# 1. The Evolving Journey of Toxicology: A Historical Glimpse
# Casarett & Doull's Toxicology, 9th Edition
# Pages: 22-43
# Unit: Unit I General Principles of Toxicology

1
chapter
The Evolving Journey of 
Toxicology: A Historical Glimpse
Philip Wexler and Antoinette N. Hayes
ABOUT TOXICOLOGY
Humans are smart but vulnerable. We need to be prepared for 
countless unforeseen events that could compromise our health and 
well-being. Toxicology arose as a way to understand, prevent, miti-
gate, and treat the potentially harmful consequences of many of the 
substances we are exposed to.
According to the Society of Toxicology (SOT) (http://
www.toxicology.org/about/vp/vision.asp):
Toxicology is the study of the adverse effects of chemical, physical, or bio-
logical agents on living organisms and the ecosystem, including the preven-
tion and amelioration of such adverse effects.
The National Library of Medicine’s (NLM) Collection 
Development Manual elaborates by noting:
Toxicology studies the agents responsible for adverse effects, the mecha-
nisms involved, the damage that may ensue, testing methodologies to deter-
mine the extent of damage, and ways to avoid or repair it. Toxicology is 
traditionally associated with chemical exposures, such as the effects of 
drugs, industrial chemicals, pesticides, food additives, household products, 
and personal care items. Toxinology, a sub discipline of toxicology, stud-
ies biological exposures, such as insect stings, poisonous mushrooms and 
plants, venomous snakes and aquatic life. The third category of toxicology 
is concerned with physical hazards, such as radiation and noise.
One of the key points to understand, as noted above, is that 
although toxicology in the popular mind is confined to chemicals 
and, probably, in practice most of the research and concern occur 
in this realm, other agents such as radiation and substances derived 
from biological organisms are equally relevant to the field.
The word toxicology is derived from the Latinized form of the 
Greek word toxicon, meaning “arrow poison.” Poison, as a noun, 
dates back to the Old French poison or puison, meaning, originally, 
a drink, especially a medical drink, but later signifying more of 
a magical potion or poisonous drink. Another point of terminol-
ogy concerns the commonly misused term toxin. Despite past and 
informal uses of the term, it formally should be used to refer to toxic 
substances produced biologically. Thus, technically, chemicals such 
as formaldehyde or asbestos, say, would not be considered toxins. 
There are any number of other terms which could be used to delin-
eate the broader category of substances which are toxic, regardless 
of origin. Examples are toxicant, toxic agent, and toxic substance. 
Xenobiotics is a term referring to substances, whether toxic or not, 
foreign to a given organism.
Finally, in this brief lesson on toxicology nomenclature, one 
needs to clarify the use of the words poisonous and venomous when 
used as animal adjectives. Though often used interchangeably, they 
are, in fact, rather distinct. A venom requires a delivery mechanism. 
Thus, because a snake, for example, injects its venom (or toxin) 
into its victim, it is considered a venomous animal. Instead, a toxic 
mushroom must be ingested to make its effect felt. Thus, it should 
instead be deemed poisonous.
Toxicology is largely concerned with the interaction of toxi-
cants and biological organisms. While toxicodynamics investigates 
the effect of the toxicant on the organism, toxicokinetics looks at 
how the organism affects the toxicant (e.g., absorption, biotransfor-
mation, distribution, and elimination). Mechanisms of toxicity at 
cellular and biochemical levels play a key role in determining why 
an agent has the effects it does. Toxic responses may be directed to 
particular organs or systems, for example, kidney, liver, and nervous 
system. Another way to consider effects is as clastogenic or muta-
genic, resulting in carcinogenic or teratogenic effects. Often the 
focus of research is on a particular chemical or class of chemicals, 
About Toxicology
About History
Toxicology in Antiquity
Ancient China
Ancient India
Ancient Egypt
Pontus, Mithridates, and Theriacas
Ancient Greece
Ancient Rome
The Middle Ages and 
Renaissance
18th and 19th Centuries
The Modern Era
Radiation
Food and Drugs
Pesticides Research and Chemical 
Warfare: A Surprising Alliance
The Poison Control Center Movement 
and High Profile Poisonings
Mass Environmental Exposures, the 
U.S. EPA, and Environmental 
Legislation
Occupational Safety and Health 
and Industrial Toxicology
Miscellaneous Organizations
International Environmental 
Conventions and Other Global 
Efforts
Animal Alternatives, Risk 
Assessment, and Green 
Chemistry
Information Resources
Where Are We Headed?
Acknowledgments
References
Supplemental Reading

4
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
such as pesticides, metals, or solvents. Environmental contamina-
tion and toxicology are tightly bound fields of study, and toxicol-
ogy has much to contribute to an understanding of air, water, and 
soil pollution. Establishing the safety of drugs relies upon toxi-
cology as does ensuring the safety of our water and food supply. 
Envenomations, whether by snakes, spiders, scorpions, aquatic life, 
or other creatures, as well as poisoning by plants and fungi are also 
within toxicology’s scope.
Toxicology today is a highly interdisciplinary science that 
borrows from and intersects with other sciences such as chemistry, 
biology, pharmacology, medicine, physiology, biochemistry, molec-
ular biology, pathology, and environmental science. Increasingly, 
it is also appropriating the tools of the computational sciences as 
one way to improve the precision of safety assessment, screen large 
numbers of chemicals efficiently, cut costs, and reduce animal use. 
Toxicology can be parsed into branches in a variety of ways. One 
such set of groupings follows:
Descriptive Toxicology: The emphasis is on the testing of toxi-
cants, typically on animals. It focuses on the dose–response rela-
tionship and extrapolation to humans.
Mechanistic Toxicology: Looks at how the agent induces its bio-
chemical or physiological effect on the organism, that is, modes 
of action. Biochemical and Molecular Toxicology is a synonym 
for this branch.
Clinical Toxicology: This branch’s focus is on the effects of drugs 
and other chemicals on humans, particularly, but also on other 
animals. Its work is often involved with drug overdoses and 
other poisonings, and determining the substance involved and 
its amount in the body. Sometimes used synonymously with 
Medical Toxicology although technically, in terms of profession, 
a medical toxicologist tends to have an MD while a clinical toxi-
cologist has a PharmD. A veterinarian who specializes in toxi-
cology, typically, has a DVM.
Forensic Toxicology: Concerned with the cause of death from toxic 
agents, often in instances of drug abuse or misuse. With a focus 
on homicides and suicides, this branch of toxicology goes hand-
in-hand with the work of the police and medical examiners.
Environmental Toxicology: Investigates the effects of toxicant expo-
sures on the general environment and living organisms therein. Thus, 
pollution of air, water, and soil, and effects on plants and wildlife 
would fall within this branch. Ecotoxicology, a more specialized 
area, is devoted to the effects of toxic chemicals on populations, 
communities, and terrestrial, freshwater, and marine ecosystems. 
Environmental toxicologists can further define their work in even 
more specialized terms, for example, aquatic toxicology.
Occupational Toxicology: Deals with the study of chemical and 
other agents in the workplace, worker exposures, safety and 
health, and standard setting. Industrial Hygiene covers a very 
similar terrain.
Regulatory Toxicology: Focuses on ways in which humans and the 
environment can be protected from toxic effects, through regula-
tions and standard setting. Considers scientific decision-making 
within a societal and legal framework. Relies heavily upon risk 
assessment.
Toxicogenomics: Concerned with the compilation and synthe-
sis of information regarding gene and protein expression in 
order to understand molecular mechanisms involved in toxic-
ity. Toxicogenomics calls upon proteomics, metabolomics, and 
transcriptomics to identify biomarkers that predict toxicity and 
genetic susceptibility to harmful substances. Environmental pol-
lutants, pharmaceuticals, and other potentially toxic substances 
are all within the scope of toxicogenomics research.
Computational Toxicology: Deals with the use of modern com-
putational approaches and information technologies to elu-
cidate mechanisms of toxicity. May also be referred to as 
toxicoinformatics.
Virtually every branch of toxicology listed overlaps with at 
least one other. Other ways to parse the discipline are by agents 
under consideration, such as venoms, pesticides, metals, solvents, 
drugs, and radiation. One can also look, instead, at target biological 
systems which the agent may affect, for example, liver, kidney, skin, 
and heart. As for toxins, they can be categorized by their biological 
origin, such as insect-, plant-, reptile-, or marine-derived toxins. 
Some toxicologists spend their careers focused very tightly on a 
subject, while others graze across many research fields.
ABOUT HISTORY
History is about the past; it is not the past. The past is passive, 
objective, all encompassing. History is active, subjective, and 
selective. The further back in time that we look, the more prob-
lematic it is for us to reach, in the present, conclusions about what 
happened in the past. Examples, particularly from ancient eras, 
described below, will show how tales accepted without question 
are currently being re-examined and revised, and remind us that 
history is also relative.
Science begins with observation. In the distant past, our obser-
vational skills did not extend beyond our senses. We put our senses, 
to good use, nevertheless, in assessing toxicity and safety even in 
prehistorical times (i.e., before the written record). Our hominin 
ancestors used trial and error extensively to explore their environ-
ment. In terms of toxicology, they would make careful note of which 
substances, particularly potential food sources, were safe and which 
were hazardous. Although it might very well be after the damage 
was done, they and their tribe and descendants would quickly learn 
to differentiate between the safe and toxic. Toxic substances, of 
course, were to be avoided, although it soon became clear that they 
could be used against enemies.
There are numerous ways to approach the history of toxicol-
ogy because there are many histories, such as those of the branches 
outlined in the previous section. Complicating the presentation of 
a uniform history is the fact that these individual histories over-
lap. Given the space limitations of this chapter, we will focus on 
chemicals and proceed chronologically, taking occasional detours 
as necessary.
TOXICOLOGY IN ANTIQUITY
Ancient China
Shen Nong, the legendary founder of Chinese Herbal Medicine, 
also known as the farmer god (for he also taught his people how to 
farm), and said to live circa 2800 bc, saved his subjects from the 
worry of trying different potential food plants to decide whether 
they were poisonous. He was said to have tasted hundreds of herbs 
daily to differentiate the poisonous from the medicinal or just 
plain edible. Although the toxins he encountered made him sick 
frequently, he somehow survived them. He is also considered the 
author of perhaps the world’s first pharmacological compendium, 
Divine Farmer’s Classic of Materia Medica. His text, a compila-
tion of oral traditions, was compiled in the 3rd century ad. Legend 
also has it that Shen Nong discovered tea when, sitting under a 
Camellia tree, dried leaves fell into the water he was boiling to 
drink (Wilkinson, 2007; Yang, 1998).

The Evolving Journey of Toxicology: A Historical Glimpse
Chapter 1
5
Du (毒) is the standard word for poison or toxicity in Chinese. 
It was understood by the ancient Chinese that drugs (herbals in this 
instance) were potentially toxic and dose played a role. Aconite, 
derived from the plant wolfsbane and possessing extreme potential 
toxicity, was widely used medicinally in small doses in China over 
2000 years ago. It was usually applied externally, often processed 
in some way or mixed with other drugs, to treat various wounds, but 
was also ingested as a tonic to restore qi (the vital energy defined by 
Chinese medicine) and extend life. At the same time, sources from 
that era show that unadulterated aconite in larger doses was often 
used to murder (Liu, 2014). Today we know that the alkaloids in 
aconite have a narrow therapeutic index and their use is not gener-
ally recommended. Interestingly, it took several thousand years for 
the role of dose in toxicity to be firmly articulated in the West by 
Paracelsus, who is discussed later in this chapter.
The ancient Chinese poison, Gu, is one of many potions 
residing in that blurry historical space between fact and legend. 
Presumably, a variety of venomous creatures such as snakes, liz-
ards, scorpions, and insects were confined in a container and left 
to devour each other until only one was left. This survivor thus 
concentrated in its body the toxins of all its former cell mates and 
the venom extracted from it was believed to be superbly potent.
Ancient India
Ancient India was no stranger to the knowledge and uses of poisons. 
Poisoned weapons of various sorts were well known. A Sanskrit 
verse reads, “Jalam visravayet sarmavamavisravyam ca dusayet,” or 
“Waters of wells were to be mixed with poison and thus polluted” 
(Khajja et al., 2011). Sushruta was an Indian surgeon. Volume 
5 of his medical and surgical compendium, Sus´rutasam. hitaˉ, 
a foundational work in Ayurveda (traditional Indian medicine), con-
tains several chapters related to poisons and poisoning, including 
descriptions of vegetable and mineral poisons (Sthavara) and ani-
mal poisons (Jangama), as well as advice on medical treatment of 
snake bites and insect bites (Wisdom Library, n.d.). Agada Tantra, 
one of the eight clinical specialties of Ayurvedic medicine, is specif-
ically associated with toxicology (Manohar, 2014; Wujastyk, 2003).
India also has a long tradition of tales about the so-called “ven-
omous virgin” (visakanya), first mentioned in the Sus´rutasam. hitaˉ. 
This maiden, sometimes referred to as the “poison damsel,” would, 
as a young girl, be fed “tolerably minute, but gradually increasing, 
amounts of poison or snake venom, and that by the time she was an 
attractive young woman, the level of toxin in her body would be so 
high that she could be sent to an enemy king as a gift. Upon kissing 
her, making love to her, or even just sharing glass of wine with her, 
he would instantly fall dead” (Slouber, 2015). The Rig Veda itself, 
one of the four texts sacred to Hinduism, includes hymns related to 
poisons (Wikisource, n.d.-a).
Ancient Egypt
Ancient Egypt was for nearly 30 centuries one of the world’s pre-
eminent civilizations and has left us a legacy of unrivalled art, 
architecture, and religious traditions. Animals played an important 
role in its belief systems. Egyptian gods and goddesses often took 
on a hybrid human–animal physical form.
Venomous snakes and insects were well known and the focus 
of toxicology as it existed in ancient Egypt. One of the major docu-
ments examining snakebite, and surviving in most of its entirety to 
our time are the Brooklyn Papyri (held by the Brooklyn Museum), 
525–600 bc (Sanchez and Harer, 2014). Its two sections describe 
individual snakes and treatment for snakebites, respectively. 
Paragraph 15 of the Papyri, for example, describes the snake known 
by the Egyptians as Apophis which, mythologically, personified 
evil. Scholars believe this may be the Boomslang (Dyspholidus 
typhus) in the Colubridae family. Symptoms and signs of snake 
envenomation are presented in the Papyri. The treatments offered 
could be general, for any snakebite, or specific. Bites by snakes 
known to be lethal generally received no treatment. Therapeutic 
measures, overall, were largely symptomatic. One treatment that 
comes up with frequency is the use of Allii Cepae, the onion, used 
in various preparations depending on the bite. Often this was used 
in conjunction with induced vomiting to rid the body of the poison:
Paragraph 41: Very good remedies to be made for those suffering from all 
snake bites: Onion, ground finely in beer. Eat and spit out for one day. (then 
follows an incantation)
Paragraph 42: As for the onion, it should be in the hand of the priest of 
Serqet, wherever he is. It is that which kills the venom of every snake, male 
or female. If one grinds it in water and one smears a man with it, the snake 
will not bite him. If one grinds it in beer and sprinkles it all over the house 
one day in the new year, no serpent male or female will penetrate therein. 
(Nunn, 1996)
Toxicity is addressed to a lesser extent in other important 
papyri such as the Berlin, Edwin Smith, and Ebers papyri.
Cleopatra VII, born in 69 bc, is one of the most fascinating 
personalities to flourish in Egypt when Greece and Rome held sway. 
During her reign as Pharaoh, Egypt was a Hellenistic (i.e., Greek) 
province, part of the Ptolemaic dynasty, established after the death 
of Alexander the Great. After Cleopatra’s death, Egypt was annexed 
by Rome. And while her romantic exploits with Julius Caesar and 
Mark Anthony have been grist for generations of writers and art-
ists, it is her death that holds toxicological interest for us. After the 
Battle of Actium (on Greece’s west coast), which ended in defeat 
for the Egyptians, and learning that Marc Anthony killed himself by 
a self-inflicted sword wound, Cleopatra decided to follow suit. It is 
said that she had her servants bring her a basket of figs, in which 
one or more asps (Egyptian cobra) were hidden, and holding one to 
her breast, she succumbed to its venomous bite. A recent analysis 
questions the feasibility of a maid capable of carrying a basket of 
one or more Royal Cobras (9.8–13 ft in length, and weighing some 
13 lbs) camouflaged by figs (Tsoucalas and Sgantzos, 2014). Other 
evidence on the time frame of her dying support this doubt. It has 
now been suggested that a more likely scenario was that she was 
murdered, perhaps with a poisonous draught by Octavian, the victor 
in their battle. He may have then spread the rumor of her suicide 
to avoid turmoil in the streets (against him) by the subjects who 
adored her.
Pontus, Mithridates, and Theriacas
The kingdom of Pontus in northeastern Turkey played an interest-
ing role in the history of poisons and antidotes. Mithridates VI, its 
ruler beginning in 120 bc, was a fierce adversary of Rome, engag-
ing it in battle three times. Ultimately, he succumbed to defeat by 
Pompey in the third war and committed suicide. Even as a boy, 
Mithridates experimented with poisons and antidotes, even on him-
self. Son of a father who was murdered with poison and a mother 
who would have poisoned him in order to ascend to the throne, he 
went into hiding for a period of years. He returned to capture his 
rightful position by likewise using poison, probably arsenic. With 
a background like that, one could hardly consider it paranoia that 
he feared assassination by poison and took precautions to avoid it 
(Mayor, 2010).
His approach was to ingest small doses of toxicants to become 
immune to them. His lifelong pursuit was to create a universal

6
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
antidote, which came to be known as a theriac, his particular one 
called a Mithridatium, by creating a concoction of tiny amounts of 
deadly poisons and antidotes. Not as far-fetched as it seems, recent 
science reveals that exposure over thousands of years to arsenic 
among certain Andean highland populations may have resulted in 
a level of resistance in their modern-day descendants (Schlebusch 
et al., 2013).
There have been many speculations about what the ingredi-
ents of the Mithridatium were, but we do not know for certain, and 
may never know. Returning to Mithridates’ defeat by Pompey, leg-
end holds that the ignominy of it led him to want to end his life. 
He retreated, with a poison, to the highest tower of his castle with 
his daughters. His daughters insisted that they be administered the 
poison first. After they died, he drank the balance. He weakened, 
but did not die, and his disorientation prevented him from stabbing 
himself with his own sword as he attempted. Instead, at least in one 
version of his actual death, he appealed to his bodyguard, Bituitus, 
to impale him with a sword.
Ancient Greece
Nicander of Colophon (fl 130 bc), a Greek poet and physician, is 
the author of two of the oldest extant works on poisons—Theriaka 
and Alexipharmaka—both written in hexameter verse (Gow and 
Scholfield, 2014; Touwaide, 2014b). The Theriaka concerns ven-
omous animals. As such they have a delivery system through which 
injection of their venom can be harmful to humans and other organ-
isms. A large portion of this volume is devoted to snakes. Among 
other information, he describes 15 snakes, including several cobras, 
and the symptoms in humans associated with envenomation, fol-
lowed by discussion of remedies. Additional narrative is devoted 
to spiders, scorpions, insects, lizards, and fish. His Alexipharmaka, 
a briefer poem, deals with 21 poisons from the vegetable, mineral, 
and animal kingdoms. Among them are aconite, white lead, and 
hemlock. As in his companion work, Nicander describes the poi-
son, its symptoms, and antidotes.
The Greek philosopher, Socrates (469–399 bc), whose wis-
dom was kept alive through the ages via his disciple, Plato, became 
an iconic figure in the history of toxicology through his death. 
Convicted of corrupting the youth of Athens and disrespecting 
the gods, he was sentenced to death. The received knowledge of 
the ages, historiographically transmitted, is that his execution was 
to be carried out in suicidal fashion, with Socrates condemned to 
drink an extract of hemlock, a poisonous plant (Conium maculatum) 
well known to the ancients. Recently, scientific evidence has called 
this into question largely because the account provided in Plato’s 
Phaedo describes a clinical disorder not caused by hemlock poison-
ing (Dayan, 2009), although the debate has yet to be resolved and 
some sources point to a possible mixture of hemlock and opium 
(Arihan et al., 2014).
Alexander the Great (born 356 bc) plays a role in the history 
of toxicology in Greece in that the cause of his death is an unsolved 
mystery as well (Mayor, 2014). He is said to have drunk vast quanti-
ties of wine at a banquet in Babylon, after which he suffered severe 
abdominal pain. Over days, things went from bad to worse and he 
developed partial paralysis finally dying two weeks later. Rumors 
of poisoning began circulating in no time. He had enough enemies. 
Some even thought that Aristotle, his former tutor, poisoned him. 
Some of his friends guessed that he succumbed to a legendary poi-
son taken from the waterfall of the Styx River, not only the mytho-
logical entrance to Hades, but an actual place in the north central 
Peloponnese. Ancient writers have considered the river poisoned. 
Though possibilities abound and speculation is widespread, the true 
cause of Alexander’s death has never been confirmed.
Recent discoveries suggest that even the Oracle at Delphi, per-
haps the most important and sacred shrine in ancient Greece, is, in 
a curious fashion, toxicologically significant. Associated with the 
Greek god Apollo, people would pilgrimage to Delphi with ques-
tions usually about what events would occur in the future. They 
would address their questions to the Pythia, a role filled by various 
women at different time. Plutarch, the celebrated Greek biographer 
and essayist, served as one of the priests at the temple of Apollo at 
Delphi. He noted that pneuma (a kind of gas or vapor) was emitted 
in the adyton, a small inner sanctum type area (de Boer, 2014). The 
Pythia would sit on a tripod-shaped chair, given a chance to inhale 
the pneuma, and go into a trance, after which a priest would address 
to her the questions asked by the petitioners. Similar accounts appear 
in ancient texts by others including Plato. Modern-day research 
attempted to assess the likelihood of an actual gas affecting the 
mental states of these priestesses. A 2002 paper bringing together 
the skills of a geologist, archaeologist, and clinical toxicologist 
reviewed the various research studies, concluding that “the prob-
able cause of the trancelike state used by the Pythia at the oracle of 
Delphi during her mantic sessions was produced under the influence 
of inhaling ethylene gas or a mixture of ethylene and ethane from a 
naturally occurring vent of geological origin” (Spiller et al., 2002).
Toxicology is also heir to a rich mythological tradition. After 
Hercules, for example, killed the nine-headed sea monster known 
as the Hydra, as part of his second labor, he cut it open and dipped 
his arrows in its venom, providing him with what may have been 
the first biological weapon for use in future battles. Achilles, one 
of the prominent heroes in Homer’s Iliad was a victim of just such 
a poison. Immersed as an infant in the river Styx by his mother to 
make him immortal, she failed to realize that in holding him by 
the heel, that very part of the body would make him susceptible to 
future danger. And so, it was that in the final battle of the Trojan 
War, he was killed by a poisoned arrow shot into this heel. These 
are but two examples of how poisons were incorporated into myth 
and legend in ancient Greece and elsewhere.
Ancient Rome
The Romans of antiquity were also knowledgeable in the principles 
and practice of toxicology. Interestingly, the Latin word venenum 
can mean either poison or remedy, and one would typically modify 
the term according to the usage intended (i.e., bonum venenum or 
malum venenum).
Dioscorides (born 40 ad), a native of Anazardus, Cilicia, 
Asia Minor, was a physician who traveled through the Roman 
Empire with Emperor Nero’s army. He would collect samples of 
local medicinal herbs as he encountered them. The information he 
gleaned became material for his encyclopedic De materia medica, 
compiled in the 1st century ad, and relied upon for centuries as 
the most extensive and reliable herbal available. In it he classi-
fied poisons as animal, plant, or mineral (Timbrell, 2005). More 
specifically, De Venenis and De venenosis animalibus, ascribed to 
Dioscorides but probably not written by him, covered poisons in 
general and animal venoms, respectively, and were very influential 
works in toxicology down through the ages (Touwaide, 2014a).
Galen, another Roman Empire era physician, born (129 ad) in 
Pergamon, had a monumental impact on the understanding and prac-
tice of medicine. He became court physician to Marcus Aurelius. 
He was a firm subscriber to the theory of the humors (blood, yel-
low bile, black bile, and phlegm), the origins of which may go 
back to ancient Egypt but which were first articulated about medi-
cine by Hippocrates. Galen formulated his own Galeni Theriaca 
and claimed it improved upon the one concocted by Mithridates 
(Karaberopoulos et al., 2012). He wrote about assorted theriac

The Evolving Journey of Toxicology: A Historical Glimpse
Chapter 1
7
compounds in his books De Antidotis I and II and De Theriaca ad 
Pisonem. Indeed, he tested them by bringing roosters into contact 
with snakes.
Poisoning, especially among the ruling classes, was frequently 
practiced, typically (but not exclusively) by women upon their hus-
bands or other inconvenient relatives. If they did not have the skills 
to do the deed themselves, they sought professional poisoners, 
usually women as well. One of the most notorious of the lot was 
Locusta. As the story is told, she was summoned by Agrippina, the 
wife of Emperor Claudius, to kill him so that Agrippina’s son, Nero, 
from a previous marriage would become the new Roman emperor. 
Locusta supplied Agrippina with a batch either of poisoned or poi-
sonous mushrooms. Though taken quite ill, the mushrooms did 
not kill Claudius outright. Quick thinking (though history is not 
quite clear by whom) led Agrippina to convince Claudius to let 
her run a feather down his throat to expel the poison. The feather 
itself, though, was coated with a lethal dose of poison which killed 
Claudius and thus Nero assumed the throne. Though Locusta was 
imprisoned, it was not long before Nero had her released and, in 
fact, employed her to poison Britannicus, a son of Claudius from a 
previous marriage and thus a threat to the new emperor. Nero ulti-
mately pardoned Locusta for all past crimes and she was allowed to 
establish a school to train others in her art.
The legal framework of toxicology is sometimes dated back 
to the age of the Roman military and political leader Sulla. Under 
the lex Cornelia de sicariis et veneficis (81 bc), punishment was 
imposed for anyone who prepared, sold, bought, kept, or admin-
istered a noxious poison (venenum malum) (Hobenreich and 
Rizzelli, 2014).
A theory proposed in 1983 by Jerome Nriagu popularized the 
idea that the metal lead was responsible for the fall of the Roman 
Empire. It has been stated that the ruling classes, in particular, were 
exposed to lead contamination in water supplies, cooking, and the 
production of wine, ultimately decreasing their fertility and repro-
ductive capacity. More recent archaeological investigations have 
found that although clinical lead poisoning probably did occur, the 
mean skeletal lead content of populations at the time was less than 
half that of present-day Europeans in the same regions. The asser-
tion that lead was the primary culprit in Rome’s decline and fall has 
been largely refuted (Cilliers and Retief, 2014a, 2014b).
Lead has continued to plague mankind, in occupational and 
other exposures, through the ages. Interestingly, in 1921 a global 
treaty the White Lead (Painting) Convention was adopted. It was 
meant to largely prohibit the use of white lead as a pigment in paint. 
With no thanks to the Lead Industries Association, this was never 
ratified by the United States (Hernberg, 2000). Herbert Needleman, 
a physician, was instrumental in helping us understand how lead 
affects children, particularly with his 1979 study in the New 
England Journal of Medicine noting deficits in children with high 
dental lead levels (Rosner and Markowitz, 2005). Still a concern in 
inner cities, lead periodically makes the headlines, as in the case 
of its seepage into the drinking water of Flint, Michigan, in 2016.
THE MIDDLE AGES AND RENAISSANCE
As we transition from antiquity to the Middle Ages at about 400 ad, 
toxicology continues to have a presence in European society vis-à-
vis both poisoning as a means of dispatching enemies but increas-
ingly in trying to establish its scientific foundation. Some of the 
well-accepted tenets of the toxicology of this time such as the 
hypothesis that the saliva of rabid dogs was a poison on a par with 
snake venom would see revision, but the scientific method was at 
least beginning to take hold.
The Venetian Council of Ten was a governing body in Venice 
from around 1310 until 1797. They were known for conducting 
secret tribunals whereby figures perceived as a threat to the state 
were ordered executed. Many of these executions were carried out 
by poisoning. There were several attempts on the life of Francesco 
Sforza of Milan, while Mehmed II, Sultan of the Ottoman Empire, 
was allegedly ordered to be poisoned by the Council (Jutte, 2015).
Poisoners continued to find steady employment but some 
reputations, as will be seen in the following paragraphs, were ill-
deserved. Poisoning as an assassination method was widespread 
during the 14th to 16th centuries in Europe. Letters to Grand Duke 
Cosimo I de’Medici affirm as much. Animal venoms, phytotox-
ins, and mineral poisons were all employed. Cosimo himself was 
suspected of poisoning and was in possession of a poison recipe 
among his confidential documents and his library contained several 
books in which poisons were discussed. He was also involved in 
a plot to assassinate Piero Strozzi, part of a rival banking empire, 
by poisoning his wine. Poisoning was clearly a family affair with 
the Medicis, and Cosimo’s sons Ferdinando and Francesco were 
equally complicit in it. Despite persistent rumors that Francesco 
and his wife, Bianca, were poisoned with arsenic by the former’s 
brother, Ferdinando, the official cause of death was listed as 
malaria. Although recent forensic examinations still do not entirely 
agree, it now appears most likely that malaria was indeed the culprit 
(Fornaciari and Bianucci, 2010). Many legends surround Catherine 
de’Medici who moved to France to marry the future King Henry II. 
Despite multiple purported victims, there is no definitive evi-
dence that she poisoned anyone. Developing and testing antidotes 
was also part of the Medicis’ stock-in-trade (Pratte et al., 2014; 
Barker, 2017).
Another powerful and infamous Italian family, originally 
from Spain, and on whom were pinned numerous heinous crimes, 
poisoning among them, were the Borgias. There were claims, for 
example, that Cesare murdered a servant who was a lover of his 
sister, Lucretia, in front of their father Pope Alexander. Cesare was 
also said to have poisoned Cardinal Juan Borgia. The reputation 
of Lucretia herself was stained with allegations, by enemies of the 
Borgias, that she was a poisoner. Documents uncovered recently in 
the Vatican archives refute these and other claims concerning the 
Borgias and it is now thought that, though saints by no means, their 
undeserved reputation for extensive poisonings and murders stems 
from rumors spread and repeated by their enemies (Dal Bello, 2012; 
Cobb, 2017).
In 17th century France, during the reign of Louis XIV there 
had been a series of poisonings which have not, at least to date, 
been subject to any of the above revisionism. It became known 
as L’affaire des poisons (the Affair of the Poisons) and originated 
with the trial of Madame de Brinvilliers, convicted of poisoning 
her father and two brothers and attempting to poison other family 
members. Prior to her execution she implicated, without specifically 
naming them, many others, who were subsequently prosecuted 
and sentenced to death. One of the most notorious was the cel-
ebrated Catherine Deshayes, also known as La Voisin, an acknowl-
edged sorceress, who did a very good business in poisons, abortions, 
and black masses. La Voisin was finally burned at the stake in 1680 
for her crimes (Duramy, 2012; Somerset, 2014).
Giulia Tofana was yet one more notorious 17th century Italian 
poisoner, thoroughly skilled at her trade. It is thought that two 
women in Palermo, Francesca la Sarda and Teofania di Adamo, 
jointly concocted and marked a poison known as “Acqua Tufania” 
for which they were executed. Some of their associates fled to Rome 
and, under the leadership of Giulia Tofana, possibly Teofania’s 
daughter, they carried on the business, even after the death of Giulia.

8
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
The poison became known as Aqua Tofana. Arsenic was likely a pri-
mary ingredient. It was sold throughout Italy to domestically unsat-
isfied women seeking freedom from their husbands. Aqua Tofana 
became an almost generic term for particularly potent poisons 
and the term has appeared in various sources, including medical 
textbooks, for some two centuries. Although originally producing 
violent symptoms, it ultimately became associated with a class of 
toxicants known as “slow poisons,” which rather than existing in 
fact may have simply been a speculative class of agents designed to 
fuel the imaginations of the easily swayed (Dash, 2015).
As already mentioned, the Middle Ages and Renaissance were 
times not only of commonplace poisonings, particularly among the 
aristocracy and ruling classes, but of an increasingly sophisticated 
understanding of toxicology. Moses Maimonides, the great Jewish 
philosopher, theologian, and scientist, wrote his Treatise on Poisons 
and their Antidotes, originally in Arabic, in 1198. Part I was con-
cerned with bites from snakes and rabid dogs (toxicology, remem-
ber, was still in its formative stage), and stings of scorpions and 
insects. Part II dealt with poisons in food and minerals, as well as 
remedies. He made a distinction between “hot” and “cold” poisons 
which, it has been claimed, may be equivalent to modern-day hemo-
lysins and neurotoxins. Maimonides also emphasized preventive 
measures (Rosner, 1968; Furst, 2001; Maimonides, 2009).
The study of toxicants was so widespread in Persian and 
Arabic countries during the Middle Ages that the era has come to be 
known as the golden age of medieval toxicology. Among prominent 
toxicologists who wrote noteworthy treatises on the subject were 
Jābir (Jaber) ibn Hayyān (721–815 ad), Ibn Maāsawyah (Yuhanna 
ibn Masawyah, Abu Zakariya, 777–857 ad), and Ibn Waḥshı̄̄yah al-
Nabti (9–10th century ad). Known by his Latin name of Avicenna 
in the West, Abū ʻAlı̄̄Aal-Ḥusayn ibn Abd Allāh ibn Sı̄nā was per-
haps the most noteworthy physician/scientist/philosopher of the 
Islamic world. His celebrated “Canon of Medicine” remained the 
most popular medical textbook for some six centuries (Nasser 
et al., 2009). Covering a broad range of topics, it includes detailed 
descriptions of venoms and other poisons, such as opioids and ole-
ander, as well as instructions related to antidotes (Ardestani et al., 
2017). He even explored the effect of alcohol on opium poisoning:
Patients may have concurrent alcohol poisoning. It can have a synergistic 
effect with opium poisoning and decrease its lethal dose. On the other hand, 
alcohol may serve as an opium antidote. This effect depends on the amount 
of ingested alcohol.
Many of his observations have been confirmed by current 
medical knowledge (Heydari et al., 2013).
On a very practical level, as was seen even in the Roman era, 
it became clear to ordinary people, especially those whose work 
entailed significant exposure to certain natural materials such as 
minerals, that their very occupations could be harmful. Georgius 
Agricola (1494–1555) born in the kingdom of Saxony, currently 
part of Germany, studied many subjects and completed his medi-
cal education in Padua. He has come to be known as “the father 
of mineralogy” largely as a result of his best known monograph, 
De Re Metallica, published in 1556.
Inevitably we reach the point where we address the incal-
culable contributions of the unorthodox medical revolutionary, 
Theophrastus von Hohenheim, called Paracelsus (1493/94–1541). 
Born in Einsiedeln, a municipality now in modern-day Switzerland, 
he was a wanderer and iconoclast, and strongly tied to the alchemi-
cal tradition. He theorized that there were four pillars of medicine: 
natural philosophy, astronomy, alchemy, and medical virtue. He 
went his own way and was not highly regarded by the medical 
establishment or local government officials. Indeed, as a lecturer 
at the University of Basel (as well as the city’s municipal physician 
until being forced to flee), he burned the standard medical textbooks 
of the day, such as those of Avicenna and Galen (Borzelleca, 1999). 
History, though, has vindicated many of his teachings. In addition to 
his medical works, he was a keen observer and investigator of toxic 
effects of various agents and wrote a treatise about their effects 
upon miners. He concludes this work with a discussion of metal-
lic mercury and criticizes its use at the time as therapy for people 
afflicted with syphilis (Gantenbein, 2017).
The most famous toxicological adage associated with 
Paracelsus is “The dose makes the poison,” which is a distillation 
of what he wrote in his Seven Defenses, designed to defend his 
controversial teachings in the face of his adversaries:
Wenn jhr jedes Gifft recht wolt außlegen/ Was ist das nit Gifft ist? alle ding 
sind Gifft/ vnd nichts ohn Gifft/ allein die Dosis macht/ dz ein ding kein 
Gifft ist.
When you want to correctly evaluate a poison, what is there that is not 
poison? All things are poison and nothing is without poison; only the dose 
determines that something is not a poison.
This was surely known in various and sundry ways, certainly by 
experience, long before the time of Paracelsus, but never had it been 
so well articulated. We may, today, look upon the latter portion of 
this statement as an oversimplification. After all, what about factors 
other than dose which influence toxicity—gender, age, pre-existing 
conditions, genetics, the microbiome, etc.? This is all well and good, 
and it is not unusual for quite valid eureka moments to be refined 
over time, but for a concise encapsulation of one of the key compo-
nents of what and when something is a poison, and which continues 
to serve as a bedrock of toxicology, Paracelsus deserves the lau-
rel crown and the oft-cited appellation, “Father of toxicology.” An 
understanding of the dose–response relationship is no less significant 
to our understanding of toxicology today than it was 500 years ago.
It is tempting to declare Paracelsus’ legacy as ironclad. 
However, proponents of a theory originating in the 19th century 
known as hormesis are today suggesting that substances known to 
be toxic at elevated doses may actually have a beneficial effect at 
very low doses. Non-monotonic dose–response (NMDR) curves 
graphically describe hormesis. Hormesis remains a controversial 
theory among toxicologists.
Paracelsus was but one example of the tenuous link between 
alchemy and toxicology. The alchemist Jan Baptist Van Helmont, 
though once a disciple of Paracelsus, ultimately went his own way. 
Van Helmont did acknowledge that almost everything in nature 
is possessed of some secret poison but that somehow it overlay a 
core of goodness. He referred to the bible and medical alchemical 
theories to support his views and reveal ways to remove the poison 
(Hedeson, 2017).
Other key figures were Pietro d’Abano who compiled a treatise 
devoted to poisons and their remedies, De venenis, which sought to 
return to the pure Greek roots of toxicology; the Paduan physician 
Girolamo Cardano who offered a careful analysis on the relation-
ship between poison and putrefaction; Gerolamo Mercuriale who 
focused on reconciling ancient and contemporary definitions of 
poison; and Andrea Bacci who argued against a universal definition 
of poison and also said that its unusual powers made it similar to 
other natural substances such as the magnet (Gibbs, 2017; see http://
fredgibbs.net/posts/universals-and-particulars-of-poison).
Interest has always been keen on both preventing and treat-
ing poisoning. Various products of biological origin, typically solid 
and hard, were said to serve in this capacity. They include stones, 
shark teeth, bezoars, and horns, sometimes embellished and worn as 
jewelry, and used in table settings or even in some instances found

The Evolving Journey of Toxicology: A Historical Glimpse
Chapter 1
9
in graves. A bezoar stone is an indigestible mass found in the gastro-
intestinal system, especially the stomach. Etymologically, the word 
derives from the Farsi words, baˉk (purification) and zahr (poison) 
and, indeed, the stones were described in ancient Arabic medical 
literature since the 8th century and used as antidotes by Persian, 
Arab, and Jewish physicians. Belief in bezoars made its way to 
Europe and is mentioned in Johannes de Cuba’s Hortus Sanitatis 
in 1485 and Pietro d’Abano described their use in 1565 (Barroso, 
2014, 2017).
Fossil shark teeth (Glossopetrae), as well, have found appli-
cation as prophylactics, detectors, and neutralizers of poisons. 
In medieval times, it was said that such teeth mounted in silver 
announced poisons by “sweating” or changing color. Their abil-
ity to detect poison and protect humans from poisoning is cited in 
Lapidaries such as those of Marbode (11th century), Sloane (16th 
century), and Jean de Mandeville. Miocence specimens of Otodus 
megalodon from Malta were said to be the most efficacious of the 
shark’s teeth. Due to a 16th century shortage of bezoar stones, a 
substitute that came to be known as Goa Stones was formulated. 
In addition to various precious stones, coral, ambergris, and musk, 
they often contained pulverized fossil shark teeth. Often gold-
plated, they could be housed in containers of elaborate silver or 
gold. Scrapings from these stones mixed in wine, beer, or other 
beverages could purportedly ward off the effects of any poisons 
(Duffin, 2017).
Alicorn, that is, the horn of the mythical unicorn, was thought 
to have medicinal and poison detecting qualities. By the end of 
the 14th century, the idea became established that it too like shark 
teeth could detect poison by perspiring in the presence of adulter-
ated food and drink. One of the earliest medieval sources about 
the medicinal power of unicorns (though the horn per se is not 
mentioned) is the Physica by Hildegard of Bingen (1098–1179) 
(Lavers, 2017). James Primrose noted: “It can scarce be said, 
whether to the Bezaar stone, or to the Unicornes horn the com-
mon people attributes greater vertues, for those are thought to be 
the prime Antidotes of all” (Primrose, 1651). Narwhal teeth or the 
horns of many another animal were likely passed off as unicorn 
horns. In 1389, John of Herse made a pilgrimage to Jerusalem and 
observed, “Near the field Helyon in the Holy Land is the river Mara 
whose bitter water Moses struck with his staff and made sweet so 
that the children of Israel could drink thereof. Even now evil and 
unclean beasts poison it after the going down of the sun; but in 
the morning the unicorn comes from the sea and dips its horn into 
the stream and thereby expels the poison so that the other animals 
can drink of it during the day. The fact which I describe I have 
seen with my own eyes” (Unitarian Review, 1879). There was not, 
though, universal acceptance of the anti-toxic legitimacy of unicorn 
products (including powder). Two respected French authorities, 
Ambroise Paré (1510–1590), court physician to four French kings, 
and the pharmacist Laurent Catelan (1568–1590) from Montpellier, 
had differing views on alicorn, with the former a detractor of its 
efficacy and the latter a proponent (Gerritsen, 2007). Eventually, as 
with much else, the antidotal property of unicorn horns was con-
signed to legend.
18TH AND 19TH CENTURIES
Hermetical traditions such as alchemy did not suddenly disappear 
come 1700. Isaac Newton himself was a passionate alchemist, as 
was Robert Boyle, often considered the father of modern chemis-
try. That said, the scientific method gained increasing prominence 
in the 18th and 19th centuries as a way of understanding our uni-
verse, and toxicology benefited from this more sophisticated and 
methodical approach. A number of scientists made important con-
tributions to toxicology during this time.
Richard Mead (1673–1754) is the author of the first book 
in English devoted solely to poisons, A Mechanical Account of 
Poisons in Several Essays. He described the signs and symptoms 
of snake envenomation, performed chemical tests on venom, and 
experimented on snakes (to study their venom delivery system) and 
other animals (Seifert, 2011).
Bernardino Ramazzini, born in Carpi, Italy, and educated at the 
University of Parma, was a physician whose seminal achievements 
have earned him the moniker Father of Occupational Medicine 
(Pope, 2004). While the connection between workers’ illnesses 
and their workplace environment, including materials to which they 
are exposed, had been noted by the ancients, Ramazzini’s analysis 
of this linkage raised the issue to an entirely new level. The first 
edition of his most famous book, De Morbis Artificum Diatriba 
(A Treatise on the Diseases of Workers), published in 1700, is the 
first comprehensive and systematic work on occupational diseases 
(Felton, 1997). It outlined the health hazards of chemicals and other 
substances, including repetitive motions, encountered by workers 
in over 50 occupations. Among Ramazzini’s many enlighten-
ing observations, and one in which he quotes Hippocrates, is the 
following:
“When you come to a patient’s house, you should ask him what sort of pains 
he has, what caused them, how many days he has been ill, whether the bow-
els are working and what sort of food he eats.” So says Hippocrates in his 
work Affections. I may venture to add one more question: what occupation 
does he follow?
The spirit of Ramazzini lives on in the Collegium Ramazzini 
(CollegiumRazazzini), an independent, international academy 
founded in 1982 by Irving J. Selikoff and others, to advance the 
study of occupational and environmental health issues. It holds con-
ferences, symposia, and training courses, and publishes statements 
and research papers.
Another key figure in occupational toxicology is Percivall 
Pott (1714–1788), born in London. In 1774 he published an essay, 
Chirurgical Observations Relative to the Cataract, the Polypus 
of the Nose, the Cancer of the Scrotum. In this he made the link 
between the profession of chimney sweeps (regarding soot lodg-
ing in the folds of scrotal skin) and scrotal cancer (Brown and 
Thornton, 1957). This was the first occupational link to cancer and 
Pott’s investigations contributed to the science of epidemiology. It 
wasn’t until the 1920s that benzo[a]pyrene was identified as the 
actual chemical responsible (Dronsfield, 2006).
There were many scientists spanning the 18th and 19th cen-
turies who played significant roles in making toxicology the dis-
cipline that it is. The ability to synthesize new chemicals and the 
added ability to detect their presence, especially in small amounts, 
marked the beginning of the modern era of toxicology. For centu-
ries, poisonings were confirmed only by confession or eye witness 
accounts. Making the leap from merely suspecting adulteration or 
poisoning to irrefutable proof was a major milestone for toxicol-
ogy. Four scientists who made remarkable advances in the area of 
chemical detection were Karl Wilhelm Scheele, Christian Friedrich 
Samuel Hahnemman, Johann Daniel Metzger, and Valentine Rose. 
Scheele discovered oxygen before Joseph Priestley, although he 
published his results later. He is also credited with the discovery 
of hydrofluoric, hydrocyanic, and arsenic acids, and devised meth-
ods for detecting arsenic in body fluids and corpses. Hahnemman 
discovered a test for arsenic oxide. Rose and Metzger discovered 
the first methods for detecting elemental arsenic and arsenic oxides 
in fluids and tissues (Farrell, 1994). In 1836, the English chemist

10
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
James Marsh developed what came to be known as the Marsh test, 
a groundbreaking method for detecting arsenic.
The medical celebrity Mathieu Joseph Bonaventure Orfila 
(1787–1853) is often claimed by Spain (where he was born and 
studied) and France (where he continued his studies, worked, 
and died) (Bertomeu-Sanchez and Nieto-Galan, 2006; Bertomeu-
Sanchez, 2009). While very influential in applying the concepts 
of chemistry to medicine, it was in toxicology that he excelled 
and for which he is best known. He became Dean of the Paris 
Medical Faculty and was a founding member of the Academy of 
Medicine. At a time when animal experimentation was somewhat 
less frowned upon, he experimented widely with dogs, varying the 
amount of poison (such as arsenic) administered and the route of 
administration, and tested antidotes and treatments. He authored 
Traite des poisons, one of the most popular textbooks of the first 
half of the 19th century (Orfila, 1814–1815). He subsequently 
extracted the sections on antidotes and treatments and published 
them in a compact free-standing volume designed not only for 
physicians but also for lay audiences that may not have access to 
medical care but need to know what to do in the event of a poison-
ing emergency.
Orfila was called to act as a medical expert in various crimi-
nal cases. He is best known for a case involving Marie Lafarge, 
charged with poisoning her husband. Eyewitnesses had seen her 
buying arsenic (used to exterminate rats) and stirring a white pow-
der into her husband’s food. Upon his exhumation, no evidence of 
arsenic was found using the newly improved test for arsenic devised 
by James Marsh, although doubts remained whether the physicians 
were performing the test properly. Orfila was summoned and found 
definite traces of arsenic in the body, and demonstrated that it did 
not come from the surrounding soil. Marie Lafarge was found guilty 
of murder and received a death sentence, later commuted to life in 
prison. The case cemented Orfila’s reputation as the greatest toxi-
cologist of the day.
And yes, indeed, not only Paracelsus, but also Orfila has been 
called “Father of Toxicology,” but of course representing a differ-
ent era, and for different reasons. “Father of Forensic Toxicology,” 
or “Father of Modern Toxicology,” might be more precise. Let’s 
hope that all these “Father of Toxicology” claims don’t result in 
any paternity suits.
In France, Francois Magendie (1783–1855) was best known 
for his pioneering contributions in neuroscience and neurosurgery, 
and experimental physiology. His studies on the effects of drugs 
on different parts of the body though led to the introduction of 
compounds such as strychnine and morphine into medical practice 
(Tubbs et al., 2008). His research into the mechanisms of toxicity 
of these and other alkaloids furthered the science of toxicology.
Claude Bernard (1813–1878), Magendie’s most celebrated 
pupil, made several physiological discoveries including the role 
of the pancreas in digestion, the regulation of the blood supply by 
vasomotor nerves, and the glycogenic function of the liver. His 
work also led to an understanding of the self-regulating process of 
living organisms we now refer to as homeostasis. He won acclaim 
for his book Introduction à l’Etude de la Médecine Expérimentale 
(An Introduction to the Study of Experimental Medicine), a classic 
in the field. He stressed the importance of starting with a hypoth-
esis and having results which are reproducible, thereby further-
ing the paradigm of the modern scientific method. In the realm of 
toxicology, Bernard demonstrated that the mechanism of action 
of curare resulted from its interference in the conduction of nerve 
impulses from the motor nerve to skeletal muscle. The sensory 
nerves were left intact. In addition to curare, he studied the toxico-
logical properties of other neuroactive compounds such as opium, 
atropine, strychnine, and nicotine (Bernard, 1857; Conti, 2002). 
He was also the first to describe the hypoxic effects of carbon 
monoxide. Bernard was attuned to how the perturbation of bio-
logical systems by toxic agents can be of value to basic science. 
He stated:
Poisons can be employed as means for the destruction of life or as agents for 
the treatment of the sick but in addition there is a third of particular interest 
to the physiologist. For him the poison becomes an instrument which dis-
sociates and analyses the most delicate phenomena of living structures and 
by attending carefully to their mechanism in causing death he can learn 
indirectly much about the physiological processes of life …
While Orfila, as we have seen, also experimented on dogs, and 
was one of many scientists, including Magendie, to subscribe to ani-
mal experimentation, Bernard established it as part of the scientific 
method. He stated:
Experiments on animals are entirely conclusive for the toxicology and 
hygiene of man. The effects of these substances are the same on man as on 
animals, save for differences in degree.
Bernard, though an acknowledged seminal figure in experi-
mental medicine, was criticized over his vivisection experiments 
on unanesthetized animals. The debate over the moral ramifica-
tions of animal experimentation gained steam during his lifetime. 
Interestingly, his wife was appalled by this part of his work. She 
left him, took their daughters, and with them became ardent anti-
vivisectionists (Cavan, n.d.).
Greatly influenced by Orfila, Robert Christison (1797–1882), 
a Scottish physician, was interested in underpinning medical juris-
prudence, especially toxicology, with a scientific foundation. Early 
on, he investigated the detection and treatment of oxalic acid poi-
soning and followed this up with investigations on arsenic, lead, 
opium, and hemlock. His celebrated book, Treatise on Poisons, first 
published in 1829, went through four editions. In addition to his 
work on poisons, he made important contributions in nephrology 
(Wikisource, n.d.-b).
Substance abuse, dependence, and addiction have plagued peo-
ple throughout all time. Published in 1821, Thomas De Quincey’s 
penetrating Confessions of an English Opium Eater is an autobio-
graphical account of his opium (more properly laudanum, for he 
took his opium with alcohol) addiction. His book covers both The 
Pleasures of Opium and The Pains of Opium. This may have been 
the first look at drug addiction but was followed by countless oth-
ers, fact and fiction, in numerous artistic genres, literary, visual, 
and even musical: to name a few (some made into movies) Aldous 
Huxley (The Doors of Perception), Hunter S. Thompson (Fear and 
Loathing in Las Vegas), William S. Burroughs (Naked Lunch and 
Junky), and Irvine Welsh (Trainspotting). Billy Wilder’s film, The 
Lost Weekend (1945), featuring Ray Milland, is a classic about alco-
holism and Frank Sinatra stars as a heroin addict in The Man with 
the Golden Arm (1955).
THE MODERN ERA
Radiation
The late 19th century is about the time when an understanding of 
radiation and its potentially hazardous effects began to surface. 
As is the case with chemicals and biological agents, radiation can 
be and has been of enormous benefit to society in general and has 
resulted in countless positive health outcomes via diagnosis and 
therapy. Nonetheless, precautions are necessary because radia-
tion hazards can be devastating. In 1895, Wilhelm Röntgen dis-
covered x-rays, electromagnetic energy waves with wavelengths

The Evolving Journey of Toxicology: A Historical Glimpse
Chapter 1
11
some 1000 times shorter than those of light. He also learned that 
x-rays could penetrate human flesh. In 1896, Nikola Tesla inten-
tionally exposed his fingers to x-rays and reported burns. In that 
same year Henri Becquerel discovered that uranium salts naturally 
emitted similar rays. Marie Curie, a student of Becquerel, named 
the phenomenon “radioactivity.” She went on to discover thorium, 
polonium, and radium, and received the Nobel Prize twice (once 
with her husband and Becquerel in physics and later in chemis-
try). Tragically, her death was attributed to aplastic anemia, likely 
contracted from her extensive work with radioactive materials 
(Jorgensen, 2016).
Soon after radium’s discovery, it was manufactured syntheti-
cally and was believed to have almost magical healing proper-
ties. It appeared in food products such as bread, chocolate, toys 
(because of its luminescence), toothpaste, cosmetics, supposito-
ries, and products to treat impotence. One of the first revelations 
about the true potency of radioactivity and the scope of its poten-
tial danger concerned the unfortunate girls who became radium 
watch dial painters in the early 1900s. These “radium girls” were 
hired by the U.S. Radium Corporation to apply radium paint to 
watch and clock faces so they would glow in the dark. They were 
instructed to use their lips to shape the brushes to a fine point. 
By 1927, over 50 women died due to radium paint poisoning, 
and many of the survivors suffered significant health problems 
(Mullner, 1999).
The detonation of the world’s first atomic bomb in 1945, the 
Trinity Test, an outgrowth of the Manhattan Project, took place in 
the New Mexico desert where the nuclear age literally burst upon 
the scene. There were no doubts, at this point, about the damage 
such a bomb could inflict and did. On August 6, 1945, while World 
War II was raging, an American B-20 aircraft dropped an atomic 
bomb over the city of Hiroshima, killing nearly 100,000 people on 
impact and decimating virtually the entire city. Maybe half of that 
number of people were killed when a second atomic bomb was 
dropped on Nagasaki. Tens of thousands of people in both cities 
would later die of radiation exposure or otherwise suffer devas-
tating injuries (Blow, 2015). The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), which entered into force in 1970 and 
was extended indefinitely in 1995, seeks to “prevent the spread of 
nuclear weapons and weapons technology, to promote cooperation 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and to further the goal of 
achieving nuclear disarmament and general and complete disarma-
ment” (UNODA, n.d.).
Although nuclear weapons were developed and used to inten-
tionally wreak destruction and havoc, nuclear power plants are 
designed to harness the force of the atom for peaceful purposes, 
that is, to generate energy. However, things do not always go as 
planned. In 1979, the Three Mile Island plant in Pennsylvania 
suffered a malfunction that led cooling water to escape from the 
reactor, and the nuclear fuel rods suffered a partial meltdown. 
Thankfully, there were no detectable health effects in the popula-
tion at large. In contrast, the people in the area of the Ukraine 
where the Chernobyl plant was located experienced a dramatic 
meltdown in 1986 and were not so fortunate. There was no con-
tainment structure and a plume of radioactive material was sent 
skyward. An estimated 30 people died from radiation poisoning 
over a period of weeks and several thousand more were put at 
risk for cancer. In 2011, a massive earthquake and tsunami dis-
abled the power supply and cooling of three Fukushima Daiichi 
reactors in Japan. All three cores melted within days. No deaths 
from radiation sickness was reported but over 100,000 people 
were evacuated from their homes (NPR, n.d.; World Nuclear 
Association, 2017).
Food and Drugs
The science of qualitative and quantitative chemical detection was 
applied most effectively to the detection of chemicals in body flu-
ids, drugs, and food. In modern society, we have grown so accus-
tomed to regulations that ensure high standards of purity for most 
commercial products that it is difficult to remember a time when 
there were no such protections in place. The realization that there 
was indeed a need for them evolved gradually. Events leading up to 
the passage of the Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906 are a good place 
to start since much of what we consider the modern era of toxicol-
ogy occurred in and around early efforts to regulate the commerce 
of food and drugs.
Toxicology has developed and continues, to some extent, to 
develop as a reactive (rather than proactive) field. Thus, chemi-
cal laws and regulations often are enacted in reaction to major or 
widespread exposure incidents. An early demonstration of this phe-
nomenon is in the efforts to ensure the safety of certain substances 
to which virtually everyone was exposed, that is, food and drugs. 
As early as 1848, chemical analyses of agricultural products were 
carried out in the U.S. Patent office under the Department of the 
Interior by Lewis Caleb Beck, an American physician and chemist 
who researched the adulterants in many drugs commonly prescribed 
by physicians of the time (Kinch, 2016). In 1846 he published 
Adulterations of Various Substances Used in Medicine and the 
Arts with Means of Detecting Them: Intended as a Manual for the 
Physician, the Apothecary, and the Artisan. His publication helped 
promote the Drug Importation Act of 1848. At the time, there were 
six major ports of entry within the United States, namely New York, 
Boston, Baltimore, Philadelphia, New Orleans, and Charleston, 
where pharmaceuticals entered the American market. The 1848 law 
required the U.S. Customs Service to inspect and stop any adulter-
ated drugs from entering the U.S. market. Inspectors were typically 
experienced physicians and pharmacists who could more easily 
detect a counterfeit substance. They were also armed with the added 
ability to conduct qualitative tests, such as those detailed in Beck’s 
publication, to determine if a drug was adulterated.
The Department of Agriculture, which would eventually give 
rise to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), was established 
under Abraham Lincoln in 1862. The Division of Chemistry rested 
within this department and employed a single chemist Charles 
Mayer Wetherill. In 1883, Harvey W. Wiley, who was to play a 
highly influential role in safeguarding the country’s food and 
drugs, took over as the Division’s fourth chemist. The Division of 
Chemistry became the Bureau of Chemistry in 1901 and in 1902 
Wiley was granted $5000 to administer what came to be called the 
“Poison Squad” experiments. These experiments involved asking 
healthy volunteers to consume measured amounts of preservatives 
routinely added to food items to determine whether they were safe 
for human consumption. The experiments were carried out in a 
controlled setting with meals prepared by a designated cook and 
chemist William R. Carter (Pray, 2003). Although cringeworthy by 
today’s ethical standards, some of the chemicals fed to these young 
men were borax, benzoic acids, and formaldehyde. While many still 
question the validity of these sensational experiments, the publicity 
helped to enlighten consumers about the potential dangers of adul-
terated foods and the importance of accurate labeling.
Wiley was not alone in his pursuit to rid the market of impure 
foods and drugs. Journalists as well took up the cause of expos-
ing quack medicines and adulterated food staples thereby fueling 
Wiley’s efforts. The so-called muckraking journalists of the early 
20th century exposed hundreds of patent medicines as misleading, 
harmful, and sometimes deadly. One example (of many) was the

12
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
case of acetanilide, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug used 
to treat pain and reduce fever, but highly toxic. In 1905, Samuel 
Hopkins Adams published, in Collier’s Weekly, “The Great 
American Fraud,” a sensational article exposing the hoax of pat-
ent medicines (Adams, 1905). Upton Sinclair’s 1906 book, The 
Jungle, detailed unsanitary conditions of workers in the meat pack-
ing industry. “The Jungle” was published as a serial in 1905 and 
then as a book in 1906. Despite the many efforts to pass legislation 
to ensure food and drug safety prior to 1906, nothing seemed to get 
through both the House and Senate and, unfortunately, many bills 
languished for years. Wiley worked tirelessly to institute food and 
drug legislation throughout his tenure at the FDA (1883–1912) and 
during this time over 100 food and drug bills were introduced in 
Congress with nearly all failing to gain any traction.
The Pure Food and Drugs Act and the Meat Inspection Act were 
passed on the very same day in 1906 by the then president Theodore 
Roosevelt. The former law became known as the “Wiley Bill” due 
to Harvey Wiley’s efforts. The Bureau of Chemistry was reorga-
nized in 1927 into the Food, Drug, and Insecticide Administration, 
later renamed the Food and Drug Administration and ultimately 
moved out of the Department of Agriculture entirely and into what 
is now the Department of Health and Human Services.
To backtrack a bit in time, England’s attention to the adul-
teration of food and drugs actually preceded that of the United 
States by a half century. Friedrich Accum, Wiley’s counterpart 
in the United Kingdom, published a book in the 1820s titled A 
Treatise on the Adulterations of Food, and Culinary Poisons with 
the subtitle There Is Death in the Pot. Accum wrote about hun-
dreds of poisonous additives commonly used in food products to 
either sweeten, color, or bulk up foods. He also pointed a finger 
at the perpetrator, giving the names and addresses of the offend-
ing manufacturers, which was unprecedented at the time (Accum, 
1820; Oser, 1987). Accum became extremely unpopular among 
wealthy shop owners and he eventually left the country. Friedrich 
Accum and, later, Thomas Wakley and Arthur Hill Hassall were the 
figures most responsible for the campaign to prevent food adultera-
tion which eventually resulted in food and drug legislation in the 
United Kingdom (Oser, 1987).
The 1906 Pure Food and Drug Act in the United States did not 
have the broad impact that was intended. Wiley and other supporters 
were hopeful that the law would have far reaching implications and 
broadly protect the food supply. However, as written, its main pur-
pose was to ban foreign and interstate traffic of adulterated, falsely 
advertised, or mislabeled food and drug products. It empowered the 
U.S. Bureau of Chemistry to inspect products and refer offenders 
to prosecutors, but gave no prosecutorial power to the agency itself. 
For example, during the Jamaican Ginger poisonings detailed in 
the next paragraph, the FDA was not involved in the investigation 
or prosecution of the crime until well after the case was resolved 
by a judge. The law required that the active ingredients be placed 
on the label of a drug’s packaging and that drugs could not fall 
below purity levels established by the United States Pharmacopeia 
(USP) or the National Formulary. The USP and National Formulary 
guidelines were established some years earlier by a group of phy-
sicians and pharmacists, and served as a foundation for the Pure 
Food and Drugs Act. Although the law was popular, it was virtu-
ally impossible to enforce. The 1906 law prevented the manufac-
ture, sale, or transportation of adulterated, misbranded, poisonous, 
or deleterious foods, drugs, medicines, and liquors. The new law 
led to the establishment of government-run analytical laboratories, 
and the conditional removal of certain ingredients such as ethanol, 
herbal mixtures, and coloring agents in most but not all cases. Many 
sections of the Act were overturned by the then Associate Justice 
Oliver Wendell Holmes and the U.S. Supreme Court in 1911. Wiley 
left the Bureau of Chemistry in 1912. The 1906 Act was not per-
fect, but it was a perfect jump start to the subsequent food and drug 
reform laws in the United States.
Prohibition in the United States ran from 1920 to 1933. During 
this time, there were very few legal means for obtaining alcohol. 
One of the few remaining options for alcohol consumption was via 
a doctor’s prescription which would allow one to procure whis-
key or rum from a pharmacist. Meanwhile, it was legal to purchase 
over-the-counter patent medicines or elixirs containing alcohol. 
Some disreputable drug companies began increasing the alcoholic 
content of their medicines or inventing new ones composed almost 
entirely of alcohol. One infamous concoction was Jamaica Ginger, 
which contained between 70% and 80% alcohol by weight. The 
U.S. Treasury Department required changes to the ingredients of 
Jamaica Ginger to discourage its abuse. The minimum requirement 
of ginger solids per cubic centimeter of alcohol resulted in a bitter 
concoction that was not palatable. Inspectors would often boil down 
the liquid and weigh the solids to ensure that the concoction was 
formulated appropriately. Two bootleggers (Harry Gross and his 
brother-in-law Max Reisman) developed an alternative recipe that 
could pass the inspection and taste well enough to sell by adding 
tri-ortho-cresyl phosphate (TOCP) to the mixture. In early 1930 
reports began to pour in detailing strange paralysis of the legs, arms, 
and wrists with little to no recovery in large numbers of people 
throughout the midwest. By 1931 the disease, which had come to 
be known colloquially as Ginger Jake paralysis, had reached epi-
demic proportions affecting an estimated 10,000 people across the 
country from New York to California. Doctors eventually traced 
the illness back to the Jamaica Ginger elixir, but since the typical 
ingredients (as listed in the U.S. Pharmacopeia) were not known 
to cause disease they immediately suspected a contaminant was 
responsible. The matter was taken up by the Public Health Service’s 
National Institutes of Health (NIH), which was newly formed from 
the Hygienic Laboratory in 1930. It was there that the adultera-
tion with tri-ortho-cresyl phosphate was discovered. There were 
over 35,000 members of the United Victims of Ginger Paralysis 
Association (Morgan and Penovich, 1978). The Ginger Jake epi-
sode and other cases of false therapeutic claims made it clear that 
change needed to come to the 1906 law, and change it did, propelled 
by the sulfanilamide poisonings of 1937–1978.
Sulfa drugs were a 20th century miracle for the treatment 
of bacterial and fungal infections. The first sulfa drug, Protonsil, 
showed no effect in vitro with bacterial assays but was extremely 
effective in vivo. It was later discovered that Protonsil is metabo-
lized to sulfanilamide in vivo and the science of the bioactivation 
of drugs was revealed. The discovery of sulfanilamide was heralded 
as a major event in combating bacterial diseases. However, for a 
drug to be effective there needed to be an equally effective delivery 
system. Sulfanilamide is highly insoluble in an aqueous solution. 
Originally prepared as an elixir in ethanol, chemists discovered that 
the drug was more soluble in diethylene glycol. Therefore, the latter 
solvent replaced it, and a sweet syrup was added to make it more 
palatable to children. The new preparation was labeled an “elixir.” 
Many patients, most of whom were children, died of acute kidney 
failure resulting from metabolism of the glycol to oxalic acid and 
glycolic acid. The drug and its metabolites crystallized in the kidney 
tubules, leading to renal failure (Wax, 1994). This tragedy led to the 
passage of the 1938 Food, Drug, and Cosmetic (FD&C) Act, also 
known as the Copeland Bill, named for Senator Royal S. Copeland. 
It contained provisions for both misbranding and adulteration. 
A cosmetic was deemed to be adulterated if it “contains any poison-
ous or deleterious substance that may render it injurious to users

The Evolving Journey of Toxicology: A Historical Glimpse
Chapter 1
13
under customary conditions of use.” The misbranding provisions 
prohibited labeling that is “false or misleading in any particular.” 
The law also required that a package’s ingredients and their amounts, 
as well as the name and address of the manufacturer, packer, or dis-
tributor, be clearly displayed on the label. To enforce the statute, the 
FDA was given search, seizure, and prosecutorial powers.
The sulfanilamide disaster played a critical role in the develop-
ment of toxicology and inspired the research of Eugene Maximillian 
Geiling in the Pharmacology Department of the University of 
Chicago that elucidated the mechanism of toxicity of the sulfanil-
amide elixir (diethylene glycol). These studies began at the heart of 
the investigations in the late 1930s (Geiling et al., 1938). Studies of 
the glycols were simultaneously carried out at the FDA by a group 
led by Arnold Lehman, another legendary modern toxicologist.
Frances Oldham Kelsey was a research assistant in Geiling’s 
lab at the University of Chicago during the sulfanilamide investiga-
tions and was responsible for conducting the animal toxicity test-
ing with sulfanilamide. She earned a PhD from the University of 
Chicago in 1938 and graduated from Chicago’s medical school in 
1950. She started working at the FDA in 1960 where she was tasked 
with reviewing new drug applications for U.S. approval. Among 
her first assignments was a new drug thalidomide (Kevadon), an 
anti-nausea medication, also used to alleviate morning sickness in 
pregnant women, recently licensed by the William S. Merrell drug 
company based in Cincinnati, Ohio. The company had already dis-
tributed the drug to over 1200 U.S. doctors with the expectation 
that it would be approved quickly. Drugs could go on the market 
60 days after the manufacturer filed an application with the FDA. 
It was often the practice of pharmaceutical companies to supply 
doctors with the new drugs and they were encouraged to test them 
on patients. Kelsey held up the application and asked Merrell for 
more information regarding its safety. By 1961 it became clear that 
thalidomide posed a serious safety risk. Infant deaths and defor-
mities were occurring at an alarming rate across Europe and the 
German manufacturer began pulling the drug from the market in 
late 1961. By 1962 the application for approval in the United States 
was withdrawn completely. Though never licensed in the United 
States, physicians distributed the drug as samples to patients. 
The government estimated that more than 2 million tablets were 
distributed to around 20,000 patients in the United States and by 
late 1962 there were at least 17 babies with thalidomide-related 
defects. Worldwide, there were more than 10,000 babies born with 
thalidomide-related defects and countless pregnancies that ended 
in miscarriage (the exact number is unknown). The tragedy could 
have been far worse in the United States if not for the efforts of 
Frances Kelsey. The thalidomide tragedy led to the 1962 Kefauver-
Harris Amendments to the FDA signed by the then President John F. 
Kennedy. With these amendments, the FDA was given the authority 
to require proof of efficacy (rather than just safety) before a new 
drug could gain approval. The amendments created the ground-
work for the multi-phased approval process involving clinical tri-
als, which is still very much in use today. Interestingly, under strict 
controls, in recent years thalidomide has been reintroduced as a 
treatment for certain symptoms of leprosy.
Even with the current laws in place, occasionally a drug 
must be highly regulated, recalled, or removed from the open 
market for reasons such as toxicity, impurities, lack of efficacy, 
or abuse potential. Clinical trials are conducted on populations 
significantly smaller than those eventually using the drug. Side 
effects not detected prior to approval often become apparent in 
the larger population. All other factors being equal, many effects 
are harder to detect in a small sample size. Increasing the sample size 
enhances the statistical power of a test which is the situation after 
approval when the drug is taken by many more people. Although 
drugs are often voluntarily removed from the market, there are 
cases where the FDA orders a drug to be recalled or removed. 
Mylotarg (gemtuzumab ozogamicin), for example, was approved 
under an accelerated approval process in 2000 for the treatment 
of acute myelogenous leukemia. In 2010 the drug was voluntarily 
withdrawn from the market by its manufacturer Pfizer. A phase 3 
comparative controlled clinical trial demonstrated an increase in 
mortality. Additionally, the drug was not considered to be more 
effective over conventional cancer therapies available at the time. 
Vioxx (rofecoxib) was one of the largest worldwide (by Merck) 
recalls ever. This nonsteroidal, anti-inflammatory medication for 
arthritis was responsible for perhaps over 27,000 heart attacks and 
cardiac deaths. These effects did not emerge in the original clinical 
trials but subsequent trials confirmed the danger.
From around 1938 to 1971, millions of pregnant women were 
prescribed diethylstilbestrol (DES) as a hormone-replacement 
therapy and to prevent miscarriages and premature births. Research 
during the 1950s showed it was not effective. Before long it was 
discovered that DES caused a rare vaginal cancer (clear cell adeno-
carcinoma) in girls and young women who had been exposed to 
DES in the womb (Herbst et al., 1971). It was recalled from the 
market in 1971.
In some cases, a drug may be removed from the market tem-
porarily to protect consumers. In 1982, there were several deaths 
eventually linked to Tylenol brand acetaminophen capsules. The 
capsules were laced with potassium cyanide (Wolnik et al., 1984). 
Several copycat crimes followed this incident; most notably, the 
conviction of Stella Nickell in 1987. Stella Nickell laced Excedrin 
capsules with cyanide, killing both her husband and a woman who 
purchased the tampered product. Crimes such as these made clear 
the need for tamper-evident packaging and led to the passage of 
the Federal Anti-Tampering Act of 1983. Tamper-evident packag-
ing created visual evidence for the consumer that a product was 
opened or damaged prior to purchase. The new packaging didn’t 
provide 100% protection against tampering but made it much more 
difficult to tamper.
The FDA is routinely scrutinized by Congress, the public, drug 
companies, and consumer advocacy groups. Amendments and other 
changes are issued as the need arises according to the changing 
landscape of drug use, discovery, and development.
Among the latest of these changes is the process by which 
the FDA plans to review applications for new drugs in the future. 
The FDA implemented an initiative to harmonize the review and 
approval process for new drugs with the SEND initiative in 2016. 
SEND stands for the Standard for Exchange of Nonclinical Data 
and is an implementation of the Clinical Data Interchange Standards 
Consortium (CDISC) Standard Data Tabulation Model (SDTM) for 
nonclinical studies. The primary purpose of SEND is to present 
nonclinical data consistently regardless of the source of the data.
Pesticides Research and Chemical Warfare: 
A Surprising Alliance
Naturally derived pesticides have been used to protect crops for 
thousands of years. The first recorded use of insecticides took place 
some 4500 years ago with the Sumerians who dusted elemental 
sulfur on their crops. Three thousand two hundred years ago, the 
Chinese used mercury and arsenic compounds to control body 
lice (Unsworth, 2010). Synthetic pesticide development and use is 
a product of the 20th century. The histories of synthetic pesticide 
use and chemical warfare agents go at least partially hand in hand. 
Their research and development was widespread throughout the

14
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
United States and Europe during the early 20th century. Many of the 
chemical warfare agents manufactured during World War I and II 
were discovered while conducting pesticide research. The chemi-
cals under investigation were typically noxious chlorine derivatives 
and were discovered to be mildly to extremely toxic to humans. 
Not surprisingly, the peacetime attention to pesticide research was 
diverted to weaponizing many of these fortuitous discoveries dur-
ing wartime. The effort behind the wartime manufacture of these 
agents was immense and after the war there was a surplus of what 
may arguably be considered the deadliest chemicals ever invented. 
The post-war effort was primarily geared toward disposal of these 
agents, although many were merely transferred and stockpiled in 
various countries outside of Germany. From 1946 through 1948 
large amounts of various chemical weapons confiscated during 
World War II were dumped into the Baltic Sea after the war in a 
military campaign known as “Operation Davy Jones’ Locker” 
(Kaffka, 1995). These materials continue to contaminate the waters 
and poison fishermen and wildlife as they are slowly released from 
their containers. The containers were not suitable for long-term 
storage and degraded over time.
Germany was responsible for much of the large-scale produc-
tion of pesticides and warfare gases used in the early to mid-1900s. 
Fritz Haber, a German scientist, sought a way to capture nitrogen 
in the air for use in large-scale fertilizer production. His success, 
with further contributions from Carl Bosch, at nitrogen fixation 
(the Haber-Bosch process), garnered him the Nobel Prize in 1918. 
The Haber-Bosch process was instrumental in the manufacture of 
nitrogen-based explosives for the German Army during World War I 
(Hager, 2009). Some argue that the Germans would have run out 
poisonous gases if not for Fritz Haber and Carl Bosch. Bosch also 
researched the weaponization of toxic substances such as chlorine, 
phosgene, and mustard gas, leading to the largest deployment of 
chemical weapons in modern history. During World War I, the 
Germans launched a chemical attack using chlorine gas in Ypres, 
Belgium in 1915. Phosgene, which is now used in the manufac-
ture of pesticides and plastics, was employed extensively by the 
Germans during World War I and accounted for nearly 85% of all 
gas-related fatalities during that war (Marrs et al., 2007). Tabun was 
the first nerve agent to be synthesized in 1937 by the IG Farben sci-
entist Gerhard Schrader during his research to discover new organo-
phosphate insecticides. The human toxicity of tabun was realized by 
accident during its development in 1935. Tabun causes acetylcholin-
esterase inhibition in the peripheral and central nervous systems. The 
symptoms that result include trembling, convulsions, and respiratory 
paralysis. During World War II, tabun was manufactured as a part of 
the Grün 3 program in Brzeg Dolny, Poland in 1942. The plant was 
seized by the Soviet Army and moved to Russia. The production 
and stockpiling of chemical warfare agents continued throughout 
World War II. In the 1930s Willy Lange (a German biochemist) and 
Gerhard Schrader also discovered organophosphate cholinesterase 
inhibitors including sarin, soman, cyclosarin, and other less potent 
organophosphate insecticides. This class of chemicals was destined 
to become a driving force in the study of neurophysiology and toxi-
cology for several decades (Sneader, 2006).
The United States embarked upon an active research program 
to study the effects of exposure to these nerve agents and to develop 
a means of defense. Much of this early research occurred at the 
University of Chicago. The growth of toxicology in academia grew 
out of these studies of organophosphate pesticides. Eugene Geiling 
and Kenneth Dubois at the University of Chicago in the 1940s were 
instrumental in these early studies. Their dedication to fostering the 
education of so many other scientists in the field of toxicology was 
pivotal to the development of toxicology programs around the country.
It should also be noted that, pesticides aside, the spread of 
toxicology through academic development of eager scientists 
was accomplished decades earlier through the work of Oswald 
Schmiedeberg (1838–1921) and Louis Lewin (1850–1929) at the 
University of Strasbourg and Berlin in Germany, respectively. 
Schmiedeberg trained approximately 120 students in toxicology 
and Lewin, who trained under Matthias Eugen Oscar Liebreich at 
the Pharmacological Institute of Berlin (1881), studied the chronic 
toxicity of narcotics and other alkaloids. Lewin also published much 
of the early research on the toxicity of methanol, glycerol, acro-
lein, and chloroform (Lewin, 1920, 1929). Lewin wrote in his book 
Gifte und Vergiftungen (1929) of the causal connection between 
dental amalgam fillings and illness. One of his famous patients was 
the well-known chemistry professor Alfred Stock (1876–1946), 
who suffered from mercury poisoning due to chronic exposure to 
mercury vapors which was common among chemists at the time. 
Lewin informed Stock of the toxicity of mercury exposure from 
dental amalgams. In 1926 in an article in Zeitschrift für Angewandte 
Chemie (Journal of Applied Chemistry), Stock sided with the claim 
that mercury released from amalgam fillings caused poisoning and 
demanded that the use of mercury for this purpose be stopped.
Though Schmiedeberg and Lewin had a 60- to 70-year head 
start, the efforts at the University of Chicago were no less signifi-
cant. Geiling and Dubois’s toxicology lab there investigated the 
effects of chemical warfare agents synthesized by chemists work-
ing at the National Defense Research Council’s Office of Scientific 
Research and Development. This organization (NDRC/OSRD) 
was founded in 1940 by Franklin Delano Roosevelt to manage and 
conduct scientific research related to the problems underlying the 
development, production, and use of devices and materials used for 
warfare. The university had a very large smokestack on the grounds 
making it an ideal place on campus to study the effects of poisonous 
gases. The toxicology lab at the University of Chicago was active 
for about 30 years, dissolving in the late 1960s (Doull, 2001). The 
lab produced many scientists who became leaders in the field of tox-
icology. These scientists went to other academic institutions, gov-
ernment agencies, and industrial laboratories and were instrumental 
in establishing many toxicology laboratories and programs through-
out the United States, consequently spreading their knowledge and 
influence and lending credibility to the discipline. Members of 
Geiling and DuBois’s group were the leaders in organophosphate 
toxicology. DuBois’s colleagues, principally Sheldon Murphy, con-
tinued to be in the forefront of this special area of study for many 
years. Geiling and Dubois wrote the first undergraduate toxicology 
text, Textbook of Toxicology, in 1959 (DuBois and Geiling, 1959). 
In 1975, Louis Casarett and John Doull (1923–2017) followed with 
what has become the most widely accepted toxicology text in aca-
demic programs—Toxicology: The Basic Science of Poisons, cur-
rently in its ninth edition and edited by Curtis D. Klaassen of the 
University of Kansas. John Doull was a revered scientist and mentor 
who remained active in toxicology through most of the first quarter 
of the 21st century.
The importance of the early research on the organophos-
phates has taken on special meaning in the years since 1960. 
Organophosphate insecticides are typically short-lived and do not 
persist in the environment or bioaccumulate up the food chain. For 
this reason, many were used as a replacement for DDT and other 
persistent organochlorine insecticides. Today, a third generation of 
insecticides, mainly pyrethroids, has replaced many of the organo-
phosphates formerly used.
DDT was recognized as an insecticide by Paul Hermann Müller 
in 1939, a discovery which won him the Nobel Prize in Physiology 
in 1972. DDT was extremely effective in preventing the spread of

The Evolving Journey of Toxicology: A Historical Glimpse
Chapter 1
15
malaria in developing countries. It was the chemical of choice for 
controlling insect populations in the United States as well. Not long 
after its introduction, it was discovered to have detrimental effects 
on wildlife, particularly on certain species of birds. The chemical 
caused fragility in eggshells and thus many birds didn’t reproduce 
effectively and populations diminished over time. The work and 
research of Rachel Carson brought this to the attention of environ-
mental scientists and to the public when she published her find-
ings in the book Silent Spring in 1962 (Carson, 1962). Although 
she encountered considerable opposition from those in the research 
community, her conclusions could not be refuted. The subsequent 
1972 ban of DDT was a milestone in toxicological history for sev-
eral reasons. For one, it was the first ban of a chemical based upon 
its effects on wildlife. Further, the grassroots effort surrounding 
the desire to ban DDT joined other environmental advocacy move-
ments, which together were instrumental in influencing the gov-
ernment to create the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in 
1970. Although DDT can still be legally manufactured in the United 
States, its use is prohibited. However, it is still used on some conti-
nents such as South America and South Africa and has effectively 
decreased the incidence of certain diseases such as malaria, typhus, 
and bubonic plague.
Another popular and critically important book which has had 
a strong influence on toxicology as it relates to pesticides and other 
chemicals (such as DES discussed above) is Theo Colburn’s Our 
Stolen Future published in 1996 with a foreword by the then Vice 
President Al Gore. It brought the concept of endocrine disruption, 
while not a new one, to the public and scientific forefront. The 
book argued that endocrine active (or estrogen mimicking) com-
pounds may be eliciting effects at doses considerably lower than 
toxicities caused by other mechanisms, and that reproductive and 
developmental risks can be significant. U.S. federal agencies have 
since funded a multitude of research projects related to endocrine 
disruption.
The Poison Control Center Movement and 
High Profile Poisonings
Pesticides were not the only class of chemicals synthesized and 
used in great quantities in the mid-20th century. Many other poten-
tially harmful industrial chemicals flooded the market. Poisoning in 
the home increased principally in young children with the advent 
and widespread use of laundry and cleaning agents. In the 1950s 
the American Academy of Pediatrics formed a special committee 
to consider the problem of poisoning in children. Louis Gdalman 
had already begun the first poison information services, however 
modest, in the 1930s at Saint Luke’s Hospital in Chicago. He kept 
a detailed card index of the most common poisons along with their 
treatments and antidotes and maintained and answered a call line 
or hotline for emergencies as well. By 1953 the Chicago Area 
Poisoning Control Program was established with Saint Luke’s at 
its epicenter in Chicago and Louis Gdalman as its head. Today this 
poison control center is known as the Chicago and Northeastern 
Illinois Regional Poison Control Center. Poison control cen-
ters were founded in Boston and New York soon after the one in 
Chicago, and by 1955 there were a total of 17 centers. There were 
661 poison control centers in 1978 at the height of the poison con-
trol center movement. The number of active centers since then has 
dramatically decreased due, largely, to federal and state funding 
cuts (Institute of Medicine Committee on Poison Prevention and 
Control, 2004). There were approximately 54 active poison con-
trol centers nationwide in 2014 and they provided telephone guid-
ance for nearly 2.2 million human poison exposures. Most poison 
control centers are also able to handle queries related to companion 
animals, and the ASPCA (American Society for the Prevention of 
Cruelty to Animals), founded in 1866, manages its own special-
ized Animal Poison Control Center, established in 1996. It operates 
24 hours a day, 365 days a year. The invention of child-safety-lock 
packaging reduced many accidental pediatric ingestions and the 
iconic figure Mr. Yuk taught children to identify hazardous sub-
stances in the home. Ways to protect consumers from chemical 
products in the home was one issue that was fervently addressed 
with numerous campaigns geared toward education and prevention.
Poisonings, even apart from their irregular use in chemi-
cal warfare or inadvertent household exposures, have continued 
unabated from ancient times forward. Several of these have been of 
high profile personalities and some have been suicides. In 1978, Jim 
Jones, founder of the Peoples Temple, led over 900 of his followers, 
one third of them children, to their deaths, by ordering them to drink 
a cyanide-laced punch drink in Jonestown, Guyana. An umbrella 
outfitted with a firing mechanism was used to administer the poison 
ricin to the leg of Georgi Markov, a Bulgarian dissident and writer. 
He died several days later. Nazi leaders such as Hitler, Himmler, 
and Goering committed suicide with cyanide and were responsible 
for the poisoning deaths of millions of Jews during World War II. 
In 1995, five plastic bags of liquid sarin were punctured with metal-
tipped umbrellas in Tokyo subway cars during rush hour releas-
ing the deadly nerve gas. The Aum Shinrikyo religious cult, led by 
Shoko Asahara, was found responsible. In 2004, prior to his election 
as President of Ukraine, Viktor Yuschchenko was poisoned with 
dioxin, resulting in severe facial disfigurement due to chloracne. In 
2006, Alexander Litvinenko, a former officer of the Russian state 
security organization FSB was poisoned by, and died from, radio-
active polonium-210. In February 2017, Kim Jong Nam, the half-
brother of North Korean Leader Kim Jong Un, was assassinated at a 
Malaysian airport when two women rubbed his face with the lethal 
nerve agent VX. It is clear that poisons continue to be a weapon of 
choice in politics and in society (Famous Deaths).
Mass Environmental Exposures, the U.S. 
EPA, and Environmental Legislation
Years prior to the advent of a full-fledged grassroots environmen-
tal movement, a variety of events made clear the fragility of our 
environment. The Donora Smog, for example, was a historic air 
inversion in Pennsylvania that killed 20 people and sickened 7000 
more in 1948. In 1952, during the so-called Great Smog of London, 
over 5 days, more than normal coal emissions mixed with fog in 
a temperature inversion resulted in thousands of deaths and tens 
of thousands of hospitalizations. Recent research has determined 
that Londoners were breathing in the fog equivalent of acid rain. 
Sulfate was a big contributor to the fog, and sulfuric acid particles 
were formed from sulfur dioxide released by coal-burning for resi-
dential use and power plants (Wang et al., 2016). It was the Great 
Smog that led to passage of the 1956 Clean Air Act in the United 
Kingdom. In Cleveland, the Cuyahoga River is remembered as the 
body of water polluted from decades of industrial waste which infa-
mously caught fire in 1969 (and, in fact, on earlier occasions as 
well). One seminal event, a harbinger of environmental awareness, 
was the celebration of the first Earth Day on April 22, 1970, an 
ongoing annual event.
More direct cause–effect incidents involving chemicals also 
began coming to light. Most companies didn’t originally have 
built-in strategies for removing the waste they created. A common 
modus operandi was to create landfills for dumping the chemical 
byproducts that accumulated because of the manufacturing process.

16
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
The increase in the manufacture of chemicals translated to both an 
increase in direct human exposure via ingestion of products kept in 
the home, and an increase in indirect human exposure via leaching 
of dumped chemicals into the ground water, air, and food supply. 
One of the earliest and most pivotal demonstrations of the issue of 
chemical dumping in the United States that is, and one that would 
influence the course of toxicology, was the environmental disaster 
that came to be known as Love Canal. Epidemiological and other 
scientific studies confirmed the tragedy.
Love Canal in Niagara Falls, New York was used as a dump 
site by the Hooker Chemical Company for over a decade. In the 
1970s, long after it was capped and an entire community built on 
top of it, weather patterns forced chemical waste into the ground-
water and at surface. The entire area was found to be contaminated 
with a variety of toxic chemicals, which led to a cluster of illnesses 
among the residents living in the area. The activism around the 
contamination and subsequent cleanup led to legislation that would 
ensure that other chemically contaminated sites would receive gov-
ernment funding for cleanup and move families to prevent further 
exposure. This law, the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA), commonly known 
as Superfund, was enacted by Congress on December 11, 1980. 
Administered by the EPA, it authorizes the cleanup of uncontrolled 
or abandoned hazardous-waste sites as well as accidents, spills, and 
other emergency releases of pollutants and contaminants into the 
environment.
Love Canal paved the way for other communities and sites to 
be cleaned up as well. Contaminated communities were found, for 
example, in Times Beach, Missouri where dioxin was discovered, 
and in Woburn, Massachusetts, where the primary contaminant of 
concern was trichloroethylene. Hexavalent chromium was discov-
ered in Hinkley, California, and asbestos contamination in Libby, 
Montana. The EPA was given the responsibility to develop risk 
assessment methodology to determine health risks from exposure 
to effluents and to attempt to remediate these sites. Exposure to 
chemicals from these waste sites tend to be highly variable and 
unpredictable because they typically involve exposure to a mix-
ture of chemicals. The effort behind the Love Canal incident led to 
broad-based support for research into the mechanisms of action of 
individual chemicals and complex mixtures.
Regrettable as it is that the consequences of toxic environmen-
tal exposure fall upon anyone, it is even more unfortunate that the 
burden is often borne by communities otherwise disadvantaged or 
in the minority, be it as a result, for example, of poverty, race, or 
education. Environmental justice, which advocates for the fair treat-
ment of people of all persuasions with regard to the development, 
implementation, and enforcement of environmental laws, regula-
tions, and policies, is but one example. The National Environmental 
Justice Advisory Council (NEJAC), a federal advisory committee to 
the EPA, was established in 1993.
Superfund was amended as a virtually direct result of the 
release of methyl isocyanate from a Union Carbide insecticide plant 
in Bhopal, India, in 1984. With an immediate death toll of some 
4000, a final death toll of many thousands more, and even more 
victims who suffered and are still suffering lingering effects, Bhopal 
disaster remains probably the worst industrial accident in history. 
An important law authorized by Title III of the 1986 Superfund 
Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA) is the Emergency 
Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act (EPCRA). It requires 
public records of chemicals managed at facilities, and provides 
the EPA with the authority to work with states and localities to 
prevent accidents and develop emergency plans in case of danger-
ous releases of chemicals (“EPA Superfund”). The EPA’s Toxics 
Release Inventory (TRI), a publicly accessible online database, is an 
outgrowth of EPCRA. It lists, among other annually collected data, 
the numbers of pounds of certain potentially hazardous chemicals 
released to the environment.
Outside of this fairly straight line to regulations protecting the 
American public from chemical releases, there was no shortage of 
other disasters throughout history. For decades in the early part of 
the 20th century, one of Japan’s Chisso Corporation plants began 
releasing methylmercury in industrial wastewater to Minamata Bay. 
It bioaccumulated in the aquatic life in the Bay and was eaten by 
the local populace, as well as animals. With the situation not discov-
ered until 1956, it took a severe toll on the population. Over 2000 
victims suffered from severe nervous system symptoms, and many 
of those died (Hachiya, 2006). Referencing this disaster as well as 
many other health concerns of the chemical, the 2013 Minamata 
Convention on Mercury is a global treaty to protect human health 
and the environment from the adverse effects of the chemical and 
its compounds (“Mercury Convention”). Itai-itai, another disease 
outbreak in Japan, was caused by cadmium poisoning, resulting 
from the release of large quantities of this chemical into the Jinzū 
River from mining operations. Weak and brittle bones are among 
the main effects. Again, it took decades for this to come to light 
and investigations were not undertaken in earnest by the Toyama 
Prefecture until 1961. In Italy, the 1976 Seveso disaster was the 
result of an industrial accident. Named after the Italian town of 
Seveso, it resulted in the exposure of thousands of people to dioxin. 
Chloracne was among the main sequelae and there was an excess 
risk of lymphatic and hematopoietic tissue neoplasms in the most 
exposed zones (Pesatori et al., 2009). Man-made as well as natu-
rally occurring environmental accidents involving chemicals have 
occurred throughout the world. Some of these exposures were 
avoidable and some were not. When natural phenomenon leads to 
chemical exposures we are often left without a clear understanding 
of the cause. On August 15, 1984, Lake Monoun in West Province, 
Cameroon exploded in a limnic eruption, in which dissolved car-
bon dioxide suddenly erupted from deep lake waters, forming a 
gas cloud with suffocating potential. The gas killed 37 people. At 
that time, such eruptions involving volcanic lakes were unknown. It 
was still unclear how to deal with this type of disaster 2 years later 
when on August 21, 1986 a similar and even more deadly eruption 
occurred at Lake Nyos, about 100 km (62 mi) NNW. The Lake 
Nyos eruption killed approximately 1746 people and more than 
3000 livestock. Lake Monoun, Lake Nyos, and Lake Kivu are the 
only known volcanic lakes in the world to have high concentrations 
of gas dissolved deep below the surface (Kling et al., 2005). The 
buildup of these gases can result in a limnic eruption. Currently 
efforts are underway to understand these volcanic lakes and devise 
ways to safely degas them without harming humans or surround-
ing plant and animal life. With each new environmental mishap or 
disaster, we are reminded of the fragility of human life and the eco-
system. We can learn by understanding how and why these expo-
sures occur and either prevent or prepare for the next incident.
The Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) is a U.S. law 
passed by the United States Congress in 1976 and administered 
by the United States Environmental Protection Agency. The law 
regulates the introduction of new or already existing chemicals. 
When the TSCA was put into place, all existing chemicals were 
considered to be safe for use. There were, however, some 62,000 
chemicals that were never tested by the EPA because they were 
“grandfathered” in and statutorily not considered an “unreasonable” 
risk. The TSCA did not require any toxicity testing before submit-
ting a Pre-Manufacturing Notice (PMN). No safety information 
was required to be included in the PMN. The EPA had to rely on

The Evolving Journey of Toxicology: A Historical Glimpse
Chapter 1
17
computer modeling to determine whether the new chemical “could” 
present an unreasonable risk. The 2013 reform to the law aimed 
to fix the key flaws in TSCA’s safety standard. These flaws led to 
the EPA’s inability to ban asbestos. The new changes allowed the 
EPA to order testing without first having to show potential risk, and 
making more information about chemicals available to states, health 
professionals, and the public by limiting trade-secret allowances. 
The Frank R. Lautenberg Chemical Safety for the 21st Century Act 
revised the standard TSCA used to determine whether regulatory 
control of a certain chemical is warranted. If a chemical presents 
an unreasonable risk of injury to health or the environment, TSCA 
requires the EPA to initiate rulemaking to reduce risks to a reason-
able level. The bill requires that standard to be based on exposure 
to a chemical under its conditions of use.
A sampling of other significant environmental legisla-
tion administered by the EPA includes the Federal Insecticide, 
Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) (1947), which regulates 
pesticides, the Clean Air Act (1970), the Clean Water Act (1972), 
the Safe Drinking Water Act (1974), and the Resource Conservation 
and Recovery Act (RCRA) (1976), giving the agency the authority 
to control hazardous waste from “cradle to grave,” all strengthened 
in various ways with amendments since their initial implementation.
The Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction 
of Chemicals (REACH) is a European Union regulation dated 
December 18, 2006. REACH requires all companies manufactur-
ing or importing chemical substances into the European Union in 
quantities of one ton or more per year to register these substances 
with the European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) in Helsinki, Finland. 
Since REACH applies to some substances that are contained in 
products (“articles” in REACH terminology), any company import-
ing goods into Europe could also be affected.
Occupational Safety and Health and 
Industrial Toxicology
As we have seen, concerns about occupational safety date back 
to antiquity. Modern industrial toxicology in the United States, 
though, was born out of the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) in 
the early 1900s with the first report on industrial hygiene commis-
sioned in 1903 by Carroll D. Wright, the Bureau’s first commis-
sioner. Charles P. Neill, Commissioner of the Bureau when the 
1906 Meat Inspection Act and Food and Drug Act were passed, 
was responsible for inspecting the meat packing factories just prior 
to the passage of these laws. Neill was an advocate for industrial 
health and safety issues and made them a priority for the Bureau. 
After the Federal Employees’ Compensation Act of 1908, Neill 
began to put even greater emphasis on industrial hygiene and safety. 
He was aware of and impressed by Alice Hamilton, Chief Medical 
Examiner for the Illinois State Commission on Occupational 
Diseases, and convinced her to work for the BLS. She was given 
the official title of “Special Investigator of Industrial Diseases” and 
one of her first assignments was to investigate companies in the 
United States that manufactured white lead. She discovered 358 
cases of lead poisoning between 1910 and 1911, 16 of which were 
fatal. She also discovered incidents of lead poisoning in the pot-
tery making industry and in the painter’s trade. Alice Hamilton 
was a modern-day pioneer of occupational safety comparable to 
Ramazzini in his day. She traveled the country documenting the 
diseases associated with various occupations, and while not offi-
cially employed by the government during her early excursions, 
her research and reports were respected and procured by the gov-
ernment. She conducted surveys throughout the United States 
and abroad. She read extensively on worker protection. While the 
subject was documented and recognized as an official branch of 
medicine in Europe, workplace-related diseases and preventive 
measures received scant attention in the United States. Government 
officials at that time were unconcerned, and assured her that the 
working conditions in the United States were better than those in 
other countries so there was no need for industrial safety. However, 
a survey conducted by the BLS under Carroll Wright proved oth-
erwise. Investigations of the match-making industry revealed hun-
dreds of workers suffering from “phossy jaw” after being exposed 
to phosphorous dust particles. The disease caused painful swelling 
of the gums and jaw. Abscesses in the jaw that resulted in partial 
or total removal of the jawbone were common. Often the condi-
tion led to organ failure and death. Phossy Jaw was well known in 
both Europe and the United States at the time. European industrial 
medicine experts warned of this occupational disease in their coun-
tries, but the United States did little to protect or warn its workers. 
Hamilton was determined to document and make public informa-
tion about these diseases so that something could be done to pro-
tect workers. During her surveys, she gained entry into countless 
factories, becoming well informed of the manufacturing processes 
for various trades. She was the leading authority on lead poison-
ing and reported on the high mortality rates of workers in the lead 
industries. Her reports undoubtedly invigorated the laws that were 
passed, as many were a direct response to tragedies or diseases she 
uncovered in workplaces across the country. The seed for occupa-
tional safety was planted by a small group of concerned officials, 
but it was cultivated by Hamilton who became the eyes and ears of 
the movement (Hamilton, 1943).
The BLS was not the only organization to address occupa-
tional health and safety concerns. The Bureau of Mines, for exam-
ple, was created in 1910, within the Department of the Interior, 
and health and safety were within its purview. The National Safety 
Council was established in 1911. An Office of Industrial Hygiene 
and Sanitation was established within the Public Health Service 
in 1914. The Journal of Industrial Hygiene started publication in 
1918. By the late 1940s many of the country’s largest companies 
(such as Dow, Du Pont, and Union Carbide) began to establish inter-
nal toxicology laboratories to help ensure worker safety. Frank A. 
Patty who served as Director of Industrial Hygiene for General 
Motors authored Industrial Hygiene and Toxicology in 1948. His 
book, now known as Patty’s Industrial Hygiene and Toxicology 
has gone through many editions and is a standard of the field. 
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) was 
founded in 1971 with the first guidelines for standards of safety 
following in 1972. Hamilton published Industrial Hygiene in 1925, 
the first American textbook in the field. She published Industrial 
Toxicology in 1934.
Harriet Hardy was a physician from Massachusetts. She 
became interested in industrial toxicology and began working for 
the Massachusetts Division of Occupational Medicine. She began 
studying the diseases of workers in the fluorescent bulb industries in 
Ipswich, Lynn and Salem, Massachusetts around 1945 (Castleman, 
1994). She discovered that many of the workers contracted beryl-
liosis. Berylliosis is caused by the inhalation of dust or fumes con-
taining beryllium. The disease presents itself with coughing, weight 
loss, shortness of breath, and scarring of the lungs. While beryllium 
was a main area of study for Dr. Hardy throughout her career, she 
also studied anthrax and mercury poisoning. Alice Hamilton invited 
Hardy to update Industrial Toxicology. Hamilton and Hardy’s 
Industrial Toxicology, now in its 6th edition, is another classic of the 
field. The OSHA passed in 1970 by President Nixon also created 
the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH). 
Although OSHA is the regulatory agency that establishes limits to

18
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
chemical exposures in the workplace and investigates workplace 
hazards, NIOSH conducts research to help to reduce workplace ill-
nesses and accidents.
MISCELLANEOUS ORGANIZATIONS
While organizations are discussed throughout this chapter in the 
context of the particular subject under consideration, we gather 
together here several additional professional societies, governmental 
organizations, and other bodies that been influential in toxicology.
The discipline and profession of toxicology has grown enor-
mously in the past century. There are numerous scholarly societ-
ies, professional and government organizations, conferences, 
textbooks, and educational programs, all dedicated to toxicology. 
The Society of Toxicology (SOT) was founded in 1961 by Fredrick 
Coulston, William Deichmann, Kenneth DuBois, Victor Drill, 
Harry Hayes, Harold Hodge, Paul Larson, Arnold Lehman, and C. 
Boyd Shaffer (Hays, 1986). There were 108 charter members who 
joined SOT the first year. There are now thousands of members of 
SOT in addition to members of affiliate organizations who attend 
the annual conference. To name just a few other groups devoted 
to more specialized areas of toxicology, consider the International 
Society of Toxinology (est. 1962), the American Academy of 
Clinical Toxicology (est. 1968), the Society of Forensic Toxicology 
(est. 1970), the Society of Toxicologic Pathology (est. 1971), the 
Society of Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry (est. 1979), 
the American College of Toxicology (est. 1979), the Society of Risk 
Analysis (est. 1980), and the International Society for the Study of 
Xenobiotics (est. 1981).
The FDA continues to play a primary role in toxicology 
research and regulations. The National Center for Toxicological 
Research (NCTR), founded in 1971 to support FDA’s ability to 
make science-based decisions, is considered its research arm. The 
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS) is a 
branch of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and was founded 
in 1969 to study the effects of the environment on human disease. 
NIEHS is home to the National Toxicology Program, an interagency 
program of the Department of Health and Human Service (DHHS), 
and dedicated to testing and evaluating substances in the environ-
ment. Other U.S. government agencies, although their mission does 
not focus on toxicology, are in fact involved in it to one extent or 
another. Examples are the Department of Transportation, which 
regulates hazardous materials, and the Department of Housing and 
Urban Development, which considers toxic chemicals in dwellings. 
The Consumer Product Safety Commission is a regulatory agency 
charged with protecting the public from unreasonable risks of injury 
or death associated with the use of consumer products, including 
household chemicals. Certainly, state and local jurisdictions also 
must deal with issues relating to toxicology and environmental 
health.
The Gordon Research Conferences “provide an international 
forum for the presentation and discussion of frontier research in the 
biological, chemical, and physical sciences, and their related tech-
nologies” (Gordon Research Conferences, n.d.). They have played 
a key role in the history of toxicology and in furthering its research. 
A series of conferences were held on toxicology and safety evalua-
tion, beginning with one chaired by Bernard Oser in 1956. Indeed, 
it was at the conference in 1961 at Kimball Union Academy in 
Meriden, New Hampshire that the first organizational meeting 
for SOT was held. There continue to be several Gordon Research 
Conferences of toxicological relevance each year.
There are also several organizations that offer certification in 
toxicology. The American Board of Toxicology is considered the 
“gold standard” in the field for many and its diplomats receive the 
“DABT” designation upon successful completion of the exam. 
The Academy of Toxicological Sciences, the American Board of 
Medical Toxicology, the American Board of Forensic Toxicology, 
and the American Board of Veterinary Toxicology are also among 
the main certifying organizations within the various toxicology 
disciplines.
The Federation of European Toxicologists and European 
Societies of Toxicology, or EUROTOX, fosters the science and 
teaching of toxicology throughout Europe. On an even broader 
global level, the International Union of Toxicology, founded in 
1980, has as its members toxicology societies from around the 
world, and hosts the triennial International Congress of Toxicology 
(ICT) in addition to the Congress of Toxicology in Developing 
Countries (CTDC).
INTERNATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL 
CONVENTIONS AND OTHER GLOBAL 
EFFORTS
Given that toxic agents do not respect national borders, it is impor-
tant to seek, where possible, international agreements on control-
ling them. Globally, there are treaties that have had, and continue 
to have, a strong component related to chemicals management. 
Multilateral Environmental Agreements (MEAs) is the broad term 
used to encompass such agreements, some of which are directly 
relevant to toxicology in terms of managing potentially hazard-
ous chemicals. While such international conventions were signed 
even in the early years of the 20th century, most of them are an 
outgrowth of several United Nations conferences, that is, the UN 
Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm, 1972), the 
UN Conference on Environment and Development, aka the Earth 
Summit (Rio de Janeiro, 1992), and the UN World Summit on 
Sustainable Development (Johannesburg, 2002). The big three 
MEAs particularly relevant to chemicals management are the 
Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements 
of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal (adopted 1989; entered 
into force 1992), the Rotterdam Convention on the Prior Informed 
Consent Procedure for Certain Hazardous Chemicals and Pesticides 
in International Trade (adopted 1998; entered into force 2004), 
and the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants 
(adopted 2001; entered into force 2004).
Complementing the treaties above is the Strategic Approach 
to International Chemicals Management (SAICM), a non-binding 
policy framework to promote chemical safety around the world. 
Its overall objective is “the achievement of the sound management 
of chemicals throughout their life cycle so that by the year 2020, 
chemicals are produced and used in ways that minimize significant 
adverse impacts on the environment and human health.” SAICM’s 
objectives are grouped into five themes: risk reduction; knowledge 
and information; governance; capacity-building and technical coop-
eration; and illegal international traffic. SAICM’s final decision-
making meeting before the 2020 goal, the fourth session of the 
International Conference on Chemicals Management, was held in 
Geneva in 2015.
ANIMAL ALTERNATIVES, RISK 
ASSESSMENT, AND GREEN CHEMISTRY
While we have already seen how poisoning incidents and environ-
mental accidents can spur legislation and consequently influence 
and advance the course of toxicological science, another issue has

The Evolving Journey of Toxicology: A Historical Glimpse
Chapter 1
19
played a major role as well. The practice of using animals in sci-
entific experiments with the ultimate aim of advancing biomedical 
research and safeguarding human health has had a long and check-
ered history. Greeks such as Aristotle and Erasistratus perfor­
med experiments on living animals as early as the 4th century bc  
(Hajar, 2011). Though animal experimentation was generally 
well intentioned and has resulted in significant breakthroughs in 
improving health, there have always been ethical concerns and 
continued questions about relevance and cost. Over the years, more 
and more, the public advocated for, and toxicologists employed, 
alternative means to assess the toxicity and safety of toxicants. The 
need for less expensive, and more efficient and germane, means of 
testing were spurs to the search for animal alternatives, in support 
of the significant argument of compassion.
W.M.S. Russell and R.L. Burch first proposed the concept of 
the Three Rs, standing for Replacement, Reduction, and Refinement, 
in 1959 (Russell and Burch, 1959). These ethical principles are 
widely adhered to throughout the world as a way to significantly 
limit the number of animals used in scientific experimentation. The 
term alternatives, as an approximate synonym for the Three Rs, 
was coined by the distinguished physiologist David Smyth in 1978 
(Smyth, 1978). The U.S. Animal Welfare Act, signed into law in 
1966, regulates the treatment of animals in research and exhibition, 
and was a good first step in addressing the issues of animal use but 
it wasn’t until the technology advanced sufficiently that true inroads 
were made into alternatives to animal testing, which in turn were an 
impetus to strengthen the framework of risk assessment.
The EPA defines human health risk assessment as “the process 
to estimate the nature and probability of adverse health effects in 
humans who may be exposed to chemicals in contaminated environ-
mental media, now or in the future.” In 1983, the National Research 
Council (NRC), in its publication, Risk Assessment in the Federal 
Government (also known as the Red Book), set forth a critical para-
digm for assessing risks consisting of four steps: (1) hazard iden-
tification, (2) dose–response assessment, (3) exposure assessment, 
and (4) risk characterization. They also drew a distinction between 
this scientifically grounded process and the process of risk manage-
ment, which ideally relies upon it, but brings into play economic, 
legal, social, technological, and political factors, as well as public 
values (National Research Council, 1983). A complementary NRC 
publication in 2009 focused on improving both the technical analy-
sis supporting risk assessment and the utility of risk assessment, 
that is, making it more relevant to and useful for risk-management 
decisions and offered several recommendations (National Research 
Council, 2009). An NRC companion volume of another sort urged 
strengthening activities in exposure science (National Research 
Council, 2012). Given that exposure assessment is a critical step 
in the risk assessment process, it has been surprisingly underem-
phasized as a scientific companion to toxicology. The committee 
preparing this report “envisions a shift toward a toxicologic assess-
ment program that has an interface with exposure science and is 
influenced by and responsive to human and environmental expo-
sure data.” Most recently, in 2017, the National Academies issued 
the report, “Using 21st Century Science to Improve Risk-Related 
Evaluations” (https://www.nap.edu/catalog/24635/using-21st-
century-science-to-improve-risk-related-evaluations). It considers 
advances in molecular and cellular biology, omics technologies, 
analytical methods, bioinformatics, and computations tools, look-
ing as well at exposure science, and makes recommendations 
for integrating these new scientific approaches into risk-based 
evaluations.
The Precautionary Principle is a relatively recent means of inte-
grating ethical and common sense concerns into the risk assessment 
process. The 1998 Wingspread Statement on the Precautionary 
Principle summarizes it as follows:
When an activity raises threats of harm to human health or the environment, 
precautionary measures should be taken even if some cause and effect rela-
tionships are not fully established scientifically. In this context the propo-
nent of an activity, rather than the public, should bear the burden of proof.
While not new conceptually (e.g., better safe than sorry), 
formalizing it has helped incorporate the principle into vari-
ous policies and laws. Although not scientifically grounded, it 
invokes common sense for many people, scientists included. 
The Stockholm Treaty on Persistent Organic Pollutants, for 
example, invokes the Precautionary Principle to govern geneti-
cally modified organisms and some toxic chemicals (http://sehn.
org/wingspread-conference-on-the-precautionary-principle/).
Tied in with both modern approaches to non-animal testing 
and bringing risk assessment into the 21st century is the concept of 
“Green Chemistry.” The term was coined in 1991 by Paul Anastas, at 
the time an EPA staff chemist, who also developed and launched the 
EPA’s Green Chemistry Program (Anastas, 2009). It was after pub-
lication of his 1998 groundbreaking book Green Chemistry: Theory 
and Practice that this approach to creating safer chemical products 
was better appreciated by toxicologists (Anastas and Warner, 2000). 
Sometimes called “sustainable chemistry,” its focus is on the design 
of chemical products and processes that reduce or eliminate the use 
or generation of hazardous substances and applies across the life 
cycle of such products. Sustainability itself has become one of the 
early 21st century’s buzzwords. There is no universal definition of 
sustainable development, but one of the most widely quoted and 
earliest comes from the 1987 Brundtland Commission Report, also 
known as Our Common Future: “Development that meets the needs 
of the present without compromising the ability of future genera-
tions to meet their own needs” (Brundtland Commission, 1987). 
This very broad definition easily encompasses green chemistry and 
the direction toxicology should be taking in the future.
INFORMATION RESOURCES
Often overlooked in discussions, historical or otherwise, of any 
science, is its informatics framework. The National Library of 
Medicine (NLM), currently a component of the National Institutes 
of Health (NIH), began life in 1836 in the office of the U.S. 
Army Surgeon General. The Index Catalogue to its collection 
of monographs and periodicals was launched in 1880 and Index 
Medicus, the first comprehensive index of journal articles, in 1879. 
Toxicology papers have been in scope since those early years. 
The Toxicology Information Program was established at NLM in 
1967 at the behest, a year earlier, of the President’s (i.e., Lyndon 
Johnson) Science Advisory Committee. The Committee concluded 
that “there exists an urgent need for a much more coordinated and 
more complete computer based file of toxicological information 
than any currently available and, further, that access to this file 
must be more generally available to all those legitimately need-
ing such information” (PSAC, 1966). The program was renamed 
the Toxicology and Environmental Health Information Program 
(TEHIP) in 1994.
The TOXLINE database, intended to be a comprehensive 
bibliographic resource for scientific literature on toxicology, 
started operation in 1972 and ultimately was incorporated into 
the larger TOXNET system (“Toxnet”). Today, TEHIP offers an 
extensive array of free online databases including TOXLINE, the 
Hazardous Substances Data Bank (HSDB), the chemical diction-
ary ChemIDplus, the Household Products Database, Haz-Map, an

20
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
occupational health and toxicology database, EPA’s Toxics Release 
Inventory, and many more.
The EPA’s Aggregated Computational Toxicology Online 
Resource (ACToR), with data on over 500,000 chemicals, is 
another major portal as is the OECD’s eChemPortal, initiated in 
2004 in response to the request by the World Summit on Sustainable 
Development to improve the availability of hazard data on chemi-
cals. Finally, the European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) offers a 
unique source of information on well over 100,000 chemicals 
(https://echa.europa.eu/information-on-chemicals).
WHERE ARE WE HEADED?
Looking to the future, toxicology, no differently than other sci-
ences, will continue to rely heavily upon the knowledge gained 
from basic research. New techniques and technologies have only 
improved the field of toxicology. The sequencing of the human 
and other genomes has markedly affected all biological sciences. 
Toxicology is no exception. Today new animal models, especially 
zebrafish, Caenorhabditis elegans, and Drosophila melanogaster 
(all of which have orthologs of human genes), are widely used 
in toxicology. The understanding of epigenetics is opening novel 
approaches to the fetal origin of adult diseases including cancers, 
diabetes, and neurodegenerative diseases and disorders. The dis-
covery of micro RNAs and siRNAs has significantly improved our 
ability to understand the function of certain genes. The 21st cen-
tury genome editing tool CRISPR (Clustered Regularly Interspaced 
Short Palindromic Repeats) will likely find its way into a variety of 
toxicological applications.
Small interfering RNA (siRNA) or short interfering RNA is a 
class of double-stranded RNA molecules ranging from 20 to 25 base 
pairs in length. Small interfering RNA functions through the RNA 
interference (RNAi) pathway and works by blocking the expression 
of specific genes with a complementary nucleotide sequence. The 
result of this interaction prevents translation of the target mRNA. 
David Baulcombe and Andrew Hamilton discovered these inhibitory 
elements in plants, and later the phenomenon was discovered in C. 
elegans by Craig Mello and Andrew Fire (Fire et al., 1998; Hamilton 
and Baulcombe, 1999). Their discoveries gave rise to a new tool 
for biomedical research and drug discovery. Significant therapeutic 
advances have been made in rare genetic diseases, infectious dis-
eases, and other more common illnesses based on the siRNA plat-
form. RNAi-based therapeutics include drugs targeting age-related 
macular degeneration (AMD), respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), 
hepatitis C, cancer, and renal failure. The development of these 
unique and specific therapies and the platform around gene silenc-
ing is responsible for the increase in pharmaceutical companies and 
academic centers devoted to this area of research. The number of 
new and existing companies and academic programs with RNAi 
programs is too numerous to list here, but they are the platform from 
which new advances in research and drug discovery will mature.
Contemporary toxicology is spreading its research tentacles 
in a variety of directions. The toxicological study of nanomateri-
als promises to yield significant findings based upon quantum 
size effects and large surface area to volume ratios. They may 
pose unique threats to the environment and humans. The recently 
articulated concept of the exposome, in a sense of the environmen-
tal equivalent of the human genome, considers the many complex 
exposures we are subjected to throughout our lives, including 
diet, lifestyle, and social influences. Systems biology is increas-
ingly being used to identify biomarkers of toxicant exposure and to 
understand molecular mechanisms of toxic pathways. Researchers 
are uncovering the significant role of the microbiome in affecting 
toxicity. Meanwhile, organs-on-chips are a new technology which 
may, in the future, revolutionize toxicity testing.
Few disciplines can point to both basic sciences, direct appli-
cations, and societal influences at the same time. Toxicology may be 
unique in this regard. The mechanisms of action of the xenobiotics 
studied by toxicologists, in the tradition of Claude Bernard, con-
tinue to be the tools of modern biology. Adverse outcome pathways 
(AOPs), today, are being recognized as a new construct for orga-
nizing biological information. Data, its generation and application, 
have always been a critical element in science. Today, big data, open 
data, and data science are all the rage, even though there seem to be 
no uniform definitions. In general terms, though, big data refers to 
data sets that are extremely large and require advanced computation 
to reveal patterns and trends. Open data refers to data that can be 
shared freely by all. One of the primary objectives is to accommo-
date interoperability to allow different data sets to work in tandem. 
Data science is an even more generic term encompassing big data, 
open data, and more. The 2017 annual conference of the Society 
of Toxicology convened an informational session on “Supporting 
Open Data in Toxicology.” Its goals were “to provide basic con-
ceptual frameworks to increase open access to toxicological data, 
encourage cross-discipline collaboration, link existing toxicological 
research data with computational toxicology and Tox21, and ensure 
long-term sustainability for toxicological data resources into the 
future.”
Tox21 (Toxicology in the 21st Century) is a federal collabora-
tion among the EPA and various NIH branches aiming to develop 
better toxicity assessment methods to quickly and efficiently test 
whether certain chemical compounds have the potential to disrupt 
processes in the human body that may lead to negative effects 
(https://www.epa.gov/chemical-research/toxicology-testing-21st-
century-tox21). Since its inception in 2008, it has focused its 
chemical screening initiatives on two themes: (1) generating fit-
for-purpose cellular models for secondary screening, and (2) devel-
oping a high-throughput gene expression core facility. In a related 
vein, Evidence-based Toxicology took a cue from Evidence-based 
Medicine to more coherently adapt assessment and validation of 
toxicological test methods and testing strategies (Hoffmann et al., 
2016). The Evidence-based Toxicology Collaboration (EBTC), 
founded in 2011 at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public 
Health, sees itself as “guided by the themes of transparency, objec-
tivity and consistency.”
One of the great challenges remaining is the issue of mixtures. 
While most research focuses on single chemicals, we are, in fact, 
exposed to many chemicals at a time and over time. Learning how 
they interact with each other in causing their effects upon organisms 
is a critical question. Related to this is the issue of the effects of 
chemicals or combinations thereof in common household products 
including furniture, cars, electronics, and baby products.
The history of toxicology is rich with fascinating narratives 
that span many scientific disciplines. There are few fields which 
have interacted so widely and intimately with its sister sciences. 
Toxicologists are shaped in academia where they learn and develop 
the primary skillset to conduct basic research to understand mecha-
nisms of chemical interaction and biological processes. Graduate 
and undergraduate programs continue to develop and improve. 
Toxicology is taught in schools of public health, medical schools, 
and schools of pharmacy inside and outside of the United States. 
Toxicologists from academic laboratories continue to seed other 
academic institutions, government organizations, and private indus-
tries, as the guardians of human, animal, and environmental health.
The upward trajectory of toxicology continues unabated. Its sci-
entific foundation is becoming more assured, precise, and relevant.

The Evolving Journey of Toxicology: A Historical Glimpse
Chapter 1
21
Challenges will remain and part of the drag on its thrust will be inter-
mittent funding and political constraints but these will not be pow-
erful enough to interfere with long-term progress. Toxicology will 
continue to build upon its history, and build a trail of new history. A 
better understanding of toxicant exposures, individual and combined, 
and their effects upon living organisms will lead to an era when the 
global environment will be significantly safer and the world’s popu-
lace healthier. Reaching this goal will take time and labor but it is 
achievable as we look toward the future and learn from the past.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The editor and authors recognize contributions of previous authors 
of this chapter: Louis J. Casarett (1st and 2nd editions), Margaret C. 
Bruce (2nd and 3rd editions), John Doull (3rd and 4th editions), 
and Michael A. Gallo (4th to 8th editions).
REFERENCES
Accum F. A Treatise on Adulteration of Food, and Culinary Poisons, 
Exhibiting the Fraudulent Sophistications of Bread, Beer, Wine, 
Spirituous Liquors, Tea, Oil, Pickles, and Other Articles Employed in 
Domestic Economy and Methods of Detecting Them. London: Longman, 
Hurst, Rees, Orme, and Brown; 1820.
Adams S. The Great American Fraud. New York: Collier and Son; 1905.
Anastas P. Green Chemistry? He Invented the Term. New York: New York 
Academy of Sciences; 2009.
Anastas PT, Warner JC. Green Chemistry: Theory and Practice. New York: 
Oxford University Press; 2000.
Ardestani MM, Rahimi R, Esfahani MM, Habbal O, Abdollahi M. The 
golden age of Medieval Islamic toxicology. In: Wexler P, ed. History of 
Toxicology and Environmental Health. Toxicology in the Middle Ages 
and Renaissance. Academic Press; 2017:11–30.
Arihan O, Arihan SK, Touwaide A. The case against Socrates and his execu-
tion. In: Wexler P, ed. History of Toxicology and Environmental Health; 
Vol. 1: Toxicology in Antiquity. Academic Press; 2014:69–82:chap 8.
Barker S. Poisons and the prince: toxicology and statecraft at the Medici 
Grand Ducal Court. In: Wexler P, ed. History of Toxicology and 
Environmental Health. Toxicology in the Middle Ages and Renaissance. 
Academic Press; 2017:71–81.
Barroso MS. Animal stones and the dark age of Bezoars. In: Wexler P, ed. 
History of Toxicology and Environmental Health. Toxicology in Middle 
Ages and Renaissance. Academic Press; 2017:115–124.
Barroso MS. The Bezoar stone: a princely antidote, the Tavora Sequeir 
Pinto Collection—Oporto. Aca Med-Hist Adriat. 2014;12(1):77–98.
Bernard C. Leçons sur les Effets des Substances Toxiques et 
Medicamenteuses. Paris: Baillière; 1857.
Bertomeu-Sanchez JR. Popularizing controversial science: a popular trea-
tise on poisons by Mateu Orfila (1818). Med Hist. 2009;53(3):351–378.
Bertomeu-Sanchez JR, Nieto-Galan A, eds. Chemistry, Medicine, and 
Crime (Mateu J.B. Orfila (1787-1853) and His Times. Sagamore Beach, 
MA: Science History Publications; 2006.
Blow M. The Atomic Bomb. New Word City, Inc.; 2015.
Borzelleca JF. Paracelsus: herald of modern toxicology. Toxicol Sci. 
1999;53(1):2–4.
Brown JR, Thornton JL. Percivall Pott (1714–1788) and chimney sweepers’ 
cancer of the scrotum. Br J Ind Med. 1957;14(1):68–70.
Brundtland Commission. Our Common Future. New York: Oxford 
University Press; 1987.
Carson R. Silent Spring. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin; 1962.
Castleman 
B. 
Remembering 
Harriet 
Hardy, 
M.D. 
New 
Solut. 
1994;4(3):33–34.
Cavan S. Animal experimentation: the tragic legacy of science; n.d. 
Available at: http://userwww.sfsu.edu/kazbeki/animexper.html. Accessed 
August 8, 2017.
Cilliers L, Retief F. Lead poisoning and the downfall of Rome: reality or 
myth? In: Wexler P, ed. History of Toxicology and Environmental Health; 
Vol. 1: Toxicology in Antiquity. Academic Press; 2014a:118–126:chap 11.
Cilliers L, Retief F. Poisons, poisoners, and poisoning in ancient Rome. In: 
Wexler P, ed. History of Toxicology and Environmental Health; Vol. 1: 
Toxicology in Antiquity. Academic Press; 2014b:127–137:chap 12.
Cobb C. The case against the Borgias. In: Wexler P, ed. History of 
Toxicology and Environmental Health. Toxicology in the Middle Ages 
and Renaissance. Academic Press; 2017:53–62.
Conti F. Claude Bernard’s Des Fonctions du Cerveau: an ante litteram 
manifesto of the neurosciences? Nat Rev Neurosci. 2002;3(12):979–985.
Dal Bello M. La leggenda nera. I Borgia (a TV series). Città Nuova. 2012.
Dash M. Aqua Tofana: slow poisoning and husband-killing in 17th 
century Italy. A blast from the past; 2015. Available at: https://
mikedashhistory.com/2015/04/06/aqua-tofana-slow-poisoning-and- 
husband-killing-in-17th-century-italy/.
Dayan AD. What killed Socrates? Toxicological considerations and ques-
tions. Postgrad Med J. 2009;85:34–37.
de Boer JZ. The oracle at Delphi: the Pythia and the pneuma, intoxicating 
gas finds, and hypotheses. In: Wexler P, ed. History of Toxicology and 
Environmental Health; Vol. 1: Toxicology in Antiquity. Academic Press; 
2014:83–91.
Doull J. Toxicology comes of age. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 
2001:41:1–21.
Dronsfield A. Percival Pott, chimney sweeps and cancer. Education in 
Chemistry. Royal Society of Chemistry; 2006. Available at: https://eic.rsc.
org/feature/percival-pott-chimney-sweeps-and-cancer/2020205.article.
DuBois K, Geiling EMK. Textbook of Toxicology. New York: Oxford 
University Press; 1959.
Duffin CJ. Fossil sharks’ teeth as alexipharmics. In: Wexler P, ed. History 
of Toxicology and Environmental Health. Toxicology in the Middle Ages 
and Renaissance. Academic Press; 2017:125–134.
Duramy BF. Women and poisons in 17th century France. Chi-Kent L Rev. 
2012;87(2):347–370.
Farrell M. Pioneer forensic toxicologists: Marsh, Orfila and their predeces-
sors. Criminologist. 1994;18(1):33–36.
Felton JS. The heritage of Bernardino Ramazzini. Occup Med (Lond). 
1997;47(3):167–179.
Fire A, Xu S, Montgomery MK, Kostas SA, Driver SE, Mello CC. Potent and 
specific genetic interference by double-stranded RNA in Caenorhabditis 
elegans. Nature. 1998;391(6669):806–811.
Fornaciari G, Bianucci R. I e Bianca: Una Scomoda Verita [Francesco I 
and Bianca: An inconvenient truth]. Paleopatologia.It; 2010. Available 
at: http://www.paleopatologia.it/attivita/pagina.php?recordID=24.
Furst A. Moses Maimonides. Toxicol Sci. 2001;59(2):196–197.
Gantenbein UL. Poison and its dose: Paracelsus on toxicology. In: Wexler 
P, ed. History of Toxicology and Environmental Health. Toxicology in the 
Middle Ages and Renaissance. Academic Press; 2017:1–10.
Geiling EMK, Paul MD, Cannon MD. Pathologic effects of elixir of sulfa-
nilamide (diethylene glycol) poisoning: a clinical and experimental cor-
relation: final report. JAMA. 1938;111(10):919–926.
Gerritsen SP. Gewina. 2007;30(1):1–20.
Gibbs F. http://fredgibbs.net/posts/universals-and-particulars-of-poison; 
2017. Accessed August 8, 2017.
Gordon Research Conferences. https://www.grc.org; n.d.
Gow ASF, Scholfield AF. Nicander: The Poems and Poetical Fragments. 
London: Cambridge University Press; 2014.
Hachiya N. The history and the present of Minamata disease: entering the 
second half a century. Jpn Med Assoc J. 2006;49(3):112–118.
Hager T. The Alchemy of Air: A Jewish Genius, a Doomed Tycoon, and the 
Scientific Discovery That Fed the World but Fueled the Rise of Hitler. 
New York: Broadway Books; 2009.
Hajar R. Animal testing and medicine. Heart Views. 2011;12(1):42.
Hamilton A. Exploring the Dangerous Trades. Boston, MA: Little, Brown; 
1943. [Reprinted by Northeastern University Press, Boston, MA; 1985.]
Hamilton AJ, Baulcombe D. A species of small antisense RNA in posttran-
scriptional gene silencing in plants. Science. 1999;286(5441):950–952.
Hays HW. Society of Toxicology History, 1961–1986. Washington, DC: 
Society of Toxicology; 1986.
Hedeson GD. Jan Baptist Van Helmont and the medical-alchemical 
perspectives of poison. In: Wexler P, ed. History of Toxicology and 
Environmental Health. Toxicology in the Middle Ages and Renaissance. 
Academic Press; 2017:91–100.

22
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
Herbst AL, Ulfelder H, Poskanzer DC. Adenocarcinoma of the vagina. 
Association of maternal stilbestrol therapy with tumor appearance in 
young women. N Engl J Med. 1971;284:878–881.
Hernberg S. Lead poisoning in a historical perspective. Am J Ind Med. 
2000;38(3):244–254.
Heydari M, Hashempu MH, Zargaran A. Medicinal aspect of opium as 
described in Avicenna’s Canon of Medicine. Acta Medico-Historica 
Adriatica. 2013;11(1):101–112.
Hobenreich E, Rizzelli G. Poisoning in ancient Rome: the legal framework, 
the nature of poisons, and gender stereotypes. In: Wexler P, ed. History 
of Toxicology and Environmental Health; Vol. 2: Toxicology in Antiquity. 
Academic Press; 2014:42–51:chap 12.
https://echa.europa.eu/information-on-chemicals.
https://www.epa.gov/chemical-research/toxicology-testing-21st-century- 
tox21.
https://www.nap.edu/catalog/24635/using-21st-century-science-to- 
improve-risk-related-evaluations.
http://sehn.org/wingspread-conference-on-the-precautionary-principle/.
http://www.toxicology.org/about/vp/vision.asp.
Hoffmann S, Hartung T, Stephens M. Evidence-based toxicology. Adv Exp 
Med Biol. 2016;856:231–241.
Institute of Medicine Committee on Poison Prevention and Control. 
Historical context of poison control. In: Forging a Poison Prevention and 
Control System. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2004:80–
105:chap 4.
Jorgensen TJ. Strange Glow: The Story of Radiation. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press; 2016.
Jutte D. The Age of Secrecy: Jews, Christians, and the Economy of Secrets, 
1400–1800. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press; 2015:56–57.
Kaffka A. Sea-Dumped Chemical Weapons: Aspects, Problems, and 
Solutions. Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic; 1995.
Karaberopoulos D, Karamanou M, Androutsos G. The art of medicine: the 
theriac in antiquity. Lancet. 2012;376:1942–1943.
Khajja BS, Sharma M, Singh R, Mathur GK. Forensic study of Indian tox-
icological plants as botanical weapon (BW): a review. J Environ Anal 
Toxicol. 2011;1(3):112.
Kinch M. A Prescription for Change: The Looming Crisis in Drug 
Development. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press; 2016.
Kling GW, Evans WC, Tanyileke G, Kusakabe M, Ohba T, Yoshida Y, Hell 
JV. Degassing lakes Nyos and Monoun: defusing certain disaster. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci USA. 2005;102(40):14185–14190.
Lavers D. Origin of myths related to curative, antidotal and other medicinal 
properties of animal “horns” in the Middle Ages. In: Wexler P, ed. History 
of Toxicology and Environmental Health; Toxicology in the Middle Ages 
and Renaissance. Academic Press; 2017:101–114.
Lewin L. Die Gifte in der Weltgeschichte: Toxikologische, allgemeinver-
standliche Untersuchungen der historischen Quellen. Berlin: Springer; 
1920.
Lewin L. Gifte und Vergiftungen. Berlin: Stilke; 1929.
Liu Y. Poisonous medicine in ancient China. In: Wexler P, ed. History of 
Toxicology and Environmental Health; Vol. 2: Toxicology in Antiquity. 
Academic Press; 2014:89–97.
Maimonides M. On Poisons and the Protection against Lethal Drugs: A 
Parallel Arabic-English Edition. Gerrit Bos, ed. McVaugh MR, trans. 
Provo, UT: Brigham Young University; 2009.
Manohar PR. Toxicity of Ayurveda medicines and safety concerns: the 
need to revive the branch of toxicology in Ayurveda. Anc Sci Life. 
2014;34(1):1–2.
Mayor A. The Poison King: The Life and Legend of Mithradates, Rome’s 
Deadliest Enemy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press; 2010.
Mayor A. Alexander the Great: a questionable death. In: Wexler P, ed. 
History of Toxicology and Environmental Health; Vol. 1: Toxicology in 
Antiquity. Academic Press; 2014:52–59.
Marrs TT, Maynard RL, Sidell F. Chemical Warfare Agents: Toxicology and 
Treatment. West Sussex, England: Wiley; 2007.
Morgan JP, Penovich P. Jamaica ginger paralysis. Forty-seven-year follow-
up. Arch Neurol. 1978;35(8):530–532.
Mullner R. Deadly Glow: The Radium Dial Worker Tragedy. Washington, 
DC: American Public Health Association; 1999.
Nasser M, Tibi A, Savage-Smith E. Ibn Sina’s Canon of Medicine: 
11the century rules for assessing the effects of drugs. J R Soc Med. 
2009;102(2):78–80.
National Research Council. Risk Assessment in the Federal Government: 
Managing the Process. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 1983.
National Research Council. Science and Decisions: Advancing Risk 
Assessment. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2009.
National Research Council. Exposure Science in the 21st Century: A Vision 
and a Strategy. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2012.
NPR. http://www.npr.org/2011/03/17/134568383/japan-three-mile-island-
chernobyl-putting-it-all-in-perspective; n.d.
Nunn JF. Ancient Egyptian Medicine. Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma 
Press; 1996:144.
Orfila MJB. Traite des Poisons Tires des Regnes Mineral, Vegetal et Animal, 
ou, Toxicologie Generale Consideree sous les Rapports de la Physiologie, 
de la Pathologie et de la Medecine Legale. Paris: Crochard; 1814–1815.
Oser B. Toxicology then and now. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 1987; 
7:427–433.
Pesatori AC, et al. Cancer incidence in the population exposed to dioxin 
after the “Seveso accident” twenty years of follow-up. Environ Health. 
2009;8:30.
Pope MH. Bernardino Ramazzini: the father of occupational medicine. 
Spine. 2004;29(20):2335–2338.
Pratte ELH, Bryant S, Handley C, Hall M. Pick your poison. The Chemist. 
2014;87(2):19–29.
Pray S. A History of Nonprescription Product Regulation. New York: 
Pharmaceutical Product Press; 2003.
Primrose J. https://quod.lib.umich.edu/e/eebo2/A91017.0001.001?view=toc.
PSAC (President’s Science Advisory Committee). Handling of Toxicological 
Information. Washington, DC: White House; 1966.
Rosner D, Markowitz G. Standing up to the lead industry: an interview with 
Herbert Needleman. Public Health Rep. 2005;120:330–337.
Rosner F. Moses Maimonides’ treatise on poisons. JAMA. 1968; 
205(13):914–916.
Russell WMS, Burch RL. The Principles of Humane Experimental 
Technique. London: Methuen; 1959.
Sanchez GM, Harer WB. Toxicology in ancient Egypt. In: Wexler P, ed. 
History of Toxicology and Environmental Health; Vol. 1: Toxicology in 
Antiquity. Academic Press; 2014:2–10:chap 1.
Schlebusch CM, et al. Possible positive selection for an arsenic-protective 
haplotype in humans. Environ Health Perspect. 2013;121(1):53–58.
Seifert S. Richard Mead: one for the ages. Clin Toxicol (Phila). 
2011;49(1):53–55.
Slouber M. The venomous virgin: fact or fantasy? In: Wexler P, ed. History 
of Toxicology and Environmental Health; Vol. 2: Toxicology in Antiquity. 
Academic Press; 2015:98–103.
Smyth D. Alternatives to Animal Experiments. Scolar Press in Association 
with The Research Defence Society; 1978.
Sneader W. Drug Discovery: A History. Wiley; 2006. Available at: http://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/book/10.1002/0470015535.
Somerset A. The Affair of the Poisons: Murder, Infanticide, and Satanism at 
the Court of Louis XIV. St. Martin’s Press; 2014.
Spiller HA, Hale JR, De Boer JZ. The Delphic oracle: a multidisci-
plinary defense of the gaseous vent theory. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 
2002;40(2):189–196.
The Unitarian Review and Religious Magazine, Boston: Office of the 
Unitarian Review, 1879;12:130.
Timbrell J. The Poison Paradox. Oxford, MI: Oxford University Press; 
2005.
Touwaide A. Harmful botanicals. In: Wexler P, ed. History of Toxicology 
and Environmental Health; Vol. 1: Toxicology in Antiquity. Academic 
Press; 2014a:60–68:chap 7.
Touwaide A. Nicander, Thêriaka, and Alexipharmacka: venoms, poisons, and 
literature. In: Wexler P, ed. History of Toxicology and Environmental Health; 
Vol. 1: Toxicology in Antiquity. Academic Press; 2014b:44–51:chap 5.
Tsoucalas G, Sgantzos M. The death of Cleopatra: suicide by snakebite or 
poisoned by her enemies? In: Wexler P, ed. History of Toxicology and 
Environmental Health; Vol. 1: Toxicology in Antiquity. Academic Press; 
2014:12–20:chap. 2.

The Evolving Journey of Toxicology: A Historical Glimpse
Chapter 1
23
Tubbs RS, et al. Francois Magendie (1783–1855) and his contributions 
to the foundations of neuroscience and neurosurgery. J Neurosurgery. 
2008;108:1038–1042.
UNODA (United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs). https://www 
.un.org/disarmament/wmd/nuclear/npt/; n.d.
Unsworth J. History of pesticide use; 2010. http://agrochemicals.iupac.org/
index.php?option=com_sobi2&sobi2Task=sobi2Details&catid=3&sob
i2Id=31. Accessed August 8, 2017.
Wang G, et al. Persistent sulfate formation from London fog to Chinese 
haze. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2016;113(48):13630–13635.
Wax PM. Elixir sulfanilamide-Massengill revisited. Vet Hum Toxicol. 
1994;36(6):561–562.
Wikisource. Rig Veda; n.d.-a. Available at: https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/
The_Rig_Veda/Mandala_1/Hymn_191. Accessed August 8, 2017.
Wikisource. Christison, Robert (DNBoo). Dictionary of National Biography, 
1885–1900, Volume 10; n.d.-b. Available at: https://en.wikisource.org/
wiki/Christison,_Robert_(DNB00). Accessed August 8, 2017.
Wilkinson P. Chinese Myth: A Treasury of Legends, Art, and History (The 
World of Mythology). New York: Routledge; 2016.
Wisdom Library. http://www.wisdomlib.org/hinduism/book/sushruta-sam-
hita-volume-5-kalpasthana/d/doc142971.html; n.d. Accessed August 8, 
2017.
Wolnik KA, Fricke FL, Bonnin E, Gaston CM, Satzer RD. The Tylenol tam-
pering incident-tracing the source. Anal Chem. 1984;56(3):466a–470a, 
474a.
World Nuclear Association. http://www.world-nuclear.org/information-
library/safety-and-security/safety-of-plants/fukushima-accident.aspx; 
2017.
Wujastyk D. The Roots of Ayurveda: Selections from Sanskrit Medical 
Writings. London: Penguin; 2003:144.
Yang S, ed. The Divine Farmer’s Materia Medica: A Translation of the Shen 
Nong Ben Cao. Boulder, CO: Blue Poppy Press; 1998.
SUPPLEMENTAL READING
Adams F, trans. The Genuine Works of Hippocrates. Baltimore, MD: 
Williams & Wilkins; 1939.
Albert A. Selective Toxicity. London: Methuen; 1951.
Beeson BB. Orfila—pioneer toxicologist. Ann Med Hist. 1930;2:68–70.
Bernard C. Analyse physiologique des proprietes des systemes musculaire 
et nerveux au moyen du curare. C R Acad Sci (Paris). 1856;43:325–329.
Bryan CP. The Papyrus Ebers. London: Geoffrey Bales; 1930.
Clendening L. Source Book of Medical History. New York: Dover; 1942.
Gaddum JH. Pharmacology. 5th ed. New York: Oxford University Press; 
1959.
Garrison FH. An Introduction to the History of Medicine. 4th ed. 
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 1929.
Holmstedt B, Liljestrand G. Readings in Pharmacology. New York: Raven 
Press; 1981.
http://www.ranker.com/list/death-by-poison-list-of-famous-poison-­
victims/notable-famous-deaths.
http://www.theaic.org/pub_thechemist_journals/Vol-87-No-2/Vol-87-No2-
Article-4.pdf.
Hutt PB, Hutt PB II. A history of government regulation of adulteration and 
misbranding of food. Food Drug Cosmet J. 1984;39:2–73.
Leung AY. Traditional toxicity documentation of Chinese Materia Medica—
an overview. Toxicol Pathol. 2006; 34:319–326.
Orfila MJB. Secours a Donner aux Personnes Empoisonees et Asphyxiees. 
Paris: Feugeroy; 1818.
Poland A, Knutson JC. 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin and related 
halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons, examination of the mechanism of 
toxicity. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 1982;22:517–554.
Ramoutsaki IA, Ramoutsakis YA, Tsikritzis MD, Tsatsakis AM. The roots 
of toxicology: an etymological approach. Vet Hum Toxicol. 2000;42:111.
Unschuld PU. Medicine in China: A History of Pharmaceutics. Berkeley, 
CA: University of California Press; 1986.
US FDA. Toxicologic Principles for the Safety Assessment of Direct Food 
Additives and Color Additives Used in Food. Washington, DC: U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration, Bureau of Foods; 1982.
Williams RT. Detoxication Mechanisms. 2nd ed. New York: Wiley; 1959.

This page intentionally left blank