# 2. Principles of Toxicology
# Casarett & Doull's Toxicology, 9th Edition
# Pages: 44-83
# Unit: Unit I General Principles of Toxicology

2
chapter
Principles of Toxicology
Lauren M. Aleksunes and David L. Eaton
INTRODUCTION TO TOXICOLOGY
Toxicology is the study of the adverse effects of chemical, biological, 
or physical agents on living organisms and the environment. These 
toxic substances include naturally occurring harmful chemicals, or 
toxins, as well as foreign substances called xenobiotics. Toxins are 
poisons that originate from plants and microbial organisms and also 
include venoms released by animals in order to injure predators. 
Aflatoxin is an example of a toxin; it is produced and released from 
the fungus Aspergillus that grows on foods such as corn and nuts. 
Exposure to aflatoxin is associated with an increased risk of liver 
cancer. By comparison, xenobiotics include a variety of synthetic 
chemicals with different intended purposes. Pharmaceuticals are 
xenobiotics developed to treat disease, whereas pesticides are used 
to deter pests. In addition, a large number of chemicals are used in 
manufacturing and industrial processes. For example, the chemical 
“dioxin” (2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin [TCDD]) is gener-
ated during the production and/or combustion of certain chlori-
nated organic chemicals. A unique skin toxicity, called chloracne, 
has been observed in individuals exposed to dioxin. Some toxic 
substances can be produced by both natural and anthropogenic 
activities. For example, polyaromatic hydrocarbons are produced 
by the combustion of organic matter through ordinary processes 
(e.g., forest fires) and human activities (e.g., combustion of coal 
for energy production and cigarette smoking). Arsenic, a toxic met-
alloid, largely appears in groundwater as a natural contaminant, 
but also enters groundwater from other sources as well. Generally, 
such toxic chemicals are referred to as toxicants, rather than tox-
ins, because, although they may be naturally produced, they are not 
produced by biological systems.
Introduction to Toxicology
Subdisciplines of Toxicology
Spectrum of Undesired Effects
Allergic Reactions
Idiosyncratic Reactions
Immediate versus Delayed Toxicity
Reversible versus Irreversible Toxic 
Effects
Local versus Systemic Toxicity
Interactions of Chemicals
Tolerance
Characteristics of Exposure
Route and Site of Exposure
Duration and Frequency of 
Exposure
Dose–Response Relationships
Individual, or Graded, Dose–
Response Relationships
Quantal Dose–Response 
Relationships
Dose Extrapolation Across Species
Shapes of Dose–Response Curves
Monotonic Dose–Response Curves
Threshold and Linear, Nonthreshold 
Models
Nonmonotonic Dose–Response 
Curves
Essential Nutrients
Hormesis
Endocrine Active Chemicals
Assumptions in Deriving the Dose–
Response Relationship
Evaluating the Dose–Response 
Relationship
Therapeutic Index
Margins of Safety and Exposure
Potency versus Efficacy
Assessing Toxicological 
Responses
Causation in Toxicology
Mechanisms and Modes of Action
Adverse Outcome Pathways
Variation in Toxic Responses
Selective Toxicity
Species Differences
Modifying Factors
Genetics
Age
Sex
Circadian Rhythm
Microbiome
Toxicity Testing
Acute Toxicity Testing
Subacute (Repeated-Dose) Toxicity 
Testing
Subchronic Toxicity Testing
Chronic Toxicity Testing
Developmental and Reproductive 
Toxicity
Mutagenicity
Carcinogenicity
Neurotoxicity Assessment
Immunotoxicity Assessment
Sensitization
Eye and Skin Irritation and 
Corrosion
Other Toxicity Tests
Systems Toxicology
Transcriptome
Epigenome
Proteome
Metabonomics/Metabolomics
Exposome
High-Content Screening
Computational Toxicology
Innovative Testing Models
Acknowledgments
References

26
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
Toxic chemicals may also be classified in terms of their physi-
cal state (gas, dust, liquid, size; e.g., nanoparticles); their chemi-
cal stability or reactivity (explosive, flammable, corrosive); general 
chemical structure (aromatic amine, halogenated hydrocarbon, 
etc.); or ability to cause significant toxicity (extremely toxic, very 
toxic, slightly toxic, etc.). Classification of toxic chemicals on the 
basis of their biochemical mechanisms of action (e.g., alkylating 
agent, cholinesterase inhibitor, and endocrine disruptor) is usually 
more informative than classification by general terms such as irri-
tants and oxidizers. However, more descriptive categories such as 
air pollutants, occupation-related exposures, and acute and chronic 
poisons may be useful to associate toxic chemicals that result in 
similar adverse events or are encountered under particular condi-
tions. There is no single classification that is applicable to the entire 
spectrum of toxic chemicals. Instead, a combination of classifica-
tion systems is generally needed to best characterize toxic sub-
stances. In this textbook, for example, toxic chemicals are discussed 
in terms of their target organs (liver, kidney, hematopoietic system, 
etc.), use (pesticide, solvent, food additive, etc.), source (animal and 
plant toxins), and adverse effects (cancer, mutation, etc.).
Virtually every known chemical has the potential to produce 
injury or death if it is present in a sufficient quantity. Paracelsus 
(1493 to 1541), a Swiss/German/Austrian physician, scientist, and 
philosopher, phrased this well when he noted, “What is there that 
is not poison? All things are poison and nothing [is] without poi-
son. Solely the dose determines that a thing is not a poison.” This 
principle is often summarized with the phrase that “the dose makes 
the poison.”
Chemicals differ in their ability to produce serious injury or 
death. Table 2-1 shows the dose of chemicals needed to produce 
death in 50% of treated animals (lethal dose 50 [LD50]). Some 
chemicals produce death in microgram doses and are commonly 
denoted as extremely poisonous. Other chemicals may be relatively 
harmless after doses in excess of several grams. It should be noted, 
however, that measures of acute lethality such as LD50 do not accu-
rately reflect the full spectrum of toxic responses, or hazards, associ-
ated with exposure to a chemical. For example, some chemicals may 
have carcinogenic, teratogenic, or neurobehavioral effects at doses 
that produce no evidence of acute or immediate injury. In addition, 
there is a growing recognition that a number of factors can account 
for an individual’s susceptibility to a range of responses. These 
include age, genetics, diet, underlying diseases, and concomitant 
exposures among many other factors. Finally, it should be recognized 
that, for a particular chemical, multiple different effects can occur in 
a given organism, each with its own “dose–response relationship.”
A toxicologist is an individual trained to examine and commu-
nicate the nature of a toxicant’s properties and identify approaches 
to prevent or mitigate harm done to human, animal, and environ-
mental health. Toxicological research identifies the cellular, bio-
chemical, and molecular mechanisms of action of toxic chemicals 
and determines the extent to which these actions cause functional 
perturbations in critical organ systems. Using these data, a toxicolo-
gist then assesses the relationship between toxicant exposure (or 
dose) to the response (or outcome) and in turn the probability of an 
adverse event to occur. This determination requires an assessment 
of risk which is the quantitative estimate of the potential effects of 
a chemical on human and environmental health at particular expo-
sure levels (e.g., pesticide residues in food and chemical contami-
nants in drinking water). The variety of potential adverse effects 
and the diversity of chemicals in the environment make toxicol-
ogy a broad applied science that draws upon multiple disciplines 
including chemistry, biology, physiology, pathology, pharmacol-
ogy, molecular biology, physics, statistics, and more. Because of 
the many facets that require toxicological examination, the field is 
often divided into subdisciplines that require specialization in par-
ticular areas. Our society’s dependence on chemicals and the need 
to assess potential hazards have made toxicologists an increasingly 
important part of the decision-making processes.
SUBDISCIPLINES OF TOXICOLOGY
The professional activities of toxicologists fall into three main cat-
egories: mechanistic, hazard assessment, and regulatory. Although 
all three categories have distinctive characteristics, each contributes 
to the others, and all are vitally important to chemical risk assess-
ment (see Chap. 4).
A mechanistic toxicologist identifies the cellular, biochemical, 
and molecular mechanisms by which chemicals exert toxic effects 
on living organisms (see Chap. 3 for a detailed discussion of mecha-
nisms of toxicity). The results of mechanistic studies have implica-
tions in many areas of toxicology. In risk assessment, mechanistic 
data may be useful in determining whether an adverse outcome 
(e.g., cancer and birth defects) observed in laboratory animals may 
occur in humans. For example, the relative toxic potential of most 
organophosphorus (OP) insecticides in humans, rodents, and insects 
can be somewhat predicted on the basis of an understanding of com-
mon mechanisms (inhibition of acetylcholinesterase) and differ-
ences in biotransformation and accumulation of these insecticides 
among the three species. Similarly, mechanistic data may be very 
useful in identifying adverse responses in experimental animals that 
may not be relevant to humans. For example, the propensity of the 
widely used artificial sweetener saccharin to cause bladder cancer 
in rats has been demonstrated to be irrelevant to humans at nor-
mal dietary intake rates. This is because mechanistic studies have 
Table 2-1
Approximate Acute LD50 Values of Some 
Representative Chemicals
CHEMICAL
LD50 (mg/kg)*
Ethyl alcohol
10,000
Glyphosate
5,600
Sodium chloride
4,000
Ferrous sulfate
1,500
Morphine sulfate
900
Phenobarbital sodium
150
Chlorpyrifos
18
Picrotoxin
5
Strychnine sulfate
2
Nicotine
1
VX nerve gas
1
d-Tubocurarine
0.5
Hemicholinium-3
0.2
Tetrodotoxin
0.10
Dioxin (TCDD)
0.001
Botulinum toxin
0.00001
*LD50 is the dose (mg/kg body weight) causing death in 50% of exposed 
animals.

Principles of Toxicology
Chapter 2
27
demonstrated that bladder cancer is induced only under conditions 
where saccharin is at such a high concentration in the urine that it 
forms a crystalline precipitate (Cohen, 1998). Dose–response stud-
ies suggest that such high concentrations would not be achieved in 
the human bladder even after extensive dietary consumption.
Mechanistic data are also useful in the design and production 
of safer alternative chemicals and in therapies for chemical poison-
ing and treatment of disease. For example, the drug thalidomide was 
originally marketed in Europe and Australia as a sedative drug for 
pregnant women. However, it was banned for clinical use in 1962 
because of devastating birth defects that occurred if the drug was 
ingested during a critical period in pregnancy. Mechanistic studies 
over the past several decades have demonstrated that thalidomide 
may have a unique molecular mechanism of action that interferes 
with the expression of certain genes responsible for blood vessel 
formation (a process called angiogenesis). With an understanding 
of this mechanism, thalidomide has been “repurposed” as a valu-
able treatment for certain infectious diseases (e.g., leprosy) and 
multiple myeloma. This provides an interesting example of how 
a highly toxic drug with selectivity toward a specific population 
(pregnant women) can be used relatively safely in other individuals 
with proper precautions.
In addition to aiding directly in the identification, treatment, 
and prevention of chemical toxicity, an understanding of the mecha-
nisms of toxicant action contributes to the knowledge of basic phys-
iology, pharmacology, cell biology, and biochemistry. The advent 
of new technologies in molecular biology and genomics now pro-
vides mechanistic toxicologists with the tools to explore exactly 
how humans may differ from laboratory animals in their response 
to toxic substances.
A hazard assessment toxicologist conducts toxicity testing 
that provides comprehensive information for the evaluation of a 
chemical’s safety and to meet important regulatory requirements. 
The appropriate toxicity tests in cell culture systems or experimen-
tal animals (as described later in this chapter and other chapters) 
are designed to yield information to identify potential hazards and 
associated risks posed to humans and the environment from expo-
sure to specific chemicals. A hazard is a chemical or action that 
causes harm, whereas the risk is the likelihood for a hazard to result 
in harm. Risk is determined by the extent of the exposure to the 
hazard. The concern may be limited to effects on humans, as in 
the case of drugs and food additives. Toxicologists in the chemical 
industry, however, must be concerned not only with the risk posed 
by a company’s chemicals (insecticides, herbicides, solvents, etc.) 
to humans but also with potential effects on fish, birds, and plants, 
as well as other factors that might disturb the balance of the ecosys-
tem. Hazard assessment studies in toxicology rely upon mechanistic 
experimentation to provide important clues to a chemical’s mecha-
nism of action and provide valuable information used in the risk 
assessments performed by regulatory toxicologists.
A regulatory toxicologist has the responsibility for decid-
ing, on the basis of data provided by descriptive and mechanistic 
toxicologists, whether a drug or other chemical poses a suffi-
ciently low risk (or, in the case of drugs, a favorable risk/benefit 
profile) to be marketed for a stated purpose. The Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) is responsible for allowing drugs, cosmet-
ics, and food additives to be sold in the U.S. market according to 
the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA) (Table 2-2). 
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is responsible 
for regulating most other chemicals according to a variety of dif-
ferent legislative acts, including the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide 
and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA), the Toxic Substances Control Act 
(TSCA), the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), 
the Safe Drinking Water Act, and the Clean Air Act. In 1996, the 
U.S. Congress passed the Food Quality Protection Act (FQPA) 
that fundamentally changed the pesticide and food safety laws to 
consider stricter safety standards particularly for infants and chil-
dren, who were recognized as more susceptible to health effects 
of pesticides. In 2016, amendments to the TSCA were included in 
the Frank R. Lautenberg Chemical Safety for the 21st Century Act. 
Under this legislation, the U.S. Congress has mandated a require-
ment for the EPA to evaluate existing chemicals on strict timelines, 
update risk-based safety standards, and increase the public’s access 
to information regarding chemicals. This legislation also calls for 
greater utilization of alternative testing methods that reduce the use 
of animals for experimentation. As a result, computational toxicolo-
gists are needed to develop and implement computer-based models 
to predict adverse health effects resulting from the interaction of 
chemicals with biological organisms. Computational toxicology is 
important for the interagency Toxicity Testing in the 21st Century 
(Tox21) initiative between the National Toxicology Program, FDA, 
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, and National 
Center for Advancing Translational Sciences.
The EPA is also responsible for enforcing the Comprehensive 
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act 
(CERCLA, later revised as the Superfund Amendments 
Reauthorization Act [SARA]), more commonly called the 
Superfund Act. This regulation provides direction and financial 
support for the cleanup of waste sites that contain toxic chemi-
cals that may present a risk to human health or the environment. 
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) of 
the Department of Labor was established to ensure that safe and 
healthful conditions exist in the workplace. The National Institute 
for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) as part of the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in the Department of 
Health and Human Services (DHHS) is responsible for conduct-
ing research and making recommendations for the prevention of 
work-related injury and illness, making occupational toxicology 
an important component of regulatory toxicology. The Consumer 
Product Safety Commission (CPSC) is responsible for protect-
ing consumers from hazardous substances used in the household, 
whereas the Department of Transportation (DOT) certifies that 
materials shipped in interstate commerce are labeled and packaged 
in a manner appropriate for the amount of commensurate hazard. 
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), established in 1974, 
regulates the civilian use of nuclear material to protect public 
health and safety, and the environment. Regulatory toxicologists 
are also involved in the establishment of standards for the amounts 
of chemicals permitted in ambient air, industrial atmospheres, and 
drinking water, often integrating scientific information from basic 
descriptive and mechanistic toxicology studies with the principles 
and approaches used for risk assessment (see Chap. 4).
In addition to the above categories, there are other specialized 
areas of toxicology such as forensic, clinical, and environmental tox-
icology. Forensic toxicology is the application of analytical chem-
istry to toxicology. This field covers the medicolegal aspects of the 
deleterious effects of chemicals on animals and humans. The exper-
tise of forensic toxicologists is used to aid in establishing the cause 
of death and determining its circumstances in a postmortem inves-
tigation (see Chap. 32). Clinical toxicology is the realm of medical 
science concerned with disease caused by or uniquely associated 
with toxic substances (see Chap. 33). Generally, clinical toxicolo-
gists are physicians who receive specialized training in emergency 
medicine and poison management. Efforts are directed at treating 
patients poisoned with drugs or other chemicals and at the develop-
ment of new techniques to treat intoxications. Public information

28
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
about treatment and prevention is often provided through the 
national network of poison control centers. Environmental toxicol-
ogy focuses on the impact of chemical pollutants in the environment 
on biological organisms. Although toxicologists concerned with the 
effects of environmental pollutants on human health fit into this 
definition, it is most commonly associated with studies of chemicals 
in nonhuman organisms such as fish, birds, terrestrial animals, and 
plants. Often, the terminology of environmental health sciences is 
used to describe environmental toxicology that is concerned with 
human health. Ecotoxicology is a specialized area within environ-
mental toxicology that focuses on the impacts of toxic substances 
on population dynamics in an ecosystem. The transport, fate, and 
interactions of chemicals in the environment constitute a critical 
component of both environmental toxicology and ecotoxicology.
Information from the toxicological sciences, gained by expe-
rience or research, has a growing influence on our personal lives 
as well as on human and environmental health across the globe. 
Complementary fields such as exposure science advance toxicology 
by studying the magnitude and duration of contact between toxic 
chemicals and biological organisms. Knowledge about the toxico-
logical effects of a compound and the extent of exposure has impor-
tant implications for drugs, consumer products, waste cleanup, 
manufacturing processes, regulatory action, civil disputes, and 
broad policy decisions. The growing influence of toxicology on 
societal issues carries with it substantial ethical, legal, and societal 
implications for toxicological research and testing. Recognizing 
the many critical roles that toxicologists play throughout society, 
the Society of Toxicology, a professional organization for toxicolo-
gists, has developed the Code of Ethics that frames the expected 
behaviors and attitudes of its members (Table 2-3). This guidance 
covers a number of important activities including the conduct of 
scientific inquiries, communication of findings and assessments of 
risk, protections for animals, patients, and the environment, as well 
as transparency in conflicts of interest reporting. Adherence to these 
professional behaviors and ideals is critical for ensuring the public’s 
trust of the data and assessments conducted by toxicologists.
Table 2-2
Federal Agencies That Regulate Exposure to Toxic Chemicals in Drugs, Cosmetics, Consumer Products, Food, Work, 
and the Environment
SECTORS
AGENCIES AND 
COMMITTEES
RESPONSIBILITIES
MAJOR LEGISLATION
Drugs and 
cosmetics
U.S. Food and Drug Ad-
ministration (FDA)
Approve investigational new drug (IND) 
­applications to initiate clinical trials; 
­approve pharmaceuticals for marketing 
under a new drug application (NDA); 
­regulate chemical exposures in skin creams, 
lotions, powders, and makeup products
1938, Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic 
Act (FFDCA)
Consumer 
products
U.S. Consumer Product 
Safety Commission 
(CPSC)
Establish exposure standards for hazard-
ous substances in consumer products 
­including toys, cribs, cleaning products; 
require ­warning labels on products that are 
­corrosive, toxic, irritants, or sensitizers
1972, Consumer Product Safety Act
Federal Hazardous Substance Act
Food addi-
tives
U.S. Food and Drug Ad-
ministration (FDA)
Approve new direct additives (flavors, 
­texturing agents, preservatives, processing 
aids, etc.) that can be used in food; deter-
mine additives that are generally recognized 
as safe (GRAS) and do not require FDA 
­approval for use
1938, Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic 
Act (FFDCA)
1958, Delaney Clause
1996, Food Quality Protection Act 
(FQPA)
Environment
U.S. Environmental Pro-
tection Agency (EPA)
“Establish exposure standards for 
­pesticides, water, and air pollutants, and 
hazardous wastes”; prepare voluntary 
health advisories for drinking water and set 
­ambient air quality standards
1947, Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, 
and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA)
1970, Clean Air Act
1972, Clean Water Act
1976, Resource Conservation and 
Recovery Act (RCRA)
1976, Toxic Substances Control Act
1980, Comprehensive Environmental 
Response, Compensation and 
Liability Act (CERCLA)—Creation 
of Superfund
1984, Federal Hazardous and Solid 
Waste Amendments
2016, Frank R. Lautenberg Chemical 
Safety for the 21st Century Act
Occupational  
Exposures
U.S. Occupational Safety 
and Health Administra-
tion (OSHA)
Set legal standards for worker exposure in-
cluding permissible exposure limits (PELs) 
and short-term exposure limits (STELs)
1970, Occupational Safety and Health 
Act

Principles of Toxicology
Chapter 2
29
SPECTRUM OF UNDESIRED EFFECTS
The spectrum of undesired effects elicited by chemicals can 
be broad. Some effects are harmful, whereas others are not. 
Prescription drugs produce a number of effects, but typically only 
one of these actions is intended to be therapeutic; all of the other 
responses are referred to as side effects. However, some of these 
side effects may be preferred for another therapeutic indication. 
For example, the drug sildenafil was originally developed to reduce 
blood pressure in patients. During the clinical studies of sildenafil 
in hypertensive patients, male subjects reported sustained erections 
as a side effect. Recognizing the potential to repurpose this investi-
gational medication, the company subsequently gained approval of 
sildenafil for the treatment of erectile dysfunction under the brand 
name Viagra® (Boolell et al., 1996). Some side effects of drugs are 
never desirable and are always harmful to the well-being of animals 
and humans. These are referred to as the adverse, deleterious, or 
toxic effects of the drug.
Allergic Reactions
A chemical allergy is an adverse reaction of the immune system 
to a chemical in response to a previous exposure to that chemi-
cal or to a structurally similar one. The term hypersensitivity is 
most often used to define this allergic response, but allergic reac-
tion and sensitization reaction may also describe the situation 
when a prior exposure (sensitization) of the chemical is required 
to produce its subsequent toxic effect. Once sensitization has 
occurred, allergic reactions may result from exposure to relatively 
very low doses of chemicals. For a given individual, allergic reac-
tions can be dose-related. For example, it is well known that the 
allergic response to poison ivy or poison sumac in sensitized indi-
viduals is related to the extent of the skin’s exposure to urushiol 
oils found in the leaves. Some sensitization reactions, such as 
allergic reactions to nuts, shellfish, and other foods as well as 
certain antibiotics and xenobiotics, may be severe and occasion-
ally fatal.
Most chemicals and their metabolic products are not suffi-
ciently large enough in size to be recognized by the immune system 
as a foreign substance. Thus, these chemicals must first interact 
with a native protein to form an antigen (or immunogen). A mol-
ecule that combines with an endogenous protein to elicit an allergic 
reaction is termed a hapten. The hapten–protein complex (antigen) 
is then capable of stimulating the immune system to form antibod-
ies over a period of 1 or 2 weeks. Upon subsequent exposure to the 
chemical, the antigen is recognized by the antibody leading to a 
range of allergic responses of varying severities (from mild to fatal 
anaphylactic shock). The pattern of allergic response differs across 
species. In humans, involvement of the skin (e.g., dermatitis, urti-
caria, and itching) and the eyes (e.g., conjunctivitis) is most com-
mon, whereas in guinea pigs, bronchiolar constriction leading to 
asphyxia is observed. While skin and eye reactions most often occur 
in humans, chemically induced asthma (characterized by bronchio-
lar constriction) certainly can be seen. Hypersensitivity reactions 
are discussed in more detail in Chap. 12.
Idiosyncratic Reactions
Chemical idiosyncrasy refers to the abnormal reactivity of an 
individual to a chemical based on its genetics or other individual 
sensitivity factors (Goldstein et al., 1974; Uetrecht, 2007; Roth 
and Ganey, 2011). Idiosyncratic reactions have historically been 
defined as responses that are qualitatively similar to that observed 
in other individuals but occur at low doses due to an individual’s 
extreme sensitivity (Goldstein et al., 1974). More recent definitions 
describe idiosyncratic drug reactions as adverse effects unrelated 
to the therapeutic action of a drug that are typically not observed in 
most treated patients (Uetrecht and Naisbitt, 2013). It has been pro-
posed that idiosyncratic drug responses involve a combination of 
individual differences in the ability to (1) form a reactive interme-
diate (usually through oxidation to an electrophilic intermediate), 
(2) detoxify the reactive intermediate (usually through hydrolysis 
or conjugation), (3) mount an immune response through human 
leukocyte antigens (HLAs) as well as T cells, and/or (4) cause cell 
death (Uetrecht, 2007; Pan et al., 2017). The relatively low inci-
dence of these occurrences likely include patient-specific factors 
that extend beyond genetics, including inflammatory stress, infec-
tion, mitochondrial dysfunction, and environmental factors (Roth 
and Ganey, 2011). Typically, there is a delay between the time drug 
therapy is initiated and the clinical presentation of symptoms. In 
some cases, reinitiation of a medication can rapidly precipitate an 
idiosyncratic reaction. Often, the risk of an idiosyncratic reaction 
does not increase with higher doses of a drug. Although such reac-
tions are often rare and may occur at an incidence of 1 in 10,000 
exposed people or less, they are one of the common reasons why 
drugs are withdrawn from the market.
Idiosyncratic reactions can occur in any organ system; how-
ever, the skin, liver, hematopoietic, and immune systems are the 
most often affected. Within the skin, idiosyncratic drug reac-
tions can range from mild to life-threatening and include macu-
lopapular rashes, urticaria, drug reactions with eosinophilia 
Table 2-3
Toxicology Code of Ethics
 • Conduct their work with objectivity and themselves 
with integrity. Being honest and truthful in reporting and 
communicating their research.
 • Hold as inviolate that credible science is fundamental to all 
toxicological research and is the basis for communicating 
results.
 • Recognize a duty to communicate information concerning 
health, safety, and toxicity in a timely and responsible 
manner, with due regard for the significance and credibility of 
the available data.
 • Give due consideration to the ethical, legal, social, and policy 
implications of their research and communications.
 • Be a thoughtful advocate for human, animal, and 
environmental health.
 • Abstain from professional judgments influenced by 
undisclosed conflict of interest, disclose any material conflicts 
of interest, and avoid situations that imply a conflict of 
interest.
 • Observe the spirit, as well as the letter of laws, regulations, 
and ethical standards with regard to the conduct of human and 
animal research.
 • Practice high standards of environmental and occupational 
health, and safety for the benefit of themselves, their co-workers, 
their families, their communities, and society as a whole.
 • Provide equal opportunity and equal consideration to all 
members without regard to sex, gender identity or expression, 
race, color, national or ethnic origin, religion or religious 
belief, age, marital status, sexual orientation, disabilities, or 
veteran status.
Adapted from the 2012 version of the Society of Toxicology (https://
www.toxicology.org/about/vp/code-of-ethics.asp).

30
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
and systemic symptoms (DRESS), toxic epidermal necrolysis, 
and Stevens–Johnson syndrome. Examples of drugs and chemicals 
associated with idiosyncratic reactions in the skin include dini-
trochlorobenzene (industrial ingredient), piperacillin (antibiotic), 
abacavir (HIV antiviral drug), allopurinaol (gout drug), nevirapine 
(HIV antiviral drug), and carbamazepine (antiseizure drug). Liver-
related idiosyncratic drug reactions can be hepatocellular or chole-
static in nature and have been reported for halothane (anesthetic), 
nitrofurantoin (antibiotic), amoxicillin/clavulonate (antibiotic), and 
flucloxacillin (antibiotic). Hematologic idiosyncratic drug reactions 
can differentially affect neutrophil, platelet, and red blood cell pop-
ulations and can be observed with a number of medications includ-
ing heparin (anticoagulant), alpha-methyldopa (antihypertensive 
drug), and chloramphenicol (antibiotic).
Genetic variants in HLAs that encode major histocompatibility 
complex (MHC) proteins in humans have been strongly implicated 
in hypersensitivity reactions for a number of drugs and chemicals 
(Pavlos et al., 2012; Pan et al., 2017). MHC Class I proteins, includ-
ing HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-C, present peptides from proteins 
that break down inside a cell to cytotoxic CD8+ T cells. The genetic 
variant HLA-B*5701 is an important risk factor for hypersensitivity 
reactions resulting from exposure to the HIV medication abacavir 
(skin toxicity) (Mallal et al., 2008) and the antibiotic flucloxacil-
lin (liver toxicity) (Daly et al., 2009). Similarly, the HLA-B*1502 
allele is a risk factor for idiosyncratic drug reactions including 
Stevens–Johnson syndrome associated with the antiseizure drug 
carbamazepine (Chung et al., 2004; Chen et al., 2011). Other 
genetic variants, including those in metabolic enzymes such as glu-
tathione S-transferase, are thought to contribute to some extent to 
idiosyncratic drug reactions (Lucena et al., 2008). Because of the 
life-threatening nature of idiosyncratic drug reactions, it is critical 
that researchers continue to identify modifying factors that initiate 
and/or heighten these responses.
Immediate versus Delayed Toxicity
The toxic effects of a chemical can develop rapidly after a single 
exposure, or may be delayed for some time. Immediate toxicity can 
be observed for hydrogen cyanide or nerve gases such as sarin. 
Exposure to high doses of these chemicals can have rapid effects 
on the cardiovascular, respiratory, and neurological systems culmi-
nating in death within minutes. Because of their high toxicity and 
expeditious actions, hydrogen cyanide, sarin, and similar chemicals 
have been used as chemical warfare agents.
Delayed toxicities of chemicals may take months or years to 
be recognized. Because of the long latency period, decades after 
exposure to a carcinogenic chemical will pass before tumors are 
observed in humans. There are a number of examples of delayed 
toxicities due to xenobiotic exposure. Women were prescribed 
diethylstilbestrol (DES) during pregnancy in order to prevent pre-
term birth. The daughters of these women have a greatly increased 
risk of developing vaginal cancer, in young adulthood, approxi-
mately 20 to 30 years after in utero exposure to DES (Hatch et al., 
1998). Also, delayed neurotoxicity is observed after exposure to 
some organophosphate insecticides that act by covalent modifica-
tion of an enzyme referred to as neuropathy target esterase (NTE), 
a neuronal protein with serine esterase activity (Johnson, 1969, 
1975). Binding of certain organophosphate chemicals to this protein 
initiates degeneration of long axons in the peripheral and ­central 
nervous system (CNS). The most notorious of the compounds that 
produce this type of neurotoxic effect is the industrial chemical 
triorthocresylphosphate. The effect is not observed until at least 
­several days after exposure to the toxic compound.
Reversible versus Irreversible Toxic Effects
Some toxic effects of chemicals are reversible, whereas others 
are irreversible. The likelihood of a toxic response to be reversed 
largely depends on the ability of an injured tissue to adapt, repair, 
and regenerate. Therefore, for tissues such as the liver and gastro-
intestinal tract that have a high ability to regenerate, many inju-
ries are reversible. Within days of exposure to the hepatotoxicant 
acetaminophen, the liver mounts an adaptive response that includes 
the proliferation of remaining centrilobular hepatocytes and the 
differentiation of oval stem cells. However, there are limits to this 
repair capacity, and very high doses may overwhelm this adaptive 
response leading to permanent loss of function and potentially 
fatal liver failure. Because of the rapid proliferation of crypt epithe-
lial cells, the gastrointestinal tract is highly sensitive to anticancer 
drug cytotoxicity, but is also able to repair and repopulate intestinal 
villi with new enterocytes.
By comparison, the CNS has a much more limited ability 
to divide and replace damaged neurons making damage largely 
irreversible. This is exemplified by the persistent loss of neu-
rons that utilize the neurotransmitter, dopamine, which results in 
Parkinson’s-like symptoms observed in patients exposed to the neu-
rotoxin 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP+). MPP+ selectively 
targets dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta, 
which leads to neurodegeneration and clinical signs that range from 
slowed reaction time and motion (bradykinesia) to cogwheel rigid-
ity (Langston et al., 1983).
Cancers and birth defects caused by chemical exposures, once 
they occur, are often also considered irreversible toxic effects. For 
example, exposure to the antiangiogenic drug thalidomide during 
sensitive windows of fetal development prevents the formation of 
limbs—an effect that cannot be reversed. As a result, children are 
born with truncated or missing arms and legs, a condition called 
phocomelia. Therefore, it is important to understand the regenera-
tive and reparative capacity of a target organ in order to counteract 
a chemical’s toxic effects.
Local versus Systemic Toxicity
Toxic responses are also characterized according to the proximity 
between the site of chemical exposure and the site(s) of molecular 
action. Local effects are those that occur where contact is first made 
by the toxicant and the biological system. Such effects are pro-
duced by the ingestion of toxic substances or the inhalation of irri-
tant materials. For example, chlorine gas reacts with lung tissue at 
the site of contact, causing damage and swelling of the lungs, with 
possibly fatal consequences, even though very little of the chemical 
is absorbed into the bloodstream. By comparison, systemic effects 
require the absorption and distribution of a toxicant from its entry 
point to a distant site where the deleterious effects are produced. 
Most substances—except those that are highly reactive, such as 
strong acids and bases—produce systemic effects. In some cases, 
both local and systemic effects can be demonstrated for a single 
chemical. For example, tetraethyl lead produces effects on skin at 
the site of absorption and then is delivered systemically to cause 
its typical effects on the CNS and other organs. If the local area 
of injury is markedly affected by the toxicant, there may also be 
indirect systemic effects due to secondary events. For example, kid-
ney damage after a severe acid burn is an indirect systemic effect 
because the toxicant does not reach the kidney.
Most chemicals that produce systemic toxicity do not cause 
a similar degree of toxicity in all organs; instead, they usually 
elicit their major toxicity in only one or two organs. These sites are 
referred to as the target organs of toxicity for a particular chemical.

Principles of Toxicology
Chapter 2
31
While it may be true in some cases, the target organ of toxicity is 
not always the site of the highest concentration of the chemical. For 
example, lead accumulates in bones, but its toxic effects occur in 
soft tissues, particularly the brain. Instead, the bones act as a reser-
voir that can leach and release stored lead and cause neurological 
injury even years after exposure. The insecticide dichlorodiphen-
yltrichloroethane (DDT) concentrates in adipose tissue due to its 
lipophilic chemical property, but produces no known toxic effects 
in that tissue. However, the primary target organs for toxicity of 
DDT are the brain and female reproductive system. Thus, migrating 
birds who accumulated DDT in body fat at high levels during the 
summer months had no adverse effects until toxic concentrations 
of DDT were released from stored body fat into the blood and then 
brain and reproductive system during migration in the fall, leading 
to both acute mortality from neurotoxicity and decreased reproduc-
tive success.
Interactions of Chemicals
Throughout the day, an individual may come in contact with many 
chemicals at any given time (in the workplace, cosmetics, medica-
tions, diet, hobbies, etc.). As a result, it is necessary to consider 
how various chemicals may interact with each other. Interactions 
may impact a number of physiologic processes including absorp-
tion, protein binding, receptor signaling, and the biotransformation 
and excretion of one or both of the interacting toxicants. As a con-
sequence, the cumulative response(s) of an individual to combina-
tions of toxicants may be increased or decreased.
The study of chemical interactions often provides a better 
understanding of key mechanisms of toxicity. A number of terms 
have been used to describe pharmacological and toxicological inter-
actions (Fig. 2-1):
 • An additive effect occurs when the combined responses of two 
chemicals is equal to the sum of the responses to each chemi-
cal given alone (e.g., 2 + 3 = 5). For example, when two 
organophosphorous insecticides are given together, inhibition 
of acetylcholinesterase enzymes (AChE) is usually additive, 
based on the relative ability of each one to inhibit AChE.
 • A synergistic effect is observed when the combined responses 
of two chemicals are much greater than the sum of the response 
to each chemical when given alone (e.g., 2 + 2 = 20). For 
example, both carbon tetrachloride and ethanol are hepato-
toxic compounds, but together they produce much more liver 
injury than expected based on the extent of damage at a given 
dose when administered alone.
 • Potentiation occurs when one substance does not produce any 
toxicity on a particular tissue or system but when added to 
another chemical makes that chemical much more toxic (e.g., 
0 + 2 = 10). Isopropanol, for example, is not hepatotoxic on 
its own, but when it is administered in combination with car-
bon tetrachloride, the hepatotoxicity of carbon tetrachloride is 
much greater than when it is given alone.
 • Antagonism occurs when two chemicals administered together 
interfere with each other’s actions or one interferes with the 
action of the other (e.g., 4 + 6 = 8; 4 + (−4) = 0; 4 + 0 = 1).
Antagonism of the toxic effects of chemicals is often desirable 
in identifying important mechanisms of toxicity as well as in devel-
oping antidotes. There are four major types of antagonism: receptor, 
chemical, dispositional, and functional (Fig. 2-2).
 • Receptor antagonism occurs when two chemicals that bind 
to the same receptor produce less of an effect when given 
together relative to the addition of their separate effects (e.g., 
4 + 6 = 8) or when one chemical antagonizes the effect of the 
second chemical (e.g., 0 + 4 = 1). Receptor antagonists are 
often termed blockers. This concept is exploited in the clinical 
treatment of poisonings. For example, the receptor antagonist 
naloxone treats the respiratory depressive effects of morphine 
and other morphine-like narcotics by competitively binding 
to the same receptor. Thus, rapid administration of naloxone 
can be life-saving for someone who has overdosed on mor-
phine. Another example of receptor antagonism is the use of 
the antiestrogen drug tamoxifen to lower breast cancer risk 
among women at high risk for this estrogen-related cancer. 
As a partial agonist, tamoxifen competitively blocks estradiol 
from binding to its receptor. Treatment of organophosphorous 
insecticide poisoning with atropine is another example of an 
antagonism of toxicity by blocking a physiological “ligand–
receptor interaction.” In this example, atropine binds to the 
acetylcholine receptor and thus blocks the excess acetylcho-
line that accumulates after inhibition of the cholinesterase 
enzyme by the organophosphorous compound (see Chap. 22).
 • Chemical antagonism or inactivation is simply a direct 
chemical reaction between two compounds that produces a 
less toxic product. For example, 2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid 
(DMSA; succimer) chelates or binds to metal ions, such as 
arsenic, mercury, and lead, leading to decreases in their toxic-
ity. The use of the strongly basic low-molecular-weight pro-
tein protamine sulfate to form a stable complex with heparin, 
which abolishes its anticoagulant activity, is another example. 
The direct binding or sequestration of the two chemicals pre-
vents the toxicant from interacting with its receptor and in turn 
reduces downstream signaling and the propensity to cause cel-
lular damage.
 • Dispositional antagonism occurs when the disposition—that 
is, the absorption, distribution, biotransformation, or excre-
tion of a chemical—is altered such that the concentration 
and/or duration of the chemical at the target organ is reduced. 
Thus, the prevention of absorption of a toxicant by use of acti-
vated charcoal, and the increased excretion of a chemical by 
administration of an osmotic diuretic or alteration of the pH 
of the urine are examples of dispositional antagonism. If the 
parent compound is responsible for the toxicity of the chemi-
cal (such as the anticoagulant warfarin) and its metabolic 
breakdown products are less toxic than the parent compound, 
increasing the compound’s biotransformation (metabolism) 
0
10
20
30
40
50
Chemical A
Chemical B
Chemical C
A
B
C
A+B
A+B
A+C
A+B
Individual
Chemicals
Chemical
Combinations
Addition
Potentiation
Antagonism
Synergism
Response Scale
Figure 
2-1.  Illustration 
of 
responses 
following 
various 
chemi-
cal interactions. Data illustrate a theoretical response to three differ-
ent chemicals, either alone or in combination. As shown, chemicals 
A and B have measureable responses when used alone, whereas chemical 
C does not. Four different examples of chemical interactions, namely addi-
tive, synergism, potentiation, and antagonism, are plotted.

32
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
by administering a drug that increases the activity of the 
metabolizing enzymes (e.g., a “microsomal enzyme inducer” 
such as phenobarbital) will decrease its toxicity. However, if 
the chemical’s toxicity is largely due to a metabolic product 
(as in the case of the organophosphate insecticide parathion), 
inhibiting its biotransformation by an inhibitor of microsomal 
enzyme activity (e.g., piperonyl butoxide) will decrease its 
toxicity.
 • Functional antagonism occurs when two chemicals coun-
terbalance each other by producing opposing effects on the 
same physiological function, often through different signal-
ing pathways. For example, blood pressure can markedly fall 
during severe intoxication with a barbiturate, which can be 
effectively antagonized by the intravenous administration of 
a vasopressor such as norepinephrine. In this case, the bar-
biturate works through GABAA receptors and norepinephrine 
activates α-adrenergic receptors to produce opposing effects 
on vascular tone.
Tolerance
Repeated exposure to a chemical can reduce its pharmacologic 
and/or toxicologic responses, a process called tolerance. Cross-
tolerance occurs when structurally related chemicals cause dimin-
ished responses. Typically, days or weeks of repeated exposure are 
required for tolerance to occur. Depending upon the chemical and 
biological effects, there may be multiple mechanisms that cause 
tolerance:
 • Dispositional tolerance occurs when the amount of chemical 
reaching the site of action decreases over time, leading to the 
reduced responsiveness of the tissue to stimulation. A chemi-
cal known to produce dispositional tolerance is phenobarbital. 
The barbiturate, phenobarbital, produces tolerance to itself 
by increasing the expression of enzymes in the liver that are 
responsible for its biotransformation to pharmacologically 
inactive products, a process known as “biotransformation 
enzyme induction.”
 • Chemical or cellular tolerance may result from a lower avail-
ability of receptors and/or mediators (e.g., neurotransmitters). 
Drugs of abuse such as morphine interact with the opioid 
receptor; with repeated exposure to morphine, a protein called 
beta-arrestin-2 binds to the opioid receptor leading to desen-
sitization and tolerance. Comparatively less is known about 
the cellular mechanisms responsible for altering the respon-
siveness of a tissue to a toxic chemical than is known about 
dispositional tolerance.
CHARACTERISTICS OF EXPOSURE
Toxicity to a biological system requires that sufficient concentrations 
of the “active” form of a chemical accumulate at the site of action 
for a requisite period of time. Many chemicals possess relatively 
low toxicity in their “native” form but, when acted on by enzymes 
in the body, are converted to intermediate forms that interfere with 
normal cellular biochemistry and physiology. Thus, whether a 
toxic response occurs is dependent on multiple factors: chemical 
and physical properties of the chemical, the exposure scenario, how 
the chemical is metabolized by the system, the concentration of the 
active form at the particular target site(s), and the overall suscep-
tibility of the biological system to injury. In order to characterize 
fully the potential hazard of a specific chemical, one needs to know 
not only the type of effect it produces and the dose required to pro-
duce that effect, but also the information about the chemical, expo-
sure, and disposition. Two major factors that influence toxicity as it 
relates to the exposure situation for a specific chemical are the route 
of exposure and the duration and frequency of exposure.
Route and Site of Exposure
The major routes for entry of toxic chemicals into the body are 
the gastrointestinal tract (ingestion), the lungs (inhalation), and the 
skin (topical, percutaneous, or dermal). Chemicals generally pro-
duce the greatest effect and the most rapid response when given 
directly into the bloodstream (the intravenous route). Chemicals 
Receptor
Chemical
Dispositional
Functional
Receptor
Chemical A
Chemical
B
Receptor
Chemical A
Chemical B
Receptor
Opposing Effects
on the Same
Physiologic
System
Prevention of Chemical–
Receptor Interaction
or Activation
Signal Transduction
Chemical A
Chemical B
Receptor
Direct Interaction of Two
Chemicals Prevents Receptor
Interaction and Activation
Chemical
Clearance
Chemical A
Chemical B
Altered Metabolism or
Clearance of Chemical
Prevents Receptor
Interaction and Activation
Receptor
Metabolite A
Figure 2-2.  Antagonism can occur by multiple mechanisms. Four different types of antagonism are shown and include receptor, chemical, dispositional, and 
function. In each scenario, two chemicals (A [triangle] and B [square]) and their antagonistic relationships are shown.

Principles of Toxicology
Chapter 2
33
can also enter the body to varying degrees through other routes. An 
approximate descending order of effectiveness for the other routes 
would be inhalation, intraperitoneal, subcutaneous, intramuscular, 
intradermal, oral, and dermal. The vehicle, or the inert material in 
which the toxicant is dissolved, and other formulation ingredients 
can markedly alter chemical absorption after ingestion, inhalation, 
or topical exposure. In addition, the route of administration can 
influence the toxicity of chemicals. For example, a chemical that 
acts on the CNS, but is efficiently detoxified in the liver, would 
be expected to be less toxic when given orally than when given 
via inhalation, because the oral route requires that nearly all of the 
dose pass through the liver before reaching the systemic circula-
tion and then the CNS. Typically, different routes of toxicant entry 
into the body have been associated with certain types of exposures. 
Occupational exposure to chemicals most frequently results from 
breathing contaminated air (inhalation) and/or direct and prolonged 
contact of the skin with the substance (dermal exposure), whereas 
accidental and suicidal poisonings occur most frequently by oral 
ingestion.
A comparison of toxic doses (TDs) of a chemical by differ-
ent routes of exposure often provides useful information about the 
extent of absorption into the body. In instances when the TD after 
oral or dermal administration is similar to the TD after intravenous 
administration, the assumption is that the chemical is absorbed 
readily and rapidly. Conversely, in cases where the TD by the der-
mal route is several orders of magnitude higher than the oral TD, 
it is likely that the skin provides an effective barrier to absorption 
of the chemical. Toxic effects by any route of exposure can also 
be influenced by the concentration of the chemical in its vehicle, 
the total volume of the vehicle, and the properties of the vehicle to 
which the biological system is exposed, as well as the rate at which 
exposure occurs. For more details on the absorption of toxicants, 
see Chap. 5.
Duration and Frequency of Exposure
The duration and frequency for exposure of experimental animals 
to chemicals is classified according to four categories: acute, sub-
acute, subchronic, and chronic (Fig. 2-3). Acute exposure refers to 
exposure to a chemical for less than 24 hours. While acute exposure 
usually refers to a single administration, repeated exposures may 
be given within a 24-hour period for some slightly toxic or practi-
cally nontoxic chemicals. Acute exposure by inhalation refers to 
continuous exposure for less than 24 hours, most frequently for 4 
hours. Repeated exposure is divided into three categories: subacute, 
subchronic, and chronic. Subacute exposure refers to repeated 
exposure to a chemical for 1 month or less, subchronic for 1 to 3 
months, and chronic for more than 3 months, although usually this 
refers to studies with at least 1 year of repeated dosing. These three 
categories of repeated exposure can be by any route, but most often 
they occur by the oral route.
In situations of human exposure to chemicals, the frequency 
and duration of exposure are not well-defined compared to con-
trolled animal studies; nonetheless, many of the same terms are 
used to describe general exposure situations. Thus, workplace or 
environmental exposures may be described as acute (occurring 
from a single incident or episode), subchronic (occurring repeatedly 
over several weeks or months), or chronic (occurring repeatedly 
for many months or years). There are multiple examples of acute, 
subchronic, and chronic toxicities in humans. In 1984, leakage of 
methyl isothiocyanate from a chemical company led to acute expo-
sure and toxicity in over 200,000 people in India with an estimated 
2000 fatalities occurring in the first 24 hours. By comparison, chil-
dren and workers that come in contact with high levels of the toxic 
metal lead in their environment or workplace can result in discern-
able neurological deficits following subchronic exposure for weeks 
or months. Typically, it takes many years for the chronic toxicities 
of ethanol (e.g., liver cirrhosis) and cigarette smoking (e.g., chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease) to be observed.
For many chemicals, the toxic effects that follow a single expo-
sure are quite different from those produced by repeated exposure. 
For example, the primary, acute toxic manifestation of benzene is 
CNS depression, but repeated exposures can result in bone mar-
row toxicity and an increased risk for leukemia. Acute exposure to 
chemicals that are rapidly absorbed is likely to produce immediate 
toxic effects but can also produce delayed toxicity that may or may 
not be similar to the toxic effects of chronic exposure. Conversely, 
chronic exposure to a toxic chemical may produce some immedi-
ate (acute) effects after each administration in addition to the long-
term, low-level, or chronic effects of the toxic substance.
Toxicokinetic studies are performed by sampling the blood or 
tissue at various times after exposure to determine the concentration 
of a chemical and better understand the influence of exposures on 
toxicity endpoints. Concentration-time profiles for a given chemi-
cal are influenced by the frequency of exposures. The relationship 
between elimination rate and frequency of chemical exposure is 
shown in Fig. 2-4. A chemical that produces severe effects with 
a single dose may have no effect if the same total dose is given in 
< 24 hrs
< 1 month
1–3 months
More than 3 months; up to years
Acute
Subacute
Subchronic
Chronic
Time Periods of Exposure
Single Exposure
Repeated Exposures
Figure 2-3.  Time periods of chemical exposure. Single exposures to chemi-
cal are observed in acute studies of short duration. Repeated exposures to 
chemicals can occur over a range of time periods spanning short (subacute), 
intermediary (subchronic), and long periods (chronic).
4
3
2
Concentration at target site
Concentration range of toxic response
Repeated doses
Single dose
A
A
B
C
B
C
Time
Time
1
Figure 2-4.  Diagrammatic view of the relationship between dose and con-
centration at the target site under different conditions of dose frequency and 
elimination rate. (Line A) A chemical with very slow elimination (e.g., half-
life of 1 year). (Line B) A chemical with a half-life approximately equal to 
frequency of dosing (e.g., 1 day). (Line C) Rate of elimination faster than 
the dosing frequency (e.g., 5 hours). Blue-shaded area is representative of 
the concentration of chemical at the target site necessary to elicit a toxic 
response.

34
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
several intervals. For the chemical depicted by line B in Fig. 2-4, in 
which the half-life for elimination (time necessary for 50% of the 
chemical to be removed from the bloodstream) is approximately 
equal to the dosing frequency, a theoretical toxic concentration 
(shown conceptually as two concentration units in Fig. 2-4) is not 
reached until the fourth dose, whereas that concentration is reached 
with only two doses for chemical A, which has an elimination rate 
much slower than the dosing interval (time between each repeated 
dose). Conversely, for chemical C, where the elimination rate is 
much shorter than the dosing interval, a toxic concentration at the 
site of toxic effect will never be reached regardless of how many 
doses are administered. Of course, it is possible that residual cell 
or tissue damage occurs with each dose even though the chemi-
cal itself is not accumulating. The important consideration, then, is 
whether the interval between doses is sufficient to allow for com-
plete repair of tissue damage. It is evident that with any type of 
repeated exposure, the production of a toxic effect not only is influ-
enced by the frequency of exposure but may also, in fact, be entirely 
dependent on the frequency rather than the duration of exposure. 
Chronic toxic effects may occur, therefore, if the chemical accumu-
lates in the biological system (rate of absorption exceeds the rate 
of biotransformation and/or excretion), if it produces irreversible 
toxic effects, or if there is insufficient time for the system to recover 
from the toxic damage within the exposure frequency interval. For 
additional discussion of these relationships, see Chaps. 5 and 7.
DOSE–RESPONSE RELATIONSHIPS
The relationship between the “dose” and “response” to a chemi-
cal is the foundation of modern toxicology. Dose–response rela-
tionships are defined as the association between the amount of a 
toxicant administered and the extent to which changes are observed 
in a biological system. When describing chemical exposures, it is 
important to consider both the dose of the chemical administered or 
measured in the environment (external dose) as well as the amount 
of chemical absorbed and found at the site of biological activity 
(internal dose). There are a number of toxicokinetic factors that 
will be important in determining the internal dose of most chemi-
cals, which often can vary between tissues. In addition to assessing 
internal doses, one’s ability to quantify a biological response will 
depend upon defining an endpoint that can be quantified.
The dose of a chemical or toxic agent can be expressed as a 
mass or concentration. The units of the concentration will depend 
upon whether the toxic chemical is found in the solid, liquid, or 
gaseous state. An internal blood concentration of the analgesic acet-
aminophen in excess of 150 mg/L a few hours after ingestion is 
considered a toxic exposure. Air pollutant concentrations are often 
referred to as the amount of the toxic agent in a cubic meter of 
air (mg/m3). Another common approach to describing concentra-
tions is based on the units of mass relative to the total number of 
units of mass. For example, the presence of the lead in drinking 
water should be less than 15 parts per billion (ppb). Another way 
to describe this drinking water standard would be 15 μg/L. When 
considering the administration of chemicals to humans and animals, 
doses are conventionally expressed as milligrams per kilogram.
Dose–response relationships are routinely divided into 
two types: (1) the individual dose–response relationship, which 
describes the response of an individual organism to increasing doses 
of a chemical, often referred to as a “graded” response because 
the measured effect is continuous over a range of doses, and (2) a 
quantal dose–response relationship, which characterizes the distri-
bution of individual responses to different doses in a population of 
organisms. For a given chemical, there are likely multiple different 
molecular, biochemical, and cellular effects (responses), each with 
its own “dose–response” relationship. These can include changes in 
receptor binding, enzymatic cofactor availability, cellular energet-
ics, and markers of cellular or organ damage. As a result, the toxic 
responses of a chemical vary as one goes from lower to higher doses. 
In turn, there are likely different types of responses across increas-
ing doses (e.g., loss of cellular ATP reserves versus stimulation of 
cell proliferation) as well as differences in the magnitude or extent 
of a specific response (e.g., moderate versus marked histopathologi-
cal changes in a tissue with higher exposure to a chemical). In the 
instance of population-level “dose–response” characterization, it is 
important to recognize that the observed response is an integration 
of the cumulative individual dose–response relationships occurring 
across multiple molecular and biochemical events in potentially a 
number of different cell types. As a result, subtle effects that occur 
at low doses (e.g., changes in gene expression in response to a 
chemical that activates a nuclear transcription factor, such as diox-
ins binding to the “aryl hydrocarbon receptor,” AhR) may be less 
evident than responses that appear at higher doses (e.g., cellular 
necrosis).
Individual, or Graded, Dose–Response 
Relationships
Individual dose–response relationships are characterized by a con-
tinuous scale of doses that lead to an increase in the magnitude of a 
specific response. The graded dose–response relationship requires 
the careful selection of a range of doses for evaluation and identi-
fication of a specific biochemical process. For example, Fig. 2-5 
shows the dose–response relationship between different dietary 
doses of the organophosphorous insecticide chlorpyrifos and the 
extent of inhibition of two different enzymes acetylcholinester-
ase and carboxylesterase in the rat brain and liver, respectively 
(Lassiter et al., 1999). In the brain, the degree of inhibition of both 
enzymes is clearly dose-related, although the degree of inhibition 
per unit dose is different for the two enzymes. From the shapes of 
these two dose–response curves it is evident that, in the brain, cho-
linesterase will be inhibited at a chlorpyrifos dose of 3 mg/kg that 
does not alter the activity of carboxylesterase. At higher doses of 
chlorpyrifos (5 mg/kg and higher), both enzymes will be inhibited, 
but the extent of inhibition will be greater for cholinesterase than 
carboxylesterase. The primary toxicological response that results 
from chlorpyrifos exposure is directly related to the degree of cho-
linesterase enzyme inhibition in the brain. Thus, clinical signs and 
symptoms for chlorpyrifos would follow a dose–response relation-
ship similar to that for the brain cholinesterase enzyme. However, 
as noted above, for many chemicals, more than one effect may 
result because of multiple various target sites in different tissues. 
Thus, the observed response to varying doses of a chemical in the 
whole organism is often complicated by the fact that most chemi-
cals have multiple sites or mechanisms of toxicity, each with their 
own “dose–response” relationship and subsequent adverse effect.
Quantal Dose–Response Relationships
In contrast to the “graded” or continuous-scale dose–response rela-
tionship that occurs in individuals, the dose–response relationships 
in a population are by definition quantal—or “all or none”—in 
nature, that is, at any given dose, an individual in the population 
is classified as either a “responder” or a “nonresponder.” Although 
these distinctions of “quantal population” and “graded individual” 
dose–response relationships are useful, the two types of responses 
are conceptually identical. The ordinate in both cases is simply

Principles of Toxicology
Chapter 2
35
labeled the response, which may be the degree of response in an 
individual or system or the fraction of a population responding, and 
the abscissa is the range of administered doses.
A widely used approach for estimating the response of a popu-
lation to a toxic exposure is the “effective dose” (ED). Generally, 
the midpoint, or 50%, response level for the population is used, giv-
ing rise to the “ED50” value. However, any response level, such as an 
ED1, ED10, or ED30, could be chosen. Where death is the measured 
endpoint, the ED50 would be referred to as the “lethal dose” LD50. 
Historically, determination of the LD50 was often the first experi-
ment performed with a new chemical. Today, it is widely recog-
nized that the LD50 is of little value as a measure of hazard, although 
it does provide a useful “ball park” indication of the relative hazard 
of a compound to cause serious, life-threatening poisoning from 
a single exposure. While death is an obvious quantal endpoint to 
measure, it should be noted that any quantal response could be used. 
For example, the LD50 of lead or DDT is not a relevant endpoint 
when characterizing hazards of the chemicals to children or wild-
life, respectively. Even continuous variables (e.g., graded data) can 
be converted to quantal responses. For example, an antihypertensive 
drug that lowers blood pressure might be evaluated in a population 
by assigning a “responder” as an individual whose blood pressure 
was lowered by 10 mm Hg or more. Note that, in this example, an 
individual who responded to a change in blood pressure of 50 mm 
Hg would be classified the same as an individual with a change of 
only 10 mm Hg, yet an individual with a change of 8 mm Hg would 
be classified as a “nonresponder.”
The top panel of Fig. 2-6 shows that quantal dose responses 
typically exhibit a normal or Gaussian distribution. The frequency 
histogram in this panel also shows the relationship between dose 
and effect. The bars represent the percentage of animals that 
responded at each dose minus the percentage that responded at the 
immediately lower dose. One can clearly see that only a few ani-
mals responded to the lowest dose and the highest dose. Larger 
numbers of animals responded to doses intermediate between these 
two extremes, and the maximum frequency of response occurred in 
the middle portion of the dose range. Thus, we have a bell-shaped 
curve known as a normal frequency distribution. The reason for this 
normal distribution is that there are differences in the susceptibil-
ity of individuals to chemical toxicity; this is known as biologi-
cal variation. Animals responding at the left end of the curve are 
referred to as hypersusceptible, and those at the right end of the 
curve are termed resistant. If the number of individuals responding 
at each consecutive dose are added together, a cumulative, quantal 
dose–response relationship is obtained. When a sufficiently large 
number of doses are used with a large number of animals per dose, 
a sigmoid dose–response curve is observed, as depicted in the 
middle panel of Fig. 2-6. With the lowest dose (6 mg/kg), 1% of 
the animals responded. A normally distributed sigmoid curve such 
as this approaches a response of 0% as the dose is decreased and 
100
75
50
% inhibition
25
0
0
A
2.5
5
Dose (mg/kg)
Carboxylesterase
Cholinesterase
7.5
10
100
75
50
% inhibition
25
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7 8
Dose (mg/kg)
10
B
Figure 2-5.  Dose–response relationship between different doses of the 
organophosphate insecticide chlorpyrifos and esterase enzyme inhibition in 
the brain. Open circles and blue lines represent acetylcholinesterase activ-
ity and closed circles represent carboxylesterase activity in the brains of 
pregnant female Long–Evans rats given five daily doses of chlorpyrifos. (A) 
Dose–response curve plotted on an arithmetic scale. (B) Same data plotted 
on a semi-log scale. (Data from Lassiter et al., 1999, with permission.)
20
15
10
5
100
80
60
40
20
7.0
6.0
98
95
90
80
70
60
50
% response (probit scale)
40
30
20
10
5
2
5.0
4.0
Response (probit units)
Cumulative response (%)
Response frequency (%)
3.0
10
20 50
100
Dose (mg/kg)
200
800
Figure 2-6.  Diagram of quantal dose–response relationship. The abscissa 
is the log dose of the chemical. In the top panel the ordinate is response 
frequency, in the middle panel the ordinate is percent response, and in the 
bottom panel the response is in probit units (see text).

36
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
approaches 100% as the dose is increased, but—theoretically—it 
never passes through 0% and 100%. However, the minimal ED of 
any chemical that evokes a stated all-or-none response is referred 
to as the threshold dose.
For a normally distributed population response, the sig-
moid curve has a relatively linear portion between 16% and 84%. 
These values represent the limits of one standard deviation (SD) 
of the mean (and the median) in a population with truly normal 
or Gaussian distribution. However, it is usually not practical to 
describe the dose–response curve from this type of plot because 
one does not usually have large enough sample sizes to define the 
sigmoid curve adequately, particularly at low and high doses. In a 
normally distributed population, the mean ±1 SD represents 68.3% 
of the population, the mean ±2 SD represents 95.5% of the popula-
tion, and the mean ±3 SD equals 99.7% of the population. Because 
quantal dose–response data usually exhibit a Gaussian distribution, 
one can convert the percent response to units of deviation from the 
mean or normal equivalent deviations (NEDs). Thus, the NED for 
a 50% response is 0; the NED of ±1 is equated with an 84.1% 
response. Traditionally, units of NED are converted by the addition 
of 5 to the value to avoid negative numbers; these converted units 
are called probit units (Bliss, 1957). The probit (from the contrac-
tion of probability unit), then, is an NED plus 5. In this transforma-
tion, a 50% response becomes a probit of 5, a ±1 deviation becomes 
a probit of 6, and a – 1 deviation is a probit of 4.
The data given in the top two panels of Fig. 2-6 are replot-
ted in the bottom panel, with the response plotted in probit units. 
The data in the middle panel (which was in the form of a sigmoid 
curve) and the top panel (a bell-shaped curve) form a straight line 
when transformed into probit units (bottom panel). In essence, 
what is accomplished in a probit transformation is an adjustment 
of quantal data from an assumed normal population distribution 
to a straight line. The ED50 is obtained by drawing a horizontal 
line from the probit unit 5, which is the 50% response point, to 
the dose–effect line. At the point of intersection, a vertical line is 
drawn, and this line intersects the abscissa at the ED50 point. It is 
evident from the line that information with respect to the ED for 
90% or for 10% of the population also may be derived by a similar 
procedure. Mathematically, it can be demonstrated that the range 
of values encompassed by the confidence limits is narrowest at the 
midpoint of the line (ED50) and widest at both extremes (ED10 and 
ED90) of the dose–response curve (dotted lines in Fig. 2-7). In addi-
tion to the ED50, the slope of the dose–response curve can also be 
obtained. Fig. 2-7 demonstrates the dose–response curves for the 
response of two compounds. Compound A exhibits a “flat” dose–
response curve, showing that a large change in dose is required 
before a significant change in response will be observed. However, 
compound B exhibits a “steep” dose–response curve, where a rela-
tively small change in dose will cause a large change in response. It 
is evident that the ED50 for both compounds is the same (8 mg/kg). 
However, the slopes of the dose–response curves are quite different. 
At one-half of ED50 of the compounds (4 mg/kg), less than 1% of 
the animals exposed to compound B would respond but 20% of the 
animals given compound A would respond.
In Figs. 2-6 and 2-7, the doses (mg/kg) have been specified 
on a logarithmic scale. For normally distributed quantal data, this 
transformation provides greater linearity in the dose–response 
relationship. However, this is not always the case. Some radia-
tion effects, for example, give a better probit fit when the dose is 
expressed arithmetically rather than logarithmically. There are also 
situations where other functions (e.g., exponentials) of dose pro-
vide a better fit to the data than does the log function. Likewise, 
additional models beyond probits including Hill, logit, and Weibull 
can be used to express dose–response relationships with rigorous 
mathematical analyses (Demidenko et al., 2017).
Dose Extrapolation Across Species
In the field of toxicology, researchers often work across multiple 
animal species and in turn there is a need to compare doses from 
one species to another. This is particularly important in drug devel-
opment where preclinical data generated in laboratory animals 
are used to justify and design experiments for clinical testing in 
humans. While body weight is typically used to calculate a dose of 
a chemical for an individual organism, it is ineffective to generalize 
across species. Therefore, the extrapolation of doses across species 
often requires allometry, a field of study that examines relationships 
between body weight and other biological and physical parameters 
such as rate of basal metabolism (caloric consumption), heart rate, 
and blood flow. Allometric studies have revealed that the relation-
ship between body weight and various other physiological param-
eters can be closely estimated by the following formula: Y = aWb, 
where Y is the biological parameter of interest (such as metabolic 
rate) and a and b are constants that relate Y to body weight (Kleiber, 
1932). In general, organ sizes between species seem to scale best 
when b is equal to 1, whereas metabolically derived parameters 
scale better when b is 0.67 to 0.75 (Sharma and McNeill, 2009).
One simple approach to estimate doses across species is to 
use body surface area (BSA) rather than body weight for compari-
son. The relationship between BSA and body weight across most 
mammalian species is described by the formula SA = 10.5 × 
(body weight [grams])0.67 (Chappell, 1992). Empirical compari-
sons of toxicity data across species confirm that this relationship 
is appropriate for toxicological scaling. For example, Travis and 
White (1988) analyzed a number of toxicity testing data sets for 
27 different chemotherapeutic drugs for which toxicity data were 
available in mouse, rat, hamster, dog, monkey, and human (Travis 
and White, 1988). They found that the exponent of body weight that 
gave the best correlation with toxicity was 0.73, with 95% confi-
dence bounds of 0.69 to 0.77.
The FDA recommends calculating the maximum recommended 
starting dose for first-in-human clinical trials of an investigational 
drug using animal data, body surface allometry, and incorporation 
of a safety factor (CDER, 2005). This requires knowledge of the 
7.0
B
A
98
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
% response (probit scale)
20
10
2
5
6.0
Response (probit units)
5.0
4.0
3.0
2
3
4
Dose (mg/kg)
6
10
8
20
30
60
Figure 2-7.  Comparison of dose–response relationship for two different 
chemicals, plotted on a log dose-probit scale. Note that the slope of the 
dose–response is steeper for chemical B than for chemical A. Dotted lines 
represent the confidence limits for chemical A.

Principles of Toxicology
Chapter 2
37
no observable adverse effect level (NOAEL) from animal studies. 
The NOAEL is the highest dose of chemical tested in an animal 
species that does not result in significant toxicities compared to con-
trol animals. Using the NOAEL dose in animals, conversion to a 
human equivalent dose (HED) using BSA can be made (Table 2-4) 
(CDER, 2005). For species not listed in the table, the equation HED 
= animal dose in mg/kg × (animal weight in kg/human weight in 
kg)0.33 should be used. These conversions are largely used for safety 
testing. The role of using BSA for estimating pharmacologically 
active doses across species has been examined (Reagan-Shaw et al., 
2008); however, it has been recommended that additional fac-
tors beyond BSA be incorporated in estimating equivalent doses 
(Blanchard and Smoliga, 2015).
Not all toxic responses will necessarily scale across species in 
the same way, nor should allometric scaling be applied to all types 
of chemicals. For example, acute lethality correlated better across 
species when body weight, rather than BSA, was used (Rhomberg 
and Wolff, 1998). Likewise, chemicals that are more amenable to 
allometric scaling are those that undergo renal excretion (rather 
than the biliary route), that exhibit minimal hepatic metabolism, 
that possess limited tissue distribution, and whose molecular targets 
are similar across species (Sharma and McNeill, 2009).
Computational modeling, particularly physiologically based 
pharmacokinetic modeling (PBPK), is increasingly being used to 
scale doses across species. PBPK modeling uses key physiologic 
parameters and mechanistic data to mathematically describe and 
predict the disposition of chemicals (Lipscomb et al., 2012) (see 
Chap. 7). Examples of critical factors used in these assessments 
include tissue volumes, rates of diffusion, perfusion, transport, 
membrane permeability, and partition coefficients. Using this infor-
mation, quantitative relationships that describe a chemical’s toxico-
kinetics across species are derived. In order to apply toxicokinetic 
data to estimate risks of toxicity, it is also important to consider 
the toxicodynamic effects of the chemical and whether differences 
would be anticipated across species. Toxicokinetic–toxicodynamic 
models can be developed that quantitatively define relationships 
between exposure and biological responses (Ashauer et al., 2011). 
This approach has been applied to a variety of quantal and graded 
dose–response relationships including those assessing growth, 
development, and reproduction.
Shapes of Dose–Response Curves
Toxicology studies are designed to investigate responses across a 
wide range of doses. Characterization of adverse responses at low 
doses often depends upon having sensitive measures that detect 
meaningful, biologic changes. It is often assumed that toxicants 
will elicit monotonic responses where increasing doses will cause a 
steady unidirectional change in response (e.g., increase or decrease). 
Monotonic dose–response curves assume shapes that are “uphill” 
(Fig. 2-8A) or “downhill” (Fig. 2-8B) in nature. Along monotonic 
dose–response curves, there are dose-dependent transitions that are 
important in the mechanism(s) of toxicity. A review of 13 toxicants 
demonstrated a number of saturable and/or inducible kinetic and 
dynamic processes that underlie these transitions. These include a 
variety of processes including chemical activation (e.g., butadiene) 
and detoxification (e.g., methylene chloride), co-­substrate ­depletion 
(e.g., acetaminophen), receptor interactions (e.g., hydroxyflu-
tamide), repair (e.g., vinyl chloride), and altered homeostasis (e.g., 
manganese) (Slikker et al., 2004a, 2004b). Typically, different 
slopes are observed along the dose-dependent transitions when the 
degree of involvement of these various processes changes.
Dose–response relationships also exist that are nonmono-
tonic, where multiple inflection points exist along the curve that 
change the shape. The shapes of nonmonotonic dose–response 
curves are variable and can resemble a biphasic “valley” (U-shaped 
[Fig. 2-8C] or J-shaped [Fig. 2-8E]) or an “entire hill” (an inverted 
U-shaped [Fig. 2-8D]). As discussed below, essential nutrients can 
exhibit U-shaped and inverted U-shaped curves. Similarly, some 
chemicals are thought to confer benefit to the organism at low expo-
sures (called “hormetic effects” or “hormesis”) and be harmful at 
higher doses. Still other dose–response curves resemble a “roller 
coaster” with multiple up and down inflection points (Fig. 2-8F). 
Long-standing regulatory approaches have focused on monotonic 
dose–response curves to extrapolate the effects anticipated at low 
doses. However, a review of regulatory framework has begun to 
examine nonmonotonic dose responses, particularly for endocrine 
active chemicals (NRC, 2014).
Monotonic Dose–Response Curves
Threshold and Linear, Nonthreshold Models  One of the 
important transitions that occurs in the investigation of dose-depen-
dent responses is found at low doses. Extrapolation of the shape 
of monotonic dose responses at low doses can be performed by 
assessing thresholds and or using linear, nonthreshold extrapolation 
(Fig. 2-9). A threshold is a dose at which toxicity is first observed; 
at doses below this level, the probability of an individual respond-
ing is zero. By comparison, linear, nonthreshold models assume 
there is a direct and proportional relationship between dose and 
response, even at very low doses. The identification of a threshold 
in monotonic dose responses depends on the particular response 
being quantified, the sensitivity of the measurement, and the num-
ber of subjects studied. For the individual dose–response relation-
ship, thresholds for many toxic effects certainly exist, although 
interindividual variability in response and qualitative changes in 
response pattern with dose make it difficult to establish a true “no 
effects” threshold in a population of people, for any chemical. The 
Table 2-4 
Conversion of Animal Doses to Human Equivalent 
Doses (HED) for a 60-kg Person Based on Body 
Surface Area
SPECIES
DIVIDE ANIMAL DOSE  
(mg/kg) BY
Mouse
12.3
Hamster
7.4
Rat
6.2
Ferret
5.3
Guinea pig
4.6
Rabbit
3.1
Dog
1.8
Monkey
3.1
Marmoset
6.2
Squirrel monkey
5.3
Baboon
1.8
Micro-pig
1.4
Mini-pig
1.1

38
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
biological basis of thresholds for acute and many chronic responses 
is well-established and frequently can be demonstrated on the basis 
of mechanistic information, although whether thresholds exist for 
some types of chronic responses, such as cancer and hormonally 
mediated effects, remains controversial.
The concept of thresholds has been applied to noncarcinogenic 
chemicals by employing a qualitative risk characterization approach 
known as threshold of toxicological concern (TTC). TTC suggests 
that there are levels of exposure for chemicals below which the 
risk to human health is not appreciable. It was first proposed in 
the context of food safety (Kroes et al., 2000, 2004) but has been 
extended to cosmetic ingredients and impurities found in pharma-
ceutical preparations (Muller et al., 2006; Kroes et al., 2007). TTC 
integrates available data including exposure, chemical structure, 
disposition, biotransformation, and toxicity and can be used to pri-
oritize chemicals for further testing.
As noted above, the existence of thresholds for chronic 
responses is less well-defined, especially in the area of chemical 
carcinogenesis. A classic example of the difficulty of establishing 
thresholds experimentally is provided by the “ED01” study, where 
over 24,000 mice and 81 different treatment groups were used to 
determine the shape of the dose–response relationship for the proto-
typical carcinogen 2-acetylaminofluorene (2-AAF) (Fig. 2-10). The 
study was designed to identify a statistically significant response 
of 1% (0.01 probability). The mice were exposed to 2-AAF at 
one of seven different doses in the dose range of 30 to 150 ppm 
(plus 0 dose control) (Littlefield et al., 1980). Multiple time points 
for tissue collections were used to determine how quickly tumors 
developed. Both liver and bladder tumors demonstrated increasing 
incidence with increasing dose, but the shapes of the two curves 
were dramatically different. For liver tumors, no clear threshold 
was evident based on the doses utilized, whereas for bladder tumors 
an apparent threshold was evident. However, the apparent thresh-
old, or no observable adverse effect level (NOAEL), for bladder 
cancer was lower at 33 months (45 ppm) than at 24 months (75 
ppm) (Fig. 2-10). Of course, the ability to detect a low incidence 
of tumors depends on the number of animals used in the study. 
Thus, although a threshold (a dose below which no response occurs) 
appears evident for bladder tumors, one cannot say for certain that 
tumors would not occur if more animals had been included in the 
lower dose groups.
At low doses of carcinogens, the extrapolated shape of the 
curve for risk assessment varies depending upon the mechanism of 
Dose
Response
Dose
Response
Dose
Response
Dose
Response
Dose
Response
Monotonic Dose-Responses
Nonmonotonic Dose-Responses
Dose
Response
A
B
C
D
E
F
Figure 2-8.  Hypothetical curves for monotonic dose responses and nonmonotonic dose responses. Traditional monotonic dose responses can exhibit increasing 
(A) and decreasing (B) changes in response with higher doses. Nonmonotonic dose responses exhibit a number of shapes including a U-shape (C), inverted 
U-shape (D), J-shape (E), and variable slope (F).
Dose
Response
Threshold
Linear, No
Threshold
Region of
Extrapolation
Observed
Data
Figure 2-9.  Extrapolation of dose responses at low doses. Experimental 
data are shown as individual dots. The gray box represents the region where 
empiric data are lacking and the shape of the curve needs to be extrapo-
lated. Two approaches, threshold and linear, no threshold are shown. The 
threshold approach continues the linear regression of the experimental data, 
maintaining the same slope. The linear, no threshold approach extrapo-
lates the curve using the lowest data point and regresses back to the zero 
response intercept. This extrapolation is typically performed for genotoxic 
carcinogens.

Principles of Toxicology
Chapter 2
39
toxicity. Non-genotoxic carcinogens, those that do not interact with 
DNA (e.g., hypolipidemic drug clofibrate), are thought to exhibit 
thresholds of dose response, whereas genotoxic carcinogens that 
directly modify and damage DNA (e.g., 2-AAF) have been assumed 
to increase the risk of cancer even at the lowest possible dose. For 
ionizing radiation, the upper confidence limit of the lowest dose that 
causes cancer has been used historically for linear regression to the 
zero-intercept, an approach called linear, nonthreshold risk model-
ing. Using epidemiologic data from the atomic bomb survivors in 
the Hiroshima and Nagasaki tumor registries, the 2006 Biological 
Effects of Ionizing Radiation VII Report recommended the con-
tinued use of the linear, nonthreshold dose–response curve for low 
linear-energy-transfer ionizing radiation (e.g., x-rays and gamma 
rays) and contended that “it is unlikely that there is a threshold 
below which cancers are not induced, but at low doses the num-
ber of radiation-induced cancers will be small” (NRC, 2006). As a 
result, the linear, nonthreshold dose–response model for ionizing 
radiation and cancer risk has been adapted by a number of global 
regulatory agencies and often applied to other genotoxic carcino-
gens. However, there are remarkable concerns regarding the basis 
for these recommendations and the continued regulatory use of 
the linear, nonthreshold model (Calabrese, 2017). This prescribed 
approach has been criticized for not considering adaptive mecha-
nisms such as DNA repair and clearance of cells with damaged 
DNA (Tubiana, 2005; Neumaier et al., 2012; Siegel et al., 2017). 
Recent mechanistic research investigating the relationship between 
DNA adducts and tumor incidence question the fundamental data 
used in the linear, nonthreshold risk model, particularly at very low 
doses of carcinogen exposure.
Emerging data with rainbow trout embryos exposed to a carcin-
ogen has allowed an even more statistically stringent analysis of the 
shape of the dose–response curve at very low doses. Applying this 
model to the genotoxic carcinogen dibenzo[def,p]chrysene (DBC, 
also referred to as dibenzo[a,l]pyrene), estimates of the shape of 
the dose–response curve down to a response level of 1 additional 
tumor in 5000 animals could be obtained, because very large num-
bers of animals could be exposed. Over 40,000 trout were exposed 
to different doses ranging over a factor of 500 (DBC, lowest dose 
0.45 ppm, highest dose 225 ppm), with over 8000 animals in the 
control and low-dose groups (Bailey et al., 2009). Because DBC is 
a potent mutagen, it was assumed that both the rate of DNA adduct 
formation and the tumor incidence would be linear throughout the 
dose range. However, there was a clear deviation from linearity at 
the lower doses, such that the extrapolated dose–response curve 
crossed the y-axis at one cancer in a million exposed animals at a 
dose 500- to 1500-fold (depending on the statistical model) higher 
than would have been predicted from the linear extrapolation below 
the 10% response range (ED10). Remarkably, although the tumor 
response exhibited a clear “threshold,” the formation of DBC–DNA 
adducts was quite linear through the lowest dose used. While these 
findings offer novel insight into very low dose–response relation-
ships of early and latent effects, additional debate over the value of 
the threshold and the linear, nonthreshold approaches for carcino-
genesis risk assessment is expected to continue.
Another study that has raised questions about the veracity of 
the nonthreshold response to chemical carcinogens examined the 
ability of an “anticarcinogen” called CDDO-Im (closely related to 
antioxidant chemicals found in broccoli) to prevent DNA damage 
and subsequent liver cancers in rats treated with the potent mutagen 
and liver carcinogen, aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) (Johnson et al., 2014). 
Although the dose of AFB1 given to a group of laboratory rats in 
this study caused a high level of AFB–DNA adducts to form, and 
nearly all of the animals (96%) developed liver cancer, pretreat-
ment of a second group of animals given the same dose of AFB1 
with CDDO-Im completely prevented the liver tumors, but reduced 
the DNA damage by only 70%. Thus, while DNA damage from a 
genotoxic chemical may be “linear at low doses,” because of the 
complex, multistep process of chemical carcinogenesis, coupled 
with inducible “adaptive response” processes such as DNA repair, 
actual development of cancers may not follow the linear, low-dose 
(nonthreshold) response, even for potent mutagenic carcinogens.
Nonmonotonic Dose–Response Curves
Essential Nutrients  For natural or endogenous chemicals that 
are required for normal physiological function and survival (e.g., 
vitamins and essential trace elements such as chromium, cobalt, 
zinc, manganese, and selenium), the “graded” dose–response rela-
tionship in an individual over the entire dose range can be U-shaped 
(Fig. 2-11). As essential elements for life, nutrient and vitamin con-
centrations need to be maintained within a specific range that allows 
for homeostasis. Doses or concentrations outside of this range can 
lead to deficiency (observed at very low doses when concentrations 
are below daily minimum requirements) or toxicity (observed at 
high, excessive doses). Often, the biological adverse responses that 
occur during periods of deficiency or toxicity will differ.
One example that illustrates the importance of proper main-
tenance of nutrient concentrations and homeostasis is manganese. 
Manganese is found in all mammalian tissues and is needed for 
bone formation and the metabolism of macromolecules including 
0
0
25
50
75
Liver tumors
24 months
Bladder tumors
% response
100
50
2-AAF dose (ppm)
100
150
0
0
25
50
75
Liver tumors
33 months
Bladder tumors
% response
100
50
2-AAF dose (ppm)
100
150
Figure 2-10.  Dose–response relationship for carcinogens—rodents and 
2-acetylaminofluorene (2-AAF).

40
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
amino acids, lipids, and carbohydrates. Manganese often works as 
a cofactor for the functioning of enzymes involved in important 
metabolic processes. The intake of manganese typically occurs 
through the diet. However, during periods of manganese deficiency, 
a number of adverse health outcomes have been reported in animals 
including growth delays, seizures, and impaired fertility. In con-
trast, excessive exposure to manganese can lead to manganism or 
neurotoxicity due to the accumulation of manganese in the brain. 
Similar examples of U-shaped dose–response relationships are 
observed for other essential elements. High doses of vitamin A can 
cause liver toxicity and birth defects, high doses of selenium can 
affect the brain, and high doses of estrogens may increase the risk 
of breast cancer, even though low amounts of all these substances 
are essential for life.
Hormesis  Evidence suggests that some non-nutritional toxic 
substances may also impart beneficial or stimulatory effects at 
low doses but that, at higher doses, produce adverse effects. This 
concept of “hormesis” has been described for radiation effects 
(Mitchel, 2006) but may also pertain to other chemicals (Calabrese 
and Baldwin, 1998; Calabrese and Blain, 2005). For example, 
chronic alcohol consumption is well recognized to increase the 
risk of esophageal cancer, liver cancer, and cirrhosis of the liver at 
relatively high doses, and this response is dose-related. However, 
there is also substantial clinical and epidemiological evidence that 
low to moderate consumption of alcohol reduces the incidence of 
coronary heart disease and stroke (Hanna et al., 1997).
The role of hormesis in chemical carcinogenesis has been eval-
uated in animals. Altered hepatic foci are preneoplastic lesions that 
represent precursors to liver tumors in rodents and can be identified 
by detection of specific markers such as glutathione S-transferase. 
In a rat carcinogenesis bioassay, the contaminant 2,3,7,8-tetrachlo-
rodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) had divergent effects on the promotion 
of altered hepatic foci; at low doses, TCDD reduced the number 
of foci in the liver, whereas at higher doses TCDD significantly 
increased the number of foci (and presumably, the risk of hepato-
carcinogenesis) (Pitot et al., 1987). Likewise, the exposure of rats 
to the insecticide 1,1-bis(p-chlorophenyl)-2,2,2-trichloroethane 
(DDT) similarly decreased the baseline number of hepatic foci at 
lower doses but enhanced their formation at higher doses (Sukata 
et al., 2002). In both of these examples, the dose–response curves 
exhibited a J-shape (Fig. 2-8E). The magnitude of low-dose hor-
metic effects are often modest (approximately 30% to 60% change 
in the endpoint) and may not reach statistical significance, particu-
larly when compared to changes observed at high doses. Because of 
these phenomena, there is great interest in understanding biological 
responses at low doses of toxicant exposure and the applicability of 
these findings to human health.
Endocrine Active Chemicals  Exogenous chemicals that exert 
their primary toxic effects via modification of hormonal responses 
(endocrine disruptors) appear to have effects at relatively low 
doses that are not seen at higher doses, raising debate about the 
traditional concept of “dose–response” for endocrine active chemi-
cals. Chemicals that have been shown to interfere with endocrine 
pathways in vivo and/or in vitro have heterogeneous sources and 
include industrial byproducts, plasticizers, plastics, pesticides, 
fungicides, and pharmaceuticals, as well as naturally occurring 
phytoestrogens. In vitro exposure of normal and cancerous pros-
tate cells to low doses of the plasticizer bisphenol A (0.01 to 100 
nM) resulted in biphasic centrosome amplification between two 
and eightfold with maximal inverted U-shape responses observed 
at a bisphenol A concentration of 0.1 nM (Tarapore et al., 2014). 
Nonmonotonic dose–response curves, where the slope of the dose–
response curve changes sign (positive or negative) at least one 
time in the tested range of endocrine active chemicals, have been 
reported for other chemicals as well (Vandenberg et al., 2012). 
Diverse mechanisms have been proposed to explain the shape 
of the nonmonotonic dose–response curves for endocrine active 
chemicals including dose-dependent cytotoxicity, cell- and tissue-
specific receptors and cofactors, receptor selectivity and down-
regulation, receptor competition, and endocrine negative feedback 
loops (Vandenberg et al., 2012).
The EPA has focused its testing efforts on chemicals that inter-
act with and modify the signaling of estrogen, androgen, and thyroid 
pathways. Specifically, the ability of endocrine active chemicals to 
modify metabolic, reproductive, and neurological development fol-
lowing early life exposure has garnered the greatest attention for 
potential human health risk. Studies of endocrine active chemicals 
require rigorous experimental design and important considerations 
ensuring a lack of chemical contamination in control groups, inclu-
sion of positive controls, and the use of responsive species for the 
endpoint(s) in question (Vandenberg et al., 2012). Critiques of the 
existence of nonmonotonic dose–response curves for endocrine 
active chemicals have included a lack of consideration of a defined 
scope, data reproducibility, consistency (including omission of neg-
ative studies), and statistical analysis using a weight-of-evidence 
approach from existing studies (Rhomberg and Goodman, 2012; 
Lamb et al., 2014). The increasing debate recently led scientists to 
apply systematic review methodologies to evaluate the low-dose 
toxicity of endocrine active chemicals (National Academies of 
Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, 2017). The recommended 
definition of low dose in the systematic review was defined as the 
“external or internal exposure that falls within the range estimated 
to occur in humans” as determined by environmental surveillance 
and biomonitoring, reliable biomarkers of exposure, and/or com-
putational models (National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, 
and Medicine, 2017). This would typically mean that the effects 
occurred at exposures in animals or humans below the NOAEL. 
The effect of phthalates on male reproductive tract development 
was used as a case study in the systematic review. From the analysis 
of available data, the committee concluded that there was a mod-
erate level of evidence that fetal exposure to low doses of di(2-
ethylhexyl) phthalate is associated with reduced anogenital distance 
Threshold for adverse response
Death
Region of
homeostasis
Dose
Deﬁciency
Toxicity
Response
Figure 2-11.  Individual dose–response relationship for an essential sub-
stance such as a vitamin or trace element. It is generally recognized that, for 
most types of toxic responses, a threshold exists such that at doses below the 
threshold, no toxicity is evident. For essential substances, doses below the 
minimum daily requirement, as well as those above the threshold for safety, 
may be associated with toxic effects. The blue-shaded region represents the 
“region of homeostasis”—the dose range that results in neither deficiency 
nor toxicity.

Principles of Toxicology
Chapter 2
41
in humans. Evaluation of study quality and bias, assessment of the 
confidence in the body of evidence, and interpretation of data using 
contemporary statistical approaches will likely be refined as addi-
tional classes of endocrine active chemicals are evaluated.
Assumptions in Deriving the  
Dose–Response Relationship
A number of assumptions need to be considered before traditional 
dose–response relationships can be used appropriately. The first is 
that the response is due to the chemical administered. To describe 
the relationship between a toxic material and an observed effect or 
response, one must know with reasonable certainty that the relation-
ship is indeed a causal one. For some data, it is not always apparent 
that the response is a result of chemical exposure. For example, an 
epidemiological study might result in the discovery of an “associa-
tion” between a response (e.g., disease) and one or more variables. 
Frequently, the data are presented similarly to the presentation of 
“dose response” in pharmacology and toxicology. Use of the dose 
response in this context is suspect unless other convincing evidence 
supports a causal connection between the estimated dose and the 
measured endpoint (response). A major challenge in environmental 
epidemiology studies where associations between exposure to a toxic 
substance and the incidence of a disease are made is the presence of 
“confounders,” extraneous variables that influence both exposure 
and outcome, either positively or negatively. When confounders are 
not carefully controlled, statistically significant, but spurious, asso-
ciations may be found. Or, conversely, “real” associations might be 
missed. Unfortunately, in nearly all retrospective and case–control 
studies and even in many prospective studies, the dose, duration, 
frequency, and routes of exposure are seldom quantified, and other 
potential etiologic factors are frequently present. In its most strict 
usage, then, the dose–response relationship is based on the knowl-
edge that the effect is a result of a known toxic agent or agents.
A second assumption seems simple and obvious: the magni-
tude of the response is in fact related to the dose. This assumption 
relies upon identifying a molecular target with which the chemical 
interacts to initiate the response and determining that the production 
of a response and the degree of response are related to the concen-
tration of the chemical at the target site. In turn, the concentration at 
the site would in fact be related to the dose administered.
The third assumption of the dose–response relationship is 
that there exists both an appropriate method of quantifying and a 
precise means of expressing the toxicity. The ideal endpoints are 
those closely associated with the molecular events resulting from 
exposure to the toxicant. For a given chemical, there may be mul-
tiple dose–response relationships, one for each toxicity endpoint. 
A hypothetical chemical that produces cancer through genotoxic 
effects, liver damage through inhibition of a specific enzyme, and 
CNS effects by reducing neurotransmitter release would likely have 
three distinct dose–response relationships. Early in the assessment 
of a chemical’s toxicity, little mechanistic information is available; 
thus, establishing a dose–response relationship based on the molec-
ular mechanism of action is often impossible. In the absence of a 
mechanistic endpoint of toxicity, one looks to a measure of toxicity 
that is unequivocal and relevant to the toxic effect. Such measures 
are often referred to as “effects-related biomarkers.” The selection 
of a toxic endpoint for quantification is not always straightforward. 
Although many endpoints are quantitative and precise, they are often 
indirect measures of toxicity. Changes in enzyme levels in blood can 
be indicative of tissue damage. For example, alanine aminotransfer-
ase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) are used to detect 
liver injury. Quantification of serum ALT and AST as effects-related 
biomarkers is informative because their enzyme activity in the blood 
is directly related to the extent of damage to liver cells.
Evaluating the Dose–Response 
Relationship
Therapeutic Index  Fig. 2-12 illustrates a hypothetical quantal 
dose–response curve for a desirable effect of a chemical (effective 
dose, ED) such as anesthesia, a toxic effect (toxic dose, TD) such 
as liver injury, and the lethal dose (LD). Each of these responses 
spans a range of doses and increases at varying rates (or estimated 
slopes). These curves highlight the importance of the (1) selection 
of relevant pharmacological/toxicological endpoints and (2) com-
parisons made between endpoints. The concept of the “therapeutic 
index” (TI) can be used to illustrate this relationship. Although the 
TI is directed toward a comparison of the therapeutic ED to the 
TD of a chemical, it is similarly applicable to considerations of 
comparative toxicities between chemicals. In its broadest sense, the 
TI is defined as the ratio of the dose required to cause a toxic effect 
to the dose needed to produce the desired therapeutic response. 
Similarly, an index of comparative toxicity is obtained by the ratio 
of doses of two distinct materials to produce an identical response 
or the ratio of doses of the same material necessary to yield differ-
ent toxic effects.
The most commonly used index is the median dose that elic-
its an effective or toxic response in 50% of a population (ED50 or 
TD50). The TI of a drug is an approximate statement about the rela-
tive safety of a drug expressed as the ratio of the adverse endpoint 
or TD (historically, the LD) to the effective therapeutic dose:
TI = TD
ED
.
50
50
From Fig. 2-12 one can approximate a TI by using median 
doses. The larger the ratio, the greater relative safety is assumed. 
The ED50 is approximately 20, and the TD50 is about 60; thus, the 
TI is 3, a number indicating that reasonable care in exposure to the 
drug is necessary to avoid toxicity. However, the use of the median 
effective and median toxic doses is not without disadvantages, 
because median doses do not reflect the slopes of the dose–response 
curves for therapeutic and toxic effects.
7.0
6.0
ED
TD
LD
Response (probit units)
% responding (probit scale)
5.0
4.0
3.0
100
Dose (mg/kg)
50
20
10
800
200
2
5
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
98
Figure 2-12.  Comparison of effective dose (ED), toxic dose (TD), and lethal 
dose (LD). The plot is of log dose versus percentage of population respond-
ing in probit units.

42
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
Margins of Safety and Exposure  One way to overcome the 
limitation of comparing variable slopes between the effective and 
toxic dose–response curves is to calculate the ED99 for the desired 
effect (efficacy in 99% of the population) and the TD1 for the unde-
sired effect (toxicity in 1% of the population), typically after a 
single administration of a chemical. These conservative parameters 
are used in the calculation of the margin of safety (MOS):
MOS
TD
ED
=
1
99
.
For chemicals with no beneficial or effective dose and/or 
repeated exposures, the ratio of TD1 to ED99 has little value. Thus, 
for nondrug chemicals, the term MOS is used in risk assessment 
procedures as an indicator of the magnitude of the difference 
between an estimated “exposed dose” to a human population and 
the no observable adverse effect level (NOAEL) or other bench-
mark dose determined in experimental animals.
A measure of the degree of accumulation of a chemical and/or 
its toxic effects can also be estimated from quantal toxicity data. The 
chronicity index of a chemical is a unitless value obtained by dividing 
its one-dose TD50 by its 90-dose (90-day) TD50, with both expressed 
in milligrams per kilogram per day. Theoretically, if no cumulative 
effect occurs over the doses, the chronicity index will be 1. If a com-
pound caused cumulative effects, the chronicity index would be 90.
Frequently, dose–response curves from repeated-dose experi-
mental animal studies (subacute, subchronic, or chronic) are used 
to estimate the NOAEL, or some other “benchmark” measure of 
minimal toxic response, such as the dose estimated to produce toxic 
effects in 10% of the population (TD10) (see also Chap. 4). These 
estimates of minimal TD, derived from quantal dose–response 
curves, can be used in risk assessment to derive a margin of expo-
sure (MOE) index. This index compares the estimated daily expo-
sure, in milligrams per kilogram per day, that might occur under 
a given set of circumstances with some estimated value from the 
quantal dose–response relationship (e.g., NOAEL or TD10). Like 
the MOS, the MOE is often expressed as a ratio of these two values. 
Thus, for example, if an estimate of human exposure to a pesticide 
residue yielded a value of 0.001 mg/kg/day, and a TD10 of 1 mg/
kg/day was determined for that same pesticide, the MOE would be 
1000. This value indicates that the estimate of daily exposure under 
the described set of conditions is 1/1000 the estimated daily dose 
that would cause evident toxicity in 10% of exposed animals. (See 
Chap. 4 for a more complete discussion of benchmark doses, points 
of departure, NOAELs, and MOE.)
Potency versus Efficacy  Additional terminology is often used 
to describe the dose–response relationship for a particular chemi-
cal. Efficacy is an assessment of the extent to which a chemical can 
elicit a response and is often interpreted using the ordinate axis 
(or y-axis). By comparison, the potency is determined by the range 
of doses (on the x-axis) over which a chemical produces increas-
ing responses. Fig. 2-13 depicts the dose–response curves for four 
different chemicals. Chemical A is said to be more potent than 
chemical B because of their relative positions along the dose axis. 
Likewise, chemical C is more potent than chemical D. Maximal 
efficacy reflects the magnitude achieved on the response axis (with 
approximately 80% responding). Chemicals A and B have equal 
maximal efficacy, whereas the maximal efficacy of C (approxi-
mately 30% responding) is less than that of chemical D (approxi-
mately 85% responding).
ASSESSING TOXICOLOGICAL RESPONSES
Causation in Toxicology
In recent years, the increasing accessibility of scientific data through 
electronic means, including social media, has provided consumers 
with greater information about the safety of chemicals in their diet, 
environment, household, and consumer products. News headlines 
may alert the public to potential adverse health effects following 
exposure to a particular chemical. In each story, some level of 
uncertainty will exist that questions whether the observed nega-
tive outcomes are directly caused by the chemical. Because of this 
uncertainty, some basic strategies may be used as one attempts to 
differentiate observed associations between a chemical and an out-
come due to causal or noncausal relationships. In 1965, Sir Austin 
Bradford Hill set forth a series of considerations intended to infer 
the likelihood that a particular outcome or disease resulted from a 
specific “exposure” (Hill, 1965). At the time, these considerations 
were largely aimed at evaluating relationships using epidemiologi-
cal and occupational data; however, a similar framework can be 
applied to evaluate experimental and observation data regarding the 
toxicity of chemicals. They are summarized as follows:
	 1.	 Strength of association. Hill suggested that strong associations 
between independent and dependent variables could support a 
causal relationship. For example, a 10 times increase in death 
rate due to a specific chemical exposure in a defined popu-
lation could serve as strong evidence in favor of a potential 
relationship. However, Hill was careful to not readily dismiss 
7.0
A
B
C
D
6.0
5.0
Response (probit units)
4.0
3.0
1
2
3
4
6
8
10
1
2
Dosage (mg/kg) (log scale)
3
4
6
8
10
% responding (probit scale)
2
5
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
98
Figure 2-13.  Schematic representation of the difference in the dose–response curves for four chemicals (A to D), illustrating the difference between potency 
and efficacy (see text).

Principles of Toxicology
Chapter 2
43
observations between modest changes in an endpoint and a 
precipitating event.
	 2.	 Consistency of findings. Hill recommended the replication of 
results by different studies, and particularly advocated using 
different experimental approaches that could reach similar 
conclusions. With each replication of the findings, the likeli-
hood that a particular error was responsible for the association 
would lessen.
	 3.	 Specificity of association. The likelihood of a cause-and-effect 
relationship is strengthened by how tightly linked an outcome 
is to exposure to a particular chemical. One limitation of this 
viewpoint, as Hill noted, is that diseases are often multifacto-
rial in their pathogenesis which may preclude one’s ability to 
establish specificity.
	 4.	 Temporal sequence. The ability to assign a cause-and-effect 
relationship requires that the “cause” occur before the effect.
	 5.	 Biological gradient. Establishment of a clear dose–response 
relationship, such that greater exposure to a chemical is 
linked to a more severe outcome, provides further support for 
causation.
	 6.	 Biological or theoretical plausibility. The ability to postulate a 
reasonable mechanism of action can be used to strengthen the 
likelihood of causation. This does not, however, address the 
potential that the current state of knowledge is limited.
	 7.	 Coherence with established knowledge. The association 
between the cause and effect should reasonably align with the 
current understanding of disease pathogenesis.
In addition to these seven viewpoints, Hill also suggested that 
the ability of intervention to limit exposure to the chemical and in 
turn reduce the likelihood or extent of disease would further sup-
port a “cause-and-effect” relationship. Likewise, the ability to draw 
analogies between related chemicals, due to physicochemical prop-
erties or molecular structures (or core features), can lessen the depth 
of experimental validation needed to assign causation when com-
paring to a previously characterized toxicant. This approach, often 
termed read-across, has been increasingly implemented since 2009 
when the European Union (EU) banned the marketing of cosmetic 
products tested on animals (Cronin et al., 2013). The read-across 
computational approach allows scientists to utilize existing and 
extrapolated data to assess the likelihood that structurally related 
chemicals share a propensity for toxicity.
Hill cautioned that his viewpoints should serve as a starting 
point to evaluate the potential for cause-and-effect relationships and 
did not advocate their use as “hard-and-fast rules of evidence” (Hill, 
1965). As Hill noted, “All scientific work is incomplete—whether 
it be observational or experimental. All scientific work is liable to 
be upset or modified by advancing knowledge. That does not con-
fer upon us a freedom to ignore the knowledge we already have 
or postpone the action that it appears to demand at a given time.” 
Instead, this framework can help establish the “weight of evidence” 
supporting the likelihood that a chemical exposure causes a par-
ticular health outcome. The advancement of molecular toxicology, 
in the context of the Bradford Hill considerations, has improved 
the identification of mechanisms of toxicity and proposed surrogate 
endpoints (such as sensitive biomarkers) that support biological 
plausibility and delineate temporal relationships between cause and 
effect (Fedak et al., 2015). Building upon the viewpoints of Hill and 
others, Guzelian et al. (2005) put forth a systematic, evidence-based 
approach for defining causation in toxicology. Similar to principles 
put forth in medicine, evidence-based toxicology is composed of 
three methodological steps. First, the toxicologist should collect 
and evaluate the relevant data regarding the chemical and outcome 
including source, exposure, dose, and diagnosis. Second, the rel-
evant knowledge should be collected in order to frame the question 
as well as collate and evaluate the relevant literature. Third, the data 
and knowledge should be integrated in order to formulate a conclu-
sion. This includes evaluation of general causation, dose–response 
relationships, timing, alternative causes or confounders, rigorous 
statistical analyses of the results of individual studies and meta-
analyses (combined studies), and coherence of the findings.
Experimentation and hazard identification are inherent to 
identifying cause-and-effect relationships. However, the risk or 
probability that toxicity will occur depends upon specific exposure 
scenarios. As a result, dose–response relationships and evaluation of 
human exposure paradigms are needed to characterize the risk and 
perform an assessment of the toxicological risk. The marketing of 
pharmaceuticals requires the systematic testing of numerous end-
points in order to ensure efficacy and safety before new drugs can 
be approved by the FDA. A series of appropriate animal and human 
studies need to be completed in order for a pharmaceutical com-
pany to apply for a new drug application. By comparison, complete 
data sets are often not available or required before introducing a 
new chemical, particularly for industrial chemicals, into commerce. 
The National Toxicology Program reports that “more than 80,000 
chemicals are registered for use in the United States” and estimates 
an additional 2000 new chemicals are introduced each year (NTP, 
2017a). Because few of these industrial chemicals undergo rigor-
ous safety testing, the NTP coordinates safety testing within the 
U.S. federal government. In the absence of empirical data regard-
ing the safety of new and existing chemicals, the Precautionary 
Principle was defined at the Wingspread Conference in 1998: 
“When an activity raises threats of harm to human health or the 
environment, precautionary measures should be taken even if some 
cause and effect relationships are not fully established scientifi-
cally” (Raffensperger and Tickner, 1999; Myers and Raffensberger, 
2006). While there have been various regulatory interpretations of 
the precautionary principle (COEC, 2000; UK-ILGRA, 2007), the 
intended purpose of the precautionary principle is the protection of 
the public’s health and the environment. As such, the precautionary 
principle advocates regulatory restrictions that limit human expo-
sure before sound empirical data regarding the safety of a chemical 
are in place. Following this approach, the burden of proof is placed 
upon the manufacturer to establish the lowest level of risk before 
commercial usage. The role of toxicological science as well as ethi-
cal considerations in regulatory decision making continues to be 
a source of considerable debate (Marchant, 2003; Goldstein and 
Carruth, 2004; Goldstein, 2006). Challenges to the precautionary 
principle suggest there is a lack of clarity in its application and 
question how much certainty is needed to guarantee there is little 
to no risk of harm. Moreover, it has been proposed that precaution 
is a “built in element” of the traditional risk-assessment paradigm 
through the use of safety factors and conservative scenarios and rep-
resents a more scientific approach to protect human health (Smith 
et al., 2008). Because of the large role that ethics play in the protec-
tion of public health and advocacy of populations (Simon, 2011), 
continued debate over the decision-making process is anticipated.
Mechanisms and Modes of Action
Fundamental to the field of toxicology is the identification of chem-
ical hazards, determination of how chemicals elicit these adverse 
events, and assessment of the risk these toxicities bear on humans 
and/or the environment. Mechanisms of action refer to the detailed 
molecular and biochemical changes that are required for a mol-
ecule to cause damage. This is a precise determination of “how”

44
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
and the “extent” to which molecular events cause toxicity. Some 
possible mechanisms of action for carcinogenesis include the abil-
ity of the chemical to act as an electrophile, be genotoxic, alter 
DNA repair, cause epigenetic changes, modulate receptor signal-
ing, and enhance proliferation (Smith et al., 2016). When approach-
ing mechanisms of toxicant action, a number of steps including the 
delivery of the chemical to the site of action, interaction with key 
signaling targets, cellular dysfunction, and disrepair will collec-
tively determine the extent and reversibility of toxicity (Fig. 2-14). 
Various factors such as pharmacokinetics, cell signaling, and main-
tenance, as well as molecular, cellular, and tissue responses will 
modulate each of these steps.
At times when these fundamental mechanisms are unknown, 
toxicologists instead describe the mode of action for a toxicant. The 
mode of action describes the functional or anatomical changes stim-
ulated by a toxicant at a cellular level. The term “mode of action” 
is more often used in regulatory toxicology and has been described 
as a “biologically plausible sequence of key events leading to an 
observed effect supported by robust experimental observations and 
mechanistic data” (Meek et al., 2003). Often, weight of evidence 
considerations such as those described above by Bradford Hill are 
used to determine whether there is sufficient verification of how a 
substance influences key physiologic processes in a way that can 
be incorporated into risk assessment (Dellarco and Baetcke, 2005). 
Of particular interest in the determination of a mode of action is 
the evaluation of biological plausibility and coherence with existing 
data, as well as temporal and dose–response relationships in evaluat-
ing the strength and specificity of the association. This approach has 
been applied to nuclear transcription factor–mediated liver carcino-
genesis in rodents with a focus on three signaling pathways: the aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor, the constitutive androstane receptor, and the 
peroxisome proliferator–activated receptor (Andersen et al., 2014; 
Budinsky et al., 2014; Corton et al., 2014; Elcombe et al., 2014).
In investigating mode of action, a number of considerations 
are made regarding (1) key events, (2) associative events, and 
(3) modulating factors (Dellarco and Baetcke, 2005; Andersen et 
al., 2014). Key events are causal precursors that are necessary for 
the adverse outcome. An example key event might be the formation 
of a specific DNA adduct. Associative events are processes that are 
not required for the mode of action but can serve as indicators or 
surrogate markers for the key events. An example of an associa-
tive event could be cellular proliferation in a nontarget tissue. Also 
important are modulating factors that can alter the dose–response 
relationship or likelihood of inducing a key event(s) leading to an 
adverse outcome. The generation of reactive oxygen species, or oxi-
dative stress, is considered one type of modulating factor. Others 
include altered cellular communication, activation of certain tran-
scriptional pathways, immune responsiveness, life stage, genetic 
variation, and others (Simon et al., 2014).
Adverse Outcome Pathways
In recent years, there has been growing interest in developing 
additional framework beyond the mode-of-action assessment that 
takes a broader view of common pathways of toxicity and may 
be applicable for more than just a particular chemical or class 
of chemicals. Thus, toxicological evaluation has adopted the use 
of adverse outcome pathways (AOPs) to advance the concept of 
“toxicity pathways” recommended in the 2007 National Research 
Council’s report on Toxicity Testing for the 21st Century: A Vision 
and a Strategy. AOPs provide a conceptual framework and practi-
cal tool to portray and associate sequential biological events at the 
T
O
X
I
C
I
T
Y
1
Delivery
Absorption
Distribution
Metabolism
Excretion
Cell
Signaling
Gene
Expression 
Electrically
Excitable Cells 
Cell
Maintenance
Internal
Maintenance
External
Maintenance
Molecular
Cellular
Tissue
Protein
Lipid
DNA
Apoptosis
Proliferation
2
Interaction
with Target
3
Cellular
Dysfunction
4
Disrepair
Figure 2-14.  Steps that result in chemical toxicity.

Principles of Toxicology
Chapter 2
45
molecular, cellular, and organ levels following exposure to a chem-
ical that ultimately results in toxicity to an organism (Fig. 2-15) 
(Ankley et al., 2010; Villeneuve and Garcia-Reyero, 2011). AOPs 
first emerged in the field of ecotoxicology. AOP modeling utilizes 
data from computational (quantitative structure activity relation-
ships), in vitro, and in vivo studies and integrates both mode and 
mechanism of action to describe toxicological processes.
AOPs are composed of the following:
 • Molecular Initiating Events
 • Key Events and Their Relationships
 • Adverse Outcomes
In each AOP, a chemical’s structural and physical proper-
ties are first evaluated using in silico approaches that may or may 
not include metabolism of the chemical to other forms. Then, the 
chemical is assessed for critical molecular initiating events, which 
include receptor/ligand interactions, macromolecule interactions, 
protein modifications and alkylation, nuclear receptor activation, 
and changes in membrane fluidity. With advancing biological 
complexity, a logical sequence of cellular, organ, and organism 
responses will be identified—each representing linked key events in 
the AOP that are required for progression of the toxicity. Responses 
that include the molecular initiating events and the cellular response 
are typically classified as the toxicity pathway. While the relation-
ships between key events are most often linear, there is the potential 
for multiple steps to converge or diverge into various key events. 
The organism responses consist of target organ toxicities, malfor-
mations, cancer development, and/or lethality revealed from in vivo 
testing. Collectively, the molecular initiating events and key events 
comprise the mode of action pathway. While AOPs are similar to 
modes of action for a chemical, the AOP is anchored to both the 
molecular initiating event as well as the adverse outcome, a spe-
cialized key event of regulatory significance, which strengthens 
the certainty of the overall model. Lastly, the AOP pathway will 
advance to understanding how toxicant responses will impact an 
entire population.
Typically, studies performed for AOP pathway development 
will assess the ability of chemicals to alter normal cellular pathways 
in appropriate human cells or tissues, particularly during the screen-
ing stage. Critical to the refinement and strength of an AOP model 
is the utilization of complementary approaches central to sys-
tems toxicology testing (described later in this chapter). Recently, 
fundamental principles in developing AOPs have been described 
(Villeneuve et al., 2014a, 2014b). Most importantly, AOPs are not 
considered specific to a particular chemical. Likewise, AOPs are 
modular with key events and key event relationships potentially 
being used in multiple pathways. Researchers can build AOPs 
using the Adverse Outcome Pathway Knowledge Base (AOP-KB) 
from the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD), an international organization that develops standard-
ized testing guidelines. Within an AOP, the models can designate 
whether there are mechanistic data supporting the relationship 
between key events or acknowledge when a plausible or predictive 
linkage exists based on limited available or computational data. To 
strengthen the quality of AOPs and standardize their development, 
the OECD has released updated guidelines that detail weight-of-
evidence evaluation based on the aforementioned Bradford Hill 
considerations (Becker et al., 2015a, 2017; OECD, 2017). The 
development of AOPs is an iterative process with continual refine-
ment as new mechanistic data are obtained. The potential utility 
for AOPs includes prioritization of chemicals for further testing, 
identification of hazards, classification, and potentially risk assess-
ment, especially for data-rich chemicals such as polychlorinated 
biphenyls, where the key initiating events in both experimental 
animals and humans are well-established, and pronounced species 
differences are known.
VARIATION IN TOXIC RESPONSES
Selective Toxicity
Selective toxicity means that a chemical produces injury to one 
kind of living matter (such as a cell or organism) without harm-
ing another form of life even though the two may exist in intimate 
contact. They may be related to each other as parasite and host or 
may be two tissues in one organism. However, by taking advantage 
of the biological diversity between species, it is possible to develop 
chemicals that are lethal for an undesired species and harmless for 
other species. In agriculture, for example, there are fungi, insects, 
and even competitive plants that injure the crop, and thus selec-
tive pesticides are needed. Similarly, animal husbandry and human 
medicine require pharmaceuticals, such as antibiotics, that are 
selectively toxic to the infectious microbe but do not produce dam-
age to the host.
Selective toxicity results because the chemical (1) is equally 
toxic to both organisms but accumulates preferentially in the target 
or (2) alters a unique cellular or a biochemical feature that is absent 
or irrelevant in the unaffected species. One source of variation that 
can lead to selectivity are differences in the absorption, biotrans-
formation, or excretion of the toxicant. The selective toxicity of 
an insecticide spray may be partly due to a larger surface area per 
unit weight that causes the insect to absorb a proportionally greater 
Chemical
Structure &
Properties
Molecular
Initiating
Events
Cellular
Responses
Tissue/Organ
Responses
Individual
Organism
Responses
Key Event Relationships
Toxicity Pathway
Mode of Action Pathway
Adverse Outcome Pathway
Population
Responses
Figure 2-15.  Key parts of adverse outcome pathways (AOPs).

46
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
dose than does the mammal being sprayed. The effectiveness of 
radioactive iodine in the treatment of hyperthyroidism (as well as its 
thyroid carcinogenicity) is due to the selective ability of the thyroid 
gland to accumulate iodine. Another major reason why chemicals 
are toxic to one, but not to another, type of tissue is that there are 
differences in metabolism or transport that dictate accumulation of 
the ultimate toxic compound in various tissues.
Selective toxicity caused by differences in cellular structure is 
exemplified by comparing plant and animal cells. Plants differ from 
animals in many ways—for example, absence of a nervous system, 
an efficient circulatory system, and muscles as well as the presence 
of a photosynthetic mechanism and cell walls. The fact that bacteria 
contain cell walls and humans do not has been utilized in devel-
oping selective antibiotics, such as penicillin and cephalosporins, 
that kill bacteria but are relatively nontoxic to mammalian cells. 
Selective toxicity can also be a result of a difference in biochemistry 
in the two types of cells. For example, bacteria do not absorb folic 
acid but synthesize it from p-aminobenzoic acid, glutamic acid, 
and pteridine, whereas mammals cannot synthesize folic acid but 
have to absorb it from the diet. Thus, sulfonamide drugs are selec-
tively toxic to bacteria because the sulfonamides, which resemble 
p-aminobenzoic acid in both charge and dimension, antagonize the 
incorporation of p-aminobenzoic acid into the folic acid molecule—
a reaction that humans do not carry out.
Species Differences
Experimental animals are routinely used in toxicology as surrogates 
for humans; however, it is important to recognize the quantitative 
and qualitative differences in response to toxic substances among 
various species. Even among phylogenetically similar species (e.g., 
rats, mice, guinea pigs, and hamsters), large differences in response 
can be observed. For example, the LD50 for TCDD differs by more 
than 1000-fold between guinea pigs and hamsters. Not only the 
lethal dose for TCDD but also the particular target organs affected 
vary widely among species.
Species differences in response to carcinogens represent 
an important issue in regulatory risk assessment. As discussed 
in Chap. 8, extrapolation of laboratory animal data to infer 
human cancer risk is a routine component of regulatory decision 
making. Large interspecies differences in chemical carcinoge-
nicity are not unusual. For example, mice are highly resistant 
to the hepatocarcinogenic effects of the fungal toxin aflatoxin 
B1. Dietary doses as high as 10,000 ppb failed to produce liver 
cancer in mice, whereas in rats dietary doses as low as 15 ppb 
produced a significant increase in liver tumors (Wogan et al., 
1974). The mechanistic basis for this dramatic difference in 
response appears to be entirely related to species differences in 
the expression of a particular form of glutathione S-transferase 
(mGSTA3-3) that has unusually high catalytic activity toward the 
carcinogenic epoxide of aflatoxin (Eaton and Gallagher, 1994). 
Mice express this enzyme constitutively, whereas rats normally 
express a closely related form with much less detoxifying activity 
toward aflatoxin epoxide. Interestingly, rats do possess the gene 
for a form of glutathione S-transferase with high catalytic activity 
toward aflatoxin epoxide (rGSTA5-5) that is inducible by cer-
tain dietary antioxidants and drugs. Thus, dietary treatment can 
dramatically change the sensitivity of a species to a carcinogen. 
Other examples in which large species differences in response 
to carcinogens have been observed include the development of 
renal tumors from 2,3,5-trimethylpentane and d-limonene in 
male rats (Lehman-McKeeman and Caudill, 1992), the produc-
tion of liver tumors from “peroxisomal proliferators” such as the 
antilipidemic drug clofibrate and the common solvent trichloro-
ethylene (Roberts, 1999), and the induction of nasal carcinomas 
in rats after inhalation exposure to formaldehyde (Monticello 
and Morgan, 1997). Identifying the mechanistic basis for spe-
cies differences in response to chemicals is an important part of 
toxicology because only through a thorough understanding of 
these dissimilarities can the relevance of animal data to human 
response be verified.
Where the mode of action (MOA) of a toxic chemical is well 
understood, species differences in response can be estimated with 
some degree of confidence by comparing the relative potency of a 
chemical to activate the MOA (e.g., a specific receptor) in tissues 
from various species. For example, the toxic chemicals referred to 
as “dioxins,” including certain dioxin-like polychlorinated biphe-
nyls (DL-PCBs), produce all or nearly all of their toxic effects by 
activating an intracellular nuclear transcription factor called the aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR). Activation of the AhR is considered to 
be a “key initiating event” in an adverse outcome pathway (AOP) 
for dioxins and dioxin-like chemicals (Becker et al., 2015b). There 
are large species differences in susceptibility to the toxic effects of 
dioxins and especially DL-PCBs. Thus, measuring the ability of 
the different DL-PCBs to activate the human versus rat AhR has 
led to the development of “Toxic Equivalency Factors” that provide 
for a more scientifically accurate way to adjust for differences in 
species susceptibility to these common environmental pollutants 
(Table 2-5) (Larsson et al., 2015).
Modifying Factors
Not all humans respond to toxicants in the same manner and to 
the same degree as each other. Multiple factors modify one’s sus-
ceptibility to adverse outcomes. Particularly important modifiers 
include genetic variation among a population, age and life stages, 
sex and hormonal status, microbiome, and circadian rhythm. 
Specific examples that illustrate the important role(s) for these 
factors are provided below and throughout this book. Other influ-
ences that can impact the extent of toxicity include the concomitant 
use of tobacco, alcohol, nutraceutical, pharmaceutical and illicit 
drugs, exercise, nutrition, and co-exposures in the workplace and 
at home.
Genetics  Hereditary differences in a single gene that occur in 
more than 1% of the population are referred to as genetic poly-
morphisms. Increasingly, genetic variants are being identified 
Table 2-5 
Examples of Toxic Equivalency Factors for Dioxin-Like 
Chemicals from the World Health Organization
CONSENSUS TOXICITY 
FACTORS
CHEMICAL
RAT
HUMAN
WHO-TEF
2378-TCDD
1
1
1
12378-PeCDD
0.5
1
1
123478-HxCDD
0.2
0.03
0.1
123678-HxCDD
0.06
0.06
0.1
123789-HxCDD
0.3
0.002
0.1
1234678-HpCDD
0.04
0.2
0.01
Adapted from Larsson et al. (2015).

Principles of Toxicology
Chapter 2
47
that impact a variety of target organ toxicities. For example, it 
is recognized that approximately 50% of the Caucasian popula-
tion has a gene deletion for the enzyme glutathione S-transferase 
M1. This enzyme has no apparent significant physiological func-
tion, and thus homozygotes for the gene deletion (e.g., those who 
lack both copies of the normal gene) are functionally and physi-
ologically normal. However, epidemiological studies have indi-
cated that cigarette smokers who express two null alleles may 
be at slightly increased risk of developing lung cancer compared 
with smokers who have one or both copies of the normal gene 
(Mohr et al., 2003).
Some individuals are abnormally sensitive to nitrites and cer-
tain other chemicals that oxidize the iron in hemoglobin to produce 
methemoglobin, a form that is incapable of carrying oxygen to the 
tissues. This abnormal phenotype is inherited as an autosomal reces-
sive trait and is characterized by a deficiency in NADH-cytochrome 
b5 reductase activity. The genetic basis for this response has been 
identified as a single nucleotide change in codon 127, which results 
in replacement of serine with proline (Kobayashi et al., 1990). The 
consequence of this genetic deficiency is that these individuals 
may suffer from a serious lack of oxygen delivery to tissues after 
exposure to doses of methemoglobin-producing chemicals (aniline 
dyes, the antibiotic trimethoprim, and the anesthetic drug benzo-
caine) that would be harmless to individuals with normal NADH-
cytochrome b5 reductase activity.
Clinically, pharmacogenetic variants can have a critical influ-
ence on a patient’s susceptibility to a drug toxicity. These variants 
may be in the coding or regulatory regions and influence pharma-
cokinetic/pharmacodynamics responses. The Pharmacogenetics 
Knowledge Database (PharmGKB) is an online resource that 
curates the literature on drug-related gene variants for use by scien-
tists and researchers. Because some variants can significantly alter 
the efficacy and/or toxicity of drugs, the Clinical Pharmacogenetics 
Implementation Consortium (CPIC) routinely publishes peer-
reviewed, evidence-based clinical guidelines that inform clinicians 
of particular variant alleles that pharmacogenetic testing should 
be ordered while initiating therapy. Within the CPIC guidelines, 
important pharmacokinetic- and toxicity-related genes include the 
(1) phase I metabolizing enzymes cytochrome P450 2C9 (antisei-
zure drug phenytoin, anticoagulant warfarin), 2C19 (antidepres-
sant citalopram, antiplatelet drug clopidogrel), and 2D6 (analgesic 
codeine), (2) phase II metabolizing enzymes UDP glucuronysyl 
transferase 1A1 (UGT 1A1) (antiviral drug atazanavir) and thiopu-
rine S-methyltransferase (antineoplastic drug mercaptopurine), and 
(3) transporters such as the solute carrier SLCO1B1 (hypolipidemic 
drug simvastatin) (see Chap. 6).
The development of new approaches to identifying associa-
tions between diseases or adverse outcomes and common genetic 
variants (polymorphisms) has changed from a focus on individual 
candidate genes to “genome-wide association studies” (GWAS) 
and next-generation sequencing of DNA. GWAS are based on a 
scan of hundreds of thousands of specific genetic variants (mark-
ers called “tag SNP”) across the genome of persons affected by 
a particular disorder or adverse-response phenotype and persons 
who are not affected, with robust statistical tests to identify associ-
ations between a specific genetic marker and the phenotype (e.g., 
disease state or adverse drug response). Next-generation sequenc-
ing allows millions or billions of DNA strands to be sequenced 
in parallel, often revealing unique and rare variants. These tools 
require critical bioinformatic and statistical infrastructure for 
interpretation and have resulted in the discovery of many “gene–
environment interactions,” including associations between adverse 
drug responses and particular genetic polymorphisms. Moving 
from the single, “candidate gene” approach to genome-wide 
studies has led to the development of the relatively new fields of 
pharmacogenomics and toxicogenomics. These areas provide an 
exciting opportunity for mechanistic toxicologists to identify and 
protect genetically susceptible individuals from harmful environ-
mental exposures, and to customize drug therapies that enhance 
efficacy and minimize toxicity, based on an individual’s genetic 
makeup.
Age  Life stage, and in turn age, is an important factor that can alter 
susceptibility to toxicity. Metabolic processes that aid in xenobi-
otic clearance are often altered at juvenile and advancing ages. For 
example, newborns have relatively low gastric emptying, gastroin-
testinal motility, and expression of the metabolic enzymes includ-
ing CYP2D6, CYP2E1, and CYP3A4. Reduced metabolic capacity 
can decrease the clearance of some chemicals and increase the risk 
of toxicity. For example, juvenile rodents exhibit a heightened sus-
ceptibility to the insecticides parathion and chlorpyrifos as a result 
of delayed expression of carboxylesterase enzymes that detoxify 
organophosphate metabolites (Atterberry et al., 1997; Karanth and 
Pope, 2000). Conversely, the inability of juveniles to bioactivate 
some chemicals such as acetaminophen to their toxic intermediates 
appears to protect against liver injury.
Likewise, as humans age to greater than 70 years old, there 
are a number of pharmacokinetic changes that can impact xenobi-
otic disposition and toxicity. Reductions in liver, gastrointestinal, 
and kidney functions as well as lower receptor activity (e.g., beta-
adrenergic receptor) along with more prevalent underlying patholo-
gies can heighten the risk of adverse events. Therefore, a number 
of pharmaceuticals need to be used judiciously in geriatric patients 
including anticholinergic drugs (e.g., diphenhydramine), anti-
inflammatory drugs (e.g., nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs), 
opioids (e.g., oxycodone), and beta-adrenergic blockers (e.g., meto-
prolol). In order to prevent medication toxicities, the Beers Criteria 
have been established, which are recommendations of drugs that 
should not be used in older patients (American Geriatrics Society 
Beers Criteria Update Expert, 2015).
Sex  Along with genetics and age, sex can be a determinant of 
xenobiotic disposition and toxicity. One of the notable sex-related 
differences in humans is the effect of alcohol. Alcohol is absorbed 
and metabolized differently in females and males. This is in part 
due to the lower extent of body water in women compared to men 
of a similar weight. Toxicities such as liver disease and brain dam-
age due to alcohol consumption appear to be more frequent and/or 
earlier in females compared to males.
A significant amount of toxicology research has compared 
sexually dimorphic differences between male and female rodents. 
Male rats metabolize cocaine, diazepam, indinavir, and tolbutamide 
at a faster rate than female rats (Mugford and Kedderis, 1998). 
A variety of mechanisms to explain these differences have been 
shown including growth hormone regulation, sex steroids, and 
imprinting. The secretion of growth hormone is remarkably dif-
ferent between male and female rodents; females release steady 
amounts of growth hormone throughout the day, whereas males 
experience large fluctuations at regular intervals. In the rat liver, 
Cyp2c11 (male-specific) and Cyp2c12 (female-specific) are two 
sexually dimorphic genes transcriptionally regulated in response to 
pulsatile or continuous growth hormone secretion (Waxman et al., 
1991; Sundseth et al., 1992). Critical transcription factors including 
the signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b (STAT5b) 
regulate liver gene expression in a sexually dimorphic manner. 
In addition to growth hormone–related signaling, sex hormones 
including estradiol and testosterone influence the expression and

48
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
function of drug metabolizing enzymes and transporters, which can 
alter xenobiotic disposition and toxicity.
Circadian Rhythm  Circadian rhythm is a 24-hour cycle that reg-
ulates a number of molecular and physiological processes. Within 
the 24-hour cycle, there are diurnal (light cycle), nocturnal (dark 
cycle), and crepuscular (transition) periods. The circadian clock 
consists of a cellular clock with specific genes that oscillate in 
expression. Timing in the circadian system is affected by a number 
of factors including light, activity, food consumption, and social 
cues. While most changes in physiological processes during the 
24-hour period are not readily apparent, they can still impact sus-
ceptibility to toxicity.
Studies have revealed that the duration of sleep within rats 
treated with phenobarbital can vary almost twofold depending upon 
the time frame of administration (Scheving et al., 1993). Similarly, 
the number of rat lethalities due to amphetamines and cytosine ara-
binoside is heightened when administered during the dark cycle. 
The extent of renal injury due to the cancer drug cisplatin is affected 
by the timing of dosing in mice. Greater elevations in blood urea 
nitrogen in cisplatin-treated mice were observed when expression 
of the kidney-specific transporter that mediates its proximal tubular 
uptake was maximal (Oda et al., 2014).
More recently, a large prospective trial in humans sought 
to determine whether diurnal variation in the timing of poison-
ings influenced the likelihood of survival (Carroll et al., 2012). 
After controlling for a variety of factors including age and sex, a 
significant association was observed between higher risk of mor-
tality in patients with toxic oleander seed exposures and evening 
ingestions (5226 patients, p < 0.001). A trend for circadian-related 
mortalities due to organophosphate pesticide poisonings was also 
observed.
Several epidemiological studies have suggested that disruption 
of circadian rhythm, such as inconsistent night shift work, which 
occurs frequently in nurses and airline attendants, may be linked to 
an increase in risk of breast cancer in women (Liu et al., 2016). This 
epidemiological association has been supported by laboratory stud-
ies demonstrating that hormones such as melatonin are influenced 
by clock genes, and that perturbations in light cycle change expres-
sion of these genes, resulting in changes in cell cycle regulation 
(Blakeman et al., 2016). However, a recent meta-analysis of three 
large prospective cohorts of women working night shifts failed to 
find any association with breast cancer risk (Travis et al., 2016). 
Thus, while the importance of clock genes and circadian rhythm 
in modulating biological processes relevant to toxicology are evi-
dent, uncertainty remains as to the impact of disruption of circadian 
rhythm on breast cancer risk in women.
Microbiome  Within the body, bacteria outnumber human cells 
by a ratio of 10:1. Typically, anaerobic and facultative aerobic 
bacteria comprise the resident microflora of the intestinal tract. 
The influence of commensal microbes on human health, includ-
ing toxicologic responses, is garnering greater attention with the 
advent of highly sensitive methods in metagenomics. The ability to 
sequence the 16S rRNA subunit allows for comprehensive profil-
ing of bacterial species. For example, exposure of mice to the AhR 
activator and environmental contaminant, 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodiben-
zofuran, can shift the microbiota from enrichment of Firmicutes to 
Bacteroidetes species (Zhang et al., 2015). As a consequence of this 
change, bile acid pathways are disrupted leading to changes in host 
metabolic homeostasis.
Within the field of toxicology, there are a number of examples 
illustrating how bacterial-mediated metabolism, including beta-
glucuronidase, azo reductase, and cardiac glycoside reductase 
enzyme activities, can alter the toxicity of xenobiotics (Klaassen 
and Cui, 2015). The beta-glucuronidase activity of microflora is an 
important determinant of the gastrointestinal toxicity of a number 
of drugs. For example, the cancer drug irinotecan and nonsteroi-
dal anti-inflammatory drug diclofenac are excreted into the intes-
tines as glucuronide conjugates. Cleavage of the glucuronic acid 
moiety by intestinal bacteria generates products that are toxic to 
enterocytes. In the case of irinotecan, use of a synthetic bacterial 
beta-glucuronidase enzyme inhibitor in mice blocked the severe, 
and often life-threatening, diarrhea associated with this cancer 
drug (Wallace et al., 2010). Similarly, pharmacological inhibition 
of the beta-glucuronidase enzyme specific to bacteria reduced the 
mucosal injury associated with diclofenac in mice (LoGuidice et al., 
2012; Saitta et al., 2014). Microflora can also alter teratogenicity. 
The benzodiazepine drug nitrazepam is teratogenic in rats causing 
cleft palate, limb reductions, and other malformations. Treatment 
of pregnant rats with antibiotics lowered the bacterial conversation 
of nitrazepam to 7-aminonitrazepam and prevented perinatal mal-
formations (Takeno and Sakai, 1991). Collectively, these examples 
show how microbiota can alter xenobiotic metabolism and in turn 
influence susceptibility to toxicity.
TOXICITY TESTING
Two principal concepts underlie descriptive animal toxicity testing. 
The first is that the effects produced by a compound in laboratory 
animals, when properly qualified, are applicable to humans. This 
premise applies to all of experimental biology and medicine. Most, 
if not all, known chemical carcinogens in humans are carcinogenic 
in some species, but not necessarily in all species of laboratory ani-
mals. It has become increasingly evident that the converse—that all 
chemicals identified as carcinogenic in laboratory animals are also 
carcinogenic in humans—is not true. However, for regulatory and 
risk assessment purposes, positive carcinogenicity tests in animals 
are usually interpreted as indicative of potential human carcino-
genicity. If a clear understanding of the mechanism of action of 
the carcinogen indicates that a positive response in animals is not 
relevant to humans, a positive animal bioassay may be considered 
irrelevant for human risk assessment (see Chap. 4). This variation 
in carcinogenic potential appears to be due in many instances to dif-
ferences in biotransformation of the procarcinogen to the ultimate 
carcinogen, or differences in target receptor regulation between 
species.
The second concept is that the exposure of experimental ani-
mals to high doses of chemicals is a necessary and valid method of 
discovering possible hazards in humans. This principle is based on 
the quantal dose–response concept that the incidence of an effect in 
a population is greater as the dose or exposure increases. Practical 
considerations in the design of experimental model systems require 
that the number of animals used in toxicology experiments always 
be small compared with the size of human populations at risk. 
Obtaining statistically valid results from such small groups of ani-
mals requires the use of relatively large doses so that the effect 
will occur frequently enough to be detected. However, the use of 
high doses can create problems in interpretation if the response(s) 
obtained at high doses does not occur at low doses. For example, it 
has been shown that bladder tumors observed in rats fed very high 
doses of saccharin will not occur at the much lower doses of sac-
charin encountered in the human diet. At the high concentrations 
fed to rats, saccharin forms an insoluble precipitate in the blad-
der that subsequently results in chronic irritation of bladder epi-
thelium, enhanced cell proliferation, and ultimately bladder tumors 
(Cohen, 1998, 1999). In vitro studies have shown that precipitation

Principles of Toxicology
Chapter 2
49
of saccharin in human urine will not occur at the concentrations 
that could be obtained from even extraordinary consumption of 
this artificial sweetener. Even for mutagenic chemicals that form 
DNA adducts, the response at high doses may not be linear at low 
doses, as discussed earlier for dibenzo[def,p]chrysene. However, for 
another DNA-reactive carcinogen, aflatoxin B1, the low-dose data 
approximated the high-dose response in a linear fashion (Williams, 
2012). Examples such as these illustrate the importance of consid-
ering the molecular, biochemical, and cellular mechanisms respon-
sible for toxicological responses when extrapolating from high to 
low dose and across species.
Toxicity tests are not designed to demonstrate that a chemical 
is safe but rather they serve to identify and characterize the toxic 
effects a chemical can produce. Although there are no set toxicol-
ogy tests that have to be performed on every chemical intended for 
commerce, a tiered approach typical of many hazard assessment 
programs is illustrated in Fig. 2-16. Depending on the eventual use 
of the chemical, the toxic effects produced by structural analogs of 
the chemical, as well as the toxic effects produced by the chemi-
cal itself, contribute to the determination of the toxicology tests 
that should be performed. The FDA, EPA, and OECD have devel-
oped good laboratory practice (GLP) standards and other guidances 
that stipulate how procedures must be performed and documented. 
These guidelines are expected to be followed when toxicity tests 
are conducted in support of introducing a chemical to the market.
Although different countries often have different test-
ing requirements for toxicity testing/product safety evaluation, 
efforts to “harmonize” such testing protocols have resulted in 
more standardized approaches. The International Conference on 
Harmonisation (ICH) of Technical Requirements for Registration 
of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use includes regulatory authorities 
from Europe, Japan, and the United States (primarily the FDA), 
as well as experts from the pharmaceutical industry in the three 
regions, who worked together to develop internationally recognized 
scientific and technical approaches to pharmaceutical product regis-
tration. ICH has adopted guidelines for most areas of toxicity test-
ing (Table 2-6). In addition to safety assessment (ICH guidelines 
designated with an “S”), ICH has also established guidelines on 
quality (Q), efficacy (E), and multidisciplinary (M) topics. (See 
http://www.ich.org/products/guidelines.html for a description of 
current ICH guidelines).
Typically, a tiered approach is used, with testing dependent 
upon the results of initial studies. A general framework for how 
new chemicals are evaluated for toxicity is shown in Fig. 2-16. 
Early studies require careful chemical evaluation of the com-
pound or mixture to assess purity, stability, solubility, and other 
0100
010110
10101001
0101011010
101001010110
10101110111001
001010010010100
Omics database(s)
Genome database(s)
“Sequence anchoring”
of molecular expression
Literature
mining
Gene, protein, or
metabolite-expression
proﬁles
Identify gene/protein
functional groups,
pathways, and networks
Computational analysis
Multi domain
multi genome
knowledge base
“Phenotypic anchoring”
of molecular expression
Toxicology database(s)
Iterative biological modeling
Integrated
systems
toxicology
Treatment
Histopathology
Clinical chemistry
Weight, physiology
Absorbtion, distribution,
metabolism, excretion
O
N
O
Figure 2-16.  Conceptual approach for incorporating “omics” technologies and resulting large databases into toxicological evaluation. Data from experiments 
that evaluate the effects of a chemical on global patterns of gene expression (transcriptomics), protein content (proteomics), and small molecules/metabolites 
(metabonomics/metabolomics), combined with genomic information from both the test species (e.g., rats and mice) and the target species of interest (e.g., 
humans), are analyzed by computational tools (bioinformatics) for unique or potentially predictive patterns of toxicity. Essential to the use of omics data for 
predictive toxicology/safety assessment is the ability to reliably tie observed omics patterns to traditional measures of toxicity, such as histopathology and 
clinical chemistry (phenotypic anchoring). (From Waters and Fostel, 2004, with permission.)

50
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
physicochemical factors that could impact the ability of the test 
compound to be delivered effectively to animals. Once this infor-
mation is obtained, the chemical structure of the test compound 
is compared with similar chemicals for which toxicological infor-
mation is already available. Structure–activity relationships (SAR) 
may be derived from a review of existing toxicological literature, 
and can provide additional guidance on the design of acute and 
repeated-dose experiments, and what specialized tests need to be 
completed. Once such basic information has been compiled and 
evaluated, the test compound is then administered to animals in 
acute and repeated-dose studies.
Because of increased societal pressure to reduce or elimi-
nate the use of animals in toxicity testing, while also ensuring that 
new chemicals do not pose unreasonable risks to human health or 
the environment, regulatory agencies have been encouraging new 
approaches in descriptive toxicity testing that do not rely on lab-
oratory animals. For example, the EU promulgated an important 
regulatory initiative for the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation 
and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH). The implementation of 
REACH “will have significant impact on applied toxicology and 
exposure assessment by stimulating innovation in sampling and 
analysis, toxicology testing, exposure modeling, alternative toxic-
ity testing, and risk assessment practices” (Williams et al., 2009). 
Alternative, in vitro approaches to toxicity assessment are beginning 
to transform the way that product safety evaluation is performed.
The recognition that many of the existing chemicals in com-
mercial use today, as well as new chemicals being introduced into 
commerce, have little toxicological information has prompted 
calls for new “high-throughput” approaches to toxicity testing. 
This would allow at least a basic hazard characterization for the 
thousands of untested chemicals currently in the marketplace, as 
well as the many new chemicals that are introduced each year. A 
report from the National Academy of Sciences/National Research 
Council in 2007 called for a “paradigm shift” in how toxicity test-
ing is done (NAS/NRC, 2007). A key component of this new vision 
on toxicity testing is the use of an extensive battery of in vitro tests 
Table 2-6
International Conference on Harmonization (ICH) Codification of “Safety” Protocols
Carcinogenicity studies
S1A
Need for Carcinogenicity Studies of Pharmaceuticals
S1B
Testing for Carcinogenicity of Pharmaceuticals
S1C(R2)
Dose Selection for Carcinogenicity Studies of Pharmaceuticals 
Genotoxicity studies
S2 (R1)
Guidance on Genotoxicity Testing and Data Interpretation for Pharmaceuticals Intended for Human Use
Toxicokinetics and pharmacokinetics
S3A
Note for Guidance on Toxicokinetics: The Assessment of Systemic Exposure in Toxicity Studies
S3B
Pharmacokinetics: Guidance for Repeated Dose Tissue Distribution Studies
Toxicity testing
S4
Duration of Chronic Toxicity Testing in Animals (Rodent and Non Rodent Toxicity Testing)
Reproductive toxicology
S5(R2)
Detection of Toxicity to Reproduction for Medicinal Products & Toxicity to Male Fertility
Biotechnological products
S6(R1)
Preclinical Safety Evaluation of Biotechnology-Derived Pharmaceuticals
Pharmacology studies
S7A
Safety Pharmacology Studies for Human Pharmaceuticals
S7B
The Non-Clinical Evaluation of the Potential for Delayed Ventricular Repolarization (QT Interval 
­Prolongation) by Human Pharmaceuticals
Immunotoxicology studies
S8
Immunotoxicity Studies for Human Pharmaceuticals
Anticancer pharmaceuticals
S9
Nonclinical Evaluation for Anticancer Pharmaceuticals
Photosafety studies
S10
Photosafety Evaluation of Pharmaceuticals
Joint safety/efficacy (multidisciplinary) topic
M3(R2)
Non-Clinical Safety Studies for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials for Pharmaceuticals
M7(R1) 
Assessment and Control of DNA Reactive (Mutagenic) Impurities in Pharmaceuticals to Limit Potential 
Carcinogenic Risk
From http://www.ich.org/products/guidelines/safety/article/safety-guidelines.html. Accessed August 8, 2017.

Principles of Toxicology
Chapter 2
51
to evaluate AOPs for chemicals. The prospect is that new technolo-
gies in genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics, and 
bioinformatics can be combined with automated high-throughput 
technologies to create a tiered structure for toxicity testing. The 
approach to using biochemical and molecular pathway-based analy-
ses, rather than apical endpoints (e.g., target organ damage, muta-
genesis, carcinogenesis, reproductive and developmental effects), 
to identify potentially problematic chemicals early in their develop-
ment is particularly attractive from a time frame and economic per-
spective. However, it is also recognized that validation of screening 
tests is critically important. In 2000, the Interagency Coordinating 
Committee on the Validation of Alternative Methods (ICCVAM) 
was established as a component of the National Toxicology 
Program (NTP) Interagency Center for the Evaluation of Alternative 
Toxicological Methods (NICEATM). ICCVAM’s mission is to 
develop and validate alternative testing methodologies that replace, 
reduce, and refine the use of animals. Validation of in vitro screen-
ing tests can reduce the number of animals needed for safety testing 
and where applicable entirely replace some traditional approaches. 
Nonetheless, the established in vivo studies described in the fol-
lowing section will continue to serve an important role in hazard 
evaluation, especially for high-priority chemicals. While guidelines 
vary between organizations (ICH, NTP, EPA, and OECD), there are 
conceptual and practical similarities that are commonly employed.
Acute Toxicity Testing
Safety testing is initiated with acute studies that identify tar-
get organs and provide an estimate of the intrinsic toxicity for a 
substance. Typically, these studies are performed in rodents (rats 
and mice) and aim to approximate the LD (e.g., LD50) of a chemi-
cal within 14 days after a single exposure. These data are used to 
inform the design and dose selection for longer-term (subchronic, 
chronic) studies.
There are a number of variables that are considered (and often 
controlled) in the design of acute toxicity tests. When performing 
acute toxicity tests, there will typically be one control group and 
four to five treatment groups that each contain three to five animals 
per group. Both sexes in two species will often undergo this testing 
protocol. Typically, the route of administration will be the same that 
is anticipated or intended for human exposure, most often oral. A 
number of approaches are recommended to determine the doses and 
dosing: (1) fixed doses (5 to 2000 mg/kg OECD Guideline 420), 
(2) stepwise method (one group is tested at a time and observations 
determine the next step (OECD Guideline 423), and (3) up-and-
down procedure, where an initial starting dose is estimated from 
in silico and in vitro testing and then successive doses are selected 
using half-log increases (OECD Guideline 425). Only a single 
dose of the vehicle and test chemical is administered. Inhalation 
exposures occur once for a 4-hour period. Assessments include 
twice-daily examination of animal weight, behavioral modifica-
tions, morbidity, and food consumption. After 14 days, all animals 
undergo a complete necropsy including gross observations, organ 
weights, and histopathological evaluation. The list of tissues evalu-
ated histologically is extensive with over 40 organs collected and 
assessed.
The LD50 is not a biological constant. Many factors influence 
toxicity and thus may alter the estimation of the LD50 in any par-
ticular study. Factors such as animal strain, age, and weight, type 
of feed, caging, pretrial fasting time, method of administration, 
volume and type of suspension medium, and duration of observa-
tion have all been shown to influence adverse responses to toxic 
substances. Because of this inherent variability in LD50 estimates, 
it is now recognized that for most purposes it is only necessary to 
characterize the LD50 within an order of magnitude range such as 
5 to 50 mg/kg, 50 to 500 mg/kg, and so on.
There is a growing interest to develop in silico and in vitro 
methods to reduce the number of animals needed for acute systemic 
toxicity tests. For example, the Registry of Cytotoxicity (RC), origi-
nally published in German in 1998, was developed by linear regres-
sion analysis of the cytotoxic concentration values determined in 
mammalian cells in culture and the LD50 values reported in the lit-
erature from various laboratory species. Using this approach, the 
authors predicted (within a reasonable dose range) the acute oral 
LD50 for 252 of 347 xenobiotics, and the intravenous LD50 for rats 
and/or mice for 117 of 150 xenobiotics (Halle, 2003). Of course, 
such in vitro approaches do not fully account for dispositional 
effects that could result in large species differences in acute toxicity, 
but do provide a rapid first approximation of acute toxicity without 
the use of experimental animals and suggest a starting dose range 
for in vivo studies.
In recent years many regulatory agencies have begun to accept 
alternative in vitro tests for dermal and eye irritation tests that do 
not use live laboratory animals. Indeed, such in vitro approaches to 
acute toxicity testing are now being more widely accepted for other 
types of acute toxicity testing. The National Toxicology Program 
provides an up-to-date listing of such alternative tests that are 
accepted by U.S. regulatory agencies (NTP, 2017b).
Subacute (Repeated-Dose) Toxicity Testing
Subacute toxicity tests are performed to obtain information on the 
toxicity of a chemical after repeated administration and as an aid 
to establish doses for subchronic studies. A typical protocol is to 
give three to four different doses of the chemicals to the animals 
by mixing them in their feed. For rats, 10 animals per sex per dose 
are often used; for dogs, three doses and three to four animals per 
sex are used. Clinical chemistry and histopathology are performed 
after either 14 or 28 days of exposure, as described in the section 
“Subchronic Toxicity Testing.”
Subchronic Toxicity Testing
Subchronic exposure can last for different periods of time, but 90 
days (13 weeks) is the most common test duration. The princi-
pal goals of the subchronic study are to establish a no observed 
adverse effect level (NOAEL) and to further identify and character-
ize the specific organ or organs affected by the test compound after 
repeated administration. One may also obtain a lowest observed 
adverse effect level (LOAEL). The numbers obtained for NOAEL 
and LOAEL will depend on how closely the doses are spaced and 
the number of animals examined. Determinations of NOAELs and 
LOAELs have regulatory implications. For example, the EPA uti-
lizes the NOAEL to calculate the reference dose (RfD), which may 
be used to establish regulatory values for “acceptable” pollutant 
levels (Barnes and Dourson, 1988) (see Chap. 4). An alternative 
to the NOAEL approach referred to as the benchmark dose uses 
all the experimental data to fit one or more dose–response curves 
(Crump, 1984). These curves are then used to estimate a bench-
mark dose that is defined as “the statistical lower bound on a dose 
corresponding to a specified level of risk” (Allen et al., 1994a). 
Often, the benchmark response is defined as a 10% increase in 
the number of test subjects exhibiting a specific pathological 
lesion. Advantages of determining a benchmark dose rather than a 
NOAEL include a lesser dependency upon the experimental doses 
selected, consideration of the shape of the dose–response curve, 
and an ability to account for variability and uncertainty within

52
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
the data (Davis et al., 2011). Although subchronic studies are fre-
quently the primary or sole source of experimental data used to 
determine both the NOAEL and the benchmark dose, these con-
cepts can be applied to other types of toxicity testing protocols, 
such as that for chronic toxicity or developmental toxicity (Allen 
et al., 1994a, 1994b; Faustman et al., 1994) (see also Chap. 4). 
If chronic studies have been completed, these data are generally 
used for NOAEL and LOAEL estimates in preference to data from 
subchronic studies.
A subchronic study is usually conducted in two species (often 
rat and dog for FDA, and rat or mouse for EPA) by the route of 
intended exposure (usually oral). At least three doses are employed 
(a high dose that produces toxicity but does not cause more than 
10% fatalities, a low dose that produces no apparent toxic effects, 
and an intermediate dose) with 10 to 20 rodents and 4 to 6 dogs 
of each sex per dose. Each animal should be uniquely identified 
with permanent markings such as ear tags, tattoos, or electronically 
coded microchip implants. Only healthy animals should be used, 
and each animal should be housed individually in an adequately 
controlled environment. Prior to the initiation of a subchronic (and 
chronic) safety study, a period of 1 to 2 weeks will be used for 
pretesting where animals in the control and (anticipated) treated 
groups are compared for various baseline values, such as urinal-
ysis. When the test compound is administered in the diet over a 
prolonged period of time (subchronic and chronic studies), the 
concentration in the diet should be adjusted periodically (weekly 
for the first 12 to 14 weeks) to maintain a constant intake of mate-
rial based on food consumption and rate of change in body weight 
(Wilson et al., 2008). Animals should be observed once or twice 
daily for signs of toxicity, including changes in body weight, diet 
consumption, changes in fur color or texture, respiratory or cardio-
vascular distress, motor and behavioral abnormalities, and palpable 
masses. All premature deaths should be recorded and necropsied as 
soon as possible. Severely moribund animals should be terminated 
immediately to preserve tissues and reduce unnecessary suffering. 
At the end of the 90-day study, all remaining animals are terminated 
and blood and tissues collected for further analysis. The gross and 
microscopic conditions of the organs and tissues (about 15 to 20) 
and the weight of the major organs (about 12) are recorded and eval-
uated. Hematology and blood chemistry measurements are usually 
done before, in the middle of, and at the termination of exposure. 
Hematology measurements usually include hemoglobin concentra-
tion, hematocrit, erythrocyte counts, total and differential leukocyte 
counts, platelet count, clotting time, and prothrombin time. Clinical 
chemistry determinations commonly made include glucose, cal-
cium, potassium, urea nitrogen, serum ALT/AST, gamma-glutamyl 
transpeptidase (GGT), lactic dehydrogenase, alkaline phosphatase, 
creatinine, bilirubin, triglycerides, cholesterol, albumin, globulin, 
and total protein. Urinalysis is usually performed in the middle of 
and at the termination of the testing period and often includes deter-
mination of specific gravity or osmolarity, pH, proteins, glucose, 
ketones, bilirubin, and urobilinogen as well as microscopic exami-
nation of formed elements. If humans are likely to have significant 
exposure to the chemical by dermal contact or inhalation, sub-
chronic dermal and/or inhalation experiments may also be required. 
Subchronic toxicity studies not only characterize the dose–response 
relationship of a test substance after repeated administration but 
also provide data for a more reasonable prediction of appropriate 
doses for chronic exposure studies.
For chemicals that are to be registered as drugs, acute and sub-
chronic studies (and potentially additional special tests if a chemical 
has unusual toxic effects or therapeutic purposes) must be com-
pleted before the company can file an Investigational New Drug 
(IND) application with the FDA. If the application is approved, 
clinical trials can commence. At the time clinical trials are per-
formed, chronic exposure of the animals to the test compound can 
be carried out in laboratory animals along with additional special-
ized tests.
Chronic Toxicity Testing
Long-term or chronic exposure studies are performed similarly to 
subchronic studies except that the period of exposure is longer than 
3 months. In rodents, chronic exposures are usually for 6 months to 
2 years. Chronic studies in nonrodent species are usually for 1 year 
but may be longer. The length of exposure is somewhat dependent on 
the intended period of exposure in humans. For example, for pharma-
ceuticals, the ICH S4 guidance calls for studies of 6 months in dura-
tion in rodents, and 9 months in nonrodents. However, if the chemical 
is a food additive with the potential for lifetime exposure in humans, 
a chronic study up to 2 years in duration is likely to be required.
Dose selection is critical in these studies to ensure that pre-
mature mortality from chronic toxicity does not limit the number 
of animals that survive to a normal life expectancy. Most regula-
tory guidelines require that the highest dose administered be the 
estimated maximum tolerable dose (MTD, also commonly referred 
to as the “minimally toxic dose”). This is generally derived from 
subchronic studies, but additional longer studies (e.g., 6 months) 
may be necessary if delayed effects or extensive cumulative toxic-
ity are indicated in the 90-day subchronic study. The MTD has had 
various definitions. It has been defined by some regulatory agencies 
as the dose that suppresses body weight gain slightly (i.e., 10%) 
in a 90-day subchronic study. However, regulatory agencies may 
also consider the use of parameters other than weight gain, such 
as physiological and pharmacokinetic considerations and urinary 
metabolite profiles, as indicators of an appropriate MTD. Generally, 
one or two additional doses, usually fractions of the MTD (e.g., 
one-half and one-quarter MTD), and a control group are tested.
Developmental and Reproductive Toxicity
The effects of chemicals on reproduction and development also 
need to be determined. Developmental toxicology is the study of 
adverse effects on the developing organism occurring anytime dur-
ing the life span of the organism that may result from exposure to 
chemical or physical agents before conception (either parent), dur-
ing prenatal development, or postnatally until the time of puberty. 
Teratology is the study of defects induced during development 
between conception and birth (see Chap. 10). Reproductive toxicol-
ogy is the study of the occurrence of adverse effects on the male 
or female reproductive system that may result from exposure to 
chemical or physical agents (see Chap. 21).
Several types of animal tests are utilized to examine the poten-
tial of a chemical to alter development and reproduction. Six criti-
cal periods are delineated during these studies often spanning more 
than one period: premating to conception, conception to implanta-
tion, implantation to closure of the hard palate, hard palate closure 
to parturition, and birth to weaning and weaning to sexual maturity. 
General fertility and reproductive performance (segment I) tests are 
usually performed in rats with two or three dose levels (20 rats per 
sex per dose) of the test chemical (neither produces maternal toxic-
ity) (ICH, 2000). Males are given the chemical 60 days and females 
14 days before mating. The dams are given the chemical throughout 
gestation and lactation. Typical observations made include the per-
centage of females that become pregnant, the number of stillborn 
and live offspring, and the weight, growth, survival, and general 
condition of the offspring during the first 3 weeks of life.

Principles of Toxicology
Chapter 2
53
The potential of chemicals to disrupt normal embryonic and/
or fetal development (teratogenic effects) is also determined in 
laboratory animals. Current guidelines for these segment II studies 
call for the use of two species, including one nonrodent species 
(usually rabbits). Teratogens are most effective when administered 
during the first trimester, the period of organogenesis. Thus, the ani-
mals (usually 12 rabbits and 24 rats or mice per group) are usually 
exposed to one of three doses during organogenesis (days 7 to 17 in 
rodents and days 7 to 19 in rabbits), and the fetuses are removed by 
cesarean section a day before the estimated time of delivery (gesta-
tional days 29 for rabbit, 20 for rat, and 18 for mouse). The uterus 
is excised and weighed and then examined for the number of live, 
dead, and resorbed fetuses. Live fetuses are weighed; half of each 
litter is examined for skeletal abnormalities and the remaining half 
for soft tissue anomalies.
The perinatal and postnatal toxicities of chemicals also are 
often examined (segment III). This test is performed by admin-
istering the test compound to rats from the 15th day of gestation 
throughout delivery and lactation and determining its effect on the 
birth weight, survival, and growth of the offspring during the first 
3 weeks of life.
A multigenerational study may be performed, often in place 
of segment III studies, to determine the effects of chemicals on the 
reproductive system. At least three dose levels are given to groups 
of 25 female and 25 male rats shortly after weaning (30 to 40 days 
of age). These rats are referred to as the F0 generation. Dosing con-
tinues throughout breeding (about 140 days of age), gestation, and 
lactation. The offspring (F1 generation) have thus been exposed to 
the chemical in utero, via lactation, and in the feed thereafter. When 
the F1 generation is about 140 days old, about 25 females and 25 
males are bred to produce the F2 generation, and administration of 
the chemical is continued. The F2 generation is thus also exposed to 
the chemical in utero and via lactation. The percentage of F0 and F1 
females that get pregnant, the number of pregnancies that progress 
to full term, the litter size, the number of stillborn, and the number 
of live births are recorded. Viability counts and pup weights are 
recorded at birth and at 4, 7, 14, and 21 days of age. The fertil-
ity index (percentage of mating resulting in pregnancy), gestation 
index (percentage of pregnancies resulting in live litters), viability 
index (percentage of animals that survive 4 days or longer), and 
lactation index (percentage of animals alive at 4 days that survived 
the 21-day lactation period) are then calculated. Gross necropsy and 
histopathology are performed on some of the parents (F0 and F1), 
with the greatest attention being paid to the reproductive organs, 
and gross necropsy is performed on all weanlings. It should be 
noted that these studies provide little data regarding developmental 
neurotoxicity and immunotoxicity, which require more specialized 
behavioral and functional tests.
The aforementioned testing for reproductive and developmen-
tal toxicities is most relevant for pharmaceuticals (OECD, 2002). 
Additional guidelines for testing nontherapeutic chemicals share 
some similarities and differences with ICH S5(R2). Most often, 
developmental tests for industrial chemicals are not segmented 
and can be folded into repeated-dose toxicity studies (EPA, 2000; 
OECD, 2015c). In addition to standard developmental toxicity test-
ing, there is interest in utilizing alternate models to screen and pri-
oritize chemicals for animal studies (Knudsen et al., 2011).
Mutagenicity
Mutagenesis is the ability of chemicals to cause changes to DNA 
that are transmitted during cell division. Mutations can occur in 
either of the two cell types: germ and somatic cells. Germline 
mutations damage DNA in sperm and ova, which undergo meiotic 
division and therefore have the potential for transmission of muta-
tions to future generations. If mutations are present at the time of 
fertilization in either the egg or the sperm, the subsequent combina-
tion of genetic material may not be viable. Alternatively, the muta-
tion may not affect early embryogenesis but cause the death of the 
fetus at a later developmental period. Congenital abnormalities may 
also result from mutations. Somatic mutations refer to nonheritable 
mutations in all other cell types. Somatic mutations may lead to cell 
death or transmission of the genetic defect through mitotic division. 
Mutagenic tests are often used to screen for potential carcinogens.
Numerous in vivo and in vitro procedures have been devised 
to test chemicals for their ability to cause mutations. Some genetic 
alterations are visible with the light microscope. In this case, cyto-
genetic analysis of bone marrow smears is used after the animals 
have been exposed to the test chemical. Because some mutations are 
incompatible with normal development, the mutagenic potential of 
a chemical can also be evaluated by the dominant lethal test. This 
test is usually performed in rodents. The male is exposed to a single 
dose of the test compound and then is mated with two untreated 
females weekly for 8 weeks. The females are killed before term, 
and the number of live embryos and the number of corpora lutea 
are determined.
The test for mutagens that has received the widest attention is 
the Salmonella/microsome test developed by Bruce Ames (Ames 
et al., 1975). This test uses several mutant strains of Salmonella 
typhimurium that lack the enzyme phosphoribosyl ATP synthetase, 
which is required for histidine synthesis. These strains are unable 
to grow in a histidine-deficient medium unless a reverse or back 
mutation to the wild-type form has occurred. Other mutations in 
these bacteria have been introduced to heighten the sensitivity of 
the strains to mutagenesis. The two most significant additional 
mutations enhance penetration of substances into the bacteria and 
decrease the ability of the bacteria to repair DNA damage. Because 
many chemicals are not mutagenic or carcinogenic unless they are 
metabolized to a toxic intermediate, rat liver microsomes containing 
biotransformation enzymes can be added to the medium contain-
ing the mutant strain and the test chemical. The number of reverse 
mutations is then quantified by the number of bacterial colonies that 
grow in a histidine-deficient medium.
In addition to the Ames test, there are a number of additional 
mutagenicity assays routinely used in safety testing. These include 
in vitro mammalian cytogenetic tests for chromosomal damage 
(such as metaphase chromosome aberrations) and the mouse lym-
phoma thymidine kinase (Tk) gene mutation assay. In vivo testing 
for micronuclei in rodent hematopoetic cells typically accompanies 
these in vitro assays. DNA strand breakage or covalent binding 
can also be assessed in rodents. With the advent of techniques that 
readily allow manipulation of the mouse genome, transgenic ani-
mals have been developed to enable in vivo assessment of chemi-
cal mutagenicity. For example, two commercially available mouse 
strains, the “MutaMouse” and “Big Blue,” contain the lac operon 
of Escherichia coli that has been inserted into genomic DNA using 
a lambda phage to DNA to produce a recoverable shuttle vector. 
Stable, homozygous strains of these transgenic animals (both mice 
and rats have been engineered) are exposed to potential mutagenic 
chemicals. Transgenic rodent mutation tests allow for relevant 
metabolism and DNA processes to occur. Following 28 days of 
repeated dosing, genomic DNA is isolated in multiple organs and 
evaluated for point mutations. Collectively, these data provide a 
comprehensive view of the mutagenicity of the test compound.
More recently, ICH has called for consideration of the geno-
toxic potential of impurities found in small-molecule pharmaceutical

54
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
products. The M7(R1) guideline integrates structure–activity rela-
tionships and Thresholds of Toxicological Concern–based intake 
of the impurity following a theoretical lifetime of daily exposure. 
Following analysis, each impurity is classified to one of five classes 
based on the potential for mutagenicity and carcinogenicity, each 
with different risk characterization strategies.
Carcinogenicity
Carcinogenicity studies are both time consuming and expensive, 
and are usually only performed when there is reason to suspect that 
a chemical may be carcinogenic, or when there may be widespread, 
long-term exposures to humans (e.g., widely used food additives, 
drinking water contaminants, or pharmaceuticals that are likely to 
be administered repeatedly for long periods of time). Chemicals 
that test positive in several mutagenicity assays are likely to be car-
cinogenic, and thus are frequent candidates for oncogenicity bio-
assay assessment. In the United States, the NTP often evaluates 
nondrug chemicals for carcinogenic potential. For pharmaceuti-
cals, the FDA may require the manufacturer to conduct carcinoge-
nicity studies as part of the preclinical assessment, depending on 
the intended use of the drug, and the results of mutagenicity assays 
and other toxicological data.
Studies to evaluate the carcinogenic (oncogenic) potential of 
chemicals are usually performed in rats and mice and extend over 
the average lifetime of the species (18 months to 2 years for mice, 
2 to 2.5 years for rats). To ensure that 30 rats per dose survive the 
2-year study, 60 rats per group per sex are often started in the study. 
Both gross and microscopic pathological examinations are made 
not only on animals that survive the chronic exposure but also on 
those that die prematurely. The use of the maximum tolerated dose 
(MTD) in carcinogenicity has been the subject of controversy. The 
premise that high doses are necessary for testing the carcinogenic 
potential of chemicals is derived from the statistical and experi-
mental design limitations of chronic bioassays. For nonmutagenic 
pharmaceuticals, ICH S1C provides the following guidance on 
dose selection for carcinogenicity studies: “The doses selected for 
rodent bioassays for non-genotoxic pharmaceuticals should provide 
an exposure to the chemical, which (1) allow an adequate margin 
of safety over the human therapeutic exposure, (2) are tolerated 
without significant chronic physiological dysfunction and are com-
patible with good survival, (3) are guided by a comprehensive set 
of animal and human data that focus broadly on the properties of 
the chemical and the suitability of the animal and (4) permit data 
interpretation in the context of clinical use.”
Another approach for establishing maximum doses to use in 
chronic animal toxicity testing relies upon basic human pharmaco-
kinetic data that are available (e.g., new pharmaceuticals that have 
completed phase I clinical trials). For chronic animal studies per-
formed on drugs where single-dose human pharmacokinetic data 
are available, a daily dose that would provide an area under the 
curve (AUC) in laboratory animals equivalent to 25 times the AUC 
in humans given the highest (single) daily dose to be used therapeu-
tically may be used, rather than the MTD.
Most regulatory guidelines require that both benign and malig-
nant tumors be reported. Statistical increases above the control inci-
dence of tumors (either all tumors or specific tumor types) in the 
treatment groups are considered indicative of a chemical’s carcino-
genic potential. Thus, the conclusion as to whether a given chronic 
bioassay is positive or negative for carcinogenic potential of the test 
substance requires careful consideration of background tumor inci-
dence. Properly designed chronic carcinogenicity studies require 
that a concurrent control group matched for variables such as age, 
diet, and housing conditions is used. For some tumor types, the 
“background” incidence of tumors is surprisingly high. Fig. 2-17 
shows the background tumor incidence for various tumors in male 
and female F344 rats used in 27 NTP 2-year rodent carcinogenicity 
studies. The data shown represent the percent of animals in control 
(nonexposed) groups that developed the specified tumor type by the 
end of the 2-year study. These studies involved more than 1300 rats 
of each sex. Fig. 2-18 illustrates the aggregated results for tumor 
development in control (nonexposed) mice from thirty 2-year car-
cinogenicity studies performed by the NTP. The data represent the 
results observed in over 1400 male and 1400 female B6C3F1 mice.
There are several key points that can be derived from these 
summary data:
	 1.	 Tumors, both benign and malignant, are not uncommon events 
in animals even in the absence of exposure to any known 
carcinogen.
	 2.	 There are numerous different tumor types that develop “spon-
taneously” in both sexes of both rats and mice, but at different 
rates.
	 3.	 Background tumors that are common in one species may be 
uncommon in another (e.g., testicular interstitial cell adeno-
mas are very common in male rats but rare in male mice; liver 
adenomas/carcinomas are about 10 times more prevalent in 
male mice than in male rats).
	 4.	 Even within the same species and strain, large gender differ-
ences in background tumor incidence are sometimes observed 
(e.g., adrenal gland pheochromocytomas are about seven times 
more prevalent in male F344 rats than in female F344 rats; 
lung and liver tumors are twice as prevalent in male B6C3F1 
mice as in female B6C3F1 mice).
Male F344 rats
% with tumors
0
100
100
25
25
50
50
75
75
Testis interstitial cell adenoma
Mononuclear cell leukemia
Mononuclear cell leukemia
Uterus stromal polyp
Pituitary adenoma/carcinoma
Thyroid c-cell adenoma/carcinoma
Thyroid c-cell adenoma/carcinoma
Skin keratoacanthoma
Skin papilloma/carcinoma
Pancreatic islets adenoma/carcinoma
Lung adenoma/carcinoma
Mesothelioma
Liver adenoma/carcinoma
Preputial gland adenoma/carcinoma
Clitoral gland adenoma/carcinoma
Pituitary gland adenoma/carcinoma
Subcutaneous tissue neoplasms
Subcutaneous tissue neoplasms
Mammary gland neoplasms
Mammary gland neoplasms
Adrenal gland pheochromocytoma
Adrenal gland pheochromocytoma
% with tumors
0
100
100
25
25
50
50
75
75
Female F344 rats
Figure 2-17.  Most frequently occurring tumors in untreated control rats 
from recent NTP 2-year rodent carcinogenicity studies. The values shown 
represent the mean ± standard deviation of the percentage of animals 
developing the specified tumor type at the end of the 2-year study. The val-
ues were obtained from 27 different studies involving a combined total of 
between 1319 and 1353 animals per tumor type.

Principles of Toxicology
Chapter 2
55
	 5.	 Even when the general protocols, diets, environment, strain 
and source of animals, and other variables are relatively con-
stant, background tumor incidence can vary widely, as shown 
by the relatively large standard deviations for some tumor 
types in the NTP bioassay program. For example, the range in 
liver adenoma/carcinoma incidence in 30 different groups of 
unexposed (control) male B6C3F1 mice went from a low of 
10% to a high of 68%. Pituitary gland adenomas/carcinomas 
ranged from 12% to 60% and 30% to 76% in unexposed male 
and female F344 rats, respectively, and from 0% to 36% in 
unexposed female B6C3F1 mice.
Collectively, these data demonstrate the importance of includ-
ing concurrent control animals in carcinogenicity studies. Often, 
comparisons of the concurrent control results to “historic” controls 
accumulated over many years of study may identify potentially spu-
rious “false-positive” results. The relatively high variability in back-
ground tumor incidence among groups of healthy, highly inbred 
strains of animals maintained in highly controlled environments 
highlights the dilemma in interpreting the significance of both posi-
tive and negative results in regard to the human population, which 
is genetically diverse, has tremendous variability in diet, nutritional 
status, and overall health, and lives in an environment full of poten-
tially carcinogenic substances, both natural and human-made.
Neurotoxicity Assessment
Neurotoxicity is defined as the adverse changes in the chemistry, 
structure, or function of the nervous system following exposure to 
a chemical or physical agent (examined in Chap. 16). Neurotoxic 
effects can occur in central or peripheral nervous systems and disrupt 
sensory, motor, autonomic, or cognitive functions. The developing 
nervous system is particularly sensitive to chemical exposures (see 
Chap. 10); therefore, testing on adult and perinatal/juvenile ani-
mals is important in assessing the potential risk of neurotoxicol-
ogy. The functional observational battery (FOB) was developed 
based on early basic screens for behavioral function in mice (Irwin, 
1968; Moser, 2000). The FOB used in young adult rats by the EPA 
evaluates changes in a number of endpoints: autonomic functions 
(lacrimation, salivation, piloerection, exophthalmos, urination, 
defecation, and pupil size), abnormal motor movements, reactivity 
to stimuli, level of activity, gait, forelimb/hindlimb strength, foot 
splay, and others (OECD, 1997; EPA, 1998c). In addition to the 
FOB, motor activity and neuropathology are assessed. These stud-
ies are performed in at least 10 rats of each sex using at least three 
dose levels compared to a vehicle control group.
Because of the heightened sensitivity of immature animals to 
the neurotoxicity of some chemicals, there are a number of meth-
ods and procedures for evaluating developmental neurotoxicology 
(Claudio et al., 2000; Cory-Slechta et al., 2001; Dorman et al., 2001; 
Garman et al., 2001; Mileson and Ferenc, 2001). Standardized 
protocols are used to evaluate developmental neurotoxicity in off-
spring from pregnant and lactating rats exposed perinatally to test 
chemicals (EPA, 1998d; OECD, 2007). These protocols include 
tests of neurobehavioral function, such as auditory startle, learning 
and memory function, changes in motor activity, and neuropatho-
logical examination and morphometric analysis across multiple 
age ranges (pre-weaning, adolescence, and young adults). In 2012, 
the OECD approved the “Extended One Generation Reproductive 
Toxicity Study” (OECD, 2012a). A main advantage is that criteria 
are described that may document that a two-generation study is not 
needed, thereby reducing substantially the number of animals, and 
the cost of testing. The document states, “Decisions on whether to 
assess the second generation and to omit the developmental neuro-
toxicity cohort and/or developmental immunotoxicity cohort should 
reflect existing knowledge for the chemical being evaluated, as well 
as the needs of various regulatory authorities” (OECD, 2012a).
Immunotoxicity Assessment
Under normal conditions, the immune system is responsible for 
host defense against pathogenic infections and certain cancers. 
However, xenobiotic exposures can alter immune system devel-
opment and/or function and lead to immunostimulation (sensiti-
zation or autoimmunity) or immunosuppression (see Chap. 12). 
Our understanding of the biological processes underlying immune 
system dysfunction remains incomplete. However, advances in 
molecular biology (including use of transgenic/knockout mice), 
analytic methods (including RNA sequencing, cell sorting, and 
multiparameter flow cytometry), animal models (including adop-
tive transfers in immunocompromised mice and host resistance to 
viral, bacterial, or tumor cell challenge), and other methods are 
greatly improving our knowledge.
The development of hypersensitivity can vary among chemi-
cals because of differing intrinsic immune mechanisms. Importantly, 
traditional dose–response relationships may not necessarily exist. 
For example, a single or incidental exposure to beryllium, an ele-
ment used in numerous manufacturing and industrial capacities, has 
been associated with chronic beryllium disease in some individuals. 
This disease is a type 4 cell-mediated hypersensitivity reaction that 
leads to the formation of lung granulomas containing epithelioid 
cells, macrophages, and T cells. Sensitization to beryllium is more 
often observed in individuals with a nonsynonymous polymorphism 
in the HLA-DPB1 gene that alters antigen recognition (Richeldi 
et al., 1993). By comparison, autoimmunity occurs when the immune 
Male B6C3F1 mice
% with tumors
0
100
100
25
25
50
50
75
75
Uterus stromal polyps
Thyroid gland follicular cell tumors
Lung adenoma/carcinoma
Lung adenoma/carcinoma
Liver adenoma/carcinoma
Liver adenoma/carcinoma
Harderian gland adenoma/carcinoma
Adrenal cortical tumors
Pituitary gland adenoma/carcinoma
Harderian gland adenoma/carcinoma
Subcutaneous tissue neoplasms
Malignant lymphoma
Malignant lymphoma
Hemangioma/hemangiosarcoma
Hemangioma/hemangiocarcinoma
Forestomach papilloma/carcinoma
0
Female B6C3F1 mice
% with tumors
100
100
25
25
50
50
75
75
Figure 2-18.  Most frequently occurring tumors in untreated control mice 
from recent NTP 2-year rodent carcinogenicity studies. The values shown 
represent the mean ± standard deviation of the percentage of animals devel-
oping the specified tumor type at the end of the 2-year study. The values 
were obtained from 30 different studies involving a total of between 1447 
and 1474 animals per tumor type.

56
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
system attacks normal tissues and can be observed in type II and 
III hypersensitivity reactions. A wide range of chemicals including 
therapeutic drugs (methyldopa, isoniazid), metals (mercury), pesti-
cides (hexachlorobenzene), and industrial materials (vinyl chloride) 
have been associated with autoimmunity. The anesthetic halothane 
is a well-studied chemical that causes autoimmunity. The trifluoro-
acetylhalide metabolite of halothane binds to proteins in the liver 
forming neoantigens that are recognized by the immune system 
leading to hepatitis.
Immunosuppression is another form of immune system toxic-
ity that can result in a failure to respond to pathogenic infection, a 
prolonged infection period, or expression of a latent infection or 
cancer. Therapeutic immunosuppressants are designed and used 
to prevent organ transplant rejection or suppress inflammation. 
However, a large number of environmental and industrial chemicals 
have been associated with immunosuppression, including organo-
chlorine pesticides, lead, and halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons 
(including TCDD), and exposures that occur during critical stages 
may present special risks to development.
With the increased development of immunomodulatory bio-
logic drugs, proper safeguards in testing are needed to prevent 
massive cytokine dysregulation. A pivotal example involved six 
healthy volunteers who had enrolled in a phase 1 clinical trial in the 
United Kingdom who developed a severe cytokine response to an 
anti-CD28 monoclonal antibody leading to systemic organ failures 
(Suntharalingam et al., 2006). Such cases are stark reminders of the 
challenges faced in understanding how the immune system is regu-
lated, establishing reliable test systems for identifying such risks 
prior to human use, and developing safe means for testing these 
chemicals in humans.
The current practice for evaluating potential toxic effects of 
novel chemical and therapeutic products on the immune system 
involves a tiered approach to immunotoxicity screening. The ICH 
S8 guidance (Table 2-6), which applies to the nonclinical (animal) 
testing of human pharmaceuticals, is the accepted standard in the 
United States, the EU, and Japan. Initial data regarding a new drug’s 
ability to alter immune system functioning in an unintended manner 
can be observed in standard toxicity tests. Evaluation of hemato-
logical changes, including differential effects on white blood cells 
and immunoglobulin changes, increases in infections or tumors, 
and alterations in lymphoid organ weights or histology, in standard 
toxicology studies can provide strong evidence of potential effects 
to the immune system. Immune system dysfunction would signal 
the need of more detailed evaluations, including the evaluation of 
functional effects (e.g., T-cell-dependent antibody response or nat-
ural killer cell activity), flow cytometric immunophenotyping, or 
host resistance studies. The NTP uses a tier-based system to screen 
immunotoxicology endpoints including histopathology and clinical 
pathology (complete blood count and hematology) for the immune 
system as well as measures innate immunity (macrophage function 
and natural killer cell assays), cell-mediated immunity (cytotoxic T 
lymphocyte activity), and humoral-mediated immunity (antibody 
production following antigen challenge).
Sensitization
Skin sensitization, also known as allergic contact dermatitis, is the 
immune-mediated reaction of the skin to a chemical. The appear-
ance of skin sensitization can range in humans from erythema, 
edema, and vesicles to bullae, whereas in rodents only erythema 
and edema may be observed. In recent years, there has been great 
interest in reducing the number of animals needed for testing a 
chemical’s propensity to cause skin sensitization. EPA and OECD 
guidelines describe protocols for evaluating skin sensitization 
(OECD, 1992, 2010a, 2010b, 2015d, 2015e, 2016; EPA, 2003). 
These studies range from the Guinea Pig Maximization test and 
include the adjuvant and non-adjuvant Buehler test. Guinea pigs 
(and sometimes mice) are exposed to the test chemical topically 
or intradermally, followed for 3 to 4 weeks, and evaluated for skin 
irritation and erythema. More recent tests of sensitization include 
the use of the local lymph node assay in mice as well a variety of 
validated in vitro methods such as the reconstructed human epider-
mis test model, ARE-Nrf2 luciferase test in human keratinocytes, 
and the human cell line activation test (h-CLAT).
Eye and Skin Irritation and Corrosion
Irritant chemicals cause reversible injury to the eyes or skin, 
whereas corrosive damage is irreversible. Similar to sensitization 
screening, a variety of new validated methods are available to test 
a chemical’s ability to cause irritation and/or corrosion. EPA proto-
cols utilize albino rabbits for both ocular and dermal testing (EPA, 
1998a, 1998b). Eye injury is assessed between 3 and 21 days after 
application of the chemical to the rabbit’s eye and compared to the 
contralateral untreated eye in the same animal. Typical ocular end-
points include evaluation of the cornea (opacity), iris (congestion 
and reaction to light), and the conjunctivae (redness and chemo-
sis). Similar testing is recommended by OECD (OECD, 2002). In 
vitro methods for assessing ocular damage have been validated and 
recommended for testing purposes (OECD, 2012b, 2013b, 2015f, 
2015g). These include use of SIRC (Seruminstitut rabbit cornea) 
cells and reconstructed human cornea-like epithelium for cell via-
bility/cytotoxicity assays, isolated chicken corneas for fluorescein 
retention and morphological changes, and Madin–Darby Canine 
Kidney cells grown on transwell inserts and evaluated for fluores-
cein leakage across the monolayer.
Dermal toxicity testing is performed by applying patches con-
taining the test chemical to a shaved section of skin for increasing 
periods of time (minutes to hours). Adjacent regions of skin are 
used as a control within the same animal. The skin is evaluated 
for erythema/eschar and edema and reversibility of these findings 
during a 14-day period. The EPA has also begun to enact alternate 
testing methods (including the bovine corneal opacity and perme-
ability assay, epiocular assay, cytosensor microphysiometer assay) 
to assess the ability of pesticides to cause eye irritation. Other 
chemicals can be tested using these alternate methods on a case-
by-case basis. OECD guidelines for dermal irritation and corro-
sion also include similar protocols for erythema and edema on the 
skin of albino rabbits (OECD, 2015a), as well as three-dimensional 
human skin models containing an epidermis and functional stratum 
corneum (OECD, 2013a, 2015b).
Other Toxicity Tests
Most of the tests described above will be included in a “standard” 
toxicity testing protocol because they are required by the various 
regulatory agencies. Additional tests may be required or included 
in the protocol to provide information relating a special route of 
exposure, such as inhalation. Inhalation toxicity tests in animals 
are usually carried out in a dynamic (flowing) chamber rather than 
in static chambers to avoid particulate settling and exhaled gas 
complications. Such studies usually require special dispersing and 
analytic methodologies, depending on whether the chemical to be 
tested is a gas, vapor, or aerosol. The duration of exposure for inha-
lation toxicity tests can be acute, subchronic, or chronic, but acute 
studies are more common with inhalation toxicology. Other special 
types of animal toxicity tests include toxicokinetics (absorption, 
distribution, biotransformation, and excretion), the development of

Principles of Toxicology
Chapter 2
57
appropriate antidotes and treatment regimens for poisoning, and the 
establishment of analytic techniques to detect residues of chemicals 
in tissues and other biological materials.
SYSTEMS TOXICOLOGY
The integration of classical toxicology testing with the “quantita-
tive analysis of large networks of molecular and functional changes 
occurring across multiple levels of biological organization” has 
resulted in the field of systems toxicology (Sturla et al., 2014). 
Systems toxicology originated from advancements in high through-
put technologies and a need to improve prediction in safety testing. 
Similar to systems biology (Weston and Hood, 2004), systems toxi-
cology anchors phenotypic data with a battery of molecular func-
tions to understand how a living organism functions or responds to 
chemicals at the cellular and tissue levels. The molecular functions 
include transcriptomics (complete set of RNA transcripts found in 
the genome), epigenomics (global modifications to genetic mate-
rial), proteomics (profile of proteins present within cells or tissues), 
metabonomics/metabolomics (endogenous and exogenous by-prod-
ucts of cellular metabolism), and lipidomics (a subset of the metabo-
lome that is enriched by lipids). Each of these molecular processes is 
vulnerable to changes by exposure to chemicals. In addition to char-
acterizing molecular and phenotypic changes, systems toxicology 
also integrates the exposome, or the cumulative environmental expo-
sures (including chemicals, diet, lifestyle, etc.) over a lifetime that 
impacts the development and progression of diseases, into the test-
ing paradigm (Wild, 2005). Together, this multi-faceted approach to 
toxicology testing enables the identification of precipitating events 
that subsequently lead to cellular injury or dysfunction.
The ability of toxicologists to identify mechanisms by which 
chemicals initiate toxicities has been improved by the recent appli-
cation of high-content screening and novel models. Likewise, the 
increasing utilization of in vitro testing schemes along with advanced 
computational approaches has enhanced the predictive screening 
and prioritization of toxicity testing for chemicals. Multiple in vitro 
molecular endpoints and in silico models are integrated together 
to identify common pathways responsible for toxic responses to 
chemicals. This requires the collection of large data sets (i.e., big 
data), application of mathematical models, computer simulations, 
and validation of models with experimental findings (Hartung et al., 
2017). The goal of predictive toxicity testing is then to prioritize the 
testing of a large number of chemicals and in turn reduce the number 
of animals needed for research and regulatory studies.
Transcriptome
Among the first changes that a cell may exhibit following expo-
sure to a toxic substance is a change in gene expression. The tran-
scriptome (all of the mature mRNA species present in a cell at a 
given point in time) is dynamic and represents the steady state 
between the rate of synthesis (transcription) and degradation of 
mRNAs in a cell. The reverse transcription–polymerase chain reac-
tion (RT-PCR) allows one to quantitatively determine the relative 
number of mRNA species in a sample for specific genes. With gen-
eral primers, it is also possible to amplify the entire transcriptome 
quantitatively to make many complete copies of the transcriptome 
in a test tube. Thus, large amounts of material for analysis can be 
obtained from a relatively small number of cells. Using microarray 
technologies, where tens of thousands of unique oligonucleotides 
(or cDNAs) are anchored on a solid matrix, toxicologists can quan-
titatively assess the expression of thousands of unique mRNAs in a 
single sample, thus capturing an “expression profile” of the entire 
transcriptome in a single analysis. While microarrays dramatically 
changed the field of toxicology by permitting large data set com-
parisons of toxicant responses, this technology has been limited by 
cross-hybridization concerns and difficulty in quantifying low and 
high enriched genes.
Next-generation sequencing (NGS) allows use of DNA or 
RNA samples for whole-genome sequencing, RNA sequencing, tar-
geted sequencing (such as exome sequencing or 16S sequencing), 
and other approaches. Whole-transcriptome sequencing identifies 
and quantifies the abundance of all RNA transcripts including cod-
ing mRNAs and noncoding RNAs (such as microRNAs). Compared 
to microarrays, RNA-sequencing has higher resolution and repro-
ducibility and can be used to study alternative splicing events and 
novel transcripts. Because large data sets are generated with RNA 
sequencing (over 27,000 genes), bioinformatics is critical for the 
proper analysis of data. RNA sequencing is gaining greater utiliza-
tion in toxicology to provide unique profiles of toxicants, such as a 
cellular response to DNA damage or oxidative stress.
Epigenome
The epigenome includes global changes in the DNA genome that 
affect gene expression. Multiple epigenetic marks including DNA 
methylation, histone modifications, and small RNA transcripts con-
tribute to the overall epigenome of a cell or tissue.
Conrad Hal Waddington first postulated in the 1930s that it 
was not just the genes that shaped development but also the envi-
ronment that shapes the genes (Holliday, 2006). Epigenetics has 
been defined in various ways, with perhaps the strictest definition 
being “a mitotically or meiotically heritable change in gene expres-
sion that occurs independently of an alteration in DNA sequence” 
(Youngson and Whitelaw, 2008). Typically, gene expression is 
silenced or suppressed, or in some instances activated, by DNA 
methylation or histone deacetylation—changes that do not alter 
the nucleotide sequence of the silenced genes. Epigenetic changes 
can potentially be transgenerational, as suggested in some ani-
mal models, which has important implications for toxicological 
assessment (Rosenfeld, 2010; Skinner, 2011). Given the growing 
recognition of epigenetics as a means by which environmental 
factors can alter biological responses, genomic analyses in toxi-
cology may also include techniques to identify toxicant-induced 
changes in DNA methylation patterns (Watson and Goodman, 
2002; LeBaron et al., 2010).
Classical approaches to toxicology have thoroughly docu-
mented the potential for a variety of environmental toxicants, such 
as thalidomide, alcohol, lead, mercury, and PCBs, to cause adverse 
effects on the developing organism. However, subtle epigenetic 
changes that are not associated with cytotoxicity or mutations 
can also result from environmental exposures and thus may have 
important toxicological implications. Epigenetic changes have been 
demonstrated to occur from exposure to a variety of environmental 
hazards, including tobacco smoke, metals, alcohol, phthalates, and 
bisphenol A (Baccarelli and Bollati, 2009; Bernal and Jirtle, 2010; 
Perera and Herbstman, 2011; Cheng et al., 2012). Furthermore, 
epigenetic changes can occur through nutrition, methyl content of 
diet, intake of folic acid and vitamins, or even social and maternal 
behavior toward the offspring (Cummings et al., 2010). Epigenetic 
changes have been causally implicated in cancer, neurodevelopment 
disorders, autoimmune diseases, diabetes and metabolic disorders, 
asthma, behavioral disorders, and endocrine disorders (Nystrom 
and Mutanen, 2009; Attig et al., 2010; Godfrey et al., 2011; Zhang 
and Ho, 2011). Thus, epigenetic changes induced by xenobiot-
ics, dietary factors, and maternal behavior have implications for 
safety assessment and risk assessment for xenobiotics (Szyf, 2007; 
Goodman et al., 2010; LeBaron et al., 2010).

58
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
Methylation of DNA is an important determinant of gene 
expression in cells and tissues, and exogenous chemicals can inter-
fere with transcriptional function by altering DNA methylation 
(Watson and Goodman, 2002). Although such epigenetic changes 
do not modify the genomic sequence, they theoretically can result 
in heritable phenotypic changes. Evidence of multigenerational 
epigenetic changes from environmental exposures has yet to be 
revealed in humans (Baccarelli and Bollati, 2009); however, sev-
eral animal models have demonstrated transgenerational epigenetic 
changes (Skinner, 2011). Thus, analyses in toxicology may also 
include techniques to identify toxicant-induced epigenetic changes 
in DNA and histones and their potential consequences (Watson and 
Goodman, 2002; Szyf, 2007).
Although changes in gene expression and epigenetic regula-
tion often contribute to, or are reflective of, phenotypic changes 
that occur in response to a toxic substance, the transcriptome and 
epigenome are still somewhat far removed from the ultimate bio-
chemical functions that dictate the actual biological function of the 
cell. Because the functional expression of a gene generally requires 
the translation of the mRNA to a protein, there is also great interest 
in looking at the “proteome”—the entire complement of proteins 
that are present in a cell or tissue at a given point in time.
Proteome
The proteome represents the complete set of proteins expressed 
within a cell, organ, or organism. Increases and decreases in 
proteins may result from changes in transcription or from post-
translational modifications that enhance translation or turnover. 
Enrichment of different proteins as a result of toxicant exposure 
can be tested using targeted and untargeted approaches. Mass spec-
trometry is the primary technology used for proteomics because of 
its high sensitivity and accuracy in identifying proteins, down to the 
subfemtomolar range. Because of size limitations for accurate mass 
spectrometry, protein mixtures are usually digested to smaller pep-
tide fragments. The mixture of peptide fragments is resolved into 
individual components, and the identity of the specific peptides is 
determined based on high-resolution mass analysis and sequential 
degradation (sequential loss of single amino acids) of the peptides 
by various means. The large and complex set of peptide mass frag-
ments is then analyzed using bioinformatics and compared with 
a large database of mass fragments of known peptides/proteins. 
Comparative proteomics in an untargeted fashion is enabled by use 
of isotope tagging for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ). 
Targeted proteomics is performed with selected reaction monitor-
ing (SRM) using predefined sequences.
Mass spectrometry can be used to not only identify and quan-
tify protein enrichment but also assess posttranslational modi-
fications including phosphorylation and ubiquitylation. These 
alterations to proteins can impact their localization, activity, and/
or interaction with other macromolecules. The mycotoxin deoxyni-
valenol is a contaminant of food and considered an innate immune 
system toxicant. Exposure of mice to deoxynivalenol resulted in 
novel phosphorylation of 90 phosphoproteins within the spleen 
(Pan et al., 2013). Computational analyses characterized the func-
tions of the modified proteins and pointed to potential mechanisms 
of deoxynivalenol toxicity including changes in the cytoskeleton, 
apoptosis, and lymphocyte signaling.
Metabonomics/Metabolomics
These two terms are often used interchangeably to describe the 
analysis of small molecules that serve as substrates, products, 
and cofactors in the multitude of enzymatic reactions and other 
metabolic processes that define living cells. Metabonomics has 
been defined as “the comprehensive and simultaneous systematic 
profiling of metabolite levels and their systematic and temporal 
change through such effects on diet, lifestyle, environment, genetic 
and pharmaceuticals, both beneficial and adverse, in whole organ-
isms” (Lindon et al., 2003, 2006). The term “metabolomics” has 
been used principally in studies in plants and in vitro or single-
cell systems (Fiehn, 2002). Regardless of the specific term used 
(metabonomics will be used here), the concept of quantitatively 
analyzing toxicant-induced changes in the “metabolic profile” (the 
“metabonome”) of a cell, tissue, or body fluid can include xeno-
biotics, their metabolites as well as perturbations in endogenous 
molecules.
Two approaches for identifying and measuring hundreds, or 
even thousands, of small molecules in biological samples have 
emerged—nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and/or mass spec-
trometry. NMR provides structural identification of metabolites; 
however, it is not as sensitive as mass spectrometry. Similar to tran-
scriptomics and proteomics, metabonomics can be performed in 
targeted experiments that quantify a predefined set of metabolites 
or using an untargeted approach. Within the field of metabonom-
ics, there is growing interest in specific types of metabolites such 
as lipids or the lipidome. Lipids not only represent energy sources 
but also serve as cellular signaling molecules. Use of untargeted 
lipidomics has revealed dynamic changes in mouse livers exposed 
to TCDD including repression of de novo fatty acid synthesis and 
beta-oxidation along with enhanced uptake of lipids (Nault et al., 
2017). When integrated with transcriptomic profiling by RNA 
sequencing, lipidomics provided insight into the mechanisms of 
TCDD-induced hepatic steatosis.
Exposome
The concept of the exposome was introduced in 2005 by Wild to 
define a systems approach to advance exposure science in a manner 
that complements the genome. The exposome represents the cumu-
lative environmental exposures (including diet, lifestyle, exercise, 
inherent metabolic activity, infections, and xenobiotics) across an 
entire lifespan that affect human health (Wild, 2005; Rappaport and 
Smith, 2010; Rappaport, 2011; Miller and Jones, 2014). Defining 
the exposome depends upon highly sensitive analytical methods 
that can detect changes in biomarkers of exposure, effect, and/or 
susceptibility that represent the interaction between an exposure 
and a biological system (Sturla et al., 2014). Biomarkers include 
exogenous chemicals (or their metabolites), biochemical, physi-
ological, or other alterations in an organism, and intrinsic and 
acquired factors that will influence susceptibility to toxicity. Two 
approaches have been developed to characterize the exposome 
(Lioy and Rappaport, 2011). The “bottom-up” approach uses each 
category of external exposure (air, water, diet, radiation, lifestyle, 
etc.) to quantify the cumulative concentrations of contaminants. 
This is a challenging approach because of the potential to miss 
sources of exposure. By contrast, the “top-down” approach uti-
lizes untargeted omic methods to quantify exposures or surrogate 
markers of exposure. The discovery and validation of appropri-
ate biomarkers has enabled the conductance of environment-wide 
association studies (EWAS) (Patel et al., 2010; Thomas, 2010). In 
EWAS studies, candidate biomarkers are used to evaluate the cau-
sality, prevention, detection, prognosis, and treatment of diseases 
with regards to the total environment. EWAS studies have been 
used to study type 2 diabetes and polychlorinated biphenyls (Patel 
et al., 2010), as well as asthma severity and dust mite exposure 
(Sordillo et al., 2015).

Principles of Toxicology
Chapter 2
59
Building on the adverse outcome pathway (AOP) concept 
discussed earlier, aggregate exposure pathways (AEPs) are being 
developed that integrate external, internal, and target site exposures 
apical to the molecular initiating events (Escher et al., 2017). This 
approach provides a more comprehensive view of AOPs that con-
sider source and infer critical concentrations that inform subsequent 
biological effects.
High-Content Screening
High-content screening or cellomics is an automated microscopy 
analysis that often uses fluorescence to visual cellular or subcel-
lular changes in a high-throughput format (Boutros et al., 2015). 
Using microtiter plates, toxicologists can use images to visualize 
temporal and spatial changes in cells, organs, or small organisms 
(such as zebrafish). Quantitative measurements include morphol-
ogy, apoptosis, autophagy, cell proliferation, DNA damage, mito-
chondria functioning, mitosis, oxidative stress, and cytotoxicity to 
name a few. In fact, multiple phenotypes can be profiled simultane-
ously (Persson and Hornberg, 2016). One of the earliest examples 
of the utility of high-content screening for the field of toxicology 
was a study of chemical-induced liver injury (Xu et al., 2008). Over 
300 drugs and chemicals were profiled for their ability to perturb 
intracellular glutathione, damage mitochondria, and cause oxida-
tive stress in primary human hepatocytes. This screening strategy 
demonstrated a 50% to 60% true-positive rate for predicting hepa-
totoxicity potential with a very low rate of false-positives (0% to 
5%). Increasingly, high-content screening is being applied to pre-
dict not only hepatotoxicity but also cardiotoxicity, neurotoxicity, 
genotoxicity, and nephrotoxicity.
Computational Toxicology
Hundreds of new chemicals are introduced into our lives each year 
and add to the tens of thousands of chemicals that we are exposed 
to on a routine basis. The current paradigm of animal testing pre-
cludes the comprehensive safety evaluation of all industrial chemi-
cals. Therefore, computational toxicology approaches that integrate 
biology, chemistry, and computer science are needed to evaluate 
chemicals for potential adverse liabilities and prioritize them for 
further testing. This discipline uses models and algorithms based 
on existing data sets for defined endpoints to predict the likelihood 
that a new chemical entity will possess the same toxic liabilities. An 
early example of this approach in drug development is the “Rule 
of Five” which used simple physicochemical properties such as 
hydrophobicity, molecular weight, composition, and bonding pat-
terns to approximate a chemical’s solubility and permeability after 
oral administration (Lipinski et al., 2001). Likewise, computa-
tional identification of quantitative structural activity relationships 
(QSARs) has been a long-standing approach to predict target organ 
toxicities (Weinstein et al., 1985). One of the earliest QSAR toxi-
cology examples is the evaluation of analogs for DDT for structural 
conformations and orientations in relationship to biological activity 
(Weinstein et al., 1985). Use of QSAR allows toxicologists to math-
ematically assess how closely a new chemical aligns to known toxi-
cants and prioritize them for further testing. This screening approach 
is particularly useful when evaluating thousands of chemicals of 
unknown toxicity potential. A related approach to QSAR that has 
been used for years to estimate a chemical’s toxicity is read-across. 
The process of read-across is routinely used for hazard identifica-
tion in risk assessment and can provide qualitative or quantitative 
information regarding how a particular property or activity will pre-
dict a toxicity endpoint from one chemical using data obtained on 
the same endpoint for a related substance (OECD, 2014).
For the majority of computational toxicology studies, in vivo 
toxicity data are used as the primary data sets and supplemented 
with in vitro and in silico studies to perform read-across. When 
in vitro data are used it is important to consider factors that are 
absent in cell culture that can influence toxicity findings. These may 
include a lack of metabolism or parameters such as blood flow rate. 
Therefore, physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) model-
ing is particularly useful when conducting quantitative in vitro to 
in vivo extrapolation (QIVIVE) (Yoon et al., 2012) (see Chap. 7). 
Using these approaches, one can integrate dosimetry data, species-
specific physiological processes, and physicochemical properties 
along with in vitro data using appropriate scaling factors.
One feature that is common among all of the various “omics” 
technologies is the ability to generate very large volumes of data. 
Both the data management and statistical evaluation of omic studies 
represent an enormous challenge. The emerging field of “big data” 
has developed to address these challenges. Since 2004, the National 
Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI), National Library of 
Medicine (NLM), National Institutes of Health (NIH) have hosted 
PubChem’s BioAssay database, which is a public repository for 
small molecule screening data. As of 2017, there were more than 
1.2 million assays and 2.3 million chemical structures in the data-
base (Wang et al., 2017). Automated profiling tools can capitalize 
on these rich sources of data and be used with QSAR to screen 
bioassay results from high-throughput screens and apply in vitro–in 
vivo correlations to identify toxicophores that predict the potential 
of a chemical to cause injury (Kim et al., 2016).
ToxCast (or Toxicity Forecaster) is a comprehensive compu-
tational toxicology initiative by the EPA that integrates computa-
tional toxicology and high-content screening to evaluate chemicals 
for potential toxic effects. In the first phase of ToxCast (2009), over 
300 well-studied chemicals such as pesticides were tested in over 
500 assays. In the second phase of ToxCast (2013), this testing was 
expanded to 2000 molecules from a broad range of chemical classes 
(industrial and consumer product chemicals, food additives, etc.) in 
even more high-throughput tests (over 700). These data were gener-
ated as part of the interagency Toxicity Testing in the 21st Century 
(Tox21) initiative between the NTP, FDA, National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences, and National Center for Advancing 
Translational Sciences. This tiered screening approach intends to 
identify potential chemical liabilities and prioritize chemicals for 
comprehensive animal testing.
Innovative Testing Models
Novel in vitro approaches for predictive safety testing include 
organs- and body-on-a-chip and stem cells. Organs-on-a-chip are 
microfluidic flow-based systems that are engineered with multiple 
cell types that spatially recapitulate three-dimensional organs. 
Three-dimensional cultures offer multiple advantages compared to 
traditional cell culture including enhanced cellular survival, differ-
entiation, cell interactions, and orientation similar to native tissues.
Microfabricated devices allow for cell–cell communication and 
dynamic mechanical forces such as breathing (lungs), shear (circu-
lation), peristalsis (intestines), and blinking (eyes) that are important 
for organ functioning. Using a lung-on-a-chip, it was shown that 
alveolar epithelial cells grown at the air–liquid interface under 10% 
mechanical strain that mimicked breathing had enhanced nanopar-
ticle translocation and generation of oxidative stress (Huh et al., 
2010). As each organ-on-a-chip advances in complexity, there is 
greater interest in using multiorgan systems (or body-on-a-chip). 
Connections between individual tissue chips such as the liver allow 
for xenobiotic biotransformation in hepatocytes and investigation

60
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
of metabolites on target organs. Other in vitro models that are gain-
ing increasing utilization are stem cells. Models include induced 
pluripotent, embryonic, and adult stem cells. Differentiation of stem 
cells using specific defined media with growth and morphogenic 
factors have been used for organ testing including liver, brain, kid-
ney, heart, intestine, and skin. Likewise, embryonic stem cells are 
used for screening developmental toxicants using reporter assays 
and neurodevelopment markers (Suter-Dick et al., 2015; Pamies 
and Hartung, 2017). Stem cell–derived testing can include screen-
ing methods as well as integration in three-dimensional tissue-like 
structures.
Innovative animal models that are advancing toxicology 
research include the use of targeted genetic knockout and knock-
in mouse models. Knockout mice are genetically modified mice 
that have an inactivated gene or cluster of genes, whereas knock-in 
mice are generated to express a specific gene or modified gene. 
Generation of knockout and knock-in transgenic mice have been 
critical in understanding the toxicity of chemicals. For example, 
use of knockout mice lacking the peroxisome proliferator–activated 
receptor alpha or knock-in mice expressing the human ortholog has 
revealed species differences in chemical-induced hepatocellular 
proliferation (Lee et al., 1995; Cheung et al., 2004).
One limitation of traditional rodent safety studies is the lack 
of genetic variation in toxicological responses. To recapitulate the 
genetic variation observed within the human population, a number of 
genetically diverse mouse strains have been developed. Beginning in 
2005, the Collaborative Cross developed a large panel of genetically 
defined strains that covered about 90% of the genetic diversity within 
laboratory mice through multiple intercrosses. Using 36 inbred 
mouse stains and whole-genome association analysis, it was revealed 
that novel polymorphisms correlated well with acetaminophen- 
induced liver injury (Harrill et al., 2009). Validation using the 
orthologous human gene (CD44) in two independent liver injury 
cohorts confirmed that this genetic factor could influence suscep-
tibility for acetaminophen toxicity. Subsequently, a second mouse 
genetic line was developed, called the Diversity Outbred population. 
The Diversity Outbred mice represent independent lineages that 
recapitulate human interindividual variation in toxicity responses. 
Linkage analysis of this animal panel identified two sulfotrans-
ferases as important genetic determinants of benzene genotoxic-
ity (French et al., 2015). With the increasing demands to identify 
chemical hazards and determine mechanisms of toxicity, additional 
innovative models for safety testing are expected in upcoming years.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The editor and authors recognize contributions of previous authors 
of this chapter: Louis J. Casarett (1st edition), Curtis D. Klaassen 
and John Doull (2nd edition), Curtis D. Klaassen (3rd to 6th edi-
tions), and Steven G. Gilbert (7th and 8th editions).
REFERENCES
Allen BC, Kavlock RJ, Kimmel CA, Faustman EM. Dose-response assess-
ment for developmental toxicity. II. Comparison of generic benchmark 
dose estimates with no observed adverse effect levels. Fundam Appl 
Toxicol. 1994a;23:487–495.
Allen BC, Kavlock RJ, Kimmel CA, Faustman EM. Dose-response assess-
ment for developmental toxicity. III. Statistical models. Fundam Appl 
Toxicol. 1994b;23:496–509.
American Geriatrics Society Beers Criteria Update Expert P. American 
Geriatrics Society 2015 Updated Beers Criteria for Potentially 
Inappropriate Medication Use in Older Adults. J Am Geriatr Soc. 
2015;63:2227–2246.
Ames BN, McCann J, Yamasaki E. Methods for detecting carcinogens and 
mutagens with the Salmonella/mammalian-microsome mutagenicity test. 
Mutat Res. 1975;31:347–364.
Andersen ME, Preston RJ, Maier A, Willis AM, Patterson J. Dose-response 
approaches for nuclear receptor-mediated modes of action for liver car-
cinogenicity: results of a workshop. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2014;44:50–63.
Ankley GT, Bennett RS, Erickson RJ, et al. Adverse outcome pathways: a 
conceptual framework to support ecotoxicology research and risk assess-
ment. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2010;29:730–741.
Ashauer R, Agatz A, Albert C, et al. Toxicokinetic-toxicodynamic modeling 
of quantal and graded sublethal endpoints: a brief discussion of concepts. 
Environ Toxicol Chem. 2011;30:2519–2524.
Atterberry TT, Burnett WT, Chambers JE. Age-related differences in para-
thion and chlorpyrifos toxicity in male rats: target and nontarget esterase 
sensitivity and cytochrome P450-mediated metabolism. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 1997;147:411–418.
Attig L, Gabory A, Junien C. Nutritional developmental epigenomics: 
immediate and long-lasting effects. Proc Nutr Soc. 2010;69:221–231.
Baccarelli A, Bollati V. Epigenetics and environmental chemicals. Curr 
Opin Pediatr. 2009;21:243–251.
Bailey GS, Reddy AP, Pereira CB, et al. Nonlinear cancer response at 
ultralow dose: a 40800-animal ED(001) tumor and biomarker study. 
Chem Res Toxicol. 2009;22:1264–1276.
Barnes DG, Dourson M. Reference dose (RfD): description and use in 
health risk assessments. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 1988;8:471–486.
Becker RA, Ankley GT, Edwards SW, et al. Increasing scientific confidence 
in adverse outcome pathways: application of tailored Bradford Hill con-
siderations for evaluating weight of evidence. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 
2015a;72:514–537.
Becker RA, Dellarco V, Seed J, et al. Quantitative weight of evidence to 
assess confidence in potential modes of action. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 
2017;86:205–220.
Becker RA, Patlewicz G, Simon TW, Rowlands JC, Budinsky RA. The 
adverse outcome pathway for rodent liver tumor promotion by sustained 
activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 
2015b;73:172–190.
Bernal AJ, Jirtle RL. Epigenomic disruption: the effects of early developmen-
tal exposures. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2010;88:938–944.
Blakeman V, Williams JL, Meng QJ, Streuli CH. Circadian clocks and 
breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res. 2016;18:89.
Blanchard OL, Smoliga JM. Translating dosages from animal models to 
human clinical trials—revisiting body surface area scaling. FASEB J. 
2015;29:1629–1634.
Bliss CL. Some principles of bioassay. Am Sci. 1957;45:449–466.
Boolell M, Allen MJ, Ballard SA, et al. Sildenafil: an orally active type 
5 cyclic GMP-specific phosphodiesterase inhibitor for the treatment of 
penile erectile dysfunction. Int J Impot Res. 1996;8:47–52.
Boutros M, Heigwer F, Laufer C. Microscopy-based high-content screen-
ing. Cell. 2015;163:1314–1325.
Budinsky RA, Schrenk D, Simon T, et al. Mode of action and dose-response 
framework analysis for receptor-mediated toxicity: the aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor as a case study. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2014;44:83–119.
Calabrese EJ. Flaws in the LNT single-hit model for cancer risk: an histori-
cal assessment. Environ Res. 2017;158:773–788.
Calabrese EJ, Baldwin LA. Hormesis as a biological hypothesis. Environ 
Health Perspect. 1998;106(suppl 1):357–362.
Calabrese EJ, Blain R. The occurrence of hormetic dose responses in the 
toxicological literature, the hormesis database: an overview. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 2005;202:289–301.
Carroll R, Metcalfe C, Gunnell D, Mohamed F, Eddleston M. Diurnal variation 
in probability of death following self-poisoning in Sri Lanka—­evidence 
for chronotoxicity in humans. Int J Epidemiol. 2012;41:1821–1828.
CDER. Guidance for Industry: Estimating the Maximum Safe Starting Dose 
in Initial Clinical Trials for Therapeutics in Adult Healthy Volunteers. 
Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Food 
and Drug Administration; 2005.
Chappell WR. Scaling toxicity data across species. Environ Geochem 
Health. 1992;14:71–80.

Principles of Toxicology
Chapter 2
61
Chen P, Lin JJ, Lu CS, et al. Carbamazepine-induced toxic effects and 
HLA-B*1502 screening in Taiwan. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:1126–1133.
Cheng TF, Choudhuri S, Muldoon-Jacobs K. Epigenetic targets of some 
toxicologically relevant metals: a review of the literature. J Appl Toxicol. 
2012;32:643–653.
Cheung C, Akiyama TE, Ward JM, et al. Diminished hepatocellular prolif-
eration in mice humanized for the nuclear receptor peroxisome prolifera-
tor-activated receptor alpha. Cancer Res. 2004;64:3849–3854.
Chung WH, Hung SI, Hong HS, et al. Medical genetics: a marker for 
Stevens–Johnson syndrome. Nature. 2004;428:486.
Claudio L, Kwa WC, Russell AL, Wallinga D. Testing methods for devel-
opmental neurotoxicity of environmental chemicals. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 2000;164:1–14.
COEC. Communication from the Commission on the Precautionary 
Principle. Brussels: Commission of the European Communities; 2000.
Cohen SM. Cell proliferation and carcinogenesis. Drug Metab Rev. 
1998;30:339–357.
Cohen SM. Calcium phosphate-containing urinary precipitate in rat urinary 
bladder carcinogenesis. IARC Sci Publ. 1999;147:175–189.
Corton JC, Cunningham ML, Hummer BT, et al. Mode of action framework 
analysis for receptor-mediated toxicity: the peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptor alpha (PPARalpha) as a case study. Crit Rev Toxicol. 
2014;44:1–49.
Cory-Slechta DA, Crofton KM, Foran JA, et al. Methods to identify and 
characterize developmental neurotoxicity for human health risk assess-
ment. I: Behavioral effects. Environ Health Perspect. 2001;109(suppl 
1):79–91.
Cronin M, Madden J, Enoch S, Roberts D. Chemical Toxicity Prediction: 
Category Formation and Read-Across. London: Royal Society of 
Chemistry; 2013.
Crump KS. An improved procedure for low-dose carcinogenic risk assess-
ment from animal data. J Environ Pathol Toxicol Oncol. 1984;5:339–348.
Cummings JA, Clemens LG, Nunez AA. Mother counts: how effects of 
environmental contaminants on maternal care could affect the offspring 
and future generations. Front Neuroendocrinol. 2010;31:440–451.
Daly AK, Donaldson PT, Bhatnagar P, et al. HLA-B*5701 genotype is a 
major determinant of drug-induced liver injury due to flucloxacillin. Nat 
Genet. 2009;41:816–819.
Davis JA, Gift JS, Zhao QJ. Introduction to benchmark dose methods and 
U.S. EPA’s benchmark dose software (BMDS) version 2.1.1. Toxicol 
Appl Pharmacol. 2011;254:181–191.
Dellarco VL, Baetcke K. A risk assessment perspective: application of 
mode of action and human relevance frameworks to the analysis of rodent 
tumor data. Toxicol Sci. 2005;86:1–3.
Demidenko E, Glaholt SP, Kyker-Snowman E, Shaw JR, Chen CY. 
Single toxin dose-response models revisited. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
2017;314:12–23.
Dorman DC, Allen SL, Byczkowski JZ, et al. Methods to identify and char-
acterize developmental neurotoxicity for human health risk assessment. 
III: Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic considerations. Environ 
Health Perspect. 2001;109(suppl 1):101–111.
Eaton DL, Gallagher EP. Mechanisms of aflatoxin carcinogenesis. Annu 
Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 1994;34:135–172.
Elcombe CR, Peffer RC, Wolf DC, et al. Mode of action and human rel-
evance analysis for nuclear receptor-mediated liver toxicity: a case study 
with phenobarbital as a model constitutive androstane receptor (CAR) 
activator. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2014;44:64–82.
EPA. Health Effects Test Guidelines OPPTS 870.2400 Acute Eye Irritation. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; 1998a.
EPA. Health Effects Test Guidelines OPPTS 870.2500 Acute Dermal 
Irritation. Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; 
1998b.
EPA. Health Effects Test Guidelines OPPTS 870.6200 Neurotoxicity 
Screening Battery. Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency; 1998c.
EPA. Health Effects Test Guidelines OPPTS 870.6300 Developmental 
Neurotoxicity Study. Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency; 1998d.
EPA. Health Effects Test Guidelines OPPTS 870.3550 Reproduction/
Developmental Toxicity Screening Test. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency; 2000.
EPA. Health Effects Test Guidelines OPPTS 870.2600 Skin Sensitization. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; 2003.
Escher BI, Hackermuller J, Polte T, et al. From the exposome to mecha-
nistic understanding of chemical-induced adverse effects. Environ Int. 
2017;99:97–106.
Faustman EM, Allen BC, Kavlock RJ, Kimmel CA. Dose-response assess-
ment for developmental toxicity. I. Characterization of database and 
determination of no observed adverse effect levels. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 
1994;23:478–486.
Fedak KM, Bernal A, Capshaw ZA, Gross S. Applying the Bradford Hill 
criteria in the 21st century: how data integration has changed causal infer-
ence in molecular epidemiology. Emerg Themes Epidemiol. 2015;12:14.
Fiehn O. Metabolomics–the link between genotypes and phenotypes. Plant 
Mol Biol. 2002;48:155–171.
French JE, Gatti DM, Morgan DL, et al. Diversity outbred mice identify pop-
ulation-based exposure thresholds and genetic factors that influence ben-
zene-induced genotoxicity. Environ Health Perspect. 2015;123:237–245.
Garman RH, Fix AS, Jortner BS, et al. Methods to identify and character-
ize developmental neurotoxicity for human health risk assessment. II: 
Neuropathology. Environ Health Perspect. 2001;109(suppl 1):93–100.
Godfrey KM, Inskip HM, Hanson MA. The long-term effects of pre-
natal development on growth and metabolism. Semin Reprod Med. 
2011;29:257–265.
Goldstein A, Aronow L, Kalman SM. Principles of Drug Action. New York: 
Wiley; 1974.
Goldstein BD. The precautionary principle: is it a threat to toxicological 
science? Int J Toxicol. 2006;25:3–7.
Goldstein BD, Carruth RS. Implications of the precautionary principle: is it 
a threat to science? Int J Occup Med Environ Health. 2004;17:153–161.
Goodman JI, Augustine KA, Cunnningham ML, et al. What do we need to 
know prior to thinking about incorporating an epigenetic evaluation into 
safety assessments? Toxicol Sci. 2010;116:375–381.
Guzelian PS, Victoroff MS, Halmes NC, James RC, Guzelian CP. Evidence-
based toxicology: a comprehensive framework for causation. Hum Exp 
Toxicol. 2005;24:161–201.
Halle W. The registry of cytotoxicity: toxicity testing in cell cultures to pre-
dict acute toxicity (LD50) and to reduce testing in animals. Altern Lab 
Anim. 2003;31:89–198.
Hanna EZ, Chou SP, Grant BF. The relationship between drinking and heart 
disease morbidity in the United States: results from the National Health 
Interview Survey. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 1997;21:111–118.
Harrill AH, Watkins PB, Su S, et al. Mouse population-guided resequencing 
reveals that variants in CD44 contribute to acetaminophen-induced liver 
injury in humans. Genome Res. 2009;19:1507–1515.
Hartung T, FitzGerald RE, Jennings P, et al. Systems toxicology: real world 
applications and opportunities. Chem Res Toxicol. 2017;30:870–882.
Hatch EE, Palmer JR, Titus-Ernstoff L, et al. Cancer risk in women exposed 
to diethylstilbestrol in utero. JAMA. 1998;280:630–634.
Hill AB. The environment and disease: association or causation? Proc R Soc 
Med. 1965;58:295–300.
Holliday R. Epigenetics: a historical overview. Epigenetics. 2006;1:76–80.
Huh D, Matthews BD, Mammoto A, et al. Reconstituting organ-level lung 
functions on a chip. Science. 2010;328:1662–1668.
ICH. S5(R2): Detection of toxicity to reproduction for medicinal products 
and toxicity to male fertility. International Conference on Harmonisation; 
2000.
Irwin S. Comprehensive observational assessment: Ia. A systematic, quanti-
tative procedure for assessing the behavioral and physiologic state of the 
mouse. Psychopharmacologia. 1968;13:222–257.
Johnson MK. The delayed neurotoxic effect of some organophosphorus 
compounds. Identification of the phosphorylation site as an esterase. 
Biochem J. 1969;114:711–717.
Johnson MK. Organophosphorus esters causing delayed neurotoxic 
effects: mechanism of action and structure activity studies. Arch Toxicol. 
1975;34:259–288.

62
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
Johnson NM, Egner PA, Baxter VK, et al. Complete protection against afla-
toxin B(1)-induced liver cancer with a triterpenoid: DNA adduct dosim-
etry, molecular signature, and genotoxicity threshold. Cancer Prev Res 
(Phila). 2014;7:658–665.
Karanth S, Pope C.Carboxylesterase and A-esterase activities during matu-
ration and aging: relationship to the toxicity of chlorpyrifos and parathion 
in rats. Toxicol Sci. 2000;58:282–289.
Kim MT, Huang R, Sedykh A, et al. Mechanism profiling of hepatotox-
icity caused by oxidative stress using antioxidant response element 
reporter gene assay models and big data. Environ Health Perspect. 
2016;124:634–641.
Klaassen CD, Cui JY. Review: mechanisms of how the intestinal micro-
biota alters the effects of drugs and bile acids. Drug Metab Dispos. 
2015;43:1505–1521.
Kleiber M. Body size and metabolism. Hilgardia. 1932;6:315–353.
Knudsen TB, Kavlock RJ, Daston GP, et al. Developmental toxicity testing 
for safety assessment: new approaches and technologies. Birth Defects 
Res B Dev Reprod Toxicol. 2011;92:413–420.
Kobayashi Y, Fukumaki Y, Yubisui T, Inoue J, Sakaki Y. Serine-proline 
replacement at residue 127 of NADH-cytochrome b5 reductase 
causes hereditary methemoglobinemia, generalized type. Blood. 
1990;75:1408–1413.
Kroes R, Galli C, Munro I, et al. Threshold of toxicological concern for 
chemical substances present in the diet: a practical tool for assessing the 
need for toxicity testing. Food Chem Toxicol. 2000;38:255–312.
Kroes R, Renwick AG, Cheeseman M, et al. Structure-based thresholds 
of toxicological concern (TTC): guidance for application to substances 
present at low levels in the diet. Food Chem Toxicol. 2004;42:65–83.
Kroes R, Renwick AG, Feron V, et al. Application of the threshold of toxi-
cological concern (TTC) to the safety evaluation of cosmetic ingredients. 
Food Chem Toxicol. 2007;45:2533–2562.
Lamb JC, Boffetta P, Foster WG, et al. Critical comments on the WHO-
UNEP State of the Science of Endocrine Disrupting Chemicals—2012. 
Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2014;69:22–40.
Langston JW, Ballard P, Tetrud JW, Irwin I. Chronic Parkinsonism in 
humans due to a product of meperidine-analog synthesis. Science. 
1983;219:979–980.
Larsson M, van den Berg M, Brenerova P, et al. Consensus toxicity fac-
tors for polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins, dibenzofurans, and biphe-
nyls combining in silico models and extensive in vitro screening of 
AhR-mediated effects in human and rodent cells. Chem Res Toxicol. 
2015;28:641–650.
Lassiter TL, Barone S Jr, Moser VC, Padilla S. Gestational exposure to 
chlorpyrifos: dose response profiles for cholinesterase and carboxylester-
ase activity. Toxicol Sci. 1999;52:92–100.
LeBaron MJ, Rasoulpour RJ, Klapacz J, et al. Epigenetics and chemical 
safety assessment. Mutat Res. 2010;705:83–95.
Lee SS, Pineau T, Drago J, et al. Targeted disruption of the alpha isoform 
of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gene in mice results in 
abolishment of the pleiotropic effects of peroxisome proliferators. Mol 
Cell Biol. 1995;15:3012–3022.
Lehman-McKeeman LD, Caudill D. Biochemical basis for mouse resis-
tance to hyaline droplet nephropathy: lack of relevance of the alpha 
2u-globulin protein superfamily in this male rat-specific syndrome. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1992;112:214–221.
Lindon JC, Holmes E, Nicholson JK. Metabonomics techniques and 
applications to pharmaceutical research & development. Pharm Res. 
2006;23:1075–1088.
Lindon JC, Nicholson JK, Holmes E, et al. Contemporary issues in toxicol-
ogy, the role of metabonomics in toxicology and its evaluation by the 
COMET project. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2003;187:137–146.
Lioy PJ, Rappaport SM. Exposure science and the exposome: an opportu-
nity for coherence in the environmental health sciences. Environ Health 
Perspect. 2011;119:A466–467.
Lipinski CA, Lombardo F, Dominy BW, Feeney PJ. Experimental and 
computational approaches to estimate solubility and permeability in 
drug discovery and development settings. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2001;46: 
3–26.
Lipscomb JC, Haddad S, Poet T, Krishnan K. Physiologically-based phar-
macokinetic (PBPK) models in toxicity testing and risk assessment. Adv 
Exp Med Biol. 2012;745:76–95.
Littlefield NA, Farmer JH, Gaylor DW, Sheldon WG. Effects of dose and 
time in a long-term, low-dose carcinogenic study. J Environ Pathol 
Toxicol. 1980;3:17–34.
Liu T, Zhang C, Liu C. The incidence of breast cancer among female flight 
attendants: an updated meta-analysis. J Travel Med. 2016;23(6):pii: 
taw055.
LoGuidice A, Wallace BD, Bendel L, Redinbo MR, Boelsterli UA. 
Pharmacologic targeting of bacterial beta-glucuronidase alleviates 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug-induced enteropathy in mice. 
J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2012;341:447–454.
Lucena MI, Andrade RJ, Martinez C, et al. Glutathione S-transferase m1 
and t1 null genotypes increase susceptibility to idiosyncratic drug-
induced liver injury. Hepatology. 2008;48:588–596.
Mallal S, Phillips E, Carosi G, et al. HLA-B*5701 screening for hypersen-
sitivity to abacavir. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:568–579.
Marchant GE. From general policy to legal rule: aspirations and limi-
tations of the precautionary principle. Environ Health Perspect. 
2003;111:1799–1803.
Meek ME, Bucher JR, Cohen SM, et al. A framework for human relevance 
analysis of information on carcinogenic modes of action. Crit Rev 
Toxicol. 2003;33:591–653.
Mileson BE, Ferenc SA. Methods to identify and characterize developmen-
tal neurotoxicity for human health risk assessment: overview. Environ 
Health Perspect. 2001;109(suppl 1):77–78.
Miller GW, Jones DP. The nature of nurture: refining the definition of the 
exposome. Toxicol Sci. 2014;137:1–2.
Mitchel RE. Low doses of radiation are protective in vitro and in vivo: evo-
lutionary origins. Dose Response. 2006;4:75–90.
Mohr LC, Rodgers JK, Silvestri GA. Glutathione S-transferase M1 polymor-
phism and the risk of lung cancer. Anticancer Res. 2003;23:2111–2124.
Monticello TM, Morgan KT. Chemically-induced nasal carcinogenesis and 
epithelial cell proliferation: a brief review. Mutat Res. 1997;380:33–41.
Moser VC. The functional observational battery in adult and developing 
rats. Neurotoxicology. 2000;21:989–996.
Mugford CA, Kedderis GL. Sex-dependent metabolism of xenobiotics. 
Drug Metab Rev. 1998;30:441–498.
Muller L, Mauthe RJ, Riley CM, et al. A rationale for determining, test-
ing, and controlling specific impurities in pharmaceuticals that possess 
potential for genotoxicity. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2006;44:198–211.
Myers NJ, Raffensberger C Precautionary Tools for Reshaping 
Environmental Policy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press; 2006.
NAS/NRC. Toxicity Testing in the 21st Century: A Vision and a Strategy. 
Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2007.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Application 
of Systematic Review Methods in an Overall Strategy for Evaluating 
Low-Dose Toxicity from Endocrine Active Chemicals. Washington, DC: 
National Academies Press; 2017.
Nault R, Fader KA, Lydic TA, Zacharewski TR. Lipidomic evaluation of 
aryl hydrocarbon receptor-mediated hepatic steatosis in male and female 
mice elicited by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin. Chem Res Toxicol. 
2017;30:1060–1075.
Neumaier T, Swenson J, Pham C, et al. Evidence for formation of DNA 
repair centers and dose-response nonlinearity in human cells. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A. 2012;109:443–448.
NRC. Health Risks from Exposure to Low Levels of Ionizing Radiation: 
BEIR VII Phase 2. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2006.
NRC. Review of the Environmental Protection Agency’s State-of-the-
Science Evaluation of Nonmonotonic Dose-Response Relationships 
as they Apply to Endocrine Disruptors. Washington, DC: National 
Academies Press; 2014:1–65.
NTP. Available at: https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/about/index.html. 2017a.
NTP. Available at: https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/pubhealth/evalatm/accept-
methods/index.html. 2017b.
Nystrom M, Mutanen M. Diet and epigenetics in colon cancer. World J 
Gastroenterol. 2009;15:257–263.

Principles of Toxicology
Chapter 2
63
Oda M, Koyanagi S, Tsurudome Y, Kanemitsu T, Matsunaga N, Ohdo S. 
Renal circadian clock regulates the dosing-time dependency of cisplatin-
induced nephrotoxicity in mice. Mol Pharmacol. 2014;85:715–722.
OECD. Test No. 406: Skin Sensitisation. Paris: Organisation for Economic 
Cooperation and Development; 1992.
OECD. Test No. 424: Neurotoxicity Study in Rodents. Paris: Organisation 
for Economic Cooperation and Development; 1997.
OECD. Test No. 405: Acute Eye Irritation/Corrosion. Paris: Organisation 
for Economic Cooperation and Development; 2002.
OECD. Test No. 426: Developmental Neurotoxicity Study. Paris: 
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development; 2007.
OECD. Test No. 429: Skin Sensitisation. Paris: Organisation for Economic 
Cooperation and Development; 2010a.
OECD. Test No. 442A and B: Skin Sensitization. Paris: Organisation for 
Economic Cooperation and Development; 2010b.
OECD. Test No. 443: Extended One Generation Reproductive Study. Paris: 
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development; 2012a.
OECD. Test No. 460: Fluorescein Leakage Test Method for Identifying 
Ocular Corrosives and Severe Irritants. Paris: Organisation for Economic 
Cooperation and Development; 2012b.
OECD. Test No. 431: In Vitro Skin Corrosion: Reconstructed Human 
Epidermis (RHE) Test Method. Paris: Organisation for Economic 
Cooperation and Development; 2013a.
OECD. Test No. 438: Isolated Chicken Eye Test Method for Identifying 
i) Chemicals Inducing Serious Eye Damage and ii) Chemicals Not 
Requiring Classification for Eye Irritation or Serious Eye Damage. Paris: 
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development; 2013b.
OECD. Test No. 194: Guidance on Grouping of Chemicals, 2nd edition. 
Paris: Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development; 2014.
OECD. Test No. 404: Acute Dermal Irritation/Corrosion. Paris: Organisation 
for Economic Cooperation and Development; 2015a.
OECD. Test No. 439: In Vitro Skin Irritation: Reconstructed Human 
Epidermis Test Method. Paris: Organisation for Economic Cooperation 
and Development; 2015b.
OECD. Test No. 422: Combined Repeated Dose Toxicity Study with the 
Reproduction/Developmental Toxicity Screening Test. Paris: Organisation 
for Economic Cooperation and Development; 2015c.
OECD. Test No. 442C: In Chemico Skin Sensitisation. Paris: Organisation 
for Economic Cooperation and Development; 2015d.
OECD. Test No. 442D: In Vitro Skin Sensitisation. Paris: Organisation for 
Economic Cooperation and Development; 2015e.
OECD. Test No. 491: Short Time Exposure In Vitro Test Method for 
Identifying i) Chemicals Inducing Serious Eye Damage and ii) Chemicals 
Not Requiring Classification for Eye Irritation or Serious Eye Damage. 
Paris: Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development; 2015f.
OECD. Test No. 492: Reconstructed Human Cornea-like Epithelium (RhCE) 
Test Method for Identifying Chemicals Not Requiring Classification and 
Labelling for Eye Irritation or Serious Eye Damage. Paris: Organisation 
for Economic Cooperation and Development; 2015g.
OECD. Test No. 442E: In Vitro Skin Sensitisation. Paris: Organisation for 
Economic Cooperation and Development; 2016.
OECD. Test No. 184: Revised Guidance Document on Developing and 
Assessing Adverse Outcome Pathways. Paris: Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development; 2017.
Pamies D, Hartung T. 21st Century cell culture for 21st century toxicology. 
Chem Res Toxicol. 2017;30:43–52.
Pan RY, Dao RL, Hung SI, Chung WH. Pharmacogenomic advances in the 
prediction and prevention of cutaneous idiosyncratic drug reactions. Clin 
Pharmacol Ther. 2017. [Epub ahead of print].
Pan X, Whitten DA, Wu M, et al. Early phosphoproteomic changes in the 
mouse spleen during deoxynivalenol-induced ribotoxic stress. Toxicol 
Sci. 2013;135:129–143.
Patel CJ, Bhattacharya J, Butte AJ. An environment-wide association study 
(EWAS) on type 2 diabetes mellitus. PLoS One. 2010;5:e10746.
Pavlos R, Mallal S, Phillips E. HLA and pharmacogenetics of drug hyper-
sensitivity. Pharmacogenomics. 2012;13:1285–1306.
Perera F, Herbstman J. Prenatal environmental exposures, epigenetics, and 
disease. Reprod Toxicol. 2011;31:363–373.
Persson M, Hornberg JJ. Advances in predictive toxicology for dis-
covery safety through high content screening. Chem Res Toxicol. 
2016;29:1998–2007.
Pitot HC, Goldsworthy TL, Moran S, et al. A method to quantitate the rela-
tive initiating and promoting potencies of hepatocarcinogenic agents in 
their dose-response relationships to altered hepatic foci. Carcinogenesis. 
1987;8:1491–1499.
Raffensperger C, Tickner J. Protecting Public Health and the Environment: 
Implementing the Precautionary Principle. Washington, DC: Island 
Press; 1999.
Rappaport SM. Implications of the exposome for exposure science. J Expo 
Sci Environ Epidemiol. 2011;21:5–9.
Rappaport SM, Smith MT. Epidemiology. Environment and disease risks. 
Science. 2010;330:460–461.
Reagan-Shaw S, Nihal M, Ahmad N. Dose translation from animal to 
human studies revisited. FASEB J. 2008;22:659–661.
Rhomberg LR, Goodman JE. Low-dose effects and nonmonotonic dose-
responses of endocrine disrupting chemicals: has the case been made? 
Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2012;64:130–133.
Rhomberg LR, Wolff SK. Empirical scaling of single oral lethal doses 
across mammalian species based on a large database. Risk Anal. 
1998;18:741–753.
Richeldi L, Sorrentino R, Saltini C. HLA-DPB1 glutamate 69: a genetic 
marker of beryllium disease. Science. 1993;262:242–244.
Roberts RA. Peroxisome proliferators: mechanisms of adverse effects 
in rodents and molecular basis for species differences. Arch Toxicol. 
1999;73:413–418.
Rosenfeld CS. Animal models to study environmental epigenetics. Biol 
Reprod. 2010;82:473–488.
Roth RA, Ganey PE. Animal models of idiosyncratic drug-induced liver 
injury—current status. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2011;41:723–739.
Saitta KS, Zhang C, Lee KK, Fujimoto K, Redinbo MR, Boelsterli UA. 
Bacterial beta-glucuronidase inhibition protects mice against enteropathy 
induced by indomethacin, ketoprofen or diclofenac: mode of action and 
pharmacokinetics. Xenobiotica. 2014;44:28–35.
Scheving LE, Scheving LA, Feuers RJ, Tsai TH, Cope FO. Chronobiology 
as it relates to toxicology, pharmacology, and chemotherapy. Regul 
Toxicol Pharmacol. 1993;17:209–218.
Sharma V, McNeill JH. To scale or not to scale: the principles of dose 
extrapolation. Br J Pharmacol. 2009;157:907–921.
Siegel JA, Pennington CW, Sacks B. Subjecting radiologic imaging to the 
linear no-threshold hypothesis: a non sequitur of non-trivial proportion. 
J Nucl Med. 2017;58:1–6.
Simon T. Just who is at risk? The ethics of environmental regulation. Hum 
Exp Toxicol. 2011;30:795–819.
Simon TW, Simons SS Jr, Preston RJ, et al. The use of mode of action infor-
mation in risk assessment: quantitative key events/dose-response frame-
work for modeling the dose-response for key events. Crit Rev Toxicol. 
2014;44(suppl 3):17–43.
Skinner MK. Role of epigenetics in developmental biology and transgener-
ational inheritance. Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today. 2011;93:51–55.
Slikker W Jr, Andersen ME, Bogdanffy MS, et al. Dose-dependent transitions 
in mechanisms of toxicity. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2004a;201:203–225.
Slikker W Jr, Andersen ME, Bogdanffy MS, et al. Dose-dependent transi-
tions in mechanisms of toxicity: case studies. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
2004b;201:226–294.
Smith LL, Brent RL, Cohen SM, et al. Predicting future human and 
environmental health challenges: the Health and Environmental 
Sciences Institute’s scientific mapping exercise. Crit Rev Toxicol. 
2008;38:817–845.
Smith MT, Guyton KZ, Gibbons CF, et al. Key characteristics of carcino-
gens as a basis for organizing data on mechanisms of carcinogenesis. 
Environ Health Perspect. 2016;124:713–721.
Sordillo JE, Kelly R, Bunyavanich S, et al. Genome-wide expression 
profiles identify potential targets for gene-environment interactions in 
asthma severity. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015;136:885–892, e882.
Sturla SJ, Boobis AR, FitzGerald RE, et al. Systems toxicology: from basic 
research to risk assessment. Chem Res Toxicol. 2014;27:314–329.

64
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
Sukata T, Uwagawa S, Ozaki K, et al. Detailed low-dose study of 1,1-bis(p-
chlorophenyl)-2,2,2-trichloroethane carcinogenesis suggests the possi-
bility of a hormetic effect. Int J Cancer. 2002;99:112–118.
Sundseth SS, Alberta JA, Waxman DJ. Sex-specific, growth hormone-regu-
lated transcription of the cytochrome P450 2C11 and 2C12 genes. J Biol 
Chem. 1992;267:3907–3914.
Suntharalingam G, Perry MR, Ward S, et al. Cytokine storm in a phase 1 
trial of the anti-CD28 monoclonal antibody TGN1412. N Engl J Med. 
2006;355:1018–1028.
Suter-Dick L, Alves PM, Blaauboer BJ, et al. Stem cell-derived systems in 
toxicology assessment. Stem Cells Dev. 2015;24:1284–1296.
Szyf M. The dynamic epigenome and its implications in toxicology. Toxicol 
Sci. 2007;100:7–23.
Takeno S, Sakai T. Involvement of the intestinal microflora in nitrazepam-
induced teratogenicity in rats and its relationship to nitroreduction. 
Teratology. 1991;44:209–214.
Tarapore P, Ying J, Ouyang B, et al. Exposure to bisphenol A correlates 
with early-onset prostate cancer and promotes centrosome amplification 
and anchorage-independent growth in vitro. PLoS One. 2014;9:e90332.
Thomas D. Gene–environment-wide association studies: emerging 
approaches. Nat Rev Genet. 2010;11:259–272.
Travis CC, White RK. Interspecific scaling of toxicity data. Risk Anal. 
1988;8:119–125.
Travis RC, Balkwill A, Fensom GK, et al. Night shift work and breast can-
cer incidence: three prospective studies and meta-analysis of published 
studies. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2016;108(12):pii: djw169.
Tubiana M. Dose-effect relationship and estimation of the carcinogenic 
effects of low doses of ionizing radiation: the joint report of the Academie 
des Sciences (Paris) and of the Academie Nationale de Medecine. Int J 
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2005;63:317–319.
Uetrecht J. Idiosyncratic drug reactions: current understanding. Annu Rev 
Pharmacol Toxicol. 2007;47:513–539.
Uetrecht J, Naisbitt DJ. Idiosyncratic adverse drug reactions: current con-
cepts. Pharmacol Rev. 2013;65:779–808.
UK-ILGRA. The precautionary principle: policy and application. 
Available at United Kingdom Inter-Departmental Liaison Group on Risk 
Assessment website at http://www.hse.gov.uk/aboutus/meetings/com-
mittees/ilgra/pppa.htm; 2007.
Vandenberg LN, Colborn T, Hayes TB, et al. Hormones and endocrine-dis-
rupting chemicals: low-dose effects and nonmonotonic dose responses. 
Endocr Rev. 2012;33:378–455.
Villeneuve DL, Crump D, Garcia-Reyero N, et al. Adverse outcome 
pathway (AOP) development. I: Strategies and principles. Toxicol Sci. 
2014a;142:312–320.
Villeneuve DL, Crump D, Garcia-Reyero N, et al. Adverse outcome path-
way development. II: Best practices. Toxicol Sci. 2014b;142:321–330.
Villeneuve DL, Garcia-Reyero N. Vision & strategy: predictive ecotoxicol-
ogy in the 21st century. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2011;30:1–8.
Wallace BD, Wang H, Lane KT, et al. Alleviating cancer drug toxicity by 
inhibiting a bacterial enzyme. Science. 2010;330:831–835.
Wang Y, Bryant SH, Cheng T, et al. PubChem BioAssay: 2017 update. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 2017;45:D955–D963.
Waters MD, Fostel JM Toxicogenomics and systems toxicology: aims and 
prospects. Nat Rev Genet. 2004;5:936–948.
Watson RE, Goodman JI. Epigenetics and DNA methylation come of age in 
toxicology. Toxicol Sci. 2002;67:11–16.
Waxman DJ, Pampori NA, Ram PA, Agrawal AK, Shapiro BH. Interpulse 
interval in circulating growth hormone patterns regulates sexually dimor-
phic expression of hepatic cytochrome P450. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
1991;88:6868–6872.
Weinstein H, Rabinowitz J, Liebman MN, Osman R. Determinants of 
molecular reactivity as criteria for predicting toxicity: problems and 
approaches. Environ Health Perspect. 1985;61:147–162.
Weston AD, Hood L. Systems biology, proteomics, and the future of 
health care: toward predictive, preventative, and personalized medicine. 
J Proteome Res. 2004;3:179–196.
Wild CP. Complementing the genome with an “exposome”: the outstanding 
challenge of environmental exposure measurement in molecular epide-
miology. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2005;14:1847–1850.
Williams DE. The rainbow trout liver cancer model: response to environ-
mental chemicals and studies on promotion and chemoprevention. Comp 
Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2012;155:121–127.
Williams ES, Panko J, Paustenbach DJ. The European Union’s REACH 
regulation: a review of its history and requirements. Crit Rev Toxicol. 
2009;39:553–575.
Wilson NH, Hardisty JF, Hayes JR. Short-term, subchronic and chronic tox-
icology studies. In: Hayes AW, ed. Principles and Methods of Toxicology. 
New York: Informa Healthcare; 2008;1223–1264.
Wogan GN, Paglialunga S, Newberne PM. Carcinogenic effects of 
low dietary levels of aflatoxin B1 in rats. Food Cosmet Toxicol. 
1974;12:681–685.
Xu JJ, Henstock PV, Dunn MC, Smith AR, Chabot JR, de Graaf D. Cellular 
imaging predictions of clinical drug-induced liver injury. Toxicol Sci. 
2008;105:97–105.
Yoon M, Campbell JL, Andersen ME, Clewell HJ. Quantitative in vitro to 
in vivo extrapolation of cell-based toxicity assay results. Crit Rev Toxicol. 
2012;42:633–652.
Youngson NA, Whitelaw E. Transgenerational epigenetic effects. Annu Rev 
Genomics Hum Genet. 2008;9:233–257.
Zhang L, Nichols RG, Correll J, et al. Persistent organic pollutants modify 
gut microbiota-host metabolic homeostasis in mice through aryl hydro-
carbon receptor activation. Environ Health Perspect. 2015;123:679–688.
Zhang X, Ho SM. Epigenetics meets endocrinology. J Mol Endocrinol. 
2011;46:R11–R32.