# 22 Toxic Effects of Pesticides
# Casarett & Doull's Toxicology, 9th Edition
# Pages: 1074-1125
# Unit: Unit V Toxic Agents

22
chapter
Toxic Effects of Pesticides
Lucio G. Costa
INTRODUCTION
Pesticides can be defined as any substance or mixture of substances 
intended for preventing, destroying, repelling, or mitigating pests. 
Pests can be insects, rodents, weeds, and a host of other unwanted 
organisms (Ecobichon, 2001a). Thus, pesticides occupy a rather 
unique position among the many chemicals that we encounter 
daily, in that they are deliberately added to the environment for 
the purpose of killing or injuring some form of life. Ideally, their 
injurious action would be highly specific for undesirable targets; 
in reality, however, many pesticides are not highly selective, and 
are often toxic to many nontarget species, including humans. Thus, 
the use of pesticides must minimize the possibility of exposure 
of nontarget organisms to injurious quantities of these chemicals 
(Murphy, 1986).
It is not uncommon for people to refer to pesticides as a single 
unitary class of chemicals, while in fact the term “pesticide” should 
be equated to that of pharmaceutical drugs. As there are dozens of 
drugs with different therapeutical indications and different mecha-
nisms of action, several different classes of pesticides exist, with 
different uses, mechanisms, and, hence, toxic effects in nontarget 
organisms. The most common classification of pesticides relies on 
the target species they act on. The four major classes (and their 
target pests) are those of insecticides (insects), herbicides (weeds), 
fungicides (fungi, molds), and rodenticides (rodents), and there 
are also acaricides (mites), molluscicides (snails, other mollusks), 
miticides (mites), larvicides (larvae), and pediculicides (lice). In 
addition, for regulatory purposes, plant growth regulators, repel-
lents, and attractants (pheromones) often also fall in this broad 
classification of chemicals. Furthermore, within each class, several 
Introduction
Historical Developments
Economics and Public Health
Use of Pesticides
Exposure
Human Poisoning
Regulatory Mandate
Insecticides
Organophosphorus Compounds
Biotransformation
Signs and Symptoms of Toxicity,  
Mechanism of Action, and 
­Treatment of Poisoning
Biochemical Measurements
The Intermediate Syndrome
Organophosphate-Induced Delayed 
Polyneuropathy
Genetic Susceptibility
Long-Term Toxicity
Developmental Toxicity and 
­Neurotoxicity
Carbamates
Pyrethroids
Signs and Symptoms of Toxicity and 
Mechanisms of Action
Organochlorine Compounds
DDT and Its Analogs
Hexachlorocyclohexanes and  
Cyclodienes
Mirex and Chlordecone
Environmental Ubiquity and 
­Persistence
Endocrine Disruption
DDT and Public Health: Risk–Benefit 
Considerations
Neonicotinoids
Other Old and New Insecticides
Rotenoids
Formamidines
Avermectins
Phenylpyrazoles
Diamides
Bacillus thuringiensis
Insect Repellents
DEET
Picaridin
Herbicides
Chlorophenoxy Compounds
Bipyridyl Compounds
Chloroacetanilides
Triazines
Phosphonomethyl Amino Acids
Glyphosate
Glufosinate
Fungicides
Captan and Folpet
Dithiocarbamates
Chlorothalonil
Benzimidazoles
Other Old and New Fungicides
Inorganic and Organometal 
­Fungicides
Azoxystrobin
Prothioconazole
Rodenticides
Anticoagulants
Bromethalin
Cholecalciferol
Zinc Phosphide
Norbormide
Other Compounds
Fluoroacetic Acid and Its Derivatives
Thioureas
Strychnine
Red Squill
Thallium Sulfate
Fumigants
Methyl Bromide
1,3-Dichloropropene
Metam Sodium
Sulfur Compounds
Acknowledgments
References

1056
TOXIC AGENTS
Unit v
subclasses exist, with substantially different chemical and toxico-
logical characteristics. For example, among insecticides, one can 
find organophosphorus compounds, carbamates, organochlorines, 
pyrethroids, neonicotinoids, and many other chemicals. Even within 
each of these subclasses, significant differences can exist, as is the 
case, for example, of organochlorine compounds such as DDT, 
aldrin, or chlordecone. Thus, detailed knowledge of the toxicologi-
cal characteristics of each chemical is needed to properly evaluate 
their potential risks for nontarget species.
The literature pertaining to the chemistry, development, 
nomenclature, biotransformation and degradation, environmental 
effects, toxicity in target and nontarget species, and mode of action 
of pesticides over the past several decades is very extensive, and the 
reader is referred to the monographs of O’Brien (1967), Ecobichon 
and Joy (1982), Hayes (1982), Wagner (1983), Matsumura (1985), 
Costa et al. (1987), Baker and Wilkinson (1990), Dikshith (1991), 
Hayes and Laws (1991), Chambers and Levi (1992), Satoh and 
Gupta (2010), and Krieger (2001, 2010), for more in-depth discus-
sions of various aspects of pesticide toxicology.
HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENTS
Pesticides have been used to a limited degree since ancient times. 
The Ebers Papyrus, written about 1500 bc, lists preparations to 
expel fleas from the house. The oldest available record is Homer’s 
mention (about 800 bc) that Odysseus burned sulfur “…to purge 
the hall and the house and the court” (Odyssey XXII, 493–494). 
Pliny the Elder (ad 23–79) collected in his Natural History many 
anecdotes on the use of pesticides in the previous three to four cen-
turies (Shepard, 1939). Dioscorides, a Greek physician (ad 40–90), 
knew of toxic properties of sulfur and arsenic. There are records 
showing that by ad 900 the Chinese were using arsenic sulfides 
to control garden insects. Veratrum album and V. nigrum, two spe-
cies of false hellebore, were used by the Romans as rodenticides 
(Shepard, 1939). In 1669, the earliest known record of arsenic as 
an insecticide in the Western world mentioned its use with honey 
as an ant bait. Use of tobacco as contact insecticide for plant lice 
was mentioned later in the same century. Copper compounds 
were known since the early 1800s to have fungicidal value, and 
the Bordeaux mixture (hydrated lime and copper sulfate) was first 
used in France in 1883. Hydrocyanic acid, known to the Egyptians 
and the Romans as a poison, was used as a fumigant in 1877 to 
kill museum pests in insect collections, and carbon disulfide has 
been used as a fumigant since 1854 (Costa, 1987). Even in this 
century, until the 1930s, pesticides were mainly of natural origins 
or inorganic compounds. Arsenicals have played a major role in 
pest control, first as insecticides, then as herbicides. Sulfur has been 
widely used as a fumigant since the early 1800s, and remains one 
of the most widely used fungicides as of today. Nicotine has been 
widely used as an insecticide all over the world, as has been rote-
none, used as a fish poison in South America since 1725 (Costa, 
1987). Mercuric chloride was used as a fungicide since 1891, 
slowly replaced by phenylmercury and alkylmercury. Outbreaks of 
poisoning with the latter compounds (Bakir et al., 1973) have led to 
a ban of these chemicals.
The period between 1935 and 1950 was characterized by the 
development of major classes of pesticides, particularly insecticides. 
In 1939 Paul Mueller found that DDT (dichlorodiphenyltrichloro-
ethane), which had been first synthesized in 1874, acted as a poison 
on flies, mosquitoes, and other insects. DDT was commercialized 
in 1942 and was used extensively and successfully for the control 
of typhus epidemics, and particularly of malaria. Together with 
DDT, other chlorinated hydrocarbon insecticides were developed. 
In the early 1940s, scientists in England and France recognized 
the gamma isomer of hexachlorocyclohexane, commonly known 
as lindane, which had been first synthesized in 1825 by Faraday, 
as a highly potent insecticide (Ecobichon, 1982). Starting in the 
mid-1940s, several other chlorinated insecticides such as chlordane, 
heptachlor, aldrin, and dieldrin were commercialized. The organo-
phosphorus insecticides were first synthesized in Germany in the 
late 1930s. Gerhard Schrader, a chemist at I. G. FarbenIndustrie in 
Germany, is considered the “father” of organophosphorus insecti-
cides. The first one, tetraethylpyrophosphate (TEEP), was brought 
to the market in 1944, but had little success because of its instability 
in aqueous solution. Several thousand molecules were synthesized 
by Schrader, and one (code name E605) was eventually introduced 
into the agricultural market under the trade name parathion, to 
become one of the most widely employed insecticides in this class. 
During those years, compounds of much greater toxicity than para-
thion were also synthesized as potential chemical warfare agents. 
Among these, sarin was utilized in 1988 against the Kurds in the 
Iraq–Iran war, and in a terrorist attack in the Tokyo subway in 1995, 
while on February 13, 2017, Kim Jong-nam (half-brother of the 
North Korean leader Kim Jong-un) was killed allegedly with VX 
(O-ethyl s-[2-(diisopropylamino)ethyl] methylphosphothionate). 
The mechanism of action of organophosphates, i.e. inhibition of 
acetylcholinesterase, was soon discovered, primarily by knowledge 
of the effects and mechanism of action of the carbamate physostig-
mine. This alkaloid had been isolated in 1864 from Calabar beans, 
the seeds of Physostigma venenosum, a perennial plant in tropical 
West Africa, and its mode of action as a cholinesterase inhibitor was 
identified in 1926 (Casida, 1964). However, despite the early stud-
ies on physostigmine, the carbamate insecticides were introduced 
only in the early 1950s. Though pyrethrum flower and extracts had 
been used as insecticides for several centuries, pyrethrins were 
characterized only between 1910 and 1924 (Casida, 1980). This led 
then to the development of synthetic pyrethroids, the first of which, 
allethrin, was followed by several others in the early 1970, par-
ticularly because of the work of Michael Elliott in England and of 
scientists at Sumitomo Chemical Company in Japan (Casida, 2010). 
Several other classes of insecticides (e.g., avermectins, neonicoti-
noids, N-phenylpyrazoles, and diamides) have also been developed 
in the past few decades (Casida and Durkin, 2017).
The past 60 years have also seen the development of hundreds 
of other chemicals used as herbicides, fungicides, and rodenticides 
(Casida and Durkin, 2017). The development of thioureas, such as 
ANTU, and of anticoagulants such as warfarin, as rodenticides, 
dates back to the mid- to late 1940s. A few years later, two impor-
tant fumigants were introduced, 1,2-dichloropropene and methyl 
bromide. In the 1950s, phenylureas and chlorophenoxy compounds 
were developed as herbicides, together with the fungicides captan 
and folpet. Triazines, chloroacetanilides, and paraquat, all widely 
used herbicides, came to the market in the 1960s, and so did the 
important class of dithiocarbamate fungicides, while the herbicide 
glyphosate was introduced in the mid-1970s.
ECONOMICS AND PUBLIC HEALTH
As with all chemicals, including therapeutic drugs, the use of pes-
ticides must take into consideration the balance of the benefits that 
may be expected versus the possible risks of injury to human health 
or degradation of environmental quality. Pesticides play a major 
role in the control of vector-borne diseases, which represent a 
major threat to the health of large human populations. Indeed, pes-
ticides of various types are used in the control of insects, rodents, 
and other pests that are involved in the life cycle of vector-borne

Toxic Effects of Pesticides
Chapter 22
1057
diseases such as malaria, filariasis, yellow fever, viral encephalitis, 
typhus, and many others (Novak and Lampman, 2001). The history 
of DDT exemplifies the difficulty in finding a balance between its 
benefits and the risks, in this case mainly to the environment. When 
introduced in 1942, DDT appeared to hold immense promise of 
benefit to agricultural economics and protection of public health 
against vector-borne diseases. For example, in the Italian province 
of Latina there were 175 new cases of malaria in 1944, but after a 
DDT spray control program was initiated, no new cases of malaria 
appeared by 1949 (Murphy, 1986). Indeed, at the time, the public 
health benefits of DDT were viewed so great that its discoverer, 
Paul Mueller, was awarded the Nobel Prize in Medicine in 1948. 
However, because of its bioaccumulation in the environment and 
its effects on bird reproduction, DDT was eventually banned in 
most countries by the mid-1970s. In South Africa, DDT was only 
banned in 1996 and at the time less than 10,000 cases of malaria 
were registered in that country. By the year 2000, cases of malaria 
had increased to 62,000, but with the reintroduction of DDT at the 
end of that year, cases were down to 12,500 (Maharaj et al., 2005). 
There are still hundreds of millions of people in the world who are 
at risk from schistosomiasis, filariasis, and intestinal worm infesta-
tions, particularly in Africa and some Asian countries, and these 
major health problems require a continuous judicious use of pesti-
cides (Novak and Lampman, 2001).
In many parts of the world, excessive loss of food crops to 
insects or other pests may contribute to possible starvation, and use 
of pesticides seems to have a favorable cost–benefit relationship 
(Murphy, 1986). In developed countries, pesticides allow produc-
tion of abundant, inexpensive, and attractive fruits and vegetables, 
as well as grains. In this case, cost–benefit considerations are based 
on economic considerations, particularly with regard to labor costs. 
Along with insecticides, herbicides and fungicides play a major 
role in this endeavor. Pests have been estimated to cause 27% to 
42% loss in production of major crops around the world, and this 
would rise to 48% to 83% without crop protection with pesticides 
(Oerke, 2006). Loss of harvested crops by post-harvest infestation 
by insects, fungi, and rodents is also a major problem (Ecobichon, 
2001a), which is dealt with by the use of fumigants and other pes-
ticides. Pesticides, particularly herbicides, also find useful appli-
cation in forestry, during reforestation, as well as the clearing of 
roadways, train tracks, and utilities’ rights of way. In the urban set-
ting, pesticides find multiple uses in the home and garden area to 
control insects, weeds, and other pests (Marsh, 2001; Rust, 2001). It 
is estimated that more than 75% of households in the United States 
utilize pesticides (Table 22-1). These could include, for example, 
chemicals to control termite, cockroach or rodent infestations, her-
bicides to control weeds in the garden, or insect repellents.
Use of Pesticides
It is commonly believed that there has been a continuous increase 
in the use of pesticides. While this is certainly true for the period 
from the 1950s to the 1980s, in the past 30 years or so use of pesti-
cides (as amount of active ingredient) has actually reached a plateau 
(Table 22-2). This is mostly due to the utilization of more efficacious 
compounds that require less active ingredient to be applied to obtain 
the same degree of pest control. Indeed, as recently as 1960 more 
than 1 kg (2.2 lbs) of a crop protection chemical was applied per hect-
are (ha), while today the application rates have decreased by almost 
100-fold to 10 g/ha (Lamberth et al., 2013). In addition, the intro-
duction of integrated pest management approaches and the increased 
popularity of organic farming have contributed, at least in the devel-
oped countries, to a decrease and/or stabilization of pesticide use. 
Expenditures on pesticides have somewhat increased, as new chemi-
cals are more expensive than older ones (Table 22-2). In the United 
States, almost half of the pesticides used are herbicides, while in 
other countries, particularly Africa, Asia, and Central America, there 
is also a substantial use of insecticides (Table 22-3). Because the lat-
ter compounds are generally more acutely toxic, they contribute to 
the still large number of yearly pesticide poisonings (see the section 
“Human Poisoning”). Table 22-4 shows the most commonly used 
pesticides in the agricultural, home, and garden, and industry/com-
mercial/government sectors in the United States, while Table 22-5 
indicates pesticide use in selected crops in the United States.
Pesticides are often, if not always, used as formulations, in 
which the active ingredient is present together with other ingredi-
ents to allow mixing, dilution, application, and stability. These other 
ingredients are lumped under the term “inert” or “other” (Tominack, 
2000), and may be emulsifiers, solvents, carriers, aerosol propel-
lants, fragrances, and dyes. Though they do not have pesticidal 
action, such inert ingredients may not always be devoid of toxicity; 
thus, an ongoing task of manufactures and regulatory agencies is 
to assure that inert ingredients do not pose any unreasonable risk 
Table 22-1 
Number of U.S. Households Using Pesticides
PESTICIDE TYPE
U.S. HOUSEHOLDS  
(MILLIONS)
% OF TOTAL 
HOUSEHOLDS*
Insecticides
59
56
Herbicides
41
39
Fungicides
14
13
Repellents
53
50
Disinfectants
59
56
Any pesticide
78
74
*Based on 105.5 million households and a population of 281.4 million.
Source: Grube et al. (2011).
Table 22-2 
Use and Expenditure on Total Pesticides in the 
United States in All Market Sectors: 1988–2006
YEAR
USE*
EXPENDITURE†
1988
1,191
  7,275
1990
1,201
  7,727
1992
1,186
  8,385
1994
1,229
10,074
1996
1,229
10,969
1998
1,206
11,416
2000
1,234
11,165
2002
1,206
11,171
2004
1,210
11,905
2006
1,127
11,784
*Millions of pounds of active ingredients. Excludes preservatives, spe-
cialty biocides, and chlorine/hypochlorites.
†Millions of dollars.
Source: Grube et al. (2011).

1058
TOXIC AGENTS
Unit v
Table 22-3 
U.S. and World Use of Pesticides: 2007
PESTICIDE
UNITED STATES
WORLD
MILLIONS OF  
POUNDS OF ACTIVE 
INGREDIENT
%
MILLIONS OF  
POUNDS OF ACTIVE  
INGREDIENT
%
Herbicides*
  531
  47
2096
  40
Insecticides
  93
  8
  892
  17
Fungicides
  70
  6
  518
  10
Others†
  439
  39
1705
  33
TOTAL
1133
100
5211
100
*Includes herbicides and plant growth regulators.
†Others: rodenticides, fumigants, nematocides, molluscicides, and other chemicals used as pesticides (e.g., sulfur and 
petroleum oil). Does not include wood preservatives, specialty biocides, and chlorine/hypochlorite. 
Source: Grube et al. (2011).
Table 22-4 
Most Commonly Used Conventional Pesticide Active Ingredients in the U.S. Market Sectors: 2007 Ranks
PESTICIDE
TYPE
AGRICULTURAL
SECTOR HOME  
AND GARDEN
INDUSTRY/COMMERCIAL/ 
GOVERNMENT
Glyphosate 
H
1
2
2
Atrazine 
H
2
–
–
Metam sodium 
Fum
3
–
–
Metolachlor-S
H
4
–
–
Acetochlor
H
5
–
–
Dichloropropene
Fum
6
–
–
2,4-D
H
7
1
1
Methyl bromide
Fum
8
–
–
Chloropicrin
Fum
9
–
–
Pendimethalin
H
10
5
6
Carbaryl
I
–
3
–
MCPP
H
–
4
–
Pyrethroids
I
–
6
–
Malathion
I
–
7
9
Dicamba
H
–
8
–
Trifluralin
H
17
9
–
Pelargonic acid
H
–
10
–
Chlorothalonil
F
12
–
3
MSMA
H
–
–
4
Diuron
H
22
–
5
Triclopyr
H
–
–
7
Copper sulfate
F
–
–
8
Sulfuryl fluoride 
Fum
–
–
10
Abbreviations: F, Fungicide; Fum, Fumigant; H, Herbicide; I, Insecticide; MCCP, methylchlorophenoxypropionic acid; MSMA, 
­monosodium methanearsonate.
Shown is rank in each sector.
Source: Grube et al. (2011).

Toxic Effects of Pesticides
Chapter 22
1059
Table 22-5 
Pesticide Active Ingredient Use in 21 Selected Crops 
in the United States in 2008*
CROP
PESTICIDE  
(MILLIONS OF POUNDS)
%
Corn
204
39.9
Soybeans
112
21.7
Potatoes
  52
10.1
Cotton
  38
  7.4
Wheat
  23
  4.5
Sorghum
  14
  2.7
Oranges
  13
  2.5
Peanuts
  10
  2.0
Tomatoes
  10
  1.9
Rice
  8
  1.5
Grapes
  8
  1.5
Apples
  7
  1.4
Others†
  17
  3.2
*Of a total of 516 million pounds, 76% were herbicides, 5.5% 
­insecticides, 5.5% fungicides, and 12.5% other pesticides.
†Others = barley, grapefruit, lemons, lettuce, peaches, pears, pecans, 
sugarcane, and sweet corns.
Source: Adapted from Fernandez-Cornejo et al. (2014).
of adverse health effects (Tominack, 2000). Examples that illus-
trate the potential problems with these “inert” ingredients are those 
with the insecticides neonicotinoids and the herbicide glyphosate 
(Defarge et al., 2016; Mullin et al., 2016).
Exposure
Exposure to pesticides can occur via the oral or dermal routes, or by 
inhalation. From a quantitative perspective, oral exposure lies on the 
extremes of a hypothetical dose–response curve. High oral doses, 
leading to severe poisoning and death, are achieved as a result of 
pesticide ingestion for suicidal intents, or of accidental ingestion, 
commonly due to storage of pesticides in improper containers. In 
contrast, chronic low doses are consumed by the general population 
as pesticide residues in food, or as contaminants in drinking water. 
Regulations exist to ensure that pesticide residues are maintained at 
levels below those that would cause any adverse effect (see the sec-
tion “Regulatory Mandate”). Workers involved in the production, 
transport, mixing and loading, and application of pesticides, as 
well as in harvesting of pesticide-sprayed crops, are at highest risk 
for pesticide exposure. The dermal route is believed in this case to 
offer the greatest potential for exposure, with a minor contribution 
of the respiratory route when aerosols or aerial spraying are used. 
In these latter cases, bystanders or individuals living in proximity 
of the spraying may also be exposed because of off-target drifts. 
In the occupational setting, dermal exposure during normal han-
dling or application of pesticides, or in case of accidental spillings, 
occurs in body areas not covered by protective clothing, such as the 
face or the hands. Furthermore, deposition of pesticides on clothing 
may lead to slow penetration through the tissue and/or to potential 
exposure of others, if clothes are not changed and washed upon 
termination of exposure. Several methodologies exist to assess 
exposure by passive dosimetry, such as the use of absorbent cloth 
or paper patches, of biosensors, or of tracers followed by video 
imaging (Fenske et al., 1986; U.S. EPA 1999; Chester, 2010). 
Biological monitoring is also used to quantify the absorbed dose 
of pesticides. Analysis of body fluids and excreta, usually urine, for 
parent compound or metabolites, can provide both a quantitative 
and a qualitative measurement of absorbed dose. The advantage 
of such approach over passive dosimetry is that it evaluates actual 
rather than potential absorption, and integrates absorption from all 
routes of exposure (Sobus et al., 2010). In some cases, modifica-
tions of biochemical parameters or a consequence of exposure can 
be quantified as an indication of both exposure and of a biological 
effect. This is the case, for example, of measurements of plasma 
or erythrocyte cholinesterases upon exposure to organophosphorus 
insecticides (Storm et al., 2000).
Human Poisoning
Pesticides are not always selective for their intended target species, 
and adverse health effects can occur in nontarget species, includ-
ing humans (Calvert et al., 2010). In the general population and in 
occupationally exposed workers, recurring concerns relate to a pos-
sible association between pesticide exposure and increased risk of 
cancer (Pearce and McLean, 2005; Weichenthal et al., 2010; Silva 
et al., 2016), or neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson dis-
ease (Moretto and Colosio, 2013; Hernandez et al., 2016). More 
recently, the acknowledgment that pesticide standards are based 
on healthy adults, and thus may not be sufficiently protective of 
susceptible populations, such as children, has led to new concerns, 
research, and regulations (NRC, 1993; Colborn, 2006). Evidence 
that some pesticides may act as endocrine disruptors, possibly con-
tributing to various adverse effects in humans, including cancer and 
reproductive and developmental toxicity, has also prompted addi-
tional concerns and initiatives (Safe, 2000; Bjørlung-Poulsen et al., 
2008; Stoker and Kavlock, 2010). Yet, from a global perspective, 
the major problem with pesticides remains that of acute human 
poisoning. The World Health Organization (WHO) estimated that 
there are around 3 million hospital admissions for pesticide poison-
ing each year that result in around 220,000 deaths (WHO, 1990; 
Colosio et al., 2010). Most occur in developing countries, particu-
larly in Southeast Asia, and a large percentage is due to intentional 
ingestion for suicide purposes (Gunnell and Eddleston, 2003). 
New estimates indicate that there are about 300,000 deaths due 
to pesticide self-poisoning each year, accounting for one-third of 
all suicides globally (Bertolote et al., 2006; Gunnell et al., 2007). 
This percentage can increase to 50% to 90% in some countries of 
Central and South America (e.g., El Salvador and Peru) or in Asia 
(e.g. Korea and Taiwan) (Ajdacic-Gross et al., 2008; Chen et al., 
2009).
The WHO has recommended a classification of pesticides by 
hazard, where acute oral or dermal toxicities in rats are consid-
ered (IPCS, 2010) (Table 22-6), which is similar to the classifica-
tion of pesticides according to the “Globally Harmonized System 
of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals” (GHS). An analy-
sis of commercially available pesticides indicates that, as a class, 
insecticides are the most acutely toxic. Indeed, among the 86 active 
ingredients listed in Class IA (Extremely hazardous) and Class 
IB (Highly hazardous), 51 (59%) are insecticides (IPCS, 2010). 
Rodenticides are also highly toxic to rats, but do not present the 
same hazard to humans. Indeed, warfarin, one of the most widely 
used rodenticides, is the same chemical used as an effective “blood 
thinner” (anticoagulant) for prevention of stroke and other blood 
clot–related conditions. Herbicides, again as a class, have gener-
ally moderate to low acute toxicity, one exception being paraquat

1060
TOXIC AGENTS
Unit v
(which has a low dermal toxicity but causes fatal effects when 
ingested). Fungicides vary in their acute toxicity, but this is usually 
low. While this classification has served public health well over the 
years, it has been recently challenged. In a prospective cohort study 
in Sri Lanka, Dawson et al. (2010) have pointed out that category II 
(moderately hazardous; Table 22-6) comprises compounds associ-
ated with very different outcomes in humans upon acute exposure 
for suicidal purposes. For example, the organophosphorus insec-
ticide dimethoate, fenthion, or chlorpyrifos, the pyrethroid insec-
ticide deltamethrin, the phenylpyrazole insecticide fipronil, and 
the herbicide paraquat are all listed in WHO category II; yet, the 
mortality rate in this study was significantly variable: 21%, 15%, 
8%, 0%, 0%, and 43%, for each indicated pesticide, respectively 
(Dawson et al., 2010).
Reports of human poisonings worldwide underline particu-
larly the severe acute toxicity of certain anticholinesterase com-
pounds and of paraquat. In Costa Rica between 1980 and 1986, 
3330 individuals were hospitalized for pesticide poisoning, and 
429 died. Cholinesterase inhibitors (organophosphates and carba-
mates) caused 63% of hospitalizations and 36% of deaths, while 
paraquat accounted for 24% of hospitalizations and 60% of deaths. 
Cholinesterase inhibitors also caused more than 70% of occupa-
tional accidents (Wesseling et al., 1993). Of 335 poisoning deaths 
in Manipal, India, in the 1990s, 70% were due to cholinesterase 
inhibitors (Mohanty et al., 2004), and similar findings were also 
reported in Brazil (Caldas et al., 2008). In Sri Lanka between 1986 
and 2000, hospital admissions for pesticide poisoning were 12,000 
to 20,000 per year, with a 10% fatality rate (Roberts et al., 2003). 
Organophosphates and the organochlorine insecticide endosulfan 
(which was banned in 1998) were the compounds most commonly 
involved. In Malaysia, during the period 1999 to 2001, pesticide 
poisonings accounted for 17% of all poisoning-related admissions, 
but 78% of fatalities (Rajasuriar et al., 2007). Similarly, in Korea, 
during the period 1996 to 2005, deaths due to pesticide poison-
ing showed a gradual increase, and accounted for 58% of the total 
poisoning fatalities (Lee et al., 2009a). However, after the ban of 
paraquat in 2012, overall acute suicidal poisoning with herbicides 
declined, though there was an increase in the use of glyphosate 
and glufosinate (Lee et al., 2015). The same pattern of poisoning 
can be also seen in Western countries. For example, in Greece, the 
number of poisonings ranged between 1200 and 1700 per year dur-
ing the period 1988 to 1999. Of these, 40% were due to occupa-
tional exposure and 45% to accidental exposure. Organophosphates, 
carbamates, and paraquat were again involved in the majority of 
cases (Bertsias et al., 2004). In a 4-year period in Japan, 346 cases 
of pesticide poisoning were reported; in this case 70% were due 
to suicide attempts. Again, cholinesterase inhibitors and paraquat 
were involved in more than 60% of poisonings. Death rate from 
poisoning with paraquat was over 70%, while it was less than 10% 
with the herbicide glyphosate or glufosinate (Nagami et al., 2005). 
Reducing the availability of highly acutely toxic pesticides would 
be of relevance, as shown by recent data from Germany, where this 
approach reduced the number of fatal pesticide poisoning from 506 
in 1980 to 39 in 2010 (Moebus and Bödeker, 2015). In the State of 
Louisiana, more than 40% of all pesticide-related hospitalizations 
during the period 1998 to 2007 involved insecticides (Badaksh et 
al., 2010). However, from 1995 to 2004, the overall number of pes-
ticide poisonings in the United States has been declining, particu-
larly for anticholinesterase insecticides (−70%), and for paraquat 
(−79%) (Blondell, 2007). As indicated earlier, while self-poisoning 
with pesticides for suicidal purposes is very common in some coun-
tries (e.g., in China it accounts for about 50% of all suicides; Page 
et al., 2016), it is the least utilized method in the United States 
(Ajdacic-Gross et al., 2008).
Regulatory Mandate
The awareness that the misuse of pesticides may pose potential 
health hazards has led to a realm of regulatory measures to ensure 
their safe use and the protection of the population. In the United 
States, the primary authority for pesticide regulation resides with 
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) under the Federal 
Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) and the 
Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic ACT (FFDCA). Under FIFRA, 
the EPA registers pesticides for use, while under FFDCA, the EPA 
establishes maximum allowable levels of pesticide residues (tol-
erances) in foods and animal feeds, which are enforced by other 
federal agencies (Fenner-Crisp, 2001).
The first legislation passed in the United States was the Federal 
Insecticide Act of 1910, which only prohibited the manufacture of 
any insecticide or fungicide that was adulterated or misbranded. 
FIFRA was originally passed by Congress in 1947, adding the 
requirement of registration by the Secretary of Agriculture before 
the sale of insecticides, rodenticides, fungicides, and herbicides. 
Amendments in subsequent years added other pesticides to FIFRA 
jurisdiction, and provided the U.S. Department of Agriculture 
(USDA) with the authority to deny, suspend, or cancel registrations 
of products. In 1954, Congress amended the FFDCA to require the 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to establish tolerances for 
pesticides in raw agricultural commodities. This was extended 4 
years later to processed foods. In 1970, the primary federal author-
ity for the regulation of pesticides was transferred from USDA and 
FDA to the newly formed EPA. Between 1970 and 1990, FIFRA 
was amended several other times to address various issues related 
to pesticide safety and registration processes.
In 1996, the Food Quality and Protection Act (FQPA) brought 
important changes to pesticide regulations in the United States that 
affected both FIFRA and FFDCA. For example, FQPA provided the 
statutory mandate, under FIFRA, for continuing the expedited con-
sideration of applications for pesticides that may provide reduced 
risks for human health, nontarget species, and the environment 
(Fenner-Crisp, 2001). Perhaps more significant were the changes 
to the FFDCA mandate. In 1958, an amendment of the FFDCA, the 
Table 22-6 
WHO-Recommended Classification of Pesticides by 
Hazard
CLASS
LD50 IN RAT (MG/KG  
BODY WEIGHT)
ORAL
DERMAL
Ia
Extremely  
hazardous
<5
<50
Ib
Highly  
hazardous
5–50
50–200
II
Moderately  
hazardous
50–200
200–2000
III
Slightly  
hazardous
Over 200
Over 2000
U
Unlikely to  
present hazard 
Over 5000
Over 5000
Source: From IPCS (2010).

Toxic Effects of Pesticides
Chapter 22
1061
Delaney clause (Section 409), stated that “…no additive shall be 
deemed safe if it is found to induce cancer when ingested by man 
or animal or if it is found, after tests which are appropriate for the 
evaluation of the safety of food additives, to induce cancer in man 
or animal….” Pesticides were included in this “additive” legisla-
tion. Under FQPA, however, pesticide residues are excluded from 
the definition of food additive, and the Delaney clause no longer 
applies to residues in food. Thus, tolerances can be set also for car-
cinogens. FQPA also directs EPA to consider aggregate exposure in 
the risk assessment process, that is, exposure which occurs from all 
food uses for a pesticide, as well as from exposures that occur from 
nonoccupational sources (e.g., drinking water and indoor residential 
or school use). Additionally, the EPA must consider whether certain 
pesticides, as well as other substances, may have the same mecha-
nism of toxicity, and if so, carry out a cumulative risk assessment.
Another change introduced by FQPA gives the EPA the man-
date to assess special risks of pesticides to infants and children. The 
Agency must assess aggregate risks based on dietary consumption 
patterns of children, possible susceptibility of infants and children to 
pesticides, and cumulative effects of compounds that share the same 
mechanism of toxicity. In the absence of adequate data, an additional 
default 10-fold safety factor should be applied to ensure children’s 
safety. Finally, provisions are included for EPA to determine whether 
certain substances may have endocrine-disrupting effects in humans. 
Additional regulations concerning pesticides are present in other 
laws, such as the Safe Drinking Water Act and the Clean Air Act.
Under FIFRA, all pesticides sold or distributed in the United 
States must be registered by the EPA. Older products, registered 
before 1984, must undergo a re-registration process. To register a 
pesticide or a formulated product, a large number of studies (over 
140) are required, a process that can take about 10 years and any-
where between $100 and $250 million. The database should include 
information on product and residue chemistry, environmental fate, 
toxicology, biotransformation/degradation, occupational exposure 
and reentry protection, spray drift, environmental impact on non-
target species (birds, mammals, aquatic organisms, plant, and soils), 
environmental persistence and bioaccumulation, as well as product 
performance and efficacy. Table 22-7 lists the basic requirements 
regarding toxicology data needed for new pesticide registration (see 
also Chap. 2, “Principles of Toxicology”). New tiered approaches to 
toxicity testing for agricultural chemicals, which would reduce the 
use of animals and improve the risk assessment process, have been 
recently proposed (Cooper et al., 2006; Doe et al., 2006).
Other nations, such as Canada, Japan, and most European 
countries have promulgated legislation similar to that of the United 
States for registration of pesticides. In the European Union (EU), a 
number of directives regulate pesticide registration; the active sub-
stance must be approved at the EU level, and the formulated prod-
ucts must be authorized at the Member State level. The European 
Commission Standard Committee on the Food Chain and Animal 
Health (SCFCAH) authorizes registration of new active substances, 
based on the initial Draft Assessment Report from a Member State, 
and a review by the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA). In 
the EU, tolerances are called Maximum Residue Levels (MRLs) 
and are set by the European Commission and EFSA. Some devel-
oping nations, with a shortage of trained technical, scientific, and 
legal professionals to develop their own legislation, have adopted 
the regulatory framework of one or another industrialized nation. 
The World Health Organization (WHO) provides guidance, particu-
larly with the setting of acceptably daily intake (ADI) values for 
pesticides (the equivalent of the Reference Dose [RfD] set in the 
United States by the EPA), through its Joint FAO/WHO Meeting on 
Pesticide Residues (JMPR). In a few countries, still no legislation 
has been introduced to curb adverse effects of pesticides on the 
environment and human health.
INSECTICIDES
Insecticides play a most relevant role in the control of insect pests, 
particularly in developing countries. All of the chemical insecticides 
in use today are neurotoxicants, and act by poisoning the nervous 
systems of the target organisms (Casida, 2009) (Table 22-8). The 
central nervous system (CNS) of insects is highly developed and not 
unlike that of mammals, and the peripheral nervous system, though 
less complex, also presents striking similarities (Ecobichon, 2001a). 
Thus, insecticides are mostly not species-selective with regard to 
targets of toxicity, and mammals, including humans, are highly sen-
sitive to their toxicity. When selectivity exists, this is often due to 
differences in detoxication pathways between insects and mammals 
or, particularly with the newer insecticides, to differential interac-
tions with their target. As a class, insecticides have higher acute 
toxicity toward nontarget species compared to other pesticides. 
Some of them, most notably the organophosphates, are involved 
in a great number of human poisonings and deaths each year. The 
literature pertaining to the chemistry, development, biotransforma-
tion, environmental effects, and toxicity in target and nontarget 
species of insecticides is extensive, and the reader should refer to 
the monographs of O’Brien (1967), Brooks (1974), Hayes (1982), 
Ecobichon (1982), Matsumura (1985), Ford et al. (1986), Clark and 
Matsumura (1986), Costa et al. (1987), Hayes and Laws (1991), 
Chambers and Levi (1992), Krieger (2001; 2010), Stevens and 
Breckenridge (2001a), Gupta (2006), and Satoh and Gupta (2010).
Table 22-7 
Basic Toxicology Testing Requirements for Pesticide 
Registration
TEST
ANIMAL SPECIES*
Acute lethality  
(oral, dermal, inhalation)
Rat, mouse,  
guinea pig, rabbit
Dermal irritation
Rabbit, rat, guinea pig
Dermal sensitization
Guinea pig
Eye irritation
Rabbit
Acute delayed neurotoxicity
Hen
Genotoxicity studies  
(in vitro, in vivo)
Bacteria, mammalian cells,  
mouse, rat, Drosophila
Teratogenicity
Rabbit, rodent  
(mouse, rat, hamster)
Two-four week toxicity study 
(oral, dermal, inhalation)
Rat, mouse
90-Day toxicity study (oral)
Rat
Chronic toxicity study  
(oral; 6 months to 2 years)
Rat, dog
Oncogenicity study
Rat, mouse
Reproductive/fertility study
Rat
Developmental neurotoxicity 
study
Rat
*Substantial efforts are being devoted to develop alternative nonanimal 
test systems. Nevertheless, only limited in vitro tests (for primary skin 
irritation) have been validated and accepted by regulatory bodies.

1062
TOXIC AGENTS
Unit v
Organophosphorus Compounds
Although a number of organic phosphorus (OP) compounds were 
synthesized in the 1800s, their development as insecticides only 
occurred in the late 1930s and early 1940s (Costa, 1988; Gallo and 
Lawryk, 1991). The German chemist Gerhard Schroeder is credited 
for the discovery of the general chemical structure of anticholin-
esterase OP compounds, and for the synthesis of the first com-
mercialized OP insecticide (Bladan, containing TEPP [tetraethyl 
pyrophosphate] as the active ingredient), and for one of the most 
known, parathion, in 1944. Since then, hundreds of OP compounds 
have been made and commercialized worldwide in a variety of 
formulations. Until as recently as 2000, OPs were about 70% of 
all insecticide used, but that value has been halved in the follow-
ing years (e.g., 35% in 2007; Grube et al., 2011). As of 2007, the 
most commonly used OP in both the agricultural sector and in all 
other sectors was chlorpyrifos, followed by acephate and malathion 
(Grube et al., 2011).
The chemistry of OPs has been thoroughly investigated 
(Chambers et al., 2010a). The general structure of OP insecticides 
can be represented by
groups (i.e., OCH3 or OC2H5), though other chemical substitutes 
are also possible; either an oxygen or a sulfur (in this case the com-
pound should be defined as a phosphorothioate) is also attached 
to the phosphorus with a double bond. Based on chemical differ-
ences, OPs can be divided into several subclasses, which include 
phosphates, phosphorothioates, phosphoramidates, phosphonates, 
and others (Chambers et al., 2010a). Fig. 22-1 shows the chemical 
structures of some commonly used OPs. Most are phosphorothio-
ates, and need to be bioactivated in vivo to their oxygen analogs to 
exert their toxic action, but some (e.g., dichlorvos, methamidophos, 
or the nerve agent sarin) have P=O bonds. Most OPs used as insec-
ticides have two methoxy or ethoxy side chains (Fig. 22-1).
Biotransformation  The complex array of reactions involved in 
the biotransformation of OPs in target and nontarget species has 
been the subject of extensive investigations (Tang et al., 2006; 
Chambers et al., 2010b). For all compounds that contain a sulfur 
bound to the phosphorus, a metabolic bioactivation is necessary for 
their biological activity to be manifest, as only compounds with a 
P=O moiety are effective inhibitors of AChE. This bioactivation, 
which consists in an oxidative desulfuration mediated by cyto-
chrome P450 enzymes (CYPs), and occurring mostly but not exclu-
sively in the liver, leads to the formation of an “oxon,” or oxygen 
analog of the parent insecticide (reaction 1 in Fig. 22-2). Multiple 
CYPs have been shown to activate organophosphorothioates to 
their oxons, with different substrate specificities; for example, 
diazinon is activated by human hepatic CYP2C19, while parathion 
is activated primarily by CYP3A4/5 and CYP2C8, and chlorpy-
rifos by CYP2B6 (Kappers et al., 2001; Tang et al., 2001; Mutch 
et al., 2003). Other reactions can also activate OPs; a relevant one 
is thioether oxidation (formation of a sulfoxide, S=O, followed by 
the formation of a sulfone, O=S=O) which occurs in the leaving 
group moiety, and is also catalyzed by CYPs (Costa, 1988). In the 
case of the OP disulfoton, the sulfoxide and the sulfone are more 
potent inhibitors of AChE than the parent compound. Several other 
biochemical reactions are detoxication reactions, as they lead to 
metabolites of lesser or no toxicity (reactions 2 to 5 in Fig. 22-2). 
Some, for example, oxidative dearylation or O-dealkylation, are 
mediated by CYPs, and substrate-dependent differences among 
CYPs also exist in the detoxication process. For example, deary-
lation of chlorpyrifos is catalyzed primarily by CYP2C19, while 
that of parathion by CYP2B6 (Tang et al., 2001; Hodgson, 2003). 
Catalytic hydrolysis by phosphotriesterases, known as A-esterases 
(which are not inhibited by OPs), also plays an important role in the 
detoxication of certain OPs (reaction 5 in Fig. 22-5). One example 
is the enzyme paraoxonase (PON1), which hydrolyzes the oxons 
of chlorpyrifos and diazinon, and at least in vitro, also of parathion 
(Li et al., 2000; Costa and Furlong, 2010). Noncatalytic hydrolysis 
of OPs also occurs when these compounds phosphorylate serine 
esterases classified as B-esterases that are inhibited by OPs but can-
not catalytically hydrolyze them. Examples are the carboxylester-
ase (CarE) and butyrylcholinesterase (BuChE), in addition to the 
OP target, AChE. CarE also performs a catalytic hydrolysis of the 
carboxylic esters of malathion; high levels of expression of CarE in 
mammals are believed to be a major determinant of their low sensi-
tivity to malathion toxicity. Inhibition of CarE by other compounds 
(including some OPs) greatly potentiates the toxicity of malathion 
in mammals (Murphy, 1986). Glutathione S-transferases may also 
contribute to the detoxication of OPs, particularly the methoxy 
compounds (Abel et al., 2004).
Signs and Symptoms of Toxicity, Mechanism of Action, 
and Treatment of Poisoning  OP insecticides have high acute 
toxicity, with oral LD50 values in rat often below 50 mg/kg, though 
Table 22-8 
Molecular Targets of the Major Classes of Insecticides
TARGET
INSECTICIDE
EFFECT
Acetylcholinesterase
Organophosphates
Inhibition
Carbamates
Inhibition
Sodium  
channels
Pyrethroids  
(Type I and II)
Activation
DDT
Activation
Dihydropyrazoles
Inhibition
Nicotinic 
­acetylcholine ­receptors
Nicotine
Activation
Neonicotinoids
Activation
GABA receptors– 
gated chloride chan-
nels
Cyclodienes
Inhibition
Phenylpyrazoles
Inhibition
Pyrethroids (Type II)
Inhibition
Glutamate-gated  
chloride channels*
Avermectins
Activation
Octopamine  
receptors†
Formamidines
Activation
Mitochondrial  
complex I
Rotenoids
Inhibition
Ryanodine  
receptors
Diamides
Activation
*Found only in insects. In mammals avermectins activate GABAA  
receptors.
†In mammals, formamidines activate α2-adrenoceptors.
O (or S)
R1
R2
P
X
where X is the so-called “leaving group,” which is removed when 
the OP phosphorylates acetylcholinesterase (AChE), and is the 
most sensitive to hydrolysis; R1 and R2 are most commonly alkoxy

Toxic Effects of Pesticides
Chapter 22
1063
for some widely used compounds (e.g., chlorpyrifos and diazi-
non) toxicity is somewhat lower due to effective detoxication. One 
exception is malathion, which has an oral LD50 in rat of more than 
1 g/kg, due to rapid detoxication by CarE. For several OPs, acute 
dermal toxicity is also high, with some exceptions being azinphos-
methyl and malathion (Murphy, 1986). The primary target for OPs 
is AChE, a B-esterase whose physiological role is that of hydro-
lyzing acetylcholine, a major neurotransmitter in the central and 
peripheral (autonomic and motor-somatic) nervous systems. 
Acetylcholine released from cholinergic nerve terminals is disposed 
of solely through hydrolysis by AChE. In fact, in contrast to other 
neurotransmitters (e.g., norepinephrine or dopamine), it is choline, 
(C2H5O)2
P
O
S
CI
CI
CI
N
Chlorpyrifos
Methylparathion
Malathion
Metamidophos
(CH3O)2
P
O
S
NO2
(C2H5O)2
P
O
S
CH (CH3)2
CH3
N
Diazinon
Dichlorvos
Sarin
Azinphos-methyl (Guthion)
O
C
N
N
(CH3O)2
P
S
N
S
CH2
(CH3)2
CH
CH3
O
P
F
O
(CH3O)2
P
O
CH
C CI2
O
CH2
(C2H5O)2
P
S
CH
C
O
S
OC2H5
C
OC2H5
O
NH2
P
CH3
S
CH3
O
O
Figure 22-1.   Structures of some organophosphorus insecticides and of the nerve agent sarin. Note that most compounds used as insecticides are organophos-
phorothioates (i.e., have a P=S bond), though some (as well as sarin) have a P=O bond and do not require metabolic activation.
OAr
P
S
RO
HO
3
2
1
OAr
P
S
RO
RO
OH
P
S
RO
RO
OAr
P
O
RO
HO
5
4
OAr
P
O
RO
RO
OH
P
O
RO
RO
Figure 22-2.   General scheme of biotransformation of dialkyl, aryl phosphorothioate insecticides. Reaction 1 is the bioactivation by oxidative desulfuration of 
the parent compound to the active metabolite, the oxon. The other reactions are enzymatic detoxication reactions that yield products that do not inhibit acetyl-
cholinesterase. Reactions 2 and 4 are dealkylation reactions, while reaction 3 is a dearylation. All are mediated by various cytochromes P450. Reaction 5 is a 
hydrolytic reaction, catalyzed by paraoxonase (PON1). Note that not all reactions occur with every organophosphorus insecticide.

1064
TOXIC AGENTS
Unit v
the product of acetylcholine hydrolysis by AChE, that is taken up by 
the presynaptic terminal. Hence, inhibition of AChE by OPs causes 
accumulation of acetylcholine at cholinergic synapses, with over-
stimulation of cholinergic receptors of the muscarinic and nicotinic 
type. As these receptors are localized in most organs of the body, a 
“cholinergic syndrome” ensues, which includes increased sweating 
and salivation, profound bronchial secretion, bronchoconstriction, 
miosis, increased gastrointestinal motility, diarrhea, tremors, mus-
cular twitching, and various CNS effects (Table 22-9). When death 
occurs, this is believed to be due to respiratory failure as a result 
of inhibition of respiratory centers in the brainstem, bronchocon-
striction, and increased bronchial secretion, and flaccid paralysis of 
respiratory muscles (Gallo and Lawryk, 1991; Lotti, 2000, 2010). 
The time interval between exposure and onset of symptoms varies 
with the route and degree of exposure, and the chemical nature of 
the OP. The first signs to appear are usually muscarinic, which may 
or may not be in combination with nicotinic signs. While respira-
tory failure is a hallmark of severe OP poisoning, mild poisoning, 
and/or early stages of an otherwise severe poisoning, may display 
no clear-cut signs and symptoms (Lotti, 2010). Therefore, diagno-
sis is made through symptom recognition; miosis is observed most 
often, followed by gastrointestinal symptoms (nausea, vomiting, 
abdominal pain, vomiting) and hypersalivation.
The interaction of OPs with AChE has been studied in much 
detail. OPs with a P=O moiety phosphorylate a hydroxyl group on 
serine in the active (esteratic) site of the enzyme, thus impeding its 
action on the physiological substrate (Fig. 22-3). The first reaction 
leads to the formation of a Michaelis complex, while a subsequent 
reaction leads to phosphorylated AChE (Table 22-10). Rates of these 
two reactions, which are usually very rapid, indicate the affinity of 
the enzyme for a given OP. The bond between the phosphorus atom 
and the esteratic site of the enzyme is much more stable than the 
bond between the carbonyl carbon of acetate (in acetylcholine) at 
the same enzyme site. While breaking of the carbon–enzyme bond 
is complete in a few microseconds, breaking of the phosphorus-
enzyme bond can take from a few hours to several days, depending 
on the chemical structure of the OP. Phosphorylated AChE is hydro-
lyzed by water at a very slow rate (Fig. 22-3; Table 22-10), and the 
rate of “spontaneous reactivation” depends on the chemical nature 
of the R substituents. Reactivation decreases in the order demethoxy, 
diethoxy, and diisopropoxy (Gallo and Lawryk, 1991). While water 
is a weak nucleophilic compound, certain hydroxylamine derivatives, 
known as oximes, can facilitate dephosphorylation of AChE, and are 
utilized in the therapy of OP poisoning (see below). Reactivation 
of phosphorylated AChE does not occur once the enzyme–inhibi-
tor complex has “aged” (Fig. 22-3). Aging consists of the loss (by 
nonenzymatic hydrolysis) of one of the two alkyl (R) groups, and 
the rate of aging depends on the nature of the alkyl group. When 
phosphorylated AChE has aged, the enzyme can be considered to be 
irreversibly inhibited, and the only means of replacing its activity is 
through synthesis of a new enzyme, a process that may take days.
Upon OP poisoning, prompt treatment is essential. Procedures 
aimed at decontamination and/or at minimizing absorption depend 
on the route of exposure. In case of dermal exposure, contaminated 
clothing should be removed, and the skin washed with alkaline soap 
(Lotti, 2010). Special attention should be exercised by medical per-
sonnel, because passive contamination may occur. In case of inges-
tion, procedures to reduce absorption from the gastrointestinal tract 
do not appear to be very effective (Lotti, 2010). The muscarinic 
receptor antagonist atropine represents the cornerstone of the treat-
ment for OP poisoning, as it prevents the action of accumulating 
acetylcholine on these receptors (Eddleston and Chowdhury, 2015). 
Atropine is preferably given intravenously, though the intramuscu-
lar route is also effective. The best clinical approach is to administer 
doses of atropine large enough to achieve evidence of atropiniza-
tion, that is, flushing, dry mouth, changes in pupil size, bronchodi-
lation, and increased heart rate, which should be maintained for at 
least 48 hours (Lotti, 2010). Indicative doses of atropine depend on 
the degree of poisoning and may range from a few milligrams to 
a few grams (Eddleston and Chowdhury, 2015). Overdosage with 
atropine is rarely serious in OP poisoned patients (Lotti, 2010). 
Oximes such as pralidoxime (2-PAM) are also used in the therapy 
of OP poisoning. 2-PAM contains a positively charged atom capa-
ble of attaching to the anionic site of AChE, and facilitates dephos-
phorylation of the enzyme (Fig. 22-4), thus restoring the catalytic 
site of AChE to its function. However, this chemical reaction occurs 
only when the phosphorylated AChE has not undergone aging. 
Dosing regimens for various oximes depend on the specific com-
pound and the severity of OP poisoning (Lotti, 2010; Eddleston and 
Chowdhury, 2015). While animal data consistently show a marked 
positive effect of oximes, several authors reported limited or no 
efficacy of oximes in the treatment of OP poisoning (Bismuth et al., 
1992; Buckley et al., 2005; Worek et al., 2016), and a meta-analysis 
of several studies of OP-poisoned patients concluded that use of 
oximes was associated “with either a null effect or possible harm” 
(Peter et al., 2006). However, inadequate dosing has been held as a 
major factor for lack of response to oxime therapy, together with the 
time of administration following OP poisoning, as their therapeutic 
window is determined by the rate of aging (Johnson et al., 2000; 
Eddleston et al., 2002). Furthermore, poisoning by OPs bearing two 
methoxy groups (malathion, methylparathion, dimethoate) is con-
sidered to be rather resistant to oxime therapy (Worek et al., 1999a). 
Though currently used oximes, such as 2-PAM, were developed in 
Table 22-9 
Signs and Symptoms of Acute Poisoning with 
Anticholinesterase Compounds
SITE AND RECEPTOR AFFECTED
MANIFESTATIONS
Exocrine glands (M)
Increased salivation, 
­lacrimation, perspiration
Eyes (M)
Miosis, blurred vision
Gastrointestinal tract (M)
Abdominal cramps, 
­vomiting, diarrhea
Respiratory tract (M)
Increased bronchial ­secretion, 
bronchoconstriction
Bladder (M)
Urinary frequency, 
­incontinence
Cardiovascular system (M)
Bradycardia, hypotension
Cardiovascular system (N)
Tachycardia, transient 
­hypertension
Skeletal muscles (N)
Muscle fasciculations, 
twitching, cramps, 
­generalized weakness, 
­flaccid paralysis
Central nervous  
system (M, N)
Dizziness, lethargy, fatigue, 
headache, mental confusion, 
depression of respiratory 
centers, convulsions, coma
Abbreviations: M, muscarinic receptors; N, nicotinic receptors.

Toxic Effects of Pesticides
Chapter 22
1065
the 1950s, research in this area is still active (Worek et al., 2016). It 
should also be mentioned that oximes have the potential of forming 
stable phosphoryl oximes that have themselves anticholinesterase 
activity, and for this reason, and because of rapid reactivation of 
carbamylated AChE, they are not indicated in case of poisoning 
with carbamate insecticides (see the section “Carbamates”).
In addition to atropine and oximes, diazepam, to relieve anxi-
ety in mild cases and to reduce muscle fasciculations and antago-
nize convulsions in the more severe cases, or magnesium sulfate, 
to reduce acetylcholine release, can also be used in the treatment of 
acute OP poisoning (Lotti, 2010; Eddleston and Chowdhury, 2015).
Biochemical Measurements  In addition to synapses, AChE is 
also present in red blood cells (RBCs). Additionally, BuChE, also 
known as pseudo-cholinesterase, is found in plasma. Though the 
physiological functions of these enzymes in blood are yet to be dis-
covered, activity of both enzymes is usually inhibited upon exposure 
to OPs, hence their measurements are widely used as an indication 
of exposure and/or biological effect of OPs. The specificity and use-
fulness of measurements of RBC AChE and of plasma BuChE, in 
the case of OP exposure, have been debated for some time (Lotti, 
1995). The main issues can be summarized as follows (Costa, 2006): 
(1) Different OPs may inhibit AChE or BuChE to a different degree 
(e.g., the oxygen analogs of malathion, diazinon, and chlorpyrifos, 
and dichlorvos are stronger inhibitors of plasma BuChE than of 
RBC AChE). (2) There is a high degree of variability of enzyme 
activity (particularly of BuChE) among individuals, in part due to 
genetic differences (see the section “Genetic Susceptibility”). This 
requires establishment of a baseline value for each individual, or in 
case this is not available, of repeated post-exposure measurements 
to determine possible changes back toward baseline values. (3) RBC 
AChE activity is better correlated with target tissue (e.g., brain and 
diaphragm) AChE than is plasma BuChE activity, as indicated by 
animal studies (Padilla et al., 1994). There is also a good correla-
tion between the severity of signs and symptoms of poisoning and 
the degree of inhibition of RBC AChE (Lotti, 2010). (4) Neither 
measurement is specific for a certain OP, and indeed, other insecti-
cides, such as carbamates, also inhibit AChE and BuChE. (5) A 30% 
Serine
AChE active center
Acetylated AChE
Phosphorylated AChE (stable)
Serine
Acetate +
Regenerated AChE
OH
Serine
Regenerated AChE
OH
Serine
Diethyl +
phosphate
Serine
Choline +
Serine
+3,5,6–Trichloropyridinol
OH
H2O (rapid)
H2O (very slow)
Acetylcholine
(CH3)2 N
(CH2)2
O
C
O
CH3
O
C
CH3
O
Extremely stable
Aging
O
OH
P
OC2H5
O
O
P
OC2H5
OC2H5
O
Chlorpyrifos oxon
P
O
OC2H5
OC2H5
O
CI
CI
CI
N
Figure 22-3.   Scheme of hydrolysis of acetylcholine by acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and reaction of chlorpyrifos oxon with AChE (see text for details).
Table 22-10 
Rates of Cholinesterase Inhibition by Carbamate and 
Organophosphorus Esters
PARAMETER
KINETIC 
CONSTANT
REACTION RATES
CARBAMATE
ORGANOPHOS-
PHORUS
Complex 
formation
k1/k1
Rapid
Rapid
Inhibition 
rate
k2
Variable
Rapid to 
moderately 
rapid
Reactiva-
tion rate
k3
Relatively rapid
Slow to 
­extremely slow
Sources: Adapted from Ecobichon (2001a, 2001b).

1066
TOXIC AGENTS
Unit v
or greater decrease of plasma BuChE from pre-exposure baseline 
raises a red flag, and requires health and workplace surveillance, and 
removal of the worker from the exposure; however, the toxicological 
significance of such decrease is still much debated (Carlock et al., 
1999; U.S. EPA, 2000). Despite these caveats, measurements of 
plasma BuChE, and particularly of RBC AChE, remain a very valid 
way to determine exposure to OPs, and early biological effects of 
OP exposure, to be used as confirmation of diagnosis of OP poison-
ing, or to monitor occupationally exposed workers. Several meth-
ods exist to quantify the activity of these two enzymes (Reiner and 
Simeon-Rudolf, 2006; Wilson and Henderson, 2007). Whole-blood 
AChE may also be quantified, considering that only about 10% of 
the activity is due to the plasma enzyme (Worek et al., 1999b).
Several analytical methods are also available to quantify OPs 
and their metabolites in body fluids; the parent compound is mea-
sured in blood, while metabolites are measured in urine (Lotti, 2010). 
These measurements are rarely carried out in the clinical setting, but 
are extensively utilized in epidemiological studies; indeed, determi-
nation of metabolite levels in urine is the most practical method to 
estimate exposure to OPs (Maroni et al., 2000). Such metabolites 
include alkylphosphate derivatives, as well as chemical residues spe-
cific for each compound (the “leaving group”). The alkylphosphates 
or alkyl-(di)-thiophosphates are the result of metabolism of parent 
compounds or their oxygen analogs by CYPs or esterases. They are 
not specific for a certain OP, but are useful to assess exposure to (or 
internal dose of) several OPs. Some alkylphosphate metabolites of 
commonly used OPs are shown in Table 22-11. Other metabolites 
are specific for certain OP compounds; for example, p-nitrophenol 
in urine is an indicator of exposure to parathion or methyl para-
thion, while 3,5,6-trichloropyridinol is useful to assess exposure to 
chlorpyrifos or methyl chlorpyrifos (Barr et al., 2005). While quan-
tification of urinary metabolites of OPs have been widely used to 
assess exposure to OP from occupational, environmental, and dietary 
sources, caution should be exercised when interpreting results, as 
dialkylphosphates, and also leaving groups, can be found in the envi-
ronment, including food and drinks, as a result of OP degradation. 
This would lead to an overestimate of OP exposure (Lu et al., 2005).
The Intermediate Syndrome  A second distinct manifestation 
of exposure to OPs is the so-called intermediate syndrome, which 
was first conceptualized by clinicians in Sri Lanka involved in the 
treatment of suicide attempts (Senanayake and Karalliedde, 1987). 
The intermediate syndrome is seen in a small subset (20% to 30%) 
of acute OP poisoning cases, and has been observed following expo-
sure to a large variety of OPs (deBleecker, 2006). The syndrome 
develops one to several days after the poisoning, during recovery 
from cholinergic manifestations, or in some cases, when patients are 
completely recovered from the initial cholinergic crisis. Prominent 
features of the intermediate syndrome are a marked weakness of 
respiratory, neck, and proximal limb muscles. Extrapyramidal 
symptoms may also be present (Detweiler, 2014). Mortality due to 
respiratory paralysis and complications ranges from 15% to 40%, 
and recovery in surviving patients usually takes up to 30 days. The 
intermediate syndrome is not a direct effect of AChE inhibition, and 
its precise underlying mechanisms are still unknown. The hypoth-
esis that muscle weakness may result from nicotinic receptor desen-
sitization due to prolonged cholinergic stimulation remains the most 
valid (Lotti, 2010). There is no specific treatment for the intermedi-
ate syndrome and intervention is exclusively supportive.
Organophosphate-Induced Delayed Polyneuropathy  A 
few OPs may also cause another type of toxicity, known as organo-
phosphate-induced delayed polyneuropathy (OPIDP). Signs and 
symptoms of this delayed neurotoxicity include tingling of the 
hands and feet, followed by sensory loss, progressive muscle weak-
ness and flaccidity of the distal skeletal muscles of the lower and 
upper extremities, and ataxia (Lotti, 1992; Lotti and Moretto, 2005; 
Ehrich and Jortner, 2010). These may occur 2 to 3 weeks after a 
single exposure, when signs of both the acute cholinergic and the 
intermediate syndromes have subsided. OPIDP can be classified 
as a distal sensorimotor axonopathy. Neuropathological studies 
in experimental OPIDP have evidenced that the primary lesion is 
a bilateral degenerative change in distal levels of axons and their 
terminals, primarily affecting larger/longer myelinated central 
and peripheral nerve fibers, leading to breakdown of neuritic seg-
ments and the myelin sheaths (Ehrich and Jortner, 2010). OPIDP is 
not related to AChE inhibition, and indeed one of the compounds 
involved in several epidemics of this neuropathy, including the so-
called Ginger-Jake paralysis in the 1930s in the United States, is 
TOCP (tri-ortho-cresyl phosphate), which is a weak AChE inhibi-
tor. Extensive studies carried out in the past 40 years (Johnson, 
1982; Lotti, 1992; Johnson and Glynn, 2001) have identified the 
target for OPIDP as an esterase, present in nerve tissues as well as 
other tissues (e.g., lymphocytes), named neuropathy target esterase 
(NTE). Several OPs, depending on their chemical structure, can 
Phosphorylated
AChE
Serine
O
P
OR
OR
O
Reactivated AChE
Serine
2-PAM
CH
NOH
CH3
N+
CH3
N+
O
P
OR
OR
CH
N
O
+
+
OH
Figure 22-4.   Reactivation of phosphorylated acetylcholinesterase by pralidoxime (2-PAM). Note that 2-PAM is only effective before the phosphorylated 
enzyme has undergone the aging reaction.
Table 22-11 
Examples of Alkylphosphates in Urine
METABOLITE 
ORGANOPHOSPHATE
DMP (dimethylphosphate)
Methylparathion, 
­methylchlorpyrifos,  
dichlorvos, trichlorfon
DEP (diethylphosphate)
Parathion, diazinon, 
chlorpyrifos
DMTP (dimethylthiophosphate)
Azinphos-methyl 
(Guthion), fenitrothion
DETP (diethylthiophosphate)
Diazinon, parathion, 
chlorpyrifos
Source: Adapted from Maroni et al. (2000).

Toxic Effects of Pesticides
Chapter 22
1067
inhibit NTE, as do some non-OPs, such as certain carbamates and 
sulfonyl fluorides. Phosphorylation of NTE by OPs is similar to 
that observed for AChE. However, only OPs whose chemical struc-
ture leads to aging of phosphorylated NTE (by a process analogous 
to that described for AChE) can cause OPIDP. Other compounds 
that inhibit NTE but cannot undergo the aging reaction are not neu-
ropathic, indicating that inhibition of NTE catalytic activity is not 
the mechanism of axonal degeneration, and that the aging of NTE 
is a key event in the initiation of OPIDP (Johnson and Read, 1987). 
For OPIDP to be initiated, phosphorylation and subsequent aging 
of at least 70% of NTE is necessary, and this two-step process 
occurs within hours of poisoning. When the first clinical signs of 
OPIDP are evident some weeks later, NTE activity has recovered. 
Lymphocyte NTE activity has been used in animals and in humans 
as a marker of NTE in nervous tissue (Lotti and Moretto, 2005).
NTE is a large protein comprising 1327 amino acid residues, 
and its physiological functions(s) are still unknown. Enzymatically, 
NTE behaves as a B-esterase, that is, it is inhibited by OPs rather 
than capable of hydrolyzing them (Wijeyesakere and Richardson, 
2010), but also has phospholipase activity, as shown by its abil-
ity to hydrolyze phosphatidylcholine to glycerophosphocholine 
(Zaccheo et al., 2004; Glynn, 2006). It is now established that NTE 
is a member of a nine-protein family of patatin-like phospholipase 
domain–containing proteins (PNPLAs), of which NTE is PNPLA6 
(Richardson et al., 2013). Mutations of the PNPLA6 gene have been 
associated with a number of congenital disorders involving altera-
tions in the central and/or peripheral nervous systems (Hufnagel et 
al., 2015). Human and mouse NTEs have an overall 39% identity 
with the Swiss Cheese Protein (Sws) in neurons of Drosophila, 
and a 61% identity in the phospholipase domain, including the 
active site at serine 966 (Moser et al., 2000). Sws mutant flies show 
neurodegeneration, glial hyperwrapping, and neuronal apoptosis, 
and similar changes are also seen in mice in which brain-only 
NTE has been knocked out, as full NTE deletion is embryo-lethal 
(Kretzschmar et al., 1997; Akossoglou et al., 2004; Moser et al., 
2004). It has been reported that Sws can regulate protein kinase A 
(by binding and inhibiting the C3 catalytic subunit, PKA-C3), and 
that exposure of flies to TOCP alters the Sws–PKA–C3 interactions, 
thereby inhibiting PKA activity and causing neurodegeneration 
(Wentzell et al., 2014). These findings would support the hypothesis 
that OPIDP is the result of a toxic gain-of-function of phosphory-
lated and aged NTE (Lotti and Moretto, 2005; Wijeyesakere and 
Richardson, 2010). Despite these recent advances, the most crucial 
issues in the mechanisms of OPIDP development and progression 
remain obscure; indeed, though reductions in axonal transport have 
been found to precede overt clinical signs, the exact chain of events 
occurring between phosphorylation and aging of NTE and axonal 
degeneration is still unknown.
Several epidemics of OPIDP have occurred in the past, but its 
occurrence in humans is now rare, since before commercialization 
OPs must undergo specific neurotoxicity testing in the hen (one of 
the most sensitive species) to determine whether OPIDP is produced 
(Moretto, 1999). For this test, high doses of OPs are used, and ani-
mals are protected from acute cholinergic toxicity with atropine; 
clinical, morphological, and biochemical measurements are then 
carried out. In vitro tests can provide the ratio of relative inhibitory 
potency toward AChE and NTE, but these have not been accepted by 
regulatory agencies (Ehrich et al., 1997). A few commercialized OPs 
(metamidophos, trichlorfon, chlorpyrifos), which initially tested 
negative in the hen test, have caused OPIDP in humans, mostly as 
a result of extremely high exposures in suicide attempts (Lotti and 
Moretto, 2005). The possibility that repeated, low-level exposure to 
OPs may cause OPIDP is negligible, as the threshold (about 70%) 
for NTE inhibition and aging would not be reached under these 
exposure conditions (Wijeyesakere and Richardson, 2010). Though 
it was once thought that some animal species (e.g., rodents) were 
insensitive to OPIDP, only mice appear to be somewhat resistant 
(Veronesi et al., 1991). However, age is an important determinant 
of susceptibility, with young animals displaying more resistance; in 
young chicks the threshold for NTE inhibition and aging is more 
than 90% versus 70% in adult hens (Peraica et al., 1993).
As noted earlier, compounds that inhibit NTE but do not age 
do not cause OPIDP. When given to experimental animals before a 
neuropathic OP, these compounds exert a protective role by occu-
pying the NTE active site. Surprisingly, however, when given after 
a neuropathic OP, these compounds have been shown to promote 
OPIDP (Lotti et al., 1991; Lotti, 2002a) (Fig. 22-5). By borrow-
ing a terminology used for carcinogenic compounds, agents that 
phosphorylate NTE and age have been named initiators, while NTE 
inhibitors that do not initiate OPIDP but can promote it have been 
Treatment :
PMSF
only
PMSF
before
DFP
after
DFP
only
DFP
only
DFP
before
PMSF
after
Uninhibited
NTE
PMSF inhibited
NTE
DFP inhibited
NTE
100
50
0
% NTE inhibition
OPIDP
–
–
–
+
+
Figure 22-5.   Initiation, protection, and promotion of OPIDP, showing the relationships among timing of administration, dose, NTE inhibition, and clinical 
response, when DFP (diisopropylfluorophosphate) and PMSF (phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride) are given alone or in combination. (From Lotti et al. [1991], with 
permission.)

1068
TOXIC AGENTS
Unit v
named promoters (Lotti, 2002a). It is easy to understand why these 
latter compounds would be protective when given before an OP 
initiator; however, why and how they are able to promote OPIDP is 
still unknown. Promoters can also potentiate axonal degeneration 
caused by means other than OPs, such as traumatic nerve lesion, or 
2,5-hexanedione (Moretto, 2000), and may involve proteins other 
than NTE itself. Though still mechanistically mysterious, the issue 
of promotion may have a bearing on risk assessment of potential 
insecticide mixtures. Indeed, exposure to an initiator at a dose lower 
than that required to cause (or for causing) OPIDP would neverthe-
less result in OPIDP if followed by exposure to a promoter.
Genetic Susceptibility  Genetically determined variations in 
biotransformation enzymes or target molecules can modify the 
response to OPs (Costa, 2001; Povey, 2010). As CYPs are impor-
tant for the activation and detoxication of OPs, polymorphisms of 
these enzymes may affect OP metabolism and toxicity. For exam-
ple, a study of Hodgson (2003) has shown that polymorphic forms 
of CYP2C19 and CYP3A4 cause differential desulfuration and 
dearylation of chlorpyrifos. However, the overall influence of CYP 
polymorphisms on OP toxicity in vivo is not clear at the moment. 
The liver and plasma A-esterase paraoxonase (PON1), which also 
detoxifies chlorpyrifos oxon and diazoxon, presents several poly-
morphisms in the coding and promoter regions, which affect the 
catalytic efficiency of the enzyme toward different substrates (the 
Q192R polymorphism), and its level of expression (e.g., the C-108T 
polymorphism) (Costa et al., 2003, 2013; Costa and Furlong, 2010). 
Studies in transgenic animal models have clearly indicated that 
PON1 “status” (encompassing both the Q192R polymorphism and 
the level of PON1 activity) plays a most relevant role in modulating 
the acute toxicity of some OPs (Li et al., 2000; Cole et al., 2005) (Fig. 
22-6). Evidence that PON1 status may play a role in susceptibility 
to OPs in humans is also emerging (Furlong et al., 2006; Hoffman 
et al., 2009; Costa et al., 2013). Genetically engineered PON1s with 
higher catalytic efficiencies toward different OPs are also being con-
sidered as catalytic scavengers to be eventually utilized in case of 
OP poisoning (Stevens et al., 2008; Costa and Furlong, 2010).
BuChE is present in plasma at high levels, though its physi-
ological function is unclear. BuChE is inhibited by OPs and may 
guard against their toxicity, as the OP would be unavailable for 
reaction with its primary target AChE (Costa, 2006). At least 39 
genetic variants of BuChE have been identified, with nucleotide 
alterations in the coding region. Several rare variants are silent, 
while the most common variants have a reduced activity and are far 
less efficient scavengers of cholinesterase inhibitors (Lockridge and 
Masson, 2000; Goodal, 2006; Lockridge et al., 2010). Individuals 
with such BuChE variants may be predicted to be more suscep-
tible to OP toxicity (Fontoura-da-Silva and Chautard-Friere-Maira, 
1996), but this assumption has been challenged and appears to be 
valid only in the case of OP nerve agents (Lockridge et al., 2016). 
A number of genetic variants of human AChE have been described 
(Goodal, 2006), but they are mainly not associated with altered 
AChE activity (Lockridge et al., 2016).
Long-Term Toxicity  While the effects of acute exposure to OPs 
have been clearly identified and characterized by thousands of 
animal studies and cases of human poisonings, there is still con-
troversy on possible long-term effects of these insecticides. Acute 
exposure to high doses of OPs may result, in some cases, in long-
lasting adverse health effects (particularly CNS sequelae) as shown 
in animals, as well as in humans (Rosenstock et al., 1991; Sanchez-
Santed et al., 2004). An increased risk of dementia may also be 
associated with acute OP poisoning (Lin et al., 2015; Sanchez-
Santed et al., 2016). More controversial is the possibility that low 
exposure to OPs, at doses that produce no cholinergic signs, may 
lead to long-term adverse health effects, particularly in the cen-
tral and peripheral nervous systems. Chronic exposure of animals 
to OPs, at doses that significantly inhibit AChE, but may not be 
associated with clinical signs, results in the development of tol-
erance to their cholinergic effects (which is mediated, at least in 
part, by downregulation of cholinergic receptors), and has been 
associated with neurobehavioral abnormalities, particularly at 
the cognitive level (Costa et al., 1982; Prendergast et al., 1998). 
Evidence describing long-term neuropsychological or neuropsy-
chiatric alterations in humans upon low chronic exposure is con-
tradictory (Daniell et al., 1992; Jamal and Julu, 2002), and several 
expert reviews tend to conclude that the balance of evidence does 
not support the existence of clinically significant neuropsychologi-
cal effects, neuropsychiatric abnormalities, or peripheral nerve dys-
function in humans chronically exposed to low levels of OPs (Ray, 
1998; IOM, 2000; Lotti 2002b; Colosio et al., 2003; Moretto et 
al., 2010). Yet, research in this area, and the ensuing debate, will 
undoubtedly continue (Muñoz-Quezada et al., 2016).
0%
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0
1
CPO dosage (mg/kg, dermal)
Brain AChE (% control)
2
3
PON1-R192
PON1-Q192
PON1–/–
0%
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0
12
6
Time (h)
Brain AChE (% control)
18
24
PON1-R192
PON1-Q192
PON1–/–
Figure 22-6.   Dose–response (top panel) and time-course (bottom panel) 
of brain acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibition by chlorpyrifos oxon (CPO) 
in PON1 knockout mice (PON1–/–) or in mice expressing either of the two 
human PON1R192 or PON1Q192 transgenes in place of endogenous mouse PON1. 
Note that mice lacking PON1 are most sensitive to CPO toxicity, while 
those expressing human PON1R192 are most resistant. Mice expressing 
human PON1Q192 show intermediate sensitivity, despite expressing simi-
lar levels of PON1 as PON1R192 mice. The experiments indicate the role 
of PON1 “status” in modulating the toxicity of CPO. (Modified from Cole 
et al. [2005], with permission.)

Toxic Effects of Pesticides
Chapter 22
1069
OPs as a class have not been considered to be mutagenic, and 
there is little evidence that they may be carcinogenic. However, IARC 
(International Agency for Research on Cancer, a branch of WHO) 
recently concluded that four OPs (tetrachlorvinphos, parathion, mala-
thion, and diazinon) are carcinogens (Guyton et al., 2015). The first 
two, which were classified as possible human carcinogens (Group 
2B), are already banned or severely restricted in the United States 
and the EU. The latter two, which are still widely used, have been 
classified as probable human carcinogens (Group 2A). For example, 
the conclusion on malathion was based on limited evidence of car-
cinogenicity in humans and sufficient evidence in rodents, in addi-
tion to some positive genotoxicity results in mammalian systems and 
endocrine-disrupting effects (Guyton et al., 2015). Of interest is that 
the U.S. EPA concluded instead that malathion should be classified 
as a compound with “suggestive evidence of carcinogenicity, but not 
sufficient to assess human carcinogenic potential” (U.S. EPA, 2016a). 
The controversy in this area is likely to continue. Immunotoxicity of 
OPs has been suggested from in vitro or high-dose animal studies, 
but evidence in humans is lacking. Some OPs have also endocrine-
disrupting activities in vitro (Tamura et al., 2003), but in vivo studies, 
even at dose levels that inhibit brain AChE activity, have not always 
substantiated these findings (Okahashi et al., 2005).
Developmental Toxicity and Neurotoxicity  A report from 
the National Academy of Sciences highlighted the potential higher 
exposure of children to pesticides (NRC, 1993), and FQPA indi-
cates that an additional safety factor should be included in the risk 
assessment process to ensure protection of children, who are pre-
sumed to be more sensitive to the effects of toxicants (FQPA, 1996). 
Experimental data indicate that young animals are more sensitive 
to the acute cholinergic toxicity of OPs (Costa, 2006; Pope, 2010). 
This increased sensitivity does not appear to be due to intrinsic 
differences in AChE, but rather to lower detoxication abilities of 
young animals. For example, low detoxication by CYPs or PON1 
accounts for the age-dependent susceptibility of parathion and 
chlorpyrifos, respectively (Benke and Murphy, 1975; Mortensen 
et al., 1996; Costa and Furlong, 2010). In contrast, as discussed 
earlier, the young appear to be more resistant to OPIDP. In recent 
years, accumulating evidence has been suggesting that perinatal 
exposure to OPs may cause developmental neurotoxicity. Studies 
in rodents indicate that OPs can affect various cellular processes 
(e.g., DNA replication, neuronal survival, and neurite outgrowth) 
and noncholinergic pathways (e.g., serotoninergic synaptic func-
tions and the adenylate cyclase system), and cause various behav-
ioral abnormalities (Dam et al., 1998; Jett et al., 2001; Aldridge 
et al., 2003; Ricceri et al., 2003; Garcia et al., 2005). Such effects 
are at times seen at dose levels that produce no cholinergic signs 
of toxicity (Timofeeva and Levin, 2010). These findings, together 
with results of biomonitoring studies that indicate exposure of chil-
dren to OPs, particularly in inner cities and farming communities, 
have led to regulatory restrictions on the use of certain OPs, and to 
concern for their potential neurotoxic effects in children (Eskenazi 
et al., 1999; Weiss et al., 2004; Eaton et al., 2008; Muñoz-Quezada 
et al., 2013), though diverging opinions also exist (Reiss et al., 2015).
Carbamates
Carbamate insecticides have a variety of chemical structures 
(Fig. 22-7), but all derive from carbamic acid, the majority being 
N-methylcarbamates. They present different degrees of acute oral 
LD50 in rats
(mg/kg)
Aldicarb
Carbaryl
Propoxur
Carbofuran
Oral
0.8
400
85
10
Dermal
3.2
>5000
~1500
>1000
Water solubility
(g/L)
6.0
0.7
2.0
0.7
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH
C
S
O
O
N
C
NH
O
O
C
CH3
NH
NH
CH
(CH3)2
O
O
NH
CH3
C
O
O
NH
CH3
C
O
O
CH3
CH3
Figure 22-7.   Structures of some carbamate insecticides, with indication of acute oral and dermal toxicity in the rat, and of water solubility. Note that carbo-
furan has been banned in recent years in several countries.

1070
TOXIC AGENTS
Unit v
toxicity, ranging from moderate to low toxicity such as carbaryl, to 
extremely high toxicity, such as aldicarb (Fig. 22-7). Dermal toxic-
ity is lower, but skin penetration is increased by organic solvents 
and emulsifiers present in most formulations (Ecobichon, 2001b). 
Carbamates are susceptible to a variety of enzyme-catalyzed bio-
transformation reactions, and the principal pathways involve oxida-
tion and hydrolysis (Fukuto, 1972; Tang et al., 2006). They do not 
require metabolic bioactivation, and the metabolites are for the most 
part devoid of biological activity, though this is not always the case. 
For example, two metabolites of aldicarb, the sulfoxide and the sul-
fone, are more potent anticholinesterases than the parent compound 
(Risher et al., 1987). The mechanism of toxicity of carbamates is 
analogous to that of OPs, in that they inhibit AChE. However, inhi-
bition is transient and rapidly reversible, because there is rapid 
reactivation of the carbamylated enzyme in the presence of water 
(Table 22-10). Additionally, carbamylated AChE does not undergo 
the aging reaction. The sign and symptoms of carbamate poison-
ing are the same observed following intoxication with OPs, and 
include miosis, urination, diarrhea, salivation, muscle fasciculation, 
and CNS effects (Vale and Lotti, 2015) (Table 22-9). However, dif-
ferently from OPs, acute intoxication by carbamates is generally 
resolved within a few hours. Fig. 22-8 shows experimental data 
on AChE inhibition by propoxur in mice; maximal inhibition is 
achieved very rapidly, as carbamates are direct AChE inhibitors and 
do not require metabolic bioactivation, and enzyme activity returns 
to control levels within 2 hours. Carbamates also inhibit BuChE; 
the degree of such inhibition varies depending on the specific com-
pound, but is generally modest after moderate exposure (when, 
however, inhibition of red blood cells and nervous tissue AChE can 
be substantial) and equivalent to that of AChE after severe exposure 
(Ecobichon, 2001b).
The transient nature of AChE inhibition following carbamate 
exposure poses several problems in quantification of its activity. 
First, measurements should be made shortly (a few hours at most) 
following exposure; otherwise, even if severe inhibition and symp-
toms of toxicity were present, the latter would be resolved, and no 
enzyme inhibition would be detected. Second, particular care should 
be taken even if blood samples are drawn shortly after exposure, as 
temperature and time elapsed before the assay would cause reversal 
of inhibition. The treatment of carbamate intoxication relies on the 
use of the muscarinic antagonist atropine. Use of oximes is gener-
ally not recommended, as 2-PAM has been shown to aggravate the 
toxicity of carbaryl (Murphy, 1986). Yet, oximes may have benefi-
cial effects in case of other carbamates such as aldicarb (Ecobichon, 
2001b), and a current view is that concern over use of oximes in 
case of carbamate poisoning is unwarranted (Rossman et al., 2009). 
There are several cases of human poisoning associated with expo-
sure to various carbamates, particularly carbaryl (Cranmer, 1986) 
and propoxur (Hayes, 1982). Most cases, however, involved aldi-
carb. This compound, which has a very high acute toxicity, is also 
highly water soluble (Fig. 22-7). Though, because of this charac-
teristic, it is not registered for use on any fruit or vegetable having 
high water content, its illegal uses in hydroponically grown cucum-
bers and in watermelons have led to outbreaks of poisoning (Goes 
et al., 1980; Goldman et al., 1990). Contamination of drinking water 
has also been reported (Zaki et al., 1982). Carbamates can inhibit 
NTE, but since carbamylated NTE cannot age, they are thought 
to be unable to initiate OPIDP. Additionally, when given before a 
neuropathic organophosphate, carbamates offer protection against 
OPIDP (Johnson and Lauwerys, 1969), but when given after, they 
can promote OPIDP. A few case reports indicate that exposure to 
very high dosages of methylcarbamates (e.g., carbaryl and carbo-
furan) may result in a peripheral polyneuropathy similar to OPIDP 
(Dickoff et al., 1987; Yang et al., 2000). This would imply that 
aging is not required for OPIDP to develop, or, alternatively, that 
in these cases, carbamates may have amplified a preexisting sub-
clinical neuropathy. Carefully conducted animal studies would be 
needed to substantiate this hypothesis.
Subchronic and chronic toxicity studies on carbamate insec-
ticides have been carried out mostly for registration purposes, and 
their main findings (inhibition of cholinesterases, effects on organ 
weight and hematological parameters, histopathological changes) 
are described in detail by Baron (1991). Development of tolerance 
to some carbamates (propoxur, carbaryl) upon repeated exposure 
has been observed, and this appears to be due to an induction of 
microsomal enzymes (Costa et al., 1981). As a class, methylcar-
bamates are not mutagenic, and there is also no evidence of car-
cinogenicity. Embryotoxicity or fetotoxicity are observed only at 
maternally toxic doses (Baron, 1991). Limited evidence suggests 
that carbamates (e.g., aldicarb) may be more acutely toxic to young 
animals than to adults (Moser, 1999), possibly because of lower 
detoxication, but this aspect has not been investigated in the same 
detail as for OPs.
Pyrethroids
Extracts of the flower heads of Chrysanthemum cinerariaefolium 
were appreciated as insecticides in ancient China and Persia. 
Reports on their cultivation and commercialization go back to the 
mid-1800s (Casida, 1980). Pyrethrum extracts contain six insec-
ticidal esters, referred to as pyrethrins, whose structures were 
elucidated in the early 1900s. However, because pyrethrins were 
decomposed rapidly by light, synthetic analogs—the pyrethroids—
were developed in the 1970s (Casida, 2010). Due to their high 
insecticidal potency, generally low mammalian toxicity, and lack 
of environmental persistence, pyrethroids have encountered much 
success in the past 40 years and now account for about 15% to 20% 
of the global insecticide market (Soderlund, 2012). Pyrethroids are 
used widely as insecticides both in the house and in agriculture, in 
medicine for the topical treatment of scabies and headlice, and in 
tropical countries for malaria control, in soaked bed nets to prevent 
mosquito bites, as well as in indoor residual spraying. Pyrethroids 
are known to alter the normal function of insect nerves by modify-
ing the kinetics of voltage-sensitive sodium channels, which medi-
ate the transient increase in the sodium permeability of the nerve 
Ileum
Diaphragm
Time (h)
AChE activity (% of control)
50
100
90
80
70
60
0
1
2
3
Brain
Figure 22-8.   Time-course of acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibition in dif-
ferent tissues of mice following administration of a single dose of the carba-
mate insecticide propoxur (10 mg/kg, i.p.). Note the near complete recovery 
of AChE activity within 2 hours after propoxur administration. (From Costa 
et al. [1981], with permission.)

Toxic Effects of Pesticides
Chapter 22
1071
membrane that underlies the nerve action potential (Soderlund, 
2012). All pyrethroid insecticides contain an acid moiety, a cen-
tral ester bond, and an alcohol moiety (Fig. 22-9). The acid moi-
ety contains two chiral carbons; thus, pyrethroids typically exist 
as stereoisomeric compounds (trans and cis). Additionally, some 
pyrethroids also have a chiral carbon on the alcohol moiety, allow-
ing for a total of eight different stereoenantiomers. These chemical 
considerations are relevant, as pyrethroids’ effects on sodium chan-
nels, their insecticidal activity, and their mammalian toxicity are 
stereospecific. The cis isomers are generally more toxic than the 
corresponding trans isomers (Casida et al., 1983). The acute oral 
mammalian toxicity of pyrethroids is generally low. Values of LD50 
range, for example, from 100 mg/kg (deltamethrin) to 10,000 mg/
kg (phenothrin). The relevance of stereo-specificity is underscored 
by the fact that the LD50 for 1R, trans-resmethrin is 8000 mg/kg, 
but that of 1R, cis-resmethrin is 100 mg/kg (Casida et al., 1983). 
The relatively low mammalian toxicity of pyrethroids is confirmed 
by the fact that despite their extensive worldwide use, there are rel-
atively few reports of human poisonings, and only a dozen deaths 
(Bradberry et al., 2005). Most deaths occurred following accidental 
or intentional exposure to pyrethroids. For example, a 45-year-old 
man died 3 hours after eating beans and cheese prepared using a 
10% cypermethrin solution instead of oil (Poulos et al., 1982). He 
et al. (1989) reported of 573 cases of acute pyrethroid poisoning 
in China between 1983 and 1988, with some fatalities. The der-
mal toxicity of pyrethroids is low, because of limited absorption 
through the skin.
Upon absorption, pyrethroids are very rapidly metabolized 
through two major biotransformation routes: hydrolysis of the 
ester linkage, which is catalyzed by hepatic and plasma CarEs 
and oxidation of the alcohol moiety by CYPs (Miyamoto, 1976; 
Soderlund and Casida, 1977; Kaneko, 2010). These initial reactions 
are followed by further oxidations, hydrolysis, and conjugation with 
sulfate or glucuronide. The relative importance of the hydrolytic or 
oxidative biotransformation varies from compound to compound, 
and from isomer to isomer for each pyrethroid. For example, the 
trans isomer of permethrin is more susceptible to hydrolysis by 
CarE than the cis isomer (Soderlund and Casida, 1977; Ross et al., 
2006). Type II pyrethroids (see the following section) are less sensi-
tive to hydrolysis. For instance, deltamethrin, a type II pyrethroid 
containing a cyano group (Fig. 22-9) and present solely as the cis 
isomer, is more extensively metabolized by hepatic CYPs, particu-
larly CYP1A2 and CYP1A1 (Vmax/Km = 34.9), than by liver CarE 
(Vmax/Km = 11.5) (Anand et al., 2006a). Though it has been sug-
gested that oxidative metabolism may lead in some cases to bio-
activation of certain pyrethroids (Dayal et al., 2003; Ray and Fry, 
2006), the current line of evidence would suggest that hydrolytic 
and oxidative metabolism achieve detoxication of the parent, active 
compound (Soderlund, 2012). Inhibition of CYPs by piperonyl 
butoxide (PBO) indeed increases pyrethroid toxicity, and so does 
inhibition of CarE (Casida et al., 1983). PBO is added to most pyre-
throid formulations as a synergist, and the need for an increased use 
of bed nets treated with both PBO and pyrethroids has been rec-
ommended to overcome pyrethroid resistance by malaria-carrying 
mosquitoes (Churcher et al., 2016). Inhibition of CarE may be of 
significance, if unauthorized pyrethroid/OP mixtures are utilized 
(Ray and Forshaw, 2000). In fact, several OPs inhibit CarE activity, 
and may thus be expected to potentiate pyrethroid toxicity (Choi et 
al., 2004). Biotransformation of pyrethroids in humans is similar to 
rats, with ester hydrolysis and oxidation as the predominant meta-
bolic reactions; the latter are mostly carried out by CYP2C9 and 
CYP3A4 (Kaneko, 2010).
Signs and Symptoms of Toxicity and Mechanisms of 
Action  The acute mammalian toxicity of pyrethroids is well 
characterized (Soderlund, 2010). Based on toxic signs in rats, 
Allethrin
Type I
CH3
CH3
O
O
O
CH3
CH3
CH3
Resmethrin
H
H
CH3
CH3
O
O
O
CH3
CH3
Phenothrin
O
CH3
CH3
O
O
CH3
CH3
Fenvalerate
Deltamethrin
Type II
O
CH3
Br
O
CN
O
Br
CH3
Cypermethrin
O
CH3
CI
O
CN
O
CI
CH3
O
O
CN
O
CH3
CH3
CI
Figure 22-9.   Structures of type I (left) and type II (right) pyrethroid insecticides. Note that all type II pyrethroids have a cyano (CN) group.

1072
TOXIC AGENTS
Unit v
elude such classification, as they produce a combination of the two 
syndromes (Ray and Fry, 2006; Soderlund, 2012).
The principal mode of action of pyrethroids in mammals is the 
same as in insects, that is, disruption of the voltage-gated sodium 
channels (Narahashi, 1996; Soderlund, 2010, 2012), though second-
ary targets have also been identified (Breckenridge et al., 2009). 
Pyrethroids bind to the α subunit of the sodium channel and slow 
the activation (opening), as well as the rate of inactivation (clos-
ing) of the sodium channel, leading to a stable hyperexcitable state. 
Sodium channels then open at more hyperpolarized potentials, and 
are held open longer, allowing more sodium ions to cross and depo-
larize the neuronal membrane (Shafer et al., 2005). In general, type 
II compounds delay the inactivation of sodium channels substan-
tially longer (more than 10 milliseconds) than do type I compounds 
(less than 10 milliseconds) (Ray and Fry, 2006). Type I compounds 
prolong channel opening only long enough to cause repetitive firing 
of the action potential (repetitive discharge), analogously to DDT 
(Vijverberg et al., 1982); type II compounds hold the channels 
open for such long periods that the membrane potential ultimately 
becomes depolarized to the point at which generation of the action 
potential is not possible (depolarization-dependent block) (Shafer 
et al., 2005) (Fig. 22-10). These differences in the time of opening 
of sodium channels are believed to be at the basis of the differences 
observed between the T and CS syndromes (Ray and Fry, 2006; 
Breckenridge et al., 2009).
The higher sensitivity of insects to pyrethroid toxicity, com-
pared to mammals, is thought to result from a combination of higher 
sensitivity of insect sodium channels, lower body temperature (as 
pyrethroids show a negative temperature coefficient of action), and 
slower biotransformation (Ray and Fry, 2006; Costa, 2015). For 
example, there is a 1000-fold difference in sensitivity to allethrin 
between the sodium channel in cockroach and rat neurons (Narahashi 
et al., 2007). Type II pyrethroids, but not type I compounds, also 
Table 22-12 
Classification of Pyrethroid Insecticides Based on 
Toxic Signs in Rats
SYNDROME
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS
EXAMPLES
Type I  
(T syndrome)
Aggressive sparring
Allethrin
Increased sensitivity  
to external stimuli
Bioallethrin
Resmethrin
Phenothrin
Whole-body tremors
Prostration
Type 2  
(CS syndrome)
Pawing and burrowing
Deltamethrin
Profuse salivation
Fenvalerate
Coarse tremor
Cypermethrin
Choreoathetosis
Cyhalothrin
Clonic seizures
Channel level
Normal
Pyrethroid modiﬁed
Cellular level
Membrane
depolarization
Membrane
depolarization
Sodium
current
Sodium
current
Action
potential
Action
potential
Extracellular
Extracellular
Intracellular
Intracellular
Closed
resting
Closed
resting
Open
Open
Type I
Type II
Open*
Inactivated
Inactivated
Closed
inactivated
Closed
resting
Closed
resting
Na+
Na+
Na+
Figure 22-10.   Effect of pyrethroids on neuronal excitability. Depolarization opens voltage-sensitive sodium channels (VSSCs) allowing Na+ to enter the cell. 
To limit Na+ entry and depolarization length, VSSCs inactivate and return to a “resting” state before reopening (top left). Pyrethroids delay inactivation (double 
arrows between states) of the channel and allow continued Na+ flux (Open*) (top right). Under normal circumstances, depolarization leads to a rapidly inac-
tivating current, and generates a single action potential (bottom left). Pyrethroid-modified VSSCs remain open when depolarization ends, resulting in a “tail” 
current. Type I compounds depolarize the cell membrane above the threshold for action potential generation, resulting in a series of action potential (repetitive 
firing). Type II compounds cause greater membrane depolarization, diminishing the Na+ electrochemical gradient and subsequent action potential amplitude, 
eventually leading to depolarization-dependent block (bottom right). (From Shafer et al. [2005], with permission.)
observed after administration of 36 pyrethroids, these compounds 
have been divided into two classes (Verschoyle and Aldridge, 1980) 
(Table 22-12). Type I compounds produce a syndrome consist-
ing in marked behavioral arousal, aggressive sparring, increased 
startle response, and fine body tremor progressing to whole-body 
tremor and prostration (type I or T [tremor] syndrome). Type II 
compounds produce profuse salivation, coarse tremor progressing 
to choreoathetosis, and clonic seizures (type II or CS [choreoath-
etosis with salivation] syndrome) (Ray and Fry, 2006; Soderlund, 
2010, 2012). A key structural difference between type I and type 
II pyrethroids is the presence only in the latter of a cyano group at 
the α carbon of the alcohol moiety of the compound (Fig. 22-9). 
However, certain pyrethroids (e.g., cyphenothrin and flucythrinate)

Toxic Effects of Pesticides
Chapter 22
1073
bind to and inhibit GABAA-gated chloride channels (Lawrence 
and Casida, 1983), albeit at higher concentrations than those suf-
ficient to affect sodium channels (10−7 M vs. 10−10 M). This effect 
is believed to contribute to the seizures that accompany severe type 
II pyrethroid poisoning. However, drugs that enhance GABAergic 
transmission (e.g., diazepam) have modest effects toward deltame-
thrin-induced choreoathetosis or seizures (Soderlund, 2010). Type 
II pyrethroids, such as deltamethrin, also inhibit at low concentra-
tion (10−10 M) voltage-dependent chloride channels (Forshaw et al., 
1993). Because xenobiotics that open these chloride channels, such 
as ivermectin and pentobarbital, antagonize pyrethroid-induced cho-
reoathetosis and salivation, inhibition of maxi voltage-dependent 
chloride channels by pyrethroid may contribute to some of the signs 
associated with the type II poisoning syndrome (Forshaw et al., 
2000; Breckenridge et al., 2009; Soderlund, 2010). Other reported 
targets for pyrethroids include calcium ATPase and voltage-gated 
calcium channels, which are, however, affected at higher concentra-
tions (10−5 M and 10−6 M, respectively). The latter interaction may 
be of interest, as pyrethroids have been shown to increase calcium-
dependent neurotransmitter release (Soderlund, 2010). Also of note 
is the observation that several pyrethroids could stimulate protein 
kinase C–dependent protein phosphorylation at very low concen-
trations (10−13 M) (Enan and Matsumura, 1993), but whether this 
interaction is involved in the modulation of sodium and/or chloride 
channels remains to be determined.
Young animals are more sensitive to the acute toxicity of cer-
tain pyrethroids, such as deltamethrin and cypermethrin (Sheets, 
2000), most likely because of a lesser capacity for metabolic detox-
ification (Anand et al., 2006b); however, only minor age-related 
differences were found for other compounds (Sheets, 2000). Some 
studies have suggested that certain pyrethroids may cause develop-
mental neurotoxicity, but current evidence has been judged inad-
equate (Shafer et al., 2005; EFSA, 2009). Furthermore, levels of 
background pyrethroid exposure (presumably through residues in 
the diet) in children have been found to be orders of magnitude 
lower than the corresponding ADI (Heudorf et al., 2004). Also, the 
use of deltamethrin-impregnated bed nets does not appear to pose 
any health risk in children and neonates (Barlow et al., 2001), while 
substantially reducing infant mortality from malaria (Alonso et al., 
1991).
Upon occupational exposure, the primary adverse effect result-
ing from dermal contact with pyrethroids is paresthesia (Flannigan 
et al., 1985; He et al., 1989). Symptoms include continuous tingling 
or pricking or, when more severe, burning. The condition reverses 
in about 24 hours, and topical application of vitamin E has been 
shown to be an effective treatment. Paresthesia is presumably due 
to abnormal pyrethroid-induced repetitive activity in skin nerve ter-
minals (Ray and Fry, 2006). Given their widespread use, reports 
on incidents due to pyrethroid exposure have been increasing over 
the past decade, though such exposures resulted in minor or no 
symptoms in most cases (Power and Sudakin, 2007). Cases of mild 
acute illness with neurological and respiratory symptoms have been 
reported by flight attendants following aircraft disinfection with 
permethrin (Sutton et al., 2007). Between 2000 and 2008, a total 
of 4974 cases of acute pyrethrin/pyrethroid-related illnesses were 
identified, mostly (85%) of low severity, with respiratory effects 
being the most common symptoms (Hudson et al., 2014).
Chronic studies with pyrethroids indicate that at high dose 
levels they cause slight liver enlargement often accompanied by 
some histopathological changes. There is little or no evidence of 
teratogenicity and mutagenicity (Miyamoto, 1976; Ray, 1991). An 
increased rate of lymphoma incidence in rodents has been reported 
for deltamethrin, but the effect was not dose-dependent (Cabral 
et al., 1990). Liver tumors were found in rats upon chronic expo-
sure to permethrin, but as the mode of action appears to be due to 
enzyme induction and increased cell proliferation, it was judged 
not to be relevant to humans (Osimitz and Lake, 2009). There is no 
compelling evidence that pyrethroids may act as endocrine disrup-
tors (Kim et al., 2004). Pyrethroids are particularly toxic to fish, but 
not to birds (Miyamoto, 1976).
Organochlorine Compounds
The organochlorine insecticides include the chlorinated ethane 
derivatives, such as DDT and its analogs; the cyclodienes, such as 
chlordane, aldrin, dieldrin, heptachlor, endrin, and toxaphene; the 
hexachlorocyclohexanes, such as lindane; and the caged structures 
mirex and chlordecone (Figs. 22-11 and 22-12). From the 1940s 
to the 1970–1980s, the organochlorine insecticides enjoyed wide 
use in agriculture, structure insect control, and malaria control pro-
grams. Their acute toxicity is moderate (less than that of OPs), but 
chronic exposure may be associated with adverse health effects par-
ticularly in the liver and the reproductive system. Primarily because 
of ecological considerations, these compounds have been banned 
in most countries in the past 30 to 40 years. Yet, because of their 
environmental persistence and high lipophilicity, exposure to these 
compounds continues, most notably through the diet. Furthermore, 
some, such as DDT, are being reintroduced in part of the world for 
malaria control; hence, a discussion of their toxicity has more than 
historical value.
DDT and Its Analogs  DDT (1,1,1-trichloro-2, 2-bis(4-chloro-
phenyl)ethane) was first synthesized by O. Zeidler in 1874, but its 
insecticidal activity was discovered only in 1939 by Paul Mueller 
in Switzerland. Early experiments showed that DDT was effective 
against a wide variety of agricultural pests, as well as against insects 
that transmit some of the world’s most serious diseases, such as 
p,p′-DDT (77.1)
p,p′-DDE (4.0)
p,p′-DDD (0.3)
o,p′-DDD (0.1)
o,p′-DDE (0.1)
o,p′-DDT (14.9)
CI
CI
CI
C
H
C
CI
CI
CI
CI
CI
CI
C
H
C
CI
H
H
C
C
CI
CI
CI
CI
CI
H
H
C
C
CI
CI
CI
CI
CI
C
C
CI
CI
CI
CI
CI
C
C
CI
Figure 22-11.   Structures of the organochlorine insecticide p,p′- DDT and 
its isomers. The percentage of each isomer present in technical grade DDT 
is indicated in parenthesis. DDE and DDD also result from biotransforma-
tion of DDT.

1074
TOXIC AGENTS
Unit v
typhus, malaria, and yellow fever. In the United States, annual use 
of DDT rose until 1959 to about 36,000 tons, and then declined 
gradually until its ban in 1972 (Rogan and Chen, 2005). However, 
as said, because of its high persistence, global redistribution, and its 
current use in many parts of the world, a discussion of the toxicol-
ogy of DDT is still of relevance (Longnecker, 2005). While DDT 
is the universally accepted common name of the insecticide, tech-
nical-trade DDT is a mixture of several isomers (Fig. 22-11), with 
p,p′-DDT being responsible for the insecticidal activity.
DDT has a moderate acute toxicity when given by the oral 
route, with an LD50 of about 250 mg/kg; p,p′-DDT is at least 10-fold 
more toxic than o,p′-DDT (Smith, 2010). Dermal absorption of 
DDT is very limited, resulting in dermal LD50 values of more than 
1000 mg/kg. In humans, oral doses of 10 to 20 mg/kg produce ill-
ness, but doses as high as 285 mg/kg have been ingested acciden-
tally without fatal results. Toxicity from dermal exposure in humans 
is also low, as evidenced by the lack of significant adverse health 
effects when thousands of people were liberally dusted with this 
compound. Upon absorption, DDT distributes in all tissues, and 
the highest concentrations are found in adipose tissue. DDT is also 
extensively but slowly metabolized, with DDE, DDD, and DDA 
(in each case both the p,p′ and the o,p′ isomers) being the primary 
metabolites in humans (Smith, 2010). DDE is also stored in adipose 
tissue. Excretion is through the bile, urine, and the milk.
Acute exposure to high doses of DDT causes motor unrest, 
increased frequency of spontaneous movements, abnormal suscep-
tibility to fear, and hypersusceptibility to external stimuli (light, 
touch, sound). This is followed by the development of fine tremors, 
progressing to coarse tremors, and eventually tonic–clonic convul-
sions. Symptoms usually appear several hours after exposure, and 
death, usually due to respiratory failure, may follow after 24 to 72 
hours (Ecobichon and Joy, 1982). Signs and symptoms of poisoning 
are similar in most animal species, with dogs displaying promi-
nent convulsions. There is no evidence that young animals may be 
more sensitive than adults to the acute toxicity of DDT, and they 
may actually be less sensitive (Smith, 2010). In humans, the earli-
est symptom of poisoning by DDT is hyperesthesia of the mouth 
and lower part of the face, followed by paresthesia of the same 
area and of the tongue; this is followed by dizziness, tremor of the 
extremities, confusion, and vomiting, while convulsions occur only 
in severe poisoning.
Signs and symptoms of acute poisoning clearly point at the 
nervous system as the primary target for DDT toxicity (Woolley, 
1982). Both in insects and in mammals, DDT interferes with the 
sodium channels in the axonal membrane by a mechanism similar 
to that of Type I pyrethroids (Vijverberg et al., 1982). DDT has little 
or no effect on the resting potential or the rising phase and peak 
amplitude of the action potential. However, it greatly prolongs the 
depolarizing (negative) afterpotential of the action potential, and 
this produces a period of increased neuronal excitability immedi-
ately after the spike phase. This, in turn, enhances the probability of 
repetitive firing, and the insurgence of a “train” of action potentials 
(Fig. 22-13). Voltage clamp studies have shown that the principal 
effect of DDT is to slow down the closing of sodium channels once 
they have opened, while having little or no effect on closed gates. 
In addition to this effect on sodium channels, DDT also affects 
ATPases. Though DDT inhibits Na+, K+-ATPase, this action would 
not contribute to its neurotoxic effect (Matsumura and Patil, 1969). 
Rather, inhibition of a Ca2+-ATPase (an ecto-ATPase, located on 
the outside of the cell membrane) may be involved in the effects of 
DDT. As the function of this Ca2+-ATPase is considered to be that 
of maintaining high external calcium concentrations, its inhibition 
would lower external calcium and contribute to membrane instabil-
ity and repetitive firing (Matsumura and Ghiasuddin, 1979). Several 
neurochemical studies have also shown that DDT exposure alters 
the levels of some neurotransmitters such as acetylcholine, norepi-
nephrine, and serotonin, as well as of cyclic GMP, but these effects 
appear to be the results, rather than the cause, of DDT-induced neu-
rotoxicity (Woolley, 1982). Treatment for DDT poisoning focuses 
on the nervous system. In laboratory animals, phenytoin and cal-
cium gluconate have been found to reduce DDT-induced tremors 
and mortality, respectively. In humans, in addition to decontamina-
tion and supportive treatment, diazepam or phenobarbital may be 
beneficial to control convulsions, if present.
While acute exposure to DDT is a rare event, chronic exposure 
has been, and still is, a primary concern. In this regard, an important 
target for DDT is the liver. DDT and DDE increase liver weight 
and cause hepatic cell hypertrophy and necrosis, and are potent 
inducers of CYPs, particularly CYP2B and CYP3A (Smith, 2010; 
Harada et al., 2016a). DDT, as well as DDE and DDD, have been 
shown to be carcinogenic in rodents, causing primarily an increase 
in liver tumors. DDT is not genotoxic in in vitro and in vivo tests. 
Associations between cancer and DDT have been studied in several 
Approximate
LD50 (mg/kg)
Lindane (γ-BHC)
200
CI
CI
CI
CI
CI
150
Heptachlor
CI2
CI
CI
CI
CI
CI
20
Endrin
CI2
CI
CI
CI
O
CI
50
Dieldrin
CI2
CI
CI
CI
O
CI
50
Aldrin
CI2
CI
CI
CI
CI
500
Chlordane
CI2
CI
CI
CI
CI
CI
CI
CI
Figure 22-12.   Structure and acute toxicity (oral LD50 in rat) of selected 
organochlorine insecticides of different chemical classes (see text for details).

Toxic Effects of Pesticides
Chapter 22
1075
cohorts, and there is evidence, albeit contradictory, of increased 
risks for liver cancer and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (Persson et al., 
2012; Alavanja et al., 2014). Given the endocrine-disrupting actions 
of DDT and DDE (see below), particular attention has been devoted 
to possible associations between exposure to these compounds and 
hormonally sensitive cancers, and positive associations were found 
for some (e.g., testicular cancer) but not for others (e.g., breast can-
cer) (Beard, 2006; McGlynn et al., 2008). DDT is classified as a 
probable human carcinogen (Group 2A) by IARC (Loomis et al., 
2015).
Methoxychlor (2,2-bis (p-methoxyphenyl)-1,1,1-trichloro-
ethane) is the p,p′-dimethoxy analog of p,p′-DDT. Because of 
its low acute toxicity (LD50 in rat = 5000 mg/kg) and short bio-
logical half-life, its use greatly expanded following the ban of 
DDT. Furthermore, methoxychlor is rapidly metabolized, and 
does not accumulate in tissues. Though convulsions have been 
reported in dogs after high doses, in the rat depression of the 
CNS, mild tremors, diarrhea, and anorexia were observed (Smith, 
2010). Upon chronic exposure, methoxychlor has been found to 
be a modest inducer of liver microsomal enzymes, and to cause 
chronic nephritis, and hypertrophy of kidneys, mammary glands, 
and uterus. Testicular atrophy and decreased spermatogenesis 
were also observed. Evidences of mutagenicity and carcinogenic-
ity are inconclusive. Methoxychlor is metabolized by CYP2C19 
and CYP1A2 to demethylated compounds, which have estrogenic 
activity (Smith, 2010); these are likely responsible for the effects 
caused by methoxychlor on the reproductive system in both male 
and female animals. Methoxychlor was banned in the EU and in the 
United States in the early 2000s.
Hexachlorocyclohexanes and Cyclodienes  These two fami-
lies of organochlorine insecticides comprise a large number of 
compounds that share a similar mechanism of neurotoxic action 
(Brooks, 2010). Lindane is the γ isomer of benzene hexachloride 
(BHC; 1,2,3,4,5,6- hexachlorocyclohexane) (Fig. 22-12). BHC is 
composed of eight stereoisomers, and the γ isomer is the one with 
insecticidal activity. Cyclodiene compounds include chlordane, 
dieldrin, aldrin (which is rapidly metabolized to dieldrin), hepta-
chlor, and endrin (Fig. 22-12). Toxaphene, a complex mixture of 
chlorinated bornanes and camphenes, is also classified as an organo-
chlorine insecticide. All of these compounds were introduced in the 
late 1940s to early 1950s, and have experienced wide use before 
being banned in most countries due to their persistence and envi-
ronmental and human health effects (Costa, 2015). Lindane’s use as 
an insecticide in agriculture has been banned, but it remains avail-
able as a scabicide and pediculocide in lotions and shampoos, as a 
second line of intervention, though in some states (e.g., California) 
even this use has been banned. The primary use of chlordane has 
been for termite control, while other compounds were primarily 
used in agriculture. Endrin was registered for use as a rodenticide to 
control voles in orchards, a testament to its rather high acute toxic-
ity, compared to most other organochlorines (Fig. 22-12).
Lindane and cyclodienes have moderate to high acute oral tox-
icity (Fig. 22-12). However, in contrast to DDT, these compounds are 
readily absorbed through the skin. The primary target for their toxic-
ity is the CNS. Unlike DDT, tremor is essentially absent, but convul-
sions are a prominent aspect of poisoning. These are due to the ability 
of these compounds to interfere with γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)–
mediated neurotransmission. GABA is an important neurotransmitter 
in the mammalian and insect CNS and in the insect neuromuscular 
junction. GABA receptors are members of the superfamily of ligand-
gated ion channels that contain a chloride ionophore; by binding to 
these receptors, endogenous GABA causes the opening of chloride 
channels resulting in hyperpolarization of the membrane. Lindane 
and cyclodienes bind to a specific site (the picrotoxin site) on the 
chloride channel, thereby blocking its opening and thus antagonizing 
the “inhibitory” action of GABA (Cole and Casida, 1986; Eldefrawi 
and Eldefrawi, 1987; Narahashi, 1996). Treatment of acute poisoning 
is symptomatic; phenobarbital and diazepam can be used as anti-
convulsants. Additional reported neurochemical effects of organo-
chlorine insecticides include inhibition of Na+, K+-, Ca2+-, and 
Mg2+-ATPases, and changes in neurotransmitter levels.
2
mV
2 milliseconds
10 milliseconds
D
A
1
mV
10 milliseconds
10 milliseconds
E
B
10 milliseconds
10 milliseconds
F
C
Figure 22-13.   Action potential of a single nerve fiber from the sciatic nerve of the toad Xenopus laevis, before (A), and 65, 85, 90, 105, and 135 minutes 
(B–F) after in vitro exposure to 10–4 M DDT. Note the difference in timescale between A and B. The first observable effect is the development of a negative 
afterpotential (B). With time of exposure, repetitive spike discharge is initiated and increased in proportion to the amplitude of the negative afterpotential (C–F). 
(From Van den Bercken [1972], with permission.)

1076
TOXIC AGENTS
Unit v
As with DDT, these compounds are slowly metabolized, and 
have a tendency to bioaccumulate in adipose tissue; they are also 
excreted in milk. Cyclodienes are inducers of microsomal biotrans-
formation enzymes and cause liver enlargement upon chronic expo-
sure (Smith, 2010). They are not genotoxic, but have been shown to 
act as tumor promoters and to cause liver tumors in mice. In 2015, 
IARC classified lindane as carcinogenic to humans (Group 1) based 
on positive human and animal findings (Loomis et al., 2015). As 
with DDT, they are extremely persistent in the environment, and 
some have endocrine-disrupting properties. Cyclodienes, and par-
ticularly dieldrin, have also been suggested as potential pesticide 
candidates that may contribute to the etiology of Parkinson dis-
ease, given their ability to disrupt dopaminergic neurotransmission 
(Kanthasamy et al., 2005; Richardson et al., 2006), and the findings 
of epidemiological studies (Elbaz et al., 2009).
Mirex and Chlordecone  These two organochlorine insecti-
cides have a cage-like structure and were introduced in the late 
1950s for use against fire ants and leaf-eating insects, respectively. 
Chlordecone (Kepone) has been the most studied because of one 
episode that involved 148 workers in a chlordecone producing fac-
tory in Hopewell, Virginia, between 1973 and 1975 (Taylor et al., 
1978). The primary manifestation of chlordecone toxicity is the 
presence of tremors, which are observed in animals as well as in 
humans (Guzelian, 1982). Tremors affected primarily the hands, 
but fine tremors of the head and the entire body (Kepone shakes) 
were also observed (Costa, 2015). The exact mechanism of chlor-
decone neurotoxicity has not been elucidated, but it is believed to 
involve inhibition of ATPases (both Na+, K+- and Mg2+-ATPases), 
and ensuing inhibition of the uptake of catecholamines (Desaiah, 
1982). In contrast to cyclodienes, chlordecone does not cause 
seizures.
Chlordecone induces hepatic drug metabolizing enzymes, and 
causes hepatosplenomegaly in rats and humans. It is not mutagenic, 
but can induce liver tumors in rodents (Smith, 2010). Chlordecone 
also causes reproductive toxicity in animals, likely by mimick-
ing the effects of excessive estrogens. Low or absent sperm count 
was found in chlordecone-exposed workers (Taylor et al., 1978; 
Guzelian, 1982). Chlordecone has been classified among the “dirty 
dozen” by the Stockholm convention on persistent organic pollut-
ants, and banned worldwide. Adverse effects of this insecticide 
(particularly developmental toxicity and neurotoxicity) are still 
being reported in the French West Indies, where chlordecone was 
banned in 2003 after being extensively used on banana plantations 
(Costa, 2015; Multigner et al., 2016).
Environmental Ubiquity and Persistence  The properties 
(low volatility, chemical stability, lipid solubility, slow rate of bio-
transformation, and degradation) that made organochlorine com-
pounds such effective insecticides also brought about their demise 
because of their persistence in the environment, bioconcentration, 
and biomagnification in food chains, and the acquisition of bio-
logically active body burdens at higher trophic levels (Ecobichon, 
2001a). Sweden banned DDT in 1970, the United States in 1972, 
and the United Kingdom in 1986. Most other organochlorine insec-
ticides were also banned in the United States during this period; 
for example, aldrin and dieldrin in 1975, toxaphene in 1982, and 
chlordane in 1988, while agricultural use of lindane was banned in 
2006. These bans occurred largely on the basis of ecological con-
siderations. The extensive use of organochlorines and their envi-
ronmental persistence made them widespread pollutants. Studies 
carried out in the Great Lakes region in the United States exem-
plify the nature and the extent of the problem. Table 22-13 shows 
the tendency of DDT to bioaccumulate in the food chain. Adverse 
effects on bird reproduction (e.g., eggshell thinning) were among 
the first ecological effects to be identified. Particularly compelling 
was the book by Rachel Carson “Silent Spring” (Carson, 1962), 
which focused on the bioaccumulation of DDT and its effects on 
birds (Peakall, 1970). This book and the debate it generated played 
an important role in the decision to ban DDT and other organochlo-
rines (U.S. EPA, 1975). Monitoring of organochlorine insecticides 
in fish in the Great Lakes shows extreme high levels in 1970 (e.g. 
20,000 ng/g of total DDT, which also includes DDE and DDD), 
and a progressive decline after the use of these compounds was 
restricted or banned (Hickey et al., 2006).
Because of their stability and high lipophilicity, organochlo-
rines are present in adipose tissues of most individuals. For exam-
ple, DDE, the breakdown product of DDT in the environment and 
the result of its biotransformation, is an extremely stable compound 
(t1/2 = 7–11 years), which accumulates in fat, and is usually found 
in human tissue at the highest concentration. Studies in populations 
from different countries in the 1960s showed that all adipose tis-
sue samples contained DDT at concentrations ranging from 5 to 20 
mg/kg (ppm), with DDE accounting for about 60% of total DDT 
(WHO, 1979). Though concentrations of DDT in humans show a 
decreasing trend, those of DDE, which is ingested with food, partic-
ularly meat and fish, remain more constant or decrease only slightly. 
Organochlorine insecticides are also excreted in the milk. Though 
levels have decreased in most countries in the last decades, elevated 
levels remain in several developing countries (Chao et al., 2006; 
Bouwman et al., 2012).
Endocrine Disruption  An endocrine, or hormone, disruptor 
can be defined as a xenobiotic that interferes with the synthesis, 
secretion, transport, binding, action, or elimination of natural hor-
mones in the body, which are responsible for the maintenance of 
homeostasis, reproduction, development, and behavior (Crisp et al., 
1998; Stoker and Kavlock, 2010). Several pesticides may fall into 
this category, and among these, a large number are organochlorine 
insecticides. The o,p′-isomer of DDT, which comprises approxi-
mately 15% of the technical grade product (Fig. 22-11), has estro-
genic properties, in that it can act as an agonist at estrogen receptors 
(ER) α and β (Table 22-14). A metabolite of DDT, p,p′-DDE, in 
contrast, inhibits androgen binding to the androgen receptor (Kelce 
et al., 1995) (Table 22-14). Metabolites of the DDT analog, 
methoxychlor, are active as ERα agonists and ERβ antagonists 
and are antiandrogenic. Chlordecone also has estrogenic properties 
(Guzelian, 1982) (Table 22-14). Other organochlorine compounds 
with weak estrogenic activity are dieldrin, endosulfan, toxaphene, 
lindane, and the β isomer of hexachlorocyclohexane (β-BHC). In all 
cases, the potency of the insecticides or their metabolites is several 
orders of magnitude less than those of the hormones. Experimental 
studies have shown that administration of these compounds to 
Table 22-13 
Concentration of DDT in a Lake Michigan Food Chain
DDT (PPM)
Water
0.000002
Bottom mud
0.014
Fairy shrimp
0.410
Coho salmon, lake trout
3–6
Herring gull
99
Source: From Harrison et al. (1970).

Toxic Effects of Pesticides
Chapter 22
1077
animals can cause hormonally mediated adverse health effects. For 
example, p,p′-DDE had clear antiandrogenic effect when given to 
fetal, pubertal, and adult male rats (Kelce et al., 1995). Several stud-
ies have shown that chlordecone and methoxychlor affect the male 
reproductive system (Guzelian, 1982; Kavlock, 2001). Of possible 
relevance is the finding that exposure of rats to methoxychlor dur-
ing gestation (E8 to E15) induced transgenerational defects in sper-
matogenic capacity and sperm viability, that is, these abnormalities 
were also observed in F2 generation animals (Anway et al., 2005). 
All these findings, though provocative, were obtained at dosage 
levels that far exceed anticipated environmental exposure. It has 
been suggested that estrogen equivalents from phytoestrogens pres-
ent in foods and beverages are several orders of magnitude higher 
than estrogen equivalents resulting from estrogenic organochlorine 
insecticide contaminants in food (Safe, 2000). While the associa-
tion between exposure to organochlorine compounds and possible 
hormone-related diseases in humans appeared to be weak (Golden 
et al., 1998; Safe, 2000), the Pine River Statement reviewed 494 
studies published between 2003 and 2008 and found that “…DDT 
and its breakdown product DDE may be associated with adverse 
health outcomes such as breast cancer, diabetes, decreased semen 
quality, spontaneous abortion, and impaired development in child-
hood …” (Eskenazi et al., 2009).
DDT and Public Health: Risk–Benefit Considerations  The 
Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants, ratified in 
2004 by 50 countries, outlaws the use of several industrial chemi-
cals (initially 12, the so-called “Dirty Dozen”), including several 
organochlorine insecticides. However, an exemption clause allows 
malaria-endemic nations to continue utilizing DDT (an earlier 
member of the dirty dozen) for indoor residual wall spraying. The 
United Nations Environment Program estimates that about 25 
countries can use DDT under this exemption from its ban. This situ-
ation is keeping the debate on the risks and benefits of DDT usage 
very much alive (Rogan and Chen, 2005; Van den Berg, 2009; 
Bouwman et al., 2011). On one hand, the environmental and human 
health effects of DDT are evident; on the other, one has to come to 
consider the burden of mortality from malaria worldwide. Indeed, 
there are an estimated 250 million clinical cases of malaria, causing 
almost one million deaths each year, mostly in children less than 
5 years of age, and mostly in sub-Saharan Africa (Van den Berg, 
2009; WHO, 2010). Thus, the use of DDT might reduce mortality 
from malaria and overall infant mortality, if spraying were carried 
out according to planned schedule, which is not always the case, 
and if malaria-transmitting mosquitoes do not become resistant to 
DDT, a problem that in the past has forced switching to other insec-
ticides. The successful results obtained in South Africa in recent 
years (see the earlier section “Economics and Public Health”) 
would support a continuous use of DDT. However, though indoor 
residual spraying might not cause the ecological effects that led to 
the ban of DDT, it would expose humans to amounts of DDT that 
may cause adverse health effects. In this regard, reproductive and 
developmental outcomes are of most concern. In particular, preterm 
births and early weaning (decreased duration of lactation), which 
can lead to increased infant mortality, have been associated with 
DDT exposure (Chen and Rogan, 2003; Rogan and Chen, 2005; 
Forns et al., 2016), though findings are controversial (Roberts 
et al., 2004). Nevertheless, reported DDT levels in breast milk often 
exceed the tolerable daily intake and would cause great concern 
in any developed country (Okankwo et al., 2008). For example 
in Mozambique, breast milk levels of ΣDDT (i.e., DDT and its 
metabolites) increased from 3.9 μg/mL in 2002 to 11 μg/mL in 
2006, when indoor residual spraying with DDT for malaria control 
was started (Manaca et al., 2011). High serum levels of DDT have 
also been found in applicators, when proper personal protective 
equipment is not utilized (Bouwman et al., 2011). DDT remains 
a public health intervention that is inexpensive, long-lasting, and 
effective. Its judicious use should be combined with that of insecti-
cide-treated bed nets to prevent mosquito biting, and with a better 
availability of therapeutic interventions in affected populations.
Neonicotinoids
Starting in the early 1980s, a new class of insecticides, the neonic-
otinoids, were developed by chemical modifications of nicotine and 
of other nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) agonists (Casida 
and Durkin, 2017). Tobacco extracts had been used to repel and kill 
insects since 1690, and tobacco smoke was also used for fumigation 
(Ujvary, 2010). Nicotine is an alkaloid extracted from the leaves of 
tobacco plants, and was used as a free base or as the sulfate salt. 
Very little nicotine is used currently in the United States, but it is 
still used as a minor insecticide in some countries. Nicotine is a sys-
temic insecticide effective toward a wide range of insects, including 
aphids, thrips, and whiteflies (Ujvary, 1999). As the primary compo-
nent of tobacco used for smoking or chewing, nicotine’s pharmacol-
ogy and toxicology have been thoroughly investigated (Benowitz, 
1996; Taylor, 1996). Nicotine exerts its pharmacological and toxic 
effects in mammals and insects by activating nAChRs. In verte-
brates, nAChRs are expressed at neuromuscular junctions, in the 
peripheral nervous system and in the CNS, while in insects they are 
confined to the CNS (Eldefrawi and Eldefrawi, 1997). Interaction 
of nicotine with nAChRs produces initial stimulation followed by 
protracted depolarization, which results in receptor paralysis. The 
overall effect is the summation of stimulatory and inhibitory effects 
of nicotine at all sites expressing nAChRs. At high doses, parasym-
pathetic stimulation and ganglionic and neuromuscular blockade 
predominate (Matyunas and Rodgers, 2001). Nicotine has a high 
acute toxicity in vertebrates, with LD50s usually below 50 mg/kg 
(Ujvary, 2010). Signs and symptoms of poisoning include nausea, 
vomiting, muscle weakness, respiratory effects, headache, lethargy, 
and tachycardia. Most cases of poisoning with nicotine occur after 
exposure to tobacco products, or gum or patches. Workers who 
cultivate, harvest, or handle tobacco may experience green tobacco 
sickness, caused by dermal absorption of nicotine.
Neonicotinoids (also referred to as neonics) contain a nitro-
methylene, nitroimine or cyanoimine groups, and now account for 
20% to 25% of the insecticide market (Casida and Durkin, 2017). 
Table 22-14 
Potency of DDT and Its Metabolites, and of 
Chlordecone, at Androgen and Estrogen Receptors
COMPOUND
ANDROGEN RECEPTOR
ESTROGEN 
RECEPTOR
IC50 (μM)
p,p′ - DDT
75
>1000
p,p′ - DDE
5
>1000
o,p′ - DDT
95
5
p,p′ - DDD
90
>1000
Chlordecone
125
3
17β-estradiol
0.5
0.002
Source: Adapted from Kelce et al. (1995).

1078
TOXIC AGENTS
Unit v
One of the first compounds synthesized was nithiazine, a nitrometh-
ylenyl heterocyclic compound highly toxic toward insects and with 
low mammalian toxicity, which was not developed commercially 
because of its photo-instability. Further structure–activity studies 
led to the development of imidacloprid (introduced in 1991), niten-
pyram, acetamiprid, and other neonicotinoid compounds (Matsuda 
et al., 2001) (Fig. 22-14). The insecticidal activity of neonicotinoids 
is attributed to activation of postsynaptic nAChRs, which in insects 
are located exclusively in the CNS. As previously for nicotine, neo-
nicotinoids are used primarily for crop protection as systemic insec-
ticides, but are also effective against fleas in cats and dogs (Schenker 
et al., 2003). Acute oral toxicity (LD50) of neonicotinoids in rats 
ranges from 180 to more than 2000 mg/kg (Fig. 22-14), while der-
mal toxicity is much lower (2000 to 5000 mg/kg), likely because 
of their low lipophilicity (Tomizawa and Casida, 2005). Signs and 
symptoms of toxicity in mammals are attributable to stimulation of 
nAChRs, particularly in the peripheral nervous system, given their 
poor penetration of the blood–brain barrier (Sheets, 2010). Some 
neonicotinoids (imidocloprid, thiacloprid) are particularly toxic to 
birds, other (thiacloprid) to fish. Most neonicotinoids are not muta-
genic or carcinogenic, nor teratogenic. Neonicotinoids undergo lim-
ited biotransformation in mammals, involving mostly CYP-mediated 
oxidative reactions (Tomizawa and Casida, 2005; Sheets, 2010).
Neonicotinoids display a high selectivity profile, which is 
largely attributable to their specificity toward insect versus mamma-
lian nAChRs. The nAChR consists of diverse subtypes assembled 
in combination from 10 α and 4 β, γ, δ, ε subunits. The most abun-
dant subtypes in the vertebrate nervous system are α4β2 and α7, 
which are insensitive and sensitive, respectively, to α-bungarotoxin. 
In insects, neonicotinoids have been shown to bind to at least three 
pharmacologically distinct nAChRs (Matsuda et al., 2001; Sheets, 
2010). Table 22-15 shows the in vitro effects of some neonicoti-
noids toward insect nAChRs and mammalian α4β2 nAChRs, and 
compares them to nicotine. Structural features of neonicotinoids 
that contribute to their selective actions at insect nAChRs have been 
described (Nakayama and Sukekawa, 1998; Matsuda et al., 2001; 
Tomizawa and Casida, 2005). Given their wider availability, there 
is an increasing number of acute neonicotinoid poisonings, primar-
ily due to suicidal attempts; mortality is however low (about 3%), 
because of their receptor selectivity and low lipophilicity (Phua 
et al., 2009). Very limited information exists on possible adverse 
effects of chronic exposure of neonicotinoids in humans, and 
given their increasing use, investigations in this area are warranted 
(Cimino et al., 2017). The possibility that some neonicotinoids may 
exert developmental neurotoxicity has been raised, though the issue 
is still controversial (EFSA, 2013; Sheets et al., 2016).
In recent years, neonicotinoids have been at the center of a 
controversy regarding their potential role in the decrease of the bee 
population. These insecticides are indeed highly acutely toxic to 
bees (Table 22-16). In addition, they are able to impair the immune 
system of bees, thereby decreasing the defense mechanisms against 
infections (Sanchez-Bayo et al., 2016). On the basis of these findings, 
three neonicotinoids (imidacloprid, clothianidin, and thiamethoxan) 
Figure 22-14.   Structures of nicotine and of neonicotinoid insecticides with 
indication of their acute oral toxicity in rat and their octanol/water partition 
(P). (Data are derived from Tomizawa and Casida [2005].)
Table 22-15 
Specificity of Neonicotinoids for Insect and 
Vertebrate nAChRs
INSECTICIDE
IC50 (nM)
INSECT
VERTEBRATE 
α4β2
SELECTIVITY 
RATIO
Imidacloprid
4.6
2,600
565
Acetamiprid
8.3
700
84
Thiacloprid
2.7
860
319
Nitenpyram
14.0
49,000
3,500
Flupyradifurone*
2.4
ND
ND
(-)Nicotine
4000
7
0.002
Abbreviation: ND, not determined.
*Butenolide.
Sources: From Tomizawa and Casida (2005) and Nauen et al. (2015).
Log P
0.93
–0.60
0.57
1.26
0.80
–0.66
50–60
300
450
640
182
1,628
Acute oral LD50
(mg/kg;rat)
Nitenpyram
N
N
H
CH3
+
(–)-nicotine
CHNO2
HN
S
Imidacloprid
Nithiazine
NNO2
CI
N
NH
N
Thiacloprid
NCN
CI
N
S
N
Acetamiprid
N
CH3
CH3
NCN
CI
N
CHNO2
H
NCH3
N
CI
N

Toxic Effects of Pesticides
Chapter 22
1079
were temporarily banned in the EU in 2013, and a full ban may be 
foreseen for 2018 to 2020. A new insecticide flupyradifurone has 
been introduced in 2014 (Nauen et al., 2015). Though it is chemi-
cally a butenolide, its mechanism of action is the same as neonicoti-
noids, that is, activation of the nAChR (Table 22-15), and its toxicity 
to bees is lower than several but not all neonicotinoids (Table 22-16).
Other Old and New Insecticides
Rotenoids  The roots of the East Asian Derris plants, particularly 
D. elliptica, and those of Lonchocarpus utilis and L. urucu in South 
America contain at least six rotenoid esters, among which the most 
abundant is rotenone. Rotenone is used as an agricultural insecti-
cide/acaricide, and is one of the few pesticides allowed in organic 
farming (Isman, 2006). It is rather persistent in food crops after 
treatment, as indicated by half-life of 4 days in olives (Cabras et 
al., 2002). Rotenone is very toxic to fish, root extracts were used to 
paralyze fish for capture and consumption, and rotenone is still used 
in fishery management. Toxicity of rotenone in target and nontarget 
species is due to its ability to inhibit, at nanomolar concentrations, 
the mitochondrial respiratory chain, by blocking electron transport 
at NADH-ubiquinone reductase, the energy-conserving enzyme 
complex commonly known as complex I. Insect and fish mitochon-
dria are particularly sensitive to complex I inhibition (Degli Esposti, 
1998). Purified rotenone has a high acute toxicity in rodents and 
dogs, and is less toxic to rabbits and birds (Ujvary, 2010). Poisoning 
symptoms include initial increased respiratory and cardiac rates, 
clonic and tonic spasms, and muscular depression, followed by 
respiratory depression. Acute intoxication in humans is rare; a case 
report describes a fatal case in a 3.5-year-old girl who ingested an 
estimated 40 mg/kg of rotenone. Of note is that the label on the 
insecticide, which was manufactured in France and recommended 
for external use on animals, had stated “Natural Product—Non 
Toxic” (De Wilde et al., 1986). An additional case report describes 
a fatal case in a middle-aged woman after deliberate ingestion of 
rotenone, at a dosage estimated at 25 mg/kg (Wood et al., 2005).
In recent years, rotenone has received much attention because 
of its potential role in the etiology of Parkinson disease. An earlier 
study by Heikkila et al. (1985) showed that stereotaxic adminis-
tration of rotenone to rats damaged the dopaminergic nigrostriatal 
pathway, similarly to that observed with MPP+ (1-methyl-4-phenyl 
pyridinium, the active metabolite of 1-methyl-4-phenyl- 1,2,3,6- 
­tetrahydropyridine, MPTP), a known parkinsonism-causing 
chemical, which is also a complex I inhibitor (Degli Esposti, 1998). 
More recent studies have shown that administration of rotenone to 
rats (2 to 3 mg/kg/day for 1 to 5 weeks) caused selective nigrostriatal 
degeneration, though inhibition of complex I was observed uniformly 
in brain (Betarbet et al., 2000; Sherer et al., 2003). The finding that 
rotenone also produced protein inclusions, similar to Lewy bodies, 
that stained positively for ubiquitin and α-synuclein suggests that 
the rotenone model for Parkinson disease would be even better than 
the MPTP model (Betarbet et al., 2002). It has also been shown that 
an increase in α-synuclein significantly precipitates motor dysfunc-
tion and nigrostriatal neurodegeneration in rats exposed to rotenone 
(Naughton et al., 2017). However, because of the severe systemic 
toxicity of rotenone, the high variability across and within strains, 
and reports on nonspecific CNS effects (Lapointe et al., 2004), limi-
tations of the rotenone model have been pointed out (Lapointe et al., 
2004; Li et al., 2005). There is no evidence of Parkinson disease-like 
clinical signs or neurodegenerative pathology in chronic dietary stud-
ies (Hollingworth, 2001), and contrasting results have been reported 
in epidemiological studies of associations between use of rotenone 
and increased risk of Parkinson disease (Hollingworth, 2001; Li et al., 
2005; Tanner et al., 2011). Recently, rotenone has been found to 
decrease activity of aldehyde dehydrogenase, thus increasing levels 
of DOPAL (3,4-dihydroxy phenylacetaldehyde), a toxic metabolite 
of dopamine involved in Parkinson disease pathogenesis (Panneton 
et al., 2010; Goldstein et al., 2015), providing an alternative mecha-
nism for its potential contribution to this neurodegenerative disease.
Formamidines  Formamidines, such as chlordimeform ((N′-
(4-chloro-o-tolyl)-N,N-dimethylformamidine) 
or 
amitraz 
(N′- 
2,4-(dimethyl-phenyl)-N,N-((2,4-dimethylphenyl) imino) methyl-N- 
methanimidamide), were developed in the early 1960s for use in 
agriculture and in veterinary medicine as insecticides/acaricides 
(Hollingworth, 1976). The structures of the most widely used, 
chlordimeform and amitraz, are shown in Fig. 22-15, together 
Table 22-16 
Acute Toxicity of Neonicotinoids in Bees
COMPOUND
ORAL LD50 (μg/
BEE)
Imidacloprid
0.004–0.02
Clothianidin
0.004–0.03
Thiamethoxam
0.005–0.03
Dinotefuran
0.02–0.07
Nitenpyram
0.14
Flupyradifurone*
1.2
Acetamiprid
7.1
Thiacloprid
14.6
*Butenolide.
Source: Adapted from Iwasa et al. (2004) and Laurino et al. (2011).
Figure 22-15.   Structures of the formamidine insecticides/acaricides ami-
traz and chlordimeform. Structures of the mammalian neurotransmitter nor-
epinephrine and of the insect neurotransmitter octopamine are also shown.
Octopamine
HO
CH
OH
CH2
NH2
Norepinephrine
HO
HO
CH
OH
CH2
NH2
Chlordimeform
CI
N
CH
CH3
N
CH3
CH3
Amitraz
CH3
CH3
CH3
N
N
CH
CH
N
CH3
H3C

1080
TOXIC AGENTS
Unit v
with the closely related structure of the neurotransmitters norepi-
nephrine and octopamine (the latter is found in insects). In inver-
tebrates, these compounds exert their toxicity by activating an 
octopamine-dependent adenylate cyclase (Nathanson, 1985). In 
mammals, symptoms of formamidine poisoning are sympathomi-
metic in nature, and include hypotension, bradycardia, and sedation 
(Beeman and Matsumura, 1973; del Pino, et al., 2015). The similarity 
between insect octopamine receptors and mammalian α2-adrenergic 
receptors suggested the latter as a possible target for formamidines. 
In vivo and in vitro studies have indeed shown that formamidines 
act as rather selective agonists for α2-adrenergic receptors (Hsu and 
Kakuk, 1984; Hsu and Lu, 1984; Costa et al., 1988; Altobelli et al., 
2001). Chlordimeform’s metabolism plays a most relevant role in 
its toxicity. The N-demethylated metabolite (desmethylchlordime-
form) is more acutely toxic than chlordimeform, and displays a more 
than 400-fold higher potency toward α2-adrenoceptors (Ghali and 
Hollingworth, 1985; Costa and Murphy, 1987). In contrast, two other 
metabolites of chlordimeform, 4-chloro-toluidine and N-formyl-4-
chloro-o-toluidine, are thought to be responsible for the observed 
haemangioendotheliomas in mice observed in carcinogenicity stud-
ies (IPCS, 1998), which has led to the classification of chlordime-
form as a probable human carcinogen (Group 2A) by IARC in 1990. 
Given the increasing evidence of an association between exposure to 
chlordimeform and 4-chloro-o-toluidine and bladder cancer (Popp et 
al., 1992), chlordimeform was withdrawn from the market in 1992.
In contrast, amitraz is still widely used for the control of 
ectoparasites in farm animals and crops. Though its acute toxicity 
is moderate (oral LD50 = 100–1600 mg/kg, depending on the ani-
mal species), several cases of acute amitraz poisoning have been 
reported, particularly in Turkey, and most have involved children 
(Yaramis et al., 2000; Caksen et al., 2003; Proudfoot, 2003; Elinav 
et al., 2005). Signs and symptoms of poisoning with amitraz 
mimic those of α2-adrenergic receptor agonists such as clonidine, 
and include nausea, hypotension, hyperglycemia, bradycardia, 
and miosis. A series of acute amitraz poisonings was also reported 
in South Africa, with CNS depression as the most common clini-
cal sign (Veale et al., 2011). Though α2-adrenoceptor antagonists 
such as yohimbine have proved useful as antidotes in animals 
(Andrade and Sakate, 2003), their usefulness in managing ami-
traz poisoning in humans has not been evaluated. Amitraz is not 
genotoxic, but is classified as a possible human carcinogen by the 
EPA due to some evidence of carcinogenicity in mice (del Pino 
et al., 2015).
Avermectins  The avermectins are macrocyclic lactones, first 
isolated in 1975 from the fermentation broth of the actinomycete 
Streptomyces avermitilis, which originated from a Japanese soil 
sample (Campbell, 1989; Fisher and Mrozik, 1992). This fungus 
synthesizes eight individual avermectins, of which avermectin B1a 
displays the highest antiparasitic activity. Currently, abamectin (a 
mixture of 80% avermectin B1a and 20% avermectin B1b) is used 
as an insecticide, while the semisynthetic derivatives of avermec-
tin B1a, emamectin benzoate and ivermectin, are used as insecti-
cides and for parasite control in human and veterinary medicine, 
respectively (Stevens and Breckenridge, 2001b). Abamectin is used 
primarily to control mites, while emamectin benzoate is effective 
at controlling lepidopteran species in various crops. Ivermectin, 
obtained by a chemical modification of avermectin B1, is used as 
an antihelmintic and antiparasitic agent in veterinary medicine, and 
in humans it has proved to be a very effective treatment for infec-
tion of intestinal threadworms, onchocerciasis (river blindness), 
and lymphatic filariasis (Stevens and Breckenridge, 2001b). The 
discovery and development of avermectin and of ivermectin led to 
the 2015 Nobel Prize in Medicine to William Campbell and Satoshi 
Omura (Molyneux and Ward, 2015). In insects and nematodes, 
avermectins exert their toxic effects by binding to, and activating, 
invertebrate-specific glutamate-gated chloride channels at nano-
molar concentrations (Lynagh and Lynch, 2012). Acute toxicity of 
avermectins is high (e.g., oral LD50s in rats of 11 mg/kg [abamectin] 
or 80 mg/kg [emamectin]), and may be even higher in neonate ani-
mals (Stevens and Breckenridge, 2001b). Signs and symptoms of 
intoxication include hyperexcitability, tremors, and incoordination, 
followed by ataxia and coma-like sedation. These effects appear to 
be due to the ability of avermectins to act as allosteric modulators 
of GABAA receptor–gated chloride channels in the vertebrate CNS 
(Fisher and Mrozik, 1992; Casida and Durkin, 2015.).
Avermectins are known to interact with P-glycoprotein, a 
plasma membrane protein of the ATP binding cassette (ABC) trans-
porters superfamily, whose main function is the ATPase-dependent 
transport of foreign substances from the cell (Didier and Loor, 
1996). The P-glycoprotein-mediated efflux plays an important role 
in attenuating the neurotoxicity and developmental neurotoxicity 
of avermectins (Stevens et al., 2010), while P-glycoprotein poly-
morphisms which may affect its function may increase avermectin 
neurotoxicity in humans (MacDonald and Gledhill, 2007). Despite 
the wide use of avermectins, and particularly of ivermectin in Africa 
and in Central America, there is little evidence of adverse health 
effects in humans. The major effect following administration of 
active doses of ivermectin (0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg) is a severe inflam-
matory response (the Mazzotti reaction), characterized by pruritis, 
erythema, vesicle, and papulae formation, and attributable to the 
killing of microfilariae which dislodge from their site of infestation 
and are transported in the blood and body fluids (Ito, 2013).
Phenylpyrazoles  A relatively recent class of insecticides is that 
of phenylpyrazole derivatives, of which fipronil, commercialized 
in the mid-1990s, was the first one brought to market. Fipronil is 
a broad-spectrum insecticide with moderate mammalian toxic-
ity (LD50 in rat: oral, 97 mg/kg; dermal, more than 2000 mg/kg), 
and a high selectivity for target species. Once absorbed, fipronil is 
extensively metabolized, particularly by CYPs (Wang et al., 2016). 
Fipronil acts as a blocker of the GABAA-gated chloride channel, 
but binds to a site different from the picrotoxin binding site used 
by organochlorine insecticides (Casida and Durkin, 2017). It also 
has a much higher specificity for insect receptors over mamma-
lian receptors (Hainzl et al., 1998; Narahashi et al., 2007; Wang 
et al., 2016). Furthermore, in insects fipronil also potently blocks 
glutamate-activated chloride channels that are not present in mam-
mals (Narahashi et al., 2007). There is no evidence that fipronil is 
an eye or skin irritant, or has any mutagenic, carcinogenic, or tera-
togenic effects. A number of human poisonings with fipronil have 
been reported that resulted from accidental or intentional ingestion. 
Less than 20% of the patients developed seizures, and all recovered 
(Mohamed et al., 2004; Lee et al., 2010; Bharathrai et al., 2015).
Diamides  These compounds represent a recent class of insec-
ticides with a novel mechanism of action, that is, activation of 
the ryanodine receptors. Flubendiamide, a phthalic diamide, and 
chlorantraniliprole, an anthranilic diamide, were introduced in 
2008 (Casida, 2015). Ryanodine receptors are a family of calcium 
channels. Under normal conditions, input from the nervous system 
activates voltage-gated calcium channels, leading to an increase in 
intracellular calcium; in turn, this triggers activation of ryanodine 
receptors located in the muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum, result-
ing in the release of stored pools of calcium and initiating muscle 
contraction. Ryanodine, a natural alkaloid present in the shrub 
Ryania speciosa, binds to and blocks these calcium channels, thus

Toxic Effects of Pesticides
Chapter 22
1081
inhibiting muscle contraction. Ryanodine itself had been utilized as 
an insecticide, but its mammalian toxicity precluded its further use 
(Satelle et al., 2008). In contrast, diamides bind to a site different 
from ryanodine, and cause receptor activation in insects by pro-
longing channel opening (Satelle et al., 2008; Bentley et al., 2010; 
Casida, 2015). Both flubendiamide and chlorantraniliprole have an 
extremely favorable toxicological profile (U.S. EPA, 2008), likely 
due to the difference between insect and mammalian ryanodine 
receptors, and to the ability of these compounds to selectively acti-
vate insect over mammalian ryanodine receptors. Acute toxicity is 
low (oral LD50 = 2000−5000 mg/kg), and there is no evidence of 
genotoxicity, carcinogenicity, neurotoxicity, and reproductive and 
developmental toxicity. Resistance to diamides’ insecticidal activ-
ity has started to emerge, possibly due to mutations in the ryano-
dine receptor (Troczka et al., 2015).
Bacillus thuringiensis  The past decade has seen increasing 
research and development in the area of biopesticides, that is, pes-
ticides derived from natural materials such as plants, bacteria, and 
fungi. There are increasing numbers of biopesticides being regis-
tered around the world, primarily for use as bioinsecticides, but also 
as biofungicides or bioherbicides (Glare et al., 2016). Biopesticides 
are increasingly used as they are effective, can be used in integrated 
pest management programs and often also in organic productions, 
and generally have a favorable environmental and toxicological pro-
file (Glare et al., 2016). Biopesticides fall into three major classes: 
(1) Microbial pesticides, which consist of a microorganism (e.g., 
a bacterium, fungus or protozoan) as the active ingredient. The 
most widely used microbial pesticides are subspecies and strains of 
Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) which act as insecticides. Other micro-
bial pesticides can control different kinds of pests; for example, 
there are fungi that can control certain weeds and others that can 
kill specific insects. (2) Plant-incorporated-protectants, which are 
pesticidal substances that plants produce from genetic material that 
has been added to the plant. For example, a plant can be genetically 
manipulated to produce the Bt pesticidal protein. (3) Biochemical 
pesticides that are naturally occurring substances that control pests 
by nontoxic mechanisms. Examples are sex pheromones that inter-
fere with mating of insects, or various scented plant extracts that 
attract insect pests to traps (Sudakin, 2003). Biopesticides have a 
global market of more than U.S.$2.5 billion, and Bt products com-
prise 50% of all biopesticides sold. Bt is a soil microorganism, 
closely related to Bacillus cereus, which produces δ-endotoxins, 
that is, proteins that are selectively toxic to certain insects. Its name 
comes from the German region of Thuringia, where this strain 
was found in 1915. Bt-based microbial insecticides were com-
mercialized in France in 1938 and in the United States in 1961. 
During the stationary phase of its growth cycle, Bt forms spores 
that contain crystals predominantly comprising one or more Cry 
and/or Cyt proteins; several hundreds of such proteins have been 
identified in Bt (Schnepf et al., 1998; van Frankenhuyzen, 2009; 
Sanahuja et al., 2011; Berry and Crickmore, 2017). After inges-
tion of Bt by an insect, the crystal proteins are solubilized, and 
proteolytically processed to active toxins in the insect’s midgut. 
Here they bind to specific receptors in the epithelial cells and insert 
into the cellular membrane. Next, aggregation of inserted crystal 
protein occurs, resulting in the formation of pores, which lead to 
changes in K+ fluxes across the epithelial cells, and to changes in 
pH. Ultimately, cells of the midgut epithelium are destroyed by the 
high pH and by osmotic lysis. Insects eventually die as a result of 
gut paralysis and feeding inhibition, and subsequent starvation and 
septicemia (Gringorten, 2001; Bravo et al., 2007). Bt targets pri-
marily leaf-feeding lepidoptera, breaks down rapidly in UV light, 
and exhibits low mammalian toxicity. The basis for the selective 
toxicity of Bt is attributed to the fact that crystalline Bt endotoxins 
require activation by alkalis and/or digestion, conditions absent in 
the mammalian stomach (Ujvary, 2010). Bt toxins have generally 
an unremarkable toxicological profile in mammals (McClintock 
et al., 1995). However, adverse health effects in humans, particu-
larly allergic reactions and infections, have been reported (Ujvary, 
2010; Rubio-Infante and Moreno-Fierros, 2016). Bt genes have 
been expressed in a variety of crop plants, most notably cotton and 
corn (Sanahuja et al., 2011). Thus, the plant, instead of the Bt bac-
terium, produces one or more crystal toxins that affect the insect 
upon feeding. Though concerns about such genetically modified 
crops remain (Rubio-Infante and Moreno-Fierros, 2016), Bt crops 
are generally considered to pose no significant risk to the environ-
ment and to human health (Mendelsohn et al., 2003). Resistance 
can develop to Bt toxins that involves alterations in the processing 
of Cry toxin in the insect’s gut, most commonly mutations, down-
regulation, or deletion of receptors on the surface of the insect’s 
midgut (Pardo-Lopez et al., 2013).
INSECT REPELLENTS
Insect-transmitted diseases remain a major source of illness and 
death worldwide, as mosquitoes alone transmit disease to more 
than 700 million persons annually (Fradin and Day, 2002). Though 
insect-borne diseases represent a greater health problem in tropical 
and subtropical climates, no part of the world is immune to their 
risks. For example, in 1999, the West Nile virus, transmitted by 
mosquitoes, was detected for the first time in the western hemi-
sphere. In the New York City area, 62 persons infected with the 
West Nile virus were hospitalized and 7 died (Nash et al., 2001). 
Other arthropod-borne viral diseases (e.g., equine encephalitis) and 
tick-borne diseases (e.g., Lyme disease) are also of concern; addi-
tionally, other insect bites can be associated with variable adverse 
health effects, from mild irritation and discomfort to possible aller-
gic reactions. More recently, in the Americas the Zika virus spread 
by the bite of an infected Aedes mosquito (e.g., A. aegypti) has been 
shown to be passed from a pregnant woman to the fetus, causing 
severe microcephaly and other neurological abnormalities (Hajra et 
al., 2017). Insect repellents are thus widely used to provide protec-
tion toward insect bites (Katz et al., 2008). The best known and 
most widely used insect repellent is DEET, and a newer compound 
picaridin is encountering increasing success. Botanical insect 
repellents based on citronella or oil of eucalyptus, and a biopesti-
cide structurally similar to the amino acid alanine are also commer-
cialized in Europe and the United States (Fradin and Day, 2002).
DEET
DEET (N,N-diethyl-m-toluamide or N,N-diethyl-3-methylbenzamide) 
was first developed by the USDA in 1946 for use in the military, and 
was registered as an insect repellent for the general public in 1957. 
The EPA estimates that 30% of the U.S. population uses DEET every 
year. More than 200 formulations exist with varying concentrations of 
DEET (commonly 4.75% to 40%), which are applied directly to the 
skin or on clothing. DEET is very effective at repelling insects, flies, 
fleas, and ticks, and protection time increases with increasing con-
centrations (Fradin and Day, 2002). The exact repellent mechanism 
of DEET is still unknown, but it may be related to disturbances of 
the mosquito antennae that allow the insect to locate humans (Koren 
et al., 2003). Percutaneous absorption of DEET varies from 7.9% to 
59%, depending on the species tested and the conditions of the study 
(Osimitz and Murphy, 1997). DEET undergoes oxidative biotransfor-
mation catalyzed by various CYPs, and is excreted mostly in the urine

1082
TOXIC AGENTS
Unit v
(Sudakin and Trevathan, 2003). DEET has low acute toxicity (LD50 
in rat = 1892 mg/kg (oral) and more than 5000 mg/kg (dermal)) 
(Schoenig and Osimitz, 2001), and does not appear to pose a signifi-
cant health concern to humans when used as directed. From 1961 to 
2002, eight deaths were reported related to DEET: three resulted from 
deliberate ingestion, while two were reported following dermal expo-
sure (Tenenbein, 1987; Bell et al., 2002). The remaining three cases 
were children, age 17 months to 6 years (Zadikoff, 1979). Subchronic 
toxicity studies in various species did not reveal major toxic effects, 
with the exception of renal lesions in male rats; these were consid-
ered to be reflective of α2u-globulin induced nephropathy, a condi-
tion unique to male rats and not occurring in humans (Schoenig and 
Osimitz, 2001) (see Chap. 14, “Toxic Responses of the Kidney”). No 
significant effects of DEET were seen in mutagenicity, reproductive 
toxicity, and carcinogenicity studies. Given the recent Zika virus epi-
demic, particular attention has been devoted to the use of DEET dur-
ing pregnancy, and the Center for Disease Control and Prevention has 
strongly recommended its use given its overall lack of developmental 
toxicity (Wylie et al., 2016). Acute and chronic neurotoxicity stud-
ies also provided negative results (Schoenig et al., 1993; Sudakin and 
Osimitz, 2010). However, a number of case reports over the past 50 
years have indicated possible neurological effects of DEET after high 
exposures, and most of these were in children (Gryboski et al., 1961; 
CDC, 1989; Osimitz and Murphy, 1997; Petrucci and Sardini, 2000; 
Briassulis et al., 2001; Sudakin and Trevathan, 2003). The most com-
mon symptoms reported were seizures and encephalopathy. Given 
that seizure disorders occur in 3% to 5% of children, and almost 30% 
of children in the United States are utilizing DEET, an association 
just by chance is certainly possible. Possible mechanism(s) respon-
sible for neurotoxic effects of DEET are unknown, though it has been 
suggested that DEET’s structure is similar to that of nikethamide, a 
convulsant (Briassulis et al., 2001). It has also been suggested that 
DEET may disrupt the permeability of the blood–brain barrier, but 
results are inconclusive (Abdel-Rahman et al., 2002). Overall, given 
its long-standing and widespread use, DEET appears to be relatively 
safe when used as recommended (Osimitz and Murphy, 1997; Koren 
et al., 2003; Wylie et al., 2016). A risk assessment by the Canadian 
Pest Management Regulatory agency has recommended that toddlers 
and children, up to 12 years old, should only be exposed to products 
with up to 10% DEET (Sudakin and Trevathan, 2003), while in all 
other individuals products with up to 30% DEET can be safely used 
(Fradin and Day, 2002; Antwi et al., 2008).
Picaridin
Picaridin (1-piperidine carboxylic acid, 2-(hydroxyl-ethyl), 
1-methyl propylester) was developed as an alternative to DEET 
(Patel et al., 2016). Insect repellent formulations (cream, aerosol, 
wipe) containing 5% to 20% picaridin are highly effective against 
a variety of arthropod pests, especially mosquitoes, ticks, and 
flies (Sangha, 2010). Its action in insects is believed to be due to 
the interaction with specific olfactory receptors of the arthropod 
(Boeckh et al., 1996). In humans it is absorbed through the skin 
to a limited degree (90% less than in the rat), and is metabo-
lized via hydroxylation and glucuronidation, before excretion in 
the urine. The toxicological profile of picaridin is unremarkable. 
Acute dermal toxicity is low (about 5 g/kg), and NOEL values 
are about 200 mg/kg/day in dermal subchronic and chronic toxic-
ity studies. There is no evidence of genotoxicity, carcinogenicity, 
teratogenicity, reproductive toxicity, or neurotoxicity (Sangha, 
2010). When used as directed, picaridin-containing formulations 
are deemed to be safe and effective (Antwi et al., 2008; Charlton 
et al., 2016).
Table 22-17 
Some Mechanisms of Action of Herbicides
MECHANISM
CHEMICAL CLASSES 
(EXAMPLE)
Inhibition of photosynthesis
Triazines (atrazine),  
substituted ureas (diuron), 
uracils (bromacil)
Inhibition of respiration
Dinitrophenols
Auxin growth regulators
Phenoxy acids (2,4-D),  
benzoic acids (dicamba), 
pyridine acids (picloram)
Inhibition of cell division
Chloroacetanilides  
(alachlor)
Inhibition of protein synthesis
Dinitroanilines
Inhibition of lipid synthesis
Aryloxyphenoxypropionates 
(diclofop)
Inhibition of specific enzymes
 • Glutamine synthetase
Glufosinate
 • Enolpyruvylshikimate 
-3-phosphate synthetase
Glyphosate
 • Acetylase synthase
Sulfonylureas
Cell membrane disruptors
Bipyridyl derivatives  
(paraquat)
HERBICIDES
Herbicides are chemicals capable of killing or severely injuring 
plants. They represent a very broad array of chemical classes and 
act at a large number of sites of metabolic functions and energy 
transfer in plant cells (Duke, 1990; Casida, 2009). A classification 
of herbicides based on the mechanisms by which they exert their 
biological effects is shown in Table 22-17. Another method of clas-
sification pertains to when herbicides are applied: preplanting her-
bicides are applied to the soil before a crop is seeded; preemergent 
herbicides are applied to the soil before the time of appearance of 
unwanted vegetation; and postemergent herbicides are applied to 
the soil or foliage after the germination of the crop and/or weeds 
(Ecobichon, 2001a). Herbicides are also divided according to how 
they are applied to plants: contact herbicides are those that affect 
the plant that was treated, while translocated herbicides are applied 
to the soil or to above-ground parts of the plant, and are absorbed 
and circulated to distant tissues. Nonselective herbicides will kill 
all vegetation, while selective compounds are those used to kill 
weeds without harming the crops. In the past couple of decades, the 
development of herbicide-resistant crops through transgenic tech-
nology has allowed the use of nonselective compounds as selec-
tive herbicides (Duke, 2005). A final classification, of relevance 
to adverse health effects in nontarget species, relies on chemical 
structures, and this is used in the following sections.
For the past several decades, herbicides have represented the 
most rapidly growing sector of the agrochemical market, and these 
compounds now represent almost half of the pesticides used in the 
United States, and more than one-third of those utilized world-
wide (Table 22-3). This can be ascribed in part to movement to 
monocultural practices, where the risk of weed infestation has 
increased, and to mechanization of agricultural practices because 
of increased labor costs. It has been estimated that in the United

Toxic Effects of Pesticides
Chapter 22
1083
States 70 million workers would be required for weeding to prevent 
crop yield losses without herbicides (Gianessi and Reigner, 2007). 
In China, about 1 billion person-days of labor would be required 
to adequately hand-weed the rice fields (Gianessi, 2013). Indeed, 
controlling weeds without herbicides represents one of the great-
est obstacles to organic crop production, and one of the highest 
costs. In addition to agriculture, herbicides are also widely utilized 
in home and garden, in forestry management to facilitate growing 
of new trees, and to clear roadsides, utilities’ rights of way, and 
industrial areas.
In terms of general toxicity, herbicides, as a class, display 
relatively low acute toxicity, compared for example to most insecti-
cides. However, there are exceptions, such as paraquat. A number of 
herbicides can cause dermal irritation and contact dermatitis, partic-
ularly in individuals prone to allergic reactions. Other compounds 
have generated much debate for their suspected carcinogenicity or 
neurotoxicity. The principal classes of herbicides associated with 
reported adverse health effects in humans are discussed below.
Chlorophenoxy Compounds
Chlorophenoxy herbicides are characterized by an aliphatic car-
boxylic acid moiety attached to a chlorine- or methyl-substituted 
aromatic ring. The most commonly used compound of this class is 
2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D), while others are 2,4,5-tri-
chlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4,5-T; no longer used) and 4-chloro-
2-methylphenoxyacetic acid (MCPA) (Fig. 22-16). Chlorophenoxy 
herbicides are chemical analogs of auxin, a plant growth hormone, 
and produce uncontrolled and lethal growth in target plants (Casida, 
2009). Because the auxin hormone is critical to the growth of many 
broad leaf plants, but is not used by grasses, chlorophenoxy com-
pounds can suppress the growth of weeds (e.g., dandelions) with-
out affecting the grass. Once absorbed, they selectively eliminate 
broadleaf plants, due to their larger leaf area and greater absorption. 
2,4-D is still one of the most widely used herbicides throughout 
the world, and is primarily used in agriculture to control weeds in 
corn and grain, in forestry, and in lawn care practices, with over 
120 commercialized formulations (Kennepohl et al., 2010). 2,4,5-T 
has been withdrawn from use because of concerns that arose from 
contamination of some formulations with 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorod-
ibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), which can derive from the reaction of 
two molecules of 2,4,5-trichlorophenol (Fig. 22-17). From 1962 to 
1971, a 50:50 mixture of the n-butyl esters of 2,4,-D and of 2,3,5-
T, known as Agent Orange (from the color of identification bands 
painted on the storage drums), was extensively used as a defoliant 
during the Vietnam War, and was found to be contaminated with 
TCDD to a maximum of 47 µg/g. Exposure of military personnel 
and of Vietnamese population to Agent Orange has raised concerns 
on possible long-term health effects, particularly carcinogenicity, 
endocrine-disrupting effects, and reproductive toxicity that are 
ascribed to the presence of TCDD (IOM, 2016). Formulations of 
2,4-D contain extremely low levels of polychlorinated dibenzo-
p-dioxins (PCDDs), usually below the limit of detection of 10 ppb 
(Kennepohl et al., 2010).
2,4-D is a compound of low to moderate acute toxicity, with 
oral LD50s in rodents of 300 to 2000 mg/kg. The dog is more sensi-
tive, possibly because of its lower ability to eliminate organic acids 
via the kidney. Upon oral exposure, 2,4-D is rapidly absorbed, 
and its salts and esters rapidly dissociate or hydrolyze in vivo, so 
that toxicity depends primarily on the acid form. It binds exten-
sively to serum albumin, but does not accumulate in tissues, and is 
excreted almost exclusively through the urine. Ingestion of 2,4-D 
has caused several cases of acute poisoning in humans, usually at 
doses above 300 mg/kg, though lower doses have been reported to 
elicit symptoms. Vomiting, burning of the mouth, abdominal pain, 
hypotension, myotonia, and CNS involvement including coma are 
among the clinical signs observed (Bradberry et al., 2000, 2004a). 
Management of 2,4-D poisoning appears to be aided by urine 
alkalinization through intravenous administration of bicarbonate 
(Bradberry et al., 2004a; Proudfoot et al., 2004). The rationale is 
that ionization of an acid, such as 2,4-D, is increased in an alkaline 
environment; though, at pH 5.0, practically all 2,4-D would already 
be ionized, further alkalinization of urine, to pH 7.5 or above, 
would reduce the nonionized fraction from approximately 0.53% 
to 0.0017%. As a result, the fraction prone to reabsorption would be 
more than 300 times lower (Bradberry et al., 2004a), thus diminish-
ing reabsorption and increasing 2,4-D elimination. Nevertheless, 
it has been recommended that additional studies be conducted to 
fully validate this approach in case of 2,4-D poisoning (Roberts 
and Buckley, 2007). Table 22-18 shows an example of the effect of 
urine alkalinization on 2,4-D renal clearance and plasma half-life.
Dermal exposure is by far the major route of unintentional 
exposure to 2,4-D in humans. Dermal absorption studies in rats, 
Figure 22-16.   Structures of three chlorophenoxy acid herbicides.
MCPA [(4-cloro-a-tolyl)oxy]acetic acid
2,4,5-T (2,4,5-trichlorophenoxy)acetic acid
2,4-D (2,4-dichlorophenoxy)acetic acid
CI
CI
O
OCH2COH
CI
CI
CI
O
OCH2COH
CH3
O
CH2
COH
O
CI
Figure 22-17.   Formation of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzodioxin (TCDD) dur-
ing the synthesis of 2,4,5-T because of reaction between two molecules of 
2,4,5-trichlorophenol.
+
2,4,5-trichlorophenol
2,4,5-trichlorophenol
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD)
CI
CI
OH
CI
CI
OH
CI
CI
CI
CI
O
O
CI
CI

1084
TOXIC AGENTS
Unit v
mice, and rabbit indicate an absorption of 12% to 36%; the absorp-
tion in humans, however, is lower (2% to 10%), and is usually less 
than 6% (Ross et al., 2005). Acute poisoning by 2,4-D via the der-
mal route is thus uncommon; no reports of systemic toxicity follow-
ing dermal exposure have been reported for over 20 years, and no 
fatalities have ever occurred (Bradberry et al., 2004a).
The precise mechanisms of toxicity of chlorophenoxy herbi-
cides have not been completely elucidated, but experimental studies 
indicate the possible involvement of three actions: (1) cell mem-
brane damage; (2) interference with metabolic pathways involving 
acetyl-coenzyme A; (3) uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation 
(Bradberry et al., 2000). The toxicity of chlorophenoxy herbicides 
has been summarized in several reviews (Sterling and Arundel, 
1986; Munro et al., 1992; Garabrant and Philbert, 2002; Kennepohl 
et al., 2010). 2,4-D and its salts and esters are not teratogenic in 
mice, rats, or rabbits, unless the ability of the dam to excrete the 
chemical is exceeded. There is also no convincing evidence that 
2,4-D is associated with human reproductive toxicity (Garabrant 
and Philbert, 2002). Subchronic and chronic toxicity studies have 
not provided evidence of immunotoxicity, and there is very lim-
ited evidence that 2,4-D may affect the nervous system (Mattsson 
et al., 1997). There are, however, several case reports suggesting 
an association between exposure to 2,4-D and neurologic effects 
ranging from peripheral neuropathy, demyelination and ganglion 
degeneration in the CNS, reduced nerve conduction velocity, myo-
tonia, and behavioral alterations (Garabrant and Philbert, 2002). 
2,4-D-induced hypomyelination upon developmental exposure has 
also been described (Konjuh et al., 2008)
Numerous in vitro and in vivo studies with 2,4-D indicate 
that it has very little genotoxic potential (Munro et al., 1992; von 
Stackelberg, 2013). Long-term bioassays in rats, mice, and dogs 
provided no evidence to suggest that 2,4-D is a carcinogen in any 
of these species. While an earlier study in rat reported an increase 
in the incidence of brain astrocytomas in male animals, only at the 
highest dose tested (45 mg/kg/day; Serota et al., 1986), it was later 
argued that the observed tumors were not treatment-related (Munro 
et al., 1992); furthermore, more recent studies did not replicate 
this finding (Charles et al., 1996). The chlorophenoxy herbicides 
have also been extensively studied for possible associations with 
non-Hodgkin lymphoma or soft-tissue sarcoma, found in a small 
number of epidemiological studies (Hoar et al., 1986; Munro et al., 
1992; Hardell et al., 1994; U.S. EPA, 1994). Garabrant and Philbert 
(2002) evaluated all cohort and case–control studies available at that 
time, and concluded that there was no adequate evidence from epi-
demiological studies to conclude that exposure to 2,4-D is associ-
ated with soft-tissue sarcoma, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, or Hodgkin 
disease. 2,4-D is classified as a Group D agent (not classifiable 
as to human carcinogenicity) (U.S. EPA, 1997). However, 2,4-D 
has been recently classified by IARC as possibly carcinogenic to 
humans (Group 2B) based primarily on limited evidence provided 
by animal findings (Loomis et al., 2015). It should also be noted that 
biomonitoring data in the United States and Canada indicate that 
exposure to 2,4-D in both the general and agricultural populations 
is well below the noncancer reference dose (Aylward et al., 2010; 
von Stackelberg, 2013).
Bipyridyl Compounds
This class of herbicides comprises paraquat and diquat (Fig. 22-18), 
of which paraquat (1,1′-dimethyl-4,4′-bipyridinium dichloride) is 
of most toxicological concern, and will be discussed in more detail. 
Paraquat was first synthesized in the 1800s, but its herbicidal prop-
erties were described in 1958, and it was first commercialized in 
the United Kingdom in 1962 (Lock and Wilks, 2010). Paraquat is 
a very effective, fast-acting, nonselective contact herbicide used 
to control broad-leaved weeds and grasses in plantations and fruit 
orchards, and for general weed control in hundreds of crops (Watts, 
2011). Its mode of action as a herbicide is believed to be due to its 
redox potential, which leads to inhibition of photosynthesis (Dinis-
Oliveira et al., 2008). The redox properties of paraquat are also 
responsible for its mammalian toxicity.
The herbicide that has one of the highest acute toxicity is para-
quat; its oral LD50 in rat is approximately 100 mg/kg, while guinea 
pigs, rabbits, and monkeys are more sensitive. Paraquat is more 
toxic when given by the i.p. route (LD50 in rats = 10–20 mg/kg), 
suggesting that it is not efficiently absorbed from the gastrointesti-
nal tract. Absorption through intact skin is minimal, and inhalation 
exposure does not occur, as paraquat has no appreciable vapor pres-
sure. Irrespective of the route of exposure, the lung and the kidneys 
are the organs showing the highest concentrations of paraquat. Only 
a small fraction of paraquat is metabolized, and the greater part is 
excreted unchanged in the urine. Thus, the major toxicological con-
cerns for acute paraquat exposure are related to its systemic effects, 
particularly in the lung, and secondarily, the kidney. Rose et al. 
(1974) first described an energy-dependent accumulation of para-
quat in lung tissue, particularly, but not exclusively, in type II alveo-
lar epithelial cells. The loss of paraquat from lung tissue following 
in vivo administration is slow. Thus, the basis for the selective tox-
icity of paraquat to the lung resides in its ability to concentrate in 
alveolar type II and I cells and Clara cells. Pulmonary concentra-
tions of paraquat can be 6- to 10-fold higher than in plasma (Dinis-
Oliveira et al., 2008).
Table 22-18 
Effect of Urine Alkalinization on Renal Clearance and 
Plasma Half-life of 2,4-D
URINE pH
RENAL CLEARANCE  
(ML/MIN)
HALF-LIFE 
(HOURS)
5.10–6.5
0.28
219
6.55–7.5
1.14
42
7.55–8.8
9.60
4.7
Source: Adapted from Park et al. (1977).
Figure 22-18.   Structures of the bipyridyl herbicides paraquat and diquat, 
marketed as the dichloride and dibromide salts, respectively.
Paraquat
1,1′-dimethyl-4,4′-bipyridylium ion
(dichloride)
Diquat
6,7-diydrodipyridol (1,2-α:2′,1′α)
pyrazidinium (dibromide)
CH3N+
2CI–
2+
N+CH3
2Br–
2+
N+
N+

Toxic Effects of Pesticides
Chapter 22
1085
The mechanism(s) by which paraquat is toxic to cells have 
been extensively investigated (Autor, 1974; Bus and Gibson, 1984; 
Smith, 1987). Paraquat can be reduced to form a free radical, which 
in the presence of oxygen rapidly reoxidizes to the cation, with 
a concomitant production of superoxide anion (O2
• ) (Fig. 22-19). 
Thus, once paraquat enters a cell, it undergoes alternate reduc-
tion followed by reoxidation, a process known as redox cycling 
(Adam et al., 1990). Superoxide dismutases (SOD) are a family of 
metalloenzymes that can dismutate superoxide anions to hydrogen 
peroxide and oxygen. The finding that transgenic mice lacking cop-
per/zinc SOD show marked increased sensitivity to paraquat (Ho 
et al., 1998) supports a role for superoxide anions in paraquat’s 
cellular toxicity. Nevertheless, superoxide anion itself is unlikely 
to be the ultimate toxic species. Three hypotheses, which are not 
mutually exclusive, have been proposed to account for the ensu-
ing cytotoxicity (Lock and Wilks, 2010). The generation of super-
oxide anion and subsequently of hydroxy radicals would initiate 
lipid peroxidation, ultimately leading to cell death (Bus and Gibson, 
1984). Intracellular redox cycling of paraquat would also result in 
the oxidation of NADPH, leading to its cellular depletion, which is 
augmented by the detoxification of hydrogen peroxide formed in 
the glutathione peroxidase/reductase enzyme system to regenerate 
GSH (Fig. 22-19). A third hypothesis is that paraquat toxicity is 
due to mitochondrial damage; however, paraquat does not affect 
complex I in isolated brain mitochondria (Richardson et al., 2005).
Upon acute exposure to lethal doses of paraquat, mortality 
may occur 2 to 5 days after dosing, though death can also occur 
after longer periods (Clark et al., 1966). Damage to alveolar epithe-
lial cells is seen within 24 hours after exposure. Damage progresses 
in the following 2 to 4 days with large areas of the alveolar epithe-
lium completely lost. This is followed by alveolar edema, exten-
sive infiltration of inflammatory cells into the alveolar interstitium, 
and finally death due to severe anoxia (Smith and Heath, 1976). 
Survivors of this first phase, called the destructive phase, show 
extensive proliferation of fibroblasts in the lung. The second phase, 
called the proliferative phase, is characterized by attempts by the 
alveolar epithelium to regenerate and restore normal architecture, 
and presents itself as an intensive fibrosis (Smith and Heath, 1976). 
Some individuals who survive the first phase may still die from 
the progressive loss of lung function several weeks after exposure.
Attempts to develop treatments for paraquat poisoning have 
focused on prevention of absorption from the gastrointestinal tract, 
removal from the bloodstream, prevention of its accumulation in the 
lung, use of free radical scavengers, and prevention of lung fibrosis 
(Dinis-Oliveira et al., 2008; Lock and Wilks, 2010). Though some 
approaches have shown promises in vitro or in isolated lung tissue 
preparations, only the first one, removal of the ingested material by 
emesis or purgation of the gastrointestinal tract, has been shown to 
be effective in vivo in animals. Administration of dexamethasone, 
with induction of P-glycoprotein in several tissues including the 
lung, and of sodium salicylate, because of its anti-inflammatory 
properties, has also been shown, in animal studies, to be effective 
treatments for paraquat poisoning (Dinis-Oliveira et al., 2008).
Since its introduction as a herbicide, there have been thousands 
of episodes of acute poisoning with paraquat in humans, a large 
percentage of which were fatal (Casey and Vale, 1994; Wesseling 
et al., 2001; Lock and Wilks, 2010; U.S. EPA, 2016b). Most cases 
involved ingestion of a 20% paraquat concentrate solution for sui-
cidal purposes, or resulted from accidental poisoning due to decant-
ing in unlabeled drink bottles or containers. To avoid the latter, in 
the 1980s, the manufacturers added a blue pigment, a stenching 
compound, and an emetic substance to the formulation, to make 
severe unintentional poisoning due to oral intake virtually impos-
sible (Sabapathy, 1995). As said, absorption of paraquat across the 
human skin is very low (but is increased by damage to skin, and 
paraquat is a skin irritant), and few cases of paraquat poisoning have 
been reported following dermal exposure. Signs and symptoms of 
paraquat poisoning in humans reflect those previously described. A 
dose of 20 to 30 mg/kg can cause mild poisoning, while 30 to 50 
mg/kg can cause delayed development of pulmonary fibrosis, which 
can be lethal. Higher doses usually cause death within a few days 
due to pulmonary edema, and renal and hepatic failure (Smith and 
Heath, 1976). No single therapeutic intervention, among those out-
lined earlier, has proved efficacious in case of severe acute paraquat 
poisoning (Bismuth et al., 1982). In rare instances, heart/lung trans-
plant has been used to treat severely paraquat-poisoned patients. 
The high acute toxicity and the lack of reliable antidotes have led 
several countries to ban the use of paraquat (e.g., the EU) or to pose 
restrictions on its use (e.g., the United States) (Watts, 2011).
Paraquat has minimal to no genotoxic activity, is not carcino-
genic in rodents, has no effect on fertility, is not teratogenic, and 
only produces fetotoxicity at maternally toxic doses (Lock and 
Wilks, 2010). Chronic exposure of experimental animals to para-
quat affects the same target organs of acute toxicity, that is, the lung 
and the kidney, and no-effect levels have been established. Under 
normal use conditions, exposure to paraquat is very low and can be 
monitored by quantifying paraquat levels in urine, as the compound 
is mostly excreted unchanged (Lee et al., 2009b). In the late 1970s 
concern was raised about possible exposure of marijuana smokers 
to paraquat by inhalation. Paraquat was indeed used to destroy mar-
ijuana fields, and residues were then present in the final products 
(Landrigan et al., 1983). However, no clinical cases were identified.
Figure 22-19.   Mechanism of toxicity of paraquat. (1) Redox cycling of para-
quat utilizing NADPH; (2) formation of hydroxy radicals leading to lipid per-
oxidation (3); (4) detoxication of H2O2 via glutathione reductase/peroxidase 
couple, utilizing NADPH. (Modified from Smith [1987], with permission.)
NADP+
NADPH
GSH
GSSG
H2O
Cell death
Lipid peroxidation
(2)
(4)
(3)
PQ+•
O2•–
O2
PQ++
NADP+
NADPH
(1)
Fe2+
Fe3+
O2•–
O2
+
+
2H+
H2O2
O2•–
O2•–
+
H2O2
Fe2+
Fe3+
+
+
+
OH•
OH–

1086
TOXIC AGENTS
Unit v
Chronic paraquat exposure has been suggested as a possible 
etiological factor in the development of Parkinson’s disease. The first 
suggestion came from a study in the Canadian province of Quebec 
(Barbeau et al., 1986), and the hypothesis arose from the structural 
similarity of paraquat to MPP+ (1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium ion), 
the toxic metabolite of MPTP (1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,5-tetrahy-
dropyridine). MPP+ itself was initially developed as a possible her-
bicide, but was never commercialized. It was initially argued that 
paraquat, being positively charged, cannot easily pass the blood–
brain barrier. However, paraquat can be transported into the brain by 
a neutral amino acid transporter, such as the system L carrier (LAT-
1) (Shimizu et al., 2001). Indeed, animal studies have shown that 
paraquat can cause CNS effects, most notably a neurodegeneration 
of dopaminergic neurons (McCormack et al., 2002; Fahim et al., 
2013). The ability of paraquat to cause oxidative damage through a 
free radical mechanism may explain the selective vulnerability of 
dopaminergic neurons, which are per se more susceptible to oxi-
dative damage (McCormack et al., 2005). Paraquat neurotoxicity 
is also distinct from that of MPTP or rotenone (Richardson et al., 
2005). Evidence from human epidemiological studies also suggest 
an association between paraquat exposure and Parkinson disease 
with approximately an overall 2.2-fold increased risk (Miller, 2007; 
Tanner et al., 2011; Moretto and Colosio, 2013; Pezzoli and Cereda, 
2013). Nevertheless, animal and human findings have been chal-
lenged by some investigators (Li et al., 2005; Berry et al., 2010; 
Smeyne et al., 2016).
Despite the chemical similarity to paraquat (Fig. 22-18), the 
herbicide diquat presents a different toxicological profile. Acute 
toxicity is somewhat lower, with oral LD50 in rats of approximately 
200 mg/kg (Lock and Wilks, 2001). In contrast to paraquat, it does 
not accumulate in the lung, and no lung toxicity is seen upon acute 
or chronic exposure. Upon chronic exposure, target organs for tox-
icity are the gastrointestinal tract, the kidney, and particularly the 
eye. Diquat indeed causes a dose- and time-dependent appearance 
of cataracts in both rats and dogs (Lock and Wilks, 2001). Like 
paraquat, diquat can be reduced to form a free radical and then reox-
idized in the presence of oxygen, with the concomitant production 
of superoxide anion. This process of redox cycling occurs in the 
eye and is believed to be the likely mechanism of cataract forma-
tion (Lock and Wilks, 2001). A limited number of cases of human 
poisoning with diquat have occurred. Clinical symptoms include 
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, ulceration of mouth and esophagus, 
decline of renal functions, and neurologic effects, but no pulmo-
nary fibrosis. As for paraquat, therapy for intoxication is directed at 
preventing absorption and enhancing elimination (Vanholder et al., 
1981; Lock and Wilks, 2001). Diquat is not a skin sensitizer, has 
minimal or no genotoxic activity, is not carcinogenic in rodents, has 
no effect on fertility, and is not teratogenic.
Chloroacetanilides
Representative compounds of this class of herbicides are alachlor, 
acetochlor, and metolachlor (shown in Fig. 22-20), as well as buta-
chlor and propachlor, all registered in the United States between 
1967 and 1997. They are used to control herbal grasses and broad-
leaf weeds in a number of crops, primarily on corn. The herbicidal 
action of chloroacetanilides is not fully understood, though they 
have been shown to inhibit the synthesis of proteins and to impact 
cell division. Chloroacetanilides display moderate to low acute 
toxicity, with oral LD50 in rat ranging from about 600 mg/kg (pro-
pachlor) to 2800 mg/kg (metolachlor). Dermal LD50 values are usu-
ally much higher, indicating a poor absorption of these compounds 
across the skin (Heydens et al., 2010). Most are nonirritant, or only 
slightly irritant to the eye and skin, with the exception of propach-
lor, which causes severe irritation to the eye (Heydens et al., 2010). 
Subchronic and chronic toxicity studies, carried out in multiple spe-
cies (mice, rats, dogs, rabbits), have identified the liver and kidney 
as principal target organs, and NOAEL (no observed adverse effect 
level) values have been established (Heydens et al., 2010). Alachlor 
was found to produce an ocular lesion, termed “progressive uveal 
degeneration syndrome,” in Long–Evans rats (Heydens, 1998). 
This ocular lesion was not observed in mice, dogs, or other strains 
of rats. Furthermore, an investigation of similar eye abnormalities 
in alachlor production workers considered to have the highest ala-
chlor exposure, far exceeding that of farmers or herbicide applica-
tors, provided no evidence of ocular disease (Ireland et al., 1994). 
Most of the chloroacetanilides do not appear to be teratogenic or to 
cause reproductive or developmental toxicity; for propachlor, slight 
effects on the offspring were observed in some studies at the high-
est dose tested (Heydens et al., 2010).
Chloroacetanilides have been extensively tested for genotox-
icity in bacterial and mammalian systems in vitro and in animals 
in vivo, and these studies suggest that these compounds are not 
genotoxic (Ashby et al., 1996; Heydens et al., 1999, 2010; EFSA, 
2004). Yet, these compounds have shown to induce tumors at vari-
ous sites in rats. Tumors in female mice (lung adenomas), found 
with alachlor and acetochlor, were considered not to be treatment 
related (Ashby et al., 1996; Heydens et al., 1999, 2010). In rats, 
nasal epithelial (olfactory) tumors and thyroid follicular tumors 
were observed in carcinogenicity studies with alachlor, acetochlor, 
Figure 22-20.   Structures of some chloroacetanilide herbicides.
Alachlor
2-chloro-2′,6′-diethyl-N-
(methoxymethyl) acetanilide
O
CH2OCH3
C.CH2Cl
C2H5
C2H5
N
Metolachlor
2-chloro-N-(2-ethyl-6-methylpheynyl-N-
(2-methoxy-1-methylethyl)-acetamide
CH2Cl
CH2O
CH3
CH3
CH
O
C
CH3
C2H5
N
Acetochlor
2-chloro-N-(ethoxymethyl)-N-
2-ethyl-6-methylphenyl)-acetamide
CH2
Cl
O
CH2
CH2
O
C
CH3
N
CH3
CH2
CH3

Toxic Effects of Pesticides
Chapter 22
1087
and butachlor, while glandular stomach tumors were found with 
alachlor and butachlor. These findings led to the initial classifica-
tion of these compounds as probable human carcinogens (Group 
B2). The discovery of alachlor in well water led to cancellation 
of its registration in some countries (e.g., in the EU) and to its 
restriction in others. A series of mechanistic studies in the past two 
decades has provided evidence that tumors observed in rats may 
be species-specific, show a threshold, and are not due to genotoxic 
mechanisms, and hence may not be relevant to humans (Ashby 
et al., 1996; Heydens et al., 1999, 2010). 
Alachlor and other chloroacetanilides are extensively metabo-
lized in rat, and more than 30 metabolites have been identified in 
this species, with equal quantities appearing in urine and feces; 
in mice, alachlor’s metabolism is qualitatively similar, but signifi-
cant quantitative differences are observed between these two species. 
In contrast, in primates alachlor is metabolized to a limited number 
of glutathione and glucuronide conjugates, excreted primarily in 
the kidney, with more than 90% of the dose being excreted in the 
urine within 48 hours. Furthermore, in rats, alachlor metabolites of 
intermediate molecular weight undergo biliary excretion and entero-
hepatic recirculation, while this phenomenon is not observed in pri-
mates. Alachlor and other chloroacetanilides undergo demethylation 
with the release of formaldehyde (Jacobsen et al., 1991), and this 
compound, known to produce rat nasal tumors upon inhalation expo-
sure, was initially thought to be involved in the nasal carcinogenicity 
of these herbicides. However, the different nature and distribution of 
tumors, and additional metabolic considerations, argue against such 
a hypothesis (Heydens et al., 2010). In rats, alachlor and butachlor 
are initially metabolized in the liver via the CYP pathway and by 
glutathione conjugation, and the metabolites undergo enterohepatic 
circulation and further metabolism in liver and nasal tissue to form 
the putative carcinogenic metabolite diethyl quinoneimine (DEIQ) 
(Feng et al., 1990). In the case of acetochlor, the carcinogenic metab-
olite is EMIQ, an acetochlor quinone imine compound analogous 
to DEIQ. Quinone imines are electrophilic, deplete glutathione, 
and exert cellular toxicity by binding to cellular proteins, which is 
followed by regenerative cell proliferation. Whole-body autoradi-
ography studies have shown that alachlor-derived protein adducts 
specifically localize in the nasal mucosa of rats, but not in nasal tis-
sue from mice or monkeys. Furthermore, the ability of rat nasal tis-
sue to form DEIQ is much higher (751-fold) than human nasal tissue 
(Wilson et al., 1995). With regard to rat stomach and thyroid tumors, 
it is suggested that these result from tissue-specific toxicity leading 
to compensatory cell proliferation in the fundic mucosa, and to alter-
ations of thyroid stimulating hormone homeostasis, respectively. 
Both are believed to be threshold-sensitive phenomena, not expected 
to be relevant to humans (Heydens et al., 2010). Epidemiological 
investigations in workers involved in the manufacturing of alachlor 
have not demonstrated any evidence of increased mortality or cancer 
incidence (Leet et al., 1996). As a result of these studies, alachlor has 
been reclassified as “likely” at high doses, but “not likely” at low 
doses, to be a human carcinogen, and a downgrading for acetochlor 
has also been suggested (Heydens et al., 2010).
Triazines
The family of triazine herbicides comprises several compounds 
(e.g., atrazine, simazine, and propazine; Fig. 22-21) that have 
been extensively used for the preemergent and postemergent con-
trol of broad-leaf weeds and certain grasses for several decades 
(Breckenridge et al., 2010). Their herbicidal action is due to inhi-
bition of photosynthesis (Casida, 2009). Triazines have low acute 
oral and dermal toxicity (LD50s = 1–2 g/kg), while chronic toxicity 
studies indicate primarily a decreased body weight gain as the 
basis for setting NOAEL values; however, in dogs, cardiotoxic-
ity is seen with atrazine, and this endpoint is used to derive the 
NOAEL for this compound (Gammon et al., 2005). There is no 
evidence that triazines are teratogenic, nor developmental or repro-
ductive toxicants (Goodman et al., 2014). The weight of evidence 
from in vitro and in vivo studies indicates that triazines are not 
genotoxic (Brusick, 1994), although a possible clastogenic effect 
of atrazine has been suggested (Taets et al., 1998). Oncogenicity 
studies found that triazines cause an increased incidence of mam-
mary carcinomas in female Sprague–Dawley rats (Gammon et al., 
2005; Breckenridge et al., 2010). Such tumors were not observed 
in male Sprague–Dawley rats, or in Fischer 344 rats or CD-1 mice 
of either sex (IARC, 1999; Breckenridge et al., 2010). It is thought 
that such mammary tumors arise from an endocrine effect that 
might be expected to show a threshold. In contrast to most rodent 
species, female Sprague–Dawley rats have a high degree of sponta-
neous mammary tumors, due their reproductive aging; they display 
prolonged or persistent estrus associated with high estrogen levels 
(Eldridge et al., 1996). This is supported by the finding that ovari-
ectomy eliminates mammary tumors in Sprague–Dawley rat that 
arise both spontaneously and as a result of atrazine administration 
(Stevens et al., 1999). The possible mechanisms for the effect of 
atrazine involve an action on pituitary luteinizing hormone, regu-
lated by hypothalamic gonadotropin-releasing hormone, in turn 
controlled by hypothalamic norepinephrine (Cooper et al., 2000, 
2007). Such effect was seen only at high doses of atrazine, but not 
at low doses, suggesting a threshold response (Breckenridge et al., 
2010). Most regulatory agencies have concluded that mammary 
tumors in female Sprague–Dawley rats are formed via a second-
ary, hormone-mediated mechanism, of little or no toxicological rel-
evance to humans. Epidemiological studies of triazine herbicides 
and cancer have provided inconclusive results (Sathiakumar and 
Figure 22-21.   Structures of some triazine herbicides.
Atrazine
2-chloro-4(ethylamino)-6-
(isopropylamino)-s-triazine
NH2C
C2H5HN
N
N
N
Cl
CH3
CH3
Propazine
2-chloro-4,6 bis(isopropylamino)-s-triazine
CH3
CH3
NHCH
CHNH
N
N
N
Cl
CH3
CH3
Simazine
2-chloro-4,6(ethylamino)-s-triazine
NHC2CH5
C2H5HN
N
N
N
Cl

1088
TOXIC AGENTS
Unit v
Delzell, 1997; Rusiecki et al., 2004), and atrazine has been judged 
as unlikely to produce cancer in humans (Boffetta et al., 2013).
Though exposure to atrazine through residues in food com-
modities is very low, contamination of groundwater and drinking 
water is common. The EU banned the use of atrazine in 2004, mainly 
because it was often detected at levels exceeding the 0.1 mg/L stan-
dard for drinking water. Recent publications have reported a pos-
sible feminization of frogs, measured in laboratory and field studies, 
by ppb levels of atrazine (Hayes et al., 2002, 2011). However, other 
investigators failed to reproduce these findings (Carr et al., 2003; 
Kloas et al., 2009). It has been argued that the overall weight of evi-
dence shows that atrazine, sometimes at environmentally relevant 
concentrations, affects molecular/biochemical responses in fish, 
amphibians, and reptiles; however, these effects are not translated 
into adverse outcomes in terms of apical endpoints (i.e., changes 
that are observed in vivo, such as abnormal breeding behavior, 
physical changes, organ alterations; Van der Kraak et al., 2014). 
In 2006, the EPA issued a cumulative risk assessment of triazine 
herbicides, concluding that they posed no harm that would result to 
the general U.S. population, infants, children, or other consumers 
(U.S. EPA, 2006). However, atrazine is still under scrutiny for its 
potential endocrine-disrupting effects. In addition, atrazine and its 
metabolites have been shown to affect the homeostasis of dopa-
mine, leading to depletion of this neurotransmitter and to disruption 
of motor functioning (Walters et al., 2015).
Phosphonomethyl Amino Acids
The two compounds of this class are glyphosate (N-phosphonomethyl 
glycine) and glufosinate (N-phosphonomethyl homoalanine). Both 
are broad-spectrum nonselective systemic herbicides used for post­
emergent control of annual and perennial plants, and are marketed 
primarily as the isopropylamine salt (glyphosate) or ammonium 
salt (glufosinate). Though both compounds contain a P=O moiety 
(Fig. 22-22), they are not organophosphates, but rather organophos-
phonates, and do not inhibit AChE (Farmer, 2010).
Glyphosate  Glyphosate, first commercialized in the mid-1970s, 
is the most widely used herbicide in the United States (Table 
22-4) and worldwide, and the development of transgenic crops 
that can tolerate glyphosate treatment has expanded its utilization. 
Glyphosate exerts its herbicidal action by inhibiting the enzyme 
5-enolpyruvylshikimate-3-phosphate synthase, responsible for the 
synthesis of an intermediate in the biosynthesis of various amino 
acids (Casida, 2009). Although important in plant growth, this 
metabolic pathway is not present in mammals, providing a high 
selectivity to this compound. The toxicity profile of technical grade 
glyphosate is mostly unremarkable (Williams et al., 2000; Farmer, 
2010; Bai and Ogbourne, 2016). Oral and dermal LD50 are more 
than 5000 mg/kg; however, given its widespread use, including the 
home and garden market, accidental or intentional exposures to 
glyphosate are inevitable. For example, during the period 2001 to 
2003, there were over 13,000 reports to the American Association 
of Poisons Control Centers’ Toxic Exposure Surveillance System 
relating to glyphosate exposure (Bradberry et al., 2004b). There 
was a major adverse outcome in 18 patients, and 5 died. Several 
other cases of glyphosate ingestions have been published, with a 
10% to 15% mortality rate (Talbot et al., 1991; Lee et al., 2000; 
Bradberry et al., 2004b; Bai and Ogbourne, 2016). Given the low 
acute toxicity of glyphosate itself, the attention has focused on 
its formulation, which contains surfactants to aid its penetration. 
The most widely used glyphosate product is Roundup®, which 
is formulated as a concentrate containing water, 41% glyphosate 
(as isopropylamine salt), and 15% polyoxethyleneamine (POEA). 
Animal studies suggest that the acute toxicity of this glyphosate 
formulation is due to the surfactant POEA, which has an oral LD 
in rat of 1200 mg/kg (Bradberry et al., 2004b). It has been recently 
suggested that POEA may increase cell permeability to glyphosate 
(Benachour and Seralini, 2009). Mild intoxication results mainly 
in transient gastrointestinal symptoms, while moderate or severe 
poisoning presents with gastrointestinal bleeding, hypotension, 
pulmonary dysfunction, and renal damage (Talbot et al., 1991). 
Chronic toxicity studies with glyphosate show failure to gain 
weight, and hepatic and renal damage at high doses; the NOAEL is 
more than 500 mg/kg/day (Bai and Ogbourne, 2016). Glyphosate 
has no teratogenic, developmental, or reproductive effects. Until 
recently, genotoxicity and carcinogenicity studies in animals were 
considered negative, and glyphosate was classified as a Group E 
compound (evidence of noncarcinogenicity in humans) by the 
EPA (Farmer, 2010). Dietary exposure of the general population 
has been estimated to be very low, only 1% to 3% of the reference 
dose (Farmer, 2010). However, in 2015 IARC published a reevalu-
ation of glyphosate and concluded that based on limited evidence 
in humans, sufficient evidence in animals, and strong evidence of 
genotoxicity and oxidative stress, glyphosate is a “probable human 
carcinogen” (Group 2A) (Guyton et al., 2015). In contrast, EFSA 
concluded that glyphosate is “unlikely to pose a carcinogenic haz-
ard to humans and the evidence does not support classification with 
regard to its carcinogenic potential” (EFSA, 2015). Conclusions 
similar to EFSA have been reached by a large panel of experts 
(Williams et al., 2016). Exposure of the general population appears 
to be low, always less than the RfD (Solomon, 2016).
Glufosinate  Glufosinate is a nonselective contact herbicide that 
acts by irreversibly inhibiting glutamine synthetase (Ebert et al., 
1990; Casida, 2009). Plants die as a consequence of the increased 
levels of ammonia and deficiency of glutamine, leading to inhibition 
of photorespiration and photosynthetic processes (Ujvary, 2010). 
Mammals have other metabolizing systems that can cope with the 
effects on glutamine synthetase activity to a certain limit. In brain, 
however, inhibition of more than 10% of this enzyme activity is 
considered an adverse effect (EFSA, 2005). Glufosinate undergoes 
very limited metabolism and 80% to 90% is excreted unchanged in 
the feces (Ujvary, 2010). Glufosinate has relatively low acute toxic-
ity (oral LD50 in rat is 1.5 g/kg), and chronic toxicity studies pro-
vided a NOAEL of 4.5 mg/kg/day, based on decreased glutamine 
synthetase activity. There is no evidence of genotoxicity or carcino-
genicity, or direct effects on reproductive performance and fertility. 
Developmental toxic effects were found in rats, rabbits, and mice, 
but were considered not to be relevant to humans under normal 
handling or use (Schulte-Hermann et al., 2006; Laugeray et al., 
Figure 22-22.   Structures of the phosphomethyl amino acids glyphosate 
and glufosinate. Note that though both have a P=O moiety such as organo-
phosphates, these compounds are not acetylcholinesterase inhibitors.
Glyphosate
O
O
C
CH2
HO
OH
NH
CH2
P
OH
Glufosinate
O
O
C
CH
HO
OH
CH2
CH2
P
NH2
CH3

Toxic Effects of Pesticides
Chapter 22
1089
2014). The most commonly used form of glufosinate is as ammo-
nium salt, which is formulated with an anionic surfactant. Several 
cases of acute human poisoning from glufosinate ammonium–con-
taining products have been reported, particularly in Japan, due to 
suicidal intent or accidental misuse. Symptoms include gastroin-
testinal effects, impaired respiration, neurological disturbance, and 
cardiovascular effects (Koyama et al., 1994; Watanabe and Sano, 
1998; Ujvary, 2010). Administration of glufosinate ammonium to 
mice (75 mg/kg) has been shown to cause repetitive tonic–clonic 
seizures (Calas et al., 2016). Though glufosinate does not inhibit 
cholinesterase, a reduction of red blood cell and plasma cholines-
terase was found in poisoned patients. As is the case for glyphosate, 
a role for the surfactant in the acute toxicity has been proposed, par-
ticularly with regard to the cardiovascular effects (Ujvary, 2010). 
In recent years, use of glufosinate has increased, as this herbicide 
has become an alternative to glyphosate due to the development 
of glyphosate-resistant weeds. Crop varieties have been genetically 
engineered to be glufosinate-tolerant.
FUNGICIDES
Fungal diseases caused by thousands of species of fungi are virtu-
ally impossible to control without chemical application, and even 
organic farmers utilize a small number of fungicides, such as sulfur, 
copper, and lime sulfur (Gianessi and Reigner, 2006). In the 1800s, 
loss of half of a potato or peach crop, or of wine grape by fun-
gal infestation was common, and the use of sulfur, copper sulfate, 
and lime sulfur drastically improved yield (Gianessi and Reigner, 
2006). Fungicidal chemicals are derived from a variety of struc-
tures, from simple inorganic compounds, such as copper sulfate, to 
complex organic compounds. Most fungicides are surface or plant 
protectants, and are applied prior to potential infection by fungal 
spores, either to plants or to postharvest crops. Other fungicides 
can be used therapeutically to cure plants when an infestation has 
already begun. Still others are used as systemic fungicides that are 
absorbed and distributed throughout the plant.
With few exceptions, fungicides have low acute toxicity in 
mammals. However, some produce positive results in genotoxicity 
tests and may have carcinogenic potentials, while others are endo-
crine disruptors. The effects are often associated with the mecha-
nisms by which these compounds act on their targets, the fungi. 
Some fungicides have been associated with severe epidemics of 
poisoning and have been banned. For example, methylmercury was 
associated with poisoning in Iraq, where grains treated with this 
fungicide were consumed instead of planted (Bakir et al., 1973). 
Hexachlorobenzene (HCB), used in the 1940–1950s to treat seed 
grains, was associated with an epidemic of poisoning in Turkey 
from 1955 to 1959 (Cam and Nigogosyan, 1963). HCB has a high 
cumulative toxicity and caused a syndrome called black sore, char-
acterized by blistering and epidermolysis of the skin, pigmentation, 
and scarring. HCB also causes porphyria as well as hepatomegaly 
and immunosuppression (Ecobichon, 2001a). The main classes of 
fungicides currently in use are discussed below; additional discus-
sions of fungicide use and toxicity can be found in Hayes (1982), 
Edwards et al. (1991), and Stevens and Breckenridge (2001a).
Captan and Folpet
Captan and folpet are broad-spectrum protectant fungicides; 
together with captafol, which was taken off the market in 1988, they 
are called chloroalkylthio fungicides, due to the presence of side 
chains containing chlorine, carbon, and sulfur (Fig. 22-23). Captan 
and folpet were registered in the United States in the early 1950s. 
As for most fungicides, these compounds have low acute oral and 
dermal toxicity (LD50 = ~5g/kg), while they are very toxic by the 
i.p. route (LD50 = 40–50 mg/kg). They are potent eye irritants and 
moderate skin irritants. Dermal absorption is low. Both are exten-
sively and rapidly metabolized in mammals through hydrolysis and 
thiol interactions, with thiophosgene being a common metabolite 
(Gordon, 2010). Captan and folpet, as well as thiophosgene, are 
mutagenic in in vitro tests; however, in vivo mutagenicity tests are 
mostly negative, possibly because of the rapid degradation of these 
compounds (Arce et al., 2010). Both fungicides induce the develop-
ment of duodenal tumors in mice, and on this basis, they were clas-
sified by the EPA as probable human carcinogens (Category B2). 
However, the mode of action for these tumors is thought to be not 
related to mutagenicity, but instead to be dependent on irritation and 
cell loss in the intestinal villi, followed by a compensatory increase 
in proliferation in the crypt compartment (Gordon, 2010). For this 
reason the EPA changed the classification of captan to “not likely 
to be a human carcinogen when used according to label directions” 
(Gordon, 2007). Additionally, tumors observed in rats (renal adeno-
mas and uterine sarcomas) are considered not to be treatment related 
(Gordon, 2007, 2010). No evidence of increased incidence of can-
cer was found among applicators exposed to captan over a 9-year 
period (Greenburg et al., 2008). Similarly, folpet was also shown to 
be an unlikely carcinogen, for the same reasons as captan (Cohen et 
al., 2010). Captan and folpet share a common mechanism of toxic-
ity with regard to the development of duodenal tumors in mice, as 
well as other toxicity endpoints, and are considered for cumulative 
risk assessment under the FQPA (Bernand and Gordon, 2000). The 
margin of exposure (MOE) for both captan and folpet is approxi-
mately 1,000,000, suggesting that neither should pose a cancer risk 
for humans. Reentry intervals for farm workers are now based on the 
potential for eye irritation (Gordon, 2010). Because of their struc-
tural similarity to the potent teratogen thalidomide (Fig. 22-23), 
chloroalkylthio fungicides have been extensively tested in reproduc-
tive/developmental studies in multiple species, but no evidence of 
teratogenicity has been found (McLaughlin et al., 1969).
Figure 22-23.   Structures of the phthalimide fungicides captan and folpet. 
The structure of thalidomide is also shown, though phthalimides have been 
shown not to be teratogenic, despite structural similarities with thalidomide.
O
S
N
Cl
C
Cl
Cl
O
O
S
N
Cl
C
Cl
Cl
O
Captan
Folpet
Thalidomide
O
N
N
H
O
O
O

1090
TOXIC AGENTS
Unit v
Dithiocarbamates
Dithiocarbamates and the related ethylenebisdithiocarbamates 
are a group of fungicides that have been widely used since the 
1940s to control about 400 fungal pathogens in a variety of crops 
(Stevens and Breckenridge, 2001a). The nomenclature of many of 
these compounds arises from the metal cations with which they 
are associated; thus, there are maneb (Mn), ziram and zineb (Zn) 
(Fig. 22-24), mancozeb (Mn and Zn), and ferbam (Fe). Thiram is 
an example of dithiocarbamate without a metal moiety (Fig. 22-24). 
The dithiocarbamates have low to moderate acute toxicity by the 
oral, dermal, and respiratory route (Hurt et al., 2010). However, 
chronic exposure is associated with adverse effects that may be due 
to the dithiocarbamate acid or the metal moiety. These compounds 
are metabolized to a common metabolite, ethylenethiourea (ETU); 
on average, 5% to 7.5% of the administered dose is converted to 
ETU on a weight basis (Hurt et al., 2010). Formation of ETU is 
responsible for the effects of dithiocarbamates on the thyroid. This 
compound causes thyroid tumors in rats and mice, which result 
from the inhibition of the synthesis of the thyroid hormones thy-
roxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3). This leads to elevated serum 
levels of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), via feedback stimu-
lation of the hypothalamus and the pituitary, and subsequent hyper-
trophy and hyperplasia of thyroid follicular cells, which progresses 
to adenomas and carcinomas (Chhabra et al., 1992). Similarly, 
dithiocarbamates alter thyroid hormone levels and cause thyroid 
hypertrophy. The hormonal mechanism of thyroid tumors implies 
a threshold model for hazard assessment. In addition, humans are 
expected to exhibit a lesser degree of sensitivity to thyroid inhibi-
tors (Hurt et al., 2010). ETU also causes liver tumors in mice, by 
yet unknown mechanisms, although levels of ETU resulting from 
fungicide metabolism at maximum tolerated doses are believed to 
be insufficient to produce hepatic tumors. Neither dithiocarbamates 
nor ETU are genotoxic in in vitro and in vivo tests.
Developmental toxicity and teratogenicity are observed with 
dithiocarbamates and ETU at maternally toxic doses, particularly in 
rats. These effects are ascribed to an effect of ETU on the thyroid. 
A key concern with chemicals affecting thyroid functions is their 
potential developmental neurotoxicity, given the essential role of 
thyroid hormones in brain development (Chan and Kilby, 2000), 
and this deserves further investigation. There is also some evidence 
that dithiocarbamates may cause neurotoxicity by mechanisms not 
involving ETU. High doses of several of these compounds cause 
hindlimb paralysis, which is possibly related to the release of the 
carbon disulfide moiety from a common metabolite, ethylene bis-
isothiocyanate sulfide (EBIS) (Johnson et al., 1998; Hurt et al., 
2010). Chronic exposure to maneb has been associated with par-
kinsonism, which is likely ascribed to exposure to the manganese 
moiety, rather than the dithiocarbamate (Ferraz et al., 1988; Meco 
et al., 1994), particularly when there is coexposure with paraquat 
(Costello et al., 2009). Maneb has also been shown to produce 
nigrostriatal degeneration when given in combination with para-
quat (Thiruchelvam et al., 2000), and to potentiate the neurotoxic-
ity of MPTP (McGrew et al., 2000). It has been shown that maneb 
affects dopaminergic neurons by inhibiting mitochondrial functions 
(Zhang et al., 2003). This fungicide has been withdrawn from the 
U.S. and the EU markets (Keigwin, 2010).
The structure of dithiocarbamate fungicides resembles that 
of disulfiram, a compound used therapeutically to produce intoler-
ance to alcohol, by virtue of its ability to inhibit aldehyde dehydro-
genase. Interactions of dithiocarbamates with alcohol, leading to 
elevation in acetaldehyde levels, have been reported (Edwards et 
al., 1991). As aldehyde dehydrogenase also metabolizes DOPAL, 
a toxic metabolite of dopamine, inhibition of aldehyde dehydroge-
nase by dithiocarbamates leads to its accumulation in the striatum, 
and is considered an important pathogenic mechanism in Parkinson 
disease (Fitzmaurice et al., 2013).
Chlorothalonil
Chlorothalonil is a halogenated benzonitrile fungicide (Fig. 22-25), 
first registered in the United States in 1966, and widely used to 
treat vegetable, ornamental, and orchard diseases (Table 22-4). 
While oral and dermal toxicities are low (LD50 = 5–10 g/kg), it 
is highly toxic by the intraperitoneal and inhalation routes. It also 
causes severe irreversible eye lesions in the rabbit, because of its 
irritant properties, but causes skin irritation only after repeated 
Figure 22-25.   Structures of the fungicides chlorothalonil and benomyl.
Figure 22-24.   Structures of three dithiocarbamate fungicides.
Maneb
Manganese ethylenebisdithiocarbamate
Zineb
Zinc ethylenebisdithiocarbamate
Thiram
Bis(diethylthio-carbamoyl)disulﬁde
S
Mn
H2C
NH
S
C
H2C
NH
S
S
C
S
Zn
H2C
NH
S
C
H2C
NH
S
S
C
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
S
N
S
C
N
S
C
S
CI
CI
CI
CI
Chlorothalonil
CN
CN
Benomyl
O
NH
O
C
CH3
O
NH
C4H9
N
C
N

Toxic Effects of Pesticides
Chapter 22
1091
dermal applications. Dermal absorption is low, but following oral 
administration chlorothalonil is rapidly absorbed and metabolized 
through glutathione conjugation, with excretion occurring primar-
ily through the feces. Chlorothalonil is not mutagenic in in vitro and 
in vivo tests; however, tumors in the forestomach and the kidney 
have been found in chronic toxicity studies in both rats and mice, 
but not in dogs (Parsons, 2010). Such tumors are believed to be due 
to regenerative hyperplasia, and it is assumed that a threshold can 
be established for carcinogenicity (Parsons, 2010). Chlorothalonil 
is not a reproductive or developmental toxicant. Known adverse 
effects in humans are limited to its irritant effects on the eye and 
the skin.
Benzimidazoles
Benomyl is the main representative of this class of fungicides 
(Fig. 22-25). It inhibits fungal growth by inhibiting microtubule 
assembly in fungi, with minor effects in plants or mammals. 
Acute toxicity is low, while chronic studies have found effects in 
the liver, testes, bone marrow, and gastrointestinal tract (Mull and 
Hershberger, 2001). Allergic contact dermatitis caused by foliar 
benomyl residues has been reported (O’Malley, 2010). Because 
of its ability to disrupt microtubule assembly during cell division, 
benomyl causes chromosomal aberrations (aneuploidy) both in 
vitro and in vivo, but does not interact directly with DNA. Liver 
tumors have been observed in chronic oncogenicity studies in mice. 
The action on dividing cells has also raised concern for benomyl’s 
potential teratogenicity and developmental toxicity. Teratogenic 
effects were observed following administration of high doses of 
benomyl and carbendazim (a metabolite of benomyl, which is com-
mercialized as a fungicide, but not in the United States) to rats and 
zebrafish (Mull and Hershberger, 2001; Kim et al., 2009). However, 
such effects were not seen in feeding studies in rats or rabbits. 
Anecdotal evidence suggests that maternal exposure to benomyl 
may result in anophthalmia in humans, but epidemiological studies 
did not demonstrate any convincing association (Spagnolo et al., 
1994). Benomyl has been shown in animals to affect the male 
reproductive system (decreased testicular and epididimal weight 
and reduced sperm count), but the mechanisms underlying these 
effects remain unclear (Kim et al., 2009). A metabolite of benomyl, 
S-methyl N-butylthiocarbamate sulfoxide, is a potent inhibitor of 
aldehyde dehydrogenase, and administration of benomyl in mice 
causes a significant increase in the levels of DOPAL in the striatum 
(Casida et al., 2014), suggesting that benomyl may be among the 
pesticides considered as etiological factors in Parkinson disease.
Other Old and New Fungicides
Inorganic and Organometal Fungicides  Several inorganic 
and organic metal compounds are, or have been, used as fungicides 
(Clarkson, 2001). The fungicidal activity of soluble copper salts 
was discovered as early as 1807, and by 1890 copper sulfate found 
extensive use, particularly in the formulation known as Bordeaux 
mixture (copper sulfate and calcium hydroxide). Copper sulfate 
has overall low toxicity and remains one of the most widely used 
fungicides. Among organotin compounds, triphenyltin acetate 
is used as a fungicide, while tributyltin has long been utilized as 
an antifouling agent. However, because of its adverse ecological 
effects, particularly on oysters, its use was banned in 2008. It has 
been replaced in antifouling paints by copper, often in combination 
with “booster” biocides, such as the fungicides chlorothalonil or 
zineb, or the herbicide diuron (Dafforn et al., 2011). Triphenyltin 
has moderate to high acute toxicity, but may cause reproductive 
toxicity and endocrine disruption (Golub and Doherty, 2004). 
These effects are believed to be due to activation of RXR (reti-
noid X receptor) and of PPARγ (peroxisome proliferator–activated 
receptor γ) by triphenyltin (Kotake, 2012; Harada et al., 2016b). 
Organic mercury compounds, such as methylmercury, were used 
extensively as fungicides in the past for the prevention of seed-
borne diseases in grains and cereals. Given their high toxicity, 
particularly neurotoxicity, and large episodes of human poisoning 
(Bakir et al., 1973), their use has since been banned. A discussion 
of organometal compounds is found in Chap. 23, “Toxic Effects of 
Metals.” Sulfur compounds are among the oldest and still widely 
used fungicides. As they are often used as fumigants, they are dis-
cussed in the section “Fumigants.”
Azoxystrobin  Azoxystrobin is a broad-spectrum fungicide 
obtained by chemical modification of strobilurins, antifungal 
compounds present in the mushroom Strobilurus tenacellus, and 
marketed since 1996. Azoxystrobin is an example of the so-called 
Qo inhibitor fungicides, which inhibit mitochondrial respiration 
and energy production by blocking electron transfer at the qui-
none “outside” site (Qo), ultimately preventing generation of ATP 
(Casida and Durkin, 2017). Azoxystrobin has low acute toxicity 
(oral LD50 in rat more than 5 g/kg), and a generally unremark-
able toxicological profile in mammals (Stevens and Breckenridge, 
2001a), though it is toxic to aquatic organisms.
Prothioconazole  Prothioconazole is the newest of a series of 
triazole fungicides, first introduced in the mid-1970s, which are 
effective against many diseases of wheat, barley, and other crops. 
They act by blocking the CYP51 sterol 14α-demethylase result-
ing in depletion of ergosterol, and are also known as inhibitors of 
sterol biosynthesis (Stevens and Breckenridge, 2001a; Casida and 
Durkin, 2017). No significant mammalian toxicity has been identi-
fied (EFSA, 2007).
RODENTICIDES
Rodents can cause health and economic damages to humans, as they 
are vectors for several diseases (e.g., plague, endemic rickettsiosis, 
and spirochetosis), can occasionally bite people, can consume large 
quantities of postharvest stored foods, and can contaminate food-
stuffs with urine, feces, and hair, which may cause diseases. Hence, 
there is a need to control rodent populations, including rats, mice, 
and others (e.g., moles and gophers). Limiting their access to feed 
and harborage, and trapping are two approaches to rodent control; 
however, rodenticides still play, and will likely continue to play, an 
important role in this endeavor. To be effective, yet safe, a rodenti-
cide must satisfy several criteria: (a) the poison must be very effec-
tive in the target species once incorporated into bait in small quantity; 
(b) baits containing the poison must not induce bait shyness, so that 
the animal will continue to eat it; (c) the manner of death must be 
such that survivors do not become suspicious of its cause; and (d) it 
should be species-specific, with considerable lower toxicity to other 
animals (Murphy, 1986; Ecobichon, 2001a; Pelfrene, 2010).
The compounds used as rodenticides comprise a diverse 
range of chemical structures having a variety of mechanisms of 
action. The ultimate goal is to obtain the highest species selectiv-
ity; in some cases (e.g., norbormide) advantage has been taken of 
the physiology and biochemistry unique to rodents. With other 
rodenticides, the sites of action are common to most mammals, but 
advantage is taken of the habits of the pest animal and/or the usage, 
thereby minimizing toxicity for nontarget species. Because roden-
ticides are used in baits that are often placed in inaccessible places, 
widespread exposures or contaminations are unlikely. However, 
toxicologic problems can arise from acute accidental ingestions

1092
TOXIC AGENTS
Unit v
or from suicidal/homicidal attempts. In particular, poison centers 
receive thousands of calls every year related to accidental ingestions 
of rodenticide baits by children, most of which resolve without seri-
ous consequences.
Anticoagulants
Following the report of a hemorrhagic disorder in cattle that resulted 
from the ingestion of spoiled sweet clover silage, the hemorrhagic 
chemical was identified by University of Wisconsin biochemistry 
professor Karl Paul Link in 1939 as bishydroxycoumarin (dicouma-
rol). In 1948, a more potent synthetic congener was introduced as 
an extremely effective rodenticide; the compound was named war-
farin, as an acronym derived from the name of the patent holder, the 
Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation (Majerus and Tollefsen, 
2006). In addition to their use as rodenticides, coumarin deriva-
tives, including warfarin itself, are used as anticoagulant drugs and 
have become a mainstay for prevention of thromboembolic disease 
(Majerus and Tollefsen, 2006). Coumarins antagonize the action 
of vitamin K in the synthesis of clotting factors (factors II, VII, 
IX, and X). Their specific mechanism involves inhibition of the 
enzyme vitamin K epoxide reductase, which regenerates reduced 
vitamin K necessary for sustained carboxylation and synthesis of 
relevant clotting factors (Fig. 22-26). The acute oral toxicity (LD50) 
of warfarin in rats ranges from 50 to 180 mg/kg, while the 90-day 
LD50 has been reported as low as 0.077 mg/kg, indicating that mul-
tiple doses are required before toxicity develops (indeed warfarin is 
referred to as a “multiple dose” rodenticide).
The appearance of rats resistant to warfarin and to other 
early anticoagulant rodenticides led to the development of “sec-
ond generation” anticoagulants. Some are coumarins, such as the 
“superwarfarins” brodifacoum or difenacoum, while others are 
indan-1,3-dione derivatives (diphacinone, chlorophacinone). These 
compounds essentially act like warfarin, but have prolonged half-
lives (e.g., brodifacoum 16 to 34 days vs. warfarin 15 to 37 hours), 
and cause very long-lasting inhibition of coagulation; in addition, 
they are mostly “single dose” rodenticides (King and Tran, 2015). 
Some are extremely toxic to most mammalian species; for example, 
the oral LD50 of brodifacoum is about 0.3 mg/kg in rats, rabbits, 
and dogs (Pelfrene, 2010; King and Tran, 2015). During the period 
1987 to 2012, Poison Centers in the United States reported a total 
of 315,951 exposures to these long-lasting anticoagulant rodenti-
cides; of these, only 2.3% resulted in any effect, and 89% involved 
children under the age of 6 (King and Tran, 2015). In 2014 almost 
80% of all rodenticide poisonings were due to superwarfarins. 
Because of the potential risks for humans and for nontarget ani-
mals, use of these compounds has been restricted to licensed pest 
control operators. Monitoring of anticoagulant therapy is normally 
done by measuring prothrombin time (PT) in comparison to normal 
pooled plasma. Values of INR (international normalized ratio) are 
then derived, with a target value of 2 to 3. In case of poisoning 
with an anticoagulant rodenticide, PT is significantly longer, and 
leads to severe internal bleeding. Hematuria, gingival bleeding, epi-
staxis, gastrointestinal bleeding, and spontaneous ecchymosis are 
also observed in case of poisoning with long-acting anticoagulant 
rodenticides (King and Tran, 2015). When INR is more than 5 to 8, 
vitamin K can be given as an antidote. In the case of superwarfarins, 
the early infusion of a lipid emulsion to modify tissue distribution 
has also proved beneficial (Feinstein et al., 2016).
Bromethalin
Bromethalin is a “single dose” rodenticide, first registered in the 
United States in the mid-1980s. Its acute toxicity is linked to the 
ability of certain animal species to metabolize bromethalin to 
the toxic metabolite desmethylbromethalin. Oral LD50 values are 
approximately 2 mg/kg in rats and cats, but only more than 1000 
mg/kg in guinea pigs; however, the LD50 of desmethylbrometh-
alin in the latter species is 7.5 mg/kg (Van Lier and Cherry, 1988). 
Symptoms of poisoning include tremors, convulsions, and prostra-
tion, which are seen 2 to 36 hours after exposure. The targets of 
toxicity for desmethylbromethalin are the mitochondria, where this 
metabolite, and to a lesser extent the parent compound, uncouples 
oxidative phosphorylation resulting in decreased ATP synthesis. 
In the CNS this leads to retention of water causing edema of the 
myelin sheath (Peterson, 2013). Due to restrictions imposed on 
superwarfarins, the use of bromethalin, which is readily available 
for over-the-counter purchase, has increased. Between 1997 and 
2014, 126 cases of human exposures to bromethalin have been 
reported to Poison Centers, with symptoms mostly of gastrointes-
tinal and nervous system nature; there were no moderate, major, or 
fatal effects in this population, which consisted primarily of chil-
dren less than 5 years old (Huntington et al., 2016).
Cholecalciferol
This rodenticide is nothing else than vitamin D3, often also used as 
a dietary supplement. Vitamin D helps the body maintain calcium 
balance by enhancing its absorption from the gastrointestinal tract 
and the kidneys. High, toxic doses of cholecalciferol cause an exces-
sive increase in calcium levels, leading to renal, CNS, and muscle 
alterations (Peterson and Fluegeman, 2013). Key to these effects is 
Figure 22-26.   Site of action of the anticoagulant rodenticide warfarin. 
Reduced vitamin K (hydroquinone) serves as cofactor for the conversion of 
glutamic acid to γ-carboxyglutamic acid in the peptide chains of coagula-
tion factors II, VII, IX, and X. During this reaction, vitamin K is oxidized to 
an epoxide that is then reduced to quinone and hydroquinone by vitamin K 
reductase, which is inhibited by warfarin.
Glutamic
acid
γ -carboxyglutamic
acid
O2
CO2
Vitamin K reductase
–
Warfarin
Vitamin K reductase
–
Warfarin
O
C
CH2
C
N
H
H
HC
COOH
COOH
O
C
CH2
C
N
H
H
HCH
COOH
Vitamin K (hydroquinone)
OH
R
OH
Vitamin K (epoxide)
O
O
O
R
Vitamin K (quinone)
O
R
O

Toxic Effects of Pesticides
Chapter 22
1093
the formation in the kidney of calcitriol (1, 25-dihydroxycholecif-
erol), a vitamin D metabolite which exerts its effects of increasing 
calcium absorption (from the gut) or reabsorption (from the kidney). 
Several doses of cholecalciferol are needed to obtain the rodentici-
dal action. Pets are often exposed, while human poisonings are rare.
Zinc Phosphide
Metal phosphides such as aluminum phosphide (AlP), magnesium 
phosphide (Mg3P2), and zinc phosphide (Zn3P2) are widely used 
globally as single-dose rodenticides, and the first two are also uti-
lized as fumigants (Lyubimov and Garry, 2010). Their toxicity is 
due to the phosphine gas (PH3) formed on ingestion upon reactions 
with water or acids as follows:
Zn P
H
Zn(OH)
PH
3
2
2
2
3
6
0
3
2
+
→
+
;
Zn P
H
Zn
PH
3
2
2
3
6
3
2
+
+ →
+
+
.
Phosphine causes widespread cellular toxicity with injury to 
the heart, liver, kidney, and nervous system (Sciuto et al., 2016). 
The mechanism of toxicity involves generation of oxidative stress 
rather than inhibition of cytochrome c oxidase as initially suggested 
(Proudfoot, 2009; Sciuto et al., 2016). Several cases of human 
poisoning have been reported with gastrointestinal, cardiovascu-
lar, hepatic, and electrolytic balance effects (Ecobichon, 2001a; 
Proudfoot, 2009). Exposure to phosphides by accidental or inten-
tional ingestion is often lethal, and there are no known antidotes, 
though recent case reports have indicated beneficial results with 
N-acetylcysteine (Oghabian et al., 2016; Sciuto et al., 2016).
Norbormide
Norbormide was introduced in 1964 as a selective rodenticide, 
lethal to rats (Rattus rattus, R. norvegicus), but not to other rodent 
species (Pelfrene, 2010). Norbormide shows a remarkable selectiv-
ity in toxicity; oral LD50 in rat is about 5 to 10 mg/kg, while it is 
more than 2000 mg/kg in mice. In other species, 1000 mg/kg produce 
no effects. Such species difference in toxicity does not appear to be 
due to differences in toxicokinetics or biotransformation (Ravindran 
et al., 2009). Instead, it may be accounted for by differences in response 
of the peripheral blood vessels to norbormide-induced vasoconstric-
tion. At the cellular level, norbormide causes a rat-specific activation 
of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore, which requires an 
intact outer mitochondrial membrane, and is mediated by the 18-kDa 
translocator protein (TSPO) (Zulian et al., 2011). No cases of human 
intoxication with norbormide have been reported (Pelfrene, 2010).
Other Compounds
Fluoroacetic Acid and Its Derivatives  Sodium fluoroac-
etate (Compound 1080) is the main representative of this class of 
rodenticides. Due to its high acute mammalian toxicity (oral LD50 
in rat = <2 mg/kg), its current use in the United States is mainly 
in livestock protection collars, though it is still used as rodenticide 
in some parts of the world (Giannitti et al., 2013). The main targets 
of toxicity are the CNS and the heart. Fluoroacetate is incorporated 
into fluoroacetyl-coenzyme A, which condenses with oxaloacetate 
to form fluorocitrate, which in turn inhibits mitochondrial aconi-
tase. This results in inhibition of the Krebs cycle, leading to low-
ered energy production, reduced oxygen consumption, and reduced 
cellular concentration of ATP. Blockage of energy metabolism is 
believed to account for most signs of toxicity, though some may be 
due to accumulation of citrate, which is a potent chelator of calcium 
ions (Pelfrene, 2010). Several cases of human and animal poison-
ing have been reported, and the estimated lethal dose in humans 
ranges from 2 to 10 mg/kg. There is no specific antidote for sodium 
fluoroacetate, and treatment is symptomatic.
Thioureas  The discovery of α-naphthylthiourea (ANTU) 
occurred fortuitously in the mid-1940s in the Psychobiological 
Laboratory of Curt Richter in Baltimore, where while studying 
thioureas (favored by geneticists for taste tests because they are 
so bitter to some people and tasteless to others) he discovered that 
ANTU was lethal yet tasteless to rodents, while being of low toxic-
ity to humans (Keiner, 2005). Acute oral LD50 values are indeed 
6 mg/kg in the rat, and 4 g/kg in the monkey. The main target of 
toxicity is the lung, where ANTU causes marked edema of the sub-
epithelial spaces of the alveolar walls mediated by an inflamma-
tory response. ANTU is believed to be biotransformed to a reactive 
intermediate that binds to lung macromolecules; however, the exact 
mechanism of its toxicity is not known. There are no reports of 
human poisonings with ANTU. In several cases involving a com-
bination of chloralose and ANTU reported in France, symptoms 
included motor agitation and coma, both characteristic of chlora-
lose poisonings, and pulmonary effects, due to ANTU: all patients 
recovered (Pelfrene, 2010).
Strychnine  Strychnine is an extremely poisonous alkaloid 
derived from the seeds of Nux vomica, which antagonizes the effect 
of the inhibitory neurotransmitter glycine, and is thus a potent con-
vulsant. It was first registered in the United States as a rodenticide 
in 1947. Its use, as a single-dose rodenticide, is severely restricted, 
though it is still used for special situations, for example, manage-
ment of pocket gophers (Baldwin et al., 2017). Signs of poison-
ing appear within 1 hour and death occurs by respiratory blockage. 
Reported lethal doses are 2 to 15 mg/kg in rodents and less than 2 
mg/kg in humans (Palatnick et al., 1997).
Red Squill  Red squill (sea onion) and its bioactive principal, scil-
liroside, affect the cardiovascular and central nervous systems and 
cause emesis; the inability of rodents to vomit explains the rather 
selective action in these species (Ujvary, 2010). It is no longer used 
as a rodenticide, mainly because of its limited effectiveness.
Thallium Sulfate  Thallium sulfate has been used as a pesticide, 
most notably as a rodenticide, since the 1920s. Because of its very 
high acute toxicity (LD50 in humans = 8–15 mg/kg), the use of thal-
lium sulfate as a rodenticide has been banned in the United States 
in 1972, but it is still used in some countries (Clarkson, 2001). 
Thallium is a mitochondrial poison and has a high affinity for sulf-
hydryl groups. Main effects of thallium poisoning are peripheral 
neuropathy, toxic encephalopathy, and alopecia (Li et al., 2015).
FUMIGANTS
A large number of compounds are used for soil or structural fumi-
gation, or for fumigating postharvest commodities. They are active 
toward insects, mites, nematodes, weed seeds, fungi, or rodents, 
and have in common the property of being in the gaseous form at 
the time they exert their pesticidal action. They can be liquids that 
readily vaporize (e.g., ethylene dibromide), solids that can release 
a toxic gas on reaction with water (e.g., phosphine released by alu-
minum phosphide), or gases (e.g., methyl bromide). For soil fumi-
gation, the compound is injected directly into the soil, which is 
then covered with plastic sheeting or other tarping materials, which 
are then sealed and kept in place for several days. By eliminating 
unwanted pests, this treatment enhances the quality of the crops 
and increases yield. For structural fumigation, the commercial or

1094
TOXIC AGENTS
Unit v
residential structure is covered by a tent, fumigated, and then aer-
ated. Fumigation of postharvest commodities, such as wheat, cere-
als, and fruits, to eradicate pest infestations typically occurs where 
the commodities are stored (e.g., warehouses, grain elevators, and 
ship holds). After treatment, mechanical ventilation aerates the com-
modity until concentration of the fumigant decreases to safe levels.
Compounds used as fumigants are usually nonselective, highly 
reactive, and cytotoxic. They provide a potential hazard, primarily 
for applicators, from the standpoint of inhalation exposure, and to 
a minor degree for dermal exposure or ingestion, in case of sol-
ids or liquids. Fumigant residues in food commodities are usually 
extremely low. Several fumigants used in the past are no longer 
marketed because of toxicological concerns. These include, for 
example, carbon disulfide, which is neurotoxic; carbon tetrachlo-
ride, a potent hepatotoxicant; 1,2-dibromo-3-chloropropane, a male 
reproductive toxicant; and ethylene dibromide, a carcinogen. Their 
toxicity is discussed in other chapters of this book. Some of the 
most commonly used fumigants are discussed below.
Methyl Bromide
Methyl bromide (CH3Br) is a broad-spectrum pesticide, used for 
soil fumigation, commodity treatment, and structural fumigation, 
and has been the most widely used fumigant for over 70 years. 
Since the early 1990s, global use of methyl bromide has substan-
tially decreased, because of environmental and toxicological con-
cerns (Ruzo, 2006). With the signing of the Montreal Protocol on 
Substances That Deplete the Ozone Layer in 1987, the international 
community initiated a series of steps to reduce emissions of ozone-
depleting products, including methyl bromide. As of January 2005, 
methyl bromide was officially phased out in the United States and 
in other developed countries (Gullino et al., 2005), while devel-
oping countries phased out methyl bromide use in 2015 (Ajwa 
et al., 2010). However, exemptions to the ban have been granted, for 
example, in 2014 for use in pre-plant strawberries or in dry-cured 
hams (Zhao et al., 2016). Concerns on certain toxicological aspects 
of methyl bromide have also contributed to its decreasing use, and 
to the search of viable alternatives (Ruzo, 2006). Yet, as of 2007 this 
compound was still used in the United States (Table 22-4), likely 
for convenience and economic reasons, and is still used in some 
countries, such as New Zealand (Bulathsinghala and Shaw, 2014).
The acute toxicity of methyl bromide relates to both its con-
centration and the duration of exposure, with LC50 values in rats of 
2833 ppm for 30-minute exposure, and of 302 ppm for an 8-hour 
exposure (Piccirillo and Piccirillo, 2010). Hundreds of cases of sys-
temic poisoning and dozens of fatalities have resulted over the years 
from use of methyl bromide as a fumigant (Alexeef and Kilgore, 
1983; Herzstein and Cullen, 1990). Acute exposure results in respi-
ratory, gastrointestinal, and particularly neurologic symptoms; the 
latter include lethargy, headache, seizures, paresthesias, peripheral 
neuropathy, and ataxia, and are considered to be more relevant 
than other toxic effects for human risk assessment (Alexeef and 
Kilgore, 1983; De Haro et al., 1997; Piccirillo and Piccirillo, 2010; 
de Souza et al., 2013). The mechanism(s) underlying methyl bro-
mide neurotoxicity are not known, though several (e.g., oxidative 
stress) have been proposed (de Souza et al., 2013; Bulathsinghala 
and Shaw, 2014). Methyl bromide is positive in several genotox-
icity tests in vitro and in vivo. Carcinogenicity studies produced 
carcinomas in the forestomach of rats following oral ingestion, and 
increased incidence of adenomas of the pituitary gland in male rats 
in an inhalation study. Alterations in GSH-mediated detoxication 
may play a role in these effects (Bulathsinghala and Shaw, 2014). 
Other studies in rats and mice, however, provided no evidence of 
carcinogenicity. Methyl bromide is classified by IARC in Group 3 
(not classifiable as to its carcinogenicity to humans), given the lim-
ited evidence in animals and the inadequate evidence in humans. As 
methyl bromide is an odorless and colorless gas, another fumigant, 
chloropicrin, which has a pungent odor and causes irritation of the 
eyes, was often used in conjunction with methyl bromide and other 
fumigant mixtures to warn against potentially harmful exposures. 
Chloropicrin has since emerged as an alternative to methyl bromide 
because its potency and short half-life make it beneficial as a fumi-
gant (Ruzo, 2006). The main adverse effects of chloropicrin are due 
to its irritant properties. Effects in humans are primarily lacrima-
tion, irritation cough, burning, and chest pains (Oriel et al., 2009).
1,3-Dichloropropene
1,3-Dichloropropene (C3H4Cl2), first introduced in 1945, is a soil 
fumigant, extensively utilized (see Table 22-4) for its ability to con-
trol soil nematodes. It has a moderate to high acute toxicity in ani-
mals (oral LD50 in rats: 130 to 713 mg/kg; dermal LD50: more than 
1200 mg/kg; inhalation LD50: approximately 1000 ppm) (Stott et al., 
2001). Human fatalities following oral exposure have been reported 
(Hernandez et al., 1994). 1,3-Dichloropropene is an irritant, and 
can cause redness and necrosis of the skin. It is extensively metabo-
lized, with the mercapturic acid conjugate being the major urinary 
metabolite. Data on genotoxicity are contradictory, with positive in 
vitro, and mostly negative in vivo, results. However, some short-
term genotoxicity assays may have been confused by the presence 
of a mutagen epichlorohydrin, which was historically added as a 
stabilizing agent (Stott and Gollapudi, 2010). Carcinogenicity stud-
ies in rodents have found an increase in benign liver tumors in rats 
but not in mice after oral administration (Stebbins et al, 2000), and 
of benign lung adenomas in mice following inhalation exposure 
(Lomax et al., 1989). Induction of these tumors appears to be due 
to a nongenotoxic mode of action, possibly by 1,3-dichloropro-
pene functioning as a tumor promoter (Klaunig et al., 2015). The 
overall toxicology of 1,3-dichloropropene has been reviewed (Stott 
and Gollapudi, 2010). Though it has been phased out in the EU, 
1,3-dichloropropene is one of the most widely used alternatives to 
methyl bromide for use as a soil nematocide in the United States 
(Sanchez-Moreno et al., 2009). However, it lacks herbicidal prop-
erties, and is often formulated with chloropicrin, which is a better 
fungicide (Ajwa et al., 2010).
Metam Sodium
Metam sodium (C2H4NNaS2), which has been registered in the 
United States since 1954, is a widely used soil fumigant (Table 22-4), 
whose toxic action toward soil nematodes, fungi, and weed seeds 
are due to its hydrolysis product methyl isothiocyanate (MITC). In 
mammals, metam sodium is metabolized in vivo to carbon disulfide 
and MITC (Pruett et al., 2001). Acute toxicity is low (e.g., oral LD50 
in rat = 870 mg/kg), while that of MITC is much higher (oral LD50 
in rat = 97 mg/kg). Upon chronic exposure in various species, toxic 
effects in the bladder, kidney, and liver have been reported. Metam 
sodium is not genotoxic, but because of evidence of carcinogenic-
ity in mice and in male rats (Carlock and Dotson, 2010), it was 
classified as a probable human carcinogen (B2) by the EPA, and 
as a compound with “limited evidence of a carcinogenic effect” 
by the EFSA (EFSA, 2011). In humans, metam sodium can act 
as a contact sensitizer, inducing allergic dermatitis possibly due to 
MITC. Main effects of acute exposure to MITC in the vapor state 
are irritated or burning eyes, nasal and throat irritation, nausea, 
coughing, and shortness of breath (Dourson et al., 2010; Deguigne 
et al., 2011). In 1991, because of the derailment of a train car,

Toxic Effects of Pesticides
Chapter 22
1095
approximately 19,000 gallons of metam sodium were accidentally 
spilled into the Sacramento River in California, causing a large kill 
of aquatic organisms. Symptoms reported by exposed individu-
als included headache, eye irritation, nausea, shortness of breath, 
and dermatitis (Pruett et al., 2001). Metam sodium is increasingly 
being used as an alternative to methyl bromide (Ruzo, 2006), as it is 
effective against nematodes, weeds, and fungi (Ajwa et al., 2010).
Sulfur Compounds
Elemental sulfur is considered the oldest of all pesticides, and its 
pesticidal properties were known to the ancient Greeks as early as 
1000 bc (Tweedy, 1981). It is very effective for the control of many 
plant diseases, particularly fungal diseases, and is still widely used in 
the United States and worldwide. In agriculture, sulfur finds its major 
use in grapes and tomatoes, and it can be used in organic farming 
(Gammon et al., 2010). Sulfur fumigation is also used for preserva-
tion of herbs used in traditional Chinese medicine (Jiang et al., 2013). 
The primary health effect in humans associated with the agricultural 
use of elemental sulfur is dermatitis (Gammon et al., 2010). In rumi-
nants, excessive sulfur ingestion can cause cerebrocortical necrosis 
(polioencephalomalacia), possibly due to its conversion by micro-
organisms in the rumen to hydrogen sulfide (Gammon et al., 2010).
Sulfuryl fluoride (SO2F2) is also used as a fumigant, particu-
larly for structural fumigation (for termite control), and for post-
harvest fumigation of stored commodities. There is no evidence 
of developmental toxicity, mutagenicity, or carcinogenicity. Upon 
chronic exposure, the primary effect in multiple species is neu-
rotoxicity, evidenced by microvacuolation in various brain areas; 
the mechanism is unknown (Eisenbrandt and Hotchkiss, 2010). 
A recent case report describes the acute poisoning of a family in 
South Florida after reentering their home that had been fumigated 
with sulfuryl fluoride. Signs and symptoms included irritation of 
the eyes, nose, and respiratory tract, nausea and vomiting, and CNS 
effects (Mulay et al., 2016).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The editor and author recognize the contributions of previous 
authors of this chapter: Sheldon D. Murphy (1st to 3rd editions), 
Donald J. Ecobichon (4th to 6th editions).
REFERENCES
Abdel-Rahman A, Shetty AK, Abou-Donia MB. Disruption of the blood–
brain barrier and neuronal cell death in cingulate cortex, dentate gyrus, 
thalamus, and hypothalamus in a rat model of Gulf War syndrome. 
Neurobiol Dis. 2002;10:306–326.
Abel EL, Bammler TK, Eaton DL. Biotransformation of methyl parathion 
by glutathione S-transferases. Toxicol Sci. 2004;79:224–232.
Adam A, Smith LL, Cohen GM. An evaluation of the redox cycling poten-
cies of paraquat and nitrofurantoin in microsomal and lung slice systems. 
Biochem Pharmacol. 1990;40:1533–1539.
Ajdacic-Gross V, Weiss MG, Ring M, et al. Method of suicide: international 
suicide patterns derived from the WHO mortality data base. Bull World 
Health Org. 2008;86:726–732.
Ajwa H, Ntow WJ, Qin R, et al. Properties of soil fumigants and their fate 
in the environment. In: Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ Handbook of Pesticide 
Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2010:315–330.
Akossoglou K, Malester B, Xu J, et al. Brain-specific deletion of neuropa-
thy target esterase/Swiss cheese results in neurodegeneration. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A. 2004;101:5075–5080.
Alavanja MCR, Hoffman JN, Lynch CF, et al. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma 
risk and insecticide, fungicide and fumigant use in the agricultural health 
study. PLoS ONE. 2014;9:e109332.
Aldridge JE, Seidler FJ, Meyer A, et al. Serotoninergic systems targeted by 
developmental exposure to chlorypyrifos: effects during different critical 
periods. Environ Health Perspect. 2003;111:1736–1743.
Alexeef GV, Kilgore WW. Methyl bromide. Residue Rev. 1983;88:101–153.
Alonso L, Lindsay SW, Armstrong JRM, et al. The effect of insec-
ticide-treated bed nets on mortality of Gambian children. Lancet. 
1991;337:1499–1502.
Altobelli D, Martire M, Maurizi S, et al. Interaction of formamidine pesti-
cides with the presynaptic α2-adrenoceptor regulating [3H] noradrenaline 
release from rat hypothalamic synaptosomes. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
2001;172:179–185.
Anand SS, Bim KB, Padilla S, et al. Ontogeny of hepatic and plasma metab-
olism of deltamethrin in vitro: role in age-dependent acute neurotoxicity. 
Drug Metab Dispos. 2006b;34:389–397.
Anand SS, Bruckner JV, Haines WT, et al. Characterization of deltame-
thrin metabolism by rat plasma and liver microsomes. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 2006a;212:156–166.
Andrade SF, Sakate M. The comparative efficacy of yohimbine and ati-
pamezole to treat amitraz intoxication in dogs. Vet Hum Toxicol. 
2003;45:124–127.
Antwi FB, Shama LM, Peterson RK. Risk assessment for the insect repel-
lents DEET and picaridin. Reg Toxicol Pharmacol. 2008;51:31–36.
Anway MD, Cupp AS, Uzumcu M, et al. Epigenetic transgenerational actions 
of endocrine disruptors and male fertility. Science. 2005;306:1466–1468.
Arce GT, Gordon EB, Cohen SM, et al. Genetic toxicology of folpet and 
captan. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2010;40:546–574.
Ashby J, Kier L, Wilson AGE. Evaluation of the potential carcinogenic-
ity and genetic toxicity to humans of the herbicide acetochlor. Hum Exp 
Toxicol. 1996;15:702–735.
Autor AP. Biochemical Mechanisms of Paraquat Toxicity. New York: 
Academic Press; 1974.
Aylward LL, Morgan MM, Arbuckle TE, et al. Biomonitoring data for 
2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid in the United States and Canada: inter-
pretation in a public health risk assessment context using biomonitoring 
equivalents. Environ Health Perspect. 2010;118:177–181.
Badaksh R, Lackovic M, Ratard R. Characteristics of pesticide-related hospi-
talizations, Louisiana, 1998–2007. Publ Health Rep. 2010;125:457–467.
Bai SH, Ogbourne SM. Glyphosate: environmental contamination, toxicity 
and potential risks to human health via food contamination. Environ Sci 
Pollut Res. 2016;29:18988–19001.
Baker SR, Wilkinson DF, eds. The Effects of Pesticides on Human Health. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton Scientific Publishing; 1990:438.
Bakir F, Damluji SF, Amin-Zaki L, et al. Methylmercury poisoning in Iraq. 
Science. 1973;181:230–241.
Baldwin RA, Meinerz R, Wimer GW. Novel and current rodenticides for 
pocket gopher Thomomys spp. Management in vineyards: what works? 
Pest Manag Sci. 2017;73;118–122.
Barbeau A, Roy M, Clourier L et al. Environmental and genetic factors in 
the etiology of Parkinson’s disease. Adv Neurol. 1986;45:299–306.
Barlow SM, Sullivan FM, Lines J. Risk assessment of the use of delta-
methrin on bed nets for the prevention of malaria. Food Chem Toxicol. 
2001;39:407–422.
Baron RL. Carbamate insecticides. In: Hayes WJ, Laws ER, eds. Handbook of 
Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 1991:1125–1189.
Barr DB, Allen R, Olsson AO, et al. Considerations of selective metabolites 
of organophosphorus pesticides in the United States population. Environ 
Res. 2005;99:314–326.
Beard J. DDT and human health. Science Tot Environ. 2006;355:78–89.
Beeman RW, Matsumura F. Chlordimeform: a pesticide acting upon amine 
regulatory mechanisms. Nature. 1973;242:273–274.
Bell JW, Veltri JC, Page BC. Human exposures to N,N-diethyl-m-toluamide 
insect repellents reported to the American Association of Poison Control 
Centers 1993–1997. Int J Toxicol. 2002;21:341–352.
Benachour N, Seralini GE. Glyphosate formulations induce apoptosis and 
necrosis in human umbilical, embryonic, and placental cells. Chem Res 
Toxicol. 2009;22:97–105.
Benke G, Murphy SD. The influence of age on the toxicity and metabolism 
of methylparathion and parathion in male and female rats. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 1975;31:254–269.

1096
TOXIC AGENTS
Unit v
Benowitz NL. Pharmacology of nicotine: addiction and therapeutics. Annu 
Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 1996;36:597–613.
Bentley KS, Fletcher JL, Woodward MD. Chlorantranilipole: an insecticide 
of the anthranilic diamide class. In: Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ Handbook of 
Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2010:2231–2242.
Bernand BK, Gordon EB. An evaluation of the common mechanism 
approach to the Food Quality Protection Act: Captan and four related 
fungicides, a practical example. Int J Toxicol. 2000;19:43–61.
Berry C, LaVecchia C, Nicotera P. Paraquat and Parkinson’s disease. Cell 
Death Diff. 2010;17:1115–1125.
Berry C, Crickmore N. Structural classification of insecticidal proteins: 
towards in silico characterization of novel toxins. J Invertebr Pathol. 
2017;142:16–22.
Bertolote JM, Fleischmann A, Eddleston M, et al. Deaths from pesticide 
poisoning: a global response. Br J Psychiat. 2006;189:201–203.
Bertsias GJ, Katonis P, Tzanakakis G, et al. Review of clinical and toxico-
logical features of acute pesticide poisoning in Crete (Greece) during the 
period 1991–2001. Med Sci Monitor. 2004;10:CR622–CR627.
Betarbet R, Sherer TB, Greenamyre JT. Animal models of Parkinson’s dis-
ease. BioEssays. 2002;24:308–318.
Betarbet R, Sherer TB, MacKenzie G, et al. Chronic systemic pesticide 
exposure reproduces features of Parkinson’s disease. Nature Neurosci. 
2000;3:1301–1306.
Bharathrai MY, Venugopal K, Jaligidad K, et al. Fipronil compound con-
sumption presenting as status epilepticus. Toxicol Int. 2015;22:165–166.
Bismuth C, Garnier R, Dolly S, et al. Prognosis and treatment of paraquat 
poisoning: a review of 28 cases. Clin Toxicol. 1982;19:461–474.
Bismuth C, Inns RH, Marrs TC. Efficacy, toxicity and clinical use of 
oximes in anticholinesterases poisoning. In: Ballantyne B, Marrs TC, 
eds. Clinical and Experimental Toxicology of Organophosphates and 
Carbamates. Oxford, UK: Butterworth-Heinemann; 1992:555–577.
Bjørlung-Poulsen M, Andersen MR, Grandjean P. Potential developmental 
neurotoxicity of pesticides used in Europe. Environ Health. 2008;7:50.
Blondell JM. Decline in pesticide poisonings in the United States from 
1995 to 2004. Clin Toxicol. 2007;45:589–592.
Boeckh J, Breer H, Geier M, et al. Acylated 1,3-aminopropanols as repel-
lents against bloodsucking arthropods. Pest Sci. 1996;48:359–373.
Boffetta P, Adami HO, Berry SC, et al. Atrazine and cancer: a review of 
epidemiologic evidence. Eur J Cancer Prev. 2013;22:169–180.
Bouwman H, Kylin H, Sereda B, et al. High levels of DDT in breast milk: 
intake, risk, lactation duration, and involvement of gender. Environ 
Pollut. 2012;170:63–70.
Bouwman H, van de Berg H, Kylin H. DDT and malaria prevention: 
addressing the paradox. Environ Health Perspect. 2011;119:744–747.
Bradberry SM, Cage SA, Proudfoot AT, et al. Poisoning due to pyrethroids. 
Toxicol Rev. 2005;24:93–106.
Bradberry SM, Proudfoot AT, Vale JA. Poisoning due to chlorophenoxy her-
bicides. Toxicol Rev. 2004a;23:65–73.
Bradberry SM, Proudfoot AT, Vale JA. Glyphosate poisoning. Toxicol Rev. 
2004b;23:159–167.
Bradberry SM, Watt BE, Proudfoot AT, et al. Mechanisms of toxicity, clini-
cal features, and management of acute chlorophenoxy herbicide poison-
ing: a review. Clin Toxicol. 2000;39:111–122.
Bravo A, Gill SS, Soberon M. Mode of action of Bacillus thuringien-
sis Cry and Cyt toxins and their potential for insect control. Toxicon. 
2007;49:423–435.
Breckenridge CB, Elridge JC, Stevens JJ, et al. Symmetrical triazine herbi-
cides: a review of regulatory toxicity endpoints. In: Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ 
Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 
2010:1711–1723.
Breckenridge CB, Holden L, Sturgess N, et al. Evidence for separate 
mechanisms of toxicity for type I and type II pyrethroid insecticides. 
Neurotoxicology. 2009;30S:S17–S31.
Briassulis G, Niarloglou M, Hatzis T. Toxic encephalopathy associated with 
use of DEET insect repellents: a case analysis of its toxicity in children. 
Hum Exp Toxicol. 2001;20:8–14.
Brooks GT. Chlorinated Insecticides. Vol I. Technology and Application; 
Vol. II. Biological and Environmental Aspects. Cleveland, OH: CRC 
Press; 1974:249 pp., 197 pp.
Brooks GT. Interactions with the gamma-aminobutyric acid A-receptor: 
polychlorocycloalkanes and recent congeners and other ligands. In: 
Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press; 2010:2065–2092.
Brusick DJ. An assessment of the genetic toxicity of atrazine: relevance to 
human health and environmental effects. Mutat Res. 1994;317:133–144.
Buckley NA, Eddleston M, Szinicz L. Oximes for acute organophos-
phate pesticide poisoning. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005;Issue 1: 
CD005085.
Bulathsinghala AT, Shaw IC. The toxic chemistry of methyl bromide. Hum 
Exp Toxicol. 2014;33:81–91.
Bus JS, Gibson JE. Paraquat: model for oxidant-initiated toxicity. Environ 
Health Perspect. 1984;55:37–46.
Cabral JR, Galendo D, Laval M, et al. Carcinogenicity studies with delta-
methrin in mice and rats. Cancer Lett. 1990;49:147–152.
Cabras P, Caboni P, Cabras M, et al. Rotenone residues in olives and in olive 
oil. J Agric Food Chem. 2002;50:2576–2580.
Caksen H, Odabas D, Arslan S, et al. Report of eight children with amitraz 
intoxication. Hum Exp Toxicol. 2003;22:95–97.
Calas AG, Perche O, Richard O. Characterization of seizures induced by 
acute exposure to an organophosphate herbicide, glufosinate ammonium. 
Neuroreport. 2016;27:532–541.
Caldas ED, Rebelo FM, Heliodoro VO, et al. Poisonings with pesticides in 
the Federal District of Brazil. Clin Toxicol. 2008;46:1058–1063.
Calvert GM, Mehler LN, Alsop J, et al. Surveillance of pesticide-related 
illness and injury in humans. In: Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ Handbook of 
Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2010:1313–1369.
Cam C, Nigogosyan G. Acquired toxic porphyria cutanea tarda due to hexa-
chlorobenzene. J Am Med Assoc. 1963;183:88–91.
Campbell WC, ed. Ivermectin and Abamectin. New York: Springer-Verlag; 
1989:363.
Carlock LL, Chen WL, Gordon EB, et al. Regulating and assessing risks of 
cholinesterase-inhibiting pesticides: divergent approaches and interpreta-
tions. J Toxicol Environ Health Part B, Crit Rev. 1999;2:105–160.
Carlock LL, Dotson TA. Metam-sodium. In: Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ 
Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 
2010:2293–2306.
Carr JA, Gentles A, Smith EE, et al. Response of larval Xenopus laevis to 
atrazine: assessment of growth, metamorphosis, and gonadal and laryn-
geal morphology. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2003;22:396–405.
Carson R. Silent Spring. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin; 1962.
Casey P, Vale JA. Deaths from pesticide poisoning in England and Wales: 
1945–1989. Hum Exp Toxicol. 1994;13:95–101.
Casida JE. Esterase inhibitors as pesticides. Science. 1964;146:1011–1017.
Casida JE. Pyrethrum flowers and pyrethroid insecticides. Environ Health 
Perspect. 1980;34:189–202.
Casida JE. Pest toxicology: the primary mechanisms of pesticide actions. 
Chem Res Toxicol. 2009;22:609–619.
Casida JE. Michael Elliot’s billion dollar crystals and other discoveries in 
insecticide chemistry. Pest Manag Sci. 2010;66:1163–1170.
Casida JE. Golden age of RyR and GABA-R diamide and isoxazoline 
insecticides: common genesis, serendipity, surprises, selectivity, and 
safety. Chem Res Toxicol. 2015;28:560–566.
Casida JE, Durkin KA. Novel GABA receptor pesticide targets. Pest 
Biochem Physiol. 2015;121:22–30.
Casida JE, Durkin KA. Pesticide chemical research in toxicology: lessons 
from nature. Chem Res Toxicol. 2017;30:94–104.
Casida JE, Ford B, Jinsmaa Y, et al. Benomyl, aldehyde dehydrogenase, 
DOPAL, and the cathecholaldehyde hypothesis for the pathogenesis of 
Parkinson’s disease. Chem Res Toxicol. 2014;27:1359–1361.
Casida JE, Gammon DW, Glickman AH, et al. Mechanisms of selec-
tive action of pyrethroid insecticides. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 
1983;23:413–438.
CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). Seizures tempo-
rarily associated with use of DEET insect repellents – New York and 
Connecticut. MMWR. 1989;38:678–680.
Chambers HW, Meek EC, Chambers JE. Chemistry of organophosphorus 
insecticides. In: Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. 
San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2010a:1395–1398.

Toxic Effects of Pesticides
Chapter 22
1097
Chambers JE, Levi PE, eds. Organophosphates: Chemistry, Fate and 
Effects. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 1992:443.
Chambers JE, Meek EC, Chambers HW. The metabolism of organophos-
phorus insecticides. In: Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ Handbook of Pesticide 
Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2010b:1399–1407.
Chan S, Kilby MD. Thyroid hormone and fetal central nervous system 
development. J Endocrinol. 2000;165:1–8.
Chao HR, Wang SL, Lin TC, et al. Levels of organochlorine pesticides in 
human milk for central Taiwan. Chemosphere. 2006;62:1776–1785.
Charles JM, Bond DM, Jeffries TK et al. Chronic dietary toxicity/oncoge-
nicity studies on 2,4- dichlorophenoxyacetic acid in rodents. Fund Appl 
Toxicol. 1996;33:166–172.
Charlton NP, Murphy LT, Parker Cote JL, et al. The toxicity of picaridin 
containing insect repellent reported to the National Poison Data System. 
Clin Toxicol (Phila). 2016;54:655–658.
Chen A, Rogan WJ. Nonmalarial infant deaths and DDT use for malaria 
control. Emerg Infect Dis. 2003;9:960–964.
Chen YY, Park NS, Lu TS. Suicide methods used by women in Korea, Sweden, 
Taiwan and the United States. J Formos Med Assoc. 2009;108:452–459.
Chester G: Worker exposure: methods and techniques. In: Krieger R, ed. 
Hayes’ Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic 
Press; 2010:1127–1138.
Chhabra RS, Eustis S, Haseman JK, et al. Comparative carcinogenicity of 
ethylene thiourea with or without perinatal exposure in rats and mice. 
Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1992;18:405–417.
Choi J, Hodgson E, Rose RL. Inhibitions of trans-permethrin hydrolysis 
in human liver fractions by chlorpyrifos oxon and carbaryl. Drug Metab 
Drug Interact. 2004;20:233–246.
Churcher TS, Lissenden N, Griffin JT, et al. The impact of pyrethroid resis-
tance on the efficacy and effectiveness of bednets for malaria control in 
Africa. eLife. 2016;5:e16090.
Cimino AM, Boyles AL, Thayer KA, et al. Effects of neonicotinoid pes-
ticide exposure on human health: a systematic review. Environ Health 
Perspect. 2017;125:155–162.
Clark DG, McElligott TF, Hurst EW. The toxicity of paraquat. Br J Ind 
Med. 1966;23:126–132.
Clark JM, Matsumura F, eds. Membrane Receptors and Enzymes as Targets 
of Insecticidal Action. New York: Plenum Press; 1986:256.
Clarkson TW. Inorganic and organometal pesticides. In: Krieger R, ed. 
Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 
2001:1357–1428.
Cohen SM, Gordon EB, Singh P, et al. Carcinogenic mode of action of fol-
pet in mice and evaluation of its relevance to humans. Crit Rev Toxicol. 
2010;40:531–545.
Colborn T. A case for revisiting the safety of pesticides: a closer look at 
neurodevelopment. Environ Health Perspect. 2006;114:10–17.
Cole LM, Casida JE. Polychlorocycloalkane insecticide–induced convul-
sions in mice in relation to disruption of the GABA-regulated chloride 
ionophore. Life Sci. 1986;39:1855–1862.
Cole TB, Walter BJ, Shih DM, et al. Toxicity of chlorpyrifos and chlorpyri-
fos oxon in a transgenic mouse model of the human paraoxonase (PON1) 
Q192R polymorphism. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2005;15:589–598.
Colosio C, Tiramani M, Maroni M. Neurobehavioral effects of pesticides: 
state of the art. Neurotoxicology. 2003;24:577–591.
Colosio C, Vellere F, Moretto A. Epidemiological studies of anticholin-
esterase pesticide poisoning: global impact. In Satoh T, Gupta RC, 
eds. Anticholinesterase Pesticides: Metabolism, Neurotoxicity and 
Epidemiology. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley; 2010:343–355.
Cooper RL, Lamb JC, Barlow SM, et al. A tiered approach to life testing for 
agricultural risk assessment. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2006;36:69–98.
Cooper RL, Laws SC, Das PC, et al. Atrazine and reproductive function: mode 
and mechanism of action studies. Birth Def Res (pt B). 2007;80:98–112.
Cooper RL, Stoker TE, Tyrey L, et al. Atrazine disrupts the hypothalamic 
control of pituitary-ovarian function. Toxicol Sci. 2000;53:297–307.
Costa LG. Toxicology of pesticides: a brief history. In: Costa LG, Galli 
CL, Murphy SD, eds. Toxicology of Pesticides: Experimental, Clinical 
and Regulatory Perspectives. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer-Verlag; 
1987:1–10.
Costa LG. Organophosphorus compounds. In: Galli CL, Manzo L, Spencer 
PS, eds. Recent Advances in Nervous System Toxicology. New York: 
Plenum Publishing; 1988:203–246.
Costa LG. Pesticide exposure: differential risk for neurotoxic outcomes due 
to enzyme polymorphisms. Clin Occup Environ Med. 2001;1:511–523.
Costa LG. Current issues in organophosphate toxicology. Clin Chim Acta. 
2006;366:1–13.
Costa LG. The neurotoxicity of organochlorine and pyrethroid pesticides. In: 
Lotti M, Bleecker MT, eds. Occupational Neurology. Vol 131. Handbook 
of Clinical Neurology Series. Amsterdam: Elsevier; 2015:135–148.
Costa LG, Cole TB, Jarvik GP, et al. Functional genomics of the paraox-
onase (PON1) polymorphisms: effect on pesticide sensitivity, cardiovas-
cular disease and drug metabolism. Annu Rev Med. 2003;54:371–392.
Costa LG, Furlong CE. Paraoxonase 1: structure, function and polymor-
phisms. In: Satoh T, Gupta RC, eds. Anticholinesterase Pesticides: 
Metabolism, Neurotoxicity, and Epidemiology. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley; 
2010:85–95.
Costa LG, Galli CL, Murphy SD, eds. Toxicology of Pesticides: 
Experimental, Clinical and Regulatory Perspectives. Heidelberg, 
Germany: Springer-Verlag; 1987:320.
Costa LG, Giordano G, Cole TB, et al. Paraoxonase (PON1) as a genetic 
determinant of susceptibility to organophosphate toxicity. Toxicology. 
2013;307:115–122.
Costa LG, Hand H, Schwab BW, et al. Tolerance to the carbamate insecti-
cide propoxur. Toxicology. 1981;21:267–278.
Costa LG, Murphy SD. Interaction of the pesticide chlordimeform with 
adrenergic receptors in mouse brain: an in vitro study. Arch Toxicol. 
1987;59:323–327.
Costa LG, Olibet G, Murphy SD. Alpha2-adrenoceptors as a target for for-
mamidine pesticides: in vitro and in vivo studies in mice. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 1988;93:319–328.
Costa LG, Schwab BW, Murphy SD. Tolerance to anticholinesterase com-
pounds in mammals. Toxicology. 1982;25:79–97.
Costello S, Cockburn M, Bronstein J, et al. Parkinson’s disease and residen-
tial exposure to maneb and paraquat from agricultural applications in the 
Central Valley in California. Am J Epidemiol. 2009;169:919–926.
Cranmer MF. Carbaryl: a toxicological review and risk analysis. 
Neurotoxicology. 1986;7:247–332.
Crisp TM, Clegg ED, Cooper RL, et al. Environmental endocrine dis-
ruption: an effects assessment and analysis. Environ Health Perspect. 
1998;106(suppl 1):11–56.
Dafforn KA, Lewis JA, Johnston EL. Antifouling strategies: history 
and regulation, ecological impact and mitigation. Marine Poll Bull. 
2011;62:453–465.
Dam K, Seidler FJ, Slotkin TA. Developmental neurotoxicity of chlorpy-
rifos: delayed targeting of DNA synthesis after repeated administration. 
Dev Brain Res. 1998;108:39–45.
Daniell WE, Barnhart S, Demers P, et al. Neuropsychological performance 
among pesticide applicators. Environ Res. 1992;59:217–228.
Dawson AH, Eddleston M, Senarathna L, et al. Acute human lethal tox-
icity of agricultural pesticides: a prospective cohort study. PLoS Med. 
2010;7(10):e1000357.
Dayal M, Parmar, Dhawan A, et al. Effect of pretreatment of cytochrome 
P450 (P450) modifiers on neurobehavioral toxicity induced by deltame-
thrin. Food Chem Toxicol. 2003;41:431–437.
De Haro L, Gastaut JL, Jouglard J, et al. Central and peripheral neurotoxic 
effects of chronic methyl bromide intoxication. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 
1997;35:29–34.
de Souza A, Narvencar KP, Sindhoora KV. The neurological effects of 
methyl bromide intoxication. J Neurol Sci. 2013;15:36–41.
De Wilde AR, Heyndrickx A, Carton D. A case of fatal rotenone poisoning 
in a child. J Forensic Sci. 1986;31:1492–1498.
deBleecker JL. Intermediate syndrome in organophosphate poisoning. 
In: Gupta RC, ed. Toxicology of Organophosphate and Carbamate 
Compounds. Amsterdam: Elsevier; 2006:371–380.
Defarge N, Takacs E, Lozano VL, et al. Co-formulants in glyphosate-based 
herbicides disrupt aromatase activity in human cells below toxic levels. 
Int J Environ Res Publ Health. 2016;13:264.

1098
TOXIC AGENTS
Unit v
Degli Esposti M. Inhibitors of NADH-ubiquinone reductase: an overview. 
Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998;1364:222–235.
Deguigne MB, Lagarce L, Boels D, et al. Metam sodium intoxica-
tion: the specific role of degradation products—methylisocyanate 
and carbon disulfide—as a function of exposure. Clin Toxicol (Phila). 
2011;49:416–422.
del Pino J, Moyano-Cires PV, Anadon MJ, et al. Molecular mechanisms 
of amitraz mammalian toxicity: comprehensive review of existing data. 
Chem Res Toxicol. 2015;28:1073–1094.
Desaiah D. Biochemical mechanisms of chlordecone neurotoxicity: a 
review. Neurotoxicology. 1982;3:103–110.
Detweiler MB. Organophosphate intermediate syndrome with neurologi-
cal complications of extrapyramidal symptoms in clinical practice. J 
Neurosci Rural Pract. 2014;5:298–301.
Dickoff DJ, Gerber O, Turovsky Z. Delayed neurotoxicity after ingestion of 
carbamate pesticide. Neurology. 1987;37:1229–1231.
Didier A, Loor F. The abamectin derivative invermectin is a potent 
P-glycoprotein inhibitor. Anticancer Drugs. 1996;7:745–757.
Dikshith TSS, ed. Toxicology of Pesticide in Animals. Boca Raton, FL: CRC 
Press; 1991:255.
Dinis-Oliveira RJ, Duarte JA, Sanchez-Navarro A, et al. Paraquat poison-
ing: mechanisms of lung toxicity, clinical features, and treatment. Crit 
Rev Toxicol. 2008;38:13–71.
Doe JE, Boobis AR, Blacker A, et al. A tiered approach to systemic toxicity 
testing for agricultural risk assessment. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2006;36:37–68.
Dourson ML, Kahrman-Vincent MJ, Allen BC. Dose response assessment 
for effects of acute exposure to methyl isocyanate (MITC). Reg Toxicol 
Pharmacol. 2010;58:181–188.
Duke SO. Overview of herbicide mechanisms of action. Environ Health 
Perspect. 1990;87:263–271.
Duke SO. Taking stock of herbicide-resistant crops ten years after introduc-
tion. Pest Manag Sci. 2005;61:211–218.
Eaton DL, Daroff RB, Autrup H, et al. Review of the toxicology of chlorpy-
rifos with an emphasis on human exposure and neurodevelopment. Crit 
Rev Toxicol. 2008;38(suppl 2):1–125.
Ebert E, Leist KH, Mayer D. Summary of safety evaluation of toxicity stud-
ies of glufosinate ammonium. Food Chem Toxicol. 1990;28:339–349.
Ecobichon DJ. Introduction. In Ecobichon DJ, Roy RM, eds. Pesticides and 
Neurological Diseases. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 1982:1–14.
Ecobichon DJ. Toxic effect of pesticides. In: Klaassen CD, ed. Casarett and 
Doull’s Toxicology. The Basic Science of Poisons. New York: McGraw-
Hill; 2001a:763–810.
Ecobichon DJ. Carbamate insecticides. In: Krieger R, ed. Handbook of 
Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2001b:1087–1106.
Ecobichon DJ, Joy RM. Pesticides and Neurological Diseases. Boca Raton, 
FL: CRC Press; 1982:281.
Eddleston M, Chowdhury FR. Pharmacological treatment of organophos-
phorus insecticide poisoning: the old and the (possible) new. Br J Clin 
Pharmacol. 2015;81:462–470.
Eddleston M, Szinicz L, Eyer P, et al. Oximes in acute organophospho-
rus pesticide poisoning: a systematic review of clinical trials. QJ Med. 
2002;95:275–283.
Edwards IR, Ferry DG, Temple WA. Fungicides and related compounds. In: 
Hayes WJ, Laws ER, eds. Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. Vol 3. San 
Diego, CA: Academic Press; 1991:1409–1470.
EFSA (European Food Safety Authority). Opinion of the Scientific Panel 
on Plant Health, Plant Protection Product and their Residues on a request 
from the Commission related to the evaluation of alachlor in the context 
of Council Directive 91/414/EEC. EFSA J. 2004;111:1–34.
EFSA (European Food Safety Authority). Conclusion regarding the peer-
review of the pesticide risk assessment of the active substance glufos-
inate. EFSA Scientific Report. 2005;27:1–81.
EFSA (European Food Safety Authority). Conclusion regarding the peer 
review of the pesticide risk assessment of the active substance prothio-
conazole. EFSA J. 2007;106;1–98.
EFSA (European Food Safety Authority). Scientific opinion of the Panel 
on Plant Protection Products and their Residues (PPR) on a request from 
the European Commission on potential developmental neurotoxicity of 
deltamethrin. EFSA J. 2009;921:1–34.
EFSA (European Food Safety Authority). Conclusion of the peer review 
of the pesticide risk assessment of the active substance metam. EFSA J. 
2011;9(9):2334.
EFSA (European Food Safety Authority). Scientific opinion on the devel-
opmental neurotoxicity potential of acetamiprid and imidacloprid. EFSA 
J. 2013;11:3471 (47 pp).
EFSA (European Food Safety Authority). Conclusion on the peer review of 
the pesticide risk assessment of the cative ingredient substance glypho-
sate. EFSA J. 2015;13:4302.
Ehrich M, Correll L, Veronesi B. Acetylcholinesterase and neuropathy tar-
get esterase inhibitions in neuroblastoma cells to distinguish organophos-
phorus compounds causing acute and delayed neurotoxicity. Fundam 
Appl Toxicol. 1997;38:55–63.
Ehrich M, Jortner BS. Organophosphorus-induced delayed neuropathy. In: 
Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press; 2010:1479–1504.
Eisenbrandt DL, Hotchkiss JA. Sulfuryl fluoride. In: Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ 
Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 
2010:2245–2258.
Elbaz A, Clavel J, Rathouz PJ, et al. Professional exposure to pesticides and 
Parkinson’s disease. Ann Neurol. 2009;66:494–504.
Eldefrawi AT, Eldefrawi ME. Receptors for γ-aminobutyric acid and 
voltage-dependent chloride channels as targets for drugs and toxicants. 
FASEB J. 1987;1:262–271.
Eldefrawi ME, Eldefrawi AT. Comparative molecular and pharmacological 
properties of cholinergic receptors in insects and mammals. In: Hedin 
PA, Hollingworth RM, Masler EP, Miyamoto J, Thompson DG, eds. 
Phytochemicals in Pest Control. Washington, DC: American Chemical 
Society; 1997:327–338.
Eldridge JC, Stevens JT, Wetzel LT, et al. Atrazine: mechanisms 
of hormonal imbalance in female SD rats. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 
1996;42:2–5.
Elinav E, Shapira Y, Ofran Y, et al. Near-fatal amitraz intoxication: the over-
looked pesticide. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2005;97:185–187.
Enan E, Matsumura F. Activation of phosphoinositide protein kinase 
C pathway in rat brain tissue by pyrethroids. Biochem Pharmacol. 
1993;45:703–710.
Eskenazi B, Bradman A, Castorina R. Exposures to children to organo-
phosphate pesticides and their potential health effects. Environ Health 
Perspect. 1999;107(suppl 3):409–419.
Eskenazi B, Chevrier J, Rosas LG, et al. The Pine River Statement: 
human health consequences of DDT use. Environ Health Perspect. 
2009;117:1359–1367.
Fahim MA, Shehab S, Nemmar A, et al. Daily subacute paraquat exposure 
decreases muscle function and substantia nigra dopamine levels. Physiol 
Res. 2013;62:313–321.
Farmer D. Inhibitors of aromatic acid biosynthesis. In: Krieger R, ed. 
Hayes’ Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic 
Press; 2010:1967–1972.
Feinstein DL, Akpa BS, Ayee MA, et al. The emerging threat of superwarfa-
rins: history, detection, mechanisms and countermeasures. Ann NY Acad 
Sci. 2016;1374:111–122.
Feng P, Wilson AGE, McClanahan R et al. Metabolism of alachlor by 
rat and mouse liver and nasal turbinate tissues. Drug Metab Dispos. 
1990;18:373–377.
Fenner-Crisp PA. Risk assessment and risk management: the regulatory 
process. In: Krieger R, ed. Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, 
CA: Academic Press; 2001:681–689.
Fenske RA, Wong SM, Leffingwell JT, et al. A video imaging technique 
for assessing dermal exposure. II. Fluorescent tracer testing. Am Ind Hyg 
Assoc. 1986;47:771–775.
Fernandez-Cornejo J, Nehring R, Osteen C, et al. Pesticide use in U.S. 
agriculture: 21 selected crops, 1960–2008. USDA Econ Informat Bull. 
2014;124:80.
Ferraz HB, Bertolucci PH, Pereira JS, et al. Chronic exposure to the fungi-
cide maneb may produce symptoms and signs of CNS manganese intoxi-
cation. Neurology. 1988;38:550–553.
Fisher MH, Mrozik H. The chemistry and pharmacology of avermectins. 
Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 1992;32:537–553.

Toxic Effects of Pesticides
Chapter 22
1099
Fitzmaurice AG, Rhodes SL, Lulla A, et al. Aldehyde dehydrogenase inhi-
bition as a pathogenetic mechanism in Parkinson’s disease. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A. 2013;110:636–641.
Flannigan SA, Tucker SB, Key MM, et al. Synthetic pyrethroid insecticides: 
a dermatological evaluation. Br J Ind Med. 1985;42:363–372.
Fontoura-da-Silva SE, Chautard-Friere-Maira EA. Butyrylcholinesterase 
variants (BChE and ChE1 loci) associated with erythrocyte acetylcho-
linesterase inhibition in farmers exposed to pesticides. Hum Hered. 
1996;46:142–147.
Ford MG, Lunt GG, Reay RC et al. eds. Neuropharmacology and Pesticide 
Action. Chichester, England: Ellis Norwood; 1986:512.
Forns J, Mandal S, Iszatt N, et al. Novel application of statistical methods 
for analysis of multiple toxicants identifies DDT as a risk factor for early 
child behavioral problems. Environ Res. 2016;151:91–100.
Forshaw PJ, Lister T, Ray DE. Inhibition of a neuronal voltage-
dependent chloride channel by the type II pyrethroid, deltamethrin. 
Neuropharmacology. 1993;32:105–111.
Forshaw PJ, Lister T, Ray DE. The role of voltage-gated chloride chan-
nels in Type II pyrethroid insecticide poisoning. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
2000;163:1–8.
FQPA (Food Quality Protection Act). Public Law. 1996;104–170.
Fradin MS, Day JF. Comparative efficacy of insect repellents against mos-
quito bites. New Engl J Med. 2002;347:13–18.
Fukuto TR. Metabolism of carbamate insecticides. Drug Metab Rev. 
1972;1:117–152.
Furlong CE, Holland N, Richter RJ, et al. PON1 status of farm worker 
mother and children as a predictor of organophosphate sensitivity. 
Pharmacogenet Genom. 2006;16:183–190.
Gallo MA, Lawryk NJ. Organic phosphorus pesticides. In: Hayes WJ, Laws 
ER, eds. Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic 
Press; 1991:917–1123.
Gammon DW, Aldous CN, Carr WC, et al. A risk assessment of atrazine 
use in California: human health and ecological aspects. Pest Manag Sci. 
2005;61:331–355.
Gammon DW, Moore TB, O’Malley MA. A toxicological assessment of 
sulfur as a pesticide. In: Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ Handbook of Pesticide 
Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2010:1889–1901.
Garabrant DH, Philbert MA. Review of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid 
(2,4-D) epidemiology and toxicology. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2002;34:233–257.
Garcia SJ, Seidler FJ, Slotkin TA. Developmental neurotoxicity of chlorypyr-
ifos: targeting glial cells. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 2005;19:455–461.
Ghali TG, Hollingworth RM. Influence of mixed function oxygenase 
metabolism on the acute neurotoxicity of the pesticide chlordimeform in 
mice. Neurotoxicology. 1985;6:215–238.
Gianessi LP. The increasing importance of herbicides in worldwide crop 
production. Pest Manag Sci. 2013;69:1099–1105.
Gianessi LP, Reigner NP. The value of herbicides in U.S. crop production. 
Weed Technol. 2007;21:559–566.
Gianessi LP, Reigner NP. The importance of fungicides in U.S. crop pro-
duction. Outlook Pest Manag. 2006;17:2019–213.
Giannitti F, Anderson M, Caspe SG. An outbreak of sodium fluoroacetate 
(1080) intoxication in selenium- and copper-deficient sheep in California. 
Vet Pathol. 2013;50:1022–1027.
Glare TR, Gwynn RL, Moran-Diez M. Development of biopesticides and 
future opportunities. Meth Mol Biol. 2016;1477:211–221.
Glynn P. A mechanism for organophosphate-induced delayed neuropathy. 
Toxicol Lett. 2006;162:94–97.
Goes AE, Savage EP, Gibbons G, et al. Suspected foodborn carbamate pes-
ticide intoxications with the ingestion of hydroponic cucumbers. Am J 
Epidemiol. 1980;111:254–259.
Golden RJ, Noller KL, Titus-Enrstoff L, et al. Environmental endocrine 
modulators and human health: an assessment of biological evidence. Crit 
Rev Toxicol. 1998;28:109–227.
Goldman LR, Smith DF, Neutra RR, et al. Pesticide food poisoning from 
contaminated watermelons in California, 1985. Arch Environ Health. 
1990;45:229–236.
Goldstein DS, Sullivan P, Cooney A. Rotenone decreases intracellular 
aldehyde dehydrogenase activity: implications for the pathogenesis of 
Parkinson’s disease. J Neurochem. 2015;133:14–25.
Golub M, Doherty J. Triphenyltin as a potential human endocrine disruptor. 
J Toxicol Environ Health B Crit Rev. 2004;7:281–295.
Goodal R. Cholinesterase pharmacogenetics. In: Gupta RC, ed. Toxicology 
of Organophosphate and Carbamate Compounds. Amsterdam: Elsevier; 
2006:187–198.
Goodman M, Mandel JS, DeSesso JM, et al. Atrazine and pregnancy out-
comes: a systematic review of epidemiological evidence. Birth Def Res B 
Dev Reprod Toxicol. 2014;101:215–236.
Gordon EB. Captan: transition from “B2” to “not likely”. How pesticide 
registrants affected the EPA cancer classification update. J Appl Toxicol. 
2007;27:519–526.
Gordon EB. Captan and folpet. In: Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ Handbook of 
Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2010:1915–1949.
Greenburg DL, Rusiecki J, Koutsos S, et al. Cancer incidence among pes-
ticide applicators exposed to captan in the Agricultural Health Study. 
Cancer Causes Control. 2008;19:1401–1407.
Gringorten JL. Ion balance in the Lepidopteran midgut and insecticidal 
action of Bacillus thuringiensis. In Isheaya I, ed. Biochemical Sites of 
Insecticide Action and Resistance. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer; 
2001:167–207.
Grube A, Donaldson D, Kiely T, et al. Pesticide Industry Sales and Usage: 
2006 and 2007 Market Estimates. Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency; 2011:33.
Gryboski J, Weinstein D, Ordway NK. Toxic encephalopathy appar-
ently related to the use of an insect repellent. New Engl J Med. 
1961;264:289–290.
Gullino ML, Clini C, Garibaldi A. Life without methyl bromide: the Italian 
experience in replacing the fumigant. Commun Agric Appl Biol Sci. 
2005;70:13–25.
Gunnell D, Eddleston M. Suicide by intentional ingestion of pesti-
cides: a continuing tragedy in developing countries. Int J Epidemiol. 
2003;32:902–909.
Gunnell D, Eddleston M, Phillips Mr, et al. The global distribution of 
fatal pesticide self-poisoning: systematic review. BMC Publ Health. 
2007;7:357.
Gupta RC, ed. Toxicology of Organophosphate and Carbamate Compounds. 
Amsterdam: Elsevier; 2006:763.
Guyton KZ, Loomis D, Grosse Y, et al. Carcinogenicity of tetrachlorvin-
phos, parathion, malathion, diazinon, and glyphosate. Lancet Oncol. 
2015;16:490–491.
Guzelian PS. Comparative toxicology of chlordecone (Kepone) in 
humans and experimental animals. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 
1982;22:89–113.
Hainzl D, Cole LM, Casida JE. Mechanisms for selective toxicity of fipronil 
insecticide and its sulfone metabolite and desulfinyl photoproduct. Chem 
Res Toxicol. 1998;11:1529–1535.
Hajra A, Banyopadhyay D, Heise LR, et al. Zika and pregnancy: a compre-
hensive review. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2017;77:e12607.
Harada S, Hiromori Y, Nakamura S, et al. Structural basis for PPARγ 
transactivation by endocrine-disrupting organotin compounds. Sci Rep. 
2016b;5:8520.
Harada T, Takeda M, Kojima S, et al. Toxicity and carcinogenicity of 
dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT). Tox Res. 2016a;32:21–33.
Hardell L, Eriksson M, Degerman A. Exposure to phenoxyacetic acids, 
chlorophenols or organic solvents in relation to histopathology, stage, 
and anatomical localization of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Cancer Res. 
1994;54:2386–2389.
Harrison ML, Loucks OL, Mitchell JW, et al. Systems studies of DDT 
transport. Science. 1970;170:503–508.
Hayes TB, Anderson LL, Beasley VR, et al. Demasculinization and femi-
nization of male gonads by atrazine: consistent effects across vertebrate 
classes. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2011;127:64–73.
Hayes TB, Collins A, Lee M, et al. Hermaphroditic, demasculinized frogs 
after exposure to the herbicide atrazine at low ecologically relevant 
doses. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002;99:5476–5480.
Hayes WJ. Pesticides Studied in Man. Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins; 
1982:672.
Hayes WJ, Laws ER, eds. Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, 
CA: Academic Press; 1991;1576.

1100
TOXIC AGENTS
Unit v
He F, Wang S, Liu L, et al. Clinical manifestations and diagnosis of acute 
pyrethroid poisoning. Arch Toxicol. 1989;63:54–58.
Heikkila RE, Nicklas WJ, Vyas I, et al. Dopaminergix toxicity of rotenone 
and the 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium ion after their stereotaxic admin-
istration to rats: implication for the mechanism of 1-methyl-4-phenyl-
1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine toxicity. Neurosci Lett. 1985;62:389–394.
Hernandez AF, Gonzales-Alzaga B, Lopez-Flores I, et al. Systematic 
reviews on neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders linked 
to pesticide exposure: methodological features and impact on risk assess-
ment. Environ Int. 2016;92–93:657–679.
Hernandez AF, Martin-Rubi JC, Ballesteros JL, et al. Clinical and patholog-
ical findings in fatal 1,3-dichloropropene intoxication. Hum Exp Toxicol. 
1994;13:303–306.
Herzstein J, Cullen MR. Methyl bromide intoxication in four field 
workers during removal of soil fumigation sheets. Am J Ind Med. 
1990;17:321–326.
Heudorf U, Angerer J, Drexler H. Current internal exposure to pesticides 
in children and adolescents in Germany: urinary levels of metabolites of 
pyrethroid and organophosphorus insecticides. Int Arch Occup Environ 
Health. 2004;77:67–72.
Heydens WF. Summary of toxicology studies with alachlor. J Pest Sci. 
1998;24:75–82.
Heydens WF, Lamb IC, Wilson AGE. Chloroacetanilides. In: Krieger R, 
ed. Hayes’ Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic 
Press; 2010:1753–1769.
Heydens WF, Wilson AGE, Kier LD, et al. An evaluation of the carcino-
genic potential of the herbicide alachlor to man. Human Exp Toxicol. 
1999;18:363–391.
Hickey JP, Batterman SA, Chernyak SM. Trends of chlorinated organic 
contaminants in Great Lakes trout and walleye from 1970 to 1998. Arch 
Environ Contam Toxicol. 2006;50:97–110.
Ho YS, Magnenat JL, Gargano M, et al. The nature of antioxidant defense 
mechanisms: a lesson from transgenic mice. Environ Health Perspect. 
1998;106:1219–1228.
Hoar SK, Blair A, Holmes FF, et al. Agricultural herbicide use and risk of 
lymphoma and soft-tissue sarcoma. JAMA. 1986;256:1141–1147.
Hodgson E. In vitro human phase I metabolism of xenobiotics I: pesticides 
and related compounds used in agriculture and public health, May 2003. 
J Biochem Mol Toxicol. 2003;17:201–206.
Hoffman JN, Keifer MC, Furlong CE, et al. Serum cholinesterase inhi-
bition in relation to paraoxonase 1 (PON1) status among organophos-
phate-exposed agricultural pesticide handlers. Environ Health Perspect. 
2009;117:1402–1408.
Hollingworth RM. Chemistry, biological activity and uses of formamidine 
pesticides. Environ Health Perspect. 1976;14:57–69.
Hollingworth RM. Inhibitors and uncouplers of mitochondrial oxidative 
phosphorylation. In: Krieger R, ed. Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. 
San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2001:1169–1261.
Hsu WH, Kakuk TJ. Effects of amitraz and chlordimeform on heart rate and 
pupil diameter in rats: mediated by alpha2-adrenoceptors. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 1984;73:411–415.
Hsu WH, Lu ZH. Amitraz-induced delay of gastrointestinal transit in 
mice: mediated by alpha2-adrenergic receptors. Drug Develop Res. 
1984;4:655–660.
Hudson NL, Kasner EJ, Beckman J, et al. Characteristics and magnitude 
of acute pesticide-related illness and injuries associated with pyre-
thrin and pyrethroid exposures—11 states, 2000–2008. Am J Ind Med. 
2014;57:15–30.
Hufnagel RB, Arno G, Hein ND, et al. Neuropathy target esterase impair-
ments cause Oliver–McFarlane and Laurence–Moon syndromes J Med 
Genet. 2015;52:85–94.
Huntington S, Fenik Y, Vohra R, et al. Human bromethalin exposures 
reported to a U.S. statewide poison control system. Clin Toxicol (Phila). 
2016;54:277–281.
Hurt S, Ollinger J, Arce G, et al. Dialkyldithiocarbamates (EBDCs). In: 
Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press; 2010:1689–1710.
IARC (International Agency for Research on Cancer). Atrazine. IARC 
Monogr Eval Carcinog Risks Hum. 1999;73:59–113.
IOM (Institute of Medicine). Gulf War and Health. Vol. 1. Washington, DC: 
National Academy Press; 2000:408.
IOM (Institute of Medicine). Veterans and Agent Orange: Update 2014. 
Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2016:1116.
IPCS (International Programme on Chemical Safety). Chlordimeform. 
Environmental Health Criteria 1999. Geneva: World Health Organization; 
1998:159.
IPCS (International Programme on Chemical Safety). The WHO 
Recommended Classification of Pesticides by Hazard and Guidelines to 
Classification: 2009. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2010:78.
Ireland B, Acquarella J, Farrell T, et al. Evaluation of ocular health among 
alachlor manufacturing workers. J Occup Med. 1994;36:738–742.
Isman MB. Botanical insecticides, deterrents and repellents in modern agricul-
ture and an increasingly regulated world. Annu Rev Entomol. 2006;51:45–66.
Ito T. Mazzotti reaction with eosinophilia after undergoing oral ivermectin 
for scabies. J Dermatol. 2013;40:776–777.
Iwasa T, Motoyama N, Ambrose JT, et al. Mechanism for the differential 
toxicity of neonicotinoid insecticides in the honey bee Apis mellifera. 
Crop Protect. 2004;23;371–378.
Jacobsen NE, Sanders M, Toia RP, et al. Alachlor and its analogues as meta-
bolic progenitors of formaldehyde: fate of N-methoxymethyl and other 
N-alkoxyalkyl substituents. J Agr Food Chem. 1991;39:1342–1350.
Jamal GA, Julu POO. Low level exposure to organophosphate esters may 
cause neurotoxicity. Toxicology. 2002;181:22–33.
Jett DA, Navoa RV, Beckles RA, et al. Cognitive function and cholinergic 
neurochemistry in weanling rats exposed to chlorpyrifos. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 2001;174:89–98.
Jiang X, Huang LF, Zhang SH, et al. Sulfur fumigation, a better or worse 
choice in preservation of traditional Chinese medicine? Phytomedicine. 
2013;20:97–105.
Johnson DJ, Graham DG, Amarnath V, et al. Release of carbon disul-
fide is a contributing mechanism in the axonopathy produced by N,N-
diethyldithiocarbamate. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1998;148:288–296.
Johnson MK. The target for initiation of delayed neurotoxicity by organo-
phosphorus esters: biochemical studies and toxicological applications. 
Rev Biochem Toxicol. 1982;4:141–212.
Johnson MK, Glynn P. Neuropathy target esterase. In: Krieger R, ed. 
Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 
2001:953–965.
Johnson MK, Jacobsen D, Meredith TJ, et al. Evaluation of antidotes 
for 
poisoning 
by 
organophosphorus 
pesticides. 
Emerg 
Med. 
2000;12:22–37.
Johnson MK, Lauwerys R. Protection by some carbamates against the 
delayed neurotoxic effects of diisopropyl phosphorofluoridate. Nature. 
1969;222:1066–1067.
Johnson MK, Read DJ. The influence of chirality on the delayed neuro-
pathic potential of some organophosphorus esters: neuropathic and pro-
phylactic effects of streoisomers of ethyl phenylphosphonic acid (EPN 
oxon and EPN) correlate with quantities of aged and unaged neuropathy 
target esterase in vivo. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1987;90:103–115.
Kaneko H. Pyrethroid chemistry and metabolism. In: Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ 
Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 
2010:1635–1663.
Kanthasamy AG, Kitazawa M, Kanthasamy A, et al. Dieldrin-induced neuro-
toxicity: relevance to Parkinson’s disease pathogenesis. Neurotoxicology. 
2005;26:701–719.
Kappers WA, Edwards RJ, Murray S, et al. Diazinon is activated by 
CYP2C19 in human liver. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2001;177:68–76.
Katz TM, Miller JH, Hebert AA. Insect repellents: historical perspectives 
and new developments. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2008;58:865–871.
Kavlock RJ. Pesticides as endocrine-disrupting chemicals. In: Krieger R, 
ed. Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 
2001:727–746.
Keigwin RP. Maneb: cancellation order for a certain pesticide registration. 
Fed Reg. 2010;75(73):19967–19968.
Keiner C. Wartime rat control, rodent ecology, and the rise and fall of chem-
ical rodenticides. Endeavour. 2005;29:119–125.
Kelce WR, Stone CR, Laws SC, et al. Persistent DDT metabolite p,p′-DDE 
is a potent androgen receptor antagonist. Nature. 1995;375:581–585.

Toxic Effects of Pesticides
Chapter 22
1101
Kennepohl E, Munro IC, Bus JS. Phenoxy herbicides (2,4-D). In: Krieger R, 
ed. Hayes’ Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic 
Press; 2010:1829–1847.
Kim DJ, Seok SH, Baek MW, et al. Benomyl induction of brain aro-
matase and toxic effects in the zebrafish embryo. J Appl Toxicol. 
2009;29:289–294.
Kim IY, Shin JH, Kim HS, et al. Assessing estrogenic activity of pyre-
throid insecticides using in vitro combination assays. J Reprod Develop. 
2004;50:245–255.
King N, Tran MH. Long-acting anticoagulant rodenticide (superwarfarin) 
poisoning: a review of its historical development, epidemiology and clin-
ical management. Transf Med Rev. 2015;29:250–258.
Klaunig JE, Gehen SC, Wang Z, et al. Mechanism of 1,3-dichloropropene-
induced rat liver carcinogenesis. Toxicol Sci. 2015;143:6–15.
Kloas W, Lutz I, Urbatzka R, et al. Does atrazine affect larval development 
and sexual differentiation of South African clawed frogs? Ann NY Acad 
Sci. 2009;1163:437–440.
Konjuh C, Garcia G, Lopez L, et al. Neonatal hypomyelination by the herbi-
cide 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid. Chemical and ultrastructural stud-
ies in rats. Toxicol Sci. 2008;104:332–340.
Koren G, Matsui D, Bailey B. DEET-based insect repellents: safety impli-
cations for children and pregnant and lactating women. Can Med Ass J. 
2003;169:209–212.
Kotake Y. Molecular mechanisms of environmental organotin toxicity in 
mammals. Biol Pharm Bull. 2012;35:1876–1880.
Koyama K, Andou Y, Saruki K, et al. Delayed and severe toxicity of an herbicide 
containing glufosinate and a surfactant. Vet Hum Toxicol. 1994;36:17–18.
Kretzschmar D, Mason G, Sharma S, et al. The Swiss cheese mutant causes 
glial hyperwrapping and brain degeneration in Drosophila. J Neurosci. 
1997;17:7425–7432.
Krieger R, ed. Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic 
Press; 2001:1908.
Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press; 2010:2342.
Lamberth C, Jeanmart S, Luksch T, et al. Current challenges and trends in 
the discovery of agrochemicals. Science. 2013;341:742–746.
Landrigan PJ, Powell KE, James LE, et al. Paraquat and marijuana-epide-
miologic risk assessment. Am J Public Health. 1983;73:784–788.
Lapointe N, St-Hilaire M, Martinoli MG, et al. Rotenone induces non-
specific central nervous system and systemic toxicity. FASEB J. 
2004;18:717–719.
Laugeray A, Herzine A, Perche O, et al. Pre- and postnatal exposure to low 
dose glufosinate ammonium induces autism-like phenotypes in mice. 
Front Behav Neurosci. 2014;8(art. 390):14.
Laurino D, Porporato M, Paletta A, et al. Toxicity of neonicotinoid insec-
ticides to honey bees: laboratory tests. Bull Insectol. 2011;64:107–113.
Lawrence LJ, Casida JE. Stereospecific action of pyrethroid insecticides 
on the γ-aminobutyric acid receptor–ionophore complex. Science. 
1983;221:1399–1401.
Lee HL, Chen KW, Chi CH, et al. Clinical presentations and prognostic 
factors of a glyphosate-surfactant herbicide intoxication: a review of 131 
cases. Acad Emerg Med. 2000;7:906–910.
Lee K, Park EK, Stoecklin-Marois M, et al. Occupational paraquat expo-
sure of agricultural workers in large Costa Rican farms. Int Arch Occup 
Environ Health. 2009b;82:455–462.
Lee SJ, Mulay P, Diebolt-Brown B, et al. Acute illnesses associated with 
exposure to fipronil-surveillance data from 11 states in the United States, 
2001–2007. Clin Toxicol (Phila). 2010;48:737–744.
Lee JW, Hwang IW, Kim JW, et al. Common pesticides used in suicide 
attempts following the 2012 paraquat ban in Korea. J Korean Med Sci. 
2015;30:1517–1521.
Lee WJ, Cha ES, Park ES, et al. Deaths from pesticide poisoning in 
South Korea: trends over 10 years. Int Arch Occup Environ Health. 
2009a;82:365–371.
Leet T, Acquavella J, Lynch C et al. Cancer incidence among alachlor man-
ufacturing workers. Am J Ind Med. 1996;30:300–306.
Li AA, Mink PJ, McIntosh LJ, et al. Evaluation of epidemiologic and ani-
mal data associating pesticides with Parkinson’s disease. J Occup Env 
Med. 2005;47:1059–1087.
Li S, Huang W, Duan Y, et al. Human fatality due to thallium poison-
ing: autopsy, microscopy, and mass spectrometry assays. J Forens Sci. 
2015;60:247–259.
Li WF, Costa LG, Richter RJ, et al. Catalytic efficiency determines the in vivo 
efficacy of PON1 for detoxifying organophosphates. Pharmacogenetics. 
2000;10:767–779.
Lin JN, Lin CL, Lin MC, et al. Increased risk of dementia in patients with 
acute organophosphate and carbamate poisoning. Medicine. 2015;94:1–8.
Lock EA, Wilks MF. Diquat. In: Krieger R, ed. Handbook of Pesticide 
Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2001:1605–1621.
Lock EA, Wilks MF. Paraquat. In: Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ Handbook of 
Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2010:1771–1827.
Lockridge O, Duysen EG, Masson P. Butyrylcholinesterase: overview, 
structure and function. In: Satoh T, Gupta RC, eds. Anticholinesterase 
Pesticides: Metabolism, Neurotoxicity and Epidemiology. Hoboken, NJ: 
Wiley; 2010:25–41.
Lockridge O, Masson P. Pesticides and susceptible populations: people with 
butyrylcholinesterase genetic variants may be at risk. Neurotoxicology. 
2000;21:113–126.
Lockridge O, Norgren RB, Johnson RC, et al. Naturally occurring genetic 
variants of human acetylcholinesterase and butyrylcholinesterase and 
their potential impact on the risk of toxicity from cholinesterase inhibi-
tors. Chem Res Toxicol. 2016;29:1381–1392.
Lomax LG, Stott WT, Johnson KA, et al. The chronic toxicity and oncoge-
nicity of inhaled technical grade 1, 3-dichloropropene in rats and mice. 
Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1989;12:418–431.
Longnecker MP. Invited commentary: why DDT matters now. Am J 
Epidemiol. 2005;162:726–728.
Loomis D, Guyton K, Grosse Y, et al. Carcinogenicity of lindane, DDT and 
2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid. Lancet Oncol. 2015;16:891–892.
Lotti M. The pathogenesis of organophosphate neuropathy. Crit Rev 
Toxicol. 1992;21:465–487.
Lotti M. Cholinesterase inhibition: complexities in interpretation. Clin 
Chem. 1995;41:1814–1818.
Lotti M. Organophosphorus compounds. In: Spencer PS, Schaumburg HH, 
Ludolph AC, eds. Experimental and Clinical Neurotoxicology. Oxford, 
UK: Oxford University Press; 2000:898–925.
Lotti M. Promotion of organophosphate-induced delayed polyneuropathy 
by certain esterase inhibitors. Toxicology. 2002a;181–182:245–248.
Lotti M. Low level exposures to organophosphorus esters and peripheral 
nerve functions. Muscle Nerve. 2002b;25:492–504.
Lotti M. Clinical toxicology of anticholinesterases in humans. In: Krieger R, 
ed. Hayes’ Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic 
Press; 2010:1543–1589.
Lotti M, Caroldi S, Capodicasa E, et al. Promotion of organophosphate-
induced delayed polyneuropathy by phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1991;108:234–241.
Lotti M, Moretto A. Organophosphate-induced delayed polyneuropathy. 
Toxicol Rev. 2005;24:37–49.
Lu C, Bravo R, Caltabiano LM, et al. The presence of dialkylphosphates in 
fresh fruit juices: implications for organophosphorus pesticide exposure 
and risk assessments. J Toxicol Environ Health Part A. 2005;68:209–227.
Lynagh T, Lynch JW. Molecular mechanisms of Cys-loop ion channel 
receptor modulation by ivermectin. Front Mol Neurosci. 2012;5:60.
Lyubimov AV, Garry VF. Phosphine. In: Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ Handbook of 
Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2010:2259–2266.
Macdonald N, Gledhill A. Potential impact of ABCB1 (P-glycoprotein) 
polymorphisms on avermectin toxicity in humans. Arch Toxicol. 
2007;81:553–563.
Maharaj R, Mthembu DJ, Sharp BL. Impact of DDT re-introduction on 
malaria transmission in KwaZulu-Natal. S Afr Med J. 2005;95:871–874.
Majerus PW, Tollefsen DM. Blood coagulation and anticoagulants, 
thrombolytic, and antiplatelet drugs. In: Brunton LL, ed. Goodman 
and Gilman’s The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics. New York: 
McGraw-Hill; 2006:1467–1488.
Manaca MN, Grimalt JO, Sunjer J, et al. Concentration of DDT com-
pounds in breast milk from African women (Manhiça, Mozambique) at 
the early stages of indoor spraying with this insecticide. Chemosphere. 
2011;85:307–314.

1102
TOXIC AGENTS
Unit v
Maroni M, Colosio C, Ferioli A, et al. Biological monitoring of pesticide 
exposure: a review. Toxicology. 2000;143:5–118.
Marsh RE. Vertebrate pest control chemicals and their use in urban and rural 
environments. In: Keirger R, ed. Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San 
Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2001:251–262.
Matsuda K, Buckingam SD, Kleier D, et al. Neonicotinoids: insecticides 
acting on insect nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 
2001;22:573–580.
Matsumura F. Toxicology of Insecticides. New York: Plenum Press; 
1985:598.
Matsumura F, Ghiasuddin SM. Characteristics of DDT-sensitive Ca-ATPase 
in the axonic membrane. In: Narahashi T. ed. Neurotoxicology of 
Insecticides and Pheromones. New York: Plenum Press; 1979:245–257.
Matsumura F, Patil KC. Adenosin triphosphatase sensitive to DDT in syn-
apses of rat brain. Science. 1969;166:121–122.
Mattsson JL, Charles JM, Yano BL, et al. Single-dose and chronic dietary 
neurotoxicity screening studies on 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid in 
rats. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1997;40:111–119.
Matyunas NG, Rodgers GC: Nicotine poisoning. In: Ford MD, Delaney 
KA, Ling LJ, Erickson T, eds. Clinical Toxicology. Philadelphia, PA: 
W.B. Saunders, 2001:985–989.
McClintock JT, Schaffer CR, Sjobald RD. A comparative review of the 
mammalian toxicity of Bacillus thuringiensis–based pesticides. Pestic 
Sci. 1995;45:95–106.
McCormack AL, Atienza JG, Johnston LC, et al. Role of oxidative stress 
in paraquat-induced dopaminergic cell degeneration. J Neurochem. 
2005;93:1030–1037.
McCormack AL, Thiruchelvam M, Manning-Bog AB, et al. Environmental 
risk factors and Parkinson’s disease: selective degeneration of nigral 
dopaminergic neurons caused by the herbicide paraquat. Neurobiol Dis. 
2002;10:119–127.
McGrew DM, Irwin I, Langston JW. Ehtylene-bisdithiocarbamate enhances 
MPTP-induced striatal dopamine depletion in mice. Neurotoxicology. 
2000;21:309–312.
McGlynn KA, Quraishi SM, Graubard BI, et al. Persistent organochlorine 
pesticides and risk of testicular germ cell tumors. J Natl Cancer Inst. 
2008;100:663–671.
McLaughlin J, Reynaldo EF, Lamar JK, et al. Teratology studies in rab-
bits with captan, folpet and thalidomide. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
1969;14:641.
Meco G, Bonifati V, Vanacore N, et al. Parkinsonism after chronic expo-
sure to the fungicide maneb (manganese ethylene-bis-dithiocarbamate). 
Scand J Work Environ Health. 1994;20:301–305.
Mendelsohn M, Kough J, Vituzis Z, et al. Are Bt crops safe? Nature 
Biotechnol. 2003;21;1003–1009.
Miller GW. Paraquat: the red herring of Parkinson’s disease research. 
Toxicol Sci. 2007;100:1–2.
Miyamoto J. Degradation, metabolism and toxicity of synthetic pyrethroids. 
Environ Health Perspect. 1976;14:15–28.
Moebus S, Bödeker W. Mortality of intentional and unintentional pesti-
cide poisonings in Germany from 1980 to 2010. J Public Health Policy. 
2015;36:170–180.
Mohamed F, Senarathna L, Percy A, et al. Acute human self-poisoning with 
the N- phenylpyrazole insecticide fipronil—a GABAA-gated chloride 
channel blocker. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 2004;42:955–963.
Mohanty MK, Kumar V, Pastia BK, et al. An analysis of poisoning deaths in 
Manipal, India. Vet Hum Toxicol. 2004;46:208–209.
Molyneux DH, Ward SA. Reflections on the Nobel Prize for Medicine 
2015: the public health legacy and impact of avermectin and artemisin. 
Trends Parasitol. 2015;31:605–607.
Moretto A. Testing for organophosphate delayed neuropathy. In Maines 
MD, Costa LG, Reed DJ, et al. eds. Current Protocols in Toxicology. 
New York: Wiley; 1999:11.5.1–11.5.14.
Moretto A. Promoters and promotion of axonopathies. Toxicol Lett. 
2000;112–113:17–21.
Moretto A, Colosio C. The role of pesticide exposure in the genesis of 
Parkinson’s disease: epidemiological studies and experimental data. 
Toxicology. 2013;307:24–34.
Moretto A, Tiramani M, Colosio C. Long-term neurotoxicological effectsof 
anticholinesterases after acute or chronic exposure. In: Satoh T, Gupta 
RC, eds. Anticholinesterase Pesticides: Metabolism, Neurotoxicity and 
Epidemiology. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley; 2010:97–108.
Mortensen S, Chandra S, Hooper M, et al. Maturational differences in 
chlorpyrifos–oxonase activity may contribute to age-related sensitivity to 
chlorpyrifos. J Biochem Toxicol. 1996;1:279–287.
Moser M, Li Y, Varpel K, et al. Placental failure and impaired vasculogen-
esis result in embryonic lethality for neuropathy target esterase-deficient 
mice. Mol Cell Biol. 2004;24:1667–1679.
Moser M, Stempfl T, Li Y, et al. Cloning and expression of the murine sws/
NTE gene. Mech Dev. 2000;90:279–282.
Moser V. Companion of aldicarb and metamidophos neurotoxicity at differ-
ent ages in the rat: behavioral and biochemical parameters. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 1999;157:94–106.
Mulay PR, Clak G, Jackson WL, et al. Acute sulfuryl fluoride poisoning in 
a family—Florida, August 2015. MMWR. 2016;65:698–699.
Mull RL, Hershberger LW. Inhibitors of DNA biosynthesis—mitosis: benz-
imidazoles. The benzimidazole fungicides benomyl and carbendazim. 
In: Krieger R, ed. Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press; 2001:1673–1699.
Mullin CA, Fine JD, Reynolds RD, et al. Toxicological risks of agrochemi-
cal spray adjuvants: organosilicone surfactants may not be safe. Front 
Public Health. 2016;4:art 92.
Multigner L, Kadhel P, Rouget F, et al. Chlordecone exposure and adverse 
effects in French Indies populations. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2016;23:3–8.
Muñoz-Quezada MT, Lucero BA, Barr DB, et al. Neurodevelopmental 
effects in children associated with exposure to organophosphorus pesti-
cides: a systematic review. Neurotoxicology. 2013;39:158–168.
Muñoz-Quezada MT, Lucero BA, Iglesias VP, et al. Chronic exposure to 
organophosphate (OP) pesticides and neuropsychological functioning in 
farm workers: a review. Int J Occup Environ Health. 2016;22:68–79.
Munro IC, Carlo GL, Orr JC, et al. A comprehensive, integrated review and 
evaluation of the scientific evidence relating to the safety of the herbicide 
2,4-D. J Am Coll Toxicol. 1992;11:559–664.
Murphy SD. Toxic effects of pesticides. In: Klaassen CD, Amdur MO, 
Doull J, eds. Casarett and Doull’s Toxicology: The Basic Science of 
Poisons. New York: Macmillan; 1986:519–581.
Mutch E, Daly AK, Leathart JBS, et al. Do multiple cytochrome P450 
isoforms contribute to parathion metabolism in man? Arch Toxicol. 
2003;77:313–320.
Nagami H, Nishigaki Y, Matsushima S, et al. Hospital-based survey of 
pesticide poisoning in Japan, 1998–2002. Int J Occup Environ Health. 
2005;11:180–184.
Nakayama A, Sukekawa M. Quantitative correlation between molecular 
similarity and receptor-binding activity of neonicotinoid insecticides. 
Pestic Sci. 1998;52:104–110.
Narahashi T. Neuronal ion channels as the target sites of insecticides. 
Pharmacol Toxicol. 1996;78:1–14.
Narahashi T, Zhao X, Ikeda T, et al. Differential actions of insecticides on tar-
get sites: basis for selective toxicity. Hum Exp Toxicol. 2007;26:361–366.
Nash D, Mostashari F, Fine A, et al. The outbreak of West Nile virus infec-
tion in the New York City area in 1999. New Eng J Med. 2001;344: 
1807–1814.
Nathanson JA. Characterization of octopamine-sensitive adenylate cyclase: 
elucidation of a class of potent and selective octopamine-2 recep-
tor agonists with toxic effects in insects. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
1985;82:599–603.
Nauen R, Jeschke P, Velten R, et al. Flupyradifurone: a brief profile of a new 
butenolide insecticide. Pest Manag Sci. 2015;71:850–861.
Naughton C, O’Toole D, Kirik D, et al. Interaction between subclinical 
doses of the Parkinson’s disease associated gene α-synuclein, and the 
pesticide rotenone precipitates motor dysfunction and nigrostriatal neu-
rodegeneration in rats. Behav Brain Res. 2017;316:160–168.
Novak RJ, Lampman RL. Public health pesticides. In: Krieger R, ed. 
Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 
2001:181–201.
NRC (National Research Council). Pesticides in the Diets of Infants and 
Children. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 1993:386.
O’Brien RD. Insecticides: Action and Metabolism. New York: Academic 
Press; 1967:332.
Oerke EC. Crop losses to pests. J Agric Sci. 2006;144:31–43.

Toxic Effects of Pesticides
Chapter 22
1103
Oghabian Z, Afshar A, Rahimi HR: Hepatotoxicity due to zinc phosphide 
poisoning in two patients: role of N-acetylcysteine. Clin Case Rep. 
2016;4:768–772.
Okahashi N, Sano M, Miyata K, et al. Lack of evidence for endocrine dis-
rupting effects in rats exposed to fenitrothion in utero and from weaning 
to maturation. Toxicology. 2005;206:17–31.
Okankwo JO, Mutshatsi TN, Botha B, et al. DDT, DDE and DDD in human 
milk from South Africa. Bull Environ Contam Toxicol. 2008;81:348–354.
O’Malley M. The regulatory evaluation of the skin effects of pesticides. In: 
Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press; 2010:701–787.
Oriel M, Edmiston S, Beauvais S, et al. Illnesses associated with chloro-
picrin use in California agriculture, 1992–2003. Rev Environ Contam 
Toxicol. 2009;200:1–31.
Osimitz TG, Lake BG. Mode of action analysis for induction of rat liver 
tumors by pyrethrins: relevance to human cancer risk. Crit Rev Toxicol. 
2009;39:501–511.
Osimitz TG, Murphy JV. Neurological effects associated with use of 
the insect repellent N,N-diethyl-m-toluamide (DEET). Clin Toxicol. 
1997;35:435–441.
Padilla S, Wilson VA, Bushnell PJ. Studies on the correlation between blood 
cholinesterase inhibition and target tissue inhibition in pesticide-treated 
rats. Toxicology. 1994;92:11–25.
Page A, Liu S, Gunnell D, et al. Suicide by pesticide poisoning remains a 
priority for suicide prevention in China: analysis of national mortality 
trends 2006–2013. J Affect Disord. 2016;208:418–423.
Palatnick W, Meatherall R, Sitar D, et al. Toxicokinetics of acute strychnine 
poisoning. Clin Toxicol. 1997;35:617–620.
Panneton WM, Kumar VB, Gan Q, et al. The neurotoxicity of DOPAL: 
behavioral and stereological evidence for its role in Parkinson’s disease 
pathogenesis. PLoS ONE. 2010;5:e15251.
Pardo-Lopez L, Soberon M, Bravo A. Bacillus thuringiensis insecticidal 
three-domain Cry toxins: mode of action, insect resistance and conse-
quences for crop protection. FEMS Microbiol Rev. 2013;37:3–22.
Park J, Darrien I, Prescott LF. Pharmacokinetic studies in severe intoxica-
tion with 2,4-D and mecoprop. Proc Eur Soc Toxicol. 1977;18:154–155.
Parsons PP. Mammalian toxicokinetics and toxicity of chlorothalonil. In: 
Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press; 2010:1951–1966.
Patel RV, Shaeer KM, Patel P, et al. EPA-registered repellents for mosquitoes 
transmitting emerging viral disease. Pharmacotherapy. 2016;36:1272–1280.
Peakall DB. Pesticides and the reproduction of birds. Scientific American. 
1970;222:72–78.
Pearce N, McLean D. Agricultural exposures and non-Hodgkin’s lym-
phoma. Scand J Work Environ Health. 2005;31(suppl 1):18–25.
Pelfrene AF. Rodenticides. In: Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ Handbook of Pesticide 
Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2010:2153–2217.
Peraica M, Capodicasa E, Moretto A, et al. Organophosphate polyneuropa-
thy in chicks. Biochem Pharmacol. 1993;45:131–135.
Persson EC, Graubard BI, Evans AA, et al. Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane 
and risk of hepatocellular carcinoma. Int J Cancer. 2012;131:20178–1084.
Peter JV, Moran JL, Graham P. Oxime therapy and outcomes in human 
organophosphate poisoning: an evaluation using meta-analytic tech-
niques. Crit Care Med. 2006;34:502–510.
Peterson ME. Bromethalin. Top Compan Anim Med. 2013;28:21–23.
Peterson ME, Fluegeman K. Colecalciferol. Top Compan Anim Med. 
2013;28:24–27.
Petrucci N, Sardini S. Severe neurotoxic reaction associated with oral 
ingestion of low-dose diethyltoluamide-containing insect repellent in a 
child. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2000;16:341–342.
Pezzoli G, Cereda E. Exposure to pesticides and solvents and risk of 
Parkinson’s disease. Neurology. 2013;80:2035–2041.
Phua DH, Lin CC, Wu Ml, et al. Neonicotinoid insecticides: an emerging 
cause of acute pesticide poisoning. Clin Toxicol. 2009;47:336–341.
Piccirillo VJ, Piccirillo AL. Methyl bromide. In: Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ 
Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 
2010:2267–2279.
Pope C. The influence of age on pesticide toxicity. In: Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ 
Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 
2010:819–835.
Popp W, Schmieding W, Speck M, et al. Incidence of bladder cancer is 
a cohort of workers exposed to 4-chloro-o-toluidine while synthesizing 
chlordimeform. Br J Ind Med. 1992;49:529–531.
Poulos L, Athanaselis S, Coutselinis A. Acute intoxication with cyperme-
thrin (NRDC 149). J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 1982;19:519–520.
Povey AC. Gene–environmental interactions and organophosphate toxicity. 
Toxicology. 2010;278:294–304.
Power LE, Sudakin DL. Pyrethrin and pyrethroid exposure in the United 
States: a longitudinal analysis of incidents reported to poison centers. J 
Med Toxicol. 2007;3:94–99.
Prendergast MA, Terry AV, Buccafusco JJ. Effects of chronic, low-level 
organophosphate exposure on delayed recall, discrimination, and spatial 
learning in monkeys and rats. Neurotoxicol Teratol. 1998;20:115–122.
Proudfoot AT. Poisoning with amitraz. Toxicol Rev. 2003;22:71–74.
Proudfoot AT. Aluminum and zinc phosphide poisoning. Clin Toxicol. 
2009;47:89–100.
Proudfoot AT, Krenzelak EP, Vale JA. Position paper on urine alkaliniza-
tion. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 2004;42:1–26.
Pruett SB, Myers LP, Keil DE. Toxicology of metam sodium. J Toxicol Env 
Health Part B. 2001;4:207–222.
Rajasuriar R, Awang R, Hashim SBH, et al. Profile of poisoning admissions 
in Malaysia. Hum Exp Toxicol. 2007;26:73–81.
Ravindran S, Hopkins B, Bova S, et al. In vivo metabolism of norbormide in 
rats and mice. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 2009;28:147–151.
Ray DE. Pesticides derived from plants and other organisms. In: Hayes 
WJ, Lawd ER, eds. Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press; 1991:585–636.
Ray DE. Chronic effects of low level exposure to anticholinesterases—a 
mechanistic review. Toxicol Lett. 1998;103:527–533.
Ray DE, Forshaw PJ. Pyrethroid insecticides: poisoning, syndromes, syner-
gies and therapy. Clin Toxicol. 2000;38:95–101.
Ray DE, Fry JR. A reassessment of the neurotoxicity of pyrethroid insecti-
cides. Pharmacol Therap. 2006;111:174–193.
Reiner E, Simeon-Rudolf V. Methods for measuring cholinesterase activi-
ties in human blood. In: Gupta RC, ed. Toxicology of Organophosphate 
and Carbamate Compounds. Amsterdam: Elsevier; 2006:199–208.
Reiss R, Chang ET, Richardson RJ, et al. A review of epidemiologic studies 
of low-level exposures to organophosphorus insecticides in non-occupa-
tional populations. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2015;45:531–641.
Ricceri L, Markina N, Valanzano A, et al. Developmental exposure to chlor-
pyrifos alters reactivity to environmental and social cues in adolescent 
mice. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2003;191:189–201.
Richardson JR, Caudle WM, Wang M, et al. Developmental exposure to 
diesldrin alters the dopamine system and increases neurotoxicity in an 
animal model of Parkinson’s disease. FASEB J. 2006;20:E976–E985.
Richardson JR, Quan Y, Sherer TB et al. Paraquat neurotoxicity is distinct 
from that of MPTP and rotenone. Toxicol Sci. 2005;88:193–201.
Richardson RJ, Hein ND Wijeyesakere SJ, et al. Neuropathy target esterase 
(NTE): overview and future. Chem Biol Interact. 2013;203:238–244.
Risher JF, Miuk FL, Stara JF. The toxicologic effects of the carbamate insecticide 
aldicarb in mammals: a review. Environ Health Perspect. 1987;72:267–281.
Roberts D, Curtis C, Tren R, et al. Malaria control and public health. Emerg 
Infect Dis. 2004;10:1170–1171.
Roberts DM, Buckley N. Urinary alkalinization for acute achlorophenoxy 
herbicide poisoning. Cochrane Database Sys Rev. 2007;1:CD005488.
Roberts DM, Karunarathna A, Buckley NA, et al. Influence of pesticide 
regulation on acute poisoning deaths in Sri Lanka. Bull World Health 
Organiz. 2003;81:789–798.
Rogan WJ, Chen A. Health risks and benefits of bis(4-chlorophenyl)-1,1,1-
trichloroethane (DDT). Lancet. 2005;366:763–773.
Rose MS, Smith LL, Wyatt I. Evidence for the energy-dependant accumula-
tion of paraquat into rat lung. Nature. 1974;252:314–315.
Rosenstock L, Keifer M, Daniell WE, et al. Chronic central nervous sys-
tem effects of acute organophosphate pesticide intoxication. Lancet. 
1991;338:223–227.
Ross JH, Driver JH, Harris SA, et al. Dermal absorption of 2,4-D: a review 
of species differences. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2005;41:82–91.
Ross MK, Borazjani A, Edward CC, et al. Hydrolytic metabolism of pyre-
throids by human and other mammalian carboxylesterase. Biochem 
Pharmacol. 2006;71:657–669.

1104
TOXIC AGENTS
Unit v
Rossman Y, Maharovski I, Bentur Y, et al. Carbamate poisoning: treatment 
recommendations in the setting of a mass casualties event. Am J Emerg 
Med. 2009;27:1117–1124.
Rubio-Infante, Moreno-Fierros L. An overview of the safety and biological 
effects of Bacillus thuringiensis Cry toxins in mammals. J Appl Toxicol. 
2016;36:630–648.
Rusiecki JA, de Roos A, Lee WJ, et al. Cancer incidence among pesticide 
applicators exposed to atrazine in the Agricultural Health Study. J Natl 
Cancer Inst. 2004;96:1375–1382.
Rust MK. Insecticides and their use in urban structural pest control. In: 
Krieger R, ed. Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press; 2001:243–250.
Ruzo LO. Physical, chemical and environmental properties of selected 
chemical alternatives for the pre-plant use of methyl bromide as soil 
fumigant. Pest Manag Sci. 2006;62:99–113.
Sabapathy NN. Paraquat formulation and safety management. In: Bismuth 
C, Hall AH, eds. Paraquat Poisoning. New York: Dekker; 1995:335–347.
Safe S. Endocrine disruptors and human health—is there a problem? An 
update. Environ Health Perspect. 2000;108:487–493.
Sanahuja G, Banakar R, Twyman RM, et al. Bacillus thuringiensis: a 
century of research, development and commercial applications. Plant 
Biotechnol J. 2011;9:283–300.
Sanchez-Bayo F, Goulson D, Pennacchio F, et al. Are bee diseases linked to 
pesticides? A brief review. Environ Int. 2016;89–90:7–11.
Sanchez-Moreno S, Alonso-Prados E, Alonso-Prados JL, et al. Multivariate 
analysis of toxicological and environmental properties of soil nemato-
cides. Pest Manag Sci. 2009;65:82–92.
Sanchez-Santed F, Canadas F, Flores P, et al. Long-term functional neuro-
toxicity of paraoxon and chlorpyrifos oxon: behavioral and pharmaco-
logical evidence. Neurotoxicol Teratol. 2004;26:304–317.
Sanchez-Santed F, Colomina MT, Herrero Hernandez E. Organophosphate 
pesticide exposure and neurodegeneration. Cortex. 2016;74:417–426.
Sangha GK. Toxicology and safety evaluation of the new insect repellent 
picaridin (Saltidin). In: Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ Handbook of Pesticide 
Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2010:2219–2230.
Satelle DB, Cordova D, Cheek TR. Insect ryanodine receptors: molecular 
targets for novel pest control chemicals. Invert Neurosci. 2008;8:107–119.
Sathiakumar N, Delzell E. A review of epidemiologic studies of triazine 
herbicides and cancer. Crit Rev Toxicol. 1997;27:599–612.
Satoh T, Gupta RC, eds. Anticholinesterase Pesticides: Metabolism, 
Neurotoxicity and Epidemiology. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley; 2010:625.
Schenker R, Tinembart O, Humbert-Droz E, et al. Comparative speed of 
kill between nitenpyram, fipronil, imidacloprid, selamectin and cythio-
ate against adult Ctenocephalides felis (Bouché) on cats and dogs. Vet 
Parasitol. 2003;112:249–254.
Schnepf E, Crickmore N, Van Rie J, et al. Bacillus thuringiensis and its 
pesticidal crystal proteins. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev. 1998;62:775–806.
Schoenig GP, Hartnagel RE, Schardein JL, et al. Neurotoxicity evalua-
tion of N,N-diethyl-m-toluamide (DEET) in rats. Fund Appl Toxicol. 
1993;21:355–365.
Schoenig GP, Osimitz TH. DEET. In: Krieger R, ed. Handbook of Pesticide 
Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2001:1439–1459.
Schulte-Hermann R, Wogan GN, Berry C, et al. Analysis of reproduc-
tive toxicity and classification of glufosinate-ammonium. Reg Toxicol 
Pharmacol. 2006;44:S1–S76.
Sciuto AM, Wang BJ, Martens ME, et al. Phosphine toxicity: a story of dis-
rupted mitochondrial metabolism. Ann NY Acad Sci. 2016;1374:41–51.
Senanayake N, Karalliedde L. Neurotoxic effects of organophosphate insec-
ticides. An intermediate syndrome. New Engl J Med. 1987;316:761–763.
Serota DG, et al. Combined Chronic Toxicity and Oncogenicity Study in 
Rats with 2,4-D Acid. Unpublished Report 2184–102. Vienna, Australia: 
Hazleton Laboratories; 1986.
Shafer TJ, Meyer DA, Crofton KM. Developmental neurotoxicity of pyre-
throid insecticides: critical review and future research needs. Environ 
Health Perspect. 2005;113:123–136.
Sheets LP. A consideration of age dependent differences in susceptibil-
ity to organophosphorus and pyrethroid insecticides. Neurotoxicology. 
2000;21:57–64.
Sheets LP. Imidacloprid: a neonicotinoid insecticide. In: Krieger R, ed. 
Hayes’ Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic 
Press; 2010:2055–2064.
Sheets LP, Li AA, Minnema DJ, et al. A critical review of neonicoti-
noid insecticides for developmental neurotoxicity. Crit Rev Toxicol. 
2016;46:153–190.
Shepard HH. The Chemistry and Toxicology of Insecticides. Minneapolis, 
MN: Burgess; 1939:383.
Sherer TB, Kim JH, Betarbet R, et al. Subcutaneous rotenone exposure 
causes highly selective dopaminergic degeneration and α-synuclein 
aggregation. Exp Neurol. 2003;179:6–16.
Shimizu K, Ohtaki K, Matsubara K, et al. Carrier-mediated processes in 
blood–brain barrier penetration and neural uptake of paraquat. Brain Res. 
2001;906:135–142.
Silva JF, Mattos IE, Luz LL, et al. Exposure to pesticides and pros-
tate cancer: systematic review of the literature. Rev Environ Health. 
2016;31:311–327.
Smeyne RJ, Breckenridge CB, Beck M, et al. Assessment of the effects of 
MPTP and paraquat on dopaminergic neurons and microglia in the substan-
tia nigra pars compacta of C57BL/6 mice. PLoS ONE. 2016;11:e0164094.
Smith AG. Toxicology of DDT and some analogues. In: Krieger R, ed. 
Hayes’s Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic 
Press, 2010:1975–2032.
Smith LL. Mechanism of paraquat toxicity in the lung and its relevance to 
treatment. Human Toxicol. 1987;6:31–36.
Smith LL, Heath D. Paraquat. CRC Crit Rev Toxicol. 1976;4:411–445.
Sobus JR, Morgan MK, Pleil JD, et al. Biomonitoring: uses and consider-
ations for assessing nonoccupational human exposures to pesticides. In: 
Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press; 2010:1021–1036.
Soderlund DM: Toxicology and mode of action of pyrethroid insecticides. 
In: Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, 
CA: Academic Press; 2010:1665–1686.
Soderlund DM. Molecular mechanisms of pyrethroid insecticide neurotox-
icity: recent advances. Arch Toxicol. 2012;86:165–181.
Soderlund DM, Casida JE. Effects of pyrethroid structure on rates of hydro-
lysis and oxidation by mouse liver microsomal enzymes. Pestic Biochem 
Physiol. 1977;7:391–401.
Solomon KR. Glyphosate in the general population and in applicators: a 
critical review of studies on exposures. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2016;46(suppl 
1):21–27.
Spagnolo A, Bianchi F, Calabro A, et al. Anophthalmia and benomyl in 
Italy: a multicenter study based on 940,615 newborns. Reprod Toxicol. 
1994;8:397–403.
Stebbins KE, Johnson KA, Jeffries TK, et al. Chronic toxicity and onco-
genicity studies of ingested 1,3-dichloropropene in rats and mice. Reg 
Toxicol Pharmacol. 2000;32:1–13.
Sterling TD, Arundel AV. Health effects of phenoxy herbicides. Scand J 
Work Environ Health. 1986;12:161–173.
Stevens J, Breckenridge CB, Wright J. The role of P-glycoprotein in pre-
venting developmental and neurotoxicity: avermectins- A case study. In: 
Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press; 2010:2093–2110.
Stevens JT, Breckenridge CB. Crop protection chemicals. In: Hayes AW, 
ed. Principles and Methods of Toxicology. Philadelphia, PA: Taylor & 
Francis; 2001a:565–648.
Stevens JT, Breckenridge CB. The avermectins: insecticidal and antipara-
sitic agents. In: Krieger R, ed. Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San 
Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2001b:1157–1167.
Stevens JT, Breckenridge CB, Wetzel LT et al. A risk characterization for 
atrazine: oncogenicity profile. J Toxicol Environ Health. 1999;56:69–109.
Stevens RC, Suzuki SM, Cole TB, et al. Engineered recombinant 
human paraoxonase 1 (rHuPON1) purified from Escherichia coli pro-
tects against organophosphate poisoning. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2008;105:12780–12784.
Stoker TE, Kavlock RJ. Pesticides as endocrine-disrupting chemicals. In: 
Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press; 2010:551–569.

Toxic Effects of Pesticides
Chapter 22
1105
Storm E, Rozman KK, Doull J. Occupational exposure limits for organo-
phosphate pesticides based on inhibition of red blood cell acetylcholines-
terase. Toxicology. 2000;150:1–29.
Stott WT, Gollapudi BB. 1,3-Dichloropropene. In: Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ 
Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 
2010:2281–2292.
Stott WT, Gollapudi BB, Rao KS. Mammalian toxicity of 1,3-dichloropro-
pene. Rev Environ Contam Toxicol. 2001;168:1–42.
Sudakin DK: Biopesticides. Toxicol Rev. 2003;22:83–90.
Sudakin DK, Osimitz T. DEET. In: Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ Handbook of 
Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2010:2111–2125.
Sudakin DK, Trevathan WR. DEET: a review and update of safety and risk 
in the general population. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 2003;41:831–830.
Sutton PM, Vergara X, Beckman J, et al. Pesticide illness among flight 
attendants due to aircraft disinfection. Am J Ind Med. 2007;50:345–356.
Taets C, Aref S, Rayburn AL. The clastogenic potential of triazine herbicide 
combinations found in potable water supplies. Environ Health Perspect. 
1998;106:197–201.
Talbot AR, Shiaw MH, Huang JS, et al. Acute poisoning with a glyphosate 
surfactant herbicide (Roundup): a review of 93 cases. Hum Exp Toxicol. 
1991;10:1–8.
Tamura H, Yoshikawa H, Gaido KW, et al. Interaction of organophosphate 
pesticides and related compounds with the androgen receptor. Env Health 
Perspect. 2003;111:545–552.
Tang J, Cao Y, Rose RL, et al. Metabolism of chlorpyrifos by human cyto-
chrome P450 isoforms and human, mouse and rat liver microsomes. 
Drug Metab Dispos. 2001;29:1201–1204.
Tang J, Rose RL, Chambers JE. Metabolism of organophosphorus and car-
bamate pesticides. In: Gupta RC, ed. Toxicology of Organophosphate 
and Carbamate Compounds. Amsterdam: Elsevier; 2006:127–143.
Tanner CM, Kamel F, Ross GW, et al. Rotenone, paraquat and Parkinson’s 
disease. Environ Health Perspect. 2011;119:866–872.
Taylor JR, Selhorst JB, Houff SA, et al. Chlordecone intoxication in man. I. 
Clinical observations. Neurology. 1978;28:626–630.
Taylor P. Agents acting at the neuromuscular junction and autonomic 
ganglia. In: Hardman JG, Limbird LE, ed. Goodman & Gilman’s The 
Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics. New York: McGraw-Hill; 
1996:177–197.
Tenenbein M. Severe toxic reactions and death following the inges-
tion of diethyltoluamide-containing insect repellents. J Am Med Ass. 
1987;258:1509–1511.
Thiruchelvam M, Richfield EK, Baggs RB, et al. The nigrostriatal dopami-
nergic system as a preferential target of repeated exposures to combined 
paraquat and maneb: implications for Parkinson’s disease. J Neurosci. 
2000;20:9207–9214.
Timofeeva OA, Levin ED. Lasting behavioral consequences of organophos-
phate pesticide exposure during development. In: Krieger R, ed. Hayes’ 
Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 
2010:837–846.
Tominack RL. Herbicide formulations. Clin Toxicol. 2000;38:129–135.
Tomizawa M, Casida JE. Neonicotinoid insecticide toxicology: mechanisms 
of selective action. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 2005;45:247–268.
Troczka BJ, Williams AJ, Williamson MS, et al. Stable expression and 
functional characterization of the diamondback moth ryanodine receptor 
G4946E variant conferring resistance to diamide insecticides. Sci Rep. 
2015;5:14680.
Tweedy BW. Inorganic sulfur as a fungicide. Residue Rev. 1981;78:43–68.
Ujvary I. Nicotine and other insecticidal alkaloids. In: Yamamoto I, Casida 
JE, eds. Nicotinoid Insecticides and the Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptor. 
Tokyo: Springer-Verlag; 1999:29–69.
Ujvary I. Pest control agents from natural products. In: Krieger R, ed. 
Hayes’ Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic 
Press; 2010:119–229.
U.S. EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). DDT: A review of 
Scientific and Economic Aspects of the Decision to Ban its Use as a 
Pesticide. Washington, DC: U.S. EPA; 1975:300.
U.S. EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). A SAB Report: 
Assessment of Potential 2,4-D Carcinogenicity. Review of Epidemiological 
and Other Data on Potential Carcinogenicity of 2,4-D. Washington, DC: 
U.S. EPA; 1994.
U.S. EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). Carcinogenicity Peer 
Review (4th) of 2,4- Dichlorophenoxyacetic Acid (2,4-D). Washington, 
DC: U.S. EPA; 1997.
U.S. EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). Exposure Factors 
Handbook. EPA/600/C-99/001, February. Washington DC: U.S. EPA; 
1999.
U.S. EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). The Use of Data on 
Cholinesterase Inhibition for Risk Assessments of Organophosphorus 
and Carbamate Pesticides. Washington, DC: U.S. EPA; 2000:50. 
Available at: http://www.epa.gov/pesticides/trac/science/cholin.pdf.
U.S. EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). Triazine Cumulative 
Risk Assessment and Atrazine, Simazine and Propazine Decisions. 
Washington, DC: U.S. EPA; 2006.
U.S. EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). Pesticide Fact Sheet: 
Flubendiamide. Washington, DC: U.S. EPA; 2008:65.
U.S. EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). Malathion: Human 
Health Draft Risk Assessment for Registration Review. Washington, DC: 
U.S. EPA; 2016a:258.
U.S. EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). EPA Takes Strong Steps 
to Prevent Poisonings and Protect Workers from Paraquat. Press release, 
March 23, 2016. Washington, DC: U.S. EPA; 2016b.
Vale A, Lotti M. Organophosphorus and carbamate insecticide poisoning. In: 
Lotti M, Bleecker ML, eds. Occupational Neurology. Vol 131. Handbook 
of Clinical Neurology Series. Amsterdam: Elsevier; 2015:149–168.
Van den Bercken J. The effect of DDT and dieldrin on myelinated nerve 
fibers. Eur J Pharmacol. 1972;20:205–214.
Van den Berg H. Global status of DDT and its alternatives for use in vector 
control to prevent disease. Environ Health Prespect. 2009;117:1656–1663.
Van der Kraak GJ, Hosmer AJ, Hanson ML, et al. Effects of atrazine in 
fish, amphibians, and reptiles: an analysis based on quantitative weight 
of evidence. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2014;44(supl 5):1–66.
van Frankenhuyzen K. Insecticidal activity of Bacillus thuringiensis crystal 
proteins. J Invert Pathol. 2009;101:1–16.
Van Lier RBL, Cherry LD. The toxicity and mechanism ofaction of 
bromethalin: a new single-feeding rodenticide. Fund Appl Toxicol. 
1988;11:664–672.
Vanholder R, Colardyn F, De Reuck J et al. Diquat intoxication: report of 
two cases and review of the literature. Am J Med. 1981;70:1267–1271.
Veale DJ, Wium CA, Muller GJ. Amitraz poisoning in South Africa: a two 
year survey (2008–2009). Clin Toxicol (Phila). 2011;49:40–44.
Veronesi B, Padilla S, Blackmon K, et al. Murine susceptibility to 
organophosphorus-induced delayed neuropathy (OPIDN). Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 1991;107:311–324.
Verschoyle RD, Aldridge WN. Structure–activity relationships of some 
pyrethroids in rats. Arch Toxicol. 1980;45:325–329.
Vijverberg HPM, van der Zalm JM, van den Bercken J. Similar mode of 
action of pyrethroids and DDT on sodium channel gating in myelinated 
nerves. Nature. 1982;295:601–603.
von Stackelberg K. A systematic review of carcinogenic outcomes and 
potential mechanisms from exposure to 2,4-D and MCPA in the environ-
ment. J Toxicol. 2013;2013; 371610.
Wagner SL. Clinical Toxicology of Agricultural Chemicals. Park Ridge, NJ: 
Noyes Data Corporation; 1983:306.
Walters JL, LAndsell TA, Lookingland KJ, et al. The effects of gestational 
and chronic atrazine exposure on motor behaviors and striatal dopamine in 
male Sprague–Dawley rats. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2015;289:185–192.
Wang X, Martinez MA, Wu Q, et al. Fipronil insecticide toxicology: oxida-
tive stress and metabolism. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2016;46:876–899.
Watanabe T, Sano T. Neurological effects of glufosinate poisoning with a 
brief review. Hum Exp Toxicol. 1998;17:35–39.
Watts M. Paraquat. Gelugor, Malaysia: Pesticide Action Network Asia and 
the Pacific; 2011:44.
Weichenthal S, Moase C, Chan P. A review of pesticide exposure and can-
cer incidence in the Agricultural Health Study cohort. Environ Health 
Perspect. 2010;118:1117–1125.
Weiss B, Amler S, Amler SW. Pesticides. Pediatrics. 2004;113:1030–1036.

1106
TOXIC AGENTS
Unit v
Wentzell JS, Casar M, Kretschmar D. Organophosphate-induced changes 
in the PKA regulatory function of swisscheese/NTE lead to behavioral 
deficits and neurodegeneration. PLoS ONE. 2014;9:e87526.
Wesseling C, Castillo L, Elinder CG. Pesticide poisonings in Costa Rica. 
Scand J Work Environ Health. 1993;19:227–235.
Wesseling C, van Wendel De Joode B, Ruepert C, et al. Paraquat in develop-
ing countries. Int J Occup Environ Health. 2001;7:275–286.
WHO (World Health Organization). DDT and its Derivatives. Environmental 
Health Criteria 9. Geneva: WHO; 1979:194.
WHO (World Health Organization). Public Health Impact of Pesticides 
Used in Agriculture. Geneva: WHO; 1990.
WHO (World Health Organization). World Malaria Report 2010. Geneva: 
WHO; 2010:238.
Wijeyesakere SJ, Richardson RJ. Neuropathy target esterase. In: Krieger R, 
ed. Hayes’ Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. San Diego, CA: Academic 
Press; 2010:1435–1455.
Williams GM, Aardema M, Acquavella J, et al. A review of the carcinogenic 
potential for glyphosate by four independent expert panels and compari-
son to the IARC assessment. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2016;46(suppl 1):3–20.
Williams GM, Kroes R, Munro IC. Safety evaluation and risk assessment of 
the herbicide Roundup and its active ingredient, glyphosate, for humans. 
Reg Pharmacol Toxicol. 2000;31:117–165.
Wilson AGE, Lau H, Asbury KJ, et al. Metabolism of alachlor by human 
nasal tissue. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1995;15:1398.
Wilson BW, Henderson JD. Determination of cholinesterase in blood and 
tissue. Curr Protoc Toxicol. 2007;12.13.1–12.13-16.
Wood DM, Alsahaf H, Streete P, et al. Fatality after deliberate ingestion 
of the pesticide rotenone: a case report. Crit Care. 2005;9:R280–R284.
Woolley DE. Neurotoxicity of DDT and possible mechanisms of action. 
In: Prasad KN, Vernadakis A, eds. Mechanisms of Action of Neurotoxic 
Substances. New York: Raven Press; 1982:95–141.
Worek F, Diebold C, Eyer P. Dimethylphosphoryl-inhibited human cho-
linesterases: inhibition, reactivation and aging kinetics. Arch Toxicol. 
1999a;73:7–14.
Worek F, Mast U, Kiderlen D, et al. Improved determination of ace-
tylcholinesterase activity in human whole blood. Clin Chim Acta. 
1999b;288:73–90.
Worek F, Thiermann H, Wille T. Oximes in organophosphate poisoning: 60 
years of hope and despair. Chem Biol Interact. 2016;259(pt B):93–98.
Wylie BJ, Hauptman M, Woolf AD, et al. Insect repellant during pregnancy 
in the era of the Zika virus. Obstet Gynecol. 2016;128:1111–1115.
Yang PY, Taso TC, Lin JL, et al. Carbofuran-induced delayed neuropathy. J 
Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 2000;38:43–46.
Yaramis A, Soker M, Bilici M. Amitraz poisoning in children. Hum Exp 
Toxicol. 2000;19:1–3.
Zaccheo O, Dinsdale D, Meacock PA, et al. Neuropathy target esterase and 
its yeast homologue degrade phosphatidylcholine to glycerophosphocho-
line in living cells. J Biol Chem. 2004;279:24024–24033.
Zadikoff CM. Toxic encephalopathy associated with use of insect repel-
lents. J Pediatr. 1979;95:140–142.
Zaki MM, Moran D. Harris D. Pesticide in groundwater: the aldicarb story 
in Suffolk County, New York. Am J Public Health. 1982;72:1391–1395.
Zhang J, Fitsanakis VA, Gu G, et al. Manganese ethylene-bis-dithiocarba-
mate and selective dopaminergic neurodegeneration in rat: a link through 
mitochondrial dysfunction. J Neurochem. 2003;84:336–346.
Zhao Y, Abbar S, Amoah B, et al. Controlling pests in dry-cured ham: a 
review. Meat Sci. 2016;111:183–191.
Zulian A, Sileikyte J, Petronilli V, et al. The translocator protein (peripheral 
benzodiazepine receptor) mediates rat-selective activation of the mito-
chondrial permeability transition by norbormide. Biochim Biophys Acta. 
2011;1807:1600–1605.