# 23 Toxic Effects of Metals
# Casarett & Doull's Toxicology, 9th Edition
# Pages: 1126-1181
# Unit: Unit V Toxic Agents

23
chapter
Toxic Effects of Metals
Alexander C. Ufelle and Aaron Barchowsky
Introduction
What Is a Metal?
Metals as Toxicants
Movement of Metals in the 
Environment
Routes of Exposure and Absorption 
of Metals
Distribution of Metals in the Body
Metal Transporters and Metal-
Binding Proteins
Excretion of Metals
Biomarkers of Metal Exposure
Chemical Mechanisms of Metal 
Toxicology
Molecular Responses to Metal 
Exposure
Factors Impacting Metal Toxicity
Therapeutic Use and Toxicity of 
Metals
Major Toxic Metals
Arsenic
Toxicokinetics
Toxicity
Carcinogenicity
Treatment
Beryllium
Toxicokinetics
Toxicity
Carcinogenicity
Cadmium
Exposure
Toxicokinetics
Toxicity
Carcinogenicity
Treatment
Chromium
Toxicokinetics
Toxicity
Carcinogenicity
Lead
Exposure
Toxicokinetics
Toxicity
Carcinogenicity
Treatment
Mercury
Global Cycling and Ecotoxicology
Exposure
Toxicokinetics
Toxicity
Sensitive Subpopulations
Treatment
Nickel
Toxicokinetics
Toxicity
Carcinogenicity
Treatment of Nickel Toxicity
Essential Metals with Potential 
for Toxicity
Cobalt
Toxicokinetics
Essentiality
Toxicity
Copper
Toxicokinetics
Essentiality
Toxicity
Hereditary Disease of Copper Me-
tabolism
Treatment
Iron
Toxicokinetics
Essentiality and Deficiency
Toxicity
Treatment
Magnesium
Toxicokinetics
Essentiality and Deficiency
Toxicity
Manganese
Toxicokinetics
Toxicity
Molybdenum
Toxicokinetics
Essentiality and Deficiency
Toxicity
Selenium
Toxicokinetics
Essentiality and Deficiency
Toxicity
Trivalent Chromium
Essentiality
Zinc
Toxicokinetics
Essentiality and Deficiency
Toxicity
Metals Related to Medical 
Therapy
Aluminum
Toxicokinetics
Toxicity
Treatment
Bismuth
Toxicokinetics
Toxicity
Treatment
Gallium
Toxicokinetics
Toxicity
Gold
Toxicokinetics
Toxicity
Lithium
Toxicokinetics
Toxicity
Platinum
Toxicokinetics
Toxicity
Minor Toxic Metals
Antimony
Toxicity
Barium
Toxicity
Cesium
Toxicity
Fluorine
Toxicity
Palladium
Toxicity
Silver
Toxicity
Tellurium
Toxicity
Thallium
Toxicity
Treatment

1108
Toxic Agents
unit V
INTRODUCTION
What Is a Metal?
What defines a “metal” is not always obvious and the differences 
between metallic and nonmetallic elements may be subtle (Vouk, 
1986). Metals are typically defined by physical properties of the 
element in the solid state, but can vary widely with the metallic ele-
ment. Current development of nano-sized metal particles revealed 
additional unrealized behaviors of metals and their interactions 
with biological systems. General metal properties include high 
reflectivity (luster), high electrical conductivity, high thermal con-
ductivity, and mechanical ductility and strength. A characteristic 
of metals of toxicological importance is that they exhibit variable 
oxidation states and may react in biological systems by losing one 
or more electrons to form cations (Vouk, 1986). In the periodic 
table, within a group there is often a gradual transition from non-
metallic to metallic properties going from lighter to heavier atoms 
(e.g., Group IVa transitions from carbon to lead). Various names are 
applied to subsets of metallic elements including alkali metals (e.g., 
lithium and sodium), the alkaline earth metals (e.g., beryllium and 
magnesium), the transition (or “heavy”) metals (e.g., chromium 
and nickel), and the metalloids (e.g., arsenic and antimony), the lat-
ter of which show characteristics of metals and nonmetals.
Over 75% of the elements in the periodic table are metals and 
several more are considered metalloids. This chapter discusses 
metals and certain metal complexes or molecules that have been 
reported to produce significant toxicity and disease in humans. The 
discussion includes major toxic metals (e.g., lead and cadmium), 
essential metals (e.g., zinc and copper), medicinal metals (e.g., 
platinum and bismuth), and minor toxic metals including metals of 
technological significance (e.g., indium and uranium). This chapter 
will also discuss toxic metalloids (e.g., arsenic and antimony) and 
certain nonmetallic elemental toxicants (e.g., selenium and fluo-
ride). An overview of toxic effects of metals is shown in Fig. 23-1.
Metals as Toxicants
Humankind’s use of metals has been critical to the progress and 
success of human civilization. It is difficult to imagine an advanced 
civilization without extensive use of metals and metal compounds. 
Eras of human development are defined by the development of spe-
cific metals, such as the many copper alloys of the Bronze Age and 
advancements in the Iron Age. However, metals are unique among 
pollutant toxicants in that they are all naturally occurring and, in 
many cases, are ubiquitous to some level within the human environ-
ment. Thus, regardless of how safely metals are used in industrial 
Adventitious bind, mimicry
Oxidative stress
Enzyme inhibition
DNA damage
Gene expression
Occupational
Environmental
Dietary
Medical
Global distribution
Biotransformation
Biomagniﬁcation
Chemical form
Speciation
Essentiality
Dose
Absorption
Distribution
Biotransformation
Excretion
Human exposure
Natural
anthropogenic
Occurrence
Environmental cycling
Ecotoxicity
Soil
Plants
Wildlife
Domestic animals
Chemistry
Toxicokinetics
Mechanisms
Adverse health effects
Age, gender, etc.
Adaptive mechanisms
Metal transporters
Metal-binding proteins
Host factors
Figure 23-1.   Overview of metal toxicology.
Tin
Toxicity
Titanium
Toxicity
Uranium
Toxicity
Vanadium
Toxicity
Acknowledgments
References

Toxic Effects of Metals
Chapter 23
1109
processes or consumer endpoint products, some level of human 
exposure is inevitable. Furthermore, life evolved in the presence 
of metals and organisms have been forced to utilize and manage 
the potential toxicities of these omnipresent elements. Evolution of 
complex biological systems required incorporating elemental met-
als into structural and enzymatic processes, such that many met-
als are essential to biological processes and life. With essentiality 
there is intentional bioaccumulation involving safe transport, stor-
age, and coordination that limits toxicity while providing essential 
functions. Genetic absence or excess metal concentrations over-
whelming of metal chaperones and coordination systems causes 
even essential metals to be toxic. In addition, nonessential metals 
with close physical properties to essential metals utilize the trans-
port, chaperoning, and coordination systems to access biological 
systems and cause toxicity. This can also account for bioaccumula-
tion of toxic metals without known biological function.
Metals differ from other toxic substances because, as elements, 
they are neither created nor destroyed by human endeavors. What 
human industry and civilization generally do accomplish is to con-
centrate metals in the biosphere. The anthropogenic contribution to 
the levels of metals in air, water, soil, and food is well recognized. 
Human use of metals can also alter the chemical form or specia-
tion of an element and thereby impact toxic potential. Production 
of metal nanoparticles has created many novel metal properties 
including unique toxicities. Unfortunately, substantial waste is pro-
duced in commercialization of metals and too often the waste and 
metal products are only sparingly recycled. These factors combine 
to make metals persistent and potentially more toxic in the human 
environment.
Due to their very early use, metals are one of the oldest classes 
of toxicants known to humans. The oldest documented environmen-
tal/occupational exposure to metals is that of the Tyrolean Neolithic 
mummy called Ötzi (c. 3359 to 3105 bc) with copper and high 
arsenic enrichment in hair follicles (Bolt, 2012). Ötzi was exposed 
through the early production of bronze tools and weapons at the 
beginning of the Bronze Age where bronze was produced by com-
bining molten copper with other alloying metals and metalloids. 
Human use of lead probably started prior to 2000 bc, when abundant 
supplies were obtained from ores as a by-product of smelting silver. 
Arsenicals and mercurial compounds have been used in Chinese 
medicines for thousands of years. Prehistoric skulls were painted 
with mercury containing cinnabar and the mining of cinnabar and 
isolation of mercury have long been recognized for producing neu-
rotoxicity. The first description of abdominal colic in a man who 
extracted metals is credited to Hippocrates in 370 bc. Arsenic and 
mercury are discussed by Theophrastus of Erebus (370 to 287 bc), 
and Pliny the Elder (ad 23 to 79). Arsenic-containing pigments (e.g., 
orpiment and realgar) were used in early decoration of Egyptian 
tombs and inorganic arsenic was the “secret poison” for assassina-
tions. Mercury assumed almost a mystical stature in early science 
and was a large focus of alchemy. Modern technological advances 
since the industrial revolution produced new anthropogenic expo-
sures to metals, such as cadmium, uranium, and rare metals (e.g., 
cerium and thallium) and metal mixtures (e.g., gallium-arsenide). 
Cadmium was first recognized in the early 1800s, and it was much 
later before the metal was widely used and its toxicity recognized. 
The toxicological importance of some of the rarer or lesser used 
metals has increased with new applications, such as chemotherapies 
and microelectronics, or other emerging technologies.
Historically, metal toxicology often concerned acute or 
overt, high-dose effects, such as abdominal colic from lead or the 
bloody diarrhea and uropenia after mercury exposures. Due to 
advances in our understanding of toxic potential of metals, and 
the accompanying improvements in industrial hygiene and stricter 
environmental standards, acute high-dose effects of metals are now 
uncommon or relegated to intentional overdose in the developed 
world. However, unregulated recycling of massive amounts of elec-
tronic wastes in the developing world presents one example of sub-
stantial exposure to toxic metals, especially in children. Advanced 
technologies for quantifying exposures and realization of the broad 
range of pathogenic effects have shifted the focus of metal toxi-
cology to the contribution of subtler, chronic, low-dose effects in 
disease promotion. These might include a level of effect that is not 
cytotoxic, but impairs important but highly complex indices of an 
affected individual’s performance or health, such as lower than 
expected IQs due to low level, childhood lead exposure, or chronic 
disease from naturally occurring exposures to arsenic. Metal expo-
sures contribute to the etiology of diseases of essentially all organ 
systems including neurological dysfunction and degeneration, 
cardiovascular and metabolic diseases, lung disease and increased 
infectivity, renal disease, skeletal/muscular disorders, and reproduc-
tive dysfunction. Several metals are listed by International Agency 
for Research on Cancer (IARC) as known or probable carcino-
gens promoting a range of cancer types (Straif et al., 2009). While 
metal or metalloid exposures are more frequently being associated 
with chronic diseases, proving causation and toxic mechanisms in 
humans remains challenging, as etiology of multifactorial diseases 
(e.g., cancer or cardiovascular disease) is complex and real-world 
exposures rarely occur in the context of a single toxic metal or 
agent. Animal or cellular/molecular models are helpful in proving 
both causation and mechanisms, but the metals and novel metal 
materials as a class of toxicants still present many challenges in 
toxicological research.
The elemental nature of metals impacts their bioabsorption, 
biotransformation, and toxicity. In contrast to chemical toxicants, it 
is not possible to detoxify metals by destructive metabolism to sub-
components of lesser toxicity as they are nondegradable, elemental 
atomic species. This level of indestructibility combined with fre-
quent bioaccumulation contributes to the high concern for metals 
as toxicants. However, these concerns can be mitigated by changes 
in the physical properties of the metals, such as change in valence, 
oxidation/reduction, or anabolic metabolism that render metals inert 
for biological reactions, incapable of entry into biological systems 
or cells, or more readily excreted to limit toxicity. Most elemental 
metals tend to form ionic bonds with biological macromolecules. 
However, biological conjugation to form organometallic com-
pounds can occur for various metals (Dopp et al., 2004; Drobna 
et al., 2010), particularly with metalloids, such as arsenic (Li et al., 
2017), that show mixed carbonaceous and metallic qualities. The 
redox capacity of a given metal or metallic compound should also 
be considered as part of its metabolism and mechanisms for both 
toxification and detoxification.
Movement of Metals in the Environment
Metals comprise the majority of the Earth’s crust and are redistrib-
uted naturally in the environment by both geological and biologi-
cal cycles. The global water cycle is the major natural contributor 
to transport of metals from the crust to the biosphere and global 
distribution. Rainwater entering surface and groundwater aquifers 
releases soluble metals from rocks and ores. Surface water run-
off and exchange of groundwater with surface waters, as well as 
human pumping of water from aquifers, release metals into the bio-
sphere and rivers that eventually transport these substances to the 
ocean to be precipitated as sediment or taken up into forming rain-
water, reinitiating the natural water cycle. Biological cycles moving

1110
Toxic Agents
unit V
metals include biomagnification by microorganisms, plants, and 
animals resulting in incorporation and amplification in food cycles. 
Human activities, including pumping of ground water, mining, 
farming, and fossil fuel burning, shorten the residence time of met-
als in ore deposits and exponentially facilitates amplification of 
metals in the biosphere. Acquisition of groundwater with naturally 
occurring high levels of crustal elements such as arsenic, fluoride, 
selenium, radon, or thallium causes major health problems in many 
parts of the world. Human mobilization also creates non-naturally 
occurring metallic compounds through smelting of ores or manu-
facturing processes that are beyond natural energy processes.
Increased distribution of metals and metal compounds in the 
environment raises concern for ecotoxicological impacts. Human 
industry greatly enhances metal distribution in the global environ-
ment by discharge to soil, water, and air, as exemplified by the 200-
fold increase in lead content of Greenland ice since the onset of the 
industrial revolution. Mining operations continue to supply a range 
of industrially important metals, but often at a cost of mobilizing 
large amount of toxic waste, as with the contamination of many 
communities with mercury from artisanal and small-scale gold min-
ing (Drace et al., 2016). Due to global cycling and biomagnification 
through extensive food chains, mercury and mercurial metabolites 
are found far from points of discharge of elemental mercury, such as 
refining, fossil fuel burning, and artisanal gold mining. The elemen-
tal mercury is biomethylated by microbial actions and biomagni-
fication through aquatic food chains is found even in isolated and 
pristine areas of the world (see Fig. 23-5). Reports of metal intoxi-
cation are common in plants, aquatic organisms, invertebrates, fish, 
sea mammals, birds, and domestic animals and the ecotoxicity of 
specific metals is discussed in each individual section below.
Routes of Exposure and Absorption 
of Metals
The main routes of human exposure to metals include oral inges-
tion, inhalation, dermal contact, and rarely through parenteral 
routes (Tchounwou et al., 2012). Oral ingestion of naturally occur-
ring metals comes primarily from drinking water drawn from con-
taminated groundwater sources (e.g., arsenic, fluoride, manganese, 
and iron) and food. Metals accumulate in various foods, especially 
those grown on lands or soils naturally containing or anthropogeni-
cally contaminated with metals. For example, leafy vegetables such 
as spinach or tobacco accumulate large amounts of cadmium from 
the soil in which they are grown. Rice and some other grains con-
centrate hazardous levels of arsenic, cadmium, and copper (Meharg 
et al., 2009; Carey et al., 2012; Hosseini Koupaie and Eskicioglu, 
2015). Many metals such as iron, zinc, lead, chromium, manganese, 
nickel, copper, and cobalt accumulate in sea animals including zoo-
planktons and fish (Achary et al., 2017). Mercury bioamplification 
through the aquatic food chain and ingestion of fish is the major 
route of human exposure (Siedlikowski et  al., 2016). However, 
the form of the metal found in food and water is important when 
assessing toxic risk as that may be inert, as in the case of organic 
arsenicals found in shellfish and ocean fish and trivalent chromium 
found in drinking water. The absorption of metals through the gas-
trointestinal tract depends on the metal solubility, pH of the envi-
ronment, secreted ligands, rate of transport through the mucous 
layer, and the presence and density of specific transport proteins in 
the gut wall (Whitehead et al., 1996).
Occupational exposures to metals and newly synthesized metal 
nanoparticles (e.g., cobalt ferrite, cesium, and cadmium core) pri-
marily enter the human body through inhalation and secondarily via 
oral ingestion (Horev-Azaria et al., 2013; Ahmad and Zhou, 2017). 
Smelting operations and metal manufacturing pose significant risks 
for metals and combined exposure to metals, as has been realized 
since the first alloying of copper in the Bronze Age. Inhalation of 
metal-containing fumes generated by welding and related processes 
may result in the clinical syndrome known as “metal fume fever” 
that presents with nonspecific complaints including influenza-like 
symptoms, fever, shaking chills, arthralgias, myalgias, headache, and 
malaise (Greenberg and Vearrier, 2015). This usually resolves and 
is benign; however, a significant portion of those afflicted develop 
severe symptoms or death (Greenberg and Vearrier, 2015). Many 
elemental metals such as chromium, copper, iron, cadmium, alumi-
num, arsenic, and beryllium exert the respective health effects after 
inhalation and absorption in the respiratory tract (Leikauf, 2002; 
Jaishankar et al., 2014). Hexavalent chromium is predominantly a 
lung carcinogen due to its kinetics of uptake into the lung epithe-
lium before being reduced to trivalent chromium that is trapped in 
the intracellular space (De Flora, 2000; Park et al., 2004). Arsenic 
is unique in posing an equivalent risk for lung cancers regardless of 
being ingested or inhaled due to its ample distribution throughout the 
body (Smith et al., 2009). Again, the form of the metal is essential for 
posing a toxic risk as many valences and oxidative states of the metals 
are inert or cannot enter cells to cause biological effects. Hexavalent 
chromium is the only form that causes lung cancers, because Cr(0) or 
Cr(III) are inert or outcompeted for cellular uptake. In the processing 
of nickel, it is predominantly soluble nickel and nickel subsulfide 
that can be taken into the lung epithelium with nickel subsulfide 
being the main carcinogenic form of the metal (Dunnick et al., 
1995; Oller et al., 1997). In addition to specific metal transporters 
that move the metals from apical to basolateral surfaces for absorp-
tion into the blood stream, soluble metals are absorbed through the 
alveoli and follow water between epithelial cells (Williams et al., 
2000). Insoluble forms are coughed out or moved by the mucocil-
liary tree into the gastrointestinal tract for excretion.
Dermal exposures are usually limited due to poor uptake of 
the small, charged metal ions across the impervious and lipophilic 
epidermis. However, corrosive forms of metals such as strong acids 
(e.g., chromic acid) or bases (e.g., metal hydroxides) cause dermal 
and mucus membrane corrosion and chemical burns. Exogenous fac-
tors that increase dermal exposure include dose, vehicle, molecular 
volume, counter ion, valence, protein reactivity and tissue deposition, 
solubility, and pH. Endogenous factors include age of the skin, ana-
tomical site, homeostatic control, skin layer, and the importance of 
oxidation and reduction of xenobiotics on the skin (Hostynek, 2003). 
The pharmaceutical and cosmetic industries take advantage of the 
low dermal permeability of metals or nanoparticles of metals in mak-
ing metal-containing dermal preparations that catalyze the detoxifi-
cation of damaging UV radiation in the dead outer skin layers.
Finally, metals introduced therapeutically either by injection/
infusion or implantation can pose toxic risk with either overdose or, in 
the case of orthopedic prostheses, immune or foreign body reactions. 
Degradation products of cobalt-, titanium-, and chrome/nickel-based 
implants evoke pathologic allergic foreign body reactions, lympho-
cyte proliferation, and allergic rejection reactions (Hallab et al., 2001; 
Ring et al., 2016). In rare cases, metal implants have caused systemic 
metal toxicity (Bradberry et al., 2014; Fox et al., 2016).
Distribution of Metals in the Body
The distribution of metals to various tissues or organs depends on 
the rate of blood flow to the organs and organ-specific properties for 
accumulation of metals (Williams et al., 2000). As with their actions 
at the molecular level, many nonessential, toxic metals distribute and 
accumulate in the body by mimicking and competing with essential

Toxic Effects of Metals
Chapter 23
1111
metals of similar physical character. Metals disrupt metabolic func-
tions by accumulating in organs or by displacing vital nutrients or 
metals (Singh et al., 2011). The majority of lead (94%) accumulates 
in the bone and teeth with a nonuniform distribution, while 99% 
of blood lead is associated with red blood cell (ATSDR, 2007c). 
In contrast, after 2 to 4 weeks of exposure, arsenic accumulates in 
keratin-rich tissues such as hair, nails, and skin (ATSDR, 2016).
Metal Transporters and Metal-Binding 
Proteins
Ionic metals are charged and as such do not readily cross lipid mem-
branes. Thus, they must be absorbed into the body and in cells by 
transport through selective and relatively nonselective ion chan-
nels. All cells possess mechanisms for metal ion homeostasis that 
involve a balance between uptake and efflux systems. The impor-
tance of metal transporters in human diseases is well illustrated by 
Menkes and Wilson diseases, which are caused by genetic mutations 
in copper-transport protein genes ATP7A and ATP7B, respectively. 
Mutation of ATP7A causes copper deficiency (Menkes), while muta-
tion of ATP7B results in copper overload (Wilson) (see Fig. 23-7). 
The 30 different transporters and channels for zinc (the third most 
abundant transition element in the body) exemplify the breadth of 
metal transporters and their complex regulation of metal ion con-
centrations in the circulation, in cells, and within cellular compart-
ments. These proteins include transporters and channels that bring 
Zn into cells and organelles (14 Zips and 3+ TRPs) and 10 Znts 
that move Zn out of the cytoplasm (Cousins, 2010; McCormick 
et al., 2014). Zip4 channels found throughout the gastrointestinal 
track are essential for uptake of dietary Zn and the majority of the 
other proteins are critical for regulating Zn actions in 100 to 300 
enzymatic reactions essential for health. Magnesium (the fourth 
most abundant metal in the body) has seven transporters and chan-
nels that are distributed differentially throughout the body. One, the 
TRPM7 channel, is a signal-generating receptor, as well as a tran-
scellular membrane transporter (Brandao et al., 2013; Krapivinsky 
et al., 2014). Activation in response to Mg stimulates TRPM7 kinase 
activity and Zn-dependent cleavage of a C-terminal kinase that 
translocates to the nucleus for epigenetic regulation of chromatin 
structure (Krapivinsky et al., 2014). The extracellular and intracellu-
lar concentrations of all of the essential metals are tightly controlled 
by their transporters and chaperone proteins such that these proteins 
become rate-limiting regulators of metal action and toxicity.
Many of the transporters are promiscuous in transporting a 
number of similarly sized and valenced cations. This provides an 
axis for nonessential, toxic metals to have cellular access and oppor-
tunity to cause toxicity. Toxicity also occurs when toxic metals or 
excessively high concentrations of essential metals outcompetes 
an essential metal for transport and action. For example, elemen-
tal nickel will cause cardiotoxicity when the nickel is in sufficient 
concentration to block calcium from entering the cardiomyocytes 
through L-type channels. In contrast, metal transporters are also 
important for cellular resistance to metals or metalloids (Rosen, 
2002). For instance, enhanced efflux via multidrug resistance pro-
tein pumps limits arsenic toxicity and is involved in acquired toler-
ance to arsenic (Liu, 2010). Decreased influx via reduced calcium 
G-type channels is involved in acquired tolerance to cadmium 
(Leslie et al., 2006). A full review of metal transporter and channel 
biology is beyond the scope of this chapter, and examples of their 
importance to metal toxicity are discussed for the individual metals.
Metal ions are rarely free during distribution and transport, 
because free metal is reactive. Thus the free concentration is tightly 
regulated to provide appropriate homeostasis and desired function 
(e.g., calcium-dependent cell signaling) without toxicity. Metal 
chaperones are a class of proteins and small molecules that prevent 
metal ions from roaming freely within the circulation and in cells. 
Transferrin is a glycoprotein that binds most of the ferric iron in 
plasma and helps transport iron across cell membranes where it 
is delivered to ferritin, the primary cellular iron storage protein. 
Transferrin also transports aluminum and manganese and may 
serve as a general metal detoxicant protein, because it binds many 
toxic metals including cadmium, zinc, beryllium, and aluminum. 
Ceruloplasmin is a ferroxidase enzyme that is the major copper- 
carrying protein in blood and helps convert ferrous iron to ferric 
iron, which then binds to transferrin. Ceruloplasmin also stimulates 
iron uptake by a transferrin-independent mechanism. Its impor-
tance is demonstrated by genetic reduction in expression causing 
Wilson’s disease, a copper storage disease with iron overload.
Chaperones are also responsible for delivering metals into 
metalloproteins, such as the approximately 1000 Zn and many 
Cu-containing enzymes in humans (Kambe et al., 2016; Matson 
Dzebo et al., 2016). For example, after ceruloplasmin releases Cu+ 
ions to the membrane-bound Cu importer CTR1, it is released to the 
Cu chaperone ATOX1 in the cytoplasm for delivery to cytoplasmic 
metal-binding domains of ATP7A and two homologous multido-
main P1B-type ATPases located in the trans-Golgi network (Matson 
Dzebo et al., 2016). These ATPases transfer Cu ions through the 
membrane to the lumen of the Golgi where Cu loading of target 
proteins occurs. In addition to ATOX1, Cu is chaperoned to Cu/
Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) by the Cu chaperone for Cu/Zn 
superoxide dismutase or binds the Cu chaperone for cytochrome c 
oxidase (COX17) for delivery into the mitochondria and incorpora-
tion in cytochrome c oxidase (COX; Matson Dzebo et al., 2016). 
Disruption of any of these proteins has profound consequences on 
enzyme production, cytoplasmic antioxidant activity (SOD1), and 
energy metabolism (COX). As discussed above, the 30 zinc chan-
nels and transporters chaperone zinc across membranes and through 
specific cellular compartments. There are many other examples of 
similar chaperones for essential metals and these chaperones are 
again a target of toxicity if they are overwhelmed by a competing 
metal or bind an incorrect metal. Examples include systems to keep 
redox active iron, manganese, and nickel from damaging organelles 
and cells (Aguirre and Culotta, 2012).
Metallothioneins are an important class of metal chaperones 
whose expression is induced by metal exposure and that play an 
important role in essential metal homeostasis and metal detoxifica-
tion (Isani and Carpene, 2014). Twenty of the 60 amino acids in 
the metallothioneins are highly conserved cysteines essential for 
binding and coordinating Zn and Cu, as well as Cd, Mg, and any 
other d10 electron configuration metals (Isani and Carpene, 2014). 
Expression of metallothioneins is highly induced by a variety of 
metals acting on the metal transcription factor-1 (MTF-1; Laity and 
Andrews, 2007; Isani and Carpene, 2014). Other stimulants include 
oxidative stress, heat shock, and exposure to chemotherapeutic 
agents. The high induction of metallothioneins in the kidney by Cd 
creates a sink for sequestering Cd, such that its biological half-life 
in humans approaches 30 years. However, this is also the source 
of renal toxicity when Cd overwhelms the sequestering chaperone.
Protein binding of metals is essential for homeostatic mecha-
nisms and toxicities. In general, the actions of metals cannot be 
accounted for by stochastic molecular interactions and instead rely 
on specific protein binding and coordination in highly structured 
three-dimensional protein binding sites. With essential metals, the 
binding and coordination result in enzyme catalytic sites capable 
of efficient shuttling of electrons. Many of these catalytic sites 
coordinate transition metals, such as iron, copper, manganese, and

1112
Toxic Agents
unit V
molybdenum, with binding to negatively charged histidine imid-
azoles, cysteine sulfur, or combinations of the two. As seen with 
the metallothioneins, many of the metal ions have great affinity for 
cysteines, although the metals differ in their affinity to monocyste-
ine thiols, as seen with orthovanadate and organic arsenicals, and 
cysteine or cysteine/histidine coordination pockets, as with zinc and 
trivalent inorganic arsenic (Beyersmann and Hartwig, 2008). The 
valence, charge structure, radius, and physical properties all con-
tribute to specificity in binding.
Excretion of Metals
Metals are excreted through fecal, biliary, and urinary elimination, 
as well as through sweat and storage in hair and nails. Several met-
als including lead, cadmium, arsenic, inorganic mercury, organic 
mercury, iron, manganese, magnesium, chromium, zinc, copper, 
nickel, cobalt, tin, and aluminum are excreted through bile and urine 
with variability to the amount of metals excreted through either 
route (Ishihara and Matsushiro, 1986). As discussed above, factors 
that affect excretion of metals include induction of methionine and 
chaperone proteins (Jaw and Jeffery, 1989). Essential calcium is sug-
gested to decrease bone deposition of lead and invariably increases 
its excretion and deposition to other target organs (Gochfeld, 1997). 
In contrast, highly soluble metals that have low protein affinity, such 
as inorganic arsenic, urinary excretion is the main route of bulk 
excretion. Arsenic is somewhat unique in being metabolized by a 
highly conserved As(III) S-adenosylmethionine methyltransferase 
(AS3MT) to monomethylated and dimethylated metabolites that are 
excreted in the urine more readily than the parent compound (Drobna 
et al., 2009; Chen et al., 2011a; Li et al., 2017). The more efficient 
excretion of the arsenic metabolites is protective in humans as AS3MT 
polymorphisms coding for enzyme with decreased catalytic activity 
increase disease risk (Kuo et al., 2015; Li et al., 2017). Metals, such 
as cadmium, lead, and mercury, are known to be excreted through 
the skin where the excretion rate might be higher than urinary excre-
tion (Sears et al., 2012). Hair and nails sequester metals in keratin 
matrices to reduce toxicity, and this provides important media for 
monitoring long-term exposure to metals (Laohaudomchok et al., 
2011; Calderon et al., 2013; Grashow et al., 2014).
Biomarkers of Metal Exposure
Biomarkers of exposure, toxicity, and susceptibility are important 
in assessing the level of concern with metal intoxication. Exposure 
biomarkers, such as concentrations in blood urine, nails, and hair, 
have long been used for metals. Techniques in molecular toxicol-
ogy have greatly expanded the possibilities for biomarkers. Thus, 
in the case of chromium, DNA–protein complexes may serve as a 
biomarker of both exposure and carcinogenic potential. The capac-
ity for expression of genes that potentially play protective roles 
against metal toxicity, such as metallothioneins and hemeoxygen-
ase, shows promise as markers of both effect and susceptibility. The 
use of such biomarkers may aid in identifying particularly sensitive 
subpopulations.
Estimates of the relationship of exposure level to toxic 
effects for a particular metal adhere to the fundamental principles 
of dose–response relationships. However, the dose of a metal is 
a multidimensional concept and is a function of time, as well as 
concentration. The most toxicologically relevant definition of dose 
is the amount of active metal within cells of target organs. The 
toxic form is often presumed to be the free metal, but free metal 
concentrations are technically difficult or impossible to precisely 
determine in vivo. In addition, protein binding of metals produces 
biological effects and the kinetics of binding and sequestering of 
metals is also very difficult to quantify.
A critical indicator of retention of a metal is its biological half-
life, or the time it takes for the body or organ to excrete half of an 
accumulated amount. The biological half-life varies according to 
the metal as well as the organ or tissue. For example, the biological 
half-lives of cadmium in the kidney and lead in the bone are 20 to 
30 years, whereas half-lives for some metals, such as arsenic or lith-
ium, are only a few hours to days. The half-life of lead in the blood 
is only a few weeks, as compared with the much longer half-life in 
the bone and other tissues. As mentioned, hexavalent chromium is 
predominantly a lung carcinogen due to its kinetics of uptake and 
retention in the lung epithelium (De Flora, 2000; Park et al., 2004). 
Due to tight binding to the airway epithelial cell DNA, distribu-
tion to the circulation is limited and thus blood and urine levels 
poorly reflect toxicologically relevant chromium concentrations. 
After inhalation of mercury vapor, at least two half-lives describe 
the retention in the brain, one on the order of a few weeks and the 
other measured in years. Differences in distribution and retention 
half-lives greatly complicate the selection of the optimal matrix for 
assessing functional lead levels (Barbosa et al., 2005). Continued, 
chronic metal exposure clearly complicates retention kinetics.
The blood, urine, hair, and nails are the most accessible tissues 
for quantifying metal exposure. The hair and nail content should be 
considered excreted metal as it is irreversibly sequestered away from 
biological action. Results from single measurements may reflect 
recent exposure, long-term, or past exposure depending on retention 
time in the particular tissue. Blood and urine concentrations usu-
ally, but not always, reflect recent exposures and correlate with acute 
adverse effects. An exception is urinary cadmium, which may reflect 
kidney damage related to renal cadmium accumulation over several 
decades. The hair can be useful in assessing variations in exposure 
to metals over the period of its growth. Analyses can be performed 
on segments of the hair, so that metal content of the newest growth 
can be compared with past exposures. Hair levels of mercury are a 
reliable measure of exposure to methylmercury. For most other met-
als, however, the hair is not a reliable tissue for quantifying exposure 
because of metal deposits from external contamination that compli-
cate analysis (e.g., Zn from shampoo). In contrast, finger nails and 
toenails have been reliably used for measuring chronic exposures 
and provide ample material for quantifying multiple metals when 
using sensitive instrumentation, such as inductively coupled plasma 
mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) (Goulle et al., 2009; Grashow et al., 
2014). However, often only total metal levels can be quantified in 
nails and it is not possible to identify different metal and metalloid 
species. This is important for exposures to environmental metal-
loids, such as arsenic, that are found in many different forms and 
are metabolized in the body. For arsenic and other metal speciation, 
it is essential to use blood or urine and couple HPLC separation of 
the arsenicals prior to ICP-MS quantification (Carlin et al., 2016).
Chemical Mechanisms of Metal Toxicology
A uniform chemical mechanism of toxic action for all metals is 
implausible because of the great variation in chemical properties 
and toxic endpoints. Chemically, metals in their ionic form can be 
very reactive and can interact with biological systems in a large 
variety of ways. In this regard, a cell presents numerous biologi-
cally active metal-binding sites in proteins and nucleic acids. Such 
adventitious binding is an important chemical mechanism by which 
exogenous metals exert toxic effects that result in steric rearrange-
ment that impairs the function of biomolecules (Kasprzak, 2002). 
As discussed above, binding and coordination of essential metals

Toxic Effects of Metals
Chapter 23
1113
in proteins are critical for enzymatic activity and binding of inap-
propriate toxic metals in these enzymes are a major mechanism for 
disrupting normal homeostasis. Binding of genotoxic metals (e.g., 
chromium and methylmercury) disrupts DNA structure, promotes 
ineffective DNA repair, and is mutagenic (Kasprzak, 2002).
Mimicry of essential metals provides a major mechanism for 
toxic metals to produce their effects. In this regard, the toxic metals 
bind to physiological sites normally reserved for essential elements. 
The unique physical and chemical properties of essential metals 
contribute to control and function of a large range of key metabolic 
and signaling pathways (Kasprzak, 2002; Cousins et al., 2006). 
Through mimicry, the toxic metals gain access to and disruption 
of the important actions of the essential metal and critical metal-
mediated cellular functions. For example, mimicry and replacement 
of zinc is a mechanism of toxicity for cadmium, copper, and nickel. 
Thallium mimicking potassium and manganese mimicking iron are 
critical factors in their toxicity. Mimicry of arsenate and vanadate 
for phosphate allows for cellular transport of these toxic elements, 
whereas selenate, molybdate, and chromate mimic sulfate and can 
compete for sulfate carriers and in chemical sulfation reactions 
(Bridges and Zalups, 2005). Organometallic compounds also act as 
mimics of biological chemicals, as, for example, with methylmer-
cury, which is transported by amino acid or organic anion transport-
ers (Bridges and Zalups, 2005). Indeed, molecular or ionic mimicry 
at the level of transport is often a key event in metal toxicity.
Metals in their ionic form can be very reactive and form 
DNA and protein adducts in biological systems. For example, 
once hexavalent chromium enters the cell it is reduced by various 
intracellular reductants to give reactive trivalent chromium species 
that form DNA adducts or DNA–protein cross-links, events likely 
to be important in chromium genotoxicity (Zhitkovich, 2005). 
Metals also induce an array of aberrant gene expression, which, in 
turn, produces adverse effects. For example, nickel can induce the 
expression of Cap43/NDRG1, under the control of the hypoxia-
inducible transcription factor (HIF-1), which is thought to play a 
key role in nickel carcinogenesis (Costa et al., 2005). An array of 
aberrant hepatic gene expression occurs in adult mice after in utero 
arsenic exposure, which could be an important molecular event in 
arsenic hepatocarcinogenesis (Liu et al., 2006).
Free ionic transition metals (e.g., iron, copper, manganese, 
and molybdenum) produce significant toxicity through one electron 
reduction with generation of free electrons and subsequent forma-
tion of reactive oxygen species (ROS). As discussed, tight coordi-
nation of these metals in enzymes catalyzes efficient electron flow 
and transfer. However, when in excess or unbound, ionic metals 
catalyze formation of cell membrane damaging oxygen-centered 
lipid radicals and peroxides, as well as incomplete reduction of 
molecular oxygen through Haber–Weiss and Fenton reactions with 
superoxide and H2O2.
Fe
O
FeO
oxidant
Lipid
2
2
2
2
+
+
+
→
→
(
)
(
)
Lipid
O
LipidOO
i
i
+
→
2
Fe
H O
Fe
OH
OH
2
2
2
3
+
+
+
→
+
+
−
i
The resultant lipid or hydroxyl radicals react indiscriminately 
with macromolecules and are capable of damaging proteins and 
DNA (Galaris and Pantopoulos, 2008). In addition to oxygen-
based radicals, damaging carbon- and sulfur-based radicals also 
occur. In contrast, lower levels of generated lipid and hydrogen 
peroxides are signal generating and affect gene regulation through 
protein interactions. Signal-generated low levels of ROS, such as 
H2O2, are second messengers for many receptor-mediated vasoac-
tive and mitogen responses, and high ROS levels from respira-
tory bursts or mitochondrial injury overwhelm cellular antioxidant 
defenses, promote mitochondrial calcium leak, and damage or kill 
cells. Chromium is an example of a metal that generates metal 
and oxygen radical species during reduction from its hexavalent 
to trivalent form. However, the oxygen-centered radicals are not 
required for chromium to damage DNA and proteins (Zhitkovich 
et al., 2001; Zhitkovich, 2005; Reynolds et al., 2012). Metals 
or metalloids, such as arsenic, that cannot undergo one elec-
tron reduction and the Haber–Weiss reaction are still capable of 
increasing intracellular ROS, but do so through protein binding 
and activation of signaling cascades (Samikkannu et al., 2003; 
Straub et al., 2008, 2009).
Molecular Responses to Metal Exposure
Exposure to essential metals produces homeostatic signaling for 
normal tissue maintenance and regeneration while nonessential 
metals signal for homeostatic disruption or directly damage macro-
molecules and tissues. The results include inappropriate activation 
of growth or metabolic signaling, loss of essential enzymatic activ-
ity, direct structural damage, and if severe, cellular apoptosis and/or 
necrosis. Disruption of normal cell signaling through inappropriate 
growth factor signaling, promotion of maladaptive stress responses, 
and cell senescence can be as detrimental in disease promotion as 
cell death, especially in chronic diseases such as cancers or cardio-
vascular disease where there is little or no evidence of cell death.
The ability of metals to affect gene expression and gener-
ate pathogenic cell phenotypes is well-documented. However, the 
mechanistic role of metal-induced changes in gene expression in 
the etiology of human disease has only recently begun to be eluci-
dated. Modern genomic technologies have identified hundreds to 
thousands of genes whose levels of expression are affected after 
exposure to excess essential and nonessential metals. The intended 
consequence of metal activation of gene expression is often to pro-
tect the organism from metal-induced damage as metal exposure 
is associated with increased expression of genes encoding pro-
teins that remove the metal from the cell via chelation or increased 
export; reduce the level of oxidative stress; and repair the metal-
induced intracellular damage. However, the inappropriate activation 
of gene expression after metal exposure can contribute to a variety 
of human pathologies.
There is no unifying mechanism for metal-activated cell signal-
ing or dysregulated gene expression. Aside from response to direct 
protein damage from metal radicals or indirect ROS generation, 
metals initiate cell signaling by activating cell receptors. Targeted 
receptors include both tyrosine kinase receptors (e.g., epidermal 
growth factor receptors [EGFR]) (Simeonova et al., 2002; Andrew 
et al., 2009; Tong et al., 2015)) and G protein–coupled receptors 
(Straub et al., 2009; Garciafigueroa et al., 2013; Klei et al., 2013). 
However, the activation differs from tightly regulated activation by 
normal endogenous ligands. The most plausible mechanism for 
metal activation of receptors and downstream kinases in the recep-
tor signaling pathways is by causing allosteric change through bind-
ing to crucial structural cysteine motifs (Ahmadibeni et al., 2007). 
Signal amplification is the inherent property of cell receptors and 
this allows for a relatively small amount of toxic metal in chronic 
exposures to affect broad programs of genetic and epigenetic change 
that ultimately generate pathogenic cell phenotypes. These broad 
signaling programs include activation of the pleiotropic mitogen-
activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascades that can lead to enhanced 
cell proliferation at low metal concentrations or cell death at higher

1114
Toxic Agents
unit V
concentrations depending on the MAPK family member (e.g., Erk, 
JNK, or p38). Similarly, metal signaling activates the Src family 
kinases (Barchowsky and O’Hara, 2003; Ahmadibeni et al., 2007; 
Nemec et al., 2010) that regulate programs of cell proliferation. The 
kinases are intermediates in amplifying signals for metal-induced 
transcriptional programmatic change that include the stress-
responsive activation of activator protein-1 (AP-1), nuclear factor 
kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-κB), metal 
transcription factor-1 (MTF-1), nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 
2)-like 2 (Nrf2), hypoxia inducible factors (HIF-1α and HIF-2α), 
and the signal transducer and the signal activator of transcription 
(STAT) family. Again, the genes driven by these transcriptional pro-
grams often code for cell protection as seen with the Nrf2 pathway 
inducing phase II metabolism and antioxidant proteins, the HIF 
factors increasing expression of proteins that oppose hypoxia, and 
MTF-1 induction of metallothioneins to sequester metals. However, 
due to overlapping effects of different metals on the transcriptional 
programs, it is difficult to predict the cell phenotypes induced by 
exposure to mixed metals. For example, chromium exposure will 
prevent arsenic from activating the Nrf2 protective program to 
reduce antioxidant genes (O’Hara et al., 2006). Chromium will 
directly activate the Src family kinase Fyn to stimulate STAT1 sup-
pression of nickel-induced HIF-1α and NF-κB signaling (Nemec 
and Barchowsky, 2009; Nemec et al., 2010). Likewise, the activity 
of a single transcription factor can be influenced by a variety of 
metals through multiple signaling pathways. For example, the activ-
ity of NF-κB is affected by copper, arsenic, vanadium, chromium, 
cadmium, mercury, lead, or any other metal that can induce intracel-
lular oxidative stress (Barchowsky et al., 1996; Chen and Shi, 2002; 
Valko et al., 2006; Thevenod and Lee, 2013).
Metal-induced epigenetic regulation contributes to the overall 
transcriptional reprograming in metal-induced adaptive and patho-
genic responses (Salnikow and Zhitkovich, 2008; Martinez-Zamudio 
and Ha, 2011; Chervona and Costa, 2012; Ryu et al., 2015) that 
may increase disease risk (Vilahur et al., 2015). Epigenetic changes 
include posttranslational modification of histones and DNA meth-
ylation to convert cytosine to 5-methylcytosine (Ryu et al., 2015; 
Bommarito et al., 2017). The ability of nickel, cadmium, arsenic, 
and chromium to induce cancer has been linked to metal-inducible 
epigenetic changes (Arita and Costa, 2009). Exposure during fetal 
development may greatly enhance chronic toxic potential of met-
als as epigenomic changes in imprinted genes, in fetal epigenomic 
changes, including altered global DNA methylation, gene-specific 
CpG methylation, and altered microRNA expression during devel-
opment have been associated with adverse birth outcomes and later-
life disease risk (Burris et al., 2016; Bommarito et al., 2017).
Factors Impacting Metal Toxicity
The standard factors that impact the toxic potential of all chemicals 
apply to the metals as well. Exposure-related factors include dose, 
route of exposure, duration, and frequency of exposure. Because 
metals can be highly reactive, the portal of entry is often initially 
the organ most affected, as with the lung after hexavalent chro-
mium inhalation.
Host-based factors that can impact metal toxicity include age 
at exposure, gender, and capacity for biotransformation. Metal 
impacts should be considered throughout the entire range of life 
stages. Fetal-stage toxicity of metals is well-documented, as with 
methylmercury, and many metals are teratogenic. For many inor-
ganics, there is no impediment to transplacental transport, as with 
lead or arsenic, and human fetal blood lead levels (BLL) are similar 
to maternal levels. In addition to overt teratogenic toxicities, fetal 
and perinatal exposures result in epigenetic reprograming of devel-
opment that can lead to enhanced risk of adult disease. Developing 
stem cells, as well as rapidly proliferating and differentiating cells, 
are important pathogenic (Burris et al., 2016) and carcinogenic 
(Tokar et al., 2011c) targets in the fetus. Several metals (e.g., arse-
nic, nickel, lead, and chromium) are transplacental carcinogens in 
rodents. It is quite clear that children are more sensitive to metal 
intoxication due to developmental stage and continued rapid growth 
(e.g., neurotoxicity of lead). Due to mimicry, lead exposure is four 
to five times greater in developing children than adults as they 
absorb larger amounts of calcium, magnesium, manganese, and 
strontium to build bones, muscle, and neural tissues. Child pica 
behavior presents additional exposure concerns as lead and other 
toxic metals are concentrated in ingested dirt, paint chips, and dusts. 
Elderly persons are also believed to be generally more susceptible 
to metal toxicity than younger adults due to overall degeneration 
of kidneys and other organs involved in metal distribution (Bridges 
and Zalups, 2017a). Recognition of factors that influence toxicity of 
a metal is important in determining risk, particularly in susceptible 
subpopulations.
As discussed above, the chemical form and nature of the metals 
directly affect their toxic potential. The oxidation state and valence 
of the metal greatly affect its competition for uptake and mecha-
nism of interaction with cellular macromolecules. Metabolism by 
microbes or mammals affects distribution, site of action, and excre-
tion. For instance, methylmercury is a potent neurotoxin, whereas 
the inorganic mercurials primarily attack the kidney, and methyl-
ated arsenicals are potentially more potent than inorganic arsenic, 
but are excreted more readily (Bridges and Zalups, 2017b).
Lifestyle factors such as smoking or alcohol ingestion may 
have direct or indirect impacts on the level of metal intoxication. 
For instance, tobacco smoke contains many toxic metals, such as 
cadmium and arsenic, and smoking may double the lifetime burden 
of cadmium in nonoccupationally exposed individuals. Other com-
ponents of tobacco smoke may also influence pulmonary effects, 
as, for instance, with metals that are lung carcinogens or promote 
pulmonary disease. Arsenic exposures synergize with tobacco 
smoke to increase risk of cardiovascular and lung disease, as well 
as cancer (Parvez et al., 2013; Nigra et al., 2016). Alcohol ingestion 
may influence toxicity by altering diet, reducing essential mineral 
intake, and altering hepatic iron deposition. Alcohol can also syn-
ergize with metals, such as arsenic, through amplification of inter-
acting signal transduction pathways (Klei and Barchowsky, 2008) 
that may promote cancers (Wang et al., 2012). The composition of 
the diet can significantly alter gastrointestinal absorption of various 
dietary metals. In addition, susceptibility to the toxic effects of met-
als can be altered by dietary constituents competing at sites of metal 
action (e.g., selenium in diet can reduce arsenic effects on metabolic 
enzymes [Walton et al., 2003; Argos et al., 2013]) or by inducing 
antioxidant or metabolic adaptive responses (e.g., induction of Nrf2 
program of phase II metabolizing enzymes).
Adaptive mechanisms are critical to susceptibility to the toxic 
effects of metals, and organisms have a variety of ways in which 
they can adapt to otherwise toxic metal insults. Typically, adapta-
tion is acquired after the first few exposures and can be long-lasting 
or transient after exposure ceases. Adaptation can be at the levels 
of uptake and excretion or, with some metals, through long-term 
storage in a toxicologically inert form (e.g., hair and nails). For 
instance, enhanced arsenic efflux is involved in acquired tolerance 
to the metalloid on the cellular level (Liu et al., 2001). Conversely, 
intentional sequestration of toxic metals is another adaptive tactic 
and examples of such long-term storage include lead inclusion bod-
ies, which form in various organs and contain protein-immobilized

Toxic Effects of Metals
Chapter 23
1115
lead in a distinct cellular aggresome. These bodies are thought 
to be protective by limiting the level of free, and therefore toxic, 
lead within the cell, and the inability to form such bodies clearly 
increases the chronic toxic effects of lead, including carcinogen-
esis (Waalkes et al., 2004). Similarly, cadmium exposure causes the 
overexpression of MT that will sequester cadmium and reduce its 
toxicity as an adaptive mechanism (Isani and Carpene, 2014). Metal 
exposure can also induce a cascade of molecular/genetic responses 
that may reduce toxicity, such as with metal-induced oxidative 
stress responses (Valko et al., 2006). It is clear that acquired metal 
adaptation, although allowing immediate cellular survival, may in 
fact be a potential contributing factor in long-term toxicity (Waalkes 
et al., 2004). For instance, acquired self-tolerance to cadmium- or 
arsenic-induced apoptosis may actually contribute to eventual car-
cinogenesis by allowing survival of damaged cells that would other-
wise have been eliminated (Hart et al., 2001; Pi et al., 2005).
Therapeutic Use and Toxicity of Metals
Metals and metal compounds have a long and rich history of pharma-
cological use. Metallic compounds, largely because of their potential 
toxicity, have been used in chemotherapeutic settings for millennia. 
Traditional Chinese medicines, usually complex mixtures, were 
made with toxic metals, such as mercury, as intentional ingredients 
(Liu et al., 2008). Arsenic and arsenicals have been a part of Chinese 
medicine for approximately 5000 years and Ehrlich’s magic bullet 
(arsphenamine) for syphilis and infectious diseases was a mixture of 
organoarsenicals. Prior to arsphenamine, syphilis was often treated 
with mercury. Arsenicals were the workhorse therapeutic agents of 
the 1800s, although they caused as many untoward effects as cures. 
Inorganic arsenic trioxide remains a frontline drug for treating pro-
myelocytic leukemia (Chen et  al., 2011b). Today, many metallic 
chemicals remain valuable pharmacological tools, as exemplified 
by the highly effective use of platinum compounds in cancer che-
motherapy. Other examples of medicinal metals used today include 
­aluminum (antacids and buffered analgesics), bismuth (peptic ulcer), 
lithium (mania and bipolar disorders), and gold (arthritis). Metallic 
compounds find their way into a variety of pharmacological prepara-
tions as active or inactive ingredients.
Treatment of metal poisoning is sometimes used to prevent, 
or even attempt to reverse, toxicity. Metal chelation has made a 
resurgence in the treatment of cardiac diseases (Solenkova et al., 
2014; Lamas et al., 2016) with the therapeutic strategy of giving 
metal chelators that complex the metal and enhance its excretion 
(Kosnett, 2015). Most chelators are not specific and will interact 
with a number of metals, eliminating more than the metal of con-
cern and possibly essential metals. In addition, the vast array of 
biological metal ligands is a formidable barrier to chelator efficacy 
as is the chelator’s water/fat solubility (Kosnett, 2015). Metal chela-
tion therapy should be considered a secondary alternative to toxic 
metal exposure reduction or even prevention. Chelator therapy can 
be used for many different metals including lead, mercury, iron, 
and arsenic.
MAJOR TOXIC METALS
Arsenic
Arsenic (As) is a toxic and carcinogenic metalloid. The word arse-
nic is from the Persian word Zarnikh, as translated to the Greek 
arsenikon, meaning “yellow orpiment.” Arsenic has been known 
and used since ancient times as the poison of kings and the king of 
poisons. The element was first isolated in about 1250, but arsenicals 
have been used since ancient times as drugs and even today are 
very effective against acute promyelocytic leukemia (Chen et al., 
2011b). Arsenic exists in the trivalent and pentavalent forms and is 
widely distributed in nature. The most common inorganic trivalent 
arsenic compounds are arsenic trioxide and sodium arsenite, while 
common pentavalent inorganic compounds are sodium arsenate, 
arsenic pentoxide, and arsenic acid. Important organoarsenicals 
include arsanilic acid, arsenosugars, and several methylated forms 
produced as a consequence of inorganic arsenic biotransforma-
tion by various organisms, including humans. Arsine (AsH3) is an 
important gaseous arsenical. Industrial and military toxic arsenicals 
include phenylarsine oxide, roxarsone, and lewisite.
Occupational exposure to arsenic occurs in the manufacture 
of pesticides, herbicides, and other agricultural products. Exposure 
to arsenic fumes and dusts occurs in smelting industries, especially 
copper smelting (Enterline et  al., 1995; IARC, 2012; ATSDR, 
2016). Environmental arsenic exposure mainly occurs from arsenic-
contaminated drinking water, which can be very high depending on 
the subsurface geology (IARC, 2012; ATSDR, 2016; Carlin et al., 
2016). Arsenic in drinking water is generally from natural sources. 
Due to high prevalence in groundwater, it is estimated that at least 
150,000 individuals daily drink water contaminated with more than 
10 ppb (USEPA and WHO MCL; Carlin et al., 2016). Food, espe-
cially seafood and rice, may contribute significantly to daily arsenic 
intake (Carlin et al., 2016; Mantha et al., 2017). Arsenic in seafood 
is largely in an organic form called arsenobetaine that is much less 
toxic than the inorganic forms (ATSDR, 2016).
Toxicokinetics  Inorganic arsenic is well absorbed (80% to 90%) 
from the gastrointestinal tract, distributed throughout the body, 
often metabolized by methylation, and then excreted primarily 
in urine (Hughes et al., 2011; ATSDR, 2016). Trivalent inorganic 
arsenic and trivalent methylated metabolite absorption from the 
gastrointestinal track and movement into cells throughout the body 
occur through aquaglyceroporins 7 and 9 (Liu, 2010). As these 
channels are primarily water and glycerol channels, trivalent arsen-
icals can freely distribute throughout the body with the volume of 
distribution of water. Pentavalent inorganic and methylated arsenic 
species resembles phosphate and must compete with mM amounts 
of phosphate for cell entry. Low-solubility arsenic compounds 
(e.g.,, arsenic trioxide, arsenic selenide, lead arsenide, and gallium 
arsenide) are absorbed less efficiently after oral exposure. Skin is a 
potential route of exposure to industrial levels of arsenic, and sys-
temic toxicity has been reported in persons having dermal contact 
with solutions of inorganic arsenic (Hostynek, 2003), but the rel-
evance of this to today’s exposure paradigms is limited. Airborne 
arsenic is largely trivalent arsenic oxide and deposition in airways 
and absorption of arsenicals from lungs is dependent on particle 
size and chemical form (ATSDR, 2016). 
Excretion of absorbed arsenic is mainly via the urine. The 
whole-body biological half-life of ingested arsenic is about 10 hours, 
and 50% to 80% is excreted into the urine over 3 days (Kenyon et al., 
2005; ATSDR, 2016). The biological half-life of methylated arseni-
cals is in the range of 30 hours (Hughes et al., 2005). Arsenic has a 
predilection for skin and is excreted by desquamation of skin and in 
sweat, particularly during periods of profuse sweating. It also con-
centrates in forming fingernails and hair bound to keratins. Arsenic 
exposure produces characteristic transverse white bands across fin-
gernails (Mees’ line), which appear about 6 weeks to 2 months after 
the onset of symptoms of arsenic toxicity (Patel et al., 2011). Arsenic 
in the fingernails and hair has been used as a biomarker for exposure, 
including both current and past exposures, while blood and urinary 
arsenic is a good indicator for current exposure.

1116
Toxic Agents
unit V
Methylation of inorganic arsenic species is protective in 
enhancing excretion, but enhances chronic toxicity with methy-
larsenite (MMA) and dimethylarsenite (DMA) being as or more 
potent in the cell as arsenite (Hughes et al., 2011; Li et al., 2017). 
High proportions of MMA and low proportions of DMA in urine 
are related to increased risks of cancer and cardiovascular disease, 
whereas low levels of MMA and high levels of DMA are linked to 
adiposity and the incidence of diabetes (Cosselman et al., 2015). 
Some animal species even lack arsenic methylation capacity, per-
haps as an adaptation mechanism. Fig. 23-2 illustrates the biotrans-
formation of arsenic. Arsenate (As5+) is rapidly reduced to arsenite 
(As3+) by arsenate reductase (presumably purine nucleoside phos-
phorylase). Arsenite is then sequentially methylated to form mono-
methylarsonic acid and dimethylarsinic acid (DMA5+) by arsenite 
methyltransferase (AS3MT) using S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) 
as a methyl group donor (Hughes et al., 2011; Li et al., 2017). In 
humans, urinary arsenicals are composed of 10% to 30% inorganic 
arsenicals, 10% to 20% MMA, and 55% to 76% DMA (IARC, 
2012; Cosselman et al., 2015). However, large variations in arsenic 
methylation occur due to factors such as age and sex. There are 
genetic polymorphisms in arsenic metabolic genes (Engstrom et al., 
2013; Li et al., 2017) and the role of these variants in promoting 
disease is currently under investigation. Arsenic metabolism also 
changes through the course of pregnancy, reflected in higher urinary 
excretion of DMA and lower urinary levels of inorganic arsenic 
and MMA, which may have toxicological impact on the developing 
fetus (Hopenhayn et al., 2003).
Toxicity 
Acute Poisoning  Ingestion of large doses (70 to 180 mg) of inor-
ganic arsenic can be fatal. Symptoms of acute intoxication include 
fever, anorexia, hepatomegaly, melanosis, cardiac arrhythmia, and, 
in fatal cases, terminal cardiac failure. Acute arsenic ingestion can 
damage mucous membranes of the gastrointestinal tract, causing 
irritation, vesicle formation, and even sloughing. Sensory loss in 
the peripheral nervous system is the most common neurological 
effect, appearing at 1 to 2 weeks after large doses and consisting 
of Wallerian degeneration of axons, a condition that is reversible 
if exposure is stopped. Anemia and leucopenia, particularly gran-
ulocytopenia, occur a few days after high-dose arsenic exposure 
and are reversible. Intravenous arsenic infusion at clinical doses 
in the treatment of acute promyelocytic leukemia may be signifi-
cantly or even fatally toxic in susceptible patients, and a few sudden 
deaths have been reported. Approximately 30% of patients under-
going arsenic chemotherapy experience life-threatening re-entrant 
arrhythmias caused by arsenic impairment of cardiac inwardly rec-
tifying potassium channels (Ficker et al., 2004; Cubeddu, 2016). 
Arsenic cancer therapies are also associated with noncardiogenic 
pulmonary edema and severe pulmonary leukocytosis (Camacho 
et al., 2000; Briasoulis and Pavlidis, 2001). Acute exposure to a 
single high dose can produce encephalopathy, with signs and symp-
toms of headache, lethargy, mental confusion, hallucination, sei-
zures, and even coma (ATSDR, 2007a).
Arsine gas, generated by electrolytic or metallic reduction of 
arsenic in nonferrous metal production, is a potent hemolytic agent, 
producing acute symptoms of nausea, vomiting, shortness of breath, 
and headache accompanying the hemolytic reaction. Exposure to 
arsine is fatal in up to 25% of the reported human cases and may be 
accompanied by hemoglobinuria, renal failure, jaundice, and ane-
mia in nonfatal cases when exposure persists (Pullen-James and 
Woods, 2006).
Chronic Toxicity  The skin is a major target organ in chronic inor-
ganic arsenic exposure. In humans, chronic exposure to arsenic 
induces a series of characteristic changes in skin epithelium. Diffuse 
or spotted hyperpigmentation and, alternatively, hypopigmentation 
can first appear between 6 months and 3 years with chronic expo-
sure to inorganic arsenic (ATSDR, 2007a). Palmar-plantar hyper-
keratosis usually follows the initial appearance of arsenic-induced 
pigmentation changes within a period of years (ATSDR, 2007a). 
Susceptibility to skin lesions is increased by folic acid and vitamin 
B deficiencies due to impaired methylation of ingested inorganic 
arsenic (Gamble et al., 2006; Ahsan et al., 2007). Skin cancer that 
presents as in situ squamous carcinoma that is often indistinguish-
able from Bowen disease is common with protracted high-level 
arsenical exposure (ATSDR, 2007a; IARC, 2012).
Cardiovascular disease and coronary artery disease in particu-
lar are the noncancer diseases most strongly associated with envi-
ronmental arsenic exposures (Moon et al., 2012; NRC, 2014; Nigra 
et al., 2016). Several highly powered prospective epidemiological 
studies have confirmed the association even with low to moder-
ate levels of arsenic exposure (Chen et al., 2011c; Moon et al., 
Arsenate
Arsenite
MMA5+
MMA3+
DMA5+
DMA3+
TMAO
HO
As
3+
OH
OH
O
As
5+
OH
OH
O–
O
As
5+
CH3
OH
O–
O
As
5+
CH3
CH3
O–
As
3+
CH3
CH3
OH
As
3+
CH3
OH
OH
GSH 
GSH 
Arsenate
reductase 
AS3MT
GSH 
AS3MT 
SAM
SAM
SAH
SAH
AS3MT (Arsenite
methyltransferase)
AS3MT
AS3MT
H3C
As
5+
CH3
CH3
O–
Figure 23-2.   Arsenic metabolism. AS3MT, arsenic methyltransferase (Cyt19); DMA3+, dimethylarsinous acid; DMA5+, dimethylarsinic acid; GSH, reduced 
glutathione; MMA3+, monomethylarsonous acid; MMA5+, monomethylarsonic acid; SAH, S-adenosylhomocysteine; SAM, S-adenosylmethionine; TMAO, 
trimethylarsenic oxide.

Toxic Effects of Metals
Chapter 23
1117
2013; D’Ippoliti et al., 2015; James et al., 2015). The dominant 
form of disease stems from the atherogenic potential of arsenic and 
its propensity to enhance both vessel disease and prolongation of 
the cardiac Q-T interval (Chen et al., 2013; Nigra et al., 2016). 
Atherosclerotic mouse models have shown increased atherosclero-
sis after even moderate arsenic exposures and that smooth muscle 
cell remodeling and macrophage lipid metabolism are the prime 
pathogenic targets (Lemaire et al., 2011, 2015). In addition, mouse 
models have also demonstrated that low to moderate levels of 
exposure cause perivascular fibrosis and loss of perivascular matrix 
integrity, especially in the heart (Soucy et al., 2005; Hays et al., 
2008). Peripheral vascular disease has been observed in persons 
with chronic exposure to inorganic arsenic in the drinking water in 
Taiwan (Wang et al., 2007). It is an arteriosclerosis manifested by 
acrocyanosis and Raynaud’s phenomenon and may progress to end-
arteritis and gangrene of the lower extremities (black foot disease). 
Studies have shown an association between high arsenic exposure 
in Taiwan and Bangladesh and an increased risk of diabetes mel-
litus (Navas-Acien et al., 2006; Tseng, 2008). Finally, the vascular 
endothelium is highly sensitive to arsenic exposures with low-level 
exposure promoting proliferation, angiogenesis, and vessel remod-
eling, whereas high exposures cause cell death and loss of vessels 
(Soucy et al., 2003, 2005; Straub et al., 2008).
Chronic exposure to arsenic is associated with a range of 
nonmalignant respiratory effects including respiratory symptoms, 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and respiratory 
disease mortality (von Ehrenstein et al., 2005; Smith et al., 2006; 
Parvez et al., 2013). Susceptibility to the respiratory effects of arse-
nic is enhanced by in utero exposure (Rahman et al., 2011; Ramsey 
et al., 2013b; Steinmaus et al., 2016) and co-exposure to tobacco 
smoke (Parvez et al., 2013). In addition, arsenic exposure is associ-
ated with increased respiratory tract infections (Rahman et al., 2011; 
Farzan et al., 2016) and chronic lung infections, including pulmo-
nary tuberculosis (Smith et al., 2011). Prospective epidemiologic 
studies indicate that arsenic causes chronic loss of lung defenses, 
such as secretion of CC16 protein from airway cells (Parvez et al., 
2010). Animal studies suggest that low to moderate levels of arse-
nic in utero exposures of mice to low to moderate concentrations 
decrease immune gene expression and promotes inflammatory 
protein expression (Kozul et al., 2009b; Ramsey et al., 2013a) that 
may make mice more susceptible to airway infections (Kozul et al., 
2009a). In keeping with reduced lung defenses, as in the heart, arse-
nic compromises lung matrix, wound repair, and barrier function 
(Hays et al., 2008; Lantz et al., 2009; Petrick et al., 2009; Sherwood 
et al., 2013).
Liver injury, characteristic of long-term or chronic arsenic 
exposure, manifests itself initially as jaundice, abdominal pain, and 
hepatomegaly (Mazumder and Dasgupta, 2011). Liver injury may 
progress to cirrhosis and ascites, even to hepatocellular carcinoma 
(Liu and Waalkes, 2008; Straif et al., 2009; IARC, 2012).
Arsenic is a peripheral neurotoxicant; it produces a clinical 
picture of severe polyneuropathy after severe poisoning (ATSDR, 
2007a). Occupational exposures, as in copper smelters, or repeated 
exposure to low levels of inorganic arsenic produce peripheral 
neuropathy (ATSDR, 2007a; Sinczuk-Walczak et al., 2010). This 
neuropathy usually begins with sensory changes, such as numb-
ness in the hands and feet, but later may develop into a painful 
“pins and needles” sensation. Both sensory and motor nerves 
can be affected, and muscle tenderness often develops, followed 
by weakness, progressing from proximal to distal muscle groups. 
Sensory-motor dysfunction is pronounced in exposed children 
(Parvez et al., 2011), suggesting that in utero or early development 
exposures increase susceptibility. Histological examination reveals 
a dying-back axonopathy with demyelination, and effects are dose-
related (ATSDR, 2007a). Arsenic exposures, especially in utero and 
during early developmental exposures, also impair central cognition 
and memory behaviors (Wasserman et al., 2011; Tyler and Allan, 
2014; Wasserman et al., 2014). In addition, studies in mice suggest 
that the impact of in utero and perinatal exposures on cognition may 
be less in females who respond to arsenic with greater antioxidant 
adaptation (Allan et al., 2015).
Arsenic, especially with chronic early-life exposure, is immu-
notoxic and potentially increases risk of infections and inflamma-
tory-like diseases during childhood and in adulthood (ATSDR, 
2016; Ferrario et al., 2016). As mentioned above, this immuno-
suppressive potential is prevalent in respiratory tract infections 
(Kozul et al., 2009a; Rahman et al., 2011; Ramsey et al., 2013a; 
Steinmaus et al., 2016), and enhancement of a global inflammatory 
state may underlie the etiology of neural, cardiovascular, metabolic, 
and cancer disease promotion. For example, arsenic exposures alter 
transcriptional programing in circulating macrophages to enhance 
atherogenesis that underlies arsenic-promoted cardiovascular dis-
ease (Lemaire et al., 2014). In addition to increasing inflammation, 
arsenic may increase allergy and autoimmune diseases (Ferrario 
et al., 2016). Further impacts on the circulation include hemato-
logic consequences of chronic exposure to arsenic that interferes 
with heme synthesis and increase in urinary porphyrin excretion, a 
biomarker for arsenic exposure (Ng et al., 2005).
Mechanisms of Toxicity  The trivalent compounds of arsenic 
are thiol-reactive, and thereby activate or inhibit enzymes or alter 
protein structure by reacting with proteinaceous thiol groups. 
Pentavalent arsenate mimics phosphate and can inhibit phospho-
transfer reactions, such as mitochondrial oxidative phosphoryla-
tion, when present in concentrations that are stoichiometrically 
competitive. Arsine gas is formed by the reaction of hydrogen with 
arsenic, and is a potent hemolytic agent (ATSDR, 2007a, 2016).
In addition to these basic modes of action, several mecha-
nisms have been proposed for arsenic toxicity and carcinogenicity. 
Arsenic and its metabolites stimulate oxidant production through 
activation of NADPH oxidases and inference with mitochondrial 
respiration. Transition between trivalent and pentavalent oxidation 
states occurs through two electron transfer and thus arsenic is not 
capable of directly generating reactive oxygen species. Instead, 
reaction with critical cysteines in receptors and signaling enzymes 
that stimulate NADPH oxidase ROS generation (Straub et al., 2008, 
2009; ATSDR, 2016). The oxidants generated are second messen-
gers in signal transduction cascades leading to activation of tyrosine 
and serine/threonine kinase pathways for enhanced proliferation, 
cell turnover, and potential transformation (Simeonova and Luster, 
2002; Andrew et al., 2009; NRC, 2014; ATSDR, 2016). Signaling 
through oxidant activation of the Nrf2 transcriptional program 
produces adaptation to arsenic-promoted stress with broad expres-
sion of antioxidant capacity and phase II metabolism genes (Lau 
et al., 2013; Sinha et al., 2013). Arsenic exposures produce lon-
ger term phenotypic change through a range of epigenetic effects 
including altered DNA methylation, histone modification, altered 
miRNA expression, and genomic instability (Rossman and Klein, 
2011; ATSDR, 2016; Bailey et al., 2016; Howe and Gamble, 2016). 
Some mechanisms, however, may be cell type or organ specific, as 
there is emerging evidence that arsenic impacts target tissue stem 
cells in various ways to facilitate oncogenic change or impair tis-
sue metabolism and regeneration (Tokar et al., 2011c; Bailey et al., 
2016; Zhang et al., 2016).
Carcinogenicity  The carcinogenic potential of arsenic was 
recognized over 110 years ago by Hutchinson, who observed an

1118
Toxic Agents
unit V
unusual number of skin cancers occurring in patients treated for 
various diseases with medicinal arsenicals (IARC, 2012). IARC 
and NTP (IARC, 2012; NTP, 2016b) have long classified arsenic as 
a known human carcinogen, mostly associated with tumors of the 
skin, lung, and urinary bladder, and possibly the kidney, liver, and 
prostate (Straif et al., 2009; IARC, 2012). The mode of action for 
arsenic-induced cancers remains unresolved and is likely to be mul-
tifactorial. Resolution of a mode of action has been complicated by 
the difficulty in confirming the carcinogenicity of inorganic arsenic 
in experimental animals (States et al., 2011; Tokar et al., 2011c). 
Unlike many carcinogens, arsenic is not a mutagen in bacteria 
and acts weakly in mammalian cells, but can induce chromosomal 
abnormalities, aneuploidy, and micronuclei formation (IARC, 
2012; ATSDR, 2016). Arsenic can also act as a co-mutagen and/or 
co-carcinogen (Rossman et al., 2002; IARC, 2012; ATSDR, 2016). 
It is clear that inorganic arsenic and its metabolites are not directly 
genotoxic, as arsenic does not react directly with DNA. Instead, 
reaction with thiols in critical proteins produces transcriptional and 
epigenetic changes that promote cancers and tumor growth (Cohen 
et al., 2013; NRC, 2014). Arsenic inhibits a number of DNA repair 
mechanisms (Hartwig et  al., 2002; Kitchin and Wallace, 2008; 
Zhou et  al., 2014) and downregulates expression of some DNA 
repair genes (Andrew et al., 2003; IARC, 2012). Trivalent arsen-
icals can bind to cysteines in zinc coordination pockets of DNA 
binding proteins to replace the zinc, inhibit the protein’s activity, 
and promote genomic instability (Hartwig et al., 2002; Zhou et al., 
2011; IARC, 2012). Inhibition of the tumor suppressor p53 and 
promotion of maladaptive antioxidant and antiapoptotic responses 
may underlie the co-carcinogenic properties of arsenicals (IARC, 
2012; NRC, 2014). As discussed, arsenic signaling for increased 
ROS generation accounts for a large portion of its tendency to pro-
mote cell proliferation at lower concentrations and DNA damage at 
higher concentrations that interfere with mitochondrial respiration 
(IARC, 2012; NRC, 2014; ATSDR, 2016).
Arsenic-induced skin cancers include basal cell carcinomas 
and squamous cell carcinomas, both arising in areas of arsenic-
induced hyperkeratosis (Davis et al., 2000; IARC, 2012). The basal 
cell cancers are usually only locally invasive, but squamous cell 
carcinomas, resembling Bowen disease, may have distant metasta-
ses. In humans, the skin cancers often, but not exclusively, occur on 
areas of the body not exposed to sunlight (e.g., on palms of hands 
and soles of feet) and often occur as multiple primary malignant 
lesions. Animal models have shown that arsenic acts as a rodent 
skin tumor co-promoter with 12-O-teradecanoyl phorbol-13-acetate 
in v-Ha-ras mutant Tg.AC mice (Germolec et al., 1998) or as a co-
carcinogen with UV irradiation in hairless mice (Rossman et al., 
2004).
The majority of arsenic-related cancer deaths result from 
lung cancer with in utero exposures increasing the risk of lung 
cancer later in life (Smith et al., 2006; Tokar et al., 2011b; IARC, 
2012; ATSDR, 2016; Bailey et al., 2016; Steinmaus et al., 2016). 
Based upon a meta-analysis, Ferreccio et al. (2013) and Begum 
et al. (2015) estimated about 4.51 additional lung cancer cases per 
100,000 people for a maximum contamination level of 10 μg/L of 
arsenic in drinking water and enhanced risk with co-exposure to 
tobacco smoke. Again, it is likely that arsenic is not the primary car-
cinogen, but synergizes with the carcinogenic potential of tobacco 
smoke constituents. Arsenic is unique among the metals and chemi-
cal carcinogens, because arsenic-promoted lung cancer is indepen-
dent of route of exposure with oral ingestion and inhalation giving 
equivalent increases in risk of disease (Smith et al., 2009).
The unique kinetics of arsenic and its methylated trivalent 
metabolites greatly increase risk for transitional cell carcinoma of 
the bladder (Tokar et al., 2011a; IARC, 2012; Cohen et al., 2013). 
The metabolites are readily excreted into the urine and the enhanced 
concentration promote cyclic cell death and epithelial regenera-
tion that ultimately results in cellular transformation (Cohen et al., 
2013). However, metabolism of inorganic arsenite is not required 
to produce carcinogenic responses in the bladder epithelium, as 
hyperplasia and transformation is increased in mice lacking As3mt, 
relative to wild-type controls (Chen et al., 2011a). Inorganic arsenic 
also forms into intracellular cytoplasmic granules in the bladder 
epithelium (Yokohira et al., 2011). Bladder cancer risk is up to six-
fold higher in arsenic-exposed females relative to males, and the 
association of arsenic exposure with bladder cancer risk is greatly 
enhanced in smokers or ever-smokers (Ferreccio et al., 2013). It 
appears that most renal cancers associated with arsenic exposure 
are transitional cell carcinomas and are thought to arise from the 
urothelial cells (IARC, 2012).
Treatment  For acute arsenic poisoning, treatment is symptom-
atic, with particular attention to fluid volume replacement and sup-
port of blood pressure. The oral chelator penicillamine or succimer 
(2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid [DMSA]) is effective in removing 
arsenic from the body. Dimercaptopropanesulfonic acid (DMPS) 
has also been used for acute arsenic poisoning with fewer side effects 
(Aposhian and Aposhian, 2006). However, for chronic poisoning, 
chelator therapy has not proved effective in relieving symptoms 
(Rahman et al., 2001; Liu et al., 2002) except for a limited prelimi-
nary trial with DMPS (Mazumder, 2005). The best current strategy 
for preventing chronic arsenic poisoning is by reducing exposure.
Beryllium
Beryllium (Be), an alkaline earth metal, was discovered in 1798. 
The name beryllium comes from the Greek beryllos, a term used 
for the mineral beryl. Beryllium alloys are used in automobiles, 
computers, sports equipment, and dental bridges. Pure beryllium 
metal is used in nuclear weapons, aircraft, x-ray machines, and 
mirrors. Beryllium compounds are divalent and human exposure to 
beryllium and its compounds occurs primarily in beryllium manu-
facturing, fabricating, or reclaiming industries. Individuals may 
also be exposed to beryllium from implanted dental prostheses. 
The general population is exposed to trace amounts of beryllium 
through the air, food, and water, as well as from cigarette smoke 
(IARC, 2012; ATSDR, 2015a).
Toxicokinetics  The primary route of exposure to beryllium com-
pounds is inhalation. After being deposited in the lung, beryllium 
is slowly absorbed into the blood. In patients accidentally exposed 
to beryllium dust, serum beryllium levels peak about 10 days after 
exposure with a biological half-life of 2 to 8 weeks (ATSDR, 
2015a). Gastrointestinal and dermal absorption of beryllium is low 
(less than 1%), but incidental oral exposure to soluble beryllium 
compounds or exposure through damaged skin may significantly 
contribute to total body burden (Deubner et  al., 2001). Most of 
the beryllium circulating in the blood is bound to serum proteins, 
such as prealbumins and globulins. A significant part of the inhaled 
beryllium is stored in the bone and lungs. More soluble beryllium 
compounds are distributed to the liver, lymph nodes, spleen, heart, 
muscle, skin, and kidney. Elimination of absorbed beryllium occurs 
mainly in the urine and only to a minor degree in the feces (ATSDR, 
2015a). Because of the long residence time of beryllium in the 
skeleton and lungs, its biological half-life is over 1 year (ATSDR, 
2015a). Beryllium persists in the lungs even decades after exposure 
causing increased potential for a sustained inflammatory response 
(Sawyer and Maier, 2011; ATSDR, 2015a).

Toxic Effects of Metals
Chapter 23
1119
Toxicity 
Skin Effects  Exposure to soluble beryllium compounds may result 
in conjunctivitis and papulovesicular dermatitis of the skin, which 
is likely an inflammatory response to beryllium (ATSDR, 2015a). 
Beryllium exposure may also cause a delayed-type hypersensitivity 
reaction in the skin, which is a cell-mediated immune response. If 
insoluble beryllium-containing materials become embedded under 
the skin, a chronic granulomatous lesion develops, which may be 
necrotizing and ulcerative. Beryllium fluoride patch test may in itself 
be sensitizing, which has been replaced by the use of 1% beryllium 
sulfate (ATSDR, 2015a; Fontenot et al., 2016). Furthermore, human 
leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DRArg74 (HLA-DR3) is linked to beryl-
lium sensitization, but not chronic beryllium disease (Hultman and 
Pollard, 2015). However, the HLA-DRPheb47 gene is a suscepti-
bility marker for beryllium hypersensitivity in individuals lacking 
HLA-DPGlu69 (Amicosante et al., 2005).
Acute Chemical Pneumonitis  Inhalation of beryllium can cause 
a fulminating inflammatory reaction of the entire respiratory tract, 
involving the nasal passages, pharynx, tracheobronchial airways, 
and the alveoli. In the most severe cases, it produces acute fulminat-
ing pneumonitis (ATSDR, 2015a). This occurs almost immediately 
after inhalation of aerosols of soluble beryllium compounds, par-
ticularly the fluoride, during the ore extraction process. Fatalities 
have occurred, although recovery is generally complete after a 
period of several weeks or even months.
Chronic Granulomatous Disease  Berylliosis, or chronic beryl-
lium disease (CBD), was first described among fluorescent lamp 
workers exposed to insoluble beryllium compounds, particularly 
beryllium oxide. Granulomatous inflammation of the lung, along 
with dyspnea on exertion, cough, chest pain, weight loss, fatigue, and 
general weakness, are the most typical features (ATSDR, 2015a). 
Impaired lung function and hypertrophy of the right heart are also 
common. Chest x-rays show miliary mottling. Histologically, the 
alveoli contain small interstitial granulomas resembling those seen 
in sarcoidosis. In severe cases CBD may be accompanied by cyano-
sis and hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (ATSDR, 2015a). Beryllium 
sensitization after initial exposure can progress to CBD (Newman 
et al., 2005). As the lesions progress, interstitial fibrosis increases, 
with loss of functioning alveoli, impairment of effective air-capillary 
gas exchange, and increasing respiratory dysfunction. CBD 
involves an antigen-stimulated, cell-mediated immune response. 
HLA, T cells, and pro-inflammatory cytokines (TNF-α and IL-6) 
may be involved in the pathogenesis of CBD (Fontenot et al., 2016; 
McKee and Fontenot, 2016). The fact that certain small percentage 
of individuals exposed to beryllium develop CBD irrespective of 
the low level of exposure suggests a genetic factor in the patho-
genesis of the disease (Laulicht et al., 2015). Polymorphisms in the 
DPB1 locus in the HLA-D region of chromosome 6, specifically 
glutamic acid at position 69, is associated with beryllium sensi-
tivity and CBD (Laulicht et al., 2015; Fontenot et al., 2016). The 
genetic variant of the HLA-DPB1 gene generates a protein with a 
profound negative charge that increases the affinity to beryllium 
and thus increases the susceptibility to beryllium sensitization and 
CBD (Silveira et al., 2012).
Carcinogenicity  A number of epidemiology studies in U.S. 
beryllium workers found that death due to lung cancer was 
increased, along with increased incidence of respiratory diseases 
(IARC, 2012; ATSDR, 2015a). The increase in lung cancers is 
linked to high exposure levels that occurred prior to stricter expo-
sure regulations introduced in the 1950s. The likelihood of lung 
cancer was greater in workers with acute beryllium disease than 
in those with CBD (Gordon and Bowser, 2003; ATSDR, 2015a). 
Beryllium has been classified as a human carcinogen (IARC, 2012; 
NTP, 2016b).
Experimental studies confirmed carcinogenic potential of 
beryllium compounds by inhalation. For example, a single, short 
(less than 48-minute) exposure to 410 to 980 mg/m3 beryllium 
metal aerosol induced lung tumors in rats 14 months after exposure. 
Chronic beryllium sulfate inhalation (13 months, 0.034 mg Be/m3) 
resulted in 100% lung tumor incidence in rats (Gordon and Bowser, 
2003). Injection of beryllium compounds also induced osteosarco-
mas in rabbits (IARC, 2012). Beryllium compounds are negative in 
bacterial mutation assays. In mammalian cells, soluble beryllium 
compounds show weak mutagenic potential, but can induce malig-
nant transformation. The ability of beryllium compounds to produce 
chromosomal aberrations is controversial, and appears to depend 
on the compound, dose, and experimental conditions (Gordon and 
Bowser, 2003). The carcinogenic mechanism of beryllium is not yet 
clear. Several molecular events can occur including oncogene acti-
vation (K-ras, c-myc, c-fos, c-jun, and c-sis), and tumor suppressor 
gene dysregulation (p53, p16), but mutations in p53 or K-ras are not 
evident. Beryllium-induced lung tumors show hypermethylation of 
p16 leading to loss of expression, and have decreased expression of 
genes associated with DNA repair. Finally, there is an obvious con-
troversy in the carcinogenic effect between soluble and insoluble 
beryllium, thereby suggesting that the two forms of the metal have 
different pathological effects (Strupp, 2011).
Cadmium
Cadmium (Cd) is a toxic transition metal that was discovered in 
1817 as an impurity of “calamine” (zinc carbonate) for which it is 
named (from the Latin cadmia). Until recently the industrial use of 
cadmium was quite limited, but now it has become an important 
metal with many uses. About 75% of cadmium produced is used in 
batteries, especially nickel–cadmium batteries. Because of its non-
corrosive properties, cadmium has been used in electroplating or 
galvanizing alloys for corrosion resistance. It is also used as a color 
pigment for paints and plastics, in solders, as a barrier to control 
nuclear fission, as a plastic stabilizer, and in some special applica-
tion alloys. This metal is typically found in ores with other met-
als, and is commercially produced as a by-product of zinc and lead 
smelting, which are sources of environmental cadmium. Cadmium 
ranks seventh on the ATSDR priority list of toxic substances and is 
the fourth most important metal (ATSDR, 2012a).
Exposure  Cadmium is ubiquitous in the environment and expo-
sure to the general population occurs mainly through ingestion of 
plant-derived foods and certain types of seafood, as well as inhala-
tion of tobacco smoke and industrial emissions (Jarup and Akesson, 
2009; ATSDR, 2012a). Many leafy plants readily accumulate cad-
mium from soil. Both natural and anthropogenic sources of cad-
mium contamination occur for soil, including fallout of industrial 
emissions, some fertilizers, soil amendments, and use of cadmium-
containing water for irrigation, all resulting in a slow but steady 
increase in the cadmium content in vegetables over the years (Jarup 
and Akesson, 2009; ATSDR, 2012a). Shellfish accumulate rela-
tively high levels of cadmium (1 to 2 mg/kg), and animal liver and 
kidney can have levels higher than 50 μg Cd/kg. Cereal grains such 
as rice and wheat, and tobacco concentrate cadmium to levels of 
10 to 150 μg Cd/kg. With nearby industrial emission, air can be a 
significant source of direct exposure or environmental contamina-
tion (Jarup and Akesson, 2009). Total daily cadmium intake from 
all sources in North America and Europe ranges from 10 to 30 μg 
Cd per day. Of this, about 10% or less is retained (ATSDR, 2012a).

1120
Toxic Agents
unit V
Tobacco leaves accumulate high levels of cadmium from the soil 
making cigarette smoking a major nonoccupational source of cad-
mium exposure. Smoking is thought to roughly double the lifetime 
body burden of cadmium (Satarug et al., 2010; ATSDR, 2012a).
Historically, levels of cadmium in the workplace have dra-
matically improved with the appreciation of its potential toxic-
ity in humans, development of safety restrictions, and improved 
industrial hygiene. Inhalation is the dominant route of exposure in 
occupational settings (ATSDR, 2012a). Airborne cadmium in the 
present-day workplace environment is generally 5 μg/m3 or less and 
occupational standards range from 2 to 50 μg/m3 (ATSDR, 2012a). 
Occupations potentially at risk from cadmium exposure include 
those involved with refining zinc and lead ores, iron production, 
cement manufacture, and industries involving fossil fuel combus-
tion, all of which can release airborne cadmium. Other occupations 
include the manufacture of paint pigments, cadmium–nickel batter-
ies, and electroplating (ATSDR, 2012a).
Toxicokinetics  Gastrointestinal absorption of cadmium is lim-
ited to 5% to 10% of a given dose. Cadmium absorption can be 
increased by dietary deficiencies of calcium or iron and by diets 
low in protein. In the general population, women have higher blood 
cadmium levels than men, possibly due to increased oral cadmium 
absorption because of relatively low iron stores in women of child-
bearing age. Indeed, women showing low serum ferritin levels have 
twice the normal rate of oral cadmium absorption (ATSDR, 2012a; 
Kim et al., 2015). It has recently been shown that rats on an iron-
deficient diet have an increased absorption of cadmium, which cor-
related with the upregulation of the iron transporter, DMT, which 
transports both iron and cadmium (Ryu et al., 2004). Absorption of 
cadmium after inhalation is generally greater, ranging from 10% to 
60%, depending on the specific compound, site of deposition, and 
particle size (Prozialeck and Edwards, 2010; ATSDR, 2012a). For 
instance, 5% to 50% of cadmium fumes, as generated in cigarette 
smoke, may be absorbed. As much as 100% of cadmium eventu-
ally reaching the alveoli can be transferred to blood (Satarug and 
Moore, 2004; ATSDR, 2012a).
The relationship of cadmium metabolism and toxicity is shown 
in Fig. 23-3. Once absorbed, cadmium is very poorly excreted and 
only about 0.001% of the body burden is excreted per day. Both uri-
nary and fecal excretory routes are operative (Satarug and Moore, 
2004; ATSDR, 2012a). The half-life of cadmium in humans is esti-
mated to be more than 26 years and half-lives of several months up 
to several years have been calculated in rodents and other mam-
mals (ATSDR, 2012a). Cadmium is transported in blood by bind-
ing to albumin and other higher-molecular-weight proteins. It is 
rapidly taken up by tissues and is primarily deposited in the liver 
and to a lesser extent in the kidney. Transport into cells is mediated 
through calcium channels (Leslie et al., 2006) and through molecu-
lar mimicry (Bridges and Zalups, 2005). In the liver, kidney, and 
other tissues, cadmium induces the expression of metallothioneins 
(MT) that are responsible for cellular retention (Klaassen et al., 
1999). Cadmium is stored in the liver primarily as cadmium–MT. 
Cadmium–MT may be released from the liver and transported via 
blood to the kidney, where it is reabsorbed and degraded in the lyso-
somes of the renal tubules. This releases cadmium to induce more 
cadmium–MT complex or cause renal toxicity. Cadmium excre-
tion in urine increases relative to body burden (ATSDR, 2012a). 
Cadmium is nephrotoxic, and when renal pathology is present the 
urinary excretion of cadmium is increased due to decreased renal 
absorption of filtered cadmium (Zalups and Ahmad, 2003).
Toxicity  Acute, high-dose cadmium toxicity in humans is now 
a rare event. Acute cadmium toxicity from the ingestion of high 
concentrations of cadmium in the form of heavily contaminated 
beverages or food causes severe irritation to the gastrointestinal 
epithelium. Symptoms include nausea, vomiting, and abdominal 
pain. Inhalation of cadmium fumes or other heated cadmium-
containing materials may produce acute pneumonitis with pulmo-
nary edema. Inhalation of large doses of cadmium can be lethal 
for humans (ATSDR, 2012a). Acute cadmium toxicity depends on 
solubility of cadmium compounds (ATSDR, 2012a). For instance, 
with acute inhalation exposures, the more soluble cadmium chlo-
ride, oxide fume, and carbonate are more toxic than the relatively 
Cd-Alb
Cd-LMWPr
Liver cell
Bile
Tubular 
ﬂuid
GSH
Cd-Alb
Cd-LMWPr
Cd-MT
Cd
Cd
Cd-GSH
Cd-GSH
aa
Cd-MT
Cd-MT
Cd-MT
Cd-MT
Lysosome
Cd
MT
Sensitive site
Damage!
aa
Kidney cell
Glomerular
membrane
MT
Kidney
basolateral
membrane
Cd-LMWPr
Plasma
To urine
Figure 23-3.   Cadmium transport, protein binding, and toxicity. aa, amino acids; Cd-Alb, Cd–albumin; Cd-LMWPr, Cd associated with low-molecular-weight 
proteins; GSH, glutathione; MT, metallothionein.

Toxic Effects of Metals
Chapter 23
1121
less soluble sulfide (Klimisch, 1993). The major long-term toxic 
effects of low-level cadmium exposure are renal injury, obstructive 
pulmonary disease, osteoporosis, and cardiovascular disease (Jarup 
and Akesson, 2009; ATSDR, 2012a). Cancer is primarily a concern 
in occupationally exposed groups. The chronic toxic effects of cad-
mium are clearly a much greater concern than the rare acute toxic 
exposures.
Nephrotoxicity  Cadmium is toxic to tubular cells and glomeruli, 
markedly impairing renal function. Pathologically, these lesions 
consist of initial tubular cell necrosis and degeneration, progress-
ing to an interstitial inflammation and fibrosis. There appears to be 
a critical concentration of cadmium in the renal cortex that, once 
exceeded, is associated with tubular dysfunction. This concentra-
tion depends on the individual, and chronic cadmium nephropathy 
is seen in about 10% of the population at renal concentrations of 
about 200 μg/g and in about 50% of the population at about 300 
μg/g (Jarup and Akesson, 2009). Because of the potential for renal 
toxicity, there is considerable concern about the levels of dietary 
cadmium intake for the general population. In fact, it is thought that 
upwards of 7% of the general population may have significant cad-
mium-induced kidney alterations due to chronic exposure with kid-
ney cadmium levels as low as 50 μg/g (Jarup and Akesson, 2009).
Cadmium-induced renal toxicity is reflected by proteinuria 
as a result of renal tubular dysfunction. The predominant proteins 
include β2-microglobulin, N-acetyl-β-d-glucosaminidase (NAG), 
and MT, as well as retinol-binding protein, lysozyme, ribonucle-
ase, α1-microglobulin, and immunoglobulin light chains (Chen 
et al., 2006; Prozialeck and Edwards, 2010). The presence of larger 
proteins, such as albumin and transferrin, in the urine after occu-
pational cadmium exposure suggests a glomerular effect as well. 
The pathogenesis of the glomerular lesion in cadmium nephropathy 
is not well understood (Prozialeck and Edwards, 2010). Urinary 
excretions of proteins and cadmium have been used as biomarkers 
for cadmium exposure.
The induction of MT by cadmium and the subsequent seques-
tration of cadmium as the cadmium–MT complex likely protect tis-
sues from cadmium toxicity. However, if cadmium–MT complex 
is injected, it is acutely nephrotoxic (Nordberg, 2004). This led to 
the hypothesis that the cadmium–MT complex was responsible 
for chronic cadmium nephropathy. In this scenario, cadmium–
MT released from the liver would be filtered by the kidney and 
reabsorbed in proximal tubule cells, where it is degraded releasing 
locally high levels of “free” cadmium (Fig. 23-3). Nephrotoxicity in 
normal rats after liver transplantation from cadmium-exposed rats 
supported this hypothesis (Chan et al., 1993). However, MT-null 
mice, which are unable to produce the major forms of MT, are 
hypersensitive to chronic cadmium nephropathy (Klaassen et al., 
1999), suggesting that cadmium nephropathy is not necessarily 
mediated through the cadmium–MT complex. Kidney pathology 
from a single injection of cadmium–MT also differs greatly from 
that induced by chronic oral inorganic cadmium exposure (Liu 
et al., 1998). Inorganic cadmium can be taken into the kidney from 
the basolateral membrane, and is more toxic than cadmium–MT 
to cultured renal cells (Bridges and Zalups, 2005; Prozialeck and 
Edwards, 2010). It is likely that inorganic cadmium can bind to 
other low-molecular-weight proteins or other complexes for renal 
uptake, and these complexes can contribute to chronic cadmium 
nephropathy (Zalups and Ahmad, 2003).
Chronic Pulmonary Disease  Cadmium inhalation is toxic to the 
respiratory system in a fashion related to the dose and duration of 
exposure (ATSDR, 2012a). Cadmium-induced obstructive lung 
disease in humans can be slow in onset, and results from chronic 
bronchitis, progressive fibrosis of the lower airways, and accom-
panying alveolar damage leading to emphysema. Pulmonary func-
tion is reduced with dyspnea, reduced vital capacity, and increased 
residual volume. The pathogenesis of these lung lesions is not 
completely understood, but can be duplicated in rodents (ATSDR, 
2012a). The chronic effects of cadmium on the lung clearly 
increased the mortality of cadmium workers with high exposure.
Skeletal Effects  Occupational cadmium exposure is a well-
recognized cause for renal tubular dysfunction associated with 
hypercalciuria, renal stone formation, osteomalacia, and osteopo-
rosis (Kazantzis, 2004). The long-term consumption of cadmium-
contaminated rice caused Itai-Itai disease, which occurred mostly in 
multiparous elderly women and was characterized by severe osteo-
malacia and osteoporosis, resulting in bone deformities and con-
comitant renal dysfunction. Vitamin D deficiency and perhaps other 
nutritional deficiencies are thought to be cofactors in Itai-Itai disease 
(Kazantzis, 2004; Nordberg, 2009). Issues with loss of bone density, 
height loss, and increased bone fractures have now been reported in 
populations exposed to far lower levels of environmental cadmium 
than Itai-Itai victims (Kazantzis, 2004). Cadmium affects calcium 
metabolism, at least partially through renal dysfunction, and excess 
excretion of calcium often occurs in the urine. The skeletal changes 
are possibly related to a loss or decrease of calcium absorption, 
and interference with the actions of parathyroid hormone, disrup-
tion of collagen metabolism, and impairment of vitamin D activity 
(Lagerkvist et al., 1988), although the effects on vitamin D activity 
are debated (Engstrom et al., 2009). Cadmium may also act directly 
on bone, and animal studies have shown the metal stimulates osteo-
clast activity, resulting in the breakdown of bone matrix. Cadmium 
in bone interferes with calcification and bone remodeling (Kazantzis, 
2004). In accord with human victims of Itai-Itai, multiparity in mice 
enhances the osteotoxicity of cadmium (Wester et al., 1981).
Cardiovascular Effects  Some epidemiological evidence sug-
gests cadmium may be an etiologic agent for cardiovascular dis-
ease including hypertension, although these associations are not 
observed in all studies (Jarup and Akesson, 2009; Julin et al., 2013; 
Larsson and Wolk, 2015). There is strong association between 
cadmium exposure and peripheral vascular disease and cadmium 
may partially mediate the negative effect of smoking on peripheral 
artery disease (Navas-Acien et al., 2004). Animal and cell culture 
experiments indicate that low-level cadmium induces endothelial 
cell angiogenesis, but that higher, environmentally relevant levels 
may directly damage the vascular endothelium (Prozialeck et al., 
2008). Additional studies indicate that cadmium may be toxic to 
myocardium (Kopp et al., 1982), although the relevance of these 
results to humans is not clear.
Neurotoxicity  There are only limited data from animals and 
humans that cadmium can be neurotoxic (Jarup and Akesson, 2009; 
ATSDR, 2012a). Studies in humans have suggested a relationship 
between abnormal behavior and decreased intelligence in children 
and adults exposed to cadmium, but are typically complicated by 
exposure to other toxic metals. Furthermore, the blood–brain bar-
rier severely limits cadmium access to the central nervous system, 
and a direct toxic effect appears to occur only with cadmium expo-
sure prior to blood–brain barrier formation (young children), or 
with blood–brain barrier dysfunction under certain pathological 
conditions. Additionally, the choroid plexus epithelium may accu-
mulate high levels of cadmium, reducing access to other areas of 
the central nervous system (Zheng, 2001).
Reproductive Health Effects  Increasing evidence indicates 
that cadmium exposure may be associated with multiple adverse

1122
Toxic Agents
unit V
women’s reproductive health outcomes (Pollack et al., 2014). In 
general, women have a higher body burden of cadmium than men, 
likely due to higher absorption of cadmium in women with low 
iron stores (ATSDR, 2012a; Vilahur et al., 2015). Pregnant women 
appear to accumulate more cadmium than nonpregnant women 
(Vilahur et al., 2015). Cadmium tends to accumulate in the pla-
centa rather than crossing the placental barrier and consequently 
the strongest epidemiological evidence indicates an association 
between cadmium and preeclampsia (Pollack et al., 2014). There 
is additional suggestive support for association with negative fertil-
ity-related outcomes. In addition, prenatal exposure to cadmium is 
associated with adverse effects on birth outcomes, child health, and 
development with associations with epigenetic effects of cadmium 
interference with de novo DNA methyltransferases (Kippler et al., 
2013; Vilahur et al., 2015).
Carcinogenicity  Cadmium compounds are considered to be 
human carcinogens (IARC, 2012; NTP, 2016b). In humans, occu-
pational respiratory exposure to cadmium has been most clearly 
associated with lung cancer (IARC, 2012; NTP, 2016b). Early 
human studies also indicated a possible link to cancer of the pros-
tate, which has not been confirmed by more recent work (Chen 
et al., 2016a; NTP, 2016b), despite evidence that the prostate can be 
a target of cadmium carcinogenesis in rats (Waalkes, 2003). Both 
the kidney and pancreas accumulate high concentrations of cad-
mium, and exposure to cadmium may be associated with human 
renal and pancreatic cancer (Straif et al., 2009; IARC, 2012).
Multiple rodent studies have confirmed that inhalation of vari-
ous cadmium compounds will lead to lung cancer (Waalkes, 2003; 
IARC, 2012; NTP, 2016b). Lung tumors can also be produced by 
systemic cadmium exposure in mice (Waalkes, 2003). Beyond the 
lung, in rodents cadmium can produce a variety of tumors, includ-
ing malignant tumors at the site of repository injection (e.g., sub-
cutaneous). Compounds such as cadmium chloride, oxide, sulfate, 
sulfide, and cadmium powder produce local sarcomas in rodents 
after subcutaneous or intramuscular injections. A single injection 
can be effective, but multiple injections of cadmium at the same 
site cause more aggressive sarcomas that show a higher rate of local 
invasion and distant metastasis. The relevance of injection site sar-
coma production to human cancer is unclear. Cadmium also induces 
tumors of the testes, specifically benign Leydig cell tumors, but 
this is likely due to a high-dose mechanism involving acute testicu-
lar necrosis, degenerative testicular atrophy, and subsequent over-
stimulation by luteinizing hormone, factors very likely of limited 
relevance in humans (Waalkes, 2003). Other studies found that cad-
mium exposure can induce tumors of the pancreas, adrenals, liver, 
kidney, pituitary, and hematopoietic system in mice, rats, or ham-
sters. Cadmium can be carcinogenic in animals after inhalation or 
oral administration or by various injection routes (Waalkes, 2003). 
Various studies indicate that zinc administration will generally 
block cadmium carcinogenesis, whereas dietary zinc deficiency can 
enhance the response (Waalkes, 2003; IARC, 2012; NTP, 2016b). 
The mechanisms of cadmium carcinogenesis are poorly understood 
(Waalkes, 2003) and it is evident that direct DNA damage or geno-
toxicity has a minor role (Hartwig, 2013). Plausible mechanisms 
that are not mutually exclusive include aberrant gene expression 
and epigenetic regulation, inhibition of DNA damage repair, inhibi-
tion of apoptosis, and interference with normal cellular redox status 
and homeostasis (Waisberg et al., 2003; Hartwig, 2013).
Treatment  At the present time, there is no effective clinical treat-
ment for cadmium intoxication. In certain cases (Itai-Itai disease, 
osteomalacia) vitamin D is prescribed, although its effects have not 
been satisfactory (Nordberg, 2009). In experimental systems, some 
chelators can reduce acute cadmium-induced mortality, but chela-
tion therapy for cadmium generally results in significant adverse 
effects.
Chromium
Chromium (Cr) was named from the Greek word “chroma” mean-
ing color, because of the many colorful compounds made from it. 
It is part of the mineral crocoite (lead chromate), and the element 
was first isolated in 1798. Most naturally occurring chromium is 
found in the trivalent state in chromite ores, which are generally 
refined to ferrochromium or metallic chromium for use in industrial 
processes. Because trivalent chromium (Cr3+) has been suggested 
to be an essential trace nutrient important for glucose metabolism, 
it will be discussed separately in the section “Essential Metals with 
Potential for Toxicity.”
Hexavalent chromium (Cr6+) is rarely found in nature and 
is formed as a by-product of industrial processes. Most chromite 
ores are processed to sodium dichromate, a hexavalent chromium 
compound, which is used as an oxidizing agent in stainless steel 
production and welding, chromium plating, ferrochrome alloys 
and chrome pigment production, and tanning industries (ATSDR, 
2012b). Hexavalent chromium is a human carcinogen and produces 
a variety of toxic effects (Carlier et al., 1991; ATSDR, 2012b; 
IARC, 2012). Chromium in ambient air originates primarily from 
industrial sources, particularly ferrochrome production, ore refin-
ing, and chemical processing. Chromium fallout is deposited on 
land and water, and, eventually, in sediments. Widespread indus-
trial uses have increased chromium levels in the environment. The 
hexavalent chromium compounds are also toxic to ecosystems, and 
microbial and plant variants occur that adapt to high chromium lev-
els in eco-environment (Cervantes et al., 2001). Up to 38% of drink-
ing water supplies in California have detectable levels of hexavalent 
chromium, but little is known about the health effects from envi-
ronmental exposures (Sedman et al., 2006; Smith and Steinmaus, 
2009; Sun et al., 2015). Cobalt–chromium alloy hip replacement 
can increase blood levels of chromium and cause systemic toxicities 
(Bradberry et al., 2014; Madl et al., 2015).
Toxicokinetics  Absorption of hexavalent chromium compounds 
is higher (2% to 10%) than that of trivalent chromium compounds 
(0.5% to 2%) (ATSDR, 2012b). Inhaled chromium compounds are 
absorbed in the lung via transfer across alveolar cell membranes. 
Dermal absorption depends on the chemical form, vehicle, and 
integrity of the skin. Concentrated potassium chromate may cause 
chemical burns to the skin and facilitate absorption. Hexavalent 
chromium readily crosses cell membranes via sulfate and phos-
phate transporters, while trivalent chromium compounds form octa-
hedral complexes making entry into cells difficult (Standeven and 
Wetterhahn, 1989; ATSDR, 2012b). Once in the blood, hexavalent 
chromium is taken up by erythrocytes, while trivalent chromium is 
only loosely associated with erythrocytes. Chromium compounds 
are distributed to all organs of the body, with high levels in the liver, 
spleen, and kidney. Particles containing chromium can be retained 
in the lungs for years. Absorbed chromium is excreted primarily 
in urine. The half-life for excretion of oral potassium chromium is 
about 35 to 40 hours (Sedman et al., 2006; ATSDR, 2012b).
Once hexavalent chromium enters cells, it is reduced intra-
cellularly by ascorbic acid, glutathione, and/or cysteine, ultimately 
to trivalent chromium. It is thought that the toxicity of hexavalent 
chromium compounds results from damage to cellular components 
during this process, including the generation of free radicals and 
the formation of DNA adducts (Zhitkovich, 2005; Reynolds et al., 
2012; Sun et al., 2015).

Toxic Effects of Metals
Chapter 23
1123
Toxicity  Toxic effects have been attributed primarily to airborne 
hexavalent chromium compounds in industrial settings (Gibb et al., 
2000a, 2000b). Hexavalent chromium is corrosive and may cause 
chronic ulceration and perforation of the nasal septum, as well as 
chronic ulceration of other skin surfaces (ATSDR, 2012b). It elicits 
allergic contact dermatitis among previously sensitized individuals, 
which is a type IV allergic reaction inducing skin erythema, pruri-
tus, edema, papule, and scars. The prevalence of chromium sensi-
tivity is less than 1% among the general population and up to 4% in 
occupational settings (Shelnutt et al., 2007). Occupational exposure 
to chromium may be a cause of asthma (Bright et al., 1997; Antonini 
et al., 2004). Accidental ingestion of high doses of hexavalent chro-
mium compounds may cause acute renal failure characterized by 
proteinuria, hematuria, and anuria, but kidney damage from lower 
level chronic exposure is equivocal (ATSDR, 2012b).
Carcinogenicity  Hexavalent chromium compounds are classi-
fied as known to be human carcinogens by the National Toxicology 
Program (NTP, 2016b). Occupational exposure to hexavalent chro-
mium compounds, particularly in the chrome production and pig-
ment industries, is associated with increased risk of lung cancer 
(Gibb et  al., 2000b) and hexavalent chromium–containing com-
pounds are considered to be human carcinogens (IARC, 2012). 
An association of hexavalent chromium in the drinking water with 
stomach cancer has also been suggested (Sedman et al., 2006; Smith 
and Steinmaus, 2009), but the evidence that chromium causes stom-
ach cancer or other cancers is inconclusive (IARC, 2012).
Hexavalent chromium compounds are genotoxic; a review of 
more than 700 sets of short-term genotoxicity test results with 32 
chromium compounds revealed 88% of hexavalent chromium com-
pounds were positive, as a function of solubility and bioavailability 
to target cells (De Flora, 2000). Trivalent chromium compounds 
were generally non-genotoxic, probably because trivalent chro-
mium is not readily taken up by cells. However, once hexavalent 
chromium enters cells, it is reduced by various intracellular reduc-
tants to create reactive chromium species and it is likely that triva-
lent chromium is the ultimate DNA damaging species (Zhitkovich, 
2005; Reynolds et al., 2012; Sun et al., 2015). During the reduc-
tion process, various genetic lesions can be generated, including 
chromium–DNA adducts, DNA–protein cross-links, DNA–chro-
mium intrastrand cross-links, DNA strand breaks, and oxidized 
DNA bases (O’Brien et al., 2003; Macfie et al., 2010). Hexavalent 
chromium compounds are mutagenic, causing base substitutions, 
deletions, and transversions in bacterial systems, and hypoxanthine 
guanine phosphoribosyltransferase, supF mutations, etc. in mam-
malian mutagenesis systems (O’Brien et al., 2003).
Hexavalent chromium compounds also react with other cel-
lular constituents during the intracellular reduction process. They 
can cause the generation of reactive oxygen radicals, inhibit pro-
tein synthesis, and arrest DNA replication. Hexavalent chromium 
can disrupt the p53 signaling pathway, alter the ATM/ATR cell cycle 
checkpoints, induce apoptosis, and interfere with DNA damage 
repair (Zhitkovich, 2005; Salnikow and Zhitkovich, 2008). All these 
effects could well play an integrated role in chromium carcinogene-
sis (O’Brien et al., 2003; Sun et al., 2015). Hexavalent chromium can 
also directly react with and activate cell signaling enzymes, such as 
Src family kinases, to stimulate signal cascades leading to transcrip-
tional repression of important cellular protectant proteins (O’Hara 
et al., 2003; Nemec and Barchowsky, 2009; Nemec et al., 2010).
Lead
Lead (Pb) has been used by humans for at least 7000 years, because 
it is ubiquitous, easy to extract, highly malleable, and ductile. In 
the early Bronze Age, lead was used with antimony and arsenic. 
Lead’s elemental symbol, Pb, is an abbreviation of its Latin name 
plumbum. Lead in lead compounds primarily exists in the divalent 
form. Metallic lead (Pb0) is resistant to corrosion and can combine 
other metals to form various alloys. Organolead compounds are 
dominated by Pb4+. Inorganic lead compounds are used as pig-
ments in paints, dyes, and ceramic glazes. Organolead compounds 
were widely used as gasoline additives until the late 1980s caus-
ing global increases in atmospheric lead. Lead alloys are used in 
batteries, shields from radiation, water pipes, and ammunition. 
Environmental lead comes mainly from human activity and is listed 
as a top toxic substance (ATSDR, 2007c, 2015b). The phasing out 
of leaded gasoline and the removal of lead from paint, solder, and 
water supply pipes have significantly lowered blood lead levels in 
the general population. Lead exposure in children remains a major 
health concern and lead contamination from aging water supply 
infrastructure is a major public health concern in a majority of U.S. 
cities and municipalities. Lead is not biodegradable and ecotoxic-
ity of lead remains a concern (Bellinger et al., 2013). For instance, 
the leaded fish sinkers or pellets lost in the bottom of lakes and 
riverbanks can be mistaken for stone and ingested by birds causing 
adverse effects including death (De Francisco et al., 2003).
Exposure  Blood lead levels in the general population of the 
United States have been decreasing over the past three decades as 
regulations regarding lead paint, leaded fuels, and lead-contain-
ing plumbing materials have reduced exposure (ATSDR, 2007c). 
Occupational exposure to lead occurs for workers in the lead smelting 
and refining industries, battery manufacturing plants, glass manu-
facturing, steel welding or cutting operations, construction, rubber 
products and plastics industries, printing industries, firing ranges, 
radiator repair shops, and other industries requiring flame soldering 
of lead solder (ATSDR, 2007c). In these occupations, the major 
routes of lead exposure are inhalation and ingestion of lead-bearing 
dusts and fumes.
Lead-containing paint in older housing and aging water infra-
structure are primary sources of lead exposure in the general popu-
lation and in children (Needleman, 2004; Bellinger, 2011; Brown 
and Margolis, 2012). Major environmental sources of lead for 
infants and toddlers up to 4 years of age is hand-to-mouth transfer 
of lead-containing paint chips or dust from floors of older housing 
(Needleman, 2004; Bellinger, 2011). Lead in household dust can 
also come from outside of the home and may be related to lead 
in neighborhood soil (von Lindern et al., 2003; von Lindern et al., 
2016). A major route of exposure for the general population is from 
food and water (Brown and Margolis, 2012). Dietary intake of lead 
has decreased dramatically in recent years, and for infants, toddlers, 
and young children is less than 5 μg/day (Manton et al., 2005). 
Herbal medicines could be potential sources of lead exposure 
(Levin et al., 2008). Certain Ayurvedic herbal products contained 
lead levels ranging up to 37 mg/g and over 55 cases of lead poison-
ing have been related to the ingestion of herbal medicines (Patrick, 
2006). A review by the EPA in 2004 found lead levels in 71% of 
the water systems in the United States showed less than 5 μg Pb/L 
(ppb) (ATSDR, 2007c). Only 3.6% exceeded the action level of 15 
ppb. Lead in urban air is generally higher than that in rural air. Air 
lead in rural areas of eastern United States is typically 6 to 10 ng/m3 
(ATSDR, 2007c). Blood lead levels and x-ray fluorescence (XRF) 
analysis of lead in bone are the primary biomarkers for exposure.
Toxicokinetics  Adults absorb 5% to 15% of ingested lead and 
usually retain less than 5% of what is absorbed. Children absorb 
40% to 50% of ingested lead with 32% retention (ATSDR, 2007c). 
Lead absorption can be enhanced by low dietary zinc, manganese,

1124
Toxic Agents
unit V
iron, and calcium, especially in children (ATSDR, 2007c; Wu 
et  al., 2011). Airborne lead is a minor component of exposure. 
Lead absorption by the lungs depends on the form (vapor vs. par-
ticle), particle size, and concentration. About 90% of lead particles 
in ambient air that are inhaled are small enough to be retained. 
Absorption of retained lead through alveoli is relatively efficient.
Lead in blood is primarily (about 99%) in erythrocytes bound 
to hemoglobin; only 1% of circulating lead in serum is available for 
tissue distribution. Lead is initially distributed to soft tissues such 
as the kidney and liver, and then redistributed to the skeleton and 
hair. The half-life of lead in the blood is about 30 days. The frac-
tion of lead in bone increases with age from 70% of body burden 
in childhood to as much as 95% in adulthood, with a half-life of 
about 20 years. Lead released from bones may contribute up to 
50% of the lead in blood, and can be a significant source of endog-
enous exposure. Bone lead release may be important in adults with 
accumulated exposure and in women due to bone resorption dur-
ing pregnancy, lactation, and menopause, and from osteoporosis 
(Gulson et al., 2003; Silbergeld and Patrick, 2005; ATSDR, 2007c). 
Lead crosses the placenta, so that amounts in cord blood generally 
correlate with maternal blood concentration, but is often slightly 
lower. Lead accumulation in fetal tissues, including brain, is propor-
tional to maternal blood levels (Gulson et al., 2003; Bellinger, 2011)
The major route of excretion of absorbed lead is the kidney. 
Renal excretion of lead is usually through glomerular filtrate with 
some renal tubular resorption. Fecal excretion via biliary tract 
accounts for one-third of total excretion of absorbed lead (ATSDR, 
2007c). Physiological-based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) models have 
been developed for lead risk assessment. The O’Flaherty model is a 
model for children and adults (Fleming et al., 1999). The integrated 
exposure uptake biokinetic (IEUBK) model was developed by the 
EPA for predicting blood lead level in children (Mickle, 1998). The 
Leggett model allows simulation of lifetime exposures and can be 
used to predict blood lead in both children and adults (ATSDR, 
2007c).
Toxicity  Lead can induce a wide range of adverse effects in 
humans depending on the dose and duration of exposure. The 
toxic effects range from inhibition of enzymes to the production 
of severe pathology or death (ATSDR, 2007c). Children are most 
sensitive to effects in the central nervous system (Bellinger, 2011; 
Wu et al., 2011), while in adults, peripheral neuropathy and hyper-
tension are concerns (ATSDR, 2007c; Navas-Acien et al., 2007). 
Other target tissues include the gastrointestinal, immune, skeletal, 
and reproductive systems. Effects on heme biosynthesis provide a 
sensitive biochemical indicator even in the absence of other detect-
able effects.
Neurological, Neurobehavioral, and Developmental Effects 
in Children  Clinically overt lead encephalopathy may occur in 
children with high exposure to lead, probably at blood lead level of 
70 μg/dL or higher (ATSDR, 2007c). Symptoms of lead encepha-
lopathy begin with lethargy, vomiting, irritability, loss of appetite, 
and dizziness, progressing to obvious ataxia, and a reduced level of 
consciousness, which may progress to coma and death. The patho-
logical findings at autopsy are severe edema of the brain due to 
extravasations of fluid from capillaries in the brain. This is accom-
panied by the loss of neuronal cells and an increase in glial cells. 
Recovery is often accompanied by sequelae including epilepsy, 
mental retardation, and, in some cases, optic neuropathy and blind-
ness (ATSDR, 2007c; Bellinger, 2011; NTP, 2012).
The most sensitive indicators of adverse neurological out-
comes are psychomotor tests or mental development indices, and 
broad measures of IQ. Most studies report a 2- to 4-point IQ deficit 
for each μg/dL increase in BLL within the range of 5 to 35 μg/
dL (NTP, 2012). The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
set the goal of eliminating more than or equal to 10 μg/dL BLL 
in children by 2020 (CDC, 2012). However, effects of lead on IQ 
may occur below this level (Bellinger, 2011; Budtz-Jorgensen et al., 
2013). Recent studies found that deficits in cognitive and academic 
skills could occur with BLL less than 5.0 μg/dL (Budtz-Jorgensen 
et al., 2013). A study of a cohort of children from pregnancy to 
10 years of age found that lead exposure around 28 weeks of ges-
tation is a critical period for later child intellectual development, 
and lead’s effect on IQ occurs with first few micrograms of BLL 
(Schnaas et al., 2006; NTP, 2012). In addition, an association of 
childhood BLL with cognitive function and socioeconomic status 
in adults has been recently established (Bellinger, 2017; Reuben 
et al., 2017).
Lead can affect the brain by multiple mechanisms. It may 
act as a surrogate for calcium and/or disrupt calcium homeosta-
sis (Marchetti, 2014). Lead affects virtually every neurotransmit-
ter system in the brain, including glutamatergic, dopaminergic, and 
cholinergic systems (Marchetti, 2014). The stimulation of protein 
kinase C through mimicking calcium may alter blood–brain bar-
rier and inhibition of cholinergic modulation of glutamate-related 
synaptic transmissions (Marchetti, 2003). All these systems play a 
critical role in synaptic plasticity and cellular mechanisms for cog-
nitive function, learning, and memory (NTP, 2012).
Neurotoxic Effects in Adults  Adults with occupational exposure 
may demonstrate abnormalities in a number of measures in neu-
robehavior with cumulative exposures resulting from BLL more 
than 40 μg/dL, whereas encephalopathy occurs with exposures 
above 100 μg/dL (ATSDR, 2007c; Bellinger, 2011). Peripheral 
neuropathy is a classic manifestation of lead toxicity in adults. 
More than a half-century ago, foot drop and wrist-drop character-
ized the house painter and other workers with excessive occupa-
tional exposure to lead but are rare today. Peripheral neuropathy 
is characterized by segmental demyelination and possibly axonal 
degeneration. Motor nerve dysfunction, assessed clinically by 
electrophysiological measurement of nerve conduction velocities, 
occurred with BLL as low as 40 μg/dL (Goyer, 1993).
Hematologic Effects  Lead has multiple hematologic effects, 
ranging from increased urinary porphyrins, coproporphyrins, 
δ-aminolevulinic acid (ALA), and zinc protoporphyrin to anemia 
(ATSDR, 2007c). The heme biosynthesis pathway and the sites of 
lead interference are shown in Fig. 23-4. The most sensitive effects 
of lead are the inhibition of δ-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase 
(ALAD) and ferrochelatase. ALAD catalyzes the condensation of 
two units of ALA to form porphobilinogen (PBG). Inhibition of 
ALAD results in accumulation of ALA. Ferrochelatase catalyzes 
the insertion of iron into the protoporphyrin ring to form heme. 
Inhibition of ferrochelatase results in accumulation of protoporphy-
rin IX, which takes the place of heme in the hemoglobin molecule 
and, as the erythrocytes containing protoporphyrin IX circulate, 
zinc is chelated at the site usually occupied by iron. Erythrocytes 
containing zinc protoporphyrin are intensely fluorescent and may 
be used to diagnose lead exposure. Feeding lead to experimental 
animals also raises heme oxygenase activity, resulting in increases 
in bilirubin formation. Anemia only occurs in very marked cases of 
lead toxicity, and is microcytic and hypochromic, as in iron defi-
ciency. The changes in ALAD in peripheral blood and excretion of 
ALA in urine correlate with BLL and serve as early biochemical 
indices of lead exposure (ATSDR, 2007c). Genetic polymorphisms 
have been identified for alleles of the ALAD gene that may affect 
the toxicokinetics of lead (Montenegro et al., 2006). However, no

Toxic Effects of Metals
Chapter 23
1125
firm evidence exists for an association between ALAD genotype 
and susceptibility to lead toxicity at background exposures (van 
Bemmel et al., 2011).
Renal Toxicity  Acute lead nephrotoxicity consists of proximal 
tubular dysfunction and can be reversed by treatment with chelating 
agents. Chronic lead nephrotoxicity consists of interstitial fibrosis 
and progressive nephron loss, azotemia, and renal failure (Goyer, 
1993). However, occurrence of lead nephrotoxicity is mostly asso-
ciated with very high level exposure and has declined (Goyer, 
1993). A characteristic microscopic change is the presence of intra-
nuclear inclusion bodies. By light microscopy the inclusions are 
dense, homogeneous, and eosinophilic with hematoxylin and eosin 
staining. The bodies are composed of a lead–protein complex. The 
protein is acidic and contains large amounts of aspartic and glu-
tamic acids with little cystine. The inclusion bodies are a form of 
aggresome accumulating large amounts of lead in a relatively inert, 
nontoxic state. MT-null mice cannot form inclusion bodies after 
lead treatment and are hypersensitive to lead-induced nephropathy 
and carcinogenesis, suggesting that lead inclusion body formation 
requires MT as a participant (Waalkes et al., 2004). In fact, MT 
is found on the outer surface of lead inclusion bodies, indicating 
that it may transport the metal to the forming inclusion (Waalkes 
et al., 2004). Lead nephrotoxicity impairs the renal synthesis of 
heme-containing enzymes in the kidney, such as heme-containing 
hydroxylase involved in vitamin D metabolism causing bone effects 
(ATSDR, 2007c). Again these are effects of high level exposures, 
and the association of chronic kidney disease with environmental 
or general population exposures remains controversial (Bellinger, 
2011; Evans and Elinder, 2011).
Effects on Cardiovascular System  There is evidence of a causal 
relationship between lead exposure and hypertension (ATSDR, 
2007c; Navas-Acien et al., 2007; NTP, 2012). This includes suf-
ficient evidence that both BLL and bone lead levels are positively 
associated with general hypertension and hypertension in preg-
nancy (Silbergeld and Patrick, 2005; NTP, 2012). However, bone 
lead, a more reliable marker of chronic exposure, is more consist-
ently associated with both hypertension and cardiovascular mortal-
ity (NTP, 2012). Analysis of data from the NHANES II for the U.S. 
population, including BLL and blood pressure measurements in a 
general population (5803 people aged 12 to 74), found a correlation 
between BLL at relatively low levels and blood pressure (Harlan, 
1988). Further investigation with a systematic review of human 
data indicated a causal relationship between lead and hypertension 
(Navas-Acien et al., 2007). Elevated blood pressure is more pro-
nounced in middle age than at young age (ATSDR, 2007c).
The pathogenesis of lead-induced hypertension is multifacto-
rial. Lead interferes with endogenous nitric oxide generation and 
subsequent cGMP-dependent vasorelaxation, possibly through 
lead-induced ROS generation. Lead may mimic calcium in acti-
vating renin secretion in the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone sys-
tem, as well as increase sympathetic to promote hypertension. 
Lead alters calcium-activated contraction and functioning of vas-
cular smooth muscle cells, including increased contractility by 
decreasing Na+/K+-ATPase activity and stimulating the Na+/Ca2+ 
exchange pump. Lead may also increase secretion of vasocon-
strictive ligands, such as endothelin and thromboxane (ATSDR, 
2007c). It is likely that renal dysfunction caused by lead contrib-
utes to its cardiovascular effects, although it is also true that the 
cardiovascular effects and hypertension contribute to renal dys-
function (NTP, 2012).
Immunotoxicity  In 2012, the NTP concluded that there was 
limited evidence that low BLL (less than 10 mg/dL) are associ-
ated with adverse immune outcomes in children and inadequate 
Glycine +
Succinyl-CoA
ALA
Bilirubin
ALA
Porphobilinogen
Uroporphyrinogen
Heme
Protoporphyrin IX
Heme oxidase
(microsome)
ALA
dehydrogenase
Mitochondria
ALA-synthetase
Cytochrome c
Coproporphyrinnogen
Coproporphyrinnogen
Iron
Iron
Coproporphyrinnogen
oxidase
Ferrochelatase
Iron
Pb
Pb
Pb
Pb
Pb
Pb
Figure 23-4.   Lead interruption of heme biosynthesis. ALA, δ-aminolevulinate; Pb, sites for lead effects. The major lead inhibition sites are ALA dehydroge-
nase and ferrochelatase.

1126
Toxic Agents
unit V
evidence for adults (NTP, 2012). Higher exposures in workers 
has demonstrated a stronger association with immune dysfunction 
(ATSDR, 2007c). The developing immune system is sensitive to 
toxic effects of lead (Dietert, 2008; Bellinger, 2011). A hallmark of 
lead-induced immunotoxicity is a pronounced shift in the balance 
in T-helper cell function toward Th2 responses at the expense of 
Th1 functions, resulting in elevated IgE levels (Leifer and Dietert, 
2011). Increased IgE levels and inflammatory cytokines were 
found in lead-exposed neonatal rodents, and there is an association 
between BLL and elevated IgE levels in children (Luebke et al., 
2006; NTP, 2012). In experimental animals, lead has been shown to 
target macrophages and T cells, especially CD4+ T cells. In occu-
pational exposure, lead-associated immunologic changes include 
altered T-cell subpopulations, reduced immunoglobulin levels, 
and reduced polymorphonuclear leukocyte chemotactic activity 
(Luebke et al., 2006; ATSDR, 2007c; NTP, 2012)
Bone Effects  Lead has an extremely long half-life in bone, 
accounting for over 90% of the body lead in adults (ATSDR, 
2007c; NTP, 2012). It can affect bone by interfering with meta-
bolic and homeostatic mechanisms including parathyroid hormone, 
calcitonin, vitamin D, and other hormones that influence calcium 
metabolism, as lead substitutes for calcium in bone. It is known to 
affect osteoblasts, osteoclasts, and chondrocytes and has been asso-
ciated with osteoporosis and delays in fracture repair (Carmouche 
et al., 2005). In children exposed to lead, a higher bone mineral 
density (BMD) was observed (Campbell et al., 2004). This may 
be due to accelerated bone maturation through inhibition of para-
thyroid hormone–related peptide, may ultimately result in lower 
peak BMD in young adulthood, and might predispose subjects to 
osteoporosis later in life (Campbell et al., 2004; ATSDR, 2007c). 
A positive association between lead exposure and dental caries in 
children has been shown in a number of studies. Lead is deposited 
in teeth, inhibits mineralization of enamel and dentine, and affects 
metabolism of the cells in the dental pulp (ATSDR, 2007c). Lead 
in bone is recognized as a potential source for exposure to other 
tissues when bone is mobilized, as during pregnancy (Silbergeld 
and Patrick, 2005).
Other Effects  Lead colic is a major gastrointestinal symptom of 
severe lead poisoning, and is characterized by abdominal pain, 
nausea, vomiting, constipation, and cramps (ATSDR, 2007c). It is 
rarely seen today, except in intentional poisoning. Lead-induced 
gametotoxic effects have been demonstrated in both male and 
female animals (Goyer, 1993).
Carcinogenicity  Lead and lead compounds are reasonably 
anticipated to be human carcinogens based on limited evidence of 
carcinogenicity from studies in humans and sufficient evidence of 
carcinogenicity from studies in experimental animals (NTP, 2016b). 
The association of lead exposure with increased human cancer risk 
was strengthened by recent studies (ATSDR, 2007c), and inorganic 
lead compounds were recently reclassified as probably carcino-
genic to humans while organic lead compounds were considered 
not classifiable as to human carcinogenicity (IARC, 2006). A 
study of a cohort of 20,700 workers co-exposed to lead and engine 
exhaust found a 1.4-fold increase in the overall cancer incidence 
and a 1.8-fold increase in the incidence of lung cancer among those 
who ever had elevated BLL (Anttila et al., 1995). Another epide-
miological study of 27,060 brain cancer cases and 108,240 controls 
who died of nonmalignant disease in the United States from 1984 
to 1992 provides evidence for a potential link between occupational 
exposure to lead and brain cancer (Cocco et al., 1998). Analysis 
of eight principal studies with well-documented lead exposures 
suggests associations of lead exposure with increased lung and 
stomach cancers (Steenland and Boffetta, 2000). However, workers 
were not exposed to lead alone, and exposures to other potential 
carcinogens such as arsenic, cadmium, and engine exhausts could 
confound these interpretations. Lead does not appear to be directly 
genotoxic in vivo or in vitro, and lead may interact with other toxi-
cants to facilitate chemical carcinogenesis (Silbergeld, 2003).
Lead is a nephrocarcinogen in adult rodents (IARC, 2012). 
Lead-induced renal tumors also occur after perinatal exposure in 
the absence of the extensive chronic nephropathy (Waalkes et al., 
1995). MT-null mice, which do not form lead inclusion bodies, are 
hypersensitive to lead-induced proliferative lesions of the kidney 
(Waalkes et al., 2004) and develop testicular teratomas (Tokar et al., 
2010) compared with similarly exposed wild-type mice.
Several mechanisms have been proposed for lead-induced 
carcinogenesis, including regenerative repair, inhibition of DNA 
synthesis or repair, generation of ROS with oxidative damage to 
DNA, substitution of lead for zinc in transcriptional regulators, 
interaction with DNA-binding proteins, and aberrant gene expres-
sion (Silbergeld, 2003).
Treatment  Chelation therapy is warranted in workmen with BLL 
more than 60 μg/dL. For children, criteria have been established 
(Laraque and Trasande, 2005) that may serve as guidelines to assist 
in evaluating the individual case with potential health effects. The 
oral chelating agent DMSA (also called succimer) has advantages 
over EDTA in that it can be given orally and is effective in tempo-
rarily reducing BLL. However, DMSA neither improves long-term 
BLL in children nor reduces brain lead levels beyond the cessa-
tion of lead exposure alone (Smith and Strupp, 2013; Andersen and 
Aaseth, 2016). A recent study shows that DMSA lowered BLL in 
children, but had no detectable benefit on learning and behavior 
(Dietert et al., 2004). Chelation therapy is nonetheless still recom-
mended for children (Warniment et al., 2010). Treatment of organic 
lead poisoning is symptomatic.
Mercury
Mercury (Hg) was named after the Greco-Roman god known for 
swift flight. Also called quicksilver, metallic mercury is in liq-
uid state at room temperature. The symbol Hg was derived from 
the Latinized Greek hydrargyrum, meaning “water” and “silver.” 
Mercury was known in ancient times from approximately 1500 bc. 
By 500 bc mercury was used to make amalgams with other met-
als. Mercury vapor (Hg0) is much more hazardous than the liquid 
form. Mercury binds to other elements (such as chlorine, sulfur, or 
oxygen) to form inorganic mercurous (Hg1+) or mercuric (Hg2+) 
salts. This metal can form a number of stable organometallic com-
pounds by attaching to one or two carbon atoms. Methylmercury 
(CH3Hg+, or MeHg) is the toxicologically most important organic 
form (ATSDR, 2013a). Mercurial compounds have characteristic 
toxicokinetics and health effects that depend on oxidation state and 
associated organic species (ATSDR, 2013a).
Global Cycling and Ecotoxicology  Mercury exemplifies 
movement of metals in the environment (Fig. 23-5). Atmospheric 
mercury, in the form of mercury vapor (Hg0), is derived from natu-
ral degassing of the Earth’s crust and through volcanic eruptions 
as well as from evaporation from oceans and soils. Anthropogenic 
sources are estimated to contribute two-thirds of the total atmo-
spheric mercury (Chen et  al., 2016b; Gonzalez-Raymat et  al., 
2017). These contributions include emissions from metal mining 
and smelting (mercury, gold, copper, and zinc), coal combustion, 
municipal incinerators, and chloralkali industries. Mercury vapor is

Toxic Effects of Metals
Chapter 23
1127
a chemically stable monatomic gas and its residence time in atmo-
sphere is about 1 year. Thus, mercury is globally distributed even 
from point resources. Eventually it is oxidized to a water-soluble 
inorganic form (Hg2+), and returned to the Earth’s surface in rain-
water. The metal may then be reduced back to mercury vapor and 
returned to the atmosphere, or it may be methylated by microorgan-
isms present in sediments of bodies of fresh and ocean water (Chen 
et al., 2016b). This natural biomethylation reaction produces meth-
ylmercury (MeHg). Methylmercury enters the aquatic food chain 
starting with plankton, then herbivorous fish, and finally ascend-
ing to carnivorous fish and sea mammals. On the top of the food 
chain, tissue mercury can rise to levels 1800 to 80,000 times higher 
than levels in the surrounding water. This biomethylation and bio-
concentration result in human exposure to methylmercury through 
consumption of fish (Magos and Clarkson, 2006; Chen et  al., 
2016b). Organomercurial compounds are generally more toxic than 
inorganic mercury to aquatic organisms, aquatic invertebrates, fish, 
plants, and birds. Organisms in the larval stages are generally more 
sensitive to toxic effects of mercury (Magos and Clarkson, 2006; 
Chen et al., 2016b).
Exposure 
Dietary Exposure  Consumption of fish is the major route of expo-
sure to methylmercury. Unlike the case of polychlorinated biphe-
nyls, which are also deposited in fat, cooking the fish does not lower 
the methylmercury content. Inorganic mercury compounds are also 
found in food. The source of inorganic mercurial is unknown but 
the amounts ingested are far below known toxic levels. Mercury in 
the atmosphere and in drinking water is generally so low that they 
do not constitute an important source of exposure to the general 
population (ATSDR, 2013a; Chen et al., 2016b).
Occupational Exposure  Inhalation of mercury vapor can occur 
from the working environment, as in the chloralkali industry, 
where mercury is used as a cathode in the electrolysis of brine. 
Occupational exposure may also occur during manufacture of a 
variety of scientific instruments and electrical control devices, and 
in dentistry where mercury amalgams are used in tooth restoration. 
In the processing and extraction of gold, large quantities of metal-
lic mercury are used to form an amalgam with gold. The amalgam 
is then heated to drive off the mercury, resulting in a substantial 
atmospheric release (ATSDR, 2013a; Drace et  al., 2016). This 
extraction process is highly prevalent in artisanal and small-scale 
gold mining that is often not regulated and, thus, poses a significant 
environmental justice issue (Drace et al., 2016).
Medicinal Exposure  Mercury was an important constituent of 
drugs for centuries and was used as an ingredient in diuretics, anti-
septics, skin ointments, and laxatives. These uses have largely been 
replaced by safer drugs. Thimerosal contains the ethylmercury rad-
ical attached to the sulfur group of thiosalicylate (49.6% mercury 
by weight as ethylmercury), and has been used as a preservative 
in many vaccines since 1930s, although its use in children’s vac-
cines was discontinued in 2001 over concerns that children may be 
exposed to excessive levels of mercury. The use of mercury amal-
gam in dental restoration releases mercury vapor in the oral cav-
ity and can result in increased mercury body burden. Although the 
Hg0
MeHg
MeHg
Hg0
Hg0
Hg0
Hg2+
Hg2+
Hg0
Hg2+
Hg2+
sediment
Figure 23-5.   The movement of mercury in the environment. In nature, mercury vapor (Hg0), a stable monoatomic gas, evaporates from the Earth’s surface 
(both soil and water) and is emitted by volcanoes. Anthropogenic sources include emissions from coal-burning power stations and municipal incinerators. 
After approximately 1 year, mercury vapor is converted to soluble form (Hg2+) and returned to the Earth by rainwater. It may be converted back to the vapor 
by microorganisms and reemitted into the atmosphere. Thus, mercury may recirculate for long periods. Mercury attached to aquatic sediments is subjected 
to microbial conversion to methylmercury, starting with plankton, then herbivorous fish, and finally ascending to carnivorous fish and sea mammals. This 
biomethylation and biomagnification result in human exposure to methylmercury through consumption of fish, and pose the health risk to humans, especially 
the developing fetus.

1128
Toxic Agents
unit V
potential health effects of amalgams have been fiercely debated, the 
amounts are low compared with occupational exposure (Magos and 
Clarkson, 2006).
Accidental Exposure  Fatal mercury poisonings come mainly 
from accidental exposure. Elemental mercury spills can occur in 
many ways, such as from broken elemental mercury containers, 
medicinal devices, barometers, and melting tooth amalgam fill-
ings to recover silver. Inhalation of large amount of mercury vapor 
can be deadly (Magos and Clarkson, 2006; ATSDR, 2013a). Oral 
ingestion of large amounts of inorganic mercury chloride has also 
been lethal in suicide cases (Magos and Clarkson, 2006; ATSDR, 
2013a). A well-known organomercurial poisoning episode was from 
consumption of fish contaminated with methylmercury from indus-
trial waste in Minamata, Japan (Ekino et al., 2007). Consumption 
of grains and rice treated with methylmercury or ethylmercury as 
fungicides to prevent plant root diseases in Iraq and China also led 
to a significant number of poisonings (Clarkson, 2002). Contact 
with even a small amount of dimethylmercury (CH3CH3Hg) can 
penetrate laboratory gloves, resulting in rapid transdermal absorp-
tion, delayed cerebella damage, and death (Nierenberg et al., 1998; 
Blayney, 2001).
Toxicokinetics 
Mercury Vapor  Mercury vapor is readily absorbed (about 80%) 
in the lungs, rapidly diffuses across alveolar membranes into the 
blood, and distributes to all tissues in the body due to its high lipid 
solubility. Once the vapor has entered cells, it is oxidized to diva-
lent inorganic mercury by tissue and erythrocyte catalase. A sig-
nificant portion of mercury vapor crosses the blood–brain barrier 
and placenta before it is oxidized by erythrocytes, and thus shows 
more neurotoxicity and developmental toxicity compared with 
administration of inorganic mercury salts that cross membranes 
less rapidly. After mercury vapor undergoes oxidation, its deposi-
tion resembles inorganic mercury. Approximately 10% of mercury 
vapor is exhaled within a week of exposure, and that converted to 
inorganic mercury is excreted mainly in urine and feces, with a 
half-life of 1 to 2 months (Magos and Clarkson, 2006; ATSDR, 
2013a). Liquid metallic mercury, such as that swallowed from a 
broken thermometer, is only poorly absorbed by the gastrointes-
tinal tract (0.01%), is not biologically reactive, and is generally 
thought to be of little or no toxicological consequence.
Inorganic Mercury  Inorganic mercury is poorly absorbed from 
the gastrointestinal tract. Absorption ranges 7% to 15% of ingested 
dose, depending on the inorganic compound (ATSDR, 2013a). A 
small portion of absorbed inorganic mercury is formed by reduction 
in tissues and exhaled as mercury vapor. The highest concentration 
of inorganic mercury is found in the kidney, a major target. Renal 
uptake of mercury salts occurs through two routes: from luminal 
membranes in renal proximal tubule in the form of the cysteine 
S-conjugates (Cys-S-Hg-S-Cys) or from the basolateral membrane 
through organic anion transporters (Bridges and Zalups, 2005). 
Inorganic mercury salts do not readily pass blood–brain barrier or 
placenta and are mainly excreted in urine and feces, with a half-life 
of about 2 months.
Methylmercury  Methylmercury is well absorbed from the gastro-
intestinal tract. About 95% of methylmercury ingested from fish is 
absorbed. It is distributed to all tissues in about 30 hours (Magos 
and Clarkson, 2006; ATSDR, 2013a). About 10% of absorbed 
methylmercury is distributed to the brain and 5% remains in the 
blood. The concentration in erythrocytes is 20 times that in plasma. 
Methylmercury is bound to thiol-containing molecules such as 
cysteine (CH3Hg-S-Cys), which mimic methionine to cross the 
blood–brain barrier and placenta through the neutral amino acid 
carrier. Methylmercury readily accumulates in hair, and although 
concentrations are proportional to that in blood, they are about 
250-fold higher. Thus, hair mercury is often used as an indicator of 
exposure. Detoxification of Hg2+ and MeHg species can also occur 
by complexing with glutathione, and the GSH–mercury complexes 
facilitate systemic excretion efflux from cells, as well as elimina-
tion by the liver and kidneys (Martinez-Finley and Aschner, 2014). 
Methylmercury undergoes extensive enterohepatic recycling, which 
can be interrupted to enhance fecal excretion. Methylmercury is 
slowly metabolized to inorganic mercury by microflora in intestine 
(about 1% of the body burden per day). In contrast to inorganic 
mercury, 90% of the methylmercury is eliminated from the body in 
the feces, and less than 10% is in the urine, with a half-life of 45 to 
70 days (Clarkson et al., 2007; ATSDR, 2013a).
The disposition of ethylmercury is similar to methylmercury. 
The major differences include that the conversion to inorganic mer-
cury in body is much faster for ethylmercury, which can result in 
renal injury. The mercury levels in brain are lower for ethylmercury 
than those for methylmercury. The half-life for ethylmercury is only 
15% to 20% of that for methylmercury (Clarkson et al., 2007).
Toxicity 
Mercury Vapor  Inhalation of mercury vapor at extremely high 
concentrations may produce an acute, corrosive bronchitis and 
interstitial pneumonitis and, if not fatal, may be associated with 
central nervous system effects such as tremor or increased excit-
ability (Magos and Clarkson, 2006). With chronic exposure to mer-
cury vapor, the major effects are on the central nervous system. 
Early signs are nonspecific, and this condition has been termed the 
asthenic-vegetative syndrome or micromercurialism. Identification 
of the syndrome requires neurasthenic symptoms and three or more 
of the following clinical findings: tremor, enlargement of the thy-
roid, increased uptake of radioiodine in the thyroid, labile pulse, 
tachycardia, dermographism, gingivitis, hematologic changes, or 
increased excretion of mercury in urine. The triad of tremors, gingi-
vitis, and erethism (memory loss, increased excitability, insomnia, 
depression, and shyness) has been recognized historically as the 
major manifestation of mercury poisoning from inhalation of mer-
cury vapor. Sporadic instances of proteinuria and even nephrotic 
syndrome may occur in persons with exposure to mercury vapor, 
particularly with chronic occupational exposure. The pathogenesis 
is probably immunologically similar to that occurring after expo-
sure to inorganic mercury (Magos and Clarkson, 2006). Mercury 
vapor release from amalgam is in general too low to cause signifi-
cant toxicity (Magos and Clarkson, 2006).
Inorganic Mercury  Kidney is the major target organ for inorganic 
mercury (Magos and Clarkson, 2006; ATSDR, 2013a). Although 
a high dose of mercuric chloride is directly toxic to renal tubu-
lar cells, chronic low-dose exposure to mercury salts may induce 
rare immunologic glomerular disease (Magos and Clarkson, 2006). 
However, the nephrotic syndrome is not rare in African women 
who have used skin lightening creams containing ammoniated mer-
cury. All the African women with the nephrotic syndrome had, at 
the time of use, 90 to 250 mg Hg/L in their urine (Barr et al., 1972; 
Niu et al., 2017).
Methylmercury  The major human health effect from exposure to 
methylmercury is neurotoxicity. Clinical manifestations of neu-
rotoxicity include paresthesia (a numbness and tingling sensation 
around the mouth and lips) and ataxia, manifested as a clumsy, 
stumbling gait, and difficulty in swallowing and articulating 
words. Other signs include neurasthenia (a generalized sensation

Toxic Effects of Metals
Chapter 23
1129
of weakness), vision and hearing loss, and spasticity and tremor 
(Magos and Clarkson, 2006; ATSDR, 2013a). These may finally 
progress to coma and death. Neuropathological observations have 
shown that the cortex of the cerebrum and cerebellum are selec-
tively involved with focal necrosis of neurons, lysis and phago-
cytosis, and replacement by glial cells. These changes are most 
prominent in the deeper fissures (sulci), as in the visual cortex and 
insula. The overall acute effect is cerebral edema, but with pro-
longed destruction of gray matter and subsequent gliosis, cerebral 
atrophy results (Magos and Clarkson, 2006). A study of the Iraq 
epidemic of methylmercury exposure has provided dose–response 
estimates of the body burden of mercury required for the onset and 
frequency of symptoms (Bakir et al., 1973) (Fig. 23-6).
Mechanism of Toxicity  High-affinity binding of divalent mer-
cury to sulfhydryl groups of proteins in the cells is an important 
mechanism for producing nonspecific cell injury or even cell 
death. A number of general mechanisms of toxicity have been 
observed after mercury exposures. Although mercury does not par-
ticipate in Fenton-like reactions, oxidative stress plays a signifi-
cant role in mercury toxicity. Reduced glutathione concentrations 
and antioxidant enzymes have been reported in mice exposed to 
methylmercury (Stringari et al., 2008; Franco et al., 2009). Genes 
associated with oxidative stress have been found to be upregulated 
by inorganic mercury exposure using microarray studies in yeast 
and human cells (Kawata et  al., 2007; Jin et  al., 2008; Hwang, 
2012; Martinez-Finley and Aschner, 2014). In vitro exposures to 
inorganic or methylmercury also affected the MAPK signaling 
pathway, although this action might be indirect and mediated by 
mercury-induced ROS (Kim et al., 2002; Kim and Sharma, 2005; 
Haase et al., 2011). Low-level exposures impair the neurodevelop-
ment by affecting neural progenitor cell proliferation, differentia-
tion, and apoptosis, as well as impairing key signaling molecules 
(Rac1, Cdc42, and RhoA) critical to migration of cerebrocoritcal 
neurons (Martinez-Finley and Aschner, 2014). Methylmercury has 
also been shown to disrupt microtubules in neurites and in neonatal 
mice (Johansson et al., 2007; Ferraro et al., 2009). Both inorganic 
and methylmercury damage mitochondria and disrupt intracellu-
lar calcium homeostasis (Freitas et al., 1996; Cambier et al., 2009; 
Nesci et al., 2016).
Sensitive Subpopulations  Early life stages are particularly 
vulnerable to mercury intoxication (Counter and Buchanan, 2004; 
Diez, 2009). In Minamata, Japan, pregnant women who consumed 
fish contaminated with methylmercury manifested mild or minimal 
symptoms, but gave birth to infants with severe developmental dis-
abilities, raising initial concerns for mercury as a developmental 
toxicant. Methylmercury crosses the placenta and reaches the fetus, 
and is concentrated to a level in fetal brain at least five to seven times 
that of maternal blood (Clarkson, 2002). Prenatal methylmercury 
exposure at high levels can induce widespread damage to the fetal 
brain. However, the observed effects from low-level exposures are 
inconsistent (Counter and Buchanan, 2004; Martinez-Finley and 
Aschner, 2014). In the Seychelles Children Development Study, a 
group with significant methylmercury exposure from a diet pre-
dominantly of fish was studied for adverse developmental effects. 
These children were examined six times over 11 years using exten-
sive batteries of age-appropriate developmental endpoints, but no 
convincing associations were found except for delayed walking 
(Davidson et al., 2006). The National Research Council reviewed 
the epidemiological studies relating in utero methylmercury expo-
sure and fetal neurological development. It concluded that the cur-
rent EPA reference dose (RfD) for methylmercury of 0.1 μg/kg/
day or 5.8 μg/L cord blood is scientifically justifiable for protection 
of human health (NRC, 2000). The RfD is equivalent to 12 ppm 
methylmercury in maternal hair.
The safety of thimerosal (ethylmercury) used in childhood 
vaccines has also received extensive attention. A recent review indi-
cates that thimerosal is safe at the doses used in vaccines, except for 
a potential for local hypersensitivity (Magos and Clarkson, 2006). 
Steps have been rapidly taken to remove thimerosal from vaccines 
in the United States by switching to single-dose vials that do not 
require preservatives. Nonetheless, the World Health Organization 
concluded that it is safe to continue using thimerosal in vaccines, 
which is important for developing countries where it is essential to 
use multidose vials (Magos and Clarkson, 2006).
Although the use of mercury amalgam in children can contrib-
ute to mercury exposure, the level of exposure is too low to cause 
significant toxicological effects (DeRouen et al., 2006; Magos and 
Clarkson, 2006).
Acrodynia has occurred in children chronically exposed to 
inorganic mercury compounds in teething powder and diaper dis-
infectants, as well as to organomercurials. It is characterized by 
pink hands and feet (also called pink disease). These subjects are 
photophobic and suffer from joint pains (Clarkson, 2002).
Treatment  Therapy for mercury poisoning should be directed 
toward lowering the concentration of mercury at the critical organ 
or site of injury. For the most severe cases, particularly with acute 
renal failure, hemodialysis may be the first measure, along with 
administration of chelating agents for mercury, such as cysteine, 
EDTA, BAL, or penicillamine. Caution should be taken to avoid 
inappropriate use of chelating agents in putative mercury poisoning 
patients (Risher and Amler, 2005). Chelation therapy is not very 
helpful for alkyl mercury exposure. Biliary excretion and reabsorp-
tion by the intestine can be interrupted by oral administration of a 
nonabsorbable thiol resin, which can bind mercury and enhance 
fecal excretion (Clarkson, 2002).
Nickel
Nickel (Ni) has been in use since ancient times. However, because 
the ores of nickel were easily mistaken for ores of silver, a more 
complete understanding of nickel and its specific use came with 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
4
10
25
50
100
200
300
Estimated body burden of mercury (mg)
Frequency of responses (% cases)
Dysarthria
Deafness
Death
Ataxia
Paresthesia
Figure 23-6.   A dose–response simulation of estimated methylmercury 
body burden and the onset and frequency of symptoms from Iraq epidemic 
poisoning in 1970s.

1130
Toxic Agents
unit V
more contemporary times. In 1751, nickel was first isolated from 
the ore kupfernickel (niccolite) from which it derives its name. 
Nickel is used in various metal alloys, including stainless steels, 
and in stainless steel welding, electroplating, batteries, pigments, 
catalysts, and ceramics. Major properties of nickel alloys include 
strength, corrosion resistance, and good thermal and electrical con-
ductivity. Occupational exposure to nickel occurs by inhalation 
of nickel-containing aerosols, dusts, or fumes, as well as dermal 
contact in workers engaged in nickel production (mining, milling, 
refinery, etc.) and nickel-using operations (melting, electroplating, 
welding, nickel–cadmium batteries, etc.) (ATSDR, 2005a; NTP, 
2016b). Nickel, like many other metals, is ubiquitous in nature, and 
the general population is exposed to low levels of nickel in air pol-
lution (Huggins et al., 2004; Ito et al., 2016), cigarette smoke, water, 
and food. Nickel has various oxidation states but the 2+ oxidation 
state is the most prevalent form in biosystems. The major soluble 
nickel compounds are nickel acetate, nickel chloride, nickel sulfate, 
and nickel nitrate. The important water-insoluble nickel compounds 
include nickel sulfide, nickel subsulfide, nickel oxide, nickel car-
bonyl, and nickel carbonate (ATSDR, 2005a; NTP, 2016b).
Toxicokinetics  Inhalation of nickel is the most important route 
toxicologically. Inhaled nickel particles are deposited in the respi-
ratory tract and, as with all inhaled particles, the site of deposition 
depends on the particle size. Large particles (5 to 30 μm) deposit 
in the nasopharyngeal area via impaction, smaller particles (1 to 
5 μm) enter the trachea and bronchiolar region by sedimentation, 
and particles smaller than 1 μm enter the alveolar space. About 
25% to 35% of the inhaled nickel that is retained in the lungs is 
absorbed into the blood. The insoluble nickel particles can be taken 
up into cells by phagocytosis. When applied or in contact with skin, 
the rate of absorption depends on the rate of penetration into the 
epidermis, which differs for different chemical forms of nickel. In 
humans, about 27% of a single oral dose of nickel in drinking water 
is absorbed, depending on the compound, whereas only about 1% is 
absorbed when nickel is given with food. Intestinal nickel absorp-
tion occurs through calcium or iron channels, or by the divalent 
metal transport protein-1 (ATSDR, 2005a; Saito et al., 2016).
The main transport proteins of nickel in blood are albumin, 
histidine, and α2-microglobulin. Nickeloplasmin and MT also can 
bind and transport nickel. After inhalation exposure, nickel is dis-
tributed to the lungs, skin, kidneys, liver, pituitary, and adrenals. 
The half-life of nickel is 1 to 3 days for nickel sulfate, 5 days for 
nickel subsulfide, and more than 100 days for nickel oxide (ATSDR, 
2005a). Absorbed nickel is excreted into urine. Urinary nickel cor-
relates closely with exposure to airborne levels of insoluble nickel 
compounds. Thus, urinary nickel may serve as a suitable measure 
of current nickel exposure.
The marked differences in carcinogenic activities of various 
nickel compounds may be due to differences in delivery of nickel 
ion to specific cells and subcellular target molecules. For example, 
injection of animals with crystalline nickel subsulfide or crystal-
line nickel sulfide results in a high incidence of tumors at the site 
of injection sites, although tumors are generally not observed in 
animals similarly injected with soluble nickel sulfate (ATSDR, 
2005a; IARC, 2017). The crystalline nickel particles can be actively 
phagocytized and apparently deliver larger quantities of nickel ions 
into the nucleus of local cells compared with water-soluble nickel 
compounds that diffuse away from the site (Kasprzak et al., 2003; 
Costa et al., 2005). Several water-soluble nickel compounds can, 
however, produce local malignant tumors when repeatedly injected 
into the peritoneal cavity of rats, suggesting repeated exposures to 
the target cells may be required (IARC, 2017).
Essentiality of nickel in higher organisms is questionable, 
although nickel may be nutritionally essential for some plants, bac-
teria, and invertebrates. Nickel deficiency syndromes have not been 
reported in humans and nickel-dependent enzymes or cofactors are 
unknown (Denkhaus and Salnikow, 2002).
Toxicity 
Contact Dermatitis  Nickel-induced contact dermatitis is the 
most common adverse health effect from nickel exposure and is 
found in 10% to 20% of the general population. It can result from 
exposure to airborne nickel, liquid nickel solutions, or prolonged 
skin contact with metal items containing nickel, such as coins and 
jewelry. Nickel sensitization usually arises from prolonged contact 
with nickel or exposure to a large dose of nickel. The resulting der-
matitis is an inflammatory reaction mediated by type IV delayed 
hypersensitivity (ATSDR, 2005a).
Nickel Carbonyl Poisoning  Metallic nickel combines with car-
bon monoxide to form nickel carbonyl (Ni[CO]4), which decom-
poses to nickel and carbon monoxide on heating to 200°C (the 
Mond process) (NRC, 2008). This reaction provides a convenient 
and efficient method for nickel refining. However, nickel carbonyl 
is extremely toxic, and can cause acute toxicity. Intoxication begins 
with headache, nausea, vomiting, and epigastric or chest pain, fol-
lowed by cough, hyperpnea, cyanosis, gastrointestinal symptoms, 
and weakness. The symptoms may be accompanied by fever and 
leukocytosis. The more severe cases can progress to pneumonia, 
respiratory failure, and eventually to cerebral edema and death.
Carcinogenicity  Nickel is a respiratory tract carcinogen in 
nickel-refining industry workers (NTP, 2016b; IARC, 2017). Risks 
are highest for lung and nasal cancers among workers heavily 
exposed to nickel. Because the refining of nickel in some plants 
that were studied involved the formation of nickel carbonyl, it was 
believed for a time that nickel carbonyl was the principal carcino-
gen. However, multiple additional epidemiological studies of work-
ers in other refineries suggest that the source of the increased risk 
is the mixture of nickel compounds (NTP, 2016b; IARC, 2017). 
Studies often involve a complex mixture of the metal and several of 
its compounds making separate carcinogenic assessment challeng-
ing (NTP, 2016b; IARC, 2017). Nickel sulfate and combinations of 
nickel sulfides and oxides encountered in nickel refining are con-
sidered to cause human cancer (NTP, 2016b; IARC, 2017). Human 
studies have also shown a strong association between primary 
exposure to water-soluble nickel compounds in the nickel-refinery 
industry and elevated cancer risk (Grimsrud and Andersen, 2010, 
2012). Nonetheless, controversy remains about the role of soluble 
nickel compounds in human cancer causation based on a biokinetic 
hypothesis that they are unable to deliver sufficient nickel to criti-
cal local targets because they are soluble (Grimsrud and Andersen, 
2010, 2012; Goodman et al., 2011). Metallic nickel is considered 
reasonably anticipated to be a human carcinogen based on suf-
ficient evidence of carcinogenicity from studies in experimental 
animals (NTP, 2016b).
Studies with rats and some with mice have shown that inhaled 
or intratracheal instilled nickel subsulfide or nickel oxide produces 
lung tumors, including carcinoma, in a dose-related fashion and 
causes adrenal gland tumors (NTP, 2016b; IARC, 2017). Injection 
of various nickel compounds (generally water insoluble) at vari-
ous sites (subcutaneous, intramuscular, intrarenal, etc.) causes local 
tumors (primarily sarcomas) in laboratory animals often in a dose-
related fashion (NTP, 2016b; IARC, 2017). The relevance of routes 
to human exposure situations is debatable, but such data are used 
to assess carcinogenic potential. Nickel monoxides, hydroxides,

Toxic Effects of Metals
Chapter 23
1131
and crystalline sulfides are also considered to be carcinogenic in 
animals based on studies finding injection site tumors and/or lung 
tumors after intratracheal instillations (NTP, 2016b; IARC, 2017). 
Metallic nickel produces injection site tumors and lung tumors after 
intratracheal instillation (NTP, 2016b; IARC, 2017). Rodent carci-
nogenesis studies of soluble nickel compounds have also yielded 
positive results in rodents (Kasprzak et al., 2003; NTP, 2016b). For 
instance, water-soluble nickel acetate is a complete transplacental 
carcinogen for the rat pituitary and initiator of kidney tumors in 
the rat (Diwan et al., 1992). The water-soluble nickel compounds, 
nickel chloride, nickel sulfate, and nickel acetate, produced local 
mesotheliomas or sarcomas when given by repeated intraperitoneal 
injection to rats, suggesting repeated exposure to soluble salts is 
required (IARC, 2017). In two strain A mouse studies, multiple 
intraperitoneal injections of nickel acetate increased lung adeno-
carcinoma incidence (one study) and lung tumor multiplicity (both 
studies; IARC, 2017). However, many rodent studies using soluble 
nickel compounds have been negative (Sivulka, 2005; Goodman 
et al., 2011).
Mechanism for Nickel Carcinogenesis  The carcinogenicity of 
nickel is thought to be due to the generation of ionic nickel in target 
cells at sites that are key for carcinogenesis (NTP, 2016b). This has 
allowed consideration of these compounds as a single group (NTP, 
2016b). Ionic nickel is thought to be the active and genotoxic form 
of the metal, and there is no reason to suspect that the mechanisms 
by which nickel causes cancer in experimental animals would dif-
fer from humans (Sivulka, 2005; NTP, 2016b).
Carcinogenic nickel particles that are phagocytized and deliver 
large quantities of nickel ions into the nucleus are generally not 
mutagenic but are clastogenic (Costa et al., 2005). In this way insol-
uble nickel compounds can produce specific chromosomal dam-
age, notable in the heterochromatic long arm of the X chromosome 
that suffers regional decondensation, frequent deletions, and other 
aberrations (Costa et al., 2005). Nickel compounds also produce 
chromosomal abnormalities such as sister chromatid exchange, 
especially in heterochromatin, micronuclei formation in human 
lymphocytes, microsatellite mutations in human lung cancer cells, 
and mutations in renal cells (Kasprzak et al., 2003). Many stud-
ies in vitro and in vivo indicate a variety of soluble and insoluble 
forms of nickel cause genetic damage, including DNA damage, 
cell transformation, and DNA repair disruption (NTP, 2016b). The 
redox activity of nickel may produce ROS that could attack DNA 
directly (NTP, 2016b).
Epigenetic Effects  A broad spectrum of epigenetic effects occurs 
with nickel and includes alterations in gene expression resulting 
from perturbed DNA methylation and posttranslational histone 
modification (Sun et  al., 2013). A notable nickel-inducible gene 
is Cap43/NDRG1, under the control of the hypoxia-inducible 
factor-1α (HIF-1α). During tumor development, HIF-1α facili-
tates angiogenesis and regulates numerous genes including glucose 
transport and glycolysis, which are essential for tumor growth. A 
correlation of overexpression of Cap43 with the neoplastic state 
of the cells was noted (Costa et al., 2005). Another nickel-induced 
gene amplification is the Ect2 gene. The Ect2 protein is overex-
pressed in nickel-transformed cells, which can cause microtubule 
disassembly and cytokinesis, and may contribute to morphologi-
cal changes in cells (Clemens et al., 2005). Nickel produces low 
but measurable ROS in cells and depletes cellular glutathione. 
Oxidative DNA damage, oxidative protein damage, and lipid per-
oxidation, as well as inhibition of DNA repair enzymes can be 
observed after nickel exposure (Kasprzak et al., 2003; Valko et al., 
2005, 2006).
Treatment of Nickel Toxicity  Sodium diethylcarbodithioate 
(DDTC) is the preferred drug for nickel treatment. Disulfiram, 
another nickel-chelating agent, has been used in nickel dermati-
tis and in nickel carbonyl poisoning. Other chelating agents, such 
as d-penicillamine and DMPS, provide some degree of protection 
from clinical effects (Blanusa et al., 2005).
ESSENTIAL METALS WITH POTENTIAL 
FOR TOXICITY
Cobalt
Cobalt (Co) is a relatively rare, ferromagnetic transition metal first 
isolated in the 1730s. The name cobalt comes from the German word 
kobalt, which is derived from kobold meaning “goblin,” a name 
applied by miners of the time to cobalt ore, which was thought to 
be worthless and poisonous. Cobalt is usually not mined alone and 
tends to be produced primarily as a by-product of copper and nickel 
mining. It is useful in various alloys, where it provides corrosion 
and wear resistance, and in cemented carbides (“hard” metals). It is 
used in permanent magnets, as a paint or varnish dryer, in catalysts, 
and in production of pigments (ATSDR, 2004b). Cobalt is essential 
as a metal cofactor coordinated in vitamin B12, but excess exposure 
induces a number of adverse health effects (Leyssens et al., 2017).
Toxicokinetics  The toxicokinetics and possible adverse health 
effects of inorganic cobalt compounds have been reviewed (De 
Boeck et al., 2003; ATSDR, 2004b; Leyssens et al., 2017). Cobalt 
absorption depends on the compound. Less than 5% of an oral dose 
of cobalt oxide is absorbed, whereas about 30% of an oral dose of 
cobalt chloride is absorbed in rodents. Oral absorption of cobalt 
varies widely in humans, and it is estimated to be between 5% and 
45%. Increasing doses of cobalt results in a decreasing proportional 
absorption, so increased cobalt levels tend not to cause significant 
accumulation. Absorption of inhaled cobalt compounds appears 
to be relatively effective in humans and animals. About 80% of 
absorbed cobalt is excreted in urine, and about 15% is excreted in 
feces. The liver, kidneys, adrenals, and thyroid have relatively high 
concentrations. The normal levels in human urine and blood are 
less than 2.0 and 0.2 to 0.5 μg/L, respectively. Cobalt in blood is 
largely associated with red blood cells.
Essentiality  Cobalt is an essential nutrient, in small amounts, 
to mammals, including humans. The essential form of cobalt is 
cobalamin, a cobalt-containing tetrapyrrolic ring and critical com-
ponent of vitamin B12. Vitamin B12 is required for the production 
of red blood cells and in the prevention of pernicious anemia. The 
recommended daily intake of vitamin B12 for adults is 2.4 μg/day, 
which contains 0.1 μg of cobalt (IOM, 2000b) Insufficient natu-
ral levels of cobalt in the diet of sheep and cattle result in cobalt 
deficiency disease, characterized by anemia and loss of weight or 
retarded growth.
Toxicity  The toxic reactions to Co exposure primarily depend on 
its chemical form. In the occupational and environmental settings, 
exposure is predominantly to Co metal particles. In the medical 
setting (e.g., metal on metal [MoM] hip implants), exposure to Co 
nanoparticle wear products, as well as Co ions occurs (Leyssens 
et al., 2017). Occupational inhalation of cobalt-containing dust may 
cause respiratory irritation at air concentrations between 0.002 and 
0.01 mg/m3. Higher concentrations may be a cause of “hard metal” 
pneumoconiosis, a progressive form of pulmonary interstitial fibro-
sis. This disease is observed in workers exposed to cobalt–tungsten 
carbide but not observed with exposure to cobalt alone (ATSDR,

1132
Toxic Agents
unit V
2004b; Leyssens et  al., 2017). Occupational dermal exposure is 
sometimes associated with an allergic dermatitis.
In the cardiovascular system, cobalt can be erythropoietic 
when most mammals, including humans, ingest excessive amounts. 
Chronic oral administration of high levels of cobalt for the treatment 
of anemia can cause goiter, and epidemiological studies suggest that 
the incidence of goiter is higher in regions containing increased 
levels of cobalt in water and soil (Leyssens et al., 2017). The goi-
trogenic effect has been elicited by the oral administration of 3 to 4 
mg/kg to children in the course of treatment of sickle cell anemia. 
Intravenous exposure to cobalt can cause increased blood pressure, 
slowed respiration, tinnitus, and deafness due to nerve damage. 
Severe cardiomyopathies were one of the first observed toxicities 
of cobalt (more than 10 mg/day), especially in isolated incidence 
of excessive consumption of beer containing cobalt as a foaming 
agent (Weber, 1998; Packer, 2016). Autopsy findings in such cases 
have found a 10-fold increase in the cardiac levels of cobalt (Packer, 
2016). The clinical emergence of cobalt cardiomyopathy seems to 
require the coexistence of one or more cofactors, particularly a low-
protein diet, thiamine deficiency, alcoholism, and hypothyroidism 
(Packer, 2016; Leyssens et al., 2017). However, there are increasing 
reports of cobalt leaching from metal prostheses or cobalt contain-
ing nanoparticle wear products causing fatal cardiomyopathies (Fox 
et al., 2016; Packer, 2016). In animals, myocardial degeneration can 
be produced by cobalt injection. Chronic cobalt exposure targets 
mitochondrial enzymes in complex II and complex III, with modest 
effects on respiration and a minimal lowering of ATP levels (Clyne 
et al., 2001; Packer, 2016). These exposures cause pronounced 
decreases in mitochondrial manganese superoxide dismutase levels 
in rat hearts, which may contribute to oxidative myocardial injury 
(Clyne et al., 2001). In addition, cobalt-stabilized HIF-1α increases 
expression of endothelin-1, which would signal for cardiac hyper-
trophy and remodeling (Kakinuma et al., 2001).
Based on experimental studies in animals, cobalt sulfate has 
been classified as reasonably anticipated to be carcinogenic in 
humans (NTP, 2016b). In rats and mice, inhalation of cobalt sulfate 
induces lung tumors, including carcinomas (Bucher et al., 1999). 
Repository injections or implantation of various cobalt compounds 
can produce local sarcomas in rodents (IARC, 2006). Incidence of 
adrenal gland tumors was also increased in female rats exposed 
to cobalt sulfate (IARC, 2006; NTP, 2016b). The mechanisms by 
which cobalt produces cancer are not fully defined but potentially 
include inhibition of DNA repair and formation of DNA-damaging 
ROS, and through alterations of important cellular functions by 
replacing other essential metal ions (ATSDR, 2004b; IARC, 2006; 
NTP, 2016b).
Cobalt–tungsten carbide powders and hard metals are rea-
sonably anticipated to be human carcinogens based on limited 
evidence of carcinogenicity from human studies and supporting 
evidence from studies on mechanisms of carcinogenesis (IARC, 
2006; NTP, 2016b). No studies examining the carcinogenicity of 
cobalt–tungsten carbide powders or hard metals in animals have 
been identified. Potential carcinogenic mechanisms include the 
release of cobalt ions, increased production of ROS with resultant 
oxidative stress response, and by causing cytotoxicity, genotoxicity, 
inflammation, and apoptosis (NTP, 2016b).
Copper
Copper (Cu) has been used for many centuries. By 2000 bc, 
“bronze” or copper–tin alloys were in wide use in Europe. In 
Roman times, copper became known as cerium because so much 
of it was mined in Cyprus, and eventually Anglicized into copper. 
Copper is an essential element widely distributed in nature. Food, 
beverages, and drinking water are major sources of exposure in the 
general population. The Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) 
of copper varies according to age, and pregnancy and lactation. 
Daily intake of copper in adults is 0.9 mg/day, in children between 
0.2 and 0.9 mg/day, and in pregnant or lactating women 1.0 to 1.3 
mg per day (IOM, 2001). The average daily intake of copper from 
food is about 1.2 to 1.7 mg/day (Chambers et al., 2010).
Copper exposure in industry is primarily from inhaled particu-
lates in mining or metal fumes in smelting operations, welding, or 
related activities. In the general population, exposure to elevated 
levels of copper can occur via metal leaching from copper plumb-
ing or copper-lined cookware (ATSDR, 2004c). Excess copper in 
the water represents a significant risk factor to the aquatic environ-
ment, producing endocrine disruption and other toxic effects in fish 
(Handy, 2003; Arnold et al., 2009).
Toxicokinetics  Approximately 55% to 75% of an oral dose of 
copper is absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, primarily in the 
duodenum. Intestinal copper absorption can be reduced by zinc, 
iron, molybdate, and fructose (IOM, 2001). As discussed earlier, 
once absorbed, copper is rarely free, and is bound to ceruloplasmin 
in the blood. Ceruloplasmin releases Cu+ ions to the membrane-
bound Cu importer CTR1 for transfer to the chaperone ATOX1 and 
delivery to cytoplasmic metal-binding domains of ATP7A and two 
homologous multi-domain P1B-type ATPases located in the trans-
Golgi network (Matson Dzebo et  al., 2016). The copper is then 
available for coordination in proteins as they are synthesized by the 
Golgi. The importance of metal transporters in human diseases is 
well illustrated by Menkes and Wilson diseases, which are caused 
by genetic mutations in copper-transport protein genes ATP7A and 
ATP7B, respectively. Mutation of ATP7A causes copper deficiency 
(Menkes), while mutation of ATP7B results in copper overload 
(Wilson) (see Fig. 23-7). Although all tissues and cells contain cop-
per, the primary sites for copper storage include the liver, which 
accounts for more than 80% of the stored copper, and brain. The 
majority of the copper is bound to the chaperones or incorpo-
rated into enzymes (Stern, 2010; Matson Dzebo et al., 2016). The 
amount of copper in the body is maintained at homeostatic levels 
mainly through control of excretion, although copper binding to 
hepatic MT may act as a form of intracellular storage. In mammals, 
the major route of excretion for excess copper is via the feces, with 
very little copper excreted into the urine. The bile is the major route 
of excretion from the liver. Bile secretion, enterohepatic recircula-
tion, and intestinal reabsorption all help to maintain copper homeo-
stasis (ATSDR, 2004c).
Essentiality  Copper is an essential component of several metal-
loenzymes, including type A oxidases and type B monoamine 
oxidases. Of the type B oxidases, cytochrome c oxidase (COX) is 
probably the most important because it catalyzes a key reaction 
in energy metabolism, and inherited mutational defects can result 
in severe pathology in humans (Hamza and Gitlin, 2002; Matson 
Dzebo et al., 2016). Of the type A oxidases, lysyl oxidase (LOX) 
plays a major role in the formation and repair of extracellular 
matrix by oxidizing lysine residues in elastin and collagen, thereby 
initiating the covalent cross-linkage (Finney et al., 2014). Copper/
zinc superoxide dismutase (SOD) is present in most cells, particu-
larly of the brain, thyroid, liver, lung, and blood, and helps protect 
from oxygen toxicity by reducing superoxide radicals to hydrogen 
peroxide (Valko et al., 2006). Disruption of copper binding in any 
of these proteins has profound consequences on enzyme produc-
tion (LOX), cytoplasmic antioxidant activity (SOD1), and energy 
metabolism (COX).

Toxic Effects of Metals
Chapter 23
1133
Copper deficiency is uncommon in humans, but can occur as a 
result of malnutrition, overdose of molybdenum, or excessive con-
sumption of zinc (Maret and Sandstead, 2006). However, as men-
tioned earlier, Menkes disease is a rare genetic disorder caused by 
poor copper transport. Copper deficiency manifests clinically by 
hypochromic, microcytic anemia that is refractory to iron supple-
mentation and predisposes to infection. More recently, a series of 
case reports has implicated acquired copper deficiency in the etiol-
ogy of adult-onset progressive myeloneuropathy and in the develop-
ment of severe blood disorders including myelodysplastic syndrome 
(Goodman et al., 2009). This deficiency is sometimes accompanied 
by bone abnormalities. Less frequent manifestations are hypopig-
mentation of the hair and hypotonia. Biomarkers of copper defi-
ciency include low serum and urine copper levels, ceruloplasmin 
concentration, and copper-dependent enzyme activities (IOM, 2001).
Toxicity  The upper safe limit for daily copper consumption is 
estimated to be 10 mg Cu/day (IOM, 2001). The most commonly 
reported adverse health effects of excess oral copper intake are gas-
trointestinal distress. Nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain have 
been reported shortly after drinking solutions of copper sulfate or 
beverages stored in containers that readily release copper (IOM, 
2001; ATSDR, 2004c). Ingestion of drinking water with more than 
3 mg Cu/L will produce gastrointestinal symptoms. Ingestion of 
large amounts of copper salts, most frequently copper sulfate, 
may produce hepatic necrosis and death. Animal and human 
epidemiological studies have not found any relation between cop-
per exposure and cancer (Tully et al., 2000).
Hereditary Disease of Copper Metabolism 
Menkes Disease  This is a rare sex-linked genetic defect in cop-
per metabolism resulting in copper deficiency in male infants. It 
is characterized by peculiar hair, failure to thrive, severe mental 
retardation, neurological impairment, connective tissue dysfunc-
tion, and death usually by 3 to 5 years of age. The majority of the 
pathologies associated with Menkes disease can be linked to defi-
ciencies in copper-containing proteins (Kaler, 2013; Matson Dzebo 
et al., 2016). Bones are osteoporotic with flared metaphases of the 
long bones and bones of the skull. There is extensive degenera-
tion of the cerebral cortex and of white matter. The gene responsi-
ble for Menkes disease, ATP7A, belongs to the family of ATPases 
and is a copper transporter (Fig. 23-7). Deficiency in this copper 
transporter in Menkes disease blocks copper transport across the 
basolateral membrane of intestinal cells into the portal circulation, 
resulting in accumulation of copper in the enterocytes and systemic 
copper deficiency in the body. The transport of copper to the brain 
is also blocked, causing severe neurological abnormalities. Animal 
models for copper deficiency support the importance of adequate 
copper intake during embryogenesis and early development (Shim 
and Harris, 2003). Supplementation with copper-histidine has been 
shown to delay disease progression and successfully increase life 
span (Kodama et al., 2011).
Wilson Disease  This is an autosomal recessive genetic disorder 
of copper metabolism characterized by the excessive accumula-
tion of copper in the liver, brain, kidneys, and cornea (Kaler, 2013; 
Matson Dzebo et al., 2016; Roberts and Socha, 2017). Serum ceru-
loplasmin is low and serum copper not bound to ceruloplasmin is 
elevated. Urinary excretion of copper is high. Clinical abnormali-
ties of the nervous system, liver, kidneys, and cornea are related to 
copper accumulation. Patients with Wilson disease have impaired 
biliary excretion of copper, which is believed to be the fundamen-
tal cause of the hepatic copper overload. Wilson disease is asso-
ciated with hepatic diseases ranging from mild hepatitis to acute 
liver failure. There is also an increased incidence of hepatocarci-
noma in patients with Wilson disease (Roberts and Socha, 2017). 
Neurological symptoms associated with Wilson disease include 
dystonia, tremor, dysarthria, and psychiatric disturbances. Genetic 
studies have identified the defect in copper transport as mutations 
of the Wilson disease locus (WND) on chromosome 13, encoding 
P-type ATPase (ATP7B) (Kaler, 2013; Matson Dzebo et al., 2016). 
There appear to be several polymorphisms of the defect, which may 
explain the clinical variability in the disorder. Diagnosis may be 
suspected with elevated serum copper but must be confirmed by 
liver biopsy and elevated liver copper (normally 15 to 55 μg/g vs. 
more than 250 μg/g in Wilson disease).
Hereditary Aceruloplasminemia  This is the autosomal reces-
sive genetic disorder of copper-binding protein ceruloplasmin, 
associated with the iron overload syndrome (Kono, 2013). Clinical 
signs and symptoms, which result from iron overload in the brain, 
include mental confusion, memory loss, dementia, cerebellar 
ataxia, altered motor function, retinal degeneration, and diabetes. 
Ceruloplasmin-null mice accumulate iron predominantly in organs 
of the reticuloendothelial system (Shim and Harris, 2003). In these 
mice, hematologic indices and serum iron are abnormal by 10 
weeks of age, with profound iron overload in the spleen and liver. 
Hepatic copper deposition is also approximately doubled in these 
mice. However, neurodegeneration and diabetes are not observed in 
these mice (Shim and Harris, 2003).
Brain
Tissues/Organs
Blood
Cu
Ceruloplasmin
Wilson disease
Menkes disease
Cu
Liver
Dietary copper
Small
intestine
Portal
vein
Feces
Bile
Cu
Figure 23-7.   Pathways of copper in the body and defects in Menkes and 
Wilson diseases. Copper is absorbed by the enterocytes of the small intes-
tine and transported across the basolateral membrane of enterocytes into the 
portal circulation. The latter process is defective in Menkes disease patients 
and results in accumulation of copper in the enterocytes and overall cop-
per deficiency in the body. Most of the newly absorbed copper is normally 
taken up by the liver. In cases of copper overload, excess copper is excreted 
in the bile and this process is blocked in Wilson disease, as is the deliv-
ery of copper to ceruloplasmin, the principal copper carrier in the blood. 
Other low-molecular-weight proteins such as Cu–metallothionein and 
Cu–histidine are also proposed to be important sources of copper to tissues. 
The transport of copper to the brain is blocked in patients with Menkes 
disease, leading to the severe neurological abnormalities. (Adapted from 
Mercer [2001], with permission from Elsevier.)

1134
Toxic Agents
unit V
Indian Childhood Cirrhosis (ICC)  This is a disorder occurring in 
young children characterized by jaundice due to an insidious and 
progressive liver disease. Two distinguishing features are a wide-
spread brown orcein staining (indicating copper) and intralobular 
hepatic fibrosis progressing to portal cirrhosis and chronic inflam-
mation (Nayak and Chitale, 2013; Patra et al., 2013). The etiol-
ogy is debated, but investigators in India and other countries where 
sporadic cases and series of endemics ICC-like diseases occur 
support an etiology of hepatotoxic injury from ingested copper 
in genetically susceptible infants (Nayak and Chitale, 2013). It is 
plausible that both ICC and non-Indian CC (NICC) can be linked to 
exposures from copper-containing fluid storage vessels and specific 
gene abnormalities (Drouin et al., 2000; Mukherjee et al., 2005; 
Patra et al., 2013).
Treatment  Treatment for Wilson disease and other diseases of 
copper overload includes copper chelators and supplementation 
with zinc salts. Clinical improvement can be achieved by chelation 
of copper with d-penicillamine, Trien (triethylenetetramine 2HCl), 
zinc acetate, and tetrathiomolybdate. The combination of tetrathio-
molybdate and zinc acetate is more effective (Brewer and Askari, 
2005; Kodama et al., 2011; Roberts and Socha, 2017).
Iron
Iron (Fe) is a highly abundant transition metal that came into use 
around 4000 bc. An early source of iron was from fallen meteorites 
and the name may derive from the Etruscan word aisar that means 
“the gods.” Iron is an essential metal for erythropoiesis and a key 
component of hemoglobin, myoglobin, heme enzymes, metallofla-
voprotein enzymes, and mitochondrial enzymes. Physiologically, 
iron mainly exists as the ferrous (2+) and ferric (3+) forms. 
Toxicological considerations are important in terms of iron defi-
ciency, accidental acute exposures, and chronic iron overload due to 
idiopathic hemochromatosis or as a consequence of excess dietary 
iron or frequent blood transfusions (Weinberg, 2010; Boshuizen 
et al., 2017; Gammella et al., 2017).
Toxicokinetics  Iron metabolism is regulated by a complex series 
of events that maintain homeostasis, mainly involving absorption, 
storage, and excretion (Coffey and Ganz, 2017; Gammella et al., 
2017). Heme iron from meat, poultry, and fish is highly bioavail-
able. Nonheme iron absorption is much less efficient in humans and 
is influenced by its solubility and by other dietary factors, such as 
ascorbic acid which enhances uptake. Nonheme iron is absorbed in 
the duodenum, where acidic gastric secretions enhance iron solu-
bility. Soluble inorganic iron is taken up in the proximal duodenum 
by divalent metal transporter protein 1 (DMT1), which couples the 
transport of Fe2+ to a proton gradient (Coffey and Ganz, 2017). 
The higher efficiency of heme uptake suggests a receptor-mediated 
mechanism; however, the identity of the receptor is unresolved 
(Coffey and Ganz, 2017). Iron taken up at the apical membrane of 
enterocytes is either sequestered within the iron storage protein fer-
ritin or exported into the portal circulation through ferroportin—a 
receptor for hepcidin, the master regulator of systemic iron homeo-
stasis (Coffey and Ganz, 2017; Gammella et al., 2017). Hepcidin 
is essential for regulating export of iron from enterocytes, as well 
as release from ferritin stores in hepatocytes and macrophages. 
Its expression and activity is inhibited by iron levels (Coffey and 
Ganz, 2017; Gammella et al., 2017). Ferroportin exports Fe2+ that 
must be oxidized by copper-containing ferroxidases, such as ceru-
loplasmin and hephaestin, before being loaded onto transferrin for 
systemic delivery to cells (Coffey and Ganz, 2017; Gammella et al., 
2017). A β1-globulin produced in the liver, transferrin, delivers iron 
to tissues by binding to transferrin receptor-1 on the cell mem-
brane, followed by endocytosis. Intracellular iron homeostasis is 
regulated by a complex coordination of iron trafficking and iron 
storage involving an iron response element/iron regulatory protein 
system and antioxidant response elements (Coffey and Ganz, 2017; 
Gammella et al., 2017). The human body contains about 3 to 5 g 
of iron. About two-thirds of body iron is in hemoglobin, 10% is 
in myoglobin and iron-containing enzymes, and the remainder is 
bound to iron storage proteins such as ferritin and hemosiderin, 
stored in liver and reticuloendothelial cells in the spleen and bone 
marrow. Iron stores serve as a reservoir to supply cellular iron 
needs, mainly for hemoglobin production. Erythrocyte destruction 
and production are responsible for most iron turnover. Humans 
cannot directly excrete iron, so regulation of iron levels are mainly 
for uptake. The major route of excretion of iron is elimination of 
heme-containing proteins into the gastrointestinal tract and eventu-
ally the feces, as well as elimination of porphyrins in the urine.
Essentiality and Deficiency  Iron deficiency is the most com-
mon nutritional deficiency worldwide, affecting infants, young 
children, and women of childbearing age and is considered a major 
public health issue (Boshuizen et al., 2017; Coffey and Ganz, 2017; 
Soliman et al., 2017). The critical period for iron deficiency in chil-
dren is between the ages of 6 months and 2 years. The major mani-
festation of iron deficiency is anemia with microcytic hypochromic 
red blood cells. Other effects of iron deficiency include impaired 
psychomotor development and intellectual performance, decreased 
resistance to infection, adverse pregnancy outcomes, and possibly 
increased susceptibility to lead and cadmium toxicity. Oral ferrous 
sulfate is the treatment of choice for iron deficiency.
Toxicity  Acute iron poisoning from accidental ingestion of iron-
containing dietary supplements is the most common cause of acute 
toxicity. It most often occurs in children. This type of poisoning 
decreased after the introduction of childproof lids on prescription 
medicines and vitamin supplements. Severe toxicity occurs after 
the ingestion of more than 0.5 g of iron or 2.5 g of ferrous sul-
fate. Toxicity occurs about 1 to 6 hours after ingestion. Symptoms 
include abdominal pain, diarrhea, and vomiting. Of particular 
concern are pallor, metabolic acidosis, liver damage, and cardiac 
collapse. Death may occur in severely poisoned children within 
24 hours. Supportive therapy and iron chelation with deferoxamine 
(also known as desferrioxamine) should be used as soon as possible 
(Andersen and Aaseth, 2016).
Chronic iron toxicity from iron overload in adults is a rela-
tively common problem. Hereditary hemochromatosis is an insuf-
ficiency of hepcidin caused by mutations in genes regulating the 
protein’s expression (Coffey and Ganz, 2017). Without the negative 
regulation of iron uptake, the inadequate levels of hepcidin pro-
mote excessive iron absorption, excessive mobilization of macro-
phage iron stores, saturation of transferrin with iron, and increased 
serum non-transferrin bound iron (Coffey and Ganz, 2017). 
Hemochromatosis refers to excessive deposition of iron that causes 
organ damage, often resulting in fibrosis. Hemosiderosis refers to 
increased iron stores in the form of hemosiderin. The body iron con-
tent can increase 20 to 40 g, up to 10 times higher than normal lev-
els. Liver iron overload from hereditary hemochromatosis appears 
to be associated with an increased risk for hepatocellular carcinoma, 
as well as with other malignancies (Papanikolaou and Pantopoulos, 
2005). Oxidant stress would be a presumable carcinogenic mode of 
action. β-thalassemia is a common genetic disorder of hemoglobin 
synthesis that occurs most frequently in people from Mediterranean 
countries, North Africa, the Middle East, India, Central Asia, and 
Southeast Asia. The iron overload results from impaired β-globin

Toxic Effects of Metals
Chapter 23
1135
production and chronic anemia that expands the erythroblast popu-
lation. This leads to feedback suppression of hepcidin expression 
and thus increased iron absorption and tissue iron loading. The iron 
overload is exacerbated by the need for frequent blood transfusions 
in these patients. In addition, patients who receive high-dose che-
motherapy in preparation for stem cell transplantation often have 
decreased transferrin levels, increased total serum iron content, 
and a pronounced rise in non-transferrin bound iron (Boshuizen 
et al., 2017). Inhalation of iron oxide fumes or dust by workers 
in hematic mines (mainly Fe2O3), steel workers, and welders may 
produce siderosis (nonfibrotic), and in some cases silicosis (fibrotic) 
in the lung, with increases in total body iron (Doherty et al., 2004).
Tissue injury from excessive iron may cause cirrhosis, dia-
betes, cardiomyopathy, atherosclerosis, and endocrine failure 
(Papanikolaou and Pantopoulos, 2005; Berdoukas et  al., 2015; 
Kontoghiorghe and Kontoghiorghes, 2016; Coffey and Ganz, 
2017; Guo et al., 2017). In addition, several neurodegenerative dis-
orders are associated with aberrant iron metabolism in the brain, 
such as neuroferritinopathy, aceruloplasminemia, and manganism 
(Papanikolaou and Pantopoulos, 2005; Farina et al., 2013). Much 
of the tissue injury results from ROS generation as the excess free 
iron is the quintessential Fenton catalyst (Berdoukas et al., 2015; 
Boshuizen et al., 2017). In addition, injuries are worsened when 
damaged tissue becomes hypoxic and necrotic, and additional iron 
is released from intracellular stores.
Treatment  Desferrioxamine is the chelator of choice for the 
treatment of acute iron intoxication and chronic iron overload. 
Deferoxamine therapies have also been shown to be effective in 
reducing iron overloads caused by thalassemias, defects in red 
blood cell synthesis (Andersen and Aaseth, 2016; Kontoghiorghe 
and Kontoghiorghes, 2016). However, chelation therapy comes 
with many risks and complications and proposed alternatives 
include using transferrin infusions (Boshuizen et al., 2017). Cancer 
chemotherapy patients with iron overload have responded well to 
transferrin supplementation with reduced non-transferrin bound 
iron and ROS generation (Boshuizen et al., 2017)
Magnesium
Magnesium (Mg) was recognized as an element in 1755. The name 
originates from the Greek word for a district in Thessaly called 
Magnesia. Magnesium is a nutritionally essential metal that plays 
a key role in a wide range of important fundamental cellular reac-
tions (Herroeder et al., 2011; Grober et al., 2015). Nuts, cereals, 
seafood, and meats are good dietary sources of magnesium. The 
drinking water content of magnesium increases with hardness of 
the water. Magnesium citrate, oxide, sulfate, hydroxide, and car-
bonate are widely taken as dietary supplements, antacids, or cathar-
tics. Magnesium hydroxide, or milk of magnesia, is one of the 
universal antidotes for poisoning. Topically, the sulfate is also used 
to relieve inflammation. Parenteral administration of magnesium 
sulfate has been carried out in the treatment of seizures associated 
with eclampsia of pregnancy and acute nephritis. Magnesium is 
analgesic and is increasingly being used as an adjuvant in anesthe-
sia (Herroeder et al., 2011; Eizaga Rebollar et al., 2017; Rodriguez-
Rubio et al., 2017).
Toxicokinetics  Ingested magnesium is absorbed mainly in the 
small intestine. The colon also absorbs some magnesium. Calcium 
and magnesium are competitive with respect to absorption, and 
excess calcium will partially inhibit magnesium absorption. Serum 
magnesium concentrations are remarkably constant at 10 mM. 
Magnesium is excreted into the digestive tract by the bile and in 
pancreatic and intestinal juices. Approximately 60% to 65% of the 
total body magnesium is in the bone, 27% in muscle, 6% to 7% in 
other organs, and only 1% is in extracellular fluid. Of the magne-
sium filtered by the glomeruli, about 95% is reabsorbed, an impor-
tant factor in maintaining homeostasis.
Essentiality and Deficiency  Magnesium is a cofactor of many 
enzymes. In the glycolytic cycle, there are seven key enzymes that 
require divalent magnesium. Magnesium-containing enzymes are 
involved in the citric acid cycle and in β-oxidation of fatty acids 
and MgATP is essential for most energy and phosphotransfer reac-
tions. Deficiency may occur as a complication of various disease 
states such as malabsorption syndromes, renal dysfunction, and 
endocrine disorders. Magnesium deficiency in humans causes 
neurological depression, neuromuscular irritability, frank tetany, 
and even convulsions (Grober et al., 2015; Serefko et al., 2016). 
Magnesium deficiency induces an inflammatory syndrome (Mazur 
et al., 2007), and is a risk factor for diabetes mellitus, hyperten-
sion, hyperlipidemia, and ischemic heart diseases (Ueshima, 2005). 
Supplementation of magnesium, by either intravenous or oral 
administration, is beneficial.
Toxicity  The toxic effects of hypomagnesemia are more common 
than hypermagnesemia (Grober et al., 2015). In industrial expo-
sures, no ill effects are produced with a twofold increase in serum 
magnesium, although concurrent increases occur in serum calcium. 
Inhaled freshly generated magnesium oxide can cause metal fume 
fever, similar to that caused by zinc oxide. In nonoccupationally 
exposed individuals, toxicity can occur when magnesium-containing 
drugs, usually antacids, are ingested chronically by persons with 
serious renal failure. The toxic effects may progress from nausea 
and vomiting to hypotension, electrocardiograph abnormalities, 
central nervous system effects, coma, and systolic cardiac arrest 
(Herroeder et al., 2011; Grober et al., 2015). Magnesium toxicity 
can sometimes be counteracted with calcium infusion.
Manganese
Manganese (Mn) was in use in prehistoric times. Paints that were 
pigmented with manganese dioxide can be traced back 17,000 years. 
The pure element was isolated in 1774 and named after the Latin 
magnes, meaning “magnet.” Manganese is the third most abundant 
element in the human body and is essential for many metabolic, cel-
lular, and structural functions. Manganese metalloenzymes include 
arginase, glutamine synthetase, phosphoenolpyruvate decarboxyl-
ase, and manganese SOD (Peres et al., 2016). Manganese is also 
a cofactor for a number of enzymatic reactions. It exists in many 
valences but the divalent cation is by far the predominant species 
within cells. Divalent manganese may be oxidized to the more reac-
tive and toxic trivalent form. The major source of manganese intake 
is from food. Vegetables, grains, fruits, nuts, and tea are rich in 
manganese. Daily manganese intake ranges from 2 to 9 mg and the 
adequate intake is 2.3 and 1.8 mg/day for adult men and women, 
respectively (IOM, 2001; ATSDR, 2012c). As with many essential 
metals, both deficiency and excess caused by high environmental 
or occupational exposures promote toxicity, such as neurocognitive 
deficits (Peres et al., 2016; Vollet et al., 2016).
Occupational exposures to high concentrations of manganese 
can occur in a number of settings, including manganese dioxide 
mines and smelters (ATSDR, 2012c). Significant exposure can 
also occur in factories making manganese steel alloys, electrical 
coils, batteries, glass, and welding rods, and during production of 
potassium permanganate (KMnO4) (ATSDR, 2012c). The industrial 
use of manganese has expanded in recent years as a ferroalloy in

1136
Toxic Agents
unit V
the iron industry and as a component of alloys used in welding. 
Environmental exposures are often associated with manganese-
based organometallic pesticides, maneb and mancozeb, as well as 
in communities located in close proximity to manganese industrial 
facilities (ATSDR, 2012c; Haynes et al., 2015). Manganese intoxi-
cation has been reported after ingestion of contaminated water and 
infant formula (Wasserman et al., 2011; ATSDR, 2012c; Vollet 
et al., 2016). There is current interest in the toxicology of manga-
nese-containing fuel additive methylcyclopentadienyl manganese 
tricarbonyl (MMT). In addition, manganese compounds, such as 
mangafodipir, are increasingly used as MRI enhancers in clinical 
imaging techniques (Peres et al., 2016; Vollet et al., 2016).
Toxicokinetics  Approximately 1% to 5% of ingested manganese 
is normally absorbed. Interactions between manganese and iron, 
as well as other divalent elements, occur and impact the toxicoki-
netics of manganese especially after oral exposure (Farina et al., 
2013; Vollet et al., 2016). Iron and manganese can compete for the 
same binding protein in serum (transferrin) and the same transport 
systems (DMT1) (Peres et al., 2016). Inhalation of particulate man-
ganese may result in direct transfer to brain tissue via the olfac-
tory system (Peres et  al., 2016). Within the plasma, manganese 
is largely bound to γ-globulin and albumin, with a small fraction 
bound to transferrin. Manganese concentrates in mitochondria, so 
that tissues rich in these organelles, such as the pancreas, liver, kid-
neys, and intestines, have the highest concentrations of manganese. 
Manganese disrupts mitochondrial function to increase oxidative 
stress (Peres et al., 2016). It readily crosses the blood–brain bar-
rier and accumulates in specific brain regions (Peres et al., 2016). 
Manganese is eliminated in the bile and reabsorbed in the intestine 
and the principal route of manganese excretion is with the feces 
(Peres et al., 2016; Vollet et al., 2016). Biliary excretion is poorly 
developed in neonates and exposure during this period may result 
in increased delivery of manganese to the brain and other tissues 
(Peres et al., 2016). Urinary levels of manganese are a poor bio-
marker of exposure, because primary homeostatic biliary excretion 
and a short half-life result in only a small amount being excreted in 
the urine (Vollet et al., 2016).
Toxicity  Chronic manganese-induced neurotoxicity (mangan-
ism) is of great concern and the brain is considered the most 
sensitive organ to manganese. Manganism affects the release of 
dopamine from dopaminergic neurons, the same neurons affected 
by Parkinson disease. While both conditions lead to some similar 
neurological effects, effects on dopaminergic neurons are not the 
same, also causing distinct behavioral effects (Peres et al., 2016). 
Neurotoxicity due to inhalation of airborne manganese ranging 
from 0.027 to 1 mg Mn/m3 has been reported in a number of occu-
pational settings. One of the earliest descriptions of Mn overexpo-
sure was in an occupational study of Chilean miners who presented 
with a condition referred to as “locura manganica” or manganese 
madness (Vollet et al., 2016). Overt manganism occurs in work-
ers exposed to aerosols containing extremely high levels of man-
ganese (more than 1 to 5 mg Mn/m3). Neurotoxicity also occurs 
after ingestion of manganese-contaminated water (1.8 to 14 ppm; 
Peres et al., 2016). Manganism is associated with elevated brain 
levels of manganese, primarily in those areas known to contain 
high concentrations of nonheme iron, such as the substantia nigra, 
basal ganglia, caudate–putamen, globus pallidus, and subthalamic 
nuclei (Farina et al., 2013; Peres et al., 2016). Early manifestations 
of manganese neurotoxicity include headache, insomnia, memory 
loss, muscle cramps, and emotional instability. Initial outward 
symptoms progress gradually and are mainly psychiatric. As expo-
sure continues and the disease progresses, patients may develop 
prolonged muscle contractions (dystonia), decreased muscle move-
ment (hypokinesia), rigidity, hand tremor, speech disturbances, and 
festinating “cock-walk” gait. These signs are associated with dam-
age to dopaminergic neurons that control muscle movement (Peres 
et al., 2016). Specialized T1-weighted magnetic resonance brain 
imaging of manganism patients indicates high levels in the basal 
ganglia and especially in the globus pallidus (Peres et al., 2016).
Inhalation of manganese-containing dust in certain occupa-
tional settings can lead to an inflammatory response in the lung. 
Symptoms of lung irritation and injury may include cough, bron-
chitis, pneumonitis, and, occasionally, pneumonia (ATSDR, 2012c). 
Men working in plants with high concentrations of manganese dust 
show an incidence of respiratory disease that is 30 times greater 
than normal. Manganese exposure also alters cardiovascular func-
tion in animals and humans, as evidenced by abnormal electrocar-
diogram and the inhibition of myocardial contraction. Manganese 
dilates blood vessels and induces hypotension (Jiang and Zheng, 
2005). Liver cirrhosis is a major contributing factor for hepatic 
encephalopathy, often associated with increased manganese levels 
in the brain (Peres et al., 2016).
Interactions between manganese and iron play a role in man-
ganese toxicity (Farina et al., 2013). The coaccumulation of iron 
with manganese in the globus pallidus raises the concern that iron 
may be a contributing factor facilitating neuronal cell loss during 
manganese intoxication (Peres et al., 2016). Chronic exposure to 
manganese alters iron concentrations in blood and cerebrospinal 
fluid, presumably due to manganese–iron interaction at certain 
iron–sulfur-containing proteins, which regulate iron homeostasis. 
Serum parameters associated with iron metabolism, such as ferritin, 
transferrin, and total-iron-binding capacity, are significantly altered 
(Peres et al., 2016). High levels of total iron and iron-associated 
oxidative stress, decreased ferritin, and abnormal mitochondrial 
complex-1 have been repeatedly reported in postmortem samples 
of substantia nigra from manganism patients (Farina et al., 2013; 
Peres et al., 2016).
There is insufficient evidence that manganese is a carcinogen 
in animals or humans (ATSDR, 2012c).
Molybdenum
Molybdenum (Mo) was first separated from lead and graphite in 
1778. The name “molybdenum” was derived from Greek molybdos 
meaning “lead-like.” As an essential element, molybdenum acts as 
a cofactor for four enzymes in humans: sulfite oxidase, xanthine 
oxidase, aldehyde oxidase, and mitochondrial amidoxime reduc-
tase (Schwarz, 2016). Molybdenum exists in five oxidation states 
but the predominant species are Mo4+ and Mo6+. Molybdenum con-
centration in food varies considerably depending on the local envi-
ronment and molybdenum is added in trace amounts to fertilizers 
to stimulate plant growth. The human requirement for molybdenum 
is low and easily provided by a common U.S. diet. The recom-
mended dietary allowance (RDA) for molybdenum is 45 μg/day 
(IOM, 2001).
The most important mineral source of molybdenum is molyb-
denite (MoS2) (ATSDR, 2017b). The industrial uses of this metal 
include the manufacture of high-temperature-resistant steel alloys 
for gas turbines and jet aircraft engines and in the production of 
catalysts, lubricants, and dyes. Ammonium tetrathiomolybdate is 
used as a molybdenum-donating copper chelator in treatment of 
Wilson disease and is often used as a model molybdenum com-
pound in animal toxicity studies (ATSDR, 2017b).
Toxicokinetics  Water-soluble molybdenum compounds are 
readily absorbed when ingested. In animals, gastrointestinal

Toxic Effects of Metals
Chapter 23
1137
absorption varies between 75% and 95%. In humans, absorption 
of molybdenum after oral intake varies from 28% to 77% (ATSDR, 
2017b). Once absorbed, molybdenum rapidly appears in blood and 
most tissues. The highest molybdenum concentrations are found in 
the kidneys, liver, and bones. Very little molybdenum appears to 
cross the placenta. When elevated exposure is ceased, tissue con-
centrations quickly return to normal levels. Molybdenum metabo-
lism is related to copper and sulfur. Exposure to molybdenum 
decreases intestinal absorption of copper and sulfate, and impairs 
the sulfation of chemicals (ATSDR, 2017b). Excretion, primarily 
via the urine, is rapid and 36% to 90% of a dose of molybdenum 
is excreted in urine in experimental animals. In humans, the uri-
nary excretion ranges from 17% to 80% of the total dose (ATSDR, 
2017b). Very little (less than 1%) of molybdenum excretion is 
via bile. When consuming a low-molybdenum diet, the intestinal 
molybdenum absorption and tissue uptake are increased, while uri-
nary excretion is decreased to reduce the molybdenum loss. With 
high dietary intake, urinary excretion can be dramatically increased 
to help eliminate excess molybdenum (ATSDR, 2017b).
Essentiality and Deficiency  Molybdenum deficiency consists 
of disturbances in uric acid metabolism and sulfite metabolism. 
Molybdenum cofactor (Moco) deficiency is a pleiotropic genetic 
disorder characterized by the loss of the molybdenum-dependent 
enzymes sulfite oxidase, xanthine oxidoreductase, and aldehyde 
oxidase, due to mutations in the genes involved with Moco bio-
synthesis. This rare human genetic metabolic disorder is character-
ized by severe neurodegeneration resulting in early childhood death 
(Schwarz, 2016).
Toxicity  Molybdenum is of low toxicity. Chronic exposure 
to excess molybdenum in humans is characterized by high uric 
acid levels in serum and urine. A gout-like syndrome has been 
observed in inhabitants exposed to high levels of environmen-
tal molybdenum or among workers exposed to molybdenum in a 
copper–molybdenum plant (ATSDR, 2017b). When inhaled, both 
metallic molybdenum and sparingly soluble molybdenum triox-
ide have been reported to cause pneumoconiosis and pulmonary 
deficits (ATSDR, 2017b). Molybdenosis is a form of molybdenum 
poisoning that produces a disease in ruminants similar to copper 
deficiency (Raisbeck et al., 2006). In many ways molybdenum tox-
icity resembles copper deficiency. Treatment with supplemental 
copper can often reverse the adverse effects of excess molybdenum 
(Raisbeck et al., 2006). Conversely, treatment of Wilson disease 
with molybdenum compounds reduces copper burden (Weiss and 
Stremmel, 2014). Molybdenum treatment may also be beneficial 
for angiogenesis, inflammation, and other disorders associated with 
excess copper (Jurowska et al., 2016).
Selenium
Selenium (Se) was discovered in 1817, and named after the Greek 
word selene meaning moon. Although technically a nonmetal, 
certain forms have metal-like properties. Selenium is an essential 
element found in selenoproteins and deficiency is recognized in 
humans and animals (Wrobel et al., 2016). It is also toxic and high 
doses cause overt selenium poisoning (selenosis)(ATSDR, 2003b; 
Wrobel et  al., 2016). The availability and the toxic potential of 
selenium compounds are related to their chemical forms and, most 
importantly, to solubility. Selenium occurs in nature and biologi-
cal systems as selenate (Se6+), selenite (Se4+), selenide (Se2+), and 
elemental selenium (Se0) (Fairweather-Tait et al., 2011).
Foods are a good source of selenium. Seafood (especially 
shrimp), meat, milk products, and grains provide the largest 
amounts in the diet (Fairweather-Tait et al., 2011; Wrobel et al., 
2016). Levels of selenium in river water vary depending on envi-
ronmental and geologic factors. Combustion of coal and other fossil 
fuels, as well as mining and processing of coal with high selenium 
content are the primary sources of soil, water, and airborne sele-
nium compounds (ATSDR, 2003b; Fairweather-Tait et al., 2011; 
Chen et al., 2014; Rowe, 2014). Occupational exposure comes from 
selenium refining operations, metal smelting, and milling opera-
tions, incineration of rubber tires, and municipal waste (ATSDR, 
2003b).
Toxicokinetics  Orally administered selenite, selenate, and 
selenomethionine are readily absorbed, often greater than 80%, 
whereas elemental selenium and selenides are virtually insoluble 
and poorly absorbed (ATSDR, 2003b). Because of their insolu-
bility, these forms may be regarded as an inert selenium sink. 
Monogastric animals have higher intestinal absorption than rumi-
nants, probably because selenite is reduced to an insoluble form in 
rumen. Selenium is distributed systemically bound to plasma sele-
noprotein P (SePP), the major circulating transport form of sele-
nium that accounts for the majority of selenium in plasma and is 
responsive to changes in level of dietary exposure (Fairweather-Tait 
et al., 2011). Selenium accumulates in many tissues, with the high-
est accumulation in the liver and kidney. It is transferred through 
the placenta to the fetus, and it also appears in milk. Levels in milk 
are dependent on dietary intake. Selenium in red blood cells is asso-
ciated with glutathione peroxidase and is about three times more 
concentrated than in plasma. Selenium is primarily eliminated in 
urine and feces. In cases of acute exposure to toxic concentrations 
of selenium, significant amounts are eliminated in expired air, caus-
ing the characteristic “garlic breath” (Fairweather-Tait et al., 2011; 
Wrobel et al., 2016).
Selenium metabolism is well regulated in order to meet several 
metabolic needs (Fig. 23-8). Inorganic selenium and selenocyste-
ine undergo stepwise reduction to the key intermediate hydrogen 
selenide, which is either transformed to selenophosphate for sele-
noprotein synthesis or excreted into breath or urine after being trans-
formed into methylated metabolites of selenide. Selenophosphate is 
involved in the synthesis of selenocystein tRNA according to the 
UGA code for the selenocysteine residue (Schweizer and Fradejas-
Villar, 2016). The translation of selenoprotein mRNA requires cis-
acting sequences in the mRNA and transacting factors dedicated to 
selenocysteine incorporation (Schweizer and Fradejas-Villar, 2016; 
Wrobel et al., 2016). Selenoprotein synthesis is highly dependent 
on selenium availability (Fairweather-Tait et al., 2011; Schweizer 
and Fradejas-Villar, 2016).
Essentiality and Deficiency  Selenium is notable for its actions 
in antioxidant systems through involvement in over 20 selenopro-
teins (Schweizer and Fradejas-Villar, 2016; Wrobel et al., 2016). 
For instance, glutathione peroxidase is the selenium-dependent 
enzyme that reduces peroxides using glutathione, and thereby pro-
tects membrane lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids from damage 
by oxidants or free radicals. The enzyme thioredoxin reductase is 
another selenium-dependent enzyme that has an important role in 
body’s defense against oxidative damage. SePP is both the main 
transporter of selenium and is the major plasma selenoprotein. It 
also serves as an antioxidant in the extracellular space (Wrobel 
et al., 2016). Selenium W is a low-molecular-weight selenoprotein 
and may have redox functions (Wrobel et al., 2016). Iodothyronine 
deiodinases are selenoproteins contributing to systemic or local 
thyroid hormone homeostasis (Wrobel et al., 2016). Selenium con-
tent in endocrine tissues (thyroid, adrenals, pituitary, testes, and 
ovary) is higher than that in many other organs. Hormones and

1138
Toxic Agents
unit V
growth factors also regulate expression of selenoproteins (Wrobel 
et al., 2016).
The most extensively documented deficiency of selenium 
in humans is Keshan disease. This endemic cardiomyopathy was 
first discovered in Keshan County in China where there are very 
low concentrations of selenium in the soil and food (Fairweather-
Tait et al., 2011). Keshan disease patients show very low plasma 
selenium levels. This deficiency occurs most frequently in chil-
dren under 15 years of age and in women of childbearing age and 
is characterized by various degrees of cardiomegaly and cardiac 
decompensation. Deficiency of selenium also occurs in domes-
tic animals and rodents. Selenium supplementation reduces these 
adverse effects (Fairweather-Tait et al., 2011).
Kashin–Beck disease is an osteoarthropathy found in areas 
where combined deficiency of selenium and iodine occurs with 
elevated exposure to mycotoxin and fulvic acids (Fairweather-
Tait et al., 2011). Selenium deficiency is a major contributing fac-
tor in this disease. Other potential effects of selenium deficiency 
include immune dysfunction, and susceptibility to cancer or infec-
tious/inflammatory diseases (Fairweather-Tait et al., 2011; Wrobel 
et al., 2016). Established tolerable upper intake limits of selenium 
in adults are 200 to 300 μg/day (IOM, 2000a). Metabolic balance 
studies in adults indicate about 50 to 70 μg/day is required to main-
tain selenium balance and presumably to satisfy selenium require-
ments (IOM, 2000a; Fairweather-Tait et al., 2011). Data indicate 
that daily intake less than 20 μg can cause Keshan disease.
Toxicity  Acute selenium toxicity in humans is rare. Intentional or 
accidental ingestion of a large dose of sodium selenate or sodium 
selenite can be life-threatening. Symptoms of fatal selenium intoxi-
cation include nausea and vomiting, followed by pulmonary edema 
and rapid cardiovascular collapse (ATSDR, 2003b; Fairweather-
Tait et al., 2011). Chronic selenium toxicity (selenosis) can occur 
with environmental exposure when the intake exceeds the excre-
tory capacity. Effects are mainly dermal and neurological including 
hair and fingernail loss, tooth discoloration, numbness, paralysis, 
and occasional hemiplegia. Selenosis occurred in several villages 
in China where people were exposed to very high selenium in food 
(Fairweather-Tait et  al., 2011). Intoxication from environmental 
selenium has also been noted in people residing in Venezuela and 
South Dakota. Selenium toxicity in animals was recognized in 
South Dakota when the livestock that had been grazed in areas with 
high soil selenium developed alkali disease and blind staggers. In 
a study of people living in this area, poor dentition, a yellowish 
discoloration of the skin, skin eruptions, and diseased fingernails 
and toenails were found (Fairweather-Tait et al., 2011).
Selenium has various bioinorganic interactions, which may 
affect the toxicity of selenium or other metals. It forms insoluble 
complexes with various metals, as, for example, with arsenic. 
Selenium complexation can increase the biliary excretion of vari-
ous metals. Selenium forms complexes with copper, and toxicity of 
either selenium or copper is influenced by the intake of the other 
elements. The methylation of selenium can influence other meth-
ylation reactions, and can reduce arsenic metabolism and toxicity 
(Chen et al., 2009; Zwolak and Zaporowska, 2012). Selenium pre-
vents the toxic effects of cadmium and can reduce the toxic effects 
of methylmercury (Zwolak and Zaporowska, 2012). The mecha-
nisms for these interactions are only partially understood, but their 
occurrence influences the determination of safe and toxic levels of 
selenium for the general population.
Selenium and selenium compounds are not considered to be 
human carcinogens (ATSDR, 2003b). However, selenium sulfide is 
considered reasonably anticipated to be a human carcinogen based 
on multiple positive rodent studies where tumors of the lung or liver 
were produced after exposure via stomach tube (NTP, 2016b). In 
contrast, epidemiological studies have linked low blood selenium 
levels with increased cancer risk, as well as decreased cancer risk 
in areas with high soil levels of selenium (ATSDR, 2003b; Wrobel 
et al., 2016). Selenium supplementations appear to decrease human 
cancer rates, especially for prostate cancer (Fairweather-Tait et al., 
2011; Wrobel et al., 2016). Increasing selenium content of forage 
crops has been shown to be beneficial in reducing cancer risk. Some 
experimental evidence supports a role for selenium in reduction of 
spontaneous tumors or tumors formed by organic carcinogens in 
rats and mice (Mosior et al., 1992).
Selenoproteins
Free 
selenocysteine
Secreted 
selenoproteins
Selenomethionine
Selenocysteine
Inorganic 
selenium
Transport form 
of selenium
Hydrogen selenide
Selenophosphate
Se-CystRNA
(ser, UGA)
Other forms
of selenium
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Excretory 
metabolites
Figure 23-8.   Selenium metabolism pathways. (1) The transsulfuration pathway; (2) selenocysteine β-lyase; (3) reduction by glutathione; (4) selenophosphate 
synthetase; (5) methylation; (6) replacement of sulfur in tRNA by selenium; (7) replacement of oxygen in serine to produce selenocysteine; (8) decoding of 
UGA in mRNA with insertion of selenocysteine into primary structure of protein; and (9) proteolytic breakdown of proteins. The origin and identity of the 
transport form for selenium are unknown, as indicated by the broken lines.

Toxic Effects of Metals
Chapter 23
1139
Trivalent Chromium
Essentiality  The essentiality of trivalent chromium (Cr3+), a nat-
urally occurring trace nutrient, has been controversial as it has been 
difficult to find populations that are deficient in the metal. There is 
evidence to suggest that Cr3+ may serve as a cofactor for insulin in 
glucose metabolism by enhancing insulin signaling (Vincent, 2013; 
Bailey, 2014). However, the failure to identify the responsible bio-
molecules that bind Cr3+ and their mode of action, particularly a 
postulated species named glucose tolerance factor, resulted in the 
essentiality of chromium being questioned (Vincent, 2013). While 
there are suggestions that tissue levels of chromium are reduced 
among diabetic individuals, recent meta-analysis of a large body of 
clinical trials of Cr3+ supplementation to improve glucose metabo-
lism in diabetic have shown no beneficial effects (Bailey, 2014). 
Nonetheless, the adequate intake of Cr3+ is now proposed as 35 
and 25 μg/kg/day for men and women, respectively (IOM, 2001). 
Chromium picolinate remains a top-selling nutritional supplement 
that contains milligram quantities of Cr3. In addition to finding no 
clear benefit of the supplement, there are no demonstrated toxic 
effects of consuming high levels of supplemented Cr3+ (IOM, 
2005; Vincent, 2013).
Zinc
Zinc (Zn) was named from German zink meaning tin. It has been 
used since ancient times in alloys and medicines. An essential 
metal, zinc deficiency results in severe health consequences. In con-
trast, zinc toxicity is relatively uncommon and occurs only at very 
high exposure levels. Zinc is ubiquitous in the environment and is 
present in most foodstuffs, water, and air. The major route of zinc 
intake is through the diet, the contents of which vary from 5.2 to 
16.2 mg Zn/day (IOM, 2001; ATSDR, 2005b). The recommended 
daily allowance (RDA) for zinc in children less than 3 years old is 
3 mg/day; this value increases to 8 mg/day for children between 4 
and 13 years old. For men more than 14 years old the RDA is 11 
mg/day, while for women it is 8 to 9 mg/day, which increases to 12 
to 13 mg/day during pregnancy (IOM, 2001).
Occupational exposure to dusts and fumes of metallic zinc 
occurs in zinc mining and smelting. The zinc content of substances 
in contact with galvanized copper or plastic pipes may be high. 
Many countries regulate workplace levels of zinc oxide fume and 
dust, and OSHA has set an average legal limit of 1 mg/m3 for zinc 
chloride fumes and 5 mg/m3 for zinc oxide (dusts and fumes) in 
workplace air during an 8-hour workday, 40-hour work week 
(ATSDR, 2005b).
Toxicokinetics  The absorption of zinc from the gastrointestinal 
tract is homeostatically regulated. About 20% to 30% of ingested 
zinc is absorbed. Zinc uptake from the intestinal lumen involves 
passive diffusion and a carrier-mediated process through zinc-
specific transmembrane transporters such as ZnT-1. Intestinal 
absorption of zinc can be reduced by dietary fiber, phytates, cal-
cium, and phosphorus, while amino acids (tryptophan), picolinic 
acid. and prostaglandin E2 can enhance zinc absorption. Zinc is the 
third most abundant element in the human body with total levels in 
the range of 1.5 to 3 g, most of which is found in muscle (60%), 
bone (30%), skin/hair (8%), liver (5%), and pancreas (3%). It is 
involved in over 300 enzymatic reactions essential for health and 
is responsible for tertiary and quaternary protein structure required 
for protein and protein/DNA interactions. As discussed above, 
there is little free zinc in the body and 30 different transporters and 
channels regulate its distribution. These transporters and channels 
include those that bring Zn into cells and organelles (14 Zips and 
3+ TRPs) and 10 Znts that move Zn out of the cytoplasm (Cousins, 
2010; McCormick et  al., 2014; Hojyo and Fukada, 2016). Zip4 
channels found throughout the gastrointestinal track are essential 
for uptake of dietary Zn. The highest concentrations of zinc are 
found in the prostate, pancreas, liver, and kidney. In plasma, zinc 
concentration is about 1 mg/L, and is bound to albumin (60% to 
80%), which represents the metabolically active pool of zinc. The 
remainder is bound to α2-macroglobulin and transferrin. Zinc is 
excreted in both urine and feces. The concentration of zinc in the 
plasma is not a sensitive indicator of zinc status and does not reflect 
the dose–response relationship between zinc levels in the body and 
effects at various target sites. Zinc ions are involved as intercel-
lular and intracellular messengers, and the homeostasis of zinc has 
to be tightly controlled. The most reliable index of zinc status is 
the determination of zinc balance, using a U-shaped homeostatic 
model to analyze the relationship between intake and excretion 
(ATSDR, 2005b).
Zinc is an effective inducer of metallothionein synthesis and 
when metallothionein is saturated in intestinal cells zinc absorp-
tion is decreased (Baltaci et al., 2018). Metallothionein is also an 
important storage depot for cellular zinc. Liver metallothionein con-
centration is influenced by hormonal factors, including adrenocor-
ticotropic hormone and parathyroid hormone, and various stimuli 
that impact zinc metabolism. The high concentration of zinc in the 
prostate is probably related to the rich content of zinc-containing 
enzyme acid phosphatase.
Essentiality and Deficiency  As mentioned there are more 
than 300 catalytically active zinc metalloenzymes and 2000 zinc-­
dependent transcription factors (Hojyo and Fukada, 2016; Liang 
et al., 2016). Zinc participates in a wide variety of metabolic pro-
cesses, supports a healthy immune system, and is essential for normal 
growth and development during pregnancy, childhood, and adoles-
cence. Zinc deficiency is related to poor dietary zinc intake, dietary 
phytate (inositol hexakisphosphate) intake, chronic illness, or over-
supplementation with iron or copper (Prasad, 2004). Symptoms of 
zinc deficiency include growth retardation, appetite loss, alopecia, 
diarrhea, impaired immune function, cognitive impairments, derma-
titis, delayed healing of wounds, taste abnormalities, and impaired 
sexual function (Prasad, 2004). Acrodermatitis enteropathica is a 
rare autosomal recessive disorder involving zinc deficiency that 
can appear after weaning from breast or formula feeding. The defi-
ciency is due to mutations in a zinc-specific transporter that is highly 
expressed in the intestine. The disease is characterized by periorifi-
cial and acral dermatitis, alopecia, and diarrhea (Hojyo and Fukada, 
2016; Ogawa et  al., 2016). Zinc supplementation, alone or with 
other micronutrients, is recommended for zinc-deficient children, 
especially in developing countries.
Therapeutic uses of zinc include the treatment of acute diar-
rhea in infants with severe zinc deficiency, the treatment of com-
mon cold by its antiviral and immunomodulatory effects, therapy 
for Wilson disease to help reduce copper burden and to induce MT, 
and the prevention of blindness in age-related macular degeneration 
(Prasad et al., 1994).
Toxicity  Acute zinc toxicity from excessive ingestion is uncom-
mon, but gastrointestinal distress and diarrhea have been reported 
after ingestion of beverages standing in galvanized cans. After inha-
lation of zinc oxide, and to a lesser extent other zinc compounds, 
the most common effect is “metal fume fever” characterized by 
fever, chest pain, chills, cough, dyspnea, nausea, muscle soreness, 
fatigue, and leukocytosis. Acute inhalation of high levels of zinc 
chloride as in the military use of “smoke bombs” results in more 
pronounced damage to the mucous membrane including interstitial

1140
Toxic Agents
unit V
edema, fibrosis, pneumonitis, bronchial mucosal edema, and ulcer-
ation. Chronic intakes of zinc (150 to 450 mg/day) have been asso-
ciated with low copper status, altered iron function, and reduced 
immune function. Recently, excessive use of denture adhesive 
cream has been recognized as a potential source for zinc toxicity. 
These individuals ingest 350 to 1200 mg of zinc per day (Hedera 
et al., 2009). After long-term exposure to lower doses of zinc (60 
mg/day), symptoms generally result from a decreased dietary cop-
per absorption, leading to early symptoms of copper deficiency, 
such as decreased erythrocyte number or decreased hematocrit 
(IOM, 2001; Trumbo et al., 2001).
Neuronal Toxicity  Zinc has dual effects in the brain. As an essential 
cofactor for numerous enzymes and proteins, zinc deficiency may alter 
activity of the antioxidant enzyme Cu–Zn SOD, resulting in excess 
free radicals that are damaging to cell membranes (Valko et al., 2005). 
A genetic abnormality of Cu–Zn SOD may be the basis of a familial 
form of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Beckman et al., 2001). Zinc 
can also act as a neurotransmitter for normal brain functions (Wright 
and Baccarelli, 2007). It modulates the solubility of β-amyloid in the 
brain and protects against β-amyloid toxicity, but excess zinc may 
trigger neuronal death that is independent or synergistic with the 
toxic effect of β-amyloid (Greenough et al., 2013). In contrast, excess 
zinc released by oxidants can act as a potent neurotoxin (Nuttall and 
Oteiza, 2014). Synaptically released zinc might contribute to excito-
toxic brain injury, and the release of excess, toxic free zinc into the 
brain that occurs during excitotoxic brain injury could be a factor that 
sets the stage for the later development of Alzheimer disease (Wright 
and Baccarelli, 2007; Nuttall and Oteiza, 2014).
Pancreatic Toxicity  Because large amounts of zinc accumulate 
in secretory granules of pancreatic islet β-cells, zinc released under 
certain conditions can affect the function or survival of islet cells 
and cause β-cell death. Excess dietary zinc is associated with dam-
age to exocrine pancreas (Maret, 2017). A single, high-dose injec-
tion of zinc increases plasma α-amylase activity and can produce 
fibrosis and necrosis of pancreatic exocrine cells, but does not 
affect the islets of Langerhans cells (Cai et al., 2005).
Zinc and Carcinogenicity  Epidemiological studies of workers 
in electrolytic zinc and copper refining industries have not found 
an increased incidence of cancer associated with occupational zinc 
inhalation. Oral zinc supplementation does not appear to have a 
significant effect on cancer incidence (ATSDR, 2005b). In contrast, 
zinc deficiency may be associated with increased risk of cancer in 
humans (Pan et al., 2017). Zinc supplementation could decrease 
oxidative stress and improve immune function, which may be a 
possible mechanism for its cancer preventive activity (Prasad, 
2004). In experimental animals, zinc prevents cadmium-induced 
testicular cancer, but facilitates cadmium-induced prostate tumors 
(Waalkes, 2003).
METALS RELATED TO MEDICAL THERAPY
Aluminum
Aluminum (Al) is the third most abundant element in the Earth’s 
crust after oxygen and silicon. Elemental aluminum was first iden-
tified in 1827. Due to its high reactivity, aluminum is not found in 
the free state in nature. Chemical compounds of aluminum occur 
typically in the trivalent state (Al3+). As a hard trivalent ion, alu-
minum binds strongly to oxygen donor ligands such as citrate and 
phosphate. The chemistry of aluminum compounds is complicated 
by a tendency to hydrolyze and form polynuclear species, many of 
which are sparingly soluble (Willhite et al., 2014).
Aluminum has many uses, mainly in the form of alloys, and 
finds use in packing, construction, transportation, electrical appli-
cations, and beverage cans. Aluminum compounds are also used as 
food additives. Human exposure to aluminum comes primarily from 
food and secondarily from drinking water. Occupational exposures 
to aluminum occur during mining and processing, as well as in alu-
minum welding. The levels of exposure can vary greatly according 
to the type of industry and hygiene conditions (Riihimaki and Aitio, 
2012; Caito and Aschner, 2015). Inhalation of aluminum-containing 
dust particles is of health concern.
Aluminum exists predominantly in forms that are innocuous to 
humans and most species. However, acidic conditions, such as acid 
rain or dry acid deposition, can dramatically increase the amount 
of aluminum in ecosystems, resulting in well-described destructive 
effects on plants, fish, and other wildlife.
Toxicokinetics  Aluminum is poorly absorbed after either oral 
or inhalation exposure and is not absorbed dermally. Inhalation of 
particulate aluminum may result in direct transfer to brain tissue via 
the olfactory system (Riihimaki and Aitio, 2012). Less than 1% of 
aluminum in the diet is absorbed. Absorption from the gut depends 
largely on pH and the presence of complexing ligands, particularly 
carboxylic acids, through which aluminum becomes absorbable. 
For example, intestinal absorption is enhanced in the presence of 
citrate. Biological speciation is also of major importance in dis-
tribution and excretion of aluminum in mammals (Riihimaki and 
Aitio, 2012; Caito and Aschner, 2015). In plasma, 80% to 90% of 
aluminum binds to transferrin, an iron transport protein with recep-
tors in many tissues. The transferrin pathway is also considered 
a mechanism for aluminum transport across the blood–brain bar-
rier. The lung, liver, and bone have the highest concentrations of 
aluminum. Aluminum is removed from blood by the kidneys and 
excreted in urine. In patients with impaired renal function, tissue 
aluminum concentrations can increase and are associated with 
encephalopathy and osteomalacia (ATSDR, 2008).
Aluminum compounds can alter absorption of other elements 
in the gastrointestinal tract. For instance, aluminum inhibits fluoride 
absorption and may decrease the absorption of calcium and iron 
compounds and salicylic acid, which, in turn, may affect the absorp-
tion of aluminum (ATSDR, 2008). The binding of phosphorus by 
aluminum in the intestinal tract can lead to phosphate depletion and, 
potentially, osteomalacia. Aluminum interacts with calcium in bone 
and kidney, resulting in aluminum osteodystrophy (Malluche et al., 
2008). Aluminum may also alter gastrointestinal tract motility by 
inhibition of acetylcholine-induced contractions, which is probably 
why aluminum-containing antacids often cause constipation.
Toxicity  Acute aluminum toxicity is rare. Most cases of alumi-
num toxicity in humans are observed in patients with chronic renal 
failure, or in persons exposed to aluminum in the workplace, with 
the lung, bone, and central nervous system as major target organs. 
Aluminum affects similar target organs in animals and can produce 
developmental effects.
Lung and Bone Toxicity  Occupational exposure to aluminum 
dust can produce lung fibrosis in humans, but this effect is prob-
ably due to lung overload caused by excessive deposition of dust 
(DeVoto and Yokel, 1994). Osteomalacia has been associated with 
excessive intake of aluminum-containing antacids in otherwise 
healthy individuals. This is assumed to be due to interference with 
intestinal phosphate absorption. Osteomalacia also can occur in 
uremic patients exposed to aluminum in the dialysis fluid. In these 
patients, osteomalacia may be a direct effect of aluminum on bone 
mineralization as bone levels are high (Willhite et al., 2014).

Toxic Effects of Metals
Chapter 23
1141
Neurotoxicity  Aluminum is neurotoxic to experimental animals, with 
wide species and age variations. In susceptible animals, such as rab-
bits and cats, aluminum toxicity is characterized by progressive neuro-
logical impairment resulting in death associated with status epilepticus 
(Rubio et al., 2010). The most prominent early pathological change is 
the accumulation of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) in large neurons, 
proximal axons, and dendrites of neurons of many brain regions. This 
is associated with loss of synapses and atrophy of the dendritic tree. 
Not all species show this reaction to aluminum. For instance, rats fail 
to develop NFTs or encephalopathy and monkeys develop NFTs only 
after more than a year of aluminum infusion. Impairment of cognitive 
and motor function and behavioral abnormalities are often observed. 
While studies in animals have provided some insights into the mecha-
nisms of the neurotoxicity of aluminum in experimental models, the 
relationship to any human disease is still uncertain.
Dialysis Dementia  This is a progressive, neurological syndrome 
reported in patients on long-term intermittent hemodialysis for chronic 
renal failure (Kandimalla et  al., 2016). The first symptom in these 
patients is a speech disorder followed by dementia, convulsions, and 
myoclonus. The disorder, which typically arises after 3 to 7 years of 
dialysis treatment, may be due to aluminum intoxication. The alu-
minum content of brain, muscle, and bone increases in these patients. 
Sources of the excess aluminum may be from oral aluminum hydrox-
ide commonly given to these patients or from aluminum in dialysis 
fluid derived from the tap water used to prepare the dialysate fluid. The 
high serum aluminum concentrations may be related to increased para-
thyroid hormone levels that are due to low blood calcium and osteod-
ystrophy common in patients with chronic renal disease. The syndrome 
may be prevented by avoiding the use of aluminum-containing oral 
phosphate binders and by monitoring of aluminum in the dialysate.
Alzheimer Disease  A possible relationship between aluminum 
and Alzheimer disease has been a matter of speculation for decades 
(Kandimalla et al., 2016). The basis for this relationship is the find-
ing of increased aluminum levels in Alzheimer diseased brains and 
neurofibrillary lesions in experimental animals, and the fact that 
aluminum is associated with various components of the pathologi-
cal lesions in Alzheimer disease brain tissue. However, elevated alu-
minum levels in Alzheimer disease brains may be a consequence and 
not a cause of the disease. The reduced effectiveness of the blood–
brain barrier in Alzheimer disease might allow more aluminum into 
the brain. Also, recent studies have raised the possibility that the 
staining methods in earlier studies may have led to aluminum con-
tamination (Bondy, 2010; Kandimalla et  al., 2016). Furthermore, 
the NFTs seen in aluminum encephalopathy differ structurally and 
chemically from those in Alzheimer disease. Epidemiological stud-
ies examining the role of aluminum exposure in Alzheimer disease 
arrive at conflicting conclusions. An examination of 20 epidemio-
logical studies concluded that there is not enough evidence to sup-
port a primary causative role of aluminum in Alzheimer disease, and 
aluminum does not induce Alzheimer pathology in vivo in any spe-
cies, including humans (WHO, 1997). However, there is increasing 
evidence suggesting a link between aluminum in the brain and other 
neurodegenerative diseases (Bondy, 2010; Kandimalla et al., 2016).
Treatment  Chelation therapy for aluminum, mostly in dialyzed 
and/or uremic patients, resembles that for iron overload, with def-
eroxamine and deferiprone (Blanusa et al., 2005).
Bismuth
Bismuth (Bi) is a metal with a stable valence of 3+. The name 
bisemutum is from German Wismuth, perhaps from the term weiβe 
Masse, for “white mass.” It was confused in early times with tin and 
lead due to its resemblance to those elements. Bismuth was shown 
to be distinct from lead in 1753. The solubility of most bismuth 
salts is low but can be affected by pH and the presence of sulfhydryl 
or hydroxy-containing ligands. The significance of environmental 
and occupational bismuth exposure is unclear. Human exposure to 
bismuth generally is due to medicinal use.
Trivalent insoluble bismuth salts such as bismuth subnitrate, 
subcarbonate, and subgallate are used for various gastrointestinal 
disorders including diarrhea, flatulence, constipation, cramps, 
and dyspepsia (Salvador et al., 2012). Colloidal bismuth subci-
trate, bismuth subsalicylate, and ranitidine bismuth citrate are 
widely used to treat peptic ulcer and Helicobacter pylori–associ-
ated gastritis (Alkim et al., 2017). Outdated medicinal applica-
tions include the use of bismuth salts for treatment of syphilis, 
malaria, warts, stomatitis, and infections of the upper respiratory 
tract (Salvador et al., 2012; Keogan and Griffith, 2014). A poten-
tial application includes the use of bismuth subnitrate to prevent 
cisplatin nephrotoxicity, probably due to a specific induction of 
renal MT (Kondo et al., 2004), although this does not appear 
to have been applied in practice. The use of α-particle-emitting 
bismuth compounds as radiotherapeutic agents and as antitumor 
agents shows some promise (Morgenstern et al., 2011; Keogan 
and Griffith, 2014).
Toxicokinetics  Most bismuth compounds are insoluble and 
poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract or when applied to 
the skin. The three widely used compounds, colloidal tripotassium 
dicitrato bismuthate, bismuth subsalicylate, and ranitidine bismuth 
citrate, are all poorly absorbed (less than 1%) (Tillman et al., 1996). 
The highest concentrations of bismuth are found in kidneys, and 
to a lesser extent in the brain, liver, and bone (Larsen et al., 2005). 
Passage of bismuth into the amniotic fluid and fetus has been dem-
onstrated. Bismuth is cleared from the body through urine and 
feces (Irgolic et al., 1977). Traces of bismuth can be found in milk 
and saliva. The elimination half-life is reported to be about 21 days, 
depending on bismuth compounds.
Toxicity  Bismuth-containing medications are consumed world-
wide and the risk of bismuth-related toxicity in the general popula-
tion is relatively low. The main target organs for bismuth toxicity 
are the kidney, brain, and bone (Tillman et al., 1996; Larsen et al., 
2005; Salvador et al., 2012). Acute renal injury is related to very 
high doses of bismuth, or to oral intake of organic bismuth com-
pounds such as bismuth sodium triglycocollamate or thioglycol-
late, particularly in children. The tubular epithelium is the primary 
site of toxicity, where bismuth produces degeneration of renal 
tubular cells and nuclear inclusion bodies composed of bismuth–
protein complex analogous to those found with lead exposure. A 
large single oral dose of colloidal bismuth subcitrate damages the 
proximal tubes, but the damage is reversible in both humans and 
animals (Leussink et al., 2002).
Treatment  The most effective treatment of bismuth toxicity is to 
discontinue bismuth intake. Chelation therapy using dimercaprol 
(BAL), DMSA, and DMPS reduces the bismuth concentration in 
most organs (especially the kidney and liver) and increases elimina-
tion of bismuth in urine. BAL was the only chelator effective in low-
ering brain bismuth concentrations (Slikkerveer and de Wolff, 1989).
Gallium
Gallium (Ga) has a very low melting point with the main valence 
state of 3+ (gallic), although the 2+ (gallous) form can also 
form stable gallium compounds. Gallium, stemming from Gallia

1142
Toxic Agents
unit V
meaning Gaul or France, was predicted to exist prior to being dis-
covered in 1875 by its characteristic spectrum. Gallium is of inter-
est because of the use of radiogallium as a diagnostic tool for the 
localization of bone lesions. Nonradioactive gallium nitrate has 
been used as an antitumor agent and in the treatment of hyper-
calcemia (Chitambar, 2012). Gallium is obtained as a by-product 
of copper, zinc, lead, and aluminum refining and is used in high- 
temperature thermometers, as a substitute for mercury in arc lamps, 
as a component of metal alloys, and as a seal for vacuum equipment 
(White and Shine, 2016). Gallium arsenide is a widely used semi-
conductor material. Gallium is the only metal other than mercury 
that is liquid at or near room temperature.
Toxicokinetics  Gallium salts are sparingly absorbed from the 
gastrointestinal tract, but accumulation in tissues can be observed 
after repeated administrations (Chitambar, 2016; White and Shine, 
2016). The oral bioavailability is improved with gallium complexes 
such as gallium maltolate. Gallium accumulates mainly in the bone, 
inflammatory lesions, and tumors, as well as in the liver, spleen, 
and kidney. It binds to plasma transferrin and enters cells by iron 
transport mechanisms (Chitambar, 2016). Urine is the major route 
of gallium excretion with lesser amounts in the feces (Chitambar, 
2012, 2016).
Toxicity  The trivalent gallium cation biologically resembles fer-
ric iron. It affects cellular acquisition of iron by binding to transfer-
rin and interacts with the iron-dependent enzyme ribonucleotide 
reductase, resulting in decreased dNTP pools and inhibition of 
DNA synthesis (Chitambar, 2016, 2017). The abundance of trans-
ferrin receptors and ribonucleotide reductase renders tumor cells 
susceptible to the cytotoxicity of gallium. Use of bolus intravenous 
injection of gallium nitrate in the treatment of lymphoma and blad-
der cancer is limited by potential nephrotoxicity, which can be 
reduced by slow continuous infusion over several days (Chitambar, 
2017). Gallium nitrate is an effective treatment for cancer-related 
hypercalcemia and diseases associated with accelerated bone loss 
including myeloma, bone metastasis, Paget disease, and osteopo-
rosis. It accumulates in metabolically active regions of bone and 
favorably alters the mineral properties to enhance hydroxyapatite 
crystallization and reduce mineral solubility. Gallium inhibits 
osteoclastic bone resorption without poisoning the osteoclast cells, 
yielding a skeletal system with increased calcium and phosphate 
content and improved strength (Tanaka, 2004; Chitambar, 2010). 
Adverse effects may include nausea, vomiting, and anemia. Less 
frequent are gallium-induced neurological, pulmonary, and derma-
tologic effects.
Acute and chronic toxicity to the lung (including alveolar and 
bronchioalveolar tumors), testes, and kidney is associated with 
exposures of gallium arsenide in animals, although the role of the 
individual metals in this response is unclear (Chitambar, 2010). 
There is little information regarding adverse effects of gallium 
compounds after occupational exposure, but renal toxicity was the 
primary side effect of gallium nitrate treatment in human clinical 
trials (White and Shine, 2016) and there is significant renal toxicity 
of gallium arsenide in rats (Fowler et al., 2005).
Gold
Gold (Au) was well known and highly valued since prehistoric 
times. It is widely distributed but usually in small quantities. The 
metal has a number of industrial uses because of its electrical and 
thermal conductivity. Monovalent organogold salts (e.g.,, aura-
nofin, aurothioglucose, and gold sodium thiomalate) are used for 
the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and infectious diseases (Faa 
et al., 2018). Monovalent and trivalent coordinated gold complexes 
have antitumor potential (Faa et al., 2018). Colloidal gold or gold 
nanoparticles are used to label subcellular structures for electron 
microscopy, carriers for drugs, and photothermal agents (Hornos 
Carneiro and Barbosa, 2016; Faa et al., 2018).
Toxicokinetics  Gold salts are poorly absorbed from the gastroin-
testinal tract. Water-soluble, therapeutic gold compounds are read-
ily absorbed after intramuscular injection, and peak concentrations 
in blood are reached in 2 to 6 hours. Gold is initially bound to 
serum albumin, and then distributes to various tissues. With con-
tinued therapy, the concentration of gold in synovium of affected 
joints is 10 times that of the muscle, bone, or fat. Gold deposits are 
also found in the macrophages, kidney, liver, testes, and skin. About 
60% to 90% of gold is excreted via the kidney while 10% to 40% 
occurs via biliary excretion into feces. Chelators such as dimercap-
rol may increase the excretion of gold. Gold has a long biological 
half-life, and elevated tissue and blood levels can be demonstrated 
for months after cessation of treatment.
Toxicity  Contact dermatitis is the most frequently reported toxic 
reaction to gold and is sometimes accompanied by stomatitis, prob-
ably involving an allergic mechanism (Chen and Lampel, 2015). 
Gold-induced allergic responses include delayed hypersensitivity, 
formation of intracutaneous nodules and immunogenic granuloma, 
as well as the occurrence of eczema (Chen and Lampel, 2015). The 
use of gold in the form of organic salts to treat rheumatoid arthri-
tis may be complicated by the development of proteinuria and the 
nephrotic syndrome, which morphologically consists of immune 
complex glomerulonephritis, with granular deposits along the glo-
merular basement membrane and in the mesangium (Schiff and 
Whelton, 2000). The pathogenesis of the immune complex disease 
is not certain, but gold may behave as a hapten and generate the 
production of antibody complexes for the glomerular deposits.
Gold nanoparticles are being developed as therapeutic agents 
that may reduce the toxic side effects of traditional gold com-
pounds (Hornos Carneiro and Barbosa, 2016). However, the mar-
gin of safety for these nanoparticles is yet to be established and in 
vivo and in vitro studies suggest that toxicity is related to the shape 
or physical properties of the nanomaterial (Hornos Carneiro and 
Barbosa, 2016).
The health risks associated with gold mining, especially min-
ers who used elemental mercury to amalgamate and extract gold, 
have been reviewed (Eisler, 2003; Drace et al., 2016). Gold miners 
have increased frequency of pulmonary diseases, including tumors, 
and increased prevalence of infectious diseases. Mercury intoxi-
cation associated with gold mining activities is well documented 
(Eisler, 2003; Drace et al., 2016).
Lithium
Lithium (Li) is an alkali metal and one of the lightest metallic ele-
ments. It was discovered in 1817, and the name was derived from 
the Greek lithos for stone. Lithium is used in batteries, alloys, cata-
lysts, photographic materials, and the aerospace industry. Lithium 
hydride produces hydrogen on contact with water and is used in 
manufacturing electronic tubes, in ceramics, and in chemical analy-
sis. Lithium carbonate and lithium citrate are widely used for mania 
and bipolar disorders. In this regard, lithium is active possibly 
through its effects on signal transduction, such as phosphoinositide 
hydrolysis, glycogen synthase kinase-3, and neurotropic cascades 
(Oruch et al., 2014). Topical applications of lithium succinate are 
still used in the treatment of seborrheic dermatitis (Mayser and 
Schulz, 2016).

Toxic Effects of Metals
Chapter 23
1143
Toxicokinetics  Lithium is readily absorbed from the gastroin-
testinal tract, with peak therapeutic levels at 30 minutes to 3 hours 
postingestion. It is not bound to plasma proteins, but associates 
with red blood cells. Lithium is distributed to total body water with 
higher levels in the kidney, thyroid, and bone, as compared with 
other tissues. Excretion is chiefly through the kidneys with 80% of 
the filtered lithium reabsorbed. The usual elimination half-life is 12 
to 27 hours, but it may rise to nearly 60 hours if renal function is 
compromised. Lithium can substitute for sodium or potassium on 
several membrane-bound transport proteins (Oruch et al., 2014). It 
enters cells via the amiloride-sensitive sodium channel or the Na/
H+ exchanger. The greater part of lithium is retained in the cells, 
perhaps at the expense of potassium. In general, it may be compet-
ing with sodium at certain sites, such as in renal tubular reabsorp-
tion (Trepiccione and Christensen, 2010).
Toxicity  From the industrial point of view, except for lithium 
hydride, lithium salts are not considered hazardous nor toxic. 
Lithium hydride is intensely corrosive, may produce burns on the 
skin because of the formation of hydroxides, and is explosive. 
Intoxications related to lithium exposure are mainly related to its 
medicinal (Oruch et al., 2014), as the therapeutic index of lithium 
is very narrow. In this regard, 0.7 to 1.2 mmol/L is considered an 
adequate therapeutic blood level, while blood levels only three-
fold higher commonly result in severe symptoms such as seizures 
and coma. The toxic responses to lithium include neuromuscular 
changes (tremor, muscle hyperirritability, and ataxia), central ner-
vous system disorders (blackout spells, epileptic seizures, slurred 
speech, coma, psychosomatic retardation, and increased thirst), 
cardiovascular disturbances (cardiac arrhythmia, hypertension, and 
circulatory collapse), gastrointestinal symptoms (anorexia, nausea, 
and vomiting), and renal damage (albuminuria and glycosuria). 
The renal lesions are believed to be due to temporary hypokale-
mic nephritis. Long-term sequelae from acute lithium poisoning 
include cognitive losses such as impaired memory, attention and 
executive functions, and visuospatial deficits.
Chronic lithium nephrotoxicity and interstitial nephritis may 
occur with long-term exposure even when lithium levels remain 
within the therapeutic range. Lithium nephrotoxicity primarily tar-
gets distal and collecting tubes, with a higher incidence of protein-
uria and associated glomerular pathology (Markowitz et al., 2000). 
Chronic lithium-induced neurotoxicity, nephritis, and thyroid dys-
function may occur, especially in susceptible patients with identifi-
able clinical risk factors such as nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, 
older age, abnormal thyroid function, and impaired renal function 
(Oruch et al., 2014).
Acute lithium overdose produces neurological sequelae and 
cardiac toxicity, which can be fatal. The toxicity may be treated by 
the administration of diuretics (amiloride) and lowering of blood 
levels via hemodialysis. Treatment with diuretics must be accompa-
nied by replacement of water and electrolytes (Oruch et al., 2014).
Platinum
Platinum (Pt) is a malleable, ductile, silvery-white noble metal. 
Naturally occurring platinum and platinum-rich alloys have been 
known for a long time. The first European reference to platinum 
appeared in 1557 and the element was isolated in 1741. In platinum 
compounds, the maximum oxidation state is 6+, while the 2+ and 
4+ valences are most stable. Platinum is found in nature either in 
the metallic form or in a number of mineral forms in various ores. 
Environmental platinum levels are very low. Platinum compounds 
are used as automobile catalysts, in jewelry, in electronics, and in 
dental alloys. Platinum coordination complexes are very important 
antitumor agents.
Toxicokinetics  After a single inhalation exposure, most of the 
inhaled platinum is rapidly cleared from the lungs by mucocili-
ary action, swallowed, and excreted in the feces, with half-life of 
about 24 hours. A small portion is detected in the urine, indicat-
ing very little platinum is absorbed. After intravenous administra-
tion of clinical doses, the drug has an initial elimination half-life in 
plasma of 25 to 50 minutes. More than 90% of the platinum in the 
blood is covalently bound to plasma proteins. After administration 
of the main metallochemotherapeutic form, cis-dichlorodiammine 
platinum(II) (cisplatin), high concentrations are found in the kid-
ney, liver, intestine, spleen, and testes, but there is poor penetration 
into the brain. Only a small portion of the drug is excreted by the 
kidney during the first 6 hours. By 24 hours up to 25% is excreted, 
while by 5 days up to 43% of the administered dose is recovered in 
the urine (Cohen and Lippard, 2001; Dugbartey et al., 2016).
Toxicity  Platinum can produce profound hypersensitivity reac-
tions in susceptible individuals (Makrilia et al., 2010; Sabin and 
Grammer, 2012). The signs of hypersensitivity include urticaria, 
contact dermatitis of skin, and respiratory distress, ranging from 
irritation to an asthmatic syndrome, after exposure to platinum dust. 
The skin and respiratory changes are termed platinosis. They are 
mainly confined to persons with a history of industrial exposure to 
soluble compounds such as sodium chloroplatinate, although cases 
resulting from the wearing of platinum jewelry have been reported 
(Forte et al., 2008). The complex salts of platinum may act as pow-
erful allergens, particularly ammonium hexachloroplatinate and 
hexachloroplatinic acid. Platinum salt sensitization may persist for 
years after cessation of exposure (Cristaudo et al., 2005). Halogeno 
complex salts of platinum are potent allergens provoking Type I 
allergic symptoms in platinum refining workers. Skin prick tests 
can detect sensitization at an early stage and are the mainstay of 
surveillance programs (Cristaudo et al., 2005; Merget et al., 2017).
Antitumor Effects of Platinum Complexes  The platinum-
coordinated complexes are important antitumor agents, including 
cisplatin, carboplatin, and oxaliplatin (Cohen and Lippard, 2001; 
Dilruba and Kalayda, 2016; Ndagi et al., 2017). They are routinely 
administered, often in combination with other anticancer drugs, in 
the treatment of a wide spectrum of malignancies, especially epi-
thelial cancers. Platinum complexes are neutral and have a pair of 
cis-leaving groups. Low intracellular chloride concentrations favor 
hydrolysis of chloride-leaving groups in cisplatin to yield a posi-
tively charged molecule, which then reacts with DNA and proteins, 
forming both intrastrand and interstrand DNA cross-links with gua-
nine and/or adenine (Dilruba and Kalayda, 2016; Ndagi et al., 2017). 
In tumor cells, the replication of DNA is impaired due to cisplatin-
induced DNA cross-links, while in normal cells, guanine is repaired 
before replication. The formation of DNA adducts with platinum 
compounds is also responsible for cytotoxicity and both efficacy and 
cytotoxicity are affected by genetic variance in DNA repair enzymes 
(Dilruba and Kalayda, 2016; Perez-Ramirez et al., 2017).
Carcinogenic Effects of Platinum Complexes  Although cispl-
atin has antitumor activity in humans, it is considered reasonably 
anticipated to be a human carcinogen (NTP, 2016b). Cisplatin is 
clearly carcinogenic in rodents (NTP, 2016b). In fact, in mice defi-
cient in metallothionein, cisplatin can induce liver carcinoma at 
clinically relevant doses (Waalkes et al., 2006). Cisplatin is a strong 
mutagen in bacterial systems and causes chromosomal aberrations 
in cultured hamster cells and a dose-dependent increase in sister 
chromatid exchanges.

1144
Toxic Agents
unit V
Toxicities of Platinum Antitumor Complexes  Cisplatin is a 
nephrotoxin, which often compromises its usefulness as a thera-
peutic agent (Dugbartey et al., 2016). Platinum compounds with 
antitumor activity produce proximal and distal tubular cell injury, 
mainly in the corticomedullary region, where the concentration of 
platinum is highest. Associated with cisplatin nephrotoxicity is the 
risk for electrolyte abnormalities (Dugbartey et al., 2016). Cisplatin 
is also associated with cumulative peripheral sensory neuropathy, 
ototoxicity due to irreversible damage of the hair cells in Corti 
organ, and significant nausea and vomiting (Dilruba and Kalayda, 
2016). Bone marrow suppression, manifested as anemia, neutrope-
nia, and thrombocytopenia, is relatively common during treatment 
with platinum complexes, especially when given in combination 
with fluorouracil. Second- and third-generation platinum com-
pounds, such as carboplatinum and oxaliplatinum, given at stand-
ard chemotherapeutic doses, have lower toxicity profiles (Dilruba 
and Kalayda, 2016; Ndagi et al., 2017).
MINOR TOXIC METALS
Antimony
Antimony (Sb) is a metalloid that belongs to the same periodic 
group as arsenic. It was recognized in antiquity (3000 bc or ear-
lier) in various compounds for its fine casting qualities, and the 
description of its isolation appeared in 1540. The name antimony 
may have come from the Greek words “anti” and “monos,” which 
means “opposed to solitude” as it was thought never to exist in 
its pure form. Most antimony compounds are of trivalent and pen-
tavalent states. Antimony has many uses including in alloys, and 
in production of fireproofing chemicals, ceramics, glassware, and 
pigments. It is used medically in the treatment of the parasitic dis-
eases: schistosomiasis and leishmaniasis (Sundar and Chakravarty, 
2010; Nigra et al., 2016). Occupational antinomy exposure comes 
from industrial emissions (Perez and Tang, 2015; Nigra et al., 2016; 
ATSDR, 2017a). In addition to living in close proximity to indus-
trial sources of antimony, water and food are the major routes for 
environmental exposure (ATSDR, 2017a).
The disposition of antimony in the body resembles that of arse-
nic and antimony can negatively impact arsenic metabolism and 
excretion in co-exposures (Nigra et al., 2016). Most antimony com-
pounds are absorbed from the lung and the gastrointestinal tract. 
The major sites of antimony accumulation are the liver, kidney, 
lung, spleen, and blood (ATSDR, 2017a). The accumulation of anti-
mony in blood may be due to high affinity of trivalent antimony for 
erythrocytes. In humans and rodents, pentavalent antimony is only 
sparingly reduced to the trivalent form, and evidence of antimony 
methylation in mammals is low (ATSDR, 2017a). The pentavalent 
form is predominantly excreted in urine, whereas trivalent antimony 
is conjugated to GSH and is excreted via the bile and found mainly 
in feces (ATSDR, 2017a).
Toxicity  Most information about antimony toxicity has been 
obtained from industrial experiences (Nigra et al., 2016; ATSDR, 
2017a). Occupational exposures are usually by inhalation of dust 
containing antimony compounds, such as the pentachloride, tri-
chloride, trioxide, and trisulfide (Sundar and Chakravarty, 2010; 
ATSDR, 2017a). Acute toxicity from the pentachloride and tri-
chloride exposures includes rhinitis and, in severe exposures, even 
acute pulmonary edema. Chronic exposure by inhalation of other 
antimony compounds results in rhinitis, pharyngitis, trachitis, and, 
over the longer term, bronchitis and eventually pneumoconiosis 
with obstructive lung disease and emphysema (ATSDR, 2017a). 
Transient skin eruptions (antimony spots) may occur in workers 
with chronic exposure (Sundar and Chakravarty, 2010). Antimony 
compounds are cardiotoxic and may enhance cardiovascular dis-
ease and hypertension (Perez and Tang, 2015; Nigra et al., 2016). 
Cardiomyopathies and pancreatitis are the dose-limiting untow-
ard effects of antimony compounds used in antiparasitic thera-
pies (Sundar and Chakravarty, 2010). Trivalent forms of antimony 
appear more toxic and may produce cardiotoxicity involving 
arrhythmias and myocardial damage, although the evidence of ath-
erosclerosis from industrial exposure to antimony is significant but 
not strong (Nigra et al., 2016).
The chemicotoxicological similarity between arsenic and 
antimony has prompted research on mutagenic and carcinogenic 
potential of antimony compounds. Antimony trioxide is considered 
an animal carcinogen (NTP, 2016a; ATSDR, 2017a), but human 
data on antimony are difficult to evaluate with the frequent co- 
exposure to arsenic and other metals (ATSDR, 2017a). Antimony 
compounds are generally negative in nonmammalian genotoxicity 
tests, whereas mammalian tests usually give positive results for 
trivalent but negative results for pentavalent antimony compounds. 
The in vivo potential of antimony to induce chromosome aberra-
tions or genotoxicity appears inconsistent (ATSDR, 2017a).
The metal hydride of antimony, stibine (SbH3), is a highly toxic 
gas that can be generated when antimony is exposed to reducing 
acids or when certain batteries are overcharged (ATSDR, 2017a). 
High-purity stibine is also used in the production of semiconductors 
and, like arsine (AsH3), causes hemolysis.
Barium
Barium (Ba) is an alkaline earth metal found in the environment in 
the 2+ oxidation state. It was first identified in 1774, and named 
from the Greek word barys meaning “heavy.” Barium and barium 
compounds (barium carbonate, sulfate, chloride, and hydroxide) 
are used in ceramics, electronics, insecticides, rodenticides, pig-
ments, and as x-ray contrast media. Barium is relatively abundant 
in nature and is found in plants and animal tissue. Some foods, such 
as Brazil nuts, pecans, and seafood, may contain high amounts of 
barium. Barium from natural sources may exceed Federal govern-
ment standards in some freshwater, although the amount found in 
food and water usually is not high enough to be a health concern. 
Occupational exposure to barium primarily occurs in workers who 
inhale barium sulfate from working with the ore, barite, and barium 
carbonate dust during mining and manufacturing (ATSDR, 2007b).
Insoluble barium sulfate is not absorbed from the gastrointesti-
nal tract, and is nontoxic to humans. Consequently, it is commonly 
used as a contrast dye for radiological imaging of the gastroin-
testinal tract. Ingested soluble compounds are absorbed, but vary 
greatly and are affected by many factors such as age, duration, dose, 
and amounts of other elements in the intestine (ATSDR, 2007b). 
Aerosols of soluble barium compounds are well absorbed in the 
lung. Bone and teeth are the major sites of barium deposition, con-
taining up to 90% of the body burden. The remainder of barium in 
the body is found in soft tissues, such as the lung, aorta, brain, heart, 
spleen, liver, and pancreas (ATSDR, 2007b). Once filtered by the 
glomeruli, barium is reabsorbed by the renal tubules with only small 
amounts appearing in the urine. The major route of barium excre-
tion is the feces. The elimination half-life is about 1 to 2 weeks.
Toxicity  Occupational poisoning by barium is uncommon, but a 
benign pneumoconiosis (baritosis) may result from inhalation of 
barium sulfate (barite) dust or barium carbonate (ATSDR, 2007b). 
This is not incapacitating and is usually reversible with cessation 
of exposure. Intentional or accidental poisoning from ingestion of 
an acute toxic dose (over 200 mg) of soluble barium salt results in

Toxic Effects of Metals
Chapter 23
1145
intractable vomiting, severe diarrhea, and gastrointestinal hemor-
rhage (ATSDR, 2007b). Cardiac arrest is often the cause of death. 
Profound hypokalemia and muscle weakness progressing to flac-
cid paralysis are the hallmarks of barium poisoning (ATSDR, 
2007b). The mechanism of toxicity probably involves the blocking 
of calcium-activated potassium channels responsible for cellular 
efflux of potassium in cardiomyocytes and muscle. The progressive 
muscle weakness seen in barium intoxication in humans could be 
due to barium-induced hypokalemia rather than a direct effect on 
muscles, which is not observed in experimental animals. Treatment 
with intravenous potassium appears beneficial.
After long-term exposure to barium, nephrotoxicity has been 
observed in rats and mice. Animal studies designed to assess car-
diovascular function have not found significant alterations. Barium 
compounds are not considered carcinogenic in rodents and there is 
no evidence of carcinogenicity in humans (ATSDR, 2007b).
Cesium
Cesium (Cs) is a soft silvery-gold alkali metal discovered in 1860, 
and named from the Latin word caesius meaning “sky blue.” 
Similar to mercury and gallium, metallic cesium exists in the liquid 
state at slightly above room temperature, and is used in vacuum 
tubes and in atomic clocks. Cesium compounds only have the 1+ 
oxidation state, and are used as catalysts in inorganic chemistry, in 
pharmaceuticals, as well as in scintillation counters. 137Cesium is 
a by-product of nuclear reactions and is used in radiation therapy.
The Chernobyl nuclear plant accident in 1986 resulted in a 
large release of cesium into the atmosphere, which then spread as 
radioactive fallout into the soil, rivers, and lakes, causing serious 
ecological problems in Northern Europe. The transfer of radioce-
sium into the food chain and into sheep and reindeer may contribute 
to human cesium exposure and these ecological issues remain in 
some areas even decades after the original accident (Jacob et al., 
2009).
Most cesium compounds are water soluble and are well 
absorbed through inhalation, ingestion, or skin contact. Once in 
the blood, cesium is rapidly distributed throughout the body, with 
higher concentrations in kidneys, skeletal muscle, liver, and red 
blood cells (Leggett et al., 2003). Cesium can cross the placenta and 
appears in milk. It mimics potassium for cellular transport. Urinary 
excretion is the primary route of elimination of cesium from the 
body. The biological half-life of cesium is variable, ranging from 
50 to 150 days. A physiologically based kinetic model has been 
developed to describe the distribution and retention of cesium in 
humans (Leggett et al., 2003).
Toxicity 
Radioactive Cesium  Exposure to radioactive cesium (134Cs and 
137Cs) is of much greater human health concern than exposure to 
nonradioactive cesium. The initial symptoms after radioactive 
cesium exposure include nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Local 
skin blistering is common when there is significant dermal contact. 
With continued exposure to radioactive cesium, adverse neuro-
logical and developmental effects can be observed. Symptoms can 
eventually progress to bone morrow suppression, infection, hemor-
rhage, and even death (ATSDR, 2004a).
Nonradioactive Cesium Compounds  Stable cesium (133Cs) com-
pounds are relatively less toxic. High-dose exposure can cause irri-
tation to the gastrointestinal tract and to the eye (ATSDR, 2004a). 
High-dose ingestion of cesium salts as homeopathic remedies 
for cancer treatment has raised concerns with a number of clini-
cal side effects related to electrolyte imbalance. In these therapies, 
total cesium intakes of 6 g/day may produce severe hypokalemia, 
hypomagnesemia, prolonged QTc interval, episodes of polymor-
phic ventricular tachycardia, with or without torsade de pointes, 
and even acute heart arrest (Melnikov and Zanoni, 2010). Prussian 
blue has been approved in the treatment of cesium poisoning 
(Thompson and Callen, 2004).
Fluorine
Fluorine (F) was isolated in 1886 by Henri Moissan for which 
he was awarded the 1906 Nobel Prize in Chemistry. Fluorides 
are organic and inorganic compounds containing the nonmetallic 
element fluorine. Fluoride is an essential component for normal 
mineralization of bones and dental enamel, and it has been widely 
used to reduce the prevalence and severity of dental caries in chil-
dren and adults. Fluorosilicic acid and sodium fluorosilicate have 
been used in water fluoridation since 1940s. Adequate intake level 
is about 0.05 mg/kg/day in adults but is much lower for infants 
(ATSDR, 2003a). Toxicologically important fluoride compounds 
include hydrogen fluoride and sodium fluoride. The major sources 
of fluoride intake in the general population are water, food, and 
fluoride-containing dental products. However, excessive intake of 
fluorides has been observed from environmental sources, including 
from drinking water with naturally high fluoride (Meenakshi and 
Maheshwari, 2006), or from exposure to indoor fluoride air pollu-
tion from the use of high fluoride-containing coal (ATSDR, 2003a; 
Jha et al., 2011).
Fluorides are readily absorbed (75% to 90%) from the gastro-
intestinal tract (ATSDR, 2003a; Jha et al., 2011). Once absorbed, 
fluorides are rapidly distributed throughout the body. Approximately 
99% of the fluoride in the body is found in bones and teeth. 
Fluoride is incorporated into bone by replacing the hydroxyl ion in 
hydroxyapatite to form hydroxyfluorapatite. Fluoride in bone can 
be remobilized slowly as a result of the ongoing process of bone 
remodeling, especially in the young children. Fluoride is readily 
transferred across the placenta but poorly transferred to breast milk. 
Fluorides are mainly excreted in urine. Plasma and urine fluoride 
levels are related to fluoride intake and are a biomarker for excess 
exposure, while hair, fingernails, and tooth enamel are indicators of 
long-term response (ATSDR, 2003a; Jha et al., 2011).
Toxicity 
Dental Fluorosis  Excessive fluoride intake from water during 
the period of enamel formation in children can cause dental fluo-
rosis. In its mild form, dental fluorosis is characterized by white, 
opaque areas on the tooth surface. In its severe form, it is mani-
fested as yellowish brown to black stains and severe pitting of the 
teeth. Dental fluorosis incidence and severity in some instances can 
be decreased by the cessation of water fluoridation (Clark et al., 
2006). Inappropriate use of fluoride toothpaste and fluoride supple-
ments in young children is a risk factor for dental fluorosis (Browne 
et al., 2005). Dental fluorosis is more common and severe in areas 
of endemic environmental fluorosis (Meenakshi and Maheshwari, 
2006).
Skeletal Fluorosis  Long-term exposure to very high oral doses 
of fluoride or occupational exposure to cryolite dusts can result 
in skeletal fluorosis. Cases of skeletal fluorosis are predominantly 
found in developing countries and are associated with high fluo-
ride intake coupled with malnutrition (ATSDR, 2003a; Meenakshi 
and Maheshwari, 2006; Patel et al., 2017). Skeletal fluorosis does 
not usually manifest symptomatically until the disease attains an 
advanced stage. Fluoride is mainly deposited in the neck, knee, 
pelvic, and shoulder joints and/or bones, which makes it difficult

1146
Toxic Agents
unit V
to move or walk. The symptoms of skeletal fluorosis are similar to 
arthritis, and early on include sporadic pain, back stiffness, burning-
like sensation, pricking and tingling in the limbs, muscle weakness, 
and chronic fatigue. These symptoms are associated with abnormal 
calcium deposits in bones and ligaments. In the advanced stage, 
symptoms include osteoporosis in long bones, and bone outgrowth. 
The vertebrae may fuse together and eventually the victim may be 
crippled (crippling skeletal fluorosis), a disability often accompa-
nied by kyphosis (humpbacked) or lordosis (arched back).
There is a suggestion that excess fluorine in drinking water 
is associated with osteosarcomas (ATSDR, 2003a); however, most 
modern studies have not found this association (Levy and Leclerc, 
2012; Archer et al., 2016). Other health effects include respiratory 
tract, skin, and eye irritation after inhalation exposure to hydro-
gen fluoride or fluorine gas. Gastrointestinal symptoms occur with 
excess ingestion of fluoride (ATSDR, 2003a). Chronic endemic 
fluorosis may also lead to muscle fiber degeneration, low hemoglo-
bin levels, skin rashes, neurological manifestations, compromised 
immunity, and endocrine effects.
Palladium
Palladium (Pd) belongs to the platinum group metals. It was discov-
ered in 1803, and named after the asteroid Pallas. Palladium occurs 
together with other platinum group metals (platinum, rhodium, 
ruthenium, iridium, and osmium) at a very low concentration in the 
Earth’s crust, and is recovered as a by-product of refining nickel, 
platinum, and other base metals. Palladium compounds commonly 
exhibit oxidation state of 2+, although compounds with oxidation 
state 4+ are observed. Organopalladium compounds also exist. 
Palladium is used in automobile catalysts, in dentistry (for crowns 
and bridges), in electrical appliances, and in jewelry and coinage. 
Environmental palladium levels are increasing, but exposure in the 
general population is low. Dental alloys and work in metal refining 
or catalyst manufacture can be major sources of palladium expo-
sure (Thyssen and Menne, 2010; Faurschou et al., 2011).
Palladium chloride is poorly absorbed from the gastrointes-
tinal tract or from subcutaneous injection sites. After intravenous 
administration of palladium compounds, palladium is distributed to 
the kidney, liver, spleen, lung, and bone. In cells, palladium com-
pounds likely complex with amino acids, proteins, DNA, and other 
macromolecules. Orally administered palladium is poorly absorbed 
and eliminated in feces, whereas intravenous palladium is mainly 
eliminated in the urine. Half-lives range from 5 to 12 days.
Toxicity  Palladium sensitization is a health concern, as very 
low doses are sufficient to cause allergic reactions in susceptible 
individuals (Thyssen and Menne, 2010; Faurschou et al., 2011). 
Persons with known nickel allergy may be especially susceptible. 
Contact dermatitis is a main manifestation of palladium sensitiv-
ity, unlike that with platinum. Immediate hypersensitivity (type I) 
reactions to palladium have been reported in refinery workers sen-
sitized to platinum (Faurschou et al., 2011). Palladium sensitization 
is often from dental alloys or jewelry. Occupational exposure to 
palladium salts may cause skin and eye irritation, and occasionally 
asthma (Thyssen and Menne, 2010; Faurschou et al., 2011).
There is little evidence that palladium compounds are carci-
nogenic. These compounds are negative in bacterial mutagenicity 
tests and in micronucleus test in human peripheral lymphocytes. 
Tetraammine palladium hydrogen carbonate induced a clastogenic 
response to lymphocytes in vitro but did not produce positive results 
in the micronucleus test (WHO, 2002). Some organopalladium 
complexes and nanoparticles have been shown to have antitumor 
potential similar to that of cisplatin (Dumas and Couvreur, 2015).
Silver
Silver (Ag) is a rare, naturally occurring element found as a soft, 
“silver”-colored metal. It was known since ancient times and was sep-
arated from lead as early as 4000 bc. The chemical symbol for silver, 
Ag, is from its Latin name argentum. Metallic silver and 1+ oxidation 
forms are common. Silver metal is used for jewelry, silverware, elec-
tronic equipment, and dental filling. Soluble silver salts (e.g., silver 
nitrate and silver sulfide) have been used to treat bacterial infection. 
Silver halide is used in the manufacture of photographic plates, while 
silver sulfadiazine is used in the treatment of burns. Occupational 
exposure occurs mainly from inhalation of silver fumes and dusts in 
a number of settings (ATSDR, 1990; Drake and Hazelwood, 2005). 
There is no essentiality for silver, and dietary intake is in the range of 
0.4 to 27 μg/day (Hadrup and Lam, 2014), which is much less than 
the silver intake from medicinal uses. For drinking water disinfection, 
WHO permissible level is 0.1 mg Ag/L (WHO, 2014).
One of the recent uses of silver is in silver nanoparticles 
(AgNP), materials with sizes ranging from 1 to 100 nm, containing 
20 to 15,000 atoms of silver. Because of their antimicrobial activity, 
AgNP are used in a variety of consumer products including medi-
cal devices, disinfectants, appliances, textiles, and water treatment 
(Hadrup and Lam, 2014; Wang et al., 2015). The primary routes 
of exposure for AgNP include lung, skin, and gastrointestinal tract 
(Hadrup and Lam, 2014; WHO, 2014; Wang et al., 2015). It has 
been reported that levels of AgNP more than 20 mg/kg i.v. is toxic 
(Shoults-Wilson et al., 2011).
Sliver compounds can be absorbed orally, by inhalation, and 
through damaged skin. Ingested silver compounds are absorbed at 
a level of less than 18%, and only 2% to 4% is retained in tissues 
(Hadrup and Lam, 2014). Metallic silver and insoluble silver com-
pounds are not readily taken up by the body, and pose minimal 
health risk (Drake and Hazelwood, 2005). Toxicity from particu-
late or colloidal silver comes from released ionic silver (Hadrup 
and Lam, 2014). Silver is widely distributed to most tissues includ-
ing the muscle, cerebellum, spleen, duodenum, heart, lung, liver, 
and kidney (Hadrup and Lam, 2014). It is not clear whether silver 
crosses the blood–brain barrier, although several studies indicate 
accumulation in specific areas of the brain (Hadrup and Lam, 2014). 
Autopsy findings after silver treatment of burn victims indicate the 
highest levels occur in the skin, gingiva, cornea, liver, and kidneys. 
Silver is predominantly excreted in the feces with only minimal 
amounts being eliminated in the urine (Hadrup and Lam, 2014).
Toxicity  Silver and silver nanoparticles are relatively nontoxic 
(Hadrup and Lam, 2014; Munger et al., 2014; WHO, 2014; Wang 
et  al., 2015), and have wide use in therapeutics and consumer 
products. Large oral doses of silver nitrate or acetate may cause 
severe gastrointestinal irritation due to its caustic action (Wang 
et al., 2015). Lesions of the kidneys and lungs and arteriosclero-
sis have been attributed to both industrial and medicinal exposures 
(Hadrup and Lam, 2014). Deposition of silver in renal glomeru-
lar basement membranes after high-level exposure may produce 
hypertension and possible cardiac complications (Hadrup and Lam, 
2014; Gonzalez et al., 2016). At lower exposure levels, more subtle 
effects of impaired endothelial function and inhibition of vascular 
endothelial growth factor action result in impaired angiogenesis 
and vasorelaxation (Abukabda et al., 2016; Gonzalez et al., 2016). 
The respiratory tract may be affected in severe cases of silver intox-
ication. Chronic bronchitis has also been reported to result from 
medicinal use of colloidal silver (ATSDR, 1990). Silver has very 
limited genotoxic effects and is not considered a carcinogen.
Prolonged exposure to silver compounds is accompanied with 
skin discoloration (argyria) or the eyes (argyrosis), which is a local

Toxic Effects of Metals
Chapter 23
1147
or systemic effect observed in individuals that are occupationally 
exposed to AgNP, such as people who ingested a AgNP suspension, 
or patients who have been treated with nAg-containing burn dress-
ings (Drake and Hazelwood, 2005; Wang et al., 2015) . The affected 
area becomes bluish-gray or ash gray. This is most prominent in the 
areas of the body exposed to sunlight, as light acts as a catalyst by 
triggering the photoreduction of these compounds to form metallic 
silver, similar to the process of developing a photographic negative.
Chelating therapy and dermal abrasion are ineffective in 
removing silver deposits from the body and there is no effective 
treatment for argyria. Argyria can be considered a mechanism for 
detoxication of silver by sequestering it in the tissues as nontoxic 
silver–protein complexes or silver sulfide (ATSDR, 1990; Drake 
and Hazelwood, 2005).
Tellurium
Tellurium (Te) is a metalloid chemically related to selenium and 
sulfur. Discovered in the 1780s, tellurium is named after the Latin 
word for earth (tellus). It is naturally found as the telluride of gold 
or combined with various other metals. Produced most often as a 
by-product of electrolytic copper refining, tellurium is used as an 
additive to improve metallurgic characteristics of copper, steel, 
and lead alloys (Gerhardsson, 2015). Tellurium vapor is used in 
“daylight” lamps and as a semiconductor in combination with other 
metals. It is also used in explosives, specialized glass, and thermo-
electric and electronic devices. It has long been used as an antimi-
crobial agent and new nanoparticle forms are being developed as 
novel therapeutic agents (Zare et al., 2017).
The biochemistry and toxicity of inorganic and organometal-
lic tellurium compounds have been reviewed (Zare et al., 2017). 
Soluble tetravalent tellurates, absorbed into the body after oral 
administration, are reduced to tellurides, partly methylated, and 
then exhaled as dimethyl telluride. The dimethylated form is 
responsible for the characteristic garlic odor in persons intoxicated 
by tellurium compounds. Food is the main source of tellurium for 
the general population, while in industrial exposure inhalation 
would predominate. Some organometallic tellurium compounds are 
absorbed through the skin. Respiratory absorption data are limited, 
but inhaled tellurium compounds are likely well absorbed. After 
oral exposure of tellurides, 10% to 20% of the ingested dose is 
absorbed (Gerhardsson, 2015). The kidney, bone, and liver accu-
mulate tellurium and it is estimated that bone stores may have a 
half-life of up to 2 years or more (Gerhardsson, 2015). The urine 
and bile are the principal routes of excretion. Tellurium crosses the 
blood–brain barrier and the placenta.
Toxicity  Of toxicological importance are elemental tellurium, the 
gases hydrogen telluride and tellurium hexafluoride, and the water-
soluble sodium or potassium tellurites and tellurates (Gerhardsson, 
2015). Many organometallic forms of tellurium exist. Tellurates 
and tellurium are of generally low toxicity, but tellurites are typi-
cally more toxic. Acute intoxication by inhalation in occupational 
exposures results in sweating, nausea, a metallic taste, and garlic 
smelling breath. In fact, garlic breath is an indicator of exposure 
to tellurium by dermal, inhalation, or oral routes. The cases of 
­tellurium intoxication reported from industrial exposure do not 
appear to have been life-threatening. Two deaths occurred within 6 
hours of accidental poisoning by mistaken injection of sodium tel-
lurite (instead of sodium iodine) into the ureters during retrograde 
pyelography (Gerhardsson, 2015; Zare et al., 2017). The victims 
had garlic breath, renal pain, cyanosis, vomiting, stupor, and loss 
of  consciousness. The amount of sodium telluride injected was 
about 2 g.
Acute systemic effects of tellurium toxicity in rats include 
listlessness, decreased locomotor activity, somnolence, anorexia, 
weight loss, gastrointestinal disturbances, changes in fur, and 
occasionally epilation and hind leg paralysis (Gerhardsson, 2015). 
Chronic exposure to high doses of tellurium dioxide produces renal 
and hepatic injury (Gerhardsson, 2015).
There are no data on human or animal carcinogenicity of tel-
lurium; however, there are studies indicating an anticarcinogenic 
effect of tellurium (Gerhardsson, 2015; Zare et al., 2017). Tellurium 
compounds are genotoxic and/or mutagenic in hamster fibroblasts, 
fungus and bacteria (Degrandi et al., 2010), rat astrocytes (Roy and 
Hardej, 2011), human blood cells (Santos et al., 2009), and human 
promyelocytic cells (Santos et al., 2009). In most cases, exposure 
to these compounds led to oxidative stress and DNA damage, and 
apoptosis was the predominant mechanism of cell death.
Thallium
Thallium (Tl) is one of the most toxic metals. Thallium (from the 
Greek thallos meaning “a green shoot or twig”) was discovered in 
1861. The thallium ion has a similar charge and ion radius as the 
potassium ion, and its toxic effects may result from interference 
with the biological functions of potassium. In addition, thallium 
disrupts mitochondrial function leading to increases in intracellular 
oxidative stress and apoptosis (Hanzel and Verstraeten, 2009).
Thallium is obtained as a by-product of the refining of iron, 
cadmium, and zinc, and is used as a catalyst in alloys, and in opti-
cal lenses, jewelry, low-temperature thermometers, semiconduc-
tors, dyes, pigments, and scintillation counters. It has been used 
medicinally as a depilatory. Thallium compounds, chiefly thallous 
sulfate, were used as rat poisons and insecticides (ATSDR, 1992). 
Once the commonest sources of human thallium poisoning, the use 
of thallium as rodenticides or insecticides is now banned (ATSDR, 
1992; Peter and Viraraghavan, 2005). Industrial poisoning is a spe-
cial risk in the manufacture of fused halides for the production of 
lenses and windows. Naturally high thallium concentration in soils 
and consequent uptake into edible plants in Southwest Guizhou, 
China, caused locally endemic chronic thallium poisoning (Xiao 
et al., 2012).
Thallium is absorbed through the skin and gastrointestinal 
tract. The highest concentrations after thallium poisoning are in 
the kidney. After the initial exposure, large amounts are excreted 
in urine during the first 24 hours, but after that urinary excretion 
becomes slow and the feces become an important route of excretion. 
The half-life of thallium in humans has been reported to range from 
1 to 30 days and depends on the initial dose. Thallium undergoes 
enterohepatic recirculation. Prussian blue, the most commonly used 
antidote, is given orally to break the enterohepatic recycling by trap-
ping thallium secreted into bile and carrying it into the feces (WHO, 
1996). Thallium can transfer across the placenta and is found in 
breast milk, and may cause toxicity in the offspring (WHO, 1996).
Toxicity  The triad of gastroenteritis, polyneuropathy, and alo-
pecia is regarded as the classic syndrome of thallium poisoning 
(WHO, 1996). Other signs and symptoms also occur depending on 
the dose and length of exposure. The estimated acute lethal dose 
in humans is 10 to 15 mg/kg. Death is due mainly to renal, central 
nervous system, and cardiac failure within a few days to 2 weeks 
(WHO, 1996; Peter and Viraraghavan, 2005).
Alopecia is the best known effect of thallium poisoning. 
Depilation begins about 10 days after ingestion and complete hair 
loss can occur in about 1 month. Other dermal signs may include 
palmar erythema, acne, anhydrosis, and dry scaly skin due to 
toxic effects of thallium on sweat and sebaceous glands. After oral

1148
Toxic Agents
unit V
ingestion of thallium, gastrointestinal symptoms occur, including 
nausea, vomiting, gastroenteritis, abdominal pain, and gastrointesti-
nal hemorrhage. Neurological symptoms usually appear 2 to 5 days 
after acute exposure, depending on age and the level of exposure. 
A consistent and characteristic feature of thallium intoxication in 
humans is the extreme sensitivity of the legs, followed by the “burn-
ing feet syndrome” and paresthesia. Central nervous system toxic-
ity is manifest by hallucinations, lethargy, delirium, convulsions, 
and coma. The acute cardiovascular effects of thallium are initially 
manifested by hypotension and bradycardia due to direct effects 
of thallium on sinus node and cardiac muscle. This is followed by 
hypertension and tachycardia due to vagal nerve degeneration. In 
severe cases, cardiac failure occurs.
Major symptoms of chronic thallium poisoning include 
anorexia, headache, and abnormal pain. Other toxic effects of 
thallium include fatty infiltration and necrosis of the liver, nephri-
tis, pulmonary edema, degenerative changes in the adrenals, and 
degeneration of the peripheral and central nervous system. In severe 
cases, alopecia, blindness, and even death have been reported as a 
result of long-term systemic thallium intake (WHO, 1996; Peter and 
Viraraghavan, 2005).
A review on thallium poisoning during pregnancy in humans 
gives a range of fetal effects from severe toxicity to normal develop-
ment. The only consistent effect identified is a trend toward prema-
turity and low birth weight in children exposed to thallium during 
early gestation (Hoffman, 2000). It may be teratogenic, especially 
with regard to cartilage and bone formation, but most of the evi-
dence comes from birds and not mammals.
Treatment  Therapy for thallium intoxication combines forced 
diuresis, use of activated charcoal, prevention of reabsorption by 
administration of Prussian blue, and administration of potassium 
ferric hexacyanoferrate (WHO, 1996). Prussian blue is the rec-
ommended drug of choice in acute thallium poisoning (Hoffman, 
2003).
Tin
Tin (Sn) is a silver-white metal. The name tin derives from the 
Anglo-Saxon, tin, through the Latin, stannum. Tin is one of the ear-
liest metals known and was used as a component of bronze from 
antiquity. Because of its hardening effect on copper, tin was used 
in bronze implements as early as 3500 bc. However, the pure metal 
was not used until 600 bc. Metallic tin can combine with chloride, 
sulfur, or oxygen to form inorganic tin compounds (stannous, Sn2+; 
and stannic, Sn4+). Tin can also bind with carbon to form a num-
ber of toxicologically important organotin compounds including 
dimethyltin, dibutyltin, dioctyltin, triphenyltin, and tricyclohexyltin 
(ATSDR, 2005c). Currently, tin is used in the manufacture of vari-
ous alloys, such as bronze and brass, for fabricating window glass 
and in solders, but was previously widely used in food packaging. 
Stannic chlorides are used in dyeing textiles. Organic tin compounds 
have been used in fungicides, bactericides, and slimicides, as well 
as in plastics as stabilizers. The average daily intake of tin from all 
sources is about 4.0 mg, considerably lower than the 17 mg esti-
mated in previous decades, thanks to better food packaging tech-
nology (Blunden and Wallace, 2003). Organotin compounds are 
ubiquitous contaminants in the environment. Bioconcentration in 
aquatic organisms and ecotoxicity are dependent on the bioavailabil-
ity of the particular compounds. Some tin compounds, especially 
organotins, show high bioavailability and may pose adverse effects 
toward aquatic ecosystems (Okoro et al., 2011; Fang et al., 2017).
Inorganic tin compounds are poorly absorbed after oral, inha-
lation, or dermal exposures. For example, only 3% of stannous and 
less than 1% of stannic compounds are absorbed from the gastro-
intestinal tract (Rudel, 2003). The majority of an oral dose of inor-
ganic tin is excreted in the feces, while only a small portion of 
absorbed tin is eliminated via urine (Rudel, 2003). The organotin 
compounds, particularly trimethyltin and triethyltin compounds, are 
better absorbed than inorganic tins (Rudel, 2003; Okoro et al., 2011; 
Fang et al., 2017). The tissue distribution of tin from these organo-
metallic compounds shows the highest concentration in the bone, 
liver, kidney, and lung, with smaller amounts in the muscle, spleen, 
heart, or brain. Tetraethyltin, triethyltin, and diethyltin undergo 
dealkylation to ethyltin compounds, whereas tributyltin is dealkyl-
ated to di- and monobutyltin compounds. Phenyltin compounds 
undergo dearylation, mainly by microsome monooxygenase and 
P450 enzymes (ATSDR, 2005c).
Toxicity  Metallic tin and inorganic tin compounds are relatively 
nontoxic. Ingestion of food items contaminated with high levels of 
inorganic tins may cause acute gastroenteritis, while chronic inha-
lation of inorganic tins (e.g.,, stannic oxide dust or fumes) may lead 
to benign nonfibrotic pneumoconiosis called stannosis (ATSDR, 
2005c). Some organic tin compounds are highly neurotoxic, par-
ticularly triethyltin and trimethyltin, and cause encephalopathy and 
cerebral edema (Aschner and Aschner, 1992; Rohl et al., 2009). 
Toxicity declines as the number of carbon atoms in the chain 
increases. Trimethyltin produces degenerative lesions in the hip-
pocampus and associated structure of the limbic system in primates 
and rodents. The lesions are characterized by neuron cell apoptosis 
with astrocyte swelling and gliosis. Microglia and astrocyte activa-
tion with the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines may well 
contribute to the lesion. Triethyltin produces cerebral edema in 
experimental animals (ATSDR, 2005c; Rohl et al., 2009).
Triphenyltin, tributyltin, dibutyltin, and dioctyltin compounds 
produce immunotoxicity in experimental animals, characterized 
by thymic atrophy, and suppression of T-cell-mediated immune 
response (ATSDR, 2005c; Ueno et al., 2009). Exposure of preg-
nant animals to organotin compounds such as tributyltin and trieth-
yltin may induce developmental and endocrine-disrupting effects 
(ATSDR, 2005c).
Experimental studies have failed to find convincing evidence 
of carcinogenicity, mutagenicity, or teratogenicity of inorganic tin 
compounds. There is inadequate information to assess carcino-
genic potential of organotin compounds in animals, and they are 
considered not classifiable as to human carcinogenicity (ATSDR, 
2005c). Studies of genotoxicity of organotin compounds have given 
mixed results depending on the specific compound and test sys-
tem. Triphenyltin compounds are potential chromosome mutagens, 
inducing production of micronuclei and sister chromatid exchange 
in Chinese hamster cells (ATSDR, 2005c).
Titanium
Discovered in 1791, titanium is named for the Titans of Greek 
mythology. Most titanium compounds are in the 4+ oxidation state 
(titanic), but the 3+ oxidation state (titanous) and 2+ compounds 
can occur. Titanium can form organometallic compounds. Because 
of its resistance to corrosion, inertness, and tensile strength, tita-
nium has many metallurgic applications, and finds use in aircraft, 
armor plating, naval ships, missiles, and as a component of surgical 
implants and prostheses. Titanium dioxide (TiO2), the most widely 
used titanium compound, is used as a white pigment in paints, 
paper, toothpaste, and plastics, as a food additive to whiten flour, 
in dietary products and confections, and as a whitener in cosmetics 
(Lomer et al., 2004). Titanium complexes (such as titanium diketo-
nate and budotitane) and titanocene complexes (such as titanocene

Toxic Effects of Metals
Chapter 23
1149
dichloride) have undergone clinical trials as cancer chemothera-
peutics (Cini et al., 2017). Titanium tetrachloride (TiCl4) is used 
to make titanium metal and other titanium-containing compounds. 
Occupational exposures to TiCl4 can be of toxicological concern 
(ATSDR, 1997, 2014).
Approximately 3% of an oral dose of inorganic titanium is 
absorbed. The majority of the absorbed dose is excreted in the urine 
while unabsorbed titanium is excreted in the feces. The normal 
urinary concentration of titanium has been estimated at 10 μg/L 
(ATSDR, 1997; Loza-Rosas et al., 2017), and the estimated total 
body burden of titanium is about 15 mg. As a result of inhalation 
exposure, titanium accumulates in the lungs where it remains for 
long periods of time. Lung burdens increase with age and vary 
according to geographic location. Concentrations of titanium in the 
liver (8 μg/g) and kidney (6 μg/g) are similar. Titanium may circu-
late in plasma bound to transferrin (Loza-Rosas et al., 2017), which 
is thought to be a mediator for delivery of titanium to tumor cells 
(Desoize, 2004).
Toxicity  Occupational inhalation exposure to TiCl4 can produce 
mild to severe pulmonary injury because it undergoes rapid hydro-
lysis on contact with water to form hydrochloric acid, titanium 
oxychloride, and TiO2. Occupational exposure to titanium dioxide 
occurs during production. TiO2 is classified as a nuisance particu-
late with a threshold limit value of 10 mg/m3. Inhalation and instil-
lation of titanium particles coated with alumina and/or amorphous 
silica produce mild and reversible pulmonary effects. The base pig-
ment-grade and/or nanoscale TiO2 particles produce minimal pul-
monary toxicity, regardless of particle size and surface area (Sayes 
et al., 2007; Warheit and Donner, 2015). In general, TiO2 has been 
considered toxicologically inert regardless of route of exposure.
Epidemiological studies in humans have not found the asso-
ciation of titanium exposure with increased risk of lung cancer and 
chronic respiratory diseases. Exposure of rats to TiO2 via inhalation 
or intratracheal instillations caused malignant lung tumors (IARC, 
2010). The titanium compound, titanocene, when suspended in 
trioctanoin and injected intramuscularly, is carcinogenic in rats and 
mice. According to IARC, there is inadequate evidence in humans 
and sufficient evidence in animals for the carcinogenicity of TiO2 
(IARC, 2010).
Titanium compounds and related metallocenes have recently 
shown chemotherapeutic activity toward gastrointestinal, breast, 
lung, and skin cancer (Desoize, 2004; Cini et al., 2017). The mech-
anism of action of titanium compounds appears different from 
platinum compounds, and nephrotoxicity and myelotoxicity are not 
prominent. TiO2 nanoparticles have photocatalytic activity raising 
concerns over their use in sunscreens. While some studies show 
TiO2 particles cause oxidative damage to DNA (IARC, 2010), much 
about the safety or toxicity of these nanoparticles is still unknown 
making their use in sunscreens somewhat controversial; although 
generally considered to be safe (Warheit and Donner, 2015; Grande 
and Tucci, 2016; McSweeney, 2016).
Uranium
Uranium (U) is an actinide metal with a long history of human use. 
It was discovered by the German chemist Martin Kloproth in 1789 
in a mineral called pitchblende, and was named after Uranus, the 
planet, which had been discovered 8 years earlier. Uranium natu-
rally occurs in three radioisotopes: 234U, 235U, and 238U. The isotope 
235U is of particular interest in nuclear weapons and nuclear reac-
tions. Thus, uranium ore is chemically enriched to increase 235U 
content from 0.72% to 2% to 4%. The by-product of this process 
is called depleted uranium, which has decreased 235U and has 40% 
less radioactivity than natural uranium (ATSDR, 2013b; Asic et al., 
2017). Depleted uranium has been used in military applications as 
warheads and tank armor. Nonmilitary uses include counterweights 
in airplanes and shields against radiation in hospitals (Asic et al., 
2017). The chemical toxicity of uranium compounds is a health 
concern, rather than their radiation. Depleted uranium has the same 
chemical toxicity potential as natural uranium (ATSDR, 2013b; 
Asic et al., 2017).
Uranium has five oxidation states but only the 4+ and 6+ 
forms are stable enough to be of practical importance. The 6+ 
oxidation state forms the uranyl ion (UO2+), which further forms 
water-soluble compounds and is an important species of uranium 
in body fluids (Bjorklund et al., 2017). The uranyl ion is also the 
most prevalent form in the environment. The ecotoxicity of uranium 
and uranyl carbonate complexes to plants, aquatic life, and birds has 
been recently reviewed (Sheppard et al., 2005).
Absorption of uranium compounds is low by all routes of 
exposure (ATSDR, 2013b; Bjorklund et al., 2017). Absorption of 
inhaled uranium compounds occurs in respiratory tract via trans-
fer across cell membranes, and is dependent on the particle size 
and solubility. Absorption from the gastrointestinal tract can vary 
from 0.1% to 6%, depending on the specific uranium compound. 
Once in the blood, uranium is distributed to the organs of the body. 
Uranium in body fluids generally exists as uranyl ion complexed 
with citrate and bicarbonate. Uranium preferentially distributes to 
the bone (66%), liver (16%), kidney (8%), and then other tissues 
(10%). Two-thirds of the uranium in the blood is excreted in urine 
over the first 24 hours, but the bone deposits of uranium last for 
about 1.5 years (ATSDR, 2013b; Bjorklund et al., 2017).
Toxicity  The kidney is the most sensitive organ for uranium 
toxicity (ATSDR, 2013b). Occupational cohort studies do not 
provide evidence of increased risk of kidney-related mortality 
among uranium-exposed workers (Arzuaga et al., 2010). However, 
occupational and community-based studies of populations chroni-
cally exposed to elevated drinking-water concentrations of ura-
nium provide some evidence of adverse renal effects, as assessed 
by biomarkers of proximal tubule damage such as urinary levels 
of glucose, calcium, and various low-molecular-weight proteins 
(Arzuaga et al., 2010). Indications of proximal tubule effects, as 
evidenced by increased urinary β2-microglobulin and retinol bind-
ing protein levels, were also seen in the most recent follow-up sur-
veillance study of Gulf War veterans exposed to depleted uranium 
(Arzuaga et al., 2010). Humans appear to be less sensitive to the 
renal effects of uranium than rodents or other mammals, which 
has complicated understanding to the underlying mechanisms 
of disease promotion (Asic et al., 2017; Bjorklund et al., 2017). 
Pathological and functional changes occur within days after acute 
exposure and are manifested by injury to renal tubular epithelial 
cells (Asic et al., 2017). Overt renal effects are observed with peak 
kidney uranium concentrations above 2 μg U/g, but mild renal 
tubular dysfunction from chronic exposure may occur at even lower 
renal concentrations. There appears to be a trend toward increased 
severity of renal toxicity with increase in length exposure and uri-
nary uranium levels (Arzuaga et al., 2010).
Challenges remain for establishing any causal relationship 
between human uranium exposure and birth defects and/or gonadal 
endocrine dysfunction, because these studies are confounded by co-
exposure to other toxicants and inadequate exposure assessments 
(ATSDR, 2013b; Bjorklund et al., 2017). However, uranium and 
depleted uranium can be developmental toxicants when given orally 
or subcutaneously to mice. Decreased fertility, embryo/fetal toxic-
ity, teratogenicity, and reduced growth of the offspring have been

1150
Toxic Agents
unit V
observed in rodents after uranium exposure during different peri-
ods of gestation. Bone is a major site of uranium accumulation, and 
chronic uranium intoxication may result in diminished bone growth 
and osteoporosis. There is also increasing concern of potential neu-
rotoxicity produced by uranium exposure (Jiang and Aschner, 2006).
A higher incidence of lung cancer has been found in uranium 
miners and is probably due to radon and its daughter products, but 
not to uranium itself (ATSDR, 2013b; Bjorklund et al., 2017). Gulf 
war veterans who were wounded subsequent to the explosion of 
armor-piercing shells containing depleted uranium often retain 
small fragments of the metal. This has created concern for the 
potential long-term effects of such embedded uranium fragments. 
Although there are no human data, studies in rats and mice indicate 
that embedded depleted uranium fragments can cause localized 
proliferative reactions and sarcomas in rats, as well as leukemia in 
mice (Asic et al., 2017). However, the studies are suspect due to the 
tendencies for sarcoma incidence of the rodent strains to imbedded 
particulates.
Vanadium
Vanadium (V) is a transition metal discovered in the early 1800s 
and is named after the goddess of beauty in Scandinavian mythol-
ogy, Vanadis, because of its beautiful multicolored chemical 
compounds. It is an essential trace element for microorganisms 
and bacteria, but definitive evidence for essentiality in mammals 
is lacking and no specific biochemical function for vanadium has 
been identified. Vanadium has several oxidation states, the most 
common being 3+, 4+, and 5+. The metal can be found as halides, 
such as the tetrachloride, and oxides, such as vanadium pentox-
ide. Organometallic vanadium compounds are generally unstable. 
Vanadium is recovered from vanadium-containing ores and from 
fossil fuels. Vanadium compounds are used in the production of 
special steels and alloys, in the manufacture of pigments, in pho-
tography, and as catalysts (ATSDR, 2012d).
Food is the major source of vanadium exposure in the general 
population (ATSDR, 2012d). Significant amounts of vanadium are 
found in seafood, mushrooms, dill seed, milk, meat, cereals, and 
vegetables. Concentrations in the drinking water largely depend on 
geographic location. Concentrations in rural air were much lower 
than in urban air, especially along the eastern seacoast, largely due 
to oil-fired fuel combustion that has been phased out over the past 
decades (ATSDR, 2012d). The dietary daily intake is estimated in 
the range of 10 to 60 μg (ATSDR, 2012d).
The lungs absorb about 25% of soluble vanadium compounds, 
but the absorption of vanadium salts from the gastrointestinal tract 
is generally poor (ATSDR, 2012d). Some dermal absorption of 
soluble compounds is possible but probably represents a minor 
route for humans. Once absorbed, extracellular vanadium will be 
in the form of vanadate (5+) and most likely in the vanadyl (4+) 
form after entering cells. After experimental exposure by various 
routes in rodents, the highest amounts of vanadium are found in 
bone, kidney, liver, and spleen (ATSDR, 2012d). Brain levels are 
considerably lower than other tissues indicating limited transport 
across the blood–brain barrier. After oral exposure, vanadium shows 
a multicompartmental pattern with potential for accumulation and 
retention particularly in the bone (ATSDR, 2012d).
Toxicity  The toxicity of vanadium compounds usually increases 
as the valence increases, the pentavalent compounds being the most 
toxic. After occupational exposure to airborne vanadium, its toxic 
actions are largely confined to irritation of the respiratory tract, 
eyes, and skin (ATSDR, 2012d). Interestingly, there is usually a 
latent period of 1 to 6 days before the adverse effects of vanadium 
appear, although the effects are usually reversible. Bronchitis and 
bronchopneumonia are more frequent in workers exposed to vana-
dium compounds. In industrial exposures to vanadium pentoxide 
dust, a characteristic greenish-black discoloration of the tongue 
occurs due to deposition of vanadium. There is some evidence that a 
sensitization reaction may occur with repeated exposures (ATSDR, 
2012d). Gastrointestinal distress, nausea, vomiting, abdominal 
pain, cardiac palpitation, tremor, nervous depression, and kidney 
damage have also been linked with industrial vanadium exposure 
(ATSDR, 2012d; Fortoul et al., 2014).
There is clear evidence that inhaled vanadium pentoxide is 
carcinogenic in mice and rats producing benign and malignant lung 
tumors in a large NTP study (Ress et al., 2003). Vanadium can act 
as a tumor promoter in the mouse lung (Rondini et al., 2010). The 
major cellular mechanism for tumor promotion as well as a number 
of potential therapeutic effects may involve binding to a critical 
thiol in the active site of tyrosine phosphatases that suppress growth 
factor and insulin signaling. There are no data indicating a carci-
nogenic potential for vanadium compounds in humans, although 
vanadium pentoxide inhalation causes a variety of DNA damage in 
exposed workers (Fortoul et al., 2014).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partially supported by grants from the National 
Institutes of Environmental Health Sciences (R01ES023696 and 
R01ES013781 to A.B.), as well as the Department of Environmental 
and Occupational Health, Graduate School of Public Health, 
University of Pittsburgh. The editor and authors also recognize the 
contributions of previous authors of this chapter: Robert P. Beliles 
(1st edition), Paul B. Hammond and Robert P. Beliles (2nd edition), 
Robert A. Goyer, (3rd to 5th editions), Robert A. Goyer and Thomas 
W. Clarkson (6th edition), Jie Liu, Robert A. Goyer, and Michael P. 
Waalkes (7th edition), and Erik J. Tokar, Windy A. Boyd, Jonathan 
H. Freedman, and Michael P. Waalkes (8th edition).
REFERENCES
Abukabda AB, Stapleton PA, Nurkiewicz TR. Metal nanomaterial tox-
icity variations within the vascular system. Curr Environ Health Rep. 
2016;3:379–391.
Achary MS, Satpathy KK, Panigrahi S, et  al. Concentration of heavy 
metals in the food chain components of the nearshore coastal waters 
of Kalpakkam, southeast coast of India. Food Control. 2017;72(pt 
B):232–243.
Aguirre JD, Culotta VC. Battles with iron: manganese in oxidative stress 
protection. J Biol Chem. 2012;287:13541–13548.
Ahmad F, Zhou Y. Pitfalls and challenges in nanotoxicology: a case of cobalt 
ferrite (CoFe2O4) nanocomposites. Chem Res Toxicol. 2017;30:492–507.
Ahmadibeni Y, Hanley M, White M, et al. Metal-binding properties of a 
dicysteine-containing motif in protein tyrosine kinases. Chembiochem. 
2007;8:1592–1605.
Ahsan H, Chen Y, Kibriya MG, et al. Arsenic metabolism, genetic suscep-
tibility, and risk of premalignant skin lesions in Bangladesh. Cancer 
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2007;16:1270–1278.
Alkim H, Koksal AR, Boga S, et al. Role of bismuth in the eradication of 
Helicobacter pylori. Am J Ther. 2017;24:e751–e757.
Allan AM, Hafez AK, Labrecque MT, et al. Sex-dependent effects of devel-
opmental arsenic exposure on methylation capacity and methylation 
regulation of the glucocorticoid receptor system in the embryonic mouse 
brain. Toxicol Rep. 2015;2:1376–1390.
Amicosante M, Berretta F, Rossman M, et  al. Identification of HLA-
DRPhebeta47 as the susceptibility marker of hypersensitivity to beryl-
lium in individuals lacking the berylliosis-associated supratypic marker 
HLA-DPGlubeta69. Respir Res. 2005;6:94.

Toxic Effects of Metals
Chapter 23
1151
Andersen O, Aaseth J. A review of pitfalls and progress in chelation treat-
ment of metal poisonings. J Trace Elem Med Biol. 2016;38:74–80.
Andrew AS, Karagas MR, Hamilton JW. Decreased DNA repair gene 
expression among individuals exposed to arsenic in United States drink-
ing water. Int J Cancer. 2003;104:263–268.
Andrew AS, Mason RA, Memoli V, et al. Arsenic activates EGFR pathway 
signaling in the lung. Toxicol Sci. 2009;109:350–357.
Antonini JM, Taylor MD, Zimmer AT, et  al. Pulmonary responses to 
welding fumes: role of metal constituents. J Toxicol  Environ Health A. 
2004;67:233–249.
Anttila A, Heikkila P, Pukkala E, et al. Excess lung cancer among workers 
exposed to lead. Scand J Work Environ Health. 1995;21:460–469.
Aposhian HV, Aposhian MM. Arsenic toxicology: five questions. Chem Res 
Toxicol. 2006;19:1–15.
Archer NP, Napier TS, Villanacci JF. Fluoride exposure in public drink-
ing water and childhood and adolescent osteosarcoma in Texas. Cancer 
Causes Control. 2016;27:863–868.
Argos M, Rahman M, Parvez F, et al. Baseline comorbidities in a skin can-
cer prevention trial in Bangladesh. Eur J Clin Invest. 2013;43:579–588.
Arita A, Costa M. Epigenetics in metal carcinogenesis: nickel, arsenic, 
chromium and cadmium. Metallomics. 2009;1:222–228.
Arnold WR, Cotsifas JS, Smith DS, et al. A comparison of the copper sen-
sitivity of two economically important saltwater mussel species and a 
review of previously reported copper toxicity data for mussels: important 
implications for determining future ambient copper saltwater criteria in 
the USA. Environ Toxicol. 2009;24:618–628.
Arzuaga X, Rieth SH, Bathija A, et al. Renal effects of exposure to natural 
and depleted uranium: a review of the epidemiologic and experimental 
data. J Toxicol Environ Health B Crit Rev. 2010;13:527–545.
Aschner M, Aschner JL. Cellular and molecular effects of trimethyltin and 
triethyltin: relevance to organotin neurotoxicity. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 
1992;16:427–435.
Asic A, Kurtovic-Kozaric A, Besic L, et al. Chemical toxicity and radioac-
tivity of depleted uranium: the evidence from in vivo and in vitro studies. 
Environ Res. 2017;156:665–673.
ATSDR. Toxicological Profile for Silver. Atlanta, GA: Agency for Toxic 
Substances and Disease Registry; 1990. Available at: https://www.atsdr.
cdc.gov/ToxProfiles/tp.asp?id=539&tid=97.
ATSDR. Toxicological Profile for Thallium. Atlanta, GA: Agency for Toxic 
Substances and Disease Registry; 1992. Available at: https://www.atsdr.
cdc.gov/ToxProfiles/tp.asp?id=309&tid=49.
ATSDR. Toxicological Profile for Titanium Tetrachloride. Atlanta, GA: 
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry; 1997. Available at: 
https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/ToxProfiles/tp.asp?id=664&tid=122.
ATSDR. Toxicological Profile for Fluorides, Hydrogen Fluoride, and 
Fluorine. Atlanta, GA: Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease 
Registry; 2003a. Available at: https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxprofiles/
TP.asp?id=212&tid=38.
ATSDR. Toxicological Profile for Selenium. Atlanta, GA: Agency for Toxic 
Substances and Disease Registry; 2003b. Available at: https://www.atsdr.
cdc.gov/ToxProfiles/tp.asp?id=153&tid=28.
ATSDR. Toxicological Profile for Cesium. Atlanta, GA: Agency for Toxic 
Substances and Disease Registry; 2004a. Available at: https://www.atsdr.
cdc.gov/toxprofiles/TP.asp?id=578&tid=107.
ATSDR. Toxicological Profile for Cobalt. Atlanta, GA: Agency for Toxic 
Substances and Disease Registry; 2004b. Available at: https://www.atsdr.
cdc.gov/ToxProfiles/tp.asp?id=373&tid=64.
ATSDR. Toxicological Profile for Copper. Atlanta, GA: Agency for Toxic 
Substances and Disease Registry; 2004c. Available at: https://www.atsdr.
cdc.gov/ToxProfiles/tp.asp?id=206&tid=37.
ATSDR. Toxicological Profile for Nickel. Atlanta, GA: Agency for Toxic 
Substances and Disease Registry; 2005a. Available at: https://www.atsdr.
cdc.gov/ToxProfiles/tp15.pdf.
ATSDR. Toxicological Profile for Zinc. Atlanta, GA: Agency for Toxic 
Substances and Disease Registry; 2005b. Available at: https://www.atsdr.
cdc.gov/toxprofiles/tp.asp?id=302&tid=54.
ATSDR. Toxicological Profiles of Tin and Tin Compounds. Atlanta, GA: 
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry; 2005c. Available at: 
https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/ToxProfiles/tp.asp?id=543&tid=98.
ATSDR. Toxicological Profile for Arsenic. Atlanta, GA: Agency for Toxic 
Substances and Disease Registry; 2007a. Available at: https://www.atsdr.
cdc.gov/ToxProfiles/tp.asp?id=22&tid=3.
ATSDR. Toxicological Profile for Barium and Compounds. Atlanta, GA: 
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry; 2007b. Available at: 
https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxprofiles/TP.asp?id=327&tid=57.
ATSDR. Toxicological Profile for Lead. Agency for Toxic Substances 
and Disease Registry; 2007c. Available at: https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/
ToxProfiles/tp.asp?id=96&tid=22.
ATSDR. Toxicological Profile for Aluminum. Atlanta, GA: Agency for 
Toxic Substances and Disease Registry; 2008. Available at: https://www.
atsdr.cdc.gov/toxprofiles/TP.asp?id=191&tid=34.
ATSDR. Toxicological Profile for Cadmium. Atlanta, GA: Agency for Toxic 
Substances and Disease Registry; 2012a. Available at: https://www.atsdr.
cdc.gov/toxprofiles/tp.asp?id=48&tid=15.
ATSDR. Toxicological Profile for Chromium. Atlanta, GA: Agency for 
Toxic Substances and Disease Registry; 2012b. Available at: http://www.
atsdr.cdc.gov/toxprofiles/tp.asp?id=62&tid=17.
ATSDR. Toxicological Profile for Manganese. Atlanta, GA: Agency for 
Toxic Substances and Disease Registry; 2012c. Available at: https://
www.atsdr.cdc.gov/ToxProfiles/tp.asp?id=102&tid=23.
ATSDR. Toxicological Profiles for Vanadium. Atlanta, GA: Agency for 
Toxic Substances and Disease Registry; 2012d. Available at: https://
www.atsdr.cdc.gov/ToxProfiles/tp.asp?id=276&tid=50.
ATSDR. Addendum to the Toxicological Profile for Mercury. Atlanta, GA: 
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry; 2013a.
ATSDR. Toxicological Profile for Uranium. Atlanta, GA: Agency for Toxic 
Substances and Disease Registry; 2013b. Available at: https://www.atsdr.
cdc.gov/toxprofiles/TP.asp?id=440&tid=77.
ATSDR. 
Addendum 
to 
the 
Toxicological 
Profile 
for 
Titanium 
Tetrachloride. Atlanta, GA: Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease 
Registry; 2014. Available at: https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/ToxProfiles/
tp.asp?id=664&tid=122.
ATSDR. Addendum to the Toxicological Profile for Beryllium. Atlanta, GA: 
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry; 2015a. Available at: 
https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/ToxProfiles/tp.asp?id=1441&tid=33.
ATSDR. ATSDR’s Substance Priority List. Atlanta, GA: Agency for Toxic 
Substances and Disease Registery; 2015b. Available at: https://www.
atsdr.cdc.gov/spl/index.html.
ATSDR. Addendum to the Toxicological Profile for Arsenic. Atlanta, GA: 
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry; 2016. Available at: 
https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxprofiles/Arsenic_addendum.pdf.
ATSDR. Toxicological Profile for Antimony and Compounds. Atlanta, GA: 
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry; 2017a. Available at: 
https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxprofiles/tp.asp?id=332&tid=58.
ATSDR. Toxicological Profile for Molybdenum. Atlanta, GA: Agency for 
Toxic Substances and Disease Registry; 2017b. Available at: https://
www.atsdr.cdc.gov/ToxProfiles/tp.asp?id=1482&tid=289.
Bailey CH. Improved meta-analytic methods show no effect of chromium 
supplements on fasting glucose. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2014;157:1–8.
Bailey KA, Smith AH, Tokar EJ, et al. Mechanisms underlying latent dis-
ease risk associated with early-life arsenic exposure: current research 
trends and scientific gaps. Environ Health Perspect. 2016;124:170–175.
Bakir F, Damluji SF, Amin-Zaki L, et al. Methylmercury poisoning in Iraq. 
Science. 1973;181:230–241.
Baltaci AK, Yuce K, Mogulkoc R. Zinc metabolism and metallothioneins. 
Biol Trace Elem Res. 2018;183:22–31.
Barbosa F Jr, Tanus-Santos JE, Gerlach RF, et al. A critical review of bio-
markers used for monitoring human exposure to lead: advantages, limita-
tions, and future needs. Environ Health Perspect. 2005;113:1669–1674.
Barchowsky A, Dudek EJ, Treadwell MD, et al. Arsenic induces oxidant 
stress and NF-kappa B activation in cultured aortic endothelial cells. Free 
Radic Biol Med. 1996;21:783–790.
Barchowsky A, O’Hara KA. Metal-induced cell signaling and gene activa-
tion in lung diseases. Free Radic Biol Med. 2003;34:1130–1135.
Barr RD, Rees PH, Cordy PE, et al. Nephrotic syndrome in adult Africans 
in Nairobi. Br Med J. 1972;2:131–134.
Beckman JS, Estevez AG, Crow JP, et al. Superoxide dismutase and the 
death of motoneurons in ALS. Trends Neurosci. 2001;24:S15–S20.

1152
Toxic Agents
unit V
Begum M, Horowitz J, Hossain MI. Low-dose risk assessment for 
arsenic: a meta-analysis approach. Asia Pac J Public Health. 
2015;27(2):NP20–NP35.
Bellinger DC. The protean toxicities of lead: new chapters in a familiar 
story. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2011;8:2593–2628.
Bellinger DC. Childhood lead exposure and adult outcomes. JAMA. 
2017;317:1219–1220.
Bellinger DC, Burger J, Cade TJ, et al. Health risks from lead-based ammuni-
tion in the environment. Environ Health Perspect. 2013;121:A178–A179.
Berdoukas V, Coates TD, Cabantchik ZI. Iron and oxidative stress in cardio-
myopathy in thalassemia. Free Radic Biol Med. 2015;88:3–9.
Beyersmann D, Hartwig A. Carcinogenic metal compounds: recent insight 
into molecular and cellular mechanisms. Arch Toxicol. 2008;82:493–512.
Bjorklund G, Albert Christophersen O, Chirumbolo S, et al. Recent aspects of 
uranium toxicology in medical geology. Environ Res. 2017;156:526–533.
Blanusa M, Varnai VM, Piasek M, et al. Chelators as antidotes of metal 
toxicity: therapeutic and experimental aspects. Curr Med Chem. 
2005;12:2771–2794.
Blayney MB. The need for empirically derived permeation data for personal 
protective equipment: the death of Dr. Karen E. Wetterhahn. Appl Occup 
Environ Hyg. 2001;16:233–236.
Blunden S, Wallace T. Tin in canned food: a review and understanding of 
occurrence and effect. Food Chem Toxicol. 2003;41:1651–1662.
Bolt HM. Arsenic: an ancient toxicant of continuous public health impact, 
from Iceman Otzi until now. Arch Toxicol. 2012;86:825–830.
Bommarito PA, Martin E, Fry RC. Effects of prenatal exposure to endo-
crine disruptors and toxic metals on the fetal epigenome. Epigenomics. 
2017;9:333–350.
Bondy SC. The neurotoxicity of environmental aluminum is still an issue. 
Neurotoxicology. 2010;31:575–581.
Boshuizen M, van der Ploeg K, von Bonsdorff L, et al. Therapeutic use of 
transferrin to modulate anemia and conditions of iron toxicity. Blood Rev. 
2017;31:400–405.
Bradberry SM, Wilkinson JM, Ferner RE. Systemic toxicity related to metal 
hip prostheses. Clin Toxicol (Phila). 2014;52:837–847.
Brandao K, Deason-Towne F, Perraud AL, et  al. The role of Mg2+ in 
immune cells. Immunol Res. 2013;55:261–269.
Brewer GJ, Askari FK. Wilson’s disease: clinical management and therapy. 
J Hepatol. 2005;42(suppl):S13–S21.
Briasoulis E, Pavlidis N. Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema: an unusual and 
serious complication of anticancer therapy. Oncologist. 2001;6:153–161.
Bridges CC, Zalups RK. Molecular and ionic mimicry and the transport of 
toxic metals. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2005;204:274–308.
Bridges CC, Zalups RK. The aging kidney and the nephrotoxic effects of 
mercury. J Toxicol Environ Health B Crit Rev. 2017a;20:55–80.
Bridges CC, Zalups RK. Mechanisms involved in the transport of mercuric 
ions in target tissues. Arch Toxicol. 2017b;91:63–81.
Bright P, Burge PS, OHickey SP, et al. Occupational asthma due to chrome 
and nickel electroplating. Thorax. 1997;52:28–32.
Brown MJ, Margolis S. Lead in drinking water and human blood lead levels 
in the United States. MMWR Suppl. 2012;61:1–9.
Browne D, Whelton H, O’Mullane D. Fluoride metabolism and fluorosis. J 
Dent. 2005;33:177–186.
Bucher JR, Hailey JR, Roycroft JR, et al. Inhalation toxicity and carcinoge-
nicity studies of cobalt sulfate. Toxicol Sci. 1999;49:56–67.
Budtz-Jorgensen E, Bellinger D, Lanphear B, et al. An international pooled 
analysis for obtaining a benchmark dose for environmental lead exposure 
in children. Risk Anal. 2013;33:450–461.
Burris HH, Baccarelli AA, Wright RO, et al. Epigenetics: linking social and 
environmental exposures to preterm birth. Pediatr Res. 2016;79:136–140.
Cai L, Li XK, Song Y, et al. Essentiality, toxicology and chelation therapy 
of zinc and copper. Curr Med Chem. 2005;12:2753–2763.
Caito S, Aschner M. Neurotoxicity of metals. Handb Clin Neurol. 
2015;131:169–189.
Calderon RL, Hudgens EE, Carty C, et al. Biological and behavioral factors 
modify biomarkers of arsenic exposure in a U.S. population. Environ Res. 
2013;126:134–144.
Camacho LH, Soignet SL, Chanel S, et al. Leukocytosis and the retinoic 
acid syndrome in patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia treated 
with arsenic trioxide. J Clin Oncol. 2000;18:2620–2625.
Cambier S, Benard G, Mesmer-Dudons N, et al. At environmental doses, 
dietary methylmercury inhibits mitochondrial energy metabolism in skel-
etal muscles of the zebra fish (Danio rerio). Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 
2009;41:791–799.
Campbell JR, Rosier RN, Novotny L, et al. The association between envi-
ronmental lead exposure and bone density in children. Environ Health 
Perspect. 2004;112:1200–1203.
Carey AM, Lombi E, Donner E, et al. A review of recent developments in 
the speciation and location of arsenic and selenium in rice grain. Anal 
Bioanal Chem. 2012;402:3275–3286.
Carlier MF, Didry D, Valentin-Ranc C. Interaction between chromium 
GTP and tubulin. Stereochemistry of GTP binding, GTP hydrolysis, and 
microtubule stabilization. J Biol Chem. 1991;266:12361–12368.
Carlin DJ, Naujokas MF, Bradham KD, et al. Arsenic and environmental 
health: state of the science and future research opportunities. Environ 
Health Perspect. 2016;124:890–899.
Carmouche JJ, Puzas JE, Zhang X, et al. Lead exposure inhibits fracture 
healing and is associated with increased chondrogenesis, delay in carti-
lage mineralization, and a decrease in osteoprogenitor frequency. Environ 
Health Perspect. 2005;113:749–755.
CDC. Low Level Lead Exposure Harms Children: A Renewed Call for 
Primary Prevention. Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention; 2012. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/acclpp/
final_document_030712.pdf.
Cervantes C, Campos-Garcia J, Devars S, et  al. Interactions of chro-
mium  with microorganisms and plants. FEMS Microbiol Rev. 
2001;25:335–347.
Chambers A, Krewski D, Birkett N, et  al. An exposure-response curve 
for copper excess and deficiency. J Toxicol Environ Health B Crit Rev. 
2010;13:546–578.
Chan HM, Zhu LF, Zhong R, et al. Nephrotoxicity in rats following liver 
transplantation from cadmium-exposed rats. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
1993;123:89–96.
Chen B, Arnold LL, Cohen SM, et al. Mouse arsenic (+3 oxidation state) 
methyltransferase genotype affects metabolism and tissue dosimetry of 
arsenicals after arsenite administration in drinking water. Toxicol Sci. 
2011a;124:320–326.
Chen C, Xun P, Nishijo M, et al. Cadmium exposure and risk of prostate 
cancer: a meta-analysis of cohort and case-control studies among the 
general and occupational populations. Sci Rep. 2016a;6:25814.
Chen CY, Driscoll CT, Lambert KF, et al. Connecting mercury science to 
policy: from sources to seafood. Rev Environ Health. 2016b;31:17–20.
Chen F, Shi X. Intracellular signal transduction of cells in response to carci-
nogenic metals. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2002;42:105–121.
Chen J, Liu G, Kang Y, et  al. Coal utilization in China: environmental 
impacts and human health. Environ Geochem Health. 2014;36:735–753.
Chen JK, Lampel HP. Gold contact allergy: clues and controversies. 
Dermatitis. 2015;26:69–77.
Chen L, Jin T, Huang B, et  al. Critical exposure level of cadmium for 
elevated urinary metallothionein—an occupational population study in 
China. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2006;215:93–99.
Chen SJ, Zhou GB, Zhang XW, et al. From an old remedy to a magic bullet: 
molecular mechanisms underlying the therapeutic effects of arsenic in 
fighting leukemia. Blood. 2011b;117:6425–6437.
Chen Y, Graziano JH, Parvez F, et al. Arsenic exposure from drinking water 
and mortality from cardiovascular disease in Bangladesh: prospective 
cohort study. BMJ. 2011c;342:d2431.
Chen Y, Parvez F, Gamble M, et al. Arsenic exposure at low-to-moderate 
levels and skin lesions, arsenic metabolism, neurological functions, and 
biomarkers for respiratory and cardiovascular diseases: review of recent 
findings from the Health Effects of Arsenic Longitudinal Study (HEALS) 
in Bangladesh. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2009;239(2):184–192.
Chen Y, Wu F, Parvez F, et al. Arsenic exposure from drinking water and 
QT-interval prolongation: results from the health effects of arsenic lon-
gitudinal study. Environ Health Perspect. 2013;121:427–432, 432e1–7.
Chervona Y, Costa M. The control of histone methylation and gene expres-
sion by oxidative stress, hypoxia, and metals. Free Radic Biol Med. 
2012;53:1041–1047.
Chitambar CR. Medical applications and toxicities of gallium compounds. 
Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2010;7:2337–2361.

Toxic Effects of Metals
Chapter 23
1153
Chitambar CR. Gallium-containing anticancer compounds. Future Med 
Chem. 2012;4:1257–1272.
Chitambar CR. Gallium and its competing roles with iron in biological sys-
tems. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016;1863:2044–2053.
Chitambar CR. The therapeutic potential of iron-targeting gallium com-
pounds in human disease: from basic research to clinical application. 
Pharmacol Res. 2017;115:56–64.
Cini M, Bradshaw TD, Woodward S. Using titanium complexes to 
defeat cancer: the view from the shoulders of titans. Chem Soc Rev. 
2017;46:1040–1051.
Clark DC, Shulman JD, Maupome G, et al. Changes in dental fluorosis 
following the cessation of water fluoridation. Community Dent Oral 
Epidemiol. 2006;34:197–204.
Clarkson TW. The three modern faces of mercury. Environ Health Perspect. 
2002;110(suppl 1):11–23.
Clarkson TW, Vyas JB, Ballatori N. Mechanisms of mercury disposition in 
the body. Am J Ind Med. 2007;50:757–764.
Clemens F, Verma R, Ramnath J, et al. Amplification of the Ect2 proto-
oncogene and over-expression of Ect2 mRNA and protein in nickel com-
pound and methylcholanthrene-transformed 10T1/2 mouse fibroblast cell 
lines. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2005;206:138–149.
Clyne N, Hofman-Bang C, Haga Y, et al. Chronic cobalt exposure affects 
antioxidants and ATP production in rat myocardium. Scand J Clin Lab 
Invest. 2001;61:609–614.
Cocco P, Dosemeci M, Heineman EF. Brain cancer and occupational expo-
sure to lead. J Occup Environ Med. 1998;40:937–942.
Coffey R, Ganz T. Iron homeostasis: an anthropocentric perspective. J Biol 
Chem. 2017;292:12727–12734.
Cohen SM, Arnold LL, Beck BD, et al. Evaluation of the carcinogenicity of 
inorganic arsenic. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2013;43:711–752.
Cohen SM, Lippard SJ. Cisplatin: from DNA damage to cancer chemo-
therapy. Prog Nucleic Acid Res Mol Biol. 2001;67:93–130.
Cosselman KE, Navas-Acien A, Kaufman JD. Environmental factors in car-
diovascular disease. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2015;12:627–642.
Costa M, Davidson TL, Chen H, et al. Nickel carcinogenesis: epigenetics 
and hypoxia signaling. Mutat Res. 2005;592:79–88.
Counter SA, Buchanan LH. Mercury exposure in children: a review. Toxicol 
Appl Pharmacol. 2004;198:209–230.
Cousins RJ. Gastrointestinal factors influencing zinc absorption and homeo-
stasis. Int J Vitam Nutr Res. 2010;80:243–248.
Cousins RJ, Liuzzi JP, Lichten LA. Mammalian zinc transport, trafficking, 
and signals. J Biol Chem. 2006;281:24085–24089.
Cristaudo A, Sera F, Severino V, et al. Occupational hypersensitivity to metal salts, 
including platinum, in the secondary industry. Allergy. 2005;60:159–164.
Cubeddu LX. Drug-induced inhibition and trafficking disruption of ion 
channels: pathogenesis of QT abnormalities and drug-induced fatal 
arrhythmias. Curr Cardiol Rev. 2016;12:141–154.
D’Ippoliti D, Santelli E, De Sario M, et al. Arsenic in drinking water and 
mortality for cancer and chronic diseases in Central Italy, 1990–2010. 
PLoS One. 2015;10:e0138182.
Davidson PW, Myers GJ, Cox C, et al. Methylmercury and neurodevelop-
ment: longitudinal analysis of the Seychelles child development cohort. 
Neurotoxicol Teratol. 2006;28:529–535.
Davis CD, Uthus EO, Finley JW. Dietary selenium and arsenic affect DNA 
methylation in vitro in Caco-2 cells and in vivo in rat liver and colon. J 
Nutr. 2000;130:2903–2909.
De Boeck M, Kirsch-Volders M, Lison D. Cobalt and antimony: genotoxic-
ity and carcinogenicity. Mutat Res. 2003;533:135–152.
De Flora S. Threshold mechanisms and site specificity in chromium(VI) 
carcinogenesis. Carcinogenesis. 2000;21:533–541.
De Francisco N, Ruiz Troya JD, Aguera EI. Lead and lead toxicity in 
domestic and free living birds. Avian Pathol. 2003;32:3–13.
Degrandi TH, de Oliveira IM, d’Almeida GS, et al. Evaluation of the cyto-
toxicity, genotoxicity and mutagenicity of diphenyl ditelluride in several 
biological models. Mutagenesis. 2010;25:257–269.
Denkhaus E, Salnikow K. Nickel essentiality, toxicity, and carcinogenicity. 
Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2002;42:35–56.
DeRouen TA, Martin MD, Leroux BG, et  al. Neurobehavioral effects 
of dental amalgam in children: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 
2006;295:1784–1792.
Desoize B. Metals and metal compounds in cancer treatment. Anticancer 
Res. 2004;24:1529–1544.
Deubner DC, Lowney YW, Paustenbach DJ, et al. Contribution of inciden-
tal exposure pathways to total beryllium exposures. Appl Occup Environ 
Hyg. 2001;16:568–578.
DeVoto E, Yokel RA. The biological speciation and toxicokinetics of alumi-
num. Environ Health Perspect. 1994;102:940–951.
Dietert RR. Developmental immunotoxicology (DIT): windows of vulner-
ability, immune dysfunction and safety assessment. J Immunotoxicol. 
2008;5:401–412.
Dietert RR, Lee JE, Hussain I, et al. Developmental immunotoxicology of 
lead. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2004;198:86–94.
Diez S. Human health effects of methylmercury exposure. Rev Environ 
Contam Toxicol. 2009;198:111–132.
Dilruba S, Kalayda GV. Platinum-based drugs: past, present and future. 
Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2016;77:1103–1124.
Diwan BA, Kasprzak KS, Rice JM. Transplacental carcinogenic effects of 
nickel(II) acetate in the renal cortex, renal pelvis and adenohypophysis in 
F344/NCr rats. Carcinogenesis. 1992;13:1351–1357.
Doherty MJ, Healy M, Richardson SG, et al. Total body iron overload in 
welder’s siderosis. Occup Environ Med. 2004;61:82–85.
Dopp E, Hartmann LM, Florea AM, et  al. Environmental distribution, 
analysis, and toxicity of organometal(loid) compounds. Crit Rev Toxicol. 
2004;34:301–333.
Drace K, Kiefer AM, Veiga MM. Cyanidation of mercury-contaminated 
tailings: potential health effects and environmental justice. Curr Environ 
Health Rep. 2016;3:443–449.
Drake PL, Hazelwood KJ. Exposure-related health effects of silver and sil-
ver compounds: a review. Ann Occup Hyg. 2005;49:575–585.
Drobna Z, Naranmandura H, Kubachka KM, et al. Disruption of the arsenic 
(+3 oxidation state) methyltransferase gene in the mouse alters the phe-
notype for methylation of arsenic and affects distribution and retention 
of orally administered arsenate. Chem Res Toxicol. 2009;22:1713–1720.
Drobna Z, Walton FS, Harmon AW, et  al. Interspecies differences in 
metabolism of arsenic by cultured primary hepatocytes. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 2010;245:47–56.
Drouin E, Russo P, Tuchweber B, et  al. North American Indian cirrho-
sis in children: a review of 30 cases. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 
2000;31:395–404.
Dugbartey GJ, Peppone LJ, de Graaf IA. An integrative view of cisplatin-
induced renal and cardiac toxicities: molecular mechanisms, current 
treatment challenges and potential protective measures. Toxicology. 
2016;371:58–66.
Dumas A, Couvreur P. Palladium: a future key player in the nanomedical 
field? Chem Sci. 6:2015;2153–2157.
Dunnick JK, Elwell MR, Radovsky AE, et al. Comparative carcinogenic 
effects of nickel subsulfide, nickel oxide, or nickel sulfate hexahydrate 
chronic exposures in the lung. Cancer Res. 1995;55:5251–5256.
Eisler R. Health risks of gold miners: a synoptic review. Environ Geochem 
Health. 2003;25:325–345.
Eizaga Rebollar R, Garcia Palacios MV, Morales Guerrero J, et  al. 
Magnesium sulfate in pediatric anesthesia: the Super Adjuvant. Paediatr 
Anaesth. 2017;27:480–489.
Ekino S, Susa M, Ninomiya T, et al. Minamata disease revisited: an update 
on the acute and chronic manifestations of methyl mercury poisoning. J 
Neurol Sci. 2007;262:131–144.
Engstrom A, Skerving S, Lidfeldt J, et al. Cadmium-induced bone effect 
is not mediated via low serum 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D. Environ Res. 
2009;109:188–192.
Engstrom KS, Hossain MB, Lauss M, et al. Efficient arsenic metabolism—
the AS3MT haplotype is associated with DNA methylation and expres-
sion of multiple genes around AS3MT. PLoS One. 2013;8:e53732.
Enterline PE, Day R, Marsh GM. Cancers related to exposure to arsenic at 
a copper smelter. Occup Environ Med. 1995;52:28–32.
Evans M, Elinder CG. Chronic renal failure from lead: myth or evidence-
based fact? Kidney Int. 2011;79:272–279.
Faa G, Gerosa C, Fanni D, et al. Gold - old drug with new potentials. Curr 
Med Chem. 2018;25:75–84.
Fairweather-Tait SJ, Bao Y, Broadley MR, et al. Selenium in human health 
and disease. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2011;14:1337–1383.

1154
Toxic Agents
unit V
Fang L, Xu C, Li J, et al. The importance of environmental factors and 
matrices in the adsorption, desorption, and toxicity of butyltins: a review. 
Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2017;24:9159–9173.
Farina M, Avila DS, da Rocha JB, et al. Metals, oxidative stress and neuro-
degeneration: a focus on iron, manganese and mercury. Neurochem Int. 
2013;62:575–594.
Farzan SF, Li Z, Korrick SA, et al. Infant infections and respiratory symp-
toms in relation to in utero arsenic exposure in a U.S. cohort. Environ 
Health Perspect. 2016;124:840–847.
Faurschou A, Menne T, Johansen JD, et al. Metal allergen of the 21st cen-
tury—a review on exposure, epidemiology and clinical manifestations of 
palladium allergy. Contact Dermatitis. 2011;64:185–195.
Ferrario D, Gribaldo L, Hartung T. Arsenic exposure and immunotoxicity: 
a review including the possible influence of age and sex. Curr Environ 
Health Rep. 2016;3:1–12.
Ferraro L, Tomasini MC, Tanganelli S, et al. Developmental exposure to 
methylmercury elicits early cell death in the cerebral cortex and long-
term memory deficits in the rat. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2009;27:165–174.
Ferreccio C, Yuan Y, Calle J, et al. Arsenic, tobacco smoke, and occupa-
tion: associations of multiple agents with lung and bladder cancer. 
Epidemiology. 2013;24:898–905.
Ficker E, Kuryshev YA, Dennis AT, et al. Mechanisms of arsenic-induced 
prolongation of cardiac repolarization. Mol Pharmacol. 2004;66:33–44.
Finney J, Moon HJ, Ronnebaum T, et al. Human copper-dependent amine 
oxidases. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2014;546:19–32.
Fleming DE, Chettle DR, Webber CE, et al. The O’Flaherty model of lead 
kinetics: an evaluation using data from a lead smelter population. Toxicol 
Appl Pharmacol. 1999;161:100–109.
Fontenot AP, Falta MT, Kappler JW, et al. Beryllium-induced hypersen-
sitivity: genetic susceptibility and neoantigen generation. J Immunol. 
2016;196:22–27.
Forte G, Petrucci F, Bocca B. Metal allergens of growing significance: 
epidemiology, immunotoxicology, strategies for testing and prevention. 
Inflamm Allergy Drug Targets. 2008;7:145–162.
Fortoul TI, Rojas-Lemus M, Rodriguez-Lara V, et al. Overview of envi-
ronmental and occupational vanadium exposure and associated health 
outcomes: an article based on a presentation at the 8th International 
Symposium on Vanadium Chemistry, Biological Chemistry, and 
Toxicology, Washington DC, August 15–18, 2012. J Immunotoxicol. 
2014;11:13–18.
Fowler BA, Conner EA, Yamauchi H. Metabolomic and proteomic bio-
markers for III-V semiconductors: chemical-specific porphyrinurias and 
proteinurias. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2005;206:121–130.
Fox KA, Phillips TM, Yanta JH, et al. Fatal cobalt toxicity after total hip 
arthroplasty revision for fractured ceramic components. Clin Toxicol 
(Phila). 2016;54:874–877.
Franco JL, Posser T, Dunkley PR, et al. Methylmercury neurotoxicity is 
associated with inhibition of the antioxidant enzyme glutathione peroxi-
dase. Free Radic Biol Med. 2009;47:449–457.
Freitas AJ, Rocha JB, Wolosker H, et al. Effects of Hg2+ and CH3Hg+ on 
Ca2+ fluxes in rat brain microsomes. Brain Res. 1996;738:257–264.
Galaris D, Pantopoulos K. Oxidative stress and iron homeostasis: mecha-
nistic and health aspects. Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci. 2008;45:1–23.
Gamble MV, Liu X, Ahsan H, et  al. Folate and arsenic metabolism: a 
double-blind, placebo-controlled folic acid-supplementation trial in 
Bangladesh. Am J Clin Nutr. 2006;84:1093–1101.
Gammella E, Buratti P, Cairo G, Recalcati S. The transferrin receptor: the 
cellular iron gate. Metallomics. 2017;9:1367–1375.
Garciafigueroa DY, Klei LR, Ambrosio F, et al. Arsenic-stimulated lipoly-
sis and adipose remodeling is mediated by G-protein-coupled receptors. 
Toxicol Sci. 2013;134:335–344.
Gerhardsson L. Tellurium. In: Norberg GF, Fowler B. A., Norberg M, eds. 
Handbook on the Toxicology of Metals: Edition 4. London, UK: Elsevier; 
2015:1217–1228.
Germolec DR, Spalding J, Yu HS, et  al. Arsenic enhancement of skin 
neoplasia by chronic stimulation of growth factors. Am J Pathol. 
1998;153:1775–1785.
Gibb HJ, Lees PS, Pinsky PF, et al. Clinical findings of irritation among 
chromium chemical production workers. Am J Ind Med. 2000a;38: 
127–131.
Gibb HJ, Lees PS, Pinsky PF, et al. Lung cancer among workers in chro-
mium chemical production. Am J Ind Med. 2000b;38:115–126.
Gochfeld M. Factors influencing susceptibility to metals. Environ Health 
Perspect. 1997;105(suppl 4):817–822.
Gonzalez-Raymat H, Liu G, Liriano C, et al. Elemental mercury: its unique 
properties affect its behavior and fate in the environment. Environ Pollut. 
2017;229:69–86.
Gonzalez C, Rosas-Hernandez H, Ramirez-Lee MA, et al. Role of silver 
nanoparticles (AgNPs) on the cardiovascular system. Arch Toxicol. 
2016;90:493–511.
Goodman BP, Mistry DH, Pasha SF, et al. Copper deficiency myeloneu-
ropathy due to occult celiac disease. Neurologist. 2009;15:355–356.
Goodman JE, Prueitt RL, Thakali S, et al. The nickel ion bioavailability 
model of the carcinogenic potential of nickel-containing substances in 
the lung. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2011;41:142–174.
Gordon T, Bowser D. Beryllium: genotoxicity and carcinogenicity. Mutat 
Res. 2003;533:99–105.
Goulle JP, Saussereau E, Mahieu L, et al. Application of inductively cou-
pled plasma mass spectrometry multielement analysis in fingernail and 
toenail as a biomarker of metal exposure. J Anal Toxicol. 2009;33:92–98.
Goyer RA. Lead toxicity: current concerns. Environ Health Perspect. 
1993;100:177–187.
Grande F, Tucci P. Titanium dioxide nanoparticles: a risk for human health? 
Mini Rev Med Chem. 2016;16:762–769.
Grashow R, Zhang J, Fang SC, et al. Toenail metal concentration as a bio-
marker of occupational welding fume exposure. J Occup Environ Hyg. 
2014;11:397–405.
Greenberg MI, Vearrier D. Metal fume fever and polymer fume fever. Clin 
Toxicol (Phila). 2015;53:195–203.
Greenough MA, Camakaris J, Bush AI. Metal dyshomeostasis and oxida-
tive stress in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurochem Int. 2013;62:540–555.
Grimsrud TK, Andersen A. Evidence of carcinogenicity in humans of 
water-soluble nickel salts. J Occup Med Toxicol. 2010;5:7.
Grimsrud TK, Andersen A. Unrecognized risks of nickel-related respira-
tory cancer among Canadian electrolysis workers. Scand J Work Environ 
Health. 2012;38:503–515.
Grober U, Schmidt J, Kisters K. Magnesium in prevention and therapy. 
Nutrients. 2015;7:8199–8226.
Gulson BL, Mizon KJ, Korsch MJ, et al. Mobilization of lead from human 
bone tissue during pregnancy and lactation—a summary of long-term 
research. Sci Total Environ. 2003;303:79–104.
Guo L, Harari E, Virmani R, et  al. Linking hemorrhage, angiogenesis, 
macrophages, and iron metabolism in atherosclerotic vascular diseases. 
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2017;37:e33–e39.
Haase H, Engelhardt G, Hebel S, et al. Mercuric ions inhibit mitogen-acti-
vated protein kinase dephosphorylation by inducing reactive oxygen spe-
cies. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2011;250:78–86.
Hadrup N, Lam HR. Oral toxicity of silver ions, silver nanoparticles and 
colloidal silver—a review. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2014;68:1–7.
Hallab NJ, Mikecz K, Vermes C, et al. Orthopaedic implant related metal 
toxicity in terms of human lymphocyte reactivity to metal-protein com-
plexes produced from cobalt-base and titanium-base implant alloy degra-
dation. Mol Cell Biochem. 2001;222:127–136.
Hamza I, Gitlin JD. Copper chaperones for cytochrome c oxidase and 
human disease. J Bioenerg Biomembr. 2002;34:381–388.
Handy RD. Chronic effects of copper exposure versus endocrine toxicity: 
two sides of the same toxicological process? Comp Biochem Physiol A 
Mol Integr Physiol. 2003;135:25–38.
Hanzel CE, Verstraeten SV. Tl(I) and Tl(III) activate both mitochondrial and 
extrinsic pathways of apoptosis in rat pheochromocytoma (PC12) cells. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2009;236:59–70.
Harlan WR. The relationship of blood lead levels to blood pressure in the 
U.S. population. Environ Health Perspect. 1988;78:9–13.
Hart BA, Potts RJ, Watkin RD. Cadmium adaptation in the lung—a double-
edged sword? Toxicology. 2001;160:65–70,
Hartwig A. Metal interaction with redox regulation: an integrating concept 
in metal carcinogenesis? Free Radic Biol Med. 2013;55:63–72.
Hartwig A, Asmuss M, Blessing H, et al. Interference by toxic metal ions 
with zinc-dependent proteins involved in maintaining genomic stability. 
Food Chem Toxicol. 2002;40:1179–1184.

Toxic Effects of Metals
Chapter 23
1155
Haynes EN, Sucharew H, Kuhnell P, et  al. Manganese exposure and 
neurocognitive outcomes in rural school-age children: the communi-
ties actively researching exposure study (Ohio, USA). Environ Health 
Perspect. 2015;123:1066–1071.
Hays AM, Lantz RC, Rodgers LS, et al. Arsenic-induced decreases in the 
vascular matrix. Toxicol Pathol. 2008;36:805–817.
Hedera P, Peltier A, Fink JK, et al. Myelopolyneuropathy and pancytopenia 
due to copper deficiency and high zinc levels of unknown origin II. The 
denture cream is a primary source of excessive zinc. Neurotoxicology. 
2009;30:996–999.
Herroeder S, Schonherr ME, De Hert SG, et al. Magnesium—essentials for 
anesthesiologists. Anesthesiology. 2011;114:971–993.
Hoffman RS. Thallium poisoning during pregnancy: a case report and com-
prehensive literature review. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 2000;38:767–775.
Hoffman RS. Thallium toxicity and the role of Prussian blue in therapy. 
Toxicol Rev. 2003;22:29–40.
Hojyo S, Fukada T. Zinc transporters and signaling in physiology and 
pathogenesis. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2016;611:43–50.
Hopenhayn C, Huang B, Christian J, et al. Profile of urinary arsenic metab-
olites during pregnancy. Environ Health Perspect. 2003;111:1888–1891.
Horev-Azaria L, Baldi G, Beno D, et al. Predictive toxicology of cobalt fer-
rite nanoparticles: comparative in-vitro study of different cellular models 
using methods of knowledge discovery from data. Part Fibre Toxicol. 
2013;10:32.
Hornos Carneiro MF, Barbosa F Jr. Gold nanoparticles: a critical review 
of therapeutic applications and toxicological aspects. J Toxicol Environ 
Health B Crit Rev. 2016;19:129–148.
Hosseini Koupaie E, Eskicioglu C. Health risk assessment of heavy metals 
through the consumption of food crops fertilized by biosolids: a probabi-
listic-based analysis. J Hazard Mater. 2015;300:855–865.
Hostynek JJ. Factors determining percutaneous metal absorption. Food 
Chem Toxicol. 2003;41:327–345.
Howe CG, Gamble MV. Influence of arsenic on global levels of histone 
posttranslational modifications: a review of the literature and challenges 
in the field. Curr Environ Health Rep. 2016;3:225–237.
Huggins FE, Huffman GP, Linak WP, et al. Quantifying hazardous species 
in particulate matter derived from fossil-fuel combustion. Environ Sci.
Technol. 2004;38:1836–1842.
Hughes MF, Beck BD, Chen Y, et al. Arsenic exposure and toxicology: a 
historical perspective. Toxicol Sci. 2011;123:305–332.
Hughes MF, Devesa V, Adair BM, et al. Tissue dosimetry, metabolism and 
excretion of pentavalent and trivalent monomethylated arsenic in mice 
after oral administration. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2005;208:186–197.
Hultman P, Pollard M. Immunotoxicology of Metals: Handbook on the 
Toxicology of Metals. London: Elsevier; 2015.
Hwang GW. Role of intracellular defense factors against methylmercury 
toxicity. Biol Pharm Bull. 2012;35:1881–1884.
IARC. IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcingenic Risks to 
Humans: Cobalt in Hard Metals and Cobalt Sulfate, Gallium Arsenide, 
Indium Phosphide, and Vanadium Pentoxide. Lyon, France: World Health 
Orginization; 2006.
IARC. IARC Monograph on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to 
Humans: Carbon Black, Titanium Dioxide, and Talc. Lyon, France: 
International Agency for Research on Cancer; 2010. Available at: http://
monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/Monographs/vol93/mono93.pdf.
IARC. IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to 
Humans. Arsenic, Metals, Fibres, Dusts. Lyon, France: International 
Agency for Research on Cancer; 2012. Available at: http://monographs.
iarc.fr/ENG/Monographs/vol100C/mono100C.pdf.
IARC. IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to 
Humans. Arsenic, Metals, Fibres, Dusts: Nickel and Nickel Compounds. 
Lyon, France: International Agency for Research on Cancer; 2017. 
Available 
at: 
http://monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/Monographs/vol100C/
mono100C-10.pdf.
IOM. Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin C, Vitamin E, Selenium, and 
Carotenoids. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2000a. 
Available at: http://doi.org/10.17226/9810.
IOM. Institute of Medicine: Dietary Reference Intakes for Thiamin, 
Riboflavin, Niacin, Vitamin B 6, Folate, Vitamin B 12, Pantothenic Acid, 
Biotin and Choline. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2000b.
IOM. Institute of Medicine, Food and Nutrition Board: Dietary Reference 
Intakes for Vitamin A, Vitamin K, Arsenic, Boron, Chromium, Copper, 
Iodine, Iron, Manganese, Molybdenum, Nickel, Silicon, Vanadium, and 
Zinc. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2001. Available at: 
https://doi.org/10.17226/10026.
IOM. Institute of Medicine and National Research Council Dietary 
Supplements: A Framework for Evaluating Safety. Washington, DC: National 
Academies Press.; 2005. Available at: https://doi.org/10.17226/10882.
Irgolic KJ, Woolson EA, Stockton RA, et al. Characterization of arsenic 
compounds formed by Daphnia magna and Tetraselmis chuii from inor-
ganic arsenate. Environ Health Perspect. 1977;19:61–66.
Isani G, Carpene E. Metallothioneins, unconventional proteins from 
unconventional animals: a long journey from nematodes to mammals. 
Biomolecules. 2014;4:435–457.
Ishihara N, Matsushiro T. Biliary and urinary excretion of metals in humans. 
Arch Environ Health. 1986;41:324–330.
Ito K, Johnson S, Kheirbek I, et  al. Intraurban variation of fine par-
ticle elemental concentrations in New York City. Environ Sci Technol. 
2016;50:7517–7526.
Jacob P, Fesenko S, Bogdevitch I, et  al. Rural areas affected by the 
Chernobyl accident: radiation exposure and remediation strategies. Sci 
Total Environ. 2009;408:14–25.
Jaishankar M, Tseten T, Anbalagan N, et al. Toxicity, mechanism and health 
effects of some heavy metals. Interdiscip Toxicol. 2014;7:60–72.
James KA, Byers T, Hokanson JE, et al. Association between lifetime expo-
sure to inorganic arsenic in drinking water and coronary heart disease in 
Colorado residents. Environ Health Perspect. 2015;123:128–134.
Jarup L, Akesson A. Current status of cadmium as an environmental health 
problem. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2009;238:201–208.
Jaw S, Jeffery EH. Role of metallothionein in biliary metal excretion. J 
Toxicol Environ Health. 1989;28:39–51.
Jha SK, Mishra VK, Sharma DK, et al. Fluoride in the environment and its 
metabolism in humans. Rev Environ Contam Toxicol. 2011;211:121–142.
Jiang GC, Aschner M. Neurotoxicity of depleted uranium: reasons for 
increased concern. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2006;110:1–17.
Jiang Y, Zheng W. Cardiovascular toxicities upon manganese exposure. 
Cardiovasc Toxicol. 2005;5:345–354.
Jin YH, Dunlap PE, McBride SJ, et  al. Global transcriptome and 
deletome profiles of yeast exposed to transition metals. PLoS Genet. 
2008;4:e1000053.
Johansson C, Castoldi AF, Onishchenko N, et  al. Neurobehavioural and 
molecular changes induced by methylmercury exposure during develop-
ment. Neurotox Res. 2007;11:241–260.
Julin B, Bergkvist C, Wolk A, et al. Cadmium in diet and risk of cardiovas-
cular disease in women. Epidemiology. 2013;24:880–885.
Jurowska A, Jurowski K, Szklarzewicz J, et al. Molybdenum metallopha-
rmaceuticals candidate compounds: the “Renaissance” of molybdenum 
metallodrugs? Curr Med Chem. 2016;23:3322–3342.
Kakinuma Y, Miyauchi T, Yuki K, et  al. Novel molecular mechanism 
of increased myocardial endothelin-1 expression in the failing heart 
involving the transcriptional factor hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha 
induced for impaired myocardial energy metabolism. Circulation. 
2001;103:2387–2394.
Kaler SG. Inborn errors of copper metabolism. Handb Clin Neurol. 
2013;113:1745–1754.
Kambe T, Takeda TA, Nishito Y. Activation of zinc-requiring ectoenzymes 
by ZnT transporters during the secretory process: biochemical and 
molecular aspects. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2016;611:37–42.
Kandimalla R, Vallamkondu J, Corgiat EB, et al. Understanding aspects of 
aluminum exposure in Alzheimer’s disease development. Brain Pathol. 
2016;26:139–154.
Kasprzak KS. Oxidative DNA and protein damage in metal-induced toxic-
ity and carcinogenesis. Free Radic Biol Med. 2002;32:958–967.
Kasprzak KS, Sunderman FW Jr, Salnikow K. Nickel carcinogenesis. Mutat 
Res. 2003;533:67–97.
Kawata K, Yokoo H, Shimazaki R, et  al. Classification of heavy-metal 
toxicity by human DNA microarray analysis. Environ Sci Technol. 
2007;41:3769–3774.
Kazantzis G. Cadmium, osteoporosis and calcium metabolism. Biometals. 
2004;17:493–498.

1156
Toxic Agents
unit V
Kenyon EM, Del Razo LM, Hughes MF. Tissue distribution and uri-
nary excretion of inorganic arsenic and its methylated metabolites 
in mice following acute oral administration of arsenate. Toxicol Sci. 
2005;85:468–475.
Keogan DM, Griffith DM. Current and potential applications of bismuth-
based drugs. Molecules. 2014;19:15258–15297.
Kim SH, Johnson VJ, Sharma RP. Mercury inhibits nitric oxide produc-
tion but activates proinflammatory cytokine expression in murine macro-
phage: differential modulation of NF-kappaB and p38 MAPK signaling 
pathways. Nitric Oxide. 2002;7:67–74.
Kim SH, Sharma RP. Mercury alters endotoxin-induced inflammatory 
cytokine expression in liver: differential roles of p38 and extracellular 
signal-regulated mitogen-activated protein kinases. Immunopharmacol 
Immunotoxicol. 2005;27:123–135.
Kim Y, Lobdell DT, Wright CW, et al. Blood metal concentrations of man-
ganese, lead, and cadmium in relation to serum ferritin levels in Ohio 
residents. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2015;165:1–9.
Kippler M, Engstrom K, Mlakar SJ, et  al. Sex-specific effects of early 
life cadmium exposure on DNA methylation and implications for birth 
weight. Epigenetics. 2013;8:494–503.
Kitchin KT, Wallace K. The role of protein binding of trivalent arsenicals in 
arsenic carcinogenesis and toxicity. J Inorg Biochem. 2008;102:532–539.
Klaassen CD, Liu J, Choudhuri S. Metallothionein: an intracellular pro-
tein to protect against cadmium toxicity. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 
1999;39:267–294.
Klei LR, Barchowsky A. Positive signaling interactions between arsenic 
and ethanol for angiogenic gene induction in human microvascular endo-
thelial cells. Toxicol Sci. 2008;102:319–327.
Klei LR, Garciafigueroa DY, Barchowsky A. Arsenic activates endothelin-1 
Gi protein–coupled receptor signaling to inhibit stem cell differentiation 
in adipogenesis. Toxicol Sci. 2013;131:512–520.
Klimisch HJ. Lung deposition, lung clearance and renal accumulation of 
inhaled cadmium chloride and cadmium sulphide in rats. Toxicology. 
1993;84:103–124.
Kodama H, Fujisawa C, Bhadhprasit W. Pathology, clinical features and 
treatments of congenital copper metabolic disorders—focus on neuro-
logic aspects. Brain Dev. 2011;33:243–251.
Kondo Y, Himeno S, Satoh M, et al. Citrate enhances the protective effect 
of orally administered bismuth subnitrate against the nephrotoxic-
ity of cis-diamminedichloroplatinum. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 
2004;53:33–38.
Kono S. Aceruloplasminemia: an update. Int Rev Neurobiol. 2013;110:125–151.
Kontoghiorghe CN, Kontoghiorghes GJ. Efficacy and safety of iron-che-
lation therapy with deferoxamine, deferiprone, and deferasirox for the 
treatment of iron-loaded patients with non-transfusion-dependent thalas-
semia syndromes. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2016;10:465–481.
Kopp SJ, Glonek T, Perry HM Jr, et al. Cardiovascular actions of cadmium 
at environmental exposure levels. Science. 1982;217:837–839.
Kosnett MJ. Heavy metal intoxication & chelators. In: Katzung BG, Trevor 
AJ, eds. Basic & Clinical Pharmacology. 13th ed. New York: McGraw-
Hill Education; 2015.
Kozul CD, Ely KH, Enelow RI, et  al. Low-dose arsenic compromises 
the immune response to influenza A infection in vivo. Environ Health 
Perspect. 2009a;117:1441–1447.
Kozul CD, Hampton TH, Davey JC, et al. Chronic exposure to arsenic in the 
drinking water alters the expression of immune response genes in mouse 
lung. Environ Health Perspect. 2009b;117:1108–1115.
Krapivinsky G, Krapivinsky L, Manasian Y, et  al. The TRPM7 chan-
zyme is cleaved to release a chromatin-modifying kinase. Cell. 
2014;157:1061–1072.
Kuo CC, Howard BV, Umans JG, et al. Arsenic exposure, arsenic metab-
olism, and incident diabetes in the strong heart study. Diabetes Care. 
2015;38:620–627.
Lagerkvist BE, Linderholm H, Nordberg GF. Arsenic and Raynaud’s phe-
nomenon. Vasospastic tendency and excretion of arsenic in smelter work-
ers before and after the summer vacation. Int Arch Occup Environ Health. 
1988;60:361–364.
Laity JH, Andrews GK. Understanding the mechanisms of zinc-sensing by 
metal-response element binding transcription factor-1 (MTF-1). Arch 
Biochem Biophys. 2007;463:201–210.
Lamas GA, Navas-Acien A, Mark DB, et al. Heavy metals, cardiovascu-
lar disease, and the unexpected benefits of chelation therapy. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2016;67:2411–2418.
Lantz RC, Chau B, Sarihan P, et al. In utero and postnatal exposure to arse-
nic alters pulmonary structure and function. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
2009;235:105–113.
Laohaudomchok W, Lin X, Herrick RF, et  al. Toenail, blood, and 
urine as biomarkers of manganese exposure. J Occup Environ Med. 
2011;53:506–510.
Laraque D, Trasande L. Lead poisoning: successes and 21st century chal-
lenges. Pediatr Rev. 2005;26:435–443.
Larsen A, Stoltenberg M, Sondergaard C, et al. In vivo distribution of bis-
muth in the mouse brain: influence of long-term survival and intracra-
nial placement on the uptake and transport of bismuth in neuronal tissue. 
Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2005;97:188–196.
Larsson SC, Wolk A. Urinary cadmium and mortality from all causes, cancer 
and cardiovascular disease in the general population: systematic review 
and meta-analysis of cohort studies. Int J Epidemiol. 2015;45:782–791.
Lau A, Whitman SA, Jaramillo MC, et  al. Arsenic-mediated activa-
tion of the Nrf2-Keap1 antioxidant pathway. J Biochem Mol Toxicol. 
2013;27:99–105.
Laulicht F, Brocato J, Ke Q, Costa M. Genotoxicity of metal compounds. In: 
Norberg GF, Fowler BA, Norberg M, eds. Handbook on the Toxicology of 
Metals. 4th ed. Oxford, UK: Elsevier; 2015.
Leggett RW, Williams LR, Melo DR, et  al. A physiologically based 
biokinetic model for cesium in the human body. Sci Total Environ. 
2003;317:235–255.
Leifer CA, Dietert RR. Early life environment and developmental immuno-
toxicity in inflammatory dysfunction and disease. Toxicol Environ Chem. 
2011;93:1463–1485.
Leikauf GD. Hazardous air pollutants and asthma. Environ Health Perspect. 
2002;110(suppl 4):505–526.
Lemaire M, Lemarie CA, Flores Molina M, et  al. Genetic deletion of 
LXRalpha prevents arsenic-enhanced atherosclerosis, but not arsenic-
altered plaque composition. Toxicol Sci. 2014;142:477–488.
Lemaire M, Lemarie CA, Molina MF, et al. Exposure to moderate arse-
nic concentrations increases atherosclerosis in ApoE(–/–) mouse model. 
Toxicol Sci. 2011;122:211–221.
Lemaire M, Negro Silva LF, Lemarie CA, et al. Arsenic exposure increases 
monocyte adhesion to the vascular endothelium, a pro-atherogenic mech-
anism. PLoS One. 2015;10:e0136592.
Leslie EM, Liu J, Klaassen CD, et  al. Acquired cadmium resistance in 
metallothionein-I/II(–/–) knockout cells: role of the T-type calcium chan-
nel Cacnalpha1G in cadmium uptake. Mol Pharmacol. 2006;69:629–639.
Leussink BT, Nagelkerke JF, van de Water B, et al. Pathways of proximal 
tubular cell death in bismuth nephrotoxicity. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
2002;180:100–109.
Levin R, Brown MJ, Kashtock ME, et  al. Lead exposures in U.S. 
Children, 2008: implications for prevention. Environ Health Perspect. 
2008;116:1285–1293.
Levy M, Leclerc BS. Fluoride in drinking water and osteosarcoma inci-
dence rates in the continental United States among children and adoles-
cents. Cancer Epidemiol. 2012;36:e83–e88.
Leyssens L, Vinck B, Van Der Straeten C, et al. Cobalt toxicity in humans: 
a review of the potential sources and systemic health effects. Toxicology. 
2017;387:43–56.
Li J, Packianathan C, Rossman TG, et al. Nonsynonymous polymorphisms 
in the human AS3MT arsenic methylation gene: implications for arsenic 
toxicity. Chem Res Toxicol. 2017;30:1481–1491.
Liang X, Dempski RE, Burdette SC. Zn(2+) at a cellular crossroads. Curr 
Opin Chem Biol. 2016;31:120–125.
Liu J, Chen H, Miller DS, et al. Overexpression of glutathione S-transferase 
II and multidrug resistance transport proteins is associated with acquired 
tolerance to inorganic arsenic. Mol Pharmacol. 2001;60:302–309.
Liu J, Habeebu SS, Liu Y, et al. Acute CdMT injection is not a good model to 
study chronic Cd nephropathy: comparison of chronic CdCl2 and CdMT 
exposure with acute CdMT injection in rats. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
1998;153:48–58.
Liu J, Lu Y, Wu Q, et al. Mineral arsenicals in traditional medicines: orpi-
ment, realgar, and arsenolite. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2008;326:363–368.

Toxic Effects of Metals
Chapter 23
1157
Liu J, Waalkes MP. Liver is a target of arsenic carcinogenesis. Toxicol Sci. 
2008;105:24–32.
Liu J, Xie Y, Ducharme DM, et al. Global gene expression associated with 
hepatocarcinogenesis in adult male mice induced by in utero arsenic 
exposure. Environ Health Perspect. 2006;114:404–411.
Liu J, Zheng B, Aposhian HV, et al. Chronic arsenic poisoning from burn-
ing high-arsenic-containing coal in Guizhou, China. Environ Health 
Perspect. 2002;110:119–122.
Liu Z. Roles of vertebrate aquaglyceroporins in arsenic transport and 
detoxification. In: Jahn TP, Bienert GP, eds. MIPs and Their Role in the 
Exchange of Metalloids. New York: Springer; 2010:71–81.
Lomer MC, Hutchinson C, Volkert S, et al. Dietary sources of inorganic 
microparticles and their intake in healthy subjects and patients with 
Crohn’s disease. Br J Nutr. 2004;92:947–955.
Loza-Rosas SA, Saxena M, Delgado Y, et al. A ubiquitous metal, difficult 
to track: towards an understanding of the regulation of titanium(iv) in 
humans. Metallomics. 2017;9:346–356.
Luebke RW, Chen DH, Dietert R, et al. The comparative immunotoxicity 
of five selected compounds following developmental or adult exposure. J 
Toxicol Environ Health B Crit Rev. 2006;9:1–26.
Macfie A, Hagan E, Zhitkovich A. Mechanism of DNA-protein cross-link-
ing by chromium. Chem Res Toxicol. 2010;23:341–347.
Madl AK, Liong M, Kovochich M, et al. Toxicology of wear particles of 
cobalt-chromium alloy metal-on-metal hip implants Part I: physico-
chemical properties in patient and simulator studies. Nanomedicine. 
2015;11:1201–1215.
Magos L, Clarkson TW. Overview of the clinical toxicity of mercury. Ann 
Clin Biochem. 2006;43:257–268.
Makrilia N, Syrigou E, Kaklamanos I, et  al. Hypersensitivity reactions 
associated with platinum antineoplastic agents: a systematic review. Met 
Based Drugs. 2010;2010:pii: 207084.
Malluche HH, Mawad H, Monier-Faugere MC. Effects of treatment of renal 
osteodystrophy on bone histology. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2008;3(suppl 
3):S157–S163.
Mantha M, Yeary E, Trent J, et  al. Estimating inorganic arsenic expo-
sure from U.S. rice and total water intakes. Environ Health Perspect. 
2017;125:057005.
Manton WI, Angle CR, Krogstrand KL. Origin of lead in the United States 
diet. Environ Sci Technol. 2005;39:8995–9000.
Marchetti C. Molecular targets of lead in brain neurotoxicity. Neurotox Res. 
2003;5:221–236.
Marchetti C. Interaction of metal ions with neurotransmitter receptors and 
potential role in neurodiseases. Biometals. 2014;27:1097–1113.
Maret W. Zinc in pancreatic islet biology, insulin sensitivity, and diabetes. 
Prev Nutr Food Sci. 2017;22:1–8.
Maret W, Sandstead HH. Zinc requirements and the risks and benefits of 
zinc supplementation. J Trace Elem Med Biol. 2006;20:3–18.
Markowitz GS, Radhakrishnan J, Kambham N, et al. Lithium nephrotoxic-
ity: a progressive combined glomerular and tubulointerstitial nephropa-
thy. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2000;11:1439–1448.
Martinez-Finley EJ, Aschner M. Recent advances in mercury research. 
Curr Environ Health Rep. 2014;1:163–171.
Martinez-Zamudio R, Ha HC. Environmental epigenetics in metal expo-
sure. Epigenetics. 2011;6:820–827.
Matson Dzebo M, Arioz C, Wittung-Stafshede P. Extended functional rep-
ertoire for human copper chaperones. Biomol Concepts. 2016;7:29–39.
Mayser P, Schulz S. Precipitation of free fatty acids generated by Malassezia: 
a possible explanation for the positive effects of lithium succinate in seb-
orrhoeic dermatitis. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2016;30:1384–1389.
Mazumder DG, Dasgupta UB. Chronic arsenic toxicity: studies in West 
Bengal, India. Kaohsiung J Med Sci. 2011;27:360–370.
Mazumder DN. Effect of chronic intake of arsenic-contaminated water on 
liver. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2005;206:169–175.
Mazur A, Maier JA, Rock E, et  al. Magnesium and the inflammatory 
response: potential physiopathological implications. Arch Biochem 
Biophys. 2007;458:48–56.
McCormick NH, Hennigar SR, Kiselyov K, et al. The biology of zinc trans-
port in mammary epithelial cells: implications for mammary gland devel-
opment, lactation, and involution. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia. 
2014;19:59–71.
McKee AS, Fontenot AP. Interplay of innate and adaptive immunity in 
metal-induced hypersensitivity. Curr Opin Immunol. 2016;42:25–30.
McSweeney PC. The safety of nanoparticles in sunscreens: an update for 
general practice. Aust Fam Physician. 2016;45:397–399.
Meenakshi, Maheshwari RC. Fluoride in drinking water and its removal. J 
Hazard Mater. 2006;137:456–463.
Meharg AA, Williams PN, Adomako E, et  al. Geographical variation in 
total and inorganic arsenic content of polished (white) rice. Environ Sci 
Technol. 2009;43:1612–1617.
Melnikov P, Zanoni LZ. Clinical effects of cesium intake. Biol Trace Elem 
Res. 2010;135:1–9.
Mercer JF. The molecular basis of copper-transport diseases. Trends Mol 
Med. 2001;7:64–69.
Merget R, Pham N, Schmidtke M, et al. Medical surveillance and long-term 
prognosis of occupational allergy due to platinum salts. Int Arch Occup 
Environ Health. 2017;90:73–81.
Mickle MH. Structure, use, and validation of the IEUBK model. Environ 
Health Perspect. 1998;106(suppl 6):1531–1534.
Montenegro MF, Barbosa F Jr, Sandrim VC, et  al. A polymorphism in 
the delta-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase gene modifies plasma/whole 
blood lead ratio. Arch Toxicol. 2006;80:394–398.
Moon K, Guallar E, Navas-Acien A. Arsenic exposure and cardiovas-
cular disease: an updated systematic review. Curr Atheroscler Rep. 
2012;14:542–555.
Moon KA, Guallar E, Umans JG, et al. Association between exposure to 
low to moderate arsenic levels and incident cardiovascular disease. A 
prospective cohort study. Ann Intern Med. 2013;159:649–659.
Morgenstern A, Bruchertseifer F, Apostolidis C. Targeted alpha therapy 
with 213Bi. Curr Radiopharm. 2011;4:295–305.
Mosior M, Krawczak-Sadowska T, Wrobel A, et al. The effect of arsenate 
and vanadate ions on the critical cell volume of bovine erythrocytes. Gen 
Physiol Biophys. 1992;11:337–343.
Mukherjee SC, Saha KC, Pati S, et  al. Murshidabad—one of the nine 
groundwater arsenic-affected districts of West Bengal, India. Part II: der-
matological, neurological, and obstetric findings. Clin Toxicol.(Phila). 
2005;43:835–848.
Munger MA, Radwanski P, Hadlock GC, et al. In vivo human time-exposure 
study of orally dosed commercial silver nanoparticles. Nanomedicine. 
2014;10:1–9.
Navas-Acien A, Guallar E, Silbergeld EK, et al. Lead exposure and car-
diovascular disease—a systematic review. Environ Health Perspect. 
2007;115:472–482.
Navas-Acien A, Selvin E, Sharrett AR, et  al. Lead, cadmium, smok-
ing, and increased risk of peripheral arterial disease. Circulation. 
2004;109:3196–3201.
Navas-Acien A, Silbergeld EK, Streeter RA, et al. Arsenic exposure and 
type 2 diabetes: a systematic review of the experimental and epidemio-
logical evidence. Environ Health Perspect. 2006;114:641–648.
Nayak NC, Chitale AR. Indian childhood cirrhosis (ICC) & ICC-like dis-
eases: the changing scenario of facts versus notions. Indian J Med Res. 
2013;137:1029–1042.
Ndagi U, Mhlongo N, Soliman ME. Metal complexes in cancer ther-
apy—an update from drug design perspective. Drug Des Devel Ther. 
2017;11:599–616.
Needleman H. Lead poisoning. Annu Rev Med. 2004;55:209–222.
Nemec AA, Barchowsky A. Signal transducer and activator of transcrip-
tion 1 (STAT1) is essential for chromium silencing of gene induction in 
human airway epithelial cells. Toxicol Sci. 2009;110:212–223.
Nemec AA, Zubritsky LM, Barchowsky A. Chromium(VI) stimulates Fyn 
to initiate innate immune gene induction in human airway epithelial cells. 
Chem Res Toxicol. 2010;23:396–404.
Nesci S, Trombetti F, Pirini M, et al. Mercury and protein thiols: stimulation 
of mitochondrial F1FO-ATPase and inhibition of respiration. Chem Biol 
Interact. 2016;260:42–49.
Newman LS, Mroz MM, Balkissoon R, et al. Beryllium sensitization pro-
gresses to chronic beryllium disease: a longitudinal study of disease risk. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2005;171:54–60.
Ng JC, Wang JP, Zheng B, et al. Urinary porphyrins as biomarkers for arse-
nic exposure among susceptible populations in Guizhou province, China. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2005;206:176–184.

1158
Toxic Agents
unit V
Nierenberg DW, Nordgren RE, Chang MB, et al. Delayed cerebellar disease 
and death after accidental exposure to dimethylmercury. N Engl J Med. 
1998;338:1672–1676.
Nigra AE, Ruiz-Hernandez A, Redon J, et al. Environmental metals and 
cardiovascular disease in adults: a systematic review beyond lead and 
cadmium. Curr Environ Health Rep. 2016;3:416–433.
Niu HX, Li SH, Li HY, et al. Clinicopathological features, diagnosis, and 
treatment of IgA nephropathy with minimal change disease related to 
exposure to mercury-containing cosmetics: a case report. Clin Nephrol. 
2017;87:196–201.
Nordberg GF. Cadmium and health in the 21st century—historical remarks 
and trends for the future. Biometals. 2004;17:485–489.
Nordberg GF. Historical perspectives on cadmium toxicology. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 2009;238:192–200.
NRC. Toxicological Effects of Methylmercury. Washington, DC: National 
Academies Press; 2000. Available at: https://doi.org/10.17226/9899.
NRC. Acute Exposure Guideline Levels for Selected Airborne Chemicals: 
Volume 6. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.; 2008.
NRC. Critical Aspects of EPA’s IRIS Assessment of Inorganic Arsenic: 
Interim Report. Washington, DC: Press TNA; 2014.
NTP. NTP Monograph on Health Effects of Low-level Lead. Research 
Triangle Park, NC: National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences; 
2012. Available at: https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/pubhealth/hat/noms/lead/
index.html.
NTP. Draft Report on Carcinogens Concept: Antimony Trioxide. Research 
Triangle Park, NC: National Toxicology Program, National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences; 2016a. Available at: https://ntp.niehs.
nih.gov/ntp/about_ntp/bsc/2016/december/meetingmaterials/draftanti-
monytrioxide_508.pdf.
NTP. Natinal Toxicology Program Report on Carcinogens, Fourteenth 
Edition. Research Triangle Park, NC: U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services; 2016b. Available at: http://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/go/roc14.
Nuttall JR, Oteiza PI. Zinc and the aging brain. Genes Nutr. 2014;9:379.
O’Brien TJ, Ceryak S, Patierno SR. Complexities of chromium carcinogen-
esis: role of cellular response, repair and recovery mechanisms. Mutat 
Res. 2003;533:3–36.
O’Hara KA, Klei LR, Barchowsky A. Selective activation of Src fam-
ily kinases and JNK by low levels of chromium(VI). Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 2003;190:214–223.
O’Hara KA, Nemec AA, Alam J, et al. Chromium (VI) inhibits heme oxy-
genase-1 expression in vivo and in arsenic-exposed human airway epithe-
lial cells. J Cell Physiol. 2006;209:113–121.
Ogawa Y, Kawamura T, Shimada S. Zinc and skin biology. Arch Biochem 
Biophys. 2016;611:113–119.
Okoro HK, Fatoki OS, Adekola FA, et al. Human exposure, biomarkers, 
and fate of organotins in the environment. Rev Environ Contam Toxicol. 
2011;213:27–54.
Oller AR, Costa M, Oberdorster G. Carcinogenicity assessment of selected 
nickel compounds. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1997;143:152–166.
Oruch R, Elderbi MA, Khattab HA, et al. Lithium: a review of pharmacol-
ogy, clinical uses, and toxicity. Eur J Pharmacol. 2014;740:464–473.
Packer M. Cobalt cardiomyopathy: a critical reappraisal in light of a recent 
resurgence. Circ Heart Fail. 2016;9(12):pii: e003604.
Pan Z, Choi S, Ouadid-Ahidouch H, et al. Zinc transporters and dysregu-
lated channels in cancers. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2017;22:623–643.
Papanikolaou G, Pantopoulos K. Iron metabolism and toxicity. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 2005;202:199–211.
Park RM, Bena JF, Stayner LT, et al. Hexavalent chromium and lung can-
cer in the chromate industry: a quantitative risk assessment. Risk Anal. 
2004;24:1099–1108.
Parvez F, Chen Y, Brandt-Rauf PW, et al. A prospective study of respiratory 
symptoms associated with chronic arsenic exposure in Bangladesh: find-
ings from the Health Effects of Arsenic Longitudinal Study (HEALS). 
Thorax. 2010;65:528–533.
Parvez F, Chen Y, Yunus M, et al. Arsenic exposure and impaired lung func-
tion. Findings from a large population-based prospective cohort study. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2013;188:813–819.
Parvez F, Wasserman GA, Factor-Litvak P, et  al. Arsenic exposure and 
motor function among children in Bangladesh. Environ Health Perspect. 
2011;119:1665–1670.
Patel LM, Lambert PJ, Gagna CE, et al. Cutaneous signs of systemic dis-
ease. Clin Dermatol. 2011;29:511–522.
Patel PP, Patel PA, Zulf MM, et al. Association of dental and skeletal fluo-
rosis with calcium intake and serum vitamin D concentration in adoles-
cents from a region endemic for fluorosis. Indian J Endocrinol Metab. 
2017;21:190–195.
Patra S, Vij M, Kancherala R, et  al. Is Indian childhood cirrhosis an 
extinct disease now?—an observational study. Indian J Pediatr. 
2013;80:651–654.
Patrick L. Lead toxicity, a review of the literature. Part 1: Exposure, evalu-
ation, and treatment. Altern Med Rev. 2006;11:2–22.
Peres TV, Schettinger MR, Chen P, et al. Manganese-induced neurotoxicity: 
a review of its behavioral consequences and neuroprotective strategies. 
BMC Pharmacol Toxicol. 2016;17:57.
Perez-Ramirez C, Canadas-Garre M, Molina MA, et  al. Contribution of 
genetic factors to platinum-based chemotherapy sensitivity and progno-
sis of non-small cell lung cancer. Mutat Res. 2017;771:32–58.
Perez AL, Tang WH. Contribution of environmental toxins in the patho-
genesis of idiopathic cardiomyopathies. Curr Treat Options Cardiovasc 
Med. 2015;17:381.
Peter AL, Viraraghavan T. Thallium: a review of public health and environ-
mental concerns. Environ Int. 2005;31:493–501.
Petrick JS, Blachere FM, Selmin O, et al. Inorganic arsenic as a develop-
mental toxicant: in utero exposure and alterations in the developing rat 
lungs. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2009;53:583–591.
Pi J, He Y, Bortner C, et al. Low level, long-term inorganic arsenite expo-
sure causes generalized resistance to apoptosis in cultured human 
keratinocytes: potential role in skin co-carcinogenesis. Int J Cancer. 
2005;116:20–26.
Pollack AZ, Ranasinghe S, Sjaarda LA, et al. Cadmium and reproductive 
health in women: a systematic review of the epidemiologic evidence. 
Curr Environ Health Rep. 2014;1:172–184.
Prasad AS. Zinc deficiency: its characterization and treatment. Met Ions 
Biol Syst. 2004;41:103–137.
Prasad AV, Mohan N, Chandrasekar B, et al. Activation of nuclear factor 
kappa B in human lymphoblastoid cells by low-dose ionizing radiation. 
Radiat Res. 1994;138:367–372.
Prozialeck WC, Edwards JR. Early biomarkers of cadmium exposure and 
nephrotoxicity. Biometals. 2010;23:793–809.
Prozialeck WC, Edwards JR, Nebert DW, et al. The vascular system as a 
target of metal toxicity. Toxicol Sci. 2008;102:207–218.
Pullen-James S, Woods SE. Occupational arsine gas exposure. J Natl Med 
Assoc. 2006;98:1998–2001.
Rahman A, Vahter M, Ekstrom EC, et al. Arsenic exposure in pregnancy 
increases the risk of lower respiratory tract infection and diarrhea dur-
ing infancy in Bangladesh. Environ Health Perspect. 2011;119:719–724.
Rahman MM, Chowdhury UK, Mukherjee SC, et al. Chronic arsenic toxic-
ity in Bangladesh and West Bengal, India—a review and commentary. J 
Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 2001;39:683–700.
Raisbeck MF, Siemion RS, Smith MA. Modest copper supplementation 
blocks molybdenosis in cattle. J Vet Diagn Invest. 2006;18:566–572.
Ramsey KA, Bosco A, McKenna KL, et al. In utero exposure to arsenic 
alters lung development and genes related to immune and mucociliary 
function in mice. Environ Health Perspect. 2013a;121:244–250.
Ramsey KA, Larcombe AN, Sly PD, et al. In utero exposure to low dose 
arsenic via drinking water impairs early life lung mechanics in mice. 
BMC Pharmacol Toxicol. 2013b;14:13.
Ress NB, Chou BJ, Renne RA, et  al. Carcinogenicity of inhaled vana-
dium pentoxide in F344/N rats and B6C3F1 mice. Toxicol Sci. 
2003;74:287–296.
Reuben A, Caspi A, Belsky DW, et al. Association of childhood blood lead 
levels with cognitive function and socioeconomic status at age 38 years 
and with IQ change and socioeconomic mobility between childhood and 
adulthood. JAMA. 2017;317:1244–1251.
Reynolds M, Armknecht S, Johnston T, et  al. Undetectable role of oxi-
dative DNA damage in cell cycle, cytotoxic and clastogenic effects of 
Cr(VI) in human lung cells with restored ascorbate levels. Mutagenesis. 
2012;27:437–443.
Riihimaki V, Aitio A. Occupational exposure to aluminum and its biomoni-
toring in perspective. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2012;42:827–853.

Toxic Effects of Metals
Chapter 23
1159
Ring G, O’Mullane J, O’Riordan A, et al. Trace metal determination as it 
relates to metallosis of orthopaedic implants: evolution and current sta-
tus. Clin Biochem. 2016;49:617–635.
Risher JF, Amler SN. Mercury exposure: evaluation and intervention the 
inappropriate use of chelating agents in the diagnosis and treatment of 
putative mercury poisoning. Neurotoxicology. 2005;26:691–699.
Roberts EA, Socha P. Wilson disease in children. Handb Clin Neurol. 
2017;142:141–156.
Rodriguez-Rubio L, Nava E, Del Pozo JSG, et al. Influence of the periop-
erative administration of magnesium sulfate on the total dose of anesthet-
ics during general anesthesia. A systematic review and meta-analysis. J 
Clin Anesth. 2017;39:129–138.
Rohl C, Grell M, Maser E. The organotin compounds trimethyltin (TMT) and 
triethyltin (TET) but not tributyltin (TBT) induce activation of microglia 
co-cultivated with astrocytes. Toxicol In Vitro. 2009;23:1541–1547.
Rondini EA, Walters DM, Bauer AK. Vanadium pentoxide induces pulmo-
nary inflammation and tumor promotion in a strain-dependent manner. 
Part Fibre Toxicol. 2010;7:9.
Rosen BP. Biochemistry of arsenic detoxification. FEBS Lett. 
2002;529:86–92.
Rossman TG, Klein CB. Genetic and epigenetic effects of environmental 
arsenicals. Metallomics. 2011;3(11):1135–1141.
Rossman TG, Uddin AN, Burns FJ, et al. Arsenite cocarcinogenesis: an 
animal model derived from genetic toxicology studies. Environ Health 
Perspect. 2002;110(suppl 5):749–752.
Rossman TG, Uddin AN, Burns FJ. Evidence that arsenite acts as a cocar-
cinogen in skin cancer. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2004;198:394–404.
Rowe CL. Bioaccumulation and effects of metals and trace elements from 
aquatic disposal of coal combustion residues: recent advances and recom-
mendations for further study. Sci Total Environ. 2014;485–486, 490–496.
Roy S, Hardej D. Tellurium tetrachloride and diphenyl ditelluride cause 
cytotoxicity in rat hippocampal astrocytes. Food Chem Toxicol. 
2011;49:2564–2574.
Rubio C, Rubio-Osornio M, Retana-Marquez S, et al. In vivo experimental 
models of epilepsy. Cent Nerv Syst Agents Med Chem. 2010;10:298–309.
Rudel H. Case study: bioavailability of tin and tin compounds. Ecotoxicol 
Environ Saf. 2003;56:180–189.
Ryu DY, Lee SJ, Park DW, et al. Dietary iron regulates intestinal cadmium 
absorption through iron transporters in rats. Toxicol Lett. 2004;152:19–25.
Ryu HW, Lee DH, Won HR, et al. Influence of toxicologically relevant met-
als on human epigenetic regulation. Toxicol Res. 2015;31:1–9.
Sabin BR, Grammer LC. Chapter 17: Occupational immunologic lung dis-
ease. Allergy Asthma Proc. 2012;33(suppl 1):S58–S60.
Saito M, Arakaki R, Yamada A, et  al. Molecular mechanisms of nickel 
allergy. Int J Mol Sci. 2016;17(2):pii: E202.
Salnikow K, Zhitkovich A. Genetic and epigenetic mechanisms in metal 
carcinogenesis and cocarcinogenesis: nickel, arsenic, and chromium. 
Chem Res Toxicol. 2008;21:28–44.
Salvador JA, Figueiredo SA, Pinto RM, et  al. Bismuth compounds in 
medicinal chemistry. Future Med Chem. 2012;4:1495–1523.
Samikkannu T, Chen CH, Yih LH, et  al. Reactive oxygen species are 
involved in arsenic trioxide inhibition of pyruvate dehydrogenase activ-
ity. Chem Res Toxicol. 2003;16:409–414.
Santos DB, Schiar VP, Paixao MW, et al. Hemolytic and genotoxic evalua-
tion of organochalcogens in human blood cells in vitro. Toxicol In Vitro. 
2009;23:1195–1204.
Satarug S, Garrett SH, Sens MA, et al. Cadmium, environmental exposure, 
and health outcomes. Environ Health Perspect. 2010;118:182–190.
Satarug S, Moore MR. Adverse health effects of chronic exposure to 
low-level cadmium in foodstuffs and cigarette smoke. Environ Health 
Perspect. 2004;112:1099–1103.
Sawyer RT, Maier LA. Chronic beryllium disease: an updated model 
interaction between innate and acquired immunity. Biometals. 2011; 
24:1–17.
Sayes CM, Reed KL, Warheit DB. Assessing toxicity of fine and nanopar-
ticles: comparing in vitro measurements to in vivo pulmonary toxicity 
profiles. Toxicol Sci. 2007;97:163–180.
Schiff MH, Whelton A. Renal toxicity associated with disease-modifying 
antirheumatic drugs used for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. Semin 
Arthritis Rheum. 2000;30:196–208.
Schnaas L, Rothenberg SJ, Flores MF, et al. Reduced intellectual develop-
ment in children with prenatal lead exposure. Environ Health Perspect. 
2006;114:791–797.
Schwarz G. Molybdenum cofactor and human disease. Curr Opin Chem 
Biol. 2016;31:179–187.
Schweizer U, Fradejas-Villar N. Why 21? The significance of selenopro-
teins for human health revealed by inborn errors of metabolism. FASEB 
J. 2016;30:3669–3681.
Sears ME, Kerr KJ, Bray RI. Arsenic, cadmium, lead, and mercury in sweat: 
a systematic review. J Environ Public Health. 2012;2012:184745.
Sedman RM, Beaumont J, McDonald TA, et al. Review of the evidence 
regarding the carcinogenicity of hexavalent chromium in drink-
ing water. J Environ Sci Health C Environ Carcinog Ecotoxicol Rev. 
2006;24:155–182.
Serefko A, Szopa A, Poleszak E. Magnesium and depression. Magnes Res. 
2016;29:112–119.
Shelnutt SR, Goad P, Belsito DV. Dermatological toxicity of hexavalent 
chromium. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2007;37, 375–387.
Sheppard SC, Sheppard MI, Gallerand MO, et al. Derivation of ecotoxicity 
thresholds for uranium. J Environ Radioact. 2005;79:55–83.
Sherwood CL, Lantz RC, Boitano S. Chronic arsenic exposure in nanomo-
lar concentrations compromises wound response and intercellular signal-
ing in airway epithelial cells. Toxicol Sci. 2013;132:222–234.
Shim H, Harris ZL. Genetic defects in copper metabolism. J Nutr. 
2003;133:1527s–1531s.
Shoults-Wilson WA, Reinsch BC, Tsyusko OV, et  al. Effect of silver 
nanoparticle surface coating on bioaccumulation and reproductive tox-
icity in earthworms (Eisenia fetida). Nanotoxicology. 2011;5:432–444.
Siedlikowski M, Bradley M, Kubow S, et  al. Bioaccessibility and bio-
availability of methylmercury from seafood commonly consumed in 
North America: in vitro and epidemiological studies. Environ Res. 
2016a;149:266–273.
Silbergeld EK. Facilitative mechanisms of lead as a carcinogen. Mutat Res. 
2003;533:121–133.
Silbergeld EK, Patrick TE. Environmental exposures, toxicologic mech-
anisms, and adverse pregnancy outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 
2005;192:S11–S21.
Silveira LJ, McCanlies EC, Fingerlin TE, et  al. Chronic beryllium dis-
ease, HLA-DPB1, and the DP peptide binding groove. J Immunol. 
2012;189:4014–4023.
Simeonova PP, Luster MI. Arsenic carcinogenicity: relevance of c-Src acti-
vation. Mol Cell Biochem. 2002;234–235, 277–282.
Simeonova PP, Wang S, Hulderman T, et  al. c-Src-dependent activation 
of the epidermal growth factor receptor and mitogen-activated pro-
tein kinase pathway by arsenic. Role in carcinogenesis. J Biol Chem. 
2002;277:2945–2950.
Sinczuk-Walczak H, Szymczak M, Halatek T. Effects of occupational expo-
sure to arsenic on the nervous system: clinical and neurophysiological 
studies. Int J Occup Med Environ Health. 2010;23:347–355.
Singh R, Gautam N, Mishra A, et al. Heavy metals and living systems: an 
overview. Indian J Pharmacol. 2011;43, 246–253.
Sinha D, Biswas J, Bishayee A. Nrf2-mediated redox signaling in arsenic 
carcinogenesis: a review. Arch Toxicol. 2013;87:383–396.
Sivulka DJ. Assessment of respiratory carcinogenicity associated with 
exposure to metallic nickel: a review. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 
2005;43:117–133.
Slikkerveer A, de Wolff FA. Pharmacokinetics and toxicity of bismuth com-
pounds. Med Toxicol Adverse Drug Exp. 1989;4:303–323.
Smith AH, Ercumen A, Yuan Y, et al. Increased lung cancer risks are similar 
whether arsenic is ingested or inhaled. J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol. 
2009;19:343–348.
Smith AH, Marshall G, Yuan Y, et al. Increased mortality from lung cancer 
and bronchiectasis in young adults after exposure to arsenic in utero and 
in early childhood. Environ Health Perspect. 2006;114:1293–1296.
Smith AH, Marshall G, Yuan Y, et al. Evidence from Chile that arsenic in 
drinking water may increase mortality from pulmonary tuberculosis. Am 
J Epidemiol. 2011;173:414–420.
Smith AH, Steinmaus CM. Health effects of arsenic and chromium 
in drinking water: recent human findings. Annu Rev Public Health. 
2009;30:107–122.

1160
Toxic Agents
unit V
Smith D, Strupp BJ. The scientific basis for chelation: animal studies and 
lead chelation. J Med Toxicol. 2013;9:326–338.
Solenkova NV, Newman JD, Berger JS, et al. Metal pollutants and cardio-
vascular disease: mechanisms and consequences of exposure. Am Heart 
J. 2014;168:812–822.
Soliman AT, De Sanctis V, Yassin M, et al. Iron deficiency anemia and glu-
cose metabolism. Acta Biomed. 2017;88:112–118.
Soucy NV, Ihnat MA, Kamat CD, et al. Arsenic stimulates angiogenesis and 
tumorigenesis in vivo. Toxicol Sci. 2003;76:271–279.
Soucy NV, Mayka D, Klei LR, et al. Neovascularization and angiogenic 
gene expression following chronic arsenic exposure in mice. Cardiovasc 
Toxicol. 2005;5:29–41.
Standeven AM, Wetterhahn KE. Chromium(VI) toxicity: uptake, reduction, 
and DNA damage. J Am Coll Toxicol. 1989;8:1275–1283.
States JC, Barchowsky A, Cartwright IL, et al. Arsenic toxicology: translat-
ing between experimental models and human pathology. Environ Health 
Perspect. 2011;119:1356–1363.
Steenland K, Boffetta P. Lead and cancer in humans: where are we now? Am 
J Ind Med. 2000;38, 295–299.
Steinmaus C, Ferreccio C, Acevedo J, et al. High risks of lung disease asso-
ciated with early-life and moderate lifetime arsenic exposure in northern 
Chile. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2016;313:10–15.
Stern BR. Essentiality and toxicity in copper health risk assessment: over-
view, update and regulatory considerations. J Toxicol Environ Health A. 
2010;73:114–127.
Straif K, Benbrahim-Tallaa L, Baan R, et  al. A review of human car-
cinogens—Part C: metals, arsenic, dusts, and fibres. Lancet Oncol. 
2009;10:453–454.
Straub AC, Clark KA, Ross MA, et al. Arsenic-stimulated liver sinusoidal 
capillarization in mice requires NADPH oxidase-generated superoxide. J 
Clin Invest. 2008;118:3980–3989.
Straub AC, Klei LR, Stolz DB, et al. Arsenic requires sphingosine-1-phos-
phate type 1 receptors to induce angiogenic genes and endothelial cell 
remodeling. Am J Pathol. 2009;174:1949–1958.
Stringari J, Nunes AK, Franco JL, et al. Prenatal methylmercury exposure 
hampers glutathione antioxidant system ontogenesis and causes long-
lasting oxidative stress in the mouse brain. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
2008;227:147–154.
Strupp C. Beryllium metal II. A review of the available toxicity data. Ann 
Occup Hyg. 2011;55:43–56.
Sun H, Brocato J, Costa M. Oral chromium exposure and toxicity. Curr 
Environ Health Rep. 2015;2:295–303.
Sun H, Shamy M, Costa M. Nickel and epigenetic gene silencing. Genes 
(Basel). 2013;4:583–595.
Sundar S, Chakravarty J. Antimony toxicity. Int J Environ Res Public 
Health. 2010;7:4267–4277.
Tanaka A. Toxicity of indium arsenide, gallium arsenide, and aluminium 
gallium arsenide. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2004;198:405–411.
Tchounwou PB, Yedjou CG, Patlolla AK, et al. Heavy metal toxicity and the 
environment. EXS. 2012;101:133–164.
Thevenod F, Lee WK. Cadmium and cellular signaling cascades: inter-
actions between cell death and survival pathways. Arch Toxicol. 
2013;87:1743–1786.
Thompson DF, Callen ED. Soluble or insoluble prussian blue for radioce-
sium and thallium poisoning? Ann Pharmacother. 2004;38:1509–1514.
Thyssen JP, Menne T. Metal allergy—a review on exposures, penetra-
tion, genetics, prevalence, and clinical implications. Chem Res Toxicol. 
2010;23:309–318.
Tillman LA, Drake FM, Dixon JS, et al. Review article: safety of bismuth 
in the treatment of gastrointestinal diseases. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 
1996;10:459–467.
Tokar EJ, Benbrahim-Tallaa L, Waalkes MP. Metal ions in human cancer 
development. Met Ions Life Sci. 2011a;8:375–401.
Tokar EJ, Diwan BA, Waalkes MP. Early life inorganic lead exposure 
induces testicular teratoma and renal and urinary bladder preneopla-
sia in adult metallothionein-knockout mice but not in wild type mice. 
Toxicology. 2010;276:5–10.
Tokar EJ, Diwan BA, Ward JM, et al. Carcinogenic effects of “whole-life” 
exposure to inorganic arsenic in CD1 mice. Toxicol Sci. 2011b;119:73–83.
Tokar EJ, Qu W, Waalkes MP. Arsenic, stem cells, and the developmental 
basis of adult cancer. Toxicol Sci. 2011c;120(suppl 1):S192–S203.
Tong D, Ortega J, Kim C, et al. Arsenic inhibits DNA mismatch repair by 
promoting EGFR expression and PCNA phosphorylation. J Biol Chem. 
2015;290:14536–14541.
Trepiccione F, Christensen BM. Lithium-induced nephrogenic dia-
betes insipidus: new clinical and experimental findings. J Nephrol. 
2010;23(suppl 16):S43–S48.
Trumbo P, Yates AA, Schlicker S, et al. Dietary reference intakes: vitamin 
A, vitamin K, arsenic, boron, chromium, copper, iodine, iron, manga-
nese, molybdenum, nickel, silicon, vanadium, and zinc. J Am Diet Assoc. 
2001;101:294–301.
Tseng CH. Cardiovascular disease in arsenic-exposed subjects liv-
ing in the arseniasis-hyperendemic areas in Taiwan. Atherosclerosis. 
2008;199:12–18.
Tully DB, Collins BJ, Overstreet JD, et al. Effects of arsenic, cadmium, 
chromium, and lead on gene expression regulated by a battery of 13 dif-
ferent promoters in recombinant HepG2 cells. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
2000;168:79–90.
Tyler CR, Allan AM. The effects of arsenic exposure on neurological 
and cognitive dysfunction in human and rodent studies: a review. Curr 
Environ Health Rep. 2014;1:132–147.
Ueno S, Kashimoto T, Susa N, et al. Reduction in peripheral lymphocytes 
and thymus atrophy induced by organotin compounds in vivo. J Vet Med 
Sci. 2009;71:1041–1048.
Ueshima K. Magnesium and ischemic heart disease: a review of epi-
demiological, experimental, and clinical evidences. Magnes Res. 
2005;18:275–284.
Valko M, Morris H, Cronin MT.Metals, toxicity and oxidative stress. Curr 
Med Chem. 2005;12:1161–1208.
Valko M, Rhodes CJ, Moncol J, et al. Free radicals, metals and antioxidants 
in oxidative stress-induced cancer. Chem Biol Interact. 2006;160:1–40.
van Bemmel DM, Li Y, McLean J, et al. Blood lead levels, ALAD gene 
polymorphisms, and mortality. Epidemiology. 2011;22:273–278.
Vilahur N, Vahter M, Broberg K. The epigenetic effects of prenatal cad-
mium exposure. Curr Environ Health Rep. 2015;2:195–203.
Vincent JB. Chromium: is it essential, pharmacologically relevant, or toxic? 
Met Ions Life Sci. 2013;13:171–198.
Vollet K, Haynes EN, Dietrich KN. Manganese exposure and cognition 
across the lifespan: contemporary review and argument for biphasic 
dose–response health effects. Curr Environ Health Rep. 2016;3:392–404.
von Ehrenstein OS, Mazumder DN, Yuan Y, et al. Decrements in lung func-
tion related to arsenic in drinking water in West Bengal, India. Am J 
Epidemiol. 2005;162:533–541.
von Lindern I, Spalinger S, Stifelman ML, et al. Estimating children’s soil/
dust ingestion rates through retrospective analyses of blood lead biomon-
itoring from the Bunker Hill Superfund Site in Idaho. Environ Health 
Perspect. 2016;124:1462–1470.
von Lindern IH, Spalinger SM, Bero BN, et al. The influence of soil reme-
diation on lead in house dust. Sci Total Environ. 2003;303:59–78.
Vouk VB. General chemistry of metals. In: Friberg L, Norberg GF, Vouk 
VB, eds. Handbook on the Toxicology of Metals. New York: Elsevier; 
1986:14–35.
Waalkes MP. Cadmium carcinogenesis. Mutat Res. 2003;533:107–120.
Waalkes MP, Diwan BA, Ward JM, et al. Renal tubular tumors and atypi-
cal hyperplasias in B6C3F1 mice exposed to lead acetate during gesta-
tion and lactation occur with minimal chronic nephropathy. Cancer Res. 
1995;55:5265–5271.
Waalkes MP, Liu J, Goyer RA, et al. Metallothionein-I/II double knockout 
mice are hypersensitive to lead-induced kidney carcinogenesis: role of 
inclusion body formation. Cancer Res. 2004;64:7766–7772.
Waalkes MP, Liu J, Kasprzak KS, et al. Hypersusceptibility to cisplatin car-
cinogenicity in metallothionein-I/II double knockout mice: production 
of hepatocellular carcinoma at clinically relevant doses. Int J Cancer. 
2006;119:28–32.
Waisberg M, Joseph P, Hale B, et al. Molecular and cellular mechanisms of 
cadmium carcinogenesis. Toxicology. 2003;192:95–117.
Walton FS, Waters SB, Jolley SL, et  al. Selenium compounds modu-
late the activity of recombinant rat AsIII-methyltransferase and the

Toxic Effects of Metals
Chapter 23
1161
methylation of arsenite by rat and human hepatocytes. Chem Res Toxicol. 
2003;16:261–265.
Wang CH, Hsiao CK, Chen CL, et al. A review of the epidemiologic litera-
ture on the role of environmental arsenic exposure and cardiovascular 
diseases. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2007;222:315–326.
Wang L, Son YO, Ding S, et al. Ethanol enhances tumor angiogenesis in 
vitro induced by low-dose arsenic in colon cancer cells through hypoxia-
inducible factor 1 alpha pathway. Toxicol Sci. 2012;130:269–280.
Wang Z, Xia T, Liu S. Mechanisms of nanosilver-induced toxicological 
effects: more attention should be paid to its sublethal effects. Nanoscale. 
2015;7:7470–7481.
Warheit DB, Donner EM. Risk assessment strategies for nanoscale and fine-
sized titanium dioxide particles: recognizing hazard and exposure issues. 
Food Chem Toxicol. 2015;85:138–147.
Warniment C, Tsang K, Galazka SS. Lead poisoning in children. Am Fam 
Physician. 2010;81:751–757.
Wasserman GA, Liu X, Loiacono NJ, et al. A cross-sectional study of well 
water arsenic and child IQ in Maine schoolchildren. Environ Health. 
2014;13:23.
Wasserman GA, Liu X, Parvez F, et al. Arsenic and manganese exposure 
and children’s intellectual function. Neurotoxicology. 2011;32:450–457,
Weber KT. A Quebec quencher. Cardiovasc Res. 1998;40:423–425.
Weinberg ED. The hazards of iron loading. Metallomics. 2010;2:732–740.
Weiss KH, Stremmel W. Clinical considerations for an effective medical 
therapy in Wilson’s disease. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2014;1315:81–85.
Wester PO, Brune D, Nordberg G. Arsenic and selenium in lung, 
liver, and kidney tissue from dead smelter workers. Br J Ind Med. 
1981;38(2):179–184.
White SJ, Shine JP. Exposure potential and health impacts of indium and 
gallium, metals critical to emerging electronics and energy technologies. 
Curr Environ Health Rep. 2016;3:459–467.
Whitehead MW, Thompson RP, Powell JJ. Regulation of metal absorption 
in the gastrointestinal tract. Gut. 1996;39:625–628.
WHO. IPCS Environmental Health Criteria. Thallium. Geneva: World 
Health Organization; 1996.
WHO. IPCS Environmental Criteria. Aluminum. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 1997.
WHO. IPCS Environmental Health Criteria. Palladium. Geneva: World 
Health Organization; 2002. Available at: http://www.inchem.org/docu-
ments/ehc/ehc/ehc226.htm.
WHO. Silver: Water Disinfection and Toxicity. Geneva: World Health 
Orginization/Centre for Research into Environment and Health; 2014.
Willhite CC, Karyakina NA, Yokel RA, et al. Systematic review of potential 
health risks posed by pharmaceutical, occupational and consumer expo-
sures to metallic and nanoscale aluminum, aluminum oxides, aluminum 
hydroxide and its soluble salts. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2014;44(suppl 4):1–80.
Williams PL, James RC, Roberts SM. Principles of Toxicology : 
Environmental and Industrial Applications. New York: Wiley; 2000.
Wright RO, Baccarelli A. Metals and neurotoxicology. J Nutr. 
2007;137:2809–2813.
Wrobel JK, Power R, Toborek M. Biological activity of selenium: revisited. 
IUBMB Life. 2016;68:97–105.
Wu Y, Yang X, Ge J, et al. Blood lead level and its relationship to certain 
essential elements in the children aged 0 to 14 years from Beijing, China. 
Sci Total Environ. 2011;409:3016–3020.
Xiao T, Yang F, Li S, et al. Thallium pollution in China: a geo-environmen-
tal perspective. Sci Total Environ. 2012;421–422:51–58.
Yokohira M, Arnold LL, Pennington KL, et al. Effect of sodium arsenite 
dose administered in the drinking water on the urinary bladder epithelium 
of female arsenic (+3 oxidation state) methyltransferase knockout mice. 
Toxicol Sci. 2011;121, 257–266.
Zalups RK, Ahmad S. Molecular handling of cadmium in transporting epi-
thelia. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2003;186:163–188.
Zare B, Nami M, Shahverdi AR. Tracing tellurium and its nanostructures in 
biology. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2017;180:171–181.
Zhang C, Ferrari R, Beezhold K, et  al. Arsenic promotes NF-kappaB-
mediated fibroblast dysfunction and matrix remodeling to impair muscle 
stem cell function. Stem Cells. 2016;34:732–742.
Zheng W. Toxicology of choroid plexus: special reference to metal-induced 
neurotoxicities. Microsc Res Tech. 2001;52:89–103.
Zhitkovich A. Importance of chromium-DNA adducts in mutagenicity and 
toxicity of chromium(VI). Chem Res Toxicol. 2005;18:3–11.
Zhitkovich A, Song Y, Quievryn G, et al. Non-oxidative mechanisms are 
responsible for the induction of mutagenesis by reduction of Cr(VI) with 
cysteine: role of ternary DNA adducts in Cr(III)-dependent mutagenesis. 
Biochemistry. 2001;40:549–560.
Zhou X, Sun X, Cooper KL, et  al. Arsenite interacts selectively with 
zinc finger proteins containing C3H1 or C4 motifs. J Biol Chem. 
2011;286(26):22855–22863.
Zhou X, Sun X, Mobarak C, et al. Differential binding of monomethylar-
sonous acid compared to arsenite and arsenic trioxide with zinc finger 
peptides and proteins. Chem Res Toxicol. 2014;27:690–698.
Zwolak I, Zaporowska H. Selenium interactions and toxicity: a review. 
Selenium interactions and toxicity. Cell Biol Toxicol. 2012;28:31–46.

This page intentionally left blank