# 24 Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
# Casarett & Doull's Toxicology, 9th Edition
# Pages: 1182-1275
# Unit: Unit V Toxic Agents

Introduction
Is There a Solvent-Induced 
Chronic Encephalopathy?
Solvent Abuse
Environmental Contamination
Toxicokinetics
Absorption
Transport and Distribution
Elimination
Metabolism
Physiological Modeling
Potentially Sensitive 
Subpopulations
Endogenous Factors
Children
Elderly
Gender
Genetics
Exogenous Factors
P450 Inducers
P450 Inhibitors
Lifestyle
Solvent Mixtures
Diseases
Chlorinated Hydrocarbons
Trichloroethylene
Metabolism
Modes of Carcinogenic Action in 
­Target Tissues
Liver Cancer
Lung Cancer
Kidney Cancer
Cancer Epidemiology
Risk Assessment
Tetrachloroethylene
Metabolism
Modes of Cytotoxicity/Carcinogenicity
Hepatorenal Toxicity
Cancer Bioassays in Rodents
Cancer Epidemiology Studies
Risk Assessment
1,1,1-Trichloroethane
Toxicokinetics (TK) and Metabolism
Toxicity
Potential Carcinogenicity
Methylene Chloride
Metabolism
Modes of Toxicity/Carcinogenicity
Cancer Bioassays in Rodents
Cancer Epidemiology Studies
Risk Assessment
Carbon Tetrachloride
Chloroform
Aromatic Hydrocarbons
Benzene
Toluene
Xylenes and Ethylbenzene
Styrene
Alcohols
Ethanol
Methanol
Glycols
Ethylene Glycol
Diethylene Glycol
Propylene Glycol
Glycol Ethers
Reproductive Toxicity
Developmental Toxicity
Hematotoxicity
Immunotoxicity/Carcinogenicity
Fuels and Fuel Additives
Automotive Gasoline
Methyl Tertiary-Butyl Ether
Jet Fuel
Pulmonary Effects
Immune Effects
Dermal Effects
Carbon Disulfide
Acknowledgments
References
24
chapter
Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
James V. Bruckner, S. Satheesh Anand, and D. Alan 
Warren
INTRODUCTION
The term solvent refers to a class of organic chemicals of variable 
lipophilicity and volatility. These properties, coupled with small 
molecular size and lack of charge, make inhalation the major route 
of exposure and provide for ready absorption across membranes of 
the lung, gastrointestinal (GI) tract, and skin. In general, the lipo-
philicity of solvents increases with increasing numbers of carbon 
and/or halogen atoms, while volatility decreases. Organic solvents 
are frequently used to dissolve, dilute, or disperse materials that are 
insoluble in water. As such they are widely employed as degreasers 
and as constituents of paints, varnishes, lacquers, inks, aerosol spray 
products, dyes, and adhesives. Other uses are as intermediates in 
chemical synthesis, and as fuels and fuel additives. Most organic sol-
vents are refined from petroleum. Many solvents such as naphthas 
and gasoline are complex mixtures, often consisting of hundreds 
of compounds. Early in the twentieth century, there were perhaps 
a dozen or so known and commonly used solvents. By 1981, this 
number had climbed to approximately 350 (OSHA, 2006).
Solvents are classified largely according to molecular struc-
ture or functional group. Classes of solvents include aliphatic 
hydrocarbons, many of which are halogenated (i.e., halocarbons);

1164
Toxic Agents
unit V
aromatic hydrocarbons; alcohols; ethers; esters/acetates; amides/
amines; aldehydes; ketones; and complex mixtures that defy clas-
sification. The main determinants of a solvent’s inherent toxicity 
are: (1) its number of carbon atoms; (2) whether it is saturated or 
has double or triple bonds between adjacent carbon atoms; (3) its 
configuration (i.e., straight chain, branched chain, or cyclic); (4) 
whether it is halogenated; and (5) the presence of functional groups. 
Some class-wise generalizations regarding toxicity can be made. 
For example, the more lipophilic a hydrocarbon, the more potent 
a central nervous system (CNS) depressant it is; amides/amines 
tend to be potent sensitizers; aldehydes are particularly irritating; 
hydrocarbons that are extensively metabolized tend to be more 
cytotoxic/mutagenic; and many unsaturated, short-chain halocar-
bons are animal carcinogens. The toxicity of solvents within the 
same class can vary dramatically. For example, 1,1,1-trichloroeth-
ane (TRI) and 1,1,2-trichloroethylene (TCE) are both halocarbons 
with three chlorine atoms, yet unsaturated TCE is carcinogenic in 
the rat and mouse, but TRI is not. Similar results have been reported 
for 2,4- and 2,6-diaminotoluene in rodents, as only the 2,4-isomer 
is capable of inducing significant hepatocyte proliferation and liver 
tumors. Slight structural differences in solvent metabolites are also 
of toxicological consequence. The peripheral neuropathy induced 
by n-hexane and 2-hexanone is dependent on the production of 
the γ-diketone metabolite 2,5-hexanedione. Diketones lacking 
the gamma structure are not neurotoxic. Thus, subtle differences 
in chemical structure can translate into dramatic differences in 
toxicity.
Nearly everyone is exposed to solvents during their normal 
activities. Consider, for example, a person who works in an aircraft 
factory as a metal degreaser (TCE exposure) drives to the neigh-
borhood bar after work and has a few drinks (ethanol exposure) 
and cigarettes (benzene and styrene exposure); stops on the way 
home at a self-service filling station for gasoline (benzene, tolu-
ene, 1,3-butadiene, etc. exposure) and the dry cleaner’s for laundry 
(tetrachloroethylene [PERC] exposure); and after dinner enjoys his 
hobby of model shipbuilding that requires the use of glue (toluene 
exposure). Cigarette smoking is the primary source of benzene, tol-
uene, and styrene exposure, as well as an important source of ethyl-
benzene and xylenes (Chambers et al., 2011). While everyone may 
not identify with the above scenarios, detailed surveys of indoor 
and outdoor air, such as the EPA’s Total Exposure Assessment 
Methodology (TEAM) and National Human Exposure Assessment 
Survey (NHEXAS) studies, indicate that airborne solvent exposure 
is unavoidable. Drinking water is also a common source of sol-
vent exposure due to discharge of solvents into surface water and 
groundwater and the presence of disinfection by-products, includ-
ing the animal carcinogen chloroform (CHCl3). Trichloroacetic acid 
(TCA) and dichloroacetic acid (DCA), metabolites of TCE and 
PERC, are also common drinking water disinfection by-products.
Environmental exposures to solvents in air and groundwater 
are frequent subjects of toxic tort litigation, despite concentrations 
that are typically in the low parts per billion (ppb) or parts per tril-
lion (ppt) ranges. Multiple exposure pathways frequently exist 
(Fig. 24-1). Although not represented in Fig. 24-1, household use 
of solvent-contaminated water may result in solvent intake from 
inhalation and dermal absorption as well as ingestion (Weisel and 
Jo, 1996; Nuckols et al., 2005). In many cases, risk assessment 
guidelines stipulate that risks be determined for physiologically 
diverse individuals who are exposed to several solvents by multiple 
exposure pathways. As an aid to the risk assessment process, the 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has derived toxicity 
factors for many of the most common/toxic solvents. These toxicity 
factors are referred to as reference concentrations (RfCs), reference 
doses (RfDs), and cancer slope factors (CSFs). Values for a num-
ber of these are available from the EPA’s online Integrated Risk 
Information System (IRIS). Additional sources of exposure guide-
lines for noncancer endpoints are found in the Toxicological Profiles 
of the U.S. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry 
(ATSDR). These profiles often contain minimal risk levels (MRLs) 
that are derived in a similar manner to EPA’s RfCs and RfDs, but 
are frequently based on different critical studies or derived with 
different uncertainty factors.
Occupational solvent exposures involve situations ranging 
from a secretary using typewriter correction fluid to the loading 
and off-loading of tanker trucks with thousands of gallons of gaso-
line. The greatest industrial use of solvents is as metal degreasers. 
This work environment is typically where the highest exposures 
occur, mainly via inhalation and secondarily via dermal con-
tact. An estimated 10 million people are potentially exposed to 
organic solvents in the workplace (OSHA, 2006). Many of the 
most severe exposures to solvents have occurred as a result of 
their use in confined spaces with inadequate ventilation. While 
the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) 
has established legally enforceable permissible exposure limits 
(PELs) for over 100 solvents, most PELs are outdated. The major-
ity of existing PELs were adopted from a list of threshold limit 
values (TLVs) previously published by the American Conference 
of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH). Many current 
TLVs are more stringent than PELs but do not carry the weight of 
law. Whereas the ACGIH’s TLVs for an 8-hour workday, 40-hour 
workweek are designed to be protective for a working lifetime, 
its short-term exposure limits (STELs) and ceiling values are 
designed to protect against the acute effects of high-level, short-
term solvent exposure. If warranted, ACGIH will assign a skin 
notation to a solvent, indicating that a significant contribution to 
overall exposure is possible by the dermal route, either by contact 
with vapors or direct skin contact with the liquid. ACGIH also 
categorizes chemicals for carcinogenicity in animals and humans. 
Biological monitoring in the workplace should find increasing 
use as technologic advances are made, because it often provides a 
better measure of exposure than classic industrial hygiene moni-
toring. The ACGIH has published over 50 Biological Exposure 
Indices (BEIs), on which bases the safety of internal measures of 
exposure can be judged (ACGIH, 2011).
Most solvent exposures involve a mixture of chemicals, rather 
than a single compound (see the subsection “Solvent Mixtures” in 
the sub section “Exogenous Factors”). Our knowledge of the toxic-
ity of solvent mixtures is rudimentary relative to the toxicology of 
individual solvents. While the assumption is frequently made that 
the toxic effects of solvents are additive, the chemicals may also 
interact synergistically or antagonistically. For example, repetitive 
alcohol consumption induces certain cytochrome P450s (CYPs), 
and may therefore enhance the metabolic activation of other solvents 
to cytotoxic metabolites. Ethanol intake near the time of exposure to 
such solvents, in contrast, may competitively inhibit their metabo-
lism and be protective. Another well-characterized example of sol-
vent antagonism is the competitive metabolic interaction between 
benzene and toluene (Medinsky et al., 1994). Coexposure to these 
chemicals results in diminished benzene metabolism, genotoxicity, 
and erythropoietic toxicity relative to that which follows benzene 
exposure alone. It is now recognized that significant data gaps exist 
in the area of mixtures toxicology, and that these can be signifi-
cant sources of uncertainty in risk assessments. Physiologically 
based toxicokinetic (PBTK) models are being developed by dif-
ferent research groups to predict the impact of metabolic induction 
and inhibition on the kinetics of individual components of specific

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1165
mixtures (see the subsection “Physiological Modeling” in the sec-
tion “Toxicokinetics”).
Although some solvents are much less hazardous than others, 
virtually all can cause adverse effects. Provided that the dose or 
concentration is sufficient, most have the potential to induce some 
level of narcosis and cause respiratory and mucous membrane irri-
tation. A number of solvents are animal carcinogens, but only a 
handful have been classified as known human carcinogens. Herein 
lies a major challenge for toxicology—determining the human rel-
evance of tumors observed in chronic, high-dose rodent studies. As 
with other chemicals, whether adverse health effects occur from 
solvent exposure is dependent on several factors: (1) toxicity/car-
cinogenicity of the solvent; (2) exposure route; (3) amount or rate 
of exposure; (4) duration of exposure; (5) individual susceptibility; 
and (6) interactions with other chemicals. Adverse health effects 
may occur acutely and be readily discernible, or they may result 
from chronic exposure and have insidious onset. Numerous epide-
miologic studies of environmentally and occupationally exposed 
populations have been conducted for some solvents, but most 
human risk assessments remain heavily reliant upon extrapolation 
from high-dose animal studies. One must bear in mind that the toxic 
effects and their underlying mechanisms discussed herein may be 
operative only in certain animal species or strains and under certain 
exposure conditions. Care must therefore be taken in generalizing 
beyond the experimental conditions under which data are col-
lected. While a relatively small number of commercially available 
solvents is discussed in this chapter, those selected for discussion 
are thought to best demonstrate principles of solvent toxicology, 
are of particular commercial importance, and/or are currently gar-
nering significant attention from the toxicological and regulatory 
communities. A book chapter that examines solvents from an organ 
systems standpoint, in contrast to discussion of individual solvents, 
is that of Gerr and Letz (1998).
IS THERE A SOLVENT-INDUCED CHRONIC 
ENCEPHALOPATHY?
The CNS-depressant effects of acute, high-level exposures and 
the potential for permanent neurologic damage in chronic solvent 
abusers are not a matter of debate. It is also clear that chronic, mod-
erate-to-high-level exposure to a few solvents such as n-­hexane 
and carbon disulfide can cause specific degenerative changes in 
the CNS or the peripheral nervous system (PNS). Far less clear 
is whether chronic, low-level exposure to virtually any solvent or 
solvent mixture can produce a pattern of neurologic dysfunction 
referred to as painters’ syndrome, organic solvent syndrome, psy-
choorganic syndrome, and chronic solvent encephalopathy (CSE). 
CSE is characterized by nonspecific symptoms (e.g., headache, 
fatigue, mood disturbances, and sleep disorders) with or without 
changes in neuropsychological function. There is a reversible 
form of CSE referred to as neurasthenic syndrome that consists of 
symptoms only, and both “mild” and “severe” forms accompanied 
by objective signs of neuropsychological dysfunction that may or 
may not be fully reversible. Regardless of form, there is universal 
agreement that CSE is a nonprogressive disease in which no severe 
deterioration of functioning occurs after diagnosis, provided expo-
sure ceases. An elevated prevalence of psychiatric disorders such as 
major depressive disorder, panic disorders, agoraphobia, and gen-
eralized anxiety disorder has been reported among CSE patients 
(Visser et al., 2011). The syndrome that is CSE was first described 
in the Scandinavian occupational literature in the late 1970s, in sol-
vent-exposed painters (Axelson et al., 1976; Arlien-Soborg et al., 
Inhalation
exposure
route
Ingestion
exposure
route
Exposure
point
Exposure
point
Exposure
point
Prevailing wind direction
Transport medium (air)
Release mechanism
(volatilization)
Release
mechanism
(spill)
Exposure
medium
(soil)
Water table
Groundwater ﬂow
Transport medium
(groundwater)
Waste pile
(source)
Release mechanism
(site leaching)
Figure 24-1.   Solvent exposure pathways and media. (Adapted from EPA Risk Assessment Guidance for Superfund. Human Health Evaluation Manual Part 
A, Interim Final. Washington, DC: Office of Emergency and Remedial Response, 1989.)

1166
Toxic Agents
unit V
1979). Since that time, numerous studies from Scandinavia have 
been published purporting that solvents as a class have chronic 
neurotoxic properties. These countries, as well as a few others in 
Europe (i.e., Germany, Austria, and Belgium) have passed legis-
lation recognizing CSE as a compensable occupational disability 
(Triebig and Hallermann, 2001). Scientists outside of Scandinavia, 
including many in the United States, have generally been less will-
ing to recognize CSE as a legitimate disease state and have pub-
lished studies to the contrary (Triebig et al., 1988; Bleecker et al., 
1991; Spurgeon et al., 1994).
In response to the numerous reports of CSE, two conferences 
were convened in 1985. The first was held in Copenhagen by the 
Nordic Council of the World Health Organization (WHO, 1985). 
The second, in Raleigh, NC, was attended by an international group 
of scientists from academia, industry, and government (Cranmer, 
1986). The categorization scheme that resulted from the Raleigh 
meeting is presented in Table 24-1. The WHO scheme is similar. 
Among those who utilize the categorization scheme, it is generally 
believed that the most severe CSE category, type 3, results from 
repeated, severe intoxications like those experienced by solvent 
abusers. CSE types 1 and 2, in contrast, are thought to be associ-
ated with prolonged, low-to-moderate-level exposure common to 
work environments. A major criticism of the categorization scheme 
is the lack of consideration of inhaled solvent concentration and 
exposure duration. However, most CSE proponents believe that 
solvent exposure must occur for some 10 years before clinical 
symptoms are manifest. Citing growing acceptance of CSE outside 
of Scandinavia, some scientists and physicians have advocated for 
refinement of existing diagnostic criteria and a unified categori-
zation scheme (van der Hoek et al., 2000, 2001). To this end, a 
European working group has published a consensus document 
updating the neuropsychological characteristics of CSE and provid-
ing guidelines for neuropsychological assessment during diagnosis 
of patients suspected of CSE (van Valen et al., 2012). Similarly, 
Verberk et al. (2012) published a set of “decision rules” to promote 
standardization in the diagnostic assessment of CSE, but found that 
application of 25 cognitive tests on patients suspected of CSE failed 
to show a characteristic profile of impairment and gave divergent 
results on tests of related mental functions.
CSE researchers typically rely upon self-reported symptoms 
and a clinical neuropsychological evaluation (Table 24-2), and to a 
much lesser extent on diagnostic tests such as electroencephalog-
raphy and computerized brain tomography (Osterberg et al., 2000; 
Carter et al., 2002; Visser et al., 2012). Based upon reanalysis of 
patients diagnosed with CSE 20 years earlier, Bast-Pettersen (2009) 
concluded that symptoms were (and still are) not very useful in diag-
nosing CSE, and objective neuropsychological tests are necessary. 
However, it has been argued that many neuropsychological tests 
are of questionable validity, sensitivity, specificity, and predictive 
value. It has also been noted that many investigations of CSE are 
fraught with methodologic flaws. For example, CSE investigators 
frequently fail to measure premorbid function or intellect; employ a 
reference population; control adequately for the potential confound-
ers of age, alcohol use, other CNS diseases, and other chemicals; 
corroborate functional deficits with objective evidence of brain 
disease; and/or examine exposure–response relationships. The 
importance of doing so is best exemplified by the reanalysis of indi-
viduals originally reported in the seminal study by Arlien-Soborg 
et al. (1979) to have “painters’ syndrome.” When the influences 
of age, education, and intelligence were considered, the previously 
reported reduction in neuropsychological test scores disappeared 
(Gade et al., 1988). Another example is that of Cherry et al. (1985), 
who demonstrated the importance of matching solvent-exposed and 
control groups for preexposure intellect before making a diagnosis 
of CSE. Subsequently, Albers et al. (1999, 2000) reportedly found 
no objective evidence of toxic encephalopathy or polyneuropa-
thy among railroad workers with long-term solvent exposure and 
Table 24-1  
Proposed Categories of Solvent-Induced 
Encephalopathy
CATEGORY CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Type 1
Symptoms only: The patient complains of non-
specific symptoms such as fatigability, memory 
impairment, difficulty in concentration, and loss 
of initiative. These symptoms are reversible if 
exposure is discontinued, and there is no objective 
evidence of neuropsychiatric dysfunction.
Type 2A
Sustained personality or mood change: There 
is a marked and sustained change in personality 
involving fatigue, emotional lability, impulse con-
trol, and general mood and motivation.
Type 2B
Impairment in intellectual function: There 
is difficulty in concentration, impairment of 
memory, and a decrease in learning capacity. 
These symptoms are accompanied by objective 
evidence of impairment. There may also be minor 
neurologic signs. The complete reversibility of 
type 2B is questionable.
Type 3
Dementia: In this condition, marked global dete-
rioration in intellect and memory is often accom-
panied by neurologic signs and/or neuroradiologic 
findings. This condition is, at best, poorly revers-
ible, but is generally nonprogressive once exposure 
has ceased.
SOURCE: Reproduced from Cranmer (1986), with permission from 
Elsevier.
Table 24-2  
Functions That May Be Assessed in a 
Neuropsychological Evaluation
Psychomotor functions
    Reaction time
    Motor speed and dexterity
    Eye–hand coordination
Sustained attention/concentration and perceptual speed
Verbal and nonverbal memory
    Immediate memory
    Delayed memory
Learning
Visual constructive ability
Conceptual ability
Evaluation of personality and affect
SOURCE: Reproduced from Cranmer (1986), with permission from 
Elsevier.

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1167
diagnosis of CSE. However, these workers were found to have sta-
tistically significantly prolongated blink reflex latencies (a potential 
sensitive indicator of subclinical solvent neurotoxicity) compared 
with historical controls, even though blink reflex latencies of all 
workers remained within the range of normal (Albers et al., 2001). 
As to this result, the authors conclude “… that the small group dif-
ferences … are of no diagnostic importance and of uncertain physi-
ologic importance, and they may reflect unrecognized confounders 
and technical factors.”
It is evident that resolution of the controversial issue of CSE 
will come only through the conduct of well-designed and controlled 
clinical and epidemiological studies, especially considering the 
absence of an appropriate animal model. Examples of such studies 
continue to originate largely from Europe and Scandinavia, includ-
ing those examining CSE risk in relation to genetic polymorphisms 
in bioactivating and detoxifying enzymes and dopamine receptors 
(Kezic et al., 2006; Godderis et al., 2010). Another such study tested 
the hypothesis that disturbances within the frontostriatothalamic 
circuitry explained the symptomology (impaired psychomotor 
speed and attention) frequently observed in CSE patients (Visser 
et al., 2008). Confirmation of the hypothesis came in the form of 
reductions among CSE patients in striatal dopamine receptor bind-
ing and neurometabolite concentrations in frontal gray matter, as 
well as changes in fractional anisotropy (a measure of the unifor-
mity of water movement within and along axons, where reductions 
are indicative of axonal injury) in the thalamus and caudate nucleus. 
While identification of such brain abnormalities brings some focus 
to the nonspecific clinical picture that is CSE, similar findings might 
be anticipated in normal aging or neurological disorders such as 
Parkinson’s, for which solvents have been considered as risk factors 
(Lock et al., 2013). Though brief and somewhat dated, insightful 
reviews of CSE by Rosenberg (1995) and Schaumburg and Spencer 
(2000) have been published. These reviews conclude that the avail-
able literature, including the “landmark” North American study of 
187 paint-manufacturing workers (Bleecker et al., 1991), does not 
support chronic low-level solvent exposure as a cause of symptom-
atic CNS or PNS dysfunction. This does not preclude, however, 
the possibility that such exposure can be associated with subclini-
cal cognitive dysfunction in the form of slight psychomotor and 
attentional deficit disorders. For the viewpoint of CSE proponents, 
readers are directed to texts by Arlien-Soborg (1992) and Kilburn 
(1998), as well as a systematic review of all evidence on the course 
and prognostic factors of CSE through 2008 (van Valen et al., 2009).
A number of scientists have examined potential relationships 
between solvent exposure and motor and psychotic disorders. 
Causes of Parkinson disease (PD) are poorly understood, although 
case reports have associated PD with exposures to various solvents, 
notably trichloroethylene (TCE). Studies of different solvents, 
including TCE, have revealed adverse effects on the substantia 
nigra, a brain region in which dopamine deficiency due to loss of 
dopanergic neurons is implicated in typical motor symptoms of the 
disease in humans. There is no consistent evidence from such toxi-
cology studies or epidemiological investigations that a specific sol-
vent or class of solvents is a cause of Parkinson disease (Lock et al., 
2013). Landtblom (1997) described a number of epidemiological 
studies of associations of occupational organic solvent exposure 
with multiple sclerosis (MS). Relative risks or odds ratio greater 
than 1 were reported in some instances. In a subsequent publication, 
Landtblom et al. (2003) examined the relationship between glu-
tathione S-transferase M1 and CYP2 polymorphisms in leukocyte 
DNA and solvent exposure in MS patients. These null genotypes 
have been associated with decreased metabolic clearance of organic 
solvents. No differences in genetic predisposition were found 
between MS patients exposed and unexposed to solvents. Prolonged 
occupational exposure to organic solvents has also been linked to 
schizophrenia (Stein et al., 2010). Solvents are often implicated in 
idiopathic neurological disorders, although sufficient evidence for 
a causal association is lacking.
SOLVENT ABUSE
Inhalants are volatile substances that can be inhaled to induce a psy-
choactive or mind-altering effect. Their abuse became a major drug 
problem worldwide, particularly in disadvantaged populations and 
among adolescents (Williams and Storck, 2007). The epidemiol-
ogy of inhalant abuse in the United States is receiving considerable 
attention (Spiller, 2004; Wu et al., 2004), with almost one in five 
8th graders claiming to have used inhalants according to a National 
Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA)-sponsored survey (Johnston et al., 
2008). Solvents are among the most popular classes of drugs of 
abuse, given their presence in a multitude of inexpensive, readily 
available products that are legal to buy and possess. These prod-
ucts are used for common household and industrial purposes and 
include paint thinners and removers, dry-­cleaning fluids, degreas-
ers, gasoline, glues, typewriter fluid, nail polish remover, felt-tip 
marker fluids, and aerosols such as fabric protector sprays and 
spray paints. Solvents are often among the first drugs used by chil-
dren and adolescents. Early use of inhalants is often a precursor 
to abuse of multiple illegal substances (Wu et al., 2004). Research 
suggests that adverse socioeconomic conditions, a history of child 
abuse, poor grades, and dropping out of school are all factors con-
tributing to inhalant abuse (NIDA, 2005).
Solvent abuse is a unique exposure situation, in that partici-
pants repeatedly subject themselves to vapor concentrations high 
enough to produce effects that resemble alcohol intoxication. 
Solvents can be breathed in through the nose or the mouth by 
“sniffing” or “snorting” vapors from containers; spraying aero-
sols directly into the nose or mouth; “bagging” by inhaling vapors 
from a plastic or paper bag; or “huffing” from a solvent-soaked rag 
stuffed into the mouth (NIDA, 2005). Although dependent on the 
pattern of inhalation, blood levels of solvents typically peak a few 
minutes after inhalation begins, and the abuser can begin to experi-
ence effects after a matter of seconds. While intoxication may last 
only a few minutes, abusers frequently seek to prolong the “high” 
by inhaling repeatedly over the course of several hours. In extreme 
circumstances, death may be a consequence of cardiac arrhythmias, 
asphyxiation, and/or cachexia.
Relatively little is known about the neuropharmacology of 
abused solvents, although they appear to have much in common 
with the classical CNS-depressant drugs like ethanol and bar-
biturates, including the potential for tolerance and dependence 
(Balster, 1998). Commonly used solvents have been shown to alter 
the function of a variety of ligand-gated ion channels, including 
those activated by glycine, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and 
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) (Beckstead et al., 2000; Cruz et al., 
2000). Recent evidence links high-level toluene exposure in rats to 
increased dopaminergic neurotransmission within the mesolimbic 
reward pathway, an effect thought to underlie the abuse potential 
of numerous drugs (Reigel and French, 2002; Reigel et al., 2004). 
Toluene, as well as TCE and TRI, has been shown to enhance sero-
tonin-3 receptor function, which has also been implicated in the 
reinforcing properties of abused drugs (Lopreato et al., 2003).
Whereas the intoxicating effects achieved through acute sol-
vent abuse are reversible, abuse may be continued for years and 
result in residual organ damage. For example, chronic abuse of 
products containing n-hexane and methyl-n-butyl ketone can cause

1168
Toxic Agents
unit V
peripheral neuropathies. Blood dyscrasias, liver damage, kidney 
injury, and hearing impairment are seen in patients who have abused 
solvents injurious to these organs. It has been known for some time 
that the brain is not spared residual damage, with long-term neuro-
logic and psychological sequelae (Caldemeyer et al., 1996; Lubman 
et al., 2008). Rosenberg et al. (2002) reported increased incidences 
of neurologic and neuropsychological effects in chronic solvent 
abusers compared to a control group of chronic drug abusers. 
Solvent abusers did significantly worse on tests of working memory 
and executive cognitive function, and a much higher percentage of 
the patients (44.0% vs. 25.5%) had structural abnormalities in sub-
cortical regions of the brain (i.e., basal ganglia, cerebellum, pons, 
and thalamus) as visualized by MRI (Fig. 24-2). Solvent abusers 
also showed moderate-to-severe diffuse abnormality of the cerebral 
white matter, consistent with that seen in earlier studies of neuro-
psychologically impaired toluene abusers (Rosenberg et al., 1988a, 
1988b). This condition was termed “white matter dementia,” as 
myelinated neurons are white in appearance. It was characterized 
primarily by diffuse cerebral, cerebellar, and brainstem atrophy, and 
ventricular enlargement (Fig. 24-2). Dementia in toluene abusers 
has been referred to as “toluene leukoencephalopathy” (Filley et al., 
2004). Leukoencephalopathy, also known as multifocal demyelinat-
ing disease, involves structural alteration of cerebral white matter, 
in which the myelin sheaths that cover nerve fibers are destroyed 
but axons are largely spared. Thus, toluene is among a long list of 
white matter toxins identified to date.
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 
IV (DSM IV) listed 292.82 “inhalant-induced persisting dementia” 
and 292.84 “inhalant-induced mood disorder.” The International 
Classification of Diseases-10 (ICD-10) included F18.7 “mental 
and behavior disorders due to use of volatile solvents; residual 
and late-onset psychiatric disorder.” DSM-5 lists Inhalant Use 
25
20
15
10
5
0
Basal ganglia
Cerebellum
Pons
Thalamus
11 (22%)
1 (2%)
9 (18%)
5 (10%)
5 (10%)
2 (4%)
21 (42%)
20 (40%)
Solvent abuse (n = 50)
Cocaine abuse (n = 51)
Number of participants with abnormalities (%)
A
B
C
Figure 24-2.   (A) Inhalant and cocaine abusers with subcortical abnormalities, by brain region affected. (B–C) Brain damage in a toluene abuser. (A) 
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans of chronic inhalant abusers and chronic cocaine abusers showed more frequent occurrence of abnormalities in the 
basal ganglia, cerebellum, pons, and thalamus for those who abused solvents. (Available at http://www.drugabuse.gov/NIDA notes/NNVol17N4/Chronic.html: 
from NIDA Notes, 2002.) MRI shows marked atrophy (shrinkage) of brain tissue in a toluene abuser (C) compared to a nonabusing individual (B). Note the 
smaller size and the larger empty (dark) space within the toluene abuser’s brain. The white outer circle in each image is the skull. (Available at http://www.
drugabuse.gov/PDF/RRInhalants.pdf.) (Courtesy of Neil Rosenberg, MD, as published in NIDA Research Report Series, March 2005.)

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1169
Disorder 304.60 (F18.20), which is defined as “a pattern of inhal-
ing ­hydrocarbon-based fumes, such as those found in solvents or 
paints, for the purpose of altering the mental state and leading to 
significant impairment.” The repeated practice is classified as a pat-
tern of substance abuse.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTAMINATION
Widespread use of solvents has resulted in their dissemination 
throughout the environment (Fig. 24-1). Everyone is exposed daily 
to solvents, as reflected by their common occurrence in blood of 
nonoccupationally exposed populations (Churchill et  al., 2001; 
Sexton et al., 2005; Blount et al., 2006; Jia et al., 2012). Because 
solvents as a chemical class are volatile, the preponderance of sol-
vents entering the environment do so by evaporation. The major-
ity of the more volatile organic chemicals (VOCs) volatilize when 
products containing them (e.g., aerosol propellants, paint thinners, 
cleaners, and soil fumigants) are used as intended. Solvent loss into 
the atmosphere also occurs during production, processing, storage, 
and transport activities, resulting in elevated concentrations in air 
in the proximity of point sources. Winds dilute and disperse sol-
vent vapors across the world. Atmospheric concentrations of most 
VOCs are usually extremely low (i.e., nondetectable to nanograms 
or a few micrograms per cubic meter (m3) of air). Relatively high 
atmospheric concentrations of certain solvents (e.g., 10 to 520 μg/
m3, or 3 to 163 ppb of benzene) have been measured in urban areas, 
around petrochemical plants, and in the immediate vicinity of haz-
ardous waste sites. Motor vehicle exhaust is a major contributor to 
hydrocarbon emissions (Mohamed et al., 2002). Fraser et al. (1998) 
measured very high levels of benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and 
xylenes in a Los Angeles roadway tunnel.
Solvent contamination of drinking water supplies is a major 
health concern. Although the majority of a solvent spilled onto 
the ground evaporates, some may permeate the soil and migrate 
through it until reaching groundwater or an impermeable material. 
In years past, the more lipophilic solvents were generally regarded 
as water insoluble. It is now recognized that all solvents are soluble 
in water to some extent. Some (e.g., alcohols, ketones, glycols, and 
glycol ethers) are freely water soluble. Maximum solubilities of 
some common hydrocarbon solvents range from 10 mg/L (ppm) for 
n-hexane to 24,000 ppm for bromochloromethane. High concentra-
tions of VOCs are sometimes found in the effluent of facilities of 
rubber producers, chemical companies, petrochemical plants, and 
paper mills. Concentrations diminish rapidly after VOCs enter bod-
ies of water, primarily due to dilution and evaporation. VOCs in 
waters rise to the surface or sink to the bottom, according to their 
density. VOCs on the surface will largely evaporate. VOCs on the 
bottom must depend on solubilization in water or mixing by current 
or wave action to reach the surface. VOCs in groundwater tend to 
remain trapped until the water reaches the surface, although some 
are subject to microbial modification. Concentrations in well water 
are rarely high enough for acute or subacute toxicity to be of con-
cern. The very low levels of some solvents typically found in water 
have, however, caused a great deal of concern and debate about their 
toxic and carcinogenic potential.
Potential health effects of solvent contaminants of water have 
received considerable attention over the past 40+ years. A report 
by Mason and McKay (1975), of an increased incidence of cancer 
in persons who drank water from the Mississippi River, prompted 
the EPA to analyze the water supply of New Orleans. The finding 
of some 76 synthetic organic chemicals, many of which were sol-
vents, prompted passage of the Safe Drinking Water Act in 1974. 
Chloroform (CHCl3) is the most frequently found VOC in finished 
drinking water supplies in the United States (ATSDR, 1997a). It and 
certain other trihalomethanes are formed by reaction of the chlorine 
added as a disinfectant with natural organic compounds present in 
the water. Levels of solvents found in drinking water in the United 
States are typically in the nanogram per liter (ppt) to microgram per 
liter (ppb) range, though concentrations in the low milligram per 
liter (ppm) range are found in water from wells situated in solvent 
plumes from hazardous waste sites and other point discharges. Of 
the thousands of chemicals found at hazardous waste sites, 6 of 
the 10 most commonly present in groundwater are solvents (Pohl 
et al., 2008).
People are subjected to solvents in environmental media by 
inhalation, ingestion, and skin contact. Considerable effort was 
devoted by the EPA, from 1979 to 1985, to assess personal exposure 
to solvents in different locales of the United States. TRI, PERC, 
benzene, xylenes, and ethylbenzene were most frequently found in 
highest concentrations (about 1 to 32 μg/m3) in air (Wallace et al., 
1987). Exhaled breath levels of some chemicals (e.g., CHCl3, ethyl-
benzene) corresponded to indoor air levels. Personal activities (e.g., 
smoking, visiting a dry cleaner or service station) and occupational 
exposures were believed to be largely responsible for exposures to 
other VOCs (e.g., benzene, toluene, xylenes, and PERC) (Ashley 
et  al., 1994). Subsequent studies, accounting for all pertinent 
exposure pathways, were conducted by the EPA in the mid-1990s 
(Gordon et al., 1999). Elliott et al. (2006) more recently reported 
that indoor exposures to VOCs did not have adverse effects on the 
respiratory function of 953 adults surveyed, with the exception of 
1,4-dichlorobenzene, a component of air fresheners, toilet bowl 
deodorants, and mothballs. It should be recognized that CHCl3 and 
other VOCs volatilize to some degree during home water usage, 
particularly when the water is heated. Thus, a significant propor-
tion of one’s total exposure to VOCs in tap water can occur via 
inhalation (Weisel and Jo, 1996), though the contribution of dermal 
exposure is relatively modest (Thrall et al., 2002).
TOXICOKINETICS
Toxicokinetic (TK) studies are playing an increasingly important 
role in reducing uncertainties in risk assessments of solvents and 
other chemicals (Andersen, 2003; Clewell et  al., 2004a; Creton 
et al., 2009). The fundamental goal of TK studies is to delineate the 
uptake and disposition of chemicals and certain of their metabolites 
in the body. It is now recognized that toxicity is a dynamic process, 
in which the degree and duration of injury of a target tissue are 
dependent on the net effect of toxicodynamic (TD) and TK pro-
cesses including systemic absorption, tissue deposition, metabo-
lism, interaction with cellular components, elimination, and tissue 
repair. Estimation of risk of toxicity from TK data is based on the 
fundamental concept that the intensity of response from an admin-
istered dose is dependent on the amount(s) of biologically active 
chemical moiety(ies) present in a target tissue (i.e., the tissue dose). 
A related concept is that the tissue dose in a given target organ in 
one species will have the same degree of effect as an equivalent 
target organ dose in a second species. This concept of tissue dose 
equivalence appears to be applicable in many cases to solvents, 
although TD differences are possible. Gaining an understanding of 
how the processes that govern solvent kinetics vary with dose, route 
of exposure, species, and even different individuals greatly reduces 
the number of assumptions that have to be made in assessment of 
health risks from exposure and effect data.
Volatility and lipophilicity are two of the most important prop-
erties of solvents that govern their absorption and disposition in the 
body. Most solvents are volatile under normal usage conditions,

1170
Toxic Agents
unit V
though volatility varies from compound to compound. Lipophilicity 
can also vary substantially, from quite water soluble (e.g., glycols, 
esters, and alcohols) to quite lipid soluble (e.g., halocarbons and 
aromatic hydrocarbons). Many solvents of particular concern at 
present are relatively lipid soluble and volatile, hence their desig-
nation as VOCs. These compounds have relatively low molecular 
weight and are uncharged. Thus, they pass freely through mem-
branes from areas of high-to-low concentration by passive diffusion.
Absorption
The majority of systemic absorption of inhaled VOCs occurs in 
the alveoli, although limited absorption has been demonstrated to 
occur in the upper respiratory tract (Stott and McKenna, 1984). 
Gases in the alveoli are thought to equilibrate almost instanta-
neously with blood in the pulmonary capillaries. Blood:air parti-
tion coefficients (PCs) of VOCs are important determinants of the 
extent of their uptake. A PC is defined by Gargas et al. (1989) as 
the ratio of concentration of VOC achieved between two different 
media at equilibrium. As blood is largely aqueous, the more hydro-
philic solvents have relatively high blood:air PCs, which favor 
extensive uptake. Gargas et al. (1989) determined in vitro PCs for 
55 VOCs in F344 rats. Human blood:air values were measured for 
36 of the compounds. Because VOCs diffuse from areas of high-to-
low concentration, increases in respiratory rate (to maintain a high 
alveolar concentration) and in cardiac output/pulmonary blood 
flow (to maintain a large concentration gradient by removing capil-
lary blood containing the VOC) enhance systemic absorption.
Systemic uptake of solvents during ongoing inhalation expo-
sures is dependent on tissue loading and metabolism, in addition to 
the factors noted above. Percent uptake is initially high, but progres-
sively declines as the chemical accumulates in tissues, and the level 
of chemical in venous blood returning in the pulmonary circula-
tion increases. A near steady state or equilibrium will be reached 
upon inhalation of a fixed concentration of lipophilic solvents. The 
approach to equilibrium is asymptotic. Despite continued inhalation 
of lipophilic solvents, levels in the blood and tissues (other than fat) 
generally only increase modestly. Percent uptake remains relatively 
constant for the duration of exposure, with metabolism and accu-
mulation in adipose tissue largely responsible for the continuing 
absorption. Hydrophilic solvents take considerably longer to reach 
steady state, due to the extended time required for equilibration of 
chemical in the inspired air with that in total body water.
Solvents are well absorbed from the GI tract. Peak blood lev-
els are observed within a few minutes of dosing fasted subjects, 
although the presence of fatty food in the GI tract can significantly 
delay absorption of lipophilic solvents. It is frequently assumed that 
100% of an oral dose of most solvents is absorbed systemically. 
The vehicle or diluent in which a solvent is ingested can affect its 
absorption and TK. Kim et al. (1990a, 1990b), for example, found 
that a corn oil vehicle served as a reservoir in the gut to delay GI 
absorption of carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) in rats. Although bioavail-
ability of CCl4 given in corn oil and in an aqueous emulsion was 
the same, peak blood CCl4 levels and acute hepatotoxicity were 
much lower in the corn oil group. Other factors that can influence 
the oral absorption of certain classes of chemicals have relatively 
little influence on most lipophilic solvents, due to their rapid passive 
diffusion in the entire GI tract.
Dermal absorption of solvents can result in both local and 
systemic effects (Semple, 2004). Skin contact with vapors and 
concentrated solutions of solvents is a common occurrence in the 
workplace. Dermal contact with solvent contaminants of water can 
also occur in the home and in recreational settings (Weisel and Jo, 
1996; Gordon et al., 2006). Lipophilic solvents penetrate the stra-
tum corneum, the skin’s barrier to absorption, by passive diffusion. 
Important determinants of the rate of dermal absorption of solvents 
include the chemical concentration, surface area exposed, exposure 
duration, integrity and thickness of the stratum corneum, and lipo-
philicity and molecular weight of the solvent (EPA, 1998a). Skin 
penetration can be quantified in laboratory animals and humans by 
a variety of in vitro and in vivo techniques (Morgan et al., 1991; 
Nakai et al., 1999). Although absorption rates measured by these 
methods may vary numerically, there is often good agreement in 
their relative ranking of chemicals’ ability to penetrate the skin. 
Dermal permeability constants are typically two to four times lower 
for human than for rodent skin (McDougal et al., 1990). The extent 
of dermal absorption in occupational and environmental exposure 
settings should be taken into account when conducting risk assess-
ments of solvents.
Transport and Distribution
Chemicals and nutrients absorbed into portal venous blood from 
the GI tract can be removed from the bloodstream by first-pass, or 
presystemic elimination. As VOCs are rapidly absorbed and human 
intestinal epithelium apparently does not contain cytochrome P450 
2E1 (CYP2E1) (Paine et al., 2006), the primary CYP isoform that 
metabolizes low doses of many VOCs, their first-pass GI metabo-
lism should be negligible. Blood in the portal venous circulation 
passes through the liver before entering the arterial circulation. 
Solvents are also subject to exhalation by the lungs during their 
first pass through the pulmonary circulation. Therefore, solvents 
that are well metabolized and quite volatile are most efficiently 
eliminated before they enter the arterial blood. The efficiency of the 
hepatic first-pass elimination is thus dependent on the chemical, as 
well as the rate at which it arrives in the liver. Pulmonary first-pass 
elimination, in contrast, is believed to be a zero-order process, as a 
fixed percentage of the chemical is thought to exit the pulmonary 
blood at each pass through the pulmonary circulation. Indeed, Lee 
et al. (1996) demonstrated in rats that pulmonary first-pass elimina-
tion of TCE was relatively constant over a range of doses, but that 
hepatic elimination was inversely related to dose. Thirty years ago 
Andersen (1981) theorized that the liver was capable of removing 
“virtually all” of an orally administered VOC, if the amount in the 
portal blood was not great enough to saturate metabolism. Liu et al. 
(2009) could not detect TCE in the arterial blood of rats gavaged 
with 0.1 µg TCE/kg in an aqueous emulsion, but did find TCE at 
bolus doses more than or equal to 1 µg/kg. Interestingly, bioavail-
ability was consistently about 12% in the dosage range of 100 to 
5000 µg TCE/kg. These findings indicate that first-pass elimination 
affords extrahepatic organs substantial, albeit not complete, protec-
tion from environmentally-encountered levels of well-metabolized 
VOCs.
Solvents are transported by the arterial blood and taken up 
by tissues according to their blood flow and mass and tissue:blood 
PCs (Astrand, 1983). Relatively hydrophilic solvents solubilize in 
plasma. Nevertheless, as much as 50% of such chemicals may still 
be carried by erythrocytes (Lam et al., 1990). These researchers 
found that lipophilic solvents do not bind appreciably to plasma 
proteins or hemoglobin, but partition into hydrophobic sites in these 
molecules. Lipophilic solvents also partition into phospholipids, 
lipoproteins, and cholesterol present in the blood. The brain is an 
example of a rapidly perfused tissue with a relatively high lipid con-
tent. Lipophilic solvents therefore quickly accumulate in the brain 
after the initiation of exposures (Warren et al., 2000). Inhalation 
of high concentrations of halothane, TCE, and CHCl3 can produce

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1171
CNS effects as profound as surgical anesthesia within as little as 1 
to 2 minutes. Redistribution to poorly perfused, lipoidal tissues sub-
sequently occurs. Adipose tissue gradually accumulates relatively 
large amounts of VOCs, and slowly releases them back into the 
blood, due to high fat:blood PCs and low blood perfusion rate.
Route of exposure can significantly influence target organ 
deposition and toxicity of solvents. Direct route-to-route extrapola-
tion does not take physiological differences in absorption pathways 
into account. All of the cardiac output passes through the pulmo-
nary circulation versus about 20% for the GI tract. Also, the alveolar 
surface area for absorption is approximately 20 times that of the 
entire GI tract in humans. VOCs absorbed in the lungs directly enter 
the arterial circulation and are transported throughout the body. In 
contrast, VOCs absorbed from the GI tract largely enter the portal 
circulation and are subject to first-pass elimination by both the liver 
and the lungs. The GI epithelium contains certain monooxygen-
ases, notably Cyp3a in rats (Mitschke et al., 2008) and CYP3A4 
in humans (Ding and Kaminsky, 2003), though these isozymes do 
not participate to a significant extent in metabolism of most sol-
vents. The liver, however, takes up and metabolizes a portion of 
many VOCs following their ingestion. It is not surprising then that 
extrahepatic organs receive a relatively high dose upon inhalation of 
VOCs. Inhalation of 1,1-dichloroethylene (1-1-DCE) produced sub-
stantially greater renal damage in rats than did gastric infusion of an 
equivalent dose over the same time-frame (Bruckner et al., 2010).
The pattern of ingestion of solvents can significantly influ-
ence their TK and health effects. For convenience, test chemicals 
are typically given daily to animals as a single bolus by gavage 
in short- and long-term oral toxicity and carcinogenicity studies. 
Actual human exposures to solvents in drinking water are quite dif-
ferent, in that people typically ingest water in divided doses. High, 
daily gavage doses of CHCl3 and other halocarbons have produced 
hepatocellular carcinoma in B6C3F1 mice. No evidence of hepatic 
tumorigenesis was seen, however, when these mice were given 
the same doses of the chemical in their drinking water (Jorgenson 
et al., 1985; Klaunig et al., 1986). Female B6C3F1 mice exhibited 
hepatocellular necrosis and regenerative hyperplasia when gavaged 
with CHCl3. Consumptions of the same doses in water were with-
out ill effect (Larson et al., 1994). Similarly, the maximum blood 
level of CCl4 was found to be much higher and hepatotoxicity more 
severe in rats dosed with CCl4 by gavage, than in those given the 
same dose over 2 hours by gastric infusion (Sanzgiri et al., 1995, 
1997). Similarly, 1,1-DCE was much more hepatotoxic to rats when 
given as an oral bolus than when infused for 2 hours into the stom-
ach (Bruckner et al., 2010). Oral bolus doses of solvents can also 
cause damage of extrahepatic organs by exceeding the capacity of 
hepatic and pulmonary first-pass elimination, as well as protection 
and repair processes of hepatocytes.
Elimination
The rate of systemic elimination of different solvents varies con-
siderably. The two major means of systemic elimination of VOCs 
are metabolism and exhalation. The rate and extent of metabolic 
clearance are dose- and compound-dependent. Exhalation is deter-
mined largely by the rate of pulmonary blood flow, the chemical’s 
blood:air PC, and the alveolar ventilation rate. The more volatile, 
lipophilic VOCs are exhaled the most readily, because they have the 
lower blood:air PCs (Gargas et al., 1989). A good “case in point” is 
the comparison of toluene with acetone. The extent of CNS depres-
sion caused by each chemical is dependent on the concentration of 
the parent compound present in the brain (Bruckner and Peterson, 
1981). As can be seen in Fig. 24-3, recovery of rats from toluene 
anesthesia occurs within minutes of exposure cessation. This can 
be attributed to redistribution of toluene from the brain to body 
fat and other tissues, as well as to relatively rapid metabolism 
and exhalation. In contrast, recovery from acetone narcosis does 
not occur for at least 9 hours postexposure. As acetone is water 
soluble, limited amounts are deposited in the brain. It is instead 
distributed in the considerable volume of the blood and other body 
water. Clearance of acetone is slow due to its large volume of distri-
bution and its relatively slow metabolism and exhalation. Acetone’s 
water solubility is responsible for its relatively high blood:air PC 
and retention in the blood. Thus, acetone is available for diffusion 
into the brain and induction of a modest degree of CNS depression 
for a prolonged time.
Body fat plays an important role in the elimination of lipo-
philic solvents. Blood levels of such solvents drop very rapidly dur-
ing the initial elimination phase following cessation of exposure. 
This so-called redistribution phase is characterized by rapid diffu-
sion of solvents from the blood into tissues. Equilibration of blood 
and adipose tissue is prolonged due to the small fraction of cardiac 
output (about 3%) supplying fat depots. Body fat increases the vol-
ume of distribution and total body burden of lipophilic solvents. 
Deequilibration from adipose tissue during the terminal elimination 
phase is prolonged, due to low blood flow and high fat:blood PCs. 
Sato et al. (1975) demonstrated slower elimination of benzene from 
female than from male rats and humans, due to the females’ higher 
body fat content. Rats with excess body fat experienced leukopenia 
during chronic benzene exposure, whereas their thinner counter-
parts did not.
Metabolism
Biotransformation plays a key role in modulating the toxicities 
of many solvents. Organic solvents are poorly soluble in water. 
Certain cellular enzymes can convert them to relatively water-
soluble derivatives, which may be more readily eliminated in the 
largely aqueous urine and/or bile. Conversion of a bioactive parent 
compound to a less bioactive or inactive metabolite(s) that (is/are) 
efficiently eliminated is termed metabolic inactivation, or detoxifi-
cation. Toluene, for example, accumulates in neuronal membranes 
and inhibits their functions. Toluene is metabolized to hydroxyl and 
carboxyl metabolites, which are too polar to accumulate or remain 
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0
1
2
3
Toluene
X performance score
Acetone
(Cessation of toluene exposure)
1
2
3
4
5
9
21
Hours postexposure
Hours of
exposure
Figure 24-3.   Comparison of the induction of and recovery from toluene and 
acetone narcosis. Rats inhaled 45 mg/L of toluene or acetone for 20 minutes 
or 3 hours, respectively. Animal performance/reflexes were monitored peri-
odically as measures of the degree of CNS depression. (Reproduced from 
Bruckner and Peterson, 1981, with permission from Elsevier.)

1172
Toxic Agents
unit V
in substantial quantities in neuronal membranes. Thus, metabo-
lism serves to detoxify and accelerate the elimination of toluene. 
Metabolism of other solvents can produce reactive metabolites 
that are cytotoxic and/or mutagenic. This phenomenon is known 
as metabolic activation, or bioactivation. Benzene, for example, 
is oxidized to a variety of epoxides, quinones, and semiquinones 
that can produce hematopoietic toxicities and leukemia (Snyder, 
2004). Benzene and many other VOCs are converted via multiple 
metabolic pathways to products of varying toxicity. Some of these 
competing pathways are considered bioactivation, others detoxifi-
cation pathways. A variety of factors can influence the prominence 
of the different pathways and hence alter toxicity outcomes.
The initial step in biotransformation of relatively lipophilic 
solvents is catalyzed primarily by microsomal cytochrome P450s 
(CYPs). They are a “superfamily” of hemoproteins that act as 
terminal oxidases of the mixed-function oxidase (MFO) system. 
Their mode of action is described in Chap. 6. CYPs can catalyze a 
number of oxidative reactions, as well as certain reductive reactions 
(Omiecinski et al., 1999). Some 40 different human CYP isoforms 
have been identified to date, but six (CYPs 3A4, 2D6, 2C9, 2C19, 
2E1, and 1A2) account for the majority of xenobiotic metabolism 
(Guengerich, 2006, Zanger and Schwab, 2013). CYPs are generally 
thought to have broad, overlapping substrate specificities, as dem-
onstrated by Kobayashi et al. (2002) in rats. Xenobiotic metabolism 
under physiological conditions may favor one or two isoforms as 
the primary catalysts for a given chemical. Different isoforms can 
predominate at different concentrations of a chemical.
The outcome of exposure to a potentially toxic solvent can 
depend on the relative abundance of CYP isoforms. Expression of 
CYPs can differ considerably as a result of genetic polymorphisms 
and exposure to chemicals that induce or inhibit specific isoforms. 
A number of factors have been found to be sources of individual 
variability in CYP induction (Tang et al., 2005). Inheritable gene 
alterations, such as base changes and deletions, can result not only 
in functionally deficient enzymes, but also in the absence of certain 
P450s (Ma et al., 2004). As CYPs have different modes of regula-
tory control, their expression in response to various inducers and 
inhibitors varies. It should also be recognized that frequently there 
are interspecies differences in the presence, regulation, and catalytic 
activities of CYPs (Lewis et al., 1998; Guengerich, 2006).
There has been a focus on identification of CYPs that par-
ticipate in the metabolism of individual solvents. Nakajima et al. 
(1992a) found that low concentrations of TCE in rat liver were 
metabolized primarily by CYP2E1, a constitutive high-affinity, low-
capacity isoform. CYP2B1/2, a low-affinity, high-capacity form 
predominated under high-dose (substrate) conditions. CYP2E1 
was observed to be a major contributor to the metabolism of TCE 
and benzene, but not toluene. CYP1A1 catalyzed the formation of 
o-cresol, but not benzyl alcohol from toluene. CYP1A1 oxidized 
TCE in mice but not in rats. Thus, CYP isoforms exhibit species 
selectivity, substrate selectivity, and regioselectivity for solvents 
(Nakajima, 1997).
CYP2E1 is a major catalyst of the oxidation of a variety of 
low-molecular-weight xenobiotics, including many solvents. 
CYP2E1 is found predominantly in liver, with lower levels present 
in kidneys, lungs, brain, testes, and other extrahepatic tissues of 
rodents and humans. Guengerich et al. (1991) reported that human 
CYP2E1 is primarily responsible for oxidation of some 16 halo-
genated and aromatic hydrocarbons, including benzene, styrene, 
CHCl3, TCE, and vinyl chloride. These compounds are oxidized 
to electrophilic metabolites, capable of causing cytotoxicity and/or 
mutagenicity (Raucy et al., 1993). The enzyme is also responsible 
for reduction of CCl4 to free radicals (see the discussion on CCl4 in 
this chapter). CYP2E1 activity is associated with the pathogenesis 
of alcoholic cirrhosis, through formation of highly reactive oxy-
gen radicals and acetaldehyde from ethanol (Gonzalez, 2005; Lu 
and Cederbaum, 2008). CYP2E1 is inducible by ethanol, acetone, 
pyridazine, chlorzoxazone, isoniazid, and other of its substrates. 
Activity of the enzyme varies from species to species and from 
human to human (Snawder and Lipscomb, 2000). Overnight fast-
ing is widely recognized to induce CYP2E1, due in part to release 
of acetone during lipolysis (Bruckner et al., 2002). Starving rats, 
however, apparently must engage in coprophagy for induction to 
occur (Chung et al., 2001). Such differences in CYP2E1 activity/
levels may play a major role in susceptibility to the toxicity and 
carcinogenicity of ethanol and a number of other solvents.
A variety of environmental factors can predispose people to 
harmful effects of solvents by altering P450s (Lof and Johanson, 
1998). Ethanol is an effective CYP2E1 inducer when ingested 
repeatedly in substantial amounts (see the sub section “Exogenous 
Factors”). The person who drinks in such a manner may be subject 
to potentiation of solvent toxicity, due to increased solvent meta-
bolic activation (Manno et al., 1996). Conversely, ethanol consumed 
at about the same time as a solvent exposure can be protective by 
competitively inhibiting metabolic activation of the solvent. Thus, 
the timing of exposures is important. Folland et al. (1976) reported 
severe CCl4-induced hepatorenal injury in workers at an isopropyl 
alcohol bottling plant. These subjects’ preexposure to the alcohol, 
which is metabolized to acetone, had markedly induced CYP2E1. 
Their induced condition resulted in a substantial increase in the 
metabolic activation and cytotoxicity of CCl4, upon inhalation of 
normally nontoxic concentrations of the halocarbon.
The metabolic basis of solvent interactions receives consider-
able attention. The consequence of CYP2E1 induction by one sol-
vent or drug depends on the nature of the second solvent. Kaneko 
et al. (1994) reported that ethanol pretreatment of rats has a more 
profound effect on the TK of TRI (poorly metabolized) than TCE 
(well metabolized). Similarly, ethanol pretreatment of rats results in 
a greater increase in metabolism and hepatotoxicity of CCl4 (rela-
tively poorly metabolized) than CHCl3 (well metabolized) (Wang 
et al., 1997). As capacity-limited (i.e., metabolic capacity of the 
liver) metabolism prevails for poorly metabolized solvents, irre-
spective of dose, induction of their metabolism could be toxico-
logically significant in high (occupational) or low (environmental) 
exposure settings. In contrast, alterations of the bioactivation of 
low doses of well-metabolized solvents should be of little conse-
quence, as their biotransformation is perfusion (i.e., hepatic blood 
flow) limited. Lipscomb et al. (2003), for example, utilized a PBTK 
model to calculate that a sixfold interindividual difference in TCE 
metabolism resulted in less than 2% change in the total amount of 
TCE oxidized by persons inhaling only 50 ppm for 8 hours or drink-
ing 2 L of water containing 5 ppb TCE. Under such circumstances, 
interindividual metabolic differences should have little influence on 
cancer risks posed by trace levels of such solvents.
Physiological Modeling
Physiologically based toxicokinetic (PBTK) models have been 
developed to provide predictions of chemical concentrations in 
blood and tissues as a function of time (Dixit et al., 2003). PBTK 
models are thus used to relate the administered, or external dose to 
the blood and/or tissue (internal) dose of parent compound and/or 
bioactive moiety. If there is sufficient knowledge of the physiology 
of the test animal/tissue and interactions of the bioactive moiety 
with cellular components and ensuing responses, physiologically 
based toxicodynamic (PBTD) models can be developed (Conolly,

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1173
2002). Relatively few PBTD models have been published to date 
for solvents. Tan et al. (2003) linked an existing PBTK model for 
CHCl3 with data for hepatocellular death and regenerative hyper-
plasia to predict liver tumor response in mice. Luke et al. (2010) 
expanded upon the work of Tan et al. (2003) by developing biologi-
cally based dose–response (BBDR) models for CHCl3 and CCl4, 
based upon key events of cytotoxicity and proliferation, to forecast 
liver tumor incidence in female B6C3F1 mice. The BBDR models 
consisted of a chemical-specific PBPK model for each chemical 
linked to a PBPD model of cytotoxicity and cellular proliferation, 
linked in turn to a clonal growth model to predict tumor incidence. 
Tan et al. (2011) have utilized models to evaluate the likelihood of 
TK and TD interactions of different chemical mixtures.
Development of PBTK models for anesthetic gases was initially 
undertaken in the 1920s and 1930s. Modeling was used in the design 
of experiments and dosage regimens for drugs, but the practice was 
not extended to industrial chemicals until the 1970s and 1980s. A 
“benchmark” paper by Ramsey and Andersen (1984) described the 
development of a PBTK model for styrene. By 1995, PBTK models 
had been developed for about 50 chemical environmental contami-
nants (Leung and Paustenbach, 1995). Some 28 of these 50 chemi-
cals were solvents. Andersen (2003) more recently identified some 
700 papers that dealt with PBTK models and/or their applications 
to toxicology and risk assessment. Thus, physiological models are 
being developed and used with increasing frequency to incorporate 
dosimetry and mechanistic data into non-cancer and cancer risk 
assessments (Krishnan and Johanson, 2005; Thompson et al., 2008), 
as well as pediatric drug development (Barrett et al., 2012).
Physiological modeling accounts for species- and dose-­
dependent shifts from linear to nonlinear kinetics, which impact 
tissue doses of bioactive moiety or moieties. The models are well 
suited for use with species-to-species extrapolations, because 
human physiological and metabolic parameter values can be input-
ted into animal models, and simulations of target tissue doses and 
effects in humans generated. Thus, solvent exposures necessary 
to produce the same target organ dose in humans, as those found 
experimentally to cause unacceptable cancer or noncancer risks in 
test animals, can be determined for some chemicals with reasonable 
certainty. In cases where there may be species differences in tissue 
sensitivity, PBTD models must be used to forecast toxicologically 
effective target organ doses.
The influence of interindividual variability in model param-
eters has received considerable attention (Price et al., 2003; Dorne, 
2004). Jonsson and Johanson have performed model fitting in a 
Bayesian framework using Markov chain Monte Carlo simulation to 
reduce parameter uncertainty for methylene chloride (MC) (Jonsson 
and Johanson, 2001) and styrene (Jonsson and Johanson, 2002). 
A Bayesian analysis of a PBPK model for TCE yielded improved 
agreement of simulated and empirical TK data (Hack et al., 2006). 
Covington et al. (2007) utilized this methodology to estimate that 
only about 2% of low inhaled doses of PERC is metabolized by 
humans to TCA. Qui et al. (2010) subsequently reported a simi-
lar finding when they used the approach in an expanded and more 
detailed assessment of PERC kinetics and TCA production. The 
percentage is far lower than that has been assumed by regulatory 
agencies in the absence of data. Hierarchical analyses are proving 
quite useful in characterization of model parameter uncertainty and 
variability, and thereby in providing improved predictions of inter-
nal dosimetry for risk assessments.
PBTK modeling is finding increasing use in estimating expo-
sure levels that result in concentrations of solvents measured 
in blood, exhaled breath, or urine (i.e., biomarkers) in humans. 
Different human populations may have highly variable exposures, 
activity, physiology, and kinetics. A procedure termed reverse 
dosimetry has been employed to reconstruct population exposures 
from limited biomarker data (Clewell et al., 2008). Reverse dosim-
etry, integrating PBPK modeling with exposure pattern character-
ization, Monte Carlo analysis, and other statistical tools, has been 
successfully employed to estimate distributions of exposures con-
sistent with concentrations of TCE (Sohn et al., 2004), CHCl3 (Tan 
et al., 2007; Lyons et al., 2008), and other trihalomethanes (Tan 
et al., 2007) measured in human blood or exhaled breath. These 
exposure distributions can be compared to occupational and envi-
ronmental exposure guidelines, in order to evaluate potential health 
risks in different situations.
POTENTIALLY SENSITIVE 
SUBPOPULATIONS
There is considerable variability in responses of humans to solvents 
and other xenobiotics. Although information on interindividual dif-
ferences in the kinetics and toxicity of solvents is usually limited, 
some significant differences are reported and should be taken into 
account in risk assessments (Grassman et al., 1998; Hattis et al., 
1999). Children within specific age groups appear to be even more 
variable than adults (Hattis et al., 2003). Current EPA cancer and 
noncancer risk assessment practices are generally considered to 
be quite protective of potentially vulnerable subgroups, due to 
the use of multiple uncertainty factors and conservative default 
assumptions.
Endogenous Factors
Children  Currently, there is considerable interest in regula-
tory and scientific issues related to protection of children’s health 
(Hines et al., 2010; Landrigan and Goldman, 2011; Felter et al., 
2015). The potential sensitivity of infants and children to pesti-
cides and other chemicals was brought to the public’s attention 
by a National Academy of Sciences’ report (NAS, 1993). Ensuing 
Presidential Executive Order 13045 in 1997, directed all federal 
agencies to make protection of children a high priority and to con-
sider risks to children when making policies and setting standards. 
The resulting Food Quality and Protection Act of 1996 dictated that 
an additional 10-fold safety/uncertainty factor be used in pesticide 
risk assessments when pediatric toxicity and TK data are unavail-
able. This is almost always the case for insecticides, solvents, and 
other chemicals. Application of the 10-fold children’s safety fac-
tor to non-­pesticides has been considered. The Pediatric Research 
Equity Act of 2003 requires pharmaceutical companies seeking 
FDA’s approval of new drugs to assess a compound’s safety and 
efficacy at different doses in pediatric patients or surrogates.
Very little information is available on the toxic potential of 
solvents and most other chemicals in infants and children. There 
are several well-known examples of compounds (e.g., lead, tha-
lidomide, chloromycetin, and diazepam) to which fetuses or neo-
nates are particularly susceptible. Results of experiments with 
chlorpyrifos in immature rats raised enough concern about possible 
neurodevelopmental disorders in children that use of a number 
of organophosphates was severely restricted, and most have been 
removed from the home-use market (Colborn, 2006). Compilations 
of maximally tolerated doses (MTDs) of chemotherapeutic drugs 
are among our most definitive data on age-dependent toxicity in 
humans. Clinical trials of diverse groups of antineoplastic drugs 
have revealed that their toxic effects are often similar qualitatively, 
and usually differ quantitatively by a factor of less than or equal 
to 2 (NAS, 1993). MTDs for anticancer drugs in children are

1174
Toxic Agents
unit V
frequently higher than those for adults (Bruckner, 2000). Ginsberg 
et al. (2002) assembled a database with which TK parameters for 
adults and children can be compared for 45 drugs. These develop-
mental metabolic profiles are relevant to some solvents and other 
environmental chemicals.
Increasing numbers of toxicology studies are being carried 
out in immature laboratory animals. Compilations of LD50 values 
and other data reveal that neonatal rodents are usually more sensi-
tive to chemicals than adults (Hasegawa et al., 2007). Variances 
are usually no more than two- to threefold, but can be as much 
as 10-fold (Goldenthal, 1971). The younger and more immature 
a subject, the more different its response from that of the adult. 
The newborn mouse and rat more nearly resemble the human fetus 
during the third trimester than during the human neonate’s initial 
weeks and months of life. Thus, it is not surprising that newborn 
rodents would be much more sensitive to many toxicants than adult 
rodents or human newborns. Growth and maturation are, of course, 
much more rapid in rodents. A few days growth of mice and rats 
can result in substantial changes in metabolism, disposition, and 
toxicity (Ginsberg et al., 2004). It is generally accepted that there 
are windows of vulnerability, or periods during the development 
of the nervous, audiovisual, immune, reproductive, endocrine, and 
other organ systems when the intricate, fragile maturational pro-
cesses may be particularly sensitive to xenobiotics (Scheuplein 
et al., 2002; Makri et al., 2004). These windows occur at different 
ages and last for different periods of time in different species. This 
makes the choice of an appropriate animal model for children com-
plex and cross-species comparisons more difficult than usual with 
adult risk assessments (Ginsberg et al., 2004; Morford et al., 2004).
Despite a paucity of data, some logical assumptions can be 
made about age-dependent changes in the TK and toxicity of sol-
vents. GI absorption of solvents would not be expected to vary 
with age, as most solvents are absorbed rapidly and completely by 
passive diffusion from the entire GI tract. Systemic absorption of 
inhaled solvents may be greater in infants and children. Their car-
diac output and respiratory rates are relatively high, although their 
alveolar surface area is lower than that of adults (Sarangapani et al., 
2003). Reduced plasma protein binding in neonates and infants may 
be of consequence for certain solvent metabolites. Low-binding 
capacity for TCA, for example, could result in more of the mouse 
hepatocarcinogen being available for hepatic uptake, as well as for 
renal clearance. Extracellular water, expressed as percent of body 
weight, is highest in newborns and diminishes through childhood. 
The larger volume of distribution for water-soluble solvents results 
in their slower clearance and longer duration of action. Body fat 
is high from about 6 months to 3 years of age, and then steadily 
decreases until adolescence, when it increases again in females. 
As lipophilic solvents accumulate in adipose tissue, more body fat 
would result in higher body burdens, slower clearance, and longer 
duration of action.
Changes in xenobiotic biotransformation during maturation 
may have the greatest impact on susceptibility to chemical toxic-
ity and carcinogenicity. Poisonings of premature and term human 
newborns by benzyl alcohol, hexachlorophene, diazepam, chloram-
phenicol, and certain other compounds are primarily attributable 
to deficits in hepatic phase II metabolic (i.e., conjugative) capac-
ity. Maturational studies of human liver reveal that CYP isoforms 
are expressed asynchronously (Hines, 2008; 2013). There have 
been comprehensive efforts to characterize the ontogeny of human 
hepatic phase I enzymes from gestation through adolescence. Levels 
of CYP2E1, the primary catalyst of oxidation of a variety of sol-
vents, are very low in fetal liver, increase steadily for the first year, 
and remain relatively constant through adolescence (Johnsrud et al., 
2003). Blanco et al. (2000) failed to find an age-related difference in 
the maximal in vitro activity of CYP2E1 or other CYP isoforms in 
liver microsomes from donors from infancy to 93 years old. More 
rapid systemic clearance of many compounds by young children 
than by adults (Ginsberg et al., 2002) is generally believed to result 
from the child’s liver’s larger volume and more rapid perfusion rate 
(Murry et al., 1995; Sarangapani et al., 2003). Glomerular filtra-
tion and renal tubular secretion are quite low at birth, but increase 
substantially during the first 6 months to 1 year (Scheuplein et al., 
2002). The half-life of creatinine, a substance eliminated entirely 
by glomerular filtration, is about half the adult value at 1 year. The 
net result of multiple age-related TK changes, some with offsetting 
effects, is difficult to predict.
A number of authorities have advocated the use of PBTK/TD 
models to collectively account for the unique and changing charac-
teristics of children (Clewell et al., 2004a; Daston et al., 2004). A 
few PBTK models have been published for predicting the internal 
dosimetry of chemicals in immature rats. Timchalk et al. (2007) 
developed a BBDR model for chlorpyrifos (CPF), a widely used 
organophosphate insecticide. More pronounced depression of 
erythrocyte and brain acetylcholinesterase (AChE) activities, appar-
ently resulting from higher CPF-oxon blood and brain levels, were 
forecast in preweanling than in adult rats. These age-dependent dif-
ferences in AChE depression were not manifest at low CPF doses 
(Marty et al., 2012). A human PBTK model for the chemical did not 
predict differences between 3-year-olds and adults in inhibition of 
brain or erythrocyte AChE activity (Hinderliter et al., 2011).
PBTK modeling has been used to forecast the TK of six 
inhaled VOCs (TCE, PERC, benzene, CHCl3, methylene chlo-
ride [MC], and methyl ethyl ketone) in 10-day-old and adult rats 
(Rodriguez et al., 2007). VOC blood levels were forecast to be up 
to 3.8-fold higher in the preweanlings, due primarily to their lower 
metabolism and faster respiration. Many of the input parameters 
were estimated or scaled, however, rather than measured. Empirical 
data were not provided to assess the accuracy of the simulations. 
Tornero-Velez et al. (2010) developed a PBTK model that clari-
fied why preweanling rats are more susceptible than adults to the 
acute toxicity of high doses of deltamethrin (DLM), a pyrethroid 
insecticide. These researchers were among the first to rely primarily 
on age-specific input parameters and to demonstrate concordance 
between measured and simulated time-courses of a bioactive moiety 
(i.e., the neurotoxic parent compound). Blood and brain levels of 
DLM were inversely related to age in 10-, 21-, 40-, and 90-day-old 
rats. Inefficient metabolic detoxification was shown to be a major 
contributor to preweanling rats’ susceptibility to DLM (Anand 
et al., 2006a), though immaturities in other kinetic processes may 
also be factors (Mortuza etl al., 2018).
Effort is being devoted to development of PBTK models for 
VOCs in human infants and children. Clewell et al. (2004a) con-
structed what they termed a life-stage model to simulate blood lev-
els of four solvents (isopropanol, vinyl chloride, MC, and PERC) 
and their primary metabolites in different life stages. This was 
intended to be a preliminary model, in view of the lack of vali-
dated models for the younger groups and the required number of 
simplifying assumptions in the face of uncertainties about many 
age-specific parameters. In general, dose metrics for the chemi-
cals across life stages were within a factor of 2, except during the 
early postnatal period when the largest TK differences occurred. 
Gentry et al. (2003) took a similar approach to forecast internal 
dosimetry of vinyl chloride, isopropanol, MC, and PERC in human 
offspring during pregnancy and lactation. In general, blood con-
centrations of the VOCs were lower in neonates during lactation 
than in the fetus during gestation. Fetal/neonatal VOC exposures

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1175
were generally several orders of magnitude lower than maternal 
exposures. Sarangapani et al. (2003) developed a PBTK model that 
integrated key age-specific respiratory tract parameters, such that 
the disposition of four VOCs (styrene, vinyl chloride, isopropanol, 
and PERC) could be forecast in children and adults. Differences in 
blood levels of parent compounds in infants and adults were com-
parable or varied less than twofold during the first year of life. Nong 
et al. (2006) incorporated measured age-specific liver volumes and 
CYP2E1 content into a PBPK model for toluene to predict internal 
doses (blood levels) of the parent compound in adults and in chil-
dren of different age groups. CYP2E1 content was the key model 
input parameter for neonates, whereas liver blood-flow rate was pre-
dominant after a few months of age. Combined interindividual and 
interage variability in the area under blood level versus time curves 
(AUCs) was within a factor of 2, except for the neonates, which had 
somewhat higher AUCs.
The aforementioned findings suggest that differences in dosim-
etry of parent solvents across life stages are usually well within the 
3.3 TK component of the classical 10-fold interspecies uncertainty 
factor. Relative little work has been done, however, to model sol-
vent metabolite dosimetry in different age groups. Potential PD 
differences should also be taken into account in children’s risk 
assessments.
Elderly  Age-related changes in effects of xenobiotics have pri-
marily been of interest in the field of drug therapy (Bressler and 
Bahl, 2003; McLean and LeCouteur, 2004; Reeve et  al., 2015). 
More attention is now being paid to exposures and vulnerabilities of 
the elderly to other chemicals (Geller and Zenick, 2005). The EPA 
encourages evaluation of toxicity across the entire lifespan, with a 
focus on lifestages with their own unique sensitivity (Brown et al., 
2008). Data are sorely lacking, however, on the relative susceptibil-
ity of geriatric populations to solvents and many other industrial 
chemicals. The aging CNS undergoes changes (e.g., neuronal loss, 
altered neurotransmitter and receptor levels, and reduced adaptabil-
ity to effects of toxicants) (Ginsberg et al., 2005), that may pre-
dispose to more pronounced neurologic effects by solvents. Older 
people do appear to be more sensitive to the CNS-depressant effects 
of ethanol, due in part to lower gastric alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) 
activity (Seitz et al., 1993). Kiesswetter et al. (1997) observed the 
most pronounced neurobehavioral effects in older workers with the 
highest single or mixed organic solvent exposures. Memory, atten-
tion, visual perception, and motor skills diminish with aging, even 
in the absence of chemical exposure. Thus, these findings could be 
interpreted as merely additive (i.e., aging + solvents effects), or as 
exacerbation during a vulnerable life stage. Paradoxically, a subse-
quent investigation by Kiesswetter et al. (2000), a study of toluene-
exposed rotogravure printers, revealed fewer symptoms and better 
psychometric performance in older workers with higher exposure 
levels. A limited number of studies of this phenomenon by other 
investigators are no more definitive.
Investigations of adverse effects of solvents on old animals 
have been quite limited. Attention has been primarily focused on 
age-related susceptibility of rodents to liver damage. Susceptibility 
varies dramatically from one chemical to another. Rikans and 
Hornbrook (1997) reviewed studies showing increased suscep-
tibility of geriatric F344 rats to allyl alcohol, but there was no 
apparent age dependency with bromobenzene. Results varied with 
species, strain, and gender. CCl4 hepatotoxicity was less severe in 
28-month-old female F344 rats than in young adults. Wauthier et al. 
(2004) saw no changes in CYP2E1 protein or mRNA in 18-month-
old male Wistar rats, but did observe decreased CYP2E1 activity. 
The investigators attributed this phenomenon to oxidative stress on 
the isoform. More severe CCl4-induced DNA damage in hepato-
cytes from older mice was shown to be due to preexisting oxidative 
DNA damage and a higher incidence of DNA strand breaks in the 
older animals (Lopez-Diazguerrero et al., 2005). Thus, it appears 
normal aging processes may be accentuated by chemical stressors.
There are few pertinent geriatric animal or human toxicology 
studies, but age-specific factors that govern the TK of solvents have 
received considerable attention. Clewell et al. (2002), Sarangapani 
et al. (2003), and Thompson et al. (2009) compiled comprehen-
sive reviews and evaluations of age-specific TK parameters, though 
data for many age groups are inadequate. Splanchnic blood flow 
decreases with age more rapidly than cardiac output. This is unlikely 
to significantly affect the GI absorption of solvents, as they are read-
ily absorbed by passive diffusion. Dermal absorption could be influ-
enced by loss of integrity of the stratum corneum, reduction in skin 
surface lipids and atrophy of the dermal capillary network (Roskos 
et al., 1989). Total lung capacity does not change with age, but vital 
capacity (mobile volume) diminishes progressively due to loss of 
lung elasticity and strength of the respiratory muscles. Residual 
capacity (fixed volume) increases with progressive narrowing and 
closure of small airways (Ritschel, 1988). Other alterations that 
may contribute to lower pulmonary absorption include decreases in 
alveolar surface area, membrane permeability and capillary blood 
volume, and thicker alveolar cell membranes (Clewell et al., 2002). 
Nevertheless, inhalation PBTK model predictions of steady-state 
blood concentrations of isopropanol, styrene, vinyl chloride, and 
PERC differed very little among 10-, 15-, 25-, 50-, and 75-year-old 
humans (Sarangapani et al., 2003).
Age influences the distribution of xenobiotics in the body, as 
well as their metabolism and elimination (Herrlinger and Klotz, 
2001; Mangoni and Jackson, 2003). With aging, body fat content 
usually increases substantially at the expense of the lean mass 
(i.e., skeletal muscle) and body water. Thus, polar solvents tend to 
reach higher blood levels during exposures. Relatively lipid-soluble 
solvents accumulate in adipose tissue and are released slowly to 
sites of action, metabolism, and elimination. Ginsberg et al. (2005) 
assembled clearance and half-life data for 46 drugs in 4500 subjects. 
Clearance was typically slower and half-life longer after the age of 
60 years, particularly in those 80 to 84 years old. Cardiac output 
diminishes 30% to 40% between the ages of 25 and 65 years, as do 
renal and hepatic blood flows (McLean and Le Couteur, 2004). This 
research group and Clewell et al. (2002) concluded that reduced 
hepatic clearance of flow- and capacity-limited xenobiotics in the 
elderly was due primarily to reductions in liver blood flow and liver 
size. McLean and Le Couteur (2004) presented evidence that aging 
of the sinusoidal endothelium reduced oxygen delivery and drug 
transfer from blood to hepatocytes. Schmucker (2005) and Klotz 
(2009) did not find significant relationships between aging and CYP 
activities in human liver. Cotreau et al. (2005) did describe some 
reports of age-related decreases in CYP3A4, an isoform important 
in metabolism of a number of drugs in humans, but of limited rel-
evance to solvent metabolism.
Recent findings indicate that toxic compounds, both xenobi-
otics and certain products of intermediary metabolism, are major 
contributors to macromolecular damage and dysregulation involved 
in aging (Zimniak, 2008). Important endogenous toxicants include 
reactive carbonyl compounds and electrophiles formed by per-
oxidation of polyunsaturated lipids. Enzymes capable of reducing 
carbonyl groups and glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) are key 
protection mechanisms. Lee et al. (2008) characterized age-related 
changed in the expression of a substantial number of xenobiotic 
metabolizing enzymes in the liver of aged male F344 and Brown 
Norway rats. GST expression diminished with age. Most data,

1176
Toxic Agents
unit V
however, indicate that phase II (conjugation) pathways in humans 
are not altered by aging (Mitchell et al., 2011). Maurya and Rizvi 
(2010) reported an increase in plasma GST activity and antioxidant 
potential with age in a study of 80 healthy male and female human 
subjects 18 to 85 years old. It was hypothesized that this was in 
response to increased production of reactive oxygen moieties with 
advancing age.
Information is available on certain age-related aspects of xeno-
biotic clearance other than metabolism. Plasma protein binding of 
drugs generally remains unaltered or diminishes modestly with age 
(Grandison and Boudinot, 2000). Hepatic and/or renal dysfunc-
tion more often account for altered protein binding. Little infor-
mation apparently exists on effects of aging on most transporters 
(Kinirons and O’Mahony, 2004), though Lee et al. (2008) did see 
diminished expression of efflux transporters in the livers of aging 
male rats. Renal clearance diminishes with advancing age, due to 
parallel annual decreases of about 0.65% in glomerular filtration 
and maximal tubular secretory capacity beyond the age of 30 years. 
The foregoing TK factors may significantly influence the internal 
dosimetry of polar solvent metabolites, and in turn certain responses 
of geriatric populations.
PBTK models can be useful for integrating age-related physi-
ological and metabolic changes into a quantitative framework to 
forecast their net effect on blood and tissue time courses of parent 
compounds and metabolites (Schlender et al., 2016). Very few such 
“geriatric” models, however, have been published. McMahon et al. 
(1994) employed a PBTK model to demonstrate that reduced uri-
nary elimination of benzene metabolites by geriatric mice was due to 
decreased renal blood flow rather than altered formation of metabo-
lites. Corley et al. (2005c) incorporated a number of age-, gender-, 
and species-specific physiological and biochemical parameters into 
a preexisting PBTK model for 2-butoxyethanol (BE), in order to 
predict the kinetics of BE and butoxyacetic acid, BE’s major metabo-
lite, in male and female mice and rats of different ages. The life-
stage PBTK model of Clewell and colleagues was used to simulate 
human blood concentrations of several VOCs and their major metab-
olite (or metabolic rate) from infancy through the age of 75 years 
(Sarangapani et al., 2003). Blood levels of the parent compounds 
remained relatively constant during adulthood, but metabolite levels 
or amounts metabolized frequently varied during the pediatric and 
geriatric years. In a subsequent publication, blood levels of PERC 
and its major metabolite, TCA, were predicted to progressively 
rise during adulthood and old age by a PBTK model. Clewell et al. 
(2004b) attributed this phenomenon to relatively low pulmonary and 
metabolic clearance, coupled with accumulation of the lipophilic 
solvent in ample amounts of adipose tissue. Much work remains to 
be done to refine these generic PBTK models and to integrate them 
with significant geriatric PD changes (Burton et al., 2005).
Gender  Some of the physiological and biochemical differences 
between men and women have the potential to alter tissue dosim-
etry and health effects of certain chemicals (Arbuckle, 2006; Vahter 
et al., 2007). Clewell et al. (2002) have provided one of the most 
comprehensive reviews of the potential impact of gender differences 
on solvents’ TK. There was no convincing evidence of sex differ-
ences in GI absorption rate constants. The investigators located 
few data on gender-dependent dermal or pulmonary absorption of 
solvents or other chemicals. Sarangapani et al. (2003) published 
tables of a number of factors (e.g., cardiac output, pulmonary ven-
tilation rate, and pulmonary surface area) that dictate pulmonary 
absorption of VOCs. These rates and values were generally higher 
for males, but a PBPK model’s predictions of steady-state blood 
concentrations for inhaled isopropanol, styrene, vinyl chloride, and 
PERC were largely sex-independent (Sarangapani et al., 2003).
Distribution of water- and lipid-soluble solvents can vary sub-
stantially between men and women (Schwartz, 2003). Most men 
have more lean body mass and larger body size. Women typically 
have smaller volumes of distribution for polar solvents, but larger 
volumes of distribution for lipophilic solvents (Gandhi et al., 2004). 
Lean body mass decreases from 76% to 52%, and body fat increases 
from 33% to 49% in females between the ages of 25 years and 65 
to 70 years. Nomiyama and Nomiyama (1974) found that women 
retain less inhaled acetone and ethyl acetate than similarly exposed 
men. Levels of toluene and TCE in expired air of females were 
lower, reflecting greater fat deposition and retention of these lipo-
philic chemicals. Similarly, women exhibited significantly higher 
respiratory uptake of 1,3-butadiene, another lipophilic VOC (Lin 
et al., 2001b). Clewell et al. (2004b) utilized their life-stage PBTK 
model to predict blood levels of PERC and TCA, its major metabo-
lite, in men and women over a lifetime of daily ingestion of 1 μg 
PERC/kg. The women were predicted to attain significantly higher 
blood PERC and TCA concentrations, ostensibly due to PERC’s 
greater storage in fat and its relatively low pulmonary and metabolic 
clearance.
The major sex differences in P450-mediated hepatic metabo-
lism in rats are not seen in humans or most other mammals. Rinn 
et  al. (2004) did see significant differences in gene expression 
in the liver, kidney, and reproductive tissues of male and female 
mice. Some of the differentially expressed genes involve drug and 
steroid metabolism, but the biological significance of these vari-
ances is unknown. No marked gender differences in P450-catalyzed 
oxidation reactions have been identified in humans (Mugford and 
Kedderis, 1998). Other investigators have described modestly 
higher levels and activities of certain liver P450s in males, including 
CYP1A2, CYP2D6, and CYP2E1 (Schwartz, 2003). Many CYP3A 
substrates do not exhibit sex-dependent differences in clearance, 
though some researchers report differences for certain substrates 
(Cotreau et al., 2005). Gender-specific metabolism data for most 
hydrocarbon solvents are lacking. Men exhibit somewhat lower 
blood ethanol levels than women upon ingestion of equal doses, 
due in part to more extensive ADH-catalyzed metabolism of the 
alcohol by the male gastric mucosa (Frezza et al., 1990). UDP-
glucuronyl transferase activity appears to be somewhat higher in 
males. Women seem to have modestly lower glomerular filtration 
rates, though information on gender-dependent renal tubular secre-
tion and reabsorption processes is lacking.
A gender-specific PBTK model was developed to assess the 
relative risks of benzene exposures (Brown et al., 1998). Women 
were found to have a higher blood:air partition coefficient, a higher 
percent of body fat and higher maximum rate of benzene metabo-
lism than men. Women exhibited higher blood benzene levels and 
a 23% to 26% increase in benzene metabolism, potentially placing 
them at greater risk than men with equivalent exposures.
Relatively little is known about potential influences of con-
traceptives, hormone replacement therapy, or pregnancy on the 
metabolism and disposition of xenobiotics (Gleiter and Gundert-
Remy, 1996). The menstrual cycle with its hormone changes may 
influence the metabolism of some xenobiotics (Fletcher et  al., 
1994). Watanabe et al. (1997) found that estradiol changes during 
the estrous cycle of rats affected both UDP-glucuronyl transfer-
ase and NADPH-cytochrome c reductase activities. Experiments 
by Nakajima et al. (1992b) demonstrated that pregnancy of rats 
resulted in significant reductions in hepatic CYP content, as well 
as the metabolism of both toluene and TCE. Pregnancy results in 
a 40% increase in tidal volume, which may increase the absorp-
tion of inhaled VOCs. Plasma volume increases about 50% in 
pregnant women, resulting in a decrease in albumin concentration 
and plasma protein binding of many drugs (Fletcher et al., 1994).

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1177
Cardiac output increases about 50%, due to increases in stroke vol-
ume and heart rate (Silvaggio and Mattison, 1994). Uterine blood 
flow, renal plasma flow, and glomerular filtration rise substantially, 
though no information on hepatic blood flow is apparently avail-
able. These TK factors need to be considered when assessing risks 
and setting occupational exposure limits for these subpopulations.
The effects of pregnancy on peroxisome-proliferator-activated 
receptors (PPARs) are being investigated. PPARs are transcription 
factors that belong to the nuclear hormone receptor superfamily. 
PPARs regulate genes involved in cell differentiation, develop-
ment, and metabolism. The three identified and described PPAR 
isoforms are PPARα, PPARβ/δ, and PPARγ. Among the isoforms, 
PPARα has the greatest influence on cellular homeostasis and car-
cinogenicity. However, all three PPAR isoforms play essential 
roles in physiologic change and development in the fetoplacental 
unit. Abnormalities in PPAR-regulated pathways may be impli-
cated in reproductive and gestational disease (Toth et al., 2007; 
Borel et al., 2008). Two TCE and PERC metabolites, TCA and 
DCA, can induce modest PPARα activation in humans. The com-
bined effects of pregnancy and low-level PPAR activation, if any, 
are unknown.
Gentry et al. (2003) described an approach for use of PBTK 
modeling to compare maternal and fetal/neonatal blood and tissue 
dosimetry during pregnancy and lactation. In general, blood levels 
of isopropanol, vinyl chloride, MC, and PERC were predicted to be 
lower in the human neonate during lactation than in the fetus during 
gestation. Simulated vinyl chloride levels, for example, were four 
orders of magnitude lower in the neonates. Fetal/neonatal isopro-
panol levels were forecast to be orders of magnitude lower than 
maternal levels. Corley et al. (2003) reviewed PBTK/TD modeling 
of the developing embryo, fetus, and neonate.
Genetics  A variety of genetic polymorphisms for biotransforma-
tion have been found to occur at different frequencies in different eth-
nic groups. Polymorphisms for xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes 
may affect the quantity and quality of enzymes and the outcomes 
of exposures to solvents and other chemicals (Wormhoudt et al., 
1999; Johansson and Ingelman-Sundberg, 2011). It is important to 
note that culturally linked environmental factors also contribute to 
ethnic differences in metabolism and disposition of solvents and 
other chemicals. It is often difficult to disentangle the influences 
of genetic traits from those of different lifestyles, socioeconomic 
status, and geographic settings.
Ethnic differences in regulating the expression of CYP iso-
zymes and other enzymes are associated with some variations in 
xenobiotic metabolism and susceptibility to certain cancers (Raunio 
et al., 1995; Rodriguez-Antona and Ingelman-Sundberg, 2006). 
Shimada et al. (1994) found that Caucasians had higher total hepatic 
CYP levels than Japanese. Caucasians exhibited higher CYP2E1 
activities, as reflected by aniline p-hydroxylation and 7-ethoxycou-
marin O-deethylation. Individuals with two linked polymorphisms 
in the transcription regulatory region of the CYP2E1 gene exhibited 
greater expression of the isoform. Reported frequencies of these rare 
alleles were 2% in Caucasians, 2% to 5% in African Americans, and 
24% to 27% in Japanese (Kato et al., 1992). Kawamoto et al. (1995) 
found that a CYP2E1 polymorphism in Japanese workers did not 
affect metabolism of toluene to benzoic acid, but that CYP1A1 and 
aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH2) polymorphisms did. ALDH2 
deficiency can result in elevated CNS levels of toluene and benz-
aldehyde (Wilkins-Haug, 1997) in toluene-exposed individuals. 
About half of the Japanese population lacks ALDH2, due to a struc-
tural point mutation in the ALDH2 gene. Pronounced interethnic 
differences in rates of ethanol metabolism have been associated 
with a number of ADH and ALDH polymorphisms (Pastino et al., 
2000). Results of investigations of relationships between occur-
rence of defective alleles for CYP2E1 and cancer incidence have 
been contradictory. Studies with more statistical power of selected 
ethnic groups are needed. Molecular markers clearly indicate vari-
ances in CYP genes, but biologically plausible mechanisms linking 
specific genotypes with specific outcomes need to be established.
Ethnic differences have been demonstrated for some phase II 
biotransformation reactions. Glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) are 
a family of enzymes, some of which promote the detoxification 
of electrophilic metabolites by catalyzing their conjugation with 
reduced glutathione (GSH). In contrast, GST theta-mediated con-
jugation with GSH is the first step in metabolic activation of methy-
lene chloride (MC) to formaldehyde, a putative carcinogen (see MC 
subsection). Individuals with a null/null genotype for GST theta are 
thus at a lower risk of developing cancer from MC (El-Masri et al., 
1999; Haber et al. 2002). The prevalence of this genotype ranges 
from 10% in Mexican Americans to 60% to 65% in Chinese and 
Koreans (Nelson et al., 1995). GST theta also catalyzes dehaloge-
nation of DCA to glyoxylic acid. DCA, a minor product of TCE 
and PERC oxidation, is a hepatocarcinogen in high doses in mice 
and rats. DCA is cleared more slowly from the systemic circula-
tion of persons with a GST theta polymorphism, possibly result-
ing in increased risk of liver cancer upon TCE or PERC exposure 
(Shroads et al., 2011). GSTs participate in conjugating relatively 
small percentages of doses of TCE and PERC, but these pathways 
can lead to production of cytotoxic, mutagenic metabolites in the 
kidney. Contrary to findings in a more limited study, Wiesenhutter 
et al. (2007) saw no association between deletion polymorphisms 
of GST-T1 and GST-M1 and incidence of renal cell cancer (RCC) 
in 134 RCC cases (20 with TCE exposure) and 401 matched con-
trols. More recently Moore et al. (2010) studied gene variants in 
1097 RCC cases and 1476 controls. A significant association was 
found between TCE exposure and RCC in individuals with at least 
one intact GST-T1 allele, but not in individuals with two deleted 
alleles.
Genetic polymorphisms, variable transporter activities, genetic 
variants of receptors and regulatory proteins, and environmental 
factors can play roles in individual variability in CYP induction 
(Tang et al., 2005). There are substantial differences in activity 
and/or content of CYP2E1 within the U.S. population. Lipscomb 
(2004) incorporated extremes in CYP2E1-mediated metabolism 
into a PBTK model for TCE and found there was very little impact 
on TCA dosimetry. Intersubject differences in hepatic blood flow 
did have a pronounced effect on TCE biotransformation, as TCE is 
an extensively metabolized (blood flow limited) compound. Wenker 
et al. (2001) similarly reported that interindividual genetic poly-
morphisms in CYP2E1 and several other CYPs did not affect the 
metabolism of styrene, another flow-limited compound. Kedderis 
(1997) utilized a PBTK-modeling approach to confirm this phe-
nomenon, and found the opposite to be true for poorly metabolized 
(capacity limited) VOCs such as PERC and CCl4.
Exogenous Factors
P450 Inducers  Considerable effort has been devoted to inves-
tigation of effects of different enzyme inducers on xenobiotic 
metabolism and toxicity (Hukkanen, 2012). Preexposure to drugs 
and other compounds, which induce CYP isoforms that metaboli-
cally activate chemicals, can markedly potentiate the chemicals’ 
toxicity/carcinogenicity (Ioannides and Lewis, 2004; Dekant, 
2009). As described in the subsection “Metabolism,” CYP2E1 is 
a high-affinity, low-capacity isoform responsible for activation of 
a wide variety of low-molecular-weight hydrocarbon and halocar-
bon solvents to cytotoxins and mutagens (Guengerich et al., 1991).

1178
Toxic Agents
unit V
A number of CYP2E1 substrates (e.g., ethanol and other alcohols, 
acetone and other ketones, pyridine and pyridazine, isoniazid, acet-
aminophen, chlorzoxazone) can act as inducers of the isoform. The 
minimal hepatocytotoxicity caused by a low dose of CCl4 alone 
(Panel B, Fig. 24-4) can be contrasted with the centrilobular necro-
sis (Panel C, Fig. 24-4) in rats pretreated with 2-butanol before the 
same CCl4 dose (Traiger and Bruckner, 1976). CYP2E1 is pres-
ent in many tissues, as are other CYPs that metabolize solvents. 
Although levels/activities are highest in liver, induction in extrahe-
patic tissues can result in increased metabolic activation in situ that 
may be toxicologically significant. It is worthy of note that many 
chemicals that induce CYPs also induce detoxifying enzymes (e.g., 
epoxide hydrolase, glucuronyl- and sulfotransferases). Thus, the 
net outcome of preexposure to an inducing agent on solvent toxic-
ity should be addressed on a case by case basis. A number of natu-
rally occurring organosulfur compounds in allium vegetables have 
been demonstrated to induce phase II enzymes in the liver, kidney, 
intestines, and lungs of Wistar rats (Guyonnet et al., 1999).
It should be recognized that timing of exposures to two or 
more CYP substrates is important. Sato et al. (1991) demonstrated 
that ethanol competitively inhibited the biotransformation of TCE 
when the exposures were concurrent. Alternatively, preexposure to 
the alcohol induced TCE metabolism. As described previously in 
the “Metabolism” subsection, increased metabolic capacity in an 
individual is of little consequence for environmentally encountered 
levels of blood flow-limited (i.e., extensively metabolized) solvents 
(e.g., TCE, vinyl chloride, MC, and CHCl3). Thus, genetically pre-
disposed or induced individuals should be at no greater cancer risk 
from oxidative metabolites of low doses of these solvents than the 
average person.
P450 Inhibitors  An increasing number of drugs and other chem-
icals, dietary supplements, fruit juices, and vegetable constituents 
are being identified as inhibitors and/or inducers of CYPs, phase 
II enzymes, and efflux transporters (Lin and Lu, 2001; Huang and 
Lesko, 2004). It should be recalled that mechanisms of P450 inhibi-
tion can be categorized as reversible, quasi-reversible, and irrevers-
ible. Reversible inhibition is transient, with the normal function of 
the CYP continuing after elimination of the inhibitor. Both quasi- 
and irreversible inhibitions result from the enzyme’s formation of a 
reactive metabolite. With quasi-reversible inhibition, the metabolite 
and enzyme form a complex that is so stable that the intact enzyme 
may or may not be available for further metabolism. With mecha-
nism based on suicide inhibition, the reactive metabolite irrevers-
ibly inhibits the enzyme by binding to its active site. Experiments 
by Lilly et al. (1998) indicate that this is the mechanism by which 
epoxide metabolites of trans- and cis-1,2-dichloroethylene inhibit 
Cyp2e1. Fisher et al. (2004) subsequently reported that metabolites 
generated from a single oral dose of CCl4 as low as 1 mg/kg are 
suicide inhibitors of Cyp2e1 and Cyp2b2 in B6C3F1 mice. The 
net result of this action by CCl4 was reduced formation of TCA 
from coadministered PERC. Blobaum (2006) described reversible 
inactivation of Cyp2e and Cyp2b isoforms during their mechanism-
based inactivation by small tert-butyl terminal alkynes.
Flavonoids in grapefruit juice were one of the first classes of 
naturally occurring compounds to be documented to produce clini-
cally significant increases in levels of therapeutic agents metabo-
lized by CYP3A4 (Chan et  al., 1998). Flavonoids in red wine 
exerted a similar effect on intestinal CYP3A4, but white wine had 
little influence. Bergamottin, a furanocoumarin in grapefruit and 
lime juice, was subsequently found to inhibit human CYP3A4 
activity (Bailey et al., 2003) as well as intestinal P-glycoprotein 
efflux transporters (Dresser and Bailey, 2003). St. John’s wort, a 
A
B
C
V
P
P
P
V
V
Figure 24-4.   Potentiation of CCl4 hepatotoxicity by 2-butanol. Rats were 
(A) untreated; (B) given 0.1 mL/kg CCl4/kg IP; or (C) pretreated with 
2-butanol (2.2 mL/kg PO) 16 hours before 0.1 mL/kg CCl4 IP. Central veins 
and portal triads are designated V and P, respectively. Occasional hepato-
cytes adjacent to the central vein are vacuolated in (B). Note the demar-
cation between vacuolated/necrotic centrilobular and midzonal cells, and 
normally appearing periportal cells in (C). Hematoxylin and eosin stain. (A) 
and (C) × 315; (B) × 480. (Reproduced from Traiger and Bruckner, 1976, 
with permission from ASPET.)

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1179
top-selling dietary supplement taken for depression, selectively 
induced CYP3A4 in the small intestine (Huang and Lesko, 2004). 
Echinacea inhibited human intestinal CYP3A, but induced hepatic 
CYP3A. Ginseno-sides exhibited no or weak inhibition of several 
human CYPs, but some of the compounds’ major intestinal metabo-
lites inhibited a wide range of CYPs (Liu et al., 2006). Certain com-
ponents of ginko biloba, frequently used for memory impairment, 
were potent inhibitors of human recombinant CYP1B1, CYP1A1, 
and CYP1A2 (Chang et al., 2006). Identification of isoform-selec-
tive, nontoxic inhibitors may eventually lead to modulation of 
human xenobiotic metabolism for therapeutic purposes. There are 
large interindividual responses to CYP enzyme inducers and inhibi-
tors (Lin and Lu, 2001).
Lifestyle  Exercise can significantly affect the kinetics of xenobi-
otics, but is often not considered in occupational risk assessments 
of solvents. Exercise increases two of the major determinants of 
VOC uptake, alveolar ventilation rate and cardiac output/pul-
monary blood flow. Polar solvents with relatively high blood:air 
PCs (e.g., acetone, ethanol, and ethylene glycol) are very rapidly 
absorbed into the pulmonary circulation. Alveolar ventilation is 
rate limiting for these chemicals. In contrast, pulmonary blood flow 
and metabolism are rate limiting for uptake of the more lipophilic 
solvents (Johanson and Filser, 1992). Heavy exercise can increase 
pulmonary uptake of relatively polar solvents as much as fivefold 
in human subjects (Astrand, 1983). Light exercise doubles uptake 
of relatively lipid-soluble solvents, but no further increases occur 
at higher workloads. Blood flow to the liver and kidneys dimin-
ishes with exercise, so biotransformation of well-metabolized 
solvents and urinary elimination of polar metabolites may be 
diminished (Lof and Johanson, 1998). Dankovic and Bailer (1994) 
modified the human PBTK model of Reitz et al. (1989) for meth-
ylene chloride (MC) to reflect light work conditions. The modi-
fied model predicted that light exercise would result in a twofold 
increase in hepatic MC deposition and in metabolite formation via 
CYP- and GSH-dependent pathways. Jonsson et al. (2001) devel-
oped a population PBTK model for humans inhaling MC during 
moderate-to-heavy exercise. Increased workload was predicted by 
PBTK modeling to produce an 87% increase in internal exposure 
to components of a mixture of toluene, ethylbenzene, and xylene 
(Dennison et al., 2005).
Dietary habits can influence the absorption, metabolism, and 
toxicity of solvents in several ways. Factors that influence gastric 
emptying would not be expected to influence systemic absorption of 
VOCs, as they are so rapidly absorbed by passive diffusion through-
out the GI tract. The mere bulk of food in the GI lumen, however, 
can inhibit absorption by preventing contact of the chemical with 
the GI epithelium. VOCs in the GI tract partition into dietary lipids, 
largely remaining there until the lipids are emulsified and absorbed. 
This serves to substantially delay uptake of lipophilic solvents such 
as CCl4, resulting in lower, but prolonged blood CCl4 levels and 
diminished hepatotoxicity in rats (Kim et al., 1990a). Food intake 
increases splanchnic blood flow, which favors GI absorption. The 
elevation in liver blood flow would be expected to enhance the bio-
transformation of low doses of well-metabolized solvents, but to 
have relatively little effect on metabolism of relatively high (i.e., 
saturating) doses. Consumption of a high-fat diet results in a selec-
tive increase in hepatic CYP2E1 activity and protein levels in male 
Sprague–Dawley rats (Raucy et al., 1991). Elevation of plasma 
ketone bodies appears to be implicated in this process, because 
acetone is a potent CYP2E1 inducer. Carbohydrate deficiency has 
been recognized for many years to enhance the metabolism of a 
series of VOCs in rats, but not to alter their conjugation (Sato and 
Nakajima, 1985). Psoralens (found in parsley, parsnip, and cel-
ery) reduce CYP1A2 activity, whereas food cooked over charcoal 
enhances it. Effects of other foods, fruit juices, and food supple-
ments are addressed in the preceding subsections on P450 inducers 
and inhibitors.
Fasting for 1 to 3 days can significantly alter the hepatotoxicity 
of medium to high doses of VOCs that undergo metabolic activa-
tion. Fasting results in decreased hepatic concentrations of reduced 
glutathione (GSH), due to the cessation of intake of amino acids 
required for its synthesis. GSH plays a key role in detoxifying elec-
trophilic metabolites of a number of VOCs. Conversely, conjuga-
tion of GSH with TCE or PERC can lead to formation of limited 
quantities of cytotoxic, mutagenic metabolites (see subsections on 
TCE and PERC). Short-term fasting (about 8 to 24 hours) results in 
induction of liver Cyp2e1 and increase in metabolism of a number 
of aromatic hydrocarbons and halocarbons (Nakajima et al., 1982). 
The hepatotoxicity of CCl4, which requires Cyp2e1-catalyzed 
metabolic activation, is more severe in fasted animals (Bruckner 
et al., 2002). In contrast, long-term food deprivation (i.e., starva-
tion) results in decreased synthesis and activity of Cyps. In a more 
recent study, male Wistar rats were dietarily restricted for 1 day, 
after which hepatic Cyp2e1 content was significantly increased and 
GSH depleted compared to conventionally fed rats. AST and ALT 
were elevated after oral CCl4 and CHCl3 in dietarily restricted rats 
compared to those conventionally fed (Qin et al., 2007).
Many physiological and biochemical processes that impact 
solvent TK exhibit circadian, or diurnal rhythms. A series of inves-
tigations has been conducted to delineate molecular control mecha-
nisms of diurnal oscillation in mammals. The phenomenon appears 
to be controlled by a “master pacemaker” in the suprachiasmatic 
nuclei (SCN) of the hypothalamus of mice (Teboul et al., 2009). 
Genetic and genomic analyses of the SCN and liver indicate that 
a relatively small number of output genes are directly regulated 
by core oscillator components. Rate-limiting steps in major cel-
lular pathways/processes are being identified as key sites of circa-
dian regulation. Experiments reveal that transcriptional feedback 
is required for maintenance of circadian rhythmicity (Sato et al., 
2006).
Several research groups have discovered circadian rhythms 
in susceptibility of rats to liver damage by various VOCs, includ-
ing CCl4, CHCl3, DCE, ethanol, and styrene. In each instance, the 
chemicals were most toxic when given during the initial part of 
the rodents’ dark/active cycle. Low hepatic GSH levels at this time 
were an important contributing factor to the increased liver injury 
by DCE and CHCl3. Restricted food intake during sleep resulted in 
lipolysis and formation of acetone, which contributed to the diurnal 
induction of Cyp2e1 and the ensuing increases in hepatic metabolic 
activation and cytotoxicity of CCl4 in male rats during the early part 
of the animals’ active cycle (Bruckner et al., 2002). Skrzypinska-
Gawrysiak et al. (2000) also observed that male mice were most 
susceptible to CCl4 hepatotoxicity when dosed at a similar time. 
Zhang et al. (2009) observed the highest expression of mRNAs of 
Cyp2e1 and a number of other Cyps in liver microsomes of male 
CD-1 mice during their active/dark cycle. In-phase expression of 
certain hepatic transcription factors suggested that the factors are 
important in coupling the clock with expression of drug metabo-
lism genes. Clearance rates for a number of well-metabolized com-
pounds, including ethanol (Sturtevant et al., 1978) and nicotine 
(Gries et al., 1996), are maximal in human subjects during the first 
part of their active/wake cycle. Hepatic blood flow and acetone lev-
els in expired air of humans peak before breakfast. Thus, humans 
may also be more susceptible during this time to the toxicity of 
solvents that undergo metabolic activation.

1180
Toxic Agents
unit V
Ethanol is an effective CYP2E1 inducer when ingested repeat-
edly in substantial amounts. There are numerous reports of marked 
potentiation of hepatic or renal damage by ethanol or other alcohols 
in persons occupationally exposed to potent hepatorenal toxicants, 
such as CCl4 (Folland et al., 1976; Manno et al., 1996). CCl4 is 
not extensively metabolized, but its free radical metabolites are 
extremely cytotoxic, as described in the subsection on the chemi-
cal. A group of moderate drinkers exposed to 1,1,1-trichlorethane 
(TRI) vapor at 175 ppm showed a significant increase in metabo-
lism and metabolic clearance of the chemical (Johns et al., 2006). 
TRI is a relatively nontoxic, poorly metabolized solvent. Kaneko 
et al. (1994) exposed ethanol-pretreated rats by inhalation to TCE or 
TRI at 50 to 1000 ppm. TRI metabolism was enhanced at all vapor 
concentrations, but TCE metabolism was enhanced by ethanol only 
at the highest vapor concentration (1000 ppm), as its biotransfor-
mation is perfusion-limited (limited by hepatic blood flow). Low 
levels of TCE entering the liver are extensively metabolized, even 
in nondrinkers who still have substantial CYP2E1 activity. Kedderis 
(1997) predicted that a 10-fold increase in CYP2E1 activity in 
humans inhaling TCE at 10 ppm would result in only a 2% increase 
in TCE metabolism by the liver. Thus, increased bioactivation 
capacity due to ethanol or other factors should not increase risks 
of toxicity or cancer from low-level exposures to TCE, DCE, MC, 
vinyl chloride, benzene, or other extensively metabolized VOCs. In 
contrast, Kedderis (1997) predicted a 10-fold increase in CYP2E1 
activity would result in a 3.8-fold increase in PERC metabolites in 
the liver of persons inhaling 10 ppm PERC. Increased bioactivation 
of less extensively metabolized VOCs could thus enhance risks of 
adverse effect of low-level exposure to such chemicals.
Timing of ethanol consumption and VOC exposure is impor-
tant. Prior repeated exposure to ethanol is necessary for substantial 
CYP2E1 synthesis to occur. Concurrent exposure to ethanol and a 
VOC, however, may often be protective from both well-metabo-
lized and poorly metabolized solvents. If a VOC and ethanol are 
both metabolized by CYP2E1, the xenobiotics compete for avail-
able isozyme. Muller et al. (1975) observed that concurrent intake 
of ethanol and inhalation of TCE at 50 ppm by human subjects 
resulted in a marked decrease in urinary excretion of TCE’s major 
metabolites, TCA, and trichloroethanol (TCOH). In this instance, 
ethanol would afford protection against these oxidative metabolites. 
Metabolism of ethanol produces an excess of NAD, a cofactor that 
favors formation of TCOH from chloral hydrate, at the expense 
of TCA. Reduced formation of TCE would be protective against 
TCA-induced hepatic tumors. Larson and Bull (1989), however, 
observed this interaction in rats only with very high doses of TCE 
and ethanol.
Medications and drugs of abuse that induce or inhibit CYP2E1 
and other enzymes involved in the metabolism of VOCs can poten-
tially alter the chemicals’ toxicity or carcinogenicity. Nakajima 
et al. (1992a) showed that pretreatment of rats with phenobarbital, 
ethanol, or 3-methylcholanthrene significantly increased TCE oxi-
dation. The same would be expected to occur in humans at high 
TCE doses. Some drugs (such as cycloheximide, disulfiram, and 
chloramphenicol) and the aforementioned natural constituents of 
plants inhibit CYP2E1. Those compounds, in sufficient doses, 
would be protective against high doses of TCE and other VOCs 
that are bioactivated by CYP2E1.
Tobacco smoke contains a number of compounds that 
are strong CYP inducers. Polycyclic hydrocarbons, such as 
3-­methylcholanthrene, are potent-inducing agents. The polycy-
clic hydrocarbons primarily stimulate synthesis of CYP1A1 and 
CYP1A2, isozymes that play a modest role in catalyzing the bio-
transformation of TCE (Nakajima et al., 1992a). Nicotine, however, 
is a strong Cyp2e1 inducer in rats (Micu et al., 2003). Cigarette 
smoke is known to induce Cyp2e1 in both rodents and humans. Yue 
et al. (2009) recently observed that chronic nicotine treatment also 
increased voluntary ethanol intake by rats, thereby further enhanc-
ing hepatic Cyp2e1 and Cyp2b1/2 levels.
Solvent Mixtures  Many occupational and environmental expo-
sures to VOCs involve multiple chemicals. That is particularly true 
of contaminated environmental media, in that widespread use of 
solvents leads to their volatilization and entry into surface water 
and groundwater. VOCs spilled onto the ground largely evaporate. 
VOC levels in air in the breathing zone of the general population 
are typically in the ppb range. Lin et al. (2008) examined correla-
tions between VOC concentrations in air and blood. Spilled VOCs 
also leach through porous soils into groundwater and remain 
trapped there. The groundwater at about 90% of 1608 hazardous-
waste sites on the U.S. National Priorities List contains VOCs. TCE 
is the most frequently found of all chemicals, followed by lead, 
PCE, and benzene (Pohl et al., 2008). The most common four-com-
ponent VOC mixture is TCE, PCE, TRI, and 1,1-dichloroethane. 
ATSDR (2004) published a toxicologic profile addressing potential 
health risks posed by this four-component mixture. Many U.S. cit-
ies’ drinking-water supplies contain complex mixtures of VOCs. 
Total concentrations generally range from parts per trillion (ppt) 
to parts per billion (ppb) (Moran et al., 2007; Rowe et al., 2007). 
Trace amounts of a variety of VOCs are also present in the blood of 
many nonoccupationally exposed members of the general popula-
tion (Churchill et al., 2001; Blount et al., 2006).
Most studies have involved experiments with binary or ternary 
mixtures. One chemical may have no effect on, potentiate (enhance), 
or antagonize (inhibit) adverse actions of a second or third chemical 
(Tan et al., 2011). Knowledge of mechanisms of VOC interactions 
involves largely the influence of one VOC on the metabolic activa-
tion or inactivation of another. Koizumi et al. (1982) published the 
results of one of the first such studies. They found that coexposure 
of rats to PERC and TRI resulted in significant suppression of TRI 
metabolism. Workers exposed to TCE and PERC were found to 
have lower urinary concentrations of TCE metabolites than workers 
exposed to TCE alone (Seiji et al., 1989). The interaction resulted 
from competitive metabolic inhibition, wherein the amounts of the 
combined chemicals exceeded the metabolic capacity of the study 
subjects. Such an interaction is protective against cytotoxicity and 
carcinogenicity, in that the bioactivation of both TCE and PERC 
is reduced. Conversely, systemic concentrations of parent VOCs 
would be increased, and this might enhance neurologic effects of 
sufficiently high doses (Pohl and Scinicariello, 2011).
PBTK modeling has been used by several research groups to 
predict the metabolic and toxicologic consequences of exposure to 
VOC mixtures. Competitive metabolic inhibition was evident in a 
PBTK-model approach to studying TCE and 1,1-DCE (El-Masri 
et al., 1996) and TCE and vinyl chloride (Barton et al., 1995). Later 
PBTK modeling efforts predicted interaction thresholds below 
which competitive metabolic inhibition would not occur. Dobrev 
et al. (2001), for example, reported that the thresholds for interac-
tion of TCE with PERC and TRI vapor in rats were 25 and 135 
ppm, respectively, when the TCE concentration was 50 ppm. Those 
findings imply that protection from adverse effects caused by oxida-
tive metabolites would occur in occupational settings when vapor 
concentrations were relatively high. An increase in blood TCE 
concentrations under these exposure conditions, however, was pre-
dicted to result in a disproportionate increase in formation of neph-
rotoxic GSH conjugation products in humans (Dobrev et al., 2002). 
Competitive metabolic inhibition, with potentiation or protection

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1181
from adverse effects of VOCs, would not occur upon exposure to 
environmentally relevant concentrations.
Additivity of toxic effects of chemicals that act by similar 
mechanisms is typically assumed in the absence of experimental 
evidence to the contrary. Stacey (1989) studied the joint action of 
TCE and PERC on the liver and kidneys of rats. Combined admin-
istration of near-toxic-threshold doses of the two solvents produced 
modest hepatorenal toxicity. Jonker et al. (1996) provided evidence 
that TCE and PERC in combination with two other similarly acting 
solvents affected kidney weight in rats given subtoxic doses of each 
chemical by gavage for 32 days. Competitive metabolic inhibition, 
as described above, would result in less than additive adverse effects 
when metabolites are the bioactive moieties (Pohl and Scinicariello, 
2011). Goldsworthy and Popp (1987) found that the joint effect of 
TCE and PERC on peroxisome proliferation in the liver and kid-
neys of mice and rats was less than additive. Competitive metabolic 
inhibition at relatively high exposure levels of toluene, ethylben-
zene, and xylene has been predicted by PBTK modeling to result in 
higher internal exposures (and CNS depressant effects) than would 
occur with simple additivity (Dennison et al., 2005).
Few toxicity or carcinogenicity studies of complex chemi-
cal mixtures including VOCs have been conducted. The National 
Toxicology Program (NTP, 1993a) supplied F344 rats and B6C3F1 
mice with drinking water containing 24 contaminants for up to 
26 weeks. The mixture contained TCE, PERC, MC, TRI, DCE, 
1,1-dichloroacetic acid, other solvents, heavy metals, polychlori-
nated biphenyls, and a phthalate. The total no-observed-adverse-
effect level (NOAEL) for histologic changes in the liver was 11 ppm 
of the complex mixture in rats. Suppression of immune function 
occurred in female mice that consumed 756 ppm of the mixture 
for 2 weeks or 378 ppm for 13 weeks. A follow-up study in chemi-
cally tumor-initiated rats showed that the contaminant mixture did 
not promote preneoplastic foci in the liver (Benjamin et al., 1999). 
Wang et  al. (2002a) supplied ICR mice with water containing 
CHCl3, 1,1-dichloroacetic acid, DCE, TRI, TCE, and PERC for 16 
and 18 months. There was a trend of increasing frequency of hepa-
tocellular neoplasms in the male mice and an increasing incidence 
of mammary adenocarcinomas in the high-dose female mice. The 
total concentration of VOCs in the drinking water of females was 
about 1555 ppb. Most of the mixture was TCE (471 ppb) and PERC 
(606 ppb). These concentrations are far lower than have previously 
been reported to produce tumors. The results must be regarded as 
preliminary, in that the study design had a number of limitations, 
and the results have not been replicated. In addition, male B6C3F1 
mice are particularly susceptible to hepatic tumors (Haseman et al., 
1998), and mice metabolically activate a substantially greater pro-
portion of VOC doses than do humans.
Diseases  Illness can be a major source of variability in response 
to solvents. Impaired drug metabolism and clearance are commonly 
seen in patients with cirrhosis and hepatitis (Tan and Schiano, 2012). 
Reduced metabolism of solvents may result from decrease in hepatic 
parenchymal mass, diminished enzymatic activity, and/or decreased 
portal blood flow (Morgan and McLean, 1995). Lower levels of 
CYP2E1, CYP1A2, and GSH are seen in livers of patients with cir-
rhosis (Murray, 1992). Reduced P450-catalyzed metabolic activa-
tion of certain solvents can be protective, but diminished capacity to 
conjugate electrophilic metabolites with GSH would have the oppo-
site effect. Plasma levels of albumin and a1-acid glycoprotein fall 
in cirrhotic patients. Thus, plasma protein binding of many xeno-
biotic metabolites decreases and their rate of elimination increases 
(Morgan and McLean, 1995). Definitive information is lacking, 
however, on the net effect of common liver diseases on solvents.
Chronic kidney disease is becoming increasingly prevalent 
in the United States over the past decade (Coresch et al., 2007). 
Progressive loss of kidney function leads to impaired renal excre-
tion of numerous chemicals and metabolites that may be toxic or 
pharmacologically active. Kidney disease can affect uptake and 
efflux transporters and metabolic enzymes in the liver and the GI 
tract (Nolin et al., 2008). Chronic renal failure can result in down-
regulation of the expression of some liver CYPs, but have no effect 
on others (Leblond et al., 2001). Effects on hepatic clearance of 
therapeutic chemicals can thus vary widely. The mechanisms of 
these effects on gene expression are unclear, as is their applicabil-
ity to solvents. The plasma protein binding of many xenobiotics is 
reduced in patients with compromised renal function, apparently 
due to retention of substances that compete for protein-binding 
sites, as well as reduced albumin synthesis. Clearance of highly 
metabolized xenobiotics thus appears to depend on potentially off-
setting influences of altered metabolism, decreased plasma protein 
binding, and decreased renal excretion (Yuan and Venitz, 2000). 
Impairment of renal metabolic activation via oxidation or β-lyase-
mediated conversion of GSH metabolic intermediates of TCE and 
PERC (see subsections on these chemicals for details) to reactive, 
mutagenic metabolites would be protective.
Diabetes mellitus is a metabolic disease characterized 
by hyperglycemia as a result of insulin deficiency (type 1) or 
insulin resistance (type 2). Type 2 accounts for 90% of cases. 
Approximately 30 million people suffer from diabetes in the United 
States. A prominent effect of chemically induced type 1 diabetes in 
rats is induction of Cyp2e1. Elevation of acetone, but apparently 
not the other ketone bodies is responsible for the Cyp2e1 increase. 
Hypoinsulinemia may play a role, in that insulin downregulates 
Cyp2e1 mRNA in rat hepatoma cells and primary cultures of rat 
hepatocytes (Cheng and Morgan, 2001). In contrast, CYP2E1 is not 
affected in type 2 diabetic animals (Sawant et al., 2004). Neither 
type 1 nor type 2 diabetes influences CYP2E1 activity in humans 
(Lucas et al., 1998; Cheng and Morgan, 2001). Nevertheless, animal 
studies show that type 2 diabetes increases susceptibility to hepa-
totoxicants including allyl alcohol and CCl4 (Sawant et al., 2004), 
apparently due to inhibition of tissue repair. Devi and Mehendale 
(2005, 2006) subsequently demonstrated inhibition of expression 
of genes involved in cell division and protease inhibitors, as well as 
enhanced gene expression of proteases in type 1 diabetic rats. These 
events may be important in delayed tissue repair following chemical 
cytotoxicity in diabetics.
Persons with bacterial infections may be more sensitive to 
cytotoxic actions of solvents. Endotoxin, which includes a lipo-
polysaccharide, is released from the cell wall of gram-negative 
organisms. The lipopolysaccharide causes the release of inflamma-
tory mediators, which alter cell membranes, intercellular signaling, 
and gene expression (Roth et al., 1997). These effects may render 
cells more susceptible to damage by solvents and other chemicals. 
Exposure of animals to small amounts of endotoxin potentiates liver 
injury by CCl4, halothane, allyl alcohol, ethanol, and other solvents 
(Roth et al., 1997). Endotoxin apparently activates Kupffer cells to 
release inflammatory mediators and cytotoxic moieties to hepato-
cytes (Thurman, 1998).
CHLORINATED HYDROCARBONS
Trichloroethylene
TCE was widely used as a solvent and metal degreasing agent in the 
United States from the early 1900s to the 1980s (Bakke et al., 2007). 
Workers were initially subjected routinely to quite high exposures.

1182
Toxic Agents
unit V
NIOSH (1989) estimated that 401,000 persons at 23,225 plants in 
the United States were potentially exposed to TCE. TCE has been 
identified at over one-half of the nearly 1300 hazardous waste sites 
that make up the EPA’s National Priorities List (ATSDR, 2006a; 
Pohl et al., 2008). TCE is released into the atmosphere from vapor 
degreasing operations; however, direct discharges to surface water 
and groundwater from disposal operations were frequent occur-
rences. As a result, TCE can be released to indoor air by vapor 
intrusion through underground walls and floors and by volatiliza-
tion from the water supply. TCE has recently received a great deal 
of attention from the scientific and regulatory communities, due in 
large part to the EPA’s effort to update the chemical’s two-decade-
old risk assessment (EPA, 2011).
Moderate-to-high doses of TCE, as with other halocarbons, 
are associated with a number of noncancer toxicities (Barton and 
Das, 1996; ATSDR, 1997d). TCE has been implicated in the devel-
opment of autoimmune disorders and immune system dysfunc-
tion (Cooper et al., 2009; Lan et al., 2010; Gilbert, 2014a, 2014b), 
and has been investigated for its potential as a male reproductive 
toxicant (Forkert et al., 2003; Xu et al., 2004). The effect of ges-
tational exposure to TCE or its oxidative metabolites on cardiac 
development is a subject that has invoked considerable debate, as 
conflicting results have been published (Fisher et al., 2001; Johnson 
et al., 2003; Watson et al., 2006). The issue of TCE’s potential effect 
on ocular development has also reemerged (Warren et al., 2006). 
Nevertheless, cancer remains the dominant issue for TCE (Jollow 
et al., 2009; Lash et al., 2014). TCE and its potential health risks 
have been reviewed by NAS (2006, 2009), EPA (2011), ATSDR 
(2014), and IARC (2014).
Metabolism  The adverse effects of TCE, other than CNS depres-
sion, are generally believed to be associated with TCE’s metabolites. 
CNS depression is due to the parent compound and a major metabo-
lite, trichloroethanol. Knowledge of TCE’s metabolism in different 
species and under different exposure conditions is thus a prerequi-
site to understanding its mechanisms of action and assessing human 
health risks. A great deal of experimentation at many biological levels 
has been expended over the last five decades to these ends.
TCE is rapidly and extensively absorbed into the systemic 
circulation via the oral and inhalation routes. Dermal absorption 
is considerably slower and less extensive. The majority of TCE is 
oxidized in the liver, while a small amount is conjugated in the 
liver with glutathione (GSH) by GSH S-transferases (GSTs). The 
oxidative pathway is shown on the left of Fig. 24-5, while the GSH 
pathway is shown on the right. This diagram is a simplification of a 
more complex metabolic scheme described in detail by Lash et al. 
(2000a, 2014).
The initial step in the oxidative pathway is catalyzed by 
microsomal cytochrome P-450s (CYPs). CYP2E1, as described 
previously under the section on Metabolism under the section on 
Toxicokinetics, is the primary isozyme responsible for oxidation 
of low concentrations of TCE (Lipscomb et al., 1997; Kim and 
Ghanayem, 2006a; Ramdhan et al., 2008). CYP-catalyzed oxi-
dation of TCE in rodents and humans, in decreasing order of 
magnitude, is as follows: mice>rats>humans (Lash et  al., 
2000a, 2014). Whether or not TCE is initially converted to TCE 
oxide is controversial. Cai and Guengerich (2001) were able to 
detect formation of trace amounts of the epoxide by phenobar-
bital-induced rat liver CYPs, but not by human liver CYPs. The 
majority of TCE is apparently converted to an oxygenated TCE-
CYP intermediate, which rearranges to form chloral, a major 
metabolic intermediate. Chloral is oxidized to chloral hydrate 
(CH), a sedative and hypnotic still widely used in medical and 
dental procedures for infants and children (Buck, 2005; Heistein 
et al., 2006; Wilson et al., 2014). CH is both oxidized to TCA and 
reduced to TCOH. Much TCOH is conjugated with glucuronic acid 
(GLU) and excreted in the urine. TCOH-GLU that is excreted in 
the bile is hydrolyzed in the intestine, reabsorbed, and oxidized in 
part to TCA (Stenner et al., 1997). Chiu et al. (2007) observed that 
concentrations of TCA were significantly lower than TCOH and 
TCOH-GLU concentrations in the blood of humans who inhaled 
TCE at 1 ppm for 6 hours. Modest amounts of DCA apparently are 
produced from TCA and TCOH in mice, but relatively little DCA 
is formed in rats or humans. Trace amounts of DCA were detected 
in one study of TCE-exposed humans (Fisher et al., 1998) but not 
in other studies (Lash et al., 2000b; Bloeman et al., 2001). Very 
high doses of both TCA and DCA have been shown to be hepatic 
carcinogens in mice (Bull, 2000). It is generally accepted that TCA 
is a non-genotoxic liver carcinogen in B6C3F1 mice, although its 
ability to cause liver cancer in humans has been discounted by 
findings in numerous laboratory investigations (Bull, 2000). The 
possible role of DCA in human liver cancer is even more contro-
versial (Walgren et al., 2005; Caldwell and Keshava, 2006; Klaunig 
et al., 2007).
The GSH conjugation pathway is quite similar qualitatively, 
but not quantitatively, in rats and humans. The initial step in this 
second, minor pathway involves conjugation of TCE with GSH to 
form S-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)GSH (DCVG). DCVG formation occurs 
primarily in the liver at a rate about 10 times greater in rats than in 
humans (Green et al., 1997a). Much of the DCVG is excreted via 
the bile into the intestines and converted to S-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-L-
cysteine (DCVC). That metabolite is reabsorbed and taken up by the 
liver, where a portion is detoxified by N-acetylation. Bernauer et al. 
(1996) exposed rats and humans to TCE vapor at up to 160 ppm for 
6 hours. The rats excreted eight times more N-acetyl-DCVC in their 
urine than did the human volunteers at each exposure level. Some 
DCVC is taken up by the kidneys and further metabolized there 
by the enzyme β-lyase to S-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)thiol (DCVSH). 
DCVSH is then converted to highly reactive products, including 
DCVC sulfoxide, chlorothioketene, and thionoacylchloride (Lash 
et al., 2014). Metabolic activation of DCVC to chlorothioketene 
was shown to occur 11 times more rapidly in rats than in humans 
(Green et al., 1997a). Lash et al. (2001) also demonstrated that 
cultured rat renal cells were more sensitive to DCVC than human 
renal cells. Chlorothioketene and similarly unstable congeners are 
capable of covalently binding to renal cellular proteins and DNA. 
This results in genotoxicity and cytotoxicity, with ensuing regenera-
tive hyperplasia and potentially renal cell carcinoma.
Modes of Carcinogenic Action in Target Tissues  Both 
metabolic pathways are implicated in the carcinogenicity of TCE: 
reactive metabolite(s) of the GSH pathway in kidney tumors in rats, 
and oxidative metabolites in liver and lung tumors in mice. That 
tumor formation in many cases is species-, strain-, sex-, and route 
of exposure–dependent has provided clues as to TCE’s modes of 
carcinogenic action. Whereas substantial progress has been made 
on the mechanistic front, the reader should not infer from the text 
that follows that all modes of action are known with certainty.
Liver Cancer  It is well established that TCE, when given chroni-
cally in very high doses by gavage, can produce an increased inci-
dence of hepatocellular carcinoma in B6C3F1 mice, but not in 
other strains of mice or in rats. This differential susceptibility can 
be explained in part by the greater capacity of the mouse to bioac-
tivate relatively large quantities of TCE via the oxidative pathway. 
The B6C3F1 mouse produces a substantially larger amount of TCA 
after TCE exposures than do unresponsive strains of mouse, rats,

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1183
or humans. The susceptibility of the B6C3F1 mouse is also likely 
related to the high (42.2%) incidence of liver adenoma/carcinoma 
in male controls (Haseman et al., 1998). This phenomenon may be 
due to an abnormally high population of spontaneously initiated 
cells in these animals’ liver. Mice express very low levels of epox-
ide hydrolase (Lorenz et al., 1984), the enzyme that catalyzes the 
hydrolytic degradation/detoxification of reactive epoxide metabo-
lites of TCE and other VOCs.
Chloral hydrate (CH) induces hepatic tumors in male B6C3F1 
mice, but not in F344 rats. Female B6C3F1 mice gavaged with up 
to 100 mg CH/kg/day for 104 weeks showed no increase in liver 
tumors, but the male mice did exhibit increased incidences of hepa-
toma and/or hepatocellular carcinoma. CH is rapidly converted 
to TCA and TCOH in rodents and humans. Merdink et al. (2008) 
detected only trace amounts of DCA in blood and urine of male 
human subjects dosed with 500 or 1500 mg of CH. An epidemiol-
ogy study of the possible association of short-term clinical adminis-
tration of CH as a sedative-hypnotic and cancer risk in 2290 patients 
was conducted by Haselkorn et al. (2006). The authors concluded 
there was no persuasive evidence of a causal relationship between 
CH and cancer in humans.
TCA and DCA are the most likely candidates for proximate 
hepatocarcinogens produced by TCE’s oxidative pathway. TCA 
is a species-specific carcinogen that induces peroxisome prolif-
eration and hepatocellular carcinoma in male and female B6C3F1 
mice when administered in very high doses in drinking water or 
by gavage. TCA does not produce liver tumors in any strain of rats 
tested under these conditions (NAS, 2006, 2009). Very high doses 
of DCA, however, produce hepatic tumors in both B6C3F1 mice 
and F344 rats. Large, repeated doses of DCA and TCA initially 
stimulate, and then depress the growth of normal hepatocytes (Bull, 
2000). This may confer a growth advantage to initiated cells, and is 
referred to as negative selection. At high tumorigenic doses, DCA 
(but not TCA) is thought to stimulate cell replication within liver 
tumors. If indeed both DCA and TCA contribute to tumorigene-
sis, findings by Bull et al. (2002) indicate they do so by distinct 
mechanisms. DCA-promoted liver tumors differed phenotypically 
from those promoted by TCA. DCA- and TCA-induced tumors 
also differ as to whether their depression of cytosine methylation 
is reversible upon cessation of treatment (Tao et al., 1998). This 
is particularly important as DNA hypomethylation, including that 
of the proto-oncogenes c-jun and c-myc, may be an epigenetic 
mechanism for the tumorigenicity of DCA and TCA (Tao et al., 
2004). It appears that hypomethylation due to TCA and DCA 
induces DNA replication and prevents the methylation of newly 
synthesized strands of DNA (Ge et al., 2001). Tao et al. (2000) have 
reported that DCA and TCA do so by virtue of their depletion of 
S-adenosylmethionine, which normally supplies the methyl group 
for the methylation process. It should be recognized that these are 
not genotoxic mechanisms. The effects disappear as soon as these 
metabolites are eliminated.
A primary mode of action of TCA, and to a smaller extent 
DCA, is activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor 
alpha (PPARα). As peroxisomes contain a variety of oxidative 
enzymes, PPARα activation produces oxidative stress, which can 
be manifest as lipid peroxidation, oxidative DNA damage, and 
transcription factor activation (O’Brien et al., 2005). Stimulation 
of PPARα can enhance DNA replication, resulting in expansion of 
some clones of hepatocytes and suppression of apoptosis, so initi-
ated and precancerous cells will be spared. Male wild-type mice 
Cl
Cl
TCE
Cl
H
Dichloroacetylchloride
TRI-epoxide
S
Cys
Glu
Gly
Cl
Cl
H
DCVSH
DCVCSO
NAcDCVC
GGT
GST
P450
DP
DCVG
DCVC
NAT
β-lyase
FMO
S
COO
NH3
Cl
Cl
H
–
+
Cl2HC
C
O
Cl
Cl2HC
C
O
OH
Cl3C
COOH
TCOH (G)
TCA
DCA
Cl3C
CH2
O
H (Glu)
Chloral
Cl3C
CH
O
Cl
Cl
Cl
H
O
Figure 24-5.   General scheme of metabolism for TCE. β-lyase, cysteine conjugate β-lyase; DCA, dichloroacetate; DCVC,S-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-l-cysteine; 
DCVSH, 1,2-dichlorovinylthiol; DCVCSO, DCVC sulfoxide; DCVG, S-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)glutathione; DP, dipeptidase; FMO, flavin-containing monooxy-
genase; GGT, γ-glutamyltransferase; GST, GSH S-transferase; P450, cytochrome P450; TCA, trichloroacetate; TCOH, trichloroethanol; TCOG, TCOH gluc-
uronide. (Reproduced from Lash et al., 2005, with permission from Elsevier.)

1184
Toxic Agents
unit V
dosed orally with TCE exhibit hepatocyte proliferation and changes 
in expression of genes involved in cell growth (Laughter et al., 
2004). PPARα-null mice are refractory to those effects, which are 
associated with carcinogenesis. Mice expressing human PPARα fail 
to show increases in markers of cell proliferation and are resistant to 
liver cancer if treated with PPARα agonists (Morimura et al., 2006; 
Yang et al., 2008). The concentration of PPARα in human cells 
is about 10% of that in the livers of rodents (Palmer et al., 1998; 
Klaunig et al., 2003). Many toxicologists have judged that the mode 
of action for hepatic carcinogenesis observed in mice after adminis-
tration of peroxisome-proliferation-inducing drugs and other chem-
icals, such as TCA, makes it unlikely that such chemicals pose a 
hepatic cancer risk in humans (Cattley et al., 1998; Clewell and 
Andersen, 2004; Klaunig et al., 2007; Gonzalez and Shah, 2008). 
It was concluded by an expert review panel that the PPARα mode 
of action for liver cancer in mice is not relevant to humans (NAS, 
2006). However, others have raised questions about the interpreta-
tion of PPARα actions and whether it is the only relevant mode of 
action for such chemicals (Keshava and Caldwell, 2006). This has 
continued to be a subject of debate (NAS, 2008).
It is important to recognize that stimulation or inhibition of cell 
growth through PPARα activation ceases when the metabolites are 
eliminated (Miller et al., 2000). Thus, such alteration of cell signal-
ing is not a genotoxic mechanism of action. Very high concentra-
tions of DCA and CH have a weak genotoxic action in vitro. Bull 
(2000) and Moore and Harrington-Brock (2000), however, conclude 
that it is unlikely that those metabolites would cause tumors in any 
organ through genotoxicity or mutagenicity at exposure concentra-
tions relevant to humans.
Lung Cancer  As discussed in the review paper by Green (2000), 
inhaled TCE is carcinogenic to the mouse lung but not to that of the 
rat. Oral TCE is not carcinogenic to the lung, probably due to first-
pass hepatic metabolism that limits the amount of TCE reaching the 
lungs. The primary target of TCE in the mouse lung is the noncili-
ated Clara cell. Cytotoxicity is characterized by vacuolization and 
increased replication of these cells in the bronchiolar epithelium. 
A dose-dependent reduction in the CYP activity in Clara cells is 
observed as well. This loss of metabolic activation capacity can be 
thought of as an adaptive response. Clara cells recover morphologi-
cally during repeated daily inhalation exposures to TCE.
Chloral is the putative toxicant responsible for pulmonary 
tumor formation. Clara cells of the mouse efficiently metabolize 
TCE to chloral. Chloral accumulates, due to its efficient production 
and low activity of ADH, the enzyme responsible for its reduc-
tion to TCOH. The Clara cells’ lack of glucuronosyltransferase, 
the enzyme that normally catalyzes the formation of TCOH-GLU, 
has also been implicated in chloral accumulation. Species differ-
ences in susceptibility of the lung to TCE are due in part to mouse 
lung Clara cells having a much higher level of Cyp2e1 than those 
of the rat, and thus a much higher capacity to metabolize TCE to 
chloral. Also, Clara cells in mice are much more numerous than in 
rats. Clara cells are rare in human lungs. A critical role for chlo-
ral is supported by the finding that its administration to mice, but 
not that of TCA or TCOH, causes Clara cell toxicity identical to 
that of TCE. Chloral does appear to have some genotoxic poten-
tial, especially in regard to inducing aneuploidy. However, the fact 
that tumors are not seen in species where cytotoxicity does not 
occur strongly implicates cytotoxicity and reparative proliferation 
in tumor formation. In an effort to test the hypothesis that bronchio-
lar damage by TCE is associated with bioactivation within Clara 
cells, Forkert et al. (2006) administered TCE i.p. to CD-1 mice. 
The result was dose-dependent production of dichloroacetyl lysine 
adducts in Clara cells (used as an in vivo marker of TCE metabo-
lism) that correlated with bronchiolar damage. The work also sug-
gested that CYP2F2 may play a more important role than CYP2E1 
in TCE metabolism and cytotoxicity within the mouse lung (Forkert 
et al., 2005).
Kidney Cancer  TCE was given in corn oil to F344/N rats and 
B6C3F1 mice of both sexes by gavage five times weekly at doses 
up to 1000 mg/kg in rats and 6000 mg/kg in mice in a 13-week 
study, as well as up to 1000 mg/kg to both species and sexes in 
a 103-week study (NTP, 1990). A low, but statistically significant 
increase in renal tumor incidence was observed only in the male 
rats given TCE at 1000 mg/kg for 2 years. Two-year gavage studies 
of TCE, in four additional rat strains, were also conducted (NTP, 
1988). In all strains of rats tested, cytomegaly and karyomegaly of 
tubular cells in the renal corticomedullary region were seen. Frank 
toxic nephropathy was observed with higher frequency in male rats 
beginning at 52 weeks of exposure. Renal adenomas or adenocarci-
nomas were occasionally seen in male rats of different strains after 
2 years of the repetitive, high-dose oral exposure regimen.
Adverse effects of TCE on the kidneys are due largely to 
metabolites formed via the GSH conjugation pathway (Lash et al., 
2000a, 2014). As described previously, conjugation of TCE with 
GSH to form S-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)GSH (DCVG) occurs primarily 
in the liver, which is secreted into bile and blood. DCVG in the bile 
is converted in the gut to S-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-L-cysteine (DCVC), 
which is reabsorbed into the bloodstream. As described previously, 
humans have a lower capacity than rats to metabolize TCE by the 
GSH pathway. Lash et al. (1999) were able to detect DCVG in the 
blood of humans who inhaled TCE at 50 or 100 ppm for 4 hours, but 
Bloeman et al. (2001) could not find DCVG or DCVC in the urine 
of similarly exposed subjects. DCVG in the blood is taken up by the 
kidneys and metabolized to DCVC by γ-glutamyltransferase and a 
dipeptidase. Lash et al. (2001) observed the following decreasing 
order of toxic potency in freshly isolated rat cortical cells: DCVC 
> DCVG >> TCE. DCVC can be detoxified by acetylation or 
activated further by two pathways: (1) cleavage by renal cytosolic 
and mitochondrial β-lyases to dichlorothioketene, which in turn can 
lose a chloride ion to yield chlorothioketene or tautomerize to form 
chlorothionacyl chloride (the latter two moieties are very reactive 
and acylate proteins and DNA); and (2) oxidation by renal CYPs or 
flavin-containing monoxygenases to DCVC sulfoxide (DCVCS), 
a reactive epoxide. Lash et al. (1994) reported that DCVCS was a 
more potent nephrotoxicant than DCVC in vitro and in vivo in rats. 
Apoptosis was observed after as little as 1 hour of incubation of 
cultured human renal proximal tubular (RPT) cells with DCVC and 
DCVCS (Lash et al., 2003, 2005). Cellular proliferation, accom-
panied by increased expression of proteins associated with cellu-
lar growth, differentiation, stress, and apoptosis, was also an early 
response to low doses. Necrosis, however, was a late, high-dose 
phenomenon. Exposure of human RPT cells to DCVC at lower con-
centrations for 10 days also resulted in expression of genes associ-
ated with cell proliferation, apoptosis, and stress (Lash et al., 2005), 
as well as repair and DCVC metabolism (Lash et al., 2006).
Animal studies typically provide insight into mode of action, 
but in the case of TCE-induced renal cell carcinoma (RCC), human 
studies have been of significant value. Bruning et al. (1997a) ana-
lyzed tumor tissues from 23 RCC patients with occupational his-
tories of long-term, high-level TCE exposure. Tumor cell DNA 
was isolated and analyzed for somatic mutations of the von-Hippel 
Lindau (VHL) tumor suppressor gene. Compared to VHL gene 
mutation rates of 33% to 55% in unexposed RCC patients, all 23 
TCE-exposed RCC patients exhibited aberrations of the VHL gene.

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1185
In a follow-up study, Brauch et al. (1999) sought to determine 
whether TCE produced a specific mutation of the VHL gene. These 
investigators analyzed VHL gene sequences in DNA isolated from 
RCC tissues from patients exposed to high levels of TCE in metal-
processing factories. Renal cell tumors of TCE-exposed patients 
showed somatic VHL mutations in 33 of 44 cases (75%). Of the 33 
cases with VHL mutations, a specific mutational hot spot at VHL 
nucleotide 454 was observed in 13 cases. The nucleotide 454 muta-
tion was not found in any of the 107 RCC patients without TCE 
exposure or among 97 healthy subjects, 47 of whom had a history of 
TCE exposure. These data suggest that the VHL gene may be a spe-
cific and susceptible target of reactive GSH pathway metabolites, a 
concept strengthened by a more recent study reporting VHL nucleo-
tide 454 mutation among TCE-exposed but not in nonexposed RCC 
patients (Brauch et al., 2004). More recently, however, Charbotel 
et al. (2007) found no associations between the number and type 
of VHL mutations in TCE-exposed and unexposed RCC patients. 
The subject awaits further clarification (Chow and Devesa, 2008).
The aforementioned reactive products of DCVC are both 
cytotoxic and mutagenic. Adverse effects on proximal tubule cells 
include alkylation of cytosolic and mitochondrial structural and 
enzymatic proteins, oxidative stress, marked ATP depletion, and 
perturbations of calcium homeostasis. Tubular necrosis ensues, with 
subsequent proliferation that can alter gene expression, which in 
term may modify cell growth and differentiation. Genes associated 
with stress, apoptosis, repair, and proliferation were upregulated 
almost twofold in cultured human renal tubular cells exposed to sub-
toxic doses of DCVC for 10 days (Lock et al., 2006). Mechanisms 
of noncarcinogenic and carcinogenic action are discussed in detail 
by Lash et al. (2014) and Lock and Reed (2006).
Bruning and Bolt (2000) opined that reactive metabolite(s) 
of the GSH pathway may have a genotoxic effect on the proximal 
tubule of the human kidney, but that full development of a malig-
nant tumor requires a promotional effect such as cell proliferation in 
response to tubular damage. If this is true, RCC secondary to TCE 
exposure would be a threshold response. The question of whether 
chronic tubular damage is a prerequisite to renal tumor formation is 
quite important. Evidence has come from the use of electrophoresis 
to examine protein excretion patterns in the urine of RCC patients 
with and without a history of chronic, high-level TCE exposure 
(Bruning et al., 1996). Protein excretion patterns indicative of tubu-
lar damage were identified in all their 17 TCE-exposed cases, but 
in only about one-half of 35 controls. Bruning et al. (1999) subse-
quently published the results of a larger study supportive of this 
concept. Some 93% of 41 RCC patients with high TCE exposure 
exhibited elevated urinary α1-microglobulin excretion versus 46% 
of 50 RCC patients without a history of TCE exposure. Similar find-
ings were reported in an updated study by Bolt et al. (2004), and 
in an investigation by Green et al. (2004) of 70 electronics workers 
who inhaled an average of 32 ppm TCE for 4 years.
Results of an investigation by Mally et al. (2006) provide addi-
tional insight into the TCE renal carcinogenesis threshold premise. 
A strain of rats (Eker) uniquely susceptible to renal carcinogens 
was administered 100, 250, 500, and 1000 mg TCE/kg by gavage 5 
days/week for 13 weeks. The Eker rat is a unique animal model for 
RCC, carrying a germ-line alteration of the Tsc-2 tumor-suppressor 
gene. Results showed a significant increase in cell proliferation in 
renal tubular cells but no increase in preneoplastic renal lesions or 
tumor incidence. In vitro studies were conducted on primary Eker 
rat renal epithelial cells by exposing them to the TCE metabolite 
DCVC dissolved in water at 10 to 50 µM for 8, 24, and 72 hours. 
Concentrations of DCVC that reduced rat renal cell survival to 
50% also resulted in cell transformation. No carcinogen-specific 
mutations were identified in the VHL or Tsc-2 tumor-suppressor 
genes in the transformed cells. Renal cell carcinomas in the Eker 
rat have substantial similarities to human RCC. It is not entirely 
clear that this or any contemporary experimental animal model ade-
quately mirrors humans with regard to the effects of TCE-induced 
mutations in the VHL gene, but the authors firmly suggest that TCE-
mediated renal carcinogenicity may occur only secondarily to neph-
rotoxicity and sustained regenerative cell proliferation.
Metabolism of TCE by the GSH pathway is similar qualita-
tively, but not quantitatively in rats and humans. N-acetyl-DCVC, 
the major detoxification product of DCVC, was found in the urine 
of humans and rats after 6 hours of inhalation of up to 160 ppm TCE 
(Bernauer et al., 1996). Cumulative excretion of the N-acetyl deriva-
tive was seven- to eightfold greater in the rats. Bruning et al. (1997b) 
originally reported an increased likelihood of RCC patients with 
high TCE exposure having a functional GSH S-transferase isozyme 
GSTT1 or GSTM1 genotype. This isozyme GSTT1 is thought to be 
primarily involved in TCE metabolism, while GSTM1 is believed to 
detoxify epoxides. A reassessment by the investigators of a larger 
population, however, revealed no such relationships (Wiesenhutter 
et al., 2007). Moore et al. (2010), however, completed an assess-
ment of an even larger population. There was an increased risk of 
RCC in workers with at least one intact GSTT1 allele, but not in 
persons with two deleted alleles (i.e., null genotype).
It is also worthy of note that male rats and humans are appar-
ently at greater risk of TCE-induced kidney cancer than their 
female counterparts. Blood DCVG levels were 3.4-fold higher in 
male than in female volunteers inhaling 50 or 100 ppm TCE (Lash 
et al., 1999). Male rats display higher GSH conjugation, γ-glutamyl 
transpeptidase activity, and cysteine conjugate β-lyase activity than 
female rats. Taken together, results of the cited studies indicate that 
male humans and male rats both possess GSH conjugation capacity 
and can produce the critical TCE metabolite DCVC. Renal carci-
noma has been observed in male rats and male workers when both 
have been exposed to very high TCE concentrations for prolonged 
periods of time. These observations show data congruence, indicat-
ing that the conjugation pathway plays a central role in induction of 
renal carcinoma in males of both species. As described previously, 
rats have a significantly greater capacity to metabolically activate 
TCE to DCVC by this pathway than do humans. Rat renal cortical 
cells, in turn, are more susceptible to injury by DCVC than their 
human counterparts.
Cancer Epidemiology  There have been many published stud-
ies of cancer incidence and mortality in TCE-exposed populations. 
Most of the epidemiology studies in the United States prior to 2000 
involved workers in the aircraft maintenance and manufacturing 
industries. There were also investigations of Swedish, Finnish, 
German, and Danish worker cohorts. Results of these assess-
ments have been mixed, ranging from no association to limited 
evidence. The major studies with some exposure data constituted 
what Wartenberg et al. (2000) referred to as Tier I studies, which 
received a greater weighting when making causal inferences than 
lower tier cohort, case–control, and community-based investiga-
tions. Among the Tier I studies, evidence for an excess incidence 
of cancer was strongest for kidney (rate ratios [RR] = 1.7, 95% 
confidence interval [CI] = 1.1 to 2.7), liver (RR = 1.9, CI = 1.0 to 
3.4), and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL) (RR = 1.5, CI = 0.9 to 
2.3) (Wartenberg et al., 2000).
Occupational exposure studies have provided the strongest evi-
dence to date for an association between TCE and RCC. Henschler 
et al. (1995) described a cohort of male cardboard factory workers 
who were exposed to moderate to extremely high concentrations of

1186
Toxic Agents
unit V
TCE vapor. Five of the 169 exposed workers had been diagnosed 
with kidney cancer versus none of the 190 controls. This resulted in 
standardized incidence ratios (SIRs) of 7.97 (CI = 2.59 to 18.59) 
and 9.66 (CI = 3.14 to 22.55), using Danish and German Cancer 
Registry data for comparison, respectively. German researchers 
also conducted a hospital-based case–control study with 58 RCC 
patients and 84 patients from accident wards who served as controls. 
Of the 58 RCC patients, 19 had histories of occupational TCE expo-
sure of at least 2 years, compared to only 5 of the controls. After 
adjustment for potential confounders, an association between RCC 
and long-term exposure to TCE was reported (odds ratio [OR] = 
10.80, CI = 3.36 to 34.75) (Vamvakas et al., 1998). In an expanded 
German case–control study of 134 RCC cases and 401 controls, 
excess risks for those working longest with TCE (OR = 1.8, CI = 
1.01 to 3.20) and those reporting narcotic symptoms (OR = 
3.71, CI = 1.80 to 7.54) were reported (Bruning et al., 2003). 
Narcosis was thought to be associated with peak exposures. These 
workers reported frequent dizziness, requiring them to seek fresh 
air several times daily. More recent investigations have generally 
involved surveys of populations with lower exposures. The results 
of these investigations have generally been indicative of an associa-
tion between TCE and RCC, although some findings were negative 
or did not reach statistical significance (Raaschou-Nielsen et al., 
2003; Wong, 2004; Chang et al., 2005; Alexander et al., 2006; Boice 
et al., 2006, Mandel et al., 2006; Moore et al., 2010). A number of 
these assessments involved a limited number of subjects. Charbotel 
et al. (2006) studied 86 RCC patients and 316 matched controls 
from an area in France with high TCE exposures in local industries. 
There was a 64% increase in RCC risk with TCE exposure, with the 
risk doubling in persons with a high cumulative dose, increasing 
more (OR = 2.74, CI = 1.06 to 7.07) when peak exposures were 
also taken into account. The OR was still high, but not statistically 
significant after adjusting for exposure to cutting fluids, because of 
the study’s lack of power. A meta-analysis based on existing studies 
was conducted, because risk estimates were modest. Statistically 
significant meta-relative risks of 1.26 to 1.32 were reported by 
Karami et al. (2012). Cichocki et al. (2016) recently reviewed find-
ings of epidemiological studies of TCE exposures and cancer risks.
Epidemiological evidence of NHL or cancer of the liver, lung, 
or other organs has been weaker than that for the kidney. There 
appeared to be a dose-dependent increase in the standardized inci-
dence ratio (SIR) for NHL, with increased duration of TCE expo-
sure in Danish workers (Raaschou-Nielsen et al., 2003). These 
researchers also reported an SIR of 1.7 for esophageal adenocar-
cinoma. Seidler et al. (2007) described the association between 
TCE exposure of more than 35 ppm/year and malignant lymphoma 
(OR = 2.1, CI = 1.0 to 4.8) as being of borderline statistical sig-
nificance. Lan et al. (2010) recently observed a dose-dependent 
decline in major types of lymphocytes in TCE-exposed workers 
in China. Little or no association with NHL incidence was seen by 
Boice et al. (2006) or Zhao et al. (2005) in aerospace employees. 
Evidence of lung cancer in persons occupationally exposed to TCE 
is limited to nonexistent (Hansen et al., 2001; Raaschou-Nielsen 
et al., 2003; Zhao et al., 2005; Boice et al., 2006). The latter group 
of scientists’ estimates of SIRs for lung cancer, for example, were 
1.4 for men and 1.9 for women. Most estimates of liver cancer risk 
in TCE-exposed workers have also been low. SIRs of 2.6 (Hansen 
et al., 2001) and 2.8 (Raaschou-Nielsen et al., 2003), resulting from 
a small number of cases, were among the highest reported.
Risk Assessment  Attempts to understand the mechanistic 
underpinnings of TCE’s carcinogenicity in rodent models and their 
relevance to humans have resulted in a massive body of published 
data. TCE provides a stellar example of how experimental data from 
laboratory and epidemiological studies may or may not impact can-
cer risk assessment in a regulatory context. The EPA began in the 
1990s to revise its guidelines for cancer risk assessment. The final 
EPA Guidelines for Carcinogen Risk Assessment were released in 
March 2005. TCE was utilized as a pilot chemical for evaluation 
and implementation of this guidance document. The guidelines 
emphasize a scientific “weight of evidence” approach that includes 
characterization of dose–response relationships, modes of action, 
and metabolic/TK processes. Where adequate data are available to 
support reversible binding of the carcinogenic moiety to biological 
molecules as the initiating event, a nonlinear (i.e., threshold) risk 
assessment/approach is to be used. Otherwise, the default assump-
tion of a linear (i.e., no-threshold) model/approach is to be used 
to estimate cancer risk. As described above, there is considerable 
evidence that TCE’s oxidative metabolites act via non-genotoxic 
modes of action. PPARα activation and induction of mouse liver 
tumors were judged to be irrelevant to humans (NAS, 2006). 
Despite a substantial increase in information in the last decade, 
Caldwell and Keshava (2006) contended that knowledge of mecha-
nisms and human relevance was still insufficient to depart from the 
default assumption. This is exemplified by the critical response of 
EPA scientists (Caldwell et al., 2006) to the effort by Clewell and 
Andersen (2004, 2006) to apply a margin of exposure approach 
(nonlinear dose–response extrapolation) in their TCE risk assess-
ment. In contrast to liver cancer, kidney cancer is widely accepted 
to be qualitatively similar in rats and humans, though rats form 
greater quantities of reactive metabolites via the GSH pathway. 
Despite genotoxic events, kidney tumor formation in humans may 
require promotion resulting from frank cytotoxicity (Bruning and 
Bolt, 2000). Caldwell and Keshava (2006), however, opine that 
there may be other modes of action of multiple metabolites opera-
tive at low doses. This logic has been retained in the EPA’s IRIS 
Toxicological Review of TCE (2011).
The EPA (2001a) draft “TCE Risk Assessment of TCE” elic-
ited considerable debate, which prompted the EPA and other federal 
agencies to request a scientific review of the document by a NAS 
expert panel. Their report was released in 2006. It concluded there 
was concordance between rat and human studies of renal carcino-
genicity. The preponderance of evidence indicated that humans 
would be much less susceptible than mice to liver and lung car-
cinogenesis. It was recommended, among other things, that a new 
meta-analysis of epidemiological data be conducted. Kelsh and his 
co-workers recently completed meta-analyses of occupational study 
data. Studies were classified as group I or II, depending on the qual-
ity of their design and exposure assessment. The summary relative 
risk estimate (SRRE) across all such studies was 1.42 (CI = 1.17 
to 1.77) for kidney cancer (Kelsh et al., 2010). The same research 
group performed meta-analyses for occupational TCE exposures 
and liver cancer (Alexander et al., 2007) and NHL (Mandel et al., 
2006). The highest SSREs calculated for liver cancer and NHL in 
any study groupings were 1.30 and 1.59, respectively. The authors 
noted that the results of many studies were inconsistent, information 
on TCE exposure was often quite limited, and recognized confound-
ing factors were not always taken into account. More recently NAS 
(2009) evaluated published occupational epidemiology studies, and 
concluded that evidence was inadequate/insufficient to determine 
whether there was as association with NHL or cancer of the liver, 
lung, or any other organ. TCE is now classified as a known human 
carcinogen by the EPA (2011), carcinogenic to humans (Group I) 
by IARC (2014), and known to be a human carcinogen by NTP 
(2015). All three agencies based their determination on the strength 
of epidemiologic evidence for kidney cancer. The IARC Group I

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1187
classification was also supported by strong mechanistic evidence of 
renal carcinogenicity (Rusyn et al., 2014). The relative consistency 
of findings across studies, positive exposure–response relationships, 
and results of meta-analyses argue against chance for a causal asso-
ciation (Cichocki et al., 2016).
Tetrachloroethylene
Tetrachloroethylene (perchloroethylene, PERC) is commonly 
used as a dry cleaner, fabric finisher, degreaser, rug and upholstery 
cleaner, paint and stain remover, solvent, and chemical interme-
diate. The highest exposures usually occur in occupational set-
tings via inhalation. Much attention is being focused on adverse 
health effects that may be experienced by dry cleaners and other 
persons living in the proximity of such facilities (Garetano and 
Gochfeld, 2000). Echeverria et al. (1995), for example, reported 
adverse effects on visuospatial functions of dry cleaners. PERC is 
frequently detected in the low ppt range in the breath and blood of 
the general populace (Ashley et al., 1994; Churchill et al., 2001; 
Blount et al., 2006). Although releases are primarily to the atmo-
sphere, PERC enters surface water and groundwater by acciden-
tal and intentional discharges (ATSDR, 1997c). Levels in the ppb 
range were reported in municipal water in areas of New England, 
where PERC was used in a process to treat plastic water pipe 
(Paulu et al., 1999). Pohl et al. (2008) reported that PERC was 
the third most frequently found chemical contaminant in ground-
water at hazardous waste sites in the United States. A dry cleaner 
adjacent to Camp Lejeune, in North Carolina, was the source of 
PERC contamination of some wells that supplied drinking water 
to the marine base. This contamination prompted assessment of 
potential health effects in employees and persons stationed at the 
base (NAS, 2009).
Metabolism  The systemic disposition and metabolism of PERC 
and TCE are similar in many respects, though PERC is much 
less extensively metabolized (ATSDR, 1997c; Chiu et al., 2007, 
Cichocki et al., 2016). Both chemicals are well absorbed from the 
lungs and GI tract, distributed to tissues according to their blood 
flow and lipid content, partially exhaled unchanged, and metabo-
lized. PERC, like TCE, is metabolized by cytochrome P450 (CYP)-
catalyzed oxidation and glutathione (GSH) conjugation. CYP2E1, 
however, is not thought to play a major role, in that PERC is 
believed to be oxidized primarily by the Cyp2b family in the rat 
(Hanioka et al., 1995). In humans, CYP2B6 is the primary isoform 
responsible for PERC metabolism, and there are minor contribu-
tions by CYP1A1 and CYP2C8 (White et al., 2001). The initial 
metabolite is the epoxide PERC oxide. This metabolic intermedi-
ate can be biotransformed to several products (Lash and Parker, 
2001). The primary one is trichloroacetyl chloride, which reacts 
with water to form TCA, the predominant PERC metabolite found 
in the urine of rodents and humans (Birner et al., 1996; Volkel et al., 
1998). Some TCA is converted to DCA.
A small proportion of absorbed PERC undergoes conjugation 
with GSH to form S-(1,2,2-trichlorovinyl)GSH (TCVG). This initial 
metabolic step is catalyzed by GSH S-transferases and occurs pri-
marily in the liver. TCVG is converted to S-(1,2,2-trichlorovinyl)-
L-cysteine (TCVC). TCVC, like the DCVC formed from TCE, 
is both detoxified in the liver by N-acetylation and metabolically 
activated by β-lyases in the kidneys. 2,2-Dichlorothioketene can 
decompose to DCA. Hence, DCA is derived from both GSH- and 
CYP-dependent biotransformation of PERC. PERC is conjugated 
with GSH more extensively by rats (1% to 2%) (Dekant et al., 1986) 
than is TCE (less than 0.005%) (Green et al., 1997a). The extent of 
GSH conjugation of PERC increases when the oxidative pathway 
begins to become saturated at high exposure levels. Metabolic prod-
ucts of GSH conjugates of TCE and PERC are primary contribu-
tors to the halocarbons’ nephrotoxicity (Lash et al., 2007; Cichocki 
et al., 2016).
Modes 
of 
Cytotoxicity/Carcinogenicity  PERC-induced 
hepatic injury is believed to be a consequence of its oxidative 
metabolism (Lash and Parker, 2001; Guyton et al., 2014). Although 
PERC is more poorly metabolized by CYPs than TCE, two addi-
tional intermediate metabolites of PERC appear to contribute to its 
hepatocytotoxicity: the initial oxidation product, PERC oxide; and 
one of its convertants, trichloroacetyl chloride. TCA is primarily 
responsible for activation of the nuclear receptor PPARα, which 
stimulates peroxisomal enzymes and selected CYPs involved in 
lipid metabolism. This results in peroxisome proliferation, which 
generates reactive oxygen moieties that can cause lipid peroxida-
tion, cellular injury, and altered expression of cell-signaling pro-
teins (Bull, 2000). Lash et al. (2007) more recently demonstrated 
that CYP inhibition resulted in reduced injury of hepatocytes iso-
lated from male F344 rats and exposed to PERC. GSH depletion 
increased cellular injury, apparently because of a shift from the 
GSH to the oxidative pathway.
The metabolism and mode of nephrotoxicity of PERC and 
TCE appear to be quite similar, although PERC and its metabolites 
are somewhat more potent. Renal effects of both halocarbons are 
due primarily to metabolites formed via the GSH pathway (Lash 
and Parker, 2001). The sites, enzymes, and products associated 
with PERC biotransformation are almost identical to those associ-
ated with TCE. The primary difference is that TCVG and TCVC 
are produced from PERC, and DCVG and DCVC are formed from 
TCE. TCVC can be detoxified by acetylation or cleaved by renal 
cytosolic and mitochondrial β-lyases to trichlorothioketene, which 
loses a chloride ion to form dichlorothioketene. The latter is a very 
reactive moiety that binds to cellular proteins and DNA. TCVC, as 
noted above, can be enzymatically oxidized to form the very reac-
tive TCVC sulfoxide (TCVCS) (Krause et al., 2003). TCVCS was 
shown to be more nephrotoxic than TCVC in male rats on i.p. injec-
tion (Elfarra and Krause, 2007). TCVC caused more pronounced 
necrosis of renal proximal tubular cells in male rats than did DCVC 
after i.v. injection (Birner et al., 1997). Lash et al. (2002) similarly 
found that PERC and TCVG were more toxic than TCE and DCVG 
in vivo to renal cortical cells of F344 rats. Cells from male rats 
were more sensitive than cells from females to PERC- and TCVG-
induced mitochondrial state 3 respiratory inhibition and cytotoxic-
ity. Isolated rat hepatocytes and their mitochondria, however, were 
unaffected by PCE and TCVC. Elevated GSH levels enhanced 
TCE-induced and PERC-induced cytotoxicity in suspensions of rat 
renal cortical cells but not hepatocytes (Lash et al., 2007). Thus, 
PERC’s GSH metabolites are both sex- and organ-specific.
Hepatorenal Toxicity  PERC, like TCE, has quite limited ability 
to adversely affect the liver or kidneys of rodents. Near-lethal i.p. 
doses of PERC were required to cause acute liver injury in mice 
(Klaassen and Plaa, 1966). Buben and O’Flaherty (1985) saw mani-
festations of modest hepatocellular damage in male mice given 500 
to 2000 mg PERC/kg daily for 6 weeks by corn oil gavage. A lack 
of dose-dependence reflected saturation of metabolic activation 
in this dosage range. Philip et al. (2007) reported that male mice 
given 150 to 1000 mg PERC/kg by aqueous gavage initially exhib-
ited a dose-dependent increase in serum alanine aminotransferase 
(ALT) activity, but levels of the enzyme regressed substantially 
over a 30-day dosing period. Hayes et al. (1986) found no consis-
tent dose-related changes in any clinical chemistry parameter in 
male or female rats that consumed up to 1440 mg PERC/kg in their

1188
Toxic Agents
unit V
drinking water for 90 days. Liver injury was not seen in B6C3F1 
mice or Osborne–Mendel rats gavaged with up to about 1000 mg/
kg daily for 78 weeks (NCI, 1977a). Dose-dependent karyomegaly 
was observed in the renal proximal tubular epithelium of mice and 
rats inhaling PERC for 103 weeks (NTP, 1986). This change was 
most prominent in the male rats. Tinston (1995) reported mild, pro-
gressive glomerulonephropathy and increased pleomorphism of 
renal tubular nuclei in male but not female rats that inhaled 1000 
ppm PERC for up to 19 weeks. Green et al. (1990) found increases 
in protein droplets and cell proliferation in the proximal tubular 
epithelium of male F344 rats gavaged with 1500 mg PERC/kg 
daily for up to 42 days. These alterations were accompanied by 
an increase in α2u-globulin, a male rat-specific protein (Fig. 24-6). 
Goldsworthy et al. (1988) reported similar findings in male, but 
not female F344 rats gavaged for 10 days with 1000 mg PERC/kg/
day. The accumulation of α2u-globulin is cytotoxic, causing cellular 
necrosis and compensatory cellular proliferation in the P2 segment 
of renal proximal tubules (Borghoff et al., 1990).
Humans should be less susceptible to hepatorenal injury by 
PERC than rodents, due to lower target-organ doses of the parent 
compound and its bioactive metabolites. Rats achieve a substan-
tially higher internal dose of VOCs than do humans upon inhalation 
exposures. Volkel et al. (1998) subjected rats and people to identical 
PERC inhalation regimens. Blood TCA concentrations were 3 to 10 
times higher in the rats. DCA was not detectable in human urine, 
but substantial amounts were found in the rat urine. A study of the 
urinary excretion of total trichloro-metabolites by PERC-exposed 
workers led Ohtsuki et al. (1983) to conclude that the capacity of 
humans to metabolize PERC was rather low. Lash and Parker (2001) 
noted that saturation of PERC metabolism occurred at lower doses 
in humans than in rodents. This indicates that humans have lower 
capacity to form biologically active metabolites from moderate-to-
high PERC doses. The difference is reflected in the finding of much 
lower concentrations of protein adducts in the blood of humans than 
in the blood of rats subjected to equivalent PERC inhalation expo-
sures (Pahler et al., 1999).
PERC has limited ability to damage the liver of humans. Stewart 
et al. (1977) found no evidence of hepatotoxicity in six male and six 
female volunteers exposed randomly to PERC at 0, 25, or 100 ppm 
5.5 hours/day, 5 days/week for 11 weeks. Serum ALT activity 
was not increased in 22 dry cleaners examined by Lauwerys et al. 
(1983). A research group in Italy studied 141 employees exposed 
to PCE in small laundries and dry cleaning shops (Gennari et al., 
1992). No worker exhibited clinical signs of hepatic dysfunction or 
abnormal serum enzyme concentrations, although there did appear 
to be an increase in one isozyme of γ-glutamyltransferse, which was 
said to be associated with hepatobiliary impairment. Another inves-
tigation of dry cleaners failed to reveal increases in serum enzymes, 
but did show mild-to-moderate changes in hepatic parenchyma 
revealed by ultrasonography (Brodkin et al., 1995). Thus, consider-
able experience in occupational settings demonstrates that humans 
may develop mild but reversible liver injury upon chronic exposure 
to high concentrations of PERC (ATSDR, 1997c).
Occupational exposures to PERC vapor have led to several 
reports of mild renal tubular damage (ATSDR, 1997c). Employees 
of dry cleaning shops have been the subjects of a number of studies 
of potential kidney effects. Increased concentrations of lysosomal or 
β-glucuronidase activity were described in the urine of dry cleaners 
exposed to 10 (Franchini et al., 1983) and 23 ppm PERC (Vyskocil 
et al., 1990) for 9 to 14 years. In a more comprehensive study, a 
number of urinary indices indicative of early glomerular and tubular 
changes were increased in 50 dry cleaners who inhaled about 15 
ppm PERC for 10 years (Mutti et al., 1992). Verplanke et al. (1999) 
monitored several indexes of tubular and glomerular function in 
Dutch dry cleaning workers, but found an increase only in retinol-
binding protein in their urine. Other investigators have failed to find 
evidence of renal effects in such populations. A laboratory study 
of 10 male and 10 female adults who inhaled PERC at up to 150 
ppm for as long as 7.5 hours/day for 5 days did not show changes 
from pre-exposure baseline BUN levels (Stewart et al., 1981). Hake 
and Stewart (1977) described a dry cleaner worker who was found 
unconscious in a pool of PERC, where he had been for an estimated 
12 hours. Laboratory tests revealed hematuria and proteinuria that 
lasted for 10 and 20 days, respectively. Mild hepatic damage was 
revealed by transient increases in serum enzymes. On the basis of the 
foregoing occupational experiences, PERC has shown limited abil-
ity to cause diffuse changes along the nephron, although extremely 
high exposures can lead to pronounced changes in humans.
Cancer Bioassays in Rodents  High, chronic doses of PERC 
have been demonstrated to produce species- and in certain cases 
strain- and gender-specific tumors in some organs of mice and rats. 
Male and female B6C3F1 mice gavaged with very high doses of 
PERC (stabilized with epichlorohydrin) for up to 78 weeks, exhib-
ited an increase in hepatocellular carcinoma (NCI, 1977a). No 
increase in tumor incidence was seen in Osborne–Mendel rats. A 
significant increase in hepatocellular neoplasms (adenomas and 
carcinomas combined) was seen in B6C3F1 mice inhaling 100 or 
200 ppm PERC for 2 years (NTP, 1986). There was also a low 
incidence of renal adenomas and carcinomas in male but not female 
F344 rats exposed for 2 years to 200 or 400 ppm PERC vapor. The 
incidence of renal neoplasms in the males was 1 of 49 controls, 3 
of 49 exposed at 200 ppm, and 4 of 49 exposed at 400 ppm (NTP, 
Renal reabsorption
Circulation
Amino acids
Heterolysosome
Nucleus
Nucleus
Circulation
α2u-globulin
α2u-globulin accumulation in kidney target cells
Chemical exposure
Chemical binding to α2u-globulin
Chemical–α2u-globulin complex
Chemically treated cell
Normal cell
Cytotoxicity and cytolethality of kidney target cells
Restorative cell proliferation of kidney target cells
Promotion of
initiated cells
Increased mutation
frequency and
accumulation
Kidney tumors
?
?
?
Renal reabsorption
Figure 24-6.   Proposed mechanism of solvent-induced kidney cancer in 
male rats involving α2u-globulin. (Used with permission of Borghoff et al. 
CIIT Activities 1996;16(10):1–8.)

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1189
1986). Even though the changes were not statistically significant, 
it was noted that these particular tumors are rare in F344/N male 
rats, so they were thought to have been caused by PERC exposure. 
There was also a significant increase over controls in mononuclear-
cell leukemia (MNL) in the male and female rats, but it was not 
clearly dose-dependent. The incidence of this form of leukemia 
can exceed 70% in F344 controls (Caldwell, 1999; Ishmael and 
Dugard, 2006). MNL in this rat strain apparently arises from large 
granular lymphocytes. This leukemic origin is very uncommon in 
humans (Caldwell, 1999). Gliomas were found in two female and 
four male F344/N rats exposed to PERC at 400 ppm and in one 
control male (NTP, 1986). The increase in incidence of this tumor 
was not statistically significant. Thus, the brain tumors were not 
considered by NTP (1986) to have been induced by exposure to 
PERC. The overall incidence of Leydig cell (testicular) tumors was 
70%, 80%, and 82% in the 0-, 200-, and 400-ppm groups, respec-
tively. Haseman et al. (1998) reported that NTP control F344 rats 
have an extremely high spontaneous incidence (89.1%) of Leydig 
cell tumors. Therefore, these tumors are believed to be irrelevant to 
men (Ishmael and Dugard, 2006). No increases in lung proliferative 
lesions were seen in B6C3F1 mice of either sex after inhalation of 
PERC at 100 or 200 ppm for 103 weeks, nor were lung neoplasms 
seen in male or female F344/N rats exposed at 200 or 400 ppm for 
103 weeks (NTP, 1986).
Cancer Epidemiology Studies  There have been many epide-
miology studies of cancer incidence and mortality in groups of 
dry cleaners and other persons occupationally exposed to PERC 
(ATSDR, 1997c; NAS, 2009; EPA, 2008; Guyton et  al., 2014). 
Some researchers have reported findings of excess incidences of 
different cancers, while others have not. Frequently, there was not 
a determination of the degree or duration of PERC exposure, or 
consideration of major confounding factors (e.g., exposure to other 
solvents/chemicals, smoking, alcohol consumption, socioeconomic 
status). Nevertheless, there was sufficient information for Weiss 
(1995) to conclude that cigarette smoking and alcohol consump-
tion could only partially account for an increased rate of esophageal 
cancer in dry cleaners. In this instance kidney cancer incidence did 
not appear to be elevated. Blair et al. (2003) conducted and updated 
a mortality assessment of a cohort of dry cleaners and found an 
increased risk of death from esophageal cancer (Standardized 
Mortality Ratio [SMR] = 2.2, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.5 
to 3.3). No exposure-response pattern was seen. Chang et al. (2005) 
did not find any cases of esophageal cancer in a Taiwanese cohort of 
electronics workers, while Lynge et al. (2006) observed a decreased 
incidence in dry cleaners in Nordic countries. Nevertheless, NAS 
(2009) concluded there was limited/suggestive evidence of an asso-
ciation between chronic PERC exposure and esophageal cancer.
There has been little evidence of an association between occu-
pational PERC exposure and liver cancer. Increased incidences or 
mortality were not seen in cohort studies (Blair et al., 2003; Chang 
et al., 2005) or in a case–control study (Lynge et al., 2006). A rate 
ratio (RR) of just 0.76 (CI = 0.38 to 1.52) was estimated in the lat-
ter investigation of Nordic dry cleaning workers. A mortality odds 
ratio (MOR) of 2.57 (CI = 1.21 to 5.46) was reported by Lee et al. 
(2003) in another case–control study, but the exposure assessment 
was weak. The NAS (2009) concluded there was insufficient/inad-
equate evidence to determine whether an association exists between 
chronic PERC exposure and hepatobiliary cancer.
Epidemiology studies of populations exposed to PERC gen-
erally have shown no increase in risk of lung cancer. Blair et al. 
(2003), however, in an updated mortality analysis of dry cleaners, 
reported a SMR of 1.5 (CI = 1.2 to 1.9) for workers with medium 
to high exposures. This study adequately characterized exposures 
and included a relatively large number of subjects. Thus, the NAS 
(2009) concluded there is limited/suggestive evidence of an associa-
tion between chronic PERC exposure and lung cancer.
Investigations of kidney cancer risk in PERC-exposed popu-
lations have yielded mixed results. A number of studies have not 
revealed an increased risk (Boice et al., 1999; Ruder et al., 2001; 
Blair et al., 2003; Mundt et al., 2003; Lynge et al., 2006). However, 
some of the assessments lacked power due to a limited number of 
study subjects. Although Blair et al. (2003) reported a very low 
SMR for kidney cancer deaths in dry cleaners with little or no 
PERC exposures; the SMR was 1.5 for those with medium or high 
exposure. Increased incidences have also been reported by Mandel 
et al. (1995), Pesch et al. (2000), and McCredie and Stewart (1993). 
The NAS (2009) concluded there is limited/suggestive evidence of 
an association between chronic PERC exposure and kidney cancer 
in humans. There are two higher NAS risk categories that require 
stronger evidence than “limited/suggestive.”
There is limited evidence of associations between occupational 
PCE exposure and bladder cancer, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, and 
multiple myeloma (Guyton et al., 2014). In several surveys of dry 
cleaning workers, increasing risks were seen with increasing dura-
tion or intensity of exposure. Vlaanderen et al. (2014) concluded 
that their meta-analysis demonstrated an increased risk of bladder 
cancer in dry cleaners reported in both case–control and cohort stud-
ies, as well as some evidence of exposure-response relationships.
Risk Assessment  A great deal of research has been conducted to 
characterize PERC’s dose–response relationships, modes of action, 
and metabolism/toxicokinetics in rodents and humans. It is appar-
ent from the previous discussion there is a considerable body of 
information available from human experience/exposures to PERC, 
as well as extensive data sets from studies in different species of 
laboratory animals. Both types of data are important in assessing 
risks to human health. Knowledge of the relevance of the animal 
data to humans is essential in order to meaningfully extrapolate 
from one species to another.
Humans appear to be less susceptible than rodents to the 
toxic or carcinogenic actions of PERC, as they are to those of 
TCE. Humans absorb less inhaled PERC and TCE, attain lower 
target organ doses of the parent compounds, have lower oxidative 
and GSH conjugation capacity, and inactivate epoxide intermedi-
ates more efficiently. Upon equivalent inhalation exposures of 
Wistar rats and humans to PERC, the rats excreted substantially 
larger amounts of TCA, DCA, and acetylated TCVC (Volkel et al., 
1998). These observations were consistent with in vitro findings of 
greater conversion of PERC to TCVC by rat liver cytosol and of 
10-fold higher β-lyase–mediated metabolism of TCVC by rat than 
by human kidney (Green et al., 1990). These data indicate that the 
human kidney has limited capacity to generate reactive metabolites 
from PERC by the GSH and β-lyase pathways. Biotransformation 
of PERC by the GSH conjugation pathway appears to be quite simi-
lar qualitatively, but not quantitatively in male rats and humans.
PERC-induced accumulation of α2µ-globulin in the P2 seg-
ment of renal proximal tubules and the accompanying cytotoxic 
and regenerative changes are unique to the male rat (Borghoff et al., 
1990). α2µ-Globulin is synthesized under androgenic control in the 
liver of male rats, reabsorbed by the P2 segment, and undergoes 
hydrolytic digestion. Accumulation of α2µ in cytoplasmic droplets 
elicits tubular cell necrosis and compensatory cell proliferation 
(Goldsworthy et al., 1988). Sustained cell proliferation can promote 
clonal expansion of spontaneously or chemically initiated cells 
in proximal tubules to form preneoplastic and neoplastic lesions

1190
Toxic Agents
unit V
(Swenberg, 1993). The increase in cell proliferation is reversible, as 
is the binding of halocarbon metabolites to α2µ-globulin. Thus, this 
mode of action is not genotoxic and is considered by IARC and the 
EPA to be irrelevant to humans. Melnick and Kohn, (1999), how-
ever, argue that some data are inconsistent with this conclusion, and 
that alternative mechanisms may exist. Doi et al. (2007) find some 
contribution of α2µ-globulin nephropathy to renal tumors produced 
by several structurally diverse chemicals in rats, but conclude that 
other critical processes are probably involved.
Several comprehensive reviews of PERC’s toxicity and car-
cinogenicity have been published. Lash and Parker (2001) and 
Cichocki et al. (2016) compiled reviews of the metabolism, toxic-
ity, and modes of toxicity of the chemical in laboratory animals and 
humans. The NAS (2009) recently published an evaluation of risks 
of use of TCE- and PERC-contaminated drinking water. It contained 
an extensive review of the metabolism, toxicity, and carcinogenic-
ity of the two VOCs. The EPA (2008) released a draft document in 
support of its IRIS risk assessment, entitled Toxicological Review 
of Tetrachloroethylene (Perchloroethylene). Quite recently, the 
NAS (2010) published a review of the EPA document. Questions 
were raised that called into question the soundness and reliability 
of EPA’s proposed toxicity and cancer risk estimates. Stated weak-
nesses included a lack of critical analysis of data, preference given 
to studies (e.g., genotoxicity, epidemiological) showing positive 
results, and lack of an integrated consideration of the weight of 
evidence. The EPA subsequently published its final IRIS document 
(EPA, 2012). EPA classifies PER as “likely to be carcinogenic to 
humans.” IARC (2014) classifies it as Group 2A (probably carcino-
genic to humans), while NTP (2015) terms PCE “reasonably antici-
pated to be a human carcinogen.”
1,1,1-Trichloroethane
1,1,1-Trichloroethane (methyl chloroform, TRI) is a widely used 
organic solvent. Its popularity as a metal degreaser, general pur-
pose solvent, spot cleaner, and component of aerosols and a vari-
ety of household products increased substantially with the decline 
in manufacture of other halocarbons found to be high-dose rodent 
carcinogens and potential human carcinogens (ATSDR, 2006b). 
Utilization of TRI diminished during the 1990s, however, due to its 
ozone-depleting properties (Doherty, 2000). The volatile organic 
chemical (VOC) was to be phased out under the Montreal Protocol 
by 2002, but is still manufactured in the United States and utilized 
as a precursor for hydrofluorocarbons. TRI is also still present in 
some cleaning products. TRI was found in groundwater at 21% of 
hazardous waste sites surveyed in the United States (Pohl et al., 
2008). TRI and other VOCs in groundwater can remain trapped 
for years and serve as a source of low-level exposure. The highest 
exposures to TRI occurred via inhalation in occupational settings, 
but people encounter the VOC at home by use of commercial prod-
ucts and tap water containing it. Ashley et al. (1994) reported TRI 
and other VOCs in the blood of 75% of 600+ nonoccupationally 
exposed individuals. TRI and TCE were also frequently detected 
in a subset of 982 adults examined in the NHANES III survey 
(Churchill et al., 2001), and in 951 members of the general popula-
tion (Blount et al., 2006).
Toxicokinetics (TK) and Metabolism  The TK of TRI has 
been characterized in rodents and in humans. TRI is rapidly and 
extensively absorbed from the lungs (Schumann et al., 1982) and 
GI tract. Systemic uptake and blood levels are elevated in humans 
inhaling TRI and other VOCs when they exercise. Dallas et  al. 
(1989) observed that uptake of inhaled TRI diminished from 
80+ % to 50% during 2 hours of exposure, due to its systemic 
accumulation as a result of slow metabolism. Monster (1979) 
similarly noted in humans that the capacity of the body to absorb 
TRI vapor was less than that for TCE, due to TRI’s relatively poor 
metabolism. The bioavailability of comparable oral doses of TRI 
and TCE in rats is about 85% and 45%, respectively. TRI, like other 
VOCs, is distributed throughout the body, with fat achieving the 
highest concentrations (Schumann et al., 1982). As TRI biotrans-
formation is quite limited, the VOC is cleared primarily by exha-
lation by rodents (Schumann et al., 1982; Reitz et al., 1988) and 
humans (Nolan et al., 1984). Prior exposure to CYP2E1 inducers 
such as ethanol can enhance the metabolic clearance of capacity-
limited chemicals like TRI (Johns et al., 2006).
A number of physiologically based toxicokinetic (PBTK) 
models for TRI in rodents and in humans have been published. Lu 
et al. (2008) evaluated the suitability of each of these for use in the 
EPA IRIS database. The model of Reitz et al. (1988) proved the 
most satisfactory, in that it accurately predicted the time course of 
TRI in mouse, rat, and human blood for different inhalation sce-
narios. No empirical data were available for assessing the accuracy 
of simulations of brain TRI levels. Warren et al. (1998), however, 
demonstrated a high degree of correlation between brain and blood 
levels in TRI-exposed mice and rats, as well as reasonable correla-
tion between brain levels and CNS effects of the VOC. TK data 
from human and rodent studies were used by Lu et al. (2008) to 
simulate internal dose metrics for appropriate human exposure sce-
narios for derivation of IRIS reference values.
Toxicity  The primary pharmacological manifestation of acute or 
chronic inhalation of TRI is CNS depression, ranging in severity 
from slight headache or dizziness to anesthesia and death (ATSDR, 
2006b). The current threshold limit value (TLV) of 350 ppm was 
established to prevent decrements in workers’ mental and physi-
cal functions. Volunteers who inhaled 450 ppm TRI for 4 hours 
showed no effects on psychophysiological functions (Salvini et al., 
1971). Two of 11 other subjects inhaling 500 ppm TRI 6.5 to 7 
hours daily for 5 days exhibited difficulty balancing on one foot 
(Stewart et al., 1969). Muttray et al. (2000) found no psychophysi-
ological effects in volunteers breathing 200 ppm TRI for 4 hours, 
but did report EEG changes and slight tiredness in their subjects. 
Warren et al. (2000) observed rapid, parallel increases in blood and 
brain TRI concentrations in mice inhaling the VOC. Mice breathing 
high vapor levels initially exhibited increased locomotor activity, 
followed by decreased activity. Mattsson et al. (1993) saw large 
evoked potential and EEG changes in F344 rats during inhalation 
of 2000 ppm TRI, but found no evidence of neurotoxicity (e.g., 
residual neurological functional or morphological changes) after 
13 weeks of exposure of ≤2000 ppm 6 hours daily, 5 days per 
week. Most studies of long-term occupational exposures have not 
revealed residual neurological effects, although one assessment 
of workers subject to near-anesthetic vapor levels did reveal defi-
cits in memory and balance (ATSDR, 2006b). It is worthy of note 
that very high inhaled concentrations of TRI, particularly when 
accompanied by hypoxia and stress, can sensitize the myocar-
dium to catecholamines, producing cardiac arrhythmias (Reinhardt 
et al., 1973).
TRI has a very limited cytotoxic potential, ostensibly due to its 
limited biotransformation to relatively nontoxic metabolites. A near-
lethal acute i.p. dose (3350 mg TRI/kg) was required to significantly 
enhance serum ALT activity in mice (Klaassen and Plaa, 1966). Male 
rats given a single oral dose of about 2500 mg/kg exhibited a tran-
sient increase in serum aspartate aminotransferase activity, but no 
ALT increase (Tyson et al., 1983). These enzymes are released from 
damaged or necrotic hepatocytes into the bloodstream. Male rats

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1191
gavaged five times weekly for as long as 12 days with up to 5 g TRI/
kg died from effects of repeated, protracted CNS depression, but 
exhibited only slight hepatotoxicity (Bruckner et al., 2001). Quast 
et al. (1988) saw only minimal histological changes in the liver of 
F344 rats inhaling 1500 ppm TRI 6 hours daily, five times/week 
for up to 2 years. Rats gavaged daily for 21 days with a high dose 
of TRI showed increased urinary N-acetyl-β-D-glucosaminidase 
(NAG) activity, but no microscopic evidence of injury indicative 
of renal toxicity (NTP, 1996). Liver and/or kidney injury are usu-
ally absent or quite modest in occupationally exposed populations, 
even in fatal cases (ATSDR, 2006b). A report by Hodgson et al. 
(1989) is an exception. They described four TRI-exposed workers 
who exhibited elevated serum ALT activity and fatty vacuolation of 
hepatocytes. In addition, Brogen et al. (1986) reported that 10% of 
a group of metal workers exposed to TRI, TCE, and freon 113 had 
elevated NAG activity in their urine.
Potential Carcinogenicity  The NCI (1977b) conducted a 
78-week study in which B6C3F1 mice and F344 rats of both sexes 
received high doses of TRI daily by gavage. There was no increase 
in cancers attributable to TRI. In a screening study, Maltoni et al. 
(1986) observed an apparent increase in leukemias in male and 
female Sprague–Dawley rats gavaged with 500 mg TRI/kg/day for 
104 weeks. Statistical analyses were not presented, and the authors 
stated that definite conclusions could not be drawn from their work 
due to limitations in the design and size of the experiment. A two-
year inhalation study in B6C3F1 mice and F344 rats of both sexes 
revealed no evidence of tumorigenicity due to TRI (Quast et al., 
1988). Few epidemiological studies of TRI-exposed populations 
have been conducted. Infante-Rivard et al. (2005) did report a high 
risk (odds ratio [OR] = 7.55, 95% CI = 0.92 to 61.97) of child-
hood leukemia in offspring of women exposed to TRI from 2 years 
before pregnancy up to birth. Gold et al. (2011) reported an OR of 
1.8 (1.1 to 2.9) for multiple myeloma in persons exposed to TRI. It 
should be recognized that workers are commonly exposed to mul-
tiple solvents in the workplace. TRI is currently designated as hav-
ing inadequate information for assessment of human carcinogenic 
potential by the EPA (2007a).
Methylene Chloride
Methylene chloride (dichloromethane, MC) has enjoyed wide-
spread use as a solvent in industrial processes, manufacture of 
drugs, degreasing agents, aerosol propellants, agriculture, and food 
preparation. MC was commonly used to decaffeinate coffee and 
tea. Thus, large numbers of people have been exposed occupation-
ally and in the home. The primary route of exposure to this very 
volatile solvent is inhalation. The preponderance of MC escaping 
into the environment does so by volatilization (ATSDR, 2000a). 
The VOC is also frequently found in wastewater discharges and in 
air and water at hazardous waste sites (Pohl et al., 2008). In 2012, 
a total of 3.4 million pounds of MC was released into the environ-
ment in the United States (EPA, 2015).
Metabolism  The TK of MC has been well characterized in 
humans and rodents. MC metabolism occurs primarily in the 
liver but also in the lung. MC is rapidly absorbed and distributed 
throughout the body (Angelo et al., 1986). Inhaled MC reached a 
near steady state in the blood of human subjects with 1 to 2 hours 
of continuous exposure (DiVincenzo and Kaplan, 1981). Less 
than 5% of the absorbed dose was exhaled unchanged. Some 25% 
to 34% was exhaled as carbon monoxide (CO), the major end-
metabolite of MC. Exposure of the volunteers to 50, 100, 150, and 
200 ppm for 7.5 hours produced peak blood carboxyhemoglobin 
saturations of 1.9%, 3.4%, 5.3%, and 6.8%, respectively. MC was 
very rapidly eliminated from the body and did not accumulate 
over a five-day exposure regimen. As shown in Fig. 24-7, metabo-
lism of MC in humans and rodents is thought to occur via three 
pathways (Andersen et al., 1987). One entails cytochrome P450 
2E1 (CYP2E1)-catalyzed oxidation to CO via formyl chloride, a 
reactive intermediate. The second, a glutathione (GSH)-mediated 
pathway, involves the theta-class GSH S-transferase (GST), GST-
T1. The GST-catalyzed pathway results in the formation of a GSH 
conjugate that is eventually metabolized to carbon dioxide. The 
conjugation of MC with GSH results in formation of two reactive 
intermediates that have been proposed to be involved in MC toxic-
ity, S-(chloromethyl) GSH and formaldehyde. Oxidation is a high-
affinity, low-capacity pathway that predominates at the relatively 
low MC concentrations present in occupational and environmen-
tal settings. The GST conjugation is a low-affinity, high-capac-
ity pathway operative at the high exposure levels used in cancer 
bioassays (Green, 1997b). With the third and minor pathway, it 
is postulated that CO2 is also formed via the oxidative pathway 
by reaction of formyl chloride with a nucleophile such as GSH 
(Watanabe and Guengerich, 2006). The abilities of different species 
to metabolize MC in the liver by the GST pathway are as follows: 
mouse>>rat>human high conjugators>hamster>human non-
conjugators (Reitz et al., 1989; Thier et al., 1998). Interindividual 
variation in the ability to biotransform MC via GST-T1 is associ-
ated with genetic polymorphisms in humans (Haber et al., 2002).
Physiologically based TK (PBTK) models for MC have been 
developed to assess the relative importance of the oxidative and GST 
pathways in MC’s toxicity and carcinogenicity. A PBTK model by 
Andersen et al. (1987) was validated by comparing simulations of 
blood MC time-course data with data from experiments with mice, 
rats, and humans. Tumor incidences in mice in chronic bioassays by 
NTP (Mennear et al., 1988) and Serota et al. (1986a, 1986b) were 
consistent with model predictions of liver and lung doses of GSH 
metabolites, but not oxidative metabolites. After extensive review, 
the EPA adopted this model as a reasonable means of extrapolat-
ing NTP bioassay results in mice to humans. This was the first 
use of PBTK modeling by EPA in a cancer risk assessment. Other 
investigators such as Reitz et al. (1988, 1989) published determin-
istic models for MC, which also provided internal dosimetry point 
estimates of GST pathway metabolites. Forecasts of relatively low 
tissue doses of GST metabolites in humans resulted in part from 
the need to saturate the oxidative pathway before appreciable GSH 
metabolites could be formed.
Recently, probabilistic PBTK models for MC have been devel-
oped, which allow for inclusion of intra- and interspecies variability 
in model predictions, as well as quantitative assessment of model 
uncertainty. Values for model input parameters and TK data from 
rodent studies from a variety of sources were subjected to Markov 
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) analysis, a Bayesian optimization 
technique. With this approach, the prior input information can be 
combined to obtain posterior distributions of key model parame-
ters. El-Masri et al. (1999) and Jonsson and Johanson (2001) used 
Bayesian analysis solely to evaluate the influence of GST-T1 poly-
morphism on human cancer risk. Marino et al. (2006) used MCMC 
analysis to develop a probabilistic PBTK model for MC in mice. The 
resulting dose metrics (mg MC metabolized by GST/L tissue/day) 
were 3- to 4-fold higher than contemporary EPA estimates. David 
et al. (2006) applied this modeling approach to humans. Inclusion of 
GSH nonconjugators resulted in a unit cancer risk estimation 500-
fold lower than the EPA unit risk at that time. The EPA (2010a) 
concluded in an extensive assessment that this was the best available 
PBTK model, despite some uncertainties.

1192
Toxic Agents
unit V
Modes of Toxicity/Carcinogenicity  MC has a quite limited 
cytotoxicity potential. Male and female B6C3F1 mice consuming 
up to about 2000 mg MC/kg/day in their drinking water for 90 days 
showed no adverse effects (Kirschmann et  al., 1986). Similarly 
dosed male and female F344 rats exhibited mild-to-moderate hepa-
tocellular lipid vacuolation and elevated serum enzyme activities at 
daily dosage levels as low as 166 to 209 mg/kg/day (Kirschmann 
et  al., 1986). Hepatic centrilobular vacuolation and focal necro-
sis occurred in the liver of rats inhaling 500 to 4000 ppm MC 6 
hours/day, 5 days/week for 2 years (Burek et al., 1984; Mennear 
et al., 1988). Manifestations of kidney damage have been rare in 
laboratory animals, but have occasionally been reported in per-
sons subjected to high vapor levels (ATSDR, 2000a; EPA, 2010a). 
There is little information on the identity of MC metabolites that 
adversely affect the liver or kidney. As described previously, the 
CO formed by oxidation of MC binds to hemoglobin to produce 
dose-­dependent increases in carboxyhemoglobin. Offspring of 
pregnant rats inhaling low concentrations of CO have been reported 
to exhibit permanent learning and memory impairment (De Salvia 
et al., 1995). It is generally accepted that tissue hypoxia can con-
tribute to CNS-depressant effects of MC. There are few reports of 
residual neurological dysfunction in MC-exposed workers (Lash 
et al., 1991; ATSDR, 2000a).
There has been a great deal of research to define mechanisms 
of MC carcinogenicity, in order to more clearly understand the rel-
evance of the murine tumors to humans (Green, 1997b). Liver and 
lung tumors in mice do not seem to be associated with overt cyto-
toxicity or increased replicative DNA synthesis (Maronpot et al., 
1995). Induction of the tumors in mice is generally considered to 
be due to a reactive intermediate generated via the GST pathway 
(Andersen et al., 1987). GST-T1 in liver and lung catalyzes con-
version of MC to S-(chloromethyl)glutathione (GSCH2Cl), which 
apparently breaks down rapidly to GSH and formaldehyde. Both 
GSCH2Cl and formaldehyde are reactive with DNA. MC is usu-
ally mutagenic in bacterial assays containing GSH/GST activity. 
MC produces DNA single-strand breaks (SSBs) in vitro in mouse 
hepatocytes and lung Clara cells, in which GST is localized in the 
nucleus (Mainwaring et al., 1996). DNA SSBs were induced in the 
mouse hepatocytes by a 60-fold lower MC concentration than in 
rat hepatocytes. Rat liver does not show preferential nuclear local-
ization of GST-T1. Some human hepatocytes apparently exhibit 
nuclear localization, others cytoplasmic (Sherratt et  al., 2002). 
Negative results have been seen in a variety of genotoxicity assays 
with rat or hamster cell lines with little or no GST activity (EPA, 
2010a). Positive results for sister chromatid exchanges, chromo-
somal aberrations, and the micronucleus test have been obtained 
in experiments with human cell lines and isolated cells. Negative 
results were seen in unscheduled DNA synthesis, DNA SSBs, and 
DNA-protein cross-links (DPX). There is limited evidence of forma-
tion of GSCH2Cl DNA adducts in some hybrid in vitro systems, but 
the adducts’ instability presents considerable technical challenges 
to their study. They have yet to be isolated in vivo. Formaldehyde 
produces both DPX and SSBs, indicative of its prominent role in 
MC’s carcinogenicity (Graves and Green, 1996).
Cancer Bioassays in Rodents  High, chronic exposures to MC 
have been found to produce species- and gender-specific tumors 
in some organs of mice and rats. Serota et  al. (1986a, 1986b) 
GS
CH2
Cl
(S-chloromethylglutathione)
(Formaldehyde)
GSH
Cytosol
H+ + Cl–
GS
CH2
OH
H
O
C
H
Cl
Cl
H COOH + GSH
CO2
CH2Cl2
GS
C
H
O
Nucleophile (i.e., GSH)?
Cl–
H2O
H+ + Cl–
H+ + Cl–
NAD+
CO2
H COOH + GSH
CO2
(Formyl chloride)
CYT. P-450
GSH
+
CH2O
GS
C
H
3
O
O2
NADPH
C
O
H
Cl
H+ + Cl
C
O (Carbon monoxide)
H+
S
G
C
O
H
H
+
1
2
Figure 24-7.   Proposed pathways for methylene chloride (CH2Cl2) metabolism. (1) Mixed function oxidase pathway; (2) glutathione transferase pathway; and 
(3) nucleotide pathway. (Modified from Andersen et al., 1987, with permission from Elsevier.)

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1193
administered a series of doses of MC to F344 rats and B6C3F1 
mice in their drinking water for 2 years. The male mice showed a 
trend for an increase in hepatocellular adenomas or carcinomas, 
but the modest response was not dose-dependent. There was a sta-
tistically significant increase in neoplastic nodules or hepatocel-
lular carcinoma in some groups of female F344 rats. Burek et al. 
(1984) saw a significant increase in salivary gland sarcomas in 
male Sprague–Dawley (S-D) rats that inhaled 3500 ppm 6 hours/
day, 5 days/week for 2 years. The number of benign mammary 
tumors per tumor-bearing female S-D rat increased with increas-
ing exposure level, though the number of tumor-bearing rats was 
not significantly elevated over controls. Similarly exposed hamsters 
were unaffected. In a two-year follow-up study (Nitschke et al., 
1988), female S-D rats inhaling 500 ppm MC also only exhibited 
an increased number of benign mammary tumors per tumor bear-
ing rat. No increase in malignant tumors was manifest in male 
rats. NTP conducted an inhalation study, in which F344/N rats 
and B6C3F1 mice inhaled up to 4000 ppm MC 6 hours/daily, five 
times weekly for 2 years (Mennear et al., 1988). There were weak 
trends for neoplastic nodules or hepatocellular carcinoma, as well 
as benign mammary tumors in female rats. Male and female mice 
inhaling 2000 or 4000 ppm MC exhibited statistically significant, 
dose-dependent increases in hepatocellular adenoma and carci-
noma, as well as bronchoalveolar adenoma and carcinoma. There 
were similar findings in a follow-up study of female B6C3F1 mice 
inhaling 2000 ppm MC for 2 years (Maronpot et al., 1995). The 
incidences of these hepatic and lung tumors in control B6C3F1 
mice are quite high (Haseman et al., 1998).
Cancer Epidemiology Studies  Despite a substantial num-
ber of epidemiology studies of MC-exposed workers, evidence of 
associations between MC and specific tumors is not strong. There 
have been four cohort mortality studies of employees at facilities 
where MC was used as a solvent for cellulose acetate. There were 
no increased risks of cancer mortality for all tissues or for lung or 
breast. In just one assessment was there an elevated risk (standard-
ized mortality ratio [SMR] = 2.98 [95% CI = 0.81 to 7.63]) of death 
from liver and biliary tract cancer (Lanes et al., 1993). This was 
apparently the sole report of increased hepatic cancer mortality in an 
occupational population. No investigations provide evidence of an 
association between MC and lung or kidney cancer (ATSDR, 2000a; 
EPA, 2010a). Cantor et al. (1995) conducted a case–control study of 
33,509 occupationally exposed women, but found little association 
between MC exposure probability and breast cancer mortality. Blair 
et al. (1998), however, reported a rate ratio (RR) of 3.0 (1.0 to 8.8) 
for breast cancer in 3605 women employed at Hill Air Force Base. 
Blair et al. (1998) also estimated RRs of 3.0 (0.9 to 10.0) and 3.4 
(0.9 to 13.2) for non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma and multiple myeloma, 
respectively, in MC-exposed aircraft maintenance employees of both 
sexes. Occasionally, excess risks of other cancers have been found in 
highly exposed groups. Gibbs et al. (1996), for example, computed a 
statistically significant SMR of 2.08 for prostate cancer death of cel-
lulose acetate workers with a latency period of at least 20 years since 
their first exposure to 350 to 700 ppm MC. In a study of association 
between MC and astrocytic brain cancer, Heineman et al. (1994) 
calculated an odds ratio (OR) of 2.4 for males with a high prob-
ability of MC exposure and for intense exposure versus unexposed 
controls. Lastly, Infante-Rivard et al. (2005) reported an increased 
risk of childhood leukemia (OR = 3.22 [0.88 to 11.7]) in offspring 
of mothers with probable or definite occupational MC exposure. 
Nevertheless, most investigations have revealed weak or no appar-
ent associations between relatively high MC inhalation exposures in 
industry and cancers (Dell et al., 1999; Starr et al., 2006).
Risk Assessment  A considerable body of scientific information 
supports the following conclusion: Should MC be a carcinogen in 
humans, it is much less potent than in rodents, notably mice. DPX 
were detected in hepatocytes that had been isolated from B6C3F1 
mice and incubated for 2 hours with MC. DPX were not found in 
hepatocytes of F344 rats, Syrian golden hamsters, or three human 
subjects (Casanova et al., 1996, 1997). RNA-formaldehyde cross-
links, however, were found in hepatocytes of all species. These 
links were 4-, 7-, and 14-fold higher in cells from mice than in 
cells from rats, humans, and hamsters, respectively. Metabolism 
of MC via the GSH pathway is an order of magnitude greater in 
mouse than in rat liver. Metabolic rates in hamster and human 
liver are even lower (Reitz et al. 1989; Thier et al., 1998; Sherratt 
et al., 2002). High GST-T1 activity was quantified in the nuclei 
of mouse centrilobular hepatocytes. Mice may be unique, in that 
the extensive metabolic activation of MC to an unstable interme-
diate occurs in the proximity of the DNA. It would be useful in 
future PBTK models to include subcompartments for cytosolic 
and nuclear GST activities (Starr et al., 2006). GST-T1 was also 
detected in relatively high levels in mouse lung Clara cells and 
ciliated cells at alveolar/bronchiolar junctions (Mainwaring et al., 
1996). Clara cells are present in much lower numbers in rats, and 
are rare in human lungs. GSCH2Cl apparently causes SSB in vivo 
and in vitro in DNA of mouse liver and lung (Graves et al., 1995). 
No DNA breaks were detected in hamster or human hepatocytes 
in vitro.
The EPA (2010a) has recently concluded that MC is likely to 
be carcinogenic in humans and appears to act via a mutagenic mode 
of action. The designation of “likely to be carcinogenic in humans” 
was based largely upon the NTP (Mennear et al., 1988) findings 
of cancer at two sites (liver and lung) in male and female B6C3F1 
mice. More limited findings of certain tumors in MC-exposed rats 
were considered to be supporting evidence. Epidemiological stud-
ies were said to provide some evidence of an association between 
occupational MC exposure and brain and liver cancer. As described 
in the previous paragraph, bioactivation of MC is qualitatively, but 
not quantitatively similar in mice and humans. Due to the similarity, 
the EPA (2010a) reasons that the apparent mode of action (muta-
genicity of GST pathway metabolites) is biologically plausible in 
humans.
Carbon Tetrachloride
Carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) previously enjoyed widespread use as 
a solvent, cleaning agent, fire extinguisher, synthetic intermedi-
ate, grain fumigant, and human anthelmintic. Its use has steadily 
declined since the 1970s, due to its hepatorenal toxicity, carcinoge-
nicity, and contribution to atmospheric ozone depletion (ATSDR, 
2005). Nevertheless, CCl4 appears to be ubiquitous in ambient air 
in the United States, and it is still found in some water wells and 
waste sites. CCl4 is a classic hepatotoxicant, but kidney injury is 
often more severe in humans.
The time course of CCl4-induced acute liver injury has been 
well characterized (ATSDR, 2005). Early signs of hepatocellular 
injury in rats include dissociation of polysomes and ribosomes 
from rough endoplasmic reticulum, disarray of smooth endoplasmic 
reticulum, inhibition of protein synthesis, and triglyceride accumu-
lation. Hypomethylation of RNA is thought to contribute to inhi-
bition of lipoprotein synthesis, thereby playing a role in steatosis 
(Clawson et al., 1987). Ingested CCl4 reaches the liver, undergoes 
metabolic activation, produces lipid peroxidation, covalently binds, 
and inhibits microsomal ATPase activity within minutes in rats. 
Single cell necrosis, evident 5 to 6 hours postdosing, progresses to

1194
Toxic Agents
unit V
maximal centrilobular necrosis within 24 to 48 hours. Most micro-
somal enzyme activities are significantly depressed (Recknagel 
et al., 1989). A variety of cytoplasmic enzymes are released from 
dead and dying hepatocytes into the bloodstream. The activity of 
these enzymes in serum generally parallels the extent of necrosis in 
the liver. Cellular regeneration, manifest by increased DNA synthe-
sis and cell cycle progression, is maximal 36 to 48 hours postdosing 
(Rao et al., 1997).
The bioactivation of CCl4 is required for its conversion to a 
variety of cytotoxic metabolites. It is widely recognized that CCl4 is 
bioactivated by cytochromes P450 via reductive dehalogenation to 
trichloromethyl radicals (CCl3•), which can react in turn with oxy-
gen to form trichloromethyl peroxy free radicals (CCl300•). Both 
unstable radicals bind covalently to a variety of cellular compo-
nents including enzymatic and structural proteins and polyunsatu-
rated fatty acids in membranes. This results in lipoperoxidation, 
loss of intracellular and cellular membrane integrity, and leakage of 
enzymes (Plaa, 2000; Weber et al., 2003). By-products of lipid per-
oxidation include reactive aldehydes, which can form adducts with 
proteins and DNA, contributing to cytotoxicity and carcinogenicity, 
respectively (Manibusan et al., 2007). Liu et al. (1995) have pro-
posed that CCl4 oxidative stress in the liver enhances nuclear factor 
kappa B activity, which in turn promotes expression of pro-inflam-
matory cytotoxic cytokines. Shi et al. (1998) proposed apoptosis 
as an additional/alternate mechanism of CCl4-induced cell death.
Perturbation of intracellular calcium (Ca2+) homeostasis 
appears to be an integral part of CCl4 cytotoxicity (Stoyanovsky and 
Cederbaum, 1996). Increased cytosolic Ca2+ levels may result from 
influx of extracellular Ca2+ due to plasma membrane damage and 
from decreased intracellular Ca2+ sequestration. Elevation of intra-
cellular Ca2+ in hepatocytes can cause activation of phospholipase 
A2 and exacerbation of membrane damage (Glende and Recknagel, 
1992). Elevated Ca2+ may also be involved in alterations in calmod-
ulin and phosphorylase activity, as well as changes in nuclear pro-
tein kinase C activity (Omura et al., 1999). High intracellular Ca2+ 
levels activate a number of catabolic enzymes including proteases, 
endonucleases, and phospholipases, which kill cells via apoptosis 
or necrosis (Weber et al., 2003). The hydrolytic enzyme calpain 
mediates progression of acute CCl4-induced liver injury by leaking 
from dying hepatocytes and attacking neighboring cells (Limaye 
et al., 2003). Ca2+ may stimulate the release of cytokines and eico-
sanoids from Kupffer cells. Edwards et al. (1993) demonstrated that 
destruction of Kupffer cells prior to CCl4 dosing of rats resulted in 
significant reductions in neutrophil infiltration and hepatocellular 
injury. Macrophages are known to release a number of inflamma-
tory mediators, such as tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), that 
are cytotoxic (Morio et al., 2001).
Development of cellular resistance and tissue repair are impor-
tant in limiting CCl4 hepatotoxicity, and in recovery (Mehendale, 
2005). Alterations in transmembrane carrier proteins have been dis-
covered in hepatocytes of CCl4-treated mice. CCl4 results in reduced 
expression of genes associated with extraction of bile acids and 
organic ions from sinusoidal blood, as well as upregulation of cer-
tain detoxification genes (Aleksunes et al., 2005). CCl4 also pro-
duces differential upregulation of multidrug resistance proteins that 
are involved in export of oxidative stress products and metabolites. 
Hepatocellular regeneration has been shown to begin within 6 hours 
of a small dose of CCl4, just as centrilobular necrosis is becom-
ing evident (Lockard et al., 1983). This early-phase regeneration 
(arrested G2 hepatocytes activated to proceed through mitosis) is 
followed at about 24 hours by the secondary phase of regenera-
tion (hepatocytes mobilized from Go/G1 to proceed through mito-
sis; Bell et al., 1988). CCl4 hepatotoxicity is obviously a complex, 
multifactorial process that is likely to continue to receive attention 
from researchers.
CCl4 has frequently been used as a model hepatotoxic com-
pound with which to examine the influence of various factors that 
alter P450s. CYP2E1 is primarily responsible for catalyzing the 
bioactivation of low doses of CCl4 in humans. CYP3A contributes 
to the metabolism of higher doses (Zangar et al., 2000). The preemi-
nent role of Cyp2e1 in animals is clearly demonstrated by the pro-
tection afforded CCl4-treated rodents by Cyp2e1 antibody (Castillo 
et al., 1992), the Cyp2e1 inhibitor 3-amino-1,2,4-triazole (Padron 
et al., 1996), and the absence of CYP2E1 expression (Wong et al., 
1998). As discussed previously in the subsection on P450 inducers, 
a variety of conditions that induce CYP2E1 potentiate CCl4 hepa-
totoxicity in test animals and humans. Sufficient doses of CYP2E1 
inhibitors, including natural constituents of foods (described in the 
subsection on P450 inhibitors), can inhibit CCl4 toxicity (Lieber, 
1997). Taieb et al. (2005) discovered protein 8, a transcription fac-
tor that regulates the expression of genes that protect cells from 
stress, rapidly triggered Cyp2e1 downregulation in CCl4-dosed 
mice, thereby minimizing CCl4 bioactivation.
CCl4 has been found to be a hepatocarcinogen in rodents, but 
there is relatively little experimental evidence of genotoxicity or 
carcinogenicity in humans (ATSDR, 2005; EPA, 2010b). There 
have been extensive studies of its potential genotoxic and muta-
genic effects, but the results are largely negative in bacterial and in 
mammalian systems. Araki et al. (2004) did report that CCl4 was 
mutagenic in a strain of E. Coli that is particularly sensitive to oxi-
dative damage. As early as the 1940s, the National Cancer Institute 
conducted a series of chronic bioassays in which very high oral 
bolus doses of CCl4 were given to mice and rats. Large increases 
over controls in incidences of liver tumors were found in male and 
female mice (ATSDR, 2005). Relatively little was seen in rats, but 
hamsters were susceptible to CCl4-induced liver cancer. Nagano 
et al. (2007) published the results of a study in which F344 rats and 
BDF1 mice of both sexes were exposed 6 hours daily, five times 
weekly for 104 weeks to 0, 5, 25, or 125 ppm CCl4 vapor. There was 
a significant increase in hepatocellular adenomas and carcinomas in 
the male and female rats at the highest exposure level. Significant 
increases in these tumors and in adrenal pheochromocytomas were 
manifest in the 25- and 125-ppm male and female mice. There was 
a statistically significant, but more modest elevation in hepatocel-
lular adenomas, but not carcinomas in the 5-ppm female mice. 
Degenerative and necrotic hepatic changes were seen in the liver 
of all groups of animals with liver tumors except the 5-ppm female 
mice. There has been limited evidence of associations between 
occupational CCl4 exposure and certain cancers described in some 
epidemiology studies, but the data were not conclusive. Exposures 
to CCl4 were poorly characterized and confounded by the concur-
rent exposures of most subjects to other chemicals in the workplace. 
There were no reported associations with liver cancer.
The weight of scientific evidence indicates that CCl4 is more 
likely an indirect than a direct acting mutagen/carcinogen (EPA, 
2010b). Manibusan et al. (2007) concluded that sustained cell death, 
regeneration and proliferation enhance the likelihood of unrepaired 
spontaneous-lipid peroxidation and endonuclease-induced muta-
tions that may lead to hepatocarcinogenesis. Jiang et al. (2004) 
observed changes in expression of genes involved in cell death, pro-
liferation, DNA damage, and fibrogenesis in livers of mice given a 
high CCl4 dose daily for 4 weeks. Four weeks after cessation of this 
treatment, most gene expression profiles returned to control levels, 
except fibrogenesis. Bioactivated CCl4 can apparently exert mod-
est genotoxic effects, such as DNA breakage and related sequelae 
only under highly cytotoxic conditions. ACGIH (2011) assigned

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1195
CCl4 the designation of A2 (suspected human carcinogen), in light 
of its threshold mode of action and its very weak or absent geno-
toxicity. Germany placed CCl4 into its category 4, indicating that 
genotoxicity plays no, or at most a minor role in its mode of action 
(MAK, 2011). IARC (1999) classified CCl4 as Group B2 “possibly 
carcinogenic to humans.” The EPA (2010b), however, categorized 
the chemical as “likely to be carcinogenic to humans.” Despite 
acknowledging the correlation between hepatocellular cytotoxicity, 
regenerative hyperplasia, and induction of liver tumors in rodents, 
concern about the reactivity of direct and indirect products of CCl4 
metabolism and about limited knowledge of key events led the 
agency to conclude that “the mode of action was unknown.” This 
led to use of a linear model to estimate human cancer risks from 
oral and inhalation exposures. PBPK models were used to estimate 
mouse internal doses and human equivalent doses as part of this 
risk assessment.
Chloroform
The primary use of chloroform (CHCl3, trichloromethane) is in the 
production of the refrigerant chlorodifluoromethane (Freon 22), 
but this use is diminishing as chlorine-containing fluorocarbons are 
phased out under the Montreal Protocol. CHCl3 was among the first 
inhalation anesthetics, but it was replaced by safer compounds after 
about 1940. CHCl3 is a by-product of drinking water chlorination 
and has been quantified in municipal drinking water supplies in 
concentrations as high as several hundred ppb, although concentra-
tions are usually less than 25 ppb (ATSDR, 1997a). CHCl3 has also 
been found in ppb concentrations in swimming pool water and sur-
rounding air (Aggazzotti et al., 1995). Like many other halocarbons, 
CHCl3 can invoke CNS symptoms at subanesthetic concentrations 
similar to those of alcohol intoxication and can sensitize the myo-
cardium to catecholamines, possibly resulting in cardiac arrhyth-
mias. A recent 28-day drinking water study in female B6C3F1 mice 
at levels up to 250 ppm failed to show any biologically relevant 
changes in immune parameters (Auttachoat et al., 2009).
The reproductive and developmental toxicities of CHCl3 are 
rather unremarkable. Schwetz et al. (1974) found that inhalation of 
100 to 300 ppm CHCl3 by pregnant rats caused a high incidence of 
fetal resorption, retardation of fetal development, and a low inci-
dence of fetal anomalies. Murray et al. (1979) reported that gesta-
tional exposure to 100 ppm CHCl3 resulted in the decreased ability 
of mice to maintain pregnancy, as well as cleft palate, decreased 
fetal weight and length, and decreased ossification in pups. Very 
high CHCl3 concentrations retarded development and induced dif-
fuse cell death in cultured rat embryos (Brown-Woodman et al., 
1998). These studies support CHCl3 as a weak teratogen, but nega-
tive studies employing maternally toxic doses argue against this 
characterization (Thompson et al., 1974; NTP, 1997a). The EPA’s 
2001 IRIS profile for CHCl3 notes that in reproductive/develop-
mental studies, maternal toxicity and fetal effects occurred at doses 
higher than those that produced liver toxicity.
Hepatotoxicity serves as the basis for EPA’s benchmark 
dose-based RfD (EPA, 2001b). Under certain conditions CHCl3 is 
hepatotoxic and nephrotoxic. These toxicities are potentiated by 
aliphatic alcohols, ketones, DCA, and TCA (Davis, 1992). Albeit 
at low doses, numerous disinfection by-products such as the rodent 
carcinogens TCA and DCA are routinely consumed with CHCl3 
in finished drinking water. For this reason, mixture studies are 
particularly relevant. Consider, for example, the studies of Pereira 
et al. (2001) in which N-methyl-N-nitrosourea-initiated B6C3F1 
mice were exposed to DCA with or without CHCl3. CHCl3 pre-
vented hypomethylation, which would have resulted in increased 
mRNA expression of the proto-oncogene c-myc and promotion of 
liver tumors by DCA. Conversely, CHCl3 increased DCA-induced 
DNA hypomethylation and enhanced the DCA promotion of kid-
ney tumors. Thus, concurrent exposure to two rodent carcinogens, 
CHCl3 and DCA, resulted in less than additive activity in one organ 
and synergism in another (Pereira et al., 2001; Tao et al., 2005). 
This exemplifies the difficulty in assessing the risks posed by sol-
vent mixtures.
Tolerance or adaptation to CHCl3’s hepatorenal toxicity and 
carcinogenicity has been observed in some mouse strains after 
repeated exposure. This phenomenon was first investigated by 
Pereira and Grothaus (1997) who reported preexposure of mice to 
low doses of CHCl3 in drinking water induced resistance to hepato-
toxicity and cell proliferation following a higher gavage dose. This 
was presumed at the time to result from suicidal inhibition of the 
cytochrome P450s (CYPs) responsible for CHCl3’s activation. More 
recently, mice exposed daily for 7, 14, and 30 days were found to 
have a robust regenerative response in target tissues, which pre-
vented the progression of injury (Anand et al., 2006b). Blood and 
tissue levels of CHCl3 after repeated exposure were substantially 
lower than those following a single exposure, owing to increased 
elimination of CHCl3 via exhalation. These same researchers also 
reported that priming mice with CHCl3 prior to a lethal dose stimu-
lated compensatory hepatogenic and nephrogenic repair, limiting 
the progression of injury and resulting in 100% survival. Relative to 
unprimed mice, there was no difference in hepatic or renal Cyp2e1 
activity, though glutathione (GSH) and GSH reductase activity were 
upregulated in the kidney (but not in the liver), with a consequent 
decrease in renal covalent binding. The area under the blood CHCl3 
versus time curve (AUC) was 40% lower in primed versus unprimed 
mice, but increased elimination via exhalation was not responsible 
for the reduction in internal exposure in this particular case (Philip 
et al., 2006). Taken together, these studies suggest that TK and 
TD factors contribute to the tolerance observed to CHCl3 toxicity. 
Mehendele and colleagues have conducted a series of other studies 
with CHCl3, alone or in combination with other hepatotoxicants, to 
further discern the role of tissue repair in toxicant-induced injury. 
These studies have provided valuable insight into the importance 
of both the timing of the tissue repair response and its magnitude 
as pivotal determinants of the outcome of toxicant-induced injury, 
emphasizing the need to consider repair processes in predictive 
toxicology (Anand et al., 2003, 2005; Mehendale, 2005).
The status of CHCl3 as a rodent carcinogen is indisputable. It 
causes liver and kidney tumors that are species-, strain-, sex-, and 
route of exposure–dependent. CHCl3-induced liver tumors in mice 
and their dependence on ongoing liver necrosis were reported near 
the end of World War II (Eschenbrenner and Miller, 1945). These 
same authors observed that male but not female mice suffered 
kidney necrosis. This observation was supported by the report of 
Roe et al. (1979) that CHCl3 ingested in a toothpaste base resulted 
in renal tumors in male but not female mice. This sex difference 
is thought to be attributable to testosterone-mediated differences 
in renal Cyp activity (Smith et al., 1984). The NCI (1976) cancer 
bioassay demonstrated renal tumors in male rats and an extremely 
high incidence of liver tumors in both sexes of B6C3F1 mice 
gavaged with CHCl3 in corn oil. In 1985, Jorgenson and colleagues 
reported that daily doses of CHCl3 in drinking water comparable 
to those in the NCI gavage assay also produced renal tumors in 
rats, but failed to cause liver tumors in B6C3F1 mice. This finding 
provided evidence that the dose rate of CHCl3 was a determinant 
of liver tumor formation, supporting the existence of a threshold 
mechanism. Hard et al. (2000) have reevaluated the kidneys from 
the Jorgenson et al. (1985) study and have confirmed the presence

1196
Toxic Agents
unit V
of chronic renal tubule injury, indicative of renal tumor formation 
via a non-genotoxic mechanism. Furthermore, in vivo studies using 
CYP450 reductase knockout mouse models have provided evi-
dence that renal CYP450 enzymes, as opposed to those of hepatic 
origin, play an essential role in CHCl3 renal toxicity (Fang et al., 
2008; Liu et al., 2013). In what may be a landmark study, Larson 
et al. (1994) compared cytotoxicity and cell proliferation in female 
B6C3F1 mice given CHCl3 by gavage in corn oil versus ad libitum 
ingestion in drinking water. As seen in Fig. 24-8, the hepatocyte-
labeling index, a measure of the proliferative response, differed 
between the two exposure regimens at comparable doses. Pereira 
(1994) reported essentially the same observation. This suggests that 
ingestion of CHCl3 in small increments, similar to drinking water 
patterns of humans, fails to produce a sufficient amount of cytotoxic 
metabolite(s) per unit time to overwhelm detoxification and other 
protective mechanisms.
Potentiation of CHCl3’s toxicity by CYP inducers and protec-
tion by GSH and P450 inhibitors suggest that a metabolite, pre-
sumably phosgene, is responsible for CHCl3’s hepatorenal toxicity. 
Both target organs metabolize CHCl3 to phosgene. There is evi-
dence that CYP2E1 and CYP2B1/2 metabolically activate CHCl3. 
The former isoform is thought to catalyze CHCl3 metabolism at a 
lower substrate concentration than the latter (Nakajima et al., 1995). 
By using an irreversible CYP2E1 inhibitor in Cyp2e1-knockout 
mice, Constan et al. (1999) have demonstrated that metabolism of 
CHCl3 by Cyp2e1 is required for liver and kidney necrosis and cell 
proliferation. The electrophilic intermediate generated by CHCl3’s 
metabolism (i.e., phosgene) is initially detoxified by covalently 
binding to cytosolic GSH, though suggestive evidence of an anti-
oxidative role for metallothionein also exists (Abbassi et al., 2010). 
Once GSH is depleted, phosgene is free to covalently bind to hepatic 
and renal proteins and lipids. Such binding damages membranes 
and other intracellular structures, leading to necrosis and subse-
quent reparative cellular proliferation. Sustained proliferation with 
repeated exposures promotes tumor formation in rodents by irre-
versibly “fixing” spontaneously altered DNA and clonally expand-
ing initiated cells. The expression of certain genes, including myc 
and fos, is altered during regenerative cell proliferation in response 
to CHCl3-induced cytotoxicity (Sprankle et al., 1996; Kegelmeyer 
et al., 1997). While the identity of phosgene’s intracellular targets 
is largely unknown, Guastadisegni et al. (1999) have reported that 
phosgene reacts with phosphatidylethanolamine (PE). The adduct 
formed appears to consist of two PE moieties cross-linked at the 
amino head groups by the carbonyl moiety of phosgene. CHCl3-
modified PE preferentially accumulates on inner mitochondrial 
membranes, inducing ultrastructural modifications and inhibiting 
functions of the organelle. These researchers observed the induc-
tion of hepatic apoptosis and necrosis in CHCl3-treated rats and 
pointed out that apoptosis may be initiated by the release of regu-
latory factors normally sequestered in mitochondria, in particular 
Ca2+. Evidence that Ca2+ perturbation plays a role in CHCl3 tox-
icity comes from a report of Ca2+ mobilization in Madin–Darby 
canine kidney cells using Fura-2 as a Ca2+ probe. CHCl3, albeit in 
millimolar concentrations, increased the cytosolic Ca2+ levels by 
releasing Ca2+ from multiple sites within the cell (Jan et al., 2000). 
Burke et al. (2007) described CHCl3-induced hepatocyte death as 
occurring in two phases: a metabolic phase characterized by GSH 
depletion, and an oxidative phase characterized by mitochondrial 
permeability transition and protein nitration.
There is no evidence of covalent binding of CHCl3 metabolites 
to nucleic acids. There is binding to nuclear histone, which plays 
a key role in controlling DNA expression and might be a mecha-
nism of CHCl3’s carcinogenicity (Diaz and Castro, 1980; Fabrizi 
et al., 2003). It has been hypothesized that the induction of oxida-
tive stress and depletion of GSH by CHCl3 may lead to indirect 
genotoxicity that could contribute to carcinogenicity. This hypoth-
esis is supported by the small dose-dependent increase in M(1)
dG adducts (malondialdehyde reacts with DNA to form adducts 
to deoxyguanosine), DNA strand breakage, and lipid peroxidation 
in CHCl3-treated rat hepatocytes in the absence of any increase in 
DNA oxidation (Beddowes et al., 2003). Such a mechanism would 
still be threshold dependent, given its reliance on the initial deple-
tion of antioxidants.
The EPA (2001b) classifies CHCl3 as a probable human car-
cinogen (group B2), meaning there is sufficient evidence for car-
cinogenicity in animals and inadequate or no evidence in humans. 
Experimental evidence and the prevailing opinion that CHCl3 is 
non-genotoxic indicate that the relationship between CHCl3 dose 
and tumor formation is nonlinear. The EPA has, as is called for in 
its Guidelines for Carcinogen Risk Assessment (EPA, 2005), con-
sidered the mode of action in the determination of CHCl3’s ­cancer 
risk and relied on a nonlinear dose–response approach and the 
use of margin-of-exposure analysis. In doing so, the Agency con-
cluded that the RfD for noncancer effects, based on the dog study 
of Heywood et al. (1979), was adequately protective for cancer by 
the oral route on the basis of cancer and noncancer effects having a 
common link through cytotoxicity.
The wealth of mechanistic data available continues to inform 
the risk assessment for CHCl3. For example, Constan et al. (2002) 
0
A
0
3
10
34
Daily oral dose (mg/kg)
90
238
477
20
40
60
LI (% nuclei in S phase)
80
100
*
*
*
*
*
4 days
3 weeks
0
0
60
200
400
Chloroform concentration (ppm)
900
1800
20
40
60
LI (% nuclei in S phase)
80
100
4 days
3 weeks
B
Figure 24-8.   Hepatocyte liver LI in female B6C3F1 mice given CHCl3 orally 
in corn oil (A) or drinking water (B) for 4 days or 3 weeks.

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1197
exercised a PBTK dosimetry model to compare hepatic responses in 
mice and humans to inhaled CHCl3. They concluded that no safety 
factor was needed to account for interspecies differences in inhala-
tion cancer risk. Additionally, Tan et al. (2003) published a PBTK/
TD model for CHCl3 to describe the plausible mechanism link-
ing the hepatic metabolism of CHCl3 to hepatocellular killing and 
regenerative proliferation, thereby creating a predictive model that 
most accurately reflects the current science. This model, originally 
calibrated with data from female B6C3F1 mice, was subsequently 
modified, scaled to humans, and exercised to derive RfCs and RfDs 
based on liver and kidney dose metrics (Liao et al., 2007). More 
recently, a PBTK model was used to estimate 24-hour amounts of 
CHCl3 metabolized in the kidneys of rats and mice. These estimates 
were used as internal doses with which to construct dose–response 
curves for multiple endpoints of kidney toxicity. Application of 
BMD methodology then revealed similarities in CHCl3 response 
across species and exposure routes not previously seen when 
inhaled concentrations or oral doses were used in dose–response 
construction. Such similarities ultimately increase confidence in the 
use of the CHCl3 database for human health risk assessment (Sasso 
et al., 2013). The database also includes a two-year bioassay in male 
F344 rats that was positive for kidney cancer when CHCl3 expo-
sure was by both the inhalation and oral routes, but negative when 
by either route alone (Nagano et al., 2006). This study, therefore, 
serves as a reminder that the assumption of additivity for multiple 
exposure routes may underestimate actual risk.
AROMATIC HYDROCARBONS
Benzene
Benzene is a volatile aromatic hydrocarbon solvent, a predominant 
air pollutant and an important industrial chemical. Benzene pro-
duced commercially in the United States is derived primarily from 
petroleum. Benzene has been utilized as a general purpose solvent, 
but it is now used principally in the synthesis of other chemicals 
(ATSDR, 2006c). The percentage by volume of benzene in gas-
oline is 1% to 2%. Benzene plays an important role in unleaded 
gasoline due to its antiknock properties. Inhalation is the primary 
route of exposure in industrial and in everyday settings. Benzene is 
present in the atmosphere both from natural sources such as forest 
fires and oil seeps and from industrial uses including automobile 
exhaust and gasoline vapor emission. Cigarette smoke is the major 
source of benzene in the home (Wallace, 1996). Smokers have ben-
zene body burdens that are six to ten times greater than those of 
nonsmokers. Passive smoke can be a significant source of benzene 
exposure to nonsmokers. Because of the health risks of benzene 
exposure, the use and environmental release of this chemical has 
significantly diminished in the last two decades.
There is strong evidence from epidemiological studies that 
high-level benzene exposures result in an increased risk of acute 
myelogenous leukemia (AML) in humans (Bergsagel et al., 1999; 
ATSDR, 2006a). Evidence of increased risks of other cancers in 
such populations is less compelling. Only AML incidence was sig-
nificantly elevated in the largest cohort study to date, in which about 
75,000 benzene-exposed workers in 12 cities in China were evalu-
ated (Yin et al., 1996). Types of cancer other than AML have been 
tentatively attributed to benzene. Marginal, nonsignificant increases 
were seen for lung cancer and chronic myelogenous leukemia. 
Some investigations of persons exposed to engine exhausts have 
reported a significant association with multiple myeloma. Bezabeth 
et al. (1996) and Bergsagel et al. (1999) have concluded, however, 
that there is no scientific evidence to support a causal relationship 
between benzene exposure and multiple myeloma or non-Hodg-
kin’s lymphoma. Increased incidences of malignant lymphomas and 
a variety of solid tumors were found in male and female B6C3F1 
mice dosed orally with high doses of benzene for up to 103 weeks 
(Huff et al., 1989). Male and female F344 rats in this bioassay 
exhibited excesses of Zymbal gland, skin, and oral cavity carcino-
mas. Benzene exposure via inhalation, dermal, and i.p. routes also 
produced a variety of tumors in rodents. Thus, benzene is clearly an 
animal and human carcinogen, but major species differences exist.
The most important adverse effect of benzene is hematopoietic 
toxicity, which precedes leukemia. Chronic, high benzene exposure 
can lead to bone marrow damage, which may be manifest initially as 
anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, or a combination of these. 
Bone marrow depression appears to be dose-dependent in both 
laboratory animals and humans. Continued exposure may result in 
marrow aplasia and pancytopenia, an often fatal outcome. Survivors 
of aplastic anemia frequently exhibit a preneoplastic state, termed 
myelodysplasia, which may progress to myelogenous leukemia 
(Snyder, 2002; Bird et al., 2005). Decreased lymphocyte counts are 
shown to be the early and consistent finding in animals and humans 
following benzene exposure (Goldstein, 1988). Hematological 
effects in workers with prolonged benzene exposure in the range 
of 1 to 30 ppm and above have been well documented (Ward et al., 
1996). However, there is conflicting evidence for effects at levels 
less than 1 ppm, the Permissible Exposure Level (PEL) recom-
mended by U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 
Three large epidemiological studies (two in the United States and 
one in the Netherlands) have not revealed any difference in blood 
parameters between exposed (less than 1 ppm) and nonexposed 
workers (Collins et al., 1997; Tsai et al., 2004; Swaen et al., 2010). 
However, Lan et al. (2004) have reported dose-dependent hemato-
toxicity in some 250 Chinese shoe workers who inhaled low (≤ 1 
to ≥ 10 ppm) levels of benzene. Exposures of 100 of these employ-
ees to less than or equal to 1 ppm reduced mature white cell and 
platelet counts, as well as myeloid progenitor cell colony formation. 
The progenitors were more sensitive to benzene than mature white 
cells. Polymorphisms in myeloperoxidase (an enzyme that metab-
olizes benzene to toxic quinones and free radicals) and NAD(P)
H:quinone oxidoreductase (an enzyme that protects against these 
moieties) conferred increased susceptibility to white cell decreases. 
Turtletaub and Mani (2003) found that formation of DNA and pro-
tein adducts in mouse liver and bone marrow was dose-dependent 
over a range of benzene doses, the lowest of which was 5 μg/kg.
Adverse health outcomes of chronic benzene exposure have 
been known for a long time, but the mechanisms by which ben-
zene causes effects remain incompletely understood. The toxicity 
of benzene is dependent upon its metabolites. Thus, it is essential to 
understand the metabolism of benzene in order to address its mecha-
nisms of toxicity. The initial metabolic step (Fig. 24-9), oxidation 
of benzene to an epoxide (i.e., benzene oxide), is catalyzed primar-
ily by hepatic CYP2E1. Valentine et al. (1996) demonstrated that 
benzene-treated Cyp2e1 knockout mice had relatively low levels of 
all benzene metabolites in their urine. A five-day, 200-ppm benzene 
inhalation regimen produced severe genotoxicity and cytotoxicity 
in wild-type B6C3F1 mice, but no adverse effects in the knockout 
mice. Benzene oxide, which is in equilibrium with its oxepin form, 
is further metabolized by three pathways: (1) conjugation with GSH 
to form a premercapturic acid, which is converted to phenyl-mercap-
turic acid; (2) rearrangement nonenzymatically to form phenol; and 
(3) hydration by epoxide hydrolase to benzene dihydrodiol, which 
in turn can be oxidized by dihydrodiol dehydrogenase to catechol. If 
phenol is hydroxylated in the ortho position, more catechol will be 
formed. Catechol can be converted to o-benzoquinone. If benzene

1198
Toxic Agents
unit V
is hydroxylated in the para position, p-hydroquinone is formed. It 
can be oxidized to p-benzoquinone. The o- and p-benzoquinones 
are believed to be among the ultimate toxic metabolites of benzene. 
Another potentially toxic metabolite, muconaldehyde, may arise 
from ring opening of oxepin. Muconaldehyde undergoes a series of 
reactions that ultimately lead to t,t-muconic acid, an end metabolite 
found in the urine (Golding and Watson, 1999; Snyder, 2004). While 
hydroquinone, phenol, catechol, benzoquinone, and muconaldehyde 
are apparently involved in benzene toxicity, the glutathione conju-
gate of mercapturic acid, and the glucuronide and sulphate conju-
gates of hydroquinone, catechol, phenol, and benzoquinone are the 
results of detoxifying processes (McHale et al., 2012).
Liver is the primary metabolic organ, while bone marrow is 
the target organ for benzene. Transport of primary metabolites and 
further metabolism in bone marrow is thought by many authori-
ties to play the key role in myelotoxicity. Levels of DNA and pro-
tein adducts were significantly higher in bone marrow than liver of 
benzene-dosed mice (Turtletaub and Mani, 2003). Bernauer et al. 
(1999) measured activity and levels of Cyp2e1 in the liver and bone 
marrow of five strains of mice of varying sensitivity to benzene. 
Cyp2e1 amounts and activities were considerably greater in the liver 
than the marrow, but no interstrain differences were seen in either 
tissue. It is likely that non-CYP enzymes (e.g., peroxidase, myelo-
peroxidase, and cyclooxygenase) play an important role in genera-
tion of semiquinones and quinones in bone marrow (Ross et al., 
1996). Lindstrom et al. (1997) have reported that benzene oxide 
has an estimated half-life of 7.9 minutes in rat blood, and thus may 
be able to travel from the liver to the bone marrow. The quinones 
are thought to be too reactive to be transported in the bloodstream. 
Reactivity of muconaldehyde in the presence of GSH suggests that 
this metabolite would not reach bone marrow; however, metabolites 
of muconaldehyde, which are less reactive, could be transported to 
bone marrow and reoxidized. It has been generally accepted that 
phenolic conjugates are formed in the liver and transported via the 
blood to the bone marrow, where they are hydrolyzed and oxidized 
to quinones. Researchers have been unable to reproduce benzene 
toxicity by giving individual phenolic metabolites to animals, but 
coadministration of metabolites, phenol and muconaldehyde with 
hydroquinone, reproduced the myelotoxic effects of benzene (Witz 
et al., 1996; Monks et al., 2010). Snyder (2004) concluded that 
H
H
OH
OH
O
Benzene
oxepin
[OH]
Hydroquinone
Phenol
1,2,4-trihydroxybenzene
o-benzoquinone
p-benzoquinone
Catechol
[OH]
[OH]
[OH]
Nonenzymatic
Benzene
oxide
Rearrangement
H
H
O
O
HO
1-glutathionyl-2-OH-3,5-cyclohexadiene
Benzene
Muconaldehyde
Benzene
dihydrodiol
Dihydrodiol
dehydrogenase
Glutathione-S-epoxide
transferase
Epoxide
hydrolase
Cytochrome
P450
SGH2
CH
NH
GLU
CO
GLY
?
O
O
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
OH
OH
OH
O
O
+H2O
Cytochrome
P450
Figure 24-9.   Biotransformation of benzene. A question mark leads from the oxepin-oxide compartment to muconaldehyde because the substrate for the ring 
opening has yet to be identified. The dotted line leading to 1,2,4-trihydroxybenzene (1,2,4-T) indicates that it is not clear what the relative contributions of 
hydroquinone and catechol are to 1,2,4-T. (Modified and used with permission of Rangan and Snyder, 1997.)

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1199
benzene hematopoietic toxicity and leukemogenesis are primarily 
a function of the bone marrow, a site remote from the liver where 
substantial benzene metabolism occurs. t,t-Muconaldehyde and 
1,4-benzoquinone are the most potent in inhibiting erythropoiesis, 
followed by hydroquinone and catechol, coadministration of phenol 
with hydroquinone and catechol, and certain glutathione adducts of 
hydroquinone (Snyder and Hedli, 1996).
Benzene’s metabolic pathways appear to be qualitatively, 
though not quantitatively similar in species studied to date 
(Henderson, 1996). Mice have a greater overall capacity to metabo-
lize benzene than do rats or primates. Mani et al. (1999) reported 
good correlation between protein–DNA adduct levels in bone mar-
row and susceptibility to benzene genotoxicity and carcinogenesis 
in F344 rats and three strains of mice. The B6C3F1 mouse shows 
the highest adduct levels and is the most sensitive of the animals 
tested. Powley and Carlson (1999) reported similar findings upon 
quantification of benzene metabolism in mouse, rat, rabbit, and 
human lung and liver microsomes. A paucity of information is 
available on the ability of human bone marrow to metabolically 
activate benzene and/or its metabolites. Rappaport et al. (2009; 
2010) suggested that humans metabolize benzene to phenol and 
muconic acid by two enzymes, a high-affinity enzyme that is active 
primarily below 1 ppm, leading to muconic acid and a low-­affinity 
enzyme active primarily above 1 ppm, leading to phenol. The 
authors also suggested that CYP2E1 was active primarily at higher 
concentrations and CYP2E1 and CYP2A13 could be contributing 
at lower concentrations.
Factors that alter the metabolism of benzene have the poten-
tial to influence the hematopoietic toxicity and carcinogenicity 
of the VOC. Pretreatment of rats with ethanol, a Cyp2e1 inducer, 
enhanced metabolism of benzene and potentiated its acute and 
subacute myelotoxicity in rats (Nakajima et al., 1985) and mice 
(Marrubini et al., 2003). Phenobarbital had a negligible effect. Pre-
treatment of male B6C3F1 mice with acetone, another Cyp2e1 
inducer, increased benzene oxidation by about fivefold (Kenyon 
et al., 1996). Pretreatment with diethyldithiocarbamate, a Cyp2e1 
inhibitor, completely abolished benzene oxidation. Coexposure of 
F344 rats to gasoline and benzene resulted in competitive metabolic 
inhibition (Travis et al., 1992). Metabolism of benzene by hepatic 
microsomes from 10 human donors was directly proportional to 
CYP2E1 activity in the samples (Seaton et al., 1994). Thus, it would 
be anticipated that CYP2E1 polymorphisms may influence suscep-
tibility to benzene toxicity. Male mice have consistently been found 
to be more sensitive than females to genotoxic effects of benzene. 
PBTK analysis of data from gas uptake experiments with B6C3F1 
mice of both sexes revealed that the optimized maximum rate of ben-
zene metabolism was twice as high in males (Kenyon et al., 1996). 
It is not known whether there is a sex-dependent difference in ben-
zene metabolism in humans. Sato et al. (1975) saw a more rapid rate 
of pulmonary elimination of benzene in men than in women follow-
ing inhalation of 25 ppm for 2 hours. Benzene was retained longer 
in the females due to their higher body fat content. Unfortunately, 
most epidemiology studies of benzene-exposed workers have not 
provided a gender comparison. Li et al. (1994) did not see a sta-
tistically significant difference in cancer mortality between male 
and female workers exposed to benzene, though risks tended to be 
somewhat higher for males. Polymorphisms in enzymes involved in 
benzene metabolism such as CYP2E1, epoxide hydrolase, myelo-
peroxidase, glutathione S-transferases, and quinone reductases will 
also influence the toxicity of benzene. Increased susceptibility to 
hematotoxicity, as evidenced by lower WBC counts, was found in 
workers with null-GSTTI, null-GSTMl, and CYP2El (rs2031920 
and rs3813867) genotypes (Ye et al., 2015).
There are a number of cell populations in the bone marrow that 
may serve as targets for benzene metabolites. Benzene exposure in 
vivo results in inhibited growth and development of pluripotential 
bone marrow stem cells. More mature precursors, such as stromal 
cells and erythroid and myeloid colony-forming units, are also 
affected. Trush et al. (1996) point out that hydroquinone-induced 
inhibition of interleukin (IL)-1 synthesis by stromal macrophages 
results in altered differentiation of myeloid and lymphoid cells that 
are normally active in immune responses. These investigators also 
note that killing of stromal macrophages and fibroblasts could result 
in such a pronounced reduction of cytokines and growth factors that 
immature and committed hematopoietic progenitors would die from 
apoptosis. The erythroid series is more susceptible than the myeloid 
series to benzene-induced cytotoxicity. Immature myeloid cells can 
proliferate when the development of erythroid cells is restricted and 
acquire neoplastic characteristics upon dedifferentiation. The end 
result is AML (Golding and Watson, 1999).
Investigations of benzene toxicity/leukemogenesis have 
uncovered a variety of potential mechanisms (Golding and Watson, 
1999; Snyder, 2002; Bird et  al., 2005). As mentioned before, 
experimental evidence indicates that the complementary actions of 
benzene and several of its metabolites are required for myelotox-
icity. It has been recognized for 20 years that a number of ben-
zene metabolites can bind covalently to GSH, proteins, DNA, and 
RNA. This can result in disruption of the functional hematopoietic 
microenvironment by inhibition of enzymes, destruction of certain 
cell populations, and alteration of the growth of other cell types. 
Covalent binding of hydroquinones to spindle-fiber proteins will 
inhibit cell replication (Smith, 1996). In vitro studies have estab-
lished that reactive benzene metabolites bind covalently to DNA 
of several tissues of different species. Through the use of accelera-
tor mass spectrophotometry, Creek et al. (1997) have demonstrated 
DNA binding in mice exposed to extremely low 14C-benzene levels. 
The binding was dose-dependent over a wide range of doses. DNA 
adduct levels were so low, however, that this mechanism alone may 
be insufficient to fully account for leukemogenic effects. Altered 
gene expression related to DNA methylation in workers exposed 
to benzene (Yang et al., 2014) indicates a role for a non-genotoxic 
mechanism in benzene toxicity. However, further investigations are 
required to fully elucidate the role of non-genotoxic mechanisms. 
The role of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) in benzene-induced 
hematoxicity is emerging. AhR-knockout mice were completely 
resistant to hematotoxicity of benzene, suggesting a central role of 
AhR in benzene toxicity (Yoon et al., 2002), but the mechanisms 
for this receptor are still under investigation. A review of literature 
by Gasiewicz et al. (2010) indicated that AhR regulates the expres-
sion of enzymes involved in benzene toxicity and plays a major role 
in the regulation of hematopoietic stem cells. In order to identify 
critical data gaps and prioritize research, Meek and Klaunig (2010) 
proposed five key events in the mode of action for benzene-induced 
leukemia: (1) benzene metabolism via cytochrome P450; (2) inter-
action of benzene metabolites with target cells in the bone marrow; 
(3) formation of initiated, mutated target cells; (4) selective prolif-
eration of the mutated cells; and (5) production of leukemia.
It appears likely that oxidative stress contributes to benzene 
toxicity. As the bone marrow is rich in peroxidase activity, phenolic 
metabolites of benzene can be activated there to reactive quinone 
derivatives. Ross et al. (1996) discovered that myeloperoxidase 
present in murine and human progenitor cells could bioactivate 
hydroquinone to p-benzoquinone. Electron spin resonance experi-
ments by Hiraku and Kawanishi (1996) revealed the formation 
of a semiquinone radical in p-benzoquinone-treated HL-60 cells 
(a human myeloid cell line). This suggested that reactive oxygen

1200
Toxic Agents
unit V
moieties (e.g., O2
− and H2O2) are produced via the formation of the 
semiquinone radicals. These active oxygen species can cause DNA 
strand breaks or fragmentation, leading to cell mutation or apop-
tosis, respectively. Ross et al. (1996), however, pointed out that 
quinones can also inhibit proteases involved in induction of apop-
tosis. These authors noted that modulation of apoptosis may lead to 
aberrant hematopoiesis and neoplastic progression. Badham et al. 
(2010) recently demonstrated that in utero exposure to benzene in 
mice increased oxidative stress in fetal tissue. The increase in oxi-
dative stress was also associated with changes in redox-sensitive 
signaling pathways involved in normal hematopoiesis.
A number of biomarkers of exposure to benzene have been 
developed and carefully evaluated. Concentrations of the parent 
compound in exhaled breath parallel blood concentrations. Clayton 
et  al. (1999) reported a high correlation between the extent of 
smoking-related activities and levels of benzene in exhaled breath 
of humans. Urinary excretion of a variety of benzene metabolites 
(i.e., phenol, catechol, hydroquinone, 1,2,4-trihydroxybenzene, 
S-phenylmercapturic acid, and t,t-muconic acid) have been shown 
to be correlated with benzene exposure in occupational settings. 
Phenol, catechol, and hydroquinone, however, are neither sensitive 
nor specific biomarkers, because relatively high levels are found 
in nonexposed individuals (Medeiros et al., 1997). Similarly, t,t-
muconic acid is not specific, because it is a metabolite of sorbic 
acid, a common food additive. Boogaard and van Sittert (1996) con-
clude that S-phenylmercapturic acid, an end-product of the conjuga-
tion of benzene oxide and GSH, is a suitable urinary biomarker for 
low-level benzene exposure because of its specificity and relatively 
long half-life. Adducts to hemoglobin and cysteine groups of pro-
teins have been demonstrated in rodents, but not in humans. DNA 
damage has been detected in benzene-exposed workers (Liu et al., 
1996; Andreoli et al., 1997), though such measures have not yet 
found widespread acceptance as biomarkers of effect. Altered gene 
expression in benzene-exposed workers could serve as potential 
biomarkers for leukemia. McHale et al. (2011) reported an increase 
in the expression of 16 genes that are involved in the immune 
response, inflammatory response, cell adhesion, cell-matrix adhe-
sion, and blood coagulation. Forrest et al. (2005) reported altered 
expressions of CXCL16, ZNF331, JUN, and PF4 by microarray 
analyses along with real-time PCR confirmation. Li et al. (2014) 
reported increased copy-number variations in several chromosomes 
and expression of NOTCH1 and BSG genes. However, further 
investigations to characterize/validate gene expression are neces-
sary to identify consistent biomarkers that can predict benzene 
exposure and/or toxicity.
A number of PBTK models have been developed to aid in 
predicting risks of myelotoxicity and leukemia posed to humans 
by benzene. Medinsky et al. (1989) published one of the first such 
models for benzene. They assumed that benzene metabolism fol-
lowed Michaelis–Menten kinetics and occurred via benzene oxide. 
B6C3F1 mice, which are more sensitive than F344 rats to benzene 
myelotoxicity, were predicted to metabolize two to three times more 
inhaled benzene. This and other PBTK models do not accurately 
simulate some laboratory data sets. Modeling benzene metabo-
lism and disposition is difficult because of its inherent complex-
ity and variability. In light of intricate dose–response relationships, 
Medinsky et al. (1996) emphasized the importance of consider-
ing competitive metabolic interactions between benzene and its 
metabolites, as well as the balance between enzymatic activation 
and inactivation processes. Cole et al. (2001) employed in vitro 
metabolic parameters for several pathways to construct a PBTK 
model that simulated most tissue dosimetry data sets for benzene-
exposed mice quite well. Yokley et al. (2006) described a PBTK 
model that simulated tissue doses of benzene, benzene oxide, phe-
nol, and hydroquinone in humans exposed orally and by inhala-
tion. A Markov Chain Monte Carlo statistical technique was used 
to assess dissimilarities in population distributions of key model 
parameters. Variability in metabolic parameters and certain physi-
ological parameters (e.g., organ weight) had to be inputted to accu-
rately predict the range of human values.
Benzene is concluded to be a known human carcinogen by 
regulatory agencies around the world. The International Agency 
for Research on Cancer (IARC) classifies benzene as a Group 1 
carcinogen (carcinogenic to humans). Benzene is characterized 
as a known human carcinogen for all routes of exposures based 
on strong evidence in human and laboratory animals (EPA, 2007). 
Maximum contaminant levels (MCLs) of 0.005 and 0.01 mg/L 
have been established for benzene in drinking water (EPA, 2002; 
WHO, 2004). For the protection of workers, OSHA has estab-
lished a TLV of 0.5 ppm as an 8-hour TWA. ACGIH has also estab-
lished a Biological Exposure Index (BEI) for benzene of 25 µg of 
S-phenylmercapturic acid and 500 µg of t,t-muconic acid per g of 
creatinine for a urine sample collected at the end of a workshift. 
Readers are encouraged to review the recent NTP’s 12th edition 
of Report on Carcinogens and ATSDR’s Toxicological Profile for 
Benzene (2006c) for other regulatory levels for benzene exposure.
Toluene
Toluene occurs naturally in crude oil and in the tolu tree and is pres-
ent in paints, lacquers, thinners, cleaning agents, glues, and many 
other products. Toluene is also used in the production of other 
chemicals. Gasoline, which contains 5% to 7% toluene by weight, 
is the largest source of atmospheric emissions and exposure of the 
general populace. In the United States, concentrations of toluene 
in outdoor air range from 1 to 35 ppb by volume (ATSDR, 2000b). 
Higher indoor levels of toluene are reported where products such 
as paint thinners, solvents, or tobacco products are used. Inhalation 
is the primary route of exposure, though skin contact occurs fre-
quently. Toluene is a favorite of solvent abusers, who intention-
ally inhale high concentrations to achieve a euphoric effect (Filley 
et al., 2004). Large amounts of toluene enter the environment each 
year by volatilization. Relatively small amounts are released in 
industrial wastewater. Toluene is frequently found in water, soil, 
and air at hazardous waste sites (Pohl et al., 2008).
Toluene TK has been thoroughly characterized in humans and 
laboratory animals. Toluene is well absorbed from the lungs and GI 
tract. It rapidly accumulates in and can affect the brain, due to that 
organ’s high rate of blood perfusion and relatively high lipid con-
tent. Toluene subsequently is deposited in other tissues according to 
their lipid content, with adipose tissue attaining the highest levels.
Toluene is well metabolized, but a portion is exhaled 
unchanged. Cytochrome P450s (CYPs) catalyze metabolism of 
toluene primarily to benzyl alcohol and lesser amounts of cresols 
(ATSDR, 2000b). Benzyl alcohol is converted by alcohol dehydro-
genase (ADH) and aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) to benzoic 
acid, which is primarily conjugated with glycine and eliminated 
in the urine as hippuric acid. Nakajima et al. (1992a) reported 
that Cyp2e1 and Cyp2c11 are primarily responsible for catalyz-
ing the initial hydroxylation step in rat liver at low and high tol-
uene levels, respectively. CYP2E1 is most active at low doses in 
humans (Nakajima et al., 1997). A minor CYP-related pathway 
involves a transient epoxidation of the aromatic ring to form cre-
sols, which undergo a variety of conjugation reactions, forming 
sulfates and glucuronides. Glutathione conjugation may also occur 
resulting in S-benzylglutathione and S-benzylmercapturic acid by

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1201
conjugation to benzyl alcohol, as well as S-p-toluyl glutathione and 
S-p-toluylmercaptic acid by conjugation of the epoxidated ring. 
Benignus et al. (1998) attempted to use a PBTK model to relate 
toluene blood levels to behavioral effects in rats and humans. It 
appeared that humans were more sensitive to increases in blood 
levels, but more rat data and much more human data are needed 
for model validation. Blood toluene and urine hippuric and cresol 
levels are commonly used as biomarkers for occupational exposures 
to toluene. Cosnier et al. (2014) reported mercapturic acid as an 
alternate to the traditional biomarkers, as it was not impacted by 
coexposure to other chemicals that impact toluene metabolism.
The CNS is the primary target organ of toluene and other 
alkylbenzenes. Cardiac, renal, and hepatic toxicities as well as fetal 
alcohol-like syndrome have occasionally been reported. Increased 
incidence of spontaneous abortion was linked to toluene exposure 
at workplaces, but has not been supported by the results of animal 
testing. Manifestations of acute exposure range from slight dizzi-
ness and headache to unconsciousness, respiratory depression, and 
death. Occupational inhalation exposure guidelines are established 
to prevent significant decrements in psychomotor functions. Acute 
encephalopathic effects are rapidly reversible upon cessation of 
exposure (Fig. 24-3), and are not associated with neuroimaging 
changes (Filley et al., 2004). Subtle neurologic effects have been 
described in some groups of occupationally exposed individuals. 
Exposure to about 100ppm toluene for years may result in sub-
clinical effects, as evidenced by altered brainstem auditory-evoked 
potentials (Abbate et al., 1993) and changes in visual-evoked poten-
tials (Vrca et al., 1995). Foo et al. (1990) reported a good correla-
tion between toluene exposure and poor scores on neurobehavioral 
tests of 30 female rotogravure workers.
Toluene is the most commonly misused solvent due to its alco-
hol-like effects of euphoria and excitation. Motor incoordination, 
dizziness, relaxation, and lightheadedness are additional character-
istic of toluene intoxication, as well as illusions and hallucinations. 
Even acute inhalation can lead to life threatening conditions when 
poor oxygenation leads to cardiac arrhythmias and other complica-
tions associated with hypokalemia (Bowen, 2011). “Sudden sniffing 
death” has been documented since the 1970s (see “Solvent Abuse” 
section). Severe neurotoxicity is often diagnosed in persons who 
have abused toluene for a prolonged period. A relatively specific 
neurobehavioral profile is manifest, including inattention, apathy, 
memory dysfunction, diminished visuospatial skills, frontal lobe 
dysfunction, and psychiatric status (Filley et al., 2004). Magnetic 
resonance imaging reveals ventricular enlargement, cerebral atrophy, 
and white matter hyperintensity, a characteristic profile termed tolu-
ene leukoencephalopathy. Such changes represent severe, chronic 
myelotoxicity. More advanced neuroimaging techniques may be 
able to reveal mild, subtle changes associated with early alterations 
in myelin of workers as well as toluene abusers (Caldemeyer et al., 
1996; Filley et al., 2004). Rat pups subjected to high doses of tolu-
ene on days 6 to 19 of gestation exhibited a significant reduction in 
myelination per forebrain cell when they were 21 days old (Gospe 
and Zhou, 1998).
There is limited information on mechanisms by which toluene 
and similar solvents produce acute or residual CNS effects (Balster, 
1998). The Meyer–Overton theory of partitioning of the lipophilic 
parent compounds into membrane lipids has been widely accepted 
for a century. It has been proposed that the presence of solvent mol-
ecules in cholesterol-filled interstices between phospholipids and 
sphingolipids changes membrane fluidity, thereby altering intercel-
lular communication and normal ion movements (Engelke et al., 
1996). Such a process is reversible. An alternate hypothesis is that 
toluene partitions into hydrophobic regions of proteins and interacts 
with them, thereby altering membrane-bound enzyme activity and/
or receptor specificity in a reversible manner (Balster, 1998). Other 
evidence suggests that toluene and other VOCs may act acutely by 
enhancing GABAA receptor function (Mihic et al., 1994), attenuat-
ing NMDA receptor-stimulated calcium flux (Cruz et al., 1998), 
attenuating nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (Bale et al., 2002), 
enhancing glycine receptors (Bale et al., 2005), and/or activating 
dopamingeric systems (von Euler, 1994). Using an in vivo micro-
dialysis study and a schedule-controlled operant behavioral task, 
it was shown that glutamate levels were decreased in mice after 
acute toluene exposure (Win-Shwe et al., 2009). In addition to neu-
rotransmitter systems, immune and hypothalamic neurohormonal 
systems also are proposed to play a role in toluene-induced neu-
rotoxicity (Win-Shwe and Fujimaki, 2010). Hester et al. (2011) 
demonstrated altered expression of genes associated with synaptic 
transmission and plasticity following acute toluene exposure. The 
mechanism of chronic toluene neurotoxicity is unknown. Toluene 
is known to be deposited in brain areas with the highest myelin 
content. Astrocytosis frequently accompanies myelin disruption 
(Gotohda et al., 2000; Filley et al., 2004).
As toluene is metabolized by CYPs, ADH, and ALDH, the 
chemical can interact with other xenobiotics metabolized by these 
enzymes. Concurrent exposure to solvents metabolized by the same 
CYP isoforms can result in competitive metabolic inhibition. Inoue 
et al. (1988) observed that benzene and toluene suppressed one 
another’s metabolism in humans. Thus, the risk of leukopenia in 
workers exposed to benzene and toluene should be less than that in 
workers exposed to benzene alone. Pryor and Rebert (1992) found 
that toluene greatly reduced manifestations of peripheral neuropa-
thy caused by n-hexane in rats. Although no interaction between 
toluene and xylenes was seen in humans inhaling low levels of each, 
simultaneous exposure to higher levels results in mutual metabolic 
suppression (Tardif et al., 1991). Prior exposure to P450 inducers 
can result in increased rates of toluene metabolism/elimination 
and more rapid recovery from toluene-induced CNS depression. 
Nakajima and Wang (1994) observed that high concentrations of 
inhaled toluene moderately induced four of the six CYP isoforms 
that metabolize it, but inhibited the other two in rat liver.
High-level prenatal toluene exposures have produced growth 
and skeletal retardations in offspring of rodents and humans. 
The term “fetal solvent syndrome” was used to describe toluene-
abusing women’s children who exhibit microcephaly and cranial 
facial features similar to those with fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) 
(Wilkins-Haug, 1997). Exposure to a pattern of binge toluene abuse 
caused growth retardation, gross morphological anomalies, skeletal 
abnormalities, and soft tissue anomalies in a dose-related fashion 
(Bowen et al., 2009). Growth and skeletal retardation were the com-
mon findings in the developmental toxicity studies in animals. The 
reproductive and developmental toxic potential of toluene was eval-
uated in a two-generation study of Sprague–Dawley rats (Roberts 
et al., 2003). Both sexes of each generation were exposed to 0, 100, 
500, or 2000 ppm toluene vapor 6 hours/day, 7 days/week for 80 
days premating and for 15 days of mating. Pregnant animals were 
also exposed from gestation days 1 to 20 and lactation days 5 to 
21. No adverse effects were seen at any dose on fertility, reproduc-
tive performance, or maternal or pup behavior. Reduced fetal body 
weight and skeletal anomalies associated with growth retardation 
were manifest in the offspring of both generations subjected to 2000 
ppm, but not to lower vapor levels (Roberts et al., 2003).
Existing studies suggest that toluene is not carcinogenic or 
mutagenic. IARC classified toluene as not classifiable as a human 
carcinogen. The U.S. EPA determined that there is inadequate 
information to assess the carcinogenic potential of toluene. ACGIH

1202
Toxic Agents
unit V
(2011) has established a TLV of 20 ppm as an 8-hour TWA to pro-
tect workers from subclinical changes in blue-yellow color vision 
and the potential for spontaneous abortion. The current ACGIH 
Biological Exposure Index I (BEI) for toluene is 0.02 mg of 
toluene/L blood, 0.03 mg toluene/L urine, and 0.3 mg o-cresol/g of 
creatinine for urine collected at the end of a workshift.
Xylenes and Ethylbenzene
Large numbers of people are exposed to xylenes and ethylben-
zene occupationally and environmentally (Wallace et  al., 1987). 
Xylenes (ATSDR, 2006d) and ethylbenzene (ATSDR, 2010a), like 
benzene and toluene, are major components of gasoline and fuel 
oil. Xylenes are also used in the production of ethylbenzene. The 
primary uses of xylenes and ethylbenzene industrially are as sol-
vents and synthetic intermediates. Most of these aromatics that are 
released into the environment evaporate into the atmosphere. They 
may also enter groundwater from oil and gasoline spills, leakage of 
storage tanks, and migration from waste sites.
The TK and acute toxicity of toluene, xylenes, and other aro-
matic solvents are quite similar. Xylenes and the others are well 
absorbed from the lungs and GI tract, distributed to well-perfused 
and lipophilic tissues such as liver, fat, brain and skin, exhaled 
unchanged to some extent, well metabolized by hepatic CYP P450s, 
and largely excreted as urinary metabolites (Lof and Johanson, 
1998). In humans, hepatic microsomal CYP2E1 is the primary 
enzyme involved in the metabolism of xylenes to methylbenzylalco-
hols, leading to the formation of methylhippuric acid isomers. Phase 
II metabolism occurs primarily by conjugation with glycine, which 
is rate limiting in humans. Conjugation with glucuronic acid and 
aromatic hydroxylation to form xylenols also occur to some extent. 
Ethylbenzene is also metabolized primarily by CYP-mediated oxi-
dation followed by conjugation. The major metabolites are benzoic 
acids, glycine conjugates (e.g., hippuric acid), 1-phenylethanol, 
mandelic acid, and phenylglyoxylic acid. Nielsen and Alarie (1982) 
state that the potency of benzene and a series of alkylbenzenes, as 
sensory irritants of the upper respiratory tract of mice, increases with 
increasing lipophilicity. Acute lethality of hydrocarbons (i.e., CNS-
depressant potency) also varies directly with lipophilicity (Swann 
et al., 1974). Some of the alkylbenzenes including xylenes and eth-
ylbenzene are shown to be ototoxic in rats. There is limited evidence 
that chronic occupational exposure to xylenes is associated with 
residual neurologic effects (ATSDR, 2006d). Limited human data 
suggest that systemic effects associated with ethylbenzene exposure 
are respiratory tract and ocular irritation, possible ototoxicity, and 
hematological alterations (ATSDR, 2010a). Exposure conditions, 
including the presence of other solvents, have usually not been 
characterized in such reports. Uchida et al. (1993), for example, 
reported increased subjective CNS symptoms in workers exposed 
for about 7 years to a mean of 21 ppm xylenes. The prevalence of 
symptoms was not dose-dependent, nor were other solvent expo-
sures characterized. This vapor concentration is significantly lower 
than current occupational exposure standards in the United States, 
which are established on the basis of acute irritancy or CNS effects. 
Savolainen et al. (1981) observed improved performance on a series 
of psychophysiological tests by humans inhaling 200 ppm m-xylene 
for 4 hours. An excitatory stage is often initially manifest in subjects, 
followed by functional inhibition with higher vapor concentrations 
and/or longer exposure periods. The current permissible exposure 
limit in the United States for xylenes and ethylbenzene is 100 ppm.
Xylenes and ethylbenzene appear to have very limited capac-
ity to adversely affect organs other than the CNS. Mild, transient 
liver and/or kidney toxicity have/has occasionally been reported 
in humans exposed to high vapor concentrations of xylenes. Little 
evidence of hepatorenal injury is typically manifest in laboratory 
animals (ATSDR, 2006c). Xylenes and ethylbenzene increase liver 
weight and moderately induce liver CYP P450s in laboratory ani-
mals (ATSDR, 2006c, 2010a). The o, p, and m isomers of xylene 
vary somewhat in their capacity to induce different CYP P450 iso-
forms in different organs of rats (Backes et al., 1993). Concurrent 
exposure to an alkylbenzene and another compound metabolized by 
CYP P450s generally results in their competitive metabolic inhibi-
tion. Competitive metabolic interaction between xylene and ethyl-
benzene following inhalation exposure has been reported (Campbell 
and Fisher, 2007). Preexposure to an alkylbenzene, conversely, can 
result in increased metabolism of the other chemical.
Xylene levels in the blood and levels of its metabolite, meth-
ylhippuric acid, in urine are the primary biomarkers used to detect 
exposure to xylene. Ethylbenzene levels in blood and mandelic acid 
and phenylglyoxylic acid in urine are used as biomarkers of eth-
ylbenzene exposure. However, mandelic acid and phenylglyoxylic 
acid are also metabolites of styrene (ATSDR, 2006d, 2000a).
Xylene’s odor threshold is about 1 ppm, which is 100 times 
lower than the OSHA PEL. IARC has determined that xylene is 
not classifiable as to its carcinogenicity to humans. Ethylbenzene 
caused kidney injury and an increased incidence of renal adenoma 
and carcinoma (combined) in male F344 rats exposed to 750 ppm 
for up to 2 years (NTP, 1997b). However, no association has been 
found between the occurrence of tumors and exposure to ethylben-
zene in humans. A battery of in vivo and in vitro genetic toxicity 
assays has shown that ethylbenzene is not genotoxic. IARC classi-
fied ethylbenzene as a possible human carcinogen.
Styrene
Styrene is primarily used in the manufacture of polystyrene items 
and in copolymers with acrylonitrile or 1,3-butadiene to produce 
synthetic rubber, latex, and reinforced plastics (Gibbs and Mulligan, 
1997). Worker exposures in the rubber industry are of greatest con-
cern toxicologically. Styrene is also often detected in the blood of 
nonoccupationally exposed populations (Churchill et  al., 2001; 
Blount et al., 2006). Sources include tobacco smoke, auto exhaust, 
and emissions from building materials. Discharges from industry 
are the major source of environmental pollution (ATSDR, 2010b). 
An estimated 90,000 U.S. workers are potentially exposed to sty-
rene (OSHA, 2016).
Central nervous system effects and mucous membrane and 
respiratory irritation are the most commonly reported effects in 
humans following styrene exposure. Workers exposed to about 25 
ppm exhibit signs of mild hepatic injury and cholestasis (Brodkin 
et al., 2001). Styrene is damaging to the nasal epithelium of rats 
and mice, and hepatotoxic and pneumotoxic in mice. Species differ-
ences in styrene toxicity can be explained by metabolic differences. 
Styrene is metabolized principally by Cyp2e1 in liver and Cyp2f2 
in lung to styrene-7,8-oxide (SO) (Linhart et al., 2000; Carlson, 
2003). SO, ultimate toxicant, can bind covalently to proteins and 
nucleic acids. This epoxide is detoxified by the actions of epoxide 
hydrolase and glutathione S-transferase (GST) (Chung et al., 2006; 
Carlson, 2010). SO is detoxified much more efficiently by epoxide 
hydrolase in rats and humans than in mice. Among the three spe-
cies, mouse liver and lungs have the greatest capacity to form SO 
from styrene (ATSDR, 2010b). Many of the enzymes involved in 
styrene metabolism are known to be polymorphic, so polymorphism 
may play a role in its toxicity.
There is considerable debate as to whether styrene is a human 
carcinogen. It is carcinogenic to the forestomach of orally dosed

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1203
mice and rats (Roe, 1994). Results of in vitro and in vivo muta-
genicity and genotoxicity studies of styrene have been mixed 
(ATSDR, 2010b). Chromosomal aberrations, micronuclei, and/or 
sister chromatid exchange have been reported in employees in some 
high-exposure occupational settings, but not in others. Increased 
rates of different cancers have been reported in workers exposed 
to 1,3-butadiene and styrene in the synthetic rubber industry. The 
excesses of cancers have largely been attributed to 1,3-butadiene, 
though styrene may modify the actions of 1,3-butadiene and/or be 
implicated itself (Matonoski et al., 1997). Occasional findings of 
small increases in incidences of lymphatic and hematopoietic neo-
plasms in epidemiological studies of workers exposed primarily to 
styrene are not robust (IARC, 2002; ATSDR, 2010b). Tumors of 
the esophagus, pancreas, and kidney were also reported in rein-
forced plastic industry workers. No increases in any tumors were 
seen in male or female Sprague–Dawley rats exposed 6 hours daily, 
5 days weekly for 104 weeks to as high as 1000 ppm styrene vapor 
(Cruzan et al., 1998). A similar inhalation cancer bioassay, however, 
revealed increases in pulmonary adenomas and/or carcinomas in 
male and female CD-1 mice (Cruzan et al., 2001). Gavage studies 
have yielded variable results (ATSDR, 2010b). In an NCI (1979) 
study, dose-related increases in the combined incidence of benign 
and malignant lung tumors were noted in mice following chronic 
gavage dosing. In an oral study in which pregnant dams were given 
a single dose of styrene on gestation day 17, and offspring were 
exposed to high oral doses weekly for 16 weeks after weaning, a 
significant increase in lung tumors was observed in these offspring 
following a 100-week exposure period (Ponomarkov and Tomatis, 
1978). The same authors reported no significant tumor incidences 
in a second study in which a different strain of mice was exposed to 
much lower doses of styrene on gestation day 17 followed by once 
a week exposure of offspring for 120 weeks. Lung tumor response 
observed in mice is most likely due to cytotoxicity caused by the 
in situ formation of SO, followed by cell proliferation (ATSDR, 
2010b). The relevance of mouse lung tumors to humans has been 
questioned due to species differences in lung metabolism of sty-
rene (Carlson, 2008). The absence of preneoplastic lesions and 
lung tumors in Cyp2f2-null and humanized CD-1 mice exposed 
to 120 ppm of styrene vapor for 104 weeks indicates that styrene 
is a rodent, not a human carcinogen (Cruzan et al., 2017). Three 
modes of action for styrene-induced tumors have been proposed by 
NTP 2011: genotoxicity, cytotoxic effects, and immunosuppression. 
Genotoxicity was identified as relevant to all cancer sites, and cyto-
toxicity and immunosuppression were identified as site-specific.
Noncancer effects reported include mucous membrane irri-
tation, changes in color vision, hearing loss, and neurocognitive 
impairment (ATSDR, 2010b). A recent review of available case 
reports, cross-sectional studies, and mortality studies suggested 
occupational exposure to styrene is a potential risk factor for non-
malignant respiratory disease, and related morbidity and mortality 
(Nett et al., 2017). The European Commission listed styrene as an 
endocrine disruptor, based primarily on reports of increased pro-
lactin levels in workers exposed to the chemical. However, acute 
­workplace-related stress is proposed as an alternative mode of 
action for elevated prolactin levels in workers (Gelbke et al., 2015).
Workers in the reinforced plastics industry are exposed to sty-
rene and SO. Tornero-Velez and Rappaport (2001) used a modified 
PBTK model to predict the relative contributions of inhaled styrene 
and SO to systemic levels of SO in humans. Inhaled SO was fore-
cast to present the greater cytogenetic hazard. Sarangapani et al. 
(2003) created a PBTK model with a multicompartment representa-
tion of the respiratory tract that included species-specific quantita-
tive information on physiology, cellular composition, and metabolic 
capacity. The model-based analysis indicated that humans would be 
100-fold less susceptible than mice to pulmonary tumors, based on 
predictions of SO concentrations in terminal bronchioles. Wenker 
et al. (2001) attempted to correlate key P450 metabolic capacities 
of 20 male volunteers with styrene clearance. Lack of correlation 
was attributed to the low inhaled vapor concentrations and styrene’s 
blood flow-limited metabolism.
Based on the limited evidence in humans and evidence in 
mice, NTP (2011) classified styrene as “reasonably anticipated to 
be a human carcinogen,” and IARC classified it as “possibly carci-
nogenic to humans.” For workers’ protection, OSHA (2006) estab-
lished a permissible exposure limit (PEL) of 100 ppm, and ACGIH 
established a TLV of 20 ppm as an 8-hour TWA (ACGIH, 2011). 
The FDA has determined that the styrene concentration in bottled 
drinking water should not exceed 0.1 ppm.
ALCOHOLS
Ethanol
Many humans experience greater exposure to ethanol (ethyl alco-
hol, alcohol) than to any other solvent. Not only is ethyl alcohol 
used as an additive in gasoline, as a solvent in industry, in many 
household products and in pharmaceuticals, but it is also heavily 
consumed in intoxicating beverages. Frank toxic effects are less 
important occupationally than injuries resulting from psychomotor 
impairment. Driving under the influence of alcohol is, of course, 
the major cause of fatal auto accidents. In many states in the United 
States, a blood alcohol level of 80 mg/100 mL blood (80 mg%) is 
prima facie evidence of “driving while intoxicated.” One’s blood 
alcohol level and the time necessary to achieve it are controlled 
largely by the rapidity and extent of consumption of the chemical. 
Ethanol is distributed in body water and to some degree in adi-
pose tissue. Alcohol is eliminated primarily by metabolism (90% 
to 95%), with the remainder exiting via urinary excretion and exha-
lation. The blood level in an average adult decreases by approxi-
mately equal to 16 mg% per hour. Thus, a person with a blood 
alcohol level of 120 mg% would require approximately equal to 8 
hours to reach negligible levels.
Ethanol is metabolized to acetaldehyde by three enzymes: 
The major pathway involves ADH-catalyzed oxidation to acetalde-
hyde. ADH is present in various tissues including stomach, lung, 
eye, and liver, but the highest concentration is found in the cyto-
plasm of hepatocytes (Yin et al., 1999). While hepatic ADH largely 
contributes to ethanol oxidation in humans (Lee et al., 2006), a 
PBTK model indicates both hepatic and gastric ADH contribute to 
first-pass metabolism of ethanol in rats, with gastric ADH playing 
a greater role at lower ethanol doses (Pastino and Conolly, 2000).
The oxidation ADH catalyzes is reversible, but the acetalde-
hyde that is formed is rapidly oxidized by acetaldehyde dehydro-
genase (ALDH) to acetate. Liver mitochondrial ALDH is the major 
enzyme responsible for acetaldehyde clearance. However, a recent 
PBTK model predicted the reversible conversion of acetaldehyde 
to alcohol by ADH to be an essential step in the systemic clearance 
of acetaldehyde (Umulis et al., 2005). A second enzyme, catalase, 
utilizes H2O2 supplied by the actions of NADPH oxidase and xan-
thine oxidase. There is usually little H2O2 available in hepatocytes 
to support the reaction, so it is unlikely that catalase will normally 
account for more than 10% of ethyl alcohol metabolism. The third 
enzyme, CYP2E1, is the principal isoform of the hepatic micro-
somal ethanol oxidizing system.
Ethanol interacts with other solvents that are also metabolized 
by ADH and CYP2E1. Ethanol can be an effective antidote for

1204
Toxic Agents
unit V
poisoning by methanol, ethylene glycol, and diethylene glycol. As 
ethyl alcohol has a relatively high affinity for ADH, it competitively 
inhibits the metabolic activation of other alcohols and glycols. Pre-
exposure to a single high dose or multiple doses of ethanol can 
induce CYP2E1, thereby enhancing the metabolic activation and 
potentiating the toxicity of a considerable number of other solvents 
and drugs such as acetaminophen (Lieber, 1997; Klotz and Ammon, 
1998). Manno et al. (1996), for example, describe heavy drinkers 
who developed severe hepatorenal toxicity from CCl4 exposures, 
which caused no ill effects in nondrinkers. Other alcohols, such 
as 2-butanol (Fig. 24-4), can have analogous effects (Traiger and 
Bruckner, 1976). Chronic heavy drinkers may develop more severe 
hepatotoxicity associated with acetaminophen overdosing than non-
alcoholics, due to increased formation and reduced detoxification 
of toxic metabolites (Riordan and Williams, 2002; Rumack, 2004). 
Such interactions are also described under the “Metabolism” and 
“Exogenous Factors” subsections in this chapter.
A variety of factors that modulate ADH, CYP2E1, and ALDH 
can influence adverse effects experienced by drinkers. Relatively 
low ADH and CYP2E1 activities increase systemic alcohol levels 
and prolong its effects, while low ALDH results in elevated acet-
aldehyde levels. Long-term ingestion of high alcohol doses can 
lead to alcohol dependency and cirrhosis, whereas high acetalde-
hyde levels may result in acute toxicity due to covalent binding 
to proteins and other macromolecules (Niemela, 1999). Ethanol-
metabolizing enzymes exist in multiple molecular forms that are 
genetically controlled. Genetic polymorphisms of these enzymes 
contribute to different disease outcomes in different ethnic and 
racial populations (Crabb et al., 2004; Russo et al., 2004). Asians 
have higher frequencies of an ADH1*2 variant, which encodes for 
a rapidly metabolizing form of ADH, preventing alcoholism. White 
and black populations in the United States predominantly have an 
ADH1*1 allele (Russo et al., 2004), which encodes for a relatively 
inactive ADH (Lee et al., 2006), leading to increased risk of alcohol 
dependency. As for ALDH, some 50% of Asians have high levels of 
the inactive allele, ALDH2*2. Hence, this population experiences 
acetaldehyde-induced flushing, tachycardia, nausea, vomiting, and 
hyperventilation upon alcohol consumption. Whereas this syndrome 
offers protection against developing alcoholism, it increases the 
risk of acetaldehyde-related cancers, including esophageal, stom-
ach, colon, lung, head, and neck tumors (Vasiliou et al., 2004). The 
proposed mechanism for these cancers is that constant interaction 
of acetaldehyde with DNA leads to mutations in procarcinogenic 
or antiapoptotic genes (Israel et al., 2011). While higher frequen-
cies ADHI*2 and ALDH2*2 result in increased internal exposure of 
acetaldehyde, the incidences of esophageal, stomach, colon, lung, 
head, and neck tumors in individuals who carry ADH1*2 is mark-
edly less. A possible explanation for this difference is that increase 
in acetaldehyde levels in ADH1*2 individuals is brief due to further 
metabolism of acetaldehyde, whereas ALDH2*2 individuals have 
sustained exposure to acetaldehyde. Hispanics, in contrast, have 
very low levels of ADH1*2 and ALDH2*2, predisposing them to 
alcoholism and their offspring to fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS). 
Disulfiram, an ALDH inhibitor, is used to treat alcoholism, by 
enhancing acetaldehyde levels when alcohol is consumed. Whereas 
CYP2E1 polymorphism is reported in humans (Zintzaras et al., 
2006), its role in the pathogenicity of alcoholism is still unclear.
Gender differences in responses to ethanol are well recognized. 
Women are more sensitive to alcohol, and exhibit higher mortality 
at lower levels of consumption than men (Sato et al., 2001; Brienza 
and Stein, 2002). Women exhibit somewhat higher blood levels 
than men following ingestion of equivalent doses of ethanol (Pikaar 
et al., 1988). This phenomenon appears to be due in part to more 
extensive ADH-catalyzed metabolism of ethanol by the male gastric 
mucosa (Frezza et al., 1990; Seitz et al., 1993). Kinetic data indicate 
that hepatic ADH does not play a role in the sex difference in first-
pass elimination of ethanol, though Chrostek et al. (2003) did report 
higher activities of ADH isoforms that efficiently oxidize ethanol 
in the liver of male subjects. Sex differences in ethanol metabolism 
in the remainder of the body appear to be small or nonexistent. A 
second factor contributing to the higher blood ethanol levels and 
greater CNS effects in women is their smaller volume of distribu-
tion for relatively polar solvents such as alcohols. It is well known 
that women are more susceptible to alcohol-induced hepatitis and 
cirrhosis (Thurman, 2000). A postulated mechanism for this sex 
difference is described below.
Alcohol now is recognized as the leading preventable cause of 
birth defects and developmental disorders (Review in Warren et al., 
2011). The severity of birth defects resulting from exposure of the 
developing embryo or fetus to alcohol is determined by multiple 
factors, including genetic background, timing and level of alcohol 
exposure, pattern of drinking, and nutritional status. Peak mater-
nal blood alcohol concentration is apparently the most important 
determinant of the likelihood of alcohol-related developmental 
effects. Overconsumption during all three trimesters of pregnancy 
can result in certain manifestations, dependent on the period of 
gestation during which ingestion occurs. The most serious adverse 
consequence of prenatal alcohol exposure is fetal alcohol syndrome 
(FAS), which has an estimated prevalence that ranges from 0.5 to 
7.0 cases per 1000 births in the United States. Diagnostic criteria 
for FAS include: (1) heavy maternal alcohol consumption during 
gestation; (2) pre- and postnatal growth retardation; (3) craniofa-
cial malformations including microcephaly; and (4) mental retarda-
tion. However, there are other alcohol-related brain and behavioral 
abnormalities that are not diagnosed as FAS because of the lack of 
abnormal facial features. This range of deficits now is referred to as 
fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (FASD) and is estimated to occur 
in 1% of births. A recent study revealed that 86.5% of children and 
adolescents (4 to 18 years old) with FASD had never been previ-
ously diagnosed or had been misdiagnosed (Chasnoff et al., 2015). 
Thus it is important to identify FASD as early in the life as possible 
to treat and prevent complications. Lecuyer et al. (2017), based on 
the results of studies in an animal model and in humans, suggested 
that measurement of placental growth factor in the placenta or fetal 
blood could serve as a predictive marker for FASD.
Despite an intensive research effort for three decades, the 
mechanisms underlying FAS remain unclear. Exposure of embry-
onic tissue to ethanol adversely affects many cellular functions criti-
cal to development, including protein and DNA synthesis, uptake of 
critical nutrients such as glucose and amino acids, and changes in 
several kinase-mediated signal transduction pathways (Shibley and 
Pennington, 1997). Alcohol may also harm the fetus indirectly as 
a result of the mother’s malnutrition. Numerous mechanisms have 
been suggested as contributing to alcohol-induced fetal damage, 
although none has been established with certainty (Goodlett and 
Horn, 2001). Some studies have suggested that oxidative stress on 
fetal tissues is responsible (Henderson et al., 1999), while others 
have implicated ethanol’s effects on neurotransmitter-gated ion 
channels, particularly the NMDA receptor (Costa et al., 2000), 
and its ability to trigger cell death via necrosis and apoptosis 
(Ikonomidou et al., 2000; Goodlett and Horn, 2001). Others have 
reported that ethanol produces a long-lasting reduction in synap-
tic efficacy (Bellinger et al., 1999) and alters the fetal expression 
of developmentally important genes such as msx2 and insulin-like 
growth factors (Singh et al., 1996; Rifas et al., 1997). Other stud-
ies suggest that NMDA and GABA receptor-mediated apoptosis

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1205
play critical roles in learning impairment (Ikonomidou et al., 2000; 
Olney et al., 2002; Toso et al., 2006). Acetaldehyde may also con-
tribute to the development of FAS, as it is shown to accumulate in 
the fetal brain after prenatal alcohol exposure (Hamby-Mason et al., 
1997) and to be cytotoxic to cultured embryonic brain cells (Lee 
et al., 2005). Ethanol may also cause brain damage through endo-
plasmic reticulum (ER) stress in neurons (Yang and Luo, 2015). 
The potential mechanisms for ER stress include production of acet-
aldehyde adducts, oxidative stress, and disruption of intracellular 
calcium homeostasis. Animal models of FASD indicate that ethanol 
induces neuroimmune activation in the developing brain, resulting 
in microglial activation and production of pro-inflammatory mol-
ecules that are postulated to alter neuron survival and function and 
lead to long-term neuropathological and cognitive defects (Drew 
and Kane, 2014). Other mechanisms of FASD include: (1) altera-
tions in the regulation of gene expression (e.g., reduced retinoic 
acid signaling, altered DNA methylation); (2) interference with 
mitogenic and growth factor responses involved in neural stem cell 
proliferation, migration, and differentiation; (3) disturbances in 
molecules that mediate cell-cell interactions (L1, NCAM, loss of 
trophic support); and (4) derangements of glial proliferation, dif-
ferentiation, and function (Guerri et al., 2009; Ramsay, 2010).
Genetic variability in metabolic enzymes is another proposed 
mechanism for FAS. A role for CYP2E1 in the induction of FAS 
has been hypothesized, given its expression in human cephalic tis-
sues during embryogenesis (Boutelet-Bochan et al., 1997). Results 
of in vitro experiments indicate that human CYP2E1 is effective in 
production of reactive oxygen intermediates (e.g., hydroxy radicals, 
superoxide anion, and H2O2) and in causation of lipid peroxidation 
(Dai et al., 1993). Membrane lipids and a variety of enzymes are tar-
gets for free radical attack. Albano et al. (1999) have demonstrated 
a marked increase in covalent binding of hydroxyethyl radicals to 
hepatic microsomal proteins from rats following chronic ethanol 
administration. There is not yet direct evidence that hydroxyethyl 
radicals contribute to lipid peroxidation, but they do readily react 
with α-tocopherol, GSH, and ascorbic acid, thereby potentially 
lowering liver antioxidant levels in vivo. Albano et al. (1999) also 
describe evidence that hydroxyethyl radical-protein adducts in 
hepatocytes induce immune responses, which may contribute to 
chronic ethanol hepatotoxicity (i.e., alcoholic liver disease [ALD]).
ALD is one of the most prevalent and fatal conditions of alco-
hol abuse. It is the 12th leading cause of death in the United States 
and accounts for approximately 4% of global mortality. The pro-
gression of ALD follows a characteristic pattern marked by appear-
ance of fatty liver, hepatocyte necrosis, inflammation, regeneration 
nodules, fibrosis, and cirrhosis. Development of steatosis, charac-
terized by accumulation of triglyceride droplets in the liver, is the 
initial stage of ALD. This stage is symptomless and reversible, if 
alcohol consumption is reduced. Despite extensive research, the 
mechanisms underlying ALD are still unclear. It is postulated that 
chronic alcohol consumption increases the gut permeability to lipo-
polysaccharide (LPS), an endotoxin that is a major constituent of 
the outer membrane of gram negative bacteria. LPS binds to recep-
tors in Kupffer cells to produce reactive oxygen species (ROS), 
which activate NF-kB, leading to TNF- α and other inflammatory 
mediators that are cytotoxic to hepatocytes and chemoattractants for 
neutrophils (Bautista, 2000; Diehl, 2000). These mediators include 
interleukins, prostaglandins, free radicals, and eicosanoids. TNF-α 
signaling also increases mitochondrial ROS, which trigger apop-
totic cell death in liver. Apoptotic cells in turn result in increased 
inflammatory response. Pro-inflammatory cytokines and oxidative 
stress stimulate collagen synthesis by hepatic stellate cells, leading 
to alcoholic fibrosis (Lieber, 2004). Chronic alcohol consumption 
also inhibits components of innate immunity, such as natural killer 
(NK) cells. The inhibition of NK cells decreases NK cell-mediated 
killing of stellate cells, contributing to fibrosis (Mandrekar and 
Szabo, 2009; Miller et al., 2011). Alcohol-induced oxidative stress 
is thought to cause liver injury by promoting the development of 
both humoral and cellular immune responses (Vidali et al., 2008). 
CYP2E1 can generate ROS during its catalytic cycle. Because 
CYP2E1 metabolizes ethanol and increases during ethanol expo-
sure, it is suggested to play a significant role in ethanol-induced 
liver toxicity. Lu et al. (2010) recently reported that wild-type mice 
and humanized CYP2E1 (knock-in) mice had significant ethanol-
induced oxidative stress and fatty liver, but CYP2E1 knock-out mice 
did not have these changes. Another mode of cell death, necroptosis 
(necrosis through apoptosis-regulated pathway), has been reported 
in mice after chronic ethanol exposure. Necroptosis is activated 
by receptor-interacting protein kinase 3, which is dependent on 
CYP2E1 expression (Roychowdhury et al., 2013). Necroptosis also 
exacerbates chronic inflammation by pro-inflammatory pathways.
Acetaldehyde is capable of upregulating collagen synthesis 
either directly or indirectly by inducing TGF-β1. Hence, poly-
morphisms of ALDH can increase the risk of fibrosis (Purohit and 
Brenner, 2006). Kupffer cells of female rats are more sensitive to 
endotoxin than those of males. Estrogen increases the sensitivity of 
Kupffer cells of rats to endotoxin, leading to increased production of 
TNF-α and death of hepatocytes (Thurman, 2000; Yin et al., 2000; 
Colantoni et al., 2003). This phenomenon is believed to account in 
part for the more severe hepatitis and cirrhosis commonly seen in 
female alcoholics (Thurman, 2000).
Alcohol-induced damage of the liver and other tissues is 
believed to result in part from nutritional disturbances, as well as 
toxic effects (Lieber, 2004; DiCecco and Francisco-Ziller, 2006). 
Lack of money, poor judgment, prolonged inebriation, and appetite 
loss contribute to poor nutrition and weight loss in alcoholics. A high 
percentage of calories in the alcoholic’s diet is furnished by alcohol. 
Malabsorption of thiamine, diminished enterohepatic circulation of 
folate, degradation of pyridoxal phosphate, and disturbances in the 
metabolism of vitamins A and D can occur (Mezey, 1985). Recent 
research showed fungal overgrowth in the intestine of mice from 
chronic alcohol exposure exacerbated ALD (Yang et al., 2017).
Prostaglandins released from endotoxin-activated Kupffer 
cells may be responsible for a hypermetabolic state in the liver. 
With the increase in oxygen demand, the viability of centrilobular 
hepatocytes would be most compromised, due to their relatively 
poor oxygen supply (Thurman, 1998). Metabolism of ethanol via 
ADH and ALDH results in a shift in the redox state of the cell. The 
metabolites and the more reduced state can result in hyperlactacide-
mia, hyperlipidemia, hyperuricemia, and hyperglycemia, leading to 
increased steatosis and collagen synthesis (Lieber, 2004).
Alcoholism can result in damage of extrahepatic tissues. 
Alcoholic myopathy is one of the more common consequences, 
occurring in 50% of alcohol abusers. The condition is characterized 
by reductions in skeletal muscle mass and strength (Adachi et al., 
2003; Preedy et al., 2003). Alcoholic cardiomyopathy is a complex 
process that occurs in 20% to 25% of alcoholics. It results from 
decreased synthesis of cardiac contractile proteins, attack of oxy-
gen radicals, increases in endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase and 
an antibody response to acetaldehyde–protein adducts (Richardson 
et al., 1998; Preedy et al., 2003). Interestingly, light-to-moderate 
drinking is reported to protect against atherosclerosis in the carotid 
artery, a major cause of ischemic stroke (Hillbom, 1999). Alcohol 
increases high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol by inducing 
the constituents, apo I and II, by increasing catabolism of very 
low-density lipoproteins and chylomicrons, and by delaying HDL

1206
Toxic Agents
unit V
catabolism (Kolovou et al., 2006). It is also hypothesized that etha-
nol metabolism in the vascular wall may inhibit oxidation of low-
density lipoproteins (LDL), a requisite for atherogenesis. Phenolic 
antioxidants in wines may also inhibit LDL oxidation as well as 
reduce platelet aggregation. Conversely, heavy drinking appears to 
deplete antioxidants and have the opposite effects (Hillbom, 1999; 
Kolovou et al., 2006). Recent heavy drinking increases the risk of 
both hemorrhagic and ischemic strokes. Increased oxidative stress 
and suppressed immunity caused by chronic alcohol exposure 
increases the risk for acute lung injury, pneumonia, acute respira-
tory distress syndrome, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(Traphagen et al., 2015). Other organ systems can also be adversely 
affected in alcoholics including the brain and GI tract (Kril et al., 
1997; Rajendram and Preedy, 2005).
There is concern about the role of ethyl alcohol in carcino-
genesis, due to the frequent consumption of alcoholic beverages 
by millions of people. IARC (1988) concluded that there was “suf-
ficient evidence” for causation of tumors of the oral cavity, pharynx 
and larynx, esophagus, and liver of humans. In a 2007 meeting, 
IARC added breast and colorectal cancers to the list of cancers 
causally linked with alcohol consumption (Baan et  al., 2007). 
Genotoxic effects by acetaldehyde and elevated estrogen levels 
are likely mechanisms for breast cancer (Boeffetta and Hashibe, 
2006). According to the World Health Organization Global Burden 
of Disease Project, drinking accounts for about 3.2% of all deaths 
and 3.6% of all cancers (Rehm et al., 2004). The original associa-
tions between alcohol and cancers came primarily from epidemio-
logical case–control and cohort studies. One such cohort study of 
276,000 American men showed increase in total cancer risk with 
increasing ethanol consumption (Boeffetta and Garfinkel, 1990). 
In support of epidemiological studies, a rat study showed that etha-
nol induces tumors in various organs including oral cavity, tongue, 
and lips (Soffritti et al., 2002). While mechanisms for alcohol-
related carcinogenesis are not fully understood, metabolism plays 
a major role (Seitz and Stickel, 2007). Ethanol is shown to induce 
CYP2E1, which is known to generate ROS that damage DNA, lip-
ids, and proteins. Additionally, acetaldehyde, which is carcinogenic 
to humans, reacts with DNA, forming adducts. Evidence suggests 
that the risk of alcohol-induced cancer in humans is modulated by 
genetic polymorphisms in enzymes responsible for alcohol metabo-
lism, folate metabolism, and DNA repair (Boeffetta and Hashibe, 
2006). Evidence also suggests that epigenetic alterations, specifi-
cally DNA methylation and histone acetylation and methylation, 
by ethanol lead to cancer development (French, 2013; Varela-Rey 
et al., 2013). Several mechanisms may mediate the effects of etha-
nol on DNA methylation, including reduced folate levels, inhibition 
of DNA methyltransferase and inhibition of enzymes that lead to 
lower levels of the methyl donor, S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe). 
Chronic ethanol feeding alters the methylation and acetylation of 
histones in the liver, leading to upregulation of p21, causing cell 
cycle arrest and DNA damage. This, in turn, results in a decrease 
in DNA methylation. Ethanol may also stimulate carcinogenesis 
by interfering with retinoic acid metabolism. Ethanol and smoking 
act synergistically to cause oral, pharyngeal, and laryngeal cancers. 
Age, sex, and ethnicity have also been reported to be factors. It 
is generally accepted that alcohol induces liver cancer by causing 
cirrhosis or other chronic liver damage and/or by enhancing the 
bioactivation of other carcinogens (Table 24-3).
Therapeutic intervention in ALD is a topic of great public 
health interest. In rat models, treatment with betaine and SAMe 
has decreased blood alcohol levels and liver pathology. Betaine 
was more effective than SAMe. The proposed mechanism for its 
decrease in ethanol toxicity is increased metabolism of ethanol 
by higher NAD+ generation, through conversion of norepineph-
rine to epinephrine. However, SAMe treatment did not decrease 
liver pathology in a 6-month clinical trial. Betaine is also proposed 
to protect leaky gut by regulating crucial methylation reactions 
required for maintaining gut barrier integrity. Based on the findings 
in animal studies, it is strongly recommended that betaine be added 
to alcoholic beverages to prevent ALD (Neuman et al., 2015).
An international symposium (Purohit et al., 2005), sponsored 
by the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism in 
2004, concluded that chronic ethanol consumption may promote 
carcinogenesis by: (1) production of acetaldehyde, a weak muta-
gen and carcinogen; (2) induction of CYP2E1 and its associated 
oxidative stressors and conversion of procarcinogens to carcino-
gens; (3) depletion of SAM and, consequently, induction of global 
DNA hypomethylation; (4) increased production of inhibitory 
guanine nucleotide regulatory proteins and components of extra-
cellular signal-regulated kinase-mitogen-activated protein kinase 
signaling; (5) accumulation of iron and associated oxidative stress; 
(6) inactivation of the tumor suppressor gene BRCA1 and increased 
estrogen responsiveness (primarily in the breast); and (7) impair-
ment of retinoic acid metabolism. Jeannot et al. (2011) recently 
reported that ethanol may act by promoting spontaneously initiated 
cells, especially H-ras mutated cells.
Methanol
Methanol (methyl alcohol, wood alcohol, and CH3OH) is primar-
ily used as a starting material for the synthesis of chemicals such 
as formaldehyde, acetic acid, methacrylates, ethylene glycol, and 
methyl tertiary-butyl ether (MTBE). CH3OH is found in windshield 
washer fluid, carburetor cleaners, antifreeze, and copy machine 
toner, and serves as fuel for SternoTM heaters, model airplanes, and 
Indianapolis 500 racecars. It also functions as a denaturant for some 
ethyl and isopropyl alcohols, rendering them unfit for consump-
tion. It is used to a limited extent as an alternative fuel for fleet 
vehicles (usually in a mixture of 85% CH3OH and 15% gasoline) 
and is being explored as a gasoline additive and hydrogen source for 
fuel cell vehicles. Exposure of the general population also occurs 
via the consumption of fruits, fruit juices, vegetables, and alcoholic 
beverages that contain free CH3OH or CH3OH precursors. Indirect 
exposure occurs via the hydrolysis of the artificial sweetener, aspar-
tame, and subsequent CH3OH absorption from the gut. Very low-
level exposures may occur via ambient air and drinking water. Of 
all chemicals reported, CH3OH was ranked No. 1 for fugitive air 
Table 24-3  
Possible Mechanisms of Ethanol Carcinogenicity
Congeners: additives and contaminants in alcoholic beverages 
influence carcinogenicity
CYP2E1 induction by ethanol increases metabolic activation 
of procarcinogens
Ethanol acts as a solvent for carcinogens, enhancing their ab-
sorption into tissues of the upper GI tract. Ethanol affects the 
actions of certain hormones on hormone-sensitive tissues
Immune function is suppressed by alcohol
Absorption and bioavailability of nutrients are reduced by 
alcohol
SOURCE: Adapted with permission from Ahmed (1995).

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1207
emissions, No. 3 for point source air emissions, and No. 2 for sur-
face water discharges according to the 2004 Toxic Release Inventory 
(EPA, 2006a). Nevertheless, persistence and bioaccumulation in 
the environment are not expected. The consumption of adulterated 
“bootleg” whiskey is a major cause of CH3OH poisoning.
Serious CH3OH toxicity is most commonly associated with 
ingestion. Following ingestion, the parent alcohol can cause CNS 
depression, ataxia, difficult breathing, acute gastritis or pancreatitis, 
anorexia, intense abdominal pain, vomiting, and diarrhea (Tephly, 
1991). Left untreated, acute CH3OH poisoning in humans is charac-
terized by an asymptomatic latent period of 12 to 24 hours followed 
by formic acidemia, ocular toxicity, coma, and in extreme cases 
death (Lanigan, 2001). These effects are caused by its metabolites. 
Respiratory failure or sudden respiratory arrest is the most common 
cause of death in methanol poisoning. Visual disturbances generally 
develop between 18 and 48 hours after ingestion and range from 
mild photophobia and misty or blurred vision to markedly reduced 
visual acuity and complete blindness (Eells et al., 1996). Although 
there is considerable variability among individuals in susceptibil-
ity to CH3OH, a frequently cited lethal oral dosage is 1 mL/kg. 
Blindness and death have been reported with dosages as low as 
0.1 mL/kg (ATSDR, 1993). CH3OH’s target within the eye is the 
retina, specifically the optic disk and optic nerve. Optic disk edema 
and hyperemia are seen, along with morphological alterations in 
the optic nerve head and the intraorbital portion of the optic nerve. 
Both axons and glial cells exhibit altered morphologies (Kavet and 
Nauss, 1990). Rods and cones, the photoreceptors of the retina, 
are also altered functionally and structurally (Seme et al., 1999). 
Evidence is accumulating that Müller cells, neuroglia that function 
in the maintenance of retinal structure and in intra- and intercel-
lular transport, are early targets of CH3OH (Garner et al., 1995a). 
There are indications of mitochondrial disruption in Müller and 
photoreceptor cells, which is consistent with the long-held view 
that formate inhibits the energy-generating mitochondrial enzyme, 
cytochrome c oxidase, which is critical for the proper functioning 
of highly oxidative organs like the retina. This mechanism might 
explain, at least in part, CH3OH’s selective toxicity to photorecep-
tors and other highly metabolically active cells (Eells et al., 1996). 
Interestingly, exposure of rats to monochromatic red radiation from 
light-emitting diode arrays can aid in the recovery of rod and cone 
function in CH3OH-treated rats and protect the retina from histo-
pathological changes characteristic of formate toxicity (Eells et al., 
2003). This “photobiomodulation” is thought to be mediated by the 
ability of monochromatic red to near-IR light to improve mitochon-
drial respiratory chain function (i.e., increase cytochrome c oxidase 
activity), thereby initiating a signaling cascade that promotes cel-
lular proliferation and cytoprotection.
Significant species differences exist in the susceptibility of 
CH3OH toxicity. Acute ocular toxicity, metabolic acidosis, CNS 
depression, and death in humans are not seen with rodents (Tephly, 
1991). Conversely, rodents can be susceptible to delayed adverse 
effects of methanol such as developmental toxicity. Therefore, eluci-
dation of the mechanism of CH3OH’s acute toxicity was hampered for 
years by the lack of appropriate animal models. Largely based on the 
work of Gilger and Potts (1955), it became apparent that only nonhu-
man primates respond to CH3OH similarly to humans. Humans and 
nonhuman primates metabolize CH3OH to formaldehyde (HCOH) 
by ADH, whereas rodents utilize catalase. In all mammalian species, 
HCOH is very rapidly converted via formaldehyde dehydrogenase 
(FLDH) to formate, which is further metabolized to CO2. The conver-
sion of formate to CO2 occurs via a two-step, tetrahydrofolate (THF)-
dependent pathway. First, formate is converted to 10-formyl-THF by 
formyl-THF synthetase, after which 10-formyl-THF is oxidized to 
CO2 by formyl-THF dehydrogenase (F-THF-DH). Because rodents 
have much higher hepatic THF levels than primates, formate does 
not accumulate as it does in humans and monkeys (Medinsky and 
Dorman, 1995; Martinasevic et al., 1996). Another possible explana-
tion is the lower F-THF-DH activity in primate liver (Johlin et al., 
1989). It is further speculated that primates are more susceptible to 
CH3OH and formate toxicity due to their relative inability to excrete 
excess formate via the kidneys (Smith and Taylor, 1982). Irregardless, 
susceptibility to CH3OH-induced ocular toxicity is dependent on the 
relative rate of formate clearance. Dietary and chemical depletion of 
endogenous folate cofactors in rats have been shown to increase for-
mate accumulation following CH3OH, resulting in the development 
of metabolic acidosis and ocular toxicity similar to that observed in 
humans (Eells et al., 1996, 2000). Sweeting et al. (2010) reported 
that rabbits, similar to humans and monkeys, metabolize CH3OH by 
ADH and exhibit slower CH3OH clearance and increased formate 
accumulation, suggesting that rabbits resemble primates and humans 
more closely than rodents. A simplified scheme of CH3OH metab-
olism is presented in Fig. 24-10. CH3OH is primarily metabolized 
by ADH. The alcohol is also metabolized by the inducible hepatic 
microsomal ethanol oxidizing system. The polymorphism of these 
enzymes, as well as enzymes involved in folate metabolism, impact 
methanol toxicity.
For years there was considerable debate whether HCOH or 
formate was responsible for CH3OH’s ocular toxicity. The finding 
that HCOH does not accumulate following CH3OH treatment, even 
in folate-deficient monkeys that are profoundly sensitive to CH3OH, 
argues against a role for HCOH. Also, species of differing susceptibil-
ity exhibit comparable blood HCOH half-lives. In contrast, formate 
has been shown to accumulate in the human and monkey following 
CH3OH treatment. CH3OH-derived formate has also been quantified 
in the vitreous humor, retina, and to a lesser extent the optic nerve 
(Eells et al., 1996). Moreover, CH3OH-induced retinal dysfunction, as 
indicated by diminution of the amplitude of electroretinogram (ERG) 
a and b waves, is negatively correlated in a linear fashion with blood 
formate concentrations (Eells et al., 1996). Others have reported simi-
lar relationships between blood formate and ERG responses indicative 
of photoreceptor dysfunction (Seme et al., 1999). Formate has also 
been shown to induce ocular toxicity in monkeys and formate oxida-
tion-inhibited rats in the absence of metabolic acidosis or a reduction 
in blood pH (Martin-Amat et al., 1978; Eells et al., 1996). Direct 
incubation of formate with cultured ocular cells caused ATP depletion 
and cytotoxicity (Treichel et al., 2003). Thus, formate appears to act 
Primates
Rodents
Alcohol dehydrogenase
Formaldehyde dehydrogenase
Formaldehyde dehydrogenase
Catalase
Abundant H4 folate
Carbon dioxide
CO2
Methanol
CH3OH
HCOO
Formate
HCOH
Formaldehyde
Limited H4 folate
Figure 24-10.   Scheme for the metabolism of methanol. Major enzymes 
are listed for primates (left) and rodents (right). Conversion of formate to 
CO2 is rapid in rodents, but relatively slow in primates. (Used with permis-
sion of Dorman DC, Welsch F: CIIT Activities. 1996;16:1–7.)

1208
Toxic Agents
unit V
as a direct ocular toxin and not indirectly through the induction of an 
acidotic state, though acidosis may potentiate formate toxicity (since 
the inhibition of cytochrome oxidase increases as pH decreases and 
acidosis allows for greater diffusion of formic acid into cells).
The question has been raised whether ocular toxicity is sim-
ply a function of circulating formate reaching the visual tract, or 
whether metabolism in retinal or optic nerve tissues generates toxic 
metabolites locally. This is a legitimate question considering that 
metabolism of CH3OH to HCOH via peroxisomal enzymes (cat-
alase) has been demonstrated in rat retina in vitro (Garner et al., 
1995a), and the presence of cytoplasmic FLDH activity has been 
demonstrated in several regions of the rat and mouse eye, including 
the retina (Messiha and Price, 1983; McCaffery et al., 1991). By use 
of a folate-deficient rat model, Garner et al. (1995b) showed that 
a level of blood formate generated by i.v. infusion of pH-buffered 
formate did not diminish the ERG b-wave amplitude generated 
by Müller cells of the retina, as did a comparable blood level of 
formate derived from CH3OH. This suggests that the intraretinal 
metabolism of CH3OH is necessary for the initiation of retinal tox-
icity by formate. Not only are the enzymes necessary to produce 
formate present in the retina, but so too are folate and F-THF-DH. 
The later was found to be localized in the mitochondria of Müller 
cells, prompting the suggestion that F-THF-DH may serve a dual 
role, one protective of the Müller cell and the other toxic. Protection 
would come in the form of formate oxidation; toxicity from the 
overconsumption or depletion of ATP required for formate metabo-
lism via the folate pathway (Martinasevic et al., 1996).
The aforementioned findings raise concerns about the safety of 
CH3OH exposure. Chamber studies of human volunteers exposed to 
200 ppm CH3OH for 4 or 6 hours showed no blood formate accu-
mulation above background (Lee et al., 1992; d’Alessandro et al., 
1994). Whereas this might be considered evidence that exposure at 
the 2011 ACGIH TLV and OSHA PEL of 200 ppm poses no risk of 
ocular toxicity, such an interpretation may not be valid, given that 
ocular toxicity may be a function of intraretinal CH3OH metabolism 
rather than circulating formate levels.
The effects of acute, high CH3OH exposures are well character-
ized compared to those of chronic, low-level exposures. Few repro-
ductive/developmental studies and even fewer cancer bioassays have 
been conducted, due to the fact that rodents are not an ideal animal 
model for CH3OH. Nonetheless, Soffritti et al. (2002) conducted a bio-
assay in which Sprague–Dawley rats received CH3OH in their drink-
ing water (0, 500, 5000, or 20,000 ppm ad libitum for 104 weeks). 
The investigators concluded that CH3OH was a multipotent carcino-
gen. However, they referenced two Japanese bioassays that found no 
evidence of carcinogenicity in B6C3F1 mice or F344 rats exposed 
20 hours/day to 10, 100, or 1000 ppm CH3OH by inhalation for 18 and 
24 months, respectively (NEDO, 1987; Katoh, 1989). A recent review 
of carcinogenicity and genetic toxicity studies concluded that CH3OH 
is not likely to be carcinogenic in humans (Cruzan, 2009).
The NTP Center for the Evaluation of Risks to Human 
Reproduction released a monograph on CH3OH’s reproductive/
developmental toxicity, largely based on an expert panel report 
(NTP, 2003, 2004b). Among the conclusions was that CH3OH is 
a potential developmental toxicant in humans, provided a high 
enough blood concentration of the parent compound (assumed to be 
the proximate teratogen) is achieved. As this conclusion was largely 
based on data in rodents that metabolize CH3OH much differently 
than humans, its validity has been called into question (Clary, 
2003). As such, the few reproductive/developmental studies in non-
human primates are particularly informative. These studies reported 
that maternal exposure of monkeys to inhaled CH3OH (200, 600, 
or 1800 ppm, 2.5 hours/day, 7 days/week prior to breeding and 
throughout pregnancy) was not associated with maternal toxicity, 
reproductive loss, or congenital malformations in offspring, but 
was associated with a 6- to 8-day reduction in the mean length 
of pregnancy (Burbacher et al., 2004a, 2004b). Studies in rodents 
and rodent whole embryo cultures have implicated dysregulated 
cell death in the pathogenesis of CH3OH-induced malformations, 
examined GSH status in the developing conceptus as it relates to 
vulnerability, and explored the basis for the increased sensitivity of 
the mouse embryo compared to the rat (Harris et al., 2003, 2004; 
Degitz et al., 2004; Hansen et al., 2005). Because the deposition of 
CH3OH and formic acid in rabbits is shown to be similar to humans, 
Sweeting et al. (2011) considered rabbits as an appropriate model 
for assessing the risk of human developmental toxicity. Three 
strains of mice and New Zealand rabbits were given a single dose 
of CH3OH during gestation. Two strains of mice were susceptible 
to CH3OH teratogenicity. One strain of mice and the rabbits were 
resistant. Despite similar CH3OH and formic acid disposition in 
three strains of mice, the finding that one strain did not exhibit tera-
togenic effects suggests mechanisms other than pharmacokinetics 
could be involved. A role for reactive oxygen species is suspected. 
The study also raised concerns about using rodents as a surrogate 
to predict human developmental toxicity of CH3OH.
Whereas there is still much to be learned about the mecha-
nisms of CH3OH toxicity, what is known allows for effective thera-
pies, if they are applied in a timely manner. The American Academy 
of Clinical Toxicology has published practice guidelines for the 
treatment of CH3OH poisoning (Barceloux et al., 2002). In cases 
of severe CH3OH poisoning, there is a direct correlation between 
the formic acid concentration and increased morbidity and mortal-
ity. Sodium bicarbonate is usually given i.v. to correct severe aci-
dosis, and case reports suggest that it may enhance renal formate 
excretion. Metabolic blockade is usually achieved with ethanol or 
4-methylpyrazole (fomepizole), both acting as effective competitive 
inhibitors of ADH. Fomepizole is the primary antidote for metha-
nol poisoning due to its efficacy and lower toxicity profile. ADH-
inhibition therapy is most effective when administered at the initial 
stages of poisoning. Folate or folinic acid (activated folate) therapy 
is also indicated to increase the efficiency of formate oxidation. 
Hemodialysis is generally indicated when acidemia, high CH3OH 
concentrations, or visual symptoms are present, although there is 
conflicting data on whether it appreciably shortens the elimina-
tion half-life of formate (Kerns et al., 2002; Hantson et al., 2005). 
Lastly, the treatment threshold of 20 mg CH3OH/dL of blood in a 
nonacidotic patient arriving early for care has been questioned as 
being overly conservative. This stems from a comprehensive review 
of worldwide CH3OH poisonings that identified 126 mg/dL as the 
lowest early blood CH3OH level ever clearly associated with aci-
dosis (Kostic and Dart, 2003). CH3OH exemplifies the benefits of 
knowing a chemical’s mode of action when treating the poisoned 
patient. This knowledge also aids in identifying potentially sensitive 
subpopulations, such as those suffering from dietary folate defi-
ciency. Research suggests, however, that even in a state of folate 
deficiency, the body probably contains sufficient folate stores to 
effectively detoxify small doses of CH3OH-derived formate from 
exogenous sources (Medinsky et al., 1997).
GLYCOLS
Ethylene Glycol
Ethylene glycol (1,2-dihydroxyethane, EG) is a constituent of anti-
freeze, deicers, hydraulic fluids, drying agents, and inks, and is 
used to make plastics and polyester fibers. Workers may be exposed

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1209
dermally or by inhalation when solutions containing EG are heated 
or sprayed. The most important exposure route is ingestion, as 
EG may be accidentally swallowed, taken deliberately in suicide 
attempts, or used as a cheap substitute for ethanol. “Antifreeze” 
poisoning occurs frequently in cats and dogs that find its taste 
appealing. Using the National Poison Data System, a retrospec-
tive analysis found 45,097 reported cases of EG exposure from 
January 2006 to December 2013, resulting in 154 deaths (Jobson 
et al., 2015). EG enters the environment as a result of disposal of 
industrial and consumer products containing the chemical. It parti-
tions into surface water and groundwater, but does not persist in 
any environmental medium and is practically nontoxic to aquatic 
organisms (Staples et al., 2001).
The TK profile of EG is well characterized. All laboratory 
mammals and humans metabolize EG similarly. A series of papers 
have been published describing the TK of EG in Sprague–Dawley 
rats and CD-1 mice after administration of a single dose by the i.v., 
oral, or percutaneous routes (Frantz et al., 1996a–c). Absorption 
from the GI tract of rodents and humans is very rapid and virtu-
ally complete, whereas cutaneous and pulmonary absorption are 
relatively slow and less extensive. Once absorbed, EG is distributed 
throughout the total body water. As illustrated in Fig. 24-11, EG is 
metabolized by NAD+-dependent ADH to glycolaldehyde and on 
to glycolic acid (GA). GA is oxidized to glyoxylic acid by GA oxi-
dase and lactic dehydrogenase. Glyoxylic acid may be converted to 
formate and CO2, or oxidized by glyoxylic acid oxidase to oxalic 
acid (OA) (Wiener and Richardson, 1988; Frantz et al., 1996b). 
The rate-limiting step in the metabolism of EG is the conversion 
of GA to glyoxylic acid. EG has a half-life in humans of 3 to 8.6 
hours (Leth and Gregersen, 2005). Under conditions of repetitive, 
low-dose exposure, EG is not expected to bioaccumulate, given its 
rapid metabolism and elimination. Pregnancy status has no bear-
ing on the TK of EG, GA, or OA, as demonstrated by compari-
sons of pregnant and nonpregnant Sprague–Dawley rats (Pottenger 
et al., 2001).
The minimum acute lethal dose of EG in humans is estimated at 
about 1.4 mL/kg, which equates to 100 mL for a 70-kg adult (LaKind 
et al., 1999; Hess et al., 2004). Acute poisoning entails three clinical 
stages after an asymptomatic period, during which EG is metabo-
lized: (1) a period of inebriation, the duration and degree depending 
on dose; (2) the cardiopulmonary stage 12 to 24 hours after exposure, 
characterized by tachycardia and tachypnea, which may progress to 
cardiac failure and pulmonary edema; and (3) the renal toxicity stage 
24 to 72 hours postexposure. Metabolic acidosis, due largely to GA 
accumulation, can develop and become progressively more severe 
during stages 2 and 3 (Jacobsen et al., 1984; Moreau et al., 1998; 
Egbert and Abraham, 1999). Hypocalcemia can result from Ca2+ 
chelation by OA to form Ca2+ oxalate monohydrate (COM) crys-
tals. Deposition of these crystals in kidney tubules is associated with 
organ damage and potentially with acute renal failure. Nephrotoxicity 
appears to be an acute, high-dose phenomenon, as no demonstrable 
kidney damage has been reported in occupational studies of groups 
such as airport deicing workers or Finnish auto mechanics (Laitinen 
et al., 1995; Gerin et al., 1997). COM crystal deposition has been 
reported in the walls of CNS blood vessels, with associated inflam-
mation, edema, and sometimes neuropathy (Froberg et al., 2006).
Based on high-dose rodent studies, including two lifetime 
dietary studies, EG has very limited chronic toxicity potential, 
CH2
CH2
OH
HO
Alcohol dehydrogenase
Aldehyde dehydrogenase
Ethylene glycol
Glycolaldehyde
CH2
C
H
HO
O
CH2
CO2
Glycine
Benzoate
B6
B1
Formate
2-oxo-4-OH-glutarate
α-OH-β-keto adipate
Malate
C
OH
HO
Glycolic acid
O
Glyoxylic acid
C
OH
H
O
C
O
C
OH
HO
Oxalic acid
Calcium
oxalate
Oxalate
crystals
O
C
O
Glycolate
oxidase
Glycolate
oxidase
Hippurate
Urine
Calcium
Glycolate
dehydrogenase
Figure 24-11.   Metabolic scheme for ethylene glycol in animals. Key metabolites that have been observed in vivo are highlighted in boxes. Dashed lines are 
theoretical pathways that have not been verified in vivo or in vitro. (Used with permission of Corley et al., 2005a.)

1210
Toxic Agents
unit V
exhibits no evidence of carcinogenicity, and does not appear to be a 
reproductive toxicant (DePass et al., 1986; NTP, 1993b). However, 
it can cause adverse developmental effects such as skeletal and soft 
tissue malformations and delayed ossification when administered 
during gestation at high doses (more than or equal to 500 mg/kg/day) 
(ATSDR, 1997b). GA appears to be the proximate developmental 
toxicant, with metabolic acidosis playing an exacerbating, but not 
obligatory role (Carney et al., 1996, 1999). Pottenger et al. (2001) 
have demonstrated that at teratogenic doses of EG, blood levels of 
GA are disproportionately high relative to the EG dose, further sup-
porting GA as the proximate teratogen and implying a role for meta-
bolic saturation. Corley et al. (2005d) have detailed the key events 
in EG-induced developmental toxicity and suggest the disruption 
of hox gene expression, fluid imbalance, and dysregulation of cell 
death in the embryo as mechanistic possibilities. The mechanism 
of GA’s teratogenic action, however, remains largely unknown, 
as does the relevance of defects in rodents given the absence of 
reported developmental effects in humans. The NTP Center for the 
Evaluation of Risks to Human Reproduction has released a mono-
graph on EG’s reproductive/developmental toxicity largely based 
on an expert panel report (NTP, 2004d, 2004f). The overall conclu-
sion was that EG exposures below the level of metabolic satura-
tion should not result in developmental toxicity in humans. Further, 
because environmental and occupational exposures to humans are 
2 to 3 orders of magnitude lower than those expected to result in 
metabolic saturation, such exposures are of negligible concern. 
Corley et al. (2005a) have developed a PBTK model of EG and GA 
and compared internal dose surrogates in rats and humans. Based on 
the comparisons, they also concluded that occupationally or envi-
ronmentally exposed humans are unlikely to achieve blood levels of 
GA that have been associated with developmental toxicity in rats. 
This PBTK model has now been extended to include glyoxylic acid, 
OA, and the precipitation of calcium oxalate in the kidney (Corley 
et al., 2011). Carney et al. (2008) have demonstrated a role for toxi-
cokinetic factors, including the rate of maternal metabolism of EG 
to GA, in the insensitivity of rabbits to teratogenicity compared to 
the rat. These authors point out that based on toxicokinetics, the rab-
bit is the more relevant model of human EG exposure. Furthermore, 
Carney et al. (2011) have experimentally confirmed that a dose rate 
of EG sufficient to saturate GA’s metabolism to glyoxylic acid is 
critical for developmental toxicity, supporting the Cmax rather than 
AUC value of embryonic GA as the key metric related to risk.
The chief concern about EG is renal toxicity after high dose, 
acute exposure. Although EG must be metabolized to toxic inter-
mediates to induce kidney damage, the specific metabolite(s) and 
underlying mechanism(s) responsible remain to be fully elucidated. 
There is agreement, however, that the process involves a toxicant-
induced proximal tubular necrosis leading to loss of renal function. 
Poldelski et al. (2001) exposed isolated mouse proximal tubule 
segments and human proximal tubular epithelial cells (HK-2) to 
GA, glycoaldehyde, glyoxylate, or OA for 15 to 60 minutes, on 
which basis they concluded glycoaldehyde and glyoxylate are 
the principal metabolites responsible for EG nephrotoxicity. This 
is contrary to the prevailing opinion that renal toxicity is due to 
the terminal metabolite, OA, which precipitates in the kidney in 
the form of COM crystals (Guo and McMartin, 2005; Guo et al., 
2007; McMartin, 2009). Corley et al. (2005d) have listed the key 
mechanistic events in the renal toxicity of EG: (1) metabolism of 
EG to OA via GA; (2) concentration of OA in tubular urine → 
precipitation of OA with Ca2+ → buildup of COM crystals in renal 
tubular epithelium → adherence of COM crystals to the plasma 
membrane of proximal tubular cells → subsequent intracellular 
uptake of COM crystals by endocytosis; and (3) physical trauma by 
COM crystals and/or production of free radicals and lipid peroxi-
dation leading to cell necrosis, apoptosis, and renal tubular degen-
eration. Clearly, the weight of evidence implicates OA is critical 
in the induction of renal damage, but a possible role for less fre-
quently observed hippuric acid crystals and direct cytotoxicity by 
other metabolites cannot be ruled out. In vitro assays have indicated 
that both oxalate and COM crystals are injurious to renal epithelial 
cells (Thamilselvan and Khan, 1998). Also, renal damage has been 
observed occasionally following exposure to EG, without documen-
tation of crystals in the kidney. Nonetheless, EG has been used as 
a model crystal-forming renal toxicant to determine the basis for 
COM crystal retention in the kidney. Studies with EG suggest that 
crystal retention in the kidney may depend on the expression of 
the proteins hyaluronan, osteopontin, and their mutual cell surface 
receptor CD44, all of which are upregulated in response to renal 
injury/inflammation, and under normal circumstances play a role 
in reestablishment of epithelial barrier integrity and restoration of 
renal function. However, their upregulation could turn a noncrystal-
binding epithelium into a crystal-binding one, thereby setting the 
stage for crystal retention and renal injury (Asselman et al., 2003; 
Verhulst et al., 2003).
The intracellular target(s) of COM crystals is(are) not known 
with certainty, but it is well established that mitochondrial dam-
age is a major mechanism for chemically mediated renal tubular 
necrosis. As such, COM crystals in the cytoplasm could directly 
affect mitochondria or be “dissolved” within the cell to release 
oxalate and Ca2+ ions that could do so. McMartin and Wallace 
(2005) hypothesized as much and demonstrated that COM pro-
duced a dose-dependent decrease in State 3 respiration in isolated 
rat kidney mitochondria, which they believe may be responsible for 
induction of a phenomenon known as mitochondrial permeability 
transition (MPT). MPT is characterized by an otherwise impen-
etrable inner mitochondrial membrane undergoing transformation, 
whereby it becomes penetrable to solutes or large molecules. As a 
result of MPT induction, mitochondria undergo a rapid and pro-
gressive osmotic swelling, depolarization of mitochondrial mem-
brane potential, and inhibition of oxidative phosphorylation/ATP 
synthesis, all of which can lead to either oncotic/ischemic cell death 
or apoptotic cell death. Additional insight into the pathogenesis of 
EG-induced renal damage has been provided by Chen et al. (2004), 
who dosed male rats with 0.75% EG in their drinking water for 2, 
4, and 8 weeks, after which the kidneys were processed for RNA 
isolation and microarray analysis using a rat-based chip. Changes 
in the expression of genes associated with tubular structure and 
function, oxidative damage, and inflammation were common. 
Increased expression of mitochondrial uncoupling protein was also 
observed, providing additional evidence of a mitochondrial target. 
Alternatively, the study of Hovda et al. (2010) raised the possibility 
of a lysosomal target and subsequent enzymatic destruction based 
on electron micrographs of human and rat proximal tubule cells that 
had internalized COM crystals.
In cases of severe EG poisoning, early diagnosis and aggres-
sive therapeutic intervention are essential for a favorable clini-
cal outcome. A plasma EG level of 20 mg/dL is considered the 
threshold for kidney toxicity, if therapeutic strategy is based on 
EG concentration alone (Hess et al., 2004). However, no signs of 
renal injury have developed in patients at initial plasma GA con-
centrations of up to 10.1 mM or 76.7 mg/dL (Brent et al., 1999; 
Hess et al., 2004). In any case, treatment of EG poisoning involves 
three primary goals: (1) correction of the patient’s metabolic aci-
dosis; (2) inhibition of EG metabolism to its toxic metabolites; and 
(3) removal of EG and its toxic metabolites by hemodialysis, if nec-
essary. As Guo and McMartin (2005) demonstrated that the renal

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1211
cytotoxicity of COM crystals is potentiated by severe acidosis, its 
correction with bicarbonate should help ameliorate the development 
of renal toxicity. As with CH3OH, ethanol and 4-­methylpyrazole 
(fomepizole) are frequently given as antidotes for EG poisoning 
and can prevent renal injury if given early in the course of intoxi-
cation. These ADH inhibitors block EG’s metabolic bioactivation, 
thus minimizing the formation of toxic metabolites and allowing 
EG to be eliminated unchanged by the kidneys. There is increas-
ing evidence that i.v. fomepizole may be more efficacious than 
ethanol as an antidote and obviate the need for hemodialysis in 
most EG-poisoned patients with normal renal function (Moreau 
et al., 1998; Brent et al., 1999; Sivilotti et al., 2000; Scalley et al., 
2002; Buchanan et al., 2010). Watson (2000) has even stated that 
the results of fomepizole therapy support the recommendation that 
ethanol’s use should be limited to settings where fomepizole is not 
available or contraindicated. The same editorial by Watson also sup-
ports the use of hemodialysis when renal insufficiency or metabolic 
acidosis are present rather than the traditional criterion of serum 
EG concentrations more than 50 mg/dL. Interestingly, Corley and 
McMartin (2005) have refined a previously published PBTK model 
for EG and its GA metabolite in rats and humans to include hemo-
dialysis, ethanol, and fomepizole as therapeutic interventions. This 
enabled the model to describe data from several human case reports 
of EG poisoning and demonstrated that fomepizole, if adminis-
tered early enough, can indeed be more effective than ethanol or 
hemodialysis in inhibiting EG metabolism. McQuade et al. (2014) 
have reviewed the diagnostic challenges associated with EG poi-
soning and recommend starting antidotal therapy based on patient 
history and indirect tests rather than waiting for chromatographic 
confirmation. Evidence-based consensus guidelines for the out-of-
hospital management of those suffering unintentional EG exposure 
have been published (Caravati et al., 2005).
From a regulatory standpoint, EPA has established an RfD of 
2 mg/kg/day based on a NOAEL for kidney toxicity in the chronic 
rat feeding study by DePass et  al. (1986) (EPA, 2006b). Using 
International Programme for Chemical Safety guidelines, Palmer 
and Brent (2005) have derived a “chemical-specific adjustment fac-
tor” of 43.7 mg/kg/day based on a NOAEL for acute renal toxicity 
in humans. Although considerably higher than EPA’s RfD, it is com-
parable to the Benchmark Dose 0.5 (BMD0.5) for EG-induced neph-
rotoxicity of 49 mg/kg/day derived by Health Canada (2000). More 
recently, Snellings et al. (2013) derived an alternative RfD based on 
an oxalate crystal-induced nephropathy mode of action. They applied 
Benchmark Dose methods to dose–response data consisting of sever-
ity and incidence measures of kidney lesions in male Wistar rats 
(Corley et al., 2008) as a function of PBTK-derived maximum con-
centrations of OA in the kidney. The resulting RfD of 15 mg/kg/day 
reflects a reduction in overall uncertainty, as male Wistar rats are con-
siderably more sensitive to EG than their Fischer-344 counterparts 
used by DePass and colleagues. The nature of this strain difference 
in sensitivity has been experimentally examined (Li and McMartin, 
2009; Li et al., 2010). The refined RfD is apt to be somewhat conser-
vative, because humans are thought to be less sensitive than Wistar 
rats based on comparisons of COM-induced cell death of cultured 
proximal tubule cells in the two species (Guo and McMartin, 2005).
Diethylene Glycol
Diethylene glycol (DEG) is similar in physicochemical properties 
to EG, but has a higher boiling point, viscosity, and specific gravity. 
DEG serves as a chemical intermediate in the production of polyes-
ter resins and polyurethanes, and as a solvent for shellacs and print-
ing ink. It is hygroscopic, which leads to applications as a drying 
agent for natural and industrial gases, a humectant for cork and 
paper, and an additive in cosmetics. Inhalation exposure is likely 
to occur by aerosols rather than vapor because of its low vapor 
pressure, and would be limited to industrial operations in which 
DEG is heated or where fogs or mists are generated. DEG’s solvent 
properties make it useful in a variety of consumer products such 
as brake fluid and lubricants, making it accessible for intentional 
and mistaken ingestion. Unlike for EG, an RfD has not been estab-
lished for DEG. Neither OSHA nor ACGIH has established occu-
pational exposure limits, though the Occupational Alliance for Risk 
Science reaffirmed in 2016 a Workplace Environmental Exposure 
Level (WEEL) for the respirable fraction of DEG of 10 mg/m3 as 
an 8-hour TWA (TERA, 2017).
DEG’s use as an excipient in a liquid sulfanilamide preparation 
resulted in 105 deaths in the United States in 1937. This mass poi-
soning incident prompted passage of the Food, Drug and Cosmetic 
Act of 1938 (Wax, 1995). Use of DEG-contaminated propylene 
glycol or glycerin in various pharmaceuticals has caused multiple 
fatalities from renal failure in Nigeria, Bangladesh, India, and Haiti. 
In the Haitian incident, 109 cases of acute renal failure (with 88 
deaths) were identified in children who received a locally manufac-
tured acetaminophen syrup containing DEG-contaminated glycerin 
(O’Brien et al., 1998). The median lethal dose of DEG was esti-
mated at 1.34 mL/kg. Renal failure was the “hallmark” finding in 
these cases, but hepatitis, pancreatitis, and severe neurologic mani-
festations (e.g., encephalopathy, optic neuritis with retinal edema, 
and unilateral facial paralysis) were frequently seen. Alfred et al. 
(2005) have presented seven cases of DEG poisoning character-
ized by metabolic acidosis, renal failure, and in three patients, neu-
rotoxicity. In one of the more bizarre case reports, Marraffa et al. 
(2008) detailed multisystem organ failure following the intentional 
ingestion of 16 ounces of wallpaper stripper containing 26% DEG. 
Schep et al. (2009) have summarized the main aspects of DEG 
poisoning including epidemiology, toxicokinetics, toxicity and its 
mechanisms, clinical features, diagnosis, and management. These 
authors, like others, describe a final phase of DEG poisoning con-
sisting of encephalopathy and multiple cranial and peripheral neu-
ropathies with fatal and near-fatal outcomes. Though mechanism(s) 
remain unclear, delayed neurological sequelae are typically seen 
only in those patients with severe metabolic acidosis and renal fail-
ure (Reddy et al., 2010; Imam et al., 2014; Gupta et al., 2017).
Compared to EG, toxicological data for DEG in animals are 
quite limited. Consistent with observations in human poisonings, 
Fitzhugh and Nelson (1946) reported dose-dependent hepatorenal 
injury in rats that consumed diets containing DEG. Kraul et al. 
(1991) reported oliguria or polyuria, proteinuria, and other mani-
festations indicative of renal tubule injury in rats given a single 
i.p. dose of DEG. Similar to EG, renal tubular necrosis and COM 
crystal deposition in tubules have been observed following acute 
exposure of male rats (Hebert et al., 1978). As for reproductive/
developmental effects, high-dose gavage and dietary studies during 
gestation in mice, rats, and rabbits have largely been negative for 
embryotoxicity and teratogenicity. One study in mice employing a 
continuous breeding protocol has revealed diminished reproductive 
performance and fertility, as well as limited data on craniofacial 
malformations in live-born and dead pups at drinking water expo-
sures equivalent to 6.1 g/kg/day (Williams et al., 1990). Citing this 
lone positive result and the developmental toxicity profile of EG, 
Ballantyne and Snellings (2005) gavaged CD-1 mice and CD rats 
with a range of DEG doses (559 to 11,180 mg/kg/day) on gestation 
days 6 to 15. They reported no embryotoxic or teratogenic effects at 
any dose in either species, except for delayed ossification consistent 
with reduced fetal body weight in rats.

1212
Toxic Agents
unit V
Like EG, DEG is well absorbed from the GI tract, distributed 
throughout total body water and organs on the basis of blood flow, 
and initially metabolized by ADH and subsequently by ALDH 
(Heilmair et al., 1993). The ether linkage of DEG is not cleaved 
and no appreciable amounts of EG or EG metabolites are formed 
from DEG, although small amounts of OA have occasionally been 
reported (Hebert et al., 1978; Winek et al., 1978). Based on studies 
in rats and dogs, unchanged DEG recovered in urine constitutes the 
majority of oral doses, with 2-hydroxyethoxyacetic acid (HEAA) 
and diglycolic acid (DGA) accounting for most of the remain-
der as major and minor urinary metabolites, respectively (Lenk 
et al., 1989; Wiener and Richardson, 1989; Mathews et al., 1991). 
Differences in the toxicity/potency of DEG and EG can thus be 
explained by differences in their TK profiles.
DEG’s nephrotoxic moiety has only recently been elucidated, 
largely owing to the efforts of a single research group. Besenhofer 
et al. (2010) first demonstrated the essentiality of metabolism by 
showing that fomepizole not only blocked the formation of HEAA 
and DGA in DEG-treated Wistar rats, but also prevented meta-
bolic acidosis and kidney toxicity. Next, it was shown that despite 
HEAA’s dominance over DGA in the blood, renal concentrations 
were similar, owing to a 100-fold concentrative mechanism for 
DGA (Besenhofer et al., 2011). This mechanism was speculated 
to be DGA’s ability to act as a substrate for a sodium dicarboxylate 
transporter that normally enables renal tubule cells to accumulate 
Krebs-cycle intermediates, to which DGA has structural similarity. 
Support for this mechanism came from in vitro studies showing 
DGA, but not HEAA or DEG, produced a dose-dependent necrosis 
in cultured human proximal tubule (HPT) cells that was signifi-
cantly diminished when HPT cells were incubated with a sodium 
dicarboxylate transporter inhibitor (Landry et  al., 2011). Thus, 
DGA was identified as the metabolite responsible for DEG’s neph-
rotoxicity, whereas these same studies support HEAA as the metab-
olite responsible for the metabolic acidosis characteristic of severe 
DEG poisoning. Subsequently, Wistar and Fischer-344 rats were 
shown to react similarly to orally administered DEG, with both 
showing kidney necrosis and markedly elevated kidney DGA at a 
10 g/kg dose, but showing neither at doses of 2 and 5 g/kg (Landry 
et al., 2015). As might be expected, Wistar rats receiving DGA 
by oral gavage responded similarly, once again showing a steep, 
threshold-dependent dose–response where renal DGA accumula-
tion and renal toxicity were strongly associated (Robinson et al., 
2017). As noted by the authors, the steep, threshold-dependent dose 
response suggests toxicity is secondary to an as-yet-unidentified-
saturable process that could involve the downstream metabolism 
of DGA or saturation of transpoter-mediated efflux of DGA from 
renal tubule cells. As for the process by which necrotic renal tubule 
cell death occurs, evidence suggests that DGA causes mitochon-
drial dysfunction via multiple mechanisms, including the chela-
tion of free Ca2+ that regulates the organelle’s metabolism (Conrad 
et al., 2016). Interestingly, DEG’s hepatotoxicity also appears to 
be dependent upon the accumulation of DGA in the liver. As with 
EG, ADH inhibitors can be effective antidotes for DEG, as demon-
strated by the use of fomepizole and hemodialysis to successfully 
treat a 17-month-old girl who ingested DEG (Brophy et al., 2000). 
Owing to its hygroscopic nature, DEG is used to dehydrate natural 
gas in off-shore extraction plants and to prevent formation of gas 
hydrates. DEG’s ecological toxicity is thus at issue, as it may be 
released into the sea accidentally or in discharged produced waters. 
Recently published studies detail the application of bioassays with 
marine/estuarine species to the ecotoxicity risk assessment of DEG 
(Tornambe et al., 2012; Manfra et al., 2015).
Propylene Glycol
Propylene glycol (PG) is used as an intermediate in the synthesis of 
polyester fibers and resins, as a component of automotive antifreeze/
coolants, and as a deicing fluid for aircraft. As PG is “generally rec-
ognized as safe” by the FDA, it is a constituent of many cosmetics, 
processed foods, and tobacco products, and serves as a diluent for 
oral, dermal, and i.v. drug preparations (ATSDR, 1997b). The most 
important routes of exposure in the general population are inges-
tion and dermal contact with products containing the compound. 
Workers involved in manufacturing or use of products contain-
ing PG may be exposed to concentrations higher than the general 
population, with the likelihood of inhalation exposure increasing 
when materials are heated or sprayed. Neither OSHA nor ACGIH 
has a workplace exposure limit for PG, but the American Industrial 
Hygiene Association (AIHA) has established a workplace environ-
mental exposure limit of 10 mg/m3 (3.2 ppm) as an 8-hour TWA. 
The inhalation route of exposure is of growing relevance for the 
general population, as PG is the predominant carrier for nicotine in 
e-cigarettes (Burstyn, 2014; Pisinger and Dossing, 2014). As there 
are no controlled long-term studies of the effects of inhaling heated 
aerosolized PG in humans, the toxicological implications of e-ciga-
rette use are uncertain. However, Kienhuis et al. (2015) have exam-
ined the risk of inhaling vapor from the e-cigarette variant known 
as a shish-pen, and concluded that PG concentrations after one puff 
are sufficiently high to potentially cause irritation of the airways. 
Others have questioned the applicability of the margin of exposure 
analysis used to arrive at this conclusion (Farsalinos and Baeyens, 
2016). The use and disposal of deicing solutions is the major means 
by which PG is released to the environment. PG has a high mobil-
ity in soil and the potential to leach into groundwater, but is neither 
persistent nor bioaccumulative. Its soil and water half-lives are a 
few days under aerobic or anaerobic conditions. The environmental 
distribution, fate, and effects of PG and its dimer, trimer, and tetra-
mer forms have been recently reviewed (West et al., 2014).
PG has a very low order of acute and chronic toxicity (ATSDR, 
1997b; LaKind et al., 1999), targets no specific organ system, and 
there have been no accounts of human fatalities. However, large i.v. 
doses given over short periods of time can be toxic, manifesting as 
hyperosmolality, increased anion gap metabolic acidosis, acute kid-
ney injury, and sepsis-like syndrome. Clinical studies and case reports 
speak of individuals with reactions to PG-containing drug prepara-
tions, particularly where preexisting conditions exist. For example, 
a patient with renal insufficiency secondary to chronic cocaine use 
developed metabolic acidosis after receiving lorazepam for sedation 
where PG was a component of the i.v. formulation (Cawley, 2001). 
Wilson et al. (2000, 2005) reported on a case of nearly fatal PG tox-
icity after i.v. diazepam for alcohol withdrawal, and later on a case 
series detailing the risk of PG toxicity from i.v. benzodiazepine ther-
apy. Several studies have reported on the accumulation of PG in criti-
cally ill adults receiving continuous i.v. lorazepam infusion (Nelson 
et al., 2008; Horinek et al., 2009), while others have focused on PG 
exposure to neonatal and pediatric patients (Shehab et al., 2009; 
Hansen et al., 2015). Less conventional PG exposures have also been 
documented. Take the case of metabolic acidosis attributable to the 
ingestion of a large quantity of a popular cinnamon-flavored whis-
key in which PG is an ingredient (Cunningham et al., 2015). Also, 
Glover and Reed (1996) reported a case in which a 2-year-old child 
experienced CNS depression and anion-gap acidosis after ingesting 
a hair gel containing PG. Brief, but insightful reviews of PG’s clini-
cal toxicity have been published, including one oriented to children 
(Zar et al., 2007; Lim et al., 2014). Practitioners should exercise cau-
tion when treating patients with PG-containing medications in large

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1213
doses or over a prolonged period, especially patients with compro-
mised hepatic and renal elimination capacities due to age or disease. 
Toxicity surveillance is typically carried out by monitoring serum 
osmolar and anion gaps as well as serum levels of PG.
Toxicity studies of PG in lab animals can be found in the litera-
ture, but findings of adverse effects are rare. Christopher et al. (1990) 
noted increases in anion-gap acidosis, CNS depression, and ataxia in 
cats ingesting high doses of PG, consistent with progressively elevated 
plasma lactate levels. The susceptibility of cats to PG may be unique, 
owing to their lack of major UDP-glucuronosyltransferase enzymes 
necessary for glucuronidation and normal renal clearance (Court, 
2013). PG has been overwhelmingly negative in tests for mutagenic 
or genotoxic activity and was negative for carcinogenicity in a chronic 
feeding study in rats (Gaunt et al., 1972), a chronic inhalation study in 
monkeys (Robertson et al., 1947), and a chronic initiation-promotion 
dermal study in mice (Stenback and Shubik, 1974). As for PG’s repro-
ductive/developmental toxicity, the NTP Center for the Evaluation of 
Risks to Human Reproduction released a monograph on the subject 
largely based on an expert panel report (NTP, 2004e, 2004g). The 
overall conclusion was that there is negligible concern for adverse 
developmental/reproductive toxicity from PG exposures in humans, 
because animal studies have shown no such effect even at the highest 
doses tested. Recent reviews of the toxicology of propylene glycols, 
including PG, have been published affirming their very low risk to 
human health (Fiume et al., 2012; Fowles et al., 2013).
PG’s TK profile explains its relative lack of toxicity. As with 
other glycols, PG is readily absorbed from the GI tract and distrib-
uted throughout total body water and to organs on the basis of blood 
flow. Approximately 55% of PG is metabolized by ADH to lact-
aldehyde, while a significant percentage (about 45%) is excreted 
unchanged by the kidneys (Morshed et al., 1988). PG has a mean 
serum half-life of 2 to 4 hours in humans. Whereas excessive lac-
tic acid from lactaldehyde metabolism is primarily responsible for 
metabolic acidosis observed in extreme exposures, lactate is a good 
substrate for gluconeogenesis, an efficient detoxification mechanism 
(NTP, 2004e, 2004g). This detoxification mechanism typically does 
not allow lactic acid to accumulate to toxic levels, even under satu-
rable metabolic conditions. The rate-limiting step in PG metabolism 
is its conversion to lactaldehyde. Saturation of this metabolic step in 
humans occurs at doses 8- to 10-fold lower than observed in labo-
ratory animals. This is protective, because PG has a lower general 
toxicity than its metabolites (NTP, 2004e, 2004g). As for EG and 
DEG, ADH inhibitors may competitively inhibit PG metabolism and 
thus be beneficial in the PG-poisoned patient. This is exemplified by 
a case of co-ingestion of ethanol and PG-containing antifreeze by 
a 61-year-old man absent of significant acid–base disturbance and 
minimal lactate elevation (Brooks and Wallace, 2002).
Two structural analogues of PG also have low hazard profiles. 
DPG (dipropylene glycol) and tripropylene glycol (TPG) are both 
widely used in personal care products such as perfumes, facial 
makeup, stick deodorants, and shaving and skin-care preparations. 
Their low hazard profiles are predictable, given that DPG is rapidly 
converted to PG, and TPG is rapidly hydrolyzed to DPG, which is 
further hydrolyzed to PG. The toxicity of these compounds has been 
summarized (UNEP, 1994, 2001). A negative DPG cancer bioassay 
was conducted in F344 rats and B6C3F1 mice receiving the chemi-
cal via drinking water (Hooth et al., 2004; NTP, 2004c).
GLYCOL ETHERS
If one alcohol residue of ethylene glycol (HO—CH2—CH2—OH) 
is replaced by an ether, the resulting compound is a monoalkyl gly-
col ether such as ethylene glycol monomethyl ether (EGME), also 
called 2-methoxyethanol (2-ME; CH3—O—CH2—CH2—OH). If 
both alcohols are replaced by ethers, the result is a di-alkyl glycol 
ether such as ethylene glycol dimethyl ether (CH3—O—CH2—
CH2—O—CH3). The alkyl group at the end of the ether linkage may 
be a straight or branched short-chain moiety (e.g., methyl, ethyl, 
n-propyl, isopropyl, or butyl). The butyl moiety results in one of 
the most widely used glycol ethers, 2-butoxyethanol (2-BE; CH3—
CH2—CH2—CH2—O—CH2—CH2—OH). Acetates of monoalkyl 
ethers such as 2-ME acetate (CH3—CO—O—CH2—CH2—O—
CH3) are also common solvents that undergo rapid ester hydrolysis 
to their parent glycol ethers in vivo, and thus tend to exhibit the same 
toxicity profiles as unesterified glycols. Glycol ethers exhibit prop-
erties of both alcohols and ethers and are thus soluble in water and 
most organic solvents. This dual solubility and a favorable evapora-
tion rate make glycol ethers very popular solvents for surface coat-
ings such as varnishes and latex paints. Glycol ethers also find use 
as solvents in paint thinners and strippers, inks, metal cleaning prod-
ucts, liquid soaps, and household cleaners, and are used as jet fuel 
anti-icing additives and in semiconductor fabrication. Human expo-
sure occurs mainly via inhalation, but also by dermal absorption.
Although glycol ether metabolism varies with chemical struc-
ture, some generalizations are possible (Fig. 24-12). For ethylene 
glycol monoalkyl ethers, the major metabolic pathway is oxida-
tion via ADH and ALDH to alkoxyacetic acids. For example, 2-ME 
and 2-BE are metabolized to methoxyacetic acid (MAA; CH3—
CO—O—CH2—O—CH3) and butoxyacetic acid (BAA; CH3—
CO—O—CH2—O—CH2—CH2—CH2—CH3), respectively. The 
competing O-dealkylase pathway results in the cleavage of the ether 
linkage to form ethylene glycol and an alkyl aldehyde. Medinsky 
et al. (1990) reported that the relative contribution of the oxida-
tive pathway to metabolism of ethylene glycol ethers increases with 
increasing alkyl chain length, whereas that of the O-dealkylase 
pathway decreases. In contrast, the propylene series of glycol ethers 
(e.g., propylene glycol monomethyl ether [PGME]) is predomi-
nantly biotransformed to PG via O-dealkylation. Glycol ethers may 
also be conjugated with glucuronide or sulfate, but this is thought to 
occur mainly after saturation of other metabolic pathways. Based on 
studies with rat skin, glycol ethers can undergo cutaneous metabo-
lism via ADH and ALDH. However, their rapid penetration of the 
skin is thought to significantly reduce the potential for first-pass 
dermal metabolism (Lockley et al., 2005). Like that of many other 
solvents, the toxicokinetics of glycol ethers may be influenced by 
age. This was shown in inhalation chamber studies with PGME 
where aging human volunteers (more than 58 years) excreted higher 
concentrations of free PGME compared to conjugated PGME than 
their 20- to 25-year-old counterparts (Hopf et al., 2012).
In vitro and in vivo toxicity studies demonstrate that some gly-
col ethers and their oxidative metabolites are reproductive, devel-
opmental, hematologic, and immunologic toxicants by all exposure 
routes. A few have also tested positive in rodent cancer bioassays. 
Two glycol ethers, 2-BE and 2-phenoxyethanol (PhE), have even 
been shown to induce apoptosis and disturb glucose metabolism in 
the brains of rats subcutaneously dosed over 4 weeks (Pomierny 
et al., 2016), raising concerns for glycol ether exposure as a risk fac-
tor for neurodegenerative disease. The metabolism of glycol ethers is 
considered a prerequisite to their toxicity, as the alkoxyacetic acids 
are usually regarded as the ultimate toxicants. Their acetaldehyde 
precursors have also been implicated on occasion. A critical role for 
metabolism is supported by the differential toxicities of glycol ethers 
metabolized via the oxidative and O-dealkylase pathways (Miller 
et al., 1984; Ghanayem et al., 1987). This differential toxicity has 
resulted in a dramatic shift away from the production and use of cer-
tain low-molecular-weight ethylene glycol ethers and their acetate

1214
Toxic Agents
unit V
esters (e.g., 2-ME and 2-ethylene glycol monoethyl ether or 2-EE) 
toward those with more favorable toxicity profiles such as ethylene, 
diethylene, and triethylene glycol butyl ethers and those in the low-
molecular-weight propylene series like PGME (de Ketttenis, 2005; 
Spencer, 2005; Robinson et al., 2009). Like several glycol ethers of 
the ethylene series, PBTK models have been developed for PGME 
and its acetate in rats and humans and exercised for risk assessment, 
including derivation of an RfC and an RfD (Corley et al., 2005b; 
Kirman et al., 2005; Lemazurier et al., 2005). Another PBTK mod-
eling effort with glycol ethers was undertaken to demonstrate the 
utility of using an in vitro alternative to live animals (i.e., embryonic 
stem cells) to generate toxicity data as model input for the derivation 
of dose–response curves for in vivo developmental toxicity (Louisse 
et al., 2010b). One of the latest modeling efforts was applied to PhE 
and its 2-phenoxyacetic acid metabolite (PhAA). Model predic-
tions based on systemic AUCs of PhE and PhAA as dose metrics 
resulted in favorable margins of exposure for use of PhE in personal 
care products (Troutman et al., 2015). Structure–activity relation-
ships have been discerned in studies of glycol ethers with various 
chemical substitution patterns (Hardin et al., 1984; Rawlings et al., 
1985; Hardin and Eisenmann, 1987; Ghanayem et al., 1989). The 
reproductive and developmental toxicities of the monoalkyl glycol 
ethers, for example, tend to decrease with increasing alkyl chain 
length, whereas hematotoxicity increases. Thus, structure–activity 
relationships may not be universally applicable across multiple toxi-
cological endpoints. The utility of a “category approach” to predict-
ing hemolysis and testicular toxicity for glycol ethers and chemicals 
related by structure, active metabolites, and/or mode of action has 
been recently demonstrated (Yamada et al., 2012, 2014).
Reproductive Toxicity
Epidemiological studies have reported associations between glycol 
ether exposure and increased risk for spontaneous abortion, men-
strual disturbances, and subfertility among women employed in the 
semiconductor industry (Schenker et al., 1995; Correa et al., 1996; 
Chen et al., 2002; Hsieh et al., 2005). These associations appear 
biologically plausible given that the reproductive toxicity of 2-ME 
and its active metabolite, MAA, is manifested as ovarian luteal cell 
hypertrophy and increased progesterone production in the female 
rat. Furthermore, MAA increased progesterone production in cul-
tured human luteal cells at the same concentration it did in rat luteal 
cells, implying that it has the potential to alter ovarian luteal func-
tion in women (Almekinder et al., 1997; Davis et al., 1997; Dodo 
et al., 2009; Taketa et al., 2011). Another monoalkyl glycol ether, 
2-EE, was shown capable of rendering female CD-1 mice infer-
tile when examined using the Fertility Assessment by Continuous 
Breeding protocol and high concentrations in drinking water (Lamb 
et al., 1984). Additional support for an effect on female reproduc-
tion comes from the study of 519 French women in whom urinary 
PhAA was significantly associated with longer time to pregnancy 
(Garlantezec et al., 2013). By contrast, diethylene glycol mono-
butyl ether did not disrupt the estrous cycle or impair fertility in 
rats (Sitarek et al., 2012). Reproductive effects, primarily revers-
ible spermatotoxicity, have also been described for men exposed to 
glycol ethers, in some cases at concentrations well below current 
OSHA PELs for 2-ME (25 ppm) and 2-EE (200 ppm). For instance, 
Welch et al. (1988) found that painters exhibited oligospermia and 
azoospermia following average exposure to 2-EE and 2-ME at 2.7 
and 0.8 ppm, respectively. In addition, men exposed to a mean level 
of 6.6 ppm 2-EE in a foundry had decreased numbers of sperm per 
ejaculate (Ratcliffe et al., 1989). Futhermore, a large case–control 
study of male fertility clinic patients revealed a highly significant 
association between a diagnosis of impaired fertility and the detec-
tion of ethoxyacetic acid in urine (Veulemans et  al., 1993). Yet 
another case–control study of fertility clinic patients has reported 
significant associations between low motile sperm count and mod-
erate or high glycol ether exposures in the preceding 3 months 
(Cherry et al., 2008).
CH2
CO2
CO2
Carboligase
Oxidase
Dehydrogenase
Dehydrogenase
Acyltransferase
Dealkylase
Dealkylase
Carboligase
Glucuronyl
transferase
Sulfotransferase
CH2OH
Ethylene glycol
CH2OH
HOCH2
Alkylacid
Alkylaldehyde
+
O
R
CH2
CHO
Gluc
O
R
CH2
CHO
SO4
O
R
H
R
O
Alkoxyethanol glucuronide
CH2
COOH
O
R
N-acetyl glycine
alkoxyacetic acid
Alkoxyacetic acid
Alkoxyethanol
Alkoxyethanol sulfate
OH
R
O
Figure 24-12.   Metabolism of glycol ethers. R denotes alkyl group of —CH3,—CH2—CH3, or—CH2—CH2—CH2—CH3 for methoxy-, ethoxy-, or butoxy-
ethanol, respectively. The formation of alkoxy glucuronide or sulfate conjugates has been identified only for butoxyethanol. (Reproduced from Medinsky et al., 
1990, with permission from Elsevier.)

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1215
Testicular effects in men are supported by experimental obser-
vations in animals including seminiferous tubule atrophy, abnormal 
sperm head morphology, necrotic spermatocytes, decreased sperm 
motility and count, and infertility (Lamb et al., 1984; Foote et al., 
1995; Watanabe et al., 2000; Wang et al., 2006). Spermatocytes are 
among the first cells to be visibly affected following glycol ether 
exposure, and their death involves apoptosis (Chapin et al., 1984; 
Brinkworth et al., 1995; Ku et al., 1995). Creasy and Foster (1984) 
noted a consistent order of spermatocyte susceptibility following 
oral administration of 2-ME or 2-EE to rats: dividing spermatocytes 
> early-pachytene spermatocytes > late-pachytene spermatocytes 
> mid-pachytene spermatocytes. Spermatocytes in the leptotene/
zygotene stages of cell division, late-stage spermatids, and sper-
matogonia can be affected if the dose is increased and exposure 
prolonged.
As for mechanism of action, studies suggest several possibili-
ties. Beattie et al. (1984) reported that rates of lactate accumulation 
in cultured rat Sertoli cells were significantly decreased by MAA. 
Lactate is the preferred metabolic substrate of spermatocytes. Also, 
2-EE has been shown to increase oxygen consumption and decrease 
ATP levels in pachytene spermatocytes in a manner consistent with 
an uncoupled oxidative state (Oudiz and Zenick, 1986). Mebus 
et al. (1989) have, in addition, demonstrated that serine, acetate, 
sarcosine, and glycine attenuated the spermatotoxicity of 2-ME 
in the rat, suggesting MAA may interfere with the availability of 
one-carbon units for incorporation into purine and pyrimidine bases 
necessary for nucleic acid synthesis in pachytene spermatocytes. A 
mechanistic role for Ca2+ has been hypothesized and investigated in 
a series of studies by Chapin and colleagues. Ghanayem and Chapin 
(1990) observed that a Ca2+ channel blocker afforded protection 
against 2-ME-induced pachytene spermatocyte cell death. These 
authors reasoned that 2-ME perturbed Ca2+ homeostasis, which is 
consistent with observations of spermatocyte mitochondrial disrup-
tion. Involvement of Ca2+ was further suggested by observations 
that 2-ME activates a Ca2+-dependent nuclease, cyclophilin A, 
found in pachytene spermatocytes and associated with spermato-
cyte apoptosis (Wine et al., 1997). Whereas an increase in intra-
cellular Ca2+ is thought to trigger endonuclease activation, the 
protection afforded by Ca2+ channel blockers against MAA-induced 
spermatocyte apoptosis is apparently not mediated by preventing a 
rise in intracellular free Ca2+ (Li et al., 1997). Rather, because an 
intact relationship between Sertoli and germ cells is necessary for 
the morphological expression of MAA-induced spermatocyte apop-
tosis, it was reasoned that spermatocyte apoptosis is mediated by 
Sertoli cell-generated factor(s). This hypothesis proposes that trans-
fer of this factor(s) from Sertoli cells into germ cells (or initiation 
of spermatocyte apoptosis by 2-ME-damaged Sertoli cells through 
direct Sertoli cell to germ cell communication) can be inhibited by 
Ca2+ channel blockers through their membrane-stabilizing effects 
and/or interaction with protein kinase C and/or calmodulin, both 
of which have demonstrated roles in apoptosis. The inhibition of 
protein kinase C and calmodulin has been shown to block MAA-
induced spermatocyte cell death (Li et al., 1997).
Jindo et al. (2001) advanced the research of their predecessors 
by using cultured seminiferous tubules of juvenile rats to demon-
strate that MAA-induced spermatocyte apoptosis could be blocked 
with protein kinase inhibitors. Several kinases (e.g., Src) increased 
immediately around dying spermatocytes in the immediate proxim-
ity of Sertoli cells. An increase was also noted in the phosphory-
lation of the endoplasmic reticulum chaperone glucose-regulated 
protein 94, known also as endoplasmin, that was located inside 
dying spermatocytes. This work implicates a role for kinase activ-
ity in the pathogenesis of MAA-induced spermatocyte apoptosis 
and suggests the involvement of Sertoli cells. Yet another investiga-
tion examined the role of tyrosine kinase pp60 (rat testicular Src), 
a tyrosine kinase encoded by the Src gene and involved in an array 
of cell signaling pathways, for its involvement in 2-ME-induced 
spermatocyte apoptosis. Sertoli cell cytoplasm was observed to be 
the principal site of Src immunoreactivity in control testis, while 
2-ME treatment significantly induced Src expression in dying 
spermatocytes. In addition, MAA-induced apoptosis was blocked 
using Src inhibitors, further supporting a role for rat testicular Src 
in Sertoli-germ cell communication and spermatocyte toxicity of 
2-ME (Wang et al., 2000). Furthermore, a suppression subtractive 
hybridization technique using whole testes from 2-ME-treated mice 
was employed to create mouse testis cDNA libraries enriched for 
gene populations either upregulated or downregulated by 2-ME 
(Wang and Chapin, 2000). A total of 70 clones were screened, and 
six of them were shown to be differentially expressed in the 2-ME 
lesion, three with increased expression, and three were suppressed. 
Interestingly, predicted peptide sequences of the six genes revealed 
several conserved motifs such as phosphorylation sites for protein 
kinase C and tyrosine kinase. Importantly, these gene changes were 
apparent at multiple germ cell stages and were localized in mul-
tiple germ cell types (Sertoli, interstitial, and peritubular cells). This 
further suggests the involvement of cell types other than the dying 
spermatocyte in the pathogenesis of 2-ME-induced spermatocyte 
death and helps explain the requirement for intact seminiferous 
tubules for in vitro replication of the pathology observed in vivo. 
Additional insights into the testicular toxicity of glycol ethers con-
tinue to come from gene/protein expression and metabolic profiling 
studies of 2-ME-treated rats and monkeys and MAA-treated cul-
tured mouse Leydig cells, including those profiling post-transcrip-
tional regulatory microRNAs (Yamamoto et al., 2007; Bagchi and 
Waxman, 2008; Wade et al., 2008; Bagchi et al., 2010; Takei et al., 
2010; Fukushima et al., 2011; Sakurai et al., 2015). Such studies 
have raised several possible mechanisms, including oxidative stress 
as a precursor to spermatocyte apoptosis, altered androgen recep-
tor signaling, inhibition of the flavoprotein dehydrogenase enzyme 
family, and increased acetylation of core histones in several testis 
germ cell populations.
Developmental Toxicity
Exposure to certain glycol ethers during organogenesis (e.g., 
2-ME and 2-EE) is toxic to the developing embryo, with effects 
seen in several animal models including nonhuman primates 
(Hardin et al., 1986; Scott et al., 1989). Others such as ethylene 
glycol butyl, propyl, and monohexyl ethers, and most PG ethers 
have either not induced fetal malformations or have a lower poten-
tial for developmental toxicity (Tyl et al., 1989; Spencer, 2005). 
Structural anomalies in rodents have included a variety of minor 
skeletal variations, hydrocephalus, exencephaly, cardiovascular 
malformations, dilatation of the renal pelvis, craniofacial anoma-
lies, and digit malformations. In the absence of structural defects, 
electrocardiograms of fetal rats from dams treated with 2-ME dur-
ing gestation showed persistent, aberrant QRS waves, suggestive 
of an intraventricular conduction delay (Toraason and Breitenstein, 
1988). Neurobehavioral changes and regional brain alterations of 
several neurotransmitters in offspring of rats treated with 2-ME or 
2-EE have been reported (Nelson and Brightwell, 1984).
There remains considerable uncertainty surrounding the 
mechanism(s) by which glycol ethers exert their developmental 
effects. 2-ME has served as a model toxicant to investigate the dis-
position of weak acids in the maternal–fetal unit and the hypoth-
esis that weak acids such as MAA exert their effects by altering

1216
Toxic Agents
unit V
embryonic pH at critical stages of organogenesis (Nelson et al., 
1989; Clarke et al., 1992; O’Flaherty et al., 1995; Terry et al., 
1995; Louisse et al., 2010a). Ambroso et al. (1998) have applied 
confocal laser scanning microscopy, classical histopathology, 
and in situ immunohistochemistry to demonstrate that a dose-
dependent increase and expansion of apoptosis in gestation day 8 
mouse embryos could underlie 2-ME-induced neural tube defects. 
Similarly, associations have been made in mice between a maternal 
dose of MAA on gestation day 11, apoptosis in embryonic forelimb 
buds, and digit malformations (Haryono et al., 2011). In vitro stud-
ies have also been informative, such as that of Scofield et al. (2006) 
that utilized MAA-exposed chick forelimb bud micromass cultures 
to show mitochondrial-mediated apoptosis during chondrogenesis. 
An apoptotic mechanism has also been hypothesized for malforma-
tions induced by several prototypical teratogens like retinoic acid 
and ethanol. Further mechanistic insights have come from expo-
sure of cultured, murine embryonic forelimbs to 2-ME and MAA. 
Dayan and Hales (2014) have reported that MAA was considerably 
more potent than 2-ME in inducing limb abnormalities, and unlike 
2-ME, induced the acetylation of p53 with resultant increases in p21 
mRNA expression and cleaved caspase-3 protein levels, markers 
for cell cycle arrest and apoptosis, respectively. Thus, the induction 
of acetylation via an increase in histone acetyltransferase activity 
and/or decrease in histone deacetylase activity, surfaces as a viable 
explanation for MAA’s testicular and developmental toxicities alike.
Few epidemiological studies have addressed developmen-
tal effects of glycol ethers. Saavedra et al. (1997) described facial 
malformations and varying degrees of mental retardation in 44 off-
spring of mothers who were exposed occupationally to 2-ME and 
ethylene glycol at a factory producing capacitors in Mexico. Two 
other reports on what appears to be a subset of the same population 
describe these dysmorphic features and mental retardation, along 
with telomere shortening and chromosomal rearrangements in the 
in utero–exposed offspring (El-Zein et al., 2002, 2007). There are 
a few reports published from a multicenter case–control study in 
Europe designed to investigate the role of maternal exposures at 
work and congenital malformations (Ha et al., 1996; Cordier et al., 
1997; Lorente et al., 2000). Preliminary results (Ha et al., 1996) 
of evaluation of offspring of mothers who were exposed to glycol 
ethers at work during pregnancy found excesses of oral clefts (OR = 
2.0; 95% CI = 1.1 to 4.1) and CNS malformations (OR = 1.8; 95% 
CI = 1.1 to 3.3). In a study of 984 cases of major congenital malfor-
mations, Cordier et al. (1997) reported an overall OR of congenital 
malformations associated with glycol ether exposure of 1.44 (95% 
CI = 1.10 to 1.90), with significant associations for glycol ether 
exposure with cleft lip, multiple anomalies, and neural tube defects. 
Lorente et al. (2000) studied 100 mothers of babies with oral clefts 
and 751 mothers of healthy babies and reported a nonsignificant OR 
of 1.7 (95% CI = 0.9 to 3.3) for maternal occupational exposure to 
glycol ethers and cleft lip, with or without cleft palate. Maldonado 
et al. (2003) have reviewed the epidemiological evidence and deter-
mined that it is insufficient to determine whether occupational expo-
sure to glycol ethers causes human congenital malformations.
Out of concern for the potential of ethylene glycol monoal-
kyl ethers as developmental toxicants, several PBTK models have 
been developed. Hays et al. (2000) developed a PBTK model for 
2-ME and MAA in the pregnant rat that was capable of predicting 
embryonic concentrations. Gargas et al. (2000a, 2000b) applied a 
PBTK model to estimate inhaled concentrations of 2-EE, its ace-
tate ester, and 2-ME in humans that would result in blood levels 
equivalent to those observed at the rat NOAELs and LOAELs for 
developmental effects. Sweeney et al. (2001) applied Monte Carlo 
simulations to the models of Gargas and co-workers to account for 
the variability in TK and TD factors among humans and laboratory 
animals and derived occupational exposure limits to protect work-
ers from developmental effects of 2-ME and 2-EE that were 1 to 2 
orders of magnitude lower than current OSHA PELs. It is worthy 
of note that 2-ME has been largely removed from commerce due to 
its teratogenic potency.
Hematotoxicity
Some glycol ethers are hemolytic to red blood cells (RBCs). 
Typically, the osmotic balance of cells is disrupted, they imbibe 
water and swell, their ATP concentration decreases, and hemolysis 
occurs (Ghanayem, 1989). Nyska et al. (1999) reported that sub-
chronic exposure to 2-BE causes disseminated thrombosis and bone 
infarctions in female, but not male rats, likely due to impedance of 
blood flow by intravascular hemolysis. It is thought that females 
might be susceptible because they are less efficient in eliminating 
BAA, the hemolytic metabolite of 2-BE, and exhibit higher peak 
blood BAA levels. Young adult rats are more resistant to the hema-
tologic effects of 2-BE than older rats, an observation attributed to 
depressed degradation and renal clearance of BAA in the older rats.
Species differ dramatically in their sensitivities to glycol ether-
induced RBC deformity and hemolysis. Humans are less suscep-
tible than rodents. This lower susceptibility even applies to RBCs 
from potentially sensitive subpopulations, such as the elderly and 
persons with hereditary blood disorders (Udden, 1994; Udden and 
Patton, 1994). A good example of using PBTK models in human 
risk assessment has been published by Corley et al. (1994). Based 
on comparisons of model output with data collected by Udden and 
colleagues on levels of 2-BE required to affect osmotic fragility 
of human RBCs, Corley and co-workers concluded that humans 
are unlikely to achieve hemolytic blood levels of BAA unless very 
large volumes of 2-BE are intentionally ingested. Udden (2005) 
more recently reported on the hemolytic effects of diethylene glycol 
butyl ether (DGBE) and its principal metabolite, butoxyethoxyace-
tic acid (BEAA), using rat and human RBCs in vitro. BEAA had 
weak hemolytic activity on rat erythrocytes, which is consistent 
with the finding of mild hemolysis when DGBE is administered to 
rats by gavage. However, such effects were absent in human RBCs 
exposed to DGBE or BEAA, indicating that it is unlikely hemolysis 
will occur in humans exposed to DGBE. Johnson et al. (2005) con-
firmed DGBE’s low order of hematotoxicity in a 13-week drinking 
water study in F344 rats that identified a NOAEL of 250 mg/kg/day, 
with minimal but statistically significant decreases in RBC count, 
hemoglobin, and hematocrit at 1000 mg/kg/day.
Hoflack et al. (1997) have shown 2-BE capable of inducing 
apoptosis in a human leukemia cell line and hypothesized that the 
hematopoietic toxicity of 2-BE may be the result of its ability to 
induce apoptotic cell death. However, once inside the cell it is not 
entirely clear how hemolysis is accomplished, although the RBC 
membrane has long been the suspected target. Udden and Patton 
(2005) have utilized BAA to examine the mechanism of glycol ether 
hemolysis in rat RBCs in vitro. They concluded that the mode of 
action of BAA is to cause a colloid osmotic lysis of the RBC and 
speculated the following scenario: BAA causes Na+ and Ca2+ to 
enter the cell. Ca2+ initially has a protective effect via the Ca2+-
activated potassium channel, which facilitates the loss of potas-
sium, thereby compensating for the osmotic effect of increased cell 
Na+. Ca2+ subsequently has deleterious effects through activation 
of proteases and the loss of the normal asymmetric distribution of 
phospholipids (e.g., phosphatidylserine) in the membrane bilayer. 
These authors noted that preliminary studies in their laboratory have 
shown the movement of phosphatidylserine from the inner to the

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1217
outer leaflet of the lipid bilayer of rat RBCs incubated with BAA. 
This “externalization” of phospatidylserine is associated with adhe-
sion of RBCs to endothelial cells and the generation of thrombin, 
which is most interesting given reports of disseminated thrombosis 
and infarction in 2-BE-treated rats (Nyska et al., 1999; Ghanayem 
et al., 2001).
Immunotoxicity/Carcinogenicity
Based on changes in thymus and splenic weights/cellularities 
and a variety of in vitro and in vivo immune function assays, the 
immune system is a potential target for the oxidative metabolites of 
some glycol ethers. 2-ME and MAA have been employed almost 
exclusively in immunotoxicity investigations of glycol ethers. Not 
only have adult animals proven susceptible, but 2-ME exposure of 
pregnant mice induces fetal thymic atrophy/hypocellularity and a 
reduction in fetal liver prolymphocytes with potential implications 
for fetal immunity (Holladay et al., 1994). Using B6C3F1 mice 
and gavage exposure, House et  al. (1985) were among the first 
to report that 2-ME and MAA reduced thymus weight. Kayama 
et al. (1991) subsequently reported that 2-ME selectively depleted 
immature thymocytes in mice. Exon et al. (1991) not only reported 
thymic atrophy in rats exposed to 2-ME in drinking water, but also 
decreased antibody production, decreased splenocyte production 
of interferon-γ, and a reduction in spleen cellularity. Around the 
same time, the first in a lengthy series of studies by Smialowicz and 
colleagues was published (Smialowicz et al., 1991a, 1991b, 1992, 
1994; Williams et  al., 1995; Kim and Smialowicz, 1997). This 
series has reported decreased thymus weights, reduced lymphop-
roliferative responses to mitogens, and reduced IL-2 production in 
splenocytes of F344 rats exposed to 2-ME by gavage. It has also 
generated data indicating that not all glycol ethers are immunosup-
pressive, that mice are relatively insensitive to glycol ether immu-
nosuppression compared to rats, and that rats of various strains 
show differential sensitivities. The Smialowicz series has further 
demonstrated that the relative insensitivity of mice is not a function 
of their more rapid clearance of MAA; that 2-ME is immunotoxic 
when applied dermally to F344 rats; and that questions remain as 
to 2-ME’s proximate immunotoxicant, as 2-methoxyacetaldehyde 
is more immunotoxic than MAA based on the ability to suppress 
IgM and IgG production by lymphocytes in F344 rats.
As for cancer, only a few chronic bioassays have been con-
ducted with glycol ethers. Two-year inhalation bioassays of 2-BE in 
F344 rats and B6C3F1 mice revealed some evidence of carcinoge-
nicity in male mice, based on increased incidences of hemangiosar-
coma of the liver, as well as some evidence of carcinogenic activity 
in female mice, based on increased incidences of forestomach squa-
mous cell papilloma or carcinoma (mainly papilloma) (NTP, 2000). 
In June, 2004, an IARC working group evaluated the cancer risk of 
2-BE and concluded that it is not classifiable as to its human carci-
nogenicity (Cogliano et al., 2005). Likewise, EPA’s IRIS profile for 
2-BE currently indicates that the human carcinogenic potential of 
2-BE cannot be determined at this time (EPA, 2006c). Since NTP’s 
bioassays were completed, numerous studies have shed light on 
2-BE’s possible modes of action related to liver hemangiosarcomas 
and forestomach tumors and their implications for risk assessment 
(Park et al., 2002; Siesky et al., 2002; Poet et al., 2003; Boatman 
et al., 2004; Klaunig and Kamendulis, 2005; Corthals et al., 2006). 
As discussed by Gift (2005), these studies suggest the following 
scenario: 2-BE consumed while grooming is metabolized to irri-
tant metabolites in the forestomach and/or irritant metabolites are 
formed in the upper respiratory tract and swallowed → chronic 
irritation → inflammation → hyperplastic effects → forestomach 
tumors. As for liver hemangiosarcomas, the following is suggested: 
2-BE is metabolized to BAA → BAA causes hemolysis of RBCs 
→ hemosiderin (iron) derived from released hemoglobin is taken up 
by and stored in phagocytic cells (e.g., Kupffer cells) of the spleen 
and liver → oxidative damage and increased synthesis of endothe-
lial DNA are initiated by reactive oxygen species from excess iron 
or Kupffer cells, producing cytokines/growth factors that suppress 
apoptosis and promote cell proliferation → endothelial DNA muta-
tions → potentiation and promotion of hepatic neoplastic cell popu-
lations. As further discussed by Gift (2005), the evidence suggests 
nonlinear modes of action in both cases and questionable human 
relevance of both tumor types. Several PBTK models have been 
developed and subsequently refined for 2-BE and BAA to aid in risk 
assessments (Corley et al., 1994, 2005c; Lee et al., 1998; Franks 
et al., 2006).
Spencer et al. (2002) have reported a two-year inhalation bio-
assay of PGME in F344 rats and B6C3F1 mice that did not result in 
increases in neoplasia in either species except for kidney adenomas 
in male rats related to α2u-globulin nephropathy. In contrast, a two-
year inhalation bioassay with propylene glycol mono-t-butyl ether 
(PGMBE) in F344 rats and B6C3F1 mice resulted in α2u-globulin 
nephropathy in male rats, but also liver tumors in male and female 
B6C3F1 mice at the highest concentration tested (1200 ppm) (NTP, 
2004a; Doi et al., 2004). Dill et al. (2004) have published informa-
tion on PGMBE TK in rats and mice that demonstrate saturation of 
PGMBE metabolism/elimination at this tumor-producing concen-
tration. The genotoxicity of some glycol ethers and their metabo-
lites has been evaluated, with most exhibiting a lack of genotoxic 
potential and others yielding weakly positive responses in certain 
tests. Therefore, the role of genetic toxicology in the toxicities dis-
cussed above cannot be summarily dismissed, but is of unknown 
significance (Elliot and Ashby, 1997; NTP, 2000; Ballantyne and 
Vergnes, 2001).
FUELS AND FUEL ADDITIVES
Automotive Gasoline
Automotive gasoline is a complex mixture of hundreds of hydro-
carbons predominantly in the C4 to C12 range. The sheer number of 
people exposed in the manufacture, distribution, and use of gasoline 
make characterization of its acute and chronic toxicities important. 
Generalizations regarding gasoline toxicity must be made with 
care, because its composition varies with the crude oil from which 
it is refined, the refining process, and the use of specific additives. 
Experiments conducted with fully vaporized gasoline may not be 
predictive of actual risk, because humans are exposed primarily to 
the more volatile components in the range of C4 to C5. These hydro-
carbons are generally regarded as less toxic than their higher-molec-
ular-weight counterparts. Concern about gasoline exposure is fueled 
in part by the toxicities of certain components, some of which are 
classified by EPA as known or probable human carcinogens (e.g., 
benzene and 1,3-butadiene). The ACGIH has established a TLV for 
gasoline of 300 ppm to prevent ocular and upper respiratory tract 
irritation and a STEL of 500 ppm to avoid acute CNS depression.
Inhalation exposure to gasoline has been measured for service 
station attendants, self-service customers, truck drivers, distribu-
tion workers, and workmen removing leaking underground storage 
tanks (Kearney and Dunham, 1986; Shamsky and Samimi, 1987). 
In one survey, short-term exposures of self-service customers aver-
aged about 6 ppm. The TLV is rarely exceeded in occupationally 
exposed individuals, due in part to the use of vapor scavenging 
systems. Brief exposures in excess of the STEL have, however,

1218
Toxic Agents
unit V
been documented for workers engaged in bulk handling operations 
(Phillips and Jones, 1978). The most extreme exposures occur to 
those intentionally sniffing gasoline for its euphoric effects. Several 
case reports of acute and chronic encephalopathies are testament to 
the dangers of this habit (Valpey et al., 1978; Fortenberry, 1985). In 
these cases, the identity of the offending agent(s) is often unclear. 
Gasoline is one of the most popular and lethal inhalants (Spiller, 
2004; Wu et al., 2004), with deaths reported even among Aboriginal 
people in South Australia (Byard et al., 2003). An all too common 
occurrence is the ingestion of gasoline during siphoning events, 
something that may occur at epidemic rates following adverse cli-
matic events that result in gasoline shortages (Kim et al., 2013). 
This is typically followed by a burning sensation in the mouth and 
pharynx, as well as nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea resulting from 
GI irritation. If aspirated into the lungs, gasoline may produce pul-
monary epithelial damage, edema, and pneumonitis. Thus, emetic 
therapy for gasoline ingestion is usually contraindicated.
Between 1986 and 2004, EPA identified 447,233 releases 
from underground petroleum storage tanks, many of which threaten 
groundwater that serves as the primary drinking water source for 
nearly one-half the U.S. population. Despite the number of releases, 
few community health studies have been conducted, and those that 
have are typically driven by concerns over leukemia risk owing to 
gasoline’s benzene content. Consider for example the retrospec-
tive cohort study of the “Tranguch Gasoline Spill” in northeastern 
Pennsylvania (Patel et al., 2004). The standard incidence ratio for 
leukemia of all types was significantly elevated (4.40; 95% CI = 
1.09 to 10.24), consistent with that reported by the Pennsylvania 
Department of Health. However, the excess was based on only 
four cases, two of which had a history of smoking, a potential con-
founder. In addition, exposure was not well characterized, and only 
two of the subjects had acute myelogenous leukemia (AML), the 
leukemia type most strongly associated with benzene. A follow-
up study reported significantly elevated SIRs for total leukemia 
(7.69: 95% CI = 1.58 to 22.46) and AML (11.54: 95% CI = 2.38 
to 33.69) during the period 4 to 10 years subsequent to the spill, 
with only three of six total leukemia cases being AML (Talbott 
et al., 2011). While such results raise concern for low-level ben-
zene exposures among some, others point to the pitfalls of drawing 
causal inferences from environmentally exposed populations based 
on such limited data. Several meta-analyses have examined popula-
tions occupationally exposed to gasoline for hematolymphopoietic 
cancers, with little to no evidence of increased risk (Dement et al., 
1997; Kane and Newton, 2010; Keenan et al., 2013). Still other 
studies have examined residences next to gasoline stations as a risk 
factor for childhood leukemia (Brosselin et al., 2009; Steinmaus 
and Smith, 2017) and genotoxicity and oxidative stress in gasoline 
station attendants (Hallare et al., 2009; Uzma et al., 2010; Moro 
et al., 2013), some with positive results.
Reese and Kimbrough (1993) and Caprino and Togna (1998) 
have reviewed the acute toxicity of gasoline and its additives. Like 
some other solvents, gasoline can sensitize the heart to catechol-
amines, defat the skin upon repeated contact, and induce hepatic 
P450s and UDP-glucuronyltransferase activities (Poon et al., 1995). 
There is a paucity of data on the reproductive toxicity of gasoline, 
but reports of enhanced estrogen metabolism and uterine atrophy 
among unleaded gasoline (UG)-treated mice suggest that this end-
point warrants investigation (Standeven et al., 1994a). Although 
dated, the study of Lykke and Stewart (1978) is of interest, because 
rats exposed to leaded gasoline at one-third the ACGIH TLV (i.e., 
100 ppm) for 40 hours/week for 6 to 12 weeks were observed to 
have a progressive interstitial fibrosis of the lungs associated with 
irregular alveolar collapse. The question of whether there is a “fetal 
gasoline syndrome” has been raised, although case reports are con-
founded by tetraethyl lead, alcohol abuse, and the possibility that an 
aberrant gene is distributed within the small Amerindian population 
where the cases reside (Hunter et al., 1979). The question of devel-
opmental exposure was recently answered, in part, by a series of 
three studies employing the same exposure regimen. Pregnant rats 
were exposed to vapors of UG containing no ethanol, 15% ethanol 
or 85% ethanol for 6.5 hours/day on GD9 to GD20. One study not 
only examined gestationally exposed offspring using tests of motor 
activity and a functional observational battery, but also reported on 
cell-mediated and humoral immunity, systolic blood pressure, and 
glucose homeostasis (Bushnell et al., 2015). In another, offspring 
underwent cognitive testing as adults using trace fear conditioning, 
Morris water maze, and operant procedures (Oshiro et al., 2015). In 
the third, male offspring underwent neurophysiological assessment 
of auditory, peripheral nerve, somatosensory, and visual system 
function as adults (Herr et al., 2016). As for results, the few adverse 
effects were minor, not consistently related to the ethanol content 
of vapors, and occurred at vapor concentrations orders of magni-
tude higher than those anticipated to the general population. The 
above series of developmental toxicology studies was conducted in 
response to a rule issued by EPA in 1994 under the Clean Air Act, 
requiring testing of motor vehicle fuels and fuel additives. Another 
series of rodent studies designed to meet these same legislative 
requirements examined the toxicology of inhaled vapor conden-
sates of gasoline or gasoline blended with various fuel oxygen-
ates to assess the influence of additives on the hazard potential of 
evaporative emissions. The series was published as supplementary 
volume 70, issue 2 of Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology. It 
consists of studies evaluating developmental toxicity (Roberts et al., 
2014a, 2014b), neurotoxicity (O’Callaghan et al., 2014), subchronic 
toxicity (Clark et al., 2014), genotoxicity using the micronucleus 
and sister chromatid exchange tests (Schreiner et al., 2014), repro-
ductive toxicity (Gray et al., 2014), and immunotoxicity (White 
et al., 2014). Overall, the studies’ results suggest that evaporative 
emissions pose a low hazard potential for the general public, as 
wide margins of safety between real-world exposure scenarios and 
NOAELs were evident.
Prior to the identification of α2u-globulin as the principal 
accumulating protein in the syndrome referred to as α2u-globulin 
nephropathy, Kuna and Ulrich (1984) reported regenerative epi-
thelium and dilated tubules in the kidneys of male rats exposed 
to 1552 ppm UG for 90 days. At about the same time, a chronic 
inhalation study revealed not only nephropathy, but also increased 
renal tumors in male rats (MacFarland et al., 1984). Subsequent 
studies by Halder et al. (1986) and Aranyi et al. (1986) showed that 
such nephropathy could not be produced by exposure of rats to a 
mixture of the butane and pentane components of gasoline or the 
0°F to 145°F gasoline distillation fraction. These are thought to be 
more representative of human occupational exposures than wholly 
vaporized gasoline. In addition, the authors of a gavage screening 
study of 15 pure hydrocarbons and gasoline fractions concluded 
that branched aliphatic alkane components were primarily respon-
sible for the nephropathy (Halder et al., 1985).
Investigations of mechanisms of the nephropathy and renal 
tumors included an assessment of unscheduled (a measure of geno-
toxicity) and replicative DNA synthesis (a measure of cell pro-
liferation) in rat kidney cells exposed in vitro and in vivo to UG. 
No unscheduled DNA synthesis occurred, even at a tumorigenic 
dose, while a five- to eightfold increase in cell proliferation was 
observed (Loury et al., 1987). In a publication the same year by 
Olson et al. (1987), UG was reported to result in an increase in hya-
line droplets harboring large accumulations of α2u-globulin within

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1219
proximal convoluted tubule epithelial cells. It was hypothesized 
that α2u-globulin accumulated secondary to a defect in renal lyso-
somal degradation of the protein (Fig. 24-6). Supportive evidence 
for this hypothesis came from the demonstration that inhibition of 
the lysosomal peptidase, cathepsin B, caused a rapid accumulation 
of phagolysosomes and α2u-globulin in the kidney similar to that of 
UG (Olson et al., 1988).
Further progress in elucidating the mechanism of α2u-globulin 
nephropathy came from the demonstration that the UG component, 
2,2,4-trimethylpentane (TMP), itself an inducer of α2u-globulin 
nephropathy, was metabolized to 2,4,4-trimethyl-2-pentanol 
(TMPOH), which was selectively retained by the kidney of male 
rats. Subsequently, it was demonstrated that the sex-specific 
retention of TMPOH in the kidney was due to reversible binding 
with α2u-globulin. This binding rendered the protein less digest-
ible by lysosomal enzymes, which accounted for its accumulation 
(Charbonneau and Swenberg, 1988). This accumulation, in turn, 
led to cellular degeneration and necrosis, primarily in the P2 seg-
ment of the proximal tubule. In response, regenerative proliferation 
occurs and promotes formation of renal cell tumors by irreversibly 
“fixing” spontaneously altered DNA and clonally expanding initi-
ated cells. The promotional effects of gasoline and TMP on atypi-
cal cell foci and renal cell tumors have been demonstrated in male 
rats following initiation with N-ethyl-N-hydroxyethylnitrosamine 
(Short et  al., 1989). NCI–Black–Reiter male rats, the only rat 
strain not to synthesize α2u-globulin, are resistant to gasoline- and 
TMP-induced nephropathy (Dietrich and Swenberg, 1991). Thus, 
gasoline and TMP have been of great value in elucidating the mech-
anism of α2u-globulin nephropathy and shedding light on its impli-
cations for renal tumorigenesis. Most toxicologists, and indeed the 
EPA, have concluded that renal tumors secondary to α2u-globulin 
nephropathy are of little relevance, because humans do not synthe-
size α2u-globulin.
Chronic inhalation of gasoline at high concentrations has also 
resulted in increased hepatocellular adenomas and carcinomas in 
female B6C3F1 mice, possibly due to the promotion of spontane-
ously initiated cells that occur with unusually high frequency in 
this mouse strain (MacFarland et al., 1984). This possibility is sup-
ported by reports that UG is a CYP inducer, mitogen, and liver 
tumor promoter in N-nitrosodiethylamine (DEN)-initiated female 
B6C3F1 mice (Standeven and Goldsworthy, 1993; Standeven et al., 
1995; Moser et al., 1996a). CYP induction by UG has been attrib-
uted to “heavy UG” (components with boiling points more than 
100°C), whereas mitogenic activity is highly concentrated in UG 
components boiling from 100 to 132°C, for which the 2,2,3-, 2,2,4-, 
and 2,3,4-trimethylpentane isomers appear at least partially respon-
sible (Standeven and Goldsworthy, 1994). It has been hypothesized 
that the liver tumor-promoting activity of UG is secondary to its 
estrogen antagonism, given that (1) UG is not a hepatocarcinogen 
in male mice; (2) estrogen inhibits liver tumor development ini-
tiated in mice but potentiates liver tumor promotion by UG; and 
(3) UG induces hepatic estrogen metabolism (Standeven et al., 
1994b). The hypothesis that liver tumor promotion by UG depends 
on its interaction with estrogen is supported by the demonstration 
that tumor-promoting activity of UG was greatly attenuated in 
ovariectomized mice relative to intact mice (Moser et al., 1997). 
Further, the addition of estrogen to DEN-treated mice substan-
tially reduces the percentage of hepatic foci with decreased ­levels 
of TGF-β1 compared to DEN-treated control mice or DEN + 
UG-treated mice, suggesting a promotional mechanism involving 
estrogen and the dysregulation of tumor growth factor(s) (Moser 
et al., 1996c). Whereas much attention has been given to its promo-
tional potential, UG may also damage DNA, as it reportedly induces 
unscheduled DNA synthesis in hepatocytes from male and female 
mice treated in vivo and in cultured mouse, rat, and human hepa-
tocytes (IARC, 1989b). The antioxidant vitamins A and E confer 
protection against the hepatotoxic effects of gasoline vapors in male 
and female rats, consistent with gasoline’s ability to induce hepatic 
oxidative stress (Uboh et al., 2009). The epidemiological evidence 
for an association between gasoline exposure and cancer in humans 
is inconclusive. Raabe (1993) has reviewed the carcinogenic poten-
tial of gasoline. IARC (1989b) classifies it as possibly carcinogenic 
to humans (Group 2B) primarily due to its benzene content. A com-
prehensive review of gasoline toxicity, though somewhat dated, is 
provided in ATSDR’s (1995) Toxicological Profile for Gasoline.
Vehicle emissions from gasoline combustion are a major con-
tributor to urban air pollution, which is at unhealthy levels in numer-
ous cities. In response, the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 
require the use of oxygenated gasoline in such areas. Oxygenated gas-
oline contains additives that add oxygen to gasoline, thereby boost-
ing its octane quality, enhancing combustion, and reducing exhaust 
emissions. Methyl tertiary butyl ether (MTBE) and ethanol are the 
two most common oxygenates, although use of the former is being 
rapidly phased out due to widespread groundwater contamination 
and health concerns. As a result, the demand for ethanol–­gasoline 
blends is increasing dramatically, raising concerns about how the 
two components might interact toxicologically. There is a dearth of 
information on this issue, but a 4-week inhalation study of an etha-
nol–gasoline mixture (6130 ppm ethanol and 500 ppm gasoline) in 
rats concluded that coexposure showed additive and possibly some 
synergistic effects on growth, neurochemistry, and histopathology 
of the adrenal gland and respiratory tract. Effects were described as 
generally mild and adaptive in nature, and returned to normal after 
exposure cessation (Chu et al., 2005). The risks and benefits of etha-
nol as an oxygenate are discussed in detail by Williams et al. (2003), 
who point out several reasons why ethanol in gasoline can increase 
groundwater plume lengths and persistence of gasoline constitu-
ents in groundwater if ethanol blends are released into the environ-
ment. The most obvious concern is that longer or more persistent 
gasoline plumes could lead to a higher probability of gasoline 
constituents affecting public water wells. Meanwhile, another fuel 
additive, methylcyclopentadienyl manganese tricarbonyl (MMT), 
is receiving attention due to concerns that it could increase man-
ganese inhalation exposures and pose a risk for neurotoxicity. The 
combustion of MMT gasoline results in the emission of fine Mn 
particulates mainly as Mn sulfate and Mn phosphate and smaller 
amounts of oxides. Several studies characterizing vehicular exhaust 
using MMT gasoline and describing the neurobehavioral toxicol-
ogy of Mn have been published (Normandin et al., 2004; Pfeifer 
et al., 2004; Reaney et al., 2006; Tapin et al., 2006; Carmona et al., 
2014; Su et al., 2016). Of particular note is the series of studies 
mandated under the Clean Air Act’s Alternative Tier 2 test program 
that generated TK data on Mn in animals and enabled the develop-
ment of PBPK models for Mn of potential value in human health 
risk assessment (Dorman et al., 2012; Taylor et al., 2012). Although 
largely beyond the scope of this chapter, gasoline engine exhaust 
has been classified as possibly carcinogenic to humans (Group 2B), 
based largely on sufficient evidence in animals when condensates 
and exhaust extracts are tested (IARC, 1989a).
Methyl Tertiary-Butyl Ether
MTBE is made by reacting methanol with isobutylene. While its 
high octane rating made it a logical replacement for tetraethyl lead as 
an octane booster for gasoline, its popularity as a gasoline oxygen-
ator drove massive increases in U.S. production. As an oxygenator,

1220
Toxic Agents
unit V
MTBE makes fuel combustion more complete, thereby reducing 
pollutant emissions from automobile exhaust as mandated by the 
Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990. By 1997, MTBE was being 
used at the rate of 10 million gal/day, with more than one-third 
of the usage in California (Williams et al., 2000a). While routine, 
low-level exposure of customers occurred at self-service stations, 
heightened concern for MTBE resulted primarily from its contami-
nation of groundwater by leaking underground gasoline tanks. It is 
highly water soluble, travels faster and farther in water than other 
gasoline components, and is resistant to degradation. Because of 
the widespread occurrence of MTBE in water supplies, in 1998 the 
EPA formed the Blue Ribbon Panel on Oxygenates in Gasoline that 
recommended a substantial reduction in MTBE use and the even-
tual removal of the oxygenate requirement for reformulated gaso-
line. As a result, MTBE has not been used in significant quantities 
in reformulated gasoline since 2005. However, it finds occasional 
use as an FDA-approved drug for the dissolution of gallstones in 
the event surgical or endoscopic options are unavailable (Kim et al., 
2015). It is also being investigated for its potential as an anti-angio-
genic treatment for solid tumors (Kozlosky et al., 2013).
MTBE is well absorbed following oral, inhalation, and dermal 
exposure of humans and rats (Dekant et al., 2001; Prah et al., 2004; 
McGregor, 2006). The majority of absorbed MTBE is exhaled 
unchanged. Some MTBE is oxidized to tert-butyl alcohol (TBA) 
and HCOH. Whereas this oxidation is primarily CYP2A6-mediated 
in humans (Hong et al., 1999), it is largely Cyp2b1-mediated in rats 
(Turini et al., 1998). TBA is relatively water soluble, so it tends to 
remain in the blood and extracellular fluid, and is slowly exhaled. 
TBA is further metabolized, first to 2-methyl-1,2-propanediol and 
then to 2-hydroxyisobutyrate, the major urinary metabolites of 
MTBE. In addition, glucuronide and sulfate conjugates of TBA are 
found in trace amounts in urine. Although HCOH is one of the oxi-
dative metabolites of MTBE, it is undetectable after MTBE expo-
sure in humans and rats, presumably due to its rapid metabolism. 
PBTK models have been developed to describe the dosimetry of 
MTBE and TBA following inhalation and oral exposures in rats 
and humans (Borghoff et al., 1996; Licata et al., 2001). These early 
PBTK models were subsequently expanded to account for MTBE 
and TBA binding of α2u-globulin in kidney (Leavens and Borghoff, 
2009; Borghoff et al., 2010).
Concern for MTBE has led to numerous toxicity studies in 
humans and rodents, and a number of reviews of MTBE’s toxic-
ity are available (ATSDR, 1996b; EPA, 1997; Borak et al., 1998; 
WHO, 1998; McGregor, 2006). The review of Borak et al. (1998) 
focuses upon the acute human health effects of MTBE. It con-
cludes, based on 19 reports of inhalation exposure to MTBE alone 
or in gasoline and 12 reports of parenteral MTBE administration 
to dissolve cholesterol gallstones, that no significant association 
exists between MTBE exposure and the acute symptoms com-
monly attributed to it. These symptoms include headache, eye, 
nose and throat irritation, cough, nausea, dizziness, and disorienta-
tion. The more recent review of McGregor (2006) is supportive of 
this conclusion. In 1988, the EPA and industry developed a Testing 
Consent Order for MTBE under the Toxic Substances Control Act 
that precipitated investigations of MTBE’s potential two-generation 
reproductive toxicity, developmental toxicity, in vivo mutagenic-
ity, subchronic inhalation toxicity, oncogenicity, and neurotoxicity. 
Results of these studies, published in a supplement to the Journal 
of Applied Toxicology, are a major addition to the toxicity litera-
ture on MTBE and define several NOAELs (Bevan et al., 1997a, 
1997b; Bird et al., 1997; Daughtrey et al., 1997; Lington et al., 
1997; McKee et al., 1997). Nearly two decades later, another series 
of studies was published in a supplement to Regulatory Toxicology 
and Pharmacology, the purpose of which was to determine whether 
the addition of oxygenates to gasoline increased the hazard poten-
tial of evaporative emissions (Schreiner et al., 2011; Clark et al., 
2014; Gray et al., 2014; O’Callaghan et al., 2014; Roberts et al., 
2014a, 2014b; White et al., 2014). This latest series not only exam-
ined MTBE as a gasoline additive, but also several other ether and 
alcohol oxygenates.
The publication of Bird et al. (1997) in the first series men-
tioned above is actually a recapitulation of reports by Chun et al. 
(1992) and Burleigh-Flayer et al. (1992), two of only three MTBE 
inhalation cancer bioassays. These bioassays exposed male and 
female F344 rats and CD-1 mice to MTBE vapor, whereas a third 
inhalation study exposed male and female F344 rats to gasoline 
vapor condensate containing MTBE (Benson et al., 2011). The 
results of two oral chronic bioassays have been published, the first 
being that of Belpoggi et al. (1995, 1997) who dosed male and 
female Sprague–Dawley rats with MTBE in an olive oil vehicle 
by gavage. The other oral study is that of Dodd et al. (2013) in 
which Wistar rats of both sexes were exposed to MTBE in drinking 
water for 2 years. The results of the five pure- and mixed-­exposure 
MTBE animal cancer bioassays are presented in Table 24-4. In 
addition, Cirvello et al. (1995) and NTP (1995) have reported some 
evidence for the carcinogenicity of TBA in the kidney and thyroid 
after long-term drinking water exposure. Taken at face value, one 
might interpret these cancer bioassay findings as ample evidence 
of carcinogenicity in animals and suggestive of a cancer risk for 
humans. The relevance of these findings to humans, however, has 
been a source of debate among toxicologists. Critics have ques-
tioned these studies on the basis of (1) the appropriateness of a 
combined incidence category for leukemias and lymphomas; 
Table 24-4  
Summary Results of MTBE Cancer Bioassays
AUTHORS
ANIMAL 
STRAIN/
SPECIES
EXPOSURE 
ROUTE
POSITIVE 
RESULTS
Chun et al. 
(1992)
Fischer 344 
rats
Inhalation
Kidney and 
testicular tu-
mors (males)
Burleigh-
Flayer et al. 
(1992)
CD-1 mice
Inhalation
Liver ad-
enomas (fe-
males)
Belpoggi 
et al. (1995)
Sprague–
Dawley rats
Oral gavage
Testicular tu-
mors (males) 
Leukemia + 
lymphoma 
(females)
Dodd et al. 
(2013)
Wistar rats
Drinking 
Water
None
Benson et al. 
(2011)
Fischer 344 
rats
Inhalation*
None**
* Exposure was to gasoline vapor condensate with a relative concentra-
tion of MTBE of 21.3%
** MTBE failed to clearly enhance the production of any proliferative 
lesion type

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1221
(2) the possibility that renal tumors were secondary to male rat-
specific α2u-globulin nephropathy; (3) the possibility that Leydig 
cell tumors were a function of abnormally low testicular tumor rates 
in control animals or increased survival time of treated rats; (4) the 
questionable relevance of testicular tumors in rats to humans, given 
the species’ differential responses of Leydig cells to proliferative 
stimuli; (5) the possibility that liver and kidney tumors are the result 
of high-dose-induced chronic cytotoxicity, cell death, and repara-
tive cell proliferation; (6) the questionable relevance of inhalation 
bioassays to prediction of drinking water risks; (7) the use of an 
oil rather than water dosing vehicle, which could unduly influence 
MTBE’s oral TK; (8) the incidence of brain astrocytomas falling 
within historical control ranges for Wistar rats; and (9) relative to 
humans, the increased susceptibility of the rodent to thyroid gland 
neoplasia when secondary to thyroid dysfunction. Mennear (1997) 
and McGregor (2006) have discussed a number of these issues. In 
addition, a review of MTBE’s mode of action for cancer endpoints 
in rodents led Cruzan et al. (2007) to conclude that the weight of 
the evidence supported a non-genotoxic mode of action and com-
paratively less risk to humans, if any, for tumorigenic responses. 
In contrast, Mehlman (2002) has argued that NTP’s failure to list 
MTBE in its 9th Report on Carcinogens and in so doing, acknowl-
edge it as a probable human carcinogen, “… did a disservice to the 
general public.” More recently, Bogen and Heilman (2015) have 
reassessed MTBE’s cancer potency in light of new data on MTBE 
and metabolite tumorigenicity, genotoxicity, and cytotoxicity. They 
note that of 53 genotoxicity tests performed for MTBE, there is 
not a single unequivocally positive test result. Accordingly, they 
have concluded that MTBE is unlikely to increase cancer risk unless 
chronic exposures are sufficient to induce target tissue toxicity. 
They nonetheless derived a cancer potency estimate of 1.8 x 10−5 
(mg/kg/day)−1 based on a hypothetical linear risk and genotoxic 
mode of action, on which basis they concluded that if MTBE is 
carcinogenic to humans, it is among the weakest 10% of chemical 
carcinogens evaluated by EPA.
As an outgrowth of the uncertainties surrounding MTBE’s 
human carcinogenicity risk, several mechanistic studies have been 
published. For example, after only 10 days of MTBE inhalation 
exposure, a strong positive linear relationship between renal α2u-
globulin concentration and cell proliferation was seen in the male 
F344 rat (Prescott-Matthews et al., 1997). This study, unlike the 
chronic bioassay of Chun et al. (1992), definitively identified the 
accumulating protein as α2u-globulin. Williams and Borghoff (2001) 
have shown that TBA interacts with α2u-globulin, which explains its 
accumulation in the male rat kidney following MTBE or TBA expo-
sure. MTBE has been shown to be a hepatic mitogen in the female 
mouse, but not a promoter of tumor formation in DEN-initiated 
female mouse liver (Moser et al., 1996b). It has been suggested in 
light of these findings that MTBE may promote the growth of spon-
taneously initiated cell populations having genetic lesions differ-
ent from those produced by DEN. Casanova and Heck (1997) have 
reported a lack of concentration-, species-, and sex-dependence 
in the formation of HCOH-induced DNA–­protein cross-links and 
RNA–HCOH adducts in isolated female CD-1 mouse hepatocytes 
incubated with MTBE. As the cancer bioassay data suggest that 
hepatocarcinogenicity varies with all of these factors, these results 
do not support a role for HCOH in MTBE-induced liver tumor 
formation. Studies also raise the possibility that MTBE-induced 
tumor formation might be hormonally mediated, as MTBE can 
cause endocrine dysregulation in rodents at high doses (Moser 
et al., 1998; Williams et al., 2000b). However, MTBE and TBA do 
not appear to directly impact the steroidogenic pathways involved 
in estrogen and androgen production, nor does MTBE interact with 
the hypothalamic–pituitary–gonadal axis of zebrafish or fathead 
minnows used in endocrine screening tests (de Peyster et al., 2014; 
Mihaich et al., 2015). Changes in triiodothyronine, luteinizing hor-
mone, testosterone, and estradiol levels have been discussed as pos-
sible mechanisms of MTBE-induced Leydig cell cancer (Williams 
and Borghoff, 2000; Williams et al., 2000b; de Peyster et al., 2003).
While several mechanistic issues surrounding MTBE’s tox-
icity have yet to be resolved, there is no evidence that MTBE-
oxygenated gasoline ever posed an imminent threat to public health. 
EPA’s Office of Water has concluded that available data are inad-
equate to estimate potential health risks of MTBE at low exposure 
levels in drinking water, and the Agency’s IRIS Database remains 
devoid of an RfD or cancer potency estimate. Fortunately, water 
containing MTBE has an unpleasant taste and odor, which may 
alert consumers to the fact that their water is contaminated. Based 
on the results of studies of taste and odor thresholds for humans, 
an advisory guidance range of 20 to 40 μg/L has been set by the 
EPA to assure consumer acceptance and provide a large margin of 
safety from toxicity and carcinogenicity. While no national stan-
dard exists, MTBE is a regulated drinking water contaminant in 
California that adopted a primary MCL of 13 μg/L correspond-
ing to the de minimis cancer risk derived from animal studies. 
Additionally, California established a secondary MCL of 5 μg/L 
to address taste and odor concerns. Whether the suspension of 
MTBE’s use in reformulated gasoline was a prudent public health 
measure depends in part on the risks associated with increased auto 
emissions and ozone formation. Two articles that discuss this sub-
ject in considerable detail are those by Spitzer (1997) and Erdal 
et al. (1997). In the United States, there was a time when 85% of 
reformulated gasoline contained MTBE—now gasoline blended 
with 10% ethanol accounts for 95% of the fuel consumed in motor 
vehicles with gasoline engines. Other ether and alcohol oxygenates 
are used more sparingly, with ethyl tertiary-butyl ether (ETBE) and 
to a lesser extent, tertiary-amyl methyl ether (TAME), receiving 
the most scrutiny from a toxicological standpoint. The carcinogenic 
potential of ETBE has been examined in two bioassays in F344 
rats, with no carcinogenic effect when given in drinking water, but 
hepatocellular adenomas in males upon inhalation (Suzuki et al., 
2012; Saito et al., 2013). Like MTBE, ETBE does not appear to be 
genotoxic and experimental evidence supports a mechanism involv-
ing hepatocyte oxidative stress and subsequent regenerative cell 
proliferation (Kakehashi et al., 2013). In addition, ETBE delivered 
by gavage to F344 rats has shown the ability for multi-organ tumor 
promotion (Hagiwara et al., 2011). As he did for MTBE, McGregor 
(2007) has reviewed the toxicity of ETBE.
Jet Fuel
Jet A, jet propellant-5 (JP-5), and JP-8 are the predominant jet fuels 
in use today. All are kerosene-like mixtures of hundreds of aliphatic 
and aromatic hydrocarbons. Jet A is commercial aviation fuel, JP-5 
is used primarily for Navy shipboard aircraft, and JP-8 is the bat-
tlefield fuel for all NATO forces and is used not only for aircraft, 
but also for ground vehicles and other equipment such as genera-
tors, cooking stoves, and tent heaters (NAS, 2003). These jet fuels 
differ slightly in hydrocarbon composition and/or additives with 
such differences intended to impart added safety, enhance combat 
aircraft survivability, and simplify battlefield logistics. Currently, 
some military units within the contiguous United States are con-
verting from JP-8 to JAA (i.e., Jet A with an additive package) in 
an effort to reduce fuel cost and simplify the logistics of obtaining

1222
Toxic Agents
unit V
fuel. There is also a move afoot to alleviate dependence on petro-
leum-based jet fuel by using synthetic versions produced from coal 
or natural gas or a blend of synthetic and petroleum-based fuels.
JP-8 is thought to be the largest toxicant exposure for the U.S. 
Armed Forces and commercial aviation fuel among the most com-
mon sources of nonmilitary occupational chemical exposure. As 
such, the Department of Defense (DoD) has a vested interest in jet 
fuel toxicology, for which it has sponsored research for decades. 
These research efforts have been summarized in book form (Witten 
et al., 2011). Civilian and military personnel are exposed to jet fuel 
by inhalation and dermal contact. Exposure can occur to liquid, 
vapor, or aerosol, each phase having a distinct composition and tox-
icity profile. Exposure is prevalent in aircraft refueling and main-
tenance operations and ground crews positioned behind jet aircraft 
during “cold starts” can become “drenched” in aerosol emissions. 
Jet fuel can be released into the environment by in-flight jettisoning 
and spills or leaks to soil or water during use, storage, or transporta-
tion. In many cases, DoD is responsible for the cost of remediating 
contaminated military sites and contractor facilities, not to mention 
its responsibility to safeguard the health of military personnel. For 
this purpose, the U.S. military has adopted an 8-hour TWA PEL 
and 15-min STEL of 200 and 1000 mg/m3, respectively, applicable 
to JP-5 and JP-8. Additionally, the National Advisory Committee 
on Acute Exposure Guideline Levels (AEGLs) has established 
AEGL1 and AEGL2 values for emergency response purposes in 
the event of an accidental or intentional release of JP-5 or JP-8 
(NRC, 2011). Given the difficulty in measuring jet fuel exposure 
via the inhalation and dermal routes, considerable effort has gone 
into identifying biomarkers of JP-8 exposure using U.S. Air Force 
personnel as study subjects. Candidate exposure surrogates include 
urinary 1- and 2-naphthol and 2-hydroxyfluorene; blood concen-
trations of o-xylene and m/p-xylene; urinary (2-methoxyethoxy)
acetic acid, a metabolite of the anti-icing additive diethylene gly-
col monomethyl ether; and naphthyl-keratin adducts (i.e., reactive 
naphthalene metabolites bound to skin keratins) that are indicative 
of dermal exposure only (Kang-Sickel et al., 2011; B’Hymer et al., 
2012; Smith et al., 2012; Rodrigues et al., 2014; Maule et al., 2016).
The complexity of jet fuel mixtures presents multiple chal-
lenges to toxicologists and risk assessors alike. One such challenge 
is to generate experimental exposures to jet fuel that accurately 
reflect those occurring in humans, a task made more difficult by the 
need to sometimes distinguish aerosol droplets from their surround-
ing vapors. The NAS Subcommittee on JP8 has reviewed the meth-
ods used to generate exposure atmospheres in several published 
studies using aerosol/vapor mixtures and suspects JP-8 concentra-
tions may have been grossly underreported, particularly in studies 
by Witten and colleagues (NAS, 2003). Because of concerns sur-
rounding the quantitative accuracy of the exposure atmospheres, the 
NAS Subcommittee recommended an examination of the methods 
used for their characterization. To this end, Dietzel et al. (2005) 
have developed and validated a GC/MS method for JP-8, which 
was subsequently used to characterize the aerosol and vapor frac-
tions of aerosolized fuel in one of the University of Arizona-based 
inhalation chambers previously utilized by Witten and colleagues. 
Subsequent publications have detailed the development and valida-
tion of new methods to generate and evaluate jet fuel vapor and 
aerosol fractions for experimentation (Gregg et al., 2006; Martin 
et al., 2010; Tremblay et al., 2010). One application of these new 
methods came in the form of a detailed assessment of jet fuel phar-
macokinetics and use of the data to develop a PBPK model for JP-8 
and synthetic jet fuel in the rat (Martin et al., 2012).
Jet A, JP-5, and JP-8 have similar toxicity profiles, which sug-
gest their toxicities are largely a function of hydrocarbon content 
rather than additives. Toxicity data on jet fuels have been well sum-
marized (ATSDR, 1998; NAS, 2003; Ritchie et al., 2003; Mattie 
and Sterner, 2011; NRC, 2011), with most studies focusing on the 
two main portals of entry (i.e., lung and skin) and the immune sys-
tem. In subchronic and chronic rodent inhalation studies of jet fuel 
vapor, the chief findings have been renal toxicity and neoplasia in 
male rats consistent with α2u-globulin nephropathy (Mattie et al., 
1991; Bruner et al., 1993). Despite the liver, kidneys, and testes in 
humans not being considered particularly sensitive targets of jet 
fuels, proteomic analyses of these tissues have been conducted in 
male rats subchronically exposed to JP-8 vapor (Witzmann et al., 
2000a, 2000b, 2003). Similarly, gene expression in the whole brain 
of rats repeatedly exposed to JP-8 vapor has been examined (Lin 
et al., 2001a, 2004), driven largely by reports of cognitive and 
motor deficits and neurochemical changes in jet fuel–exposed 
workers and experimental animals (Baldwin et al., 2001, 2007; 
Ritchie et al., 2001; Rossi et al., 2001; Bell et al., 2005). Among 
U.S. Air Force personnel enrolled in the Occupational JP8 Exposure 
Neuroepidemiology Study (OJENES), repeated workday exposures 
to JP-8 did not result in performance deviations from reference 
ranges on most neuropsychological tasks (Proctor et al., 2011). 
Experimental studies do not support jet fuel as a teratogen or strong 
reproductive toxicant, and genotoxicity studies have been contra-
dictory. Like several aromatic hydrocarbon solvents, JP-8 expo-
sure enhances noise-induced hearing loss, apparently by causing 
the death of outer hair cells in the cochlea and suppressing central 
auditory function (Kaufman et al., 2005; Fechter et al., 2007, 2010, 
2012; Guthrie et al., 2014, 2015). Perhaps most intriguing, how-
ever, are reports that JP-8 exposure in the gestating rat is capable of 
inducing the epigenetic transgenerational inheritance of adult-onset 
diseases, including obesity and reproductive disorders in both sexes 
(Manikkam et al., 2012; Tracey et al., 2013).
Pulmonary Effects  The pulmonary effects of an aerosol/vapor 
mixture of JP-8 were initially investigated in rats with nose-only 
exposures designed to simulate military flightline exposures (Hays 
et al., 1995; Pfaff et al., 1995, 1996). Functional changes in the form 
of increases in pulmonary resistance and alveolar permeability were 
accompanied by a decrease in the concentration of the tachykinin 
Substance P (SP) in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. Pathological 
changes were observed in lower pulmonary structures including 
inflammation of the terminal bronchioles, degeneration of alveolar 
type II epithelial (AIIE) cells, and disruption of terminal bronchial 
airway epithelium. Most interestingly, the activity of neutral endo-
peptidase (NEP), an enzyme responsible for the metabolism of SP in 
the lung, was increased by exposure and a significant inverse relation-
ship between SP and NEP activity demonstrated. Thus, JP-8 appears 
to exhibit a rather novel mechanism of lung injury that involves the 
reduction or depletion of SP due to its enhanced metabolism by NEP.
Because SP participates in the maintenance of airway epithelial 
cell competency, the effect of JP-8 and n-tetradecane (C14), a primary 
constituent of JP-8, on epithelial barrier integrity was examined in 
vitro using paracellular mannitol flux in BEAS-2B human bronchial 
epithelial cells (Robledo et al., 1999). Noncytotoxic concentrations 
of JP-8 and C14 produced dose-dependent increases in transepithelial 
mannitol flux that spontaneously reversed to control values over a 
48-hour recovery period. This suggests that JP-8 and C14 compro-
mise the integrity of intercellular tight junctions that may precede 
and initiate the pathological alterations observed in whole animal 
studies. Evidence was also collected that SP’s protective effect on 
the lung is largely mediated through the plasma membrane-bound 
neurokinin receptor, NK1, present on airway epithelium from the 
trachea to the respiratory bronchioles (Robledo and Witten, 1999).

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1223
Among the most affected alveolar cells in rodent studies are 
AIIE cells. In support of the hypothesis that apoptotic cell death 
is responsible at least partially for JP-8’s cytotoxicity in the lung, 
Stoica et al. (2001) reported that JP-8 results in morphological and 
biochemical changes characteristic of apoptosis in the rat AIIE 
cell line, RLE-6TN. Further, Boulares et al. (2002) have collected 
data that strongly suggest JP-8 triggers apoptosis in rat lung epi-
thelial cells by inducing the generation of reactive oxygen species, 
depleting/reducing intracellular GSH, and markedly decreasing 
mitochondrial membrane potential, thereby initiating the apoptotic 
cascade (i.e., caspase-3 activation and DNA fragmentation).
A characteristic feature of the lung inflammatory response to 
JP-8 in rodents is vacuolization of AIIE cells and accumulation of 
pulmonary alveolar macrophages (PAM). The findings of Wang 
et al. (2002b) suggest that JP-8 causes pro-inflammatory cytokine 
secretion not only by PAM, but also AIIE cells. The prolonged pro-
duction of pro-inflammatory cytokines, together with the proteases 
produced by activated macrophages and neutrophils, is capable 
of producing a sustained immune response with increased risk 
for lung damage. Moreover, cocultures of AIIE cells and primary 
PAM indicate that the balance of cytokines released in response to 
JP-8 could possibly be regulated in vivo by cross-communication 
between the two cell types. Espinoza et al. (2005) showed that the 
JP-8-induced expression of pro-inflammatory cytokine genes in 
AIIE cells was mediated by the activation of PARP-1 (an enzyme 
coactivator of NF-κβ) and NF-κβ (a transcription factor that con-
trols the expression of a variety of genes involved in inflammatory 
responses). The release of cytokines in the lung in response to JP-8 
is similar to cytokine release from epidermal cells, which is thought 
to mediate, at least in part, the dermal and immune toxicities of JP-8 
(see below). Further insight into the pulmonary effects of jet fuel 
has come from examinations of aerosolized JP-8’s effect on gene 
and protein expression in lung cytosol and lung tissue of rats and 
mice (Witzmann et al., 1999; Drake et al., 2003; Espinoza et al., 
2005). Like its petroleum-based counterpart, the pulmonary toxic-
ity of synthetic jet fuel has been examined in nose-only exposures 
to male mice and in cultured AIIE cells of rats (Wong et al., 2009; 
Robb et al., 2010).
Immune Effects  The immune system appears to be as suscep-
tible to jet fuel as the lung, if not more so. Detrimental effects on 
the immune system of mice have been reported for aerosolized Jet 
A, JP-8, and JP-8+100 (Harris et al., 2001a). Some effects were 
apparent just 1 hour after a single inhalation exposure with con-
tinued deterioration with each successive exposure (Harris et al., 
2002). As first reported by Harris et  al. (1997a), mice exposed 
nose-only to a JP-8 aerosol/vapor mix exhibited decreased spleen 
and thymus weights and cellularities and an altered number of 
viable immune cells in lymph nodes, bone marrow, and periph-
eral blood. Depending on the immune tissue examined, different 
immune cell sub-populations were lost, including T and B cells 
and macrophages. In addition, JP-8 affected immune function as 
demonstrated by a concentration-dependent suppression of T-cell 
proliferation upon stimulation with the mitogen concanavalin A. In 
a short-term exposure study, Harris et al. (1997b) determined that 
JP-8-induced immunotoxicity persisted for at least 1 month after 
insult. These same authors later expanded the number of immune 
parameters examined and reported that aerosolized JP-8 exposure 
of mice nearly completely ablated natural killer cell function, sup-
pressed the generation of lymphokine-activated killer cell activity, 
suppressed the generation of cytotoxic T lymphocytes from precur-
sor T cells, and inhibited helper T-cell activity (Harris et al., 2000). 
As even a 1-hour exposure to aerosolized JP-8 elevated serum levels 
of interleukin-10 (IL-10) and prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), these two 
immunosuppressive cytokines should be suspected as means by 
which jet fuel can modulate immune function (Harris et al., 2007a).
Ullrich (1999) has shown that like inhalation, dermal applica-
tion of JP-8 to mice can induce immune suppression. He found 
IL-10 in the serum of JP-8 dermally treated mice and interpreted this 
as suggestive of an immune suppressive mechanism involving the 
upregulation of cytokine release. A follow-up study suggested that 
the immunosuppressive effect of dermally applied JP-8 was specific 
to cell-mediated immune reactions (i.e., T-helper cell-driven cell-
mediated immunity), as JP-8 had no effect on antibody production 
in immunized mice (Ullrich and Lyons, 2000). Ramos et al. (2002) 
have demonstrated that the dermal application of JP-8 and Jet A 
suppresses delayed-type hypersensitivity and immunologic memory 
upon rechallenge with a fungal pathogen, raising the possibility that 
jet fuel exposure is capable of depressing the protective effect of 
prior vaccination. He and his colleagues used platelet-activating 
factor (PAF) receptor antagonists to show that the PAF receptor, a 
signaling phospholipid that activates the transcription of genes for 
PGE2 and IL-10 in keratinocytes, plays a critical role in jet fuel–
induced immune suppression (Ramos et al., 2004). This, coupled 
with the demonstration that jet fuel–induced immunosuppression 
can be reversed by inhibiting prostaglandin secretion with a selec-
tive COX-2 inhibitor or injecting an anti-IL-10 antibody (Ullrich 
and Lyons, 2000), strongly supports an essential role for PGE2 and 
IL-10 in the sequence of events culminating in immunosuppres-
sion. Using synthetic jet fuel’s absence of aromatic hydrocarbons 
to their experimental advantage, Ramos et al. (2007) demonstrated 
that the aromatic hydrocarbons in JP-8 are the active agents that 
induce immune suppression. This is seemingly due to the aromatic 
fraction’s ability to produce reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the 
skin that activates NF-κβ, which in turn activates COX-2, thereby 
inducing the secretion of PGE2 (Ramos et al., 2009). Such a mode 
of action is consistent with the demonstration that functional mast 
cells and their PGE2 are essential to jet fuel immunosuppression, 
as is mast cell migration from the skin to draining lymph nodes that 
enables transmission of the immunosuppressive signal from skin 
to the immune system (Limon-Flores et al., 2009). Similar to that 
seen for pulmonary toxicity, aerosolized SP can both prevent and 
reverse some facets of JP-8-induced immunotoxicity, suggesting 
a key mechanistic role for the neuropeptide (Harris et al., 2001b, 
2007c). Also, as reported in AIIE cells, JP-8 induces apoptosis in 
primary mouse thymocytes (Stoica et al., 2001). Exposure of mice 
to JP-8 in utero is reportedly immunosuppressive, whether dams are 
exposed by gavage or aerosol inhalation (Keil et al., 2003; Harris 
et al., 2007b). Lastly, immunosuppression secondary to jet fuel 
exposure has been shown to potentiate the growth and metastasis 
of tumors in experimental animal models (Harris et al., 2007c) and 
increase the severity of viral infection and related mortality in mice 
(Harris et al., 2008).
Dermal Effects  Owing to reports of severe contact dermatitis 
among military personnel, the dermal toxicity of jet fuel has been 
the subject of intensive investigation. A recent examination of der-
mal exposure in 124 U.S. Air Force fuel-cell maintenance work-
ers, using a noninvasive tape-strip technique and naphthalene as a 
surrogate, confirmed that the skin provides a significant exposure 
route for JP-8 (Chao et al., 2005). Dermal absorption and penetra-
tion of JP-8 and its component hydrocarbons have been examined 
in vitro using dermatomed rat skin and static diffusion cells and in 
vivo in weanling pigs and humans (McDougal et al., 2000; Singh 
et al., 2003; Kim et al., 2006a). Their cutaneous toxicity has been 
explored in pigs, rats, rabbits, and in vitro using human epidermal

1224
Toxic Agents
unit V
keratinocytes (HEK) (Kabbur et al., 2001; Monteiro-Riviere et al., 
2001; Chou et al., 2003; Singh and Singh, 2004). Dermal expo-
sure to jet fuel can lead to skin irritation and sensitization and 
the disruption of skin barrier function. Research implicates cyto-
kine release, oxidative stress, and DNA damage/fragmentation as 
mechanistic underpinnings (Allen et al., 2000; Rogers et al., 2001; 
Gallucci et al., 2004). In stark contrast to traditional histopathology 
techniques, Sharma and Locke (2010) used noninvasive magnetic 
resonance microimaging as a means of skin damage assessment. 
They noted exfoliated epidermis, dermis thickening, and hair fol-
licle atrophy in nude rats sprayed with heated JP-8 vapor for 1 min-
ute and examined 24 hours later. Chronic dermal application of 
middle distillate fuels such as jet fuel can be weakly carcinogenic, 
though it has been effectively argued that such tumorigenicity is 
secondary to chronic irritation (Nessel, 1999; Nessel et al., 1999).
The ultrastructural analysis of pig skin exposed to cotton fabric 
saturated with jet fuel suggests that the primary effect of exposure 
is damage of the stratum corneum barrier (Monteiro-Riviere et al., 
2004). This same publication reported that IL-8 release from HEK 
after JP-8 exposure was decreased by SP, which is an agonist for the 
NK1 receptor present in keratinocytes and mechanistically linked 
to IL release. The attenuation of IL release in keratinocytes by SP 
and the protection SP affords against pulmonary and immunotoxic-
ity suggests that there may be a common mechanistic linkage to 
these toxicities. However, studies suggest that jet fuel–induced cell 
death in skin is via necrosis, not apoptosis as observed in some 
other cell types such as AIIE cells and T lymphocytes (Stoica et al., 
2001). This was also demonstrated by Rosenthal et al. (2001), who 
observed JP-8-induced necrotic rather than apoptotic cell death in 
mouse skin fibroblasts and HEK in culture or grafted onto nude 
mice. These authors used immunoblot analysis to determine that 
necrosis of HEK appeared to be associated with the perturbation of 
the ratio between anti- and pro-survival members of the Bcl-2 fam-
ily of proteins (i.e., the toxic, higher level of JP-8 decreased levels 
of the pro-survival proteins Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL, while simultaneously 
elevating levels of the anti-survival proteins Bad and Bak). This led 
to the suggestion that high intrinsic levels of Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL may 
prevent apoptotic death of keratinocytes at low concentrations of 
JP-8, whereas modulation of Bcl-2 family members by high doses 
may lead to necrotic cell death.
As the skin allows for the selective absorption and penetration 
of various jet fuel components, one cannot assume that the internal 
or target tissue dose of chemical is qualitatively or quantitatively the 
same as that of the external dose (McDougal and Robinson, 2002). 
This has led to efforts to identify the offending components of jet 
fuel mixtures. Using static diffusion cells, McDougal et al. (2000) 
identified 12 components of JP-8 that fully penetrated rat skin and 
six components, all aliphatic hydrocarbons, which were partially 
absorbed or retained by the skin. This led these researchers to spec-
ulate that the aliphatic components of jet fuel may be the cause 
of skin irritation. Allen et al. (2001) exposed HEK to micromolar 
concentrations of four aliphatic hydrocarbon components of jet fuel 
and found that they all induced IL-8 release at subtoxic doses, fur-
ther implicating aliphatic components. However, Chou et al. (2002) 
exposed HEK to 10 aliphatic jet fuel hydrocarbons (C6–C16) and 
found that the higher cytotoxicity of the shorter chain aliphatics did 
not correlate with their ability to induce IL-8 release, which peaked 
at mid-chain lengths (i.e., C9–C13). The toxicological interactions 
of jet fuel’s aromatic and aliphatic components on HEK cells have 
also been explored (Yang et al., 2006). The cytotoxicity and IL-8 
release from these “mixed” hydrocarbon exposures were not always 
predictable based on the cytotoxic and IL-8 profiles of individual 
components. Muhammad et al. (2005) exposed pigs topically to 
cotton fabric soaked with one of eight aliphatic hydrocarbons or one 
of six aromatic hydrocarbons and monitored skin irritation. Based 
on these data, coupled with data on IL-8 release, in vitro absorp-
tion and cytotoxicity, they postulate that tridecane and tetradecane 
may be the two most important hydrocarbons responsible for jet 
fuel–induced skin irritation. Jet fuel exemplifies the difficulty of 
accurately predicting the dermal risk posed by a complex mixture 
based on limited knowledge of a few individual components. Aside 
from the skin as a target tissue, dermal exposure to JP-8 may result 
in systemic levels of hydrocarbons, the prediction of which may 
aid in risk assessment. Toward this end, Kim et al. (2006b) pub-
lished a dermatotoxicokinetic model of the skin that quantitatively 
characterized the TK of three aromatic and three aliphatic jet fuel 
components following application of a single dose of JP-8 to the 
forearm of human volunteers (Kim et al., 2006a). This model was 
subsequently expanded to include an inhalation component and 
exercised to describe the relative contribution of dermal and inhala-
tion exposures to the end-exhaled air concentrations of naphthalene 
among JP-8 exposed U.S. Air Force personnel. The median relative 
contribution of dermal exposure to the end-exhaled breath concen-
tration of naphthalene was 4% (10th percentile 1% and 90th percen-
tile 11%) (Kim et al., 2007). As in lung tissue and lung cytosol of 
rodents, the capacity of JP-8 to alter gene or protein expression in 
HEK and rat epidermis has been examined (Espinoza et al., 2004; 
Witzmann et al., 2005; Chou et al., 2006; McDougal et al., 2007).
CARBON DISULFIDE
The toxicity of carbon disulfide (CS2) was first recognized during 
the nineteenth century, when it was widely employed as a solvent 
to soften rubber. CS2 is among the current 187 chemicals regulated 
under the Clean Air Act because of reported high emissions and 
the potential for human exposure and serious health effects. The 
major uses of CS2 are in the production of rayon fiber, cellophane, 
and CCl4 and as a solubilizer for waxes and oils (ATSDR, 1996a). 
Historically, exposures were particularly high during the early 
period of rayon production, and studies of these workers have been 
very informative as to CS2’s toxicity. Human exposure is predomi-
nantly occupational, although CS2 has been identified in at least 200 
current or former EPA National Priority List hazardous waste sites 
(ATSDR, 1996a). Most industrial releases are to the atmosphere. 
The general public may be subjected to low vapor levels as dem-
onstrated by detection of CS2 in samples of breath and indoor and 
outdoor air surveyed in and around New York City (Phillips, 1992). 
Exposure to dithiocarbamate pesticides and drugs (e.g., the alcohol 
aversion drug, disulfiram) can result in indirect exposure to CS2, as 
it is a product of their metabolism. However, there is evidence that 
the metabolic production of CS2 is not a unifying explanation for 
the neuropathies frequently associated with dithiocarbamate expo-
sure (Tonkin et al., 2000; Mulkey, 2001).
The relative contributions of parent compound and metabolites 
to most CS2-induced toxicities are unknown. Two distinct metabolic 
pathways for CS2 exist: (1) the direct interaction of CS2 with free 
amine and sulfhydryl groups of amino acids and polypeptides to 
form dithiocarbamates and trithiocarbonates; and (2) microsomal 
metabolism of CS2 to reactive sulfur intermediates capable of 
covalently binding tissue macromolecules (Graham et al., 1995) 
(Fig. 24-13). The conjugation of CS2 with sulfhydryls of cysteine 
or glutathione (GSH) results in the formation of 2-thiothiazolidine-
4-carboxylic acid (TTCA), which is excreted in urine and has been 
frequently used as a biomarker of CS2 exposure, especially among 
viscose rayon workers (Riihimaki et al., 1992; Lee et al., 1995). 
Several limitations of TTCA as a biomarker have been noted, and

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1225
covalently cross-linked erythrocyte spectrin and hemoglobin have 
been discussed as potential alternatives (Valentine et al., 1993, 
1998). Nonetheless, the current ACGIH Biological Exposure Index 
(BEI) for CS2 is 0.5 mg of TTCA per g of creatinine for a urine 
sample collected at the end of a workshift (ACGIH, 2011).
A few comprehensive reviews of CS2’s toxicity have been 
published (Beauchamp et al., 1983; ATSDR, 1996a; WHO, 2002; 
Gelbke et al., 2009). CS2 is capable of targeting multiple organ 
systems including the cardiovascular system, central and periph-
eral nervous systems, male and female reproductive systems, eyes 
(retinal angiopathy and impairment of color vision), and ears (hear-
ing loss). CS2 toxicity requires frequent and prolonged exposures 
in occupational settings. The nervous and cardiovascular systems 
have garnered the most attention. The most common neurotoxic 
effect is a distal sensorimotor neuropathy that preferentially affects 
long axons in the PNS and CNS (particularly the ascending and 
descending tracks of the spinal cord and the visual pathways). 
Encephalopathy with motor and cognitive impairment has also been 
reported following chronic, low-level exposure to CS2 (Graham 
et  al., 1995). Several MRI studies report diffuse white matter 
lesions in chronically exposed workers similar to that described 
for “toluene leukoencephalopathy” among solvent abusers (Cho 
et al., 2002; Ku et al., 2003). For those particularly interested in the 
nervous system, the classic paper by Richter (1945) detailing his 
observations of chronic CS2 poisoning in monkeys is recommended. 
Rosenberg (1995) described the following clinical syndromes asso-
ciated with CS2: (1) acute and chronic encephalopathy (often with 
prominent psychiatric manifestations); (2) polyneuropathy (both 
peripheral and cranial); (3) Parkinsonism; and (4) asymptomatic 
CNS and PNS dysfunction. Pathologic changes occur in both the 
CNS and PNS. CNS pathology consists of neuronal degeneration 
throughout the cerebral hemispheres, with maximal diffuse involve-
ment in the frontal regions. Cell loss is also noted in the globus 
pallidus, putamen and cerebellar cortex, with loss of Purkinje cells. 
Vascular abnormalities with endothelial proliferation of arterioles 
may be seen, sometimes associated with focal necrosis or demy-
elination. PNS changes consist primarily of myelin swelling and 
fragmentation and large focal axonal swellings, characteristic of 
distal axonopathy.
Significant contributions to the understanding of CS2’s neu-
rotoxicity have come from collaborative research by the NIEHS, 
EPA, and several universities (Harry et al., 1998; Sills et al., 2005). 
Studies were conducted with F344 rats subchronically exposed to a 
range of CS2 concentrations, in order to define the onset and tempo-
ral progression of neurotoxicity as manifest by multiple endpoints. 
These specific endpoints included toxicokinetic (TK) changes in 
blood CS2 levels and urinary TTCA, covalent cross-linking of 
blood and spinal cord proteins, alterations in axon/Schwann cell 
interactions as indicated by nerve growth factor mRNA expres-
sion, morphology of distal axonopathy, nerve conduction velocity 
and action potential, and behavioral assessment using a Functional 
Observational Battery. This research showed sensitive endpoints at 
the cellular level that progressed to alterations in hindlimb and fore-
limb function, followed by electrophysiological and morphological 
changes. The TK data provided useful information about internal 
exposure to CS2, but its use in the prediction of biological effects 
was limited (Moorman et al., 1998). The collaborative efforts sup-
port the theory that the axonal degeneration that underlies CS2’s 
central–peripheral neuropathy results from the reaction of CS2 
(and perhaps carbonyl sulfide [COS]) with protein amino groups 
to yield initial adducts (dithiocarbamate derivatives). The adducts 
decompose to an electrophile (isothiocyanate for CS2 and isocya-
nate for COS), which in turn reacts with protein nucleophiles on 
neurofilaments to cause covalent protein cross-linking. Progressive 
cross-linking of neurofilaments occurs during neurofilament 
transport along the axon, and covalently cross-linked masses of 
Dithiocarbamate
Trithiocarbonate
TTCA
CH2
CO2
CH
NH
S
C
HS
S
–
CH2
CO2
CH
NH3
HS
–
+
S
C
S
S
S
C
S
MFO
S
C
O
OH
SH
O
C
O
O
–
–
CO2
–
Dithiocarbamates
S
C
S
NH
CO2
CH
R
–
–
S
C
S
CH2
CO2
CH
NH3
S
–
–
+
NH3
CO2
CH
R
–
+
+
S
S
NH
–
O
S
S
NH
R
–
Figure 24-13.   Metabolism of carbon disulfide (CS2). CS2 is metabolized by the mixed-function oxidase (MFO) system to carbonyl sulfide, atomic sulfur, and 
HS–. Reaction of CS2 with sulfhydryls of cysteine or GSH yields trithiocarbonates, which can cyclize to form thiazolidine-2-thione-4-carboxylic acid (TTCA). 
Reaction of CS2 with amino groups of amino acids results in dithiocarbamate derivatives, which can cyclize to yield 2-thio-5-thiazolidinones; reaction of 
cysteine amine could also produce TTCA. CS2 is also metabolized in the liver by P450s to an unstable oxygen intermediate, which spontaneously generates 
atomic sulfur, carbonyl sulfide (COS), and CO2. (Reproduced with permission of Graham et al., 1995.)

1226
Toxic Agents
unit V
neurofilaments are thought to occlude axonal transport at the nodes 
of Ranvier, ultimately resulting in axonal swelling and degeneration 
(similar to that seen with 2,5-hexanedione). It should be noted that 
several other mechanisms for the disruption of neurofilament trans-
port that underlie CS2’s axonopathy have been proposed including: 
impaired energy metabolism, metal ion chelation by CS2’s dithio-
carbamate derivatives, induction of vitamin deficiency, disruption 
of cytoskeletal protein association by the increased phosphoryla-
tion of neurofilaments, changes in neurofilament content due to an 
imbalance of neurofilament synthesis and degradation by activated 
calpains, and production of reactive oxygen species and enhanced 
lipid peroxidation (Wilmarth et al., 1993; Graham et al., 1995; Song 
et al., 2009; Sun et al., 2009).
One of the potentially more important outcomes of the col-
laborative research effort described above was the identification of 
thiourea cross-linking structures on erythrocyte spectrin and hemo-
globin. This cross-linking exhibited a linear dose–response over the 
range of inhaled CS2 concentrations examined, was detectable at 
subneurotoxic exposure levels, preceded axonal structural damage, 
and was positively correlated with neurofilament cross-linking (i.e., 
spectrin and hemoglobin cross-linking reflect neurofilament cross-
linking). These findings suggest the utility of spectrin and hemoglo-
bin cross-linking as sensitive biomarkers of exposure and effect, and 
potential alternatives or supplements to TTCA that was found to lack 
dose proportionality in the same studies (Valentine et al., 1997, 1998; 
Moorman et al., 1998). More recently, Chinese researchers collected 
serum from CS2-exposed workers with damaged nerve fibers and 
surveyed it for aberrantly expressed microRNAs (miRNAs) com-
pared to control serum (first reported in mammalian systems in 2001, 
miRNAs are noncoding RNAs that usually act as gene silencers and 
influence a wide range of biological processes). Two miRNAs were 
identified, miR-150 and miR-30a, both of which were upregulated 
and capable of discerning damaged nerve fiber cases from controls. 
These and other miRNAs appear to hold promise as noninvasive bio-
markers for a damaged nervous system (Guo et al., 2015).
Numerous worker studies support an association between CS2 
exposure and cardiovascular disease and related mortality. Elevated 
mortality from cardiovascular disease has been reported among vis-
cose rayon workers in Finland, the United Kingdom, the United 
States, Scandinavia, and Poland (WHO, 2002). Viscose rayon 
worker studies reporting excess cardiovascular morbidity expand 
the range to Germany (Drexler et al., 1996) and Japan (Takebayashi 
et al., 2004). Further support for a CS2–cardiovascular disease link 
comes from examination of cardiovascular disease risk factors 
in workers, and to a lesser extent experimental rodent studies. In 
workers, CS2 exposure has been associated with elevations in blood 
pressure, total and LDL cholesterol, triglycerides, apolipoproteins, 
and lipid peroxidation in plasma, as well as reductions in HDL and 
antioxidant status (Vanhoorne et al., 1992; Wronska-Nofer et al., 
2002; Luo et al., 2003). Wronska-Nofer (1979) conducted studies in 
rats supporting a role for CS2 in the elevation of blood cholesterol, 
whereas Lewis et al. (1999) found that exposure to as little as 50 
ppm CS2 significantly enhanced the rate of arterial fat deposition in 
mice placed on a Western style, high-fat diet. Sulsky et al. (2002) 
have reviewed 37 studies addressing the CS2–cardiovascular dis-
ease association and concluded that epidemiological evidence for 
an association was “mixed,” with an effect on total and/or LDL 
cholesterol being the most consistent finding but of limited mag-
nitude and uncertain clinical significance. Tan et al. (2002) con-
ducted a meta-analysis of 11 cohort studies on CS2’s cardiovascular 
effects that showed a small, but significant, correlation between 
CS2 exposure and cardiovascular disease prevalence (pooled RR = 
1.56; 95% CI = 1.12 to 2.1). More recently, a cross-sectional study 
of 290 exposed and 137 nonexposed German workers in a rayon 
manufacturing plant reported increased intima-media thickness (an 
established marker of atherosclerosis and a reasonable surrogate 
marker of cardiovascular risk) among those with long-term expo-
sures to high CS2 levels. However, it was noted that no significant 
changes in intima-media thickness were found in the group of 
workers whose exposure never exceeded 10 ppm (Schramm et al., 
2016). This is in agreement with another study of German viscose 
workers that examined an array of biomarkers of cardiovascular risk 
where average CS2 exposure was less than 5 ppm (Domergue et al., 
2016). No associations between long-term or recent CS2 exposure 
and cardiovascular risk parameters were detected. Taken together, 
studies suggest that CS2 has the ability to accelerate atherosclerosis, 
provided an exposure threshold is exceeded. Further, some have 
speculated that like neurotoxicity, protein cross-linking may also be 
involved in CS2’s promotion of the atherosclerotic process (Lewis 
et al., 1999).
Price et al. (1997) pointed out that the cardiovascular mortality 
excesses seen in most published studies were among workers chron-
ically exposed to high concentrations that no longer are observed 
in the workplace. These authors reviewed historical exposure and 
mortality data in the viscose rayon industry and estimated that 
chronic exposures of 15 to 20 ppm would not be associated with an 
increased risk of mortality due to ischemic heart disease. They were 
also instrumental in applying the benchmark dose method toward 
the establishment of EPA’s RfC for CS2 of 0.7 mg/m3 (about 0.22 
ppm), that is based on reduced maximum motor conduction velocity 
in the peroneal nerves of the NIOSH cohort of viscose rayon work-
ers reported by Johnson et al., 1983; Price et al., 1996; EPA, 2006d. 
For the protection of workers, OSHA has established a permissible 
exposure limit (PEL) of 20 ppm as an 8-hour TWA, a 30 ppm ceil-
ing for 30 minutes, and a 100 ppm peak. The ACGIH TLV, as an 
8-hour TWA, was reduced from 10 to 1 ppm in 2006, based on neu-
rologic endpoints. As a result, the ACGIH also reduced CS2’s BEI 
from 5 to 0.5 mg TTCA/g creatinine in 2009. Gelbke et al. (2009) 
reviewed the health effects of CS2 in the viscose industry and con-
cluded that while some uncertainties exist, available data generally 
support an occupational exposure limit of 10 ppm.
One of the uncertainties surrounding Gelbke et al.’s (2009) 
general support of an occupationoral exposure limit of 10 ppm 
involved the reproductive capacity of female workers. Menstrual 
disorders, spontaneous abortion, premature birth, and extended 
time to pregnancy have been reported among workers, with recently 
published mouse studies shedding light on potential mechanisms. 
For example, CS2 administered to gestating mice resulted in DNA 
damage and apoptosis of endometrial cells (with upregulation of 
Bax and caspase-3 genes and downregulation of the Bcl-2 gene in 
uterine tissue), dramatic elevations in uterine tissue of 8-OH-dG 
(a biomarker of oxidative DNA damage), and a reduction in the 
number of implanted blastocysts (Zhang et al., 2013; Yang et al., 
2014). In addition, gestational exposure to CS2 was shown to disrupt 
murine embryo implantation by decreasing the uterine expression 
of the cell adhesion molecule known as integrin β3, a biomarker 
of uterine receptivity in humans as well (Sun et al., 2013). These 
same researchers later reported the ability of CS2 to decrease the 
sex steroid hormones, progesterone and estrogen, and in turn down-
regulate the cell adhesion protein and mRNA of leukemia inhibi-
tory factor (LIF) in maternal uterine tissue (Wang et al., 2015). Not 
only do progesterone and estrogen stimulate LIF synthesis from 
endometrial epithelial cells, but LIF serves as an upstream regula-
tory protein of integrin β3, potentially explaining integrin β3’s loss 
and embryo implantation failure. The possibility also exists that 
CS2’s reproductive toxicity may be male-mediated in some cases,

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1227
as suggested by the health histories of 100 male viscose rayon 
workers employed 10 years prior to study, all of whom were asked 
about occurrences of spontaneous abortion and fetal deaths (Patel 
et al., 2004). This “epidemiological” study reported an incidence of 
miscarriage of 5.71% among workers exposed to 1.695 ppm CS2 
on average compared to 18.91% among those exposed to an aver-
age concentration of 12.28 ppm. CS2 has been reported to result 
in testicular atrophy and reduced sperm count, with two recent rat 
studies elucidating possible mechanisms. Both exposed male rats to 
CS2 via inhalation, with the first implicating reduced nitric oxide (a 
second messenger in the reproductive system) levels in serum and 
tissues of the hypothalamic–pituitary–gonadal axis in decreases in 
sex hormones and sperm quantity and quality (Huang et al., 2012). 
The second study reported CS2-induced apoptosis in testicular germ 
cells and a role for the mitochondrial membrane permeability tran-
sition in the cell death (Guo et al., 2014).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The editor and authors recognize the contributions of previous 
authors of this chapter: Herbert H. Cornish (1st and 2nd editions), 
and Robert Snyder and Larry S. Andrews (4th and 5th editions).
REFERENCES
Abbassi R, Chamkhia N, Sakly M. Chloroform-induced oxidative 
stress in rat liver: implication of metallothionein. Toxicol Ind Health. 
2010;26:487–496.
Abbate C, Giorgianni C, Munao F, Brecciaroli R. Neurotoxicity induced 
by exposure to toluene. An electropyhysiologic study. Int Arch Occup 
Environ Health. 1993;64:389–392.
ACGIH (American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists). 
Threshold Limit Values (TLVs) and Biological Exposure Indices (BEIs). 
Cincinnati, OH, 2011. Available at: www.acgih.org.
Adachi J, Asano M, Ueno Y, et al. Alcoholic muscle disease and biomem-
brane perturbations. Nutr Biochem. 2003;14:616–625.
Aggazzotti G, Fantuzzi G, Righi E, Predieri G. Environmental and biologi-
cal monitoring of chloroform in indoor swimming pools. J Chromatogr 
A. 1995;710:181–190.
Ahmed FE. Toxicological effects of ethanol on human health. Crit Rev 
Toxicol. 1995;25:347–367.
Albano E, French SW, Ingelman-Sundberg M. Hydroxyethyl radicals in 
ethanol hepatotoxicity. Front Biosci. 1999;4:533–540.
Albers JW, Wald JJ, Garabrant DH, et al. Neurologic evaluation of workers 
previously diagnosed with solvent-induced toxic encephalopathy. JOEM. 
2000;42:410–423.
Albers JW, Wald JJ, Trask CL, et  al. Evaluation of blink reflex results 
obtained from workers previously diagnosed with solvent-induced toxic 
encephalopathy. JOEM. 2001;43:713–722.
Albers JW, Wald JJ, Werner RA, et al. Absence of polyneuropathy among 
workers previously diagnosed with solvent-induced toxic encephalopa-
thy. JOEM. 1999;41:500–509.
Aleksunes LM, Slitt AM, Cherrington NJ, et al. Differential expression of 
mouse hepatic transporter genes in response to acetaminophen and car-
bon tetrachloride. Toxicol Sci. 2005;83:44–52.
Alexander DD, Kelsh MA, Mink PJ. A meta-analysis of occupational 
trichloroethylene exposure and liver cancer. Int Arch Occup Environ 
Health. 2007;81: 127–143.
Alexander DD, Mink PJ, Mandel JH, Kelsh MA. A meta-analysis of occu-
pational trichloroethylene exposure and multiple myeloma or leukemia. 
Occup Med. 2006;56:485–493.
Alfred S, Coleman P, Harris D, et al. Delayed neurologic sequelae resulting 
from epidemic diethylene glycol poisoning. Clin Toxicol. 2005;43:155–159.
Allen DG, Riviere JE, Monteiro-Riviere NA. Identification of early bio-
markers of inflammation produced by keratinocytes exposed to jet fuels 
jet A, JP-8, and JP-8 (100). J Biochem Mol Toxicol. 2000;14:231–237.
Allen DG, Riviere JE, Monteiro-Riviere NA. Analysis of interleukin-8 
release from normal human epidermal keratinocytes exposed to aliphatic 
hydrocarbons: delivery of hydrocarbons to cell cultures via complexation 
with α-cyclodextrin. Toxicol in Vitro. 2001;15:663–669.
Almekinder JL, Lennard DE, Walmer DK, et al. Toxicity of methoxyacetic acid 
in cultured human luteal cells. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1997;38:191–194.
Ambroso JL, Stedman DB, Elswick BA, Welsch F. Characterization of cell 
death induced by 2-methoxyethanol in CD-1 mouse embryos on gesta-
tion day 8. Teratology. 1998;58:231–240.
Anand SS, Kim K-B, Padilla S, et  al. Ontogeny of hepatic and plasma 
metabolism of deltamethrin in vitro: Role in age-dependent acute neuro-
toxicity. Drug Metab Dispos. 2006a;34:389–397.
Anand SS, Mumtaz MM, Mehendale HM: Dose-dependent liver regenera-
tion in chloroform, trichloroethylene and allyl alcohol ternary mixture 
hepatotoxicity in rats. Arch Toxicol. 2005;79:671–682.
Anand SS, Philip BK, Palkar PS, et al. Adaptive tolerance in mice upon sub-
chronic exposure to chloroform: Increased exhalation and target tissue 
regeneration. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2006b;213:267–281.
Anand SS, Soni MG, Vaidya VS, et al. Extent and timeliness of tissue repair 
determines the dose-related hepatotoxicity of chloroform. Int J Toxicol. 
2003;22:25–33.
Andersen ME. A physiologically based toxicokinetic description of the 
metabolism of inhaled gases and vapors: analysis at steady state. Toxicol 
Appl Pharmacol. 1981;60:509–526.
Andersen ME. Toxicokinetic modeling and its applications in chemical risk 
assessment. Toxicol Lett. 2003;138:9–27.
Andersen ME, Clewell HJ III, Gargas ML, et  al. Physiologically based 
pharmacokinetics and the risk assessment process for methylene chlo-
ride. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1987;87:185–205.
Andreoli C, Leopardi P, Crebelli R. Detection of DNA damage in human 
lymphocytes by alkaline single cell gel electrophoresis after exposure to 
benzene or benzene metabolites. Mutat Res. 1997;377:95–104.
Angelo MJ, Pritchard AB, Hawkins DR, et al. The pharmacokinetics of 
dichloromethane. II. Disposition in Fischer 344 rats following intrave-
nous and oral administration. Food Chem Toxicol. 1986;24:975–980.
Araki A, Kamigaito N, Sasaki T, Matsushima T. Mutagenicity of carbon 
tetrachloride and chloroform in Salmonella typhimurium. TA 98, TA 100, 
TA 1535, and TA 1537, and Escherichia coli WP2uvrA/pKM101 and 
WP2/pKM101, using a gas exposure method. Environ Mol Mutagen. 
2004;43: 128–133.
Aranyi C, O’Shea WJ, Halder CA, et al. Absence of hydrocarbon-induced 
nephropathy in rats exposed subchronically to volatile hydrocarbon mix-
tures pertinent to gasoline. Toxicol Ind Health. 1986;2:85–98.
Arbuckle TE. Are there sex and gender differences in acute exposure to 
chemicals in the same setting? Environ Res. 2006;101:195–204.
Arlien-Soborg P. Solvent Neurotoxicity. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 1992.
Arlien-Soborg P, Bruhn P, Gyldensted P, Melgaard B. Chronic painters’ 
syndrome: chronic toxic encephalopathy in house painters. Acta Neurol 
Scand. 1979;60:149–156.
Ashley DL, Bonin MA, Cardinali FL, et al. Blood concentrations of volatile 
organic compounds in a nonoccupationally exposed US population and 
in groups with suspected exposure. Clin Chem. 1994;40:1401–1404.
Asselman M, Verhulst A, de Broe ME, Verkoelen CF. Calcium oxalate 
crystal adherence to hyaluronan-, osteopontin-, and CD44-expressing 
injured/regenerating tubular epithelial cells in rat kidneys. J Am Soc 
Nephrol. 2003;14:3155–3166.
Astrand I. Effect of physical exercise on uptake, distribution and elimination 
of vapors in man. In: Fiserova-Bergerova V, ed. Modeling of Inhalation 
Exposure to Vapors: Uptake, Distribution, and Elimination. Vol 2. Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press; 1983:107–130.
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). Methanol 
toxicity. Am Fam Physician. 1993;47:163–171.
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). Toxicological 
Profile for Gasoline. Atlanta, GA: Public Health Service; 1995.
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). Toxicological 
Profile for Carbon Disulfide. Atlanta, GA: Public Health Service; 1996a.
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). Toxicological 
Profile For Methyl T-Butyl Ether. Atlanta, GA: Public Health Service; 
1996b.

1228
Toxic Agents
unit V
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). Toxicological 
Profile for Chloroform. Atlanta, GA: Public Health Service; 1997a.
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). Toxicological 
Profile for Ethylene Glycol and Propylene Glycol. Atlanta, GA: Public 
Health Service; 1997b.
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). Toxicological 
Profile for Tetrachloroethylene. Atlanta, GA: Public Health Service; 
1997c.
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). 
Toxicological Profile for Trichloroethylene. Atlanta, GA: Public Health 
Service; 1997d.
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). Toxicological 
Profile for Jet Fuels (JP-5 and JP-8). Atlanta, GA: Public Health Service; 
1998.
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). Toxicological 
Profile for Methylene Chloride. Atlanta, GA: Public Health Service; 
2000a.
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). Toxicological 
Profile for Toluene. Atlanta, GA: Public Health Service; 2000b.
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). Interac-
tion Profile for 1,1,1-Trichloroethane, 1,1-Dichloroethane, Trichloro-
ethylene and Tetrachloroethylene. Atlanta, GA: Public Health Service; 
2004.
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). Toxicological 
Profile for Carbon Tetrachloride. Atlanta, GA: Public Health Service; 
2005.
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). ToxFAQs for 
Trichloroethylene (TCE). Atlanta, GA: Public Health Service; 2006a. 
http://www.atsdr.ege.gov/tfacts19.html.
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). Toxicological 
Profile for 1,1,1-Trichloroethane (Update). Atlanta, GA: Public Health 
Service; 2006b.
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). Toxicological 
Profile for Benzene. Atlanta, GA: Public Health Service; 2006c.
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). Toxicological 
Profile for Xylenes. Atlanta, GA: Public Health Service; 2006d.
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). Toxicological 
Profile for Ethylbenzene. Atlanta, GA: Public Health Service; 2010a.
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). Toxicological 
Profile for Styrene. Atlanta, GA: Public Health Service; 2010b.
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). Draft 
Toxicological Profile for Trichloroethylene. Atlanta, GA: Public Health 
Service; 2014.
Auttachoat W, Germolec DR, Collins BJ, et al. Immunotoxicological profile 
of chloroform in female B6C3F1 mice when administered in drinking 
water. Drug Chem Toxicol. 2009;32:77–87.
Axelson O, Hane M, Hogstedt C. A case-referent study of neuropsychiat-
ric disorders among workers exposed to solvents. Scand J Work Environ 
Health. 1976;2:14–20.
Baan R, Straif K, Grosse Y, et al. Carcinogenicity of alcoholic beverages. 
WHO International Agency for Research on Cancer Monograph Working 
Group. Lancet Oncol. 2007;8: 292–293.
Backes WL, Sequeira DJ, Cawley GF, Eyer CS. Relationship between 
hydrocarbon structure and induction of P450: effects on protein levels 
and enzyme activities. Xenobiotica. 1993;23:1353–1366.
Badham HJ, Renaud SJ, Wan J, Linn LM. Benzene-induced oxidative 
stress: effects on embryonic signaling pathways. Chem-Biol Interact. 
2010;184:218–221.
Bagchi G, Waxman DJ. Toxicity of ethylene glycol monomethyl ether: 
impact of testicular gene expression. Int J Androl. 2008;31:269–274.
Bagchi G, Zhang Y, Waxman DJ. Impact of methoxyacetic acid on mouse 
Leydig cell gene expression. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2010;8:65.
Bailey DG, Dresser GK, Bend JR. Bergamottin, lime juice, and red wine as 
inhibitors of cytochrome P450 3A4 activity: comparison with grapefruit 
juice. Clin Pharmacol Therap. 2003;73:529–537.
Bakke B, Stewart PA, Waters MA. Use of and exposure to trichloroethylene 
in U.S. industry: a systematic literature review. J Occup Environ Hyg. 
2007;4:375–390.
Baldwin CM, Figueredo AJ, Wright LS, et al. Repeated aerosol-vapor JP-8 
jet fuel exposure affects neurobehavior and neurotransmitter levels in a 
rat model. J Toxicol Environ Health Part A. 2007;70:1203–1213.
Baldwin CM, Houston FP, Podgornik MN, et al. Effects of aerosol-vapor 
JP-8 jet fuel on the functional observational battery, and learning and 
memory in the rat. Arch Environ Health. 2001;56:216–226.
Bale AS, Smothers CT, Woodward JJ. Inhibition of neuronal nicotine ace-
tylcholine receptors by the abused solvent, toluene. Br J Pharmacol. 
2002;137:375–383.
Bale AS, Tu Y, Carpenter-Hyland EP, et  al. Alterations in glutamatergic 
and gabaergic ion channel activity in hippocampal neurons follow-
ing exposure to the abused solvent toluene. Neuroscience. 2005;30: 
197–206.
Ballantyne B, Snellings WM. Developmental toxicity study with diethylene 
glycol dosed by gavage to CD rats and CD-1 mice. Food Chem Toxicol. 
2005;43:1637–1646.
Ballantyne B, Vergnes JS. In vitro and in vivo genetic toxicology studies with 
diethylene glycol monohexyl ether. J Appl Toxicol. 2001;21:449–460.
Balster RL. Neural basis of inhalant abuse. Drug Alcohol Dep. 
1998;512:207–214.
Barceloux DG, Bond GR, Krenzelok EP, et  al. American Academy of 
Clinical Toxicology practice guidelines on the treatment of methanol 
poisoning. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 2002;40:415–446.
Barrett JS, Alberighi OCD, Läer S, and Meibohm B. Physiologically Based 
Pharmacokinetic (PBPK) Modeling in Children. Clin Pharmacol Therap. 
2012;92:40–49.
Barton HA, Creech JR, Godin CS, et al. Chloroethylene mixtures: pharma-
cokinetic modeling and in vitro metabolism of vinyl chloride, trichloro-
ethylene, and trans-1,2-dichloroethylene in rat. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
1995;130:237–247.
Barton HA, Das S. Alternative for a risk assessment on chronic non-cancer 
effects from oral exposure to trichloroethylene. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 
1996;24:269–285.
Bast-Pettersen R. The neuropsychological diagnosis of chronic solvent 
induced encephalopathy (CSE)—a reanalysis of neuropsychological 
test results in a group of CSE patients diagnosed 20 years ago, based 
on comparison with matched controls. Neurotoxicology. 2009;30: 
1195–1201.
Bautista AP. Impact of alcohol on the ability of Kupffer cells to produce 
chemokines and its role in alcoholic liver disease. J Gastroenterol 
Hepatol. 2000;15:349–356.
Beattie PJ, Welsh MJ, Brabec MJ. The effect of 2-methoxyethanol and 
methoxyacetic acid on Sertoli cell lactate production and protein synthe-
sis in vitro. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1984;76:56–61.
Beauchamp RO, Bus JS, Popp JA, et al. A critical review of the literature on 
carbon disulfide toxicity. Crit Rev Toxicol. 1983;11:169–278.
Beckstead MJ, Weiner JL, Eger EI, et al. Glycine and gamma-aminobutyric 
acid (A) receptor function is enhanced by inhaled drugs of abuse. Mol 
Pharmacol. 2000;57:1199–1205.
Beddowes EJ, Faux SP, Chipman JK. Chloroform, carbon tetrachloride and 
glutathione depletion induce secondary genotoxicity in liver cells via oxi-
dative stress. Toxicology. 2003;187:101–115.
Bell AN, Young RA, Lockard VG, Mehendale HM. Protection of chlorde-
cone-potentiated carbon tetrachloride hepatotoxicity and lethality by par-
tial hepatectomy. Arch Toxicol. 1988;61:392–405.
Bell IR, Brooks AJ, Baldwin CM, et al. JP-8 jet fuel exposure and divided 
attention test performance in 1991 Gulf War veterans. Aviat Space 
Environ Med. 2005;76:1136–1144.
Bellinger FP, Bedi KS, Wilson P, Wilce PA. Ethanol exposure during the 
third trimester equivalent results in long-lasting decreased synaptic 
efficacy but not plasticity in the CA1 region of the rat hippocampus. 
Synapse. 1999;31:51–58.
Belpoggi F, Soffritti M, Filippini F, Maltoni C. Results of long-term experi-
mental studies on the carcinogenicity of methyl tert -butyl ether. Ann NY 
Acad Sci. 1997;837:77–95.
Belpoggi F, Soffritti M, Maltoni C. Methyl-tertiary-butyl ether (MTBE)-a 
gasoline additive-causes testicular and lymphophaematopoietic cancers 
in rats. Toxicol Ind Health. 1995;11:119–149.

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1229
Benignus VA, Boyes WK, Bushnell PG. A dosimetric analysis of behav-
ioral effects of acute toluene exposure in rats and humans. Toxicol Sci. 
1998;43:186–195.
Benjamin SA, Yang RS, Tessari JD, et al. Lack of promotional effects of 
groundwater contaminant mixtures on the induction of preneoplastic foci 
in rat liver. Toxicology. 1999;137:137–149.
Benson JM, Gigliotti AP, March TH, et al. Chronic carcinogenicity study of 
gasoline vapor condensate (GVC) and GVC containing methyl tertiary-
butyl ether in F344 rats. J Toxicol Environ Health, Part A. 2011;74:638–657.
Bergsagel DE, Wong O, Bergsagel PL, et al. Benzene and multiple myeloma: 
appraisal of the scientific evidence. Blood. 1999;94:1174–1182.
Bernauer U, Birner G, Dekant W, Henschler D. Biotransformation of tri-
chloroethene: dose-dependent excretion of 2,2,2-trichloro-metabolites 
and mercapturic acids in rats and humans after inhalation. Arch Toxicol. 
1996;70: 338–346.
Bernauer U, Vieth B, Ellrich R, et  al. CYP2E1-dependent benzene tox-
icity: The role of extrahepatic benzene metabolism. Arch Toxicol. 
1999;73:189–196.
Besenhofer LM, Adegobyega PA, Bartels M, et al. Inhibition of metabolism 
of diethylene glycol prevents target organ toxicity in rats. Toxicol Sci. 
2010;117:25–35.
Besenhofer LM, McLaren MC, Latimer B, et al. Role of tissue metabo-
lite accumulation in the renal toxicity of diethylene glycol. Toxicol Sci. 
2011;123:374–383.
Bevan C, Neeper-Bradley TL, Tyl RW, et  al. Two-generation reproduc-
tive toxicity study of methyl tertiary-butyl ether (MTBE) in rats. J Appl 
Toxicol. 1997a;17(S1):S13–S19.
Bevan C, Tyl RW, Neeper-Bradley TL, et al. Developmental toxicity evalu-
ation of methyl tertiary-butyl ether (MTBE) by inhalation in mice and 
rabbits. J Appl Toxicol. 1997b;17(S1):S21–S29.
Bezabeth S, Engel A, Morris CB, Lamm SH. Does benzene cause multiple 
myeloma? An analysis of the published case–control literature. Environ 
Health Perspect. 1996;104(suppl 6):1393–1398.
B’Hymer C, Mathias P, Krieg E, et al. (2-Methoxyethoxy)acetic acid: a uri-
nary biomarker of exposure for jet fuel JP-8. Int Arch Occup Environ 
Health. 2012;85:413–420.
Bird MG, Burleigh-Flayer HD, Chun JS, et  al. Oncogenicity studies of 
inhaled methyl tertiary-butyl ether (MTBE) in CD-1 mice and F-344 rats. 
J Appl Toxicol. 1997;17:S45–S55.
Bird MG, Greim H, Snyder R, Rice JM. International symposium: recent 
advances in benzene toxicity. Chem-Biol Interact. 2005;153–154:1–5.
Birner G, Bernauer U, Werner M, Dekant W.Biotransformation, excretion, 
and nephrotoxicity of haloalkane-derived cysteine S-conjugates. Arch 
Toxicol. 1997;72:1–8.
Birner G, Rutkowska A, Dekant W. N-acetyl-S-(1,2,2-trichlorovinyl)-L-
cysteine and 2,2,2-trichloroethanol: Two novel metabolites of tetrachlo-
roethylene in humans after occupational exposure. Drug Metab Dispos. 
1996;14:41–48.
Blair A, Hartge P, Stewart PA, et  al. Mortality and cancer incidence of 
aircraft maintenance workers exposed to trichloroethylene and other 
organic solvents and chemicals: extended follow-up. Occup Environ 
Med. 1998;55:161–171.
Blair A, Petralia SA, Stewart PA. Extended mortality following of a cohort 
of dry cleaners. Ann Epidemiol. 2003;13:50–56.
Blanco JG, Harrison PL, Evans WE, Relling MV. Human cytochrome P450 
maximal activities in pediatric versus adult liver. Drug Metab Dispos. 
2000;28:379–382.
Bleecker ML, Bolla KI, Agnew J, et al. Dose-related subclinical neurobe-
havioral effects of chronic exposure to low levels of organic solvents. Am 
J Ind Med. 1991;19:715–728.
Blobaum AL. Mechanism-based inactivation and reversibility: Is there a 
new trend in the inactivation of cytochrome P450 enzymes? Drug Metab 
Dispos. 2006;34:1–7.
Bloemen LJ, Monster AC, Kezic S, et al. Study on the cytochrome P-450- 
and glutathione-dependent biotransformation of trichloroethylene in 
humans. Int Arch Occup Environ Health. 2001;74:102–108.
Blount BC, Kobelski RJ, McElprang DO, et al. Quantification of 31 volatile 
organic compounds in whole blood using solid-phase microextraction 
and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. J Chromatogr B. 
2006;832:292–301.
Boatman R, Corley R, Green T, et al. Review of studies concerning the 
tumorigenicity of 2-butoxyethanol in B6C3F1 mice and its relevance 
for human risk assessment. J Toxicol Environ Health B Crit Rev. 
2004;7:385–398.
Bogen KT, Heilman JM. Reassessment of MTBE cancer potency consid-
ering modes of action for MTBE and its metabolites. Crit Rev Toxicol. 
2015;45:1–56.
Boeffetta P, Garfinkel L. Alcohol drinking and mortality among men 
enrolled in an American Cancer Society prospective study. Epidemiology. 
1990;1:342–348.
Boeffetta P, Hashibe M. Alcohol and cancer. Lancet Oncol. 2006;7:149–156.
Boice JD Jr, Marano DE, Fryzek JP, et al. Mortality among aircraft manu-
facturing workers. Occup Environ Med. 1999;56:581–597.
Boice JD, Marano DE, Cohen SS, et  al. Mortality among Rocketdyne 
workers who tested rocket engines, 1948-1999. J Occup Environ Med. 
2006;48:1070–1092.
Bois FY. Applications of population approaches in toxicology. Toxicol Lett. 
2001;120:385–394.
Bolt HM, Lammert M, Selinski S, Bruning T. Urinary alpha 1-microglobu-
lin excretion as a biomarker of renal toxicity in trichloroethylene-exposed 
persons. Int Arch Occup Environ Health. 2004;77:186–190.
Boogaard PJ, van Sittert NJ. Suitability of S-phenylmercapturic acid and 
trans-trans-muconic acid as biomarkers for exposure to low concentra-
tions of benzene. Environ Health Perspect. 1996;104(suppl 6):1151–1157.
Borak J, Pastides H, Van Ert M, et al. Exposure to MTBE and acute human 
health effects: A critical literature review. Hum Ecol Assess. 1998;4:177–200.
Borel V, Gallot D, Marceau G, et al. Placental implications of peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptors in gestation and parturition. PPAR Res. 
2008;758562.
Borghoff SJ, Murphy JE, Medinsky MA. Development of physiologi-
cally based pharmacokinetic model for methyl tertiary-butyl ether 
and tertiary-butanol in male Fischer-344 rats. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 
1996;30:264–275.
Borghoff SJ, Parkinson H, Leavens TL. Physiologically based pharmaco-
kinetic rat model for methyl tertiary-butyl ether; comparison of selected 
dose metrics following various MTBE exposure scenarios used for toxic-
ity and carcinogenicity evaluation. Toxicology. 2010;275:79–91.
Borghoff SJ, Short BG, Swenberg JA. Biochemical mechanisms and patho-
biology of α2µ-globulin nephropathy. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 
1990;30:349–367.
Boulares AH, Contreras FJ, Espinoza LA, Smulson ME. Roles of oxidative 
stress and glutathione depletion in JP-8 jet fuel-induced apoptosis in rat 
lung epithelial cells. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2002;180:92–99.
Boutelet-Bochan H, Huang Y, Juchau MR. Expression of CYP2E1 during 
embryogenesis and fetogenesis in human cephalic tissues: Implications 
for the fetal alcohol syndrome. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 
1997;238:443–447.
Bowen SE. Two-serious and challenging medical complications associated 
with volatile substance misuse: sudden sniffing death and fetal solvent 
syndrome. Subst Use Misuse. 2011;46:68–72.
Bowen SE, Irtenkauf S, Hannigan JH, Stefanski AL. Alterations in rat 
fetal morphology following abuse patterns of toluene exposure. Reprod 
Toxicol. 2009;27:161–169.
Brauch H, Weirich G, Hornauer MA, et al. Trichloroethylene exposure and 
specific somatic mutations in patients with renal cell carcinoma. J Natl 
Cancer Inst. 1999;91:854–861.
Brauch H, Weirich G, Klein B, et al. VHL mutations in renal cell cancer: 
Does occupational exposure to trichloroethylene make a difference? 
Toxicol Lett. 2004;151:301–310.
Brent J, McMartin K, Phillips S, et al. Fomepizole for the treatment of eth-
ylene glycol poisoning. Methylpyrazole for Toxic Alcohols Study Group. 
N Engl J Med. 1999;340:832–838.
Bressler R, Bahl JJ. Principles of drug therapy for the elderly patient. Mayo 
Clin Proc. 2003;78:1564–1577.
Brienza RS, Stein MD. Alcohol use disorders in primary care: do gender-
specific differences exist? J Gen Intern Med. 2002;17:387–397.

1230
Toxic Agents
unit V
Brinkworth MH, Weinbauer GF, Schlatt S, Nieschlag E. Identification 
of male germ cells undergoing apoptosis in adult rats. J Reprod Fertil. 
1995;105:25–33.
Brodkin CA, Daniell W, Checkoway H, et al. Hepatic ultrasonic changes 
in workers exposed to perchloroethylene. Occup Environ Med. 
1995;52:679–685.
Brodkin CA, Moon J-D, Camp J, et al. Serum hepatic biochemical activity 
in two populations of workers exposed to styrene. Occup Environ Med. 
2001;58:95–102.
Brogen C-H, Christensen JM, Rasmussen K. Occupational exposure to 
chlorinated organic solvents and its effect on renal excretion of N-acetyl-
Beta-D-glucosaminidase. Arch Toxicol. 1986;9(suppl): 460–464.
Brooks DE, Wallace KL. Acute propylene glycol ingestion. J Toxicol Clin 
Toxicol. 2002;40:513–516.
Brophy PD, Tenebein M, Gardner J, et  al. Childhood diethylene glycol 
poisoning treated with alcohol dehydrogenase inhibitor Fomepizole and 
hemodialysis. Am J Kidney Dis. 2000;35:958–962.
Brosselin P, Rudant J, Orsi L, et al. Acute childhood leukaemia and resi-
dence next to petrol stations and automotive repair garages: the ESCALE 
study (SFCE). Occup Environ Med. 2009;66:598–606.
Brown EA, Shelley ML, Fisher JW. A pharmacokinetic study of occupa-
tional and environmental exposure with regard to gender. Risk Anal. 
1998;18:205–213.
Brown RC, Barone S, Kimmel CA. Children’s health risk assessment: 
incorporating a lifestage approach into the risk assessment process. Birth 
Defects Res. 2008;83: 511–521.
Brown-Woodman PDC, Hayes LC, Huq F, et  al. In vitro assessment of 
the effect of halogenated hydrocarbons: Chloroform, dichloromethane, 
and dibromomethane on embryonic development of the rat. Teratology. 
1998;57:321–333.
Bruckner JV. Differences in sensitivity of children and adults to chemical tox-
icity: the NAS panel report. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2000;31:280–285.
Bruckner JV, Kyle GM, Luthra R, et al. Acute, short-term and subchronic oral 
toxicity of 1,1,1-trichloroethane in rats. Toxicol Sci. 2001;60:363–372.
Bruckner JV, Peterson RG. Evaluation of toluene and acetone inhal-
ant abuse. I. Pharmacology and pharmacodynamics. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 1981;61:27–38.
Bruckner JV, Ramanathan R, Lee KM, Muralidhara S. Mechanisms of cir-
cadian rhythmicity of carbon tetrachloride hepatotoxicity. J Pharmacol 
Exp Therap. 2002;300:273–281.
Bruckner JV, White CA, Muralidhara S, Dallas CE. Effect of exposure route 
and dosage regimen on the toxicokinetics and target organ toxicity of 
1,1-dichloroethylene. J Pharmacol Exp Therap. 2010;333:519–527.
Bruner RH, Kinkead ER, O’Neill TP, et al. The toxicologic and oncogenic 
potential of JP-4 jet fuel vapors in rats and mice: 12-Month intermittent 
inhalation exposures. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1993;20:97–110.
Bruning T, Bolt HM. Renal toxicity and carcinogenicity of trichloroeth-
ylene: key results, mechanisms, and controversies. Crit Rev Toxicol. 
2000;30:253–285.
Bruning T, Golka K, Makropoulos V, Bolt HM. Preexistence of chronic 
tubular damage in cases of renal cell cancer after long and high exposure 
to trichloroethylene. Arch Toxicol. 1996;70:259–260.
Bruning T, Weirich G, Hornauer MA, et al. Renal cell carcinomas in trichlo-
roethene (TRI) exposed persons are associated with somatic mutations 
in the von Hippel–Lindau (VHL) tumour suppressor gene. Arch Toxicol. 
1997a;71:332–335.
Bruning T, Lammert M, Kempkes M, et al. Influence of polymorphisms 
of GSTM1 and GSTT1 for risk of renal cell cancer in workers with 
long-term high occupational exposure to trichloroethene. Arch Toxicol. 
1997b;71:596–599.
Bruning T, Mann H, Melzer H, et al. Pathological excretion patterns of uri-
nary proteins in renal cell cancer patients exposed to trichloroethylene. 
Occup Med. 1999;49:299–305.
Bruning T, Pesch B, Wiesenhutter B, et al. Renal cell cancer risk and occu-
pational exposure to trichloroethylene: Results of a consecutive case–
control study in Arnsberg, Germany. Am J Ind Med. 2003;43:274–285.
Buben JA, O’Flaherty EJ. Delineation of the role of metabolism in the 
hepatotoxicity of trichloroethylene and perchloroethylene. A dose-effect 
study. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1985;78:105–122.
Buchanan JA, Alhelail M, Cetaruk EW, et  al. Massive ethylene glycol 
ingestion treated with fomepizole alone—a viable therapeutic option. 
J Med Toxicol. 2010;6:131–134.
Buck ML. The use of chloral hydrate in infants and children. Ped 
Pharmacotherap. 2005;11:1–4.
Bull RJ. Mode of action of liver tumor induction by trichloroethylene and 
its metabolites, trichloroacetate and dichloroacetate. Environ Health 
Perspect. 2000;108(suppl 2):241–259.
Bull RJ, Orner GA, Cheng RS, et al. Contribution of dichloroacetate and 
trichloroacetate to liver tumor induction in mice by trichloroethylene. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2002;182:55–65.
Burbacher TM, Grant KS, Shen DD, et  al. Chronic maternal methanol 
inhalation in nonhuman primates (Macaca fascicularis): reproduc-
tive performance and birth outcome. Neurotoxicol Teratol. 2004a;26: 
639–650.
Burbacher TM, Shen DD, Lalovic B, et  al. Chronic maternal methanol 
inhalation in nonhuman primates (Macaca fascicularis): exposure and 
toxicokinetics prior to and during pregnancy. Neurotoxicol Teratol. 
2004b;26:201–221.
Burek JD, Nitschke KD, Bell TJ, et al. Methylene chloride: a two-year inha-
lation toxicity and oncogenicity study in rats and hamsters. Fundam Appl 
Toxicol. 1984;4:30–47.
Burke AS, Redeker K, Kurten RC, et  al. Mechanisms of chloroform-
induced hepatotoxicity: Oxidative stress and mitochondrial permeabil-
ity transition in freshly isolated mouse hepatocytes. J Toxicol Environ 
Health Part A. 2007;70:1936–1945.
Burleigh-Flayer HD, Chun JS, Kintigh WJ. Methyl Tertiary Butyl Ether: 
Vapor Inhalation Oncogenicity Study in CD Mice. Export, PA: Bushy 
Run Research Center; 1992.
Burstyn I. Peering through the mist: Systematic review of what the chem-
istry of contaminants in electronic cigarettes tells us about health risks. 
BMC Public Health. 2014;14:18.
Burton DA, Allen MC, Bird JL, Faragher RA. Bridging the gap: age-
ing, pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. J Pharm Pharmacol. 
2005;57:671–679.
Bushnell PJ, Beasley TE, Evansky PA, et  al. Toxicological assessments 
of rats exposed prenatally to inhaled vapors of gasoline and gasoline-­
ethanol blends. Neurotoxicol Teratol. 2015;49:19–30.
Byard RW, Chivell WC, Gilbert JD. Unusual facial markings and lethal 
mechanisms in a series of gasoline inhalation deaths. Am J Foren Med 
Path. 2003;24:298–302.
Cai H, Guengerich FP. Reaction of trichloroethylene and trichloroethylene 
oxide with cytochrome P450 enzymes: Inactivation and sites of modifica-
tion. Chem Res Toxicol. 2001;14: 451–458.
Caldemeyer KS, Armstrong SW, George KK, et al. The spectrum of neu-
roimaging abnormalities in solvent abuse and their clinical correlation. 
J Neuroimag. 1996;6:167–173.
Caldwell DJ. Review of mononuclear cell leukemia in F-344 rat bioassays 
and its significance to human cancer risk: a case study using alkyl phthal-
ates. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 1999;30:40–53.
Caldwell JC, Evans MV, Marcus AH, et al. Comments on article “Applying 
mode-of-action and pharmacokinetic considerations in contemporary 
cancer risk assessments: An example with trichloroethylene” by Clewell 
and Andersen. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2006;36:291–294.
Caldwell JC, Keshava N. Key issues in the modes of action and effects of 
trichloroethylene metabolites for liver and kidney tumorigenesis. Environ 
Health Perspect. 2006;114:1457–1463.
Campbell JL Jr, Fisher JW. A PBPK modeling assessment of the competi-
tive metabolic interactions of JP-8 vapor with two constituents, m-xylene 
and ethylbenzene. Inhal Toxicol. 2007;19:265–273.
Cantor KP, Stewart PA, Brinton LA, Dosemaci M. Occupational exposures 
and female breast cancer mortality in the United States. J Occup Environ 
Med. 1995;37:336–348.
Caprino L, Togna GI. Potential health effects of gasoline and its constitu-
ents: a review of current literature (1990–1997) on toxicological data. 
Environ Health Perspect. 1998;106:115–125.
Caravati EM, Erdman AR, Christianson G, et al. Ethylene glycol exposure: 
an evidence-based consensus guideline for out-of-hospital management. 
Clin Toxicol. 2005;43:327–345.

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1231
Carlson GP. In vitro metabolism of styrene to styrene oxide in liver 
and lung of CYP2E1 knockout mice. J Toxicol Environ Health A. 
2003;66:861–869.
Carlson GP. Critical appraisal of the expression of cytochrome P450 
enzymes in human lung and evaluation of the possibility that such expres-
sion provides evidence of potential styrene tumorigenicity in humans. 
Toxicology. 2008;254:1–10.
Carlson GP. Metabolism and toxicity of styrene in microsomal epox-
ide  hydrolase-deficient mice. J Toxicol Environ Health A. 2010;74: 
1689–1699.
Carmona A, Roudeau S, Perrin L, et al. Environmental manganese com-
pounds accumulate as Mn (II) within the Golgi apparatus of dopamine 
cells: Relationship between speciation, subcellular distribution and cyto-
toxicity. Metallomics. 2014;6:822–832.
Carney EW, Freshour NL, Dittenber DA, Dryzga MD. Ethylene glycol 
developmental toxicity: unraveling the roles of glycolic acid and meta-
bolic acidosis. Toxicol Sci. 1999;50:117–126.
Carney EW, Liberacki AB, Bartels MJ, Breslin WJ. Identification of proxi-
mate toxicant for ethylene glycol developmental toxicity using rat whole 
embryo culture. Teratology. 1996;53:38–46.
Carney EW, Tornesi B, Liberacki AB, et al. The impact of dose rate on 
ethylene glycol developmental toxicity and pharmacokinetics in pregnant 
CD rats. Toxicol Sci. 2011;119:178–188.
Carney EW, Tornesi B, Markham DA, et al. Species-specificity of ethyl-
ene glycol-induced development toxicity: Toxicokinetic and whole 
embryo culture studies in the rabbit. Birth Defects Res (Part B). 2008;83: 
573–581.
Carter N, Iregren A, Soderman E, et al. EUROQUESST – A questionnaire 
for solvent related symptoms: Factor structure, item analysis and predic-
tive validity. Neurotoxicology. 2002;23:711–717.
Casanova M, Bell DA, Heck H d’A. Dichloromethane metabolism to form-
aldehyde and reaction of formaldehyde with nucleic acids in hepatocytes 
of rodents and humans with and without glutathione S-transferase T1 and 
M1 genes. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1997;37:168–180.
Casanova M, Conolly RB, Heck H d’A. DNA–protein cross-links (DPX) 
and cell proliferation in B6C3F1 mice but not Syrian golden hamsters 
exposed to dichloromethane: Pharmacokinetics and risk assessment with 
DPX as dosimeter. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1996;31:103–116.
Casanova M, Heck H d’A. Lack of evidence for the involvement of form-
aldehyde in the hepatocarcinogenicity of methyl tertiary-butyl ether in 
CD-1 mice. Chem-Biol Interact. 1997;105:131–143.
Castillo T, Koop DR, Kamimura S, et al. Role of cytochrome P-450 2E1 
in ethanol-, carbon tetrachloride- and iron-dependent microsomal lipid 
peroxidation. Hepatology. 1992;16:992–996.
Cattley RC, DeLuca J, Elcombe C, et  al. Do peroxisome proliferating 
compounds pose a hepatocarcinogenic hazard to humans? Regul Toxicol 
Pharmacol. 1998;27:47–60.
Cawley MJ. Short-term lorazepam infusion and concern for propylene glycol 
toxicity: case report and review. Pharmacotherapy. 2001;21:1140–1144.
Chambers DM, Ocariz JM, McGuirk MF, Blount BC. Impact of cigarette 
smoking on volatile organic compound (VOC) blood levels in the U.S. 
population. Environ Internat. 2011;37:1321–1328.
Chan WK, Nguyen LT, Miller VP, Harris RZ. Mechanism-based inactiva-
tion of human cytochrome P450 3A4 by grapefruit juice and red wine. 
Life Sci. 1998;62:135–142.
Chang TKH, Chen J, Yeung EYH. Effect of Ginkgo biloba extract on 
­procarcinogen-bioactivating human CYP enzymes: Identification of isor-
hamnetin, kaempferol, and quercetin as potent inhibitors of CYP1B1. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2006;213:18–26.
Chang YM, Tai CF, Yang SC, et al. Cancer incidence among workers poten-
tially exposed to chlorinated solvents in an electronics factory. J Occup 
Health. 2005;47:171–180.
Chao YC, Gibson RL, Nylander-French LA. Dermal exposure to jet fuel 
(JP-8) in US Air Force personnel. Ann Occup Hyg. 2005;49:639–645.
Chapin RE, Dutton SD, Ross MD, et  al. The effects of ethylene gly-
col monomethyl ether on testicular histology in F344 rats. J Androl. 
1984;5:369–380.
Charbonneau M, Swenberg JA. Studies on the biochemical mechanism of 
αu-globulin nephropathy in rats. CIIT Activities. 1988;8:1–5.
Charbotel B, Fevotte J, Hours M, et  al. Case–control study on renal 
cell cancer and occupational exposure to trichloroethylene. Part II: 
Epidemiological aspects. Ann Occup Hyg. 2006;50:777–787.
Charbotel B, Gad S, Caiola D, et al. Trichloroethylene exposure and somatic 
mutations of the VHL gene in patients with renal cell carcinoma. J Occup 
Med Toxicol. 2007;2:13–20.
Chasnoff IJ, Wells AM, King L. Misdiagnosis and missed diagnoses in 
foster and adopted children with prenatal alcohol exposure. Pediatrics. 
2015;135:264–270.
Chen DH, Kaung HL, Miller CM, et al. Microarray analysis of changes in 
renal phenotype in the ethylene glycol rat model of urolithiasis: Potential 
and pitfalls. BJU Int. 2004;94:637–650.
Chen PC, Hsieh GY, Wang JD, Cheng TJ. Prolonged time to pregnancy 
in female workers exposed to ethylene glycol ethers in semiconductor 
manufacturing. Epidemiology. 2002;13:191–196.
Cheng P-Y, Morgan ET. Hepatic cytochrome P450 regulation in disease 
states. Curr Drug Metab. 2001;2:165–183.
Cherry NH, Hutchins H, Pace T, Waldron JA. Neurobehavioral effects of 
repeated occupational exposure to toluene and paint solvents. Br J Ind 
Med. 1985;42:291–300.
Cherry N, Moore H, McNamee R, et al. Occupation and male fertility: Glycol 
ethers and other exposures. Occup Environ Med. 2008;65:708–714.
Chiu WA, Micallef S, Monster AC, Bois FY. Toxicokinetics of inhaled tri-
chloroethylene and tetrachloroethylene in humans at 1 ppm: empirical 
results and comparisons with previous studies. Toxicol Sci. 2007;95:23–26.
Cho SK, Kim RH, Yim SH, et al. Long-term neuropsychological effects 
and MRI findings in patients with CS2 poisoning. Acta Neurol Scand. 
2002;106:269–275.
Chou CC, Riviere JE, Monteiro-Riviere NA. Differential relationship 
between the carbon chain length of jet fuel aliphatic hydrocarbons and 
their ability to induce cytotoxicity vs. interleukin-8 release in human epi-
dermal keratinocytes. Toxicol Sci. 2002;69:226–233.
Chou CC, Riviere JE, Monteiro-Riviere NA. The cytotoxicity of jet fuel 
aromatic hydrocarbons and dose-related interleukin-8 release from 
human epidermal keratinocytes. Arch Toxicol. 2003;77:384–391.
Chou CC, Yang JH, Chen SD, et al. Expression profiling of human epi-
dermal keratinocyte response following 1-minute JP-8 exposure. Cutan 
Ocul Toxicol. 2006;25:141–153.
Chow W-H, Devesa SS. Contemporary epidemiology of renal cell cancer. 
Cancer J. 2008;14: 288–301.
Christopher MM, Eckfeldt JH, Eaton JW. Propylene glycol ingestion causes 
D-lactic acidosis. Lab Invest. 1990;62:114–118.
Chrostek L, Jelski W, Szmitkowski M, Puchalski Z. Gender-related differ-
ences in hepatic activity of alcohol dehydrogenase isoenzymes and alde-
hyde dehydrogenase in humans. J Clin Lab Anal. 2003;17:93–96.
Chu I, Poon R, Valli V, et al. Effects of an ethanol-gasoline mixture: Results 
of a 4-week inhalation study in rats. J Appl Toxicol. 2005;25:193–199.
Chun JS, Burleigh-Flayer HD, Kintigh WJ. Methyl Tertiary Butyl Ether: 
Vapor Inhalation Oncogenicity Study in Fisher 344 Rats. Export, PA: 
Bushy Run Research Center; 1992.
Chung HC, Sung SH, Kim JS, et  al. Lack of cytochrome P450 2E1 
(CYP2E1) induction in the rat liver by starvation without coprophagy. 
Drug Metab Dispos. 2001;29: 213–216.
Chung J-K, Yuan W, Liu G, Zheng J. Investigation of bioactivation and 
toxicity of styrene in CYP2E1 transgenic cells. Toxicology. 2006;226: 
99–106.
Churchill JE, Ashley DL, Kaye WE. Recent chemical exposures and blood 
volatile organic compound levels in a large population-based sample. 
Arch Environ Health. 2001;56:157–166.
Cichocki JA, Guyton KZ, Guha N, et al. Target organ metabolism, toxic-
ity, and mechanism of trichloroethylene and perchloroethylene: Key 
similarities, differences, and data gaps. J Pharmacol Exp Therap. 
2016;359:110–123.
Cirvello JD, Radovsky A, Heath JE, et al. Toxicity and carcinogenicity of 
t-butyl alcohol in rats and mice following chronic exposure in drinking 
water. Toxicol Ind Health. 1995;11:151–165.
Clark CR, Schreiner CA, Parker CM, et al. Health assessment of gasoline 
and fuel oxygenate vapors: Subchronic inhalation toxicity. Regul Toxicol 
Pharmacol. 2014;70:S18–S28.

1232
Toxic Agents
unit V
Clarke DO, Duignan JM, Welsch F. 2-Methoxyacetic acid dosimetrytera-
togenicity relationships in CD-1 mice exposed to 2-methoxyethanol. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1992;114:77–87.
Clary JJ. Methanol, is it a developmental risk to humans? Reg Toxicol 
Pharmacol. 2003;37:83–91.
Clawson GA, MacDonald J, Woo C. Early hypomethylation of 2-0-ribose 
moieties in hepatocytes cytoplasmic ribosomal RNA underlies the pro-
tein synthesis defect produced by CCl4. J Cell Biol. 1987;105:705–711.
Clayton CA, Pellizzari ED, Whitmore RW, et al. National Human Exposure 
Assessment Survey (NHEXAS): distributions and associations of lead, 
arsenic and volatile organic compounds in EPA Region 5. J Expos Anal 
Environ Epidemiol. 1999;9:381–392.
Clewell HJ, Andersen ME. Applying mode-of-action and pharmacokinetic 
considerations in contemporary cancer risk assessments: An example 
with trichloroethylene. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2004a;34:385–445.
Clewell HJ, Andersen ME. Response to comments by Caldwell et al. on 
article “Applying mode-of-action and pharmacokinetic considerations in 
contemporary cancer risk assessments: an example with trichloroethyl-
ene.” Crit Rev Toxicol. 2006;36:295–298.
Clewell HJ, Gentry PR, Covington TR, et al. Evaluation of the potential 
impact of age- and gender-specific pharmacokinetic differences on tissue 
dosimetry. Toxicol Sci. 2004b;79:381–393.
Clewell HJ, Tan YM, Campbell JL, Andersen ME. Quantitative inter-
pretation of human biomonitoring data. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
2008;231:122–133.
Clewell HJ, Teeguarden J, McDonald T, et al. Review and evaluation of the 
potential impact of age- and gender-specific pharmacokinetic differences 
on tissue dosimetry. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2002;32(5):329–389.
Cogliano VJ, Grosse Y, Baan RA, et al. Meeting report: Summary of IARC 
monographs on formaldehyde, 2-butoxyethanol, and 1-tert-butoxy-
2-propanol. Environ Health Perspect. 2005;113:1205–1208.
Colantoni A, Idilman R, De Maria N, et al. Hepatic apoptosis and prolifera-
tion in male and female rats fed alcohol: role of cytokines. Alcohol Clin 
Exp Res. 2003;27:1184–1189.
Colborn T. A case for revisiting the safety of pesticides: a closer look at 
neurodevelopment. Environ Health Perspect. 2006;114:10–17.
Cole CE, Tran HT, Schlosser PM. Physiologically based pharmacokinetic 
modeling of benzene metabolism in mice through extrapolation from in 
vitro to in vivo. J Toxicol Environ Health A. 2001;62:439–465.
Collins JJ, Ireland BK, Easterday PA, et  al. Evaluation of lymphopenia 
among workers with low-level benzene exposure and the utility of rou-
tine data collection. J Occup Environ Med. 1997;39:232–237.
Conolly R. The use of biologically based modeling in risk assessment. 
Toxicology. 2002;181-182:275–279.
Conrad T, Landry GM, Aw TY, et al. Diglycolic acid, the toxic metabolite 
of diethylene glycol, chelates calcium and produces renal mitochondrial 
dysfunction in vitro. Clin Toxicol. 2016;54:501–511.
Constan AA, Sprankle CS, Peters JM, et al. Metabolism of chloroform by 
cytochrome P4502E1 is required for induction of toxicity in the liver, 
kidney, and nose of male mice. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1999;160: 
120–126.
Constan AA, Wong BA, Everitt JI, Butterworth BE. Chloroform inhalation 
exposure conditions necessary to initiate liver toxicity in female B6C3F1 
mice. Toxicol Sci. 2002;66:201–208.
Cooper GS, Markris SL, Nietert PG, Jinot J. Evidence of autoimmune-
related effects of trichloroethylene exposure from studies in mice and 
humans. Environ Health Perspect. 2009;117:696–702.
Cordier S, Bergeret A, Goujard J, et  al. Congenital malformations and 
maternal occupational exposure to glycol ethers. Epidemiology. 
1997;8:355–363.
Coresch J, Selvin E, Stevens LA, et al. Prevalence of chronic kidney disease 
in the United States. JAMA. 2007;398: 2038–2047.
Corley RA, Bartels MJ, Carney EW, et al. Development of a physiologically 
based pharmacokinetic model for ethylene glycol and its metabolite, gly-
colic acid, in rats and humans. Toxicol Sci. 2005a;85:476–490.
Corley RA, Bormett GA, Ghanayem BI. Physiologically based pharma-
cokinetics of 2-butoxyethanol and its major metabolite, 2-butoxyacetic 
acid, in rats and humans. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1994;129:61–79.
Corley RA, Gies RA, Wu H, Weitz KK. Development of a physiologically 
based pharmacokinetic model for propylene glycol monomethyl ether 
and its acetate in rats and humans. Toxicol Lett. 2005b;156:193–213.
Corley RA, Grant DM, Farris E, et al. Determination of age and gender dif-
ferences in biochemical processes affecting the disposition of 2-butoxy-
ethanol and its metabolites in mice and rats to improve PBPK modeling. 
Toxicol Lett. 2005c;156:127–161.
Corley RA, Mast TJ, Carney EW, et al. Evaluation of physiologically based 
models of pregnancy and lactation for their application in children’s 
health risk assessments. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2003;33:137–211.
Corley RA, McMartin KE. Incorporation of therapeutic interventions in 
physiologically based pharmacokinetic modeling of human clinical case 
reports of accidental or intentional overdosing with ethylene glycol. 
Toxicol Sci. 2005;85:491–501.
Corley RA, Meek ME, Carney EW. Mode of action: Oxalate crystal-
induced renal tubule degeneration and glycolic acid-induced dysmorpho-
genesis—renal and developmental effects of ethylene glycol. Crit Rev 
Toxicol. 2005d;35:691–702.
Corley RA, Saghir SA, Bartels MJ, et al. Extension of PBPK model for 
ethylene glycol and glycolic acid to include the competitive formation 
and clearance of metabolites associated with kidney toxicity in rats and 
humans. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2011;250:229–244.
Corley RA, Wilson DM, Hard GC, et al. Dosimetry considerations in the 
enhanced sensitivity of male Wistar rats to chronic ethylene glycol-
induced nephrotoxicity. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2008;228:165–178.
Correa A, Gray R, Cohen R, et al. Ethylene glycol ethers and risks of spon-
taneous abortion and subfertility. Am J Epidemiol. 1996;143:707–717.
Corthals SM, Kamendulis LM, Klaunig JE. Mechanism of 2-butoxyetha-
nol-induced hemangiosarcomas. Toxicol Sci. 2006;92:378–386.
Cosnier F, Nunge H, Brochard C, et al. Impact of coexposure on toluene 
biomarkers in rats. Xenobiotica. 2014;44:217–228.
Costa ET, Savage DD, Valenzuela CF. A review of the effects of prenatal 
or early postnatal ethanol exposure on brain ligand-gated ion channels. 
Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2000;24:706–715.
Cotreau MM, von Moltke LL, Greenblatt DJ. The influence of age and sex 
on the clearance of cytochrome P450 3A substrates. Clin Pharmacokinet. 
2005;44:33–60.
Court MH. Feline drug metabolism and disposition: Pharmacokinetic evi-
dence for species differences and molecular mechanisms. Vet Clin North 
Am Small Anim Pract. 2013;43:1039–1054.
Covington TR, Gentry PR, Van Landingham CB, et al. The use of Markov 
chain Monte Carlo uncertainty analysis to support a public health goal for 
perchloroethylene. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2007;47:1–18.
Crabb DW, Matsumoto M, Chang D, You M. Overview of the role of alco-
hol dehydrogenase and aldehyde dehydrogenase and their variants in the 
genesis of alcohol-related pathology. Proc Nutr Soc. 2004;63:49–63.
Cranmer JM. Proceedings of the workshop on neurobehavioral effects of 
solvents. Neurotoxicology. 1986;7:1–95.
Creasy DM, Foster PMD. The morphological development of glycol ether-
induced testicular atrophy in the rat. Exp Mol Pathol. 1984;40:169–176.
Creek MR, Mani C, Vogel JS, Turteltaub KW. Tissue distribution and 
macro-molecular binding of extremely low doses of [14C]-benzene in 
B6C3F1 mice. Carcinogenesis. 1997;18:2421–2427.
Creton S, Billington R, Davies W, et al. Application of pharmacokinetics to 
improve chemical risk assessment: Implications for the use of animals. 
Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2009;55:291–299.
Cruz SL, Balster RL, Woodward JJ. Effects of volatile solvents on recombi-
nant N -methyl-d-aspartate receptors expressed in Xenopus oocytes. Br J 
Pharmacol. 2000;131:1303–1308.
Cruz SL, Mirshahi T, Thomas B, et al. Effects of the abused solvent toluene 
on recombinant N -methyl-d-aspartate and non-N -methyl-d-aspartate 
receptors expressed in Xenopus oocytes. J Pharmacol Exp Therap. 
1998;286:334–340.
Cruzan G. Assessment of the cancer potential of methanol. Crit Rev Toxicol. 
2009;39:347–363.
Cruzan G, Borghoff SJ, de Peyster A, et  al. Methyl tertiary-butyl ether 
mode of action for cancer endpoints in rodents. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 
2007;47:156–165.

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1233
Cruzan G, Bus JS, Banton MI, et al. Complete attenuation of mouse lung 
cell proliferation and tumorigenicity in CYP2F2 knockout and CYP2F1 
humanized mice exposed to inhaled styrene for up to 2 years supports a 
lack of human relevance. Toxicol Sci. 2017;159:413–421.
Cruzan G, Cushman JR, Andrews LS, et al. Chronic toxicity/oncogenicity 
study of styrene in CD rats by inhalation exposure for 104 weeks. Toxicol 
Sci. 1998;46:266–281.
Cruzan G, Cushman JR, Andrews LS, et al. Chronic toxicity/oncogenicity 
study of styrene in CD-1 mice by inhalation exposure for 104 weeks. 
J Appl Toxicol. 2001;21:185–198.
Cunningham CA, Ku K, Sue GR. Propylene glycol poisoning from excess 
whiskey ingestion: a case of high osmolal gap metabolic acidosis. 
J Investig Med High Impact Case Rep. 2015;3:1–2.
Dai Y, Rashba-Step J, Cederbaum AI. Stable expression of human cyto-
chrome P4502E1 in HepG2 cells: characterization of catalytic activi-
ties and production of reactive oxygen intermediates. Biochemistry. 
1993;32:6928–6937.
d’Alessandro A, Osterloh JD, Chuwers P, et al. Formate in serum and urine 
after controlled methanol exposure at the threshold limit value. Environ 
Health Perspect. 1994;102:178–181.
Dallas CE, Ramanathan R, Muralidhara S, et al. The uptake and elimina-
tion of 1,1,1-trichloroethane during and following inhalation exposures 
in rats. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1989;98: 385–397.
Dankovic DA, Bailer AJ. The impact of exercise and intersubject variability 
on dose estimates for dichloromethane derived from a physiologically 
based pharmacokinetic model. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1994;22:20–25.
Daston G, Faustman E, Ginsberg G, et al. A framework for assessing risks 
to children from exposure to environmental agents. Environ Health 
Perspect. 2004;112:238–256.
Daughtrey WC, Gill MW, Pritts IM, et al. Neurotoxicological evaluation of 
methyl tertiary-butyl ether in rats. J Appl Toxicol. 1997;17(S1):S57–S64.
David RM, Clewell HJ, Gentry PR, et al. Revised assessment of cancer risk 
to dichloromethane. II. Application of probabilistic methods to cancer 
risk determinations. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2006;45:55–65.
Davis BJ, Almekinder JL, Flagler N, et al. Ovarian luteal cell toxicity of 
ethylene glycol monomethyl ether and methoxy acetic acid in vivo and in 
vitro. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1997;142:328–337.
Davis ME. Dichloroacetic acid and trichloroacetic acid increase chloroform 
toxicity. J Toxicol Environ Health. 1992;37:139–148.
Dayan C, Hales BF. Effects of ethylene glycol monomethyl ether and its 
metabolite, 2-methoxyacetic acid, on onganogenesis stage mouse limbs 
in vitro. Birth Defects Res Part B. 2014;101:254–261.
de Ketttenis P. The historic and current use of glycol ethers: a picture of 
change. Toxicol Lett. 2005;156:5–11.
de Peyster A, MacLean KJ, Stephens BA, et  al. Subchronic studies in 
Sprague–Dawley rats to investigate mechanisms of MTBE-induced 
Leydig cell cancer. Toxicol Sci. 2003;72:31–42.
De Salvia MA, Cagiano R, Carratu MR, et al. Irreversible impairment of 
active avoidance behavior in rats prenatally exposed to mild concentra-
tions of carbon monoxide. Psychopharmacology. 1995;122:66–71.
Degitz SJ, Rogers JM, Zucker RM, Hunter ES III. Developmental toxicity 
of methanol: pathogenesis in CD-1 and C57BL/6J mice exposed in whole 
embryo culture. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2004;70:179–184.
Dekant W. The role of biotransformation and bioactivation in toxicity. In: 
Luch A, ed. Molecular Clinical and Environmental Toxicology. Vol 1. 
Switzerland: Birkhauser Verlag; 2009:57–86.
Dekant W, Bernauer U, Rosner E, Amberg A. Biotransformation of MTBE, 
ETBE, and TAME after inhalation or ingestion in rats and humans. 
Health Effects Inst Res Report. 2001;102:29–71.
Dekant W, Metzler M, Henschler D. Identification of S-(1,2,2-trichlorovinyl)-
N-acetylcysteine as a urinary metabolite of tetrachloroethylene: 
Bioactivation through glutathione conjugation as a possible explanation 
for its nephrocarcinogenicity. J Biochem Toxicol. 1986;1:57–71.
Dell LD, Mundt KA, McDonald M, et al. Critical review of the epidemi-
ology literature on the potential cancer risks of methylene chloride. Int 
Arch Occup Environ Health. 1999;72:429–442.
Dennison JE, Bigelow PL, Mumtaz MM, et al. Evaluation of potential tox-
icity from co-exposure to three CNS depressants (toluene, ethylbenzene, 
and xylene) under resting and working conditions using PBPK modeling. 
J Occup Environ Hyg. 2005;2:127–135.
DePass LR, Garman RH, Woodside MD, et al. Chronic toxicity and onco-
genicity studies of ethylene glycol in rats and mice. Fund Appl Toxicol. 
1986;7:547–565.
de Peyster A, Mihaich E, Kim DH, et al. Responses of the steroidogenic 
pathway from exposure to methyl-tert-butyl ether and tert-butanol. 
Toxicology. 2014;319:23–37.
Devi SS, Mehendale HM. Disrupted G1 to S phase clearance via cyclin sig-
naling impairs liver tissue repair in thioacetamide-treated type I diabetic 
rats. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2005;207:89–102.
Devi SS, Mehendale HM. Microarray analysis of thioacetamide-treated 
type I diabetic rats. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2006;212:69–78.
DiVincenzo GD, Kaplan CJ. Effect of exercise or smoking on the uptake, 
metabolism and excretion of methylene chloride vapor. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 1981;59:141–148.
Diaz G, Castro JA. Covalent binding of chloroform metabolites to nuclear 
proteins—no evidence for binding to nucleic acids. Cancer Lett. 
1980;9:213–218.
DiCecco SR, Francisco-Ziller N. Nutrition in alcoholic liver disease. Nutr 
Clin Pract. 2006;21:245–254.
Diehl AM. Cytokine regulation of liver injury and repair. Immunol Rev. 
2000;174:160–171.
Dietrich DR, Swenberg JA. NCI–Black–Reiter (NBR) male rats fail to 
develop renal disease following exposure to agents that induce α-2u-
globulin (α2u) nephropathy. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1991;16:749–762.
Dietzel KD, Campbell JL, Bartlett MG, et al. Validation of a gas chroma-
tography/mass spectrometry method for quantification of aerosolized Jet 
Propellant 8. J Chromatogr A. 2005;1093:11–20.
Dill J, Fuciarelli A, Lee K, et al. Toxicokinetics of propylene glycol mono-
t-butyl ether following intravenous or inhalation exposure in rats and 
mice. Inhal Toxicol. 2004;16:271–290.
Ding X, Kaminsky LS. Human extrahepatic cytochromes P450: function in 
xenobiotic metabolism and tissue-selective chemical toxicity in the respiratory 
and gastrointestinal tracts. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 2003;43:149–173.
DiVincenzo GD, Kaplan CJ. Uptake, metabolism, and elimination of methy-
lene chloride vapor by humans. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1981;59:130–140.
Dixit R, Riviere J, Krishnan K, Andersen ME. Toxicokinetics and physi-
ologically based toxicokinetics in toxicology and risk assessment. 
J Toxicol Environ Health B. 2003;6:1–40.
Dobrev ID, Andersen ME, Yang RS. In silico toxicology: stimulating inter-
action thresholds for human exposure to mixtures of trichloroethylene, 
tetrachloroethylene, and 1,1,1-trichloroethane. Environ Health Perspect. 
2002;110:1031–1039.
Dobrev ID, Andersen ME, Yang RSH. Assessing interaction thresholds 
for trichloroethylene in combination with tetrachloroethylene and 
1,1,1-­trichloroethane using gas uptake studies and PBPK modeling. Arch 
Toxicol. 2001;75:134–144.
Dodd D, Willson G, Parkinson H, Bermudez E. Two-year drinking water 
carcinogenicity study of methyl tertiary-butyl ether (MTBE) in Wistar 
rats. J Appl Toxicol. 2013;33:593–606.
Dodo T, Taketa Y, Sugiyama M, et al. Collaborative work on evaluation of 
ovarian toxicity. 11) Two- or four-week repeated-dose studies and fertil-
ity study of ethylene glycol monomethyl ether in female rats. J Toxicol 
Sci. 2009;34(Special Issue I):SP121–SP128.
Doherty RE. A history of the production and use of carbon tetrachloride, 
tetrachloroethylene, trichloroethylene and 1,1,1-trichloroethane in 
the United States: Part 2-Trichloroethylene and 1,1,1-trichloroethane. 
J Environ Forensics. 2000;1:83–93.
Doi AM, Hill G, Seely J, et  al. α2µ-Globulin in nephropathy and renal 
tumors in National Toxicology Program studies. Toxicol Pathol. 
2007;35:533–540.
Doi AM, Roycroft JH, Herbert RA, et al. Inhalation toxicology and carcino-
genesis studies of propylene glycol mono-t-butyl ether in rats and mice. 
Toxicology. 2004;199:1–22.
Domergue J, Lison D, Haufroid V. No evidence of cardiovascular toxicity in 
workers exposed below 5 ppm carbon disulfide. Int Arch Occup Environ 
Health. 2016;89:835–845.

1234
Toxic Agents
unit V
Dorman DC, Andersen ME, Roper JM, Taylor MD. Update on a pharma-
cokinetic-centric alternative tier II program for MMT—Part I: Program 
implementation and lessons learned. J Toxicol. 2012;2012:1–10.
Dorne JLCM. Impact of inter-individual differences in drug metabolism 
and pharmacokinetics on safety evaluation. Fund Clin Pharmacol. 
2004;18:609–620.
Drake MG, Witzmann FA, Hyde J, Witten ML. JP-8 jet fuel exposure alters 
protein expression in the lung. Toxicology. 2003;191:199–210.
Dresser GK, Bailey DG. The effects of fruit juices on drug disposition: 
a new model for drug interactions. Eur J Clin Invest. 2003;33(suppl 
2):10–16.
Drew PD, Kane CJ. Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders and neuroimmune 
changes. Int Rev Neurobiol. 2014;118:41–80.
Drexler H, Ulm K, Hardt R, et al. Carbon disulphide: IV. Cardiovascular 
function in workers in the viscose industry. Int Arch Occup Environ 
Health. 1996;69:27–32.
Echeverria D, White RF, Sampaio C. A behavioral evaluation of PCE expo-
sure in patients and dry cleaners: a possible relationship between clinical 
and preclinical effects. J Occup Environ Med. 1995;37:667–680.
Edwards MJ, Keller BJ, Kauffman FC, Thurman RG. The involvement of 
Kupffer cells in carbon tetrachloride toxicity. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
1993;119:275–279.
Eells JT, Henry MM, Lewandowski MF, et al. Development and character-
ization of a rodent model of methanol-induced retinal and optic nerve 
toxicity. Neurotoxicology. 2000;21:321–330.
Eells JT, Henry MM, Summerfelt P. Therapeutic photobiomodula-
tion for methanol-induced retinal toxicity. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 
2003;100:3439–3444.
Eells JT, Salzman MM, Lewandowski MR, Murray TG. Formate-induced 
alterations in retinal function in methanol-intoxicated rats. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 1996;140:58–69.
Egbert PA, Abraham K. Ethylene glycol intoxication: Pathophysiology, 
diagnosis, and emergency management. ANNA J. 1999;26:295–302.
Elfarra AA, Krause RJ. S-(1,2,2-trichlorovinyl)-L-cysteine sulfoxide, a 
reactive metabolite of S-(1,2,2-trichlorovinyl)-L-cysteine formed in rat 
liver and kidney microsomes, is a potent nephrotoxicant. J Pharmacol 
Exp Therap. 2007;321:1095–1101.
Elliot BM, Ashby J. Review of the genotoxicity of 2-butoxyethanol. Mutat 
Res. 1997;387:89–96.
Elliott L, Longnecker MP, Kissling GE, London SJ. Volatile organic com-
pounds and pulmonary function in the Third National Examination 
Survey. Environ Health Perspect. 2006;114:1210–1214.
El-Masri HA, Bell DA, Portier CJ. Effects of glutathione transferase theta 
polymorphism on the risk estimates of dichloromethane to humans. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1999;158:221–230.
El-Masri HA, Tessari JD, Yang RS. Extrapolation of an interaction thresh-
old for the joint toxicity of trichloroethylene and 1,1-dichloroethylene: 
Utilization of a PBPK model. Arch Toxicol. 1996;70:527–539.
El-Zein R, Abdel-Rahman SZ, Morris DL, Legator MS. Exposure to eth-
ylene glycol monomethyl ether: Clinical and cytogenetic findings. Arch 
Environ Health. 2002;57:371–376.
El-Zein R, Albrecht T, Knutson E, et al. Reduction in telomere length in 
individuals exposed in utero to glycol ether. Arch Environ Occup Health. 
2007;62:161–163.
Engelke M, Tahti H, Vaalavirta L. Perturbation of artificial and biological 
membranes by organic compounds of aliphatic, alicyclic and aromatic 
structure. Toxicol In Vitro. 1996;10:111–115.
EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). Drinking Water Advisory: 
Consumer Acceptability Advice and Health Effects Analysis on Methyl 
Tertiary-Butyl Ether (MtBE). Washington, DC: Office of Water; 
December 1997.
EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). Risk Assessment Guidance for 
Superfund. Human Health Evaluation Manual Supplemental Guidance, 
Dermal Risk Assessment, Interim Guidance, Vol I. Washington, DC: 
Office of Emergency and Remedial Response; 1998a.
EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). On-line Integrated Risk Information 
System (IRIS) Substance File—1,1,1-Trichloroethane. Washington, DC, 
1998b. Available at: http://www.epa.gov/iris/subst/0020.htm.
EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). Trichloroethylene Health 
Risk Assessment: Synthesis and Characterization. External Review Draft. 
EPA/600/P-01/002A. National Center for Environmental Assessment, 
Washington, DC, 2001a.
EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). On-line Integrated Risk 
Information System (Iris) Substance File—Chloroform. Washington, DC, 
2001b. Available at: http://www.epa.gov/iris/subst/0025.htm.
EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). National Primary Drinking 
Water Regulations. EPA/816/F-02/013, Office of Ground Water and 
Drinking Water, Washington, DC, 2002. Available at: http://www.epa.
gov/safewater/mcl.html.
EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). Guidelines for Carcinogen 
Risk Assessment. Washington, DC, Risk Assessment Forum, EPA/630/P-
03/001F, 2005.
EPA (U.S. Envioronmental Protection Agency). EPA’s Toxics Release 
Inventory, 2006a. Available at: http://semanticommunity.info/EPA/Web.
EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). On-line Integrated Risk 
Information System (Iris) Substance File—Ethylene Glycol. Washington, 
DC, July 30, 2006b. Available at: http://www.epa.gov/iris/subst/0238.htm.
EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). On-line Integrated Risk 
Information System (Iris) Substance File—Ethylene Glycol mMonobu-
tyl Ether (EGBE) (2-Butoxyethanol). Washington, DC, August 1, 2006c. 
Available at: http://www.epa.gov/iris/subst/0500.htm.
EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). On-line Integrated Risk 
Information System (Iris) Substance File—Carbon Disulfide. Washington, 
DC, July 17, 2006d. Available at: http://www.epa.gov/iris/subst/0217.htm.
EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). On-line Integrated Risk 
Information System (Iris) Substance File—Benzene. Washington, DC, 
2007. Available at: http://www.epa.gov/iris/subst/index.html.
EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). Toxicological Review of 
Tetrachloroethylene (Perchloroethylene). In Support of IRIS. External 
Review Draft, EPA/635/R-08/011A, Washington, DC, 2008.
EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). Toxicological Review of 
Dichloromethane (Methylene Chloride). In Support of IRIS. External 
Review Draft, EPA/635/R-10/003A, Washington, DC, 2010a.
EPA (U.S.Environmental Protection Agency). On-line Integrated Risk 
Information System (Iris) Substance File—Carbon Tetrachloride. 
Washington, DC, 2010b. Available at: http://www.epa.gov/iris/
subst/0020.htm.
EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). Toxicological Review of 
Trichloroethylene. In Support of IRIS. External Review Draft. EPA/635/
R-09/011F, Washington, DC, 2011.
EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). TRI explorer (2012 Data 
update released March 2014), 2015.
Erdal S, Gong H Jr, Linn WS, Rykowski R. Projection of health ben-
efits from ambient ozone reduction related to the use of methyl tertiary 
butyl ether (MTBE) in the reformulated gasoline program. Risk Anal. 
1997;17:693–704.
Eschenbrenner AB, Miller E. Induction of hepatomas in mice by repeated 
oral administration of chloroform, with observations on sex differences. 
J Natl Cancer Inst. 1945;5:251–255.
Espinoza LA, Li P, Lee RY, et al. Evaluation of gene expression profile 
of keratinocytes in response to JP-8 jet fuel. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
2004;200:93–102.
Espinoza LA, Valikhani M, Cossio MJ, et  al. Altered expression of 
γ -Synuclein and detoxification-related genes in lungs of rats exposed to 
JP-8. Am J Resp Cell Mol. 2005;32:192–200.
Exon JH, Mather GG, Bussiere JL. Effects of subchronic exposure of rats to 
2-methoxyethanol or 2-butoxyethanol: Thymic atrophy and immunotox-
icity. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1991;16:830–840.
Fabrizi L, Taylor GW, Canas B, et al. Adduction of the chloroform metab-
olite phosgene to lysine residues of human histone H2B. Chem Res 
Toxicol. 2003;16:266–275.
Fang C, Behr M, Xie F, et al. Mechanism of chloroform-induced renal tox-
icity: non-involvement of hepatic cytochrome P450-dependent metabo-
lism. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2008;227:48–55.
Farsalinos KE, Baeyens F. Harmful effects from one puff of shisha-pen 
vapor: methodological and interpretational problems in the risk assess-
ment analysis. Tob Induc Dis. 2016;14:22.
Fechter LD, Fisher JW, Chapman GD, et  al. Subchronic JP-8 jet fuel 
exposure enhances vulnerability to noise-induced hearing loss in rats. J 
Toxicol Environ Health Part A. 2012;75:299–317.

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1235
Fechter LD, Gearhart C, Fulton S. Ototoxic potential of JP-8 and a Fischer-
Tropsch synthetic jet fuel following subacute inhalation exposure in rats. 
Toxicol Sci. 2010;116:239–248.
Fechter LD, Gearhart C, Fulton S, et al. JP-8 fuel can promote auditory 
impairment resulting from subsequent noise exposure in rats. Toxicol Sci. 
2007;98:510–524.
Filley CM, Halliday W, Kleinschmidt-DeMasters BK. The effects of tol-
uene on the central nervous system. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2004; 
63:1–12.
Fisher J, Lumpkin M, Boyd J, et  al. PBPK modeling of the interaction 
between carbon tetrachloride and tetrachloroethylene in mice. Environ 
Toxicol Pharmacol. 2004;16:93–105.
Fisher JW, Channel SR, Eggers JS, et al. Trichloroethylene, trichloroacetic 
acid, and dichloroacetic acid: do they affect fetal rat heart development? 
Int J Toxicol. 2001;20:257–267.
Fisher JW, Mahle D, Abbas R. A human physiologically based pharmacoki-
netic model for trichloroethylene and its metabolites, trichloroacetic acid 
and free trichloroethanol. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1998;152:339–359.
Fitzhugh OG, Nelson AA. Comparison of the chronic toxicity of triethylene 
glycol with that of diethylene glycol. J Ind Hyg Toxicol. 1946;28:40–43.
Fiume MM, Bergfeld WF, Belsito DV, et al. Safety assessment of propylene 
glycol, tripropylene glycol, and PPGs as used in cosmetics. Int J Toxicol. 
2012;31(suppl 2):245S–260S.
Fletcher CV, Acosta CP, Strykowski JM. Gender differences in human phar-
macokinetics and pharmacodynamics. J Adoles Health. 1994;15:619–629.
Folland DS, Schaffner W, Ginn EH, et  al. Carbon tetrachloride toxicity 
potentiated by isopropyl alcohol. JAMA. 1976;236:1853–1856.
Foo SC, Jeyaratnam J, Koh D. Chronic neurobehavioral effects of toluene. 
Br J Ind Med. 1990;47:480–484.
Foote RH, Farrell PB, Schlafer DH, et  al. Ethylene glycol monomethyl 
ether effects on health and reproduction in male rabbits. Reprod Toxicol. 
1995;9:527–539.
Forkert P-G, Baldwin RM, Millen B, et  al. Pulmonary bioactivation of 
trichloroethylene to chloral hydrate: relative contributions of CYP2E1, 
CYP2F, and CYP2B1. Drug Metab Dispos. 2005;33:1429–1437.
Forkert P-G, Lash L, Tardif R, et al. Identification of trichloroethylene and 
its metabolites in human seminal fluid of workers exposed to trichloro-
ethylene. Drug Metab Dispos. 2003;31:306–311.
Forkert P-G, Millen B, Lash LH, et al. Pulmonary bronchiolar cytotoxicity 
and formation of dichloroacetyl lysine protein adducts in mice treated 
with trichloroethylene. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2006;316:520–529.
Forrest MS, Lan Q, Hubbard AE, et al. Discovery of novel biomarkers by 
microarray analysis of peripheral blood mononuclear cell gene expres-
sion in benzene-exposed workers. Environ Health Perspec. 2005;113: 
801–807.
Fortenberry JD. Gasoline sniffing. Am J Med. 1985;79:740–744.
Fowles JR, Banton MI, Pottenger LH. A toxicological review of the propyl-
ene glycols. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2013;43:363–390.
Foxenberg RJ, Ellison CA, Knaak JB, et  al. Cytochrome P450-specific 
human PBPK/PD models for the organophosphorus pesticides: 
Chlorpyrifos and parathion. Toxicology. 2011;285:57–66.
Franchini I, Cavtorta A, Falzoi M, et al. Early indicators of renal damage 
in workers exposed to organic solvents. Int Arch Occup Environ Health. 
1983;52:1–9.
Franks SJ, Spendiff MK, Cocker J, Loizou GD. Physiologically based phar-
macokinetic modeling of human exposure to 2-butoxyethanol. Toxicol 
Lett. 2006;162:164–173.
Frantz SW, Beskitt JL, Grosse CM, et al. Pharmacokinetics of ethylene gly-
col. I. Plasma disposition after single intravenous, peroral, or percutane-
ous doses in female Sprague–Dawley rats and CD-1 mice. Drug Metab 
Dispos. 1996a;24:911–921.
Frantz SW, Beskitt JL, Grosse CM, et al. Pharmacokinetics of ethylene gly-
col II. Tissue distribution, dose-dependent elimination, and identification 
of urinary metabolites following single intravenous, peroral or percutane-
ous doses in female Sprague–Dawley rats and CD-1 mice. Xenobiotica. 
1996b;26:1195–1220.
Frantz SW, Beskitt JL, Tallant MJ, et  al. Pharmacokinetics of ethylene 
glycol. III. Plasma disposition and metabolic fate after single increasing 
intravenous, peroral, or percutaneous doses in the male Sprague–Dawley 
rat. Xenobiotica. 1996c;26:515–539.
Fraser MP, Cass GR, Simoneit BRT. Gas-phase and particle-phase organic 
compounds emitted from motor vehicle traffic in a Los Angeles roadway 
tunnel. Environ Sci Technol. 1998;32:2051–2060.
French SW. Epigenetic events in liver cancer resulting from alcoholic liver 
disease. Alcohol Res. 2013;35:57–67.
Frezza M, di Padova C, Pozzato G, et  al. High blood alcohol levels in 
women. The role of decreased gastric alcohol dehydrogenase activity and 
first-pass metabolism. N Engl J Med. 1990;322:95–99.
Froberg K, Dorion RP, McMartin KE. The role of calcium oxalate crys-
tal deposition in cerebral vessels during ethylene glycol poisoning. Clin 
Toxicol. 2006;44:315–318.
Fukushima T, Taki K, Ise R, et  al. MicroRNAs expression in the ethyl-
ene glycol monomethyl ether-induced testicular lesion. J Toxicol Sci. 
2011;36:601–611.
Gade A, Mortensen EL, Bruhn P. “Chronic painter’s syndrome.” A reanal-
ysis of psychological test data in a group of diagnosed cases, based 
on comparisons with matched controls. Acta Neurol Scand. 1988;77: 
293–306.
Gallucci RM, O’Dell SK, Rabe D, Fechter LD. JP-8 jet fuel exposure 
induces inflammatory cytokines in rat skin. Int Immunopharmacol. 
2004;4:1159–1169.
Gandhi M, Aweeka F, Greenblatt RM, Blaschke TF. Sex differences in 
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. Ann Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 
2004;44:499–523.
Garetano G, Gochfeld M. Factors affecting tetrachloroethylene concen-
trations in residences above dry cleaning establishments. Arch Environ 
Health. 2000;55:59–68.
Gargas ML, Burgess RJ, Voisard DE, et al. Partition coefficients of low-
molecular-weight volatile chemicals in various liquids and tissues. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1989;98:87–99.
Gargas ML, Tyler TR, Sweeney LM, et al. A toxicokinetic study of inhaled 
ethylene glycol monomethyl ether (2-ME) and validation of a physi-
ologically based pharmacokinetic model for the pregnant rat and human. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2000a;165:53–62.
Gargas ML, Tyler TR, Sweeney LM, et  al. A toxicokinetic study of 
inhaled ethylene glycol ethyl ether acetate and validation of a physi-
ologically based pharmacokinetic model for rat and human. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 2000b;165:63–73.
Garlantezec R, Warembourg C, Monfort C, et  al. Urinary glycol ether 
metabolites in women and time to pregnancy: the PELAGIE Cohort. 
Environ Health Perspect. 2013;121:1167–1173.
Garner CD, Lee EW, Louis-Ferdinand RT. Muller cell involvement 
in methanol-induced retinal toxicity. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
1995a;130:101–107.
Garner CD, Lee EW, Terzo TS, Louis-Ferdinand RT. Role of retinal metab-
olism in methanol-induced retinal toxicity. J Toxicol Environ Health. 
1995b;44:43–56.
Gasiewicz TA, Singh KP, Casado FL. The aryl hydrocarbon receptor 
has an important role in the regulation of hematopoiesis: Implications 
for benzene-induced hematopoietic toxicity. Chem-Biol Interact. 
2010;184:246–251.
Gaunt IF, Carpanini FM, Grasso P, Lansdown AB. Long-term toxicity of 
propylene glycol in rats. Food Cosmet Toxicol. 1972;10:151–162.
Ge R, Yang S, Kramer PM, et  al. The effect of dichloroacetic acid and 
trichloroacetic acid on DNA hypomethylation and cell proliferation in 
B6C3F1 mice. J Biochem Mol Toxicol. 2001;15:100–106.
Gelbke HP, Goen T, Maurer M, Sulsky SI. A review of health effects of 
carbon disulfide in viscose industry and a proposal for an occupational 
exposure limit. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2009;39(suppl 2):1–126.
Gelbke HP, Banton M, Leibold E, et  al. A critical review finds sty-
rene lacks direct endocrine disruptor activity. Crit Rev Toxicol. 
2015;45:727–764.
Geller AM, Zenick H. Aging and the environment: a research framework. 
Environ Health Perspect. 2005;113:1257–1262.
Gennari P, Naldi M, Motta R, et  al. Gamma-glutamyltransferase iso-
zymes pattern in workers exposed to tetrachloroethylene. Am J Ind Med. 
1992;21: 661–671.
Gentry PR, Covington TR, Clewell HJ III. Evaluation of the potential 
impact of pharmacokinetic differences on tissue dosimetry in offspring 
during pregnancy and lactation. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2003;38:1–16.

1236
Toxic Agents
unit V
Gerin M, Patrice S, Begin D, et al. A study of ethylene glycol exposure 
and kidney function of aircraft de-icing workers. Int Arch Occup Environ 
Health. 1997;69:255–265.
Gerr F, Letz R. Organic solvents. In: Rom WD, ed. Environmental and Occupa-
tional Medicine. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott-Raven; 1998:1091–1108.
Ghanayem BI. Metabolic and cellular basis of 2-butoxyethanol-induced 
hemolytic anemia in rats and assessment of human risk in vitro. Biochem 
Pharmacol. 1989;38:1679–1684.
Ghanayem BI, Burka LT, Matthews HB. Metabolic basis of ethylene glycol 
monobutyl ether (2-butoxyethanol) toxicity: Role of alcohol and alde-
hyde dehydrogenases. J Pharmacol Exp Therap. 1987;242:222–231.
Ghanayem BI, Burka LT, Matthews HB. Structure–activity relationships for 
the in vitro hematotoxicity of n-alkoxyacetic acids, toxic metabolites of 
glycol ethers. Chem-Biol Interact. 1989;70:339–352.
Ghanayem BI, Chapin RE. Calcium channel blockers protect against eth-
ylene glycol monomethyl ether (2-methoxyethanol)-induced testicular 
toxicity. Exp Mol Pathol. 1990;52:279–290.
Ghanayem BI, Long PH, Ward SM, et al. Hemolytic anemia, thrombosis, 
and infarction in male and female F344 rats following gavage exposure 
to 2-butoxyethanol. Exp Toxicol Pathol. 2001;53:97–105.
Gibbs BF, Mulligan CN. Styrene toxicity: An ecotoxicological assessment. 
Ecotoxicol Environ Safety. 1997;38:181–194.
Gibbs GW, Amsel J, Soden K. A cohort mortality study of cellulose triace-
tate-fiber workers exposed to methylene chloride. J Occup Environ Med. 
1996;38:693–697.
Gift JS. U.S. EPA’s IRIS assessment of 2-butoxyethanol: The relationship 
of noncancer to cancer effects. Toxicol Lett. 2005;156:163–178.
Gilger AP, Potts AM. Studies on the visual toxicity of methanol: V. The 
role of acidosis in experimental methanol poisoning. Am J Ophthalmol. 
1955;39:63–86.
Ginsberg G, Hattis D, Miller R, Sonawane B. Pediatric pharmacokinetic 
data: Implications for environmental risk assessment for children. 
Pediatrics. 2004;113:973–983.
Ginsberg G, Hattis D, Russ A, Sonawane B. Pharmacokinetic and pharma-
codynamic factors that can affect sensitivity to neurotoxic sequelae in 
elderly individuals. Environ Health Perspect. 2005;113:1243–1249.
Ginsberg G, Hattis D, Sonawane B, et al. Evaluation of child/adult pharma-
cokinetic differences from a database derived from the therapeutic drug 
literature. Toxicol Sci. 2002;66:185–200.
Ginsberg G, Slikker W Jr, Bruckner JV, Sonawane B. Incorporating chil-
dren’s toxicokinetics into a risk framework. Environ Health Perspect. 
2004;112:272–283.
Gleiter CH, Gundert-Remy U. Gender differences in pharmacokinetics. Eur 
J Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 1996;21:123–128.
Glende EA Jr, Recknagel RO. Phospholipase A2 activation and cell injury 
in isolated rat hepatocytes exposed to bromotrichloromethane, chloro-
form and 1,1-dichloroethylene as compared to effects of carbon tetra-
chloride. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1992;113:159–162.
Glover ML, Reed MD. Propylene glycol: the safe diluent that continues to 
cause harm. Pharmacotherapy. 1996;16:690–693.
Godderis L, Maertens N, de Gelder V, et al. Genetic susceptibility in solvent 
induced neurobehavioral effects. Neurotox Res. 2010;17:268–278.
Gold LS, Stewart PA, Milliken K, et al. The relationship between multiple 
myeloma and occupational exposure to six chlorinated solvents. Occup 
Environ Med. 2011;68: 391–399.
Goldenthal EI. A compilation of LD50 values in newborn and adult ani-
mals. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1971;18:185–207.
Golding BT, Watson WP. Possible mechanisms of carcinogenesis after expo-
sure to benzene. In: Singer B, Bartsch H, eds. Exocyclic DNA Adducts 
in Mutagenesis and Carcinogenesis. Lyons, France: ARC; 1999:75–88, 
IARC Publ No. 150.
Goldstein BD. Benzene toxicity. Occup Med. 1988;33:541–554.
Goldsworthy TL, Lyght O, Bumett VL, Popp JA. Potential role of α-2µ-
globulin, protein droplet accumulation, and cell replication in the renal 
carcinogenicity of rats exposed to trichloroethylene, perchloroethylene 
and pentachloroethane. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1988;96:367–379.
Goldsworthy TL, Popp JA. Chlorinated hydrocarbon-induced peroxisomal 
enzyme activity in relation to species and organ carcinogenicity. Toxicol 
Appl Pharmacol. 1987;88:225–233.
Gonzalez FJ. Role of cytochromes P450 in chemical toxicity and oxidative 
stress: studies with CYP2E1. Mutat Res. 2005;569: 101–110.
Gonzalez FJ, Shah YM. PPARα: Mechanism of species differences 
and hepatocarcinogenesis of peroxisome proliferators. Toxicology. 
2008;246:2–8.
Goodlett CR, Horn KH. Mechanisms of alcohol-induced damage to the 
developing nervous system. Alcohol Res Health. 2001;25:175–184.
Gordon SM, Brinkman MC, Ashley DL, et al. Changes in breath trihalo-
methane levels resulting from household water-use activities. Environ 
Health Perspect. 2006;114:514–521.
Gordon SM, Callahan PJ, Nishioka MG, et al. Residential environmental 
measurements in the National Human Exposure Assessment Survery 
(NHEXAS) pilot study in Arizona: Preliminary results for pesticides and 
VOCs. J Expos Anal Environ Epidemiol. 1999;9:456–470.
Gospe SM Jr, Zhou SS. Toluene abuse embryopathy: Longitudinal neu-
rodevelopmental effects of prenatal exposure to toluene in rats. Reprod 
Toxicol. 1998;12:119–126.
Gotohda T, Takunaga I, Kubo S-i, et  al. Effect of toluene inhalation on 
astrocytes and neutrotrophic factor in rat brain. Forensic Sci Internat. 
2000;113:233–238.
Graham DG, Amarnath V, Valentine WM, et al. Pathogenetic studies of hex-
ane and carbon disulfide neurotoxicity. Crit Rev Toxicol. 1995;25:91–112.
Grandison MK, Boudinot FD. Age-related changes in protein binding of 
drugs: implications for therapy. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2000;38:271–290.
Grassman JA, Kimmel CA, Neumann DA. Accounting for variability in 
responsiveness in human risk assessment. In: Neumann DA, Kimmel CA, 
eds. Human Variability in Response to Chemical Exposures. Washington, 
DC: International Life Sciences Institute; 1998:1–26.
Graves RJ, Coutts C, Green T. Methylene chloride-induced DNA damage: 
an interspecies comparison. Carcinogenesis. 1995;16:1919–1926.
Graves RJ, Green T. Mouse liver glutathione S-transferase mediated metab-
olism of methylene chloride to a mutagen in the CHO/HRPT assay. 
Mutat Res. 1996;367:143–150.
Gray TM, Steup D, Roberts LG, et al. Health assessment of gasoline and 
fuel oxygenate vapors: Reproductive toxicity assessment. Regul Toxicol 
Pharmacol. 2014;70:S48–S57.
Green T. Methylene chloride induced mouse liver and lung tumors: an over-
view of the role of mechanistic studies in human safety assessment. Hum 
Exp Toxicol. 1997b;16:3–13.
Green T. Pulmonary toxicity and carcinogenicity of trichloroethylene: 
Species differences and modes of action. Environ Health Perspect. 
2000;108(suppl 2):261–264.
Green T, Dow J, Ellis MK, et al. The role of glutathione conjugation in 
the development of kidney tumors in rats exposed to trichloroethylene. 
Chem-Biol Interact. 1997a;105:99–117.
Green T, Dow J, Ong CN, et al. Biological monitoring of kidney function 
among workers occupationally-exposed to trichloroethylene. Occup 
Environ Med. 2004;61:312–317.
Green T, Odum J, Nash JA, et  al. Perchloroethylene-induced rat kidney 
tumors: an investigation of the mechanisms involved and their relevance 
to humans. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1990;103:77–89.
Gregg SD, Fisher JW, Bartlett MG. A review of analytical methods for the 
identification and quantification of hydrocarbons found in jet propellant 8 
and related petroleum based fuels. Biomed Chromatogr. 2006;20:492–507.
Gries J-M, Benowitz N, Verotta D. Chronopharmacokinetics of nicotine. 
Clin Pharmacol Ther. 1996;60:385–395.
Guastadisegni C, Balduzzi M, Mancuso MT, Di Consiglio E. Liver mito-
chondria alterations in chloroform-treated Sprague–Dawley rats. 
J Toxicol Environ Health. 1999;57:415–429.
Guengerich FP. Cytochrome P450s and other enzymes in drug metabolism 
and toxicity. AAPS J. 2006;8:E101–E111.
Guengerich FP, Kim DH, Iwasaki M. Role of human cytochrome P-450 
IIE1 in the oxidation of many low molecular weight cancer suspects. 
Chem Res Toxicol. 1991;4:168–179.
Guerri C, Bazinet A, Riley EP. Foetal alcohol spectrum-disorders and alter-
ations in brain and behavior. Alcohol Alcohol. 2009;44:108–114.
Guo C, McMartin KE. The cytotoxicity of oxalate, metabolite of ethylene 
glycol, is due to calcium oxalate monohydrate formation. Toxicology. 
2005;208:347–355.

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1237
Guo C, Cenac TA, Li Y, McMartin KE. Calcium oxalate, and not other 
metabolies, is responsible for the renal toxicity of ethylene glycol. 
Toxicol Lett. 2007;173:8–16.
Guo L, Luo C, Fan J, et al. Serum miRNA profiling identifies miR-150/30a 
as potential biomarker for workers with damaged nerve fibers from car-
bon disulfide. Ind Health. 2015;53:38–47.
Guo Y, Wang W, Dong Y, et al. Carbon disulfide induces rat testicular injury 
via mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. Chemosphere. 2014;108:367–375.
Gupta A, Diaz FJ, Lal A, et  al. Basal ganglion hemorrhage as delayed 
complication of diethylene glycol ingestion. Am J Forensic Med Pathol. 
2017;38:39–42.
Guthrie OW, Wong BA, McInturf SM, et al. Inhalation of hydrocarbon jet 
fuel suppress central auditory nervous system function. J Toxicol Environ 
Health Part A. 2015;78:1154–1169.
Guthrie OW, Xu H, Wong BA, et al. Exposure to low levels of jet-pro-
pulsion fuel impairs brainstem encoding of stimulus intensity. J Toxicol 
Environ Health Part A. 2014;77:261–280.
Guyonnet D, Siess M-H, Le Bon A-M, Suschetet M. Modulation of phase 
II enzymes by organosulfur compounds from allium vegetables in rat tis-
sues. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1999;154:50–58.
Guyton KZ, Hogan KA, Scott CS, et al. Human health effects of tetrachlo-
roethylene: key findings and scientific issues. Environ health Perspect. 
2014;122:325–334.
Ha M-C, Cordier S, Dananche B, et al. Congenital malformations and occu-
pational exposure to glycol ethers: A European collaborative case–con-
trol study. Occup Hyg. 1996;2:417–421.
Haber LT, Maier A, Gentry PR, et al. Genetic polymorphisms in assessing 
interindividual variability in delivered dose. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 
2002;35:177–197.
Hack CE, Chiu WA, Zhao QJ, Clewell HJ. Bayesian population analysis 
of a harmonized physiologically based pharmacokinetic model of tri-
chloroethylene and its metabolites. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2006;46: 
63–83.
Hake CL, Stewart RD. Human exposure to tetrachloroethylene: inhalation 
and skin contact. Environ Health Perspect. 1977;21:231–238.
Hagiwara A, Doi Y, Imai N, et  al. Medium-term multi-organ carci-
nogenesis bioassay of ethyl tertiary-butyl ether in rats. Toxicology. 
2011;289:160–166.
Halder CA, Holdsworth CE, Cockrell BY, Piccirillo VJ. Hydrocarbon 
nephropathy in male rats: Identification of the nephrotoxic components 
of unleaded gasoline. Toxicol Ind Health. 1985;1:67–87.
Halder CA, Van Gorp GS, Hatoum NS, Warne TM. Gasoline vapor expo-
sures. Part II. Evaluation of the nephrotoxicity of the major C4/C5 hydro-
carbon components. Am Ind Hyg Assoc J. 1986;47:173–175.
Hallare AV, Gervasio MKR, Gervasio PLG, Acacio-Claro PJB. Monitoring 
genotoxicity among gasoline station attendants and traffic enforcers in 
the City of Manila using the micronucleus assay with exfoliated epithe-
lial cells. Environ Monit Assess. 2009;156:331–341.
Hamby-Mason R, Chen JJ, Schenker S, et al. Catalase mediates acetalde-
hyde formation from ethanol in fetal and neonatal rat brain. Alcoholism: 
Clin Exper Res. 1997;21:1063–1072.
Hanioka N, Jinno H, Toyo’oka T, et al. Induction of rat liver drug metabo-
lizing enzymes by tetrachloroethylene. Arch Environ Contam Toxicol. 
1995;28:273–280.
Hansen J, Raaschou-Nielson O, Christensen JM, et al. Cancer incidence 
among Danish workers exposed to trichloroethylene. J Occup Environ 
Med. 2001;43:133–139.
Hansen JM, Contreras KM, Harris C. Methanol, formaldehyde, and sodium 
formate exposure in rat and mouse conceptuses: a potential role of the 
visceral yolk sac in embryotoxicity. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 
2005;73:72–82.
Hansen L, Lange R, Gupta S. Development and evaluation of a guideline 
for monitoring propylene glycol toxicity in pediatric intensive care unit 
receiving continuous infusion Lorazepam. J Pediatr Pharmacol Ther. 
2015;20:367–372.
Hantson P, Haufroid V, Wallemacq P. Formate kinetics in methanol poison-
ing. Human Exp Toxicol. 2005;24:55–59.
Hard GC, Boorman GA, Wolf DC. Re-evaluation of the 2-year chloro-
form drinking water carcinogenicity bioassay in Osborne–Mendel rats 
supports chronic renal tubule injury as the mode of action underlying the 
renal tumor response. Toxicol Sci. 2000;53:237–244.
Hardin BD, Eisenmann CJ. Relative potency of four ethylene glycol ethers 
for induction of paw malformations in the CD-1 mouse. Teratology. 
1987;35:321–328.
Hardin BD, Goad PT, Burg JR. Developmental toxicity of four glycol ethers 
applied cutaneously to rats. Environ Health Perspect. 1984;57:69–74.
Hardin BD, Goad PT, Burg JR. Developmental toxicity of diethylene glycol 
monomethyl ether (diEGME). Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1986;6:430–439.
Harris C, Dixon M, Hansen JM. Glutathione depletion modulates methanol, 
formaldehyde and formate toxicity in cultured rat conceptuses. Cell Biol 
Toxicol. 2004;20:133–145.
Harris C, Wang SW, Lauchu JJ, Hansen JM. Methanol metabolism and 
embryotoxicity in rat and mouse conceptuses: Comparisons of alcohol 
dehydrogenase (ADH1), formaldehyde dehydrogenase (ADH3), and 
catalase. Reprod Toxicol. 2003;17:349–357.
Harris DT, Sakiestewa D, Robledo RF, Witten M. Immunotoxicological 
effects of JP-8 jet fuel exposure. Toxicol Ind Health. 1997a;13:43–55.
Harris DT, Sakiestewa D, Robledo RF, Witten M. Short-term exposure to 
JP-8 jet fuel results in long-term immunotoxicity. Toxicol Ind Health. 
1997b;13:559–570.
Harris DT, Sakiestewa D, Robledo RF, Witten M. Protection from JP-8 jet 
fuel induced immunotoxicity by administration of aerosolized substance 
P. Toxicol Ind Health. 1997c;13:571–588.
Harris DT, Sakiestewa D, Robledo RF, et  al. Effects of short-term JP-8 
jet fuel exposure on cell-mediated immunity. Toxicol Ind Health. 
2000;16:78–84.
Harris DT, Sakiestewa D, Titone D, Witten M. JP-8 jet fuel exposure rapidly 
induces high levels of IL-10 and PGE2 secretion and is correlated with 
loss of immune function. Toxicol Ind Health. 2007a;23:223–230.
Harris DT, Sakiestewa D, He X, et al. Effects of in utero JP-8 jet fuel expo-
sure on the immune systems of pregnant and newborn mice. Toxicol Ind 
Health. 2007b;23:545–552.
Harris DT, Sakiestewa D, He X, et  al. JP-8 jet fuel exposure sup-
presses the immune response to viral infections. Toxicol Ind Health. 
2008;24:209–216.
Harris DT, Sakiestewa D, Titone D, et al. JP-8 jet fuel exposure potenti-
ates tumor development in two experimental model systems. Toxicol Ind 
Health. 2007c;23:617–623.
Harris DT, Sakiestewa D, Titone D, et al. Jet fuel-induced immunotoxicity. 
Toxicol Ind Health. 2001a;16:261–265.
Harris DT, Sakiestewa D, Titone D, et al. Substance P as prophylaxis for 
JP-8 jet fuel-induced immunotoxicity. Toxicol Ind Health. 2001b;16: 
253–259.
Harris DT, Sakiestewa D, Titone D, et al. JP-8 jet fuel exposure results in 
immediate immunotoxicity, which is cumulative over time. Toxicol Ind 
Health. 2002;18:77–83.
Harry GJ, Graham DG, Valentine WM, et al. Carbon disulfide neurotoxicity 
in rats: VIII. Summary. Neurotoxicology. 1998;19:159–162.
Haryono A, Surjono TW, Sutasurya LA, Sudarwati S. Methoxyacetic acid 
induced apoptosis on the forelimb bud of Swiss Webster mice. Hayati J 
Biosci. 2011;18:33–36.
Hasegawa R, Hirata-Koizumi M, Dourson M, et al. Pediatric susceptibility 
to 18 industrial chemicals: a comparative analysis of newborn with young 
animals. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2007;47:296–307.
Haselkorn T, Whittemore AS, Udaltsova N, Friedman GD. Short-term 
chloral hydrate administration and cancer in humans. Drug Safety. 
2006;29:67–77.
Haseman JK, Hailey JR, Morris RW. Spontaneous neoplasm incidences 
in Fischer 344 rats and B6C3F1 mice in two-year carcinogenicity stud-
ies: a  National Toxicology Program update. Toxicol Pathol. 1998;26: 
428–441.
Hattis D, Banati P, Goble R, Burmaster DE. Human interindividual vari-
ability in parameters related to health risks. Risk Anal. 1999;19: 
711–726.
Hattis D, Ginsberg G, Sonawane B, et al. Differences in pharmacokinetics 
between children and adults-II. Children’s variability in drug elimination 
half-lives and in some parameters needed for physiologically based phar-
macokinetic modeling. Risk Anal. 2003;23:117–142.

1238
Toxic Agents
unit V
Hayes JR, Condie LW Jr, Borzelleca JF. The subchronic toxicity of tetra-
chloroethylene (perchloroethylene) administered in the drinking water of 
rats. Fund Appl Toxicol. 1986;7:119–125.
Hays AM, Parliman G, Pfaff JK, et al. Changes in lung permeability corre-
late with lung histology in a chronic exposure model. Toxicol Ind Health. 
1995;11(3):325–36.
Hays SM, Elswick BA, Blumenthal GM, et al. Development of a physiologically 
based pharmacokinetic model of 2-methoxyethanol and 2-methoxyacetic 
acid disposition in pregnant rats. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2000;163:67–74.
Health Canada. Priority substances list. State-of-the-Science Report for 
Ethylene Glycol. Health Canada and Environment Canada, 2000. http://
www.ec.gc.ca/substances/ese/eng/psap/final/ethyleneglycol.cfm.
Hebert JL, Fabre M, Auzepy P, Paillas J. Acute experimental poisoning by 
diethylene glycol: Acid base balance and histological data in male rats. 
Toxicol Eur Res. 1978;1:2890–2894.
Heilmair R, Lenk W, Lohr D. Toxicokinetics of diethylene glycol (DEG) in 
the rat. Arch Toxicol. 1993;67:655–666.
Heineman EF, Cocco P, Gomez MR, et al. Occupational exposure to chlo-
rinated aliphatic hydrocarbons and risk of astrocytic brain cancer. Am J 
Ind Med. 1994;26:155–169.
Heistein LC, Ramaciotti C, Scott WA, et al. Chloral hydrate sedation for 
pediatric echocardiography: Physiologic responses, adverse events, and 
risk factors. Pediatrics. 2006;117:e434–e441.
Henderson GI, Chen JJ, Schenker S. Ethanol, oxidative stress, reactive alde-
hydes, and the fetus. Front Biosci. 1999;4:D541–D550.
Henderson RF. Species differences in the metabolism of benzene. Environ 
Health Perspect. 1996;104(suppl 6):1173–1175.
Henschler D, Vamvakas S, Lammert M, et al. Increased incidence of renal 
cell tumors in a cohort of cardboard workers exposed to trichloroethene. 
Arch Toxicol. 1995;69:291–299.
Herr DW, Freeborn DL, Degn L, et  al. Neurophysiological assessment 
of auditory, peripheral nerve, somatosensory, and visual system func-
tion after developmental exposure to gasoline, E15, and E85 vapors. 
Neurotoxicol Teratol. 2016;54:78–88.
Herrlinger C, Klotz U. Drug metabolism and drug interactions in the 
elderly. Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol. 2001;15:897–918.
Hess R, Bartels MJ, Pottenger LH. Ethylene glycol: an estimate of tolerable 
levels of exposure based on a review of animal and human data. Arch 
Toxicol. 2004;78:671–680.
Hester SD, Johnstone AF, Boyes WK, et al. Acute toluene exposure alters 
expression of genes in the central nervous system associated with synap-
tic structure and function. Neurotoxicol Terotol. 2011;33:521–529.
Heywood R, Sortwell RJ, Noel PRB, et al. Safety evaluation of toothpaste 
containing chloroform. III. Long-term study in beagle dogs. J Environ 
Pathol Toxicol. 1979;2:835–851.
Hillbom M. Oxidants, antioxidants, alcohol and stroke. Front Biosci. 
1999;4:67–71.
Hinderliter PM, Price PS, Bartels MJ, et al. Development of a sources-to-
outcome model for dietary exposures to insecticide residues: an example 
using chloripyrifos. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2011;61:82–92.
Hines RN. The ontogeny of drug metabolism enzymes and implications for 
adverse drug events. Pharmacol Therap. 2008;118:250–267.
Hines RN. Developmental expression of drug metabolising enzymes: Impact 
on disposition in neonates young children. Int J Pharm. 2013;452:3–7.
Hines RN, Sargent D, Autrup H, et al. Approaches for assessing risks to sen-
sitive populations: lessons learned from evaluating risks in the pediatric 
population. Toxicol Sci. 2010;113:4–26.
Hiraku Y, Kawanishi S. Oxidative DNA damage and apoptosis induced by 
benzene metabolites. Cancer Res. 1996;56:5172–5178.
Hodgson MJ, Heyl AE, Van Thiel DH. Liver disease associated with expo-
sure to 1,1,1-trichloroethane. Arch Intern Med. 1989;149:1793–1798.
Hoflack J-C, Vasseur P, Poirier GG. Glycol ethers induce death and necrosis 
in human leukemia cells. Biochem Cell Biol. 1997;75:415–425.
Holladay SD, Comment CE, Kwon J, Luster MI. Fetal hematopoietic altera-
tions after maternal exposure to ethylene glycol monomethyl ether: pro-
lymphoid cell targeting. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1994;129:53–60.
Hong J-Y, Wang Y-Y, Bondoc FY, et al. Metabolism of methyl tert- butyl 
ether and other gasoline ethers by human liver microsomes and heterolo-
gously expressed human cytochromes P450: identification of CYP2A6 as 
a major catalyst. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1999;160:43–48.
Hooth MJ, Herbert RA, Haseman JK, et  al. Toxicology and carcino-
genesis studies of dipropylene glycol in rats and mice. Toxicology. 
2004;204:123–140.
Hopf NB, VErnez D, Berthet A, et al. Effect of age on toxicokinetics among 
human volunteers exposed to propylene glycol methyl ether (PGME). 
Toxicol Lett. 2012;211:77–84.
Horinek EL, Kiser TH, Fish DN, MacLaren R. Propylene glycol accumula-
tion in critically ill patients receiving continuous intravenous Lorazepam 
infusions. Ann Pharmacother. 2009;43:1964–1971.
House RV, Lauer LD, Murray MJ, et al. Immunological studies in B6C3F1 
mice following exposure to ethylene glycol monomethyl ether and its 
principal metabolite methoxyacetic acid. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
1985;77:358–362.
Hovda KE, Guo C, Austin R, McMartin KE. Renal toxicity of ethylene gly-
col results from internalization of calcium oxalate crystals by proximal 
tubule cells. Toxicol Lett. 2010;192:365–372.
Hsieh GY, Wang JD, Cheng TJ, Chen PC. Prolonged menstrual cycles in 
female workers exposed to ethylene glycol ethers in the semiconductor 
manufacturing industry. Occup Environ Med. 2005;62:510–516.
Huang S-M, Lesko LJL. Drug–drug, drug–dietary supplement, and drug–
citrus fruit and other food interactions: what have we learned? J Clin 
Pharmacol. 2004;44:559–569.
Huang X, Zhou Y, Ma J, et al. Nitric oxide mediated effects on reproduc-
tive toxicity caused by carbon disulfide in male rats. Environ Toxicol 
Pharmacol. 2012;34:679–687.
Huff JE, Haseman JK, DeMarini DM, et al. Multiple-site carcinogenicity of 
benzene in Fischer 344 rats and B6C3F1 mice. Environ Health Perspect. 
1989;82:125–163.
Hukkanen J. Induction of cytochrome P450 enzymes: a view on human in 
vivo findings. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2012;5:569–585.
Hunter AGW, Thompson D, Evans JA. Is there a fetal gasoline syndrome? 
Teratology. 1979;20:75–80.
IARC (International Agency for Research on Cancer). IARC Monographs 
on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans: Alcohol Drinking. 
Vol 44. Lyon, France: World Health Organization; 1988:251–259.
IARC (International Agency for Research on Cancer). IARC Monographs 
on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans. Diesel and Gasoline 
Engine Exhausts and Some Nitroarenes. Vol 46. Lyon, France: World 
Health Organization; 1989a.
IARC (International Agency for Research on Cancer). IARC Monographs 
on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans. Occupational 
Exposures in Petroleum Refining: Crude Oil and Major Petroleum Fuels. 
Vol 45. Lyon, France: World Health Organization; 1989b.
IARC (International Agency for Research on Cancer). Re-evaluation of 
Some Organic Chemicals, Hydrazine, and Hydrogen Peroxide. Vol 71. 
Lyon, France: World Health Organization; 1999:401–432.
IARC (International Agency for Research on Cancer). Summaries and 
Evaluations—Styrene (Group 2B). Vol 82. Lyon, France: World Health 
Organization; 2002:437.
IARC (International Agency for Research on Cancer). Trichloroethylene, 
Tetrachloroethylene, and Some Other Chlorinated Agents. Vol 106. Lyon, 
France: World Health Organization; 2014.
Ikonomidou C, Bittigau P, Ishimaru MJ, et  al. Ethanol-induced apop-
totic neurodegeneration and fetal alcohol syndrome. Science. 
2000;287:1056–1060.
Imam YZB, Kamran S, Karim H, et al. Neurological manifestation of rec-
reational fatal and near-fatal diethylene glycol poisonings. Medicine. 
2014;93:1–8.
Infante-Rivard C, Siemiatycki R, Nadon L. Maternal exposure to occu-
pational solvents and childhood leukemia. Environ Health Perspect. 
2005;113:787–792.
Inoue O, Seiji K, Watanabe T, et  al. Mutual metabolic suppression 
between benzene and toluene in man. Int Arch Occup Environ Health. 
1988;60:15–20.
Ioannides C, Lewis DFV. Cytochrome P450 in the bioactivation of chemi-
cals. Current Topics Med Chem. 2004;5:1767–1788.
Ishmael J, Dugard PH. A review of perchloroethylene and rat mononuclear 
cell leukemia. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2006;45:178–184.
Israel Y, Rivera-Meza M, Quintanilla ME, et al. Acetaldehyde burst protec-
tion of ADH1B*2 against alcoholism: an additional hormesis protection

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1239
against esophageal cancers following alcohol consumption? Alcohol Clin 
Exp Res. 2011;35:306–810.
Jacobsen D, Ovrebo S, Ostborg J, Sejersted OM. Glycolate causes the aci-
dosis in ethylene glycol poisoning and is effectively removed by hemodi-
alysis. Acta Med Scand. 1984;216:409–416.
Jan CR, Chen LW, Lin MW. Ca(2+) mobilization evoked by chloro-
form in Madin–Darby canine kidney cells. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 
2000;292:995–1001.
Jeannot E, Pogribny IP, Breland FA, Rusyn I. Chronic administration of 
ethanol leads to an increased incidence of hepatocellular adenoma by 
promoting H-ras-mutated cells. Cancer Lett. 2011;301:161–167.
Jia C, Yu X, Masik W. Blood/air distribution of volatile organic com-
pounds (VOCs) in a nationally representative sample. Sci Total Environ. 
2012;419:225–232.
Jiang Y, Liu J, Waalkes M, Kang YJ. Changes in gene expression associated 
with carbon tetrachloride-induced liver fibrosis persist after cessation of 
dosing in mice. Toxicol Sci. 2004;79: 404–410.
Jindo T, Wine RN, Li L-H, Chapin RE. Protein kinase activity is central to 
rat germ cell apoptosis induced by methoxyacetic acid. Toxicol Pathol. 
2001;29:607–616.
Jobson MA, Hogan SL, Maxwell CS, et al. Clinical features of reported ethyl-
ene glycol exposures in the United States. PLos One. 2015;10:e0143044.
Johanson G, Filser JG. Experimental data from closed chamber gas 
uptake studies in rodents suggest lower uptake rate of chemical than 
calculated from literature values on alveolar ventilation. Arch Toxicol. 
1992;66:291–295.
Johansson I, Ingelman-Sundberg M. Genetic polymorphism and ­toxicology—
with emphasis on cytochrome P450. Toxicol Sci. 2011;120:1–13.
Johlin FC, Swain E, Smith C, Tephly TR. Studies on the mechanism of 
methanol poisoning: purification and comparison of rat and human 
liver 
10-formyltetrahydrofolate 
dehydrogenase. 
Mol 
Pharmacol. 
1989;35:745–750.
Johns DO, Daniell WE, Shen DD, et al. Ethanol induced increase in the 
metabolic clearance of 1,1,1-trichloroethane in human volunteers. 
Toxicol Sci. 2006;92: 61–70.
Johnson BL, Boyd J, Burg JR, et al. Effects on the peripheral nervous system 
of workers’ exposure to carbon disulfide. Neurotoxicology. 1983;4:53–65.
Johnson KA, Baker PC, Kan HL, et al. Diethylene glycol monobutyl ether 
(DGBE): Two- and thirteen-week oral toxicity studies in Fischer 344 rats. 
Food Chem Toxicol. 2005;43:467–481.
Johnson PD, Goldberg SJ, Mays MZ, Dawson BV, et al. Threshold of tri-
chloroethylene contamination in maternal drinking waters affecting fetal 
heart development in the rat. Environ Health Perspect. 2003;111:289–292.
Johnsrud EK, Koukouritaki SB, Divakaran K, et  al. Human hepatic 
CYP2E1 expression during development. J Pharmacol Exp Therap. 
2003;307:402–407.
Johnston LD, O’Malley PM, Bachman JG, Schulenberg JE. Monitoring 
the Future National Results on Adolescent Drug Use: Overview of Key 
Findings. Bethesda, MD: National Institute on Drug Abuse, 2008, NIH 
Publication No. 09-7401, pp. 1–67.
Jollow DJ, Bruckner JV, McMillan DC, et al. Trichloroethylene risk assess-
ment: a review and commentary. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2009;39:782–797.
Jonker D, Woutersen RA, Fernon VJ. Toxicity of mixtures of nephrotoxi-
cants with similar or dissimilar mode of action. Food Chem Toxicol. 
1996;34:1075–1082.
Jonsson F, Bois F, Johanson G. Physiologically based pharmacokinetic 
modeling of inhalation exposure of humans to dichloromethane during 
moderate to heavy exercise. Toxicol Sci. 2001;89:209–218.
Jonsson F, Johanson G. A Bayesian analysis of the influence of GSTT1 
polymorphism on the cancer risk estimate for dichloromethane. Toxicol 
Appl Pharmacol. 2001;174:99–112.
Jonsson F, Johanson G. Physiologically based modeling of the inhalation 
kinetics of styrene in humans using a Bayesian population approach. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2002;179:35–49.
Jorgenson TA, Meierhenry EF, Rushbrook CJ, et  al. Carcinogenicity of 
chloroform in drinking water to male Osborne–Mendel rats and female 
B6C3F1 mice. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1985;5:760–769.
Kabbur MB, Rogers JV, Gunasekar PG, et al. Effect of JP-8 jet fuel on 
molecular and histological parameters related to acute skin irritation. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2001;175:83–88.
Kakehashi A, Hagiwara A, Imai N, et al. Mode of action of ethyl tertiary-
butyl ether hepatotumorigenicity in the rat: Evidence for a role of oxida-
tive stress via activation of CAR, PXR and PPAR signaling pathways. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2013;273:390–400.
Kane EV, Newton R. Occupational exposure to gasoline and the risk of 
non-Hodgkin lymphoma: A review and meta-analysis of the literature. 
Cancer Epidemiol. 2010;34:516–522.
Kaneko T, Wang P-Y, Sato A. Enzymes induced by ethanol differently 
affect the pharmacokinetics of trichloroethylene and 1,1,1-trichloroeth-
ane. Occup Environ Med. 1994;51:113–119.
Kang-Sickel J-CC, Butler MA, Frame L, et  al. The utility of naphthyl-
keratin adducts as biomarkers for jet-fuel exposure. Biomarkers. 
2011;16:590–599.
Karami S, Lan Q, Rothman N, et al. Occupational trichloroethylene expo-
sure and kidney cancer risk: a meta-analysis. Occup Environ Med. 
2012;69:858–867.
Kato S, Shields PG, Caparoso NE, et  al. Cytochrome P450IIE1 genetic 
polymorphisms, racial variation, and lung cancer risk. Cancer Res. 
1992;52:6712–6715.
Katoh M. New Energy Development Organization data. Presented at the 
Methanol Vapors and Health Effects Workshop: What we know and 
what we need to know—Summary Report. Washington, DC, ILSI Risk 
Science Institute/U.S. Environmental Protection Agency/Health Effects 
Institute/American Petroleum Institute, A-7, 1989.
Kaufman LR, LeMasters GK, Olsen DM, Succop P. Effects of concur-
rent noise and jet fuel exposure on hearing loss. J Occup Environ Med. 
2005;47:212–218.
Kavet R, Nauss KM. The toxicity of inhaled methanol vapors. Crit Rev 
Toxicol. 1990;21:21–50.
Kawamoto T, Koga M, Murata K, et  al. Effects of ALDH2, CYP1A1, 
and CYP2E1 genetic polymorphisms and smoking and drinking habits 
on toluene metabolism in humans. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1995;133: 
295–304.
Kayama F, Yamashita U, Kawamoto T, Kodama Y. Selective depletion of 
immature thymocytes by oral administration of ethylene glycol mono-
methyl ether. Int J Immunopharmacol. 1991;13:531–540.
Kearney CA, Dunham DB. Gasoline vapor exposures at a high volume ser-
vice station. Am Ind Hyg Assoc J. 1986;47:535–539.
Kedderis GL. Extrapolation of in vitro enzyme induction data to humans in 
vivo. Chem-Biol Interact. 1997;107:109–121.
Keenan JJ, Gaffney S, Gross SA, et  al. An evidence-based analysis of 
epidemiologic associations between lymphatic and hematopoietic 
cancers and occupational exposure to gasoline. Hum Exp Toxicol. 
2013;32:1007–1027.
Kegelmeyer AE, Sprankle CS, Horesovsky GJ, Butterworth BE. 
Differential display identified changes in mRNA levels in regenerat-
ing livers from chloroform-treated mice. Mol Carcinogen. 1997;20: 
288–297.
Keil DE, Warren DA, Jenny MJ, et  al. Immunological function in mice 
exposed to JP-8 jet fuel in utero. Toxicol Sci. 2003;76:347–356.
Kelsh MA, Alexander DD, Mink PJ, Mandel JH. Occupational trichloro-
ethylene exposure and kidney cancer: A meta-analysis. Epidemiology. 
2010;21: 95–102.
Kenyon EM, Kraichely RE, Hudson KT, Medinsky MA. Differences in 
rates of benzene metabolism correlate with observed genotoxicity. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1996;136:49–56.
Kerns W, Tomaszewski C, McMartin K, et al. Formate kinetics in methanol 
poisoning. Clin Toxicol. 2002;40:137–143.
Keshava N, Caldwell JC. Key issues in the role of peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptor agonism and cell signaling in trichloroethylene toxic-
ity. Environ Health Perspect. 2006;114: 1464–1470.
Kezic S, Calkoen F, Wenker M, et al. Genetic poylmorphisms of metabolic 
enzymes modifies the risk of chronic solvent-induced encephalopathy. 
Toxicol Ind Health. 2006;22:281–289.
Kienhuis AS, Soeteman-Hernandez LG, Gox PMJ, et al. Potential harmful 
health effects of inhaling nicotine-free shisha-pen vapor: A chemical risk 
assessment of the main components propylene glycol and glycerol. Tob 
Induc Dis. 2015;13:15.
Kiesswetter E, Sietmann B, Seeber A. Standardization of a questionnaire 
for neurotoxic symptoms. Environ Res. 1997;73:73–80.

1240
Toxic Agents
unit V
Kiesswetter E, Sietmann B, Zupanic M, Seeber A. Neurobehavioral study 
on the interactive effects of age and solvent exposure. Neurotoxicology. 
2000;21:685–696.
Kilburn KH. Chemical Brain Injury. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold; 
1998.
Kim B-S, Smialowicz RJ. The role of metabolism in 2-methoxyethanol 
induced suppression of in vitro polyclonal antibody responses by rat and 
mouse lymphocytes. Toxicology. 1997;123:227–239.
Kim D, Andersen ME, Chao Y-CE, et al. PBTK modeling demonstrates 
contribution of dermal and inhalation exposure components to end-
exhaled breath concentrations of naphthalene. Environ Health Perspect. 
2007;115:894–901.
Kim D, Andersen ME, Nylander-French LA. Dermal absorption and pen-
etration of jet fuel components in humans. Toxicol Lett. 2006a;165: 
11–21.
Kim D, Andersen ME, Nylander-French LA. A dermatotoxicokinetic model 
of human exposures to jet fuel. Toxicol Sci. 2006b;93:22–33.
Kim D, Ghanayem BI. Comparative metabolism and disposition of tri-
chloroethylene in CYP2E1-/- and wild-type mice. Drug Metab Dispos. 
2006a;34:2020–2027.
Kim G, Malayaman SN, Green MS. Use of methyl tert-butyl ether for the 
treatment of refractory intrahepatic biliary strictures and bile casts: a 
modern perspective. Case Rep Surg. 2015;2015:408175.
Kim HJ, Bruckner JV, Dallas CE, Gallo JM. Effect of dosing vehicles on 
the pharmacokinetics of orally administered carbon tetrachloride in rats. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1990a;102:50–60.
Kim HJ, Oden’hal S, Bruckner JV. Effect of oral dosing vehicles on 
the acute hepatotoxicity of carbon tetrachloride in rats. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 1990b;102:34–49.
Kim HK, Takematsu M, Biary R, et al. Epidemic gasoline exposures follow-
ing hurricane Sandy. Prehosp Disaster Med. 2013;28:586–591.
Kinirons MT, O’Mahony MS. Drug metabolism and aging. Br J Clin 
Pharmacol. 2004;57:540–544.
Kirman CR, Sweeney LM, Corley R, Gargas ML. Using physiologically 
based pharmacokinetic modeling to address nonlinear kinetics and 
changes in rodent physiology and metabolism due to aging and adapta-
tion in deriving reference values for propylene glycol methyl ether and 
propylene glycol methyl ether acetate. Risk Anal. 2005;25:271–284.
Kirschmann JC, Brown NM, Coots RH, et al. Review of investigations of 
dichloromethane metabolism and subchronic oral toxicity as the basis for 
the design of chronic oral studies in rats and mice. Food Chem Toxicol. 
1986;24:943–949.
Klaassen CD, Plaa GL. Relative effects of various chlorinated hydrocar-
bons on liver and kidney function in mice. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
1966;9:139–151.
Klaunig JE, Babich MA, Baetcke KP, et al. PPARalpha agonist-induced 
rodent tumors: Modes of action and human relevance. Crit Rev Toxicol. 
2003;33:655–780.
Klaunig JE, Babich MA, Cook JC, et  al. PPARα and effects of TCE. 
Environ Health Perspect. 2007;115:A14–A15.
Klaunig JE, Kamendulis LM. Mode of action of butoxyethanol-induced 
mouse liver hemangiosarcomas and hepatocellular carcinomas. Toxicol 
Lett. 2005;156:107–115.
Klaunig JE, Ruch RJ, Pereira MA. Carcinogenicity of chlorinated methane 
and ethane compounds administered in drinking water to mice. Environ 
Health Perspect. 1986;69:89–95.
Klotz U. Pharmacokinetics and drug metabolism in the elderly. Drug Metab 
Rev. 2009;41:67–76.
Klotz U, Ammon E. Clinical and toxicological consequences of the induc-
tive potential of ethanol. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 1998;54:7–12.
Kobayashi K, Urashima K, Shimada N, Chiba K. Substrate specificity for 
rat cytochrome P450 (CYP) isoforms: Screening with cDNA-expressed 
systems in rats. Biochem Pharmacol. 2002;63:889–896.
Koizumi A, Kumai M, Ikeda M. In vivo suppression of 1,1,1-trichloroeth-
ane metabolism by co-administered tetrachloroethylene: an inhalation 
study. Bull Environ Contam Toxicol. 1982;29: 196–199.
Kolovou GD, Salpea KD, Anagnostopoulou KK, Mikhailidis DP. Alcohol 
use, vascular disease, and lipid-lowering drugs. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 
2006;318:1–7.
Kostic MA, Dart RC. Rethinking the toxic methanol level. J Toxicol Clin 
Toxicol. 2003;41:793–800.
Kozlosky J, Bonventre J, Cooper K. Methyl tert butyl ether (MTBE) is anti-
angiogenic in both in vitro and in vivo mammalian model systems. J Appl 
Toxicol. 2013;33:820–827.
Kraul H, Jahn F, Braunlich H. Nephrotoxic effects of diethylene glycol 
(DEG) in rats. Exp Pathol. 1991;42:27–32.
Krause RJ, Lash LH, Elfarra AA. Human kidney flavin-containing monoxy-
genases and their potential roles in cysteine S-conjugate metabolism and 
nephrotoxicity. J Pharmacol Exp Therap. 2003;304:185–191.
Kril JJ, Halliday GM, Svoboda MD, Cartwright H. The cerebral cortex is 
damaged in chronic alcoholics. Neuroscience. 1997;79:983–998.
Krishnan K, Johanson G. Physiologically-based pharmacokinetic and 
toxicokinetic models in cancer risk assessment. J Environ Sci Health. 
2005;23:31–53.
Ku MC, Huang CC, Kuo HC, et al. Diffuse white matter lesions in carbon 
disulfide intoxication: Microangiopathy or demyelination. Eur Neurol. 
2003;50:220–224.
Ku WW, Wine RN, Chae BY, et al. Spermatocyte toxicity of 2-methoxy-
ethanol (ME) in rats and guinea pigs: Evidence for the induction of apop-
tosis. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1995;134:100–110.
Kuna RA, Ulrich CE. Subchronic inhalation toxicity of two motor fuels. 
J Am Col Toxicol. 1984;3:217–229.
Laitinen J, Liesivuori J, Savolainen H. Exposure to glycols and their renal 
effects in motor servicing workers. Occup Med. 1995;45:259–262.
LaKind JS, McKenna EA, Hubner RP, Tardiff RG. A review of the com-
parative mammalian toxicity of ethylene glycol and propylene glycol. 
Crit Rev Toxicol. 1999;29:331–365.
Lam C-W, Galen TJ, Boyd JF, Pierson DL. Mechanism of transport and 
distribution of organic solvents in blood. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
1990;104:117–129.
Lamb JC IV, Gulati DK, Russell VS, et al. Reproductive toxicity of ethyl-
ene glycol monoethyl ether tested by continuous breeding of CD-1 mice. 
Environ Health Perspect. 1984;57:85–90.
Lan O, Zhang L, Li G, et al. Hematotoxicity in workers exposed to low 
levels of benzene. Science. 2004;306: 1774–1776.
Lan Q, Zyang L, Tang X, et al. Occupational exposure to trichloroethylene 
is associated with a decline in lymphocyte subsets and soluble CD27 and 
CD30 markers. Carcinogenesis. 2010;31:1592–1596.
Landrigan PJ, Goldman LR. Children’s vulnerability to toxic chemicals: A 
challenge and opportunity to strengthen health and environmental policy. 
Health Affairs. 2011;30: 842–850.
Landry GM, Dunning CL, Abreo F, et  al. Diethylene glycol-induced 
toxicities show marked threshold dose response in rats. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 2015;282:244–251.
Landry GM, Martin S, McMartin KE. Diglycolic acid is the nephrotoxic 
metabolite in diethylene glycol poisoning inducing necrosis in human 
proximal tubule cells in vitro. Toxicol Sci. 2011;124:35–44.
Landtblom A-M. Exposure to organic solvents and multiple sclerosis. 
Neurology. 1997;49:570–574.
Landtblom A-M, Wateson M, Ahmad A, Soderkvist P. Multiple sclero-
sis and exposure to organic solvents investigated by genetic polymor-
phisms of the GSTM1 and CYP2D6 enzyme systems. Neurol Sci. 
2003;24:248–251.
Lanes SF, Rothman KJ, Dreyer NA, et al. Mortality update of cellulose fiber 
production workers. Scand J Work Environ Health. 1993;19:426–428.
Lanigan S. Final report on the safety assessment of methyl alcohol. Int J 
Toxicol. 2001;20(suppl 1):57–85.
Larson JL, Bull RJ. Effect of ethanol on the metabolism of trichloroethyl-
ene. J Toxicol Environ Health. 1989;28:395–406.
Larson JL, Wolf DC, Butterworth BE. Induced cytotoxicity and cell pro-
liferation in the hepatocarcinogenicity of chloroform in female B6C3F1 
mice: comparison of administration by gavage in corn oil vs ad libitum in 
drinking water. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1994;22:90–102.
Lash AA, Becker CE, So Y, Shore M. Neurotoxic effects of methylene chlo-
ride: are they long lasting in humans? Br J Ind Med. 1991;48:418–426.
Lash LH, Chiu WA, Guyton KZ, Rusyn I. Trichloroethylene biotransforma-
tion and its role in mutagenicity, carcinogenicity and target organ toxic-
ity. Mut Res. 2014;762:22–36.

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1241
Lash LH, Fisher JW, Lipscomb JC, Parker JC. Metabolism of trichloroeth-
ylene. Environ Health Perspect. 2000a;108(suppl 2):177–200.
Lash LH, Parker JC. Hepatic and renal toxicities associated with perchloro-
ethylene. Pharmacol Rev. 2001;53:177–208.
Lash LH, Parker JC, Scott CS. Modes of action of trichloroethylene for 
kidney tumorigenesis. Environ Health Perspect. 2000b;108(suppl 
2):225–240.
Lash LH, Putt DA, Brashear WT, et al. Identification of S-(1,2-dichlorovinyl) 
glutathione in the blood of human volunteers exposed to trichloroethyl-
ene. J Toxicol Environ Health A. 1999;56: 1–21.
Lash LH, Putt DA, Huang P, et  al. Modulation of hepatic and renal 
metabolism and toxicity of trichloroethylene and perchloroethylene by 
alterations in status of cytochrome P450 and glutathione. Toxicology. 
2007;235:11–26.
Lash LH, Putt DA, Hueni SE, et al. Roles of necrosis, apoptosis, and mito-
chondrial dysfunction in S-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-L-cysteine sulfoxide-
induced cytotoxicity in primary cultures of human renal proximal tubular 
cells. J Pharmacol Exp Therap. 2003;305:1163–1172.
Lash LH, Putt DA, Hueni SE, Horwitz BP. Molecular markers of tri-
chloroethylene-induced toxicity in human kidney cells. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 2005;206:157–168.
Lash LH, Putt DA, Parker JC. Metabolism and tissue distribution of orally 
administered trichloroethylene in male and female rats: identification of 
glutathione- and cytochrome P-450-derived metabolites in liver, kidney, 
blood, and urine. J Toxicol Environ Health A. 2006;69: 1285–1309.
Lash LH, Qian W, Putt DA, et al. Renal and hepatic toxicity of trichloro-
ethylene and its glutathione-derived metabolites in rats and mice: Sex-, 
species- and tissue-dependent differences. J Pharmacol Exp Therap. 
2001;297:155–164.
Lash LH, Qian W, Putt DA, et al. Renal toxicity of perchloroethylene and 
S-(1,2,2-trichlorovinyl)glutathione in rats and mice: Sex- and species-
dependent differences. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2002;179:163–171.
Lash LH, Sausen PJ, Duescher RJ. Roles of cysteine β-lyase and S-oxidase 
in nephrotoxicity: studies with S-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-4-cysteine and 
S-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-L-cysteine sulfoxide. J Pharmacol Exp Therap. 
1994;269:374–383.
Laughter AR, Dunn CS, Swanson CL, et al. Role of the peroxisome prolif-
erators-activated receptor alpha (PPARalpha) in responses to trichloro-
ethylene and metabolites, trichloroacetate and dichloroacetate in mouse 
liver. Toxicology. 2004;203:83–98.
Lauwerys R, Herbrand J, Buchet JP, et al. Health surveillance of workers 
exposed to tetrachloroethylene in dry cleaning shops. Int Arch Occup 
Environ Health. 1983;52: 69–77.
Leavens TL, Borghoff SJ. Physiologically based pharmacokinetic model of 
methyl tertiary butyl ether and tertiary butyl alcohol dosimetry in male 
rats based on binding to α2u-globulin. Toxicol Sci. 2009;109:321–335.
Leblond F, Guevin C, Demers C, et al. Downregulation of hepatic cytochrome 
P450 in chronic renal failure. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2001;12:326–332.
Lecuyer M, Laquerriere A, Bekri S, et al. PLGF, a placental marker of fetal 
brain defects alter in utero alcohol exposure. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 
2017;6:44.
Lee BL, Yang XF, New AL, Ong CN. Liquid chromatographic determina-
tion of urinary 2-thiothiazlidine-4-carboxylic acid, a biomarker of carbon 
disulphide exposure. J Chromatogr B. 1995;668:265–272.
Lee EW, Terzo TS, D’Arcy JB, et al. Lack of blood formate accumulation 
in humans following exposure to methanol vapor at the current permis-
sible exposure limit of 200 ppm. Am Ind Hyg Assoc J. 1992;53:99–104.
Lee JS, Ward WO, Wolf DC, et  al. Coordinated changes in xenobiotic 
metabolizing enzyme gene expression in aging male rats. Toxicol Sci. 
2008;106:263–283.
Lee KM, Bruckner JV, Muralidhara S, Gallo JM. Characterization of pre-
systemic elimination of trichloroethylene and its nonlinear kinetics in 
rats. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1996;139:262–271.
Lee KM, Dill JA, Chou BJ, Roycroft JH. Physiologically based pharma-
cokinetic model for chronic inhalation of 2-butoxyethanol. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 1998;153:211–226.
Lee LJ, Chung CW, Ma YC, et al. Increased mortality odds ratio of male 
liver cancer in a community contaminated by chlorinated hydrocarbons 
in groundwater. Occup Environ Med. 2003;60:364–369.
Lee RD, An SM, Kim SS, et al. Neurotoxic effects of alcohol and acet-
aldehyde during embryonic development. J Toxicol Environ Health A. 
2005;68:2147–2162.
Lee SL, Chau GY, Yao CT, et al. Functional assessment of human alcohol 
dehydrogenase family in ethanol metabolism: Significance of first-pass 
metabolism. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2006;30:1132–1142.
Lemazurier E, Lecomte A, Robidel F, Bois FY. Propylene glycol mono-
methyl ether. A three-generation study of isomer beta effects on repro-
duction and developmental parameters in rats. Toxicol Ind Health. 
2005;21:33–40.
Lenk W, Lohr D, Sonnenbichler J. Pharmacokinetics and biotransforma-
tion of diethylene glycol and ethylene glycol in the rat. Xenobiotica. 
1989;19:961–979.
Leth PM, Gregersen M. Ethylene glycol poisoning. Forensic Sci Int. 
2005;155:179–184.
Leung H-W, Paustenbach DJ. Physiologically based pharmacokinetic and 
pharmacodynamic modeling in health risk assessment and characteriza-
tion of hazardous substances. Toxicol Lett. 1995;79:55–65.
Lewis DFV, Ioannides C, Parke DV. Cytochrome P450 and species differ-
ences in xenobiotic metabolism and activation of carcinogen. Environ 
Health Perspect. 1998;106:633–641.
Lewis JG, Graham DG, Valentine WM, et  al. Exposure of C57BL/6 
mice to carbon disulfide induces early lesions of atherosclerosis and 
enhances arterial fatty deposits induced by a high fat diet. Toxicol Sci. 
1999;49:124–132.
Li G-L, Linet MS, Hayes RB, et al. Gender differences in hematopoietic 
and lymphoproliferative disorders and other cancer risks by major occu-
pational group among workers exposed to benzene in China. J Occup 
Med. 1994;36:875–881.
Li K, Jing Y, Yang C, et al. Increased leukemia-associated gene expression 
in benzene-exposed workers. Sci Rep. 2014;4:5369.
Li L-H, Wine RN, Miller DS, et al. Protection against methoxyacetic-acid-
induced spermatocyte apoptosis with calcium channel blockers in cul-
tured rat seminiferous tubules: Possible mechanisms. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 1997;144:105–119.
Li Y, McLaren MC, McMartin KE. Involvement of urinary proteins in the 
rat strain differences in sensitivity to ethylene glycol-induced renal toxic-
ity. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2010;299:F605–F615.
Li Y, McMartin KE. Strain differences in urinary factors that promote cal-
cium oxalate crystal formation in the kidneys of ethylene glycol-treated 
rats. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2009;296:F1080–F1087.
Liao KH, Tan Y-M, Conolly RB, et  al. Bayesian estimation of pharma-
cokinetic and pharmacodynamics parameters in a mode-of-action-
based cancer risk assessment for chloroform. Risk Anal. 2007;27: 
1535–1551.
Licata AC, Dekant W, Smith CE, Borghoff SJ. A physiologically based phar-
macokinetic model for methyl tert -butyl ether in humans: Implementing 
sensitivity and variability analyses. Toxicol Sci. 2001;62:191–204.
Lieber CS. Cytochrome P4502E1: its physiological and pathological role. 
Physiol Rev. 1997;77:517–544.
Lieber CS. Alcoholic fatty liver: its pathogenesis and mechanism of pro-
gression to inflammation and fibrosis. Alcohol. 2004;34:9–19.
Lilly PD, Thorton-Manning JR, Gargas ML, et al. Kinetic characterization 
of CYP2E1 inhibition in vivo and in vitro by the chloroethylenes. Arch 
Toxicol. 1998;72:609–621.
Lim TY, Poole RL, Pageler NM. Propylene glycol toxicity in children. J 
Pediatr Pharmacol Ther. 2014;19:277–282.
Limaye PB, Apte UM, Shankar K, et al. Calpain release from dying hepato-
cytes mediates progression of acute liver injury induced by model hepa-
totoxicants. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2003;191:211–226.
Limon-Flores AY, Chacon-Salinas R, Ramos G, Ullrich SE. Mast cells 
mediate the immune suppression induced by dermal exposure to JP-8 jet 
fuel. Toxicol Sci. 2009;112:144–152.
Lin B, Ritchie GD, Rossi J III, Pancrazio JJ. Gene expression profiles in 
the rat central nervous system induced by JP-8 jet fuel vapor exposure. 
Neurosci Lett. 2004;363:233–238.
Lin JH, Lu AYH. Interindividual variability in inhibition and induc-
tion of cytochrome P450 enzymes. Ann Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 
2001;41:535–567.

1242
Toxic Agents
unit V
Lin B, Ritchie GD, Rossi J III, Pancrazio JJ. Identification of target genes 
responsive to JP-8 exposure in the rat central nervous system. Toxicol Ind 
Health. 2001a;17:262–269.
Lin Y, Egeghy PP, Rappaport SM. Relationships between levels of vola-
tile organic compounds in air and blood from the general population. J 
Exposure Sci Environ Epidemiol. 2008;18:421–429.
Lin Y-S, Smith TJ, Kelsey KT, Wypij D. Human physiological fac-
tors in respiratory uptake of 1,3-butadiene. Environ Health Perspect. 
2001b;109:921–926.
Lindstrom AB, Yeowell-O’Connell K, Waidyanatha S, et al. Measurement 
of benzene oxide in the blood of rats following administration of ben-
zene. Carcinogenesis. 1997;18:1637–1641.
Lington AW, Dodd DE, Ridlon SA, et al. Evaluation of 13-week inhalation 
toxicity study on methyl t -butyl ether (MTBE) in Fischer 344 rats. J Appl 
Toxicol. 1997;17(S1):S37–S44.
Linhart I, Gut I, Smejkal J, Novak J. Biotransformation of styrene in mice. 
Stereochemical aspects. Chem Res Toxicol. 2000;13:36–44.
Lipscomb JC. Evaluating the relationship between variance in enzyme 
expression and toxicant concentration in health risk assessment. Human 
Ecol Risk Assess. 2004;10:39–55.
Lipscomb JC, Teuschler LK, Swartout J, et al. The impact of cytochrome 
P450 2E1-dependent metabolic variance on a risk-relevant pharmacoki-
netic outcome in humans. Risk Anal. 2003;23:1221–1238.
Liu L, Zhang Q, Feng J, et al. The study of DNA oxidative damage in ben-
zene-exposed workers. Mutation Res. 1996;370:145–150.
Liu S-L, Esposti SD, Yao T, et al. Vitamin E therapy of acute CCl4-induced 
hepatic injury in mice is associated with inhibition of nuclear factor 
kappa B binding. Hepatology. 1995;22:1474–1481.
Liu S, Yao Y, Lu S, et al. The role of renal proximal tubule P450 enzymes in 
chloroform-induced nephrotoxicity: utility of renal specific P450 reductase 
knockout mouse models. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2013;272:230–237.
Liu Y, Bartlett MG, White CA, et al. Presystemic elimination of trichloro-
ethylene in rats following environmentally relevant oral exposures. Drug 
Metab Dispos. 2009;37:1994–1998.
Liu Y, Zhang J-W, Li W, et al. Ginsenoside metabolites, rather than natu-
rally occurring ginsenosides, lead to inhibition of human cytochrome 
P450 enzymes. Toxicol Sci. 2006;91:356–364.
Lock EA, Barth JL, Argraves SW, Schnellmann RG. Changes in gene 
expression in human renal proximal tubule cells exposed to low concen-
trations of S-(1,2-dichlorovinyl)-l-cysteine, a metabolite of trichloroeth-
ylene. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2006;216:319–330.
Lock EA, Reed CJ. Trichloroethylene: Mechanisms of renal toxic-
ity and renal cancer and relevance to risk assessment. Toxicol Sci. 
2006;91:313–331.
Lock EA, Zhang J, Checkoway H. Solvents and Parkinson’s disease: a sys-
tematic review of toxicological and epidemiological evidence. Toxicol 
Appl Pharmacol. 2013;266:345–355.
Lockard VG, Mehendale HM, O’Neal RM. Chlordecone-induced poten-
tiation of carbon tetrachloride hepatotoxicity: a morphometric and bio-
chemical study. Exp Mol Pathol. 1983;39:246–256.
Lockley DJ, Howes D, Williams FM. Cutaneous metabolism of glycol 
ethers. Arch Toxicol. 2005;79:160–168.
Lof A, Johanson G. Toxicokinetics of organic solvents: a review of modify-
ing factors. Crit Rev Toxicol. 1998;28:571–650.
Lopez-Diazguerrero NE, Luna-Lopez A, Gutierrez-Ruiz MC, et  al. 
Susceptibility of DNA to oxidative stressors in young and aging mice. 
Life Sci. 2005;77:2840–2854.
Lopreato GF, Phelan R, Borghese CM, et al. Inhaled drugs of abuse enhance 
serotonin-3 receptor function. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2003;70:11–15.
Lorente C, Cordier S, Bergeret A, et al. Maternal occupational risk fac-
tors for oral clefts. Occupational exposure and congenital malformation 
working group. Scand J Work Environ Health. 2000;26:137–145.
Lorenz J, Glatt HR, Fleishmann R, et al. Drug metabolism in man and its 
relationship to that in three rodent species: monooxygenase, epoxide 
hydrolase, and glutathione S-transferase activities in subcellular fractions 
of lung and liver. Biochem Med. 1984;32:43–56.
Louisse J, Bai Y, Verwei M, et al. Decrease of intracellular pH as possible 
mechanism of embryotoxicity of glycol ether alkoxyacetic acid metabo-
lites. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2010a;245:236–243.
Louisse J, de Jong E, van de Sandt JJM, et al. The use of in vitro toxicity 
data and physiologically based kinetic modeling to predict dose-response 
curves for in vivo developmental toxicity of glycol ethers in rat and man. 
Toxicol Sci. 2010b;118:470–484.
Loury DJ, Smith-Oliver T, Butterworth BE. Assessment of unscheduled 
DNA and replicative DNA synthesis in rat kidney cells exposed in vitro or 
in vivo to unleaded gasoline. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1987;87:127–140.
Lu Y, Cederbaum AI. CYP2E1 and oxidative liver injury by alcohol. Free 
Radic Biol Med. 2008;44: 723–738.
Lu Y, Rieth S, Lohitnavy M, et al. Application of PBPK modeling in support 
of the derivation of toxicity reference values for 1,1,1-trichloroethane. 
Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2008;50:249–260.
Lu Y, Wu D, Wang X, et al. Chronic alcohol-induced liver injury and oxi-
dant stress are decreased in cytochrome P4502E1 knockout mice and 
restored in humanized cytochrome P4502E1 knock-in mice. Free Radic 
Biol Med. 2010;49:1406–1416.
Lubman DI, Yucel M, Lawrence AJ. Inhalant abuse among adolescents: 
neurobiological considerations. Br J Pharmacol. 2008;154:316–326.
Lucas D, Farez C, Bardou LG, et al. Cytochrome P450 2E1 activity in dia-
betic and obese patients as assessed by chlorzoxazone hydroxylation. 
Fundam Clin Pharmacol. 1998;12:553–558.
Luke NS, Sams R, DeVito MJ, et al. Development of a quantitative model 
incorporating key events in a hepatotoxic mode of action to predict tumor 
incidence. Toxicol Sci. 2010;115:253–266.
Luo JC, Chang HY, Chang SJ, et al. Elevated triglyceride and decreased 
high density lipoprotein level in carbon disulfide workers in Taiwan. J 
Occup Environ Med. 2003;45:73–78.
Lykke AWJ, Stewart BW. Fibrosing alveolitis (pulmonary interstitial fibro-
sis) evoked by experimental inhalation of gasoline vapours. Experientia. 
1978;34:498.
Lynge E, Andersen A, Rylander L, et  al. Cancer in persons working 
in dry cleaning in the Nordic countries. Environ Health Perspect. 
2006;114:213–219.
Lyons MA, Yang RSH, Mayeno AN, Reisfeld B. Computational toxicol-
ogy of chloroform: reverse dosimetry using Bayesian inference, Markov 
chain Monte Carlo simulation, and human biomonitoring data. Environ 
Health Perspect. 2008;116:1040–1046.
Ma JD, Nafziger AN, Bertino JS Jr. Genetic polymorphisms of cyto-
chrome P450 enzymes and the effect on interindividual, pharmacoki-
netic variability in extensive metabolizers. J Clin Pharmacol. 2004;44: 
447–456.
MacFarland HN, Ulrich CE, Holdsworth CE, et al. A chronic inhalation 
study with unleaded gasoline vapor. J Am Col Toxicol. 1984;3:231–248.
Mainwaring GW, Williams SM, Foster JR, et al. The distribution of Theta-
class glutathione S-transferase in the liver and lung of mouse, rat and 
human. Biochem J. 1996;318: 297–303.
MAK. List of MAK and BAT Values. Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft. 
Commission for the Investigation of Health Hazards of Chemical 
Compounds in the Work Area. Report No. 47, 2011. Available at: http://
www.dfg.de.
Makri A, Goveia M, Balbus J, Parkin R. Children’s susceptibility to chemi-
cals: a review by developmental stage. J Toxicol Environ Health Part B. 
2004;7:417–435.
Maldonado G, Delzell E, Tyl RW, Sever LE. Occupational exposure to gly-
col ethers and human congenital malformations. Int Arch Occup Environ 
Health. 2003;76:405–423.
Mally A, Walker CL, Everitt JI, et al. Analysis of renal cell transforma-
tion following exposure to trichloroethene in vivo and its metabolite 
S-(dichlorovinyl)-l-cysteine in vitro. Toxicology. 2006;224:108–118.
Maltoni C, Cotti G, Patella V. Results of long-term carcinogenicity bio-
assays on Sprague-Dawley rats of methyl chloroform, administered by 
ingestion. Acta Oncol. 1986;7:101–107.
Mandel JH, Kelsh MA, Mink PJ. Occupational trichloroethylene expo-
sure and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma: a meta-analysis and review. Occup 
Environ Med. 2006;63:597–607.
Mandel JS, McLaughlin JK, Schlehofer B, et  al. International renal-cell 
cancer study. IV. Occupation. Int J Cancer. 1995;61:601–605.
Mandrekar P, Szabo G. Signaling pathways in alcohol-induced liver inflam-
mation. J Hepatol. 2009;50:1258–1266.

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1243
Manfra L, Tornambe A, Savorelli F, et al. Ecotoxicity of diethylene gly-
col and risk assessment for marine environment. J Hazard Mater. 
2015;284:130–135.
Mangoni AA, Jackson SHD. Age-related changes in pharmacokinetics and 
pharmacodynamics: basic principles and practical applications. Br J Clin 
Pharmacol. 2003;57:6–14.
Mani C, Freeman S, Nelson DO, et al. Species and strain comparisons in 
the macromolecular binding of extremely low doses of [14C] benzene 
in rodents using accelerator mass spectrophotometry. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 1999;159:83–90.
Manibusan MK, Odin M, Eastmond DA. Postulated carbon tetrachloride 
mode of action: a review. J Environ Sci Health C. 2007;25:185–209.
Manikkam M, Guerrero-Bosagna C, Tracey R, et al. Transgenerational actions 
of environmental compounds on reproductive disease and identification of 
epigenetic biomarkers of ancestral exposures. PLos One. 2012;7:e31901.
Manno M, Rezzadore M, Grossi M, Sbrana C. Potentiation of occupa-
tional carbon tetrachloride toxicity by ethanol abuse. Hum Exp Toxicol. 
1996;15:294–300.
Marino DJ, Clewell HJ, Gentry PR, et al. Revised assessmenmt of cancer 
risk to dichloromethane. I. Bayesian PBPK and dose-response modeling 
in mice. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2006;45:44–54.
Maronpot RR, Devereux TR, Hegi M, et al. Hepatic and pulmonary car-
cinogenicity of methylene chloride in mice: a search for mechanisms. 
Toxicology. 1995;102:73–81.
Marraffa JM, Holland MG, Stork CM, et  al. Diethylene glycol: widely 
used solvent presents serious poisoning potential. J Emerg Med. 
2008;35:401–406.
Marrubini G, Castoldi AF, Coccini T, Manzo L. Prolonged ethanol inges-
tion enhances benzene myelotoxicity and lowers urinary concentrations 
of benzene metabolite levels in CD-1 mice. Toxicol Sci. 2003;75:16–24.
Martin SA, Campbel JL, Tremblay RT, Fisher JW. Development of a physi-
ologically based pharmacokinetic model for inhalation of jet fuels in the 
rat. Inhal Toxicol. 2012;24:1–26.
Martin SA, Tremblay RT, Brunson KF, et al. Characterization of a nose-
only inhalation exposure system for hydrocarbon mixtures and jet fuels. 
Inhal Toxicol. 2010;22:382–393.
Martin-Amat G, McMartin KE, Hayreh SS, et  al. Methanol poison-
ing: ocular toxicity produced by formate. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
1978;45:201–208.
Martinasevic K, Green MD, Baron J, Tephly TR. Folate and 10-formyltetra-
hydrofolate dehydrogenase in human and rat retina: Relation to methanol 
toxicity. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1996;141:373–381.
Marty MS, Andrus AK, Bell MP, et  al. Cholinesterase inhibition and 
toxicokinetics in immature and adult rats after acute or repeated expo-
sures to chloropyrifos or chlorpyrifos-oxon. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 
2012;63:209–224.
Mason TJ, McKay FW. U.S. Cancer Mortality by County:1950–1969. NIH 
Publ. No. 74-615. National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, 1975.
Mathews JM, Parker MK, Matthews HB. Metabolism and disposition of 
diethylene glycol in rat and dog. Drug Metab Dispos. 1991;19:1066–1070.
Matonoski G, Elliott E, Tao X, et al. Lymphohematopoietic cancers and 
butadiene and styrene exposure in synthetic rubber manufacture. Ann NY 
Acad Sci. 1997;837:157–169.
Mattie DR, Alden CL, Newell TK, et al. A 90-day continuous vapor inhala-
tion toxicity study of JP-8 jet fuel followed by 20–21 months of recovery 
in Fischer 344 rats and C57BL/6 mice. Toxicol Pathol. 1991;19:77–87.
Mattie DR, Sterner TR. Past, present and emerging toxicity issues for jet 
fuel. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2011;254:127–132.
Mattsson JL, Albee RR, Lomax LG, et al. Neutotoxicologic examination of 
rats exposed to 1,1,1-trichloroethane vapor for 13 weeks. Neurotoxicol 
Teratol. 1993;15:313–326.
Maule AL, Proctor SP, Blount BC, et al. Volatile organic compounds in 
blood as biomarkers of exposure to JP-8 jet fuel among US Air Force 
personnel. JOEM. 2016;58:24–29.
Maurya PK, Rizvi SI. Age-dependent changes in glutathione-S-transferase: 
correlation with total plasma antioxidant potential and red cell intracel-
lular glutathione. Ind J Clin Biochem. 2010;25:398–400.
McCaffery P, Tempst P, Lara G, Drager U. Aldehyde dehydrogenase as a 
positional marker in the retina. Development. 1991;112:693–702.
McCredie M, Stewart JH. Risk factors for kidney cancer in New South 
Wales, IV. Occupation. Br J Ind Med. 1993;50:349–354.
McDougal JN, Garrett CM, Amato CM, Berberich SJ. Effects of brief cuta-
neous JP-8 jet fuel exposures on time course of gene expression in the 
epidermis. Toxicol Sci. 2007;95:495–510.
McDougal JN, Jepson GW, Clewell HJ III, et  al. Dermal absorption of 
organic chemical vapors in rats and humans. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 
1990;14:299–308.
McDougal JN, Pollard DL, Weisman W, et al. Assessment of skin absorp-
tion and penetration of JP-8 jet fuel and its components. Toxicol Sci. 
2000;55:247–255.
McDougal JN, Robinson PJ. Assessment of dermal absorption and pen-
etration of components of a fuel mixture (JP-8). Sci Total Environ. 
2002;288:23–30.
McGregor D. Methyl tertiary-butyl ether: studies for potential human health 
hazards. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2006;36:319–358.
McGregor D. Ethyl tertiary-butyl ether: a toxicological review. Crit Rev 
Toxicol. 2007;37:287–312.
McHale CM, Zhang I, Lan Q, et  al. Global gene expression profiling 
of a population exposed to a range of benzene levels. Environ Health 
Perspect. 2011;119:628–634.
McHale CM, Zhang I, Smith MT. Current understanding of the mechanism 
of benzene-induced leukemia in humans: Implications for risk assess-
ment. Carcinogenesis. 2012;33:240–252.
McKee RH, Vergnes JS, Galvin JB, et  al. Assessment of the in vivo 
mutagenic potential of methyl tertiary-butyl ether. J Appl Toxicol. 
1997;17(S1):S31–S367.
McLean AJ, Le Couteur DG. Aging biology and geriatric clinical pharma-
cology. Pharmacol Rev. 2004;56:163–184.
McMahon TF, Medinsky MA, Birnbaum LS. Age-related changes in ben-
zene disposition in male C57BL/6N mice described by a physiologically 
based model. Toxicol Lett. 1994;74:241–253.
McMartin K. Are calcium oxalate crystals involved in the mechanism 
of acute renal failure in ethylene glycol poisoning? Clin Toxicol. 
2009;47:859–869.
McMartin KE, Wallace KB. Calcium oxalate monohydrate, a metabolite of 
ethylene glycol, is toxic for rat renal mitochondrial function. Toxicol Sci. 
2005;84:195–200.
McQuade DJ, Dargan PI, Wood DM. Challenges in the diagnosis of ethyl-
ene glycol poisoning. Ann Clin Biochem. 2014;51:167–178.
Mebus CA, Welsch F, Working PK. Attenuation of 2-methoxyethanol 
induced testicular toxicity in the rat by simple physiological compounds. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1989;99:110–121.
Medeiros AM, Bird MG, Witz G. Potential biomarkers of benzene expo-
sure. J Toxicol Environ Health. 1997;51:519–539.
Medinsky MA, Dorman DC. Recent developments in methanol toxicity. 
Toxicol Lett 1995;82/83:707–711.
Medinsky MA, Dorman DC, Bond JA, et al. Pharmacokinetics of methanol 
and formate in female cynomolgus monkeys exposed to methanol vapors. 
Res Rep Health Effects Inst. 1997;77:1–38.
Medinsky MA, Kenyon EM, Seaton MJ, Schlosser PM. Mechanistic con-
siderations in benzene physiological model development. Environ Health 
Perspect. 1996;104(suppl 6):1399–1404.
Medinsky MA, Sabourin PJ, Lucier G, et al. A physiological model for 
simulation of benzene metabolism by rats and mice. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 1989;99:193–206.
Medinsky MA, Schlosser PM, Bond JA. Critical issues in benzene toxicity 
and metabolism: The effect of interactions with other organic chemicals 
on risk assessment. Environ Health Perspect. 1994;102(suppl 9):119–124.
Medinsky MA, Singh G, Bechtold WE, et al. Disposition of three glycol 
ethers administered in drinking water to male F344/N rats. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 1990;102:443–455.
Meek ME, Klaunig JE. Proposed mode of action of benzene-induced leuke-
mia: interpreting available data and identifying critical data gaps for risk 
assessment. Chem-Biol Interact. 2010;184:279–285.
Mehendale HM. Tissue repair: an important determinant of final outcome of 
toxicant-induced injury. Toxicol Pathol. 2005;33:41–51.
Mehlman MA. Carcinogenicity of methyl-tertiary butyl ether in gasoline. 
Ann NY Acad Sci. 2002;982:149–159.

1244
Toxic Agents
unit V
Melnick RL, Kohn MC. Possible mechanisms of induction of renal tubule 
cell neoplasms in rats associated with α2u-globulin: Role of protein accu-
mulation versus ligand delivery to the kidney. In: Cappen CC, Dybing E, 
Rice JM, Wilbourn JD, eds. Species Differences in Thyroid, Kidney and 
Urinary Bladder Carcinogenesis. Lyons, France, 1999, IARC Publ No 
147:119–137.
Mennear JH. Carcinogenicity studies on MTBE: critical review and inter-
pretation. Risk Anal. 1997;17:673–681.
Mennear JH, McConnell EE, Huff JE, et al. Inhalation and carcinogenesis 
studies of methylene chloride (dichloromethane) in F344/N rats and 
B6C3F1 mice. Ann NY Acad Sci. 1988;534:343–351.
Merdink JL, Robison LM, Stevens DK, et  al. Kinetics of chloral 
hydrate and its metabolites in male human volunteers. Toxicology. 
2008;245:130–140.
Messiha FS, Price J. Properties and regional distribution of ocular aldehyde 
dehydrogenase in the rat. Neurobehav Toxicol Teratol. 1983;5:251–254.
Mezey E. Metabolic effects of ethanol. Fed Proc. 1985;44:134–138.
Micu AL, Miksys S, Sellers DL, et al. Rat hepatic CYP2E1 is induced by 
very low nicotine doses: An investigation of induction, time course, dose 
response and mechanism. J Pharmacol Exp Therap. 2003;306:941–947.
Mihaich E, Erler S, Le Blanc G, Gallagher S. Short-term fish reproduc-
tion assays with methyl tertiary butyl ether with zebrafish and fathead 
minnow: implications for evaluation of potential for endocrine activity. 
Environ Toxicol Chem. 2015;34:2013–2022.
Mihic SJ, McQuilkin SJ, Eger EI, et al. Potentiation of γ-aminobutyric acid 
type A receptor-mediated chloride currents by novel halogenated com-
pounds correlated with their abilities to induce general anesthesia. Mol 
Pharmacol. 1994;46:851–857.
Miller AM, Horiguchi N, Jeong W-I, et al. Molecular mechanisms of alco-
holic liver disease: innate immunity and cytokines. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 
2011;35:787–793.
Miller JH, Minard KR, Wind RA, et al. In vivo MRI measurements of tumor 
growth induced by dichloroacetate: implications for mode of action. 
Toxicology. 2000;145:115–125.
Miller RR, Hermann EA, Young JT, et  al. Ethylene glycol monomethyl 
ether and propylene glycol monomethyl ether: Metabolism, disposition, 
and subchronic inhalation toxicity studies. Environ Health Perspect. 
1984;57:233–239.
Mitchell SJ, Kane AE, Hilmer SN. Age-related changed in the hepatic phar-
macology and toxicology of paracetamol. Current Gerontol Geriatr Res. 
2011;2011:1–14.
Mitschke D, Reichel A, Fricker G, Moenning U. Characterization of cyto-
chrome P450 expression along the entire length of the intestine of male 
and female rats. Drug Metab Dispos. 2008;36:1039–1045.
Mohamed MF, Kang D, Aneja VP. Volatile organic compounds in some 
urban locations in United States. Chemosphere. 2002;47:863–882.
Monks TJ, Butterworth M, Lau SS. The fate of benzene-oxide. Chem-Biol 
Interact. 2010;184: 201–206.
Monster AC. Difference in uptake, elimination, and metabolism in expo-
sure to trichloroethylene, 1,1,1-trichloroethane and tetrachloroethylene. 
Int Arch Occup Environ Health. 1979;42:311–317.
Monteiro-Riviere N, Inman A, Riviere J. Effects of short-term high-dose 
and low-dose exposure to Jet A, JP-8 and JP-8 + 100 jet fuels. J Appl 
Toxicol. 2001;21:485–494.
Monteiro-Riviere NA, Inman AO, Riviere JE. Skin toxicity of jet fuels: 
ultra-structural studies and the effects of substance P. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 2004;195:339–347.
Moore LE, Boeffetta P, Karami S, et  al. Occupational trichloroethylene 
exposure and renal carcinoma risk: Evidence of genetic susceptibility by 
reductive metabolism gene variants. Cancer Res. 2010;70: 6527–6536.
Moore MM, Harrington-Brock K. Mutagenicity of trichloroethylene and 
its metabolites: Implications for the risk assessment of trichloroethylene. 
Environ Health Perspect. 2000;108(suppl 2):215–223.
Moorman MP, Sills RC, Collins BJ, Morgan DL. Carbon disulfide neuro-
toxicity in rats: II. Toxicokinetics. Neurotoxicology. 1998;19:89–97.
Moran MJ, Zogorski JS, Squillace PJ. Chlorinated solvents in groundwater 
of the United States. Environ Sci Technol. 2007;41:74–81.
Moreau CL, Kerns W II, Tomaszewski CA, et al. Glycolate kinetics and 
hemodialysis clearance in ethylene glycol poisoning. META Study 
Group. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 1998;36:659–666.
Morford LL, Henck JW, Breslin WJ, DeSesso JM. Hazard identification and 
predictability of children’s health risk from animal data. Environ Health 
Perspect. 2004;112: 266–271.
Morgan DL, Cooper SW, Carlock DL, et al. Dermal absorption of neat and 
aqueous volatile organic chemicals in the Fischer 344 rat. Environ Res. 
1991;55:51–63.
Morgan DJ, McLean AJ. Clinical pharmacokinetic and pharmacody-
namics considerations in patients with liver disease. An update. Clin 
Pharmacokinet. 1995;29:370–391.
Morimura K, Cheung C, Ward JM, et  al. Differential susceptibility of 
mice humanized for peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (alpha) 
to Wy-14,643-induced liver carcinogenesis. Carcinogenesis. 2006;27: 
1074–1080.
Morio LA, Chiu H, Sprowles KA, et al. Distinct roles of tumor necrosis 
factor-α and nitric oxide in acute liver injury induced by carbon tetra-
chloride in mice. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2001;172:44–51.
Moro AM, Charao MF, Brucker N, et al. Genotoxicity and oxidative stress 
in gasoline station attendants. Mutat Res. 2013;754:63–70.
Morshed KM, Nagpaul JP, Majumdar S, et al. Kinetics of propylene gly-
col elimination and metabolism in the rat. Biochem Med Metab Biol. 
1988;39:90–97.
Mortuga T, Chen C, White CA, et al. Toxicokinetic of deltamethrin: Dosage 
dependency which effects and low-dose age equivalent dosimetry in rate. 
Toxicol Sci. 2018;162:327–336.
Moser GJ, Wolf DC, Sar M, et al. Methyl tertiary butyl ether-induced endo-
crine alterations in mice are not mediated through the estrogen receptor. 
Toxicol Sci. 1998;41:77–87.
Moser GJ, Wolf DC, Wong BA, Goldsworthy TL. Loss of tumor-promoting 
activity of unleaded gasoline in N-nitrosodiethylamine-initiated ovariec-
tomized B6C3F1 mouse liver. Carcinogenesis. 1997;18:1075–1083.
Moser GJ, Wong BA, Wolf DC, et al. Comparative short-term effects of 
methyl tertiary butyl ether and unleaded gasoline vapor in B6C3F1 mice. 
Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1996a;31:173–183.
Moser GJ, Wong BA, Wolf DC, et  al. Methyl tertiary butyl ether lacks 
tumor-promoting activity in N-nitrosodiethylamine-initiated B6C3F1 
female mouse liver. Carcinogenesis. 1996b;17:2753–2761.
Moser GJ, Wolf DC, Harden R, et  al. Cell proliferation and regula-
tion of negative growth factors in mouse liver foci. Carcinogenesis. 
1996c;17:1835–1840.
Mugford CA, Kedderis GL. Sex-dependent metabolism of xenobiotics. 
Drug Metab Rev. 1998;30:441–498.
Muhammad F, Monteiro-Riviere NA, Riviere JE. Comparative in vivo tox-
icity of topical JP-8 jet fuel and its individual hydrocarbon components: 
identification of tridecane and tetradecane as key constituents responsible 
for dermal irritation. Toxicol Pathol. 2005;33:258–266.
Mulkey ME. The determination of whether dithiocarbamate pesticides 
share a common mechanism of toxicity. Internal memorandum, U.S. 
EPA Office of Pesticide Programs, December 19, 2001:1–38. Available 
at: http://www.epa.gov/oppsrrdl/cumulative/dithiocarb.pdf.
Muller G, Spassowski M, Henschler D. Metabolism of trichloroethylene 
in man. III. Interaction of trichloroethylene and ethanol. Arch Toxicol. 
1975;33:173–189.
Mundt KA, Birk T, Burch MT. Critical review of the epidemiological litera-
ture on occupational exposure to perchloroethylene and cancer. Int Arch 
Occup Environ Health. 2003;76:473–491.
Murray FJ, Schwetz BA, McBride JG, Staples RE. Toxicity of inhaled chlo-
roform in pregnant mice and their offspring. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
1979;50:515–522.
Murray M. P450 enzymes. Inhibition mechanisms, genetic regulation and 
effects of liver disease. Clin Pharmacokinet. 1992;23:132–146.
Murry DJ, Crom WR, Reddick WE, et al. Liver volume as a determinant 
of drug clearance in children and adolescents. Drug Metab Dispos. 
1995;23:1110–1116.
Mutti A, Alinovi R, Bergamaschi E, et al. Nephropathies and exposures to 
perchloroethylene in dry-cleaners. Lancet. 1992;340:189–183.
Muttray A, Kurten R, Jung D, et al. Acute effects of 200 ppm 1,1,1-trichlo-
roethane on the human EEG. Eur J Med Res. 2000;5:375–384.
Nagano K, Kano H, Arito H, et al. Enhancement of renal carcinogenicity 
by combined inhalation and oral exposures to chloroform in male rats. J 
Toxicol Environ Health, Part A. 2006;69:1827–1842.

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1245
Nagano K, Sasaki T, Umeda Y, et al. Inhalation carcinogenicity and chronic 
toxicity of carbon tetrachloride in rats and mice. Inhal Toxicol. 2007;19: 
1089–1103.
Nakai JS, Stathopulos PB, Campbell GL, et al. Penetration of chloroform, 
trichloroethylene, and tetrachloroethylene through human skin. J Toxicol 
Environ Health. 1999;58:157–170.
Nakajima T. Cytochrome P450 isoforms and the metabolism of volatile hydro-
carbons of low relative molecular mass. J Occup Health. 1997;39:83–91.
Nakajima T, Elovaara E, Okino T, et al. Different contributions of cyto-
chrome P450 2E1 and P450 2B1/2 to chloroform hepatotoxicity in rat. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1995;133:215–222.
Nakajima T, Koyama Y, Sato A. Dietary modification of metabolism and 
toxicity of chemical substances—with special reference to carbohydrate. 
Biochem Pharmacol. 1982;31:1005–1011.
Nakajima T, Okuyama S, Yonekura I, Sato A. Effects of ethanol and phe-
nobarbital administration on the metabolism and toxicity of benzene. 
Chem-Biol Interact. 1985;55:23–38.
Nakajima T, Wang R-S. Induction of cytochrome P450 by toluene. Int J 
Biochem. 1994;26:1333–1340.
Nakajima T, Wang R-S, Elovaara E, et al. A comparative study on the contri-
bution of cytochrome P450 isozymes to metabolism of benzene, toluene 
and trichloroethylene in rat liver. Biochem Pharmacol. 1992a;43:251–257.
Nakajima T, Wang R-S, Elovaara E, et al. Toluene metabolism by cDNA-
expressed human hepatic cytochrome P450. Biochem Pharmacol. 
1997;53:271–277.
Nakajima T, Wang R-S, Katakura Y, et al. Sex-, age- and pregnancy-induced 
changes in the metabolism of toluene and trichloroethylene in rat liver in 
relation to the regulation of cytochrome P450IIE1 and P450IIC11 con-
tent. J Pharmacol Exp Therap. 1992b;261:869–874.
NAS (National Academy of Sciences). Pesticides in the Diets of Infants 
and Children. National Research Council. Washington, DC: National 
Academy Press; 1993:1–12.
NAS (National Academy of Sciences). Toxicologic Assessment of Jet-
Propulsion Fuel 8. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2003.
NAS (National Academy of Sciences). Assessing the Human Health Risks 
of Trichloroethylene: Key Scientific Issues. Washington, DC: National 
Academy Press; 2006.
NAS (National Academy of Sciences). Mouse Liver Tumors: Benefits and 
Constraints on Use in Human Health Risk Assessment, Qualitative and 
Quantitative Aspects. Risk Analysis Issues and Reviews Newsletter No. 
2, 2008.
NAS (National Academy of Sciences). Contaminated Water Supplies at 
Camp Lejeune: Assessing Potential Health Effects. Washington, DC: 
National Academy Press; 2009.
NAS (National Academy of Sciences). Review of the Environmental 
Protection Agency’s Draft IRIS Risk Assessment of Tetrachloroethylene. 
Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2010.
NCI (National Cancer Institute). Carcinogenesis Bioassay of Chloroform. 
National Technical Information Service No. PB264018/AS. Bethesda, 
MD: NCI, 1976.
NCI (National Cancer Institute). Bioassay of Tetrachloroethylene for 
Possible Carcinogenicity. NCI: DHEW Publ. No. NIH 77-813, Bethesda, 
MD: NCI, 1977a.
NCI (National Cancer Institute). Bioassay of 1,1,1-Trichloroethane for 
Possible Carcinogenicity. DHEW Pub. No. NIH 77-803, NCI-CG-TR-3, 
Bethesda, MD, 1977b.
NCI (National Cancer Institute). Bioassay of Styrene for Possible 
Carcinogenicity. Technical Report Series No. 185. NIH 79-1741, NCI-
CG-TR-185, Bethesda, MD, 1979.
NEDO (New Energy Development Organization). Toxicological research 
of methanol as a fuel for power station: Summary report on test with 
monkeys, rats and mice. Tokyo. 1987;1–296.
Nelson BK, Brightwell WS. Behavioral teratology of ethylene glycol mono-
methyl and monoethyl ethers. Environ Health Perspect. 1984;57:43–46.
Nelson BK, Vorhees CV, Scott WJ, Hastings L. Effects of 2-methoxyetha-
nol on fetal development, postnatal behavior, and embryonic intracellular 
pH of rats. Neurotoxicol Teratol. 1989;11:273–284.
Nelson HH, Wiencke JK, Christiani DC, et al. Ethnic differences in the prev-
alence of the homozygous deleted genotype of glutathione S-transferase 
theta. Carcinogenesis. 1995;16:1243–1245.
Nelson JL, Haas CE, Habtemariam B, et  al. A prospective evaluation 
of propylene glycol clearance and accumulation during continuous-
infusion Lorazepam in critically ill patients. J Intensive Care Med. 
2008;23:184–194.
Nessel CS. A comprehensive evaluation of the carcinogenic potential of 
middle distillate fuels. Drug Chem Toxicol. 1999;22:165–180.
Nessel CS, Freeman JJ, Forgash RC, McKee RH. The role of dermal irrita-
tion in the skin tumor promoting activity of petroleum middle distillates. 
Toxicol Sci. 1999;49:48–55.
Nett RJ, Cox-Ganser JM, Hubbs AF, et al. Non-malignant respiratory dis-
ease among workers in industries using styrene—a review of the evi-
dence. Am J Ind Med. 2017;60:163–180.
Neuman MG, Malnick S, Maor Y, et al. Alcoholic liver disease: Clinical and 
translational research. Exp Mol Pathol. 2015;99:596–610.
NIDA (National Institute on Drug Abuse). Research Report Series: Inhalant 
Abuse. (NIH Publication No. 05-3818). Bethesda, MD, 2005:1–8.
Nielsen GD, Alarie Y. Sensory irritation, pulmonary irritation, and respira-
tory stimulation by airborne benzene and alkylbenzenes: Prediction of 
safe industrial exposure levels and correlation with their thermodynamic 
properties. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1982;65:459–477.
Niemela O. Aldehyde–protein adducts in the liver as a result of ethanol-
induced oxidative stress. Front Biosci. 1999;4:506–513.
NIOSH (National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health). 1981–83 
National Occupational Exposure Survey (NOAES), 1989.
Nitschke KD, Burek JD, Bell TJ, et al. Methylene chloride: a 2-year inha-
lation toxicity and oncogenicity study in rats. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 
1988;11:48–59.
Nolan RJ, Freshour NL, Rick DL, et al. Kinetics and metabolism of inhaled 
methyl chloroform (1,1,1-trichloroethane) in male volunteers. Fund Appl 
Toxicol. 1984;4:654–662.
Nolin TD, Naud J, Leblond FA, Pichette V. Emerging evidence of the impact 
of kidney disease on drug metabolism and transport. Clin Pharmacol 
Ther. 2008;83:898–903.
Nomiyama K, Nomiyama H. Respiratory retention, uptake and excretion of 
organic solvents in man. Int Arch Arbeitsmed. 1974;32:75–83.
Nong A, McCarver DG, Hines RN, Krishnan K. Modeling interchild differ-
ences in pharmacokinetics on the basis of subject-specific data on physi-
ology and hepatic CYP2E1 levels: A case study with toluene. Toxicol 
Appl Pharmacol. 2006;214:78–87.
Normandin L, Ann Beaupre L, Salehi F, et  al. Manganese distribution 
in the brain and neurobehavioral changes following inhalation expo-
sure of rats to three chemical forms of manganese. Neurotoxicology. 
2004;25:433–441.
NRC (National Research Council). Acute Exposure Guideline Levels for 
Selected Airborne Chemicals: Vol 10. Washington, DC: The National 
Academies Press. Available at: https://doi.org/10.17226/13247, 2011.
NTP (National Toxicology Program). Toxicology and Carcinogenesis 
Studies of Tetrachloroethylene (Perchloroethylene) in F344/N Rats and 
B6C3F1 Mice. Research Triangle Park, NC, 1986.
NTP (National Toxicology Program). Toxicology and Carcinogenesis 
Studies of Trichloroethylene in Four Strains of Rats (ACI, August, 
Marshall, Osborne-Mendel) (Gavage Studies). NIH Publ. No. 88-2529. 
Research Triangle Park, NC, 1988.
NTP (National Toxicology Program). Carcinogenesis Studies of 
Trichloroethylene (Without Epichlorohydrin) in F344/N Rats and 
B6C3F1 Mice (Gavage Studies). NIH Pub. No. 90-1779. Research 
Triangle Park, NC, 1990.
NTP (National Toxicology Program). Toxicity Studies of a Chemical 
Mixture of 25 Groundwater Contaminants Administered in Drinking 
Water to F344/N Rats and B6C3F1 Mice. (Tech Rep. Ser. No. 35; NIH 
Publ. No. 93-3384). Research Triangle Park, NC, 1993a.
NTP (National Toxicology Program). Toxicology and Carcinogenesis 
Studies of Ethylene Glycol in B6C3F1 Mice (Feed Studies). NIH Publ. 
No 93-3144. Research Triangle Park, NC, 1993b.
NTP (National Toxicology Program). Toxicology and Carcinogenesis 
Studies of t-Butyl Alcohol in F344/N Rats and B6C3F1 Mice (Tech. Rep. 
Ser. No. 436; NIH Publ. No. 95-3167). Research Triangle Park, NC, 
1995.
NTP (National Toxicology Program). NTP Technical Report on Renal 
Toxicity Studies of Selected Halogenated Ethanes Administered by

1246
Toxic Agents
unit V
Gavage to F344/N Rats. (Toxicity Report Series 45, NIH Publ No. 
96-3935), Research Triangle Park, NC, 1996.
NTP (National Toxicology Program). Chloroform. NTP reproductive 
assessment by continuous breeding study. Environ Health Perspect. 
1997a;105(suppl 1):285–286.
NTP (National Toxicology Program). Toxicology and Carcinogenesis 
Studies of Ethylbenzene in F344/N Rats and B6C3F1 Mice. (Inhalation 
Studies). Research Triangle Park, NC, 1997b.
NTP (National Toxicology Program). NTP Toxicology and Carcinogenesis 
Studies 2-Butoxyethanol (CAS No. 111-76-2) in F344/N Rats and 
B6C3F1 Mice (Inhalation Studies). Natl Toxicol Program Tech Rep Ser. 
2000;484:1–290.
NTP (National Toxicology Program). NTP-CERHR Monograph on the 
Potential Human and Reproductive and Developmental Effects of Methanol. 
NTP-Center for the Evaluation of Risks to Human Reproduction, U.S. 
DHHS, NIH Publication No. 03-4478, September 2003.
NTP (National Toxicology Program). NTP technical report on the toxicol-
ogy and carcinogenesis studies of propylene glycol mono-t-butyl ether 
(CAS No. 57018-52-7) in F344/N rats and B6C3F1 mice and a toxicol-
ogy study of propylene glycol mono-t-butyl ether in male NBR rats (inha-
lation studies). Natl Toxicol Program Tech Rep Ser. 2004a;515:1–306.
NTP (National Toxicology Program). NTP-CERHR expert panel on the 
reproductive and developmental toxicity of methanol. Reprod Toxicol. 
2004b;18:303–390.
NTP (National Toxicology Program). NTP toxicology and carcinogenesis 
studies of dipropylene glycol (CAS No. 25265-71-8) in F344/N rats and 
B6C3F1 mice (drinking water studies). Natl Toxicol Program Tech Rep 
Ser. 2004c;511:6–260.
NTP (National Toxicology Program). NTP-CERHR expert panel report on 
the reproductive and developmental toxicity of ethylene glycol. Repro 
Toxicol. 2004d;18:457–532.
NTP (National Toxicology Program). NTP-CERHR expert panel report on 
the reproductive and developmental toxicity of propylene glycol. Repro 
Toxicol. 2004e;18:533–579.
NTP (National Toxicology Program). NTP-CERHR Monograph on the 
Potential Human Reproductive and Developmental Effects of Ethylene 
Glycol. NTP CERHR MON. 2004f;11:1–III36.
NTP (National Toxicology Program). NTP-CERHR Monograph on the 
Potential Human Reproductive and Developmental Effects of Propylene 
Glycol (PG). NTP CERHR MON. 2004g;12:i–III6.
NTP (National Toxicology Program). 12th Report on Carcinogens (ROC). 
Public Health Service, 2011. Available at: http://niehs.nih.gov/go/roc12.
NTP (National Toxicology Program). 14th Report on Carcinogens: 
Monograph on Trichloroethylene. U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services, Research Triangle Park, NC, 2015.
Nuckols JR, Ashley DL, Lyu C, et al. Influence of tap water quality and 
household water use activities on indoor air and internal dose levels of 
trihalomethanes. Environ Health Perspect 2005;113:863–870.
Nyska A, Maronpot RR, Long PH, et al. Disseminated thrombosis and bone 
infarction in female rats following inhalation exposure to 2-butoxyetha-
nol. Toxicol Pathol. 1999;27:287–294.
O’Brien KL, Selanikio JD, Hecdivert C, et al. Epidemic of pediatric deaths 
from acute renal failure caused by diethylene glycol poisoning. JAMA. 
1998;279:1175–1180.
O’Brien ML, Spear BT, Glauert HP. Role of oxidative stress in peroxisome 
proliferator mediated carcinogenesis. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2005;35:61–88.
O’Callaghan JP, Daughtrey WC, Clark CR, et al. Health assessment of gas-
oline and fuel oxygenate vapors: Neurotoxicity evaluation. Regul Toxicol 
Pharmacol. 2014;70:S35–S42.
O’Flaherty EJ, Nau H, McCandless D, et al. Physiologically based pharma-
cokinetics of methoxyacetic acid: Dose-effect considerations in C57BL/6 
mice. Teratology. 1995;52:78–89.
Ohtsuki T, Sato K, Koizumi A, et  al. Limited capacity of humans to 
metabolize tetrachloroethylene. Int Arch Occup Environ Health. 
1983;51:381–390.
Olney JW, Wozniak DF, Farber NB, et al. The enigma of fetal alcohol neu-
rotoxicity. Ann Med. 2002;34:109–119.
Olson MJ, Garg BD, Murty CVR, Roy AK. Accumulation of α2u-globulin 
in the renal proximal tubules of male rats exposed to unleaded gasoline. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1987;90:43–51.
Olson MJ, Mancini MA, Garg BD, Roy AK. Leupeptin-mediated altera-
tion of renal phagolysosomes: Similarity to hyaline droplet nephropa-
thy of male rats exposed to unleaded gasoline. Toxicol Lett. 1988;41: 
245–254.
Omiecinski CJ, Remmel RP, Hosagrahara VP. Concise review of the 
cytochrome P450s and their roles in toxicology. Toxicol Sci. 1999;4: 
151–156.
Omura M, Katsumata T, Misawa H, Yamaguchi M. Decreases in pro-
tein kinase and phosphatase activities in the liver nuclei of rats 
exposed to carbon tetrachloride. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1999;160: 
192–197.
OSHA (Occupational Safety and Health Administration). Solvents. July 3, 
2006. Available at: http://www.osha.gov/archive/oshinfo/priorities/sol 
vents.html.
OSHA (Occupational Safety and Health Administration). Styrene. https://
www.osha.gov/SLTC/styrene. 2016.
Oshiro WM, Beasley TE, McDaniel KL, et al. Prenatal exposure to vapors 
of gasoline-ethanol blends causes few cognitive deficits in adult rats. 
Neurotoxicol Teratol. 2015;49:59–73.
Osterberg K, Orbaek P, Karlson B, et al. A comparison of neuropsychologi-
cal tests for the assessment of chronic toxic encephalopathy. Am J Ind 
Med. 2000;38:666–680.
Oudiz D, Zenick H. In vivo and in vitro evaluations of spermatotoxic-
ity induced by 2-ethoxyethanol treatment. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
1986;84:576–583.
Padron AG, de Toranzo EGD, Castro JA. Depression of liver microsomal 
glucose 6-phosphatase activity in carbon tetrachloride-poisoned rats. 
Potential synergistic effects of lipid peroxidation and of covalent binding 
of haloalkane-derived free radicals to cellular components in the process. 
Free Radic Biol Med. 1996;21:81–87.
Pahler A, Parker J, Dekant W. Dose-dependent protein adduct formation in 
liver, kidney, and blood of rats and in human blood after perchloroethy-
lene inhalation. Toxicol Sci. 1999;48:5–13.
Paine MF, Hart HL, Ludington SS, et al. The human intestinal cytochrome 
P450 “pie.” Drug Metab Dispos. 2006;34:880–886.
Palmer CN, Hsu MH, Griffin KJ, et  al. Peroxisome proliferator acti-
vated receptor α expression in human liver. Mol Pharmacol. 1998;53: 
14–22.
Palmer RB, Brent J. Derivation of a chemical-specific adjustment factor 
(CSAF) for use in the assessement of risk from chronic exposure to eth-
ylene glycol: application of international programme for chemical safety 
guidelines. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2005;207:576–584.
Park J, Kamendulis LM, Klaunig JE. Effects of 2-butoxyethanol on hepatic 
oxidative damage. Toxicol Lett. 2002;126:19–29.
Pastino GM, Conolly RB. Application of a physiologically based pharma-
cokinetic model to estimate the bioavailability of ethanol in male rats: 
distinction between gastric and hepatic pathways of metabolic clearance. 
Toxicol Sci. 2000;55:256–265.
Pastino GM, Flynn EJ, Sultatos LG. Genetic polymorphisms in ethanol 
metabolism: issues and goals for physiologically based pharmacokinetic 
modeling. Drug Chem Toxicol. 2000;23:179–201.
Patel AS, Talbott EO, Zborowski JV, et  al. Risk of cancer as a result 
of community exposure to gasoline vapors. Arch Environ Health. 
2004;59:497–503.
Patel KG, Yadav PC, Pandya CB, Saiyed HN. Male exposure mediated 
adverse reproductive outcomes in carbon disulphide exposed rayon 
workers. J Environ Biol. 2004;25:413–418.
Paulu C, Aschengrau A, Ozonoff D. Tetrachloroethylene-contaminated 
drinking water in Massachusetts and the risk of colon-rectum, lung, and 
other cancers. Environ Health Perspect. 1999;107:265–271.
Pereira MA. Route of administration determines whether chloroform 
enhances or inhibits cell proliferation in the liver of B6C3F1 mice. Fund 
Appl Toxicol. 1994;23:87–92.
Pereira MA, Grothaus M. Chloroform in drinking water prevents hepatic 
cell proliferation induced by chloroform administered by gavage in corn 
oil to mice. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1997;37:82–87.
Pereira MA, Kramer PM, Conran PB, Tao L. Effect of chloroform on 
dichloroacetic acid and trichloroacetic acid-induced hypomethylation 
and expression of c-myc gene and on their promotion of liver and kidney 
tumors in mice. Carcinogenesis. 2001;22:1511–1519.

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1247
Pesch B, Haerting J, Ranft U, et al. Occupational risk factors for renal cell 
carcinoma: Agent-specific results from a case–control study in Germany. 
Int J Epidemiol. 2000;29: 1014–1024.
Pfaff J, Parton K, Lantz RC, et al. Inhalation exposure to JP-8 jet fuel alters 
pulmonary function and substance P levels in Fischer 344 rats. J Appl 
Toxicol. 1995;15:249–256.
Pfaff JK, Tollinger BJ, Lantz RC, et al. Neutral endopeptidase (NEP) and its 
role in pathological pulmonary change with inhalation exposure to JP-8 
jet fuel. Toxicol Ind Health. 1996;12:93–103.
Pfeifer GD, Roper JM, Dorman D, Lynam DR. Health and environmen-
tal testing of manganese exhaust products from use of methylcyclo-
pentadienyl manganese tricarbonyl in gasoline. Sci Total Environ. 
2004;334-335:397–408.
Philip BK, Anand SS, Palkar PS, et al. Subchronic chloroform priming pro-
tects mice from a subsequently administered lethal dose of chloroform. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2006;216:108–12106.
Philip BK, Mumtaz MM, Latendresse JR, Mehendale HM. Impact of 
repeated exposure on toxicity of perchloroethylene in Swiss Webster 
mice. Toxicology. 2007;232:1–14.
Phillips CF, Jones RK. Gasoline vapor exposures during bulk handling 
operations. Am Ind Hyg Assoc J. 1978;39:118–128.
Phillips M. Detection of carbon disulfide in breath and air: a possible new 
risk factor for coronary artery disease. Int Arch Occup Environ Health. 
1992;64:119–123.
Pikaar NA, Wedel M, Hermus RJJ. Influence of several factors on blood 
alcohol concentrations after drinking alcohol. Alcohol Alcoholism. 
1988;23:289–297.
Pisinger C, Dossing M. A systematic review of health effects of electronic 
cigarettes. Prev Med. 2014;69:248–260.
Plaa GL. Chlorinated methanes and liver injury: highlights of the past 50 
years. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 2000;40:43–65.
Poet TS, Soelberg JJ, Weitz KK, et al. Mode of action and pharmacokinetic 
studies of 2-butoxyethanol in the mouse with an emphasis on forestom-
ach dosimetry. Toxicol Sci. 2003;71:176–189.
Pohl HR, Scinicariello F. The impact of CYP2E1 genetic variability on risk 
assessment of VOC mixtures. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2011;59:364–374.
Pohl HR, Tarkowski S, Buczynska A, et al. Chemical exposures at hazard-
ous waste sites: Experiences from the United States and Poland. Environ 
Toxicol Pharmacol. 2008;25: 283–291.
Poldelski V, Johnson A, Wright S, et al. Ethylene glycol-mediated tubular 
injury: identification of critical metabolites and injury pathways. Am J 
Kidney Dis. 2001;38:339–348.
Pomierny B, Krzyzanowska W, Neidzielska E, et  al. Ethylene glycol 
ethers induce apoptosis and disturb glucose metabolism in the rat brain. 
Pharmacol Rep. 2016;68:162–171.
Ponomarkov V, Tomatis L. Effects of long-term oral administration of 
styrene to mice and rats. Scand J Work Environ Health. 1978;4(suppl 
2):127–135.
Poon R, Chu IH, Bjarnason S, et  al. Short-term inhalation toxicity of 
methanol, gasoline, and methanol/gasoline in the rat. Toxicol Ind Health. 
1995;11:343–361.
Pottenger LH, Carney EW, Bartels MJ. Dose-dependent nonlinear pharma-
cokinetics of ethylene glycol metabolites in pregnant (GD 10) and non-
pregnant Sprague–Dawley rats following oral administration of ethylene 
glycol. Toxicol Sci. 2001;62:10–19.
Powley MW, Carlson GP. Species comparison of hepatic and pulmonary 
metabolism of benzene. Toxicology. 1999;139:207–217.
Prah J, Ashley D, Blount B, et al. Dermal, oral, and inhalation pharma-
cokinetics of methyl tertiary butyl ether (MTBE) in human volunteers. 
Toxicol Sci. 2004;77:195–205.
Preedy VR, Ohlendieck K, Adachi J, et  al. The importance of alcohol-
induced muscle disease. Clin Sci. 2003;104:287–294.
Prescott-Matthews JS, Wolf DC, Wong BA, Borghoff SJ. Methyl tert 
-butyl ether causes α2u-globulin nephropathy and enhanced renal 
cell proliferation in male Fischer-344 rats. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
1997;143:301–314.
Price B, Bergman TS, Rodriguez M, et al. A review of carbon disulphide 
exposure data and the association between carbon disulfide expo-
sure and ischemic heart disease mortality. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 
1997;26:119–128.
Price B, Berner T, Henrich RT, et al. A benchmark concentration for car-
bon disulfide: analysis of the NIOSH carbon disulfide exposure database. 
Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 1996;24:171–176.
Price PS, Conolly RB, Chaisson CF, et al. Modeling interindividual varia-
tion in physiological factors used in PBPK models in humans. Crit Rev 
Toxicol. 2003;33:469–503.
Proctor SP, Heaton KJ, Smith KW, et al. The occupational JP8 exposure 
neuroepidemiology study (OJENES): repeated workday exposure and 
central nervous system functioning among US Air Force personnel. 
Neurotoxicology. 2011;32:799–808.
Pryor GT, Rebert CS. Interactive effects of toluene and hexane on behavior 
and neurophysiologic responses in Fischer-344 rats. Neurotoxicology. 
1992;13:225–234.
Purohit V, Brenner DA. Mechanisms of alcohol-induced hepatic fibrosis: a 
summary of the Ron Thurman Symposium. Hepatology. 2006;43:872–878.
Purohit V, Khalsa J, Serrano J. Mechanisms of alcohol-associated cancers: 
introduction and summary of the symposium. Alcohol. 2005;35:155–160.
Qui J, Chien Y-C, Bruckner JV, Fisher JW. Bayesian analysis of a physi-
ologically based model for perchloroethylene in humans. J Toxicol 
Environ Health A. 2010;73:74–91.
Qin LQ, Wang Y, Xu J-Y, et al. One-day dietary restriction changes hepatic 
metabolism and potentiates the hepatotoxicity of carbon tetrachloride 
and chloroform. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2007;212:379–387.
Quast JF, Calhoun LL, Frauson LE. 1,1,1-Trichlooethane formulation: a 
chronic inhalation toxicity and oncogenicity study in Fischer 344 rats 
and B6C3F1 mice. Fund Appl Toxicol. 1988;11:611–625.
Raabe GK. Review of the carcinogenic potential of gasoline. Environ 
Health Perspect. 1993;101:35–38.
Raaschou-Nielsen O, Hansen J, McLaughlin JK, et al. Cancer risk among 
workers at Danish companies using trichloroethylene: a cohort study. Am 
J Epidemiol. 2003;158:1182–1192.
Rajendram R, Preedy VR. Effect of alcohol consumption on the gut. Dig 
Dis. 2005;23:214–221.
Ramdhan DH, Kamijima M, Yamada N, et  al. Molecular mechanism of 
trichloroethylene-induced hepatotoxicity mediated by CYP2E1. Toxicol 
Appl Pharmacol. 2008;231: 300–207.
Ramos G, Kazimi N, Nghiem DX, et al. Platelet activating factor recep-
tor binding plays a critical role in jet fuel-induced immune suppression. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2004;195:331–338.
Ramos G, Limono-Flores AY, Ullrich SE. Dermal exposure to jet fuel sup-
presses delayed-type hypersensitivity: A critical role for aromatic hydro-
carbons. Toxicol Sci. 2007;100:415–422.
Ramos G, Limon-Flores AY, Ullrich SE. JP-8 induces immune suppression 
via a reactive oxygen species NF-Kβ-dependent mechanism. Toxicol Sci. 
2009;108:100–109.
Ramos G, Nghiem DX, Walterscheid JP, Ullrich SE. Dermal application of 
jet fuel suppresses secondary immune reactions. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
2002;180:136–144.
Ramsay M. Genetic epigenetic insights into fetal alcohol spectrum disor-
ders. Genome Med. 2010;2:27–35.
Ramsey JC, Andersen ME. A physiologically based description of the 
inhalation pharmacokinetics of styrene in rats and humans. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 1984;73:159–175.
Rao PS, Mangipudy RS, Mehendale HM. Tissue injury and repair as parallel 
and opposing responses to CCl4 hepatotoxicity: a novel dose–response. 
Toxicology. 1997;118:181–193.
Rappaport SM, Kim S, Lan Q, et al. Evidence that humans metabolize ben-
zene via two pathways. Environ Health Perspect. 2009;117:946–952.
Rappaport SM, Kim S, Lan Q, et al. Human benzene metabolism follow-
ing occupational and environmental exposures. Chem-Biol Interact. 
2010;184:189–195.
Ratcliffe JM, Schrader SM, Clapp DE, et  al. Semen quality in workers 
exposed to 2-ethoxyethanol. Br J Ind Med. 1989;46:399–406.
Raucy JL, Kraner JC, Lasker JM. Bioactivation of halogenated hydrocar-
bons by cytochrome P4502E1. Crit Rev Toxicol. 1993;23:1–20.
Raucy JL, Lasker JM, Kraner JC, et al. Induction of cytochrome P450IIE1 
in the obese overfed rat. Mol Pharmacol. 1991;39:275–280.
Raunio H, Husgafvel-Pursianinen K, Anttila S, et al. Diagnosis of poly-
morphisms in carcinogen-activating and inactivating enzymes and cancer 
susceptibility: a review. Gene. 1995;159:113–121.

1248
Toxic Agents
unit V
Rawlings SJ, Shuker DE, Webb M, Brown NA. The teratogenic potential of 
alkoxy acids in post-implantation rat embryo culture: structure–activity 
relationships. Toxicol Lett. 1985;28:49–58.
Reaney SH, Bench G, Smith DR. Brain accumulation and toxicity of Mn(II) 
and Mn(III) exposures. Toxicol Sci. 2006;93:114–124.
Recknagel RO, Glende EA Jr, Dolak JA, Waller RL. Mechanisms of carbon 
tetrachloride toxicity. Pharmacol Therap. 1989;43:139–154.
Reddy NJ, Sudini M, Lewis LD. Delayed neurological sequelae from eth-
ylene glycol, diethylene glycol and methanol poisoning. Clin Toxicol. 
2010;48:967–973.
Reese E, Kimbrough RD. Acute toxicity of gasoline and some additives. 
Environ Health Perspect. 1993;101(suppl 6):115–131.
Reeve E, Wiese MD, Mangoni AA. Alterations in drug disposition in older 
adults. Expert Opinion Drug Metab Toxicol. 2015;11:491–508.
Rehm J, Room R, Monteiro M, et al. Alcohol use. In: Ezzati M, Lopez A, 
Rodgers A, Murray C, eds. Comparative Quantification of Health Risks. 
Global and Regional Burden of Disease Attritutable to Selected Major 
Risk Factors. Geneva: WHO; 2004:960–1108.
Reigel AC, Ali SF, Torinese S, French ED. Repeated exposure to the abused 
inhalant toluene alters levels of neurotransmitters and generates per-
oxynitrite in nigrostriatal and mesolimbic nuclei in rat. Ann NY Acad Sci. 
2004;1025:543–551.
Reigel AC, French ED. Abused inhalants and central reward pathways: 
electrophysiological and behavioral studies in the rat. Ann NY Acad Sci. 
2002;965:281–291.
Reinhardt CT, Mulllin LS, Maxfield ME. Epinephrine-induced cardiac 
arrhythmia potential of some common industrial solvents. J Occup Med. 
1973;15:953–955.
Reitz RH, McDougal JN, Himmelstein MW, et al. Physiologically-based 
pharmacokinetic modeling with methylchloroform: implications for 
interspecies, high dose/low dose, and dose route extrapolations. Toxicol 
Appl Pharmacol. 1988;95:185–199.
Reitz RH, Mendrala AL, Guengerich FP. In vitro metabolism of methy-
lene chloride in human and animal tissues: use in physiologically 
based pharmacokinetic models. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1989;97: 
220–246.
Richardson PJ, Patel VB, Preedy VR. Alcohol and the myocardium. 
Novartis Found Symp. 1998;216:35–45.
Richter R. Degeneration of the basal ganglia in monkeys from chronic car-
bon disulfide poisoning. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 1945;4:324–353.
Rifas L, Towler DA, Avioli LV. Gestational exposure to ethanol suppresses 
msx2 expression in developing mouse embryos. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 
1997;94:7549–7554.
Riihimaki V, Kivisto H, Peltonen K, et al. Assessment of exposure to carbon 
disulfide in viscose production workers from urinary 2-thiothiazolidine-
4-carboxylic acid determinations. Am J Ind Med. 1992;22:85–97.
Rikans LE, Hornbrook KR. Age-related susceptibility to hepatotoxicants. 
Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 1997;4:339–344.
Rinn JL, Rozowsky JS, Laurenzi IJ, et  al. Major molecular differences 
between mammalian sexes are involved in drug metabolism and renal 
function. Dev Cell. 2004;6:791–800.
Riordan SM, Williams R. Alcohol exposure and paracetamol-induced hepa-
totoxicity. Addict Biol. 2002;7:191–206.
Ritchie GD, Rossi J III, Nordholm AF, et al. Effects of repeated exposure 
to JP-8 jet fuel vapor on learning of simple and difficult operant tasks by 
rats. J Toxicol Environ Health. 2001;64:385–415.
Ritchie GD, Still KR, Rossi J, et al. Biological and health effects of expo-
sure to kerosene-based jet fuels and performance additives. J Toxicol 
Environ Health B. 2003;6:357–451.
Ritschel WA. Physiology of the aged respiratory system. In: Ritschel WA, 
ed. Gerontokinetics: The Pharmacokinetics of Drugs in the Elderly. 
Caldwell, NJ: The Telford Press; 1988:7.
Robb TM, Rogers MJ, Woodward SS, et al. In vitro time- and dose-effect 
response of JP-8 and S-8 jet fuel on alveolar type II epithelial cells of rats. 
Toxicol Ind Health. 2010;26:367–374.
Roberts LG, Bevans AC, Schreiner CA. Development and reproductive tox-
icity evaluation of toluene vapor in the rat. I. Reproductivity toxicity. 
Repro Toxicol. 2003;17:649–658.
Roberts LG, Gray TM, Marr MC, et al. Health assessment of gasoline and 
fuel oxygenate vapors: Developmental toxicity in mice. Regul Toxicol 
Pharmacol. 2014a;70:S58–S68.
Roberts LG, Gray TM, Trimmer GW, et al. Health assessment of gasoline 
and fuel oxygenate vapors: Developmental toxicity in rats. Regul Toxicol 
Pharmacol. 2014b;70:S69–S79.
Robertson OH, Loosli CG, Puck TT, et  al. Tests for the chronic toxic-
ity of propylene glycol and triethylene glycol on monkeys and rats 
by vapor inhalaton and oral administration. J Pharmacol Exp Therap. 
1947;91:52–76.
Robinson CN, Latimer B, Abreo F, et al. In-vivo evidence of nephrotoxicity 
and altered hepatic function in rats following administration of diglycolic 
acid, a metabolite of diethylene glycol. Clin Toxicol. 2017;55:196–205.
Robinson V, Bergfeld WF, Belsito DV, et  al. Final report on the safety 
assessment of PPG-2 methyl ether, PPG-3 methyl ether, and PPG-2 
methyl ether acetate. Int J Toxicol. 2009;28:162S–174S.
Robledo RF, Barber DS, Witten ML. Modulation of bronchial epithelial 
cell barrier function by in vitro jet propulsion fuel 8 exposure. Toxicol 
Sci. 1999;51:119–125.
Robledo RF, Witten ML. NK1-receptor activation prevents hydrocarbon-
induced lung injury in mice. Am J Physiol. 1999;276:L229–L238.
Rodrigues EG, Smith K, Maule AL, et  al. Urinary polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbon (OH-PAH) metabolite concentrations and the effect of GST 
polymorphisms among US Air Force personnel exposed to jet fuel. J 
Occup Environ Med. 2014;56:465–471.
Rodriguez-Antona C, Ingelman-Sundberg M. Cytochrome P450 pharmaco-
gentics and cancer. Oncogene. 2006;25:1679–1691.
Rodriguez CE, Mahle DA, Gearhart JM, et al. Predicting age-appropriate 
pharmacokinetics of six volatile organic compounds in the rat utiliz-
ing physiologically based pharmacokinetic modeling. Toxicol Sci. 
2007;98:43–56.
Roe FJ. Styrene: Toxicity studies—what do they show? Crit Rev Toxicol. 
1994;24(suppl 1):S117–S125.
Roe FJC, Palmer AK, Worden AN, Van Abbe NJ. Safety evaluation of tooth-
paste containing chloroform. I. Long-term studies in mice. J Environ 
Pathol Toxicol. 1979;2:799–819.
Rogers JV, Gunasekar PG, Garrett CM, et al. Detection of oxidative species 
and low-molecular weight DNA in skin following dermal exposure with 
JP-8 jet fuel. J Appl Toxicol. 2001;21:521–525.
Rosenberg NL. Neurotoxicity of organic solvents. In: Rosenberg NL, ed. 
Occupational and Environmental Neurology. Newton, MA: Butterworth-
Heinemann, 1995:71–113.
Rosenberg NL, Grigsby J, Dreisbach J, et al. Neuropsychologic and MRI 
abnormalities associated with chronic solvent abuse. J Toxicol Clin 
Toxicol. 2002;40:21–34.
Rosenberg NL, Kleinschmidt-DeMasters BK, Davis KA, et  al. Toluene 
abuse causes central nervous system white matter changes. Ann Neurol. 
1988a;23:611–614.
Rosenberg NL, Spitz MC, Filley CM, et  al. Central nervous system 
effects of chronic toluene abuse—Clinical, brainstem evoked response 
and magnetic resonance imaging studies. Neurotoxicol Teratol. 
1988b;10:489–495.
Rosenthal DS, Simbulan-Rosenthal CMG, Liu WF, et al. Mechanisms of 
JP-8 jet fuel cell toxicity. II. Induction of necrosis in skin fibroblasts and 
keratinocytes and modulation of levels of Bcl-2 family members. Toxicol 
Appl Pharmacol. 2001;171:107–116.
Roskos KV, Maibach HI, Guy RH. The effect of aging on percutaneous 
absorption in man. J Pharmacokin Biopharmaceut. 1989;17:617–630.
Ross D, Siegel D, Schattenberg DG, et  al. Cell-specific activation and 
detoxification of benzene metabolites in mouse and human bone marrow: 
Identification of target cells and potential role for modulation of apoptosis in 
benzene toxicity. Environ Health Perspect. 1996;104(suppl 6):1177–1182.
Rossi J III, Nordholm AF, Carpenter RL, et al. Effects of repeated exposure 
of rats to JP-5 or JP-8 jet fuel vapor on neurobehavioral capacity and 
neurotransmitter levels. J Toxicol Environ Health A. 2001;63:397–428.
Roth RA, Harkema JR, Pestka JP, Ganey PE. Is exposure to bacterial endo-
toxin a determinant of susceptibility to intoxication from xenobiotic 
agents? Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1997;147:300–311.

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1249
Rowe BL, Toccalino PL, Moran MJ, et al. Occurrence and potential human-
health relevance of volatile organic compounds in drinking water from 
domestic wells. Environ Health Perspect. 2007;115:1539–1546.
Roychowdhury S, McMullen MR, Pisano SG, et  al. Absence of recep-
tor interacting protein kinase 3 prevents ethanol-induced liver injury. 
Hepatology. 2013;57:1773–1783.
Ruder AM, Ward EM, Brown DP.: Mortality in dry-cleaning workers: an 
update. Am J Ind Med. 2001;39:121–132.
Rumack BH. Acetaminophen misconceptions. Hepatology. 2004;40:10–15.
Russo D, Purohit V, Foudin L, Salin M. Workshop on alcohol use and health 
disparities 2002: A call to arms. Alcohol. 2004;32:37–43.
Rusyn I, Chiu WA, Lash LH, et al. Trichloroethylene: mechanistic, epide-
miologic and supporting evidences of carcinogenic hazard. Pharmacol 
Therap. 2014;141:55–68.
Saavedra D, Arteaga M, Tena M. Industrial contamination with glycol ethers 
resulting in teratogenic damage. Ann NY Acad Sci. 1997;837:126–137.
Saito A, Sasaki T, Kasai T, et al. Hepatotumorigenicity of ethyl tertiary-
butyl ether with 2-year inhalation exposure in F344 rats. Arch Toxicol. 
2013;87:905–914.
Sakurai K, Mikamoto K, Shirai M, et al. MicroRNA profiling in ethylene 
glycol monomethyl ether-induced monkey testicular toxicity model. J 
Toxicol Sci. 2015;40:375–382.
Salvini M, Binaschi S, Riva M. Evaluation of the psychological functions 
in humans exposed to the Threshold Limit Value of 1,1,1-trichloroethane. 
Br J Industr Med. 1971;28: 286–292.
Sanzgiri UY, Kim HJ, Muralidhara S, et al. Effect of route and pattern of 
exposure on the pharmacokinetics and acute hepatotoxicity of carbon tet-
rachloride. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1995;134:148–154.
Sanzgiri UY, Srivatsan V, Muralidhara S, et al. Uptake, distribution, and 
elimination of carbon tetrachloride in rat tissues following inhalation and 
ingestion exposures. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1997;143:120–129.
Sarangapani R, Gentry PR, Covington TR, et al. Evaluation of the potential 
impact of age- and gender-specific lung morphology and ventilation rate 
on the dosimetry of vapors. Inhal Toxicol. 2003;15:987–1016.
Sarangapani R, Teeguarden JG, Cruzan G, et  al. Physiologically based 
pharmacokinetic modeling of styrene and styrene oxide respiratory-tract 
dosimetry in rodents and humans. Inhal Toxicol. 2002;14:789–834.
Sasso AF, Schlosser PM, Kedderis GL, et al. Application of an updated physio-
logically based pharmacokinetic model for chloroform to evaluate CYP2E1-
mediated renal toxicity in rats and mice. Toxicol Sci. 2013;131:360–374.
Sato A, Endoh K, Kaneko T, Johanson G. Effects of consumption of ethanol 
on the biological monitoring of exposure to organic solvent vapors: a 
simulation study with trichloroethylene. Br J Ind Med. 1991;48:548–556.
Sato A, Nakajima T. Enhanced metabolism of volatile hydrocarbons in 
rat liver following food deprivation, restricted carbohydrate intake, and 
administration of ethanol, phenobarbital, polychlorinated biphenyl and 
3-methylcholanthrene: a comparative study. Xenobiotica. 1985;15:67–75.
Sato A, Nakajima T, Fujiwara Y, Murayama N. Kinetic studies on sex differ-
ence in susceptibility to chronic benzene intoxication with special refer-
ence to body fat content. Br J Ind Med. 1975;32:321–328.
Sato N, Lindros KO, Baraona E, et al. Sex difference in alcohol-related 
organ injury. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2001;25:40S–45S.
Sato TK, Yamada RG, Ukai H, et al. Feedback repression is required for 
mammalian clock function. Nat Genet. 2006;38:312–319.
Savolainen K, Riihimaki V, Laine R, Kekoni J. Short-term exposure of 
human subjects to m-xylene and 1,1,1-trichloroethane. Int Arch Occup 
Environ Health. 1981;49:89–98.
Sawant SP, Dnyanmote AV, Shankar K, et al. Potentiation of carbon tetra-
chloride hepatotoxicity and lethality in Type 2 diabetic rats. J Pharmacol 
Exp Therap. 2004;308:694–704.
Scalley RD, Ferguson DR, Piccaro JC, et al. Treatment of ethylene glycol 
poisoning. Am Fam Physician. 2002;66:807–812.
Schaumburg HH, Spencer PS. Organic solvent mixtures. In: Spencer PS, 
Schaumburg HH, eds. Experimental and Clinical Neurotoxicology. 2nd 
ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 2000, pp. 894–897.
Schenker MB, Gold EB, Beaumont JJ, et al. Association of spontaneous 
abortion and other reproductive effects with work in the semiconductor 
industry. Am J Ind Med. 1995;28:639–59.
Schep LJ, Slaughter RJ, Temple WA, Beasley DMG. Diethylene glycol poi-
soning. Clin Toxicol. 2009;47:525–536.
Scheuplein R, Charnley G, Dourson M. Differential sensitivity of chil-
dren and adults to chemical toxicity. I. Biological basis. Regul Toxicol 
Pharmacol. 2002;35:429–447.
Schmucker DL. Age-related changes in liver structure and function: impli-
cations for disease? Exper Gerontol. 2005;40:650–659.
Schramm A, Uter W, Brandt M, et al. Increased intima-media thickness 
in rayon workers after long-term exposure to carbon disulfide. Int Arch 
Occup Environ Health. 2016;89:513–519.
Schreiner CA, Hoffman GM, Gudi R, Clark CR. Health assessment of 
gasoline and fuel oxygenate vapors: micronucleus and sister chromatid 
exchange evaluations. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2014;70:S29–S34.
Schlender JF, Meyer M, Thelen K, et al. Development of a whole-body 
physiologically based pharmacokinetic approach to assess the phar-
macokinetics of drugs in elderly individuals. Clin Pharmacokinet. 
2016;55:1573–1589.
Schmucker DL. Age-related changes in liver structure and function: impli-
cations for disease? Exper Gerontol. 2005;40:650–659.
Schumann AM, Fox TR, Watanabe PG. [14C] Methyl chloroform (1,1,1-tri-
chlorothane): pharmacokinetics in rats and mice following inhalation 
exposure. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1982;62: 390–401.
Schwartz JB. The influence of sex on pharmacokinetics. Clin Pharmacokinet. 
2003;42:107–121.
Schwetz BA, Leong BK, Gehring PJ. Embryo- and fetotoxicity of inhaled 
chloroform in rats. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1974;28:442–451.
Scofield EH, Henderson WM, Funk AB, et al. Diethylene glycol mono-
methyl ether, ethylene glycol monomethyl ether and the metabolite, 
2-methoxyacetic acid affect in vitro chondrogenesis. Reprod Toxicol. 
2006;22:718–724.
Scott WJ, Fradkin R, Wittfoht W, Nau H. Teratologic potential of 2-methoxy-
ethanol and transplacental distribution of its metabolite, 2-methoxyacetic 
acid, in non-human primates. Teratology. 1989;39:363–373.
Seaton MJ, Schlosser PM, Bond JA, Medinsky MA. Benzene metabolism 
by human liver microsomes in relation to cytochrome P450 2E1 activity. 
Carcinogenesis. 1994;15:1799–1806.
Seidler A, Mohner M, Berger J, et al. Solvent exposure and malignant lym-
phoma: a population-based case–control study in Germany. J Occup Med 
Toxicol. 2007;2:2–12.
Seiji K, Inoue O, Jin C, et al. Dose excretion relationship in tetrachloroeth-
ylene-exposed workers and the effect of tetrachloroethylene co-exposure 
on trichloroethylene exposure. Am J Ind Med. 1989;16:675–684.
Seitz HK, Egerer G, Simanowski UA, et al. Human gastric alcohol dehydroge-
nase activity: effect of age, sex, and alcoholism. Gut. 1993;34:1433–1437.
Seitz HK, Stickel F. Molecular mechanisms of alcohol-mediated carcino-
genesis. Natl Rev Cancer. 2007;7:599–612.
Seme MT, Summerfelt P, Henry MM, et  al. Formate-induced inhibition 
of photoreceptor function in methanol intoxication. J Pharmacol Exp 
Therap. 1999;289:361–370.
Semple S. Dermal exposure to chemicals in the workplace: just how impor-
tant is skin absorption? Occup Environ Med. 2004;61:376–382.
Serota DG, Thakur AK, Ulland BM, et al. A two-year drinking-water study 
of dichloromethane in rodents. I. Rats. Food Chem Toxicol. 1986a;24: 
951–958.
Serota DG, Thakur AK, Ulland BM, et al. A two-year drinking-water study 
of dichloromethane in rodents. II. Mice. Food Chem Toxicol. 1986b;24: 
959–963.
Sexton K, Adgate JL, Church TR, et  al. Children’s exposure to volatile 
organic compounds as determined by longitudinal measurements in 
blood. Environ Health Perspect. 2005;113: 342–349.
Shamsky S, Samimi B. Organic vapors at underground gasoline tank 
removal sites. Appl Ind Hyg. 1987;2:242–245.
Sharma R, Locke BR. Jet fuel toxicity: skin damage measured by 900MHz 
MRI skin microscopy and visualization by 3D MR image processing. 
Magn Reson Imaging. 2010;28:1030–1048.
Shehab N, Lewis CL, Streetman DD, Donn SM. Exposure to the pharma-
ceutical excipients benzyl alcohol and propylene glycol among critically 
ill neonates. Pediatr Crit Care Med. 2009;10:256–259.

1250
Toxic Agents
unit V
Sherratt PJ, Williams S, Foster J, et al. Direct comparison of the nature of 
mouse and human GST T1-1 and the implications on dichloromethane 
carcinogenicity. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2002;179:89–97.
Shi J, Aisaki K, Ikawa Y, Wake K. Evidence of hepatocyte apoptosis in 
rat liver after the administration of carbon tetrachloride. Am J Pathol. 
1998;153:515–525.
Shibley IA, Pennington SN. Metabolic and mitotic changes associated with 
the fetal alcohol syndrome. Alcohol Alcoholism. 1997;32:423–434.
Shimada T, Yamazaki H, Mimura M, et  al. Interindividual variations in 
human liver P-450 enzymes involved in the oxidation of drugs, carcino-
gens and toxic chemicals: studies with liver microsomes of 30 Japanese 
and 30 Caucasians. J Pharmacol Exp Therap. 1994;270:414–423.
Short BG, Steinhagen WH, Swenberg JA. Promoting effects of unleaded 
gasoline and 2,2,4-trimethylpentane on the development of atypical cell 
foci and renal tubular cell tumors in rats exposed to N-ethyl-N hydroxy-
ethylnitrosamine. Cancer Res. 1989;49:369–378.
Shroads AL, Langaee T, Coats BS, et  al. Human polymorphisms in the 
­glutathione transferase zeta 1/maleylacetoacetate isomerase gene influ-
ence the toxicokinetics of dichloroacetate. J Clin Pharmacol. 2012;52(6): 
837–49.
Siesky AM, Kamendulis LM, Klaunig JE. Hepatic effects of 2-butoxyetha-
nol in rodents. Toxicol Sci. 2002;70:252–260.
Sills RC, Harry GJ, Valentine WM, Morgan DL. Interdisciplinary neurotox-
icity inhalation studies: carbon disulfide and carbonyl sulfide research in 
F344 rats. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2005;207:S245–S250.
Silvaggio T, Mattison D. Setting occupational health standards: toxicoki-
netic differences among and between men and women. J Occup Med. 
1994;36: 849–854.
Singh S, Singh J. Dermal toxicity and microscopic alteration by JP-8 jet fuel 
components in vivo in rabbit. Environ Toxicol Phar. 2004;16:153–161.
Singh S, Zhao K, Singh J. In vivo percutaneous absorption, skin barrier 
perturbation, and irritation from JP-8 jet fuel components. Drug Chem 
Toxicol. 2003;26:135–146.
Singh SP, Ehmann S, Snyder AK. Ethanol-induced changes in insulin-like 
growth factors and IGF gene expression in the fetal brain. Proc Soc Exp 
Biol Med. 1996;212:349–354.
Sitarek K, Gromadzinska J, Lutz P, et al. Fertility and developmental toxic-
ity studies of diethylene glycol monobutyl ether (DGBE) in rats. Int J 
Occup Med Environ Health. 2012;25:404–417.
Sivilotti ML, Burns MJ, McMartin KE, Brent J. Toxicokinetics of ethyl-
ene glycol during fomepizole therapy: implications for management. For 
the Methylpyrazole for Toxic Alcohols Study Group. Ann Emerg Med. 
2000;36:114–125.
Skrzypinska-Gawrysiak M, Piotrowski JK, Sporny S. Circadian variations 
in hepatotoxicity of carbon tetrachloride in mice. Internat J Occup Med 
Environ Health. 2000;13:165–173.
Smialowicz RJ, Riddle MM, Luebke RW, et  al. Immunotoxicity of 
2-methoxyethanol following oral administration in Fischer 344 rats. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1991a;109:494–506.
Smialowicz RJ, Riddle MM, Rogers RR, et al. Evaluation of the immuno-
toxicity of orally administered 2-methoxyacetic acid in Fischer 344 rats. 
Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1991b;17:771–781.
Smialowicz RJ, Riddle MM, Williams WC, et al. Species and strain com-
parisons of immunosuppression by 2-methoxyethanol and 2-methoxy-
acetic acid. Int J Immunopharmacol. 1994;16:695–702.
Smialowicz RJ, Williams WC, Riddle MM, et al. Comparative immunosup-
pression of various glycol ethers orally administered to Fischer 344 rats. 
Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1992;18:621–627.
Smith EN, Taylor RT. Acute toxicity of methanol in the folate-deficient 
acatalasemic mouse. Toxicology. 1982;25:271–287.
Smith JH, Maita K, Sleight SD, Hook JB. Effect of sex hormone status on 
chloroform nephrotoxicity and renal mixed function oxidases in mice. 
Toxicology. 1984;30:305–316.
Smith KW, Proctor SP, Ozonoff A, McClean MD. Urinary biomarkers of 
occupational jet fuel exposure among Air Force personnel. J Exp Sci 
Environ Epidemiol. 2012;22:35–45.
Smith MT. The mechanism of benzene-induced leukemia: A hypothesis 
and speculations on the causes of leukemia. Environ Health Perspect. 
1996;104(suppl 6):1219–1225.
Snawder JE, Lipscomb JC. Individual variance of cytochrome P450 forms 
in human hepatic microsomes: correlation of individual forms with xeno-
biotic metabolism and implications in risk assessment. Regul Toxicol 
Pharmacol. 2000;32:200–209.
Snellings WM, Corley RA, McMartin KE, et al. Oral reference dose for 
ethylene glycol based on oxalate crystal-induced renal tubule degenera-
tion as the critical effect. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2013;65:229–241.
Snyder R. Benzene and leukemia. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2002;32:155–210.
Snyder R. Xenobiotic metabolism and the mechanism(s) of benzene toxic-
ity. Drug Metab Rev. 2004;36:531–547.
Snyder R, Hedli CC. An overview of benzene metabolism. Environ Health 
Perspect. 1996;104:S1165–S1171.
Soffritti M, Belpoggi F, Cevolani D, et al. Results of long-term experimen-
tal studies on the carcinogenicity of methyl alcohol and ethyl alcohol in 
rats. Ann NY Acad Sci. 2002;982:46–69.
Sohn MD, McKone TE, Blancato JN. Reconstructing population exposure 
from dose biomarkers: Inhalation of trichloroethylene (TCE) as a case 
study. J Expos Sci Environ Epidemiol. 2004;14:204–213.
Song F, Zhang C, Wang Q, et al. Alterations in neurofilaments content and 
calpains activity of sciatic nerve of carbon disulfide-treated rats. Arch 
Toxicol. 2009;83:587–594,
Spencer PJ. New toxicity data for the propylene glycol ethers—a commit-
ment to public health and safety. Toxicol Lett. 2005;156:181–188,
Spencer PJ, Crissman JW, Stott WT, et al. Propylene glycol monomethyl 
ether (PGME): Inhalation toxicity and carcinogenicity in Fischer 344 rats 
and B6C3F1 mice. Toxicol Pathol. 2002;30:570–579.
Spiller HA. Epidemiology of volatile substance abuse (VSA) cases 
reported to US poison control centers. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse. 
2004;30:155–165.
Spitzer HL. An analysis of the health benefits associated with the use of 
MTBE reformulated gasoline oxygenated fuels in reducing atmospheric 
concentrations of selected volatile organic compounds. Risk Anal. 
1997;17:683–691.
Sprankle CS, Larson JL, Goldsworthy SM, Butterworth BE. Levels of myc, 
fos, Ha-ras, met and hepatocyte growth factor mRNA during regenerative 
cell proliferation in female mouse liver and male rat kidney after a cyto-
toxic dose of chloroform. Cancer Lett. 1996;101:97–106.
Spurgeon A, Glass DC, Calvert IA, et al. Investigation of dose related neu-
robehavioral effects in paintmakers exposed to low levels of solvents. 
Occup Environ Med. 1994;51:626–630.
Stacey NH. Toxicity of mixtures of trichloroethylene, tetrachloroethylene 
and 1,1,1-trichloroethane: Similarity of in vitro to in vivo responses. 
Toxicol Ind Health. 1989;5:441–450.
Standeven AM, Blazer DG, Goldsworthy TL. Investigation of anties-
trogenic properties of unleaded gasoline in female mice. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 1994a;127:233–240.
Standeven AM, Goldsworthy TL. Promotion of preneoplastic lesions and 
induction of CYP2B by unleaded gasoline vapor in female B6C3F1 
mouse liver. Carcinogenesis. 1993;14:2137–2141.
Standeven AM, Goldsworthy TL. Identification of hepatic mitogenic and 
cytochrome P-450-inducing fractions of unleaded gasoline in B6C3F1 
mice. J Toxicol Environ Health. 1994;43:213–224.
Standeven AM, Wolf DC, Goldsworthy TL. Interactive effects of unleaded 
gasoline and estrogen on liver tumor promotion in female B6C3F1 mice. 
Cancer Res. 1994b;54:1198–1204.
Standeven AM, Wolf DC, Goldsworthy TL. Promotion of hepatic preneo-
plastic lesions in male B6C3F1 mice by unleaded gasoline. Environ 
Health Perspect. 1995;103:696–700.
Staples CA, Williams JB, Craig GR, Roberts KM.Fate, effects and poten-
tial environmental risks of ethylene glycol: a review. Chemosphere. 
2001;43:377–383.
Starr TB, Matanoski G, Anders MW, Andersen ME. Workshop overview: 
reassessment of the cancer risk of dichloromethane in humans. Toxicol 
Sci. 2006;91:20–28.
Stein Y, Finkelstein Y, Levy-Nativ O, et al. Exposure and susceptibility: 
schizophrenia in a young man following prolonged high exposures to 
organic solvents. Neurotoxicology. 2010;31:603–607.
Steinmaus C, Smith MT. Steinmaus and Smith respond to “proximity to gas-
oline stations and childhood leukemia. Am J Epidemiol. 2017;185:5–7.

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1251
Stenback F, Shubik P. Lack of toxicity and carcinogenicity of some com-
monly used cutaneous agents. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1974;30:7–13.
Stewart RD, Gay HH, Schaffer AW, et al. Experimental human exposure to 
methyl chloroform vapor. Arch Environ Health. 1969;19:467–472.
Stewart RD, Hake CL, Forster HV, et al. Tetrachloroethylene: Development 
of a biologic standard for the industry worker by breath analysis. 
Contract No. HSM 99-72-83. NIOSH-MCOW-ENVM-PCE-74-6. NTIS 
No. PB82-152166. National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health, 
Cincinnati, OH, 1981.
Stewart RD, Hake CL, Wu A, et al. Effects of perchloroethylene/drug inter-
action on behavior and neurological function. Final Report PB-83-17460. 
National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health, Washington, DC, 
1977.
Stenner RD, Merdink JL, Stevens DK, et al. Enterohepatic recirculation 
of trichloroethanol glucuronide as a significant source of trichloroacetic 
acid. Drug Metab Dispos. 1997;25:529–535.
Stoica BA, Boulares AH, Rosenthal DS, et al. Mechanisms of JP-8 jet fuel 
toxicity. I. Induction of apoptosis in rat lung epithelial cells. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 2001;171:94–106.
Stott WT, McKenna MJ. The comparative absorption and excretion of 
chemical vapors by the upper, lower and intact respiratory tract of rats. 
Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1984;4:594–602.
Stoyanovsky DA, Cederbaum AI. Thiol oxidation and cytochrome P450-
dependent metabolism of CCl4 triggers Ca+ 2 release from liver micro-
somes. Biochemistry. 1996;35:15839–15845.
Sturtevant RP, Sturtevant FM, Pauly JE, Scheving LE: Chrono­
pharmacokinetics of ethanol. Int J Clin Pharmacol. 1978;16:594–599.
Su C, Chen K, Zou Y, et al. Chronic exposure to manganese sulfate leads 
to adverse dose-dependent effects on the neurobehavioral ability of rats. 
Environ Toxicol. 2016;31:1571–1579.
Sulsky SI, Hooven FH, Burch MT, Mundt KA: Critical review of the epi-
demiological literature on the potential cardiovascular effects of occu-
pational carbon disulfide exposure. Int Arch Occup Environ Health. 
2002;75:365–380.
Sun D-Q, Li A-W, Li J, et  al. Changes in lipid peroxidation in carbon 
disulfide-treated rat nerve tissues and serum. Chem-Biol Interact. 
2009;179:110–117.
Sun Y, Dai B, Wu Y, et al. Carbon disulfide exposure at peri-implantation 
disrupts embryo implantation by decreasing integrin β3 expression in the 
uterine tissue of pregnant mice. Chem-Biol Interact. 2013;206:126–133.
Suzuki M, Yamazaki K, Kano H, et  al. No carcinogenicity of ethyl 
­tertiary-butyl ether by 2-year oral administration in rats. J Toxicol Sci. 
2012;37:1239–1246.
Swaen GM, van Amelsvoort L, Twisk JJ, et  al. Low level occupational 
benzene exposure and hematological parameters. Chem-Biol Interact. 
2010;184:94–100.
Swann HE Jr, Kwon BK, Hogan GK, Snellings WM. Acute inhalation toxi-
cology of volatile hydrocarbons. Am Ind Hyg Assoc J. 1974;35:511–518.
Sweeney LM, Tyler TR, Kirman CR, et al. Proposed occupational exposure 
limits for select ethylene glycol ethers using PBPK models and Monte 
Carlo simulations. Toxicol Sci. 2001;62:124–139.
Sweeting JN, Siu M, McCallum GP, et al. Species differences in methanol 
and formic acid pharmacokinetics in mice, rabbits and primates. Toxicol 
Appl Pharmacol. 2010;247:28–35.
Sweeting JN, Siu M, Wiley MJ, Wells PG. Species- and strain-depen-
dent teratogenicity of methanol in rabbits and mice. Reprod Toxicol. 
2011;31:50–58.
Swenberg JA. α2µ-Globulin nephropathy: Review of the cellular and 
molecular mechanisms involved and their implications for human risk 
assessment. Environ Health Perspect. 1993;101:39–44.
Taieb D, Malicet C, Garcia S, et al. Inactivation of stress protein 8 increases 
murine carbon tetrachloride hepatotoxicity via preserved CYP2E1 activ-
ity. Hepatology. 2005;42:176–182.
Takebayashi T, Nishiwaki Y, Uemura T, et al. A six-year follow-up study of 
the subclinical effects of carbon disulphide exposure on the cardiovascu-
lar system. Occup Environ Med. 2004;61:127–134.
Takei M, Ando Y, Saitoh W, et  al. Ethylene glycol monomethyl ether-
induced toxicity is mediated through the inhibition of flavoprotein dehy-
drogenase enzyme family. Toxicol Sci. 2010;118:643–652.
Taketa Y, Inomata A, Hosokawa S, et al. Histopathological characteristics 
of luteal hypertrophy induced by ethylene glycol monomethyl ether 
with a comparison to normal luteal morphology in rats. Toxicol Pathol. 
2011;39:372–380.
Talbott EO, Xu X, Youk AO, et al. Risk of leukemia as a result of com-
munity exposure to gasoline vapors: A follow-up study. Environ Res. 
2011;111:597–602.
Tan H-H, Schiano TD. Effects of liver disease on drug metabolism in 
humans. Encyclopeda Drug Metab Interact. 2012;X:1–46.
Tan X, Peng X, Wang F, et  al. Cardiovascular effects of carbon disul-
fide: meta-analysis of cohort studies. Int J Hyg Environ Health. 
2002;205:473–477.
Tan Y-M, Butterworth BE, Gargas ML, Conolly RB. Biologically motivated 
modeling of chloroform cytolethality and regenerative cellular prolifera-
tion. Toxicol Sci. 2003;75:192–200.
Tan Y-M, Clewell H, Campbell J, Andersen M. Evaluating pharmacokinetic 
and pharmacodynamic interactions with computational models in sup-
porting cumulative risk assessment. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 
2011;8: 1613–1630.
Tan Y-M, Liao KH, Clewell HJ. Reverse dosimetry: Interpreting trihalo-
methanes biomonitoring data using physiologically based pharmacoki-
netic data. J Expos Sci Environ Epidemiol. 2007;17:591–603.
Tang C, Lin JH, Lu AYH. Metabolism-based drug-drug interactions: what 
determines individual variability in cytochrome P450 induction? Drug 
Metab Dispos. 2005;33:603–613.
Tao L, Kramer PM, Ge R, Pereira MA. Effect of dichloroacetic acid and 
trichloroacetic acid on DNA methylation in liver and tumors of female 
B6C3F1 mice. Toxicol Sci. 1998;43:139–144.
Tao L, Li Y, Kramer PM, et al. Hypomethylation of DNA and the insulin-
like growth factor-II gene in dichloroacetic and trichloroacetic acid-pro-
moted mouse liver tumors. Toxicology. 2004;196:127–136.
Tao L, Wang W, Li L, et al. DNA hypomethylation induced by drinking 
water disinfection by-products in mouse and rat kidney. Toxicol Sci. 
2005;87:344–352.
Tao L, Yang S, Xie M, et al. Effect of trichloroethylene and its metabo-
lites, dichloroacetic acid and trichloroacetic acid, on the methylation 
and expression of c-Jun and c-Myc protooncogenes in mouse liver: 
Prevention by methionine. Toxicol Sci. 2000;54:399–407.
Tapin D, Kennedy G, Lambert J, Zayed J. Bioaccumulation and locomo-
tor effects of manganese sulfate in Sprague–Dawley rats following 
subchronic (90 days) inhalation exposure. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
2006;211:166–174.
Tardif R, Lapare S, Plaa GL, Brodeur J. Effect of simultaneous exposure 
to toluene and xylene on their respective biological exposure indices in 
humans. Int Arch Occup Environ Health. 1991;63:279–284.
Taylor MD, Clewell HJ, Andersen ME, et al. Update on a pharmacokinetic-
centric alternative tier II program for MMT – Part II: physiologically 
based pharmacokinetic modeling and manganese risk assessment. J 
Toxicol. 2012;2012:1–17.
Teboul M, Grechez-Cassiau A, Guillaumond F, Delaunnay F. How nuclear 
receptors tell time. J Appl Physiol. 2009;107:1965–1971.
Tephly TR. The toxicity of methanol. Life Sci. 1991;48:1031–1041.
TERA (Toxicology Excellence for Risk Assessment). Workplace 
Environmental Exposure Level, Deithylene Glycol 2016. Available at: 
http://www.tera.org/OARS/. Accessed June 13, 2017.
Terry KK, Elswick BA, Welsch F, Conolly RB. Development of a physi-
ologically based pharmacokinetic model describing 2-methoxyace-
tic acid disposition in the pregnant mouse. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
1995;132:103–114.
Thamilselvan S, Khan SR. Oxalate and calcium oxalate crystals are inju-
rious to renal epithelial cells: results of in vivo and in vitro studies. J 
Nephrol. 1998;11:66–69.
Thier R, Wiebel FA, Hinkel A, et al. Species differences in the glutathione 
transferase GSTT1-1 activity towards the model substrates methyl chloride 
and dichloromethane in liver and kidney. Arch Toxicol. 1998;72:622–629.
Thompson CM, Johns DO, Sonawane B, et al. Database for physiologi-
cally based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) modeling: physiological data for 
healthy and healthy-impaired elderly. J Toxicol Environ Health Part B: 
2009;12(1):1–24.

1252
Toxic Agents
unit V
Thompson CM, Sonawane B, Barton HA, et al. Approaches for applications 
of physiological models in risk assessment. J Toxicol Environ Health Part 
B. 2008;11:519–547.
Thompson DJ, Warner SD, Robinson VB. Teratology studies on orally 
administered chloroform in the rat and rabbit. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
1974;29:348–357.
Thrall KD, Weitz KK, Woodstock AD. Use of real-time breath analysis 
and physiologically based pharmacokinetic modeling to evaluate der-
mal absorption of aqueous toluene in human volunteers. Toxicol Sci. 
2002;68:280–287.
Thurman RG. Mechanisms of hepatic toxicity II. Alcoholic liver injury 
involves activation of Kupffer cells by endotoxin. Am J Physiol. 
1998;275:G605–G611.
Thurman RG. Sex-related liver injury due to alcohol involves activation of 
Kupffer cells by endotoxin. Can J Gastroenterol. 2000;14:129D–135D.
Timchalk C, Kousba AA, Poet TS. An age-dependent physiologically based 
pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic model for the organophosphorus 
insecticide in the preweanling rat. Toxicol Sci. 2007;98:348–365.
Tinston DJ. Perchloroethylene: multigeneration inhalation study in the 
rat. Report No. CTL/P/4907. Zenca Central Laboratory, Alderly Park, 
Cheshire, UK, 1995.
Tonkin EG, Erve JC, Valentine WM. Disulfiram produces a non-carbon 
disulfide-dependent schwannopathy in the rat. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 
2000;59:786–797.
Toraason M, Breitenstein M. Prenatal ethylene glycol ether (EGME) expo-
sure produces electrocardiographic changes in the rat. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 1988;95:321–327.
Tornambe A, Manfra L, Mariani L, et al. Toxicity evaluation fo diethylene 
glycol and its combined effects with produced waters of off-shore gas 
platforms in the Adriatic Sea (Italy): Bioassays with marine/estuarine 
species. Mar Environ Res. 2012;77:141–149.
Tornero-Velez R, Mirfazaelian A, Kim K-B, et al. Evaluation of deltame-
thrin kinetics and dosimetry in the maturing rat using a PBPK model. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2010;244:208–217.
Tornero-Velez R, Rappaport SM. Physiological modeling of the relative 
contributions of styrene-7,8-oxide derived from direct inhalation and 
from styrene metabolism to the systemic dose in humans. Toxicol Sci. 
2001;64:151–161.
Toso L, Roberson R, Woodard J, et  al. Prenatal alcohol exposure alters 
GABA(A)alpha(5) expression: a mechanism of alcohol-induced learning 
dysfunction. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2006;195:1038–1044.
Toth B, Hornung D, Scholz S, et al. Peroxisome proliferator-activated recep-
tors: new players in the field of reproduction. Am J Reprod Immunol. 
2007;58:289–310.
Tracey R, Manikkam M, Guerrero-Bosagna C, Skinner MK. Hydrocarbons (Jet 
Fuel JP-8) induce epigenetic transgenerational inheritance of obesity, repro-
ductive disease and sperm epimutations. Reprod Toxicol. 2013;36:104–116.
Traiger GJ, Bruckner JV. The participation of 2-butanone in 2-butanol-
induced potentiation of carbon tetrachloride hepatotoxicity. J Pharmacol 
Exp Therap. 1976;196:493–500.
Traphagen N, Tian Z, Allen-Gipson D. Chronic ethanol exposure: 
Pathogenesis of pulmonary disease and dysfunction. Biomolecules. 
2015;5:2840–2853.
Travis CC, Fox MT, Simmons WM, Lyon BF. Co-exposure to gasoline 
vapor decreases benzene metabolism in Fischer-344 rats. Toxicol Lett. 
1992;62:231–240.
Treichel JL, Henry MM, Skumatz CM, Eells JT, Burke JM. Formate, the 
toxic metabolite of methanol, in cultured ocular cells. Neurotoxicology. 
2003;24:825–834.
Tremblay RT, Martin SA, Fisher JW. Novel characterization of the aero-
sol and gas-phase composition of aerosolized jet fuel. Inhal Toxicol. 
2010a;22:394–401.
Tremblay RT, Martin SA, Fisher JW. Chapter 12: Evaluation of methods 
used to generate and characterize jet fuel vapor and aerosol for inhala-
tion toxicology studies. In: Witten ML, Zeigler E, Ritchie GD, eds. Jet 
Fuel Toxicology. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group; 
2011:219–238.
Triebig G, Claus D, Csuzda I, et al. Cross-sectional epidemiological study 
on neurotoxicity of solvents in paints and lacquers. Int Arch Occup 
Environ Health. 1988;60:233–241.
Triebig G, Hallermann J. Survey of solvent related chronic encephalopathy 
as an occupational disease in European countries. Occup Environ Med. 
2001;58:575–581.
Troutman JA, Rick DL, Stuard SB, et al. Development of a physiologically-
based pharmacokinetic model of 2-phenoxyethanol and its metabolite 
phenoxyacetic acid in rats and humans to address toxicokinetic uncer-
tainty in risk assessment. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2015;73:530–543.
Trush MA, Twerdok LE, Rembish SJ, et  al. Analysis of target cell sus-
ceptibility as a basis for the development of a chemoprotective strategy 
against benzene-induced hematotoxicities. Environ Health Perspect. 
1996;104(suppl 6):1227–1234.
Tsai SP, Fox EE, Ransdell JD, et al. A hematology surveillance study of 
petrochemical workers exposure to benzene. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 
2004;40:67–73.
Turini A, Amato G, Longo V, Gervasi PG. Oxidation of methyl- and ethyl-
tertiary-butyl ethers in rat liver microsomes: role of the cytochrome P450 
isoforms. Arch Toxicol. 1998;72:207–214.
Turtletaub KW, Mani C. Benzene metabolism in rodents at doses relevant 
to human exposure from urban air. Res Report Health Effects Inst. 
2003;113:1–26.
Tyl RW, Ballantyne B, France KA, et al. Evaluation of the developmental 
toxicity of ethylene glycol monohexyl ether vapor in Fischer 344 rats 
and New Zealand white rabbits. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1989;12:269–280.
Tyson CA, Hawk-Prather K, Story DL, et al. Correlations of in vitro and 
in vivo hepatotoxicity for five haloalkanes. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
1983;70:289–302.
Uboh FE, Ebong PE, Umoh IB. Comparative hepatoprotective effect of 
vitamins A and E against gasoline vapor toxicity in male and female rats. 
Gastroenterol Res. 2009;2:295–302.
Uchida Y, Nakatsuka H, Ukai H, et al. Symptoms and signs in workers 
exposed predominantly to xylenes. Int Arch Occup Environ Health. 
1993;64:597–605.
Udden MM. Hemolysis and deformability of erythrocytes exposed to 
butoxyacetic acid, a metabolite of 2-butoxyethanol: II. Resistance in red 
blood cells from humans with potential susceptibility. J Appl Toxicol. 
1994;14:97–102.
Udden MM. Effects of diethylene glycol butyl ether and butoxyethoxyace-
tic acid on rat and human erythrocytes. Toxicol Lett. 2005;156:95–101.
Udden MM, Patton CS. Hemolysis and deformability of erythrocytes exposed 
to butoxyacetic acid, a metabolite of 2-butoxyethanol: I. Sensitivity in rats 
and resistance in normal humans. J Appl Toxicol. 1994;14:91–96.
Udden MM, Patton CS. Butoxyacetic acid-induced hemolysis of rat red 
blood cells: effect of external osmolarity and cations. Toxicol Lett. 
2005;156:81–93.
Ullrich SE. Dermal application of JP-8 jet fuel induces immune suppres-
sion. Toxicol Sci. 1999;52:61–67.
Ullrich SE, Lyons HJ. Mechanisms involved in the immunotoxicity induced 
by dermal application of JP-8 jet fuel. Toxicol Sci. 2000;58:290–298.
Umulis DM, Gurmen NM, Singh P, Fogler HS. A physiologically based 
model for ethanol and acetaldehyde metabolism in human beings. 
Alcohol. 2005;35:3–12.
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). SIDS Initial Assessment 
Report for SIAM 2 - Tripropylene Glycol, July, 1994. Available at: http://
www.inchem.org/documents/sids/sids/24800-44-0.pdf.
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). SIDS Initial Assessment 
Report for 11th SIAM—Dipropylene Glycol (Mixed Isomers and 
Dominant Isomer), January, 2001. Available at: http://www.inchem.org/
documents/sids/sids/25265-71-8.pdf.
Uzma N, Kumar BS, Hazari MAH. Exposure to benzene induces oxidative 
stress, alters the immune response and expression of p53 in gasoline fill-
ing workers. Am J Ind Med. 2010;53:1264–1270.
Vahter M, Gochfeld M, Casati B, et al. Implications of gender differences 
for human health risk assessment and toxicology. Environ Res. 2007;104: 
70–84.
Valentine JL, Lee SS-T, Seaton MJ, et al. Reduction of benzene metabo-
lism and toxicity in mice that lack CYP2E1 expression. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 1996;141:205–213.
Valentine WM, Amarnath V, Amarnath K, et al. Covalent modification of 
hemoglobin by carbon disulfide: III. A potential biomarker of effect. 
Neurotoxicology. 1998;19:99–108.

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1253
Valentine WM, Amarnath V, Graham DG, et al. CS2-mediated cross-­linking 
of erythrocyte spectrin and neurofilament protein: dose response and 
temporal relationship to the formation of axonal swellings. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 1997;142:95–105.
Valentine WM, Graham DG, Anthony DC. Covalent cross-linking of eryth-
rocyte spectrin by carbon disulfide in vivo. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
1993;121:71–77.
Valpey R, Sumi SM, Copass MK, Goble GJ. Acute and chronic progressive 
encephalopathy due to gasoline sniffing. Neurology. 1978;28:507–510.
Vamvakas S, Bruning T, Thomasson B, et al. Renal cell cancer correlated 
with occupational exposure to trichloroethene. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 
1998;124:374–382.
van der Hoek JAF, Verberk MM, Hageman G. Criteria for solvent-induced 
chronic toxic encephalopathy: a systematic review. Int Arch Occup 
Environ Health. 2000;73:362–368.
van der Hoek JAF, Verberk MM, van der Laan G, Hageman G. Routine 
diagnostic procedures for chronic encephalopathy induced by solvents: 
survey of experts. Occup Environ Med. 2001;58:382–385.
van Valen E, van Thriel C, Akila R, et al. Chronic solvent-induced encephalop-
athy: European consensus of neuropsychological characteristics, assess-
ment, and guidelines for diagnostics. Neurotoxicology. 2012;33:710–726.
van Valen E, Wekking E, van der Laan G, et al. The course of chronic sol-
vent induced encephalopathy: a systematic review. Neurotoxicology. 
2009;30:1172–1186.
Vanhoorne MH, De Bacquer D, De Backer G. Epidemiological study 
of the cardiovascular effects of carbon disulphide. Int J Epidemiol. 
1992;21:745–752.
Vasiliou V, Pappa A, Estey T. Role of human aldehyde dehydroge-
nases in endobiotic and xenobiotic metabolism. Drug Metab Rev. 
2004;36:279–299.
Verberk MM, van der Hoek J, van Valen E, et al. Decision rules for assess-
ment of chronic solvent-induced encephalopathy: Results in 2370 
patients. Neurotoxicology. 2012;33:742–752.
Varela-Rey M, Woodhoo A, Lu SC. Alcohol, DNA methylation, and cancer. 
Alcohol Res. 2013;35:25–35.
Verhulst A, Asselman M, Persy VP, et al. Crystal retention capacity of cells 
in the human nephron: Involvement of CD44 and its ligands hyaluronic 
acid and osteopontin in the transition of a crystal binding—into a non-
adherent epithelium. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2003;14:107–115.
Verplanke AJ, Leummens MH, Herber RF. Occupational exposure to tet-
rachloroethylene and its effects on the kidneys. J Occup Environ Med. 
1999;41:11–16.
Veulemans H, Steeno O, Maschelein R, Groeseneken D. Exposure to eth-
ylene glycol ethers and spermatogenic disorders in man: a case–control 
study. Br J Ind Med. 1993;50:71–78.
Vidali M, Stewart SF, Albano E. Interplay between oxidative stress and 
immunity in the progression of alcohol-mediated liver injury. Trends Mol 
Med. 2008;14: 63–71.
Visser I, Lavini C, Booij J, et al. Cerebral impairment in chronic solvent-
induced encephalopathy. Ann Neurol. 2008;63:572–580.
Visser I, Wekking EM, de Boer A, et al. Prevalence of psychiatric disor-
ders in patients with chronic solvent induced encephalopathy (CSE). 
Neurotoxicology. 2011;32:916–922.
Visser I, de Boer A, Wekking EM, et al. The coping with attention and 
memory complaints questionnaire (CAMQ): psychometric evaluation 
of an instrument in suspected chronic solvent-induced encephalopathy 
(CSE). Neuropsychol Rehab. 2012;22:794–808.
Vlaanderen J, Straif K, Ruder A, et al. Tetrachloroethylene exposure and 
cancer risk: a meta-analysis of dry-cleaning-worker studies. Environ 
Health Perspect. 2014;122:661–666.
Volkel W, Friedewald M, Lederer E, et al. Biotransformation of perchloro-
ethene: dose-dependent excretion of trichloroacetic acid, dichloroacetic 
acid, and N-acetyl-S-(trichlorovinyl)-l-cysteine in rats and humans after 
inhalation. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1998;153:20–27.
von Euler G. Toluene and dopaminergic transmission. In: Isaacon RL, 
Jensen KF, eds. The Vulnerable Brain and Environmental Risk. Toxins in 
Air and Water. Vol 3. New York: Plenum Press; 1994:301–321.
Vrca A, Bozicevic D, Karacic V, et al. Visual evoked potentials in individu-
als exposed to long-term low concentrations of toluene. Arch Toxicol. 
1995;69:337–340.
Vyskocil A, Emminger S, Tejral J, et al. Study on kidney function in female 
workers exposed to perchloroethylene. Human Exp Toxicol. 1990;9: 
377–380.
Wade MG, Kawata A, Williams A, Yauk C. Methoxyacetic acid-induced 
spermatocyte death is associated with histone hyperacetylation in rats. 
Biol Reprod. 2008;78:822–831.
Walgren JL, Kurtz DT, McMillan JM. Lack of direct mitogenic activ-
ity of dichloroacetate and trichloroacetate in cultured rat hepatocytes. 
Toxicology. 2005;211: 220–230.
Wallace L. Environmental exposure to benzene: an update. Environ Health 
Perspect. 1996;104(suppl 6):1129–1136.
Wallace LA, Pellizzari ED, Hartwell TD, et al. A TEAM study: personal 
exposures to toxic substances in air, drinking water, and breath of 400 
residents of New Jersey, North Carolina, and North Dakota. Environ Res. 
1987;43:290–307.
Wang FI, Kuo ML, Shun CT, et al. Chronic toxicity of a mixture of chlo-
rinated alkanes and alkenes in 1CR mice. J Toxicol Environ Health. 
2002a;65:279–291.
Wang PY, Kaneko T, Tsukada H, et al. Dose- and route-dependent altera-
tions in metabolism and toxicity of chemical compounds in ethanol-
treated rats: Difference between highly (chloroform) and poorly 
(carbon tetrachloride) metabolized hepatotoxic compounds. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 1997;142:13–21.
Wang S, Sun Y, Wu Y, et al. Down-regulation of uterine LIF expression 
induced by the hormonal level disorder causes embryo implanation loss 
after mice exposed to carbon disulfide at peri-implantation. Biochem 
Biophys Res Commun. 2015;467:7–13.
Wang S, Young RS, Sun NN, Witten ML. In vitro cytokine release from rat 
type II pneumocytes and alveolar macrophages following exposure to 
JP-8 jet fuel in co-culture. Toxicology. 2002b;173:211–219.
Wang W, Chapin RE. Differential gene expression detected by suppres-
sion subtractive hybridization in the ethylene glycol monomethyl ether-
induced testicular lesion. Toxicol Sci. 2000;56:165–174.
Wang R-S, Ohtani K, Suda M, Nakajima T. Inhibitory effect of ethylene gly-
col monoethyl ether on rat sperm motion. Ind Health. 2006;44:665–668.
Wang W, Wine RN, Chapin RE. Rat testicular Src: Normal distribution and 
involvement in ethylene glycol monomethyl ether-induced apoptosis. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2000;163:125–134.
Ward E, Hornung R, Morris J, et al. Risk of low red or white blood cell 
count related to estimated benzene exposure in a rubberworker cohort. 
Am J Ind Med. 1996;29:247–257.
Warren DA, Bowen SE, Jennings WB, et al. Biphasic effects of 1,1,1-tri-
chloroethane on the locomotor activity of mice: relationship to blood and 
brain solvent concentrations. Toxicol Sci. 2000;56:365–373.
Warren DA, Graeter LJ, Channel SR, et al. Trichloroethylene, trichloroace-
tic acid, and dichloroacetic acid: do they affect eye development in the 
Sprague–Dawley rat? Int J Toxicol. 2006;25:279–284.
Warren DA, Reigle TG, Muralidhara S, Dallas CE. Schedule-controlled 
operant behavior of rats during 1,1,1-trichloroethane inhalation: rela-
tionship to blood and brain solvent concentrations. Neurotoxicol Teratol. 
1998;20:143–153.
Warren KR, Hewitt BG, Thomas JD. Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders: 
research challenges and opportunities. Alcohol Res Health. 2011;34: 
4–14.
Wartenberg D, Reyner D, Scott CS. Trichloroethylene and cancer: epidemi-
ologic evidence. Environ Health Perspect. 2000;108(suppl 2):161–176.
Watanabe A, Nakano Y, Endo T, et al. Collaborative work to evaluate tox-
icity on male reproductive organs by repeated dose studies in rats 27. 
Repeated toxicity study on ethylene glycol monomethyl ether for 2 and 
4 weeks to detect effects on male reproductive organs in rats. J Toxicol 
Sci. 2000;25:259–266.
Watanabe K, Guengerich FP. Limited reactivity of formyl chloride with glu-
tathione and relevance to metabolism and toxicity of dichloromethane. 
Chem Res Toxicol. 2006;19:1091–1096.
Watanabe M, Tanaka M, Tateishi T, et al. Effects of the estrous cycle and 
the gender differences on hepatic drug metabolizing enzyme activities. 
Pharmacol Res. 1997;35:477–480.
Watson RE, Jacobson CF, Williams AL, et  al. Trichloroethylene-
contaminated drinking water and congenital heart defects: a critical anal-
ysis of the literature. Reprod Toxicol. 2006;21:117–147.

1254
Toxic Agents
unit V
Watson WA, Litovitz TL, Rodgers GC Jr, et  al. 2004 Annual report of 
the American Association of Poison Control Centers Toxic Exposure 
Surveillance System. Am J Emerg Med. 2005;23:589–666.
Watson WA. Ethylene glycol toxicity: closing in on rational, evidence-
based treatment. Ann Emerg Med. 2000;36:139–141.
Wauthier V, Verbeeck RK, Calderan PB. Age-related changes in the pro-
tein and mRNA levels of CYP2E1 and CYP3A isoforms as well as in 
their hepatic activities in Wistar rats. What role for oxidative stress? Arch 
Toxicol. 2004;78:131–138.
Wax PM. Elixirs, diluents, and the passage of the 1938 Federal Food, Drug 
and Cosmetic Act. Ann Intern Med. 1995;122:456–461.
Weber LWD, Boll M, Stampfl A. Hepatotoxicity and mechanisms of action 
of haloalkanes: carbon tetrachloride as a toxicological model. Crit Rev 
Toxicol. 2003;33:105–136.
Weisel CP, Jo WK. Ingestion, inhalation, and dermal exposures to chlo-
roform and trichloroethene from tap water. Environ Health Perspect. 
1996;104:48–51.
Weiss NS. Cancer in relation to occupational exposure to perchloroethy-
lene. Cancer Causes Control. 1995;6:257–266.
Welch LS, Schrader SM, Turner TW, Cullen MR. Effects of exposure to 
ethylene glycol ethers on shipyard painters: II. Male reproduction. Am J 
Ind Med. 1988;14:509–526.
Wenker MAM, Kerzic S, Monster AC, de Wolff FA. Metabolic capacity 
and interindividual variation in toxicokinetics of styrene in volunteers. 
Human Exp Toxicol. 2001;20:221–228.
West R, Banton M, Hu J, Klapacz J. The distribution, fate, and effects of 
propylene glycol substances in the environment. Rev Environ Contam 
Toxicol. 2014;232:107–138.
White INH, Razvi N, Gibbs AH, et al. Neoantigen formation and clasto-
genic action of HCFC-123 and perchloroethylene in human MCL-5 cells. 
Toxicol Lett. 2001;124:129–138.
White KL, Peachee VL, Armstrong SR, et al. Health assessment of gasoline 
and fuel oxygenate vapors. Immunotoxicity evaluation. Regul Toxicol 
Pharmacol. 2014;70:S43–S47.
Wilson ME, Karaoui M, Al Djasim L, et al. The safety and efficacy of chlo-
ral hydrate sedation for pediatric ophthalmic procedures: a retrospective 
review. J Pediatr Ophthalmol Strabismus. 2014;51:154–159.
WHO (World Health Organization)/Nordic Council of Ministers. Chronic 
Effects of Organic Solvents on the Central Nervous System and 
Diagnostic Criteria. Copenhagen, 1985.
WHO (World Health Organization of the United Nations). Environmenta 
Health Criteria 206: Methyl Tertiary-Butyl Ether. Geneva, 1998.
WHO (World Health Organization). Concise International Chemical 
Assessment Document 46—Carbon Disulfide. Geneva, 2002:1–64. 
Available at: http://www.inchem.org/documents/cicads/cicads/cicad46.htm.
WHO (World Health Organization). Guidelines for Drinking Water 
Quality, 3rd ed., Geneva, 2004. Available at: http://www.who.int/
water_sanitation_health/drug/gdwq3/en/.
Wiener HL, Richardson KE. The metabolism and toxicity of ethylene gly-
col. Res Commun Subst Abuse. 1988;9:77–87.
Wiener HL, Richardson KE. Metabolism of diethylene glycol in male rats. 
Biochem Pharmacol. 1989;38:539–541.
Wiesenhutter B, Selinski S, Golka K, et al. Re-assessment of the influence 
of polymorphisms of phase-II metabolic enzymes on renal cell cancer 
risk of trichloroethylene-exposed workers. Int Arch Occup Environ 
Health. 2007;81: 247–251.
Wilkins-Haug L. Teratogen update: Toluene. Teratology. 1997;55: 
145–151.
Williams J, Reel JR, George JD, Lamb JC IV. Reproductive effects of 
diethylene glycol and diethylene glycol monoethyl ether in Swiss CD-1 
mice assessed by a continuous breeding protocol. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 
1990;14:622–635.
Williams JF, Storck M. Inhalant abuse. Pediatrics. 2007;119:1009–1017.
Williams PR, Cushing CA, Sheehan PJ. Data available for evaluating the 
risks and benefits of MTBE and ethanol as alternative fuel oxygenates. 
Risk Anal. 2003;23:1085–1115.
Williams PRD, Scott PK, Sheehan PJ, Paustenbach DJ. A probabilistic 
assessment of household exposures to MTBE in California drinking 
water. Human Ecol Risk Assess. 2000a;6:827–849.
Williams TM, Cattley RC, Borghoff SJ. Alterations in endocrine responses 
in male Sprague–Dawley rats following oral administration of methyl 
tert-butyl ether. Toxicol Sci. 2000b;54:168–176.
Williams TM, Borghoff SJ. Induction of testosterone biotransformation 
enzymes following oral administration of methyl tert -butyl ether to male 
Sprague–Dawley rats. Toxicol Sci. 2000;57:147–155.
Williams TM, Borghoff SJ. Characterization of tert-butyl alcohol binding to 
alpha2u-globulin in F-344 rats. Toxicol Sci. 2001;62:228–235.
Williams WC, Riddle MM, Copeland CB, et al. Immunological effects of 
2-methoxyethanol administered dermally or orally to Fischer 344 rats. 
Toxicology. 1995;98:215–223.
Wilmarth KR, Viana ME, Abou-Donia MB. Carbon disulfide inhalation 
increases Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent kinase phosphorylation of cytoskele-
tal proteins in the rat central nervous system. Brain Res. 1993;628:293–300.
Wilson KC, Reardon C, Farber HW. Propylene glycol toxicity in a patient 
receiving intravenous diazepam. N Engl J Med. 2000;343:815.
Wilson KC, Reardon C, Theodore AC, Farber HW. Propylene glycol tox-
icity—a severe iatrogenic illness in ICU patients receiving IV benzodi-
azepines: A case series and prospective, observational pilot study. Chest. 
2005;128:1674–1681.
Wine RN, Ku WW, Li LH, Chapin RE. Cyclophilin A is present in rat 
germ cells and is associated with spermatocyte apoptosis. Reproductive 
Toxicology Group. Biol Reprod. 1997;56:439–446.
Winek CL, Shingleton DP, Shanor SP. Ethylene and diethylene glycol toxic-
ity. Clin Toxicol. 1978;13:297–324.
Win-Shwe TT, Fujimaki H: Neurotoxicity of toluene. Toxicol Lett. 
2010;198:93–99.
Win-Shwe TT, Hojo R, Mitsushima D, et al. Establishment of mouse model 
to assess brain neurotransmitter level and learning performance simulta-
neously following toxic chemical exposure: Using in vivo microdialysis 
and schedule-controlled operant behavior. J UOEH. 2009;31:1–11.
Witten ML, Zeigler E, Ritchie GD, eds. Jet Fuel Toxicology. Boca Raton, 
FL: CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group; 2011.
Witz G, Zhang Z, Goldstein BD. Reactive ring-opened aldehyde metabo-
lites in benzene hematotoxicity. Environ Health Perspect. 1996;104(suppl 
6):1195–1199.
Witzmann FA, Bauer MD, Fieno AM, et al. Proteomic analysis of simulated 
jet fuel exposure in the lung. Electrophoresis. 1999;20:3659–3669.
Witzmann FA, Bauer MD, Fieno AM, et al. Proteomic analysis of the renal 
effects of simulated occupational jet fuel exposure. Electrophoresis. 
2000a;21:976–984.
Witzmann FA, Carpenter RL, Ritchie GD, et  al. Toxicity of chemical 
mixtures: proteomic analysis of persisting liver and kidney protein 
alterations induced by repeated exposure of rats to JP-8 jet fuel vapor. 
Electrophoresis. 2000b;21:2138–2147.
Witzmann FA, Bobb A, Briggs GB, et al. Analysis of rat testicular protein 
expression following 91-day exposure to JP-8 jet fuel vapor. Proteomics. 
2003;3:1016–1027.
Witzmann FA, Monteiro-Riviere NA, Inman AO, et al. Effect of JP-8 jet 
fuel exposure on protein expression in human keratinocyte cells in cul-
ture. Toxicol Lett. 2005;160:8–21.
Wong FW-Y, Chan W-Y, Lee SS-T. Resistance to carbon tetrachloride-
induced hepatotoxocity in mice which lack CYP2E1 expression. Toxicol 
Appl Pharmacol. 1998;153:109–118.
Wong O. Carcinogenicity of trichloroethylene: an epidemiologic assess-
ment. Clin Occup Environ Med. 2004;4:557–589.
Wong SS, Thomas A, Barbaris B, et al. Pulmonary evaluation of permis-
sible exposure limit of syntroleum S-8 synthetic jet fuel in mice. Toxicol 
Sci. 2009;109:312–320.
Wormhoudt LW, Commandeur JNM, Vermeulen NPE. Genetic polymor-
phisms of human N-acetyltransferase, cytochrome P450, glutathione-
S-transferase, and epoxide hydrolase enzymes: Relevance to xenobiotic 
metabolism and toxicity. Crit Rev Toxicol. 1999;29: 59–124.
Wronska-Nofer T. Various disorders of cholesterol metabolism and their 
effect on the development of experimental arteriosclerosis in rats exposed 
to carbon disulfide. Med Proc. 1979;30:121–134.
Wronska-Nofer T, Chojnowska-Jezierska J, Nofer JR, et al. Increased oxi-
dative stress in subjects exposed to carbon disulfide (CS2)—an occupa-
tional coronary risk factor. Arch Toxicol. 2002;76:152–157.

Toxic Effects of Solvents and Vapors
Chapter 24
1255
Wu L-T, Pilowsky DJ, Schlenger WE. Inhalant abuse and dependence 
among adolescents in the United States. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psych. 
2004;43:1206–1214.
Xu H, Tanphaichitr N, Forkert PG, et al. Exposure to trichloroethylene and 
its metabolites causes impairment of sperm fertilizing ability in mice. 
Toxicol Sci. 2004;82:590–597.
Yamada T, Tanaka Y, Hasegawa R, et  al. Development of a category 
approach to predict the testicular toxicity of chemical substances struc-
turally related to ethylene glycol methyl ether. Reg Toxicol Pharmacol. 
2014;70:711–719.
Yamada T, Tanaka Y, Zhang H, et al. A category approach to predicting the 
hemolytic effects of ethylene glycol alkyl ethers in repeated-dose toxic-
ity. J Toxicol Sci. 2012;37:503–515.
Yamamoto T, Horii I, Yoshida T. Ingegrated NMR-based metabonomic 
investigation of early metabolic effects of ethylene glycol monomethyl 
ether (EGME) on male reproductive organs in rats. J Toxicol Sci. 
2007;32:515–528.
Yang AM, Inamine T, Hochrath K, et al. Intestinal fungi contribute to devel-
opment of alcoholic liver disease. J Clin Invest. 2017;127:2829–2841.
Yang F, Luo J. Endoplasmic reticulum stress and ethanol neurotoxicity. 
Biomolecules. 2015;5:2538–2553.
Yang JH, Lee CH, Monteiro-Riviere NA, et al. Toxicity of jet fuel aliphatic 
and aromatic hydrocarbon mixtures on human epidermal keratinocytes: 
evaluation based on in vitro cytotoxicity and interleukin-8 release. Arch 
Toxicol. 2006;80:508–523.
Yang J, Bai W, Niu P, et al. Aberrant hypomethylated STAT3 was identified as 
a biomarker of chronic benzene poisoning through integrating DNA meth-
ylation and mRNA expression data. Exp Mol Pathol. 2014;96:346–353.
Yang Q, Nagano T, Shah R, et al. The PPARα-humanized mouse: a model 
to investigate species differences in liver toxicity mediated by PPARα. 
Toxicol Sci. 2008;101: 132–139.
Yang Y, Xu X, Georgopoulos PG. A Bayesian population PBPK model 
for multiroute chloroform exposure. J Expos Sci Environ Epidemiol. 
2010;20:326–341.
Ye LL, Zhang GH, Huang JW, et al. Are polymorphisms in metabolism 
protective or a risk for reduced white blood cell counts in a Chinese popu-
lation with low occupational benzene exposures? Int J Occup Environ 
Health. 2015;21:232–240.
Yin M, Ikejima K, Wheeler MD, et al. Estrogen is involved in early alco-
hol-induced liver injury in a rat enteral feeding model. Hepatology. 
2000;31:117–123.
Yin SJ, Han CL, Lee AI, Wu CW. Human alcohol dehydrogenase family. 
Functional classification, ethanol/retinol metabolism, and medical impli-
cations. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1999;463:265–274.
Yin S-N, Hayes RB, Linet MS, et  al. A cohort study of cancer among 
benzene-exposed workers in China: overall results. Am J Ind Med. 
1996;29:227–235.
Yokley K, Tran HT, Pekari K, et al. Physiologically based pharmacokinetic 
(PBPK) modeling of benzene in humans: a Bayesian approach. Risk 
Anal. 2006;26:925–942.
Yoon BI, Hirabayashi Y, Kawasaki Y, et al. Aryl hydrocarbon receptor medi-
ates benzene-induced hematotoxicity. Toxicol Sci. 2002;70:150–156.
Yuan R, Venitz J. Effect of chronic renal failure on the disposition of highly 
hepatically metabolized drugs. Internat J Clin Pharmacol Therap. 
2000;38:245–253.
Yue J, Khokhar J, Miksys S, Tyndale RF. Differential induction of etha-
nol-metabolizing CYP2E1 and nicotine-metabolizing CYP2B1/2 in rat 
liver by chronic nicotine treatment and voluntary ethanol intake. Europ J 
Pharmacol. 2009;609:88–95.
Zangar RC, Benson JM, Burnett VL, Springer DL. Cytochrome P450 
2E1 is the primary enzyme responsible for low-dose carbon tetra-
chloride metabolism in human liver microsomes. Chem-Biol Interact. 
2000;125:233–243.
Zanger UM, Schwab M. Cytochrome P450 enzymes in drug metabolism: 
regulation of gene expression, enzyme activities, and impact of genetic 
variation. Pharmacol Therap. 2013;138:103–141.
Zar T, Graeber C, Perazella MA. Recognition, treatment, and prevention of 
propylene glycol toxicity. Semin Dial. 2007;20:217–219.
Zhang B, Shen C, Yang L, et al. DNA damage and apoptosis of endometrial 
cells cause loss of the early embryo in mice exposed to carbon disulfide. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2013;273:381–389.
Zhang Y-KJ, Yeager RL, Klaassen CD. Circadian expression of drug-
processing genes and transcription factors in mouse liver. Drug Metab 
Dispos. 2009;37:106–115.
Zhao Y, Krishnadasan A, Kennedy N, et al. Estimated effects of solvents 
and mineral oils on cancer incidence and mortality in a cohort of aero-
space workers. Am J Ind Med. 2005;48:249–258.
Zimniak P. Detoxification reactions: relevance to aging. Ageing Res Rev. 
2008;7:281–300.
Zintzaras E, Stefanidis I, Santos M, Vidal F. Do alcohol-metabolizing 
enzyme gene polymorphisms increase the risk of alcoholism and alco-
holic liver disease? Hepatology. 2006;43:352–361.

This page intentionally left blank