# 26 Toxic Effects of Plants and Animals
# Casarett & Doull's Toxicology, 9th Edition
# Pages: 1294-1333
# Unit: Unit V Toxic Agents

26
chapter
Toxic Effects of Plants  
and Animals
John B. Watkins, III
INTRODUCTION
The earliest humans have used plant extracts and animal venoms 
for hunting, war, assassination, and political intrigue for millen-
nia. The Ebers Papyrus, which dates to around 1550 bc, describes 
concoctions using plant substances as primary ingredients. The 
toxic properties of plants and animals often enhance their abil-
ity to survive in their surroundings and against predators. Some 
toxic compounds are used primarily to aid an animal in obtaining 
food, whereas plants have developed toxic properties to specifically 
ward off being used as food. These toxic compounds are invaluable 
as tools and in the insight that they provide into the systems that 
they disrupt and poison. One major complication to the study of 
plant and animal poisons arises from their complexity as mixtures. 
Studies readily separate and evaluate individual components, but 
it is very difficult to use purified components to make the original 
toxin or venom. Nevertheless, extensive study of many toxins has 
contributed to a greater understanding of their biology and chemis-
try. Toxins have been utilized as tools to study human biochemistry 
and physiology in order to pave the way for new pharmaceuticals. 
Clinical evaluation of human poisoning is complicated by ques-
tionable identification of plant or animal species and the inability 
to quantify the level of exposure. In this chapter, an overview of 
specific plant and animal toxins and their effects will precede a 
Introduction
Introduction to Plant Toxicities
Toxic Effects by Organ
Skin
Irritant Contact Dermatitis
Allergic Contact Dermatitis
Photosensitivity
Respiratory Tract
Allergic Rhinitis
Cough Reflex
Toxin-Associated Pneumonia
Gastrointestinal System
Direct Irritant Effects
Antimitotic Effects
Protein Synthesis Inhibition
Cardiovascular System
Cardioactive Glycosides
Actions on Cardiac Nerves
Vasoactive Chemicals
Liver
Hepatocyte Damage
Mushroom Toxins
Mycotoxins
Kidney and Bladder
Carcinogens
Kidney Tubular Degeneration
Blood and Bone Marrow
Anticoagulants
Bone Marrow Genotoxicity
Cyanogens
Nervous System
Epileptiform Seizures
Excitatory Amino Acids
Motor Neuron Demyelination
Cerebellar Neurons
Parasympathetic Stimulation
Parasympathetic Block
Sensory Neuron Block
Skeletal Muscle and Neuromuscular 
Junction
Neuromuscular Junction
Skeletal Muscle Damage
Bone and Tissue Calcification
Bone and Soft Tissue
Reproduction and Teratogenesis
Abortifacients
Teratogens
Clinical Study of Plant Poisons
Summary of Plant Toxicities
Introduction to Animal Venoms
Properties of Animal Toxins
Arthropods
Arachnida
Scorpions
Spiders
Agelenopsis Species (American  
Funnel Web Spiders)
Latrodectus Species (Widow Spiders)
Loxosceles Species (Brown or Violin 
Spiders)
Steatoda Species
Cheiracanthium Species (Running 
Spiders)
Theraphosidae Species (Tarantulas)
Ticks
Chilopoda (Centipedes)
Diplopoda (Millipedes)
Insecta
Heteroptera (True Bugs)
Hymenoptera (Ants, Bees, Wasps, 
and Hornets)
Formicidae (Ants)
Apidae (Bees)
Vespidae (Wasps)
Lepidoptera (Caterpillars, Moths, 
and Butterflies)
Mollusca (Cone Snails)
Reptiles
Lizards
Snakes
General Information and Classification
Snake Venoms
Enzymes
Polypeptides
Toxicology
Snakebite Treatment
Snake Venom Evolution
Antivenoms
Potential Clinical Application of 
Venoms
Conclusion
Acknowledgments
References

1276
Toxic Agents
unit V
short discussion of the considerable effort to harness the natural 
pharmacopeia for clinical use.
INTRODUCTION TO PLANT TOXICITIES
The plant kingdom contains potentially 300,000 species, and the 
toxic effects of plants serve primarily as defense mechanisms 
against natural predators. Toxicity in humans can result from sim-
ply touching as well as ingesting plants to cause a truly wide array 
of deleterious effects. Toxic effects on humans can range from 
simple hay fever caused by exposure to plant pollen all the way to 
serious systemic reactions caused by ingestion of specific plants. 
Table 26-1 lists some of the poisoning syndromes that plants can 
produce (Nelson et al., 2007).
Many variables can affect the concentration of a plant’s toxin 
and can be a major factor in the severity of reaction one will experi-
ence on exposure. These factors include what part of the plant expo-
sure is from, the age of the plant, amount of sunlight and soil quality 
that the plant has grown in, and genetic differences within a species. 
Also, plant toxins fall under a number of different chemical struc-
tures, which is useful in understanding related toxins. Table 26-2 
lists some of the common classifications.
The number and variety of plants that have some level of use or 
toxicity are far too many to be discussed here (see Table 1 in Polito 
et al. [2016]). Criteria for inclusion for discussion are based on how 
frequently human exposure occurs, the seriousness of these expo-
sures, and also how well the toxic agent is scientifically understood. 
Excellent source material can be found in the comprehensive texts 
by Barceloux (2008), Dart (2004), Cameron et al. (2015), Leikin 
and Paloucek (2008), and Nelson et al. (2007).
TOXIC EFFECTS BY ORGAN
Skin
Irritant Contact Dermatitis  Plants causing irritation of the skin 
on contact are rather common (Nelson et al., 2007). A list of such 
plants containing their family, genus, and common names can be 
found in Table 26-3. The trichomes, or barb-like hairs (Fig. 26-1), 
found on stinging nettles (Urtica species, Urticaceae) puncture skin 
on contact and release an irritating sap containing a mixture of for-
mic acid, histamine, acetylcholine, and serotonin (Kavalali, 2003). 
Various species of Urtica can be found all over the world; how-
ever, the most dangerous is U. ferox (poisonous tree nettle), which 
is most common in New Zealand. Exposure has been reported to 
cause death in humans and animals. Mucuna pruriens (cowhage), 
which also deploys its toxin via barbed trichomes on contact, may 
cause pain, itching, erythema, and vesication. Mucinain, contained 
Table 26-1 
Poisoning Syndromes Caused by Plants
SYNDROME
GENERA
MECHANISM(S)
Antimuscarinic
Atropa, Datura, Hyoscyanmus, Solanum
Blockade of muscarinic cholinoceptors
Cardiotoxic
Adenium, Digitalis, Convallaria, Nerium
Inhibition of cellular Na+, K+-ATPase increases contractility,  
enhanced vagal effect
Convulsants
Anemone, Conium, Labrunum, Nicotinia, 
Ranunculus
Blockade of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor on the 
neuronal chloride channel, alteration of acetylcholine homeostasis, 
mimic excitatory amino acids, sodium channel alteration, hypoglycemia
Cyanogenic
Eriobotrya, Hydrangea, Prunus
Gastric acid hydrolysis of cyanogenic glycosides releases cyanide
Dysrhythmia
Acotinum, Rhododendron, Veratrum
Sodium channel activation
Nicotinic
Conium, Laburnum, Lobelia, Nicotinia
Stimulation of nicotinic cholinoceptors
Pyrrolizidine
Crotalaria, Heliotropium, Senecia
Pyrroles injure endothelium of hepatic or pulmonary vasculature 
leading to veno-occlusive disease and hepatic necrosis
Toxalbumin
Abrus, Ricinus
Protein synthesis inhibitors leading to multiple organ system failure
Table 26-2 
Chemical Classification of Plant Toxins
CHEMICAL CATEGORY
GENERA
EXAMPLES
Alkaloids
Atropa, Senecio, Nicotinia, Coffea, 
Papaver, Solanum, Acotinum
Tropines, pyrrolizidines, pyridines, purines, isoquinolines, 
steroids, diterpines
Glycosides
Digitalis, Aesculus
Steroids, coumarins
Proteinaceous compounds
Abrus, Amanitin, Lathyrus
Toxalbumins (abrin, ricin), polypeptides (amatoxins, 
phallotoxins, phalloidin), amines (aminopropionitrile)
Organic acids
Caladium, Dieffenbachia, Rheum
Oxalates
Alcohols
Cicuta, Eupatorium
Cicutoxin, tremetol
Resins and resinoids
Cannabis, Rhus
Tetrahydrocannabinol, urushiol

Toxic Effects of Plants and Animals
Chapter 26
1277
in the toxin, is the proteinase responsible for causing the pruritus 
(Southcott and Haegi, 1992).
Certain species of Ranunculus (buttercup) contain a compound 
known as ranunculin, which is enzymatically broken down into the 
toxin protoanemonin. On contact with skin, protoanemonin found 
in Anemone (buttercup) is converted to anemonin, which is the 
irritant directly responsible for the resulting dermatitis. If ingested, 
protoanemonin may cause severe irritation of the gastrointestinal 
tract (Kelch et al., 1992).
Damage to the stems or leaves of the genus Euphorbia 
(Euphorbiaceae, spurge family) causes exudation of a milky 
latex that contains diterpene esters that are irritating to the skin. 
Euphorbia marginata (snow-on-the-mountain) is a common plant 
in the United States that is used in flower arrangements by florists. 
Dermal contact with its latex can cause skin irritation (Urushibata 
and Kase, 1991). In addition, serious eye irritation has been 
reported (Frohn et al., 1993). The poinsettia (Euphorbia pulcher-
rima; Fig. 26-2), which is ubiquitous at holiday times, may cause 
contact dermatitis (Massermanian, 1998).
Allergic Contact Dermatitis  Many people have experienced 
allergic dermatitis (see Chap. 19, “Toxic Responses of the Skin”), 
most frequently from contact with poison ivy. Allergic dermatitis is 
an actual allergic reaction occurring within the skin as opposed to 
just a response to the presence of an irritant. Due to this immuno-
logical component, the severity of the reaction can range widely.
Philodendron scandens (Araceae, arum family) and the toxico-
dendron group of plants, which contains Rhus radicans (poison ivy; 
Fig. 26-3), Rhus diversiloba (poison oak), and Rhus vernix (poison 
sumac), are all known to cause allergic dermatitis. P. scandens is 
a common houseplant that produces allergenic resorcinols, espe-
cially 5-n-heptadecatrienyl resorcinol (Knight, 1991). In the Rhus 
species, the allergen is a fat-soluble substance called urushiol that 
can penetrate the stratum corneum and then bind Langerhans cells 
in the epidermis. These haptenated cells then migrate to lymph 
nodes, where T cells are activated resulting in the allergic response 
(Kalish and Johnson, 1990). Ingestion of Rhus species has been 
reported to cause generalized dermatitis (Oh et al., 2003). Sap of the 
mango fruit (Magnifera indica, Anacardiaceae) can also cause aller-
gic dermatitis due to the presence of oleoresins that, with repeated 
exposure, will cross-react with allergens of poison ivy (Tucker and 
Swan, 1998).
Table 26-3  
Selective Plants Producing Contact Dermatitis
BOTANICAL FAMILY
GENUS SPECIES
COMMON NAME
Amaryllidaceae
Narcissus
Narcissus
Apocynaceae
Nerium oleander
Oleander
Bromeliaceae
Ananas comosus
Pineapple
Asteraceae
Ambrosia, Aster, 
Chrysanthemum, 
Rudbeckia hirta, 
Tagetes minuta
Ragweed, aster, 
chrysanthemum, 
black-eyed 
Susan, Mexican 
marigold
Euphorbiaceae
Ricinus communis
Castor bean
Fumariaceae
Dicentra spectabilis
Bleeding heart
Ginkgoaceae
Ginkgo biloba
Ginkgo
Liliaceae
Allium cepa
Onion
Myrtaceae
Eucalyptus globulus
Eucalyptus
Pinaceae
Abies balsamea
Balsam fir
Saxifragaceae
Hydrangea
Hydrangea
Solanaceae
Lycopersicon 
esculentum, Solanum 
carolinense, 
S. turerosum
Tomato, horse 
nettle, potato
Umbelliferae
Daucus carota, 
Heracleum lanatum
Carrot, cow 
parsnip
Urticaceae
Urtica dioica, 
U. urens
Stinging nettle
Figure 26-1.  Stinging hairs of Urtica ferox (nettles).
Figure 26-2.  Euphorbia pulcherrima (poinsettia).

1278
Toxic Agents
unit V
Alkaloids present in the sap of daffodils, hyacinths, and tulips 
can sometimes cause irritation. Irritation can also be caused by con-
tact with needle-like crystals of calcium oxalate, also known as raph-
ides, which are present on these plants’ bulbs (Gude et al., 1988). The 
major culprit is the compound tulipalin-A, which causes “tulip fin-
gers” from handling tulip bulbs (Christensen and Kristiansen, 1999). 
Tulipalin-A can be found in concentrations up to 2%. A safe thresh-
old for this allergen is considered to be 0.01% (Hausen et al., 1983). 
Table 26-4 contains more plants that cause irritation due to oxalates.
“Latex-fruit syndrome” is the result of cross-sensitivity to latex 
in rubber gloves and some fruits. Hevea brasiliensis (the latex tree) 
produces prohevein, a chitin-binding polypeptide that is also found 
in several plants. Hevein, a 43 amino acid N-terminal fragment of 
prohevein, is the major binding component (Kolarich et al., 2005). 
Individuals who are allergic to rubber latex may become sensitized 
to fruits containing a chitinase with a hevein-like domain, such as 
banana, kiwi, tomato, and avocado (Blanco et al., 1999).
Lichens, such as species of Usnea and Cladonia, are known to 
cause dermatitis due to the production of usnic acid (a benzofuran) 
and related acids (Aalto-Korte et al., 2005). Usnic acid has also 
been implicated in hepatotoxicity following use of certain nonpre-
scription weight loss supplements (Han et al., 2004).
Photosensitivity  Dermatitis does not necessarily have to be 
caused by skin contact. Consumption of Hypericum perforatum 
(St. John’s wort) by animals can lead to serious dermatitis and 
even may be life threatening. The toxic agent is hypericin (a bian-
thraquinone) that once ingested and dispersed systemically causes 
photosensitization of the animal’s skin. On exposure to sunlight, 
edematous lesions form on areas of skin that are not protected by 
hair such as the nose and ears (Sako et al., 1993). Photosensitization 
caused by St. John’s wort in humans is a rare occurrence; however, 
an increased response to therapeutic exposure to ultraviolet therapy 
has been reported (Beattie et al., 2005). However, compounds in 
Hypericum perforatum cause induction of cytochrome P450s, lead-
ing to potential interactions with many drugs (Russo et al., 2014).
Respiratory Tract
Allergic Rhinitis  Rhinitis from inhalation of plant pollens is a 
seasonal problem for many individuals. A chromosomal association 
in these individuals is under investigation (Blumenthal et al., 2006). 
Trees, grasses, and weeds are all responsible to contributing to air-
borne pollen. Grass species Poa and Festuca are major contributors 
along with pollen from several weed genera in the Asteraceae (e.g., 
mugwort, Artemisia vulgaris, in Europe, and ragweed, Ambrosia 
sp., in North America; Fig. 26-4). The common denominator in the 
various pollen allergens is the conserved binding domain known 
as profiling, which is also found in birch pollen (Hirschwehr et al., 
1998). Asthma and rhinitis have been linked to individuals who are 
exposed to cascara sagrada (Rhamnus purshiana) (Giavina-Bianchi 
et al., 1997), or workers in greenhouses in which bell peppers are 
growing (Groenewoud et al., 2006).
Cough Reflex  Workers who process peppers have a signifi-
cantly increased incidence of coughing when specifically handling 
Capsicum annuum (sweet pepper) and Capsicum frutescens (red 
pepper). These two types of peppers produce the major irritants 
capsaicin (trans-8-methyl-N-vanillyl-6-nonenamide) and dihydro-
capsaicin (Surh et al., 1998). Specific nerves in the airway have 
been found to be capsaicin-sensitive, which leads to the irritation 
and cough (Blanc et al., 1991).
Toxin-Associated Pneumonia  The pneumotoxin, 4-ipomeanol, 
is produced in sweet potato roots (Ipomea batatas, Convolvulaceae) 
by the mold Fusarium solani. 4-Ipomeanol is activated by human 
Figure 26-3.  Toxicodendron radicans (poison ivy).
Table 26-4  
Selective Plants Causing Gastrointestinal Irritation 
Due to Release of Raphides of Oxalates
BOTANICAL FAMILY
SCIENTIFIC NAME
COMMON NAME
Amaranthaceae
Halogeton 
glomeratus
Saltlover, 
halogeton
Araceae
Alocasia 
macrorrhiza
Giant taro
Anthurium 
andreanum
Flamingo Lily
Caladium bicolor
Caladium
Dieffenbachia sp.
Dumbcane
Epipremnum sp.
Pothos, Devil’s 
Ivy
Monstera sp.
Shingle plant, 
Swiss Cheese 
plant
Philodendron 
scandens
Philodendron
Scindapsus aureus, 
Pothosaureus sp.
Marble queen
Spathiphyllum sp.
Peace Lily
Syngonium 
podophyllum
Arrowhead plant
Chenopodiaceae
Spinacia oleracea
Spinach
Commelinaceae
Tradescantieae sp.
Spiderworts
Onagraceae
Fushsia sp.
Fuchsia
Oxalidaceae
Oxalis sp.
Wood sorrel
Palmae
Caryotamitis sp.
Fishtail palm
Polygonaceae
Rheum 
rhaponticum
Rhubarb
Portulacaceae
Portulaca sp.
Purslane
Vitaceae
Parthenocissus 
quinquefolia
Virginia creeper
Parthenocissus 
triscupidata
Boston ivy, 
Japanese 
creeper

Toxic Effects of Plants and Animals
Chapter 26
1279
cytochrome P450s to an intermediate that binds to DNA (Alvarez-
Diez and Zheng, 2004). In cattle and rabbits, the major P450 activa-
tor is CYP4B1 found in the lung that results in pneumonia. In the 
mouse, CYP4B1 is most abundant in the kidneys that results in renal 
toxicity, and in humans multiple subsets of liver P450 enzymes are 
responsible for activating 4-ipomeanol (Baer et al., 2005).
Gastrointestinal System
Direct Irritant Effects  Ingestion of a toxic plant can cause irri-
tation of the gastrointestinal tract, often resulting in nausea, vomit-
ing, and diarrhea. Many different compounds produced by plants 
can cause mild to severe versions of these effects. A list of plants 
known to cause these effects is provided in Table 26-5. Ingestion of 
ripe tung nuts (Aleurites fordii) causes abdominal pain, vomiting, 
and diarrhea. Outbreaks of poisoning are most likely to occur in 
children (Lin et al., 1996).
Toxic quinolizidine alkaloids are found in buffalo beans, also 
known as buffalo peas (Thermopsis rhombifolia), which grow nat-
urally in the western United States. Ingestion by children causes 
nausea, vomiting, dizziness, and abdominal discomfort (McGrath-
Hill and Vicas, 1997). In addition, consumption by livestock of the 
mature plant with seeds has been reported to be fatal.
Nuts from Aesculus hippocastanum (horse chestnut; Fig. 26-5) 
and Aesculus glabra (Ohio buckeye) contain a white crystalline cou-
marin glucoside called esculin. Ingestion by humans causes gastroen-
teritis, which increases in severity with the number of nuts consumed. 
Fortunately, esculin is poorly absorbed by the gastrointestinal tract of 
humans and its systemic effects are usually limited. However, in cat-
tle, esculin may be hydrolyzed in the rumen, resulting in the release 
of aglycone to cause systemic effects. This can lead to nervous system 
stimulation—marked by a stiff-legged gait and, in severe poisoning, 
tonic seizures with opisthotonus (Casteel et al., 1992). The triterpene 
saponin β-aescin in horse chestnut seed extract may have value in the 
treatment of venous insufficiency in humans (Siebert et al., 2002).
Antimitotic Effects  Podophyllotoxin is found in Podophyllum 
peltatum (May apple, Berberidaceae) especially in its foliage and 
roots. In low doses, mild purgation occurs; however, overdose 
results in nausea and severe paroxysmal vomiting (Frasca et al., 
1997). By binding microtubules, podophyllotoxin blocks mitosis 
from proceeding. This has made podophyllotoxin of interest for the 
treatment of cancer (Schacter, 1996).
Found in the bulbs of Colchicum autumnale (autumn cro-
cus, Liliaceae), colchicine blocks the formation of microtubules, 
ultimately preventing successful mitosis. Ingestion of these bulbs 
causes severe gastroenteritis (nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and 
dehydration). Severe poisoning can result in confusion, hematuria, 
neuropathy, renal failure, and cardiotoxicity (Mendis, 1989).
Figure 26-4.  Ambrosia psilostachya (western ragweed).
Table 26-5  
Selective Plants Causing Gastrointestinal Irritation
COMMON NAME
SCIENTIFIC NAME
TOXIC PART
TOXIN
Amaryllis
Hippeastrum equestre
Bulb
Lycorine
Barberry
Berberis vulgaris
Root
Protoberberine and other isoquinoline alkaloids
Boxwood
Buxus sp.
Leaves, stems
Steroidal alkaloids
Buttercup
Ranunculus sp.
All parts
Ranunculin, protoanemonin
Crown of thorns
Euphorbia milii
All parts
Resiniferatoxin
Daffodil
Narcissus sp.
All, especially bulb
Lycorine, narcissin, phenanthridine alkaloids
English Ivy
Hedera helix
All parts
Hederin from hederagenin
Euonymus
Euonymus sp.
All parts
Alkaloids
Hyacinth
Hyacinthus orientalis
Bulb
Calcium oxalate, lycorine
Iris
Iris
Bulb
Irritant resin
Mayapple
Podophyllum peltatum
Green fruit, roots
Podophyllotoxin
Mistletoe
Phoradendron flavescens
Berries, other parts
Phoratoxin
Pokeweed
Phytolacca americana
All parts
Phytolaccatoxin, related triterpines
Purging nut
Jatropha curcas
Seeds
Jatrophin (curcin) (toxalbumin)
Tung nut
Aleurites fordii
Nut
Derivative of phorbol, saponins, toxalbumins
Wiseria
Wisteria sinensis
Pods
Wistarine (glycoside)

1280
Toxic Agents
unit V
Protein Synthesis Inhibition  There are many plants that pro-
duce ribosomal inhibiting proteins (Bolognesi et al., 2016; Polito 
et al., 2016). These ribosome-inhibiting proteins are broadly dis-
tributed among different plant genera; various tissues express dif-
ferent isoforms and most are single-chain proteins (Schrot et al., 
2016). The family Euphorbiaceae contains several genera that 
are known to be very toxic. The castor bean (Ricinus communis; 
Fig. 26-6) is an ornamental plant that produces seeds that, if eaten 
by children or adults, causes no symptoms of poisoning for several 
days after ingestion. Gradually, gastroenteritis develops, resulting 
in some loss of appetite, with nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. If a 
fatal dose is ingested, the gastroenteritis becomes extremely severe 
and is marked by persistent vomiting, bloody diarrhea, and icterus 
followed by death within 6 to 8 days. A fatal dose for a child can 
be as few as 5 seeds and may be as low as 20 seeds for an adult. 
However, fatality occurs in less than 10% of ingestions when a 
“fatal” dose is consumed, owing to the fact that the toxic protein is 
largely destroyed during digestion. There are two lectins found in 
the beans: ricin I and ricin II of which ricin II is more toxic. Ricin II 
is made up of an A-chain and a B-chain. The B-chain, composed of 
262 amino acids, binds terminal galactose residues on cell surfaces 
allowing the A-chain to be endocytosed (Wu et al., 2006). Once 
inside, the 267 amino acid A-chain inactivates the 60S ribosomal 
subunit of cells by catalytic depurination of an adenosine residue 
within the 28S rRNA, thereby blocking protein synthesis (Bantel 
et al., 1999; Spooner and Lord, 2015).
The seeds of Abrus precatorius (jequirity bean, Leguminosae) 
contain lectins known as abrins. Abrin-a, one of four isoabrins pro-
duced by the plant, has the highest inhibitory effect on protein syn-
thesis and consists of an A-chain and a B-chain (Tahirov et al., 1994). 
Similar to ricin, the A-chain directly inhibits protein synthesis while 
the B-chain is responsible for getting the A-chain inside the cell 
(Ohba et al., 2004). The LD50 of abrin when injected in mice is less 
than 0.1 μg/kg, making abrin one of the most toxic substances known.
Plants that produce only A-chains are not nearly as toxic as 
those that pair them with a B-chain. Young shoots of pokeweed 
(Phytolacca americana, Phytolaccaceae; Fig. 26-7) can be ingested 
without toxicity; however, consumption of mature leaves and ber-
ries may cause nausea and diarrhea. The plant produces three iso-
zymes of single-chain lectins that are capable of inhibiting protein 
synthesis in cells and have antiviral properties (Di and Tumer, 2015; 
Polito et al., 2016). However, these do not readily pass through a 
cell’s membrane but are capable of doing so with the help of a virus 
(Monzingo et al., 1993).
Wisteria floribunda (Leguminosae) is a common ornamental 
climbing vine that develops seeds in the fall. Ingestion of these 
seeds can cause severe gastroenteritis. Just a few seeds can produce 
Figure 26-5.  Aesculus hippocastanum.
Figure 26-6.  Ricinus communis (castor bean plant).
Figure 26-7.  Phytolacca americana (pokeweed).

Toxic Effects of Plants and Animals
Chapter 26
1281
headache, nausea, and diarrhea within hours, followed by dizzi-
ness, confusion, and hematemesis (Rondeau, 1993). The toxic lectin 
binds N-acetylglucosamine on mammalian neurons.
Sambucus ebulus (dwarf elder) has medicinal and food prop-
erties that are limited by inherent toxicity (Jimenez et al., 2015). 
Medicinal applications include antioxidant action owing to polyphe-
nols, and inhibition of tumor cell growth by anthocyanidins includ-
ing cyanidin-3-O-glucoside. Lectins with and without antiribosomal 
activity have been isolated. Single-chain ribosome-inhibiting pro-
teins have N-glycosidase activity on the 28S rRNA subunit, thereby 
inhibiting polypeptide chain elongation. Ebulin and nigrin have 
been tested in targeted therapy (Ferreras et al., 2011).
Cardiovascular System
Cardioactive Glycosides  The best known cardioactive glyco-
side is Digitalis purpurea (foxglove, Scrophulariaceae; Fig. 26-8). 
However, squill (Scilla maritima), which contains scillaren, and 
lily of the valley (Convallaria majalis), which contains conval-
latoxin in the bulbs, have actions similar to digitalis. Also, milk-
weeds (Asclepias spp., Asclepiadaceae) contain glycosides (Roy 
et al., 2005). Other cardiotoxic plants can be found in Table 26-6. 
The cardiac glycoside desglucouzarin in Asclepias asperula, like 
digitalis, inhibits Na+,K+-ATPase (Abbott et al., 1998). Two plants 
in the Apocynaceae (oleander family) also contain cardioactive gly-
cosides. Thevetia peruviana (yellow oleander) is a common orna-
mental plant in the United States whose seeds contain the highest 
concentration of cardiac glycosides. The fatal dose to an adult is 8 
to 10 seeds (Prabhasankar et al., 1993). Clinical aspects of oleander 
toxicosis have been described in sheep (Aslani et al., 2004) and 
humans (Pietsch et al., 2005).
Actions on Cardiac Nerves  Toxic alkaloids found in Veratrum 
viride (American hellebore, Liliaceae; Fig. 26-9), Veratrum album 
(European hellebore), and Veratrum californicum cause nausea, 
emesis, hypotension, and bradycardia on ingestion. Veratrum album 
has been used for centuries to “slow and soften the pulse.” The mix-
ture of alkaloids includes protoveratrine, veratramine, and jervine 
that affects the heart by causing a repetitive response to a single 
stimulus resulting from prolongation of the sodium current (Jaffe 
et al., 1990). The bulbs of the wild camas (Zigadenus paniculatus 
Figure 26-8.  Digitalis purpurea (common foxglove).
Table 26-6  
Selective Plants Causing Cardiotoxicity
COMMON 
NAME
SCIENTIFIC 
NAME
TOXIC 
PART
TOXIN
Azalea
Rhodendron 
sp.
All
Grayanotoxins
Death 
camus
Zigadenus 
sp.
All
Zygadenine, 
veratrine
Foxglove
Digitalis sp.
Leaves, 
seeds
Digitalis glycosides
Larkspur
Delphenium 
ambiguum
All
Delphinine
Lily of the 
valley
Convallaria 
majalis
All
Convallarin, 
convallamarin
Milkweed
Asclepias sp.
(Hydroxycinnamoyl) 
desglucouzarin
Monkshood
Aconitum sp.
Leaves, 
roots, 
seeds
Aconitine, aconine
Oleander
Nerium 
oleander
All
Oleandrin, 
oleandrosine
Figure 26-9.  Veratrum viride (American hellebore).

1282
Toxic Agents
unit V
and other species of Zigadenus, Liliaceae) contain veratrum-like 
alkaloids (Peterson and Rasmussen, 2003).
Aconitum species, which have been used in western and east-
ern medicine for centuries, produce the toxic alkaloids aconitine, 
mesaconitine, and hypoaconitine. Poisoning may occur on ingestion 
but severity varies with the concentration of the alkaloids, which 
depends on species, place of origin, time of harvest, and processing 
procedures (Chan et al., 1994). Along with cardiac arrhythmias and 
hypotension, ingestion causes gastrointestinal upset and neurologi-
cal symptoms. The alkaloids work by causing a prolonged sodium 
current with slowed repolarization in cardiac muscle (Peper and 
Trautwein, 1967) and in nerve fibers (Murai et al., 1990).
Grayanotoxins are produced exclusively by several genera 
of Ericaceae (heath family) and in particular they are found in 
Rhododendron ponticum (Onat et al., 1991; Fig. 26-10), R. mac-
rophyllum (Casteel and Wagstaff, 1989), and Kalmia angustifolia 
(Burke and Doskotch, 1990). Ingestion of honey contaminated 
with grayanotoxins, brought by bees, can produce a severe reaction 
called “mad honey poisoning.” The poisoning resembles aconitine 
poisoning, in that there is bradycardia, hypotension, oral parasthesia, 
and gastrointestinal upset. Severe poisoning can result in respiratory 
depression and eventually loss of consciousness. Grayanotoxins 
bind to sodium channels in cardiac and muscle cells resulting in 
increased sodium conductance (Maejima et al., 2002).
Vasoactive Chemicals  American mistletoe (Phoradendron fla-
vescens) and European mistletoe (Viscum album, Loranthaceae) are 
members of the same family and both produce a toxin that is marked 
for its effect on the cardiovascular system. Both phoratoxin (pro-
duced by American mistletoe) and viscotoxin (produced by European 
mistletoe) cause hypotension, vasoconstriction of the vessels in skin 
and skeletal muscle, and bradycardia resulting from negative inotro-
pic actions on heart muscle. Phoratoxin is only one-fifth as active 
as the viscotoxins (Rosell and Samuelsson, 1988). Although serious 
poisoning from the plants is rare, it is possible to induce anaphylaxis 
with repeated injections of a mistletoe extract (Bauer et al., 2005).
Ingestion of the fungus Claviceps purpurea (ergot), which 
grows on grains that are used for food, causes vasoconstriction. 
The “ergot gene cluster” is required for the production of ergot 
alkaloids (Coyle and Panaccione, 2005; Haarmann et al., 2005). 
Ergot poisoning was called “St. Anthony’s fire” due to the black-
ened appearance of the limbs of some victims. In extreme cases, the 
vasoconstriction was severe enough that gangrene would develop 
in the extremities. Abortion in pregnant women is also common 
after ingestion of ergot-contaminated grains. Acremonium coeno-
phialum, a fungus which grows on the grass tall fescue (Festuca 
arundinacea), produces some ergot alkaloids. Grazing cattle that 
ingest the contaminated grass develop “fescue toxicosis” (Hill et al., 
1994; Blodgett, 2001). This condition results in decreased weight 
gain, decreased reproductive performance, and increased peripheral 
vasoconstriction. Pulmonary infection from Acremonium strictum 
has been noted in a horse (Pusterla et al., 2005).
Liver
Hepatocyte Damage  Pyrrolizidine alkaloids can be found 
in Senecio (groundsel, Asteraceae) and within four genera of 
Boraginaceae: Echium (bugloss), Cynoglossum (hound’s tongue), 
Heliotropium (heliotrope), and Symphytum (comfrey) (Altamirano 
et al., 2005; Mei et al., 2005). Ingestion of significant concentrations 
of these alkaloids causes liver damage in the form of hepatic veno-
occlusive disease associated with lipid peroxidation (Bondan et al., 
2005). Cattle that graze on grass contaminated with Senecio have 
been found to develop hepatitis that can progress to death if allowed 
to continue grazing. Human deaths have also been reported in several 
countries, and in Afghanistan, an epidemic of hepatic veno-occlusive 
disease arose from consumption of a wheat crop contaminated by 
Heliotropium (Tandon et al., 1978). The liver damage caused by 
ingestion clinically appears to be similar to cirrhosis and some 
hepatic tumors that can easily be mistaken to be the source of the 
disease (McDermott and Ridker, 1990). Consumption of these plants 
leads to a form of the Budd–Chiari syndrome, which is hallmarked 
by portal hypertension and obliteration of the small hepatic veins. 
Human consumption can occur from drinking “comfrey tea” that 
contains Symphytum (Rode, 2002). There are species differences in 
metabolism of the pyrrolizidine alkaloids (Huan et al., 1998).
Lantana camara (Verbenaceae), a shrub native to Jamaica, has 
been shown to poison livestock, particularly in India. Cattle graz-
ing on the plant develop bile-related disorders including cholestasis 
and hyperbilirubinemia. Several triterpenoids have been isolated 
from the plant and, in particular, lantadene A (22-β-angeloyloxy-3- 
oxo-olean-12-en-28-oic acid) has been shown to be hepatotoxic 
(Sharma et al., 1991).
Mushroom Toxins  Most nonedible mushrooms may cause mild 
discomfort and are not life threatening; however, repeated inges-
tion of the false morel, Gyromitra esculenta, has been found to 
cause hepatitis (Michelot and Toth, 1991). The toxin gyromitrin 
is inactivated generally by boiling. Most fatal poisonings related 
to wild mushrooms are from ingestion of different species within 
Amanita, Galerina, and Lepiota (Karlson-Stiber and Persson, 
2003). The dangerousness of Amanita phalloides (Fig. 26-11) and 
Amanita ocreata is why they are named “death cap” and “death 
angel,” respectively. Two types of toxins, phalloidin and amatoxins, 
can be found within A. phalloides. Phalloidin is capable of binding 
actin in muscle cells; however, it is not readily absorbed during 
digestion, which limits its harmful effects (Cappell and Hassan, 
1992). Parenterally administered phalloidin produces toxicity in 
wild-type mice but not in Oatp1b2-null mice, which is consistent 
with phalloidin being a substrate for uptake into hepatocytes by 
the Oatp1b2 carrier (Lu et al., 2008). Unfortunately, α-, β-, and 
γ-amanitins are readily absorbed due to being molecularly much 
Figure 26-10.  Rhododendron ponticum (rhododendron).

Toxic Effects of Plants and Animals
Chapter 26
1283
smaller than phalloidin. Of the amatoxins, α-amanitin is the most 
toxic as it inhibits protein synthesis in hepatocytes by binding to 
RNA polymerase II (Jaeger et al., 1993). In addition to the liver, the 
intestinal mucosa and kidneys are also affected and serious clinical 
signs develop about 3 days after ingestion. In cases of severe poi-
soning, a liver transplant may be required. Amatoxin-α irreversibly 
inhibits acetylcholinesterase (Hyde and Carmichael, 1991).
Mycotoxins  Fumonisin toxins are produced by the fungus 
Fusarium that is known to grow on corn. Consumption of contami-
nated corn by horses leads to equine leukoencephalomalacia that 
is marked by lethargy, ataxia, convulsions, and ultimately death 
(Norred, 1993). The liver is the most affected organ in many spe-
cies including horses, pigs, chickens, and rats (Riley et al., 1994). 
Ingestion in humans has been suggested to be associated with 
esophageal cancer (Yoshizawa et al., 1994). Fumonisins are dies-
ters of propane-1,2,3-tricarboxylic acid and a pentahydroxyicosane 
containing a primary amino acid (Gurung et al., 1999) that is simi-
lar to sphingosine. This similarity is responsible for their toxicity 
as they block the enzymes involved in sphingolipid biosynthesis 
(Norred, 1993). In contrast, mycoestrogenic zearalenone induces 
CYP3A enzymes (Ding et al., 2006). Aflatoxin B1 has been shown 
to form guanine adducts and induce apoptosis in human hepato-
cytes (Reddy et al., 2006).
Kidney and Bladder
Carcinogens  The bracken fern (Pteridium aquilinum), which 
is extremely common worldwide, is the only higher plant known 
to be carcinogenic in animals under natural feeding conditions. 
The commonest bladder tumors in cattle are epithelial and mes-
enchymal neoplasms (Kim and Lee, 1998). Ptaquiloside, a norses-
quiterpene glucoside, is the known carcinogen present in the fern 
and it has been found to alkylate adenines and guanines of DNA 
(Shahin et al., 1999; Rasmussen et al., 2003). Bovine consumption 
of bracken fern has been shown to significantly increase chromo-
somal aberrations (Lioi et al., 2004). In addition, evidence has been 
found that consumption of young bracken fern shoots by humans 
is associated with cancers of the mouth and throat (Alonso-Amelot 
and Avendano, 2002).
Kidney Tubular Degeneration  Species of Xanthium (cock-
lebur, Asteraceae) have been found to contain the toxin carboxy-
atractyloside, which causes microvascular hemorrhages in multiple 
organs (Turgut et al., 2005). Livestock poisoning has been noted 
to cause the outward signs of depression and dyspnea; however, 
internally the toxin causes tubular degeneration and necrosis in the 
kidney and centrilobular necrosis in the liver (del Carmen Mendez 
et al., 1998).
Consumption of the mushroom species Cortinarius has been 
found to cause acute renal failure but different species vary widely 
in toxicity and, therefore, edibility. In an investigation of a series 
of 135 poisonings related to Cortinarius ingestion, where death 
occurred in almost 15% of the cases, renal biopsy showed acute 
degenerative tubular lesions with inflammatory interstitial fibro-
sis (Bouget et al., 1990). Cortinarius orellanus and C. rubellus 
(Fig. 26-12) contain the deadly toxin orellanin, which triggers renal 
failure. Table 26-7 lists the common and scientific names and toxins 
for selective plants that are capable of inducing nephrotoxicity.
Figure 26-11.  Amanita phalloides (death cap).
Figure 26-12.  Cortinarius rubellus (deadly webcap).
Table 26-7  
Selective Plants Producing Nephrotoxicity
COMMON 
NAME
SCIENTIFIC 
NAME
PART
TOXIN
Autumn 
crocus
Colchicum 
autumnale
Bulb
Colchicine
Castor bean
Ricinus 
communis
All
Ricin, recinine
Daphne
Daphne 
mezereum
Leaves, 
fruits
Daphnin, 
mezerein 
(diterpenoid)
Impila
Callilepis 
laureola
Tubers
Atractyloside
Mushrooms
Amanita 
phalloides
All
Amatoxin
Cortinarius sp.
All
Orellanine
Water 
hemlock
Cicuta 
maculata
Roots
Cicutoxin

1284
Toxic Agents
unit V
Blood and Bone Marrow
Anticoagulants  Fungal infections in sweet clover (Melilotus 
alba) have been found to produce dicumarol, a coumarin derivative 
that is a potent anticoagulant. Deaths in cattle have been reported 
and are caused by hemorrhages (Puschner et al., 1998). The dicu-
marol derivative warfarin is a widely used rodenticide and as an 
anticoagulant drug.
Bone Marrow Genotoxicity  Argemone (Papaveraceae), a spe-
cies of poppy, produces sanguinarine, a benzophenanthridine 
alkaloid that is known to intercalate DNA and have carcinogenic 
potential (Das et al., 2005). Studies in mice have shown that a sin-
gle low dose of argemone oil increases chromosomal aberrations in 
bone marrow cells (Ansari et al., 2004).
Cyanogens  Cyanogens are found in a wide variety of plants 
including the kernels of apples, cherries, and peaches. The highest 
concentrations are found in the seeds of the bitter almond, Prunus 
amygdalus var amara. However, small children are susceptible to 
amygdalin poisoning if they consume sufficient peach (Prunus per-
sica) kernels. Fortunately, the concentration present in the seeds 
of apples is low enough that they are unlikely to cause a problem. 
Metabolism of amygdalin releases hydrocyanic acid that binds 
to the ferric ion in methemoglobin and the cytochrome oxidases, 
which, if severe enough, results in cyanide poisoning with death 
from asphyxiation (Bromley et al., 2005; Jorgensen et al., 2005). 
Severe cyanide poisoning can occur with cyanogen-containing 
vitamin supplements (O’Brien et al., 2005).
Cassava produced from Manihot esculenta (Euphorbiaceae) 
is a major food source for some regions of Africa. The raw root 
contains a cyanogenic glucoside linamarin that degrades during 
Table 26-8  
Selective Plants Producing Neurotoxicity
COMMON NAME
SCIENTIFIC NAME
PART
TOXIN
MECHANISM
Acacia tree
Acacia willardiana
Seeds
Willardiine
Glutamate receptor agonist
Alga
Digenea simplex
All
Kainic acid
Depolarization of glutamate-gated channels
Chondria armata
Domoic acid
Betel nut
Areca catechu
Nut
Guvacine
GABA uptake inhibitor, anticonvulsant
Arecoline
Stimulates muscarinic cholinoceptors;  
CNS stimulation
Buckthorn; Coyotillo
Karwinskia 
humboldtiana
Seeds, leaves
Tullidinol
Demyelination of motor neurons leading to 
paralysis
Chrysanthemum
Chrysanthemum 
cinerarifolium
Seeds
Pyrethrins
Stimulate sodium efflux from neurons in insects
Deadly nightshade
Atropa belladonna
Berries
Tropine alkaloid
Blockade of muscarinic cholinoceptors
Fly agaric mushroom
Amanita muscaria
All
Muscarine
Stimulates muscarinic cholinoceptors;  
CNS stimulation
Muscimol
GABA receptor agonist
Rhododendron
Rhododendron sp.
Leaves
Grayanotoxins
Stimulate sodium channel and membrane 
depolarization
Ryania
Ryania speciosa
Stems
Ryanodine
Stimulates calcium channels and muscle contraction
Poison nut tree
Strychnos nux 
vomica
All, especially 
seeds
Strychnine
Glycine receptor antagonist that produces 
convulsions
Tobacco
Nicotiana tabacum
Leaves
Nicotine
Nicotinic cholinoceptor agonist (low doses) or 
antagonist (high doses); CNS stimulation
processing of the root for human consumption. Unfortunately, 
local processing may be inadequate and that can lead to ingestion 
of linamarin. Chronic ingestion has been suggested to be the cause 
of epidemics of konzo, a form of tropical myelopathy with sudden 
onset of spastic paralysis (Tylleskar et al., 1992).
Nervous System
Epileptiform Seizures  The common and scientific names 
for selective plants that produce neurotoxins can be found in 
Table 26-8. Within the family Apiaceae, which contains carrots, the 
fleshy tubers of Cicuta maculata (water hemlock; Fig. 26-13) pro-
duce neurotoxic cicutoxin (a C17-polyacetylene). Consumption of 
a single tuber can result in fatal poisoning, characterized by tonic–
clonic convulsions, owing to the cicutoxin binding to GABA-gated 
chloride channels (Uwai et al., 2000).
Members of the mint family (Labiatae) such as pennyroyal 
(Hedeoma), sage (Salvia), and hyssop (Hyssopus) are well known for 
their essential oils containing monoterpenes. Ingestion of these mono-
terpenes in concentrations much higher than those used for flavoring 
can cause tonic–clonic convulsions. In particular, menthol is a selec-
tive modulator of inhibitory ligand-gated channels (Hall et al., 2004).
Certain species within Strychnos (Loganiaceae) produce 
strychnine and brucine, which are known to cause increased central 
nervous system (CNS) stimulation by blocking glycine-gated chlo-
ride channels. Strychnos nux vomica, a small tree native to India, 
produces seeds that have been implicated in cases of unintentional 
poisoning (Wang et al., 2004).
Excitatory Amino Acids  Red algae (Digenia simplex) under 
certain conditions can proliferate rapidly leading to the notorious 
beach vacating “red tide” and producing kainic acid. Kainic acid

Toxic Effects of Plants and Animals
Chapter 26
1285
may be ingested by humans who eat filter-feeding mussels that 
have eaten red algae. Acute symptoms are most notably gastroin-
testinal distress, headache, hemiparesis, confusion, and seizures. 
Severe exposure can result in severe memory deficits and senso-
rimotor neuropathy (Teitelbaum et al., 1990). Isodomoic acid from 
Nitzschia sp. has seizure-inducing properties (Kotaki et al., 2005).
The fungi Amanita muscaria (fly agaric; Fig. 26-14) and 
Amanita pantherian (panther agaric) produce the excitatory amino 
acid ibotenic acid (isoxazole amino acid) and its derivative musci-
mol that is neurotoxic (Li and Oberlies, 2005). Poisoning produces 
CNS depression, ataxia, hysteria, and hallucinations. Myoclonic 
twitching and seizures sometimes develop (Benjamin, 1992). 
Other genera of fungi have been marked for their hallucinogenic 
actions, notably Psilocybe, which contains psilocin and psilocybin 
(Tsujikawa et al., 2003).
Willardiine, an agonist on glutamate receptors, has been iso-
lated from Acacia willardiana, Acacia lemmoni, Acacia millefolia, 
and Mimosa asperata (Gmelin, 1961) and causes excitation of the 
nervous system. Seeds from the legume Lathyrus sativus (grass pea) 
also contain an excitatory amino acid known as β-N-oxalyl-l-α,β-
diaminopropionic acid (Warren et al., 2004). Consumption of seeds 
over long periods can cause lathyrism with severe spastic muscle 
weakness and atrophy but little sensory involvement. Thiocyanate 
from linamarin can stimulate neuronal glutamate receptors, leading 
to degeneration of corticospinal motor pathways (Spencer, 1999).
Motor Neuron Demyelination  Karwinskia humboldtiana is a 
shrub found in the southwestern United States, Mexico, and Central 
America that produces anthracenones in its seeds. Both human and 
livestock poisonings have been known to occur. Several days fol-
lowing ingestion, ascending flaccid paralysis develops with demy-
elination of large motor neurons in the legs and eventually leads to 
bulbar paralysis in fatal cases (Martinez et al., 1998). In addition to 
neurotoxicity, the anthracenones in Karwinskia, especially peroxi-
somicine A2, cause lung atelectasis, emphysema, and massive liver 
necrosis. Inhibition of catalase in peroxisomes has been proposed 
as the mechanism of cell toxicity (Martinez et al., 1997).
Cerebellar Neurons  The legumes Swainsonia cansescens, 
Astragalus lentiginosus (spotted locoweed), and Oxytropis sericea 
(locoweed) produce a toxic indolizidine alkaloid called swainso-
nine. These weeds can be accidentally consumed by grazing cattle, 
causing aberrant behavior with hyperexcitability and locomotor 
difficulty (James et al., 1991). In fatal cases, there is cytoplasmic 
foamy vacuolation of cerebellar neurons. Swainsonine causes 
marked inhibition of liver lysosomal and cytosomal α-mannosidase 
and Golgi mannosidase II resulting in abnormal accumulation of 
brain glycoproteins and mannose-rich oligosaccharides that ulti-
mately causes cell death (Tulsiani et al., 1988). Embellisia fungi 
from locoweed produce a locoweed-like toxicosis (McLain-
Romero et al., 2004).
Parasympathetic Stimulation  Certain mushrooms of the 
genera Inocybe, Clitocybe, and Omphalatus contain significant 
amounts of muscarine, which mimics the action of acetylcholine, 
the principal neurotransmitter in the parasympathetic nervous 
system. Consumption of any of these species results in extreme 
parasympathetic activation resulting in miosis, diarrhea, sweating, 
salivation, lacrimation, urination, bradycardia, and bronchocon-
striction (de Haro et al., 1999).
Parasympathetic Block  Atropine, l-hyoscyamine, and sco-
polamine are belladonna alkaloids that can be found in varying 
concentrations in several genera of Solanaceae such as Datura stra-
monium (jimson weed; Fig. 26-15), Hyoscyamus niger (henbane), 
Atropa belladonna (deadly nightshade; Fig. 26-16), and Duboisia 
myoporoides (pituri). These alkaloids all effectively block the mus-
carinic receptor, essentially turning off the parasympathetic drive at 
Figure 26-13.  Cicuta maculata (water hemlock).
Figure 26-14.  Amanita muscaria (fly agaric).

1286
Toxic Agents
unit V
the target organ. This explains why tachycardia, dry mouth, dilated 
pupils, and decreased gastrointestinal motility all occur on inges-
tion of these toxins. Of the three alkaloids, scopolamine is the most 
potent; however, sizable doses of l-hyoscyamine or atropine can 
produce similar effects. Large doses can cause confusion, bizarre 
behavior, hallucinations, and subsequent amnesia, and in severe 
intoxication, tachycardia may be completely absent (Caksen et al., 
2003).
The seeds of Solanum dulcamara (bittersweet, which is often 
used in flower arrangements) contain the glycoalkaloid solanine 
that on ingestion causes tachycardia, dilated pupils, and hot and dry 
skin—symptoms similar to atropine poisoning (Ceha et al., 1997).
Sensory Neuron Block  Capsaicin found in C. annuum (sweet 
pepper) and C. frutescens (red pepper) causes a burning sensation on 
vanilloid-type (VR1) sensory receptors. It also desensitizes the tran-
sient receptor potential vanilloid 1 (TRPV1) receptor of sensory end-
ings of C-fiber nociceptors to stimuli, a property that has therapeutic 
use in treating chronic pain (Szalcsany, 2002). Capsaicin also can 
relax ileal smooth muscle (Fujimoto et al., 2006). Fortunately, desen-
sitization produced by capsaicin is not due to cell death (Dedov et al., 
2001). Polygodial, a sesquiterpene found in Polygonum hydropiper, 
also desensitizes the TRPV1 (Andre et al., 2006), whereas resinif-
eratoxin activates TRVP1 (Raisinghani et al., 2005). Pyrethum from 
chrysanthemum flowers blocks sodium channels in the insect ner-
vous system (McGovern and Barkley, 1999).
Skeletal Muscle and Neuromuscular 
Junction
Neuromuscular Junction  Anabasine, an isomer of nicotine, 
is present in Nicotiana glauca (tree tobacco, Solanaceae) and pro-
duces prolonged depolarization of the junction after a period of 
excessive stimulation. Consumption of N. glauca leaves can result 
in flexor muscle spasm and gastrointestinal irritation, followed 
by severe, generalized weakness, and respiratory compromise 
(Mellick et al., 1999). Curare, which is used as a poison placed on 
the tips of arrows, is also a potent neuromuscular blocking agent 
and is obtained from tropical species of Strychnos toxifera and 
Chondrodendron tomentosum. Anabaena flosaquae, a species of 
alga, can produce under the right conditions a neurotoxin anatoxin 
A that is known to be fatal. Anatoxin A, ingested by animals that 
drink pond water with the alga present, depolarizes and blocks the 
animal’s nicotinic and muscarinic acetylcholine receptors, which 
can cause death from respiratory arrest within minutes to hours 
(Short and Edwards, 1990).
Delphinium barbeyi (tall larkspur, Ranunculaceae), which 
grows naturally in the western United States, contains methylly-
caconitine. Ingestion of the toxin by cattle results in muscle tremors 
and ataxia followed by prostration and can ultimately lead to respi-
ratory arrest in fatal cases. Methyllycaconitine is similar to curare, 
in that it has a high affinity for the acetylcholine receptor at the 
neuromuscular junction. Physostigmine, an inhibitor of acetylcho-
linesterase that increases acetylcholine at the neuromuscular nico-
tinic receptor, has been used successfully as an antagonist to treat 
some cases of methyllycaconitine poisoning (Pfister et al., 1994).
Skeletal Muscle Damage  Certain species of Thermopsis pro-
duce seeds that contain quinolizidine alkaloids. Human poison-
ing from eating the seeds is rare, but cases have been reported in 
young children who experienced abdominal cramps, nausea, vom-
iting, and headache lasting up to 24 hours (Spoerke et al., 1988). 
Livestock grazing on Thermopsis montana (false lupine, moun-
tain goldenbanner; Fig. 26-17) develop locomotor depression and 
recumbency due to areas of necrosis in skeletal muscle that have 
been found on autopsy (Keeler and Baker, 1990).
Consumption of Cassia obtusifolia (sicklepod, Leguminosae) 
seeds by livestock causes a degenerative myopathy in cardiac and 
skeletal muscle. Extracts of C. obtusifolia have been found to 
inhibit NADH-oxidoreductase in bovine and swine mitochondria 
in vitro (Lewis and Shibamoto, 1989).
White snakeroot (Ageratina altissima, Asteraceae; Fig. 26-18), 
a common plant in the central and western United States, can be 
accidentally eaten by grazing cattle. On ingestion, the cattle exhibits 
tremors and humans who drink the milk of an affected cow can get 
“milk sickness” (Beier et al., 1993). The toxic effects are attributed 
to tremetone, a benzofuran, which blocks gluconeogenesis from 
lactate, resulting in acidosis, tremor, and ultimately death (Polya, 
2003).
Bone and Tissue Calcification
Bone and Soft Tissue  Consumption of Solanum malacoxylon 
(Solanaceae) by sheep and cows can cause a marked decrease in 
bone calcium and calcification of the entire vascular system due to 
the presence of a water-soluble vitamin D–like substance. In severe 
Figure 26-15.  Datura stramonium (jimson weed).
Figure 26-16.  Atropa belladonna (deadly nightshade).

Toxic Effects of Plants and Animals
Chapter 26
1287
cases other organs can also be affected such as the lungs, joint car-
tilage, and kidney.
Consumption of Cestrum diurnum (day-blooming jasmine, 
Solanaceae) and Cestrum laevigatum has been found to cause 
hypercalcemia and soft tissue calcification in grazing cattle (Durand 
et al., 1999) and chickens (Mello and Habermehl, 1992), which 
is due to the presence of a dihydroxyvitamin D3 glycoside in the 
leaves (Durand et al., 1999). Hay that had been contaminated with 
C. laevigatum caused a marked centrilobular and midzonal hepatic 
necrosis in goats (Peixato et al., 2000).
Reproduction and Teratogenesis
Abortifacients  Besides its actions on the nervous system, 
swainsonine, the active alkaloid in the legumes Astragalus and 
Oxytropus, also causes abortions in pregnant livestock that acci-
dentally ingest locoweeds (Bunch et al., 1992).
Foliage and seeds of Leucaena leucocephala, Leucaena 
glauca, and Mimosa pudica contain a toxic amino acid, mimosine, 
which on ingestion by cattle leads to uncoordinated gait, goiter, and 
reproductive disturbances including infertility and fetal death (Kulp 
et al., 1996). Mimosine has been found to arrest the cell cycle in 
late G1 phase that helps explain its toxic effects (Perry et al., 2005).
Lectins present in bitter melon seeds (Momordica charantia, 
Cucurbitaceae) have antifertility, abortifacient, and embryotoxic 
actions on ingestion. Components of the lectins known as momor-
charins are known to induce midterm abortion in humans (Wang 
and Ng, 1998).
Caulophyllum thalictroides (blue cohosh, Berberidaceae) 
contains a toxin known as caulophylline that is teratogenic in rats 
(Kennelly et al., 1999) and herbal preparations of blue cohosh have 
been used to terminate pregnancy (Jones and Lawson, 1998). In 
fact, nicotine toxicity may result from blue cohosh use as an abor-
tifacient (Rao and Hoffman, 2002).
Teratogens  Ingestion of V. californicum (California false helle-
bore, Liliaceae; Fig. 26-19) by pregnant sheep is known to cause 
malformations in its offspring that can include cyclopia, exenceph-
aly, and microphthalmia. As with most teratogens, the severity of 
malformations depends on what developmental stage the fetus is in 
at the time of exposure. Limb defects are common with exposure 
during the fourth to fifth weeks of gestation; fetal stenosis of the 
trachea will occur with ingestion on days 31 to 33 (Omnell et al., 
1990). Many other species of animals are susceptible to V. califor-
nicum poisoning, including cows, goats, chickens, rabbits, rats, and 
mice (Omnell et al., 1990), hamsters (Gaffield and Keeler, 1993), 
lambs (Keeler, 1990), and rainbow trout embryos (Crawford and 
Kocan, 1993). The toxic alkaloid called jervine causes teratogen-
esis by blocking cholesterol synthesis that, among other things, 
prevents a proper response of fetal target tissue to the sonic hedge-
hog gene (Shh). Shh has an important role in proper developmental 
Figure 26-17.  Thermopsis montana (mountain goldenbanner).
Figure 26-18.  Ageratina altissima (white snakeroot).

1288
Toxic Agents
unit V
patterning of head and brain, and blocking cholesterol synthesis 
has been shown experimentally to cause a loss of midline facial 
structures (Cooper et al., 1998).
Pregnant cattle grazing on Lupinus caudatus and Lupinus 
formosus (lupines, Leguminosae), N. glauca (tree tobacco, 
Solanaceae), and Conium maculatum (poison hemlock, Solanaceae) 
have been found to experience a myriad of fetal deformations if 
ingestion occurs during a sensitive gestational period. The toxic 
alkaloids in these plants are anagyrine (L. caudatus), ammodendrine 
(L. formosus), anabasine (N. glauca), and coniine (C. maculatum; 
Forsyth et al., 1996). It is thought that these alkaloids depress fetal 
movements that can lead to malformations (Lopez et al., 1999).
CLINICAL STUDY OF PLANT POISONS
Recent research concerning the use of plant toxins in a clinical set-
ting has blossomed (Ball and Kowdley, 2005). A number of fac-
tors make plant toxins of particular interest, including their diverse 
effects, availability, and cost. With a growing group of people who 
wish to return to a more “natural” way of life, a medicine that is 
derived straight from a plant is much more marketable than one that 
is completely chemically synthesized. For example, root extract of 
the African Uzara plant has been used as an antidiarrheal remedy for 
centuries; however, its mechanism of action was only speculative. 
Recent research has shown that Uzara root extract reduced chlo-
ride secretion by the gut specifically by inhibiting Na+,K+-ATPase. 
This effect was seen even in the presence of cholera toxin that 
causes potent diarrhea by increasing chloride secretion in the gut 
(Schulzke et al., 2011). Interestingly, anemonin, which is the active 
skin irritant produced by species of Ranunculus (buttercup), has 
been found to show potent anti-inflammation effects under certain 
conditions. The compound was found to reduce nitric oxide pro-
duction that resulted in a lessened inflammatory response to inflam-
matory stimuli (Lee et al., 2008). This mechanism could provide a 
new anti-inflammatory treatment modality and is being tested for 
possible medical use. Silymarin and usnic acid may have promise 
as anticancer drugs (Mayer et al., 2005a, 2005b). Finally, native 
Nigerians use an extract from M. pruriens seeds as a pretreatment 
for snakebites from Naja sputatrix (Javan spitting cobra). When 
tested in rats, the seed extract helped protect against the cardiore-
spiratory and neuromuscular depressant effects of the snake venom 
(Fung et al., 2011). A recent review on the ethnopharmacology of 
aconitine, strychnine, scopolamine, and anisodamine contrasted 
the medicinal value of these chemicals with their high toxicity (Ma 
et al., 2015). In addition, tenuifolide B, which is extracted from 
the stem of the plant Cinnamomum tenuifolium, may selectively 
reduce cell viability of oral cancer cells (Chen et al., 2016). These 
toxic plants have great potential for pain reduction and other pur-
poses. Thus, old herbal remedies are a ripe field of study, for many 
of their effects can be beneficial yet toxic at high enough concen-
trations. A goal for new research is to elucidate the mechanism of 
action so that treatments can be tailored to the individual needs 
and toxic effects can be avoided or interactions with conventional 
drugs can be minimized (Izzo and Ernst, 2001). As our knowledge 
of plant toxins and their mechanisms of action expands, the number 
of new and clinically useful plant remedies and medical products 
is bound to increase (Polito et al., 2016). Technological advances 
in chemical purification and identification will permit better toxic 
characterization as well (Arilla et al., 2006). 
Plant engineering with ribosome-inhibiting proteins can 
increase resistance to pests and microbial pathogens. Moreover, 
conjugation with carriers such as antibodies and nanoparticles can 
help direct the active protein to target cells for destruction, such as 
cancer cells (Gilabert-Oriol et al., 2014; Pizzo and Di Maro, 2016). 
A challenge to the use of these ribosomal inhibitor-conjugates, or 
immunotoxins, is that endosomal destruction can occur upon entry 
into target cells. Considerable effort to produce endosomal escape 
enhancers has been reviewed (Fuchs et al., 2016). These enhancers 
may work by increasing cell penetrance, protection of the catalytic 
domain, conversion to secondary metabolites, and complexing with 
light-sensitive substances for activation. Of more than 500-targeted 
toxins from disparate species, very few have been approved for 
therapeutic application (Fuchs et al., 2016).
SUMMARY OF PLANT TOXICITIES
Toxic chemicals produced by plants can cause something as innoc-
uous as a mild rash on the skin all the way to death by respiratory 
arrest. It is important to remember that these toxins are primarily 
defense mechanisms against natural predators. However, we benefit 
greatly from plants as many have produced potent antibiotics and 
pharmacologic therapies for myriad diseases that afflict humans.
Figure 26-19.  Veratrum californicum (California false hellebore).

Toxic Effects of Plants and Animals
Chapter 26
1289
INTRODUCTION TO ANIMAL VENOMS
The animal kingdom consists of more than 100,000 species spread 
through major phyla including arthropods, mollusks, and chordates 
(Mebs, 2002). Venomous animals are capable of producing a poi-
son in a highly developed exocrine gland or group of cells and can 
deliver their toxin during a biting or stinging act. The venom is the 
sum of all natural venomous substances produced in the animal 
(Ménez et al., 2006). Conversely, poisonous animals have no spe-
cific mechanism or structure for the delivery of their poisons, and 
poisoning usually takes place through ingestion. Venomous or poi-
sonous animals are widely distributed throughout the animal king-
dom, from the unicellular protistan Alexandrium (Gonyaulax) to 
certain mammals, including the platypus and the short-tailed shrew. 
At least 400 species of snakes are considered dangerous to humans. 
Myriad venomous and poisonous arthropods exist, and toxic 
marine animals are found in almost every sea and ocean (Russell 
and Nagabhushanam, 1996; Mebs, 2002; Mackessy, 2010).
Animal venom may play a role in offense (as in the capture 
and digestion of food), in the animal’s defense (as in protection 
against predators or aggressors), or in both functions. Venoms used 
in an offensive posture are generally associated with the oral pole, 
as in the snakes and spiders, while those used in a defensive func-
tion are usually associated with the aboral pole or with spines, as 
in the stingrays and scorpion fish. In the snake, the venom provides 
a food-getting mechanism. Its secondary function is its defensive 
status. In contrast, in venomous spiders, toxin is used to paralyze 
the prey before the extraction of hemolymph and body fluids. The 
venom is not primarily designed to kill the prey, but it is only to 
immobilize the organism for feeding. The same can be said for scor-
pions, although they do use their venom in defense. In fish, such 
as the scorpion fish and stone fish, and in elasmobranches, such 
as the stingray, the venom apparatus is generally used in the ani-
mal’s defense. In contrast, poisonous animals usually derive their 
toxins through the food chain. As such, poison is often a metabo-
lite produced by microorganisms, plants, or animals. Poisons are 
sometimes concentrated as they pass through the food chain from 
one animal to another. It is also worth noting that animal and plant 
toxins tend to differ significantly in their chemical complexity, yet 
both are capable of causing massive harm. Plant toxins tend to be 
smaller compounds or proteins, and often times a single offending 
substance can be pinpointed. Conversely, animal toxins must be 
studied in the context of the entire venom or poison that typically 
is very complex and contains many individual toxic compounds 
and very large proteins that essentially work together to cause 
their effects. Just the same as the preceding section on plant tox-
ins, certain criteria were employed to effectively narrow down the 
animal toxins discussed. Specifically considered were how often 
does human exposure occur, how significant is an exposure, and 
in general how much is known about the animal’s toxic properties.
PROPERTIES OF ANIMAL TOXINS
Venoms are very complex, containing polypeptides, high- and 
low-molecular-weight proteins, amines, lipids, steroids, amino-
polysaccharides, quinones, glucosides, and free amino acids, as 
well as serotonin, histamine, and other substances. Some venoms 
are known to consist of more than a hundred proteins. The venom is 
a source of peptides and proteins that act on myriad exogenous tar-
gets such as ion channels, receptors, and enzymes within cells and 
on cell membranes (Ménez et al., 2006). Studying venom is impor-
tant for several reasons. First, venoms offer valuable insight into 
the systems they act on such as the cardiovascular system, nervous 
system, coagulation, and homeostasis. Second, venoms are use-
ful as a source of potential new drugs, with at least five chemicals 
already on the market and dozens undergoing preclinical or clinical 
trials. Third, a greater understanding of venoms favors development 
of improved protection against envenomation (Ménez et al., 2006).
Novel instrument developments have permitted the greater 
application of mass spectrometry, coupled with various separa-
tion technologies, to tease out the complexity of natural venoms, 
thereby identifying the peptide and protein components of venoms 
(Escoubas, 2006). The technology allows considerable resolution 
of extremely small amounts of venom. Fig. 26-20 demonstrates the 
application of gel filtration and high-pressure liquid chromatog-
raphy (HPLC), as cone snail venom was fractionated into numer-
ous peptides with varying activities (Olivera et al., 1990). Similar 
fractionations have been performed on many other types of venom 
to identify the individual components. Unfortunately, studying the 
chemistry, pharmacology, and toxicology of venoms requires iso-
lating and dismantling the venoms and losing the synergy among 
multiple components. Nevertheless, advanced technology will 
permit peptide sequencing, and the characterization of posttrans-
lational modifications, such as glycosylation, and the discovery of 
new pharmacophores. Most venoms probably exert their effects 
on almost every cell and tissue, and their principal pharmacologic 
properties are usually determined by the amount of a fraction that 
accumulates at an activity site. Table 26-9 reveals the extremely 
large range in the LD50 of different toxic compounds and venoms 
injected intravenously into mice.
The bioavailability of a venom is determined by its composi-
tion, molecular size, amount or concentration gradient, solubility, 
degree of ionization, and the rate of blood flow into that tissue, as 
well as the properties of the engulfing surface itself. The venom 
can be absorbed by active or passive transport, facilitated diffu-
sion, or pinocytosis, among other physiologic mechanisms. Besides 
the bloodstream, the lymph circulation not only carries surplus 
interstitial fluid produced by the venom but also transports larger 
molecular components and other particulates back to the blood-
stream. Thus, the larger toxins of snake venoms, particularly those 
of Viperidae, probably enter the lymphatic network preferentially 
and then are transported to the central venous system in the neck 
(Russell, 2001). Because lymphatic capillaries, unlike blood capil-
laries, lack a basement membrane and have fibroelastic “anchoring 
filaments,” they can readily adjust their shape and size, facilitating 
absorption of excess interstitial fluid along with macromolecules 
contained in a venom.
The site of action and metabolism of venom is dependent on 
its diffusion and partitioning along the gradient between the plasma 
and the tissues where the components are deposited. Once the toxin 
reaches a particular site, its entry to that site is dependent on the rate 
of blood flow into that tissue, the mass of the structure, and the par-
tition characteristics of the toxin between the blood and the particu-
lar tissue. Receptor sites appear to have highly variable degrees of 
sensitivity. In the case of complex venoms, there may be several, if 
not many, receptor sites. There is also considerable variability in the 
sensitivity of those sites for the different components of a venom.
A venom may also be metabolized in several or many differ-
ent tissues before undergoing excretion. Some venom components 
are metabolized distant to the receptor site(s) and may never reach 
the primary receptor in a quantity sufficient to affect that site. The 
amount of a toxin that tissues can metabolize without endanger-
ing the organisms may also vary. Organs or tissues may contain 
enzymes that catalyze a host of reactions, including deleterious 
ones. Once a venom component is metabolically altered, the end 
substance is excreted primarily through the kidneys. The intestines

1290
Toxic Agents
unit V
play a minor role, and the contributions by the lungs and biliary 
system have not been determined. Excretion may be complicated by 
the direct action of the venom on the kidneys themselves.
ARTHROPODS
There are more than 1 million species of arthropods, generally 
divided into 25 orders, of which only about 10 orders are of sig-
nificant venomous or poisonous importance. These include the 
arachnids (scorpions, spiders, whip scorpions, solpugids, mites, 
and ticks), the myriapods (centipedes and millipedes), the insects 
(water bugs, assassin bugs, and wheel bugs), beetles (blister 
beetles), Lepidoptera (butterflies, moths, and caterpillars), and 
Hymenoptera (ants, bees, and wasps). Several texts and papers that 
deal with venomous and poisonous arthropods are available (Piek, 
1986; Cohen and Quistad, 1998; Russell, 2001; Kuhn-Nentwig, 
2003; Isbister et al., 2004; Heinen and Gorini da Veiga, 2011).
The number of deaths from arthropod stings and bites is 
unknown. In Mexico, parts of Central and South America, North 
Africa, and India, deaths from scorpion stings, for instance, exceed 
several thousand a year. Spider bites probably do not account for 
more than 200 deaths a year worldwide. A common problem faced 
by physicians in suspected spider bites relates to the differential 
diagnosis. The arthropods most frequently involved in the misdi-
agnoses were ticks (including their embedded mouthparts), mites, 
bedbugs, fleas (infected flea bites), Lepidoptera insects, flies, 
vesicating beetles, water bugs, and various stinging Hymenoptera. 
Among the disease states that were confused with spider or arthro-
pod bites or stings were erythema chronicum migrans, erythema 
4
8
12
16
20
24
28
32
36
40
Time (min)
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
Absorbance
*
Kicking on back, scratching
Depressed activity
Depressed activity
Depressed, and then hyperactivity †
Trembling
Comatose †
Paralysis †
Dragging †
Convulsion, bleeding †
Convulsion †
Scratching, convulsion †
Normal
Normal
Head swinging
Paralysis
Twisted jumping
Uncoordinated
* Sleeper/climber
* Back legs drag
Circular motion
µ-conotoxins
Volume (mL)
A 570
Vt
Vo
A
B
C
D
Figure 26-20.  Multiple biologically active components were obtained from Conus geographus venom by first subjecting the venom to gel filtration on Sephadex 
G-25 into four fractions and then separation of fraction B (which contains the α-conotoxins) by high-pressure liquid chromatography on a VYDAC C18 column 
using a trifluoroacetic acid–acetonitrile gradient. Various peak fractions were then injected intracerebrally into mice and different responses were noted. (†) The 
fraction was lethal in at least one injected animal. (Reprinted with permission from Olivera et al. [1990].)
Table 26-9  
Intravenous LD50 Values of Selected Toxins 
Determined in Mice
TOXIN SOURCE
COMMON NAME
LD50 (µg/kg)
Clostridium 
botulinum
Botulinum toxin
0.0003
Crotalus viridis 
helleri
Southern pacific 
rattlesnake
1.3
Crotalus 
adamanteus
Eastern diamondback
1.5
Oxyuranus 
scutellatus
Australian taipan
2
Crotalus atrox
Western diamondback
2.2
Agkistrodon 
piscivorus
Eastern cottonmouth
4
Agkistrodon 
contortrix
Copperhead
11
Androctonus 
australis
North African scorpion
17
Notechis scutatus
Australian tiger snake
25
Naja siamensis
Indochinese spitting 
cobra
75
SOURCES: Data from Mebs (2002) and Russell (2001).

Toxic Effects of Plants and Animals
Chapter 26
1291
nodosum, periarteritis nodosum, pyroderma gangrenosum, kerion 
cell-mediated response to a fungus, Stevens–Johnson syndrome, 
toxic epidermal necrolysis, herpes simplex, and purpura fulminans. 
Any arthropod may bite or sting and not eject venom. Finally, some 
arthropod venom poisonings accentuate the symptoms and signs of 
an existing undiagnosed subclinical disease that further complicates 
diagnosis.
ARACHNIDA
Scorpions
Of the more than 1000 species of scorpions, the stings of more 
than 75 can be considered of sufficient importance to warrant medi-
cal attention (Keegan, 1980; Polis, 1990; Russell, 2001). Some of 
the more important scorpions are noted along with their location 
in Table 26-10. In addition, members of the genera Pandinus, 
Hadrurus, Vejovis, Nebo, and some of the others are capable of 
inflicting painful and often erythematous lesions.
Many scorpion venoms contain low-molecular-weight pro-
teins, peptides, amino acids, nucleotides, and salts, among other 
components (Possani et al., 2000; Goldin, 2001; Rodriguez de 
la Vega and Possani, 2004, 2005). The neurotoxic fractions are 
generally classified on the basis of their molecular size. The 
short-chain toxins with 20 to 40 amino acid residues have three 
or four disulfide bonds and appear to affect potassium or chlo-
ride channels. The long-chain toxins have 58 to 76 amino acid 
residues (6500 to 8500 Da) with four disulfide bonds and affect 
mainly the sodium channels (Mouhat et al., 2004). These particular 
toxins may have an effect on other voltage-dependent channels. 
The amino acid content is known for more than 90 species, and 
there appears to be a high number of cysteine residues in most of 
these venoms. The toxins can selectively bind to a specific chan-
nel of excitable cells, thus impairing the initial depolarization of 
the action potential in the nerve and muscle that results in their 
neurotoxicity. It appears that the way some scorpion venoms dif-
ferently affect mammalian, as opposed to insect tissues, is related 
to the structural basis of the gates in the two organisms. Not all 
scorpions, however, have fractions that affect neuromuscular 
transmission. In fact, Rodriguez de la Vega and Possani (2005) 
constructed a phylogenetic tree using 191 different amino acid 
sequences from long-chain peptides and discussed their functional 
divergence and extant biodiversity. The effects of scorpion venom 
on various potassium channels have been reviewed (Rodriguez de 
la Vega and Possani, 2004).
The symptoms and signs of scorpion envenomation differ 
considerably depending on the species (Russell, 2001). Common 
offenders are members of the family Vejovidae, generally found 
in the southwestern and western United States, Central America, 
and South America. Their sting gives rise to localized pain, swell-
ing, tenderness, and mild parasthesia. Systemic reactions are rare, 
although weakness, fever, and muscle fasciculations have been 
reported.
Envenomations by some members of the genus Centruroides 
are clinically the most important, particularly in the western United 
States. The bark scorpion, C. exilicauda, is often found hiding under 
the loose bark of trees or in dead trees or logs, and may frequent 
human dwellings. Straw to yellowish-brown or reddish-brown in 
color, it is often easily distinguishable from other scorpions in the 
same habitat by its long, thin telson, or tail, and its thin pedipalps, or 
pincer-like claws. In children, their sting may produce initial pain, 
although some children do not complain of pain and are unaware of 
the injury. The area becomes sensitive to touch, and merely pressing 
lightly over the injury will elicit an immediate retraction. Usually 
there is little or no local swelling and only mild erythema. The child 
becomes tense and restless and shows abnormal and random head 
and neck movements. Often the child will display roving eye move-
ments. Centruroides vittatus, the striped bark scorpion (Fig. 26-21), 
is commonly involved in envenomenation but fatalities are rare. 
In their review of Centruroides sculpturatus stings, Rimsza et al. 
(1980) noted visual signs, including nystagmus roving eye and ocu-
logyric movements, in 12 of 24 patients stung by this scorpion. 
Tachycardia is usually evident within 45 minutes as well as some 
hypertension. Although this is not seen in children as early or as 
severely as in adults, it is often present within an hour following 
the sting. Respiratory and heart rates are increased, and by 90 min-
utes the child may appear quite ill. Fasciculations may be seen over 
the face or large muscle masses, and the child may complain of 
generalized weakness and display some ataxia or motor weakness. 
Opisthotonos is not uncommon. The respiratory distress may pro-
ceed to respiratory paralysis. Excessive salivation is often present 
and may further impair respiratory function. Slurring of speech may 
Table 26-10  
Location of Some Medically Important Scorpions
GENUS
DISTRIBUTION
Androctonus species
North Africa, Middle East, Turkey
Buthus species
France and Spain to Middle East 
and north Africa, Mongolia, China
Buthotus species
Africa, Middle East, central Asia
Centruroides species
North, Central, South America
Heterometrus species
Central and Southeast Asia
Leiurus species
North Africa, Middle East, Turkey
Mesobuthus species
Turkey, India
Parabuthus species
Southern Africa
Tityus species
Central and South America
Figure 26-21.  Centruroides vittatus (striped bark scorpion).

1292
Toxic Agents
unit V
be present, and convulsions may occur. If death does not occur, the 
child usually becomes asymptomatic within 36 to 48 hours.
In adults, the clinical picture is somewhat similar, but there 
are some differences (Russell, 2001). Almost all adults complain 
of immediate pain after the sting, regardless of the Centruroides 
species involved. Adults do not show the restlessness that is seen in 
children. Instead, they are tense and anxious. They develop tachy-
cardia and hypertension, and respirations are increased. They may 
complain of difficulties in focusing and swallowing. In some cases, 
there is some general weakness and pain on moving the injured 
extremity. Convulsions are very rare, but ataxia and muscle incoor-
dination may occur. Most adults are asymptomatic within 12 hours, 
but may complain of generalized weakness for 24 hours or more.
Spiders
Of the 30,000 or so species, at least 200 have been implicated in sig-
nificant bites on humans. Spiders are predaceous, polyphagous arach-
nids that generally feed on insects or other arthropods. Additional 
information on spider bites can be found elsewhere (Gertsch, 1979; 
Mareticˆ and Lebez, 1979; Russell, 2001). Table 26-11 provides a 
short list of spiders with their associated toxins and the targets of 
their toxins.
All spiders except the Uloboridae family possess a venom 
apparatus that produces neurotoxins designed to paralyze or kill 
prey. Spider venoms are complex mixtures of low-molecular-weight 
components, including inorganic ions and salts, free acids, amino 
acids, biogenic amines and neurotransmitters, and polypeptide 
toxins. The acylpolyamines, composed of a hydrophobic aromatic 
carboxylic acid linked to a lateral chain of one to nine amino-
propyl, aminobutyl, or aminopentyl units, are voltage-dependent 
open-channel blockers (sodium, calcium, and potassium chan-
nels) and/or blockers of the ion channel associated with glutamate 
receptors. They also act on nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. The 
acylpolyamines possess insecticidal activity and induce fast insect 
paralysis via a reversible block of the insect neuromuscular junction. 
Polypeptide toxins include the ion channel blockers, pore-forming 
peptides, and enzymes. In particular, hanatoxins 1 and 2 have 
allowed characterization of voltage-dependent potassium channels 
(Swartz and MacKinnon, 1995; Yellen, 2002). The ω-agatoxins 
block voltage-sensitive vertebrate calcium channels (Corzo and 
Escoubas, 2003). The ω-atracotoxins have greater selectivity on 
insect voltage-sensitive calcium channels (Wang et al., 2001). Many 
more spiders and the spider peptide toxins have been studied to date 
(Fatehi et al., 1997; Liu et al., 1997; Corzo and Escoubas, 2003; 
Adams, 2004; Kuhn-Nentwig et al., 2004; Rodriguez de la Vega and 
Possani, 2004; Ushkaryov et al., 2004; Wilson and Alewood, 2006). 
The small spider peptide toxins are relatively easy to produce by 
chemical synthesis or by recombinant means. Peptide toxins from 
spiders have proved useful in discriminating between different cel-
lular components of native ion channel currents and for the molecu-
lar isolation and designation of cellular receptors (Escoubas et al., 
2000; Corzo and Escoubas, 2003; Adams, 2004).
Poor case definition and spider identification contribute to the 
controversy regarding the clinical consequences and inappropriate 
diagnosis of spider bites worldwide. Many patients never see the spi-
der, yet many skin lesions or areas of necrosis are attributed to spi-
der bites. The medically important spiders include the Agelenopsis 
sp., Latrodectus sp., Loxosceles sp., Atrax sp., Hadronyche sp., and 
Phoneutria sp. Table 26-12, summarized from Isbister and White 
(2004), lists local and systemic effects for known cases of major 
spider groups in Australia.
Agelenopsis Species (American Funnel Web Spiders)  The 
American funnel web spider (Agelenopsis aperta) contains three 
classes of agatoxins that target ion channels (Adams, 2004). The 
α-agatoxins appear to be use-dependent, noncompetitive antago-
nists of the glutamate receptor channels. These are low-molecular- 
weight acylpolyamines that are devoid of amino acids. Mass 
spectrometry analysis has identified more than 33 α-agatoxins in 
A. aperta venom (Chesnov et al., 2001). The μ-agatoxins are 36 
to 37 amino acid, C-terminal amidated, peptides with four internal 
disulfide bridges (Skinner et al., 1989). These μ-agatoxins cause 
increased spontaneous release of neurotransmitter from presyn-
aptic terminals and repetitive action potentials in motor neurons. 
In addition, the μ-agatoxins are specific for insect sodium chan-
nels. The ω-amatoxins are a structurally diverse group of peptides 
that are selective for voltage-activated calcium channels. There are 
four types of ω-amatoxins that can be distinguished by sequence 
similarity and their spectrum of action against insect and vertebrate 
calcium channels. The μ-agatoxins causing channels to open at the 
normal resting potentials synergize the action of the α-agatoxins. It 
is interesting to note that the agatoxins are used as selective phar-
macologic probes to characterize ion channels in organs such as 
brain and heart, and have been evaluated as candidate biopesticides.
Latrodectus Species (Widow Spiders)  Found throughout the 
world in all continents with temperate or tropical climates, these 
spiders are commonly known as the black widow, brown widow, or 
red-legged spider. They, however, have many other common names 
in English: hourglass, poison lady, deadly spider, red-bottom spider, 
T-spider, gray lady spider, and shoe-button spider. Although both 
male and female widow spiders are venomous, only the female has 
fangs that are large and strong enough to penetrate the human skin. 
Mature Latrodectus mactans females range in body length from 
Table 26-11  
Some Significant Spiders, Their Toxins, and the 
Targets of the Toxins
SPIDER
PEPTIDE
TARGET
Acanthoscurria gomesiana
Gomesin
PLM
Agelenopsis aperta
ω-AfaI-IVA
Ca2+
μ-Afatoxin 1-6
Na+
Grammostola spatula
HaTx1,2
K+
GsMTx2,4
MS
GSTxSIA
Ca2+
Hadronyche versuta
ω-ACTX-Hv1a
Ca2+
ω-ACTX-Hv2a
Ca2+
δ-ACTX-Hv1a
Na+
Heteroscodra maculate
HmTx1,2
K+
Ornithoctonus huwena
Huwentoxin I
Ca2+
Huwentoxin IV
Na+
Psalmopoeus cambridgei
PcTx1
ASIC
Phrixotrichus auratus
PaTx1,2
K+
Thrixopelma pruriens
ProTxI,II
Na+
Abbreviations: ASIC, acid-sensing ion channels; Ca2+, K+, and Na+, 
calcium, potassium, and sodium ion channels; MS, mechanosensitive 
ion channels; PLM, phospholipid membranes.
Additional species, their toxins, and their targets may be obtained from 
the article by Corzo and Escoubas (2003).

Toxic Effects of Plants and Animals
Chapter 26
1293
10 to 18 mm, whereas males range from 3 to 5 mm (Fig. 26-22). 
These spiders have a globose abdomen varying in color from gray 
to brown to black, depending on the species. In the black widow, 
the abdomen is shiny black with a red hourglass or red spots and 
sometimes with white spots on the venter (Russell, 2001).
The latrotoxins, a family of high-molecular-weight proteins 
that are found in Latrodectus venoms, target different classes of ani-
mals including vertebrates, insects, and crustaceans (Grishin, 1998, 
1999; Ushkaryov et al., 2004). The toxins are synthesized as large 
precursors containing around 1000 amino acid residues (around 132 
to 156 kDa) that undergo proteolytic processing to 110 to 130 kDa 
and activation in the lumen of the venom gland. Mature latrotox-
ins are structurally conserved and contain multiple ankyrin repeats. 
At least seven different latrotoxins have been isolated and all are 
large acidic proteins (pI approximately 5.0 to 6.0). Some are called 
latroinsectotoxins because they affect insects but not vertebrates, 
and one protein called α-latrocrustatoxin is active only in crayfish. 
All latrotoxins stimulate massive release of neurotransmitters after 
binding to specific neuronal receptors.
α-Latrotoxin is the most studied protein that is toxic only 
to vertebrates and not to insects or crustaceans (Ushkaryov et al., 
2004). A presynaptic toxin is said to exert its toxic effects on the 
vertebrate central nervous system depolarizing neurons by increas-
ing intracellular [Ca2+] and by stimulating exocytosis of neu-
rotransmitters from nerve terminals (Holz and Habener, 1998). The 
purported three-dimensional structure of α-latrotoxin consists of 
tetrameric complexes with a central channel that inserts into the 
lipid bilayer. A G protein–coupled receptor latrophilin and a single-
transmembrane receptor neurenin are high-affinity binding sites for 
α-latrotoxin (Ushkaryov et al., 2004). The latrotoxins act by both 
calcium-dependent and calcium-independent mechanisms. In fact, a 
mutant recombinant α-latrotoxin that does not form pores has been 
invaluable in furthering our understanding of the multiple actions 
of the toxin (Volynski et al., 2003). α-Latrotoxin and its mutants are 
versatile tools for the study of exocytosis. In particular, studies with 
this toxin have helped confirm the vesicular hypothesis of trans-
mitter release (Hurlbut et al., 1990), establish the requirement of 
calcium ion for endocytosis (Ceccarelli and Hurlbut, 1980), charac-
terize individual neurotransmitter sites in the central nervous system 
(Auger and Marty, 1997), and identify two families of important 
neuronal cell surface receptors (Krasnoperov et al., 1997).
Bites by the black widow are described as sharp and pinprick-
like, followed by a dull, occasionally numbing pain in the affected 
extremity and by pain and cramps in one or several of the large 
muscle masses (Russell, 2001). Rarely is there any local skin reac-
tion except during the first 60 minutes following the bite. Muscle 
fasciculations frequently can be seen within 30 minutes of the bite. 
Sweating is common, and the patient may complain of weakness 
and pain in the regional lymph nodes, which are often tender on pal-
pation and occasionally are enlarged; lymphadenitis is frequently 
observed. Pain in the low back, thighs, or abdomen is a common 
complaint, and rigidity of the abdominal muscles is seen in most 
cases in which envenomation has been severe. Severe paroxys-
mal muscle cramps may occur, and arthralgia has been reported. 
Hypertension is a common finding, particularly in the elderly 
after moderate to severe envenomations. Blood studies are usually 
normal.
Loxosceles Species (Brown or Violin Spiders)  These primi-
tive spiders are variously known in North America as the fiddle-
back spider or the brown recluse (Fig. 26-23). There are over 100 
species of Loxosceles. The abdomen of these spiders varies in 
Table 26-12 
Comparison of Clinical Effects of Bites by Some Spiders of Australia
CLINICAL EFFECTS
LACTRODECTUS 
REDBACK SPIDERS
STEATODA  
CUPBOARD SPIDERS
LAMPONIDAE  
WHITE-TAIL SPIDERS
MYGALOMORPHAE  
FUNNEL WEB SPIDERS, MOUSE  
SPIDERS, TRAPDOOR SPIDERS
Severe pain (%)
62
26
27
49
Duration of pain
36 hours
6 hours
0.8 hours
1 hour
Fang marks (%)
6
17
17
58
Initial erythema
74
96
83
36
Swelling (%)
7
9
8
13
Itchiness (%)
38
48
44
0
Nausea, vomiting, 
headache, malaise 
(%)
35
30
9
36
Distal limb bite (%)
46
52
82
91
SOURCE: Data from Isbister and White (2004).
Figure 26-22.  Latrodectus mactans (female black widow spider).

1294
Toxic Agents
unit V
color from grayish to orange and reddish-brown to blackish and 
is distinct from the pale yellow to reddish-brown background of 
the cephalothorax. This spider has six eyes grouped in three dyads. 
Females average 8 to 12 mm in body length, whereas males average 
6 to 10 mm. Both males and females are venomous (Russell, 2001).
The venom of Loxosceles spiders appears to contain phos-
pholipase, protease, esterase, collagenase, hyaluronidase, deoxy-
ribonuclease, ribonuclease, dipeptides, dermonecrosis factors, and 
sphingomyelinase D. The venom has coagulation and vasoconstric-
tion properties and it causes selective vascular endothelial dam-
age. There are adhesions of neutrophils to the capillary wall with 
sequestration and activation of passing neutrophils by the perturbed 
endothelial cells (Patel et al., 1994). In Loxosceles intermedia, the 
toxic effects appear to be associated with a 35-kDa protein that 
demonstrates a complement-dependent hemolytic activity and a 
dermonecrotic-inducing factor. 31P-nuclear magnetic resonance 
assay of the four bands representing proteins, measuring 34 kDa in 
the venom, produced three proteins with sphingomyelinase D activ-
ity (Merchant et al., 1998). An endotoxemic-like shock, showing 
eosinophilic material in the proximal and distal tubules and tubular 
necrosis, was the most common histopathological finding, preceded 
in mice by prostration, acute cachexia, hypothermia, neurological 
changes, and hemoglobinuria (Tambourgi et al., 1998).
The bite of this spider produces about the same degree of 
pain as does the sting of an ant, but sometimes the patient may be 
unaware of the bite. In most cases, a local burning sensation, which 
may last for 30 to 60 minutes, develops around the injury. Pruritus 
over the area often occurs, and the area becomes red, with a small 
blanched area surrounding the reddened bite site. Skin temperature 
usually is elevated over the lesion area. With significant envenom-
ations, the reddened area enlarges and becomes purplish during the 
subsequent 1 to 8 hours. It often becomes irregular in shape, and as 
time passes, hemorrhages may develop throughout the area. A small 
bleb or vesicle may form at the bite site, increase in size, and rupture 
with subsequent pustule formation. The red hemorrhagic area con-
tinues to enlarge, as does the pustule. The whole area may become 
swollen and painful, and lymphadenopathy is common. During the 
early stages, the lesion often takes on a bull’s-eye appearance, with 
a central white vesicle surrounded by the reddened area and ringed 
by a whitish or bluish border. The central pustule ruptures, and 
necrosis to various depths can be visualized (Russell, 2001).
In serious bites, the lesion can measure 8 × 10 cm2 with severe 
necrosis invading muscle tissue. On the face, large lesions result-
ing in extensive tissue destruction and requiring subsequent plastic 
surgery sometimes are seen after bites by Loxosceles laeta in South 
America. Systemic symptoms and signs include fever, malaise, stom-
ach cramps, nausea and vomiting, jaundice, spleen enlargement, 
hemolysis, hematuria, and thrombocytopenia. Fatal cases, while rare, 
usually are preceded by intravascular hemolysis, hemolytic anemia, 
thrombocytopenia, hemoglobinuria, and renal failure (Russell, 2001).
Steatoda Species  These spiders are variously known as the 
false black widow, combfooted, cobweb, or cupboard spiders. The 
female of Steatoda grossa differs from L. mactans and Latrodectus 
hesperus in having a purplish-brown abdomen rather than a black 
one. It is less shiny, and its abdomen is more oval than round. It 
may have pale yellow or whitish markings on the dorsum of the 
abdomen, and no markings on the venter. The abdomen of some 
species is orange, brown, or chestnut in color, and often bears a 
light band across the anterior dorsum (Russell, 2001).
The venom of Steatoda paykulliana stimulates the release 
of transmitter substances similar to Latrodectus venom (Cavalieri 
et al., 1987). The venom is said to form ionic channels permeable 
for bivalent and monovalent cations, and the duration of time in 
the open state depends on the membrane potential (Sokolov et al., 
1984). S. paykulliana venom induces strong motor unrest, clonic 
cramps, exhaustion, ataxia, and then paralysis in guinea pigs. Bites 
by S. grossa or Steatoda fulva in the United States have been fol-
lowed by local pain, often severe; induration; pruritus; and the occa-
sional breakdown of tissue at the bite site (Russell, 2001).
Cheiracanthium Species (Running Spiders)  The 160 species 
of this genus have an almost circumglobal distribution, although 
only four or five species have been implicated in bites on humans 
(Russell, 2001). Cheiracanthium punctorium, Cheiracanthium 
inclusum, Cheiracanthium mildei, Cheiracanthium diversum, and 
Cheiracanthium japonicum are often implicated in envenomations. 
The abdomen is convex and egg shaped and varies in color from 
yellow, green, or greenish-white to reddish-brown; the cephalotho-
rax is usually slightly darker than the abdomen. The chelicerae are 
strong, and the legs are long, hairy, and delicate. The spider ranges 
in length from 7 to 16 mm. Like Phidippus jumping spiders but 
even more so, Cheiracanthium tends to be tenacious and sometimes 
must be removed from the bite area. For that reason, there is a high 
degree of identification following the bite of these spiders. The 
most toxic venom fraction is said to be a protein of 60 kDa, and the 
venom is high in norepinephrine and serotonin.
The patient usually describes the bite by C. inclusum as sharp 
and painful, with the pain increasing during the first 30 to 45 hours. 
The patient complains of dull pain over the injured part. A red-
dened wheal with a hyperemic border develops. Small petechiae 
may appear near the center of the wheal. Skin temperature over the 
lesion is often elevated, but body temperature is usually normal. 
Lymphadenitis and lymphadenopathy may develop. C. japonicum 
produces more severe manifestations, including severe local pain, 
nausea and vomiting, headache, chest discomfort, severe pruritus, 
and shock (Russell, 2001).
Theraphosidae Species (Tarantulas)  True tarantulas are 
members of the family Theraphosidae and there are around 
800 species that are distributed worldwide, but especially in tropi-
cal or semitropical regions. Tarantulas are predators and they feed 
on various vertebrate and invertebrate preys that are captured after 
envenomation with venoms that act rapidly and irreversibly on 
the central and peripheral nervous systems. In humans, reported 
bites elicit mild to severe local pain, strong itching, and tenderness 
that may last for several hours. Edema, erythema, joint stiffness, 
swollen limbs, burning feelings, and cramps are common. In more 
Figure 26-23.  Loxosceles reclusa (male brown recluse spider) with the vio-
lin pattern on the dorsal cephalothorax.

Toxic Effects of Plants and Animals
Chapter 26
1295
severe cases, strong cramps and muscular spasms lasting up to sev-
eral hours may be observed. Poecilotheria and Stromatopelma spp. 
appear to be most toxic to humans, although no fatalities have been 
reported (Escoubas and Rash, 2004).
Tarantula venoms have been extensively studied, and modern 
purification often uses orthogonal HPLC separations that combine 
reversed-phase and ion-exchange chromatography. Most spider 
peptide toxins appear to have basic pI in the 9 to 11 range (Escoubas 
et al., 2000). At least 33 peptide toxins have been described from 
various tarantula venoms. These have a molecular weight of 3000 to 
5700 Da, and targets include voltage-gated potassium, sodium, and 
calcium channels, tetrodotoxin-sensitive channels, and acid-sensing 
ion channels, which are sensitive to extracellular pH (reviewed by 
Escoubas and Rash, 2004). At least two distinct structural motifs 
have been characterized: the inhibitory cystine knot (ICK) with a 
consensus sequence of CIX3-7–CIIX3-8–CIIIX0-7–CIVX1-4–CVX4-13–CVI 
and disulfide bond pairing of CI–CIV, CII–CV, and CIII–CVI (Craik 
et al., 2001), and the disulfide-directed β-hairpin (DDH) motif 
that comprises an antiparallel β-hairpin stabilized by two disulfide 
bridges (Wang et al., 2000). Tarantula toxins have been classified 
as long-loop ICK, short-loop ICK, or DDH toxins (Escoubas and 
Rash, 2004).
Theraphosid spiders contain several toxins that are being evalu-
ated for development as antiarrhythmic or as antinociceptive drugs. 
In particular, Grammostola mechanotoxin 4 from Grammostola 
spatulata has considerable promise as an antiarrhythmic. Protoxin 
I and II from Thrixopelma pruriens have promise as analgesics 
because they inhibit the tetrodotoxin-resistant sodium channels 
(Middleton et al., 2002).
Future work on the toxins of tarantulas will encompass 
genomic and proteomic approaches. Expanding knowledge suggests 
trends in the association of primary and three-dimensional struc-
tures with pharmacologic activity. Continued improvement in isola-
tion and purification technologies plus the combination of cDNA 
library screening with mass spectrometry will prove invaluable in 
characterization of toxin function and definition of toxin targets.
Ticks
Many of the approximately 900 species of ticks are associated with 
disease in humans and wild and domesticated animals (Rash and 
Hodgson, 2002; Barker and Murrell, 2004; Steen et al., 2006). 
The saliva of certain ticks of the families Ixodidae, Argasidae, and 
Nuttalliellidae causes tick paralysis. The tick bite involves inser-
tion of cutting, tube-like mouthparts through the host’s skin with 
anchoring so that the tick can feed for hours, days, or weeks. Saliva 
from the salivarium flows outward initially and the blood meal 
flows inward afterward. Ticks are known to transmit the organisms 
causing Lyme disease, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, babesiosis, 
leptospirosis, Q fever, ehrlichiosis, typhus, tick-borne encephalitis, 
and others. In fact, the import of immunosuppression by tick saliva 
in the transmission of flaviviruses has been discussed (Nuttall and 
Labuda, 2003).
Tick saliva contains a number of active constituents (Steen 
et al., 2006). For example, saliva from Ixodes scapularis con-
tains apyrase (ATP diphosphohydrolase), which hydrolyzes ADP 
that is released at the bite site thereby inhibiting ADP-induced 
platelet aggregation (Mans et al., 1998); kininase (ACE-like 
protein or angiotensin-converting enzyme-like protein), which 
hydrolyzes circulating kinins and reduces the host inflammatory 
response (Francischetti et al., 2003); glutathione peroxidase (Das 
et al., 2001); serine protease inhibitors, which inhibit coagula-
tion enzymes (Valenzuela, 2004); an anticomplement protein that 
inhibits an enzyme in the alternative pathway for complement 
(Valenzuela et al., 2000); an amine-binding protein that binds sero-
tonin, histamine, and other biogenic amines (Sangamnetdej et al., 
2002); and prostanoids (PGE2 and PGF2α) (Inokuma et al., 1994). 
A discussion of toxins from other species may be found elsewhere 
(Cavassani et al., 2005; Steen et al., 2006).
Potentially 50 species of ticks are associated with clinical 
paralysis (Russell, 2001). As tick bites are often not felt, the first 
evidence of envenomation may not appear until several days later, 
when small macules 3 to 4 mm in diameter develop that are sur-
rounded by erythema and swelling, often displaying a hyperemic 
halo. The patient often complains of difficulty with gait, followed by 
paresis and eventually locomotor paresis and paralysis. Problems in 
speech and respiration may ensue and lead to respiratory paralysis if 
the tick is not removed. The saliva of Ixodes holocyclus has yielded 
a peptide holocyclotoxin-1 that may cause paralysis (Masina and 
Broady, 1999). Peak paralytic activity was found between 60 and 
100 kDa, and was a trimer of a neurotoxic protein subunit of 23 kDa 
(Crause et al., 1993). Symptoms resolve rapidly on removal of the 
tick (Russell, 2001).
CHILOPODA (CENTIPEDES)
These elongated, many-segmented brownish-yellow arthropods 
have a pair of walking legs on most segments, and they are fast 
moving, secretive, and nocturnal and are found worldwide. They 
feed on other arthropods and even small vertebrates and birds. 
The first pair of legs behind the head is modified into poison jaws. 
Centipedes range in length from 3 to almost 300 mm. In the United 
States, the prevalent biting genus is a Scolopendra species. The 
venom is concentrated within the intracellular granules, discharged 
into vacuoles of the cytoplasm of the secretory cells, and moved by 
exocytosis into the lumen of the gland; from thence ducts carry the 
venom to the jaws (Ménez et al., 1990).
Centipede venoms contain high-molecular-weight proteins, 
proteinases, esterases, 5-hydroxytryptamine, histamine, lipids, and 
polysaccharides (Mebs, 2002). Such venom contains a heat-labile 
cardiotoxic protein of 60 kDa that produces, in humans, changes 
associated with acetylcholine release (Gomes et al., 1983). The 
bite produces two tiny punctures, sharp pain, immediate bleeding, 
redness, and swelling often lasting for 24 hours. Localized tissue 
changes and necrosis have been reported, and severe envenomations 
may cause nausea and vomiting, changes in heart rate, vertigo, and 
headache. In the most severe cases, there can be mental distur-
bances (Bush et al., 2001; Russell, 2001; Mebs, 2002).
DIPLOPODA (MILLIPEDES)
Ranging in length from 20 to 300 mm, these arthropods are cylin-
drical, worm-like creatures, mahogany to dark brown or black 
in color, and bearing two pairs of jointed legs per segment. In 
Australia and New Guinea particularly, the repellent secretions 
expelled from the sides of their bodies contain a toxin of benzo-
quinone derivatives plus a variety of complex substances such as 
iodine and hydrocyanic acid, which the animal makes use of to pro-
duce hydrogen cyanide (Kuwahara et al., 2002). Some species can 
spray these defensive secretions, and eye injuries are not uncom-
mon. The lesions produced by millipedes consist of a burning or 
prickling sensation and development of a yellowish or brown-pur-
ple lesion; subsequently, a blister containing serosanguinous fluid 
forms, which may rupture. Eye contact can cause acute conjuncti-
vitis, periorbital edema, keratosis, and much pain; such an injury 
must be treated immediately (Russell, 2001).

1296
Toxic Agents
unit V
INSECTA
Heteroptera (True Bugs)
The clinically most important of the true bugs are the Reduviidae (the 
reduviids): the kissing bug, assassin bug, wheel bug, or cone-nose bug 
of the genus Triatoma (Russell, 2001). Generally, they are parasites 
of rodents and common in the nests of wood rats or in wood piles. 
These are elongated bugs with freely movable, cone-shaped heads, 
and straight beaks. The most commonly involved species appear to 
be Triatoma protracta, Triatoma rubida, Triatoma magista, Reduvius 
personatus, and Arilus cristatus. The average length of these bugs is 
19 mm. The venom of these bugs appears to have apyrase activity and 
to lack 5-nucleotidase, inorganic pyrophosphatase, phosphatase, and 
adenylate kinase activities, but it is fairly rich in protease properties. It 
inhibits collagen-induced platelet aggregation. Three peptides isolated 
from the saliva of predatory reduviids are 34 to 36 amino acid resi-
dues in size, are calcium channel blockers similar to ω-conotoxins, 
and belong to the four-loop disulfide bridge scaffold structural class 
(Corzo et al., 2001). The bites of Triatoma species are painful and give 
rise to erythema, pruritus, increased temperature in the bitten part, 
localized swelling, and—in those allergic to the saliva—systemic 
reactions such as nausea and vomiting and angioedema. With some 
bites the wound area will slough, leaving a depression.
The water-dwelling true bugs are of at least three families, 
Naucoridae, Belostomatidae, and Notonectidae, which are capable 
of biting and envenomating humans (Russell, 2001). They are found 
in lakes, ponds, marshes, quiet fresh water, and swimming pools. 
Lethocerus americanus, a Belostomatidae, ranges in length from 12 
to 70 mm, but some water bugs may reach 150 mm. The dorsal side 
is usually tan or brown, but it may be brightly colored, while the 
ventral side is brown. They are very strong insects and can immo-
bilize snails, tadpoles, salamanders, and even small fish and water 
snakes. Water bug saliva is said to contain digestive enzymes, neuro-
toxic components, and hemolytic fractions. ApoLp-III isolated from 
the hemolymph of Lathocerus medius is about 19 kDa and has an 
amino acid composition high in methionine. If molested, water bugs 
will bite, and their bites give rise to immediate pain, some localized 
swelling, and possibly induration and formation of a small papule.
Hymenoptera (Ants, Bees, Wasps,  
and Hornets)
Formicidae (Ants)  Most ant species sink their powerful man-
dibles into the flesh, providing leverage, and then drive their 
stings into the victim. Most ants have stings, but those that lack 
them can spray a defensive secretion from the tip of the gaster, 
which is often placed in the wound of the bite. Ants of the differ-
ent species vary considerably in length, ranging from less than 1.5 
to over 35 mm. Clinically important stinging ants are the harvest-
ing ants (Pagonomyrmex), fire ants (Solenopsis), and little fire ants 
(Ochetomyrmex). The harvester ants are large red, dark brown, or 
black ranging in size from 6 to 10 mm and having fringes of long 
hairs on the posterior of their heads (Russell, 2001).
The venoms of the ants vary considerably. The venoms of 
the Ponerinae, Ecitoninae, and Pseudomyrmex are proteinaceous 
in character. The Myrmicinae venoms are a mixture of amines, 
enzymes, and proteinaceous materials, histamine, hyaluronidase, 
phospholipase A, and hemolysins, which hemolyze erythrocytes and 
mast cells. Formicinae ant venom contains about 60% formic acid. 
Fire ant venoms are poor in polypeptides and proteins, but are rich in 
alkaloids such as solenopsin (Russell, 2001; Mebs, 2002). The sting 
of the fire ant gives rise to a painful burning sensation, after which 
a wheal and localized erythema develop, leading in a few hours to a 
clear vesicle. Within 12 to 24 hours, the fluid becomes purulent and 
the lesion turns into a pustule. It may break down or become a crust 
or fibrotic nodule. In multiple stings, there may be nausea, vomit-
ing, vertigo, increased perspiration, respiratory difficulties, cyanosis, 
coma, and even death. Cross-exposure to the venom of other species 
of ants is possible. Allergic reactions and fatal anaphylactic shock are 
seen in sensitized victims (Hoffman, 2006). Treatment of ant stings 
is dependent on the number of bites, on whether an allergic reaction 
is involved, and on whether there are possible complications.
Apidae (Bees)  This family includes the bumble bees, honeybees, 
carpenter bees, and yellow jackets. The commonest stinging bees 
are Apis mellifera and the Africanized bee, Apis mellifera adanso-
nii, and the incidence of Hymenoptera poisonings is increasing. The 
venom of the Africanized bee is not remarkably different from that 
of the European bee, A. m. mellifer (Fig. 26-24). The former bee 
is smaller and gives less venom, but its aggressiveness is such that 
attacks of 50 to hundreds of bees are not unusual (Russell, 2001).
The venom contains biologically active peptides, such as 
melittin, apamine, mast cell–degranulating peptide, and others, as 
well as phospholipases A2 and B, hyaluronidase, histamine, dopa-
mine, monosaccharides, and lipids (Mebs, 2002). Melittin, which is 
secreted as the 70 amino acid prepromelittin, consists of 26 amino 
acids with no cysteines that have natural detergent-like proper-
ties and causes erythrocyte lysis. Melittin also forms tetramers 
with pores, thereby facilitating ion transport through membranes. 
In particular, melittin tetramers cause a breakdown of the resting 
potential and rapid depolarization of nociceptors, which induces 
pain (Demsey, 1990; Bechinger, 1997). The compound apamine 
contains 18 amino acids cross-linked by two disulfide bridges. 
Apamine is a blocker of calcium-dependent potassium channels and 
is thought to be the “lethal factor” (Habermann, 1984). In addition 
to apamine, mast cell–degranulating peptide is also a basic pep-
tide containing 22 amino acids with two disulfide bonds. Besides 
stimulating release of histamine, this peptide specifically inhibits 
voltage-dependent potassium channels (Dreyer, 1990; Baku, 1999).
Bee stings typically produce immediate, sharp or burning pain, 
slight local erythema, and edema followed by itching. The edema 
may vary depending on location of the sting. It is said that 50 stings 
can be serious and lead to respiratory dysfunction, intravascular 
hemolysis, hypertension, myocardial damage, hepatic changes, 
shock, and renal failure. With 100 or more stings, death can occur. 
In patients who are allergic to bee stings, immediate allergic reac-
tion with the risk of anaphylactic shock requires urgent medical 
treatment (Mebs, 2002; Hoffman, 2006).
Figure 26-24.  Apis mellifera mellifera (honey bee).

Toxic Effects of Plants and Animals
Chapter 26
1297
Vespidae (Wasps)  This family includes wasps and hornets. 
These venoms contain a high content of peptides, which include 
mastoparan in wasps and hornets and crabolin from hornet venom. 
These peptides release histamine from mast cells and consist of 13 
to 17 amino acids with no disulfide bridges. Other peptides named 
wasp kinins cause immediate pain, vasodilation, and increased vas-
cular permeability leading to edema. These venoms also contain 
phospholipases and hyaluronidases, which contribute to the break-
down of membranes and connective tissue to facilitate diffusion of 
the venom. These proteins also contribute to the allergenicity of the 
venoms (Mebs, 2002; Hoffman, 2006).
Lepidoptera (Caterpillars, Moths,  
and Butterflies)
The urticating hairs, or setae, of caterpillars are effective defensive 
weapons that protect some species from predators. The setae are 
attached to unicellular poison glands at the base of each hair. Both 
the larvae and the adults are capable of stinging, either by direct con-
tact with the setae or indirectly when the creature becomes irritated. 
It appears that contraction of the caterpillar’s abdominal muscles 
is sufficient to release the barbs from their sockets, allowing them 
to become airborne. The toxic material found in the venom glands 
contains aristolochic acids, cardenolides, kallikrein, and histamine 
among other substances. Fibrinolytic activity has been found in 
16 and 18 kDa components (isoelectric point of 8.5); coagulation 
defects such as prolonged prothrombin and partial thromboplastin 
times have been detected, and decreases in fibrinogen and plasmino-
gen have been noted. It is thought that the hemorrhagic syndrome 
cannot be classified as being either totally fibrinolytic or a syndrome 
such as disseminated intravascular coagulopathy. The spicules of 
Thaumetopoea pityocampa contain a 28-kDa toxin called thaumeto-
poein, which is a strong dermal irritant and highly allergenic peptide 
(Kawamoto and Kumada, 1984; Russell, 2001; Mebs, 2002).
In some parts of the world, the stings of several species of 
Lepidoptera give rise to a bleeding diathesis, often severe and some-
times fatal. Envenomation by members of the family Saturniidae, 
the buck moths, the grapeleaf skeletonizer (family Zygaenidae), 
the puss moth (family Megalopygidae), and the brown-tailed moth 
(Euproctis species) generally gives rise to little more than immediate 
localized itching and pain, usually described as burning, followed 
in some cases by urticaria, edema, and occasionally fever. The 
hemolymph and spicules contain highly active clotting enzymes, 
a protease with fibrinolytic activity and an enzyme that activates 
prothrombin. In the more severe cases—often due to Megalopyge, 
Dioptidae, Automeris, and Hemileuca spp.—there is localized pain 
as well as papules (sometimes hemorrhagic) and hematomas; on 
occasions there may also be headache, nausea, vomiting, hema-
turia, lymphadenitis, and lymphadenopathy. Contacts with larvae 
of the saturnid moths in South America (Lonomia acheolus and 
Lonomia oblique, Fig. 26-25) can cause severe coagulopathy, due 
to inhibition of clotting factor XIII by a venom component called 
lonomine V. Severe envenomation can cause cerebral hemorrhage 
and death (Guerrero et al., 1999).
MOLLUSCA (CONE SNAILS)
Human interest in this group of mollusks has been due to the beau-
tiful patterns on their shells. Cone snails were known to Roman 
scholars and natural history collectors, as the shells were often 
made into jewelry. The first record of fatality from cone snail sting 
may be found in the book of Rumphius from 1705. The genus 
Conus is a group of approximately 500 species of carnivorous pred-
ators found in marine habitats that use venom as a weapon for prey 
capture (Fig. 26-26). Cone snails have a venom duct for synthesis 
and storage of venom and hollow harpoon-like teeth for injection of 
the venom (Rockel et al., 1995).
Cone snails may be divided into three groups depending on 
preferred prey. The largest group contains worm-hunting species 
that feed on polychaetes (segmented marine worms in the phylum 
Annelida). The second group is molluscivorous and hunts other gas-
tropods. The final group is piscivorous and has venoms that rapidly 
immobilize fish (Olivera, 1997, 2002; Mebs and Kauferstein, 2005).
There are probably over 100 different venom components 
per species (Terlau and Olivera, 2004). Components have become 
known as conotoxins, which may be rich in disulfide bonds, and 
conopeptides. Molecular targets include G protein–coupled recep-
tors, neurotransmitter transporters, and ligand- or voltage-gated ion 
channels. Some components have enzymatic activity.
Fig. 26-27 provides an overview of peptidic Conus venom 
components, indicating gene superfamilies, disulfide bond charac-
teristics, and general targets (McIntosh et al., 1999; Olivera, 2002). 
The two major divisions of Conus toxins are the disulfide-rich cono-
toxins and the peptides that lack multiple disulfide cross-links. The 
arrangement of cysteines in the primary sequence is restricted to 
only a few patterns, which may be diagnostic of the gene superfam-
ily. Most disulfide-rich conotoxins are small and consist of 12 to 30 
amino acids. These toxins contain an unusually diverse complement 
of posttranslationally modified amino acids, including hydroxypro-
line, O-glycosylated serine or threonine, γ-carboxyl-glutamate, sul-
fated tyrosine, and d-amino acids (Craig et al., 1999). Apparently, 
the posttranslational modification enzyme γ-carboxylase is present 
in their venom ducts (Bandyopadhyay et al., 2002). The enzyme has 
a recognition signal in the pro region of the precursor that instructs 
the enzyme to modify specific amino acid residues in the mature 
toxin region. Thus, the pro region of conopeptide precursors pro-
vides potential anchor-binding sites for posttranslational modifica-
tion enzymes (Hooper et al., 2000).
Figure 26-25.  Lonomia oblique (giant silkworm moth).
Figure 26-26.  Conus geographus (geography cone).

1298
Toxic Agents
unit V
Cone snails could be called sophisticated practitioners of com-
bination drug therapy. After injection, multiple conopeptides act 
synergistically to affect the targeted prey. The term “toxin cabal” 
has been applied to this coordinated action of the conopeptide 
mixture. The fish-hunting species Conus purpurascens apparently 
has two distinct cabals whose effects differ in time and space. The 
“lightning-strike cabal” causes immediate immobilization of the 
injected prey because various venom components inhibit voltage-
gated sodium channel inactivation and block potassium channels, 
resulting in massive depolarization of axons near the injection site 
and a tetanic state. The second physiologic cabal, the “motor cabal,” 
acts more slowly as conotoxins must distribute throughout the body 
of the prey. The overall result is total inhibition of neuromuscu-
lar transmission. Various conopeptides inhibit presynaptic calcium 
channels that control neurotransmitter release, the postsynaptic neu-
romuscular nicotinic receptors, and the sodium channels involved in 
the muscle action potential (Terlau et al., 1996).
Conopeptides can affect many ion channels (Olivera et al., 
1994; Terlau and Olivera, 2004). For example, μ-conotoxins are 
peptides with 22 to 25 amino acids and six cysteine residues that 
block sodium currents by acting at a site that overlaps the tetro-
dotoxin-sensitive site of sodium channels. The main effect of the 
unusually hydrophobic δ-conotoxins, which are peptides with an 
inhibitory cysteine knot motif pattern of disulfide bridges, is the 
inhibition of the fast inactivation of sodium currents, which affects 
the shape and duration of the action potential. This can lead to 
a massive electrical hyperexcitation of the complete organism. 
The κ-, κA-, and κM-conotoxins target potassium channels. The 
ω-conotoxins are peptides that target calcium channels, and these 
toxins have been widely used in neuroscience research. A character-
istic feature of the ω-conotoxins is their high content of basic amino 
acids. One peptide, ω-conotoxin MVIIA from Conus magus, has 
been developed as ziconotide (Prialt®) for the treatment of intrac-
table pain (Olivera, 2000). Other conotoxins are being studied as 
potential antinociceptive agents.
Conopeptides also target ligand-gated ion channels that medi-
ate fast synaptic transmission (Kandel et al., 2013). One major 
group of ligand-gated ion channels is activated by acetylcholine, 
serotonin, γ-aminobutyric acid, or glycine. These proteins differ 
in ligand specificity and selectivity for the permeant ion. The sec-
ond family activates the glutamate receptors, N-methyl-d-aspartate 
and kainate/AMPA receptors. A third group activates synaptic 
transmission at certain synapses via the ATP receptors. It is evi-
dent from Fig. 26-27 that there are conopeptides that target these 
three different families of ligand-gated ion channels. It is clear that 
our understanding of the structure and function of conopeptides is 
rapidly expanding and additional information regarding these toxins 
is available in some excellent reviews (Terlau and Olivera, 2004; 
Lewis et al., 2012; Kumar et al., 2015; Lebbe and Tytgat, 2016; 
Mir et al., 2016).
REPTILES
Lizards
The Gila monster (Heloderma suspectum; Fig. 26-28) and the 
beaded lizards (Heloderma horridum) are divided into five subspe-
cies. These large, corpulent, relatively slow moving, and largely 
nocturnal reptiles have few enemies other than humans. They are 
far less dangerous than is generally believed. Their venom is trans-
ferred from venom glands in the lower jaw through ducts that dis-
charge their contents near the base of the larger teeth of the lower 
jaw. The venom is then drawn up along grooves in the teeth by 
capillary action (Brown and Carmony, 1991). The venom of this 
Non-disulﬁde-rich
Disulﬁde-rich
No S-S
Single S-S
Target
Superfamily
Framework #
General
target
Conotoxin
family
S-S motif
Family
Contulakin
Conantokin
Conorfamide
Conopressin
Contryphan
Neurotensin
receptor
NMDA
receptor
Rfamide
receptor (?)
Vasopressin
receptor
(?)
O
M
A
S
T
P
I
VI/VII
III
I/II
IV
VIII
V
X
IX
XI
C-C-CC-C-C
CC-C-C-CC
CC-C-C
CC-C-C-C-C
C-C-C-C-C-C-C-C-C-C
CC-CC
CC-CPC
C-C-C-C-C-C
C-C-CC-CC-C-C
Na
channel
K
channel
Ca
channel
Na
channel
nACh
channel
K
channel
K
channel
K
channels
nACh
receptor
nACh
receptor
5-HT3
receptor
(?)
(?)
NE
transporter
Conopeptides
δ
µO
κ
κM
κA
ω
µ
ψ
α
αA
σ
χ
Figure 26-27.  Organizational diagram for Conus peptides, indicating gene superfamilies, disulfide patterns, and known pharmacologic targets. Only the super-
families of the disulfide-rich peptides are shown. (Used with permission from Terlau and Olivera [2004].)

Toxic Effects of Plants and Animals
Chapter 26
1299
lizard has serotonin, amine oxidase, phospholipase A, a bradyki-
nin-releasing substance, helodermin, gilatoxin, and low-proteolytic 
as well as high-hyaluronidase activities, but lacks phosphomono-
esterase and phosphodiesterase, acetylcholinesterase, nucleotidase, 
ATPase, deoxyribonuclease, ribonuclease, amino acid oxidase, and 
fibrinogenocoagulase activities. The clinical presentation of a helo-
dermatid bite can include algogenia, edema, hypotension, nausea, 
vomiting, weakness, and diaphoresis. No antivenin is commercially 
available. Treatment is supportive (Strimple et al., 1997).
The venom has been shown to contain a 25-kDa protein, helo-
thermine, containing 223 amino acids and four pairs of disulfide 
bonds, which appears to inhibit Ca2+ flux from the sarcoplasmic 
reticulum (Morrissette et al., 1995; Nobile et al., 1996). A fraction 
causing hemorrhage in internal organs and the eye, a glycoprotein 
of 210 amino acid residues with plasma kallikrein-like properties, 
has also been described (Datta and Tu, 1997). A 35 amino acid resi-
due, helodermin produces hypotension that is partially attributed to 
activation of glibenclamide-sensitive K+ channels (Horikawa et al., 
1998). In fact, helospectin I and II and helodermin are nonami-
dated peptides similar to vasoactive intestinal peptide that are iso-
lated from the salivary gland venom of the lizards H. suspectum 
and H. horridum, which have strong and potent vasodilator effects 
(Uddman et al., 1999).
Snakes
General Information and Classification  Snakes have a 
three-chambered heart and rely almost exclusively on an enlarged 
right lung (which spans approximately half of the body length) for 
respiration. Of the approximately 2700 known species of snakes, 
about 20% are considered to be venomous (Mebs, 2002; Mackessy, 
2010). Venomous snakes primarily belong to the following fami-
lies: Viperidae (vipers), Elapidae, Atractaspididae, and Colubridae. 
The vipers are further divided into subfamilies, an example of 
which is the Crotalinae, or pit vipers, which possess a pit between 
the eyes and nostrils that serves as a heat sensor to detect warm-
blooded animals. Some of the subfamilies are regarded as separate 
families altogether depending on the classification scheme. Overall, 
the Colubridae are considered the largest venomous family, and are 
composed of nearly 60% of all snakes. The Atractaspididae family 
is known for burrowing into the ground and possessing the ability 
to expose their fangs without opening their mouth.
Another characteristic that is often used for self-defense 
or hunting prey is mimicry (O’Shea, 2011). Scale pattern and 
coloration provide distinct boundaries in the wild and often carry 
unspoken warnings based on a reputation for snake venom toxic-
ity for a given species. If a relatively harmless species is able to 
mimic the physical characteristics, especially color patterns, of a 
well-known highly toxic counterpart, then other potential predators 
may recognize both snakes as toxic and not pursue either.
Fang anatomy and dentition are good indicators of such factors 
as snake habitat and feeding habits (O’Shea, 2011). In general, the 
anatomical structure of fangs makes it nearly impossible for snakes 
to chew their prey. The distinct curvature of the fangs is engineered 
not only for puncturing skin and delivering venom, but also for 
swallowing whole prey as well. The teeth and jaw structure are rela-
tively mobile and effectively facilitate the positioning of whole prey 
for swallowing. The skull and jaw possess an extremely high degree 
of responsiveness to stimuli. The jaw does not actually dislocate; 
however, it is able to rapidly reposition itself to capture, contain, 
and swallow prey. In addition to the capabilities of the teeth, fangs, 
and jaws, the classic fork-shaped tongue is another tool for identify-
ing prey (O’Shea, 2011).
The Viperidae fang structure is regarded as the most devel-
oped and efficient means of venom, or toxin, delivery to prey. The 
venom gland is positioned at the base of a long (about 30 mm) hol-
low retractable fang (Mebs, 2002; Weinstein et al., 2010). Muscle 
pressure on the gland determines the amount of venom released. 
Another highly developed venom delivery apparatus is character-
istic of the spitting cobras, aptly named for their ability to project 
venom via glands that protrude from the base of the fang opening 
(Mebs, 2002). Venom is carried toward the prey, or target, via force-
ful exhalation that is accompanied by a hissing sound. Toxin deliv-
ery via venom exposure is the primary mechanism by which snakes 
immobilize and kill their prey. Toxin composition and toxicity differ 
depending on the species as most venoms consist of complex mix-
tures of components that affect variable organ systems and interact 
with one another increasing the overall potency.
It is estimated that there are over 2.5 million snakebites annu-
ally, and that over 100,000 victims will die (White, 2005; Mackessy, 
2010). Information resources available to physicians on manage-
ment of snakebite victims may be found at the Clinical Toxinology 
Resources Web site—www.toxinology.com—or other appropriate 
references (Dart, 2004; Tintinalli et al., 2016; Corbett and Clark, 
2017).
Snake Venoms  These venoms are complex mixtures: proteins 
and peptides, consisting of both enzymatic and nonenzymatic com-
pounds, make up over 90% of the dry weight of the venom (Phui 
Yee et al., 2004). Snake venoms also contain inorganic cations such 
as sodium, calcium, potassium, magnesium, and small amounts of 
zinc, iron, cobalt, manganese, and nickel. The metals in snake ven-
oms are likely catalysts for metal-based enzymatic reactions. For 
example, in the case of some elapid venoms, zinc ions appear to be 
necessary for anticholinesterase activity, and calcium may play a 
role in the activation of phospholipase A and the direct lytic factor. 
Some proteases appear to be metalloproteins. Some snake venoms 
also contain carbohydrates (glycoproteins), lipids, and biogenic 
amines, such as histamine, serotonin, and neurotransmitters (cat-
echolamines and acetylcholine) in addition to positively charged 
metal ions (Russell, 2001; Mebs, 2002; Ménez, 2003; Ramos and 
Selistre-de-Araujo, 2006; McCleary and Kini, 2013; Nery et al., 
2016; Boldrini-França et al., 2017; Silva et al., 2017). The complex-
ity of snake venom components is illustrated nicely in Fig. 26-29 
(Ramos and Selistre-de-Araujo, 2006).
Actions of snake venoms can be said to be broad ranging in 
several areas (O’Shea, 2011). A simplistic approach would group 
toxin components as neurotoxins, coagulants, hemorrhagins, 
Figure 26-28.  Heloderma suspectum (Gila monster).

1300
Toxic Agents
unit V
hemolytics, myotoxins, cytotoxins, and nephrotoxins. Neurotoxins 
produce neuromuscular paralysis ranging from dizziness to ptosis; 
to ophthalmoplegia, flaccid facial muscle paralysis, and inability to 
swallow; to paralysis of larger muscle groups; and finally to paraly-
sis of respiratory muscles and death by asphyxiation. Coagulants 
may have initial procoagulant action that uses up clotting factors 
leading to bleeding. Coagulants may directly inhibit normal clotting 
at several places in the clotting cascade or via inhibition of plate-
let aggregation. In addition, some venom components may dam-
age the endothelial lining of blood vessels leading to hemorrhage. 
Bite victims may show bleeding from nose or gums, from the bite 
site, and in saliva, urine, and stools. Myotoxins can directly affect 
muscle contraction leading to paralysis or cause rhabdomyolysis 
or the breakdown of skeletal muscle. Myoglobinuria, or a dark 
brown urine, and hyperkalemia may be noted. Cytotoxic agents 
have proteolytic or necrotic properties leading to the breakdown of 
tissue. Typical signs include massive swelling, pain, discoloration, 
blistering, bruising, and wound weeping. Sarafotoxins, which are 
found only in burrowing asps of Afro-Arabia, cause coronary artery 
constriction that can lead to reduced coronary blood flow, angina, 
and myocardial infarction. Finally, nephrotoxins can cause direct 
damage to kidney structures leading to bleeding, damage to several 
parts of the nephron, tissue oxygen deprivation, and renal failure.
Enzymes  At least 26 different enzymes have been isolated from 
snake venoms, which can be a sequence of 150 to 1500 amino acids 
(Ménez, 2003). No single snake venom contains all 26 enzymes 
and some important snake venom enzymes are shown in Fig. 26-29.
Proteolytic enzymes that catalyze the breakdown of tissue pro-
teins and peptides include peptide hydrolases, proteases, endopep-
tidases, peptidases, and proteinases. Several proteolytic enzymes 
may be in a single venom. The proteolytic enzymes have molecular 
Proteins
--C protein activators
--Growth factors (NGF, VEGF)
--Inhibitors of the prothrombinase complex formation
--Lectins (C-type lectins, galactose-binding lectins)
--Precursors of bioactive peptides
--von Willebrand factor-binding proteins
--Platelet GPIb-binding proteins
--CRISPs
-Enzymes
-Nonenzymatic
-Enzymatic inhibitors
-Peptides
Inorganic
compounds
-Calcium
-Cobalt
-Cooper
-Iron
-Phosphorus
-Potassium
-Magnesium
-Manganese
-Sodium
-Zinc
Organic compounds with
low molecular mass
-Biogenic amines 
-Serotonin, histamine
-Amino acids
-Carbohydrates
-Citrate
-Nucleosides
--Toxic (cytotoxic, cardiotoxic, myotoxic, neurotoxic)
--Disintegrins
--Natriuretic
--Waglerins
--Bradykinin potentiators   -ACE inhibitors (ACEI)
--Prokinecitin-like
--CRISPs
-RGD
-Non-RGD
{
{
-Acetylcholinesterases (AChE)
-Aminotransferases
-ADPases and ATPases
-β-glucosaminidase
-CVF
-Catalases
-Phosphoesterases
-PLA2 (synovial and pancreatic-type)
-Hyaluronidases
-l-amino acid oxidases (LAO)
-NAD nucleosidases
-Proteases
-Phosphomonoesterases
-Phosphodiesterases
{
-Aspartic/Thiol proteases (traces)
-Metalloproteases
-Serinoproteases
{
Figure 26-29.  Components of snake venoms. ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; CRISP, cysteine-rich secretory protein; CVF, cobra venom factor–like 
proteins; LAO, l-amino acid oxidase; PLA2, phospholipase A2; RGD, arginine–glycine–aspartate. (Used with permission from Ramos and Selistre-de-Araujo 
[2006].)

Toxic Effects of Plants and Animals
Chapter 26
1301
weights between 20,000 and 95,000. Some are inactivated by eth-
ylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) and certain reducing agents. 
Metals appear to be intrinsically involved in the activity of certain 
venom proteases and phospholipases. The crotalid venoms exam-
ined so far appear to be rich in proteolytic enzyme activity. Viperid 
venoms have lesser amounts, whereas elapid and sea snake venoms 
have minimal, if any, proteolytic activity. Venoms that are rich in 
proteinase activity are associated with marked tissue destruction 
(Russell, 2001; Serrano, 2013).
Collagenase is a specific kind of proteinase that digests colla-
gen. This activity has been demonstrated in the venoms of a number 
of species of crotalids and viperids. The venom of Crotalus atrox 
(Fig. 26-30) digests mesenteric collagen fibers but no other pro-
teins. EDTA inhibits the collagenolytic effect, but not the arginine 
esterase effect.
Hyaluronidase cleaves internal glycoside bonds in certain 
acid mucopolysaccharides resulting in a decrease in the viscos-
ity of connective tissues. The breakdown in the hyaluronic barrier 
allows other fractions of venom to penetrate the tissues, causing 
hyaluronidase to be called “spreading factor.” The degree to which 
hyaluronidase contributes to the extent of edema produced by the 
whole venom is not known (Kemparaju et al., 2010).
Phospholipase A2 (PLA2) enzymes are widely distributed 
throughout the tissues of animals, plants, and bacteria, and have 
been well studied in snake venoms (Ohno et al., 2003; Soares and 
Giglio, 2003; Doley et al., 2010). Mammalian PLA2 enzymes are 
involved in fertilization and cell proliferation, and have been impli-
cated in respiratory ailments such as asthma, as well as skin condi-
tions such as psoriasis (Kini, 2003; Soares and Giglio, 2003). PLA2 
catalyzes the Ca2+-dependent hydrolysis of the 2-acyl ester bond, 
producing free fatty acids and lysophospholipids. However, libera-
tion of pharmacologically active products and effects independent 
of enzymatic action may contribute to their overall action. In gen-
eral, mammalian PLA2s are considered to be nontoxic and do not 
elicit the same pharmacologic effects as similar enzymes in snake 
venoms.
As of 2003, over 280 PLA2 enzymes had been classified, 
sharing at least 40% identity in their amino acid sequences (Kini, 
2003; Soares and Giglio, 2003). Many PLA2s have been sequenced. 
They have approximately 120 amino acids and 14 cysteine resi-
dues forming seven disulfide bonds. Surface residue recognition 
and covalent/noncovalent bonds stabilize complexes for receptor 
binding. Specific amino acid residues play an important role in the 
diversification and overall function of the PLA2s. Of note, histidine, 
lysine, cysteine, and methionine have been well studied for their 
contribution to enzyme structure and function (Soares and Giglio, 
2003). For example, alkylation of His48 diminishes the hydrolytic 
capabilities of certain toxins. Alkylation of amino acids has proven 
to effectively mitigate PLA2 toxicity and has been proposed as an 
antivenom treatment (Soares and Giglio, 2003). PLA2s interact with 
other toxins in the venom as well, often resulting in synergistic reac-
tions. Similarly, snake venom PLA2 enzymes can be separated into 
three major groupings depending on their pharmacologic activities: 
low-toxicity enzymes (LD50 > 1 mg/kg), high-toxicity enzymes 
(1 mg/kg > LD50 > 0.1 mg/kg), and presynaptically acting toxins 
(LD50 < 0.1 mg/kg) (Rosenberg, 1990). Although the sequences 
of these enzymes are homologous and their enzymatically active 
sites are identical, they differ widely in their pharmacologic prop-
erties. For example, taipoxin, a PLA2 enzyme from the venom of 
the Australian elapid Oxyuranus scutellatus (Fig. 26-31), has an 
intravenous LD50 in mice of 2 μg/kg, whereas the neutral PLA2 
from Naja nigricollis (Fig. 26-32) has an LD50 of 10,200 μg/kg, 
even though N. nigricollis PLA2 is enzymatically more active 
(Russell, 2001).
Arginine ester hydrolase is one of a number of noncholin-
esterases found in snake venoms. The substrate specificities are 
directed to the hydrolysis of the ester or peptide linkage, to which 
an arginine residue contributes the carboxyl group. This activity 
Figure 26-30.  Crotalus atrox (western diamondback rattlesnake).
Figure 26-31.  Oxyuranus scutellatus (Australian costal taipan).
Figure 26-32.  Naja nigricollis (black necked spitting cobra).

1302
Toxic Agents
unit V
is found in many crotalid and viperid venoms and some sea snake 
venoms, but is lacking in elapid venoms with the possible excep-
tion of Ophiophagus hannah. Some crotalid venoms contain at least 
three chromatographically separable arginine ester hydrolases. The 
bradykinin-releasing and perhaps bradykinin-clotting activities of 
some crotalid venoms may be related to esterase activity.
Two distinct classes of fibrin(ogen)olytic enzymes, the metal-
loproteinases and the serine proteinases, have been isolated from 
venom of Viperidae, Elapidae, and Crotalidae snake families 
(Swenson and Markland, 2005). These two classes of proteinases 
differ in mechanism of action and their target in fibrin(ogen), but 
ultimately they break down fibrin-rich clots and help to prevent fur-
ther clot formation. The properties of fibrolase, an α-chain fibri-
nolytic metalloproteinase from Agkistrodon contortrix contortrix 
(Fig. 26-33) venom, and β-fibrinogenase, a β-chain fibrinogenase 
from Vipera lebetina, are provided in Table 26-13. Properties of some 
additionally characterized fibrin(ogen)ases are listed in Table 26-14. 
It is apparent that there are major differences in the properties of 
these enzymes from different snakes even though they have similar 
catalytic properties. An exciting development from the research on 
these enzymes is that one specific recombinant fibrinolytic enzyme 
derived from fibrolase called alfimeprase is progressing through 
clinical trials for the treatment of peripheral arterial occlusions.
The snake venom metalloproteinases (SVMPs) are enzymes 
that disrupt the hemostatic system and they are characterized by 
their domain structure into four primary classes, PI to PIV (Fox 
and Serrano, 2010; Markland and Swenson, 2013). SVMPs are syn-
thesized in vivo as multimodular proteins that comprise a signal 
peptide, a prodomain, and a metalloprotease domain (SVMP PI). 
SVMP potency tends to increase by class and those within the PIV 
class are larger and comprise additional disulfide bonds (Calvette 
et al., 2003, 2005). Class PII proteins exhibit a C-terminal disinteg-
rin domain. The PII metalloproteases block the function of integrin 
receptors, a function that could alleviate a variety of pathological 
conditions such as inflammation, tumor angiogenesis and metasta-
sis, and thrombosis. The integrin-blocking specificity of this class 
of metalloproteins is highly dependent on the conformation of the 
inhibitory loop, and thus the placement and bonding of cysteine 
residues. More specifically, within the inhibitory loops, RGD-
containing disintegrins are specific to the class PII metalloproteases 
Table 26-14  
Biological and Physiological Properties of Specific Fibrin(ogen)ases
PROPERTIES
α-CHAIN  
FIBRINOGENASE
α-CHAIN  
FIBRINOGENASE
α-CHAIN  
FIBRINOGENASE
β-CHAIN  
FIBRINOGENASE
Genus species
Bothops neuwiedi
Agkistrodon halys
Lachesis stenophrys
Agkistrodon blomhoffi 
brevicadus
Common name
Neuwiedase
Brevilysin L6
LSF
Brevinase
Chain length
198 amino acids
203 amino acids
>200 amino acids
233 amino acids
Molecular weight
22.5 kDa
22.7 kDa
24 kDa
25.7 kDa
pI
5.9
4.8
ND
5.5
Carbohydrate content
<1%
None
Glycosylated
ND
pH optimum
7.4–8.0
8.5–9.5
ND
5.5–8.5
Abbreviation: ND, not determined.
SOURCE: Data from Swenson and Markland (2005).
Table 26-13  
Representative Properties of Some α-Chain and 
β-Chain Fibrin(ogen)ases
PROPERTIES
α-CHAIN 
FIBRINOGENASE
β-CHAIN 
FIBRINOGENASE
Common name
Fibrolase
β-Fibrinogenase
Class of enzyme
Metalloproteinase
Serine protease
Chain length
203 amino acids
232 amino acids
Molecular weight
~22.7 kDa
~26 kDa
pI
6.8
~3
Carbohydrate 
content
None
>30%
pH optimum
7.1–7.4
8.5–9.5
SOURCE: Data from Swenson and Markland (2005).
Figure 26-33.  Agkistrodon contortrix contortrix (copperhead).

Toxic Effects of Plants and Animals
Chapter 26
1303
(Calvette et al., 2003, 2005). Class PIII SVMPs exhibit the disin-
tegrin-like domain and the C-type lectin-like domain is present in 
PIV SVMPs. The metalloproteinase domain or catalytic domain is 
composed of about 215 amino acids and has metal-dependent endo-
peptidase activity (Calvette et al., 2005). SVMPs degrade proteins 
such as laminin, fibronectin, type IV collagen, and proteoglycans 
from the endothelial basal membrane; degrade fibrinogen and von 
Willebrand factor enhancing the hemorrhagic action; and inhibit 
platelet aggregation and stimulate release of cytokines (Ramos and 
Selistre-de-Araujo, 2006).
The proteolytic action of thrombin and thrombin-like snake 
venom enzymes is shown in Table 26-15. This table compares 
ancrod (from Calloselasma rhodostoma), batroxobin (from 
Bothrops moojeni), crotalase (from Crotalus adamanteus), 
gabonase (from Bitis gabonica), and the enzyme from A. contor-
trix. Table 26-16 shows the molecular size of some thrombin-like 
enzymes. A recent contribution on snake toxins, using mass spec-
trometric immunoassay and bioactive probe techniques, has been 
published by Ramirez et al. (1999a, 1999b). Considerable study 
has been given to the hemostatic properties of venoms (Markland, 
1998; Phillips et al., 2010). The hemostatically active components 
are summarized in Table 26-17.
Phosphomonoesterase (phosphatase) is widely distrib-
uted in the venoms of all families of snakes except the colubrids 
(Dhananjaya et al., 2010). It has the properties of an orthophos-
phoric monoester phosphohydrolase. There are two nonspecific 
phosphomonoesterases, and they have optimal pH at 5.0 and 8.5. 
Many types of venom contain both acid and alkaline phosphatases, 
whereas others contain one or the other.
Phosphodiesterase has been found in the venoms of all fami-
lies of poisonous snakes. The enzyme is an orthophosphoric diester 
phosphohydrolase that releases 5-mononucleotide from the poly-
nucleotide chain, and thus acts as an exonucleotidase, attacking 
DNA and RNA. More recently, it has been found that it also attacks 
derivatives of arabinose.
Table 26-15  
Comparison of Thrombin and Thrombin-Like Snake Venom Enzyme Actions
ENZYMES
ACTION ON HUMAN FIBRINOGEN
FIBRINOPEPTIDES 
RELEASED
CHAIN DEGRADATION
ACTIVATION OF 
FACTOR XIII
PROTHROMBIN 
FRAGMENT CLEAVAGE
PLATELET AGGREGATION 
AND RELEASE
Thrombin
A − B
α(A)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Thrombin-like 
enzymes
A*
α(A)† or β(B)‡
No
Yes or no§
No
Agkistrodon  
c. contortrix 
venom
B
ND
Incomplete
ND
No
Bitis gabonica 
venom
A + B
ND
Yes
ND
ND
Abbreviation: ND, not determined.
*Includes ancrod, batroxobin, crotalase, and the enzyme from T. okinavensis.
†Ancrod (batroxobin degrades α(A) chain of bovine but not human fibrinogen).
‡Crotalase.
§Fragment I released by crotalase and Agkistrodon contortrix venom, but not by ancrod or batroxobin.
SOURCE: Data from Russell (2001).
Table 26-16  
Comparison of Snake Venom Thrombin-Like Enzymes
VENOM ENZYME
MOLECULAR 
WEIGHT
CARBOHYDRATE 
CONTENT (%)
ACTIVE 
SITE 
SERINE
Agkistrodon 
contortrix 
contortrix
100,000
ND
+
Bitis gabonica
32,500
ND
ND
Bothrops 
marajoensis
31,400
High
+
Bothrops 
moojeni
36,000
5.8
+
Calloselasma 
rhodostoma
59,000
36.0
+
Crotalus 
adamantus
32,700
8.3
+
Crotalus 
horridus 
horridus
19,400
Very low
ND
Deinagkistrodon 
acutus
33,500
13.0
+
Trimeresurus 
gramineus
27,000
25.0
+
Trimeresurus 
okinavensis
34,000
6.0
+
Abbreviation: ND, not determined.
SOURCE: Data from Russell (2001).

1304
Toxic Agents
unit V
Acetylcholinesterase was first demonstrated in cobra venom 
and is widely distributed throughout the elapid venoms (Ahmed 
et al., 2010). It is also found in sea snake venoms but is totally lack-
ing in viperid and crotalid venoms. It catalyzes the hydrolysis of 
acetylcholine to choline and acetic acid. The role of the enzyme in 
snake venoms is not clear, but may function to catalyze the hydroly-
sis of acetylcholine, thereby facilitating tetanic paralysis and capture 
of prey.
RNase is present in some snake venoms in small amounts 
as the endopolynucleotidase RNase. It appears to have specificity 
toward pyrimidine-containing pyrimidyladenyl bonds in DNA. The 
optimum pH is 7 to 9 when ribosomal RNA is used as the sub-
strate. This enzyme in Naja oxiana venom has a molecular weight 
of 15,900.
DNase acts on DNA to produce predominantly trinucleotides 
or higher oligonucleotides that terminate in 3′-monoesterified phos-
phate. C. adamanteus venom contains two DNases, with optimum 
pH at 5 and 9.
5′-Nucleotidase is a common constituent of all snake venoms; 
in most instances, it is the most active phosphatase in snake venoms. 
It specifically hydrolyzes phosphate monoesters, which link with a 
5′ position of DNA and RNA. It is found in greater amounts in 
crotalid and viperid venoms than in elapid venoms. The molecular 
weight as determined from amino acid composition and gel filtra-
tion with Naja naja atra venom has been estimated at 10,000. The 
enzyme from N. naja venom is enhanced by Mg2+, is inhibited by 
Zn2+, is inactivated at 75°C at pH 7.0 or 8.4, and has an isoelectric 
point of about 8.6. The enzyme from Agkistrodon halys blomhoffi 
shows a pH optimum of 6.8 to 6.9, with activity being enhanced by 
Mg2+ and Mn2+ and inhibited by Zn2+. The enzyme has a low order 
of lethality (Russell, 2001).
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) nucleotidase has 
been found in a number of snake venoms. This enzyme catalyzes 
the hydrolysis of the nicotinamide N-ribosidic linkage of NAD, 
yielding nicotinamide and adenosine diphosphate riboside. Its 
optimum pH is 6.5 to 8.5; it is heat labile, losing activity at 60°C. 
Nucleotidases function as ADP scavengers, thereby acting as potent 
inhibitors of platelet aggregation.
l-Amino acid oxidase has been found in all snake venoms 
examined so far and it is what gives the characteristic yellow color to 
the venom. This enzyme catalyzes the oxidation of l-α-amino and 
α-hydroxy acids. This activity results from a group of homologous 
enzymes with molecular weights ranging from 85,000 to 150,000. 
The mouse intravenous LD50 of the enzyme from C. adamanteus 
venom was 9.13 mg/kg body weight, approximately four times less 
than the lethal value of the crude venom, and this enzyme had no 
effect on nerve, muscle, or neuromuscular transmission (Russell, 
2001; Tan and Fung, 2010).
Polypeptides  Snake venom polypeptides are low-molecular-
weight proteins that do not have enzymatic activity. More than 80 
polypeptides with pharmacologic activity have been isolated from 
snake venoms. Interested readers will find definitive reviews on 
these peptides in the works of Lee (1979), Eaker and Wadström 
(1980), and Gopalakrishnakone and Tan (1992). Most of the lethal 
activity of the poison of the sea snake Laticauda semifasciata was 
recovered as two toxins, erabutoxin-a and erabutoxin-b, using 
carboxymethylcellulose chromatography; 30% of the proteins 
were erabutoxins. More recently, erabutoxin-a, a short-chain cura-
mimetic, has been crystallized in monomeric and dimeric forms 
(Nastopoulos et al., 1998). Erabutoxin-b is said to be relatively 
ineffective at the mammalian neuromuscular junction (Vincent 
et al., 1998). Another curamimetic, a long-chain polypeptide, is 
α-cobratoxin, while a novel “neurotoxin” from N. naja atra, having 
61 amino acid residues and eight cystine residues, has been isolated 
by Chang et al. (1997).
Disintegrins are a family of short cysteine-rich polypeptides 
and are divided into five subgroups based on the combination of 
length and number of disulfide bonds of polypeptides. In general, 
the disintegrins comprise 40 to 100 amino acids. Their small size 
coupled with a relatively dense network of disulfide bonds contrib-
utes to the tertiary structure of these compounds and high potency 
of such small compounds. Disintegrins are released in venoms via 
proteolytic processes of PII metalloproteinases, whereas structures 
similar in form and function to disintegrins, or disintegrin-like, are 
subject to PIII processes (Calvette et al., 2005). Monomeric disin-
tegrins can vary from about 50 residues and four disulfide bonds 
as in echistatin and obtustatin to around 70 amino acid residues 
and 6 disulfide bridges as in albolabrin, barbourin, and halysin, to 
over 84 amino acids and 7 disulfide bonds for bitistatin and sal-
mosin-3. Dimeric disintegrins are about 67 amino acids long and 
contain 4 intrachain disulfide linkages and 2 between-chain bonds. 
Examples include contortrostatin and acostatin. The monomeric 
disintegrin-like chemicals contain around 100 amino acids and 8 
disulfide bonds, and include trimelysin-I, bothropasin, and jara-
rhagin (Calvette et al., 2003; Ramos and Selistre-de-Araujo, 2006).
RGD (argine–glycine–asparagine) and non-RGD-containing 
disintegrins coexist in certain venoms and exhibit affinities for 
variable ligand receptors. In such cases, one copy of the gene 
encodes for the more conserved RGD function of platelet aggre-
gation, whereas the duplicated genes have drifted toward facilitat-
ing other biological functions. Modeling and structure analysis of 
cyclic RGD peptides has implicated the importance of amino acid 
sequences on the C-terminal of the RGD sequence; furthermore, the 
physical features such as size of the integrin-binding loop contribute 
to the receptor-binding capabilities (Calvette et al., 2005). In gen-
eral, the amino acid residues of this region of the RGD sequence are 
not well conserved and are thought to play a key role in determining 
integrin receptor-binding specificity. There are additional mecha-
nisms within the C-terminal region, which include conformational 
epitopes that are utilized to alter receptor-binding capabilities.
The small basic polypeptide myotoxins are widely distrib-
uted in Crotalus snake venoms. The specific agent crotamine from 
Crotalus durissus terrificus venom induces skeletal muscle spasms 
Table 26-17  
Snake Venom Proteins Active on the Hemostatic 
System
GENERAL FUNCTIONAL 
ACTIVITY
SPECIFIC BIOLOGICAL ACTIVITY
Procoagulant
Activates factors II, V, IX, X, and 
protein C
Fibrinogen clotting
Anticoagulant
Factor IX/factor X–binding protein
Thrombin inhibitor
Phospholipase A
Fibrinolytic
Fibrin(ogen) degradation
Plasminogen activation
Vessel wall interactive
Hemorrhagic
SOURCES: Data from Markland (1998) and Russell (2001).

Toxic Effects of Plants and Animals
Chapter 26
1305
and paralysis by changing the inactivation process of sodium 
channels, which are inhibited by tetrodotoxin and potentiated by 
veratridine and grayanotoxin, leading to depolarization of the neu-
romuscular junction. Crotamine is composed of 42 amino acid resi-
dues and 3 disulfide bonds. The crotamine gene contains 1.8 kbp 
and has three exons that are separated by a long phase-1 and a 
short phase-2 intron and mapped to chromosome 2. In addition, the 
three-dimensional structure has been published, and the structural 
topology is similar to that of other three disulfide bridge containing 
peptides such as human β-defensins and scorpion sodium chan-
nel toxin. These structural properties enable crotamine to have a 
unique cell-penetrating ability allowing the toxin to concentrate in 
the nucleus by means of a probable receptor-independent mecha-
nism. It is interesting to note that topology and diversification of 
functional folds are common themes in animal venom peptides act-
ing on ion channels and other targets (Ménez, 1998; Mouhat et al., 
2004; Oguiura et al., 2006).
Toxicology  In general, the venoms of rattlesnakes and other New 
World crotalids produce alterations in the resistances and often in 
the integrity of blood vessels, changes in blood cells and blood 
coagulation mechanisms, direct or indirect changes in cardiac and 
pulmonary dynamics, and—with crotalids such as C. durrissus ter-
rificus and C. scutulatus—serious alterations in the nervous system 
and changes in respiration. In humans, the course of the poisoning 
is determined by the kind and amount of venom injected; the site 
where it is deposited; the general health, size, and age of the patient; 
the kind of treatment; and those pharmacodynamic principles noted 
earlier in this chapter. Death in humans may occur within less than 
1 hour or after several days, with most deaths occurring between 18 
and 32 hours. Hypotension or shock is the major therapeutic prob-
lem in North American crotalid bites (Russell, 2001).
Snakebite Treatment  The treatment of bites by venomous snakes 
is now so highly specialized that almost every envenomation requires 
specific recommendations. However, three general principles for 
every bite should be kept in mind: (1) snake venom poisoning is a 
medical emergency requiring immediate attention and the exercise 
of considerable judgment; (2) the venom is a complex mixture of 
substances of which the proteins contribute the major deleterious 
properties, and the only adequate antidote is the use of specific or 
polyspecific antivenom; and (3) not every bite by a venomous snake 
ends in an envenomation. Venom may not be injected. In almost 1000 
cases of crotalid bites, 24% did not end in a poisoning. The incidence 
with the bites of cobras and perhaps other elapids is probably higher. 
The reader is referred to other appropriate texts for appropriate treat-
ment of snakebites ( Dart, 2004; Singletary and Holstege, 2006; 
Smith and Bush, 2010; Tintinalli et al., 2016; Auerbach et al., 2017; 
see also Clinical Toxinology Resources, www.toxinology.com.).
Snake Venom Evolution  Considerable efforts are being 
expended to examine the complex process by which snake venom 
components are thought to have changed over the years. This 
evaluation involves tracing the ancestral roots of toxins, which is 
made even more cumbersome due to the distinct differences in the 
speed at which individual components of a venom evolve. The cur-
rent assemblage of snake venoms with regard to functionality and 
ancestral protein activity is outlined in Table 26-18 (Fry, 2005). In 
general, the toxins from ancestral proteins that were constructed of 
dense networks of cysteine cross-linkages are considered among 
the most diverse today in terms of toxicological insult.
The evolution of the PLA2s appears to be directed toward 
modifying the molecular surface in order to maximize the diversity 
of the pharmacologic properties of each isozyme component (Kini 
and Chan, 1999; Li et al., 2005). As PLA2s are not crucial for snake 
survival, mutations in some PLA2 isozymes may be ignored and 
allowed to progress, thereby expediting the evolution in comparison 
to other more critical enzymes in which mutations are monitored 
more closely and not allowed to progress. The functionality of PLA2 
isozymes can be significantly hindered by increased rates of muta-
tions within highly conserved regions of the amino acid sequence, 
which could in turn displace cysteine residues and alter the tertiary 
protein structure. However, increased mutation of a particular sub-
set of enzymes, such as the PLA2s, may be a result of a shift in 
ecological niche. A recent study (Li et al., 2005) reports a shift in 
the diet composition of the marbled sea snake as the root cause 
of decelerated evolution of the PLA2 enzymes. The diet change 
from live prey to fish eggs essentially negated the need for PLA2 
enzymes to immobilize live prey for swallowing and digestion. 
Future research could focus on the declining need for PLA2s, and on 
the altered digestive enzyme composition that has likely occurred 
as a result of diet shift.
ANTIVENOMS
Antivenoms have been produced against most medically important 
snake, spider, scorpion, and marine toxins. Animals immunized 
with venom develop a variety of antibodies to the many antigens 
Table 26-18  
Basal Bioactivities of Some Toxin Types
TOXIN
ACTIVITY
3FTx
α-Neurotoxicity, blocks nicotinic 
acetylcholine receptor
ADAM
In Viperidae venoms, proteolytic cleavage 
of C-terminal domains results in direct 
fibrinolytic activity, liberation of disintegrins, 
which inhibit platelet aggregation
Cobra 
venom factor
Causes unregulated activation of complement 
cascade, hemolysis, and cytolysis
Crotamine
Myonecrosis, modifies voltage-gated sodium 
channels
Factor V
In taipan and brown snake venom, combines 
with toxic form of factor X to convert 
prothrombin to thrombin
Kallikrein
Increases vascular permeability, stimulates 
inflammation, and reduces blood pressure
Kunitz
Inhibits plasmin and thrombin and other serine 
proteases, blocks l-type calcium channels
l-Amino 
oxidase
Induces apoptosis, decreases platelet 
aggregation, inhibits blood factor IX
PLA2
Releases arachidonic acid from phospholipids, 
resulting in inflammation and tissue 
destruction
VEGF
Increases permeability of vascular bed causing 
hypotension and shock
Whey acidic 
proteins
Inhibit leukoproteinases
SOURCE: Data from Fry (2005).

1306
Toxic Agents
unit V
in the venom. Antivenom consists of venom-specific antisera 
or antibodies concentrated from immune serum to the venom. 
Antisera contain neutralizing antibodies: one antigen (monospe-
cific) or several antigens (polyspecific). Monovalent antivenoms 
have a high neutralization capacity, which is desirable against the 
venom of a specific animal. Polyvalent antisera are typically used 
to cover several venoms, such as snakes from a geographic region. 
Polyvalent preparations usually require higher doses or volumes 
than monovalent antivenoms. Neutralization capacity of antivenom 
is highly variable as there are no enforced international standards. 
Antivenom may cross-react with venoms from distantly related 
species and may not react with venom from the intended species. 
Nevertheless, in general, the antibodies bind to the venom mole-
cules, rendering them ineffective.
Antivenoms are available in several forms: intact IgG anti-
bodies or fragments of IgG such as F(ab)2 and Fab. The molecu-
lar weight of the intact IgG is about 150,000, whereas that of Fab 
is approximately 50,000. The molecular size of IgG prevents its 
renal excretion and produces a volume of distribution much smaller 
than that of Fab. The elimination half-life of IgG in the blood is 
approximately 50 hours. Its ultimate fate is not known, but most 
IgG is probably taken up by the reticuloendothelial system and 
degraded with the antigen attached. Fab fragments have an elimi-
nation half-life of about 17 hours, and are small enough to permit 
renal excretion.
All antivenom products may produce hypersensitivity reac-
tions. Type I (immediate) hypersensitivity reactions are caused by 
antigen cross-linking of endogenous IgE bound to mast cells and 
basophils. Binding of antigen by a mast cell may cause the release 
of histamine and other mediators, producing an anaphylactic reac-
tion. Once initiated, anaphylaxis may continue despite discontinu-
ation of antivenom administration. Type III hypersensitivity (serum 
sickness) may develop several days after antivenom administration. 
In these cases, antigen–antibody complexes are deposited in dif-
ferent areas of the body, often producing inflammatory responses 
in the skin, joints, kidneys, and other tissues. Fortunately, these 
reactions are rarely serious. The risks of anaphylaxis should always 
be considered when one is deciding whether to administer antive-
nom, and thus antivenom should be given only by intravenous infu-
sion under medical supervision (Heard et al., 1999; Russell, 2001; 
Mebs, 2002; Dart, 2004; Tintinalli et al., 2016; Clinical Toxinology 
Resources, n.d.).
POTENTIAL CLINICAL APPLICATION 
OF VENOMS
Animal venoms are being used as research and clinical tools based 
on their high affinity for specific targets and well-studied pharma-
cologic properties (Ménez, 1998, 2003; Dimarcq and Hunneyball, 
2003; Escoubas and Rash, 2004; Cherniack, 2010, 2011; Mayer 
et al., 2010; McCleary and Kini, 2013). Toxin specificities for 
receptors and channels that facilitate the interface and coordination 
of neuromuscular activity are utilized and manipulated to study, 
model, diagnose, and sometimes treat acute and degenerative con-
ditions. On closer examination of α-bungarotoxin and candoxin 
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor specificity, plans are under way to 
utilize the reversible and irreversible receptor binding in muscular 
and neuronal tissues, respectively, in Alzheimer patients (Phui Yee 
et al., 2004). In addition to treating neurological diseases, specific 
α-toxins (longer chained) are also studied for their antiangiogenic 
capabilities in treating malignant tumor growth in patients suffering 
from small cell lung carcinoma (Tsetlin and Hucho, 2004). In cases 
such as this, there is an inherent trade-off between promoting some 
degree of neurological deficit in light of combating tumor growth. 
Toxins such as the snake venom thrombin–like enzymes are valu-
able tools in both research and therapeutic applications. Similarly, 
fibrin(ogen)olytic enzymes that break down fibrin-rich clots pre-
venting further clot formation may be useful as controls in blood 
clotting research or to treat heart attacks and strokes (Castro et al., 
2004; Marsh and Williams, 2005; Swenson and Markland, 2005). 
To facilitate research, the complement-activating cobra venom fac-
tor has been produced by recombinant techniques (Vogel et al., 
2004). These pharmazooticals include reptilase-R, bothrocethin, 
stypven, ecarin, and protac.
Active research efforts have noted that animal venoms contain 
components that can reduce pain, can selectively kill specific can-
cers, may reduce the incidence of stroke via effects on blood coag-
ulability, and function as antibiotics. Numerous compounds have 
been isolated from marine animals (Newman et al., 2009; Bingham 
et al., 2010), including the anticancer agents plinabulin, tasidotin, 
bryostatin 1, hemiasterlin, and salinosporamide A (also known as 
marizomib). The compound epibatidin comes from the skin of the 
South American frog, Epipedobates tricolor, and a synthetic deriva-
tive ABT-594 appears to be more effective than morphine without 
being addictive. TM 601 is derived from the Israeli yellow scorpion 
and attacks malignant brain tumors called glioma tumors respon-
sible for two-thirds of the cases of brain cancer, without harming 
healthy cells. ET 743, which comes from sea squirts, is being tested 
for treatment of ovarian cancer and soft tissue sarcoma. Ancrod is 
an anticoagulant with potential to prevent cell damage and death 
when someone suffers a stroke. The active ingredient comes from 
the venom of the Malaysian pit viper. In Germany, where Ancrod 
has been marketed for a number of years, a specially built facility 
houses about 3000 snakes. Several other sources of anticoagulants 
are being examined. A substance called magainin 2, which comes 
from the skin of frogs, is an effective antibiotic to which bacteria do 
not appear to develop resistance. The clotting enzyme batroxobin is 
an ingredient in reptilase and has been used in the development of 
fibrin glue, which is used in surgery to stop diffuse bleeding from 
liver or lung by covering the surface with a thin layer of fibrin.
Another major area of investigation and success involves 
the venom components that act as enzyme inhibitors. In particu-
lar, venom peptides from Bothrops jararaca were initially called 
bradykinin-potentiating peptides and lowered blood pressure. After 
further research, it became clear that these peptides were inhibitors 
of angiotensin I–converting enzyme, and chemical modification 
leads to orally active agents such as captopril.
Venom toxins can also be used as a component of the toxin–
receptor–antibody complex for diagnosis of autoimmune disorders 
(Ménez, 2003). In addition to providing a promising means for 
researching and treating muscular and neurological diseases and 
cancer, work is being conducted on designing methods by which to 
consistently reconstruct and conform the overall toxin structure to 
bind to a specific protein, such as HIV (Ménez, 2003).
The venoms of the spider Phoneutria nigriventer and the yel-
low South American scorpion Tityus serrulatus are known to cause 
priapism. While erectile dysfunction is a growing health problem, 
the use of animal venoms and toxins as pharmacological tools could 
not only illuminate the mechanisms involved in erectile function, 
but also potentially create a possible model for new drugs to treat 
erectile dysfunction (Nunes et al., 2013).
It has been shown that leeches, earthworms, helminths, snails, 
centipedes, spiders, and ticks all produce substances with potential 
clinical applications, such as osteoarthritis, deep vein thrombosis, 
antimicrobial action, inflammatory bowel disease, analgesia, and 
hyperlipidemia (Cherniack, 2011). In particular, approximately 14

Toxic Effects of Plants and Animals
Chapter 26
1307
anticoagulant chemicals have been isolated from the leech, includ-
ing hirudin and lepirudin, apyrase, collagenase, hyaluronidase, and 
eglin (Lubenow and Greinacher, 2002; Massart et al., 2009). Tick 
saliva contains proteins that inhibit human kallikrein and factors 
XIa and XIIa (Mazzuca et al., 2007). Earthworms contain proteins 
with anticoagulant, antimicrobial, and anti-inflammatory bowel dis-
ease properties (Joo et al., 2009; Reddy and Fried, 2009; Ruyssers et 
al., 2010). Bees can provide honey, royal jelly, and propolis, which 
all have antimicrobial properties, and the venom contains apamin 
and mellitin, which have anti-inflammatory properties. Additional 
details of the clinical applications of animal saliva and venom may 
be found in Cherniack (2010, 2011).
There have been numerous success stories: captopril, an 
angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor for hypertension was pat-
terned after a Brazilian viper venom peptide (Koh and Kini, 2012); 
ziconotide, a conotoxin from Conus magus, is used to treat pain 
(Webster and Fakata, 2005); and exenatide from Gila monster 
venom is used in type 2 diabetes treatment (Furman, 2012). Much 
exciting work will no doubt lead to other new therapeutic com-
pounds as the exploration and harvest of natural products continues 
(Harvey, 2014; Verdes et al., 2016)
Additional work is being conducted on animals such as the mon-
goose, hedgehog, and opossum, which all embody a high level of 
resistance to snakebites. Blood from these animals contains proteins 
between 400 and 700 amino acids long that inhibit hemorrhagins. The 
exact mechanism of the many components in animal venoms that pro-
duce toxicity or resistance to certain toxins has yet to be determined. 
Further research will require a multidisciplinary approach involving 
techniques from parasitology, chemistry, molecular biology, genom-
ics, proteomics, physiology, pharmacology, and toxicology.
CONCLUSION
The myriad toxins produced by plants and animals range from 
the relative simplicity of small chemicals to the exceedingly com-
plex proteinaceous toxins. The effects of these compounds are 
amazingly diverse and can range from local irritation to systemic 
destruction and death. The interplay between toxin and organism is 
often difficult to study due to difficulty involved in recreating the 
interaction in the laboratory. One must also not forget the interac-
tions that arise between toxins and substances already present in 
the organism. These interactions can act to worsen or reduce the 
poisonous outcome. As laboratory techniques become more sophis-
ticated and new methods are developed, research concerning toxins 
and their effects will continue to grow.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The editor and author recognize the contributions of previous 
authors of this chapter: chapters on plant: John M. Kingsburg (1st 
and 2nd editions), Kenneth F. Lampe (3rd and 4th editions), and 
Stata Norton (5th to 7th editions); chapters on animal: Frederick 
W. Oehme, John F. Brown, and Murray E. Fowler (1st and 2nd 
editions), Findlay E. Russell (3rd to 6th editions), and Findlay E. 
Russell and Richard C. Dart (4th edition).
REFERENCES
Aalto-Korte K, Lauerma A, Alanko K. Occupational allergic contact 
dermatitis from lichens in present-day Finland. Contact Dermatitis. 
2005;52:36–38.
Abbott AJ, Holoubek CG, Martin RA. Inhibition of Na+,K+-ATPase by 
the cardenolide 6′-O-(E-4-hydroxycinnamoyl) desglucouzarin. Biochem 
Biophys Res Commun. 1998;251:256–259.
Adams ME. Agatoxins: ion channel specific toxins from the American fun-
nel web spider, Agelenopsis aperta. Toxicon. 2004;43:509–525.
Ahmed M, Rocha JBT, Morsch VM, Schetinger MRC. Snake venom ace-
tylcholinesterase. In: Mackessy SP, ed. Handbook of Venoms and Toxins 
of Reptiles. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2010:207.
Alonso-Amelot ME, Avendano M. Human carcinogenesis and bracken 
fern: a review of the evidence. Curr Med Chem. 2002;9:675–686.
Altamirano JC, Gratz SR, Wolnik KA. Investigation of pyrrolizidine alka-
loids and their N-oxides in commercial comfrey-containing products and 
botanical materials by liquid chromatography electrospray ionization 
mass spectrometry. JAOAC Int. 2005;88:406–412.
Alvarez-Diez TM, Zheng J. Mechanism-based inactivation of cytochrome 
P450 3A4 by 4-ipomeanol. Chem Res Toxicol. 2004;17:150–157.
Andre E, Campi B, Trevisani M, et al. Pharmacological characterisation of 
the plant sesquiterpenes polygodial and drimanial as vanilloid receptor 
agonists. Biochem Pharmacol. 2006;71:1248–1254.
Ansari KM, Chauhan LK, Dhawan A, et al. Unequivocal evidence of geno-
toxic potential of argemone oil in mice. Int J Cancer. 2004;112:890–895.
Arilla MC, Gonzalez-Rioja R, Ibarrola I, et al. A sensitive monoclo-
nal antibody-based enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay to quantify 
Parietaria judaica major allergens, Par j1 and Par j2. Clin Exp Allergy. 
2006;36:87–93.
Aslani MR, Movassaghi AR, Mhori M, et al. Clinical and pathological 
aspects of experimental oleander (Nerium oleander) toxicosis in sheep. 
Vet Res Commun. 2004;28:609–616.
Auerbach PS, Cushing TA, Harris NS. Auerbach’s Wilderness Medicine. 
7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier, 2017.
Auger C, Marty A. Heterogeneity of functional synaptic parameters among 
single release sites. Neuron. 1997;19:139–150.
Baer BR, Rettie AE, Henne KR. Bioactivation of 4-ipomeanol by CYP4B1: 
adduct characterization and evidence for an enedial intermediate. Chem 
Res Toxicol. 2005;18:855–864.
Baku A. Mast cell degranulating (MCD) peptide: a prototypic peptide in 
allergy and inflammation. Peptides. 1999;20:415–420.
Ball KR, Kowdley KV. A review of Silybum marianum (milk this-
tle) as a treatment for alcoholic liver disease. J Clin Gastroenterol. 
2005;39:520–528.
Bandyopadhyay PK, Garrett JE, Shetty RP, et al. γ-Carboxylation: an 
extra-cellular post-translational modification that antedates the diver-
gence of molluscs, arthropods and chordates. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2002;99:1264–1269.
Bantel H, Engels IH, Voelter W, et al. Mistletoe lectin activates caspase-8/
FLICE independently of death receptor signaling and enhances anti- 
cancer drug-induced apoptosis. Cancer Res. 1999;59:2038–2090.
Barceloux DG. Medical Toxicology of Natural Substances: Foods, Fungi, 
Medicinal Herbs, Plants and Venomous Animals. New York: Wiley; 2008.
Barker SC, Murrell A. Systematics and evolution of ticks with a list of valid 
genus and species names. Parasitology. 2004;129:S15–S36.
Bauer C, Oppel T, Rueff F, et al. Anaphylaxis to viscotoxins of mistletoe 
(Viscum album) extracts. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2005;94:86–89.
Beattie PE, Dawe RS, Traynor NJ, et al. Can St. John’s wort (Hypericin) 
ingestion enhance the erythremal response during high-dose ultraviolet 
A1 therapy? Br J Dermatol. 2005;153:1187–1191.
Bechinger B. Structure and functions of channel-forming peptides: 
magainins, cecropins, melittin and alamethicin. J Membr Biol. 
1997;156:197–211.
Beier RC, Norman JO, Reagor JC, et al. Isolation of the major component in 
white snakeroot that is toxic after microsomal activation: possible expla-
nation of sporadic toxicity of white snakeroot plants and extracts. Nat 
Toxins. 1993;1:286–293.
Benjamin DR. Mushroom poisoning in infants and children. J Toxicol Clin 
Toxicol. 1992;30:13–22.
Bingham J-P, Mitsunaga E, Bergeron ZL. Drugs from slugs—past, pres-
ent and future perspectives of conotoxin research. Chem Biol Interact. 
2010;183:1–18.
Blanc P, Liu D, Juarez C, et al. Cough in hot pepper workers. Chest. 
1991;99:27–32.
Blanco C, Diaz-Perales A, Collada C, et al. Class I chitinases as poten-
tial panallergens involved in the latex-fruit syndrome. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol. 1999;103(pt 1):507–513.

1308
Toxic Agents
unit V
Blodgett DJ. Fescue toxicosis. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract. 
2001;17:567–577.
Blumenthal MN, Langefeld CD, Barnes KC, et al. A genome-wide search 
for quantitative trait loci contributing to variations in seasonal pollen 
reactivity. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2006;117:79–85.
Boldrini-França J, Cologna CT, Pucca MB, et al. Minor snake venom pro-
teins: structure, function and potential applications. Biochim Biophys 
Acta. 2017;1861:824–838.
Bolognesi A, Bortolotti M, Maiello S, et al. Ribosome-inactivating proteins 
from plants: a historical overview. Molecules. 2016. 21:1627–1646.
Bondan C, Soares JC, Cecim M, et al. Oxidative stress in the erythrocytes 
of cattle intoxicated with Senecio sp. Vet Clin Pathol. 2005;34:353–357.
Bouget J, Bousser J, Pats B, et al. Acute renal failure following col-
lective intoxication by Cortinarius orellanus. Intensive Care Med. 
1990;16:506–510.
Bromley J, Hughes BG, Leong DC, et al. Life-threatening interaction 
between complementary medicines: cyanide toxicity following ingestion 
of amygdalin and vitamin C. Ann Pharmacother. 2005;39:1566–1569.
Brown DE, Carmony NB. Gila Monster. Silver City, NM: High Lonesome 
Books; 1991.
Bunch TD, Panter KD, James LK. Ultrasound studies of the effects of cer-
tain poisonous plants on uterine function and fetal development in live-
stock. J Anim Sci. 1992;70:1639–1643.
Burke JW, Doskotch RW. High field I H- and 13 C-NMR assignments of 
grayanotoxins I, IV and XIV isolated from Kalmia angustifolia. J Nat 
Prod. 1990;53:131–137.
Bush SP, King BO, Norris RL, et al. Centipede envenomation. Wilderness 
Environ Med. 2001;12:93–99.
Caksen H, Odabas D, Akabayram S, et al. Deadly nightshade (Atropa bel-
ladonna) intoxication: an analysis of 49 children. Hum Exp Toxicol. 
2003;22:665–668.
Calvette JJ, Marcinkiewicz C, Monleon D, et al. Snake venom disintegrins: 
evolution of structure and function. Toxicon. 2005;45:1063–1074.
Calvette JJ, Moreno-Murciano MP, Theakston RDG, et al. Snake venom 
disintegrins: novel dimeric disintegrins and structural diversification by 
disulfide bond engineering. Biochem J. 2003;372:725–734.
Cameron P, Jelinek G, Kelly A-M, Murray L, Brown AFT, Little M. 
Textbook of Adult Emergency Medicine. 4th ed. New York: Churchill 
Livingstone; 2015.
Cappell MS, Hassan T. Gastrointestinal and hepatic effects of Amanita 
phalloides ingestion. J Clin Gastroenterol. 1992;15:225–228.
Casteel SW, Johnson GC, Wagstaff DJ. Aesculus glabra intoxication in 
cattle. Vet Hum Toxicol. 1992;34:55.
Casteel SW, Wagstaff DJ. Rhododendron macrophyllum poisoning in a 
group of sheep and goats. Vet Hum Toxicol. 1989;31:176–177.
Castro HC, Zingali RB, Albuquerque MG, et al. Snake venom thrombin-
like enzymes: from retilase to now. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2004;61:843–856.
Cavalieri M, D’Urso D, Lassa A, et al. Characterization and some properties 
of the venom gland extract of a theridiid spider (Steatoda paykulliana) 
frequently mistaken for black widow spider (Latrodectus tredecimgut-
tatus). Toxicon. 1987;25:965–974.
Cavassani KA, Aliberti JC, Dias ARV, et al. Tick saliva inhibits differentia-
tion, maturation and function of murine bone-marrow derived dendritic 
cells. Immunology. 2005;114:235–245.
Ceccarelli B, Hurlbut WP. Ca2+-dependent recycling of synaptic vesicles at 
the frog neuromuscular junction. J Cell Biol. 1980;87:297–303.
Ceha LJ, Presperin C, Young E, et al. Anticholinergic toxicity from night-shade 
berry poisoning responsive to physostigmine. J Emerg Med. 1997;15:65–69.
Chan TYF, Tomlinson B, Crichley JAJH, et al. Herb-induced aconitine poi-
soning presenting as tetraplegia. Vet Hum Toxicol. 1994;36:133–134.
Chang LS, Chou YC, Lin SR, et al. A novel neurotoxin, cobrotoxin b, from 
Naja naja atra venom: purification, characterization and gene organiza-
tion. J Biochem. 1997;122:1252–1259.
Chen CY, Yen CY, Wang HR, et al. Tenuifolide B from Cinnamomum 
tenuifolium stem selectively inhibits proliferation of oral cancer cells 
via apoptosis, ROS generation, mitochondrial depolarization, and DNA 
damage. Toxins. 2016;8:319.
Cherniack EP. Bugs as drugs, part 1: insects. The “new” alternative medi-
cine for the 21st century? Altern Med Rev. 2010;15:124–135.
Cherniack EP. Bugs as drugs, part two: worms, leeches, scorpions, snails, 
ticks, centipedes and spiders. Altern Med Rev. 2011;16:50–58.
Chesnov S, Bigler L, Hesse M. The acylpolyamines from the venom of the 
spider Agelenopsis aperta. Helv Chim Acta. 2001;84:2178–2197.
Christensen LP, Kristiansen K. Isolation and quantification of tuliposides 
and tulipalins in tulips (Tulipa) by high-performance liquid chromatogra-
phy. Contact Dermatitis. 1999;40:300–309.
Clinical Toxinology Resources. Department of Toxinology, Women’s 
Children’s Hospital, Adelaide, Australia. n.d. Available at: www.toxinol-
ogy.com.
Cohen E, Quistad GB. Cytotoxic effects of arthropod venoms on various 
cultured cells. Toxicon. 1998;36:353–358.
Cooper MK, Porter JA, Young RE, et al. Teratogen-mediated inhibition of 
target tissue response to Shh signalling. Science. 1998;280:603–1610.
Corbett B, Clark RF. North American snake envenomation. Emerg Med 
Clin North Am. 2017;35:339–354.
Corzo G, Adachi-Akahane S, Nagao T, et al. Novel peptides from assassin 
bugs (Hemiptera: Reduviidae): isolation, chemical and biological charac-
terization. FEBS Lett. 2001;499:256–261.
Corzo G, Escoubas P. Pharmacologically active spider peptide toxins. Cell 
Mol Life Sci. 2003;60:2409–2426.
Coyle CM, Panaccione DG. An ergot alkaloid biosynthesis gene and 
clustered hypothetical genes from Aspergillus fumigatus. Appl Environ 
Microbiol. 2005;71:3112–3118.
Craig AG, Bandyopadhyay P, Olivera BM. Post-translationally modified 
peptides from Conus venoms. Eur J Biochem. 1999;264:271–275.
Craik DJ, Daly NL, Waine C. The cysteine knot motif in toxins and implica-
tions for drug design. Toxicon. 2001;39:43–60.
Crause JC, Vershoor JA, Coetzee J, et al. The localization of paralysis toxin 
in granules and nuclei of prefed female Rhipicephalus evertsi evertsi tick 
salivary gland cells. Exp Appl Acarol. 1993;17:357–363.
Crawford L, Kocan RM. Steroidal alkaloid toxicity to fish embryos. Toxicol 
Lett. 1993;66:175–181.
Dart RC, ed. Medical Toxicology. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott; 
2004.
Das M, Ansari KM, Dhawan A, et al. Correlation of DNA damage in epi-
demic dropsy patients to carcinogenic potential of argemone oil and iso-
lated sanguinarine alkaloid in mice. Int J Cancer. 2005;117:709–717.
Das S, Bannerjee G, DePonte K, et al. Salp25D, an Ixodes scapularis anti-
oxidant, is 1 of 14 immunodominant antigens in engorged tick salivary 
glands. J Infect Dis. 2001;184:1056–1064.
Datta G, Tu AT. Structure and other chemical characterizations of gila toxin, 
a lethal toxin from lizard venom. J Pept Res. 1997;50:443–450.
de Haro L, Prost N, David JM, et al. Syndrome sudorien ou muscarinien. 
Presse Med. 1999;28:1069–1070.
Dedov VN, Mondadi S, Armati PJ, et al. Capsaicin-induced depolarisation 
of mitochondria in dorsal root ganglion neurons is enhanced by vanilloid 
receptors. Neuroscience. 2001;103:219–226.
del Carmen Mendez M, dos Santos RS, Riet-Correa F. Intoxication by 
Xanthium cavanillesii in cattle and sheep in southern Brazil. Vet Hum 
Toxicol. 1998;40:144–147.
Demsey CE. The actions of melittin on membranes. Biochim Biophys Acta. 
1990;1031:143–161.
Dhananjaya BL, Vishwanath BS, D’Souza CJM. Snake venom nucle-
ases, nucleotidases and phosphomonoesterases. In: Mackessy SP, ed. 
Handbook of Venoms and Toxins of Reptiles. Boca Raton, FL: CRC 
Press; 2010:155.
Di R, Tumer NE. Pokeweed anitviral protein: its cytotoxicity mechanism 
and applications in plant disease resistance. Toxins. 2015;7:755–772.
Dimarcq J-L, Hunneyball I. Pharma-entomology: when bugs become drugs. 
Drug Discov Today. 2003;8:107–110.
Ding X, Lichti K, Staudinger JL. The mycoestrogen zearalenone induces 
CYP3A through activation of the pregnane X receptor. Toxicol Sci. 
2006;91:448–455.
Doley R, Zhou X, Kini RM. Snake venom phospholipase A2 enzymes. In: 
Mackessy SP, ed. Handbook of Venoms and Toxins of Reptiles. Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2010:173.
Dreyer F. Peptide toxins and potassium channels. Rev Physiol Biochem 
Pharmacol. 1990;115:93–116.

Toxic Effects of Plants and Animals
Chapter 26
1309
Durand R, Figueredo JM, Mendoza E. Intoxication in cattle from Cestrum 
diurnum. Vet Hum Toxicol. 1999;41:26–27.
Eaker D, Wadström T, eds. Natural Toxins. Elmsford, NY: Pergamon Press; 
1980.
Escoubas P. Mass spectrometry in toxinology: a 21st-century technology 
for the study of biopolymers from venoms. Toxicon. 2006;47:609–613.
Escoubas P, Diochot S, Corzo G. Structure and pharmacology of spider 
venom neurotoxins. Biochimie. 2000;82:893–907.
Escoubas P, Rash L. Tarantulas: eight-legged pharmacists and combinato-
rial chemists. Toxicon. 2004;43:555–574.
Fatehi M, Rowan EG, Harvey AL, et al. Polyamine FTX-3.3 and poly-
amine amide sFTX-3.3 inhibit presynaptic calcium currents and acetyl-
choline release at mouse motor nerve terminals. Neuropharmacology. 
1997;36:185–194.
Ferreras JM, Citores L, Iglesias R, et al. Use of ribosome-inactivating pro-
teins from Sambusus for the construction of immunotoxins and conju-
gates for cancer therapy. Toxins. 2011;3:420–441.
Forsyth CS, Speth RC, Wecker L, et al. Comparison of nicotinic receptor 
binding and biotransformation of coniine in the rat and chick. Toxicol 
Lett. 1996;89:175–183.
Fox JW, Serrano SMT. Snake venom metalloproteinases. In: Mackessy SP. 
ed. Handbook of Venoms and Toxins of Reptiles. Boca Raton, FL: CRC 
Press; 2010:95.
Francischetti IBM, Mather TN, Ribeiro JMC. Cloning of a salivary gland 
metalloprotease and characterization of gelatinase and fibrino(gen)lytic 
activities in the saliva of the lyme disease tick vector Ixodes scapularis. 
Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003;305:869–875.
Frasca T, Brett AS, Yoo SD. Mandrake toxicity. Arch Intern Med. 
1997;157:2007–2009.
Frohn A, Frohn C, Steuhl KP, et al. Wolfsmilchveratzung. Ophthalmology. 
1993;90:58–61.
Fry BG. From genome to “venome”: molecular origin and evolution of 
the snake venom proteome inferred from phylogenetic analysis of toxin 
sequences and related body proteins. Genome Res. 2005;15:403–420.
Fuchs H, Weng A, Gilabert-Oriol R. Augmenting the efficacy of immuno-
toxins and other targeted protein toxins by endosomal escape enhancers. 
Toxins. 2016;8:200–228.
Fujimoto S, Mori M, Tsushima H, et al. Capsaicin-induced, capsaze-
pine-insensitive relaxation of the guinea-pig ileum. Eur J Pharmacol. 
2006;530:144–151.
Fung SY, Tan NH, Sim SM, et al. Mucuna pruriens seed extract pretreat-
ment protects against cardiorespiratory and neuromuscular depressant 
effects of Naja sputatrix (Javan spitting cobra) venom in rats. Indian J 
Exp Biol. 2011;49:254–259.
Furman BL. The development of Byetta (exenatide) from the venom of the 
Gila monster as an anti-diabetic agent. Toxicon. 2012;59:464–471.
Gaffield W, Keeler RF. Implications of C-5, C-6 unsaturation as a key 
structural factor in steroidal alkaloid-induced mammalian teratogenesis. 
Experientia. 1993;49:922–924.
Gertsch WJ. American Spiders. 2nd ed. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold; 
1979.
Giavina-Bianchi PF Jr, Castro FF, Machado ML, et al. Occupational respi-
ratory allergic disease induced by Passiflora alata and Rhamnus purshi-
ana. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 1997;79:449–454.
Gilabert-Oriol R, Weng A, von Mallinckrodt B, et al. Immunotoxins con-
structed with ribosome-inactivating proteins and their enhancers. Curr 
Pharm Des. 2014;20:6584–6643.
Gmelin R. Isolierung von Willardiin [3-(1-uracyl)-l-alanin] aus den samen 
von Acacia millefolia, Acacia lemmoni und Mimosa asperata. Acta Chem 
Scand. 1961;15:1188–1189.
Goldin AL. Resurgence of sodium channel research. Annu Rev Physiol. 
2001;63:871–894.
Gomes A, Datta A, Sarangi B, et al. Isolation, purification and pharmacody-
namics of a toxin from the venom of centipede, Scolopendra subspinipes 
dehaani Brandt. Ind J Exp Biol. 1983;21:203–207.
Gopalakrishnakone P, Tan CK, eds. Recent Advances in Toxinology 
Research. Singapore: National University of Singapore; 1992.
Grishin E. Polypeptide neurotoxins from spider venoms. Eur J Biochem. 
1999;264:276–280.
Grishin EV. Black widow spider toxins: the present and the future. Toxicon. 
1998;36:1693–1701.
Groenewoud GC, de Groot H, van Wijk RG. Impact of occupational and 
inhalant allergy on rhinitis-specific quality of life in employees of bell 
pepper greenhouses in the Netherlands. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 
2006;96:92–97.
Gude M, Hausen MD, Heitsch H, et al. An investigation of the irritant 
and allergenic properties of daffodils (Narcissus pseudonarcissus, 
Amaryllidaceae): a review of daffodil dermatitis. Contact Dermatitis. 
1988;19:1–10.
Guerrero B, Perales J, Gil San Juan A, Arocha-Pinango CL. Effect on plate-
let FXIII and partial characterization of Lonomin V, a proteolytic enzyme 
from Lonomia achelous caterpillars. Thromb Res. 1999;93:243–252.
Gurung NK, Rankens DL, Shelby RA. In vitro ruminal disappearance of 
fumonisin B1 and its effects on in vitro dry matter disappearance. Vet 
Hum Toxicol. 1999;41:196–199.
Haarmann T, Machado C, Lubbe Y, et al. The ergot alkaloid gene cluster in 
Claviceps purpurea: extension of the cluster sequence and intra species 
evolution. Phytochemistry. 2005;66:1312–1320.
Habermann E. Apamin. Pharmacol Ther. 1984;25:255–270.
Hall AC, Turcotte CM, Betts BA, et al. Modulation of human GABAA and 
glycine receptor currents by menthol and related monoterpenoids. Eur J 
Pharmacol. 2004;506:9–16.
Han D, Matsumaru K, Rettori D, et al. Usnic acid-induced necrosis of cul-
tured mouse hepatocytes: inhibition of mitochondrial function and oxida-
tive stress. Biochem Pharmacol. 2004;67:439–451.
Harvey AL. Toxins and drug discovery. Toxicon. 2014;92:193–200.
Hausen BM, Prater E, Shubert H. The sensitizing capacity of Alstroemeria 
cultivars in man and guinea pig. Contact Dermatitis. 1983;9:46–54.
Heard K, O’Malley GF, Dart RC. Antivenom therapy in the Americas 
[review]. Drugs. 1999;58:5–15.
Heinen TE, Gorini da Veiga AB. Arthropod venoms and cancer. Toxicon. 
2011;57:495–511.
Hill NS, Thompson FN, Dawe DL, et al. Antibody binding by circulat-
ing ergot alkaloids in cattle grazing tall fescue. Am J Vet Res. 1994;55: 
419–424.
Hirschwehr R, Heppner C, Spitzauer S, et al. Allergens, IgE mediators, 
inflammatory mechanisms. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1998;101:196–206.
Hoffman DR. Hymenoptera venom allergens. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 
2006;30:109–128.
Holz GG, Habener JF. Black widow spider alpha-latrotoxin: a presynaptic 
neurotoxin that shares structural homology with the glycogen-like pep-
tide-1 family of insulin secretagogic hormones. Comp Biochem Physiol 
B Biochem Mol Biol. 1998;121:177–184.
Hooper D, Lirazon MB, Schoenfeld R, et al. Post-translational modification: 
a two dimensional strategy for molecular diversity of Conus peptides. In: 
Fields GB, Tam JP, Barany G, eds. Peptides for the New Millennium: 
Proceedings of the Sixteenth American Peptide Symposium. Dordrecht, 
The Netherlands: Kluwer; 2000.
Horikawa N, Kataha K, Watanabe N, et al. Glibenclamide-sensitive hypo-
tension produced by helodermin assessed in the rat. Biol Pharm Bull. 
1998;21:1290–1293.
Huan J-Y, Mironda CL, Buhler DR, et al. Species differences in the hepatic 
microsomal enzyme metabolism of the pyrrolizidine alkaloids. Toxicol 
Lett. 1998;99:127–137.
Hurlbut WP, Iezzi N, Fesce R, et al. Correlation between quantal secre-
tion and vesicle loss at the frog neuromuscular junction. J Physiol. 
1990;425:501–526.
Hyde EG, Carmichael WW. Amatoxin-a(s), a naturally occurring organo-
phosphate, is an irreversible active site-directed inhibitor of acetylcholin-
esterase (E.C.3.1.1.7). J Biochem Toxicol. 1991;6:195–201.
Inokuma H, Kemp DH, Willadsen P. Comparison prostaglandin E2 in 
salivary gland of Boophilus microplus, Haemaphysalis longicornis and 
Ixodes holocyclus and quantification of PGE2 in saliva, hemolymph, 
ovary and gut of B. microplus. J Vet Med Sci. 1994;56:1217–1218.
Isbister GK, Volschenk ES, Seymour JE. Scorpion stings in Australia: five 
definite stings and a review. Int Med J. 2004;34:427–430.
Isbister GK, White J. Clinical consequences of spider bites: recent advances 
in our understanding. Toxicon. 2004;43:477–492.

1310
Toxic Agents
unit V
Izzo AA, Ernst E. Interactions between herbal medicines and prescribed 
drugs: a systematic review. Drugs. 2001;61:2163–2175.
Jaeger A, Fehl F, Flesch F, et al. Kinetics of amatoxins in human poisoning: 
therapeutic implications. Clin Toxicol. 1993;31:63–80.
Jaffe AM, Gephardt D, Courtemanche L. Poisoning due to ingestion of 
Veratrum viride (false hellebore). J Emerg Med. 1990;8:161–167.
James LF, Panter KE, Broquist HP, et al. Swainsonine-induced high moun-
tain disease in calves. Vet Hum Toxicol. 1991;33:217–219.
Jimenez P, Tejero J, Cordoba-Diaz D, et al. Ebulin from dwart elder 
(Sambucus ebulus L.): A mini-review. Toxins. 2015;7:648–658.
Jones TK, Lawson BM. Profound neonatal congestive heart failure caused 
by maternal consumption of blue cohosh herbal medication. J Pediatr. 
1998;132:550–552.
Joo SS, Won TJ, Kim JS, et al. Inhibition of coagulation activation and 
inflammation by a novel factor Xa inhibitor synthesized from the earth-
worm Eisenia andrei. Biol Pharm Bull. 2009;32:253–258.
Jorgensen K, Bak S, Busk PK, et al. Cassava plants with a depleted cyanogenic 
glucoside content in leaves and tubers. Plant Physiol. 2005;139:363–374.
Kalish RS, Johnson KL. Enrichment and function of urushiol (poison ivy)-
specific T lymphocytes in lesions of allergic contact dermatitis to uru-
shiol. J Immunol. 1990;145:3706–3713.
Kandel ER, Schwartz JH, Jessel TM, Siegelbaum SA, Hudspeth AJ. 
Principles of Neural Science. 5th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2013.
Karlson-Stiber C, Persson H. Cytotoxic fungi—an overview. Toxicon. 
2003;42:339–349.
Kavalali G. The chemical and pharmacological aspects of Urtica. In: 
Kavalali GM, ed. Urtica. New York: Taylor & Francis; 2003:25–39.
Kawamoto F, Kumada N. Biology and venoms of Lepidoptera. In: Tu A, ed. 
Insect Poisons, Allergens, and Other Invertebrate Venoms. Vol 2. New 
York: Marcel Dekker; 1984:292.
Keegan HL. Scorpions of Medical Importance. Jackson, MI: University 
Press of Mississippi; 1980.
Keeler RF. Early embryonic death in lambs induced by Veratrum californi-
cum. Cornell Vet. 1990;80:203–207.
Keeler RF, Baker DC. Myopathy in cattle induced by alkaloid extracts from 
Thermopsis montana, Laburnum anagyroides and a Lupinus sp. J Comp 
Pathol. 1990;103:169–182.
Kelch WJ, Kerr LA, Adair HS, et al. Suspected buttercup (Ranunculus bul-
bosus) toxicosis with secondary photosensitization in a Charolais heifer. 
Vet Hum Toxicol. 1992;34:238–239.
Kemparaju K, Girish KS, Nagaraju S. Hyaluronidases, a neglected class of 
glycosidases from snake venom: beyond a spreading factor. In: Mackessy 
SP, ed. Handbook of Venoms and Toxins of Reptiles. Boca Raton, FL: 
CRC Press; 2010:237.
Kennelly EJ, Flynn TJ, Mazzola EP, et al. Detecting potential teratogenic 
alkaloids from blue cohosh rhizomes using an in vitro rat embryo culture. 
J Nat Prod. 1999;62:1385–1389.
Kim D-Y, Lee Y-S. Ovine copper poisoning and Pteridium aquilinum-
associated bovine urinary bladder tumor in Korea. J Toxicol Soc. 
1998;23(suppl 4):645–646.
Kini RM. Excitement ahead: structure, function and mechanism of snake 
venom phospholipase A2 enzymes. Toxicon. 2003;42:827–840.
Kini RM, Chan YM. Accelerated evolution and molecular surface of venom 
phospholipases A2 enzymes. J Mol Evol. 1999;48:125–132.
Knight TE. Philodendron-induced dermatitis: report of cases and review of 
the literature. Cutis. 1991;48:375–378.
Koh CY, Kini RM. From snake venom toxins to therapeutics—cardiovascu-
lar examples. Toxicon. 2012;59:497–506.
Kolarich D, Altmann F, Sunderasan E. Structural analysis of the glycopro-
tein allergen Hev b 4 from natural rubber latex by mass spectrometry. 
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005;46:946–953.
Kotaki Y, Furio EF, Satake M, et al. Production of isodomoic acids A and B 
as major toxin components of a pennate diatom Nitzschia navis-varingica. 
Toxicon. 2005;46:946–953.
Krasnoperov VG, Bittner MA, Beavis R, et al. α-Latrotoxin stimulates exo-
cytosis by the interaction with a neuronal G-protein-coupled receptor. 
Neuron. 1997;18:925–937.
Kuhn-Nentwig L. Antimicrobial and cytolytic peptides of venomous arthro-
pods. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2003;60:2651–2668.
Kuhn-Nentwig L, Schaller J, Nentwig W. Biochemistry, toxicology and 
ecology of the venom of the spider Cupiennius salei (Ctenidae). Toxicon. 
2004;43:534–553.
Kulp KS, Valliet PR, Richard P. Mimosine blocks cell cycle progression by 
chelating iron in asynchronous human breast cancer cells. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 1996;139:356–364.
Kumar PS, Kumar DS, Umamaheswari S. A perspective on toxicology of 
Conus venom peptides. Asian Pac J Trop Med. 2015;8:337–351.
Kuwahara Y, Omura H, Tanabe T. 2-Nitroethenylbenzenes as natu-
ral products in millipede defense secretions. Naturwissenschaften. 
2002;89:308–310.
Lebbe EK, Tytgat J. In the picture: disulfide-poor conopeptides, a class of 
pharmacologically interesting compounds. J Venom Anim Toxins Incl 
Trop Dis. 2016;22:30.
Lee C-Y, ed. Snake Venoms. New York: Springer-Verlag; 1979.
Lee TH, Huang NK, Lai TC, et al. Anemonin, from Clematis crassifo-
lia, potent and selective inducible nitric oxide synthase inhibitor. J 
Ethnopharmacol. 2008;116:518–527.
Leikin JB, Paloucek FP. Poisoning and Toxicology Handbook. New York: 
Informa Healthcare; 2008.
Lewis DC, Shibamoto T. Effects of Cassia obtusifolia (sicklepod) extracts 
and anthraquinones on muscle mitochondrial function. Toxicon. 
1989;27:519–529.
Lewis RJ, Dutertre S, Vetter I, Christie MJ. Conus venom peptide pharma-
cology. Pharmacol Rev. 2012;64:259–298.
Li C, Oberlies NH. The most widely recognized mushroom: chemistry of 
the genus Amanita. Life Sci. 2005;78:532–538.
Li M, Fry BG, Kini RM. Putting the brakes on snake venom evolution: the 
unique molecular evolutionary patterns of Aipysurus eydouxii (marbled 
sea snake) phospholipase A2 toxins. Mol Biol Evol. 2005;22:934–941.
Lin TJ, Hsu CI, Lee KH, et al. Two outbreaks of acute tung nut (Aleurites 
fordii) poisoning. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 1996;34:87–92.
Lioi MB, Barbieri R, Borzacchiello G, et al. Chromosome aberrations in cat-
tle with chronic enzootic haematuria. J Comp Pathol. 2004;131:233–236.
Liu M, Nakazawa K, Inoue K, et al. Potent and voltage-dependent block 
by philanthotoxin-343 of neuronal nicotinic receptor/channels in PC12 
cells. Br J Pharmacol. 1997;122:379–385.
Lopez TA, Cid MS, Bianchini ML. Biochemistry of hemlock (Conium 
maculatum) alkaloids and their acute and chronic toxicity in livestock: a 
review. Toxicon. 1999;37:841–865.
Lu H, Choudhuri S, Ogura K, et al. Characterization of organic anion trans-
porting polypeptide 1b2-null mice: essential role in hepatic uptake/toxic-
ity of phalloidin and microcystin-LR. Toxicol Sci. 2008;35–45.
Lubenow N, Greinacher A. Hirudin in heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. 
Semin Thromb Hemost. 2002;28:431–438.
Ma L, Gu R, Tang L, et al. Important poisonous plants in Tibetian ethno-
medicine. Toxins. 2015;7:138–155.
Mackessy SP. Handbook of Venoms and Toxins of Reptiles. Boca Raton, FL: 
CRC Press; 2010.
Maejima H, Kinoshita E, Yuki T, et al. Structural determinants for the 
action of grayanotoxin in D1 S4-S5 and D4 S4-S5 intracellular link-
ers of sodium channel alpha-subunits. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 
2002;295:452–457.
Mans BJ, Gasper AR, Louw AI, Neitz AW. Purification and characterization 
of apyrase from the tick, Ornithodoros savignyi. Comp Biochem Physiol 
B Biochem Mol Biol. 1998;120:617–624.
Mareti Z, Lebez D. Araneism. Belgrade, Yugoslavia: Nolit Belgrade; 1979.
Markland FS. Snake venoms and their hemostatic system. Toxicon. 
1998;36:1749–1800.
Markland FS, Swenson S. Snake venom metalloproteinases. Toxicon. 
2013;62:3–18.
Marsh N, Williams V. Practical applications of snake venom toxins in hae-
mostasis. Toxicon. 2005;45:1171–1181.
Martinez FJ, Duron RR, de Torres NW, et al. Experimental evidence for 
toxic damage induced by a dimeric anthracenon: diast T-514 (peroxisome 
A2). Toxicol Lett. 1997;90:155–162.
Martinez HR, Bermudez MV, Rangel-Guerra RA, et al. Clinical diag-
nosis in Karwinskia humboldtiana polyneuropathy. J Neurol Sci. 
1998;154:49–54.

Toxic Effects of Plants and Animals
Chapter 26
1311
Masina S, Broady KW. Tick paralysis: development of a vaccine. Int J 
Parasitol. 1999;29:535–541.
Massart D, Sohawon S, Noordally O. Medicinal leeches. Rev Med Brux. 
2009;30:533–536.
Massermanian A. Contact dermatitis due to Euphorbia pulcherrima Willd, 
simulating a phototoxic reaction. Contact Dermatitis. 1998;38:113–114.
Mayer AM, Glaser KB, Cuevas C, et al. The odyssey of marine phar-
maceuticals: a current pipeline perspective. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 
2010;31:255–265.
Mayer KE, Myers RP, Lee SS. Silymarin treatment of viral hepatitis. J Viral 
Hepat. 2005a;12:559–567.
Mayer M, O’Neill MA, Murray KE, et al. Usnic acid: a non-genotoxic com-
pound with anti-cancer properties. Anticancer Drugs. 2005b;16:805–809.
Mazzuca M, Heurteaux C, Alloui A, et al. A tarantula peptide against pain via 
ASIC1a channels and opioid mechanisms. Nat Neurosci. 2007;10:943–945.
McCleary RJ, Kini RM. Non-enzymatic proteins from snake venoms: a gold 
mine of pharmacological tools and drug leads. Toxicon. 2013;62:56–74.
McDermott WV, Ridker PM. The Budd–Chiari syndrome and hepatic veno-
occlusive disease. Arch Surg. 1990;125:525–527.
McGovern TW, Barkley TM. Botanical briefs: chrysanthemum— 
Dendranthema spp. Cutis. 1999;63:319–320.
McGrath-Hill CA, Vicas IM. Case series of Thermopsis exposures. J 
Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 1997;35:659–665.
McIntosh JM, Santos AD, Olivera BM. Conus peptides targeted to spe-
cific nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subtypes. Annu Rev Biochem. 
1999;68:59–88.
McLain-Romero J, Creamer R, Zepeda H, et al. The toxicosis of Embellisia 
fungi from locoweed (Oxytropis lambertii) is similar to locoweed toxico-
sis in rats. J Anim Sci. 2004;82:2169–2174.
Mebs D. Venomous and Poisonous Animals. Stuttgart: Medpharm; 2002.
Mebs D, Kauferstein S. Ichthyotoxity caused by marine cone snail venoms? 
Toxicon. 2005;46:355–356.
Mei N, Guo L, Fu PP, et al. Mutagenicity of comfrey (Symphytum offici-
nale) in rat liver. Br J Cancer. 2005;92:873–875.
Mellick LB, Makowski T, Mellick GA, et al. Neuromuscular blockade 
after ingestion of tree tobacco (Nicotiana glauca). Ann Emerg Med. 
1999;34:101–104.
Mello JR, Habermehl GG. Calcinogenic plants and the incubation effect of 
rumen fluid. Dtsch Tierarztl Wochenschr. 1992;99:371–376.
Mendis S. Colchicine cardiotoxicity following ingestion of Gloriosa 
superba tubers. Postgrad Med J. 1989;65:752–755.
Ménez A. Functional architectures of animal toxins: a clue to drug design? 
Toxicon. 1998;36:1557–1572.
Ménez A. The Subtle Beast: Snakes, from Myth to Medicine. New York: 
Taylor & Francis; 2003.
Ménez A, Stocklin R, Mebs D. “Venomics” or: the venomous systems 
genome project. Toxicon. 2006;47:255–259.
Ménez A, Zimmerman K, Zimmerman S, et al. Venom apparatus and toxic-
ity of the centipede Ethmostigmus rubripes (Chilopoda, Scolopendridae). 
J Morphol. 1990;206:303–312.
Merchant ML, Hinton JF, Geren CR. Sphingomyelinase D activity of brown 
recluse spider (Loxosceles reclusa) venom as studied by 31 P-NMR: 
effects on the time-course of sphingomyelin hydrolysis. Toxicon. 
1998;36:537–545.
Michelot D, Toth B. Poisoning by Gyromitra esculenta—a review. J Appl 
Toxicol. 1991;11:235–243.
Middleton RE, Warren VA, Kraus RL, et al. Two tarantula peptides 
inhibit activation of multiple sodium channels. Biochemistry. 2002;41: 
14734–14747.
Mir R, Karim S, Kamal MA, Wilson CM, Mirza Z. Conotoxins: structure, 
therapeutic potential and pharmacological applications. Curr Pharm 
Des. 2016;22(5):582–589.
Monzingo AF, Collins EJ, Ernst SR, et al. The 2.5 A structure of pokeweed 
antiviral protein. J Mol Biol. 1993;233:705–715.
Morrissette J, Kratezschmar J, Haendler B, et al. Primary structure and 
properties of helothermine, a peptide toxin that blocks ryanodine recep-
tors. Biophys J. 1995;68:2280–2288.
Mouhat S, Jouirou B, Mosbah A, et al. Diversity of folds in animal toxins 
acting on ion channels. Biochem J. 2004;378:717–726.
Murai M, Kimura I, Kimura M. Blocking effects of hypoaconitine and 
aconitine on nerve action potentials in phrenic nerve–diaphragm muscles 
of mice. Neuropharmacology. 1990;29:567–572.
Nastopoulos D, Kanellopoulos PN, Tsernoglov D. Structure of dimeric and 
monomeric erabutoxin a refined at 1.5 A resolution. Acta Crystallogr D 
Biol Crystallogr. 1998;54:964–974.
Nelson LS, Shih RD, Balik MJ. Handbook of Poisonous and Injurious 
Plants. New York: Springer; 2007.
Nery NM, Luna KP, Fernandes CF, Zuliani JP. An overview of Bothrops 
erythromelas venom. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop. 2016;49:680–686.
Newman DJ, Cragg GM, Battershill CN. Therapeutic agents from the sea: 
biodiversity, chemo-evolutionary insight and advances to the end of 
Darwin’s 200th year. Diving Hyperbaric Med. 2009;39:216–225.
Nobile M, Noceti F, Prestipino G, et al. Helothermine, a lizard venom 
toxin, inhibits calcium current in cerebellar granules. Exp Brain Res. 
1996;110:15–20.
Norred WP. Fumonisins—mycotoxins produced by Fusarium moniliforme. 
J Toxicol Environ Health. 1993;38:309–328.
Nunes KP, Torres FS, Borges MH, et al. New insights on arthropod toxins 
that potentiate erectile function. Toxicon. 2013;69:152–159.
Nuttall PA, Labuda M. Dynamics of infection in tick vectors and at the 
tick–host interface. Adv Virus Res. 2003;60:233–272.
O’Brien B, Quigg C, Leong T. Severe cyanide toxicity from “vitamin sup-
plements.” Eur J Emerg Med. 2005;12:257–258.
Oguiura N, Boni-Mitake M, Radis-Baptista G. New view on crotamine, 
a small basic polypeptide myotoxin from South American rattlesnake 
venom. Toxicon. 2006;46:363–370.
Oh SH, Haw CR, Lee MH. Clinical and immunologic features of systemic 
contact dermatitis from ingestion of Rhus (Toxicodendron). Contact 
Dermatitis. 2003;48:251–254.
Ohba H, Moriwaki S, Bakalova R, et al. Plant-derived abrin-a induces apop-
tosis in cultured leukemic cell lines by different mechanisms. Toxicol 
Appl Pharmacol. 2004;195:182–193.
Ohno M, Chijiwa T, Oda-Ueda N, et al. Molecular evolution of myotoxic 
phospholipases A2 from snake venom. Toxicon. 2003;42:841–854.
Olivera BM. Conus venom peptides, receptor and ion channel targets and 
drug design: 50 million years of neuropharmacology. Mol Biol Cell. 
1997;8:2101–2109.
Olivera BM. ω-Conotoxin MVIIA: from marine snail venom to analgesic 
drug. In: Fusetani N, ed. Drugs from the Sea. Basel, Switzerland: Karger; 
2000.
Olivera BM. Conus venom peptides: reflections from the biology of clades 
and species. Annu Rev Ecol Syst. 2002;33:25–42.
Olivera BM, Miljanich G, Ramachandran J, et al. Calcium channel diversity 
and neurotransmitter release: the ω-conotoxins and ω-agatoxins. Annu 
Rev Biochem. 1994;63:823–867.
Olivera BM, Rivier J, Clark C, et al. Diversity of Conus neuropeptides. 
Science. 1990;249:257–263.
Omnell ML, Sun FRP, Keeler RF, et al. Expression of Veratrum alkaloid 
teratogenicity in the mouse. Teratology. 1990;42:105–119.
Onat FY, Yegen BC, Lawrence R, et al. Mad honey poisoning in man and 
rat. Rev Environ Health. 1991;9:3–9.
O’Shea M. Venomous Snakes of the World. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press; 2011.
Patel KA, Modur V, Zimmerman GA. The necrotic venom of the brown 
recluse spider induces dysregulated endothelial cell-dependent neutro-
phil activation. Differential induction of GM-CSF, IL-8, and E-selectin 
expression. J Clin Invest. 1994;94:631–642.
Peixato PV, Brust LC, Duarte MD, et al. Cestrum laevigatum poisoning in 
goats in southeastern Brazil. Vet Hum Toxicol. 2000;42:13–14.
Peper K, Trautwein W. The effect of aconitine on the membrane current in 
cardiac muscle. Pflugers Arch. 1967;296:328–336.
Perry C, Sastry R, Nasrallah IM, et al. Mimosine attenuates serine hydroxy-
methyltransferase transcription by chelating zinc. Implications for inhibi-
tion of DNA replication. J Biol Chem. 2005;280:396–400.
Peterson MC, Rasmussen GJ. Intoxication with foothill camas (Zigadenus 
paniculatus). J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 2003;41:63–65.
Pfister JA, Panter KE, Manners GD. Effective dose in cattle of toxic alkaloids 
from tall larkspur (Delphinium barberi). Vet Hum Toxicol. 1994;36:10–11.

1312
Toxic Agents
unit V
Phillips DJ, Swernson SD, Markland FS. Thrombin-like snake venom ser-
ine proteinases. In: Mackessy SP, ed. Handbook of Venoms and Toxins of 
Reptiles. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2010:139.
Phui Yee JS, Nanling G, Afifiyan F, et al. Snake postsynaptic neurotox-
ins: gene structure, phylogeny and applications in research and therapy. 
Biochimie. 2004;86:137–149.
Piek T, ed. Venoms of the Hymenoptera. London: Academic Press; 1986.
Pietsch J, Oertel R, Trautmann S, et al. A non-fatal oleander poisoning. Int 
J Legal Med. 2005;119:236–240.
Pizzo E, Di Maro A. A new age for biomedical applications of ribosome 
inactivating proteins: from bioconjugate to nanoconstructs. J Biomed Sci. 
2016;23:54–62.
Polis GA, ed. The Biology of Scorpions. Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press; 1990:482.
Polito L, Bortolotti M, Maiello S, et al. Plants producing ribosome-inacti-
vating proteins in traditional medicine. Molecules. 2016;21:1560–1587.
Polya G. Biochemical Targets of Plant Bioactive Compounds. A 
Pharmacological Reference Guide to Sites of Actions and Biological 
Effects. London: Taylor & Francis; 2003:583.
Possani LD, Merino E, Corona M, et al. Peptides and genes encoding for 
scorpion toxins that affect ion-channels. Biochimie. 2000;82:861–868.
Prabhasankar P, Raguputhi G, Sundaravadivel B, et al. Enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay for the phytotoxin thevetin. J Immunoassay. 
1993;14:279–296.
Puschner B, Galey FD, Holstege DM, et al. Sweet clover poisoning in 
California. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1998;212:857–859.
Pusterla N, Holmberg TA, Lorenzo-Figueras M, et al. Acremonium strictum 
pulmonary infection in a horse. Vet Clin Pathol. 2005;34:413–416.
Raisinghani M, Pabbidi RM, Premkumar LS. Activation of transient 
receptor potential vanilloid 1 (TRPV1) by resiniferatoxin. J Physiol. 
2005;567(pt 3):771–786.
Ramirez M, Rivera E, Ereu C. Fifteen cases of atropine poisoning after 
honey ingestion. Vet Hum Toxicol. 1999a;41:19–20.
Ramirez MS, Sanchez EE, Garcia-Prieto C, et al. Screening for fibrino-
lytic activity in 8 viperid venoms. Comp Biochem Physiol C Pharmacol 
Toxicol Endocrinol. 1999b;124:91–98.
Ramos OHP, Selistre-de-Araujo HS. Snake venom metalloproteases—
structure and function of catalytic and disintegrin domains. Comp 
Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2006;142:328–346.
Rao RB, Hoffman RS. Nicotinic toxicity from tincture of blue cohosh 
(Caulophyllum thalictroides) used as an abortifacient. Vet Hum Toxicol. 
2002;44:221–222.
Rash LD, Hodgson WC. Pharmacology and biochemistry of spider venoms. 
Toxicon. 2002;40:225–254.
Rasmussen LH, Jensen LS, Hansen HC. Distribution of the carcinogenic 
terpene ptaquiloside in bracken fronds, rhizomes (Pteridium aquilinum), 
and litter in Denmark. J Chem Ecol. 2003;29:771–778.
Reddy A, Fried B. An update on the use of helminths to treat Crohn’s and 
other autoimmunune diseases. Parasitol Res. 2009;104:217–221.
Reddy L, Odhav B, Bhoola K. Aflatoxin B1-induced toxicity in HepG2 
cells inhibited by carotenoids: morphology, apoptosis and DNA damage. 
Biol Chem. 2006;387:87–93.
Riley RT, Hinton DM, Chamberlain WJ, et al. Dietary fumonisin B1 
induces disruption of sphingolipid metabolism in Sprague–Dawley rat: a 
new mechanism of nephrotoxicity. J Nutr. 1994;124:594–603.
Rimsza ME, Zimmerman DR, Bergeson PS. Scorpion envenomation. 
Pediatrics. 1980;66:298–302.
Rockel D, Korn W, Kohn AJ. Manual of the Living Conidae. Weisbaden, 
Germany: Verlag Christa Hemmen; 1995.
Rode D. Comfrey toxicity revisited. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2002;23: 
497–499.
Rodriguez de la Vega RC, Possani LD. Current views on scorpion toxins 
specific for K+-channels. Toxicon. 2004;43:865–875.
Rodriguez de la Vega RC, Possani LD. Overview of scorpion toxins specific 
for Na+ channels and related peptides: biodiversity, structure–function 
relationships and evolution. Toxicon. 2005;46:831–844.
Rondeau ES. Wisteria toxicity. J Toxicol. 1993;31:107–112.
Rosell S, Samuelsson G. Effect of mistletoe viscotoxin and phoratoxin on 
blood circulation. Toxicon. 1988;26:975–987.
Rosenberg P. Phospholipases. In: Shier WT, Mebs D, eds. Handbook of 
Toxinology. New York: Marcel Dekker; 1990:67.
Roy MC, Chang FR, Huang HC, et al. Cytotoxic principles from the formo-
san milkweed, Asclepias curassavica. J Nat Prod. 2005;68: 1494–1499.
Russell FE. Toxic effects of animal venoms. In: Klaassen CD, ed. Casarett 
and Doull’s Toxicology: The Basic Science of Poisons. 6th ed. New York: 
McGraw-Hill; 2001:945.
Russell FE, Nagabhushanam R. The Venomous and Poisonous Marine 
Invertebrates of the Indian Ocean. Enfield, NH: Science Publications; 
1996:271.
Russo E, Scicchitano F, Whalley BJ, et al. Hypericum perforatum: pharma-
cokinetic, mechanism of action tolerability and clinical drug–drug inter-
actions. Phytotherap Res. 2014;28:643–655.
Ruyssers NE, De Winter BY, De Man JG, et al. Schistosoma mansoni pro-
teins attenuate gastrointestinal motility disturbances during experimental 
colitis in mice. World J Gastroenterol. 2010;16:703–712.
Sako MDN, Al-Sultan II, Saleem AN. Studies on sheep experimentally 
poisoned with Hypericum perforatum. Vet Hum Toxicol. 1993;35: 
298–300.
Sangamnetdej S, Paesen GC, Slovak M, et al. A high affinity serotonin- 
and histamine-binding lipocalin from tick saliva. Insect Mol Biol. 
2002;11:79–86.
Schacter L. Etopside phosphate: what, why, where and how? Semin Oncol. 
1996;23(suppl 13):1–7.
Schrot J, Weng A, Melzig MF. Ribosome-inactivating and related proteins. 
Toxins. 2016:1556–1615.
Schulzke JD, Andres S, Amasheh M, Fromm A, Günzel D. Anti-diarrheal 
mechanism of the traditional remedy Uzara via reduction of active chlo-
ride secretion. PLoS One. 2011;6(3):e18107.
Serrano SM. The long road of research on snake venom serine proteinases. 
Toxicon. 2013;62:19–26.
Shahin M, Smith BL, Prakash AS. Bracken carcinogens in the human diet. 
Mutat Res. 1999;443:69–79.
Sharma OP, Dawra RK, Pattabhi V. Molecular structure, polymorphism, 
and toxicity of lantadene A, the pentacyclic triterpenoid from the hepato-
toxic plant Latana camara. J Biochem Toxicol. 1991;6:57–63.
Short SO, Edwards WC. Blue green algae toxicosis in Oklahoma. Vet Hum 
Toxicol. 1990;32:558–560.
Siebert U, Brach M, Sroczynski G, et al. Efficacy, routine effectiveness, and 
safety of horse chestnut seed extract in the treatment of chronic venous 
insufficiency. A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials and large 
observational studies. Int Angiol. 2002;21:305–315.
Silva A, Hodgson WC, Isbister GK. Antivenom for neuromuscular paralysis 
resulting from snake envenoming. Toxins. 2017;9:143–160.
Singletary EM, Holstege CP. Bites and stings: insects, marine, mammals 
and reptiles. In: Aghababian RV, ed. Essentials of Emergency Medicine. 
Sudbury, MA: Jones and Bartlett; 2006.
Skinner WS, Adams ME, Quistad GB, et al. Purification and characteriza-
tion of two classes of neurotoxins from the funnel web spider Agelenopsis 
aperta. J Biol Chem. 1989;264:2150–2155.
Smith J, Bush S. Envenomations by reptiles in the United States. In: 
Mackessy SP, ed. Handbook of Venoms and Toxins of Reptiles. Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2010:475.
Soares AM, Giglio JR. Chemical modifications of phospholipases A2 from 
snake venoms: effects on catalytic and pharmacological properties. 
Toxicon. 2003;42:855–868.
Sokolov IuV, Chanturiia AN, Lishko VK. Channel-forming proper-
ties of Steatoda paykulliana spider venom [Russian]. Biofizika. 
1984;29:620–623.
Southcott RV, Haegi LAR. Plant hair dermatitis. Med J Aust. 1992;156: 
623–628.
Spencer PS. Food toxins, AMPA receptors and motor neuron diseases. Drug 
Metab Rev. 1999;31:561–587.
Spoerke DG, Murphy MM, Wruk KM, et al. Five cases of Thermopsis  
poisoning. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 1988;26:397–406.
Spooner RA, Lord JM. Ricin trafficking in cells. Toxins. 2015. 7:49–65.
Steen NA, Barker SC, Alewood PF. Proteins in the saliva of the Ixodida 
(ticks): pharmacological features and biological significance. Toxicon. 
2006;47:1–20.

Toxic Effects of Plants and Animals
Chapter 26
1313
Strimple PD, Tomassoni AJ, Otten EJ, et al. Report on envenomation by 
a Gila monster (Heloderma suspectum) with a discussion of venom 
apparatus, clinical findings, and treatment. Wilderness Environ Med. 
1997;8:111–116.
Surh Y-J, Lee E, Lee JM. Chemoprotective properties of some pungent ingre-
dients present in red pepper and ginger. Mutat Res. 1998;404:259–267.
Swartz KJ, MacKinnon R. An inhibitor of the Kv2.1 potassium channel 
isolated from the venom of a Chilean tarantula. Neuron. 1995;15:35–42.
Swenson S, Markland FS Jr. Snake venom fibrin(ogen)olytic enzymes. 
Toxicon. 2005;45:1021–1039.
Szalcsany J. Capsaiscin receptors as target molecules on nociceptors for 
development of novel analgesic agents. In: Keri G, Toth I, eds. Molecular 
Pathomechanisms and New Trends in Drug Research. London: Taylor & 
Francis; 2002:319–333.
Tahirov THO, Lu T-H, Liaw Y-C, et al. A new crystal form of abrina from 
the seeds of Abrus precatorius. J Mol Biol. 1994;235:1152–1153.
Tambourgi DV, Petricevich VL, Magnoli FC, et al. Endotoxemic-like shock 
induced by Loxosceles spider venoms: pathological changes and putative 
cytokine mediators. Toxicon. 1998;36:391–403.
Tan N-H, Fung S-Y. Snake venom l-amino acid oxidases. In: Mackessy SP, 
ed. Handbook of Venoms and Toxins of Reptiles. Boca Raton, FL: CRC 
Press; 2010:221.
Tandon HD, Tandon BN, Mattocks AR. An epidemic of veno-occlusive dis-
ease of the liver in Afghanistan. Am J Gastroenterol. 1978;70:607–613.
Teitelbaum JS, Zatorre RJ, Carpenter S, et al. Neurologic sequelae of 
domoic acid intoxication due to the ingestion of contaminated mussels. N 
Engl J Med. 1990;322:1781–1787.
Terlau H, Olivera BM. Conus venoms: a rich source of novel ion channel-
targeted peptides. Physiol Rev. 2004;84:41–68.
Terlau H, Shon K, Grilley M, et al. Strategy for rapid immobilization of 
prey by a fish-hunting cone snail. Nature. 1996;381:148–151.
Tintinalli JE, Stapczynski JS, Ma OJ, et al., eds. Emergency Medicine: A 
Comprehensive Study Guide. 8th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2016.
Tsetlin VI, Hucho F. Snake and snail toxins acting on nicotinic acetylcho-
line receptors: fundamental aspects and medical applications. FEBS Lett. 
2004;557:9–13.
Tsujikawa K, Kanamori T, Iwata Y, et al. Morphological and chemical anal-
ysis of magic mushrooms in Japan. Forensic Sci Int. 2003;138:85–90.
Tucker MO, Swan CR. The mango–poison ivy connection. N Engl J Med. 
1998;339:235.
Tulsiani DR, Broquest HP, James LF, et al. Production of hybrid glyco-
protein and accumulation of oligosaccharides in the brain of sheep and 
pigs administered swainsonine or locoweed. Arch Biochem Biophys. 
1988;264:607–617.
Turgut M, Alhan CC, Gurgoze M, et al. Carboxyatractyloside poisoning in 
humans. Ann Trop Paediatr. 2005;25:125–134.
Tylleskar T, Banca M, Bikongi N, et al. Cassava cyanogens and konzo, an 
upper motoneuron disease found in Africa. Lancet. 1992;339:208–211.
Uddman R, Goadsby PJ, Jansen-Olesen I, et al. Helospectin-like peptides: 
immunochemical localization and effects on isolated cerebral arteries 
and on local cerebral blood flow in the cat. J Cerebral Blood Flow Metab. 
1999;19:61–67.
Urushibata O, Kase K. Irritant contact dermatitis from Euphorbia margin-
ata. Contact Dermatitis. 1991;24:155–157.
Ushkaryov YA, Volnski KE, Ashton AC. The multiple actions of black 
widow spider toxins and their selective use in neurosecretion studies. 
Toxicon. 2004;43:527–542.
Uwai K, Ohashi K, Takaya Y, et al. Exploring the structural basis of neu-
rotoxicity in C(17)-polyacetylenes isolated from water hemlock. J Med 
Chem. 2000;43:4508–4515.
Valenzuela JG. Blood-feeding arthropod salivary glands and saliva. In: 
Marquardt WC, ed. Biology of Disease Vectors. Amsterdam: Elsevier; 
2004:chap 28.
Valenzuela JG, Charlab R, Mather TN, et al. Purification, cloning and 
expression of a novel salivary anticomplement protein from the tick 
Ixodes scapularis. J Biol Chem. 2000;275:18717–18723.
Verdes A, Anand P, Gorson J, et al. From mollusks to medicine: a venom-
ics approach for the discovery and characterization of therapeutics from 
Terebridae peptide toxins. Toxins. 2016;8:117–147.
Vincent A, Jacobson L, Curran L. Alpha-bungarotoxin binding to human 
muscle acetylcholine receptor. Neurochem Int. 1998;332:427–433.
Vogel C-W, Fritsinger DC, Hew BE. Recombinant cobra venom factor. Mol 
Immunol. 2004;41:191–199.
Volynski KE, Capogna M, Ashton AC, et al. Mutant α-latrotoxin (LTXN4C) 
does not form pores and causes secretion by receptor stimulation. This 
action does not require neurexins. J Biol Chem. 2003;278:31058–31066.
Wang H, Ng TB. Ribosome inactivating protein and lectin from bitter melon 
(Momordica charantia) seeds: sequence comparison with related pro-
teins. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998;253:143–146.
Wang X, Connor M, Smith R, et al. Discovery and characterization of a 
family of insecticidal neurotoxins with a rare vicinal disulfide bridge. Nat 
Struct Biol. 2000;7:505–513.
Wang X, Connor M, Wilson D, et al. Discovery and structure of a potent 
and highly specific blocker of insect calcium channels. J Biol Chem. 
2001;276:40306–40312.
Wang Z, Zhao J, Xing J, et al. Analysis of strychnine and brucine in post-
mortem specimens by RP-HPLC: a case report of fatal intoxication. 
J Anal Toxicol. 2004;28:141–144.
Warren BA, Patel SA, Nunn PB, et al. The Lathyrus excitotoxin beta-
N-oxalyl-l-alpha,beta-diaminopropionic acid is a substrate of the 
l-cystine/l-glutamate exchanger system xc-. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
2004;200:83–92.
Webster LR, Fakata KL. Ziconotide for chronic severe pain. Pr Pain Mgmt. 
2005;5:47–51, 55–56.
Weinstein SA, Smith TL, Kardong KV. Reptile venom glands: form, func-
tion and future. In: Mackessy SP, ed. Handbook of Venoms and Toxins of 
Reptiles. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2010:65.
White J. Snake venoms and coagulopathy. Toxicon. 2005;45:951–967.
Wilson D, Alewood PF. Taxonomy of Australian funnel-web spiders using 
rp-HPLC/ESI-MS profiling techniques. Toxicon. 2006;47:614–627.
Wu JH, Singh T, Herp A, et al. Carbohydrate recognition factors of the 
lectin domains present in the Ricinus communis toxic protein (ricin). 
Biochemie. 2006;88:201–217.
Yellen G. The voltage-gated potassium channels and their relatives. Nature. 
2002;419:35–42.
Yoshizawa T, Yamashita A, Luo Y. Fumonisin occurrence in corn from high-
and low-risk areas for human esophageal cancer in China. Appl Environ 
Microbiol. 1994;60:1626–1629.

This page intentionally left blank