# 27 Food Toxicology: Fundamental and Regulatory Aspects
# Casarett & Doull's Toxicology, 9th Edition
# Pages: 1334-1379
# Unit: Unit V Toxic Agents

27
chapter
Food Toxicology: Fundamental 
and Regulatory Aspects*
Supratim Choudhuri, Ronald F. Chanderbhan, and Antonia 
Mattia
Introduction to Food  
Toxicology
Nature and Complexities of 
Food
Importance of the 
Gastrointestinal Tract
Transporters and Absorption
Food Constituents and 
Genotypic Variations: 
Nutritional Implications 
of Inter-Individual Genetic 
Differences
Genotypic Variations and 
the Ability to Utilize Food 
Constituents
Food Habits Driving Nutritional 
Adaptation During Evolution
Starch Digestion
Lactose Digestion
Alcohol Metabolism
Food Constituents and 
Regulation of Gene  
Expression
Carbohydrates and Gene  
Expression
Amino Acids and Gene  
Expression
Fatty Acids and Gene Expression
Vitamins and Gene Expression
Minerals and Gene Expression
Dietary Polyphenols, Indoles, 
Carotenoids, and Gene 
Expression
Food–Drug Interactions
Food Safety Regulations in the 
United States
The U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration
Historical Perspective on the 
Science of Food Toxicology
History of Food Law
Current U.S. Food Law to 
Ensure Safety of Foods, 
Food Ingredients, and Food 
Contaminants
FD&C Act, FDA Regulations, and FDA 
Guidance
Food Additives
Substances Generally Recognized as 
Safe (GRAS)
Color Additives
The Delaney Clause and Its 
Applications
The Safety Standard and 
Toxicological Testing 
Recommendations for Food 
Ingredients
ADI, EDI, and Reasonable Certainty 
of No Harm
Dietary Intake Estimate
Threshold of Regulation (TOR)
Food from New Plant Varieties
The Food Allergen Labeling  
and Consumer Protection Act 
(FALCPA)
Food Safety Through the Hazard 
Analysis and Critical Control Point 
(HACCP) System
The Food Safety and Modernization 
Act (FSMA)
Regulation of the Dietary 
Supplements
Global Food Safety Authoritative 
Bodies
Toxic Substances in Food
Some Naturally Occurring Toxic 
Substances in Food
Cycasin
Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids
Ptaquiloside
Safrole
Cyanogenic Glycosides
Glucosinolates
Glycoalkaloids (α-Solanine and 
α-Chaconine)
Tannins
Furocoumarins
Gossypol
Erucic Acid
Lectins
Phytic Acid (Phytate)
Oxalic Acid
Enzyme Inhibitors
Phytoestrogens
Some Naturally Occurring Toxins in 
Food of Marine Origin
Saxitoxin
Okadaic Acid (OA), Dinophysistoxin 
(DTX), Pectenotoxin (PTX), 
Yessotoxins (YTX)
Domoic Acid (DA)
Brevetoxins
Ciguatoxin
Tetrodotoxin
Scombroid Toxicity
Palytoxin
Some Microbial Contaminants in 
Food
Some Foodborne Molds and 
Mycotoxins
Aflatoxins
Trichothecenes
Fumonisins
Ochratoxin A
Ergot Alkaloids
Bovine Spongiform  
Encephalopathy
Some Toxicants Generated in Food 
During Cooking or Processing
Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons
Heterocyclic Amines
N-Nitroso Compounds
Acrylamide
Furan
*The opinions expressed in this chapter are the authors’ personal opinions and do not necessarily reflect those of FDA, DHHS, or the federal government.

1316
Toxic Agents
unit V
INTRODUCTION TO FOOD TOXICOLOGY
Food is one of the most essential materials for the survival of liv-
ing organisms, in addition to oxygen and water. Food toxicology 
deals with the substances found in food that, when consumed, may 
cause harm to the consumers. Therefore, the practice of food toxi-
cology involves detecting toxic substances in food, characterizing 
their properties, studying their fate in the body (absorption, distri-
bution, metabolism, and excretion), and investigating their adverse 
health effects. Toxic substances can be naturally present in food, 
formed when the food is cooked, added directly to food, or they 
can find their way into food from the immediate environment, such 
as packaging. Among various subdisciplines of toxicology, food 
toxicology has received wider public attention in recent years. This 
has been driven by an increased awareness of the health effects of 
foods, foodborne illness, as well as the rapid availability of infor-
mation to consumers, thanks to the world-wide-web.
Typically, a food contains hundreds of substances. Apart from 
the most obvious constituents, a majority of the substances in vari-
ous foods have not been fully characterized. The assumption that 
food is safe to consume is based on the history of its consumption. 
In recent years, there has been increasing interest on the part of 
consumers regarding the “health-promoting” properties of various 
naturally occurring constituents of food, such as phytosterols from 
vegetable oils and isoflavones from soy. The addition of substances 
to foods that do not contain them naturally has raised questions 
about how they should be regulated. There is a debate whether 
the concept of nutrients should be expanded to include a growing 
number of food constituents that seemingly produce health benefits 
(Sansalone, 1999). Because federal dietary guidance applies to the 
total diet and there are no widely accepted standards to judge the 
“healthfulness” of individual foods, fortification of foods with new 
substances should require a thorough evaluation of safety at the 
intended level of intake for the general population (Mackey and 
Kotsonis, 2002).
NATURE AND COMPLEXITIES OF FOOD
Food is a very complex mixture of nutrient and non-nutrient sub-
stances, whether it is consumed uncooked (e.g., raw agricultural 
product) or in a cooked and highly processed ready-to-eat form 
(Tables 27-1 and 27-2). Many of the non-nutrient substances are 
necessary for the growth and survival of the plant (from which 
they are derived), and for the plant’s adaptation to the environment. 
Some of these substances may act as antinutrients rather than frank 
toxins, such as trypsin and chymotrypsin inhibitors, phytates that 
bind minerals, anti-thiamines in fish and plants, etc. Traditionally, 
the nutrients in food are classified as calorigenic macronutrients, 
such as carbohydrates, proteins, and fats, and the non-calorigenic 
micronutrients, such as vitamins and minerals.
The Food and Nutrition Board of the Institute of Medicine 
(IOM), which is a division of the U.S. National Academies of 
Sciences, Engineering and Medicine (NAS), has developed 
Dietary Reference Intakes (DRIs) that serve as a guide for good 
nutrition. Since 1994 the IOM’s Food and Nutrition Board has 
been involved in developing an expanded approach to establish 
dietary reference standards. This approach, the DRIs, provides a 
set of four nutrient-based reference values designed to replace the 
Table 27-1  
Food as a Complex Mixture
NUTRIENTS
NON-NUTRIENTS
Macronutrients
Micronutrients
Naturally 
occurring 
substances
Carbohydrates
Vitamins
Food additives 
(direct, indirect)
Total fiber
Minerals
Contaminants
Proteins
Products of food 
processing
Fats
Table 27-2  
Non-nutrient Substances in Some Common Food
FOOD
NUMBER OF IDENTIFIED 
NON-NUTRIENT CHEMICALS
Cheddar cheese
160
Orange juice
250
Banana
325
Tomato
350
Wine
475
Coffee
625
Beef (cooked)
625
SOURCE: From Smith (1991), with permission from Medical Society of 
London.
Some Heavy Metal Contaminants 
in Food
Lead
Cadmium
Mercury
Arsenic
Food Allergy
Definition
Occurrence and Symptoms
Foods That Elicit Allergic  
Reactions
Mechanism of IgE and  
Non-IgE-Mediated Food Allergic 
Reactions
Diagnosis and Treatment of Food 
Allergy
Examples of Inadvertent Food 
Contaminations
Conclusion
Acknowledgments
References

Food Toxicology: Fundamental and Regulatory Aspects
Chapter 27
1317
Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) in the United States 
and the Recommended Nutrient Intakes (RNIs) in Canada. These 
reference values include Estimated Average Requirement (EAR), 
RDA, Adequate Intake (AI), and Tolerable Upper Intake Level 
(UL). To date, several volumes in this series have been published 
(http://nationalacademies.org/hmd/reports/2000/dietary-reference-
intakes-applications-in-dietary-assessment.aspx).
The EAR is the average daily nutrient intake level estimated to 
meet the requirements of 50% of the healthy individuals in a group, 
and the RDA is the daily dietary intake level sufficient to meet the 
nutrient requirements of nearly all (97% to 98%) healthy individu-
als in a group. RDA is calculated from the EAR; the RDA is the 
EAR plus two standard deviations (RDA = EAR + 2SD). If suffi-
cient information is not available to establish an EAR and calculate 
the RDA, an AI level is developed; AI represents the approximate 
estimates of nutrient intake by healthy people. The UL is the high-
est level of daily nutrient intake that is not likely to pose any risk of 
adverse health effects (IOM, 2003). Therefore, nutrient intake levels 
beyond the UL represent a transition from nutrition to potential tox-
icity in an exposure-dependent manner.
For adults, the average DRIs (average of values for males and 
females) for carbohydrate and protein are 130 and 51 g/day, respec-
tively. The acceptable ranges for the source of energy in adults are 
45% to 65% from carbohydrate, 10% to 35% from protein, and 
20% to 35% from fat (IOM, 2003). The IOM recommendation 
includes total dietary fiber as a macronutrient and recommends its 
AI for different age groups in males and females, such as 38 g/day 
for males and 25 g/day for females, between the age of 19 and 50 
years. Dietary fiber is a complex carbohydrate that is primarily a 
non-calorigenic macronutrient, but it is claimed to have beneficial 
effects on health and well-being. It is resistant to digestion by the 
gut enzymes in humans, but can be broken down by gut bacteria.
IMPORTANCE OF THE 
GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
Humans consume approximately 1500 g of food and an equal 
amount of liquid per day; therefore, within a year, humans ingest 
approximately 550 kg of food (or about 1200 lbs). All these foods 
are digested, the products of digestion are absorbed from the intes-
tine, and the undigested remains are excreted on a regular basis. 
The digestive system of all animals has evolved to handle this job 
efficiently. The gastrointestinal (GI) tract is a large, complex, and 
dynamic organ with a vast absorptive surface that has been esti-
mated in humans to be 250 square meters or more (Hall, 2011). 
The digestive system consists of the GI tract (digestive tract), and 
the liver, pancreas, and gallbladder. The salivary glands, liver, pan-
creas, and gall bladder all play a direct role in the digestive process. 
Current understanding of the digestive process demonstrates an 
important role of the gut microbiome as well. The recently revised 
estimate of gut microbiome in adult humans is roughly 40 tril-
lion organisms (Sender et al., 2016), which changes the old 10:1 
microbe:body cell ratio to roughly 1:1.
Because chemicals and microorganisms from the environment 
can get direct entry into the GI tract, it has developed the capacity 
to perform various important functions in addition to digestion. 
The enterocytes of the intestinal epithelium are capable of exten-
sive metabolism of xenobiotics that gain entry through the GI tract. 
The ability of the GI tract to metabolize xenobiotics may be second 
only to the liver, as it possesses a full complement of phase I and 
phase II xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes and transporters. The 
GI tract is also an immunologic organ and is constantly exposed 
to a large number of antigens in food (approximately 88 kg of pro-
tein annually), commensal and ingested bacteria. Therefore, the 
immune system maintains a strong presence at the intestinal muco-
sal barrier. The immune system of the GI tract is referred to as 
the gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT). It is heavily populated 
by lymphocytes, macrophages, and other cells that participate in 
immune responses (Doe, 1989). One cell layer away from these 
antigens is the lamina propria of the GI tract, which contains the 
mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT), comprising lym-
phocytes and antigen-presenting cells, as well as unique dendritic 
cells, which interact with dietary antigens and ultimately determine 
whether an antigen is tolerated or an immune response is initiated 
(Brandtzaeg, 2010; Vickery et al., 2011).
The combination of a large absorptive surface area and the rich 
vascularization of the intestine further aids in efficient absorption. 
The normal rate of blood flow in the portal vein is approximately 
1.2 L/h/kg; however, after a meal, there is a 30% increase in blood 
flow through the splanchnic area (Concon, 1988). Consequently, 
the substances that affect blood flow also tend to affect the rate 
of absorption of other materials. An example is alcohol, which 
tends to increase blood flow to the stomach and thus enhances 
its own absorption as well as other substances. Lymph circula-
tion is important in the transfer of fats, large molecules, such as 
botulinum toxin, benzo[a]pyrene, 3-methylcholanthrene, and cis-­
dimethylaminostilbene (Chhabra and Eastin, 1984). Lymph has 
a flow rate of about 1 to 2 mL/h/kg in humans. Tripalmitin has 
been shown to double the lymph flow rate and therefore double the 
absorption of materials, such as p-aminosalicylic acid and tetracy-
cline (Chhabra and Eastin, 1984). Thus, understanding the changes 
substances undergo in the GI tract, their possible effect on the GI 
tract, and whether they are absorbed or affect the absorption of other 
substances is critical to an understanding of food toxicology and 
safety assessment (Kotsonis and Burdoch, 2013).
Transporters and Absorption
The constituents of food and other ingesta (e.g., drugs, contami-
nants, inhaled pollutants dissolved in saliva and swallowed) are 
physicochemically heterogeneous and, as a result, the intestine has 
evolved into a relatively impermeable membrane with specialized 
mechanisms of absorption. Recent progress in transporter research 
has changed our understanding of the role of various membrane 
transport proteins in regulating the absorption, distribution, and 
excretion of food, drugs, and other substances. The role of some 
transporters in the absorption of various macro- and microingre-
dients in food is shown in Table 27-3. The strategic localization 
of transporters on the apical versus the basolateral side of the cells 
is crucial for proper directional transport. It has been known for a 
long time that hydrophilic molecules need specialized mechanisms 
for transport through the cell membrane. Even hydrophobic mol-
ecules need to be transported by specific transporters in order to 
maintain a tightly regulated cellular homeostasis. This is contrary 
to the traditional thinking that assumed that hydrophobic molecules 
could simply diffuse through the plasma membrane. The transport-
ers may be active transporters or facilitative transporters. In pri-
mary active transport (1° active), ATP directly provides the energy 
needed to move a molecule against its concentration gradient. In 
secondary active transport (2° active), the electrochemical gradi-
ent of an ion (e.g., Na+ or H+), already established through primary 
active transport, is utilized to move a molecule across the mem-
brane. In facilitative (facilitated) or passive transport, transporters 
passively transport substrates down the concentration gradient from 
high to low concentration (Choudhuri and Chanderbhan, 2016).

1318
Toxic Agents
unit V
Once inside the cell, the nutrients exert a multitude of effects from 
providing energy to regulating specific gene expression and cellular 
homeostasis, and the survival/death of the cell. Readers are referred 
to http://slc.bioparadigms.org/ for the detailed classification of the 
solute carrier (SLC) family of transporters.
Like food, water is absorbed by special means in the GI 
tract. Fluid transport is a major function of the GI tract, with more 
than 9 L of fluid being absorbed or secreted across epithelia in 
human salivary gland, stomach, the hepatobiliary tract, pancreas, 
small intestine, and colon (Ma and Verkman, 1999). The move-
ment of water across the cell membrane can occur by several 
mechanisms. The membrane phospholipid bilayer is basically per-
meable to small polar molecules, and water can slowly permeate 
the bilayer by simple diffusion. But simple (passive) diffusion is a 
Table 27-3  
An Overview of Some Nutritionally Relevant Transporters
TRANSPORTER
SLC (GENE) FAMILY 
DESIGNATION
KNOWN SUBSTRATES
Sugar Transporters
SGLT (2° Active)
SLC5A
Glucose, galactose
SGLT1—high-affinity but low-capacity glucose transporter 
that also transports galactose
SGLT2—low-affinity but high-capacity glucose transporter 
that does not transport galactose
GLUT (Facilitative)
SLC2A
Glucose, fructose, myo-inositol, 
glucosamine, dehydroascorbate
The major glucose transporter across the basolateral 
membrane
Amino Acid Transporters
AA TRANSPORTERS
SLC 1A, 6A, 7A, 16A, 
36A, 38A, 43A
Amino acids, monocarboxylates (e.g., 
lactate, pyruvate)
(2° Active or Facilitative depending on the transporter)
Peptide Transporters
PEPT (2° Active)
SLC15A 
Dipeptides, tripeptides
Fatty Acid Transporters
MCT (2° Active)
SLC16A
Short-chain fatty acids (monocarboxylates, 
e.g., acetate, lactate, pyruvate, butyrate, 
propionate, succinate)
FATP
SLC27A
Long-chain fatty acids
Nucleoside Transporters
CNT (2° Active)
SLC28A
Nucleosides
ENT (Facilitative)
SLC29A
Nucleosides
Water-Soluble Vitamin Transporters
SVCT (2° Active)
SLC23A
Vitamin C (l-ascorbate)
SMVT (2° Active)
SLC5A6
Biotin, pantothenate, α-lipoate
PCFT (2° Active)
SLC46A1
Folate, antifolate (e.g., methotrexate)
RFC1 (2° Active)
SLC19A1
Folate, antifolate (e.g., methotrexate)
THTR (Facilitative)
SLC19A2 & SLC19A3
Thiamine
Fat-Soluble Vitamin Transporters
SR-B1
Vitamin D, vitamin E, lutein, lycopene, 
cholesterol, cholesteryl esters
NPC1L1
Vitamin D, vitamin E, cholesterol
Other Transporters
OCTN, CT2 (2° Active or Facilitative depending on the 
transporter)
SLC22A
l-Carnitine
TAUT
SLC6A6
Taurine
ZIP
SLC39
Metals (e.g., Zn)
ZnT
SLC30
Metals (e.g., Zn)
Nramp (Nramp1; Nramp2 also known as DCT1/DMT1)
SLC11A
Divalent metals and iron
SOURCE: Modified from Choudhuri and Chanderbhan (2016, chap. 7). © Elsevier. With permission from Elsevier.

Food Toxicology: Fundamental and Regulatory Aspects
Chapter 27
1319
slow process that does not account for the transcellular transport of 
large volumes of water on a daily basis. The general paradigm of 
water absorption in the GI tract is that water is cotransported along 
with ions and solutes. For example, Loo et al. (1996) expressed 
Na+/glucose cotransporter SGLT1 in Xenopus oocyte and dem-
onstrated that the transport of 260 water molecules was directly 
coupled to each glucose molecule transported. Water is also trans-
ported by water channels (aquaporins). Aquaporins are a family of 
small, integral membrane proteins. The primary function of most 
aquaporins is to serve as channels in the transfer of water across 
cell membranes, and in some cases, small solutes. Water transport 
through aquaporins occurs in response to osmotic gradients created 
by active solute transport. In addition to water, aquaporins serve in 
the permeation of small molecules such as glycerol and urea. The 
mammalian aquaporins are expressed in many cell types involved 
in fluid transport, including epithelia and endothelia in the kidney, 
lung, exocrine glands, eye, and GI organs (Takata et al., 2004; 
Verkman, 2013).
Sometimes a transporter may transport multiple food 
ingredients as substrates but with vastly different affinities. For 
example, biotin (vitamin B7) transport is mediated by the Na+-
dependent multivitamin transporter (SMVT; gene SLC5A6), 
which also transports pantothenic acid (vitamin B5) and α-lipoic 
acid (a metabolic antioxidant) (Prasad and Ganapathy, 2000). 
The SMVT is a very high affinity transporter of α-lipoic acid, 
which can inhibit the transport of both biotin and pantothenic 
acid with an inhibition constant (Ki) of about 5 μM (Choudhuri 
and Chanderbhan, 2016). Lipoic acid is present in many dietary 
supplements. It seems logical that separating the intakes of 
such nutrients/ingredients by several hours might ensure proper 
absorption from the small intestine. An example of how a drug/
xenobiotic transporter may play a protective role from the toxicity 
of normal food constituents comes from the study of Abcg2−/− 
mice. ABCG2 in humans (Abcg2 in mice), also referred to as 
BCRP (Breast Cancer Resistance Protein), is an ATP-binding cas-
sette (ABC) transporter that plays an important role in the efflux 
of many drugs and xenobiotics. Jonker et al. (2002) showed that 
Abcg2−/− mice were extremely sensitive to pheophorbide-a, which 
is a breakdown product of dietary chlorophyll. These mice had 
severe phototoxic lesions on light-exposed skin. Because Abcg2 
extrudes pheophorbide-a from cells, the lack of Abcg2 activity 
results in the accumulation of pheophorbide-a in cells. Therefore, 
low or no Abcg2 activity (due to inherited genetic mutations) may 
make an organism susceptible to developing diet-dependent pho-
tosensitization and even phototoxicity.
FOOD CONSTITUENTS AND GENOTYPIC 
VARIATIONS: NUTRITIONAL 
IMPLICATIONS OF INTER-INDIVIDUAL 
GENETIC DIFFERENCES
There are inter-individual genetic differences in taste preference, 
food tolerance, metabolism, absorption of food constituents, and 
other nutrition-related characteristics in human population (Lampe, 
2009). The evolution of Homo sapiens was intimately associated with 
adaptive radiation to different environments. Many genotypic varia-
tions that conferred selective advantage in an environment were fixed 
in a population. In terms of food, the impact of selection pressures 
was reciprocal; that is, just as a genotypic variation could determine 
the ability to utilize food constituents, food habits could also drive 
the evolution of traits necessary for nutritional adaptation. However, 
not all genotypic variants are adaptive in nature; some could even 
be maladaptive. Certain null alleleic variants can make an individual 
unable to utilize a food constituent. A classic example discussed in all 
genetics textbooks is phenylketonuria (PKU), which is an inherited 
disorder caused by mutations in both alleles of the gene for phenyl-
alanine hydroxylase. Individuals afflicted with PKU have increased 
levels of the amino acid phenylalanine in the blood because they are 
not able to metabolize dietary phenylalanine. If PKU is not treated, 
phenylalanine can build up to harmful levels in the body, causing 
intellectual disability and other serious health problems.
Many of these genotypic variations are allelic variants cre-
ated through single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs; pronounced 
snips). SNPs and copy number variations (CNVs) are the two com-
mon types of heritable variations that are responsible for many 
apparent inter-individual genetic differences in a population. In the 
human genome, about 65% of all SNPs involve C→T (transition) 
mutations. It is thought that many of the SNPs and CNVs can pre-
dispose people to disease or influence their response to drugs and 
xenobiotics. The frequency of occurrence of SNPs in the human 
genome is about one per 1000 bases, but SNPs that make up about 
90% of all human genetic variations occur every 100 to 300 bases 
in the genome. The inter-individual differences in the ability to pro-
duce functional enzymes, transporters, and other proteins that aid in 
the digestion, transport, and assimilation of nutrients are important 
determinants of personalized nutrition (Choudhuri, 2009).
Genotypic Variations and the Ability to 
Utilize Food Constituents
There are a number genotypic variants that determine an individ-
ual’s ability to utilize nutrients in food—both macro- and micro-
nutrients. The lack of ability to utilize the nutrients often results 
in mild-to-severe pathological conditions. For example, two poly-
morphisms in the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) 
gene [C677T→Ala222Val (A222V) and A1298C→Glu429Ala 
(E429A)1] are associated with higher homocysteine levels in the 
blood; the C677T polymorphism being the most common. The 
C677T variant encodes the thermolabile form of the MTHFR 
enzyme and it is recognized as the most common genetic cause of 
hyperhomocysteinemia. The TT homozygous individuals (C677T 
mutation in both alleles) have mildly elevated homocysteine levels 
and low-serum folate levels. The frequency of this polymorphism 
is the highest in Mexico (32%) and the least in Africa (6%). The 
A1298C does not cause increased homocysteine levels in AC het-
erozygous or CC homozygous individuals, but combined heterozy-
gosity of A1298C and C677T results in an outcome similar to TT 
homozygous individuals (van der Put et al., 1998; Wilcken et al., 
2003). Carriers of these mutations could be at higher risk of cardio-
vascular disease (Choudhuri and Chanderbhan, 2016).
Another example of a genotypic variation that impacts the abil-
ity to use food ingredients is glutathione S-transferase M1 (GSTM1) 
1A1298C→Glu429Ala means that base #1298 in the open reading frame 
(ORF) of the cDNA has mutated from Adenine (A) to Cytosine (C). This 
SNP can also be written as 1298A>C. This A1298C mutation in the ORF 
has changed the amino acid #429 in the protein from Glutamic Acid to 
Alanine; hence, Glu429Ala (E429A). The recommendations for designating 
changes in DNA and protein have been developed by the Human Genome 
Variation Society, which is an affiliate of the International Federation of 
Human Genetics Society, and the Human Genome Organization (commonly 
referred to as HUGO). In the current text, the use of SNP designations is 
based on that of the original article.

1320
Toxic Agents
unit V
deficiency. Mutations downregulating GSTM1 expression is associ-
ated with more rapid excretion of sulforaphane, an isothiocyanate 
with anti-tumor effects. Because sulforaphane is obtained from cru-
ciferous vegetables, such as broccoli, brussel sprout, and cabbage, 
individuals with this mutation may not be able to derive the full 
benefit of consuming cruciferous vegetables. Likewise, polymor-
phisms in the genes encoding UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 
and sulfotransferase (SULT) may contribute to variability in phy-
tochemical (e.g., flavonoid) clearance and efficacy (Lampe, 2009; 
Lampe et al., 2013).
Human milk contains about 200 oligosaccharides that contain 
3 to 22 sugar residues (German et al., 2008). These oligosaccha-
rides modulate the microbiota of breast-fed infants (Wang et al., 
2015). However, some mothers are deficient in glycosyl transferase 
enzymes involved in the synthesis of specific oligosaccharides. For 
example, 2′-fucosyllactose (2′-FL) is a highly abundant oligosac-
charide in the milk of most mothers. However, mothers who are 
deficient in the enzyme α-(1→2)-fucosyltransferase (FUT2) do not 
produce the 2′-FL in their milk, leading to the nonsecretor pheno-
type. The human milk oligosaccharides apparently provide protec-
tion and enhance the development of the GI and immune systems 
of breast-fed infants. Thus, genetic differences among mothers can 
determine a baby’s exposure/lack of exposure to specific oligosac-
charides from mother’s milk (Muñoz et al., 2013).
Lactose malabsorption, commonly also referred to as lactose 
intolerance,2 is due to the cessation of expression of the enzyme 
lactase with age in certain populations. In certain populations the 
lactase expression is maintained throughout life. Such difference is 
determined by genotypic difference involving specific SNPs. It has 
been proposed that the evolution of this trait was the result of nutri-
tional adaptation driven by the food habit (discussed below in detail).
Dietary iron is found in heme and ionic (non-heme) forms and 
their absorption occurs at the apical surface of the enterocytes of 
the small intestine by different mechanisms. Heme iron is absorbed 
by an as yet unidentified, heme receptor (Siah et al., 2006). The 
metabolism of non-heme iron involves a complex interplay of 
several proteins, starting from the intestinal divalent metal trans-
porter 1 (DMT1) to the intracellular iron storage protein ferritin. 
Interestingly, DMT1 is upregulated in iron-deficient diet and it also 
transports cadmium and lead. Therefore, long-term consumption of 
iron-deficient diet contaminated with cadmium (such as, the rice 
in the diet) or lead may result in a significant increase in the body 
burden of these heavy metal contaminants through food (Park et al., 
2002; Bressler et al., 2004). The dysregulation of many of these pro-
teins can cause iron overload in the body and precipitate hemochro-
matosis. There are several forms of hemochromatosis of which Type 
1 hemochromatosis is known as the primary hereditary hemochro-
matosis. It is an autosomal recessive disorder involving the HFE 
gene on chromosome 6. Two mutations in the HFE gene most rel-
evant to the onset of this disease are G845A→Cys282Tyr (C282Y) 
and C187G→His63Asp (H63D). About 85% to 90% of the affected 
individuals are homozygous for C282Y mutation (genotype AA) 
whereas about 5% of the affected individuals are compound hetero-
zygous for C282Y and H63D mutations (genotype: GA at position 
845 and CG at position 187) (Siah et al., 2006). Another mutation 
A193T→Ser65Cys (S65C) localized in the vicinity of H63D also 
2Lactose malabsorption is a common condition caused by reduced expres-
sion or activity of lactase in the small intestine. The genetic basis of lactose 
malabsorption has been established. In contrast, lactose intolerance is less 
well understood, and could be driven by a number of factors, such as lactase 
expression, the dose of lactose, intestinal flora, and the sensitivity of the 
gastrointestinal tract.
contributes to the etiology of primary hereditary hemochromato-
sis (Mura et al., 1999). Primary hemochromatosis mainly affects 
Caucasians of Northern European descent, and is extremely rare in 
other ethnic groups.
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is 
a genetic disorder that occurs mostly in males because the gene is 
X-linked. Normally RBCs have a life span of 120 days in the cir-
culation. In individuals affected by G6PD deficiency the life span 
of RBCs is shortened because of premature hemolysis, resulting 
in hemolytic anemia. In people with G6PD deficiency, hemolytic 
anemia can be triggered by certain foods, drugs, and infection. For 
example, eating fava beans or inhaling pollen from fava plants (Vicia 
faba) can trigger hemolytic anemia. This adverse reaction to fava 
beans is called favism. Males of Asian, Middle Eastern, or African 
descent are more prone to this hereditary disorder. Many missense 
mutations causing single amino acid substitutions of G6PD protein 
have been described (Vulliamy et al., 1993). Oxidative stress plays 
an important role in the development of favism. Because G6PD helps 
in the formation of NADPH, and NADPH helps in the regeneration 
of GSH from GSSG, G6PD-deficient erythrocytes are NADPH-
deficient, high in GSSG, and are consequently prone to oxidative 
stress-induced damage. Oxidative stress mediates the opening of cat-
ion channels that triggers a series of events, such as the entry of Ca2+ 
into the erythrocytes, activation of scramblases, loss of membrane 
asymmetry, and ultimately hemolysis (Ganesan et al., 2012).
Another example of genotypic variations limiting the uptake 
of the micronutrient zinc (Zn) comes from the mutations in Zn 
transporters. At least two zinc transporters, ZIP4 and ZnT2, are 
now known to be involved in the genetics of zinc deficiency. ZIP4 
is an uptake transporter that is involved in intestinal zinc uptake. 
Mutations in ZIP4, inherited as an autosomal recessive trait, can 
cause acrodermatitis enteropathica (AE). In contrast, mutations in 
ZnT2 cause transient neonatal zinc deficiency (TNZD) with symp-
toms similar to AE but with autosomal dominant inheritance. This 
is because ZnT2 is responsible for supplying human milk with zinc. 
The two diseases can be distinguished in affected infants. AE is fatal 
if zinc is not supplied to the infant after weaning, whereas TNZD 
is a genetic defect of the mother limiting the supply of zinc in the 
milk, and therefore the infant usually will obtain enough zinc once 
weaned (Kasana et al., 2015). Some mutations in ZIP4 and ZnT2 
are discussed as follows.
A total of 34 mutations (missense, nonsense, splice-site, and 
frameshift insertion–deletion mutations) have been reported in the 
SLC39A4 gene that codes for the ZIP4 protein. A vast majority of 
these mutations exist in a homozygous or compound heterozygous 
state (Küry et al., 2016). Several mutations in mother’s SLC30A2 
gene-encoding mutant ZnT2 have also been reported. Heterozygous 
mutations resulting in His54Arg (H54R) and Gly87Arg (G87R) 
mutations in ZnT2 lead to a 75% reduction in the secretion of zinc 
into the human milk. Infants fed on such Zn-deficient milk develop 
TNZD (Chowanadisai et al., 2006; Lasry et al., 2012). Itsumura 
et al. (2013) identified two additional missense mutations in the 
SLC30A2 gene in a Japanese mother, resulting in a 90% reduction in 
Zn concentrations in her milk. These were T454C transition in exon 
4 causing a Trp152Arg (W152R) mutation, and C887T transition in 
exon 7 causing a Ser296Leu (S296L) mutation in the ZnT2 protein.
Food Habits Driving Nutritional Adaptation 
During Evolution
Just as the genotype could determine the ability to utilize food 
constituents/nutrients, food habits could also drive the evolution of 
traits necessary for nutritional adaptation. The focus of research

Food Toxicology: Fundamental and Regulatory Aspects
Chapter 27
1321
in this area has been to identify genetic adaptations to dietary spe-
cializations. The obvious candidate genes are those that encode 
enzymes, which play important roles in nutrient metabolism. To 
date, the genes coding for amylase (AMY1), lactase (LCT), and 
alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) enzymes provide three of the most 
interpretable examples of genetic adaptations to dietary specializa-
tions in human metabolism (Luca et al., 2010).
Starch Digestion  An example of how gene CNV may play a 
role in nutritional adaptation comes from the study by Perry et al. 
(2007). The alpha-amylase (AMY1) gene encodes salivary alpha-
amylase enzyme that helps digest starch. Salivary amylase can 
persist in the stomach and intestine after swallowing, thereby 
augmenting the enzymatic activity of pancreatic amylase (Luca 
et al., 2010). There is a direct correlation between the AMY1 gene 
copy number and salivary amylase content. When seven different 
populations were examined for their salivary amylase content and 
the diploid AMY1 gene copy number, it was found that the high-
starch consuming populations (e.g., agricultural populations of 
European Americans, Japanese, and Hazda hunter-gatherers) had 
a higher diploid AMY1 gene copy number (median 7) compared 
to the low-starch consuming populations (e.g., Biaka and Mbuti 
rainforest hunter-gatherers, Datog pastoralists, and Yakut pastoral-
ist and fishing society) (median 5). Further comparison of chim-
panzee, Bonobo (an ape), and human AMY1 genes suggest that (1) 
the expansion of AMY1 gene copy number took place in human 
lineage, suggesting that a shift toward high-starch diet resulted in 
positive selection of the high CNVs of the AMY1 gene in the popu-
lation, and (2) the selection appears to be ongoing even after the 
evolution of Homo sapiens (Choudhuri and Chanderbhan, 2016).
Lactose Digestion  An independent evolution of convergent 
adaptive traits occurred in response to selection pressure related 
to milk consumption. The lactase gene (LCT) is expressed in the 
intestine, and it produces the enzyme lactase that digests the lac-
tose in milk. Most mammals, including humans, lose the ability 
to digest lactose with age due to reduced lactase expression. The 
persistence of lactase expression phenotype, known as lactase per-
sistence (LP), and the continuing ability to digest milk lactose is 
inherited as a dominant genetic trait. The LP is a common phe-
notype only in populations with a long history of pastoralism and 
milk production (Luca et al., 2010). The LP phenotype is high 
among northern Europeans (more than 90% in Swedes and Danes), 
decreases across southern Europe and the Middle East (about 50% 
in Spanish, French, and pastoralist Arab populations), and is low 
in the African and Asian agriculturalists (about 5% to 20% in West 
African and about 1% in Chinese). Notably, LP is also prevalent in 
African pastoralist groups, like the Tutsi (about 90%) and Fulani 
(about 50%) (Ye and Gu, 2011). Two SNPs, C/T(−13910)3 and 
G/A(−22018) identified in the enhancer region of the LCT gene 
are associated with LP phenotype in European populations. The 
C/T(−13910) is proposed to be the causal regulatory site because 
of its strong correlation with the LP phenotype (Ye and Gu, 
2011). Surprisingly, C/T(−13910) is present in low frequency in 
a few West African pastoralist populations and absent in others, 
3C/T(−13910) means that base #13910 upstream of the transcription start 
site in the gene (i.e., to the left of the transcription start site in the lin-
ear sequence) has mutated from C to T. This can also be represented as 
−13910C>T or C−13910T or C/T−13910. Therefore, SNP notation with 
a “−” sign represents a mutation in the regulatory region of the gene. 
Depending on the distance from the transcription start site, the mutation may 
fall in the proximal or distal promoter, or further upstream in the enhancer. 
Obviously −13910 position falls in the enhancer region of the gene.
suggesting the existence of different genetic variants for the LP phe-
notype in Africans. The genetic variants determining the LP phe-
notype in Africans were identified through a genotype–phenotype 
association study by Tishkoff et al. (2007). The authors identified 
three SNPs [G/C(−14010), T/G(−13915), and C/G(−13907)] that 
are associated with the LP phenotype, as confirmed by enhanced 
in vitro transcription of the alleles containing these SNPs. These 
SNPs originated on different haplotype backgrounds compared to 
that of the European C/T(−13910) SNP. Subsequently, Enattah et 
al. (2008) identified two new population-specific SNPs determining 
the LP phenotype among Middle Easterners: T/G(−13915) within 
the −13910 enhancer region and a synonymous T/C(−3712) 
SNP in exon 17 of the MCM6 gene. It is interesting to note that 
the MCM6 gene, which is a different gene, contains some of the 
regulatory regions controlling LCT gene expression. The absence 
of the European C/T(−13910) SNP in these populations was also 
confirmed by the authors. Because the SNPs responsible for the LP 
phenotypes are different in geographically isolated populations, it 
suggests the independent evolution of convergent adaptive traits in 
response to similar selection pressure (milk consumption).
Alcohol Metabolism  Natural selection has led to metabolic 
adaptation that is protective of alcohol overconsumption related 
to fermentation of food. Ethanol is oxidized to acetaldehyde by 
alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH), and acetaldehyde is subsequently 
oxidized to acetic acid by aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH). The 
metabolism of ethanol varies widely among individuals due to 
genetic variations in these two genes. One of the best-studied poly-
morphisms influencing ethanol metabolism is ADH1B Arg47His 
(Peng et al., 2010). The ADH1B*47His allele (previously called 
ADH2*2) causes enhanced catalytic activity, resulting in an 
increased metabolism of ethanol, and increased blood levels of 
acetaldehyde. If acetaldehyde is not metabolized rapidly by ALDH, 
chronic tissue exposure to acetaldehyde could result in significant 
adverse consequences including cancer. Therefore, ALDH defi-
ciency, which is seen among East Asians, together with an increased 
catalytic activity of ADH results in an increased blood level of 
acetaldehyde. This causes flushing, intolerance, and discomfort 
associated with alcohol drinking. Such individuals are most likely 
to avoid alcohol. Therefore, the ADH1B*47His allele indirectly 
serves to protect from alcoholism (Li et al., 2007). A global inves-
tigation of the ADH1B*47His allele frequency shows a strong geo-
graphic distribution; it is dominant in East Asian populations, but 
rare in European and African populations. The regionally restricted 
enrichment of this allele in southern China and the adjacent areas 
suggests positive selection. Molecular dating suggests that the 
emergence of this allele coincides with the origin of rice domesti-
cation in East Asia, and that there is a strong correlation between 
ADH1B*47His frequency and the age of rice domestication (Peng 
et al., 2010). It has been proposed that the rise of ADH1B*47His 
allele frequency was an adaptation to rice domestication and the 
subsequent production and consumption of fermented food and/or 
beverages. Because ADH1B*47His is involved in protection from 
alcohol overconsumption-related adverse effects, the fixation of 
this allele was favored by natural selection (Peng et al., 2010).
FOOD CONSTITUENTS AND REGULATION 
OF GENE EXPRESSION
One of the earliest examples of nutrient-mediated modulation of 
gene expression came from the discovery of the lactose operon 
in Escherichia coli. Growing E. coli in lactose instead of glucose 
led to the de novo transcription and expression of three enzymes:

1322
Toxic Agents
unit V
β-galactosidase, trans-acetylase, and permease that are all involved 
in the uptake and utilization of lactose as the carbon source. 
Likewise, in higher eukaryotes nutrients such as glucose, amino 
acids, fatty acids, as well as vitamins and minerals are known to 
regulate gene expression (Choudhuri and Chanderbhan, 2016).
Carbohydrates and Gene Expression
Glucose homeostasis is tightly regulated in the body to meet the 
energy demands during the starvation/feeding cycle in animals. 
Red blood cells and the brain primarily rely on a direct supply of 
glucose as their fuel source. Therefore, for most genes regulated by 
a rich carbohydrate diet, the induction or inhibition of their mRNAs 
is substantial and relatively rapid, and is reversible once the carbo-
hydrate availability decreases. Both insulin and glucose contribute 
to the coordinated regulation of carbohydrate and lipid metabolism 
in the liver (Vaulont et al., 2000; Dentin et al., 2005).
Fasting causes low-insulin levels, and activates glucose pro-
duction and lipolysis. In contrast, feeding a carbohydrate-rich diet 
after fasting activates fat synthesis by enhancing the rate of fatty 
acid synthase transcription (Fukuda et al., 1999). Many enzymes 
involved in carbohydrate metabolism are induced in the liver and 
other tissues by a diet high in carbohydrates. For example, Iynedjian 
et al. (1987) demonstrated that in adult rats, glucokinase mRNA 
was low during fasting but it increased more than 50-fold above 
the fasting level within 6 hours of an oral glucose load, and the 
mRNA level returned toward basal values by 18 hours after refeed-
ing. A high carbohydrate (65% sucrose) diet also induces L-type 
pyruvate kinase (L-PK) and aldolase B mRNAs in rats (Weber et 
al., 1984). In livers from starved rats, L-PK mRNA was practically 
undetectable. A carbohydrate-rich diet increased both mRNA con-
centrations, with a maximum being between 12 and 18 hours, and 
the increase being about 4 to 8 times for aldolase B mRNA and 40 
to 100 times for L-PK mRNA. Transcription was maximal at 12 
hours after refeeding, decreasing to 10% of maximum at 72 hours. 
The level of transcribed L-PK mRNA remained constant at 50% 
of maximum for at least 120 hours (Vaulont et al., 1986). Glucose 
also induces the expression of glucose transporters and lipogenic 
enzymes, such as acetyl CoA carboxylase (ACC) (Pape et al., 1988) 
and fatty acid synthase (FAS) (Paulauskis and Sul, 1989), and 
represses the expression of genes of the gluconeogenetic pathway, 
such as phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) (Kahn et al., 
1989). Both insulin and glucose can independently repress PEPCK 
gene expression. Normally, PEPCK expression is induced by glu-
cagon but is dominantly inhibited by glucose-induced increases in 
insulin secretion upon feeding (Kahn et al., 1989).
Based on a number of observations, Mourrieras et al. (1997) 
proposed that glucose-6-phosphate (G6P) is the most likely signal-
ing molecule regulating the glucose-induced transcription of the 
target genes. The conversion of glucose to G6P is carried out by 
glucokinase, whose expression is strongly activated by insulin. 
Glucose-6-Phosphatase (G6Pase), the enzyme that breaks down 
G6P to release glucose, is active in the liver, kidneys, and intes-
tines, and is the main regulator of glucose production in the liver. 
Insulin reduces G6Pase expression (mRNA and protein levels) in 
the fed and refed state where insulin levels are elevated (Argaud et 
al., 1996). In contrast, a low-glucose level dramatically increases 
G6Pase expression (mRNA and protein levels) so that more glu-
cose can be obtained from the glycogen stores to meet the cellular 
energy need. Therefore, in a fed and refed state, when both insu-
lin and glucose levels are high, insulin exerts a dominant nega-
tive effect. The dominant negative effect of a high-insulin level on 
glucagon-mediated PEPCK gene expression and G6Pase gene 
expression is yet another testimony of insulin’s central role in regu-
lating carbohydrate metabolism.
Two transcription factors—the sterol regulatory element 
(SRE)-binding protein 1c (SREBP-1c) and the carbohydrate 
response element (ChRE)-binding protein (ChREBP)—play crucial 
roles in insulin- and glucose-mediated transcriptional regulation of 
genes involved in carbohydrate metabolism (Foufelle and Ferré, 
2002; Dentin et al., 2005; Shankar et al., 2010).
SREBP-1c is a major mediator of insulin action on hepatic glu-
cokinase and lipogenic gene expression. It is rapidly and robustly 
induced by a carbohydrate-rich diet (resulting in a high-insulin 
level) and downregulated by fasting (resulting in a low-insulin 
level). The expression of SREBP-1c gene itself is under the con-
trol of the nuclear receptor transcription factor liver-X-receptor 
(LXR) (Espenshade, 2006). For nuclear receptors (NRs) that form 
heterodimers with the retinoid-X-receptor (RXR), the NR–RXR 
(in this case LXR-RXR) heterodimer binds to the corresponding 
response element (NR-RE; in this case LXRE) in the promoter 
of the target genes. The induced SREBP-1c binds to the SREs in 
the promoter of the target genes, such as glucokinase, ACC, FAS 
(Dentin et al., 2005). Fig. 27-1 shows the relationship between the 
glycolytic and lipogenic pathways.
The ChREBP is another important regulator that mediates the 
effects of glucose; it is predominantly expressed in the liver, kidney, 
and white and brown adipose tissue. ChREBP forms a heterodi-
mer with Max-like protein X (Mlx) that binds to the carbohydrate 
response element (ChRE) located in the promoters of glucose tar-
get genes, such as the L-PK, FAS, and ACC. The ChREBP–Mlx 
complex is able to discriminate between the E-box sites that are 
glucose-responsive and those that are not (Stoeckman et al., 2004). 
Fig. 27-2 shows possible signaling pathways for transcriptional reg-
ulation of target genes in the liver mediated by glucose and insulin.
Studies in humans with high- and low-carbohydrate diets 
showed differential gene expression in subcutaneous fat as well. In 
individuals fed a rye-pasta diet (low postprandial insulin response), 
71 genes showed decreased expression and none showed increased 
expression. In contrast, in individuals fed an oat–wheat–potato diet 
(high postprandial insulin response), 62 genes showed increased 
expression and none showed decreased expression (Kallio et al., 
2007). Two of the noteworthy downregulated genes were the 
hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL) gene and the transcription factor 
TCF7L2 gene. Downregulation of HSL, which is a key enzyme in 
the release of fatty acids from adipose tissue, is associated with 
resistance to genetic or diet-induced obesity. The transcription fac-
tor TCF7L2 is the strongest known genetic predictor of type 2 dia-
betes. In humans, the stable but differential expression pattern of 
many genes involved in carbohydrate metabolism may be rooted in 
geographic ancestral lineage (Schisler et al., 2009).
Amino Acids and Gene Expression
On an average, the daily protein turnover (synthesis and breakdown 
of proteins) in humans is more than 300 g/day; about half of the 
daily protein turnover comes from protein synthesis (Waterlow, 
1984; Poortmans et al., 2012). About 75% of the amino acids are 
utilized for the resynthesis of tissue proteins. Unlike carbohydrates 
and fats, excess amino acids cannot be stored, but are degraded pri-
marily in the liver. Most of the nitrogen in amino acids is converted 
to urea and excreted, while the carbon skeletons are either oxidized 
to form carbon dioxide and water or utilized for gluconeogenesis 
and ketogenesis.
Amino acid availability regulates the expression of many genes 
both in vivo and in vitro. Some examples of genes upregulated by

Food Toxicology: Fundamental and Regulatory Aspects
Chapter 27
1323
amino acid starvation include the enzymes of amino acid synthesis 
pathway (e.g., asparagine synthetase, glutamine synthetase), enzymes 
of the urea cycle (e.g., argininosuccinate synthetase), the rate-­
controlling enzyme in polyamine biosynthesis pathway (e.g., ornithine 
decarboxylase), transporters (e.g., sodium-coupled neutral amino acid 
transporter SNAT2, cationic amino acid transporter CAT1, amino acid 
transporter ATA2), ribosomal proteins (e.g., L17, L35, S13, and S25), 
transcriptional activator proteins, such as CCAAT/enhancer-binding 
protein (C/EBP) and C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), insulin-like 
growth factor-binding protein-1 (IGFBP-1), and proto-oncogenes (jun 
and myc) (Kilberg et al., 1994, 2012; Fafournoux et al., 2000; Jousse 
et al., 2004; Brasse-Lagnel et al., 2009).
Overexpression of IGFBP-1 (e.g., in transgenic mice) causes 
growth defect. Growth defect is also seen in amino acid deficiency. 
Consistent with these facts was the finding that strong induction of 
IGFBP-1 mRNA in the liver was seen following feeding rats with 
a low-protein diet for 10 days. Amino acid starvation has also been 
reported to induce IGFBP-1 mRNA in cultured cells (Jousse et al., 
2004). Amino acid supplementation results in the upregulation of 
a number of genes. For example, a high concentration of trypto-
phan enhances the expression of collagenase and tissue inhibitors 
of metalloproteinases. The expression of argininosuccinate syn-
thetase and ornithine decarboxylase, which are induced by amino 
acid starvation, is also upregulated in response to high amino acid 
supplementation. The majority of the mRNA increase by amino 
acid starvation or supplementation is through an increase in de novo 
transcription (mRNA synthesis), but mRNA stabilization also plays 
important roles. For example, the increase in CHOP mRNA, at least 
in part, involves mRNA stabilization. High glutamine concentration 
induces the accumulation of argininosuccinate synthetase mRNA 
in isolated hepatocytes. Similarly, high asparagine concentration 
induces ornithine decarboxylase mRNA expression primarily by 
post-transcriptional stabilization of the mRNA, but also by stimu-
lating the synthesis and suppressing the degradation of ornithine 
decarboxylase protein (Fafournoux et al., 2000). The translation of 
mRNAs of some of these amino acid–regulated genes is initiated 
through internal ribosomal entry sites (IRES).4
4IRES facilitate cap-independent translational initiation, and are located at 
the 5′-untranslated region of certain “survival” mRNAs whose expression 
is upregulated during severe cellular stress. Many viral mRNAs employ the 
same mechanism to hijack the host’s translation machinery.
Triglyceride
Cholesterol
Mevalonate
HMG CoA
Acetoacetyl CoA
Fatty acid
Acyl CoA
Malonyl CoA
Acetyl CoA
Citrate
TCA cycle
Dihydroxy-
acetone-P
Phosphoenol
Pyruvate
Fructose-6-P
Glucose-6-P
Glucose
Glycolysis
Lipogenesis
SREBP-1c
regulated
SREBP-2
regulated
Pyruvate
HEPATOCYTE
Glycerol-3-P
Figure 27-1.  The liver is the major site of carbohydrate metabolism (glycolysis and glycogen synthesis) and fatty acid synthesis (lipogenesis). The precursor of 
fatty acid synthesis is acetyl CoA. The SREBP-1c preferentially regulates genes involved in de novo lipogenesis, but SREBP-2 preferentially regulates genes 
involved in cholesterol synthesis and uptake, at least in the liver.
Glucose
Transporter
Glucose
MEMBRANE
HEPATOCYTE CYTOPLASM
Insulin
Receptor
Insulin
Insulin
signaling
Glucose-6-P
Glucose
signaling
Nucleus
Transcription
ChoRE/GIRE
Transcription
preinitiation
complex
Glycolysis
Glucokinase
Figure 27-2.  Transcriptional regulation by glucose and insulin signaling 
in the liver. Glucose-6-phophate is the most likely signaling molecule 
regulating glucose-induced transcription, and its formation is an important 
step in glucose-signaling pathway. Insulin-signaling pathway may involve 
insulin-responsive transcription factor SREBP-1c.

1324
Toxic Agents
unit V
The current knowledge on the amino acid regulation of gene 
expression has developed mostly from detailed studies on the 
upregulation of two genes, CHOP and asparagine synthetase (AS), 
in response to amino acid starvation. It may be emphasized here 
that cellular stressors like nutrient and energy deprivation activate 
autophagy, which is the primary catabolic program.
The CHOP gene expression is strongly induced by cellular 
stress, such as oxidative stress, DNA damage, and amino acid 
starvation. CHOP is a nuclear protein related to the CCAAT/
enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) family of transcription factors. 
Leucine limitation in human cell lines results in the induction of 
CHOP mRNA and protein in a dose-dependent fashion (Averous 
et al., 2003). The CHOP gene promoter contains the amino acid 
response element (AARE), which binds in vitro the activating tran-
scription factor 2 (ATF-2) under both starved and unstarved condi-
tions. The expression of CHOP mRNA during amino acid starvation 
is mediated by ATF-2 and ATF-4 (Bruhat et al., 2000; Jousse et al., 
2004). The expression of CHOP mRNA is also induced by endo-
plasmic reticulum (ER) stress response (ERSR), also known as 
unfolded protein response (Patil and Walter, 2001), and is mediated 
by the ER stress response element (ERSRE)-binding protein ATF-6.
Asparagine synthetase (AS) is responsible for the biosynthe-
sis of asparagine from aspartate and glutamate. It is ubiquitously 
expressed in most mammalian cells. The transcription of the AS 
gene is also increased in response to both amino acid and glucose 
starvation, the latter resulting in an ERSR as discussed above. The 
AS gene contains five specific cis-elements: three GC boxes (GC-I, 
GC-II, and GC-III) and two nutrient-sensing response elements 
(NSRE-1 and NSRE-2) (Leung-Pineda and Kilberg, 2002). All 
three GC boxes are required for basal transcription and also for 
the maximal induction of the AS gene by amino acid limitation. 
The genomic unit containing both NSRE-1 and NSRE-2 is called 
nutrient-sensing response unit (Jousse et al., 2004). Even though 
amino acid starvation does not cause ER stress (unfolded protein 
response), the amino acid starvation response pathway and the ER 
stress pathway appear to closely overlap. This may be due to the 
involvement of some common transcriptional trans-activators that 
are involved in both pathways, such as ATF-4 (Jousse et al., 2004).
The amino acid deficiency response involves a number of sig-
naling pathways that include many proteins, but the central pathway 
of general control nonderepressible 2 (GCN2)–eukaryotic initiation 
factor eIF2–ATF4 appears to be involved in all tissues (Kilberg et 
al., 2012; Choudhuri and Chanderbhan, 2016).
Fatty Acids and Gene Expression
Fatty acids and their acyl-CoA derivatives serve many biological 
functions within the cell. They serve as metabolic energy sources, 
substrates for membranes, signaling molecules for metabolic regu-
lation, and regulators of gene expression. Fatty acid regulation of 
gene transcription occurs in unicellular as well as complex organ-
isms (Duplus et al., 2000).
While controversy still exists regarding the contribution of 
passive diffusion versus protein-mediated fatty acid transport, both 
processes are now widely accepted (Kalant and Cianflone, 2004). 
A completely passive diffusion of fatty acids across the plasma 
membrane is not conducive to maintaining cellular homeostasis. 
The uptake of fatty acid across the plasma membrane is mediated by 
distinct transport proteins (Table 27-3). Once within the cell, most 
fatty acids are non-covalently bound to fatty acid-binding proteins 
(FABPs). FABPs are involved in reversibly binding intracellular 
hydrophobic ligands, and trafficking them throughout cellular com-
partments, including the peroxisomes, mitochondria, endoplasmic 
reticulum, and nucleus (Smathers and Petersen, 2011).
The regulation of gene expression by fatty acids is dictated 
by the type, quantity, and the duration of exposure to dietary fats. 
Among short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), such as acetate, propionate, 
and butyrate, the effects of butyrate on gene expression have been 
studied by many laboratories. Butyrate is produced by anaerobic 
bacterial fermentation of dietary fibers. It was shown by the mid-
1970s that sodium butyrate halts DNA synthesis, arrests cell pro-
liferation, alters cell morphology, and increases or decreases gene 
expression (Prasad and Sinha, 1976). The observation that butyr-
ate increased the level of acetylated histones in cultured HeLa and 
Friend erythroleukemic cells was a turning point in understanding 
the molecular mechanisms of action of butyrates in gene regulation 
(Davie, 2003). Butyrates were found to increase gene expression by 
inhibiting histone deacetylase activity, thereby increasing histone 
acetylation, which promotes transcriptional activation (Davie, 2003).
A large number of studies investigating the role of fatty acids 
on gene expression have focused on the long-chain fatty acids 
(LCFAs). Analyses of fatty acid regulation of gene expression have 
focused on several possible mechanisms, including peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) and prostanoid-regulated 
processes (Jump and Clarke, 1999). PPAR is a ligand-dependent 
transcription factor that heterodimerizes with RXR. Three differ-
ent PPAR subtypes have been cloned—PPARα, PPARβ (or δ), and 
PPARγ. All three forms of PPARs bind polyunsaturated fatty acids 
(PUFAs), such as arachidonic acid (ARA), docosahexanoic acid 
(DHA), and others. In addition to PUFAs that are bona fide PPAR 
ligands, numerous fatty acid-derived compounds showing a struc-
tural resemblance to fatty acids, such as acyl-CoAs, oxidized fatty 
acids, eicosanoids, endocannabinoids, and phytanic acid, have also 
been shown to activate PPARs (Clark, 2002).
Surprisingly, circulating free fatty acids (FFAs) that primarily 
originate from adipose tissue lipolysis (so-called old fat) cannot 
activate PPARα in the liver. In contrast, dietary and endogenously 
synthesized fatty acids (so-called new fat) can. This difference 
may be related to the existence of (as yet unknown) differential 
signaling properties between the two forms of FFAs. However, the 
plasma FFAs (the old fat) can activate hepatic PPARγ (Georgiadi 
and Kersten, 2012).
Studies in rodents demonstrated that PPARα mediates the 
effects of dietary fatty acids on hepatic gene expression (Choudhuri 
and Chanderbhan, 2016). The importance of PPARα in overall glu-
cose and fatty acid homeostasis was demonstrated by the obser-
vations that PPARα-knockout mice lack the ability to increase 
fatty acid oxidation during periods of food deprivation and they 
develop characteristics of adult-onset diabetes, including fatty liv-
ers, elevated blood triglycerides, and hyperglycemia (Clark, 2002). 
Because PPARα plays a pivotal role in both fatty acid and glucose 
metabolism, it was proposed to be a “master switch” transcription 
factor that is targeted by PUFAs to coordinately suppress genes 
encoding the enzymes of lipid synthesis and induce genes encod-
ing the enzymes of fatty acid oxidation and thermogenesis (Clark, 
2002). It should be borne in mind, however, that peroxisome prolif-
eration is a rodent-specific response mediated by PPARα. Although 
humans have a functional PPARα, its expression and ligand-bind-
ing affinities are different from that of mouse PPARα.
The PPARs play a critical physiological role as lipid sensors 
and regulators of lipid metabolism (Rogue et al., 2010). The major 
groups of target genes for the PPARs are genes involved in lipid 
and glucose metabolism. PPARα exerts its effects on the liver 
and muscle, whereas PPARγ exerts its effects on the adipose tis-
sues and tumor cells. PPARα ligands include both ω-3 and ω-6 
PUFAs, but ω-3 PUFAs seem to be more potent (Price et al., 2000). 
PPARγ is expressed at the highest level in adipose tissue whereas

Food Toxicology: Fundamental and Regulatory Aspects
Chapter 27
1325
its expression in the liver is low, being only 10% to 30% of the level 
in adipose tissue in both mice and humans. Prostaglandin PGJ2 is a 
PPARγ ligand; it binds and activates PPARγ. The effects of PPARγ 
on lipid metabolism are mainly mediated by genes expressed in 
adipocytes.
Fatty acids also regulate the expression of various transcrip-
tion factors, such as SREBP-1c, LXR, farnesoid-X-receptor (FXR, 
the bile acid–activated nuclear receptor), hepatic nuclear factor 4α 
(HNF-4α), and NF-κB (Georgiadi and Kersten, 2012), thus regu-
lating the expression of the target genes of these transcription fac-
tors. Mammalian cells produce several isoforms of SREBPs. The 
importance of SREBP-1a, SREBP-1c, and SREBP-2 in regulating 
the expression of genes relevant to carbohydrate and lipid metabo-
lism has been studied more extensively. SREBP-1a and -1c are the 
products of alternative splicing but SREBP-2 is encoded by a dif-
ferent gene (Hua et al., 1995). Unlike typical transcription factors, 
SREBPs are synthesized as integral membrane proteins localized in 
the endoplasmic reticulum. The N- and the C-terminal domains are 
cytosolic (Fig. 27-3). The N-terminal domain of the SREBP is the 
actual transcription regulatory part of the protein and it contains a 
basic helix–loop–helix (bHLH)–Zip domain. This domain is cleaved 
from the membrane by a sterol-regulated protease and allows it to 
enter into the nucleus. In the nucleus, this transcription regulatory 
bHLH-Zip domain binds to the enhancer sequences known as the 
sterol response elements (SREs) of the lipogenic genes, and activates 
transcription (Ye and DeBose-Boyd, 2011). The proteolytic pathway 
that liberates the N-terminal bHLH-Zip domain from membranes 
in response to intracellular levels of cholesterol and fatty acids is 
known as the SREBP pathway (Brown and Goldstein, 1997).
Dietary PUFAs inhibit hepatic lipogenesis through inhibi-
tion of both SREBP-1c and SREBP-2, in particular SREBP-1c 
(Georgiadi and Kersten, 2012). Interestingly, the ω-3 long-chain 
PUFAs (e.g., EPA and DHA) and the ω-6 PUFA (e.g., ARA) 
have far more inhibitory capacity on SREBP than do the shorter 
chain unsaturated fatty acids (e.g., 18:1 oleic acid, 18:2 linoleic 
acid), and saturated fatty acids have almost no effect on SREBP 
(Georgiadi and Kersten, 2012; Choudhuri and Chanderbhan, 2016). 
The SREBP-1c preferentially activates genes involved in de novo 
lipogenesis, but SREBP-2 preferentially activates genes involved 
in cholesterol synthesis and uptake, at least in the liver (Fig. 27-1). 
Because PUFAs antagonize LXR, PUFAs inhibit the transcription 
of LXR-regulated genes, such as SREBP-1a and SREBP-1c, in 
humans (Hannah et al., 2001).
Dietary fatty acids can also regulate the expression of pro-
teins associated with micronutrient metabolism. It is well known 
that vitamin A absorption in the intestine is stimulated by the pres-
ence of fat. The modulation of intestinal vitamin A absorption is 
the result of a dietary fat-inducible cellular retinol-binding protein 
II (CRBPII), which plays a pivotal role in the intestinal absorption 
and metabolism of retinol and β-carotene. In mice, unsaturated fatty 
acids (e.g., oleic, linoleic, and α-linolenic acids) enhance CRBPII 
mRNA levels, whereas medium-chain fatty acids and saturated fatty 
acids have little effect. Consistent with this finding, feeding a fat-
free diet repressed CRBPII mRNA accumulation in the small intes-
tine by 50% within a day, and this low level was sustained over the 
following 9 days. The molecular mechanism of such dietary fatty 
acid regulation was shown to involve PPARα (Takase et al., 2000).
Vitamins and Gene Expression
Like the macronutrients (protein, carbohydrate, and fat), micro-
nutrients (vitamins and minerals) can also modulate gene expres-
sion. There are several publications discussing the potential role of 
vitamins in regulating gene expressions. These studies primarily 
relied on microarray to investigate global gene expression profil-
ing; hence, these findings need to be tested more comprehensively 
in order to establish the causality. The following discussion focuses 
on two examples, vitamins A and D.
B-HLH-Zip
domain
B-HLH-Zip
domain
B-HLH-Zip
domain
Cytoplasm
Lumen
Site 1
High
cellular
sterol
Golgi
ER
Cytoplasm
Lumen
N
C
C
C
C
N
N
N
N
Site 2
Figure 27-3.  The N-terminal domain of SREBP is the actual transcription regulatory part of the protein and it contains a basic helix–loop–helix (bHLH)–Zip 
domain. The precursor of SREBP is synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), where it is in complex with another protein, the SREBP cleavage activat-
ing protein (SCAP). SCAP contains a sterol sensory domain. In low intracellular sterol concentration, SCAP helps in the translocation of SREBP to the Golgi. 
This translocation is prevented when the intracellular sterol concentrations are high. Once in Golgi, the SREBP undergoes two proteolytic cleavage steps to 
release the mature, biologically active transcription factor that translocates to the nucleus. The nuclear SREBP binds to the sterol response element (SRE) in 
the promoter/enhancer regions of target genes to activate transcription.

1326
Toxic Agents
unit V
Vitamin A-mediated regulation of gene expression is a 
well-known example of direct gene regulation by micronutrients. 
Retinoic acid, a bioactive form of vitamin A, is a ligand for the 
nuclear retinoic acid receptor (RAR). Ligand-activated RAR het-
erodimerizes with RXR; the RAR–RXR complex binds to the cog-
nate retinoic acid response element (RARE) in the regulatory region 
of the target genes and regulates gene expression. As mentioned 
above, PEPCK-catalyzed reaction is the rate-limiting step of gluco-
neogenesis in animals. The expression of PEPCK gene is a target of 
retinoic acid. Retinoic acid plays an important role in development, 
but high levels of retinoic acid exposure can be teratogenic to the 
developing embryo. Thus, it is imperative that retinoic acid targets 
many genes including the developmentally important homeobox 
(Hox) genes, such as Hoxa1, Hoxb1, Hoxb4, and Hoxd4. All the 
target genes harbor RARE (Rhinn and Dollé, 2012). Dietary vita-
min A levels can also modulate the expression of genes encoding 
insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I), IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR), and 
insulin receptor (IR) in many different tissues. Serum IGF-I con-
centrations and tissue IGF-I mRNA are downregulated by vitamin 
A deficiency (Choudhuri and Chanderbhan, 2016).
The model of vitamin D (1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3)-mediated 
gene expression involves similar steps of events as for vitamin 
A, that is, vitamin D binding-mediated activation of vitamin D 
receptor (VDR), formation of VDR–RXR complex, its binding to 
VDRE, and modification of transcriptional output. Genome-wide 
mapping of vitamin D receptor binding revealed that vitamin D 
could influence over 200 genes, highlighting links to disease states 
(Ramagopalan et al., 2010). Vitamin D plays an important role in 
regulating genes involved in bone remodeling and the maintenance 
of bone health, such as VDR, TNFSF11, LRP5, CBS, and CYP24a1.
Mencej-Bedrac et al. (2009) reported certain SNPs in the 
human VDR, OPG, and TNFSF11 genes that are associated with 
bone mineral density. These SNPs predispose the carriers to osteo-
porosis. Vitamin D is inactivated by the vitamin D 24-hydroxy-
lase, which is encoded by the CYP24A1 gene. Because vitamin D 
upregulates the expression of CYP24A1, it autoregulates its own 
inactivation. Vitamin D also regulates a network of genes involved 
in bile acid metabolism in the colon, the degradation of xenobiotic 
compounds in several tissues, the differentiation of keratinocytes 
in skin, the development and cycling of dermal hair follicles, and 
the functions of key cell types involved in both innate and adaptive 
immunity (Pike and Meyer, 2010; Pike et al., 2014).
Some vitamins may also regulate gene expression through epi-
genetic modification of the chromatin. For example, using Jurkat 
lymphoma cells, Gralla et al. (2008) demonstrated that when bio-
tin concentration in Jurkat cells was high because of high levels 
of biotin supplementation in the media, the lysine 12 of histone 
H4 (H4K12) at the SMVT promoter had high levels of biotinyl-
ation (H4K12Bio). Biotinylation of histone H4 is a transcription 
repressing modification. Therefore, high levels of intracellular bio-
tin downregulated the expression of SMVT (by 86%) and resulted 
in a significant decrease in further biotin uptake. Thus, biotin may 
autoregulate its own intracellular concentration by regulating its 
own uptake through epigenetic regulation of SMVT.
Minerals and Gene Expression
In recent years, several nutrigenomics studies investigated global 
changes in gene expression by a number of minerals. The changes 
in gene expression profiles by the same mineral reported in different 
studies are not the same. Therefore, these findings are yet to be inter-
preted for their overall biological relevance to be able to develop a 
coherent narrative. The following discussion focuses on iron.
Dietary non-heme ferric iron Fe(III) is first reduced by entero-
cyte membrane-bound ferrireductases into ferrous Fe(II) form. The 
apical transporter divalent metal transporter 1 (DMT1) transports 
Fe(II) from the intestine into the enterocytes, thus helping in non-
heme iron absorption. Heme iron is taken up by enterocytes by an 
as yet undefined mechanism. The Fe(II) is translocated through 
the enterocyte and is exported into the circulation by the basolat-
eral exporter ferroportin. Ferroportin is the only iron export protein 
known. During export, Fe(II) is oxidized by hephaestin, which is a 
membrane-bound ferrooxidase. Thus, hephaestin is necessary for 
effective iron transport from enterocytes into the circulation. In the 
circulation, Fe(III) binds to plasma transferrin (Tf) to be distributed 
throughout the body, and taken up primarily by the liver. In the liver, 
the Fe(III)–Tf complex binds to the membrane transferrin receptor 
(TfR). The Fe(III)–Tf–TfR complex is endocytosed inside the cell. 
The acidic pH of the endosome releases the Fe(III), which is again 
reduced to Fe(II) by the intracellular ferrireductase STEAP3 (Fig. 
27-4). The intracellular iron storage is regulated at multiple levels. 
Vitamin D and the Genetics of Bone Remodeling
During bone remodeling osteoclasts resorb old bone tissue, 
osteoblasts deposit new bone tissue, and some osteoblasts that 
become trapped within the bone matrix differentiate into osteo-
cytes. When the two functions are out-of-balance, bone health is 
affected. For example, when osteoclasts remove more bone than 
osteoblasts can deposit, the result is osteoporosis. In contrast, if 
osteoblasts deposit more bone than osteoclasts can remove, the 
result is osteopetrosis (hyper dense bones). By regulating the 
VDR gene, vitamin D regulates a wide variety of target genes that 
contain the VDRE. The VDR gene is highly expressed in osteo-
blasts, terminally differentiated osteocytes and probably in osteo-
clasts as well. The TNFSF11 gene produces the protein RANKL 
that regulates osteoclast differentiation, function, and activation. 
In normal bone remodeling, the RANKL (ligand) is secreted by 
osteoblasts and binds to the RANK receptor on both osteoclast 
precursor and mature osteoclast cells. The RANK–RANKL 
interaction triggers cellular signaling events that trigger osteo-
clast differentiation, function, and activation. This can be inhib-
ited by osteoprotegerin (OPG), which is produced by osteoblasts 
and stromal cells and acts as a decoy receptor that sequesters 
RANKL. Sequestration of RANKL by OPG inhibits the differen-
tiation and activation of osteoclasts. Evidently, the RANKL/OPG 
ratio acts as an important determinant of bone mass and skeletal 
integrity by regulating the balance between bone resorption and 
bone deposition processes. This is also demonstrated in animal 
models—RANK-null (RANK−/−) and OPG-null (OPG−/−) mice. 
While RANK-null mice develop osteopetrosis-like conditions 
(Dougall et al., 1999), OPG-null mice develop osteoporosis-like 
conditions (Bucay et al., 1998). The LRP5 gene encodes LRP5 
protein that regulates osteoblast proliferation and differentiation. 
A loss-of-function mutation in LRP5 gene causes a decrease in 
bone mass and osteoporosis, whereas a gain-of-function mutation 
causes drastic increases in bone mass. The CBS gene encodes the 
enzyme cystathionine β-synthase that converts homocysteine to 
cystathionine, which is an intermediate in the synthesis of cyste-
ine. High homocysteine levels are a risk factor for osteoporotic 
fracture. Thus, individuals with cystathionine β-synthase defi-
ciency that results in a reduction in the enzyme activity are prone 
to osteoporosis (Kruger et al., 2003).

Food Toxicology: Fundamental and Regulatory Aspects
Chapter 27
1327
When body iron stores and erythropoiesis are adequate, iron export 
from enterocytes into the circulation is reduced by hepcidin-mediated 
internalization and degradation of Fe–ferroportin complex. The iron 
thus released from ferroportin is stored in ferritin. Under such con-
ditions, the hepatic iron uptake is also reduced by downregulating 
the expression of the transferrin receptor through degradation of the 
transferrin receptor mRNA. In the enterocytes, the stored iron in fer-
ritin is lost after 3 days by desquamation of intestinal cells (Anderson 
et al., 2012). Iron regulation of gene expression requires the presence 
of a 30-nucleotide long iron response element (IRE) in the 5′-untrans-
lated or 3′-untranslated region of the target mRNAs. The IRE forms 
a special stem-loop structure. The IRE binds the iron regulatory 
protein (IRP), also called IRE-binding protein (IRE-BP). The IRPs 
are cellular iron sensors. The mRNAs associated with iron transport, 
distribution, and storage all contain IREs, such as DMT1, ferropor-
tin, transferrin, and ferritin mRNAs. Some other mRNAs containing 
IREs include that of mitochondrial aconitase and succinate dehydro-
genase. Fig. 27-5 shows how the binding of the IRP–Fe complex to 
IRE affects mRNA stability based on the location of the IRE in the 
5′-UTR versus the 3′-UTR of the target mRNA. Other dietary miner-
als, such as zinc (Zn) and copper (Cu), regulate gene expression by 
activating metal regulatory transcription factor 1 (MTF1).
Dietary Polyphenols, Indoles, Carotenoids, 
and Gene Expression
Dietary polyphenolic constituents present in fruits, vegetables, 
and spices can mediate nutrient–gene interactions by activating 
or inhibiting specific transcription factor pathways (Ashida et al., 
2008). These include both flavonoid polyphenols (e.g., quercetin, 
kaempferol, apigenin, tangeretin), and non-flavonoid polyphenols 
(e.g., resveratrol, curcumin). Indole-3-carbinol (I3C), present in 
cruciferous vegetables, and dietary carotenoids (e.g., canthaxanthin, 
astaxanthin) also mediate nutrient–gene interactions. I3C is derived 
from glucobrassicin (glucosinolate) (Fig. 27-11). These dietary 
constituents regulate gene expression through modulation of the 
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) pathway. Although AhR is known 
for its role in effecting the toxicity of dioxins and other environ-
mental pollutants, it also plays important roles in normal biological 
processes, such as regulating anti-inflammatory response, and the 
development of the immune system.
Table 27-4 shows some transcription factor pathways involved 
in nutrient–gene interactions.
Food–Drug Interactions
The food and drug interactions are in most part the results of 
food-induced changes in drug bioavailability or metabolism, 
although some are the result of altered drug concentrations at the site 
of action and the resulting effect. In other words, food–drug interac-
tions can alter pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic parameters of 
the drug. For drugs with a narrow therapeutic index and the need for 
dose titration, even small changes in the dose–response effects can 
have great consequences (Schmidt and Dalhoff, 2002).
Examples of dietary constituents that may produce an effect on 
the overall pharmacokinetics of drugs would include food or food 
components that change the pH of urine or simply the presence of 
fiber in the intestine. Examples of pharmacodynamic interactions 
might include the effect of unsaturated fatty acids in the diet on anti-
coagulants or membrane potentials of the membranes in which they 
become incorporated, or high potassium intake from potassium-rich 
foods and the risk of hyperkalemia during therapy with angioten-
sin-converting enzyme inhibitors or spironolactone (Schmidt and 
Dalhoff, 2002). Some food–drug interactions, such as the effects of 
dietary constituents on the induction or inhibition of CYP3A4, may 
be potentially important because CYP3A4 metabolizes more than 
Plasma
Transferrin
Blood
Vessel
Ferroportin
(the only iron export
protein known)
(intracellular iron storage
protein; lost when intestinal
mucosa is sloughed off)
DMT1
(mediates proton-
dependent
Fe2+ transport)
Ferrireductase
(membrane-bound)
Ferrooxidase
(Hephaestin)
Endocytosis
Transferrin Receptor
Ferrireductase (STEAP3)
(intracellular)
Ferritin and
Transferrin
Gene
Regulation
Fe3+
Fe2+
H e p a t o c y t e
E n t e r o c y t e
Fe2+
Fe3+
Fe2+
Fe3+
Fe2+
Fe2+
Fe2+
Transferrin
Ferropor
(intracellular i
protein; lost wh
mucosa is slo
Ferroo
(Heph
Fe2+
Fe3+
DMT1
M
DM
DM
DM
ates proton-
tatatatet
pendent
pe
pe
transport)
rtrtrt
rrireductase
rrrrrrr
mbrane-bound)
mb
mb
m
Fe3+
tosis
Transferrin Rece
Ferrireduct
(intracellular
Fe3+
Figure 27-4.  The transport of dietary iron from the intestine to the liver. Non-heme ferric iron Fe(III) is first reduced by enterocyte membrane–bound ferrire-
ductases into ferrous Fe(II) form. The apical transporter divalent metal transporter 1 (DMT1) transports Fe(II) into the enterocytes. The Fe(II) is translocated 
through the enterocyte and is exported into the circulation by the basolateral exporter ferroportin. During export, Fe(II) is oxidized by hephaestin, which is a 
membrane-bound ferrooxidase. In the circulation, Fe(III) binds to plasma transferrin to be distributed throughout the body, and taken up primarily by the liver. 
In the liver, the Fe(III)–Tf complex binds to the membrane transferrin receptor (TfR). The Fe(III)–Tf–TfR complex is endocytosed inside the cell. The acidic 
pH of the endosome releases the Fe(III), which is again reduced to Fe(II) by the intracellular ferrireductase STEAP3.

1328
Toxic Agents
unit V
Table 27-4  
Some Dietary Constituents That Mediate Nutrient–Gene Interactions by Modulating Specific Transcription Factor 
Pathways (Partial List)
FOOD/FOOD INGREDIENTS (SOURCE)
ACTIVATING CONSTITUENTS
TARGET TRANSCRIPTION FACTORS
Proteins
Amino acids
C/EBP, CHOP, IGFBP-1
Carbohydrates
Glucose
SREBPs, ChREBP, LXR
Fats
Fatty acids
SREBPs, ChREBP, PPARs, HNF-4,  
NF-κB, LXR, RXR 
Cholesterol
SREBPs, LXR, FXR, RXR
Vitamins
A
RAR, RXR 
D
VDR, RXR
Minerals
Fe
IRPs (IREBPs) 
Zn, Cu
MTF1
Vegetables and fruits
Flavonoid polyphenols (e.g., quercetin, 
kaempferol, apigenin, tangeretin)
AhR, Nrf2
Spices and wine
Non-flavonoid polyphenols (e.g., curcumin in 
turmeric, resveratrol in grapes and wine)
Cruciferous vegetables
Indole-3-carbinol
Salmon, shrimp
Carotenoids (e.g., canthaxanthin, astaxanthin)
5′-IRE
5′
5′
3′
3′
3′-IRE
3′-IRE
3′-IRE
Low intra-
cellular iron
IRE Binding
IRE Binding
mRNA stablized
Transferrin
translation
More transferrin receptor; increased iron transport
No translation
IRE-BP
A
B
IRE-BP
IRE-BP + Fe
IRE-BP + Fe
No IRE binding
Ferritin translation
More ferritin; iron sequestration
ORF
ORF
Ferritin mRNA
High intra-
cellular iron
Transferrin receptor mRNA
High plasma iron
Low plasma iron
No IRE binding
mRNA degraded
No translation
Figure 27-5.  When intracellular iron levels are high, IRP binds iron (Fe) and the IRP–Fe complex cannot bind to IRE in the 5′-UTR of ferritin mRNA. (A) This 
allows ferritin mRNA to be translated to ferritin, which then sequesters excess intracellular iron. When intracellular iron levels are low, the IRP does not bind 
iron; hence it can bind to the IRE. As a result, the translation of the ferritin mRNA is prevented. When iron levels are low, transferrin receptor mRNAs are 
stabilized by the binding of IRP with the IREs in its 3′-UTR so that more transferrin receptors can be translated and cells can take up more iron from transfer-
ring. (B) Unlike ferritin mRNA which has a single IRE in 5′-UTR, transferrin receptor mRNA has multiple IREs in 3′-UTR. When iron levels are high, IRP 
binds iron and cannot interact with IREs; as a result, transferrin receptor mRNA is degraded at a faster rate to prevent over-uptake (thus, over-accumulation) 
of iron in the cell.

Food Toxicology: Fundamental and Regulatory Aspects
Chapter 27
1329
50% of all drugs consumed by humans. Thus, induction of CYP3A4 
might enhance the clearance and reduce the efficacy of a drug. In 
contrast, inhibition of CYP3A4 might prevent the drug’s metabo-
lism, resulting in a gradual build-up of its serum concentration and 
causing toxicity (Choudhuri and Valerio, 2005; Kirby and Unadkat, 
2007). Examples of foods affecting a number of phase I and phase 
II enzymes, and transporters are provided in Table 27-5.
FOOD SAFETY REGULATIONS IN THE 
UNITED STATES
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration
The United States (U.S.) Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
has a wide responsibility for protecting public health that includes 
ensuring the safety of the nation’s food supply. FDA began as the 
Division of Chemistry under the U.S. Department of Agriculture 
(USDA). The name changed to the Bureau of Chemistry in 1901. 
In 1927, the Bureau of Chemistry was reorganized into two sepa-
rate entities; the regulatory functions became the responsibility of 
Food, Drug, and Insecticide Administration, and nonregulatory 
research became the responsibility of the Bureau of Chemistry and 
Soils. In 1930 the name was changed again to the Food and Drug 
Administration (Swan, 1998; http://www.fda.gov/AboutFDA/
WhatWeDo/History/Milestones/ucm128305.htm). Within FDA, 
the Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (CFSAN) is the 
center that is responsible for protecting the food supply. CFSAN’s 
food safety mission involves all of the areas noted below:
 • The safety of substances added to food, e.g., food additives 
(including sources of radiation) and color additives
 • The safety of foods and ingredients developed through 
biotechnology
 • Seafood and juice Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point 
(HACCP) regulations
 • Regulatory and research programs to address health risks asso-
ciated with foodborne, chemical, and biological contaminants
 • Regulations and activities dealing with the proper labeling of 
foods (e.g., ingredients, nutrition health claims)
 • Regulations and policy governing the safety of dietary supple-
ments, infant formulas, and medical foods
 • Food industry postmarket surveillance and compliance
 • Industry outreach and consumer education
 • Cooperative programs with state, local, and tribal governments
 • International food standard and safety harmonization efforts
Chemical risk assessment is a critical aspect of food toxicology; 
the chemicals of interest are natural toxicants found in food, sub-
stances intentionally added to food, substances that unintentionally 
become part of food, and contaminants. Microbial risk ­assessment, 
also critically important to food safety, will not be discussed here.
Historical Perspective on the Science of 
Food Toxicology
Food toxicology involves the study of the toxic substances in food and 
any adverse impact in humans that results from their ingestion. Early 
on in history, humans recognized that many plants including plants 
used for food contained poisonous substances. Such plants were 
either avoided or prepared in ways that mitigated concerns for toxic-
ity. However, the history of food toxicology as it relates to substances 
intentionally added to food or becoming part of food via food process-
ing or contamination began in the last decades of the 19th century.
In 1883, Dr Harvey Washington Wiley of Purdue University 
was named the Chief Chemist of the USDA. That era saw the 
beginning of numerous debates about the use of substances added 
to food, including chemical preservatives, such as benzoates and 
salicylates; flour-bleaching agents, such as nitrites and nitrogen 
peroxide; artificial sweeteners, such as saccharin; and food colors, 
such as synthetic coal-tar dyes. The issues raised in those debates 
formed the basis for the development of food toxicology during 
the early part of the 20th century. Dr Wiley recruited healthy male 
volunteers, the so-called “poison squad,” whose job was to ingest 
various foods containing chemical additives under controlled condi-
tions to test their purported health effects. The volunteers were fed 
many chemicals including borax; salicylic, sulfurous, and benzoic 
acids; and formaldehyde. The experiments went on for 5 years. 
Wiley and the public became convinced that chemical preservatives 
Table 27-5  
Food–Drug Interactions (Activity May be Enhanced or Inhibited)
ENZYME OR 
TRANSPORTER
FOOD
DRUG
CYP1A2
Caffeine, theophylline, grapefruit juice 
(naringen and furanocoumarins bergamottin and 
dihydroxybergamotin), grape juice, cruciferous 
vegetables, apiaceous vegetables, cooked meat
Clozapine, fluvoxamine, imipramine
CYP2E1
Watercress and possibly other isothiocyanate-
containing cruciferous vegetables; polyunsaturated 
fatty acids (corn oil, menhaden oil)
Ethanol, halothane, enflurane
CYP3A4
Grapefruit juice, orange juice, red wine, possibly other 
polyphenol-containing substances, St Johns wort, garlic
Ketoconazole, cyclosporin, erythromycin, 
protease inhibitors, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-
coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors
UGT and GST
Brussel sprouts, cabbage, watercress, broccoli
Acetaminophen, oxazepam, morphine, ibuprofen
P-glycoprotein and 
OATP
Vegetables, fruit juice, St Johns wort
Digoxin, cyclosporine, pravastatin
Abbreviations: GST, glutathione-S-transferases; OATP, organic anion–transporting polypeptides; UGT, uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferases.

1330
Toxic Agents
unit V
should be used in food only when necessary. Wiley intended for 
his experiments to lead to the regulation of food additives but he 
was opposed by the food lobby. Nevertheless, the Pure Food and 
Drug Act was enacted by Congress in 1906 as the first federal law 
to regulate food; the poison squad was disbanded one year later 
(Janssen, 1981; Swan, 1998; Watson, 2013; http://www.fda.gov/
AboutFDA/WhatWeDo/History/Milestones/ucm128305.htm). 
Relatively speaking, food toxicology as a scientific discipline did 
not significantly advance for another 30 years.
The 50 years between 1930 and 1980 witnessed considerable 
development of toxicology (Guengerich, 2004). After World War 
II, there was a significant growth in both the food and the chemi-
cal industry, which led to the development of chemicals such as 
pesticides. The beginning of toxicology as “the science of poisons” 
implied that death was an important endpoint measured in toxicol-
ogy studies. In order to find out the adverse effects of a chemical, 
toxicologists of the time relied mainly on acute toxicity studies with 
a LD50 value as the endpoint. The concepts of longer-term studies 
with repeat dosing, the importance of various biochemical end-
points, species differences, and other factors determining toxicity 
were not appreciated until later.
During the post–World War II period, the concept of longer 
term, repeat dose, toxicity studies, and their utility took root in 
experimental toxicology. Using various short- and long-term toxic-
ity studies with apical endpoints, food toxicology at FDA advanced 
within the Division of Pharmacology under the leadership of Dr 
O. Garth Fitzhugh. During the 1950s further advances were made 
under the new director of the Division of Pharmacology, Dr Arnold 
J. Lehman. FDA established an organized approach to evaluating 
the safety of chemical constituents of foods, drugs, and cosmet-
ics in making safety decisions. In 1959, FDA published the docu-
ment Appraisal of the Safety of Chemicals in Foods, Drugs and 
Cosmetics (Hattan and Rulis, 1999). In 1982, the FDA Center 
for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (CFSAN), then known as 
the Bureau of Foods, published a document titled Toxicological 
Principles for the Safety Assessment of Food Additives and Color 
Additives Used in Food, often referred to as the “FDA Redbook.” 
The safety standard applicable to food ingredients is reasonable 
certainty of no harm under the conditions of intended use. The 
Redbook has been updated several times since then, and FDA has 
published numerous additional guidance related to diverse aspects 
of food safety assessment. A web search using the search term 
“FDA Redbook” returns many relevant FDA links including a link 
to download the Redbook.
History of Food Law
The current federal law governing food safety is the result of incre-
mental legislative actions over a period spanning more than 100 
years. It began with the passage of the Pure Food and Drug Act 
of 1906 by the U.S. Congress, which prohibited interstate com-
merce in misbranded and adulterated foods, drinks, and drugs. The 
law declared a food to be adulterated if it contained “any added 
poisonous or other added deleterious ingredient which may ren-
der such article injurious to health” (Hattan and Rulis, 1999). This 
spurred efforts to investigate the potential adverse effects of inap-
propriate food chemicals. Although several publications reported 
various toxicological investigations during the first decade of the 
20th century (when the law was passed), the science of toxicology 
was in its infancy. Therefore, the evaluation of food chemical safety 
using the toxicology testing paradigms currently practiced did not 
evolve until much later as described above. It is interesting to note 
that the two concepts, “adulterated” and “misbranded,” that were 
part of the 1906 Act, still provide the legal basis for food safety 
regulations.
In 1933, FDA recommended a complete revision of the obso-
lete 1906 Pure Food and Drug Act. The first bill was introduced 
in the Senate, launching a five-year legislative battle. In 1937, 
the Elixir of Sulfanilamide containing the poisonous solvent 
diethylene glycol killed 107 individuals. This unfortunate event 
accelerated the passage of the 1938 Food, Drug, and Cosmetic 
Act (Janssen, 1981; Swan, 1998; http://www.fda.gov/AboutFDA/
WhatWeDo/History/Milestones/ucm128305.htm). The Food, 
Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act) of 1938 clarified the regu-
lation of poisonous and deleterious substances in foods. Foods 
under this statute are considered adulterated if they contain added 
poisonous or deleterious substances that “may render the food 
injurious to health.” In case a substance is not added but is natu-
rally present, the food would be adulterated only if the substance 
present “ordinarily renders” the food injurious. The FD&C Act 
of 1938 introduced the concept of premarket approval. However, 
premarket approval by FDA at the time was required only for 
drugs, not food ingredients.
The 1938 FD&C Act provided FDA with the regulatory author-
ity to stop the use of known poisons. However, the vast effort needed 
to assure that all food chemicals were safe was clearly beyond 
the available resources and regulatory authority. In 1949, FDA 
Commissioner Paul B. Dunbar presented the problem to Rep. Frank 
B. Keefe of Wisconsin. Mr Keefe introduced a resolution to investi-
gate chemicals in food, and later, cosmetics. The hearings, chaired 
by Rep. James T. Delaney of New York, went on for 2 years. From 
the committee’s work came three amendments that fundamentally 
changed the character of the U.S. food and drug law: the Pesticide 
Amendment (1954), the Food Additives Amendment (1958), and the 
Color Additive Amendments (1960) (Janssen, 1981).
The FDA Modernization Act (FDAMA) of 1997 further 
amended the 1958 FD&C Act to enhance FDA’s mission. The 
FDAMA focused largely on reforming certain aspects of the regu-
lation of medical products and cosmetics, and to a lesser extent it 
addressed the regulation of food additives by streamlining the review 
process for the food contact substances (FCSs). The FCSs are defined 
in Section 409 of the Act as “any substance intended for use as a 
component of materials used in manufacturing, packing, packaging, 
transporting, or to hold food if such use is not intended to have any 
technical effect in such food” [sec. 409(h)(6) of the Act] (FDA, 1997).
Current U.S. Food Law to Ensure Safety 
of Foods, Food Ingredients, and Food 
Contaminants
The FD&C Act along with its amendments provides the necessary 
regulatory tools to ensure the safety of food and food ingredients. 
The recent amendments include The Food Additives Amendment 
of 1958, the Color Additive Amendments of 1960, and FDAMA of 
1997. The following discussion briefly focuses on the regulatory 
definitions and safety evaluation processes of food additives, gen-
erally recognized as safe (GRAS) ingredients, and color additives.
FD&C Act, FDA Regulations, and FDA Guidance  The United 
States Code (U.S.C.) is a compilation of all codified federal laws 
enacted by Congress. Each “Title” in the U.S.C. represents the sub-
ject matter for which federal laws have been enacted. Title 21 of 
the U.S.C. pertains to Food and Drug laws. Therefore, the FD&C 
Act (referred to as “the Act” below) is a federal law enacted by 
Congress and contained in Title 21 of the United States Code (21 
U.S.C.). The Act provides the legal framework within which FDA

Food Toxicology: Fundamental and Regulatory Aspects
Chapter 27
1331
operates. The Act along with all its provisions can be accessed at 
http://uscode.house.gov/browse/&edition=prelim.
Once the Congress enacts a federal law, executive departments 
and agencies can publish further regulations based on the legal frame-
work set forth in the federal law. FDA develops regulations based on 
the laws set forth in the Act and other laws under which FDA operates. 
An example of “other laws” is the Administrative Procedure Act. FDA 
follows the procedures required by the Administrative Procedure Act 
(5 U.S.C.) to issue FDA regulations. This typically involves a process 
known as “notice and comment rulemaking” that allows for public 
input on a proposed regulation before FDA issues a final rule. The rule-
making procedures also come from Executive Orders and memoranda 
issued by the President, and FDA’s own regulations. The rules are first 
published in the Federal Register, the federal government’s official 
publication. Rules are then codified into regulations (laws) in the code 
of federal regulations (CFR). Therefore, FDA regulations are also fed-
eral laws, but they are not part of the FD&C Act. FDA regulations 
can be found in Title 21 of the Code of Federal Regulations (21 CFR).
In contrast to FDA regulations that are federal laws, FDA guid-
ance describes the agency’s current thinking on a regulatory issue, 
and is not legally binding on the public or FDA. FDA follows the 
procedures required by its “Good Guidance Practice” regulation 
to issue FDA guidance. The Good Guidance Practice regulation 
can be found in 21 CFR 10.115 (http://www.fda.gov/AboutFDA/
Transparency/Basics/ucm194909.htm).
Food Additives
Sections 201(s) of the 1958 Food Additives Amendment defines 
the term “food additive” very broadly. Food additive is defined as 
follows:
… any substance the intended use of which results or may reasonably be 
expected to result, directly or indirectly, in its becoming a component or 
otherwise affecting the characteristics of any food (including any substance 
intended for use in producing, manufacturing, packing, processing, pre-
paring, treating, packaging, transporting, or holding food; and including 
any source of radiation intended for any such use), if such substance is not 
generally recognized, among experts qualified by scientific training and 
experience to evaluate its safety, as having been adequately shown through 
scientific procedures (or, in the case of a substance used in food prior to 
January 1, 1958, through either scientific procedures or experience based 
on common use in food) to be safe under the conditions of its intended use …
The 1958 Food Additives Amendment covers both “direct 
additives” and “indirect additives.” Direct additives are described 
in 21 CFR Part 172 as substances added deliberately to food for a 
specific technical purpose; such substances usually remain in food 
as consumed. The technical effects could be intended to maintain 
or improve safety and freshness; improve or maintain nutritional 
value; or, improve taste, texture, and appearance. Secondary direct 
additives are described in 21 CFR Part 173 as substances added to 
food or food components during the manufacture or processing, but 
which are usually removed from the food before the product is con-
sumed. Small amounts of these substances may remain in the final 
food. Examples of secondary direct additives include processing 
agents such as solvents, sanitizers, and defoaming agents. Indirect 
additives are described in 21 CFR Part 174 as substances that may 
become components of food, such as materials that may migrate 
from food contact surfaces during production, manufacturing, 
packing, processing, preparing, treating, packaging, transporting, 
or holding food. For premarket approval by FDA, a food additive 
must be demonstrated to be safe at levels of requested use (the Act, 
Section 409(c)(3)(A)). The actual addition of a substance to food 
should be at levels no higher than necessary to fulfill the desired 
technical effect, even if the safety data support a higher level of 
exposure (21 CFR 171.l(c)(C)).
Both indirect and some secondary direct additives are now 
referred to as food contact substances (FCSs). Therefore, FCSs are 
legally food additives. Some FCSs may still be evaluated by FDA 
under the premarket paradigm depending on the complexity and 
exposure. In 1958 the FD&C Act was amended by adding Section 
409, which requires FDA to approve new food additives before they 
can be used in foods. Section 409-mandated premarket approval 
also applies to the FCSs. Section 309 of the FDAMA amended 
Section 409 of the Act (21 U.S.C. 348) to establish a food contact 
notification (FCN) process as the primary method by which FDA 
regulates food additives that are FCSs. In doing so, the FDAMA 
eliminated the food additive petition process for most packaging 
and other substances that come in contact with food and migrate 
into food, and established a notification program whereby a notifier 
notifies FDA about its intended use of the FCS(s). The notifier may 
use the FCSs unless FDA objects to the intended use. By law, FDA 
must respond within 120 days. The amendment did not alter the 
safety standard applied to all food additives. Therefore, the noti-
fication for an FCS must contain sufficient scientific information 
demonstrating that the substance is safe for the intended use. On 
January 18, 2000, the Agency began accepting new food contact 
notifications, and in July 2000 FDA published proposed regulations 
for the program. The regulations were finalized in May 2002 and 
codified in 21 CFR Part 170.100-106 (Shanklin and Sanchez, 2005). 
Table 27-6 shows some direct food additives based on functionality.
Table 27-6  
Some Direct Food Additives by Functionality
NUMBER
DESIGNATION
DESCRIPTION
EXAMPLES
170.3(o) (1)
Anticaking agents 
and free-flow agents
Substances added to finely powdered or crystalline food 
products to prevent caking, lumping, or agglomeration
Glucitol, sodium ferrocyanide, 
silicon dioxide
(3)
Antioxidants
Substances used to preserve food by retarding 
deterioration, rancidity, or discoloration due to oxidation
Butylated hydroxyanisole, butylated 
hydroxytoluene, propyl gallate
(9)
Enzymes
Enzymes used to improve food processing and the 
quality of the finished food
Papain, rennet, pepsin
(12)
Flavor agents and 
adjuvants
Substances added to impart or help impart a taste or 
aroma in food
Cinnamon, citral, p-cresol, thymol, 
Zingerone
(19)
Non-nutritive 
sweeteners
Substances having less than 2% of the caloric value of 
sucrose per equivalent unit of sweetening capacity
Aspartame, neotame, sucralose, 
saccharin

1332
Toxic Agents
unit V
Substances Generally Recognized as Safe (GRAS)  While 
developing the definition of a food additive, it became clear that 
there are many foods and food ingredients that have a long history 
of safe use, such as butter, egg, salt, milk, vinegar, sugar, and oth-
ers. Thus, the concept of generally recognized as safe (GRAS) was 
born. Under the 1958 Food Additives Amendment to the Act, any 
substance intentionally added to food is a food additive and is sub-
ject to premarket approval by FDA unless the use of the substance 
is generally recognized as safe (GRAS; the GRAS provision) or 
otherwise exempted from the definition of food additive (e.g., color 
additive). By 1961, FDA had amended its regulations to include a 
list of food substances that are GRAS under certain conditions of 
use (“the GRAS list”) (Gaynor et al., 2006). The GRAS status of an 
ingredient can be based on either a safe history of “common use in 
food prior to 1958” (history of use) or “scientific procedures” that 
demonstrate safety.
The GRAS provision removed the requirement of premar-
ket review by FDA, and provided for independent conclusions 
of GRAS status. In 1969, FDA removed cyclamate salts from its 
GRAS list as a result of safety questions, and then-President Nixon 
directed FDA to reexamine the safety of GRAS substances. In the 
1970s, FDA began a “comprehensive review” of presumed GRAS 
substances and established rulemaking procedures to affirm the 
GRAS status of substances that were either on the GRAS list or 
the subject of a GRAS affirmation petition. If FDA concluded that 
the available data and information supported GRAS status, FDA 
issued a final rule affirming GRAS status by amending 21 CFR 
184 (direct food ingredients) or 186 (indirect food substances). By 
affirming the GRAS status through rulemaking, FDA owned the 
GRAS conclusions. However, meeting this self-imposed regula-
tory burden became resource-intensive and was difficult to meet. 
To eliminate the resource-intensive rulemaking procedures, FDA 
proposed to replace the GRAS affirmation petition process with a 
notification procedure (“GRAS notification”) (Gaynor et al., 2006).
On April 17, 1997 FDA proposed to move away from the 
GRAS affirmation petition process and establish the GRAS noti-
fication process, whereby a notifier could voluntarily inform FDA 
of its determination that the use of a substance is GRAS under the 
intended conditions of use (62 FR 18938; April 17, 1997). By law, 
premarket approval by FDA is not required for GRAS. The ini-
tial GRAS notification process was established under an interim 
policy and pilot program. It operated from 1997 until mid-August, 
2016. By that time FDA had already reviewed more than 600 GRAS 
notices. On August 17, 2016 FDA published the final rule to amend 
and clarify the criteria for when the use of a substance in human 
food or animal feed is not subject to the premarket approval require-
ments of the Act because the substance is GRAS under the condi-
tions of its intended use (81 FR 54959; August 17, 2016). The final 
rule became effective on October 17, 2016.
The GRAS notification process is voluntary like the GRAS 
affirmation petition process. However, from the regulatory perspec-
tive, the main differences are that the affirmation petition process 
was a premarket approval process and the onus of GRAS affir-
mation was on FDA, whereas the notification process is not pre-
market approval and the onus of GRAS determination is on the 
notifier. Because the onus of GRAS determination was on FDA 
in the GRAS affirmation petition process, it involved rulemaking 
(discussed above).
Color Additives
Section 201(t) of the 1960 Color Additives Amendment defines the 
term “color additive” as follows:
A color additive is any material, not exempted under section 201 (t) of the Act, 
that is a dye, pigment, or extracted, isolated, or otherwise derived with or with-
out intermediate or final change of identity, from vegetable, animal, mineral, or 
other source and that, when added or applied to a food, drug, or cosmetic or 
to the human body or any part thereof, is capable (alone or through reaction 
with another substance) of imparting a color thereto. Substances capable of 
imparting a color to a container for foods, drugs, or cosmetics are not “color 
additives” unless the customary or reasonably foreseeable handling or use of 
the container may reasonably be expected to result in the transmittal of the 
color to the contents of the package or any part thereof. Food ingredients such 
as cherries, green or red peppers, chocolate, and orange juice which contrib-
ute their own natural color when mixed with other foods are not regarded as 
color additives; but where a food substance such as beet juice is deliberately 
used as a color, as in pink lemonade, it is a color additive.
Color additives are defined in 21 CFR, Section §70.3. Section 
§70.5 describes general restrictions on the use of color additives, 
such as use in the area of the eye, injections, and surgical sutures. 
The use of an unlisted color additive, the improper use of a listed 
color additive, or the use of a color additive that does not conform 
to the purity and identity specifications of the listing regulation may 
cause a product to be adulterated and could be subject to enforce-
ment action by FDA. Under the Color Additive Amendments, 
approximately 200 color additives that were in commercial use at the 
time were provisionally listed and could be used on an interim basis 
until they were either permanently listed or terminated due to safety 
concerns or lack of commercial interest. After 1960, FDA gradually 
removed color additives from the provisional list either by perma-
nent listing or by termination of listing. Today about half of the 
1960 color additives remain listed (Barrows et al., 2003). Table 27-7 
shows per capita intakes of certified color additives for the U.S. 
population.
Table 27-7  
Per Capita Intakes of Certified Color Additives for 
the U.S. Population
COLOR 
ADDITIVE
U.S. 
POPULATION 
PER CAPITA 
EDI (mg/
PERSON/DAY)
U.S. 
POPULATION 
PER CAPITA 
ADI (mg/
person/
day) (60-kg 
PERSON)
CHILDREN 
PER CAPITA 
ADI (mg/
person/
day) (30-kg 
CHILD)
FD&C Blue 
No. 1
1.72
720
360
FD&C Blue 
No. 2
1.95
150
75
FD&C Green 
No. 3
0.038
150
75
FD&C Red 
No. 3
0.61
150
75
FD&C Red 
No. 40
17.91
420
210
FD&C 
Yellow No. 5
12.06
300
150
FD&C 
Yellow No. 6
10.74
225
113
SOURCE: Kotsonis and Burdoch (2013).

Food Toxicology: Fundamental and Regulatory Aspects
Chapter 27
1333
The Delaney Clause and Its Applications  The Delaney 
clause [Section 409(c)(3)(A) of the Act] is a provision in the Food 
Additives Amendment of 1958. It states that no cancer-causing 
substance, as demonstrated in humans or animals, may be added 
to food. The 1960 Color Additive Amendments also contained the 
Delaney clause [Section 706(b)(5)(B) of the Act] that prohibited 
the use of a color additive shown to be a carcinogen in animal feed 
or human food.
A perusal of the scientific literature reveals that there is dis-
agreement among experts regarding the utility of the blanket appli-
cation of the Delaney clause with its zero-risk standard. Many 
scientists are of the opinion that it was needed at a time when the 
biology of carcinogenesis was poorly understood and the limits of 
detection of various residues in food were not nearly as sensitive as 
today’s techniques, which have advanced from detection at the level 
of parts per thousand to parts per trillion or beyond. Advances in 
science ultimately triggered careful consideration of the zero-risk 
standard for carcinogens and action from the Congress through the 
passage of The Food Quality Protection Act (FQPA) of 1996 (21 
U.S.C, §346A). The new law amended the zero-risk standard of the 
Delaney clause as it applies to pesticide residues in food, which are 
regulated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The 
new standard was based on quantitative risk assessment and deter-
mination of the lifetime risk of developing cancer from exposure to 
the pesticide residues in food. In practice, EPA targets a risk level 
of less than one in one million people (10−6) over the course of a 
typical human life-span.
Except for the situation of pesticide residues in food discussed 
above, the Delaney clause still applies to food safety in general. The 
most conservative assumptions for the carcinogenic risk assessment 
result in an overestimation of the risk at each step ultimately lead-
ing to a combined overestimate of perhaps a million-fold or more. 
Therefore, an upper bound lifetime risk of one cancer or less in a 
million individuals is considered to be the biological equivalent of 
zero. Historically, FDA has employed a high threshold for establish-
ing that a food or color additive has been found to induce cancer 
when ingested by humans or animals. Two indirect food additives 
(Flectol H and mercaptoimidazoline) that migrate from packaging 
material were banned. Among direct additives, safrole, cinnamyl 
anthranilate, thiourea, and diethylpyrocarbonate were banned 
because of the Delaney clause, and diethylpyrocarbonate because it 
forms urethane (Kotsonis and Burdoch, 2013).
Nevertheless, a number of substances (e.g., butylated hydroxy-
anisole [BHA], xylitol, methylene chloride, sorbitol, trichloroethyl-
ene, nitrilotriacetic acid [NTA], diethylhexyl phthalate, melamine, 
formaldehyde, bentonite) are listed in the CFR as food additives, but 
they are also listed as carcinogens by NTP, the International Agency 
for Research on Cancer (IARC), or the state of California (under 
the Safe Drinking Water and Toxic Enforcement Act of 1986, also 
known as Proposition 65). The reasoning applied by FDA in almost 
every case is based on secondary carcinogenesis, such as irritation 
and restorative hyperplasia in the forestomach in the case of BHA, 
mineral imbalance in the case of sugar alcohol, etc. The one excep-
tion is formaldehyde, which is carcinogenic only on inhalation, and 
inhalation is not an appropriate route for food additives (Kotsonis 
and Burdoch, 2013).
In an effort to restrict the applicability of the Delaney clause, 
FDA has narrowed the definition of food additive to exempt con-
stituents and contaminants that pose a de minimis risk. According 
to FDA’s constituents’ policy, food additive refers to the added sub-
stance as a whole and not to each of its individual constituents. For 
example, the constituents’ policy was employed to approve the use 
of FD&C Green No. 5 and Green No. 6, both of which contain a 
nonfunctional contaminant p-toluidine that by itself causes cancer 
(Picut and Parker, 1992).
For new animal drugs, safety assessment is concerned pri-
marily with residues that occur in animal food products (milk, 
cheese, etc.) and edible tissues (muscle, liver, etc.). Toxicity stud-
ies require data on metabolism and the nature of metabolites, along 
with data on the drug’s pharmacokinetics. During this phase, the 
parent drug and its metabolites are evaluated both qualitatively 
and quantitatively in the animal products of concern (eggs, milk, 
meat, etc.).
To comply with the no residue provision of the Delaney clause, 
FDA addressed the issue of residues of metabolites of animal drugs 
known to induce cancer in humans or animals. Because not every 
metabolite could be accurately tested, FDA considered threshold 
assessment. Threshold assessment combines information on the 
structure and in vitro biological activity of a metabolite for the 
purpose of determining whether carcinogenicity testing is necessary. 
If testing is necessary and if the substance is found to induce cancer, 
the FDA’s definition states that a lifetime risk of one in a million is 
equivalent to the meaning of “no residue” as intended by Congress 
(Kotsonis and Burdoch, 2013).
The Safety Standard and Toxicological Testing Recom­
mendations for Food Ingredients  The following narrative is 
a general discussion on the toxicological testing recommendations 
for food ingredients, such as food additives, color additives, GRAS 
ingredients, and FCSs. Section 409 of the 1958 Food Additives 
Amendment states that before a food additive can be added to food, 
it must be demonstrated to be safe under its intended conditions 
of use. This statute is the foundation of the premarket approval of 
food additives, including FCSs. Congress, however, realized that it 
is impossible to assure the absolute safety of food additives under 
all circumstances. Thus, Section 409 states, “Safety requires proof 
of a reasonable certainty that no harm will result from the intended 
use of an additive.” In other words, Congress recognized that abso-
lute certainty of no harm (zero risk) was impossible to achieve. 
Thus, the safety standard for food and color additives is reasonable 
certainty of no harm. The same safety standard also applies for the 
other food ingredients.
In 1982 the FDA published a document titled Toxicological 
Principles for the Safety Assessment of Direct Food Additives and 
Color Additives Used in Food. This is popularly known as “the 
Redbook.” In the Redbook, FDA provided its recommendations 
for the minimum set of toxicological data normally needed for 
evaluating the safety of the use of direct food additives. The 1982 
Redbook was updated in 1993 and 2000 (Revised October 2001, 
November 2003, April 2004, February 2006, and July 2007) (FDA 
Guidance for industry). The original Redbook of 1982 is referred to 
as Redbook I, the 1993 updated version is referred to as Redbook 
II or Redbook 1993, and the 2000 version is called Redbook 2000. 
The Redbook is available to the public on the world-wide-web.
The recommendations in the Redbook utilize the concept of 
structure–activity relationships of chemicals to assign categories to 
substances added to food. Additives with functional groups with 
a high order of toxicity are assigned to category C, those with 
low potential for toxicity are assigned to category A, while those 
of unknown or intermediate toxicity are assigned to category B. 
Further, based on structure assignment and calculated exposure, 
“concern levels” are assigned. Concern levels are relative measures 
of the degree to which the use of an additive may present a hazard 
to human health. Concern level III represents the highest probable 
risk to human health, Concern level I represents the lowest probable 
risk, and Concern level II is intermediate between high and low risk 
(Table 27-8). Each concern level is associated with a different level

1334
Toxic Agents
unit V
of initial toxicological testing. Listed in Table 27-9 are the recom-
mended initial testing batteries for substances assigned to Concern 
levels I, II, and III. These represent the minimum testing recommen-
dations; more extensive testing may be needed to resolve scientific 
questions that may arise during research and development. While 
testing in human subjects is not required for the safety assessment 
of many food additives, certain circumstances or scientific issues 
arise that may profit from this type of testing. For example, com-
parison of data from metabolism and pharmacokinetic studies in 
human subjects and test animals may be used to identify the species 
that provides the most accurate reflection of a toxicological effect in 
human subjects. The FDA expects that any toxicological testing that 
is conducted to provide data to support the safety of food additives 
will comply with its regulations entitled Good Laboratory Practice 
for Nonclinical Laboratory Studies that are found in 21 CFR 21.58 
(Hattan and Rulis, 1999).
FDA scientists review the data and information submitted by 
the sponsor in support of the safety of a new additive or a new use of 
an additive or GRAS ingredient and they independently determine 
whether the intended use is consistent with the safety standard of 
reasonable certainty of no harm. Once the FDA determines that the 
intended use of the food/color additive is safe, it issues a regula-
tion permitting the addition of the new food additive to food. In the 
case of GRAS ingredients, it is the notifier that determines whether 
the ingredient is GRAS for its intended use in food. FDA reviews 
the data and information provided by the notifier and determines 
whether it has no questions to the notifier’s conclusion that the 
ingredient is GRAS for its intended use, or whether it finds that there 
is no basis to conclude that the ingredient is GRAS for its intended 
use. Therefore, FDA does not have to write a regulation for GRAS 
ingredients because FDA does not “own” the safety conclusion.
In the revised guidance for industry for the FCSs, FDA pro-
vided the minimum safety testing recommendations that depend on 
the exposure to the FCS in the diet. For example, no safety stud-
ies are recommended for an FCS (or a constituent, as appropriate) 
if exposure for a single use is at or less than 0.5 ppb [see the sec-
tion “Threshold of Regulation (TOR)”]. If the cumulative exposure is 
between 0.5 ppb and 50 ppb, the potential carcinogenicity of the FCS 
(and/or a constituent, if appropriate) should be evaluated using genetic 
toxicity tests, such as (1) a test for gene mutations in bacteria and 
(2) an in vitro test with cytogenetic evaluation of chromosomal 
damage using mammalian cells or an in vitro mouse lymphoma tk± 
(thymidine kinase) assay. If the cumulative exposure is between 
50 ppb and 1 ppm the potential carcinogenicity of the FCS (and/or a 
constituent, if appropriate) should be evaluated using genetic toxicity 
tests, such as (1) a test for gene mutations in bacteria; (2) an in vitro 
test with cytogenetic evaluation of chromosomal damage using mam-
malian cells or an in vitro mouse lymphoma tk± assay (the mouse 
lymphoma assay is preferred); and (3) an in vivo test for chromosomal 
damage using rodent hematopoietic cells. If the estimated exposure to 
an FCS or a constituent is 1 ppm or greater, FDA recommends that a 
food additive petition be submitted for the FCS (FDA, 2002).
ADI, EDI, and Reasonable Certainty of No Harm  The goal 
of the toxicological testing of a food additive is to determine the 
acceptable daily intake (ADI) of the additive. The ADI is compared 
to the estimated daily intake (EDI) of the additive to determine 
whether the proposed use of the additive falls within the bounds 
of “reasonable certainty of no harm.” In order to calculate the 
ADI, FDA uses the longest duration study in the most appropri-
ate animal species to establish the no-observed-adverse-effect-level 
(NOAEL). The NOAEL is the highest dose that does not cause any 
observed adverse effects. By applying an appropriate safety factor 
to this NOAEL, the ADI is obtained. The standard safety factor 
is usually 100, which is derived by multiplying a factor of 10 to 
account for interspecies variation with an additional factor of 10 to 
account for intraspecies variation in the sensitivity of response to a 
chemical. Hence, ADI = NOAEL ̸100.
The default safety factor of 100 may be modified (lowered or 
increased) based on various considerations, including the number of 
Table 27-9  
Recommended Toxicological Testing Based on 
Concern Level Assignment
TOXICITY STUDIES
CONCERN 
LEVELS
I
II
III
Genetic toxicity tests
X
X
X
Short-term toxicity tests in rodents
X
X
X
Subchronic toxicity studies in rodents
X
X
Subchronic toxicity studies in nonrodents
X
X
One-year toxicity studies in nonrodents
X
Chronic toxicity or combined chronic toxicity/
carcinogenicity tests in rodents
X
Carcinogenicity study in rodents
X
Reproduction studies with teratology phase
X
X
Developmental toxicity studies
X
X
Metabolism and pharmacokinetic studies
X
X
Human studies
X
SOURCE: The Redbook. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/Food/
GuidanceRegulation/GuidanceDocumentsRegulatoryInformation/
IngredientsAdditivesGRASPackaging/ucm054658.htm.
Table 27-8  
Assignment of Concern Levels Based on Structure 
Category and Exposure
STRUCTURE 
CATEGORY A
STRUCTURE 
CATEGORY B
STRUCTURE 
CATEGORY C
CONCERN 
LEVEL
<0.05 ppm 
(= <50 ppb) 
in the total 
diet
<0.025 ppm 
(= <25 ppb) 
in the total 
diet
<0.0125 ppm 
(= <12.5 ppb) 
in the total diet
I
or
or
or
≥0.05 ppm 
(= ≥50 ppb) 
in the total 
diet
≥0.025 ppm 
(= ≥25 ppb) 
in the total 
diet
≥0.0125 ppm 
(= ≥12.5 ppb) 
in the total diet
II
or
or
or
≥1 ppm in 
the total diet
≥0.5 ppm in 
the total diet
≥0.25 ppm in 
the total diet
III
SOURCE: The Redbook. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/Food/
GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/GuidanceDocuments/
FoodIngredientsandPackaging/Redbook/default.htm.

Food Toxicology: Fundamental and Regulatory Aspects
Chapter 27
1335
long-term studies, number of species in which these studies are con-
ducted, the nature of the toxicological effect found, the nature of the 
food additive, or the extent and the quality of supporting data. For 
micronutrients, for example, it may not be possible to apply a 100-
fold safety factor to a NOAEL and have an adequate dietary intake 
to allow them to fulfill their physiological roles. In such instances, a 
10-fold or lower safety factors are not uncommon. The same is true for 
macroingredients, which are food additives intended to replace macro-
nutrients (e.g., fats) in the diet. Macroingredients are added to food in 
appreciable quantities in order to impart their technological purpose. 
An example is olestra, which is a fat substitute. Animals were fed up 
to about 6 g/kg body weight/day whereas the human 90th percentile 
intake of olestra for just one food category, snack foods, is 0.33 g/kg 
body weight/day (Hattan and Rulis, 1999). The traditional safety 
factors are not applied to substances that have been demonstrated to 
be carcinogenic in humans or animals. This is because Delaney clause 
prohibits the addition of carcinogenic food additives to the food supply.
Typically, if the EDI is less than the ADI (in the same units, 
such as mg/kg body weight/day), the use of the additive or a GRAS 
ingredient is considered to lie within the bounds of “reasonable cer-
tainty of no harm,” for its intended use in food. GRAS ingredients 
are often macroingredients and it is not possible to feed enough to 
experimental animals in order to calculate an ADI based on 100-
fold safety factor.
Dietary Intake Estimate  The FDA’s pre-market approval pro-
cesses for food and color additives require an estimate of the prob-
able consumer intake of the additive to determine whether its use 
or presence in a food at a given concentration is safe. The basis for 
this requirement is stated in the Act as amended in 1958 (Section 
409—food additives) and 1960 (Section 721—color additives). In 
addition, FDA also considers consumer intake of contaminants that 
may be present in foods. Under Section 402(a)(1)-adulterated food, 
a food shall be deemed to be adulterated if it bears or contains any 
poisonous or deleterious substance which may render it injurious 
to health (FDA, 2006a). In 2006 FDA revised its 1995 guidance on 
estimating dietary intake of substances in food. The document uses 
the term “ingredient” to refer generically to substances intention-
ally added to food, including food additives, GRAS ingredients, 
color additives, and prior-sanctioned substances.
The dietary intake (dietary exposure) is an important contribu-
tor to the development of the concern level. Estimates of intake 
of an ingredient or chemical constituent of food require two key 
pieces of information: (1) the concentration of the substance in a 
food, and (2) consumer intake of foods that will or might contain 
the substance (FDA, 2006a).
The concentration of an ingredient in food can be obtained 
from (1) the intended use levels of the substance in target foods; 
(2) the measured concentration in food as consumed; (3) the 
limit of detection (LOD) or limit of quantification (LOQ) of the 
analytical method; (4) established limits for the substance (e.g., 
specifications in the CFR or the Food Chemical Codex [FCC] for 
unavoidable impurities and contaminants in food ingredients, or 
maximum allowable levels of impurities and contaminants in foods 
adopted by a recognized standards-setting body, such as the Codex 
Alimentarius Commission) (FDA, 2006a).
The consumer intake can be obtained from a number of 
sources that provide intake estimates of substances in the diet, 
such as (1) food consumption surveys; (2) food/ingredient dis-
appearance data; (3) total diet study; (4) body burden/excretion 
measurements, or “biomarkers.” Food consumption data may be 
collected at the national, household, or individual level. Examples 
of some frequently used food consumption surveys are Continuing 
Survey of Food Intakes by Individuals (CSFII), National Health 
and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), and the integrated 
CSFII/NHANES, and MRCA 14-Day Survey. Food/ingredient 
disappearance data represent the disappearance of food into the 
marketing system. Annual amounts of major U.S. commodities 
entering into the U.S. food supply are determined by subtracting 
data on exports, year-end inventory, and non-food use from data 
on production, imports, and beginning inventories. In the United 
States, information on the poundage of many food commodi-
ties entering commerce is available annually from the Economic 
Research Service (ERS) of the USDA. An online database of 
poundage-based per capita food consumption is also available from 
the ERS, which permits customized searches of commodities (e.g., 
meat) and sub-commodities (e.g., red meat, poultry, fishery prod-
ucts) by year. FDA’s Total Diet Study (TDS; also called the market 
basket study) is an ongoing program through which the Agency 
monitors and analyzes a wide range of foods to determine levels of 
selected substances (e.g., nutrients, pesticide residues, and indus-
trial contaminants). The TDS has been conducted continuously 
in the United States since the early 1960s. The program currently 
uses four regional sample collections (or market baskets) each 
year. FDA updates the list of foods to be surveyed about every 10 
years to reflect changes in food consumption patterns. The use of 
biomarkers for estimating intake has been investigated for methyl 
mercury, fumonisins, phthalate diesters, and several nutrients (e.g., 
fat, protein, minerals, and vitamins). The use of biomarkers in expo-
sure assessment methods is the subject of ongoing research. For a 
detailed discussion of these topics as well as additional sources of 
information, see FDA (2006a).
The relationship of substance concentration data, portion size, 
and food consumption frequency to the estimated daily intake (EDI) 
of a substance X for a single individual is captured in the following 
equation (FDA, 2006a):
EDI
Freq
Port
Conc
x
f
f
xf
f
F
N
=
×
×
=∑
1
where
F = Total number of foods in which substance “x” can be found
Freqf = Number of eating occasions of food “f” over “N” survey days
Portf = Average portion size for food “f”
Concxf = Concentration of the substance “x” in food “f”
N = Number of survey days
Threshold of Regulation (TOR)  In 1995, the FDA introduced 
the threshold of regulation (TOR) policy and established procedures 
for exempting indirect food additives (now called FCSs) from pre-
market evaluation and petition review if the likely dietary exposure 
to humans from the migrating substances is below 0.5 ppb (21 CFR 
170.39). The TOR policy is based upon the notion that below cer-
tain dietary exposure levels, additives migrating into food will pres-
ent only negligible risk. The policy is intended only for substances 
not known or expected to be carcinogenic, but is based upon the 
presumption that even if a migrating substance were inadvertently 
a carcinogen, the upper-bound risk of cancer from exposure to the 
substance at the low levels permitted would be negligible. The pol-
icy is based upon a systematic analysis of the potencies of numer-
ous carcinogens and noncarcinogens (Hattan and Rulis, 1999).
Food from New Plant Varieties  FDA regulates the safety of 
food for humans and animals produced from new plant varieties, 
including genetically engineered (GE) plants. The safety of new

1336
Toxic Agents
unit V
plant varieties is regulated primarily under the FDA’s postmarket 
authority [section 402(a)(1) of the act (21 U.S.C. 342(a)(1)]. This 
section, normally applied to occurrences of unsafe levels of toxi-
cants in food, is applied to new plant varieties whose composition 
has been altered by an added substance. Foods from GE plants must 
meet the same food safety requirements as foods derived from tra-
ditionally bred plants.
The FDA published its “Statement of Policy: Foods Derived 
from New Plant Varieties”, the 1992 policy (FDA, 1992) in the 
Federal Register in 1992 (57 FR 22984–23005). In the 1992 policy, 
the FDA explained that under the Act developers of new foods have 
a responsibility to ensure that the foods they offer to consumers are 
safe and in compliance with all requirements of the Act. The 1992 
policy applied to all foods (such as fruits, vegetables, grains, and 
their byproducts) derived from all new plant varieties, including 
varieties that are developed using recombinant DNA technology. 
The plant varieties that are developed using recombinant DNA tech-
nology are referred to as “bioengineered foods.”
In the 1992 policy, the FDA provided guidance to the indus-
try regarding scientific considerations for evaluating the safety and 
nutritional aspects of food from new plant varieties derived by tra-
ditional methods (such as hybridization or mutagenesis), tissue cul-
ture methods (such as somaclonal variation and protoplast fusion), 
and recombinant DNA methods. FDA recognized in its 1992 policy 
statement that it is prudent practice for developers of new variet-
ies to consult with the agency on safety and regulatory questions, 
especially with regard to products developed through new technol-
ogy. Because of the rapid advances in recombinant DNA technol-
ogy (bioengineering), FDA believes that it is in the best interests 
of the regulated industry and the agency for developers to inform 
FDA prior to commercial distribution, about foods or feed derived 
from new plant varieties, including those derived using recombinant 
DNA technology. FDA issued guidance on the consultation process 
in 1996, which was revised in 1997 (FDA, 1997a).
In the United States, new plant varieties are regulated not only 
by FDA, but also by the EPA and USDA. FDA is responsible for 
the safety and labeling of foods and feeds derived from crops, irre-
spective of the method used to produce the new plant variety. The 
EPA is responsible for assuring the safety of pesticides; thus, if a 
pesticidal protein is produced in a new plant variety, this product 
would also fall under EPA’s jurisdiction. The USDA’s Animal and 
Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) has responsibility for the 
environmental safety of field testing and commercial planting of 
new plant varieties. The developer of a biotechnology-derived crop 
variety must obtain registration from not only the country of origin 
but from importing countries as well (Kotsonis and Burdoch, 2013).
The Food Allergen Labeling and Consumer Protection 
Act (FALCPA)  In 2004, an amendment to the FD&C Act (Public 
Law 108-282) was introduced mandating the labeling of a food 
that contains an ingredient that is or contains protein from a “major 
food allergen.” This is the Food Allergen Labeling and Consumer 
Protection Act (FALCPA), which became effective January 1, 
2006. For a series of questions and answers on FALCPA, see FDA 
(2006b). According to FALCPA, manufacturers are required to iden-
tify the presence of ingredients that contain proteins derived from 
milk, eggs, fish, crustacean shellfish, tree nuts, peanuts, wheat, or 
soybeans, and also specify the source when possible. For example, 
specify the type of tree nut (e.g., almonds, pecans, or walnuts), the 
species of fish (e.g., bass, flounder, or cod), and the kind of crus-
tacean shellfish (e.g., crab, lobster, or shrimp). Also, because the 
source of ingredients such as lecithin, flour, or whey may not be 
obvious to the consumer, the source must follow the name of the 
ingredient. For example, lecithin, flour, and whey must be given on 
the labels as follows: lecithin (soy), flour (wheat), and whey (milk); 
alternatively, immediately after or next to the list of ingredients in a 
“contains” statement—for example “Contains wheat, milk, and soy.”
Food Safety Through the Hazard Analysis and Critical 
Control Point (HACCP) System  The HACCP is a manage-
ment system in which food safety is addressed through the analysis 
and control of biological, chemical, and physical hazards from raw 
material production, procurement, and handling, to manufacturing, 
distribution, and consumption of the finished product. The current 
practice of HACCP was developed over time, but the initial trigger 
came from the need to provide safe food for space flights (Sperber 
and Stier, 2009–2010). In the United States, the initial participants 
were the United States Army Laboratories, the National Aeronautics 
and Space Administration (NASA), and Pillsbury. Pillsbury and 
NASA required contractors to identify the critical control points 
(CCPs), that is, the “critical failure areas” and eliminate them from 
the system. In the 1970s, several cases of Clostridium botulinum 
contamination were attributed to under-­processed, low-acid canned 
foods. FDA asked Pillsbury to organize a training program for its 
inspectors. This training program, “Food Safety through the Hazard 
Analysis and Critical Control Point System,” was held in 1972, and 
appears to be the first published use of the term “HACCP” (Sperber 
and Stier, 2009–2010).
The National Advisory Committee on Microbiological Criteria 
for Foods (NACMCF) was established in 1988. It is an advisory 
committee chartered under the USDA and comprises participants 
from the USDA (Food Safety and Inspection Service), Department 
of Health and Human Services (FDA and CDC), the Department of 
Commerce (National Marine Fisheries Service), the Department of 
Defense (Office of the Army Surgeon General), academia, indus-
try, and state employees. When the NACMCF was established, the 
HACCP system was already in place. However, one of the first 
NACMCF efforts was the definition of an HACCP system and 
guidelines for its application. Its efforts were coordinated with those 
of the Codex Committee for Food Hygiene (permanently chaired 
by the United States), leading to reports from each group in 1992, 
which were further harmonized in 1997. Since its birth in 1959 and 
formalization in 1972, the HACCP system has grown from three to 
seven principles (Sperber and Stier, 2009–2010). The seven princi-
ples of HACCP are: (1) Hazard analysis; (2) Identification of CCPs; 
(3) Establishing the critical limits; (4) Monitoring control of the 
CCPs; (5) Establishing corrective actions; (6) Establishing verifica-
tion procedures; and (7) Establishing documentation and record-
keeping systems. The HACCP principles and application guidelines 
adopted in 1997 can be accessed at the FDA website (FDA, 1997b). 
The links to dairy HACCP, juice HACCP, retail and food service 
HACCP, and seafood HACCP can all be accessed from there.
The Food Safety and Modernization Act (FSMA)  The FDA 
Food Safety and Modernization Act (FSMA) was signed into law 
by the President on January 4, 2011. It aims to ensure the safety 
of the U.S. food supply by shifting the focus from responding to 
contamination to preventing it. In other words, FDA can use regula-
tion to prevent food safety problems before they occur. The FSMA 
provides FDA with new enforcement authorities related to food 
safety standards, provides FDA tools to hold imported foods to 
the same standards as domestic foods, and directs FDA to build an 
integrated national food safety system in partnership with state and 
local authorities. One of the most important enforcement tools the 
FDA has under the FSMA is the power to withdraw a food facility’s 
registration.
The major elements of FSMA include (1) Preventive con-
trols; (2) Inspection and compliance; (3) Imported food safety; (4)

Food Toxicology: Fundamental and Regulatory Aspects
Chapter 27
1337
Response; and (5) Enhanced partnerships. The new food safety plan 
requires the identification and prevention of all reasonably foresee-
able food safety hazards that could be natural or unintentionally 
introduced into the food facility. This goes beyond the practice of 
HACCP. This new process is called Hazard Analysis and Risk-Based 
Preventive Controls (HARPC), which is the plan and the process that 
a food company has to use in each of its facilities to implement its 
food safety plan. Simply stated, it is the system used to control the 
different hazards found in various facilities that manufacture food. 
Each food manufacturing facility owned and operated by a food 
company must have its own HARPC plan if there are any differ-
ences in the foods it manufactures between facilities (King and Ades, 
2015). The facilities and the products that are already in compliance 
with HACCP are exempt from HARPC, such as the juice and sea-
food HACCP-compliant facilities, and HACCP-compliant facilities 
involved in packaging thermally processed low-acid foods in hermet-
ically sealed containers. FDA provides a detailed FAQ on FSMA that 
explains various aspects of this law, including the background of its 
genesis, utility, and applications (FDA FSMA FAQ). While HACCP 
is a recognized global standard, HARPC is a U.S. standard set forth 
by FSMA, although there are similarities. In the FAQ (PC7), it is 
stated that the HACCP systems that many FDA-regulated manufac-
turers have in place are the foundation of the preventive controls regu-
lations. Although there are similarities between the FSMA preventive 
controls requirements and the HACCP system, not every provision 
is identical. For example, in HACCP systems, controls are applied 
at CCPs, whereas preventive controls include controls at CCPs or 
controls other than those at CCPs that are appropriate for food safety 
(https://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/PublicHealthFocus/ucm239907.
htm; https://www.fda.gov/Food/GuidanceRegulation/FSMA/).
Regulation of the Dietary Supplements  A dietary supple-
ment is a product intended for ingestion that contains a dietary 
ingredient intended to add further nutritional value to (supplement) 
the diet. A dietary ingredient may be one, or any combination, of 
the following substances: a vitamin, a mineral, an herb or other 
botanical, an amino acid, a dietary substance for use by people to 
supplement the diet by increasing the total dietary intake, a concen-
trate, metabolite, constituent, or extract. Dietary supplements must 
be labeled as such and must not be represented for use as a conven-
tional food or as the sole item of a meal or the diet. One way to dis-
tinguish dietary supplements from conventional foods is by looking 
at the nutrition information on the label of the product. Conventional 
foods must have a Nutrition Facts panel on their labels, but dietary 
supplements must have a Supplement Facts panel.
FDA regulates dietary supplements under a different set of 
regulations than those covering conventional foods. This regula-
tion is called the Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act of 
1994 (DSHEA). Under DSHEA, dietary supplement manufacturers 
and distributors are not required to obtain premarket approval from 
FDA before marketing dietary supplements, but they are respon-
sible for evaluating the safety and labeling of their products before 
marketing to ensure that they meet all the requirements of DSHEA 
and FDA regulations. In other words, manufacturers and distribu-
tors are prohibited from marketing products that are adulterated or 
misbranded. FDA can take action against any adulterated or mis-
branded dietary supplement product after it reaches the market. In 
August 2016, FDA issued revised draft guidance for the industry 
regarding the New Dietary Ingredient (NDI) notification process 
that replaced the earlier guidance of 2011.
The information discussed above and additional information 
on various aspects of dietary supplements and their regulation can 
be obtained from the following link (and all the other links provided 
therein): https://www.fda.gov/Food/DietarySupplements/.
It should be noted that terms such as “functional foods” or 
“nutraceuticals” are widely used in the marketplace these days. But 
these terms are not defined by law, that is, these terms do not have 
any legal definition for regulatory use. Such foods are regulated by 
FDA under the authority of the FD&C Act.
Global Food Safety Authoritative Bodies
In parallel with U.S. FDA’s effort to assure the safety of food additives, 
similar efforts were started internationally. The evaluation of food 
additives at the international level was initiated as a result of a Joint 
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)/World Health Organization 
(WHO) Conference on Food Additives held in Geneva, Switzerland 
in 1955. The Conference recommended to the Directors-General of 
FAO and WHO that expert committees should be convened to address 
the safety of chemical additives in food. The outcome of the recom-
mendation was the establishment of an international expert scientific 
committee known as the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food 
Additives (JECFA), which has been meeting since 1956. JECFA 
developed the concept and coined the term “acceptable daily intake 
(ADI)” in 1961 (Lu, 1988; http://www.fao.org/3/a-at863e.pdf).
Several other global food safety authoritative bodies were 
established since the 1990s, such as the Food Standards Australia 
and New Zealand (FSANZ), European Food Safety Authority 
(EFSA), and others. FSANZ was formally established in 2002 
but its predecessor, called Australia New Zealand Food Authority 
(ANZFA), was established in 1996. FSANZ is a bi-national gov-
ernment agency that develops and administers the food standard 
code for Australia and New Zealand. The food standard code, which 
is publicly available on the web (http://www.foodstandards.gov.
au/code/Pages/default.aspx), lists requirements for foods such as 
additives, food safety, labeling, and genetically engineered foods. 
The decisions made by FSANZ have to be approved by both gov-
ernments (http://foodregulation.gov.au/internet/fr/publishing.nsf/
Content/history-and-governance).
The European Food Safety Agency (EFSA) is another rela-
tively recent global food safety authoritative body. The EFSA was 
legally established by the European Union (EU) under the General 
Food Law and is funded by the EU. It was set up in 2002 following 
a series of food crises in the late 1990s and it serves as a source 
of scientific advice and communication on risks associated with 
the food chain. The General Food Law created a European food 
safety system in which the responsibility for risk assessment (sci-
ence) and for risk management (policy) are kept separate. EFSA is 
responsible for the risk assessment (science), and also has a duty to 
communicate its scientific findings to the public. As the risk asses-
sor, EFSA produces scientific opinions and advice that form the 
basis for European policies and legislation, and it covers Food and 
feed safety; Nutrition; Animal health and welfare; Plant protection; 
and Plant health. EFSA’s scientific opinions are mostly published 
in the EFSA Journal and are publicly available at https://www.efsa.
europa.eu/en/aboutefsa.
TOXIC SUBSTANCES IN FOOD
The requirement for food varies with age and activity level. The 
average daily consumption of food is about 2 kg/day. Obviously, 
human beings consume a lot of materials as food on a daily basis. 
Thus, any hazard present in foods, such as toxic substances,5 
5Toxic substance is a general term. Typically, toxic substances produced by 
living organisms are referred to as toxins, whereas toxic substances produced 
by human activities are referred to as toxicants.

1338
Toxic Agents
unit V
antinutrients, or contaminants may have adverse health conse-
quences. Discussed below are certain common toxic substances in 
food that are either naturally occurring, or formed during cook-
ing, or they find their way into the food as contaminants during 
processing of foods. The list is by no means complete. The human 
and animal exposure to many of these toxins/toxicants has been 
significantly reduced because of our understanding of these toxins 
and their toxicity.
Some Naturally Occurring Toxic 
Substances in Food
Plants produce a stunning array of chemicals to protect themselves 
from invading pathogens, insects, and herbivorous animals. Many 
of these chemicals are secondary metabolites; they are not essential 
for growth and reproduction. Some of these secondary metabolites 
may have beneficial health effects on humans, usually at a low or 
moderate level of consumption. However, many others are toxic 
to animals and humans, particularly when consumed at high lev-
els. The secondary metabolites usually belong to one of the three 
major chemical classes: terpenoids (contain isoprene units), phe-
nolics (contain phenol group), and alkaloids (contain nitrogen). 
There are also nitrogen-containing non-alkaloids. Some of these 
toxic substances are fatty acids or proteins. Understanding how 
plant defense mechanisms work is essential to protecting our food 
supply as well as developing disease-resistant plant varieties. In the 
following description, one representative chemical structure from 
each group of substances is shown.
Cycasin  Cycasin (an alkaloid; Fig. 27-6) is an azoxyglycoside 
found in cycads. Cycasin and its metabolite methylazoxymetha-
nol (MAM) can be extracted from seeds and roots of cycad plants 
(Laqueur and Spatz, 1968). The inhabitants of Guam (Chamorros) 
have long used various parts of Cycas circinalis, including seeds, 
as a source of food before its toxicity was recognized. They also 
relished the meat of flying fox, a type of fruit bat that lived on 
cycad seeds. The consumption of cycad seeds was correlated with 
a complex neurodegenerative disease known as amyotrophic lat-
eral sclerosis-parkinsonism-dementia (ALS-PDC) that occurred at 
a far higher rate compared to the rest of the world. Studies trying to 
identify the putative neurotoxin in Cycad seeds, roots, and leaves 
identified cycasin as a carcinogenic compound in rabbits, monkeys, 
and multiple species of rodents, although the neurotoxicity was not 
confirmed. In the animal studies cycasin induced tumors in multiple 
organs, such as the liver, kidney, lung, and intestine. Oral doses of 
cycasin induced tumors in conventional rats but not in germ-free 
rats, suggesting that intestinal metabolism of cycasin produced the 
carcinogen. Several reports confirmed that the β-d-glucosidase of 
intestinal bacteria hydrolyzes cycasin into its aglycone metabolite 
MAM, and that MAM was the toxicant and the ultimate carcino-
gen in rodents (Sieber et al., 1980). The incidence of ALS-PDC 
among Chamorros fell sharply after 1960 because of the awareness 
of cycad seed toxicity.
Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids  Pyrrolizidine alkaloids (PAs) are found 
in many species of flowering plants. Several hundred PAs have been 
isolated from these plants. PA structure has two parts: the bicyclic 
necine base (necine) that shares a bridgehead nitrogen atom and 
the necic acid, a C5-C10 branched chain acid that is esterified to 
necine. Some examples of PAs are heliotrine, lycopsamine (Fig. 
27-7), lasciocarpine, retrorsine, and senecionine. Animals can be 
exposed to PA from the consumption of PA containing plant mate-
rial, whereas human exposure results from the consumption of 
either the plant material or products of animal origin (Wiedenfeld, 
2011). PAs are metabolized in the liver to electrophilic pyrrole 
derivatives, which cause hepatotoxicity in animals and veno-
occlusive disease in humans. Many PAs also have genotoxic and 
carcinogenic properties (EFSA, 2011). In vitro studies and in vivo 
studies in big blue transgenic rats demonstrated that upon meta-
bolic activation, PAs form DNA adducts and DNA strand breaks, 
leading to mutations and chromosomal aberrations. The major type 
of mutation was GC→TA transversions and tandem base substi-
tutions of G:G to T:T and G:G to A:T, which is consistent with 
a mechanism involving adduct formation at guanine residues (G). 
The main carcinogenic target site for PAs in animals is the liver. 
There are no human epidemiological data on PA carcinogenesis 
(EFSA, 2011). However, it has been hypothesized that carcinogen-
esis may be favored by extended exposure to PAs. The U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) issued an advisory in 2001 asking 
the dietary supplement manufacturers to remove the herb comfrey 
from their products because comfrey contains PAs.
Ptaquiloside  Ptaquiloside (a terpenoid; Fig. 27-8) is a norses-
quiterpene glucoside, and is the major carcinogen in bracken fern 
(Pteridium aquilinum). It causes bladder and intestinal cancer in 
livestock, mammary and intestinal tumors in rats, as well as neuro-
toxicity in mice and sheep. In addition to the ptaquiloside (PTA), 
bracken fern contains a number of other toxic substances, such as 
prunasin (a cyanogen glycoside) and thiaminase. The thiaminase 
splits thiamine (vitamin B1) into its two inactive components, 
pyrimidine and thiazole, causing thiamine deficiency. Bracken-fed 
cows secrete PTA in the milk and the concentration is dependent on 
the amount of bracken fern ingested by the cow. After the ingestion 
of the plant material or contaminated milk, both PTA and its agly-
cone ptaquilosin are converted by the hepatic CYP enzymes into 
the unstable dienone, which is a strong electrophile. This dienone 
O
OH
OH
HO
O
OH
N
N+ O–
Figure 27-6.  Cycasin.
O
O
OH
OH
N
H
OH
Figure 27-7.  Lycopsamine.
OH
O
O
O
HO
OH
OH
OH
H
Figure 27-8.  Ptaquiloside.

Food Toxicology: Fundamental and Regulatory Aspects
Chapter 27
1339
is the ultimate carcinogen; it rapidly reacts with DNA, forming 
covalent adducts and DNA strand breaks. The PTA in milk may 
be responsible for the incidence of gastric cancer in the popula-
tions of farmers that inhabit cattle-range areas in Costa Rica and 
other countries where bracken growth is dense. Tumors have been 
demonstrated in rats that were fed the milk of cows that grazed on 
bracken. However, the dilution resulting from the bulk processing 
of milk is thought to reduce any risk from milk in most developed 
countries to negligible levels (Bode and Dong, 2015; Kristanc and 
Kreft, 2016).
Safrole  Safrole (a terpenoid; Fig. 27-9) is typically extracted 
from the root-bark or the fruit of sassafras plants in the form of sas-
safras oil. It is also found in a variety of spices, such as cinnamon, 
nutmeg, black pepper, and herbs such as basil. It was used to flavor 
root beer and other foods, but was banned by the FDA in 1960 as 
a food additive. Safrole produces liver tumors in mice and rats by 
oral administration. The metabolic intermediates of safrole are able 
to directly react with DNA forming adducts. Safrole is mutagenic 
and also genotoxic in various in vitro mammalian cell systems. 
Safrole also induces chromosome aberrations, sister chromatid 
exchange, and DNA adducts in the liver of rats (EFSA, 2002). In 
2011, the National Toxicology Program (NTP) opined that safrole 
is reasonably anticipated to be a human carcinogen based on suf-
ficient evidence of carcinogenicity from studies in experimental 
animals (NTP, 2011). Safrole is a precursor in the synthesis of 
the illegal recreational drug methylenedioxymethamphetamine 
(MDMA) or “Ecstasy.” Thus, safrole still poses a potential threat 
to human health.
Cyanogenic Glycosides  Cyanogenic glycosides (nitrogen-
containing non-alkaloid) account for approximately 90% of the 
plant toxins known as cyanogens. The toxicity of cyanogenic gly-
cosides is due to their ability to produce hydrogen cyanide (HCN; 
also known as prussic acid), which inhibits cellular respiration 
and causes cytotoxic hypoxia. Many common food plants contain 
cyanogenic glycosides, such as linamarin from cassava, flax seed 
meal; amygdalin (Fig. 27-10) from cherry, apple, and peach. The 
cyanogenic glycosides are present at negligible levels in the fleshy 
parts of the fruit. Cases of acute poisoning have been associated 
with misuse, particularly of preparations from apricot pits, bitter 
almonds, and cyanide rich apple seeds (http://www.foodsafety.
govt.nz/elibrary/industry/Cyanogenic_Glycosides-Toxin_Which.
pdf). In parts of Africa, cassava is consumed as a dietary staple. 
Inappropriate handling and processing of cassava prior to con-
sumption can result in a chronic form of cyanide poisoning termed 
“tropical ataxic neuropathy,” the result of demyelinization of the 
optic, auditory, and peripheral nerve tracts (Dolan et al., 2010).
Glucosinolates  Glucosinolates 
(nitrogen-containing 
non-
alkaloid) are sulfur-containing goitrogenic glycosides found 
in Brassicaceae and related families (cruciferous vegetables). 
Enzymatic hydrolysis of glucosinolates produces several different 
products, such as isothiocyanates, thiocyanates, oxazolidinethi-
ones, and nitriles. These hydrolysis products contribute to the bit-
ter, hot taste of condiments (mustard, horseradish) and are thought 
to be responsible for the toxicity of glucosinolate including the 
goitrogenic or antithyroid activity. Thiocyanate and oxazolidine-
thione anions compete with iodine in two ways, by inhibiting its 
uptake by the sodium iodide symporter, and also by the binding of 
iodine to tyrosine residues of thyroglobulin at high concentrations. 
Some examples of glucosinolates are sinigrin, dehydroerucin, and 
glucobrassicin (Fig. 27-11). Glucobrassicin is hydrolyzed to form 
indole-3-carbinol. Glucosinolate toxicity has been reported in rumi-
nants, poultry, and swine. Poultry, swine, and other non-ruminants 
can tolerate 5% to 10% rapeseed meal in their diets. Symptoms of 
poisoning include depressed growth, goiters, enlarged livers, pero-
sis (leg deformity in birds), and poor egg production in chicken 
(EFSA, 2008a). FDA regulates glucosinolate levels in animal 
feed—glucosinolate calculated as epi-progoitrin, not more than 
4%; goitrin, not more than 0.1%; and nitrile calculated as 1-cyano-
2-hydroxy-3-butene, not more than 1.4% (21 CFR 573.310).
Glycoalkaloids 
(α-Solanine 
and 
α-Chaconine)  
Glycoalkaloids (α-solanine, Fig. 27-12; and α-chaconine) in 
potato are steroidal glycoalkaloids, which together constitute about 
95% of the total glycoalkaloids in the edible potato (Solanum 
N
O
O
O
O
O
HO
HO
HO
O
OH
OH
OH
HO
HO
HO
Figure 27-12.  α-Solanine.
O
O
Figure 27-9.  Safrole.
O
O
O
N
O
HO
HO
HO
OH
OH
OH
HO
H
Figure 27-10.  Amygdalin.
HO
O
S
NH
N
O
S
OH
O
O
OH
OH
HO
Figure 27-11.  Glucobrassicin.

1340
Toxic Agents
unit V
tuberosum). There is usually slightly more α-chaconine than 
α-solanine. Increases in α-solanine and α-chaconine in the potato 
peel are closely associated with greening of the peel due to expo-
sure to light, mechanical damage, and improper storage condi-
tions. The α-solanine and α-chaconine each is normally present in 
amounts less than 5 mg/100 g of tuber fresh weight. Depending on 
the variety and storage conditions, the concentrations of α-solanine 
and α-chaconine in potato tubers vary between less than 1 mg 
and about 25 mg/g potato (Dolan et al., 2010). The content of 
α-solanine and α-chaconine is not affected much by normal bak-
ing, frying, or microwave cooking, but peeling significantly reduces 
these glycoalkaloids. Acute, short-term, and subchronic animal 
toxicity studies identified similar adverse effects of α-chaconine, 
and α-solanine, which is due to their ability to act as inhibitors of 
acetylcholinesterase and disruptors of cell membranes. Effects on 
the nervous system included increased heart, pulse, and respiratory 
rates, sedation, and coma. Effects resulting from cell membrane 
disruption included internal hemorrhaging, edema, diarrhea, con-
striction of the abdominal muscles, and lesions of the stomach and 
duodenum. α-Chaconine is a more potent cholinesterase inhibitor 
than α-solanine. In some studies, hepatotoxic effects were also 
induced. It was also determined that the average consumption of 
glycoalkaloids from potatoes was 12.75 mg glycoalkaloids/person/
day (0.18 mg/kg bw based on a bw of 70 kg), which is approxi-
mately one-fifth of the lowest dose that has been shown to produce 
signs of acute toxicity in humans (1 mg/kg bw) (Tice, 1998).
Tannins  Tannins are a group of plant phenolics. Tannins are of 
two types: condensed tannins and hydrolyzable tannins (HT). HTs 
are polymers of gallic or ellagic acid, and are potentially toxic to 
ruminants. For example, pyrogallol is a product of HT degrada-
tion by ruminal microbes, and has hepatotoxic and nephrotoxic 
effects (Reed, 1995). Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) (Fig. 
27-13) and epicatechin gallate (ECG) are the main tannins in green 
tea. Very high dose of EGCG, such as a single intragastric dose of 
1500 mg EGCG/kg, is hepatotoxic in mice (Lambert et al., 2010). 
Hepatotoxicity in humans has been associated with the consump-
tion of high doses of green tea–containing dietary supplements (10 
to 29 mg/kg bw/d) (reviewed by Mazzanti et al., 2009). All cases 
resolved following cessation of supplement consumption. Based on 
their analysis, Mazzanti et al. (2009) suggested a causal associa-
tion between green tea and liver damage, and that the hepatotoxic-
ity was the result of EGCG or its metabolites. Laboratory studies 
in rodents and dogs using a high bolus dose of green tea–derived 
preparations rich in EGCG revealed hepatotoxicity and nephro-
toxicity (Lambert et al., 2010). However, Isbrucker et al. (2006) 
demonstrated that dietary administration of EGCG preparation to 
rats for 13 weeks was not toxic at doses up to 500 mg/kg bw/d. 
Similarly, no adverse effects were noted when 500 mg EGCG prep-
aration/kg/day was administered to pre-fed dogs in divided doses. 
The same dose caused morbidity when administered to fasted dogs 
as a single bolus dose.
Furocoumarins  Furocoumarins are another group of plant phe-
nolics. Furocoumarins are found mainly in plants belonging to the 
Rutaceae (e.g., citrus fruits) and Umbelliferae (e.g., parsnip, pars-
ley, celery, carrots) families. Furocoumarins, such as psoralen (Fig. 
27-14), 5-methoxypsoralen (5-MOP, bergapten), and 8-methoxy-
psoralen (8-MOP, xanthotoxin or methoxsalen), can form DNA 
adducts and DNA crosslinks in the presence of UV light (UVA) 
(320 to 380 nm). The estimated dietary intake of furocoumarins 
for about 80% of the population is 1.31 mg/day, which is approxi-
mately 0.022 mg/kg bw/day for a 60 kg human (Dolan et al., 2010). 
In humans the phototoxic threshold dose of furocoumarin mixtures 
is of the order of 10 mg 8-MOP plus 10 mg 5-MOP, which is equiv-
alent to about 15 mg 8-MOP per person (Schlatter et al., 1991). 
This dose is not reached by the consumption of furocoumarin-
containing conventional vegetables under normal dietary habits. 
Therefore, ordinarily dietary exposure to psoralens is not consid-
ered to be a significant risk for the development of photodermatitis, 
although the margin of safety is low (Schlatter et al, 1991). The 
13-week dietary no observable adverse effect level for liver toxicity 
in the rat (25 mg 8-MOP/kg bw/day) is 1000-fold higher than the 
estimated dietary intake of furocoumarins in humans. Therefore, 
the risk of developing liver toxicity in humans due to ingestion of 
psoralens in the diet is low (Dolan et al., 2010).
Gossypol  Gossypol (polyphenolic aldehyde; Fig. 27-15) is a toxic 
compound found in cotton plants (Gossypium sp.). It is concen-
trated in the cottonseed but is also found in hulls, leaves, and stems. 
The free form of gossypol is toxic whereas the protein-bound form 
is relatively nontoxic. The bound form is produced through cova-
lent bonds between gossypol and the free epsilon-amino groups of 
lysine and arginine. The concentrations of free gossypol contained 
in feedstuffs such as whole cottonseed and cottonseed meals vary 
considerably, but gossypol toxicity limits cottonseed use in ani-
mal feed. Gossypol poisoning is usually chronic and cumulative. 
In pigs, poultry, dogs (non-ruminant), pre-ruminants (e.g., young 
O
O
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
OH
Figure 27-13.  EGCG.
O
O
O
Figure 27-14.  Psoralen.
O
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
Figure 27-15.  Gossypol.

Food Toxicology: Fundamental and Regulatory Aspects
Chapter 27
1341
calf), and ruminants (e.g., cattle, goat, sheep), the signs of gossy-
pol poisoning are similar and include labored breathing, decreased 
growth rate, and anorexia. Postmortem findings include general-
ized edema and congestion of lungs and liver, fluid-filled thoracic 
and peritoneal cavities, and degeneration of heart fibers. Gossypol 
also has antifertility effects in many non-ruminant species (Randel 
et al., 1992). In terms of the severity of toxicity, monogastric ani-
mals, such as pigs, birds, and rodents are more susceptible to gos-
sypol toxicity than ruminants. Among ruminants, young ruminants 
are more sensitive than adult ruminants. However, if the gossypol 
intake overwhelms the ruminal detoxification capacity, free gos-
sypol may be absorbed at hazardous concentrations even in adult 
ruminant animals (Gadelha et al., 2014).
Erucic Acid  Erucic acid (Fig. 27-16) is a 22-carbon monounsatu-
rated fatty acid with a single double bond at the omega 9 posi-
tion (C22:1, ω-9). Erucic acid comprises about 30% to 60% of the 
total fatty acids of rapeseed and mustard seed. The oil extracted 
from rape (Brassica napus or B. campestris) and mustard (Brassica 
nigra) seeds have been used in cooking in different parts of the 
world. Through selective breeding, B. napus and B. campestris 
varieties with low erucic acid content were developed in Canada in 
the 1980s. These improved varieties are popularly known as canola. 
By definition, canola refers to B. napus and B. campestris lines con-
taining less than 2% of the total fatty acids as erucic acid. Erucic 
acid is digested, absorbed, and metabolized like other fatty acids. 
It undergoes mitochondrial β-oxidation, but is poorly oxidized. 
Heart muscle seems to be particularly poor at oxidizing erucic acid, 
which explains the occurrence of myocardial lipidosis in a num-
ber of species, such as rat, pigs, and monkeys fed erucic acid in 
short-term or subchronic studies. Myocardial lipidosis may inter-
fere with the contractile force of heart muscle. Myocardial lipidosis 
due to erucic acid consumption has not been confirmed in humans, 
but the results from the animal feeding studies triggered regulatory 
action in limiting erucic acid exposure in humans (FSANZ, 2003). 
For example, FDA limits the amount of erucic acid in canola oil to 
no more than 2% of the component fatty acids (21 CFR 184.1555).
Lectins  Lectins are glycoproteins that are known for their ability 
to agglutinate (clump) cells including erythrocytes in vitro. Hence, 
lectins are also known as agglutinins (agglutinate cells) and hemag-
glutinins (agglutinate erythrocytes). Lectins can be found in both 
plants and animals; those of plant origin are called phytohemag-
glutinins. Lectins are present in high levels in legumes (e.g., black 
beans, soybeans, lima beans, kidney beans, and lentils) and grain 
products. Lectins selectively bind carbohydrates and more impor-
tantly, the carbohydrate moieties of the glycoproteins on the sur-
face of most animal cells. High levels of plant lectins in certain 
improperly cooked food can interfere with nutrient absorption from 
the intestine and also cause acute GI tract distress. However, not all 
lectins are toxic, and there are highly toxic lectins without hemag-
glutinating activity, such as ricin from castor bean. Ricin is one 
of the most toxic substances known. The seeds of precatory bean 
Abrus precatorius contain the highly toxic lectin abrin that has an 
estimated human fatal dose of 0.1 to 1 μg/kg bw, and has caused 
death after accidental or intentional poisoning (Wu and Sun, 2012). 
Less toxic lectins can also be fatal if ingested in high amounts, 
such as concanavalin A from Concanavalia ensiformis (jack bean). 
Lectins isolated from black beans can produce growth retardation 
when fed to rats at 0.5% of the diet, and lectin from kidney beans 
causes death within two weeks when fed to rats at 0.5% of the diet. 
Soybean lectin produces growth retardation when fed to rats at 
1% of the diet (Dolan et al., 2010). Long-term intake of lectins 
in rodent models shows increased cell turnover, gut hyperplasia, 
and weight loss. Epithelial cell microvilli are particularly affected 
by lectin exposure. Areas of epithelial cell necrosis and complete 
epithelial cell denudation are seen in biopsies of the stomach and 
intestine. The mechanism of injury of surface-bound lectins may 
involve inhibition of plasma membrane repair and the exocytosis 
of mucus that normally accompanies the repair response (Miyake 
et al., 2007). The combination of soaking and cooking is the best 
way to reduce the lectin content and its activity in all bean varieties 
(Nciri et al., 2015).
Phytic Acid (Phytate)  Phytic acid (phytate; Fig. 27-17) is ino-
sitol hexaphosphate found in edible seeds, nuts, beans/legumes, 
and grains (mostly in the bran). It serves as the main storage form 
of phosphorus. When seeds sprout, phytic acid provides the phos-
phorus needed by the young plant. Ironically, the presence of so 
many phosphates also enables phytic acid to strongly bind min-
erals, such as calcium, magnesium, iron, copper, and zinc, mak-
ing the minerals unavailable for absorption in the intestines. The 
phytic acid content in plants is highly variable. Phytate has also 
been shown to inhibit digestive enzymes such as pepsin, trypsin, 
α-amylase, α-glucosidase. Phytate-rich foods are digested at a 
slower rate. Several methods reduce the phytic acid content in food, 
such as fermentation, soaking, germination, and enzymatic treat-
ment of grains with phytase enzyme (Gupta et al., 2015).
Oxalic Acid  Oxalic acid (Fig. 27-18) is one of the antinutrients 
found in the leaves and stems including the corms (underground 
bulbotubers) of many plants. Some examples include rhubarb, 
spinach, beet greens, purslane, taro (Colocasia esculenta), and 
many other plants. Ingestion of foods containing high concentra-
tions of oxalic acid results in the formation of insoluble calcium 
O
OH
O
HO
Figure 27-18.  Oxalic acid.
OH
O
Figure 27-16.  Erucic acid.
O
P
OH
HO
O
O
P
HO
OH
O
O
P
HO
OH
O
O
P
OH
HO
O
O
O
P
O
OH
HO
P
O
OH
HO
Figure 27-17.  Phytic acid.

1342
Toxic Agents
unit V
oxalate and oxalates of other minerals in the systemic circulation. 
Calcium oxalate precipitates in the kidneys, resulting in renal fail-
ure. Sequestration of minerals by oxalate may also decrease their 
bioavailability, such as reduction in the bioavailability of calcium 
in the bone. Non-ruminants appear to be more prone to oxalate tox-
icity than ruminants because rumen bacteria help degrade oxalate. 
Nevertheless, feeding large amount of oxalate-rich plants at one 
time may result in oxalate toxicity even in ruminants because the 
rumen’s capacity to degrade oxalate is overwhelmed (Rahman 
et al., 2013). About 65% of kidney stones consist of calcium oxa-
late. A randomized controlled trial assigned men with hypercalci-
uria to follow either a diet low in calcium (400 mg) and oxalate or 
a diet higher in calcium (1200 mg) with restricted intake of oxa-
late, protein, and salt. At 5 years, the latter group had a 51% lower 
rate of stone recurrence than those following a low-calcium diet 
(Finkelstein and Goldfarb, 2006). Thus, the intake of foods high in 
oxalate should be limited.
Enzyme Inhibitors  Enzyme inhibitors present in many plants 
(e.g., beans, peas, cereal grains, alfalfa, sunflower, potatoes) and 
animal foods can inhibit the action of proteases, amylases, and 
lipases. These inhibitors function as plants’ natural defense mecha-
nism against insects and herbivores. For example, kidney beans 
(Phaseolus vulgaris) contain some protease (trypsin and chy-
motrypsin) inhibitors, and α-amylase inhibitor. The α-amylase 
inhibitors (α-AI) occur in many plants, and are particularly abun-
dant in cereals. The α-AI inhibits the activity of some mamma-
lian and insect α-amylases, and is a member of a protein family 
that includes two other defense proteins, phytohemagglutinin and 
arcelins. These defense proteins are encoded by tightly linked 
genes. It is likely that this gene family originated from a common 
ancestral gene through both duplication and divergence (Carlini 
and Grossi-de-Sá, 2002). Trypsin inhibitor (TI) occurs naturally in 
many plant-derived foods, notably soybean protein products. Heat 
treatment inactivates most of the inhibitor activity but 5% to 20% 
residual inhibitor activity remains. Chronic feeding of food prod-
ucts containing TI can inhibit trypsin and chymotrypsin, stimulate 
their secretion, cause hypertrophy and hyperplasia of the pancreas, 
and lead to adenomas and carcinomas of the exocrine pancreas. 
In the rat, TI promotes pancreatic carcinogenesis initiated by aza-
serine (Hathcock, 1991). Likewise, most commercially heated 
soybean meals retain up to 20% of the Bowman–Birk inhibitor 
(BBI) of chymotrypsin and trypsin, and the Kunitz inhibitor of 
trypsin (KTI). Toxicology studies in rodents demonstrated that raw 
soy-based diets had trophic effects on pancreas in rats and hamsters 
but not in mice. Thus, long-term feeding of raw soy-based diets 
caused hypertrophy, adenomas, and nodular hyperplasia of the pan-
creas (Friedman and Brandon, 2001). In contrast, there were no 
adverse effects on the pancreas of monkeys fed diets containing 
low levels of trypsin inhibitor for up to 4 years. Specifically, neither 
pancreatic hypertrophy nor hyperplasia was evident. In addition to 
monkeys, pancreatic enlargement resulting from the consumption 
of inhibitors was not observed in dogs, pigs, calves, and baboons 
(Schneeman and Gallaher, 1986; Friedman and Brandon, 2001). 
Thus, the consumption of soybeans in amounts normally consumed 
is unlikely to produce any effect of toxicological significance in 
humans. Biotin is a coenzyme and a B vitamin (vitamin B7). Biotin 
acts as a coenzyme of several carboxylase enzymes. Avidin is a tet-
rameric protein that binds biotin. Avidin is found in raw eggs (egg 
white) and it binds biotin with a very strong affinity (KD ≈ 10−15 
M). Thus, consuming raw egg directly or mixing it in other drinks 
or shakes chronically can cause biotin deficiency. Avidin’s ability 
to bind biotin is largely, but not completely, destroyed by cooking 
the egg (Durance and Wong, 1992).
Phytoestrogens  Phytoestrogens are so named because of their 
ability to bind to estrogen receptors and stimulate receptor activ-
ity. The main groups of phytoestrogen are the lignans, flavonoids 
(subgroups isoflavones, coumestans, and prenylflavonoids), and 
stilbenes. Lignans are the main phytoestrogens in a normal diet, 
and they are found in many cereals, fruits, and vegetables. In vitro 
assays have shown that most phytoestrogens bind both estrogen 
receptors (ERs), ERα and ERβ, and activate ER-dependent gene 
transcription. However, they generally have a higher binding affin-
ity for ERβ. Isoflavones act like selective estrogen receptor modula-
tors (SERMs), such as tamoxifen. Tamoxifen acts as an ER agonist 
in the uterus and bone but as an antagonist in the breast, where it 
has proven anticancer activity. In animal models, some phytoestro-
gens (e.g., isoflavones) produce symptoms of endocrine disruption, 
which include premature reproductive senescence, compromised 
fertility, disruption of the lactation and the timing of puberty, the 
inhibition of sexual behavior, etc. However, the data in humans 
are not conclusive. The majority of epidemiological studies and 
meta-analyses concluded that the high intake of soy isoflavones 
is associated with reduced breast cancer risk in pre- and post-
menopausal women. The use of soy isoflavones is seemingly safe 
in women with a history of breast cancer. Studies even indicate 
that the isoflavone intake improves the prognosis of breast cancer 
patients. Thus, the results of the in vitro and animal studies that 
indicate a potential adverse effect of phytoestrogens are not nec-
essarily corroborated by the findings in humans (Bode and Dong, 
2015; Kristanc and Kreft, 2016).
Some Naturally Occurring Toxins in Food of 
Marine Origin
Toxicity from seafood is due to algal or bacterial toxins that accu-
mulate in shellfish6 and fish, or due to the production of histamine 
by spoilage bacteria in fish. These toxin-producing algae are impor-
tant food source for various shellfish and fish, which accumulate 
these toxins in specific organs. There are no antidotes for these tox-
ins; they are heat stable and largely unaffected by cooking (Sobel 
and Painter, 2005). The seafood contaminated with such toxins still 
look, smell, and taste normal. Many of these toxins act on sodium 
channels—some toxins block the channels inducing muscle paraly-
sis; others open the channels, prolong depolarization of the mem-
brane and spontaneous firing causing symptoms like involuntary 
muscle spasms, tingling paresthesia, etc. These toxins are usually 
lethal in small doses.
Saxitoxin  Saxitoxin and related toxins are tetrahydropu-
rines mainly produced by the marine dinoflagellate genus 
Alexandrium spp., but also from other dinoflagellate species, such 
as Gymnodinium catenatum and Pyrodinium bahamense (Dolan 
et al., 2010). Saxitoxin causes paralytic shellfish poisoning (PSP), 
which is a severe, rapid onset, life-threatening neurotoxicity caused 
by the consumption of oysters, mussels, scallops, clams, crusta-
ceans, gastropods, and fish that are contaminated with saxitoxin 
or closely related marine toxins. Saxitoxin inhibits the conduction 
of nerve impulse by blocking the sodium channels (Daranas et al., 
2001). Symptoms of PSP, such as headache, nausea, vomiting, and 
diarrhea, appear within 30 minutes. In fatal cases respiratory arrest 
occurs 2 to 12 hours following consumption of the contaminated 
shellfish. Using the available human data on intoxication in humans 
6Edible shellfish include two groups: crustaceans and mollusks. Common 
crustaceans include lobster, crab, crawfish (crayfish), prawn, and shrimp. 
Common mollusks include clam, mussel, oyster, scallop, squid, and octopus.

Food Toxicology: Fundamental and Regulatory Aspects
Chapter 27
1343
comprising more than 500 individuals, EFSA CONTAM Panel 
determined a LOAEL of 1.5 μg saxitoxin equivalents/kg bw. Using 
the uncertainty factor of 3, an ARfD of 0.5 μg saxitoxin equiva-
lents/kg bw was established (EFSA, 2009a). The rationale for using 
3 as the safety factor was the fact that documentation of human 
cases included a large number of affected consumers, including 
sensitive individuals, and the fact that saxitoxin-induced mild ill-
ness is readily reversible. It was determined that in order for a 60 kg 
adult to avoid exceeding the ARfD of 0.5 μg saxitoxin equivalents/
kg bw, there should not be more than 75 µg saxitoxin equivalents/
kg of shellfish meat. The EFSA CONTAM Panel recommended 
significant reduction of the current European Commission (EC) 
limit of PSP, which is 800 μg/kg (= 80 μg/100 g) of shellfish meat. 
The FDA consumer guidance recommends that the limit of the 
saxitoxins in shellfish meat should not exceed 0.8 ppm saxitoxin 
equivalents, that is, 80 μg saxitoxin equivalents/100 g shellfish 
meat (FDA, 2011a).
Okadaic Acid (OA), Dinophysistoxin (DTX), Pectenotoxin 
(PTX), Yessotoxins (YTX)  Okadaic acid (OA) (Fig. 27-19), 
dinophysistoxin (DTX), pectenotoxin (PTX), and yessotoxins 
(YTX) are lipophilic polyether compounds that all cause diarrheic 
shellfish poisoning (DSP), which is a rapid-onset but self-resolv-
ing illness involving the GI system. The toxins are produced by 
marine dinoflagellates of the genus Dinophysis spp. These toxins 
are known to accumulate in marine shellfish, particularly in the 
hepatopancreas (Paredes et al, 2011; Reguera et al., 2014). DSP has 
been reported more often in Japan but also in Europe. OA strongly 
inhibits the eukaryotic serine/threonine phosphatases 1 and 2A, 
resulting in hyperphosphorylation of many cellular proteins. It has 
been proposed that OA-induced stimulation of phosphorylation of 
proteins that control sodium secretion by intestinal cells results 
in diarrhea. Symptoms of DSP, such as diarrhea and abdominal 
cramps, usually appear within 30 minutes after exposure but typi-
cally resolve within 3 to 4 days. These are not considered to be 
lethal (Paredes et al, 2011; Valdiglesias et al., 2013). An intake of 
40 μg of OA equivalents is the minimum dose required to produce 
DSP symptoms in human adults. The lowest observed adverse 
effect level (LOAEL) in mice, by acute oral administration, was 
calculated to be 75 μg/kg bw. Human data indicate a LOAEL of 1.0 
to 1.6 μg/kg bw (Valdiglesias et al., 2013). EFSA concluded that 
the LOAEL for human illness is approximately 50 µg OA equiva-
lents/person, which is equivalent to 0.83 μg OA equivalent/kg bw 
for a 60-kg person (EFSA, 2008b). The FDA consumer guidance 
recommends that the limit of the total OA in shellfish meat should 
not exceed 0.16 ppm, that is, 16 μg of total OA/100 g shellfish meat 
(FDA, 2011a).
Domoic Acid (DA)  Domoic acid (DA) (Fig. 27-20) is a water-
soluble, heat-stable amino acid that causes amnesic shellfish poi-
soning (ASP). DA is produced by marine diatoms (algae) of the 
genus Pseudonitzschia spp., and by marine red algae of the genus 
Chondria spp., particularly when there are severe algal blooms. 
Because DA toxicity does not always involve amnesia, it is also 
known as domoic acid poisoning (Paredes et al, 2011). Symptoms 
of ASP included vomiting, nausea, diarrhea, and abdominal 
cramps within 24 hours of ingestion; neurological symptoms 
developed within 48 hours. Both shellfish and fish can accumulate 
DA with­out apparent ill effects. In mammals including humans, 
DA is neurotoxic; high levels of DA cause seizures. DA specifi-
cally targets the hippocampus. DA is structurally similar to but 
2 to 3 times more potent than another known neurotoxin kainic 
acid (KA) found in marine seaweed. Both DA and KA are excit-
atory amino acid analogues of glutamic acid, and they act through 
the ionotropic glutamate receptors (GluR), preferentially the KA 
subtype of GluR (Pulido, 2008). Hyperexcitation of the receptors 
leads to hyperexcitation of the neurons which ultimately “burn out” 
and die off. The damage of hippocampal neurons results in perma-
nent loss of the “short-term memory” in susceptible individuals 
(hence the name amnesic shellfish poisoning). The toxicological 
database for DA comprises mostly studies on the acute toxicity 
in rodents and cynomolgus monkeys. Neurotoxicity is the critical 
toxicological effect identified in experimental animals as well as 
in humans (EFSA, 2009b). Using the human DA poisoning acute 
toxicity data, EFSA (2009b) determined the ARfD to be 30 μg DA/
kg bw. This ARfD was derived by applying an overall uncertainty 
factor of 30 to the lowest-observed-adverse-effect-level (LOAEL) 
for mild signs and symptoms, which was 0.9 mg/kg bw. The basis 
for the uncertainty factor 30 was a factor of 3 for the extrapolation 
of LOAEL to NOAEL multiplied by a factor of 10 to account for 
inter-individual variability in humans. The FDA consumer guid-
ance recommends that the limit of DA in shellfish meat should not 
exceed 20 ppm except in the viscera of Dungeness crab, where it 
should not exceed 30 ppm (FDA, 2011a). A 20 and 30 ppm DA 
are equivalent to 2 mg DA/100 g and 3 mg/100 g of shellfish meat, 
respectively.
Brevetoxins  Brevetoxins are a family of lipophilic cyclic poly-
ether toxins that cause neurotoxic shellfish poisoning (NSP), which 
involves transient GI and neurological symptoms. Brevetoxins are 
produced by the marine dinoflagellate Karenia brevis (formerly 
known as Gymnodinium breve) (Watkins et al., 2008). Brevetoxins 
open voltage-gated sodium channels causing uncontrolled Na+ 
influx into the cell, prolonged depolarization of neuronal and 
muscle cell membranes, and spontaneous firing. The GI symptoms 
HN
O
HO
O
OH
O
OH
Figure 27-20.  Domoic acid.
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
OH
H
OH
H
H
H
OH
H
OH
OH
O
Figure 27-19.  Okadaic acid.

1344
Toxic Agents
unit V
of NSP include vomiting, diarrhea, and pain in the abdomen. 
Neurological symptoms include paresthesia (a pricking, tingling 
sensation), reversal of hot and cold perception, vertigo (false sense 
of motion), and ataxia (involuntary muscular movement, or spasms). 
Symptoms typically occur within 30 minutes to a couple of hours 
after consuming contaminated shellfish and typically resolve within 
2 days. The toxicological database for brevetoxins is limited, and 
comprises only studies on their acute toxicity following intravenous 
(i.v.), intraperitoneal (i.p.), and oral administration (EFSA, 2010). 
Because brevetoxins are lipophilic, they pass through cell mem-
branes including the blood–brain barrier. Brevetoxins are rapidly 
absorbed and distributed throughout the body, and are metabolized 
in the liver. They are primarily removed in the bile within the first 
48 hours, but urinary excretion plays a role after this time as well 
(Watkins et al., 2008). The LD50 of different brevetoxins may vary 
widely and the route of administration also plays a major role. For 
example, the oral LD50 in mice for brevetoxin-2 is 6600 mg/kg 
bw and for brevetoxin-3 is 520 mg/kg bw. In contrast, i.v. and i.p. 
administration causes toxic signs including death almost immedi-
ately, whereas toxic signs including death occurred approximately 
after 5 hours after oral administration (EFSA, 2010). EFSA (2010) 
concluded that there were insufficient human and animal toxicity 
data to complete a risk assessment. The FDA consumer guidance 
recommends that the limit of the brevetoxins in shellfish meat 
should not exceed 0.8 ppm brevetoxin-2 equivalents, that is, 80 μg 
brevetoxin-2 equivalents/100 g shellfish meat (FDA, 2011a).
Ciguatoxin  Ciguatoxin group of toxins include ciguatera toxin, 
gambiertoxin, and maitotoxin. They occur in marine fishes. 
Ciguatoxins are mostly lipophilic, heat-stable polyethers. They 
are produced by the benthic dinoflagellate Gambierdiscus toxicus. 
Gambiertoxin produced by the dinoflagellate is biotransformed by 
the fish to produce ciguatera toxin. These dinoflagellates are con-
sumed by small herbivorous fishes that are, in turn, consumed by 
large carnivorous fishes (e.g., barracuda and grouper fish), resulting 
in bioconcentration of the toxin along the food chain (Lehane and 
Lewis, 2000). Ciguatoxins cause ciguatera fish poisoning (CFP), 
which is primarily associated with the consumption of large preda-
tory fishes that have accumulated ciguatoxins by feeding on smaller 
contaminated fishes. Ciguatoxins open voltage-gated sodium 
channels at the neuromuscular junction, resulting in membrane 
hyperexcitability, spontaneous repetitive neurotransmitter release, 
blockage of synaptic transmission, and depletion of synaptic vesi-
cles. Maitotoxin is water-soluble and it opens calcium channels of 
the cell plasma membrane; it is the most toxic nonproteinaceous 
molecule known (Lehane and Lewis, 2000; Daranas et al., 2001). 
CFP is typically a self-limiting illness, although symptoms may 
last for months and deaths have been reported. Symptoms of CFP 
include GI (e.g., vomiting, diarrhea, nausea), neurological (e.g., 
tingling, itching), and cardiovascular (e.g., hypotension, bradycar-
dia) effects. In severe cases the symptoms may begin as soon as 30 
minutes after ingestion of contaminated fish, while in milder cases 
they may be delayed for 24 to 48 hours. Symptoms may last even 
for months and the administration of mannitol within 24 hours of 
consumption relieves some symptoms (Dickey and Plakas, 2010). 
CFP is currently the most common type of marine biotoxin food 
poisoning with an estimated number of 10,000 to 50,000 people 
affected annually (Lehane, 2000). The FDA consumer guidance rec-
ommends that the limit of ciguatoxins in fish flesh should not exceed 
0.01 ppb (0.01 μg/kg fish flesh) for Pacific ciguatoxin, and 0.1 ppb 
(= 0.1 μg/kg fish flesh) for Caribbean ciguatoxin (FDA, 2011a).
Tetrodotoxin  Tetrodotoxin is a heat-stable, water-soluble mol-
ecule produced by symbiotic bacteria concentrated in the liver and 
gonad of puffer fish (Fugu), and in many other marine organisms. 
Tetrodotoxin is a potent sodium channel blocker; it reduces the 
membrane excitability and blocks the conduction of nerve impulse, 
thereby causing muscle paralysis. Symptoms of toxicity include 
perioral paresthesia (burning or prickling sensation) that may spread 
to the entire body, and could be followed by vomiting, lighthead-
edness, dizziness. In non-fatal poisoning, symptoms usually begin 
within 30 minutes after exposure and completely resolve within 24 
hours after onset. In fatal cases, progression is precipitous, with 
death due to respiratory muscle paralysis occurring within 6 hours 
after onset of symptoms. In Japan, puffer fish is a delicacy but it is 
cleaned and prepared by specially trained chefs. The intragastric 
LD50 of tetrodotoxin in mouse was 532 μg/kg (Lago et al., 2015). 
Even though tetrodotoxin is such a potent sodium channel blocker, 
it cannot block the sodium ion channel of puffer fish because these 
sodium channels are insensitive to tetrodotoxin.
Scombroid Toxicity  Scombroid toxicity causes scombroid fish 
poisoning. Scombroid poisoning is unique among the seafood toxins 
because it results from product mishandling rather than contamina-
tion from other trophic levels (Hungerford, 2010). It is mostly caused 
by the consumption of fish (Scombroidae family) with high histamine 
levels, such as tuna, mackerel, blue fish, sardines, anchovies, and 
mahi-mahi. Symptoms are essentially the same as those associated 
with histamine toxicity. Thus, such histamine-induced reactions are 
often misdiagnosed as IgE-mediated fish allergy. If the fish with high 
levels of tissue histidine are not refrigerated properly, the bacteria pro-
liferate and convert the tissue histidine into histamine, which is heat- 
stable. In most cases, histamine levels in illness-causing fish have 
been above 200 ppm, often above 500 ppm (FDA, 2011a). Symptoms 
of toxicity include tingling and burning sensations around the mouth, 
headache, facial flushing, palpitations, profuse sweating, truncal 
rash and pruritis, abdominal cramps, nausea, and diarrhea. In most 
people, these symptoms are self-limiting, but circulatory collapse, 
shock, and acute pulmonary edema have been described in severe 
cases (Kerr and Parke, 1998; Becker et al., 2001). Scombroid poi-
soning is the most common cause of ichythyotoxicosis worldwide. 
Because more than 80% of fish consumed in the United States is now 
imported from other countries, the disease is intimately linked with 
the global fish trade (Feng et al., 2016).
Palytoxin  Palytoxin is produced by the zoantharians of the genus 
Palythoa (cnidarians found in coral reefs). Fishes and crabs living in 
close association with or eating this mass may become contaminated 
with palytoxin. Palytoxin has been reported in mackerel, parrotfish, 
and several species of crabs. It is one of the most lethal marine tox-
ins known. It binds to the Na+/K+-ATPase (Na+/K+ pump) and turns 
it into a nonspecific ion channel. This results in K+ efflux, Na+ influx, 
and prolonged membrane depolarization. Victims exposed to paly-
toxin report nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Within several hours, 
symptoms include myoglobinuria, a burning sensation around the 
mouth and extremities, muscle spasms, paresthesia, bradycardia, 
dyspnea (labored breathing), and dysphonia (difficulty in speaking). 
Cause of death may be the result of myocardial injury. Palytoxin is 
known in vitro to be a powerful hemolysin. The Na+/K+-ATPase 
inhibition by palytoxin is similar to that of ouabain, but unlike 
ouabain, palytoxin has no effect on H+-, Ca2+-, or H+/K+-ATPases 
(Ramos and Vasconcelos, 2010; Kotsonis and Burdoch, 2013).
Some Microbial Contaminants in Food
Food-related illnesses resulting from microbial contamination can 
pose a serious threat to public health. Foodborne disease outbreaks 
are tracked by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 
CDC estimates that each year roughly 1 in 6 Americans (or 48 mil-
lion people) gets sick, 128,000 are hospitalized, and 3000 die of

Food Toxicology: Fundamental and Regulatory Aspects
Chapter 27
1345
foodborne diseases. The 2014 CDC annual report on the surveillance 
for foodborne disease outbreaks in the United States reports that there 
were 864 outbreaks involving bacterial, viral, parasitic, chemicals, 
and toxin etiology. However, the actual frequency may be signifi-
cantly higher because (1) an outbreak is classified as such only when 
the source can be identified as affecting two or more people and (2) 
most home poisonings are mild or have a long incubation time and 
are therefore not connected to the ingested food, and go unreported.
Food can serve as the vector for the transfer of microbial tox-
ins or live pathogenic microbes into the human GI tract. Bacterial 
toxins are of two types: exotoxin and endotoxin. Exotoxins are not 
an integral part of the bacterial membrane; they are soluble, usually 
heat-labile proteins found in the cytoplasm, and are easily secreted 
into the surrounding medium, usually by gram-positive bacteria. 
Exotoxins enhance bacterial virulence, and are further subdivided 
according to their mode of action, such as emetic toxins that trigger 
severe vomiting; enterotoxins that cause diarrhea; cytotoxins that 
kill host cells; neurotoxins that interfere with normal transmission of 
nerve impulse. Table 27-10 lists some important foodborne bacterial 
exotoxins and their mode of action in causing toxicity. In contrast, 
endotoxins are lipopolysaccharides and membrane constituents. 
Endotoxins are not secreted but released from dead or dying gram-
negative bacteria. Humans have background exposure to endotox-
ins by the oral and inhalation route, which may vary significantly 
depending on the living and working conditions (Madsen, 2006; 
Inagawa et al., 2011). However, higher-than-tolerable exposure to 
endotoxins can be problematic. Endotoxins are pyrogenic and are not 
easily destroyed. Endotoxins also stimulate inflammatory responses. 
Some bacteria, such as Shigella spp., Staphylococcus aureus, or 
Escherichia coli, can elaborate both endotoxin and exotoxin.
The FDA Bad Bug Book, which is available to the public, 
provides current information about the major known agents that 
Table 27-10  
Some Foodborne Bacterial Exotoxins and Their Mode of Action
BACTERIAL EXOTOXIN
PRODUCING ORGANISM
TOXICITY TO THE HOST
MODE OF ACTION
Cereulide (emetic 
toxin)
Bacillus cereus
Vomiting (emesis)
Toxin binds to the 5-HT3 receptors in the stomach/
small intestine and stimulates the vagus nerve. 
Stimulation of the afferent vagal neurocircuit triggers 
the vomiting center in the hindbrain
Cholera toxin 
(enterotoxin)
Vibrio cholerae
Diarrhea
Stimulates the efflux of ions and water from 
intestinal epithelial cells. The mechanism involves 
overstimulation of G proteins which results in 
persistent activation of adenylate cyclase to produce 
cAMP. Very high levels of intracellular cAMP prolong 
the opening of membrane channels that cause the efflux 
of Cl− and other ions and water from the infected cells
Staphylococcal 
enterotoxin 
(superantigen)
Staphylococcus aureus
Vomiting and diarrhea
Stimulates the vomiting center in the brain. 
Penetrates the gut lining and also activates immune 
response in the gut. The inflammatory response and 
the released inflammatory mediators are associated 
with inflammatory injury to the GI tract, and 
electrolyte dysregulation
Listeriolysin O 
(enterotoxin)
Listeria monocytogenes
Diarrhea
Pore-forming cytolysin that directly binds to the 
membranes in a cholesterol-dependent manner, 
which is followed by oligomerization of monomers, 
and formation of pores of 20- to 30-nm diameter that 
facilitate the efflux of ions and water
CPE (enterotoxin) 
Clostridium perfringens
Diarrhea
Pore-forming cytolysin. Binds to the claudin 
receptors (tight junction membrane proteins) on 
enterocytes, forms large complex that forms pores 
in the membrane, causes a strong influx of calcium, 
and apoptotic cell death. Enterocyte death disrupts 
villus integrity, and causes intestinal damage and 
electrolyte dysregulation
Diphtheria toxin 
(cytotoxin)
Corynebacterium 
diphtheriae
Cytotoxicity (cell 
death)
Inhibits protein synthesis by inhibiting the eukaryotic 
elongation factor 2 (eEF2)
Shiga toxin (cytotoxin)
Shigella dysenteriae; 
shiga toxin–producing 
Escherichia coli (STEC)
Cytotoxicity (cell 
death)
Inhibits protein synthesis by inhibiting 28S ribosomal 
RNA (28S rRNA). The same mechanism is also 
utilized by ricin in castor beans
Botulinum toxin 
(neurotoxin)
Clostridium botulinum
Neurotoxicity
Interferes with normal transmission of nerve impulse 
by blocking neurotransmitter (e.g., acetylcholine) 
release at the nerve terminals
SOURCES: Schmitt et al. (1999), Dramsi and Cossart (2002), Pinchuk et al. (2010), and Kotsonis and Burdoch (2013).

1346
Toxic Agents
unit V
cause foodborne illness. The information provided in the book is 
abbreviated and general in nature, and is intended for practical 
use. It is not intended to be a comprehensive scientific or clini-
cal reference. In the following narrative, a few of the microbial 
contaminants in food are briefly discussed. The FDA Bad Bug 
Book can be accessed at: http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Food/
FoodborneIllnessContaminants/UCM297627.pdf.
Clostridium botulinum, C. butyricum, and C. baratti  Food 
botulism is caused by eating foods contaminated with botulinum 
toxins. Foods associated with botulinum toxin include improperly 
canned low-acid foods (e.g., green beans, corn, beets, asparagus, 
chili peppers, mushrooms, spinach, figs, baked potato, cheese 
sauce, beef stew, olives, and tuna). The toxin also may occur in 
smoked fish, fermented food (e.g., seal flippers, salmon eggs), 
and improperly home-cured hams. An increasing source of poi-
sonings is from the use of flavored oils or oil infusion, most typi-
cally in garlic-in-oil preparations. All Clostridia are gram-positive, 
spore-forming anaerobes, and they produce a total of seven serotyp-
ically and antigenically distinct botulinum neurotoxins (serotypes 
A–G) (Rossetto et al., 2014). Human botulism is caused mainly by 
types A, B, E, and (rarely) F. Types C, D, and also E cause toxic-
ity in other mammals, birds, and fish (WHO, 2013). Type G has 
not caused any human illness. Botulinum toxin is neurotoxic that 
interfere with neural transmission by blocking the release of acetyl-
choline at peripheral nerve endings, causing muscle paralysis. The 
toxin is elaborated in foods, wounds, and infant gut. Clinical illness 
is characterized by cranial nerve palsies, followed by descending 
flaccid muscle paralysis, which can involve the muscles of respira-
tion. Recovery often takes weeks to months (Sobel et al., 2004). 
The toxins are heat-labile (may be rendered harmless at 80°C to 
100°C for 5 to 10 minutes) but the spores are among the most 
heat-resistant. The case fatality rate in the United States is 4% 
(Sobel et al., 2004) and the poison is fatal in 3 to 10 days; the lethal 
dose is approximately 1 ng. Whereas a proteolytic strain of C. botu-
linum (Group I) may cause the food to appear and smell “spoiled” 
(by-products include isobutyric acid, isovaleric acid, and phenyl-
propionic acid), this is not the case with nonproteolytic strains, 
many of which can flourish and elaborate toxin at temperatures as 
low as 3°C. Current methods for detecting botulinum toxin include 
a mouse bioassay and an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, 
with the mouse bioassay being the accepted standard. The suc-
cessful use of nitrates in meat to prevent spoilage by C. botulinum 
resulted in the petitioning of FDA by the USDA to have sodium 
and potassium nitrate approved for use by “prior sanction” (21 CFR 
181.33) (Kotsonis and Burdoch, 2013).
Clostridium perfringens  The primary reservoir for C. perfrin-
gens is the intestinal tract of warm-blooded animals (including 
humans). Most incidences of C. perfringens food poisoning are 
associated with the consumption of roasted meat that has been 
contaminated with intestinal contents at slaughter, followed by 
roasting and inadequate storage. This allows C. perfringens growth 
and the elaboration of C. perfringens enterotoxin (CPE). Virtually 
all food poisoning is produced by type A strain, although a par-
ticularly severe form (a necrotic enteritis called “pig-bel” among 
indigenous peoples of the New Guinea highlands or in Germany 
known as “Darmbrand”) is produced by the type C strain, which 
has a mortality rate of 15% to 25% even with treatment. The toxin 
is normally trypsin-sensitive, but people with low intakes of protein 
or who consume trypsin-inactivating foods (e.g., sweet potatoes) 
are more at risk than those with normal trypsin levels (Granum and 
Brynestad, 1999; Granum, 2006). CPE is enterotoxic and follows 
an ordered series of events, first causing cellular ion permeability, 
followed by inhibition of macromolecular (DNA, RNA) synthesis, 
morphological alteration, cell lysis, and villi tip desquamation and 
severe fluid loss. This is manifested by abdominal cramping and 
diarrhea; diarrhea occurs within 8 to 16 hours. However, symp-
toms are of short duration, one day or less. Foods associated with 
C. perfringens poisoning include cooked meat or poultry, gravy, 
stew, and meat pies. C. perfringens is also associated with the 
production of 11 other toxins, including those associated with gas 
­gangrene (Crane, 1999; Kotsonis and Burdoch, 2013).
Bacillus cereus  B. cereus produces one emetic toxin and three 
different enterotoxins. The emetic toxin (a cyclic oligopeptide) is 
pre-formed in food, and the enterotoxins (proteins) are produced in 
the small intestine of the host (Granum and Lund, 1997). B. cereus 
is a Gram-positive, spore-forming rod, but is an aerobe or facul-
tative anaerobe. B. cereus is a causative agent of emetic or diar-
rheagenic enterotoxins elaborated in food. The emetic thermostable 
toxin (surviving 259°F for 90 minutes) is called cerulide (a small 
cyclic peptide, 1.2 kDa, that acts on 5-HT3 receptors stimulating 
the vagus afferent nerve) and is produced by serotypes 1, 3, and 8; 
it is also resistant to pH and proteolysis, but is not antigenic. The 
diarrheagenic thermolabile toxin (surviving 133°F for 20 minutes) 
is produced by serotypes 1, 2, 6, 8, 10, and 19 and may also be 
produced in situ in the lower intestine of the host. The diarrheal 
form may actually consist of three toxins, one of which is hemo-
lytic (Granum, 2006). Foods associated with this organism and its 
toxic properties include boiled and fried rice (principally the emetic 
form), while the diarrheal form has a wider occurrence and may 
be found in meats, stews, pudding, sauces, dairy products, vegeta-
ble dishes, soups, and meat loaf (Granum and Lund, 1997; Crane, 
1999). The foods associated with the two types somewhat reflect 
the geographic distribution of the types. For example, the emetic 
type predominates in Japan, whereas in North America and Europe, 
the diarrhea type is most often seen. Evidence is accumulating that 
other species of Bacillus may elaborate food toxins, including 
B. thuringiensis, B. subtilis, B. licheniformis, and B. pumilis (Crane, 
1999; Granum, 2006). A notable exception is B. cereus var toyoi, a 
naturally occurring, nontoxigenic, and nonpathogenic strain. This 
has been approved for addition to swine, bovine, poultry, and rabbit 
feed in the European communities (Kotsonis and Burdoch, 2013).
Staphylococcus aureus  Staphylococcal intoxication includes 
staphyloenterotoxicosis and staphylococcus food poisoning. S. aureus 
produces a wide variety of exotoxins, including toxic shock syn-
drome toxin-1 (TSST-1), the exfoliative toxins ETA and ETB, leu-
kocidin, and the staphylococcal enterotoxins A–I (SEA–SEI). SEA 
is the most common toxin in staphylococcus-related food poison-
ing. Although enterotoxemia only develops from ingestion of large 
amounts of SE, emesis is produced as the result of stimulation of 
the putative SE receptors in the abdominal viscera, followed by a 
cascade of inflammatory mediator release. All the SE toxins cause 
emesis and gastroenteritis in primates but the induction of emesis is 
not directly correlated to superantigenic activity (Granum, 2006). 
Sources of Staphylococcus include nose and throat discharges, 
hands and skin, infected cuts, wounds, burns, boils, pimples, acne, 
and feces. The anterior nares of humans are the primary reservoirs. 
Other reservoirs include mastitis in the udders of cows and ewes 
(responsible for contamination of unpasteurized milk) and arthritic 
and bruised tissues of poultry. Foods usually are contaminated after 
cooking by persons cutting, slicing, chopping, or otherwise handling 
them, and then keeping them at room temperature for several hours 
or storing them in large containers. Foods associated with staphy-
lococcal poisoning include cooked ham, meat products including 
poultry and dressing, sauces and gravy, cream-filled pastry, potatoes, 
ham, poultry, fish salads, milk, cheese, bread pudding, and generally 
high-protein leftover foods (Kotsonis and Burdoch, 2013).

Food Toxicology: Fundamental and Regulatory Aspects
Chapter 27
1347
Escherichia coli  Enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC) sero-
type O157:H7 is a human pathogen responsible for outbreaks 
of bloody diarrhea and hemolytic uremic syndrome worldwide. 
There are four main categories of E. coli associated with diarrheal 
disease: enteropathogenic, enterotoxigenic, enteroinvasive, and 
verocytotoxin-producing E. coli (VTEC). VTEC includes “shiga 
toxin”–producing E. coli (STEC) and “shiga-like toxin”–producing 
E. coli. EHEC is a serotype of VTEC. The reference to shiga toxin 
is the result of the clinical similarity of the bloody diarrhea caused 
by EHEC to that caused by Shigella. The symptoms of E. coli STEC 
infections vary, but commonly include severe stomach cramps, 
diarrhea (often bloody), and vomiting, and about 5% to 10% of 
those diagnosed with STEC infections develop hemolytic uremic 
syndrome, a potentially life-threatening complication because the 
kidneys may stop working. Cattle are a significant reservoir of 
E. coli O157:H7. Hence, most outbreaks in the United States have 
been associated with hamburgers and other beef products, although 
raw vegetables (often fertilized with manure) and unpasteurized 
apple cider and juice have been reported as sources of outbreaks. 
Outbreaks in Europe are more often associated with contamination 
of recreational waters (swimming pools, lakes, etc.). Other sources 
of contamination include person-to-person contact (especially in 
families and among institutionalized persons) and contact with 
farm animals especially following educational farm visits (Karch 
et al., 1999). Human cases of E. coli O157:H7 infections have been 
reported from the consumption of contaminated lettuce, potatoes, 
radish sprouts, alfalfa sprouts, cantaloupe, and unpasteurized apple 
cider and juice (Karch et al., 1999; Kotsonis and Burdoch, 2013).
Like the diarrhea-causing E. coli, Shigella spp. (S. dysente-
riae, S. flexneri, S. boydii, and S. sonnei) cause an estimated 165 
million cases of Shigella diarrhea annually, over 90% of which is 
in developing countries resulting in over a million deaths annually 
(Niyogi, 2005). Contamination of food by unhygienic food handlers 
and consumption of raw vegetables raised in contaminated soils are 
two main contributors to the incidence of Shigella diarrhea.
Listeria monocytogenes  L. monocytogenes is the causative agent 
for Listeriosis. L. monocytogenes is a gram-positive bacillus found 
in soil, water, and some animals, including poultry and cattle. It can 
be present in dairy products, poultry, meat, salads, etc. Food prod-
ucts can be contaminated by contact with soil, feces, discharges, and 
urine from infected animals and humans. Listeria can also live in 
food processing plants and contaminate a variety of processed foods. 
Listeria can grow even in the refrigerator, but is killed by cooking 
and pasteurization. The populations that are particularly at risk from 
L. monocytogenes infection include older adults, pregnant women, 
infants, immunocompromised individuals, organ transplant patients, 
and people with certain diseases. Listeriosis in pregnant women can 
result in abortion, fetal death, or premature birth. Listeriosis has 
a low incidence of infection, although this is undeniably increas-
ing, with a high fatality rate among those infected (Mateus et al., 
2013). Since 2008, several Listeriosis outbreaks have been linked 
to diverse types of fresh produce: sprouts, celery, cantaloupe, stone 
fruit, and apples. The 2011 cantaloupe-associated outbreak was one 
of the deadliest foodborne outbreaks in recent U.S. history (Garner 
and Kathariou, 2016). In 2008, FDA issued a draft guidance for the 
industry that contains nonbinding recommendations for the control 
of L. monocytogenes in refrigerated or frozen ready-to-eat foods 
(FDA, 2008). In the recent past there have been multiple reports of 
food-related Listeria outbreaks in the United States.
Salmonella sp.  Salmonella enterica serotype Enteritidis is of 
great public health concern. Salmonella sp. in food can cause sal-
monellosis. Feces of infected humans, animals, and birds contain-
ing Salmonella can contaminate raw fruits and vegetables as well 
as meat and milk products. Consuming contaminated food causes 
nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramps, diarrhea, fever, and head-
ache. The interval between exposure and the onset of the symptoms 
may be as short as a few hours or it can take a couple of days. 
The illness is generally self-limiting for people with intact immune 
system and is resolved within a week. Mortality is rare but occurs 
in the very young and the very old and in immunocompromised 
individuals (Coburn et al., 2007). FDA issued a final rule in 2009 
that requires shell egg producers to implement measures to pre-
vent Salmonella Enteritidis from contaminating eggs on the farm 
and from further growth during storage and transportation (FDA, 
2009). In the recent past there have been several multistate food-
borne outbreaks involving Salmonella.
Cronobacter sakazakii (Enterobacter sakazakii)  C. sakazakii 
was previously known as E. sakazakii. C. sakazakii is found in milk 
powder, rice, vegetables, cheese, sausage meat, teas, and various 
spices. C. sakazakii has also been identified in the hospital environ-
ment in association with infant bottle brushes and food preparation 
equipment, such as blenders. Most of the attention to C. sakazakii–
related contamination of food products has focused on powdered 
infant formula. In 2002, FDA published a warning regarding the 
presence of C. sakazakii in infant formula (Hunter et al., 2008). 
This bacterium is an emerging opportunistic pathogen that is 
associated with rare but life-threatening cases of meningitis, 
necrotizing enterocolitis, and sepsis in premature and full-term 
infants. Infants aged less than 28 days are considered to be most at 
risk (Drudy et al., 2006).
Some Foodborne Molds and Mycotoxins
Molds have served humans for centuries in the production of foods 
(e.g., ripening cheese) and have provided various fungal metabo-
lites with important medicinal uses; they also may produce sec-
ondary metabolites with the potential to produce severe adverse 
health effects, including behavioral changes (Cousins et al., 2005). 
Frank growth of fungi on animal hosts produces mycoses, whereas 
dietary, respiratory, dermal, and other exposures to toxic fungal 
metabolites produce mycotoxicoses. In the context of food toxicol-
ogy, a discussion of mycotoxins and the mycotoxicosis they cause 
is more relevant. Mycotoxins are secondary fungal metabolites 
(i.e., not essential for survival of the mold) secreted into the micro-
environment around the mold. Mycotoxins represent a diverse 
group of chemicals that can occur in a variety of plants used as 
food, including commodities such as cereal grains (barley, corn, 
rye, wheat), coffee, dairy products, fruits, nuts, peanuts, and spices. 
A few mycotoxins also can occur in animal products derived from 
animals that consume contaminated feed (e.g., milk). However, 
because commodities are consumed in great amounts, the myco-
toxins present in these foods represent the greatest risk (Cousins 
et al., 2005).
Data from animal studies indicate that the consumption of food 
contaminated with mycotoxins has the potential to contribute to a 
variety of human diseases (Miller, 1991). Reports of acute intoxi-
cations are few (e.g., consumption of wild Amanita mushroom and 
α-amanitin poisoning); however, prolonged exposure to small quan-
tities of mycotoxin may lead to more deleterious effects including 
growth retardation, birth defects, impaired immunity, decreased 
disease resistance, and tumor formation in humans and decreased 
production in farm animals (CAST, 2003). Importantly, the pres-
ence of a toxigenic mold does not guarantee the presence of a myco-
toxin, which is elaborated only under certain conditions. Although 
there are many different mycotoxins and subgroups (Table 27-11), 
this discussion will focus on aflatoxins, trichothecenes, fumonisins, 
ochratoxin A, and ergot alkaloids.

1348
Toxic Agents
unit V
Aflatoxins  Among the various mycotoxins, the aflatoxins (Fig. 
27-21) have been the subject of the most intensive research because 
of the potent hepatocarcinogenicity and toxicity of aflatoxin B1 in 
rats. Epidemiological studies conducted in Africa and Asia suggest 
that it is a human hepatocarcinogen, and various other reports have 
implicated the aflatoxins in incidences of human toxicity. Aflatoxin 
B1 is the most potent natural carcinogen known and is the major 
aflatoxin produced by toxigenic strains (Bennett and Klich, 2003). 
Generally, aflatoxins occur in susceptible crops as mixtures of afla-
toxins B1, B2, G1, and G2, with only aflatoxins B1 and G1 dem-
onstrating carcinogenicity. A carcinogenic hydroxylated metabolite 
Table 27-11  
Selected Mycotoxins Produced by Various Molds and Some of Their Effects and Commodities Potentially 
Contaminated
MUCOTOXIN
SOURCE
EFFECT
COMMODITIES 
CONTAMINATED
Aflatoxins B1, B2, G1, G2
Aspergillus flavus, A. 
parasiticus
Acute aflatoxicosis, carcinogenesis
Corn, peanuts, and 
others
Aflatoxin M1
Metabolite of AFB1
Hepatotoxicity
Milk
Fumonisins B1, B2, B3, B4, 
A1, A2
Fusarium verticillioides
Renal and liver carcinogenesis
Corn
Trichothecenes (e.g., 
T-2, deoxynivalenol, 
diacetoxyscirpenol)
Fusarium, myrothecium
Hematopoietic toxicity, meningeal 
hemorrhage of brain, “nervous” disorder, 
necrosis of skin, hemorrhage in mucosal 
epithelia of stomach and intestine, emesis, 
feed refusal, immune suppression
Cereal grains, corn
Zearalenones
Fusarium
Estrogenic effect
Corn, grain
Cyclopiazonic acid
Aspergillus, Penicillium
Muscle, liver, and splenic toxicity
Cheese, grains, 
peanuts
Kojic acid
Aspergillus
May be hepatotoxic?
Grain, animal feed
3-Nitropropionic acid
Arthrinium sacchari, 
A. saccharicola, A. 
phaeospermum
Central nervous system impairment
Sugarcane
Citreoviridin
Penicillium citreoviride, 
P. toxicarium
Cardiac beriberi
Rice
Cytochalasins E, B, F, H
Aspergillus, Penicillium
Cytotoxicity
Corn, cereal grain
Sterigmatocystin
Aspergillus versiolar
Carcinogenesis
Corn
Penicillinic acid
Penicillium cyclopium
Nephrotoxicity, abortifacient
Corn, dried beans, 
grains
Rubratoxins A, B
Penicillium rubrum
Hepatotoxicity, teratogenic
Corn
Patulin
Penicillium patulum
Carcinogenesis, liver damage
Apple and apple 
products
Ochratoxin
Aspergillus ochraceus, 
A. carbonarius, 
Penicillium verrucosum
Endemic nephropathy, carcinogenesis
Grains, peanuts, 
grapes, green coffee
Citrinin
Aspergillus, Penicillium
Nephrotoxicity
Cereal grains
Penitrem(s)
Tremors, incoordination, bloody diarrhea, 
death
Moldy cream cheese, 
English walnuts, 
hamburger bun, beer
Ergot alkaloids
Claviceps purpurea
Ergotism
Grains
O
O
O
O
O
H
H
O
Figure 27-21.  Aflatoxin B1.

Food Toxicology: Fundamental and Regulatory Aspects
Chapter 27
1349
of aflatoxin B1 (termed aflatoxin M1) can occur in the milk from 
dairy cows that consume contaminated feed. Aflatoxins may occur 
in a number of susceptible commodities and products derived from 
them, including edible nuts (peanuts, pistachios, almonds, wal-
nuts, pecans, and Brazil nuts), oil seeds (cottonseed and copra), 
and grains (corn, grain sorghum, and millet). In tropical regions, 
aflatoxin can be produced in unrefrigerated prepared foods. The 
two major sources of aflatoxin contamination of commodities are 
field contamination, especially during times of drought and other 
stresses, which allow insect damage that opens the plant to mold 
attack, and inadequate storage conditions. Aflatoxin B1 is acutely 
toxic in all species studied, with an LD50 ranging from 0.5 mg/kg 
for the duckling to 60 mg/kg for the mouse. Death typically results 
from hepatotoxicity. Aflatoxin B1 is also highly mutagenic, hepa-
tocarcinogenic, and possibly teratogenic. There exists a wide range 
of species-susceptibility to aflatoxin B1. For instance, aflatoxin 
B1 appears to be the most hepatocarcinogenic compound known 
for the rat, but the adult mouse is essentially totally resistant to its 
hepatocarcinogenicity (Kotsonis and Burdoch, 2013). Such species 
differences may be due in part to differences in biotransformation 
(glutathione conjugation) and susceptibility to the initial biochemi-
cal lesion (Monroe and Eaton, 1987). Progress has been made in 
decreasing the level of aflatoxins in specific commodities in devel-
oped countries, such as ensuring adequate storage conditions, care-
ful monitoring of susceptible commodities for aflatoxin, and the 
banning of lots that exceed the action level for aflatoxin B1. The 
hepatocarcinogenicity of aflatoxin B1 is associated with the forma-
tion of covalent adducts with DNA, RNA, and protein. Damage to 
DNA is thought to be the initial biochemical lesion.
Trichothecenes  The trichothecenes (Fig. 27-22) constitute more 
than 60 sesquiterpenoid metabolites produced by a number of 
fungal genera including Fusarium, Myrothecium, Phomopsis, 
Stachybotrys, Trichoderma, Trichothecium, and others. They are 
commonly found as food and feed contaminants, and consump-
tion of these mycotoxins can result in alimentary hemorrhage and 
vomiting; direct contact causes dermatitis (Bennett and Klich, 
2003). Fusarium head blight, caused by trichothecene-producing 
Fusarium species, is a destructive disease of cereal grain crops that 
has a worldwide economic impact. Consumption of contaminated 
grain has been associated with intestinal irritation in mammals 
and can lead to feed refusal in livestock and other toxic responses 
(Eriksen and Pettersson, 2004). There have been many reported 
cases of trichothecene toxicity in farm animals and a few in 
humans. Alimentary toxic aleukia (ATA) is a frequently fatal myco-
toxicosis, caused by the ingestion of contaminated overwintered 
grain or grain by-products. ATA can be caused by trichothecene 
toxins (e.g., T-2 toxin) in humans and is characterized by leukope-
nia, agranulocytosis, necrotic angina, a hemorrhagic rash, sepsis, 
exhaustion of the bone marrow, bleeding from the nose, throat, and 
gums, and fever. One major outbreak was reported in Russia during 
1944 around Orenburg, Siberia. About 10% of the population was 
affected and mortality rates in the affected population were as high 
as 60% in some counties. The symptoms of ATA could be induced 
in cats by administration of the toxins, but not in other experimental 
models (Bennett and Klich, 2003; Kotsonis and Burdoch, 2013). 
Trichothecenes bind to ribosomes and inhibit protein synthesis. 
The acute LD50s of the trichothecenes range from 0.5 to 70 mg/kg. 
The extent of toxicity associated with the trichothecenes in humans 
and farm animals is poorly understood, owing in part to the num-
ber of entities in this group and the difficulty of assaying for these 
compounds (JECFA, 2001).
Fumonisins  Fumonisins are produced by a number of Fusarium 
species, notably Fusarium verticillioides (formerly F. moniliforme), 
F. proliferatum, and F. nygamai. The major species of economic 
importance is F. verticillioides because it grows in corn, in both 
vegetative and reproductive tissues. F. verticillioides is present in 
virtually all corn samples (Marasas et al., 2001). Most strains do not 
produce the toxin, so the presence of the fungus does not necessar-
ily mean that fumonisin is also present (Plumlee and Galey, 1994). 
The most abundantly produced member of the family is fumonisin 
B1. Fumonisins affect animals in different ways by interfering with 
sphingolipid metabolism. They cause leukoencephalomalacia (hole 
in the head syndrome) in equines and rabbits; pulmonary edema 
and hydrothorax in swine; and hepatotoxic and hepatocarcinogenic 
effects, and apoptosis in the liver of rats (Bennett and Klich, 2003). 
In humans, there is a probable link with esophageal cancer. The 
occurrence of fumonisin B1 is correlated with the occurrence of a 
higher incidence of esophageal cancer in regions of Transkei (South 
Africa), China, and northeast Italy (Peraica et al., 1999). A possible 
case of acute exposure to fumonisin B1 involved 27 villages in 
India, where consumption of unleavened bread made from moldy 
sorghum or corn caused transient abdominal pain, borborygmus, 
and diarrhea. All those affected recovered fully (Bhat et al., 1997). 
Fumonisins can cause neural tube defects in experimental animals 
and thus may also have a role in human cases. The International 
Agency for Research on Cancer has evaluated the cancer risk of 
fumonisins to humans and classified them as group 2B (possibly 
carcinogenic to humans, that is, there is inadequate evidence of 
carcinogenicity in humans, but sufficient evidence of carcinogenic-
ity in animals) (IARC, 2002). Fumonisins target different organs 
in various species, but the underlying mechanism is a disruption of 
lipid metabolism by inhibition of ceramide synthetase, an enzyme 
integral to the formation of complex lipids for use in membranes 
(ICSP, 2000; IARC, 2002).
Ochratoxin A  Ochratoxin A (Fig. 27-23) is primarily produced 
by Aspergillus ochraceus, A. carbonarius, and Penicillium ver-
rucosum. Human exposure occurs through the consumption of 
contaminated small grains (barley, wheat, and corn), coffee beans, 
O
O
O
O
O
H
H
Figure 27-22.  Trichothecene.
Cl
HO
O
O
NH
O
O
HO
Figure 27-23.  Ochratoxin A.

1350
Toxic Agents
unit V
and grapes. Ochratoxin A is a nephrotoxin to all animal species 
studied. It binds tightly to albumin in the blood and can therefore 
have a very long serum half-life. Of all the ochratoxins studied, 
ochratoxin A has the longest half-life in humans for elimination 
(Creppy, 1999). Animal studies indicate that in addition to being 
a nephrotoxin, ochratoxin A is also a liver toxin, an immune 
suppressant, a potent teratogen, and a carcinogen (Bennett and 
Klich, 2003). An important molecular mechanism of action of 
ochratoxin A is the inhibition of the enzymes involved in phe-
nylalanine metabolism including phenylalanine-tRNA synthetase. 
In addition, ochratoxin A inhibits mitochondrial ATP production 
and also stimulates lipid peroxidation (Marquardt and Frohlich, 
1992). Initial epidemiological evidence determined that there is 
an association between exposures to ochratoxin A and the devel-
opment of Balkan endemic nephropathy (BEN) and renal tumors 
in parts of eastern Europe. However, recent evidence strongly sug-
gests that the causative agent is aristolochic acid, and not ochra-
toxin A (Pavlovic´, 2013).
Ergot Alkaloids  Ergot poisoning (ergotism) in humans and 
domestic animals is one of the oldest known diseases caused by 
ergot alkaloids. They are produced by the fungus Claviceps pur-
purea and other genera of Claviceps that infect rye and cereals. 
Ergot alkaloids cause vasoconstriction and reduced blood flow by 
direct action on the smooth muscles of the arterioles and uterus; the 
most affected regions being the lower extremities (lower extremity 
ischemia). The disruption of blood flow causes gangrene, loss of 
hands and feet, as well as miscarriage of fetuses. Ergot alkaloids 
also stimulate the central nervous system, resulting in strange hal-
lucinations, itchy and burning skin (Belser-Ehrlich et al., 2013).
Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy
BSE is a form of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies 
(TSEs), which are a group of neurodegenerative disorders. In 
humans, the diseases kuru and Creutzfeldt–Jakob Disease (CJD) 
are TSEs. The causative agents for TSEs are prions. Normal prion 
is a cellular protein, designated PrPc and is found on the surface of 
neurons. The general term for pathogenic (infectious) isoforms of 
PrPc is PrPres (because they are proteinase K-resistant). The PrPres 
acts as a template and replicates by converting normal cellular pro-
teins into copies of itself. Other names for PrPres are PrPSc or PrPTSE. 
The infective agent can be transferred using preparations of neural 
tissue from infected animals across species barriers. Horizontal 
transmission from mother to offspring and lateral transmission 
through biting or injury has been reported. The protein is resistant 
to heat, antimicrobials, ultraviolet or ionizing radiation, and is not 
consistently inactivated with alcohol, formaldehyde, glutaralde-
hyde, or sodium hydroxide. Phenol and sodium hypochlorite disin-
fection have had variable success.
Clinically, these diseases present neurological deterioration 
and wasting. The incubation period and interval from clinical 
onset to inexorable death are determined by the dose of the infec-
tive agent, its virulence, and the genetic makeup of the victim. The 
incubation of BSE in cattle is generally four to five years (range 
of 20 months to 18 years) and an interval of 1 to 12 months from 
the presentation of clinical signs to death. Characteristic histologi-
cal lesions in the brain and spinal cord are vacuolation and “spon-
giform” changes. BSE fibrils (long strands of the prion protein) 
in spinal cord preparations may be seen with electron microscopy 
(Flechsig and Weissmann, 2004). As a response to the concerns 
about transmission, new enhanced BSE-related feed bans went into 
effect in Canada in 2007 and in the United States in 2009. The 
enhanced bans prohibit most proteins, which include potentially 
BSE infectious tissues from all animal feeds, pet foods, and fertil-
izers not just from cattle feed as required by bans instituted in 1997 
(Kotsonis and Burdoch, 2013).
Some Toxicants Generated in Food During 
Cooking or Processing
Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons  Polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons (PAHs) are largely formed when food is cooked 
using high-temperature methods, such as frying, roasting, barbe-
cuing, grilling, and smoking directly over an open flame. Grilling 
food, particularly meat, over log fire in which the food is in direct 
contact with the flame is expected to produce high levels of PAHs. 
Fat and juices from meat being grilled directly over an open fire 
drip onto the fire, causing flames. These flames contain PAHs that 
then adhere to the surface of the meat; hence, charring of meat 
produces significant amounts of PAHs. PAHs can also be formed 
during smoking of meats (Cross and Sinha, 2004). Tobacco smoke 
contains high concentrations of PAHs as well. Therefore, burning 
of the organic matter in food produces PAHs. One of the widely 
studied food-associated PAHs is benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P) (Fig. 
27-24). Studies on PAHs in animals have shown various toxicologi-
cal effects, such as hematotoxicity, reproductive and developmental 
toxicity, immunotoxicity, and carcinogenicity. B[a]P, for example, 
is classified as a human carcinogen (Group 1). Estimates of PAH 
intake from food vary widely, ranging from a few nanograms to a 
few micrograms per person per day (IARC, 2012).
Heterocyclic Amines  Heterocyclic amines (HCAs) are gener-
ated during cooking, particularly meat and fish by pan frying or 
grilling. There are more than 20 HCAs. They are formed when 
amino acids, sugars, and creatine react at high temperatures. In other 
words, HCAs are formed as a result of high-temperature cooking 
of proteins and carbohydrates. Meats cooked at high temperatures 
(e.g., above 300ºF), as well as well-done meat that are cooked for 
a long time tend to form more HCAs. Like PAHs, HCAs are also 
metabolized to bioactivated genotoxic carcinogens that form DNA 
adducts. HCAs are rapidly absorbed by the GI tract, distributed to all 
organs, and decline to undetectable levels within 72 hours (Kotsonis 
and Burdoch, 2013). There are different types of HCAs in cooked 
foods. The amount of MeIQx (2-amino-3,8-dimethylimidazo[4,5-
f]quinoxaline) (Fig. 27-25) formed during cooking seems to be 
N
N
H2N
N
N
Figure 27-25.  MeIQx.
Figure 27-24.  Benzo[a]pyrene.

Food Toxicology: Fundamental and Regulatory Aspects
Chapter 27
1351
higher than any other HCAs formed, being 3.10 ng/g in food-grade 
beef extract, 2.33 ng/g in broiled chicken, and 2.11 ng/g in broiled 
beef (Kotsonis and Burdoch, 2013). HCAs are indirect carcinogens 
because they need to be metabolically activated into electrophilic 
carcinogen that form DNA adducts. Unreacted HCAs are subject 
to phase II detoxication reactions and are excreted via the urine 
and feces.
N-Nitroso Compounds  N-nitroso compounds (NOCs) are so 
named because they contain an N-nitroso group. Several hundred 
N-nitroso compounds are currently known. There are two major 
classes of NOCs: nitrosamines and nitrosamides. Nitrosamines are 
more stable than nitrosamides. Nitrosamines are metabolically acti-
vated by hydroxylation, and through a series of steps ultimately 
form a carbonium ion that alkylates DNA. Nitrosamides spontane-
ously decompose to a carbonium ion at physiological pH by a simi-
lar mechanism. Nitrosamides are potent neurocarcinogens in animal 
models. Diet is a major source of NOCs, but endogenous NOC for-
mation is estimated to account for 45% to 75% of total exposure to 
NOCs. Nitrites, amines, and amides found in processed meat are the 
precursors for the endogenous formation of NOCs in the stomach. 
In addition, nitrosamines are also found in nitrite-preserved foods, 
such as meat and fish. NOCs may also be formed endogenously 
after consumption of nitrate, which is reduced to nitrite by bacteria 
in the gut. The main sources of dietary nitrate are grain products and 
many leafy vegetables. The NOCs in food could be volatile or non-
volatile. Volatile NOCs, such as N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA; 
Fig. 27-26), N-nitrosodiethylamine (NDEA), N-nitrosopyrrolidine 
(NPYR; Fig. 27-27), and N-nitrosopiperidine (NPIP) are known 
to be carcinogenic, whereas the non-volatile NOCs, such as 
N-nitrosoproline (NPRO) are not known to be mutagenic or car-
cinogenic. NDMA and NPYR have been commonly reported in 
food. NOCs originate from two sources: environmental formation 
and endogenous formation. Environmental sources have declined 
over the last several years but still include foods (e.g., nitrate-
cured meats) and beverages (e.g., malt beverages), occupational 
exposure, and rubber products. NOCs formed in vivo may actually 
constitute the greatest exposure and are formed from nitrosation of 
amines and amides in several areas, including the stomach, where 
the most favorable conditions exist (pH 2 to 4), although consump-
tion of Histamine H2-receptor blockers or antacids decreases the 
formation of NOCs (Kotsonis and Burdoch, 2013). In the western 
countries, the consumption of volatile NOCs is usually 0.3 to 1.0 
μg/person/day, whereas that of non-volatile NOCs is usually 10 to 
100 μg/person/day. In Asia, the exposure to volatile NOCs is sig-
nificantly higher because of the consumption of dried and nitrite-
salted fish. Cigarette smoke is another significant source of volatile 
NOCs; an average smoker may be exposed to more than 15 μg 
volatile NOCs per day (Skog et al., 1998).
Acrylamide  Cooking starchy foods (e.g., potato) at high tem-
peratures (120oC or higher) causes a chemical reaction between 
certain sugars and the amino acid asparagine present in the food; 
the reaction forms acrylamide (Fig. 27-28). Longer cooking times 
and cooking at higher temperatures can increase the amount of 
acrylamide in foods further. Thus, crunchy, dark brown potato 
fries are likely to contain higher levels of acrylamide than non-
crunchy, non-brown potato fries. Most acrylamide is formed in the 
final stages of baking, grilling, or frying as the moisture content 
of the food falls and the surface temperature rises (JECFA, 2005). 
Acrylamide (the monomer) is known to be a neurotoxin. Repeated 
dosing of acrylamide in drinking water at 21 mg/kg bw/day for 
40 days produces neurotoxicity (JECFA, 2005). Acrylamide was 
also classified as probably carcinogenic to humans (Group 2A) 
by IARC (IARC, 1994). Interestingly, the polymer of acrylamide, 
polyacrylamide, does not have significant toxicity. Acrylamide 
intake estimates range from 0.3 to 2.0 μg/kg bw/day for the aver-
age population. Primary sources include French fries (1% to 
30%), potato chips (6% to 46%), coffee (13% to 39%), pastry and 
cookies (10% to 20%), and bread and rolls/toasts (10% to 30%). 
The NOEL for morphological change in nerves and for reproduc-
tive effects is 200 and 2000 μg/kg bw/day, respectively (JECFA, 
2005). Table 27-12 shows the acrylamide content of some com-
mon food.
Furan  Furan (Fig. 27-29) occurs in a number of foods that 
undergo heat treatment, such as canned and jarred foods, including 
baby food. It is considered by IARC (1995) to be possibly carcino-
genic to humans. Furan is hepatotoxic and shows clear evidence of 
carcinogenicity in both sexes in mice and rats (NTP, 1993). Furan 
is produced in a variety of experimental systems, including heat-
ing of sugars (e.g., glucose, lactose, fructose, xylose, rhamnose), 
heating sugars in the presence of amino acids or protein (e.g., ala-
nine, cysteine, casein), and thermal degradation of vitamins (ascor-
bic acid, dehydroascorbic acid, thiamine) (FDA, 2004). Furan has 
been found in a small number of heat-treated foods, including cof-
fee, canned meat, baked bread, cooked chicken, sodium caseinate, 
hazelnuts, soy protein isolate, hydrolyzed soy protein, rapeseed 
protein, fish protein concentrate, and caramel (FDA, 2004). Very 
little information has been developed on furan levels in food.
Some Heavy Metal Contaminants in Food
There are no standard definitions of heavy metals. The term is fre-
quently used to indicate toxic metals with a specific gravity of 5 or 
above. The heavy metals discussed here are lead, cadmium, mer-
cury, and arsenic. Elsewhere in the book (Chap. 23), these heavy 
N
N
O
Figure 27-26.  N-nitrosodimethylamine.
N
O
N
Figure 27-27.  N-nitrosopyrrolidine.
NH2
O
Figure 27-28.  Acrylamide.
O
Figure 27-29.  Furan.

1352
Toxic Agents
unit V
metals are discussed along with the history of their human expo-
sure, target organ toxicity, as well as the mechanisms of toxicity. 
Those are not repeated here.
Lead  Lead is a toxic metal present in our environment in small 
amounts. Everyone is exposed to lead from daily actions such as 
inhaling dust, eating food, or drinking water. Lead poisoning in 
children is a potential cause for concern. FDA’s provisional total 
tolerable intake level (PTTIL) for lead by small children is 6 μg/day 
(FDA, 2006c). FDA also recommends that the lead levels in candy 
products likely to be consumed frequently by small children do not 
exceed 0.1 ppm (FDA, 2006c). This recommended maximum level 
is consistent with the FDA’s long-standing goal of reducing lead 
levels in the food supply.
Cadmium  Cadmium is widely dispersed into the environment 
by industrial and man-made activities. Cadmium released into 
the environment can be associated with respirable-sized airborne 
particles and can be carried long distances. It is ultimately depos-
ited onto the Earth by rain or falling out of the air. Once on the 
ground, cadmium moves easily through soil layers and is taken up 
into the food chain by uptake into plants such as leafy vegetables, 
root crops, cereals, and grains (e.g., rice and wheat). Cadmium 
is primarily toxic to the proximal tubular cells of the kidney and 
tends to accumulate in the cortex of the kidney, eventually lead-
ing to renal failure. Bone demineralization occurs with prolonged 
exposure. Cadmium absorption in humans is the greatest with pul-
monary exposure, but it is relatively low (3% to 5%) after dietary 
exposure (EFSA, 2009c). Because cadmium has a very long half-
life in the body (10 to 30 years), cadmium exposure is still a cause 
for concern. JECFA (2005) investigated cadmium consumption for 
several countries including the United States and found that the 
current total intake of cadmium is 40% to 60% of the Provisional 
Tolerable Weekly Intake (PTWI) of 7 μg/kg bw/week established 
several years ago (JECFA, 2005). Many U.S. health agencies have 
set exposure standards designed to protect the general public from 
excess cadmium exposure from various sources, such as a maxi-
mum limit of 5 μg/L (5 ppb) in drinking water (see ATSDR, 2008).
Mercury  Currently, exposure to elemental mercury is relatively 
rare. Of interest to food toxicology is methylmercury, which is 
formed in aquatic environments by bacterial action on elemental 
mercury. Anthropogenic sources that can add elemental mercury 
to aquatic environments include burning of coal (which contains 
mercury), chloralkali processes, and other sources of elemental 
mercury discharge into aquatic environments. Methylmercury is 
neurotoxic. Developmental delays have been documented in chil-
dren borne of mothers exposed to methylmercury (Carrington 
and Bolger, 1992). Methylmercury becomes concentrated in fish 
including bonito (Sarda spp.), halibut (Hippoglossus spp.), mack-
erel (Scomberomorus spp.), marlin (Makaira spp.), shark (all spe-
cies), swordfish (Xiphias gladius), and bluefin tuna (Thunnus spp.). 
Human exposure to mercury can occur through the consumption of 
these fish species. The current FDA action level is 1.0 ppm mercury 
in the edible portion of fish (FDA, 2011b).
Arsenic  Arsenic is a naturally occurring element widely distrib-
uted in the air, water, and land. In the environment, arsenic may 
exist as inorganic and organic arsenic compounds. Inorganic arse-
nic compounds are highly toxic. For most people, food is the largest 
source of arsenic exposure, although much of this is likely to be in 
the organic form, which is less toxic. The highest levels of total 
arsenic (inorganic plus organic) in foods can be found in seafood, 
rice, rice cereal and other rice products, mushrooms, poultry, and 
other foods. Rice is of particular concern because it is a major part 
of the diet in many parts of the world. It is also a major component 
of many of the cereals consumed by infants and young children. 
In the United States, an average adult intake of dietary inorganic 
arsenic was estimated to be 3.2 μg/day, with a range of 1 to 20 μg/
day (Hughes et al., 2011). EFSA (2014) reported a mean dietary 
exposure among European infants, toddlers, and other children 
ranging from 0.20 to 1.37 μg/kg bw/day, whereas the mean dietary 
exposure among the adult population ranged from 0.09 to 0.38 μg/
kg bw/day. FDA proposed an “action level” of 10 μg/kg (10 ppb) 
for inorganic arsenic in apple juice. This is the same level set by 
the United States (EPA) for arsenic in drinking water (FDA, 2013).
Food Allergy
Definition
In 2003 the World Allergy Organization of the World Health 
Organization (WHO) proposed that adverse nontoxic reactions to 
food in general should be termed food hypersensitivity. If there is 
no role of the immune system in the development of food hyper-
sensitivity, it should be called non-allergic food hypersensitivity 
(e.g., lactose intolerance, hypersensitivity toward sulfites). If an 
immunologic mechanism has been demonstrated, the appropriate 
term is food allergy. Food allergy could further be subdivided into 
IgE-mediated food allergy (e.g., allergy caused by milk, egg, pea-
nut, etc.) and non-IgE-mediated food allergy (e.g., celiac disease) 
(Johansson et al., 2004). The IgE-mediated food allergy involves 
Table 27-12  
Representative Concentrations of Acrylamide in 
Several Foods
FOOD
MEAN CONC.  
(μg/kg)
REPORTED 
MAXIMUM  
(μg/kg)
Cereal-based products
Breads and rolls
446
3436
Pastry and cookies
350
7834
Breakfast cereals
96
1346
Roots and tubers
Baked potato
169
1270
Potato chips
752
4080
French fries
334
5312
Coffee
Coffee, brewed, ready to drink
13
116
Coffee extracts
1100
4948
Coffee, decaffeinated
668
5399
Coffee substitutes
845
7300
Vegetables
Raw, boiled, and canned
4.2
25
Processed (toasted, baked, 
fried, grilled)
59
202
Infant formula
<5
15
Baby food (biscuits)
181
1217
SOURCE: Adapted from JECFA (2005). Available at: http://www.fda.
gov/downloads/Food/FoodSafety/FoodContaminantsAdulteration/
ChemicalContaminants/Acrylamide/UCM194526.pdf.

Food Toxicology: Fundamental and Regulatory Aspects
Chapter 27
1353
the humoral immune response (antibody-mediated), whereas the 
non-IgE-mediated food allergy involves the cell-mediated immune 
response.
Occurrence and Symptoms
Food allergies are abnormal responses of the immune system to 
certain food components (allergens) in some individuals. The vast 
majority of consumers may not react to the same allergen. The aller-
gens in foods are typically naturally occurring proteins. Basically, 
any food that contains protein has the potential to elicit allergic sen-
sitization in some individuals. There are both genetic and environ-
mental risk factors determining food allergy. Genetic risk factors 
include a family history of atopic disorders. Environmental factors 
include the extent and duration of exposure to the allergen from the 
environment, route of exposure, prior exposure to similar antigens 
(determining cross-reactivity), and others. The evidence of envi-
ronmental factors modulating the expression of food allergy is pro-
vided by increasing peanut allergy in children (Sicherer et al., 2003; 
Benedé et al., 2016). Recent findings suggest that in the dual envi-
ronmental exposure, the scenario of food allergy and the exposure 
through skin promote sensitization, while early exposure through 
the GI tract may be tolerogenic. This is supported by clinical find-
ings that early consumption of food, such as peanuts, fish, or wheat 
is associated with a lower incidence of food allergy (Benedé et al., 
2016). The relationship between diet during infancy (other than the 
allergenic food itself) and the development of allergic diseases is 
not well understood. Exposure to an increased diversity of foods 
in early life is inversely associated with allergic diseases including 
food allergy (Roduit et al., 2014; Benedé et al., 2016). But there 
are relatively few studies identifying specific dietary components 
that might be a risk for the development of food allergy (Benedé 
et al., 2016).
Approximately 6% of young children and 3.7% of adults in the 
United States have a food allergy. In young children the most com-
mon food allergies are those to cow’s milk (2.5%), egg (1.3%), peanut 
(0.8%), wheat (about 0.4%), soy (about 0.4%), tree nuts (0.2%), fish 
(0.1%), and shellfish (0.1%). Early childhood allergies to milk, egg, 
soy, and wheat usually resolve by school age (about 80%). Although 
peanut, tree nut, and seafood allergies are generally considered per-
manent, about 20% of young children with peanut allergy experience 
resolution by 5 years of age (although recurrence is also possible). 
Adults are more likely to have allergies to shellfish (2%), peanut 
(0.6%), tree nuts (0.5%), and fish (0.4%). Reactions to fruits and 
vegetables are common (approximately 5%) but usually not severe. 
Allergy to seeds (e.g., sesame) is being increasingly reported. To 
summarize, egg and milk allergies are the most common food aller-
gies among infants but are often outgrown. Shellfish allergy is more 
common among adults than children, while peanut allergy is equally 
common among children and adults (Sicherer and Sampson, 2006).
The symptoms of food allergies may range from mild dis-
comfort to severe, life-threatening reactions that require immediate 
medical attention. Symptoms may involve itching, redness, swell-
ing in the skin; itching and swelling of the eyes; swelling of oral 
cavity; pain in the GI tract; nausea, vomiting, diarrhea; itching and 
swelling of the nose and throat; asthma; chest pain, abnormal heart 
rhythm, and very low blood pressure causing fainting. Allergic 
reactions to foods generally occur within a few minutes to one 
hour (immediate hypersensitivity) after eating the offending food. 
Symptoms can last for days or even weeks. The specific symptoms 
and severity of an allergic reaction are affected by the amount of 
the allergen consumed and by the sensitivity of the allergic person 
(WHO-INFOSAN, 2006).
Eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) is a newly recognized chronic 
disease that can be associated with food allergies. It affects as many 
as 56 of every 100,000 people in the United States, and is char-
acterized by inflammation and accumulation of eosinophils in the 
esophagus. Symptoms include nausea, vomiting, and abdominal 
pain after eating and can resemble acid reflux. Recently, Davis et 
al. (2016) identified that calpain 14 is the causative agent of EoE. 
Calpain 14 is an IL-13-induced protease that mediates esophageal 
epithelial barrier impairment. EoE involves T-helper type 2 (Th2) 
response in esophageal mucosal epithelium.
Foods That Elicit Allergic Reactions
Overall, more than 170 foods have been documented as causing 
food allergies (Hefle et al., 1996). The eight most common foods 
that elicit allergic reactions are eggs, milk, fish, crustacean shellfish 
(e.g., crab, lobster, and shrimp), tree nuts (e.g., almonds, walnuts, 
and pecans), peanuts, wheat, and soybeans, although reactions to 
many other foods can occur as well. Food-induced anaphylactic 
reactions are possible, but the more prevalent adverse immuno-
logical reactions include eczema, urticaria, angioedema, nausea, 
vomiting, diarrhea, rhinoconjunctivitis, and asthma (Kotsonis and 
Burdoch, 2013).
Mechanism of IgE and Non-IgE-Mediated 
Food Allergic Reactions
IgE-mediated reactions are true allergic responses; these are also 
known as type I hypersensitivity responses that typically affect the 
cutaneous, respiratory, GI and/or cardiovascular systems. IgEs are 
produced by B cells, and the response usually occurs within an 
hour of exposure and can result in anaphylaxis. Most allergens, 
including food allergens, are proteins. In IgE-mediated allergic 
reaction, the allergenic proteins are taken up by the antigen pre-
senting cells (APCs), such as the dendritic cells. The APCs cleave 
the proteins into pieces in the lysosomes; these pieces are pre-
sented at the cell surface in complex with MHC class II molecules. 
The MHC–antigen (allergen) complex is recognized by the CD4+ 
T-helper (Th) cells, which then differentiate into T-helper type 2 
(Th2) effector cells in individuals who have genetic predisposi-
tion to the allergen (atopic individuals). Th2 cells produce a whole 
array of cytokines of which IL-4 and IL-13 are critical for the syn-
thesis of IgE by B cells. During an allergic response, IgEs bind to 
the IgE receptors (FcεRI and FcεRII) on mast cells (in tissues) and 
basophils (in circulation). When two or more IgEs bound to recep-
tors on the mast cells or basophils are cross-linked by the allergen 
through the allergenic epitope, these cells are activated. Both mast 
cells and basophils contain special cytoplasmic granules that store 
many mediators of inflammation (i.e., histamine, tryptase, cys-
teinyl leukotrienes, prostaglandin D2). The extracellular release 
of these mediators following activation of these cells is known 
as degranulation. The released mediators of inflammation trig-
ger allergic response and allergy symptoms. Some examples of 
IgE-mediated food allergy symptoms include urticaria (hives), 
eczema, dermatitis, pruritas (severe itching of the skin), rash, nau-
sea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal cramps, asthma, wheezing, 
rhinitis, bronchospasm, anaphylactic shock, hypotension, palatal 
itching, swelling including tongue and larynx, and methemoglobin-
emia. The most severe manifestation of food allergy is anaphylaxis, 
which is an acute reaction that affects two or more organ systems 
and can be life-threatening (Wang and Sampson, 2009; Benedé 
et al., 2016).

1354
Toxic Agents
unit V
Non-IgE-mediated food allergy is less frequent and it occurs 
in the absence of detectable food-specific IgE antibodies in the 
serum or skin. The mechanisms of non-IgE-mediated food allergy 
are not well understood, but are thought to be cell-mediated. They 
occur at least 2 hours after exposure (or later) and mostly involve 
acute or chronic inflammation in the GI tract. The delayed onset 
of symptoms makes the clinical association between offending 
food and the clinical symptoms difficult. The non-IgE-mediated 
allergies can be classified into different types of hypersensitivity 
responses, such as Type II (IgG- or IgM-mediated cytotoxic hyper-
sensitivity response), Type III (immune complex–mediated hyper-
sensitivity response), and Type IV (cell-mediated hypersensitivity 
response). Both Type II and III responses involve activation of the 
complement proteins. The gut mucosal immune system develops 
tolerance to macronutrients that could be potentially immunogenic 
(e.g., proteins). This immune tolerance is maintained by actively 
suppressing the antigen-specific regulatory T (Treg) cells. In the 
first few years of life, humans gradually develop an intricate bal-
ance between tolerance and immune reactivity in the gut mucosa 
along with a tremendous expansion of gut-associated lymphoid 
tissue (GALT). Expectedly, both IgE- and non-IgE-mediated food 
allergy is frequently seen during this period. Non-IgE-mediated 
food reactions are classified as negative skin test results or specific 
IgE to foods, with positive challenge to the offending food. The 
reactions can vary by system, from GI to cutaneous to respiratory; 
GI reactions are the most common reactions. Some examples of 
non-IgE-mediated food allergy symptoms include atopic dermati-
tis (could be mixed IgE/non-IgE), dermatitis herpetiformis, food 
protein–induced enterocolitis syndrome, food protein–induced 
proctitis, eosinophilic esophagitis (could be mixed IgE/non-IgE), 
celiac disease, and pulmonary hemosiderosis (Heiner syndrome) 
(Spergel, 2006; Jyonouchi, 2008).
Diagnosis and Treatment of Food Allergy
The first step in diagnosing a food allergy is to obtain/develop a 
detailed medical history. The next step is to conduct certain tests 
in order to identify food allergy. The tests that an allergy specialist 
may conduct are: (1) Skin prick test; (2) Blood test; (3) Oral food 
challenge; (4) Elimination diet.
The skin prick test (SPT) is conducted by placing a drop of 
solution (or mashed fresh material, such as fruits or vegetables) 
containing the food allergen on the forearm or back of the person. 
Then the area of the skin where the material has been applied is 
gently pricked to let the applied material enter just below the sur-
face. A positive reaction is indicated by a wheal (a raised bump 
surrounded by a small circle of itchy red skin) within 30 minutes or 
so. A positive SPT may prompt further tests by the physician. Blood 
test measures the presence of IgE antibodies to specific food. In 
the past, the test was called RAST (radioallergosorbent assay). The 
assay used radiolabeled secondary antibodies that bind and detect 
human IgE against the food allergen. Modern tests do not use any 
radioactivity. The RAST has been replaced by more sensitive fluo-
rescence enzyme-labeled immunoassays. As opposed to SPT which 
is rapid, the blood test takes a few days to perform; however, per-
forming SPT on a person whose skin is full of rashes is impossible; 
hence, the blood test becomes important for such patients. If the 
SPT and blood test are not sufficient for the physician to arrive at 
a conclusion, an oral food challenge (OFC) may be required; OFC 
is a highly accurate diagnostic test for food allergy. Because OFC 
has the potential to cause a serious reaction, it should be performed 
under the advice and supervision of a qualified allergy specialist 
doctor. Briefly, the person is fed the suspected offending food in 
small, incremental doses until a reaction is observed. The food chal-
lenge is then stopped. Depending on the severity of the reactions, 
the person may be given antihistamine to relieve the symptoms. 
Opposite to the OFC is the elimination diet trial. In this method, the 
person is advised to avoid the suspected offending food(s) for about 
a month. The disappearance of symptoms is monitored, and the 
offending food is identified. Once the offending food is identified 
by the elimination diet trial, the physician may want to conduct an 
OFC with the same food to double-confirm the role of the food in 
precipitating the food allergy (Sicherer and Sampson, 2006).
The best remedy for food allergies is to avoid the foods that 
cause the allergy. In reality, this may be difficult to practice because 
the possibility of inadvertent exposure to the offending allergens 
from the surrounding environment cannot be ruled out. In general, 
antihistamines should work for mild reactions and epinephrine for 
serious reactions. However, a person who is suffering from con-
firmed or suspected food allergy should always consult the doc-
tor about the necessary steps he/she should take, and follow the 
doctor’s advice. The reader may visit the University of Nebraska 
“Treatment of food allergies” page of the Food Allergy Research 
and Resource Program for a collection of resources on this topic 
(http://farrp.unl.edu/resources/gi-fas/treatment-of-food-allergies). 
In this respect, the FALCPA labeling (discussed above) is an impor-
tant tool to alert consumers regarding the presence of potential aller-
gic ingredients in the food.
EXAMPLES OF INADVERTENT FOOD 
CONTAMINATIONS
There have been only a few incidents of mass poisonings via food, 
two of which involved cooking oil contaminated with polychlori-
nated organics. The first became known as yusho, or rice oil dis-
ease, from rice oil contamination originally thought to be confined 
to polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), but has since been revised 
to include polychlorinated quarterphenyls and polychlorinated 
dibenzofurans (PCDFs). The poisoning occurred in 1968 in Japan 
and affected approximately 2000 individuals. The most vulnerable 
were newborns of poisoned mothers. The liver and skin were the 
most severely affected. Symptoms included dark brown pigmenta-
tion of nails; acne-like eruptions; increased eye discharge; visual 
disturbances; pigmentation of the skin, lips, and gingiva; swelling 
of the upper eyelids; hyperemia of the conjunctiva; enlargement 
and elevation of hair follicles; itching; increased sweating of the 
palms; hyperkeratotic plaques on the soles and palms; and general-
ized malaise (Kanagawa et al., 2008; Kotsonis and Burdoch, 2013).
Both polybrominated biphenyls (PBBs) (sold as fire retardant 
under the trade name FireMaster) and magnesium oxide (sold as 
a cattle feed supplement under the trade name NutriMaster) were 
produced at the same site in Michigan. In early 1973, FireMaster 
was placed in bags labeled NutriMaster because of a mix-up, and 
several farms received animal feed contaminated by FireMaster. By 
the time the problem was detected in early 1974, approximately 
650 lbs of PBBs had entered the food chain through milk and other 
dairy products, beef products, and contaminated swine, sheep, 
chickens, and eggs. Over 500 Michigan farms were quarantined, 
and approximately 30,000 cattle, 4500 swine, 1500 sheep, and 1.5 
million chickens were destroyed, along with over 800 tons of ani-
mal feed, 18,000 pounds of cheese, 2500 pounds of butter, 5 mil-
lion eggs, and 34,000 pounds of dried milk products. PBB-exposed 
Michigan residents had a variety of complaints including nausea, 
abdominal pain, loss of appetite, joint pain, fatigue, and weakness, 
and although a cause–effect relationship could not be established

Food Toxicology: Fundamental and Regulatory Aspects
Chapter 27
1355
for these symptoms, there is a fairly strong case for development 
of chloracne from exposure to PBBs (MDCH, 2011; Kotsonis and 
Burdoch, 2013).
CONCLUSION
Food toxicology is a unique discipline, in the sense that the words 
“food” and “toxicology” are apparently not compatible to each 
other. People take it for granted that food is always nutritious and 
hedonic or of satiatal value. It should be clear from the preceding 
discussion that many foods that have been consumed for hundreds 
of years by humans may naturally contain antinutrients/toxicants 
that, if consumed in large amounts, could cause health concerns. 
Microbial food contamination is another problem. There is also the 
issue of food allergy among a seemingly increasing fraction of the 
population. The FD&C Act provides some thoughtful and pragmatic 
solutions through the creative use of specifications, process and 
manufacturing controls, action levels, tolerances, warning labels, 
advisories, and outright prohibitions (Kotsonis and Burdoch, 2013).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The editor and authors recognize the contributions of previous 
authors of this chapter: Ruth Roberts Painter and Wendell W. 
Kilgore (1st edition), Wendell W. Kilgore and Ming-Yu Li (2nd edi-
tion), Jonnie R. Hayes and T. Colin Campbell (3rd edition), Sanford 
A. Miller (4th edition), Frank N. Kotsonis, George A. Burdock, and 
W. Gary Flamm (5th and 6th editions), and Frank N. Kotsonis and 
George A. Burdock (7th and 8th editions).
REFERENCES
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR). Cadmium 
toxicity: what are the U.S. standards for cadmium exposure? 2008. 
Available at: https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/csem/csem.asp?csem=6&po=7.
Anderson CP, Shen M, Eisenstein RS, Leibold EA. Mammalian iron metab-
olism and its control by iron regulatory proteins. Biochim Biophys Acta. 
2012;1823:1468–1483.
Argaud D, Zhang Q, Pan W, Maitra S, Pilkis SJ, Lange AJ. Regulation of 
rat liver glucose-6-phosphatase gene expression in different nutritional 
and hormonal states: gene structure and 5′-flanking sequence. Diabetes. 
1996;45:1563–1571.
Ashida H, Nishiumi S, Fukuda I. An update on the dietary ligands of the 
AhR. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol. 2008;4:1429–1447.
Averous J, Bruhat A, Mordier S, Fafournoux P. Recent advances in the 
understanding of amino acid regulation of gene expression. J Nutr. 
2003;133:2040S–2045S.
Barrows JN, Lipman AL, Bailey CJ. Color Additives: FDA’s regulatory pro­
cess and historical perspectives. Food Safety Magazine. October/November. 
2003. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/ForIndustry/ColorAdditives/Regul
atoryProcessHistoricalPerspectives/#authors.
Becker K, Southwick K, Reardon J, Berg R, MacCormack JN. Histamine poi-
soning associated with eating tuna burgers. JAMA. 2001;285:1327–1330.
Belser-Ehrlich S, Harper A, Hussey J, Hallock R. Human and cattle ergot-
ism since 1900: symptoms, outbreaks, and regulations. Toxicol Ind 
Health. 2013;29:307–316.
Benedé S, Blázquez AB, Chiang D, Tordesillas L, Berin MC. The rise 
of food allergy: environmental factors and emerging treatments. 
EBioMedicine. 2016;7: 27–34.
Bennett JW, Klich M. Mycotoxins. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2003;16:497–516.
Bhat RV, Shetty PH, Amruth RP, Sudershan RV. A foodborne disease out-
break due to the consumption of moldy sorghum and maize containing 
fumonisin mycotoxins. J Clin Toxicol. 1997;35:249–255.
Bode AM, Dong Z. Toxic phytochemicals and their potential risks for 
human cancer. Cancer Prev Res. 2015;8:1–8.
Brandtzaeg P. Food allergy: separating the science from the mythology. Nat 
Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010;7:380–400.
Brasse-Lagnel C, Lavoinne A, Husson A. Control of mammalian gene 
expression by amino acids, especially glutamine. FEBS J. 2009;276: 
1826–1844.
Bressler JP, Olivi L, Cheong JH, Kim Y, Bannon D. Divalent metal transporter 
1 in lead and cadmium transport. Ann NY Acad Sci. 2004;1012:142–152.
Brown MS, Goldstein JL. The SREBP pathway: regulation of cholesterol 
metabolism by proteolysis of a membrane-bound transcription factor. 
Cell. 1997;89:331–340.
Bruhat A, Jousse C, Carraro V, Reimold AM, Ferrara M, Fafournoux P. 
Amino acids control mammalian gene transcription: activating transcrip-
tion factor 2 is essential for the amino acid responsiveness of the CHOP 
promoter. Mol Cell Biol. 2000; 20:7192–7204.
Carlini CR, Grossi-de-Sá MF. Plant toxic proteins with insecticidal prop-
erties: a review on their potentialities as bioinsecticides. Toxicon. 
2002;40:1515–1539.
Carrington CD, Bolger PM. An assessment of the hazards of lead in foods. 
Regul Toxicol Pharm. 1992;16:265–272.
Chhabra RS, Eastin WC Jr. Intestinal absorption and metabolism of xeno-
biotics in laboratory animals. In: Schiller CM, ed. Intestinal Toxicology. 
New York: Raven Press; 1984:145–160.
Choudhuri S. The eukaryotic genome: a brief overview of structure, 
function and evolution. In: Choudhuri S, Carlson DB, eds. Genomics: 
Fundamentals and Applications. New York: Informa; 2009:49–99.
Choudhuri S, Chanderbhan RF. The biology of nutrients: genetic and 
molecular principles. In: Gupta RC, ed. Neutraceuticals: Efficacy, Safety 
and Toxicity. London: Elsevier; 2016:209–225.
Choudhuri S, Valerio LG. Usefulness of studies on the molecular mecha-
nism of action of herbals/botanicals: the case of St. John’s Wort. J 
Biochem Mol Toxicol. 2005;19:1–11.
Chowanadisai W, Lonnerdal B, Kelleher SL. Identification of a muta-
tion in SLC30A2 (ZnT-2) in women with low milk zinc concentra-
tion that results in transient neonatal zinc deficiency. J Biol Chem. 
2006;281:39699–39707.
Clark RB. The role of PPARs in inflammation and immunity. J Leukoc Biol. 
2002;71:388–400.
Coburn B, Grassl GA, Finlay BB. Salmonella, the host and disease: a brief 
review. Immunol Cell Biol. 2007;85:112–118.
Concon JM. Food Toxicology Part A: Principles and Concepts. New York: 
Marcel Dekker; 1988:1371.
Council for Agricultural Science and Technology (CAST). Mycotoxins: 
Risks in Plant, Animal, and Human Systems, Task Force Report No. 139. 
Ames, Iowa; 2003;199 pp.
Cousins MA, Riley RT, Pestka JJ. Foodborne mycotoxins: chemistry, biol-
ogy, ecology, and toxicology. In: Fratamico PM, Bhunia AK, Smith JL, 
eds. Foodborne Pathogens: Microb. Molec. Biol. Norfolk, UK: Horizon 
Scientific Press; 2005:164.
Crane JK. Preformed bacterial toxins. Clin Lab Med. 1999;19:583–599.
Creppy EE. Human ochratoxicosis. J Toxicol Toxin Rev. 1999;18: 
277–293.
Cross AJ, Sinha R. Meat-related mutagens/carcinogens in the etiology of 
colorectal cancer. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2004;44:44–55.
Daranas AH, Norte M, Fernandez JJ. Toxic marine microalgae. Toxicon. 
2001;39:1101–1132.
Davie JR. Inhibition of histone deacetylase activity by butyrate. J Nutr. 
2003;133:2485S–2493S.
Davis BP, Stucke EM, Khorki ME, et al. Eosinophilic esophagitis-linked cal-
pain 14 is an IL-13-induced protease that mediates esophageal epithelial 
barrier impairment. JCI Insight. 2016;1:e86355.
Dentin R, Girard J, Postic C. Carbohydrate responsive element binding 
protein (ChREBP) and sterol regulatory element binding protein-1c 
(SREBP-1c): two key regulators of glucose metabolism and lipid synthe-
sis in liver. Biochimie. 2005;87:81–86.
Dickey RW, Plakas SM. Ciguatera: a public health perspective. Toxicon. 
2010;56:123–136.
Doe W. The intestinal immune system. Gut. 1989;30:1679–1685.
Dolan LC, Matulka RA, Burdock GA. Naturally occurring food toxins. 
Toxins. 2010;2:2289–2332.

1356
Toxic Agents
unit V
Dougall WC, Glaccum M, Charrier K, et al. RANK is essential for osteo-
clast and lymph node development. Genes Dev. 1999;13:2412–2424.
Dramsi S, Cossart P. Listeriolysin O: a genuine cytolysin optimized for an 
intracellular parasite. J Cell Biol. 2002;156:943–946.
Drudy D, Mullane NR, Quinn T, Wall PG, Fanning S. Enterobacter saka-
zakii: an emerging pathogen in powdered infant formula. Clin Infect Dis. 
2006;42:996–1002.
Duplus E, Glorian M, Forest C. Fatty acid regulation of gene transcription. 
J Biol Chem. 2000;275:30749–30752.
Durance TD, Wong NS. Kinetics of thermal inactivation of avidin. Food Res 
Int. 1992;25:89–92.
European Food Safety Authority (EFSA). Opinion of the Scientific 
Committee on Food on the safety of the presence of safrole (1-allyl-
3,4-methylene dioxy benzene) in flavorings and other food ingredients 
with flavoring properties. 2002. Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/food/
safety/docs/fs_food-improvement-agents_flavourings-out116.pdf.
EFSA. Glucosinolates as undesirable substances in animal feed: Scientific 
Panel on Contaminants in the Food Chain. EFSA J. 2008a;590:1–76.
EFSA. Opinion of the Scientific Panel on Contaminants in the Food Chain 
on a request from the European Commission on marine biotoxins in 
shellfish—okadaic acid and analogues. EFSA J. 2008b;589: 1–62.
EFSA. Marine biotoxins in shellfish—saxitoxin group: scientific opinion of 
the Panel on Contaminants in the Food Chain. EFSA J. 2009a;1019:1–76.
EFSA. Marine biotoxins in shellfish—domoic acid: scientific opinion of the 
Panel on Contaminants in the Food Chain. EFSA J. 2009b;1181:1–61.
EFSA. Cadmium in food: scientific opinion of the Panel on Contaminants 
in the Food Chain (Question No EFSA-Q-2007-138). EFSA J. 
2009c;980:1–139.
EFSA. Scientific opinion on marine biotoxins in shellfish—emerging tox-
ins: brevetoxin group. EFSA J. 2010;8:1677.
EFSA. Scientific opinion on pyrrolizidine alkaloids in food and feed: 
EFSA Panel on Contaminants in the Food Chain (CONTAM). EFSA J. 
2011;9:2406.
EFSA. Dietary exposure to inorganic arsenic in the European population. 
EFSA J. 2014;12:3597.
Enattah NS, Jensen TGK, Nielsen M, et al. Independent introduction of 
two lactase-persistence alleles into human populations reflects different 
history of adaptation to milk culture. Am J Hum Genet. 2008;82:57–72.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Table of regulated drinking 
water contaminants. Available at: https://www.epa.gov/ground-water-
and-drinking-water/table-regulated-drinking-water-contaminants# 
Inorganic.
Eriksen GS, Pettersson H. Toxicological evaluation of trichothecenes in ani-
mal feed. Anim Feed Sci Technol. 2004;114:205–239.
Espenshade PJ. SREBPs: sterolregulated transcription factors. J Cell Sci. 
2006;119:973–976.
Fafournoux P, Bruhat A, Jousse C. Amino acid regulation of gene expres-
sion. Biochem J. 2000;351:1–12.
FDA. Guidance to industry for foods derived from new plant varieties. 1992. 
Available at: http://www.fda.gov/Food/GuidanceRegulation/Guidance 
DocumentsRegulatoryInformation/Biotechnology/ucm096095.htm.
FDA. Consultation Procedures under FDA’s 1992 Statement of Policy—foods 
derived from new plant varieties. 1997a. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/
Food/GuidanceRegulation/GuidanceDocumentsRegulatoryInformation/
ucm096126.htm.; http://www.fda.gov/Food/IngredientsPackagingLabel 
ing/GEPlants/default.htm. 
FDA. HACCP Principles & Application Guidelines. 1997b. Available at: 
http://www.fda.gov/Food/GuidanceRegulation/HACCP/ucm2006801.
htm.
FDA. Guidance for industry: preparation of food contact notifications for 
food contact substances—toxicology recommendations. 2002. Available 
at: http://www.fda.gov/Food/GuidanceRegulation/GuidanceDocuments 
RegulatoryInformation/ucm081825.htm.
FDA. Furan in food, thermal treatment: request for data and information. 
Fed Regist. 2004;69:25911.
FDA. Guidance for industry: estimating dietary intake of substances in food. 
2006a. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/Food/GuidanceRegulation/
GuidanceDocumentsRegulatoryInformation/IngredientsAdditives 
GRASPackaging/ucm074725.htm#sour.
FDA. Food Allergen Labeling and Consumer Protection Act of 2004: 
questions and answers. 2006b. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/Food/
GuidanceRegulation/GuidanceDocumentsRegulatoryInformation/
Allergens/ucm106890.htm#q1.
FDA. Supporting document for recommended maximum level for lead 
in candy likely to be consumed frequently by small children. 2006c. 
Available at: http://www.fda.gov/Food/FoodborneIllnessContaminants/
Metals/ucm172050.htm.
FDA. Guidance for industry: control of Listeria monocytogenes in 
refrigerated or frozen ready-to-eat foods; draft guidance. 2008. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.fda.gov/Food/GuidanceRegulation/
GuidanceDocumentsRegulatoryInformation/FoodProcessingHACCP/
ucm073110.htm.
FDA. Prevention of Salmonella enteritidis in shell eggs during production, 
storage, and transportation; Final Rule 21 CFR Parts 16 and 118. Federal 
Register. 2009;74(130):33030–33101.
FDA. Natural toxins. In: Fish and Fishery Products: Hazards and Control 
Guidance. 2011a:chap 6. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/downloads/
Food/GuidanceRegulation/UCM251970.pdf.
FDA. Methyl mercury. In: Fish and Fisheries Products: Hazards and 
Controls Guidance. 4th ed. 2011b:chap 10. Available at: http://www.fda.
gov/downloads/Food/GuidanceRegulation/UCM251970.pdf.
FDA. Draft Guidance for Industry: Arsenic in Apple Juice—Action 
Level. 2013. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/RegulatoryInformation/
Guidances/ucm360020.htm.
Feng C, Teuber S, Gershwin ME. Histamine (Scombroid) fish poisoning: a 
comprehensive review. Clin Rev Allerg Immunol. 2016;50: 64–69.
Finkelstein VA, Goldfarb DS. Strategies for preventing calcium oxalate 
stones. Can Med Assoc J. 2006;174:1407–1409.
Flechsig E, Weissmann C. The role of PrP in health and disease. Curr Mol 
Med. 2004;4:337–353.
Food Standards Australia New Zealand (FSANZ). Erucic acid in food: A 
toxicological review and risk assessment. Tech. Rep. Ser. 2003;21:1–25. 
Available at: https://www.foodstandards.gov.au/publications/documents/
Erucic%20acid%20monograph.pdf.
Foufelle F, Ferré P. New perspectives in the regulation of hepatic glyco-
lytic and lipogenic genes by insulin and glucose: a role for the transcrip-
tion factor sterol regulatory element binding protein-1c. Biochem J. 
2002;366:377–391.
Friedman M, Brandon DL. Nutritional and health benefits of soy proteins. J 
Agric Food Chem. 2001;49:1069–1086.
Fukuda H, Iritani N, Sugimoto T, Ikeda H. Transcriptional regulation of 
fatty acid synthase gene by insulin/glucose, polyunsaturated fatty acids 
and leptin in hepatocytes and adipocytes in normal and genetically obese 
rats. Eur J Biochem. 1999;260:505–511.
Gadelha IC, Fonseca NB, Oloris SC, Melo MM, Soto-Blanco B. Gossypol 
toxicity from cottonseed products. Scientific World J. 2014;2014:231635.
Ganesan S, Chaurasiya ND, Sahu R, Walker LA, Tekwani BL. Understanding 
the mechanisms for metabolism-linked hemolytic toxicity of primaquine 
against glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficient human erythro-
cytes: evaluation of eryptotic pathway. Toxicology. 2012;294:54–60.
Garner D, Kathariou S. Fresh produce-associated Listeriosis outbreaks: 
sources of concern, teachable moments, and insights. J Food Prot. 
2016;79:337–344.
Gaynor PM, Bonnette R, Garcia E Jr, Kahl LS, Valerio LG Jr. FDA’s approach 
to the GRAS provision: a history of processes. 2006. Available at: 
https://www.fda.gov/Food/IngredientsPackagingLabeling/GRAS/ucm 
094040.htm.
Georgiadi A, Kersten S. Mechanisms of gene regulation by fatty acids. Adv 
Nutr. 2012;3:127–134.
German JB, Freeman SL, Lebrilla CB, Mills DA. Human milk oligosaccha-
rides: evolution, structures and bioselectivity as substrates for intestinal 
bacteria. Nestle Nutr Workshop Ser Pediatr Program. 2008;62:205–218.
Gralla M, Camporeale G, Zempleni J. Holocarboxylase synthetase regu-
lates expression of biotin transporters by chromatin remodeling events at 
the SMVT locus. J Nutr Biochem. 2008;19:400–408.
Granum PE. Bacterial toxins as food poisons. In: Alouf JE, Popoff ME, eds. 
The Comprehensive Sourcebook of Bacterial Protein Toxins. 3rd ed. New 
York: Academic Press; 2006:949–958.

Food Toxicology: Fundamental and Regulatory Aspects
Chapter 27
1357
Granum PE, Brynestad S. Bacterial toxins as food poisons. In: Alouf JE, 
Freer JH, eds. The Comprehensive Sourcebook of Bacterial Protein 
Toxins. 2nd ed. New York: Academic Press; 1999;669–681.
Granum PE, Lund T. Bacillus cereus and its food poisoning toxins. FEMS 
Microbiol Lett. 1997;157:223–228.
Guengerich FP. Where is toxicology headed in the future? Drug Metab Rev. 
2004;36:475–486.
Gupta RK, Gangoliya SS, Singh NK. Reduction of phytic acid and enhance-
ment of bioavailable micronutrients in food grains. J Food Sci Technol. 
2015;52:676–684.
Hall JE. Guyton and Hall Textbook of Medical Physiology. 12th ed. 
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2011:1091.
Hannah VC, Ou J, Luong A, Goldstein JL, Brown MS. Unsaturated fatty 
acids down-regulate SREBP isoforms 1a and 1c by two mechanisms in 
HEK-293 cells. J Biol Chem. 2001;276:4365–4372.
Hathcock JN. Residue trypsin inhibitor: data needs for risk assessment. Adv 
Exp Med Biol. 1991;289:273–279.
Hattan DG, Rulis AM. Food toxicology: legal aspects. In: Marquardt H, 
Schäfer SG, McClellan RO, Welsch F, ed. Toxicology. London: Elsevier; 
1999;1087–1101.
Hefle SL, Nordlee JA, Taylor SL. Allergenic foods. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr. 
1996;36:S69–S89.
Hua X, Wu J, Goldstein JL, Brown MS, Hobbs HH. Structure of the human 
gene encoding sterol regulatory element binding protein-1 (SREBF1) 
and localization of SREBF1 and SREBF2 to chromosomes 17p11.2 and 
22q13. Genomics. 1995;25:667–673.
Hughes MF, Beck BD, Chen Y, Lewis AS, Thomas DJ. Arsenic exposure 
and toxicology: a historical perspective. Toxicol Sci. 2011;123:305–332.
Hungerford JM. Scombroid poisoning: a review. Toxicon. 2010;56:231–243.
Hunter CJ, Singamsetty VK, Chokshi NK, et al. Enterobacter sakazakii 
enhances epithelial cell injury by inducing apoptosis in a rat model of 
necrotizing enterocolitis. J Infect Dis. 2008;198:586–593.
Inagawa H, Kohchi C, Soma GI. Oral administration of lipopolysaccharides 
for the prevention of various diseases: benefit and usefulness. Anticancer 
Res. 2011;31:2431–2436.
Institute of Medicine (IOM). Dietary Reference Intakes: Guiding Principles 
for Nutrition Labeling and Fortification. Washington, DC: The National 
Academies Press; 2003:204.
International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). Acrylamide: Some 
Industrial Chemicals. Working Group on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic 
Risk to Humans; Vol. 60. Lyon, France: IARC Press; 1994:389.
IARC. Some Traditional Herbal Medicines, Some Mycotoxins, Naphthalene 
and Styrene; Vol. 171. IARC Working Group on the Evaluation of 
Carcinogenic Risk to Humans. Lyon, France: IARC Press; 2002.
IARC. Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans: 
Dry Cleaning, Some Chlorinated Solvents and Other Industrial 
Chemicals; Vol. 63. Lyon, France: IARC Press; 2005:393–407.
IARC. Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans: 
A Review of Human Carcinogens; 100F. Lyon, France: IARC Press; 
2012:111–144.
International Chemical Safety Programme (ICSP). Fumonisin B1, 
Environmental Health Criteria 219. Geneva: United Nations Environmental 
Programme, the International Labour Organization and the World Health 
Organization International Programme on Chemical Safety; 2000:153.
Isbrucker RA, Edwards JA, Wolz E, Davidovich A, Bausch J. Safety studies 
on epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG) preparations. Part 2: dermal, acute 
and short-term toxicity studies. Food Chem Toxicol. 2006;44:636–650.
Itsumura N, Inamo Y, Okazaki F, et al. Compound heterozygous muta-
tions in SLC30A2/ZnT2 results in low milk zinc concentrations: a 
novel mechanism for zinc deficiency in a breast-fed infant. PLoS ONE. 
2013;8:e64045.
Iynedjian PB, Ucla C, Mach B. Molecular cloning of glucokinase cDNA: 
developmental and dietary regulation of glucokinase mRNA in rat liver. J 
Biol Chem. 1987;262:6032–6038.
Janssen WF. The story of the laws behind the labels. FDA Consumer, June; 
1981.
Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA). Safety 
Evaluation of Certain Mycotoxins in Food. WHO Food Additives Series 
47. Geneva: WHO; 2001:419.
JECFA. Summary and Conclusions of the Sixty-fourth Meeting of the 
Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA); 
Vol. 47. 2005. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Food/
FoodSafety/FoodContaminantsAdulteration/ChemicalContaminants/
Acrylamide/UCM194526.pdf.
Johansson SG, Bieber T, Dahl R, et al. Revised nomenclature for allergy 
for global use: report of the Nomenclature Review Committee of the 
World Allergy Organization, October 2003. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 
2004;113:832–836.
Jonker JW, Buitelaar M, Wagenaar E, et al. The breast cancer resistance 
protein protects against a major chlorophyll-derived dietary phototoxin 
and protoporphyria. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002;99:15649–15654.
Jousse C, Averous J, Bruhat A, Carraro V, Mordier S, Fafournoux P. Amino 
acids as regulators of gene expression: molecular mechanisms. Biochem 
Biophys Res Commun. 2004;313:447–452.
Jump DB, Clarke SD. Regulation of gene expression by dietary fat. Annu 
Rev Nutr. 1999;19:63–90.
Jyonouchi H. Non-IgE-mediated food allergy. Inflamm Aller Drug Targ. 
2008;7:173–180.
Kahn CR, Lauris V, Koch S, Crettaz M, Granner DK. Acute and chronic 
regulation of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase mRNA by insulin and 
glucose. Mol Endocrinol. 1989;3:840–845.
Kalant D, Cianflone K. Regulation of fatty acid transport. Curr Opin 
Lipidol. 2004;15:309–314.
Kallio P, Kolehmainen M, Laaksonen DE, et al. Dietary carbohydrate 
modification induces alterations in gene expression in abdominal sub-
cutaneous adipose tissue in persons with the metabolic syndrome: the 
FUNGENUT Study. Am J Clin Nutr. 2007;85:1417–1427.
Kanagawa Y, Matsumoto S, Koike S, et al. Association of clinical findings 
of Yusho patients with serum concentrations of polychlorinated biphe-
nyls, polychlorinated quterphenyls and 2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodiben-
zofuran more than 30 years after the poisoning event. Environ Health. 
2008;7:47–58.
Karch H, Bielaszewska M, Bitzan M, Schmidt H. Epidemiology and 
diagnosis of Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli infections. Diagn 
Microbiol Infect Dis. 1999;34:229–243.
Kasana S, Din J, Maret W. Genetic causes and gene–nutrient interactions 
in mammalian zinc deficiencies: acrodermatitis enteropathica and tran-
sient neonatal zinc deficiency as examples. J Trace Elem Med Biol. 
2015;29:47–62.
Kerr GW, Parke TR. Scombroid poisoning—a pseudoallergic syndrome. J 
Royal Soc Med. 1998;91:83–84.
Kilberg MS, Balasubramanian M, Fu L. The transcription factor network 
associated with the amino acid response in mammalian cells. Adv Nutr. 
2012;3:295–306.
Kilberg MS, Hutson RG, Laine RO. Amino acid-regulated gene expression 
in eukaryotic cells. FASEB J. 1994;8:13–19.
King H, Ades G. Hazard analysis and risk-based preventive controls 
(HARPC): the new GMP for food manufacturing. Food Safety Magazine. 
2015. Available at: http://www.foodsafetymagazine.com/magazine-
archive1/octobernovember-2015/hazard-analysis-and-risk-based-pre-
ventive-controls-harpc-the-new-gmp-for-food-manufacturing/.
Kirby BJ, Unadkat JD. Grapefruit juice, a glass full of drug interactions? 
Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2007;81:631–633.
Kotsonis FN, Burdoch GA. Food toxicology. In: Klaassen CD, ed. Casarett 
and Doull’s Toxicology: The Basic Science of Poison. 8th ed. New York: 
McGraw Hill; 2013;1305–1356.
Kristanc L, Kreft S. European medicinal and edible plants associated with 
subacute and chronic toxicity part I: Plants with carcinogenic, teratogenic 
and endocrine-disrupting effects. Food Chem Toxicol. 2016;92:150–164.
Kruger WD, Wang L, Jhee KH, Singh RH, Elsas LJ II. Cystathionine beta-
synthase deficiency in Georgia (USA): correlation of clinical and bio-
chemical phenotype with genotype. Hum Mutat. 2003;22:434–441.
Küry S, Kharfi M, Blouin E, Schmitt S, Bézieau S. Clinical utility gene 
card for: acrodermatitis enteropathica—update 2015. Eur J Hum Genet. 
2016;24.
Lago J, Rodríguez LP, Blanco L, Vieites JM, Cabado AG. Tetrodotoxin, 
an extremely potent marine neurotoxin: distribution, toxicity, origin and 
therapeutical uses. Mar Drugs. 2015;13:6384–6406.

1358
Toxic Agents
unit V
Lambert JD, Kennett MJ, Sang S, Reuhl KR, Ju J, Yang CS. Hepatotoxicity 
of high oral dose (-)-Epigallocatechin-3-Gallate in mice. Food Chem 
Toxicol. 2010;48:409–416.
Lampe JW. Interindividual differences in response to plant based diets: impli-
cations for cancer risk. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009;89(suppl):1553S–1557S.
Lampe JW, Navarro SL, Hullar MA, et al. Inter-individual differences in 
response to dietary intervention: integrating omics platforms towards 
personalised dietary recommendations. Proc Nutr Soc. 2013;72:207–218.
Laqueur GL, Spatz M. Toxicology of cycasin. Cancer Res. 1968;28: 
2262–2267.
Lasry I, Seo YA, Ityel H, et al. A dominant negative heterozygous G87R 
mutation in the zinc transporter, ZnT-2 (SLC30A2), results in transient 
neonatal zinc deficiency. J Biol Chem. 2012;287:29348–29361.
Lehane L. Ciguatera update. Med J Australia. 2000;172:176–179.
Lehane L, Lewis RJ. Ciguatera: recent advances but the risk remains. Int J 
Food Microbiol. 2000;61:91–125.
Leung-Pineda V, Kilberg MS. Role of Sp1 and Sp3 in the nutrient-regu-
lated expression of the human asparagine synthetase gene. J Biol Chem. 
2002;277:16585–16591.
Li H, Mukherjee N, Soundararajan U, Tárnok Z, Barta C, et al. Geographically 
separate increases in the frequency of the derived ADH1B*47His allele in 
eastern and western Asia. Am J Hum Genet. 2007;81:842–846.
Loo DDF, Zeuthen T, Chandy G, Wright EM. Cotransport of water by the Na+/
glucose cotransporter. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996;93:13367–13370.
Lu FC. Acceptable daily intake: inception, evolution, and application. Regul 
Toxicol Pharmacol. 1988;8:45–60.
Luca F, Perry GH, Di Rienzo A. Evolutionary adaptations to dietary 
changes. Annu Rev Nutr. 2010;30:291–314.
Ma T, Verkman AS. Aquaporin water channels in gastrointestinal physiol-
ogy. J Physiol. 1999;517:317–326.
Mackey M, Kotsonis FN. Functional foods: regulatory and scientific consid-
erations. In: Kotsonis F, Mackey M, Hjelle J, eds. Nutritional Toxicology. 
2nd ed. New York: Taylor & Francis; 2002:243.
Madsen AM. Airborne endotoxin in different background environments and 
seasons. Ann Agric Environ Med. 2006;13:81–86.
Marasas WFO, Miller JD, Riley RT, Visconti A. Fumonisins—occurrence, 
toxicology, metabolism and risk assessment. In: Summerell BA, Leslie 
JF, Backhouse D, Bryden WL, Burgess LW, eds. Fusarium. St. Paul, MN: 
Paul E. Nelson Memorial Symposium, APS Press; 2001:332–359.
Marquardt RR, Frohlich AA. A review of recent advances in understanding 
ochratoxicosis. J Anim Sci. 1992;70:3968–3988.
Mateus T, Silva J, Maia RL, Teixeira P. Listeriosis during pregnancy: a pub-
lic health concern. ISRN Obstet Gynecol. 2013;2013:851712.
Mazzanti G, Menniti-Ippolito F, Moro PA, et al. Hepatotoxicity from green 
tea: a review of the literature and two unpublished cases. Eur J Clin 
Pharmacol. 2009;65:331–41.
MDCH 
(Michigan 
Department 
of 
Community 
Health). 
PBBs 
(Polybrominated Biphenyls) in Michigan. Frequently asked questions, 
2011. Available at: https://www.michigan.gov/documents/mdch_PBB_
FAQ_92051_7.pdf. Accessed March 4, 2017.
Mencej-Bedrac S, Prezelj J, Kocjan T, et al. The combinations of polymor-
phisms in vitamin D receptor, osteoprotegerin and tumour necrosis factor 
superfamily member 11 genes are associated with bone mineral density. 
J Mol Endocrinol. 2009;42:239–247.
Miller SA. Food additives and contaminants. In: Amdur MO, Doull J, 
Klaassen CD, eds. Toxicology: The Basic Science of Poisons. New York: 
Taylor & Francis; 1991:819.
Miyake K, Tanaka T, McNeil PL. Lectin-based food poisoning: a new 
mechanism of protein toxicity. PLoS One. 2007;2:e687.
Monroe DH, Eaton DL. Comparative effects of butylated hydroxyanisole on 
hepatic in vivo DNA binding and in vitro biotransformation of aflatoxin 
B1 in the rat and mouse. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1987;90:401–409.
Mourrieras F, Foufelle F, Foretz M, Morin J, Bouche S, Ferre P. Induction 
of fatty acid synthase and S14 gene expression by glucose, xylitol and 
dihydroxyacetone in cultured rat hepatocytes is closely correlated with 
glucose 6-phosphate concentrations. Biochem J. 1997;326:345–349.
Muñoz EC, Martin MJ, Prieto PA. 2′-fucosyllactose: an abundant, geneti-
cally determined soluble glycan present in human milk. Nutr Rev. 
2013;71:773–789.
Mura C, Raguenes O, Ferec C. HFE mutations analysis in 711 hemochro-
matosis probands: evidence for S65C implication in mild form of hemo-
chromatosis. Blood. 1999;93:2502–2505.
National Toxicology Program (NTP). Toxicology and Carcinogenesis 
Studies of Furan (CAS No. 110-00-9) in F344/N Rats and B6C3F1 Mice 
(gavage studies). NTP Technical Report No. 402. Research Triangle 
Park, NC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health 
Service, National Institutes of Health; 1993.
National Toxicology Program (NTP). 2016. Safrole. In 14th Report on 
Carcinogens. https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/ntp/roc/content/profiles/safrole.pdf.
Nciri N, Cho N, El Mhamdi F, et al. Toxicity assessment of common beans 
(Phaseolus vulgaris L.): widely consumed by Tunisian population. J Med 
Food. 2015;18:1049–1064.
Niyogi SK. Shigellosis. J Microbiol. 2005;43:133–143.
Pape ME, Lopez-Casillas F, Kim KH. Physiological regulation ofacetyl-
CoA carboxylase gene expression: effects of diet, diabetes, and lac-
tation on acetyl-CoA carboxylase mRNA. Arch Biochem Biophys. 
1988;267:104–109.
Paredes I, Rietjens IM, Vieites JM, Cabado AG. Update of risk assess-
ments of main marine biotoxins in the European Union. Toxicon. 
2011;58:336–354.
Park JD, Cherrington NJ, Klaassen CD. Intestinal absorption of cadmium 
is associated with divalent metal transporter 1 in rats. Toxicol Sci. 
2002;68:288–294.
Patil C, Walter P. Intracellular signaling from the endoplasmic reticulum to 
the nucleus: the unfolded protein response in yeast and mammals. Curr 
Opin Cell Biol. 2001;13:349–355.
Paulauskis JD, Sul HS. Hormonal regulation of mouse fatty acid synthase 
transcription in liver. J Biol Chem. 1989;264:574–577.
Pavlovic´ NM. Balkan endemic nephropathy—current status and future per-
spectives. Clin Kidney J. 2013;6:257-265.
Peng Y, Shi H, Qi X-b, et al. The ADH1B Arg47His polymorphism in East 
Asian populations and expansion of rice domestication in history. BMC 
Evol Biol. 2010;10:15.
Peraica M, Radic B, Lucic A, Pavlovic M. Toxic effects of mycotoxins in 
humans. Bull WHO. 1999;77:754–766.
Perry GH, Dominy NJ, Claw KG, et al. Diet and the evolution of human 
amylase gene copy number variation. Nat Genet. 2007;39:1256–1260.
Picut CA, Parker GA. Interpreting the Delaney Clause in the 21st century. 
Toxicologic Pathol. 1992;20:617–627.
Pike JW, Lee SM, Meyer MB. Regulation of gene expression by 1,25-dihy-
droxyvitaminD3 in bone cells: exploiting new approaches and defining 
new mechanisms. Bonekey Rep. 2014;3:482.
Pike JW, Meyer MB. The vitamin D receptor: new paradigms for the regula-
tion of gene expression by 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3. Endocrinol Metab 
Clin North Am. 2010;39:255–269.
Pinchuk IV, Beswick EJ, Reyes VE. Staphylococcal enterotoxins. Toxins 
(Basel). 2010;2:2177–2197.
Plumlee KH, Galey FD. Neurotoxic mycotoxins: a review of fungal tox-
ins that cause neurological disease in large animals. J Vet Intern Med. 
1994;8:49–54.
Poortmans JR, Carpentier A, Pereira-Lancha LO, Lancha A Jr. Protein turn-
over, amino acid requirements and recommendations for athletes and 
active populations. Brazilian J Med Biol Res. 2012;45:875–890.
Prasad KN, Sinha PK. Effect of sodium butyrate on mammalian cells in 
culture: a review. In Vitro. 1976;12:125–132.
Prasad PD, Ganapathy V. Structure and function of mammalian 
sodium-dependent multivitamin transporter. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab 
Care. 2000;3:263–266.
Price PT, Nelson CM, Clarke SD. Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid regu-
lation of gene expression. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2000;11:3–7.
Pulido OM. Domoic acid toxicologic pathology: a review. Mar Drugs. 
2008;6:180–219.
Rahman MM, Abdullah RB, Wan Khadijah WE. A review of oxalate poi-
soning in domestic animals: tolerance and performance aspects. J Animal 
Physiol Animal Nutr. 2013;97:605–614.
Ramagopalan SV, Heger A, Berlanga AJ, et al. A ChIP-seq defined genome-
wide map of vitamin D receptor binding: associations with disease and 
evolution. Genome Res. 2010;20:1352–1360.

Food Toxicology: Fundamental and Regulatory Aspects
Chapter 27
1359
Ramos V, Vasconcelos V. Palytoxin and analogs: biological and ecological 
effects. Mar Drugs. 2010; 8:2021–2037.
Randel RD, Chase CC Jr, Wyse SJ. Effects of gossypol and cottonseed 
products on reproduction of mammals. J Anim Sci. 1992;70:1628–1638.
Reed JD. Nutritional toxicology of tannins and related polyphenols in for-
age legumes. J Anim Sci. 1995;73:1516–1528.
Reguera B, Riobó P, Rodríguez F, et al. Dinophysis toxins: causative organ-
isms, distribution and fate in shellfish. Mar Drugs. 2014;12:394–461.
Rhinn M, Dollé P. Retinoic acid signalling during development. 
Development. 2012;139:843–858.
Roduit C, Frei R, Depner M, et al. Increased food diversity in the first 
year of life is inversely associated with allergic diseases. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol. 2014;133:1056–1064.
Rogue A, Spire C, Brun M, Claide N, Guillouzo A. Gene expression 
changes induced by PPAR gamma agonists in animal and human liver. 
PPAR Res. 2010;2010:325183.
Rossetto O, Pirazzini M, Montecucco C. Botulinum neurotoxins: genetic, 
structural and mechanistic insights. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2014;12: 
535–549.
Sansalone W, ed. What is a nutrient: defining the Food-Drug Continuum. 
Washington, DC: Proceedings, Georgetown University, Center for Food 
and Nutritional Policy; 1999:82.
Schisler JC, Charles PC, Parker JS, et al. Stable patterns of gene expression 
regulating carbohydrate metabolism determined by geographic ancestry. 
PLoS One. 2009;4:e8183.
Schlatter J, Zimmerli B, Dick R, Panizzon R, Schlatter C. Dietary intake 
and risk assessment of phototoxic furocoumarins in humans. Food Chem 
Toxicol. 1991;29:523–530.
Schmidt LE, Dalhoff K. Food-drug interactions. Drugs. 2002;62: 
1481–1502.
Schmitt CK, Meysick KC, O’Brien AD. Bacterial toxins: friends or foes? 
Emerg Infect Dis. 1999;5:224–234.
Schneeman B, Gallaher D. Pancreatic response to dietary trypsin inhibitor: 
variation among species. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1986;199:185–187.
Sender R, Fuchs S, Milo R. Revised estimates for the number of human and 
bacteria cells in the body. PLoS Biol. 2016;14:e1002533.
Shankar K, Harrell A, Kang P, Singhal R, Ronis MJ, Badger TM. 
Carbohydrate-responsive gene expression in the adipose tissue of rats. 
Endocrinology. 2010;151:153–164.
Shanklin AP, Sanchez ER. FDA’s food contact substance notification pro-
gram. Food Safety Magazine. October/November, 2005.
Siah CW, Ombiga J, Adams LA, Trinder D, Olynyk JK. Normal iron metab-
olism and the pathophysiology of iron overload disorders. Clin Biochem 
Rev. 2006;27:5–16.
Sicherer SH, Muñoz-Furlong A, Sampson HA. Prevalence of peanut and 
tree nut allergy in the United States determined by means of a random 
digit dial telephone survey: a 5-year follow-up study. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol. 2003;112:1203–1207.
Sicherer SH, Sampson HA. Food allergy. Allergy Clin Immunol. 
2006;117:S470–S475.
Sieber SM, Correa P, Dalgard DW, McIntire KR, Adamson RH. Carcinogenicity 
and hepatotoxicity of cycasin and its aglycone methylazoxymethanol ace-
tate in nonhuman primates. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1980;65:177–189.
Skog KI, Johansson MA, Jägerstad MI. Carcinogenic heterocyclic amines 
in model systems and cooked foods: a review on formation, occurrence 
and intake. Food Chem Toxicol. 1998;36:879–896.
Smathers RL, Petersen DR. The human fatty acid-binding protein family: 
evolutionary divergences and functions. Hum Genom. 2011;5:170–191.
Smith RL. Does one man’s meat become another man’s poison? Trans Med 
Soc Lond. 1991;11:6.
Sobel J, Painter J. Illnesses caused by marine toxins. Clin Infect Dis. 
2005;41:1290–1296.
Sobel J, Tucker N, Sulka A, et al. Foodborne botulism in the United States, 
1990–2000. Emerg Infect Dis. 2004;10:1606–1611.
Sperber WH, Stier RF. Happy 50th Birthday to HACCP: retrospec-
tive and prospective. Food Safety Magazine. 2009–2010. Available at: 
http://www.foodsafetymagazine.com/magazine-archive1/december-
2009january-2010/happy-50th-birthday-to-haccp-retrospective-and- 
prospective/.
Spergel JM. Nonimmunoglobulin E-mediated immune reactions to foods. 
Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol. 2006;2:78–85.
Stoeckman AK, Ma L, Towle HC. Mlx is the functional heteromeric part-
ner of the carbohydrate response element-binding protein in glucose 
regulation of lipogenic enzyme genes. J Biol Chem. 2004;279:15662– 
15669.
Swan JP. FDA’s origin. In: George Kurian, ed. Adapted from a Historical 
Guide to the U.S. Government. New York: Oxford University Press; 
1998. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/AboutFDA/WhatWeDo/History/
Origin/ucm124403.htm.
Takase S, Suruga K, Goda T. Regulation of vitamin A metabolism-related 
gene expression. Br J Nutr. 2000;84(suppl 2):S217–S221.
Takata K, Matsuzaki T, Tajika Y. Aquaporins: water channel proteins of the 
cell membrane. Prog Histochem Cytochem. 2004;39:1–83.
Tice R. α-Chaconine [20562-03-2] and α-Solanine [20562-02-1]. Review 
of toxicological literature. Prepared for Errol Zeiger, National Institute 
of Environmental Health Sciences, February, 1998. Available at: http://
ntp.niehs.nih.gov/ntp/htdocs/chem_background/exsumpdf/chaconineso-
lanine_508.pdf.
Tishkoff SA, Reed FA, Ranciaro A, et al. Convergent adaptation of human 
lactase persistence in Africa and Europe. Nat Genet. 2007;39:31–40.
Valdiglesias V, Prego-Faraldo MV, Pásaro E, Méndez J, Laffon B. Okadaic 
acid: more than a diarrheic toxin. Mar Drugs. 2013;11:4328–4349.
van der Put NM, Gabreëls F, Stevens EM, et al. A second common mutation 
in the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene: an additional risk factor 
for neural-tube defects? Am J Hum Genet. 1998;62:1044–1051.
Vaulont S, Munnich A, Decaux JF, Kahn A. Transcriptional and post-tran-
scriptional regulation of L-type pyruvate kinase gene expression in rat 
liver. J Biol Chem. 1986;261:7621–7625.
Vaulont S, Vasseur-Cognet M, Kahn A. Glucose regulation of gene tran-
scription. J Biol Chem. 2000;275:31555–31558.
Verkman AS. Aquaporins. Curr Biol. 2013;23:R52–R55.
Vickery BP, Chin S, Burks AW. Pathophysiology of food allergy. Pediatr 
Clin North Am. 2011;58:363–376.
Vulliamy T, Beutler E, Luzzatto L. Variants of glucose-6-phosphate dehy-
drogenase are due to missense mutations spread throughout the coding 
region of the gene. Hum Mutat. 1993;2:159–167.
Wang J, Sampson HA. Food allergy: recent advances in pathophysiology 
and treatment. Allergy Asthma Immunol Res. 2009;1:19–29.
Wang M, Li M, Wu S, et al. Fecal microbiota composition of breast-fed 
infants is correlated with human milk oligosaccharides consumed. 
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2015;60:825–833.
Waterlow JC. Protein turnover with special reference to man. Quart J Exp 
Physiol. 1984;69:409–438.
Watkins SM, Reich A, Fleming LE, Hammond R. Neurotoxic shellfish poi-
soning. Mar Drugs. 2008;6:431–455.
Watson B. The poison squad: an incredible history. 2013. Available at: 
http://www.esquire.com/food-drink/food/a23169/poison-squad/.
Weber A, Marie J, Cottreau D, et al. Dietary control of aldolase B and L-type 
pyruvate kinase mRNAs in rat. Study of translational activity and hybrid-
ization with cloned cDNA probes. J Biol Chem. 1984;259:1798–1802.
WHO−International Food Safety Authorities Network (INFOSAN). Food 
allergies. INFOSAN Information Note No. 3/2006—food allergies. June 
9, 2006.
Wiedenfeld H. Plants containing pyrrolizidine alkaloids: toxicity and prob-
lems. Food Addit Contam. 2011;28:282–292.
Wilcken B, Bamforth F, Li Z, et al. Geographical and ethnic variation of the 
677C>T allele of 5,10 methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR): 
findings from over 7000 newborns from 16 areas worldwide. J Med 
Genet. 2003;40:619–625.
World Health Organization. Botulism (updated August 2013). 2013. 
Available at: http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs270/en/.
Wu W, Sun R. Toxicological studies on plant proteins: a review. J Appl 
Toxicol. 2012;32:377–386.
Ye J, DeBose-Boyd RA. Regulation of cholesterol and fatty acid synthesis. 
Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2011;3:a004754.
Ye K, Gu Z. Recent advances in understanding the role of nutrition in 
human genome evolution. Adv Nutr. 2011;2:486–496.

This page intentionally left blank