# 28 Toxic Effects of Calories
# Casarett & Doull's Toxicology, 9th Edition
# Pages: 1380-1399
# Unit: Unit V Toxic Agents

28
chapter
Toxic Effects of Calories
Martin J.J. Ronis, Kartik Shankar, and Thomas M. 
Badger
BIOLOGY OF EATING AND DIGESTION
All biotic organisms derive energy from food to sustain life and 
this energy “drives” various cellular functions, including digestion, 
metabolism, pumping blood, and muscle contractions. Nutrients can 
broadly be defined as chemical substances (typically found in foods 
or supplements) that are necessary for proper growth and develop-
ment, reproduction, cellular function and maintenance, and repair 
following injury. Based on their chemical nature, nutrients can be 
grouped into organic (carbon-containing) and inorganic classifica-
tions. Carbohydrates, proteins, fats, and vitamins comprise the for-
mer, while minerals and water are inorganic nutrients essential for 
life (Stipanuk, 2006). Inorganic nutrients such as minerals can be 
absorbed into the body through food and are generally incorporated 
into the food chain through environmental sources (soil, water). 
Minerals comprise about 4% of the body weight in humans and in 
combination with water furnish a major part of the obligatory milieu 
necessary for cellular functioning (pH, osmolarity). Macrominerals 
are those whose abundance is generally 0.01% of body weight or 
daily required amounts exceed 100 mg/day. Calcium, phosphorous, 
sodium, and magnesium fall in this group. Other minerals that are 
not as abundant can be equally important for an organism. Trace 
minerals are defined as minerals whose concentration is less than 
0.01% of total body weight. Other alternative definitions include 
nutrients whose requirements are below 1 ppm. Iron, zinc, ­copper, 
iodine, selenium, and molybdenum are six essential trace ­elements 
with established recommended dietary allowances. Overall, trace 
nutrients perform a variety of important functions, including trans-
port of oxygen (iron as a part of hemoglobin), catalysis of biological 
reactions as component of enzymes (iron, zinc), and as part of other 
organic molecules (selenocysteine). While inorganic compounds 
serve important roles in physiology, the energy in food is derived 
from metabolism of organic substances. Organic compounds are 
generally synthesized by living cells from simpler molecules. For 
example, green plants and marine phytoplankton utilize photosyn-
thesis to convert the very simple molecule carbon dioxide into more 
complex, energy-rich compounds such as carbohydrates using the 
energy from the sunlight. Because most bacteria and higher organ-
isms cannot carry out photosynthesis, they derive their energy by 
metabolism of preformed organic molecules, such as carbohydrates. 
In general, bacteria utilize simpler organic ­molecules and animals 
and humans require more complex macronutrients (­proteins, fats, 
and carbohydrates) to meet their energy needs.
Biology of Eating and  
Digestion
Digestion of Foods
Integrated Fuel Metabolism
Set-Point Theory and Neural 
Control of Energy Balance
Methods to Assess Energy 
Balance
Assessing Caloric Intake
Assessing Caloric Content  
of Foods
Assessing Energy Expenditure
Assessing Body Composition
Anthropometric Analysis
Hydrodensitometry
Air Displacement Plethysmography
Absorptiometry
Computerized Tomography
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
Electrical Impedance
Total Body Water
Assessing Physical Activity
Biology of Obesity
Obesity Risk: Genes, Epigenetics, 
and Fetal Environment
Toxicity Related to Excess 
Caloric Intake/Obesity
Adaptation of Liver and  
Adipose Tissue to Excess  
Calories
Ectopic Fat Deposition
Metabolic Syndrome
Therapeutic Options for Managing 
Metabolic Syndrome
Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis
Alteration in Drug 
Pharmacokinetics  
and Metabolism in Obesity  
and NAFLD
Endocrine Dysfunction in  
Obesity, Metabolic Syndrome, 
and NAFLD
Obesity and Cancer Risk
Health Benefits and Life 
Extension Associated with 
Caloric Restriction
Treatment of Obesity
Lifestyle Modification: Dieting  
and Exercise
Toxic Effects of Dieting
Drug Therapy for Weight Loss
Surgical Interventions
Economic, Sociological, and 
Legal Aspects of the Obesity 
Epidemic
Health Insurance and Obesity
Changing the Environment: Family 
and Community Approaches to 
Healthy Eating and Physical 
Activity
Food Labels
Governmental and Corporate Issues
References

1362
Toxic Agents
unit V
Digestion of Foods
Common foods are a complex matrix and before the nutrients in 
food can be utilized they invariably need to undergo digestion. The 
process of digestion is a remarkable orchestration of many complex 
biochemical and physiological events, which occurs throughout 
the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, involving mechanical and chemi-
cal breakdown of food into simpler nutrients that are amenable 
for absorption. The upper GI tract consists of oral cavity, esopha-
gus, and stomach. Breakdown of food begins in the mouth via the 
actions of enzymes in saliva. Movement of food between sections 
of the GI tract is restricted via sphincters or valves. In the stomach, 
food is acted upon by gastric juices, which are secretions from the 
cardiac, oxyntic, and pyloric glands in the stomach. Gastric juice 
contains high amounts of hydrochloric acid that is secreted from 
gastric parietal cells. This along with the enzymes such as pepsin 
and α-amylase act upon proteins and carbohydrates, respectively, 
to generate polypeptides and simpler sugars (such as dextrins 
from starch). Digestion in the small intestine is aided by numerous 
enzymes supplied by the pancreas, which drains into the proximal 
portion of the small intestine, the duodenum. Bile is made in the liver 
and stored in the gall bladder until secreted to aid in the absorption 
of dietary fats. Pancreatic juice contains digestive enzymes includ-
ing carboxypeptidases, lipases, amylases, and nucleases. Pancreatic 
secretions also contain bicarbonate and divalent cations (mostly 
sodium and potassium) that help neutralize the gastric acid. Almost 
half of ingested carbohydrates and proteins, and 90% of ingested fat 
are digested by pancreatic enzymes. In addition to the enzymes, the 
small intestine itself secretes numerous enzymes including amino-
peptidases, lipases, and disaccharidases.
The latter parts of the small intestine, the jejunum and ileum, 
are primary sites of absorption of nutrients. The surface of the small 
intestine is uniquely adapted to facilitate the absorption of digested 
dietary nutrients. The surface area of the intestinal mucosa available 
for absorption is greatly increased due to a combination of folds 
called valvulae conniventes (folds of Kerckring) and finger-like pro-
jections (villi) that are lined with enterocytes. The luminal surface 
of the enterocytes is further lined by microvilli that give the mucosal 
surface brush-border-like appearance. The luminal and basolateral 
surfaces of the enterocytes are rich in transporters that mediate 
uptake of nutrients into the enterocytes. Absorption of nutrients 
into enterocytes may be accomplished by diffusion, facilitated dif-
fusion, or active transport. Luminal digestion of complex carbo-
hydrates involves breakdown via salivary and pancreatic amylases 
into dextrins that undergo further digestion to simple monosac-
charides in the membrane. Furthermore commensal gut microbiota 
play important roles in breakdown of complex carbohydrates (such 
as dietary fiber) into substrates that can be utilized by the host. 
Monosaccharides are transported into the enterocytes by active 
transport (glucose, galactose) or via facilitated diffusion (fructose). 
Digestion of proteins begins in the stomach and continues in the 
lumen of the small intestine. The jejunum is the site of absorption of 
amino acids and dipeptides and tripeptides. Specific carriers for free 
amino acid and small peptides in the enterocyte brush border aid 
absorption. Dietary lipids, such as triacylglycerols, are hydrolyzed 
by pancreatic and intestinal lipases to free fatty acids or monoacylg-
lycerol. Bile salts along with phospholipids facilitate the absorption 
of lipids by forming emulsified complexes called micelles, which 
allows uptake into the enterocyte, where fatty acids are reesterified 
and packaged into chylomicrons that exit the enterocyte into the 
lymphatic system. Macronutrient molecules (amino acids, sugars, 
and fatty acids) that end up in the circulation undergo metabolism 
in various tissues to be either oxidized to extract energy or stored 
for future utilization.
Integrated Fuel Metabolism
The requirement for energy to fuel cellular functions in all organ-
isms is continuous. However, food consumption is intermittent. 
Hence, most organisms have developed processes to store energy 
from a meal to be utilized until the next meal. Energy in the body 
is derived from three main nutrient classes: carbohydrates, protein, 
and fat, which in turn are made up of sugars, amino acids, and free 
fatty acids, respectively. The principal circulating fuels in the body, 
glucose and free fatty acids, are stored as glycogen and triglycer-
ides, respectively. Highest concentrations of glycogen are present 
in the liver and skeletal muscle, it is a macromolecule consisting of 
branching chains of glucose held together by α-1,4 and 1,6 link-
ages. Triglycerides are stored in adipose depots in specialized cells 
(adipocytes) within large lipid droplets. While total body protein 
constitutes a large percentage of the energy, unlike fats and carbo-
hydrate, protein is not normally utilized as storage form of energy. 
Proteins are critical in maintaining structure and function and are 
catabolized for energy only as a last-ditch effort, under extreme 
conditions. The energetic value of macromolecules per gram of 
tissue is influenced based on their hydration. While the theoreti-
cal energy content of glycogen is approximately 4 kcal/g, due to 
its highly hydrophilic nature, each gram of glycogen is associated 
with two to three times its weight of water. Hence, in reality glyco-
gen provides approximately 1 kcal/g of actual energy. This makes 
storage of energy predominantly in the form of glycogen quite 
inefficient. In contrast, because triglycerides are stored in a mostly 
nonaqueous milieu, fat tissue is energy dense, yielding close to 
the theoretical 9.4 kcal/g of triglyceride. Hence, most animals have 
developed systems to convert glucose into lipids (lipogenesis) and 
adipose depots to store de novo synthesized lipids.
The interconversion of fuel sources and release in the time 
of need is designed to address three priorities of fuel utilization 
(Shulman et al., 2003). Maintaining a stable supply of substrate for 
utilization by the brain is the first priority. Because the brain has 
little to no stored energy in the form of glycogen or triglycerides, it 
exclusively depends on the liver for maintaining a continuous sup-
ply of glucose. Blood glucose concentrations are maintained within 
a narrow range (55 to 140 mg/dL) via a number of interrelated 
mechanisms that are highly conserved. Unlike the brain, the heart 
and to some degree the liver and skeletal muscles derive most of 
their energy needs through the oxidation of fatty acids. Maintenance 
of protein reserves and replenishment of proteins (enzymes, cyto-
skeletal proteins, contractile proteins) following feeding are the 
next important functions of fuel metabolism. Finally, conversion of 
existing nutrients into their storage forms (glycogen and triglycer-
ides) is carried via anabolic biological pathways (glycogenesis and 
lipogenesis).
Hormonal messages generated by the endocrine cells of the 
pancreas, adipose tissue (adipokines), and GI tract (gut neuropep-
tides) are critical to orchestrating the multiple processes associated 
with fuel flux and metabolism. Insulin is the principal hormone 
required to manage nutrient fuels in both fed and fasted states. The 
presence and subsequent absorption of food in the GI tract and rise 
in blood glucose stimulate insulin secretion from the pancreas. 
Through its actions on various signaling pathways, insulin promotes 
glucose uptake in peripheral tissues, glycogen synthesis in the liver 
and muscle, lipid synthesis in adipocytes, and amino acid and pro-
tein synthesis in most cells. Insulin also acts to restrain catabolic 
processes such as lipolysis, gluconeogenesis, and protein degrada-
tion, which classically occur under states of low insulin (such as 
fasting). Following the immediate disposal of absorbed nutrients, 
the body enters a postabsorptive (early fasting) state, during which 
the energy derived from glucose supplied directly from the meal is

Toxic Effects of Calories
Chapter 28
1363
diminished (Ruderman et al., 2005). In this state, serum levels of 
insulin start to decrease, and the liver begins metabolic actions to 
maintain glucose levels by glycogenolysis to release stored glucose 
and by de novo synthesis of glucose (from gluconeogenic precur-
sors, lactate and fatty acids, and glycerol). Energy for these cata-
bolic and anabolic processes can be derived from metabolism of 
triglycerides and fatty acids (in adipose tissues). If food remains 
unavailable for a protracted period, glycogen levels become almost 
completely depleted in both the muscle and liver, and protein catab-
olism releases amino acids which become the primary source for 
glucose production. A rise in glucagon and glucocorticoids (such 
as cortisol) also characterize this state. These hormones promote 
lipolysis and breakdown of glycogen.
Set-Point Theory and Neural Control 
of Energy Balance
A number of redundant feedback mechanisms operate to maintain 
the homeostasis of energy in living systems. These mechanisms 
eventually regulate the balance between food intake and energy 
expenditure to maintain fuel reserves at preset levels. Energy 
consumed is normally metabolized and utilized to maintain basic 
metabolic rate and thermogenesis, and carry out cellular processes, 
organ-specific functions, and movement (muscle contractions). 
Excess fuels are converted to triglycerides and stored in adipose 
tissues. Because adipose tissue is the major depot of preserving 
energy, signals derived from the periphery signal to regions in the 
brain that coordinate energy balance. When total energy consumed 
equals the total energy required to meet basal metabolic needs, 
growth, thermogenesis, and physical activity, the individual is in 
energy balance, and maintaining this balance will result in rela-
tively stable weight and healthy body composition. When energy 
intake exceeds the actual energy expenditure, weight gain ensues 
and body composition can become problematic. The existence of 
a precise energy balance system is illustrated by considering nor-
mal variations in weight among groups of individuals over time. 
Over the course of a year, the average adult male consumes about 1 
million calories, yet body weight of most weight-stable individuals 
does not fluctuate more than 1 lb. Even a small (about 5%) error in 
matching intake and expenditure would result in a net change of 
approximately 6 kg of body weight. Therefore, it is obvious that 
mechanisms operating within the body can regulate energy balance 
with exquisite precision.
One theory called the “set-point” theory proposes that food 
intake and energy expenditure are coordinately regulated by defined 
regions in the central nervous system that signal to maintain a rela-
tively constant level of energy reserve and body weight (Keesey 
and Hirvonen, 1997). It is posited that the status of energy stores is 
sensed by the central nervous system and changes in the afferent sig-
nal result in adjustments in food intake and/or energy expenditure. 
Implicitly, the model requires the existence of four major compo-
nents of an energy homeostasis system: afferent signals relaying the 
levels of energy stores, efferent processes regulating energy storage 
and expenditure, efferent mechanisms controlling ingestive behav-
ior, and integrative centers in the brain to coordinate these processes. 
Studies have shown that the hypothalamus plays a central role in 
the control of energy balance, especially food intake. The hormone 
leptin, secreted in proportion to body fat stores from the adipose tis-
sue, was the first signal to be identified to be a homeostatic regulator 
of energy balance. Leptin acts on metabolic-sensing neurons in the 
brain with receptor-mediated actions regulating signaling pathways 
that in effect decrease food intake (Friedman and Leibel, 1992). 
Leptin also has potent neurotrophic actions in the brain.
Two populations of neurons are seat of appetite control 
machinery in the brain, both of which are sensitive to leptin’s 
actions (among other neuropeptides), one expressing orexigenic 
peptides neuropeptide-Y (NPY) and agouti-related peptide (AGRP) 
and the other expressing anorexigenic peptides proopiomelanocor-
tin (POMC) and cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript 
(CART). These are located in the arcuate nucleus of the hypothala-
mus. Downstream projections from these neurons interact with 
the melanocortin receptor neurons and the neurons in the paraven-
tricular nucleus of the hypothalamus. In addition to the hypotha-
lamic control of appetite per se, reward and hedonic processes of 
“liking” and “wanting” food occur in the ventral striatum of the 
midbrain in conjunction with the mesolimbic dopamine system. In 
addition, the corticolimbic system of reward is controlled by areas 
in the ­prefrontal cortex, which integrates sensory, emotional, and 
­cognitive information to coordinate behavioral responses (Lenard 
and Berthoud, 2008). Hence, the homeostatic control of energy 
­balance fits into the larger decision scheme of choice behavior via 
a ­complex neural system.
METHODS TO ASSESS ENERGY BALANCE
Assessing Caloric Intake
In animal studies, caloric intake can be quantitatively monitored by 
measuring the amount of food consumed by animals in metabolic 
cages. Caloric intake can be derived by multiplying the quantity 
(grams per day) of diets consumed with the caloric density of the 
diet. Knowledge of caloric intake is important in many experi-
mental designs where pair-feeding a parallel cohort of animals is 
necessary. In clinical studies, assessment of caloric intake can be 
performed in a number of ways, each with its strengths and limita-
tions. A prospective method to collect information about current 
intake is maintenance of food records. These are usually carried 
out for a specific duration of time (3 to 7 days, generally including 
both week and weekend days) during which a written record of all 
food and beverages consumed is maintained. Quantification is per-
formed by estimation of weights or actual weighing of foodstuff, 
and hence food records provide both qualitative and quantitative 
data. Advantages include high reliability, as records do not rely on 
memory but will be more detailed and accurate records of diet and 
nutrient intake. However, weighed records are both labor and cost 
intensive and place higher burden on participants. Habitual eating 
habits can be influenced by the process of recording, and the reli-
ability of the method decreases over long periods of data collection. 
Collected data are analyzed using a nutritional database such as 
the Nutrition Data System for Research (University of Minnesota). 
Several methods of dietary assessment rely on retrospective col-
lection of food intake. The diet history and food recall are com-
monly used methods in clinical research, where a trained individual 
obtains details of participant’s habitual dietary intake in-person or 
over the phone. Details may include portion sizes, cooking meth-
ods, and patterns of eating. The techniques allow a large amount 
of descriptive data to be collected. Most usually, the interviewer 
incorporates a 24-hour or 3-day window in which detailed recall 
is obtained. Burden on the participant is low; however, the tech-
nique involves considerable training and time on the part of the 
researcher. Recall interviews can sometimes be time-consuming 
and several recalls may be necessary to obtain useful information. 
Again, analysis of the collected data using a nutritional database 
is necessary to get quantitative measures of nutrient and caloric 
intakes. Food frequency questionnaires (FFQ) are tools that can be 
self-administered or provided in an interview setting to participants. 
FFQ collect information about consumption of each food from a

1364
Toxic Agents
unit V
list of foods over a specified period of time (e.g., last 6 months). 
They are devoid of specific data regarding the portion sizes and 
cooking method and are not an appropriate method for quantify-
ing intakes. However, FFQ are useful in gathering information on 
long-term food patterns, in a low-burden and inexpensive method. 
Both of these methods are merely estimations and can have signifi-
cant errors. With the rapid increase in mobile devices and smart-
phones a number of research and commercial “apps” have been 
developed to assess and track caloric and nutritional intake by 
adapting the principles of food diaries and the convenience of digi-
tally capturing images of meals.
Assessing Caloric Content of Foods
Accurate assessment of the caloric value of foods is essential for 
effective nutritional management in clinical and public policy 
arenas. Classical investigations by Professor Atwater and his col-
leagues providing the general calorie factors of 4, 9, and 4 for the 
major sources of energy—carbohydrate, fat, and protein—have 
been widely used. Both fats and carbohydrates can be completely 
oxidized to water and carbon dioxide, while protein is incom-
pletely oxidized and partly excreted from the body as urea. The 
heat released by combustion of a food in a bomb calorimeter is a 
measure of its gross energy. However, not all the ingested energy 
will be available for metabolism and digestible energy refers to the 
fraction following losses of energy as fecal energy and gases from 
microbial fermentation. The truly metabolizable energy can be 
derived by accounting for lost energy in urine (mainly from nitro-
gen) and on the body surface. Analytical methods to determine the 
macronutrients in food, protein, fat, and carbohydrates in ­addition 
to alcohol and other organic acids have been described widely 
(Tontisirin et al., 2003). Protein content is mainly determined via 
estimating nitrogen content by either the Kjeldahl method or hydro-
lysis of proteins into amino acids and then measuring concentra-
tions using gas or high-pressure liquid chromatography. Fat ­content 
can be assessed by measuring the sum of methanol–chloroform 
extractable total fatty acids that can be expressed as triglyceride 
equivalents. Total fat can also be assessed by gravimetric methods. 
Carbohydrate content is generally measured by difference as the 
remaining energy after accounting for protein, fat, alcohol, and 
ash. This measure of carbohydrate included energy from fiber as 
well as some components that may strictly not be carbohydrates 
(organic acids).
Assessing Energy Expenditure
The process of oxidative phosphorylation couples the oxidation 
of nutrients with the synthesis of high-energy molecules (viz. 
­adenosine triphosphate [ATP]), the main energy currency of the 
cell. The energy stored with these molecules is utilized to power all 
the biochemical processes in cells, which encompass metabolism, 
growth, and cell division. The total energy expenditure (TEE) or 
metabolic cost for an average adult ranges from 1500 to 3000 kcal/
day. A calorie is defined as a unit of energy that is required to raise 
the temperature of 1 g of water by 1°C. TEE is ­primarily composed 
of three components: (1) basal energy expenditure, (2)  ­thermic 
effect of food (TEF), and (3) energy expenditure associated with 
physical activity (EEPA). While most of the variance in daily 
TEE is accounted for by the three aforementioned ­components, a 
small fraction of energy expenditure is accounted for by adaptive 
­thermogenesis (energetic cost of cold adaptation). Basal energy 
expenditure, also called as resting energy expenditure (REE), is the 
energy expended when the individual is lying down and at complete 
rest, generally after sleep in the postabsorptive state. REE accounts 
for almost 60% of TEE (Gropper et al., 2005). A close surrogate 
of REE is the resting metabolic rate (RMR). TEF, which accounts 
for 10% to 15% of TEE, is the energy expenditure associated with 
the digestion, absorption, and storage of food. EEPA consists of 
(1)  expenditure related to planned exercise and (2) nonexercise 
activity thermogenesis (NEAT). The former refers to purposeful 
physical activity, which varies in most individuals and is negligible 
in individuals who do not participate in exercise. However, even in 
individuals who do undertake regular exercise, NEAT contributes 
the greater proportion to EEPA. NEAT includes all energy expen-
diture from occupational and leisure activities (­sitting, climbing 
stairs, walking, fidgeting, etc.).
Components of energy expenditure can be measured using 
either (1) direct or (2) indirect calorimetry. The basic principle in 
direct calorimetry is to measure the actual heat produced by the 
organism in a highly controlled environment as an estimate of 
energy expenditure. In large organisms (such as human subjects) 
direct calorimetry is generally impractical due to the large inher-
ent capacity to store heat. Further, due to limitations in the design, 
complexity, and cost of carrying out direct calorimetry, this meth-
odology is seldom utilized. The most commonly used methods to 
estimate energy expenditure, therefore, involve indirect calorimetry. 
Because most aerobic organisms derive energy from oxidation reac-
tions, consumption of oxygen can serve as reliable surrogate for 
heat production. Using experimentally derived estimates for energy 
yields per mole of oxygen for the main fuel substrates, heat produc-
tion can be calculated based on the quantity of oxygen consumed. 
Indirect calorimetry can be coupled with specific tracer techniques 
to examine the utilization and metabolism of specific substrates in 
both whole-body and tissue-specific compartments. The ratio of car-
bon dioxide expired and oxygen consumed is called the respiratory 
quotient (RQ). RQ estimates can be useful in understanding both 
energy expenditure and overall substrate oxidation. An RQ value 
of 1.0 suggests that carbohydrate is being oxidized, because under 
these conditions the amount of oxygen required for oxidation of 
glucose is equal to the amount of carbon dioxide produced. The rep-
resentative average RQ values for carbohydrate, fat, and protein are 
1.0, 0.7, and 0.8, respectively. Indirect calorimetry can be assessed 
in animals by placing them in closed chambers in which airflow 
is controlled at specified flow rates. Oxygen and carbon dioxide 
concentrations are assessed using gas analyzers to calculate RQ val-
ues. Specialized chambers that are commercially available integrate 
measurement of body weights, food and water intake, activity, and 
oxygen consumption in a single chamber.
In human subjects, the same principle is utilized to assess 
oxygen consumption in a variety of designs. A simple metabolic 
cart can be utilized to assess basal metabolic rate (BMR) in indi-
viduals over a short 30-minute period while the individual is in the 
supine position, but not asleep. Estimates of 24-hour RMR can 
be calculated by extrapolation. Metabolic carts can be adapted to 
estimate energy expenditure during physical activity such as tread-
mill running to estimate maximal oxygen consumption (VO2 max). 
However, these measurements only estimate the REE component of 
TEE. Room calorimeters allow estimating the true TEE by measur-
ing oxygen consumption during all aspects of free living, including 
postmeal thermic expenditure and during physical activity. These 
studies require the participant to be isolated in a room calorimeter 
and are expensive to undertake and maintain. Another method to 
estimate TEE in free-living subjects utilizes measurement of sta-
ble isotopes 2H2 (deuterium) and 18O. In this technique, referred 
to as “doubly labeled water,” a stable isotope of water is given to 
individuals (H2
18O and 2H2O) and the disappearance of the labeled 
tracer in blood and urine is assessed over a 3- to 6-week time period.

Toxic Effects of Calories
Chapter 28
1365
The labeled water incorporates into the body water pool and esti-
mates either the water turnover alone (2H label) or the turnover of 
water and production of CO2 (18O label). The difference between 
the two rates of loss of the two labels corresponds to the rate of 
production of CO2. The amount of oxygen consumed is indirectly 
calculated via food records (food quotient) over the assessment 
period. RQ and energy expenditure can then be calculated using 
the volumes of oxygen and carbon dioxide. RMR estimates can 
also be calculated nonexperimentally based on derived equations. 
Equations such as the Harris–Benedict equation and the Mifflin–
St. Jeor equation utilize the person’s body weight, body surface 
area, age, gender, and height (Mifflin et al., 1990).
Assessing Body Composition
Body composition assessments are aimed at describing the overall 
mass of an individual organism in terms of its molecular or nutrient 
components: water, fat mass, lean mass, protein, and minerals. In a 
simple two-compartment model of body composition assessment, 
total body mass is divided into fat mass (essential and nonessen-
tial fat) and fat-free mass (including lean mass and water). Lean 
mass in this scenario includes protein, carbohydrate, and minerals. 
A number of techniques have been developed to indirectly assess 
either specific components or all measures of body composition.
Anthropometric Analysis  Body mass is an obvious, but poor 
surrogate to relative fat mass. While individuals with greater body 
weight (mass) per height tend to have greater fat mass, total body 
weight may also be determined by increased muscle mass. Taller 
people on average have greater weight, and weight and/or body 
composition also change more dynamically with age. Hence, the 
simplest indirect measure of body fatness is the relative propor-
tion of weight to height, more commonly referred to as body mass 
index (BMI). BMI is derived by ratio of mass (in kilograms) and 
square of height (in meters). The advantage of BMI is that it is easy 
to compute and large worldwide reference data sets exist. BMI, 
however, is only an estimate and because BMI does not always 
reflect fat mass, care must be taken when using BMI as a fat index. 
Other anthropometric estimates of body composition include 
­measurement of skin folds and circumference at various sites 
(abdomen, waist, hip). The general assumption is that total body fat 
is proportional to the fat deposited beneath the skin. Measurements 
can be analyzed by utilizing several regression models that predict 
percent body fat. Five commonly employed sites include triceps, 
subscapula, suprailiac, abdomen, and thigh. While the technique 
is inexpensive to perform, sites chosen for analysis and skill of the 
anthropometrist influence the accuracy of the results.
Hydrodensitometry  The principle used to calculate body 
density using hydrostatic weighing has been known since antiq-
uity when the Greek mathematician Archimedes showed that the 
density of an object is the ratio of its weight in air to its loss of 
weight in water. Using the density of the whole body and correct-
ing for residual air in the lungs and GI tract, the relative body fat 
can be estimated using derived equations by Siri or Brozek (Nord 
and Rayne, 1995). This procedure is also known as underwater 
weighing.
Air Displacement Plethysmography  This procedure employs 
the same principles as underwater weighing described above, 
except rather than the body displacing water, it displaces air. This 
allows the body volume to be calculated and then body fat can 
be calculated. This is probably the most accurate, precise, and 
­cost-effective measure of total body fat, and is employed widely in 
clinical research in the United States.
Absorptiometry  This is one of the most widely used tools in 
assessing body composition. In this technique imaging is performed 
throughout the entire body by a photon beam. Most investigations 
using this technique use either a dual-photon source (gadolinium) 
or x-ray at two different energy levels (dual-energy x-ray absorp-
tiometry [DXA]). Hence, this allows imaging of both soft tissues 
and bone. The attenuation of the x-ray signal received on the detec-
tor is proportional to the density of the tissue. Percentage of body 
fat, lean tissue, and bone mineral density can be computed for the 
whole body or specific sites based on the analysis of images.
Computerized Tomography  While utilizing similar princi-
ples of differential x-ray attenuation through a body, computer-
ized tomography is used to produce three-dimensional “slices” 
or cross-sectional images of the subject. This is made possible by 
positioning the x-ray source and detectors on opposite poles of a 
circular tube within which the subject is imaged. The ability to 
generate 3D images allows regional localization of adipose tissues, 
muscles, and organs (liver). Using the image data, percent body fat 
and lean mass can be calculated.
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance  Nuclear magnetic resonance 
(NMR) works by interpreting radio-frequency signals of excited 
nuclei in an external magnetic field. The physical characteristics 
of the hydrogen atom differ when the hydrogen is located on pro-
tein, fat, or water and this can be detected and quantitated to deter-
mine body composition. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is an 
extremely powerful imaging technique with high-­resolution capacity 
and employed widely as a clinical diagnostic tool. Images acquired 
are three-dimensional allowing detailed analysis of body composi-
tion and regional fat and lean mass distribution with depots and ecto-
pic deposition within tissues. While MRI has several advantages in 
terms of assessing the distribution of body fat, its expense relative to 
NMR makes it less used, and other considerations such as the require-
ment for the participant to lay still during the scanning period and the 
extreme noise make MRI less ­applicable than NMR for children.
Electrical Impedance  Bioelectrical impedance analysis (BIA) 
and total body electrical conductivity (TOBEC) measure total body 
composition based on measuring electrical impedance (the inverse 
of conductance) of an electric current passed through the body. The 
conductance of a weak painless current through the body (which 
serves as an electrolytic medium) is utilized to infer lean body mass 
and fat mass. Lean mass has more water and greater conductivity 
than fat mass, and predictive equations are employed to derive fat 
and lean body mass.
Total Body Water  Body fat and lean mass can be calculated 
by estimating total body water using stable isotopes. Dilution of 
water containing specific concentrations of labeled isotope (either 
deuterium or 18O) is usually assessed. Concentrations of isotopes 
are measured in blood or urine over a timecourse following a 2- to 
6-hour equilibration period. Because body water occupies 73.2% of 
lean mass, fat-free mass can be computed based on total body water. 
Using a three-compartment model fat mass can be ­calculated. 
The method is significantly influenced by hydration status and 
­assumptions are confounded by water present in fat tissue. While 
the cost of chemicals and collection of samples is not high, analysis 
of ­stable isotopes can be expensive.
Assessing Physical Activity
Accurate quantification of physical activity in free-living subjects 
is challenging. Methods utilizing self-reported diaries and ques-
tionnaires tend to overestimate physical activity. Devices such as

1366
Toxic Agents
unit V
accelerometers and pedometers can be utilized to empirically esti-
mate activity. Accelerometers are versatile and cost-effective and 
can measure activity with little subject burden. Existing acceler-
ometers and wearable fitness trackers come in varying degrees of 
sophistication from simple pedometers that count steps to models 
that can assess motion in three dimensions. An important chal-
lenge in utilizing accelerometers is to convert the count data into 
energy expenditure, which is done using different regression mod-
els. A widely used and lay-friendly translatable “unit” of ambu-
latory physical activity is the number of steps in a unit of time 
(steps/day).
BIOLOGY OF OBESITY
Obesity Risk: Genes, Epigenetics,  
and Fetal Environment
Access to plentiful food has been unpredictable throughout most 
of human (and animal) developmental history, marked by periods 
of feast or famine. In evolutionary terms, fitness and survival of an 
individual were likely to be closely related to the ability to maxi-
mally seek, acquire, consume, and store energy (as fat) when food 
was available, and to select for mechanisms that reduce energy 
expenditure during times when food is scarce. Thus, selection 
favored so-called thrifty genes that orchestrate anabolic processes 
over energy-consuming ones and provide selective advantage to 
those who possessed them during periods of food deprivation (Neel, 
1962). However, the advent of agrarian lifestyle and recent indus-
trialization has meant that much of the developed and emerging 
world now has a drastically altered environment. Food is generally 
available for most people and our lifestyles require less physical 
activity and exertion. Hence, the genetic legacy of once beneficial 
thrifty genes placed in an environment of caloric abundance acts 
as a powerful engine for weight gain, obesity, and its associated 
metabolic dysfunction.
Recently, questions have been raised whether the selection of 
thrifty genes occurred because of a true advantage contributing to 
survival. Speakman has proposed that natural variation and random 
mutation (genetic drift) in genes controlling hypothalamic energy 
balance set-points occurred in human evolution as human beings 
developed fire and social behaviors, and were released from risk of 
predation. This theory, referred to as the “drifty gene” hypothesis, 
better explains why even in societies where obesity is high, not 
everyone becomes obese (Speakman, 2008). Obesity is a highly 
heritable trait and studies comparing monozygotic with dizygotic 
twins indicate that 40% to 75% of the interindividual difference in 
trait is accounted for by genetic variability. Several genes whose 
disruption causes severe monogenic forms of familial obesity have 
been described. Remarkably, most of these genes impair central 
control of food intake. However, the genetic basis of nonsyndromic 
(common) obesity has remained elusive.
Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have 
been highly effective in identifying common genetic variants that 
impact adiposity and other aspects of the metabolic syndrome 
(MetS). To date 50 such obesity-associated loci have been iden-
tified with high confidence (O’Rahilly and Farooqi, 2008). Of 
these the FTO (fat mass and obesity associated) is unequivocally 
associated with increased risk of obesity. Individuals who are 
homozygous for the high-risk (AA) allele weigh on average 3 kg 
more than individuals who do not carry any risk allele. New meta-
analysis of GWAS including about 250,000 subjects has revealed 
18 novel loci associated with BMI. Overall, the presently identi-
fied loci in combination still explain only a small proportion of 
obesity. Epigenetic regulation of gene expression is another area 
that might explain the underlying differences in susceptibility 
to obesity. Epigenetics is loosely defined as heritable changes in 
­modifications to the DNA that do not alter the DNA sequence. 
DNA ­methylation, ­covalent ­modification of histone tails that affect 
chromatin structure and accessibility, and regulation via noncoding 
RNAs are examples of epigenetic regulation. It is clear that epigen-
etic mechanisms are involved in basic cell functions including pro-
liferation, ­differentiation, and growth. Because DNA methylation 
and histone modifications can also be affected by environmental 
influences (in utero environment, exposure to xenobiotics, stress), 
it is plausible that interaction of certain risk alleles and epigenetic 
mechanisms are responsible for susceptibility to obesity.
The incidence of obesity continues to rise and prevalence even 
among infants is rapidly rising. As for many chronic diseases, it is 
now widely accepted that increased susceptibility to obesity can 
be programmed in utero and early postnatal life. This hypothesis 
referred to as the “developmental origins of health and disease” is 
derived from the findings by Professor David Barker and colleagues 
at the University of Southampton, who discovered an inverse rela-
tionship between birth weight and risk of mortality due to coronary 
heart disease (Barker et al., 1989). Over the last two decades, epi-
demiological studies have extended the initial associations between 
birth weight and later cardiovascular disease to include associations 
between early growth patterns and risk for hypertension, insulin 
resistance, type 2 diabetes, and obesity in later life. Experimentally 
manipulating birth weights in a variety of animal models (rats, mice, 
sheep, pigs) also recapitulates the developmental programming 
phenotype (McMillen and Robenson, 2005). Another important 
influence on risk of obesity in later life is maternal body composi-
tion (fat mass) at conception and gestational weight gain. Studies 
in women and experimental models clearly indicate that maternal 
diet and body composition during pregnancy influence aspects of 
metabolism and appetite regulation in the offspring (Shankar et al., 
2008). The mechanisms of such programming presumably involve 
epigenetic mechanisms.
TOXICITY RELATED TO EXCESS CALORIC 
INTAKE/OBESITY
Many of the adaptive, physiological responses to a positive energy 
balance produced as a result of overeating and inadequate physical 
activity result in toxicity over the long term. Short-term coordinated 
changes in metabolic pathways in white adipose tissue in response 
to overfeeding result in excess energy storage in the form of triglyc-
erides and increased size of preexisting adipocytes (hypertrophy), 
and this also leads to formation of new adipocytes through hyper-
plasia (Virtue and Vidal-Puig, 2010). However, management of 
excess ingested energy over the long term can be complex. Under 
such conditions, the efficiency of energy storage in adipose tissue is 
decreased and the body has to resort to several different options to 
store energy in addition to fat, such as in ectopic sites, which may 
in fact be detrimental. As plasma concentrations of nonesterified 
fatty acids (NEFA) increase as a result of ingestion of high-fat diets 
and as a result of hydrolysis of triglycerides in the fat, triglycerides 
begin to accumulate in nonadipose tissues such as the liver, skeletal 
muscle, and the pancreas as lipid droplets. The presence of excess 
NEFA and lipid metabolites in these tissues results in direct and 
indirect toxic actions leading to insulin resistance, inflammation, 
and tissue damage.
In addition, adipose tissue from obese individuals releases 
chemokines and cytokines, the so-called adipokines, which con-
tribute to a state of “metabolic inflammation” (Dulloo et al., 2010;

Toxic Effects of Calories
Chapter 28
1367
Gustafson, 2010). Fat is also an endocrine organ and the pattern of 
adipokines produced by adipose tissue in obesity differs substan-
tially from that seen in lean individuals (Cornier et al., 2008).
NEFA and the other factors released from adipose tissue con-
tribute to the development of the metabolic syndrome (MetS) in 
some overweight and obese individuals. This is a cluster of com-
ponents including insulin resistance, disruptions in lipid homeosta-
sis (dyslipidemia), and elevated blood pressure that substantially 
increase the risk for development of cardiovascular disease and type 
2 diabetes. MetS is also associated with other comorbidities includ-
ing nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and reproductive 
dysfunction and elevated serum insulin in response to insulin resis-
tance contributes to increased cancer risk associated with ­obesity. 
As a consequence, overall mortality is increased and life span is 
shortened with increasing caloric intake, body weight, and adipos-
ity, whereas caloric restriction (CR), at least in animal models, has 
been shown to substantially increase life span.
Adaptation of Liver and Adipose Tissue 
to Excess Calories
Triglycerides and glycogen are used by the body to store excess 
caloric energy. This is a homeostatic mechanism that maintains 
energy sources such as blood glucose levels between meals. Dietary 
fats are transported in blood from the gut to the liver and adipose 
tissue by lipoprotein particles called chylomicrons. In both tissues, 
local hydrolysis of triglycerides in the capillary bed by the enzyme 
lipoprotein lipase results in the release of free fatty acids that are 
subsequently taken up into hepatocytes and adipocytes via fatty 
acid transport proteins (FATPs) and the scavenger receptor CD36. 
As they enter the cell, free fatty acids that are toxic are immediately 
conjugated with acetyl CoA and are bound to intracellular fatty 
acid–binding proteins before reesterification with glycerol to form 
triglyceride lipid droplets in the cytosol. Such droplets are highly 
dynamic and are coated with PAT proteins (named after perilipin, 
adipophilin, and the tail-interacting protein). Adipophilin and per-
ilipin have important roles in droplet stabilization and regulation 
of triglyceride turnover. The hepatocyte cytosol contains many 
small droplets that vary in size depending on the length of time 
after a meal, dietary fat to carbohydrate ratio, type of dietary fat, 
and overall caloric intake relative to metabolic requirements. The 
small hepatic lipid droplets function as a temporary energy storage 
site, whereas in adipocytes the small lipid droplets fuse to form a 
single large storage droplet and can serve as a longer-term storage 
site. In the hours after a meal, triglycerides from the hepatic drop-
lets are incorporated into the lipoprotein VLDL, which is secreted 
into the plasma and which transports hepatic triglycerides to the 
adipose tissue for storage. Removal of triglycerides from VLDL 
by lipoprotein lipase in adipose and other peripheral tissues results 
in generation of the more dense lipoprotein LDL, which is subse-
quently recycled by the liver as a result of endocytosis on binding 
to the LDL receptor (Olson, 1998).
Obesity is often associated with consumption of high-fat diets. 
In addition to being more energy dense, recent studies have sug-
gested that, at least in part, the obesogenic effects of these diets 
stem from changes in composition of the gut microbiota (Shen 
et al., 2014). Transplantation of gut microbiota from donor mice 
made obese by high fat feeding into germ-free mice has been shown 
to increase adiposity in these mice relative to mice receiving gut 
microbes from lean mice. Decreases in populations of Bacteroidetes 
and increases in populations of Firmicutes in the gut of obese ani-
mals change the spectrum of microbial fermentation products, 
which may in turn change energy harvest and expenditure, alter 
satiety signals such as the gut peptides YY or ghrelin, and impact 
insulin action through changes in synthesis of the gut peptide, glu-
cagon-like peptide (GLP-1). In addition, increased bacterial synthe-
sis of short-chain fatty acids (SCFA) may increase obesity as they 
are substrates for lipid synthesis.
However, obesity can also develop from excessive caloric 
intake of any food energy source, including carbohydrates and 
proteins. Although overall consumption of dietary fat has declined 
in the United States over the past two decades, the proportion 
of obesity has increased to epidemic levels. In part, this is due 
to excessive intake of simple carbohydrates that have increased 
as dietary fat consumption has decreased. Dietary carbohydrates 
are converted to monosaccharides, mainly glucose and fructose, 
which are further metabolized in the liver and peripheral tissues. 
Excess glucose can be stored in the liver in the form of the glucose 
polymer glycogen that accumulates as cytosolic granules and can 
make up as much as 7% of liver weight. However, the majority of 
excess hepatic glucose is metabolized via glycolysis and the citric 
acid cycle to acetyl CoA and is shunted into de novo fatty acid and 
triglyceride synthesis.
Recent DNA microarray analysis of gene expression in 
human adipose tissue biopsies suggests that coordinated upregu-
lation of lipogenesis occurs in fat rapidly and directly as a result 
of increased caloric intake independent of changes in body weight 
(Franck et al., 2011). Evidence for increases in adipose tissue glu-
cose transport, and fatty acid and triglyceride biosynthesis has also 
been obtained from microarray analysis of fat from rats overfed 
a mixture of simple carbohydrates and fat (Shankar et al., 2010). 
The increase in triglyceride synthesis in both the liver and fat after 
consumption of excess calories appears to be driven by activation 
of two important diet-sensitive transcription factors: sterol regu-
latory element–binding protein 1c (SREBP-1c) and carbohydrate 
response element–binding protein (ChREBP) (Postic and Girard, 
2008), and this process in fat ultimately drives adipose tissue hyper-
trophy. In addition to fat cells getting larger, excess calories also 
trigger ­proliferation and differentiation of preadipocytes in adipose 
tissue depots into new adipocytes, a process known as hyperplasia. 
However, the degree to which hyperplasia contributes to the ability 
of fat stores to expand in response to the need to store excess energy 
relative to hypertrophy remains unclear.
What is clear is that in some individuals, there is a limit to 
which adipocytes can expand safely and that when this limit is 
reached, toxicity results. This limit appears to depend on which 
fat depot the adipocytes are in. Subcutaneous adipocytes can attain 
a greater size than adipocytes in visceral fat and this may explain 
why metabolic dysfunction and diseases such as type 2 diabetes 
are linked to visceral adiposity. Hypertrophic adipocytes develop 
ultrastructural abnormalities including calcium accumulation and 
cholesterol crystals and show evidence of oxidative and endo-
plasmic reticulum (ER) stress ultimately leading to cell death and 
release of intracellular components that can serve as metabolic 
damage–­associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) (Giordano et al., 
2013; Khan and Wang, 2014). Recent data from high fat-induced 
obese mice suggest that DAMP release from dying adipocytes 
results in activation of the Nod-like receptor NLRP3 inflamma-
some in remaining hypertrophic adipocytes. This amplifies obese 
adipocyte cell death by pyroptosis, a form of proinflammatory 
programmed cell death mediated via NLRP3-dependent caspase 1, 
and also results in a sterile inflammatory response characterized by 
­activation of interleukin 1β (Giordano et al., 2013). Macrophage 
infiltration of metabolically stressed adipose tissue to remove cell 
debris associated with adipocyte death results in further inflam-
mation and the formation of characteristic crown-like structures.

1368
Toxic Agents
unit V
When fat mass increases excessively, adipose tissue also 
undergoes extensive structural remodeling. An extracellular matrix 
(ECM) with high concentrations of collagen fibrils and fibronectin 
appears to be essential for maintenance of the structural integrity 
of adipocytes and for preadipocyte differentiation (Divoux and 
Clement, 2011). However, at the point when adipocytes reach a 
certain size limit within a particular fat pad, hypoxia appears to 
develop possibly as a result of restricted blood flow. This triggers 
expression of the transcription factor hypoxia-inducible factor 1α 
(HIF-1α). Evidence from HIF-1α transgenic and knockout mice 
suggests that HIF-1α regulates inappropriate ECM remodeling and 
development of fibrosis in adipose tissue in response to hypoxia 
and obesity (Halberg et al., 2009). Fibrosis has been reported to 
be increased in subcutaneous adipose tissue from obese subjects 
compared with lean subjects both by staining of collagen fibrils and 
by analysis of col6a3 gene expression. The percentage of fibrosis 
in white adipose tissue has further been shown to correlate with 
inflammation in morbidly obese subjects (Divoux and Clement, 
2011). Further evidence linking adipose tissue ECM with limita-
tions in the ability of fat pads to expand to store excess caloric 
energy and for limited adipocyte hypertrophy to precede the devel-
opment of obesity-linked pathologies such as inflammation and 
MetS comes from studies with mice in which genes involved in 
ECM formation have been knocked out. The protein SPARC is 
required for appropriate collagen synthesis during ECM remod-
eling. Both SPARC–/– mice and obesity-prone ob/ob mice where 
the collagen VI gene has been deleted display increased adipocyte 
and fat pad size, loose ECM structure, and reduced inflammation 
and metabolic disturbances after high-fat feeding. It is thought that 
complex interactions between enlarging adipocytes and a fibrotic 
ECM trigger activation of MAP kinase pathways such as c-Jun 
N-terminal kinase (JNK) resulting in development of adipocyte 
insulin resistance (Divoux and Clement, 2011) (see Fig. 28-1).
Ectopic Fat Deposition
In general, there is a positive correlation between increased BMI and 
inappropriate accumulation of lipids in tissues other than fat. The 
major sites for this ectopic fat deposition are the liver and ­skeletal 
muscle. However, lipid accumulation in other tissues such as small 
intestine, pancreas, and uterus has also been reported to be associated 
with chronic consumption of high-fat diets and ­development of obe-
sity. Correlation between central (visceral) adiposity, waist circum-
ference, and ectopic fat deposition is better than for BMI and is also 
highly correlated with progressive insulin resistance. However, the 
relationship between adiposity, ectopic fat accumulation in the liver 
and muscle, and insulin resistance is highly ­complex and is strongly 
affected by diet composition, ­exercise, and race (Lara-Castro and 
Garvey, 2008).
In the liver, intrahepatocellular lipid accumulation, also known 
as fatty liver, or steatosis, is defined as an increase in hepatic lipid 
content above 5% by weight and is characterized in paraffin-stained 
sections by the appearance of multiple round empty vacuoles in hepa-
tocytes displacing the nucleus to the periphery of the cell. To confirm 
that steatosis is actually present, additional staining of frozen sections 
for triglycerides using stains such as Oil Red O is required. Abnormal 
Lean fat
Excess calories
Triglyceride synthesis,
hypertrophy hyperplasia,
hypoxia, matrix production,
macrophage accumulation, and
activation
Thiazolidinediones
(PPARγ activation)
Excess calories
Lean fat
SPARC–/–, HIF-1α–/–, Coll 6–/– Mice
Obese fat
Pyroptosis
Metabolic syndrome
NEFA
Chemokines (MIP-1)
Cytokines (TNF-α, IL-6)
Inﬂammasome activation
(IL-1β)
Adipokines
(increased leptin,
resistin, decreased
adiponectin)
Increased weight gain
Normal metabolism
Obese fat
Size limited adipocyte
surrounded by ﬁbrous matrix
Activated macrophage
Enlarged adipocyte surrounded
by disorganized matrix
Triglyceride synthesis,
hypertrophy hyperplasia,
blockage of hypoxia, or
matrix production
Figure 28-1.   Effects of excess calories (energy) on fat morphology under conditions leading to metabolic syndrome (left) or following stimulation of ­adipocyte 
differentiation and hyperplasia by thiazolidinedione treatment/in knockout mice incapable of normal responses to hypoxia (HIF-1α–/–)/in knockout mice 
­incapable of normal extracellular matrix production (SPARC–/–, Coll 6–/–) (right).

Toxic Effects of Calories
Chapter 28
1369
lipid accumulation in the liver in the absence of heavy alcohol usage 
is referred to as nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and is 
associated with a wide spectrum of hepatic dysfunction. The inci-
dence of NAFLD in the general population including children has 
increased in line with increasing incidence of obesity and is observed 
in more than 50% of adult obese patients (Browning et al., 2004). 
Simple steatosis is generally reversible with weight loss and/or life-
style modification (diet and exercise). However, a small proportion 
of patients progress to more severe liver pathologies (see the section 
“Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis” later in this chapter). Hepatic lipid 
accumulation can occur as a result of one or more of the following: 
(1) increased fatty acid supply to the liver and increased fatty acid 
transporter expression; (2) increased de novo fatty acid and triglyc-
eride synthesis; (3) decreased fatty acid oxidation; and (4) decreased 
synthesis and/or secretion of VLDL. Which of these processes pre-
dominates depends on the degree of obesity, total caloric intake, 
and diet composition. As the capacity of adipose tissue to expand is 
compromised with increasing BMI and insulin resistance develops 
in adipocytes, there is an increase in plasma nonesterified free fatty 
acids (NEFA) as a result of increased hydrolysis of triglycerides in fat 
by two enzymes—hormone-sensitive lipase and adipose triglyceride 
lipase. Increased hepatic exposure to NEFA derived from adipose 
tissue or from dietary fats has been reported to increase fatty acid 
transporter expression in hepatocytes (Baumgardner et al., 2008a; 
Marecki et al., 2011). In contrast, excess calories in the form of 
simple carbohydrates results in increased de novo hepatic fatty acid 
synthesis (Shankar et al., 2010). The type of dietary fat can also influ-
ence the development of steatosis. For example, it has been shown 
that saturated and polyunsaturated fatty acids can interfere with 
VLDL secretion relative to monounsaturated fatty acids via differ-
ent mechanisms; while polyunsaturated fatty acids provoke oxidative 
stress and degradation of ApoB100 in hepatocytes, saturated fatty 
acids appear to block VLDL secretion via stimulation of an unfolded 
protein response and ER stress (Pan et al., 2004; Caviglia et al., 
2011). In addition to increased NEFA, adipose tissue inflammation 
also appears to significantly contribute to development of NAFLD. 
Positive correlations have been reported between expression of mac-
rophage markers in adipose tissue and liver fat content independent 
of total fat mass (Lara-Castro and Garvey, 2008).
Moreover, disrupted adipokine secretion also plays a role. The 
adipokine adiponectin acts on the liver to inhibit fatty acid synthesis 
and increase fatty acid degradation through activation of the AMP 
kinase cascade, downstream inhibition of SREBP-1c, and activa-
tion of the transcription factor peroxisome proliferator–activated 
receptor α (PPARα). Reduced serum concentrations of adipokine 
adiponectin that accompany development of obesity will result in 
increased hepatic fatty acid synthesis and reduced fatty acid deg-
radation and thus contribute to development of steatosis (Shankar 
et al., 2010).
The other major site of ectopic fat deposition in obesity is skel-
etal muscle in the form of intramyocellular lipid (IMCL). Skeletal 
muscle contains an intracellular pool of stored triglyceride that 
exchanges with circulating free fatty acids. Although older meth-
ods such as biochemical extraction and computer tomography scans 
could quantitate muscle tissue triglycerides, more recent approaches 
such as Oil Red O staining of frozen sections and proton NMR 
spectroscopy are capable of quantifying IMCL distinct from extra-
myocellular fat in muscle tissue. Using these methods, IMCL has 
been shown to positively correlate with visceral adiposity. Various 
mechanisms have been proposed to underlie accumulation of IMCL 
in obesity. In adults it has been suggested that changes in intracel-
lular distribution of the fatty acid transporter CD36 from soluble 
to membrane-associated pools are responsible for increased import 
of NEFA and triglyceride accumulation (Nickerson et al., 2007). 
In contrast, data from a pediatric model of obesity demonstrated 
increased CD36 mRNA and protein expression in skeletal muscle 
associated with appearance of IMCL (Marecki et al., 2011).
Metabolic Syndrome
The development of central obesity as a result of overnutrition and 
a sedentary lifestyle leads to a clustering of metabolic and physi-
ological components in some individuals that is associated with 
a doubling of cardiovascular disease risk and a fivefold increase 
in incidence of type 2 diabetes originally described as “syndrome 
X” by Reaven (1988) or “insulin resistance syndrome” and more 
recently as metabolic syndrome (MetS) (Cornier et al., 2008). 
Although the definition of MetS differs by health agency, all tend 
to agree that the core components include central obesity (waist 
circumference), insulin resistance (increased fasting glucose above 
100 mg/dL and increased fasting insulin, as a result of impaired 
glucose uptake into skeletal muscle/fat and increased glucose out-
put by the liver, resulting from end-organ insensitivity to insulin), 
dyslipidemia (decreased serum HDL below 40 mg/dL in men and 
50 mg/dL in women, and increased serum triglycerides above 150 
mg/dL), and hypertension (blood pressure higher than 130/85). The 
worldwide incidence of MetS is increasing rapidly with the obe-
sity epidemic and is influenced by sex, age, and ethnicity. In the 
United States, prevalence of MetS is around 30% with higher rates 
in Mexican Americans than in white non-Hispanics and African 
Americans and increases with age into the sixth decade. Although 
there are no established criteria for MetS in children and adoles-
cents and prevalence values depend on age, population studied, 
and definition, among adolescents, overall incidence has been esti-
mated to be 4.2% rising to 28.7% in those classified as obese (Cook 
et al., 2008).
Although there does not appear to be a common unifying 
pathophysiological cause for all components of MetS, central obe-
sity and insulin resistance appear to be the major drivers of this 
condition. The majority of obese individuals are insulin resistant 
but the correlation between obesity and insulin resistance is better 
for abdominal obesity/waist circumference than it is for overall BMI 
and better for whites than for African Americans. Moreover, weight 
loss following the feeding of low-calorie diets or following bariatric 
surgery rapidly leads to marked improvements in insulin sensitivity. 
However, the relationship between obesity and whole-body insulin 
resistance is not direct but appears to be mediated through increased 
circulating fatty acids and ectopic fat deposition particularly in 
intramyocellular lipid (IMCL) in skeletal muscle (Fig. 28-2). 
Consumption of a very low calorie diet in obese subjects for as little 
as 5 days has been shown to produce marked decreases in IMCL 
and enhanced insulin sensitivity without significant changes in 
body fat mass (Lara-Castro et al., 2008). It has been suggested that 
reductions in glucose import into skeletal muscle with IMCL result 
from inhibition of translocation of the glucose transporter GLUT-4 
from cytosolic- to membrane-associated compartments through the 
action of IMCL metabolites such as diacylglycerol, long-chain fatty 
acid CoAs, ceramides, and oxidized lipids (Pan et al., 1997). Insulin 
resistance in muscle is accompanied by evidence of impaired mito-
chondrial function. However, it is unclear if this is a consequence of 
or contributor to IMCL (Lara-Castro and Garvey, 2008). Reduced 
glucose transport also occurs in insulin-resistant adipose tissue 
itself, and the negative effects of obesity are exacerbated because 
reduced insulin signaling in adipocytes also enhances expression 
of hormone-sensitive and adipose triglyceride lipases to further 
increase the release of NEFA (Cornier et al., 2008).

1370
Toxic Agents
unit V
The relationship between liver steatosis and hepatic insulin 
resistance is less clear and the question of whether NAFLD is a 
cause or a consequence of hepatic insulin resistance remains unre-
solved (Cohen et al., 2011). Insulin resistance in the liver leads to 
excess glucose production as a result of a reduced ability of insu-
lin to suppress the gluconeogenic enzyme phosphoenolpyruvate 
carboxykinase (PEPCK). This contributes to systemic hypergly-
cemia and increased pancreatic insulin production. Insulin resis-
tance and steatosis are strongly correlated and interventions that 
lead to lower plasma insulin levels also decrease liver triglyceride 
content. Moreover, patients producing hepatic insulin as a result 
of metastatic insulin-secreting tumors develop steatosis in the sur-
rounding hepatocytes. However, the suggestion that steatosis causes 
hepatic insulin resistance is contradicted by data from genetically 
manipulated mouse models where reduced fatty acid mobilization, 
reduced fatty acid oxidation, and defective choline synthesis are all 
associated with development of steatosis, but where hepatic insulin 
sensitivity is maintained (Cohen et al., 2011).
The dyslipidemia associated with MetS is thought to be a direct 
consequence of increased VLDL secretion by the liver. Increased 
serum triglycerides are generally associated with a change in HDL 
size and lipid composition, and reduction of serum HDL concentra-
tion as a result of increased clearance via the kidney. Several different 
mechanisms have been proposed to explain the rise in blood pressure 
associated with MetS. Insulin acts both directly as a vasodilator and 
secondarily to increase sodium resorption from the kidney. Evidence 
suggests that under conditions of insulin resistance, the vasodilatory 
effects of insulin are lost while the renal effect on sodium resorp-
tion is maintained. In addition, fatty acids can act directly to medi-
ate vasoconstriction and both fatty acids and insulin can increase 
the activity of the sympathetic nervous system. Adipokines, such as 
leptin and resistin, have also been implicated in the pathogenesis of 
obesity-associated hypertension (Cornier et al., 2008).
Therapeutic Options for Managing 
Metabolic Syndrome
Because it is unclear that there is a unifying mechanism underly-
ing the constellation of metabolic and physiological abnormalities 
that make up MetS, management can be problematic. Lifestyle 
modifications in the obese, including diets producing stable weight 
loss and long-term increased physical activity or bariatric surgery 
(discussed in the section “Surgical Interventions” later in this 
­chapter), are of benefit in treating all the components of MetS, but 
suffer from limited compliance and significant risk of complica-
tions in the case of surgery. Therefore, routine clinical manage-
ment of MetS has focused on pharmaceutical therapies for insulin 
­resistance/hyperglycemia, dyslipidemia, and hypertension to reduce 
the risks of cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes.
Several classes of drugs are used to target insulin resistance. 
Metformin acts on the liver to reduce hepatic glucose production 
as a result of activation of the AMP kinase pathway (Boyle et al., 
2010). Moreover, metformin is relatively nontoxic and has been 
shown to reduce progression from hyperglycemia to type 2 dia-
betes and the incidence of cardiovascular disease (Knowler et al., 
2002; Ratner et al., 2005). Thiazolidinediones such as pioglitazone 
and rosiglitazone also improve insulin sensitivity and slow pro-
gression of diabetes in about 50% of patients as a result of activa-
tion of the transcription factor PPARγ in extrahepatic tissues and 
increasing circulating levels of adiponectin (Gerstein et al., 2006; 
Cho and Momose, 2008). However, increased insulin ­sensitivity 
is associated with an expansion of adipose tissue and significantly 
increased body weight because PPARγ regulates adipocyte dif-
ferentiation. Moreover, a recently discovered adverse effect of 
thiazolidinediones is increased bone loss and an increased risk of 
osteoporosis; PPARγ activation in bone inhibits osteoblastogenesis 
and ­stimulates accumulation of fat cells in bone marrow (Lecka-
Czernik, 2010). Additional concerns have been raised regarding 
potential for increased cardiovascular problems in patients taking 
rosiglitazone (Palee et al., 2011).
Dyslipidemia associated with MetS is a major modifiable risk 
factor for cardiovascular disease. Increased triglycerides and low 
HDL levels are often accompanied by increased total and LDL 
cholesterol and LDL is a primary target for cholesterol-lowering 
therapy. Standard first-line therapy is statin inhibitors of 3-hydroxy-
3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA), the rate-limiting step 
in cholesterol biosynthesis, such as atorvastatin (Lipitor®). These 
compounds improve overall lipid profiles by decreasing LDL con-
centrations 20% to 40%, increasing HDL 5% to 10%, and decreas-
ing triglycerides 7% to 30% (McFarlane et al., 2002). Although 
NEFA
Obese fat
Liver
Glucose
Adipokines
Glucose
Size limited adipocyte surrounded by ﬁbrous matrix
Activated macrophage
Lipid droplet
Pancreas
Insulin
Insulin
Skeletal muscle
NEFA
NEFA
Cytokines
Cytokines
Blood vessels
Hypertension
Cytokines
VLDL
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
C-reactive protein
Sympathetic
tone
↓ HDL
Figure 28-2.   Pathogenesis of metabolic syndrome.

Toxic Effects of Calories
Chapter 28
1371
generally well tolerated, atorvastatin results in muscle or joint pain 
in 5% of patients. Muscle pain can be an indication of rhabdomy-
olysis (muscle breakdown). In addition, liver injury as indicated 
by elevated serum values of liver enzymes such as alanine amino-
transferase (ALT) has been reported in some users (Bakker-Arkema 
et al., 1996). Statins are often used in combination with ezetimibe or 
niacin to further reduce LDL and triglycerides and raise HDL lev-
els. In addition to statins, high doses of 2 to 4 g of fish oil omega-3 
fatty acids such as eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexae-
noic acid (DHA) have been shown to reduce serum triglycerides by 
20% to 40% (Cornier et al., 2008).
Control of hypertension is also the key to prevention of cardio-
vascular events. Many antihypertensive drugs are available and are 
taken chronically. The most commonly prescribed are adrenergic 
β-blockers, which inhibit sympathetic inputs to reduce cardiovas-
cular output and slow heart rate. Despite substantial decreases in 
systolic and diastolic blood pressure, long-term prospective stud-
ies suggest that treated hypertensive men continue to have a much 
greater risk of stroke and coronary heart disease than normotensive 
men of the same age in the second decade of treatment (Deshmukh 
et al., 2008). This may be due to metabolic side effects, particularly 
increased serum triglycerides and lowering of HDL. In addition, 
diuretics are often given in combination with β-blockers. This can 
result in reductions of serum potassium and increased occurrence of 
gout in patients with marginal uric acid concentrations. Other front-
line antihypertensive drugs are the angiotensin-converting enzyme 
(ACE) inhibitors. ACE inhibitors work on the renin–angiotensin 
system by preventing the conversion of angiotensin I to angiotensin 
II and reducing production of the hormone aldosterone. Aldosterone 
acts to reduce sodium and water excretion and is a direct vasocon-
strictor. ACE inhibitors reduce arteriolar resistance, increase venous 
capacity, and increase cardiac output while increasing sodium excre-
tion. ACE inhibitors in general have favorable effects on lipid profile.
Data linking obesity development and MetS with dysbiosis 
of the gut microbiota have resulted in increasing interest in the 
use of probiotics as a potential therapeutic option. Recent stud-
ies of probiotic supplementation with a highly proliferative strain 
of Bifidobacterium animalis spp. lactis in mice fed high-fat diets 
resulted in reduced visceral fat accumulation and improved glucose 
tolerance associated with increased levels of the most abundant 
bacterial short-chain fatty acids (SCFA), acetate, and an increase 
in levels of glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) in both the gut and 
the plasma. Acetate has been implicated in the protective effects 
of probiotics. It has been shown to bind to a G protein–coupled 
receptor GPR43 to inhibit fat accumulation in adipocytes, to poten-
tiate pancreatic β-cell function, and to reduce appetite via a central 
hypothalamic mechanism (Aoki et al., 2017).
Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis
As described above, ectopic fat deposition in the liver is strongly 
correlated with obesity and insulin resistance. Although NAFLD is 
not considered a core symptom of MetS, it is often a comorbidity. 
Fatty liver is very common being found in 30% of autopsies and 
in more than 80% of the obese. However, for reasons that remain 
unclear, in the majority of cases, steatosis is reversible and rela-
tively asymptomatic. The disease progression of NAFLD begins 
with simple steatosis which progresses to nonalcoholic steatohepa-
titis (NASH), which is characterized by cell death, inflammation, 
and fibrosis, then to cirrhosis in which liver function is significantly 
impaired, and ultimately to hepatocellular carcinoma (Cohen et al., 
2011) (Fig. 28-3). Only about 30% of individuals with NAFLD 
show evidence of progression of pathology to NASH, and of these 
only 20% to 30% progress further to cirrhosis within 10 years. Of 
those with NASH-induced cirrhosis, 4% to 27% ultimately develop 
liver cancer. NASH was first described by Ludwig et al. (1980) in 
a group of obese adults without a history of alcohol abuse and has 
increased in prevalence with the obesity epidemic to about 2% to 
3% of the U.S. population. It is also increasingly observed in the 
pediatric population including cases in children as young as 2 years 
of age (Loomba et al., 2009). Although steatosis can be diagnosed 
noninvasively using ultrasound or imaging, improved methods for 
early detection of NASH are urgently required. Although elevated 
serum ALT values increase the likelihood of NASH, up to 59% of 
Obese fat
Gut microbiota
dysbiosis, leakage
inflammation  
Excess calories/high-fat diet
ROS
ER stress
Microvesicle release
Inflammasome activation
Stellate cell activation
Pancreas
Insulin
resistance
Insulin
NEFA
Normal liver
Fatty liver
NASH
Cirrhosis
Liver
cancer
Adipokines
Endotoxin
Toll-like receptor
activation
Cytokines
Size limited adipocyte surrounded by fibrous matrix
Activated macrophage
Lipid droplet
Collagen fiber
Figure 28-3.   Progression of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). ER stress, endoplasmic reticulum stress; ROS, reactive oxygen species.

1372
Toxic Agents
unit V
NASH patients had normal ALT values and at present, only liver 
biopsy can provide accurate diagnosis.
Our understanding of the molecular mechanisms whereby 
NAFLD pathology progresses is hampered by lack of an animal 
model that recapitulates all aspects of the human disease (Hebbard 
and George, 2011). Until recently, a widely held “two-hit” hypoth-
esis held that progression of NAFLD to NASH requires initial 
development of steatosis followed by several possible second hits. 
These include oxidative stress resulting from lipid peroxidation and 
mitochondrial dysfunction and ER stress triggered by protein mis-
folding resulting from direct lipotoxicity of saturated fatty acids. 
In addition, bacterial overgrowth and increased gut permeability 
resulting from chronic consumption of high-fat diets can increase 
plasma endotoxin levels resulting in Kupffer cell activation and 
inflammation. An initiating role for steatosis in NASH progression 
is supported by human studies of NAFLD heritability. NAFLD, 
NASH, and cirrhosis cluster in families and one genetic variant 
consistently associated with appearance of NAFLD is a missense 
mutation in the PNPLA3 (adiponutrin) gene. PNPLA3 has triglyc-
eride hydrolase activity that is lost on mutation, consistent with the 
accumulation of liver fat. More recent GWA association analysis of 
SNPs from subjects with biopsy-proven NAFLD has yielded addi-
tional genetic variants associated with dysregulated lipid homeosta-
sis. These include lysophospholipase-like 1 (LYPLAL1), which like 
PNPLA3 is linked to triglyceride breakdown, and glucokinase regu-
lator (GCKR), which regulates glucose storage and provides sub-
strates for de novo lipogenesis (Speliotes et al., 2011). Treatment 
with insulin sensitizers, bariatric surgery, and lifestyle modification 
(diet and exercise) resulting in weight loss and reduction of hepatic 
fat content improve NASH liver pathology (Cohen et al., 2011).
More recently the two-hit hypothesis has been modified into 
a multiple interrelated hit theory as evidence has accumulated that 
factors derived from obese adipose tissue such as adipokines and 
the proinflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis factor (TNF-α), acti-
vation of the endogenous immune system through Toll-like recep-
tors, ER stress, and signals from the gut microbiota can all increase 
hepatic fat accumulation (Tilg and Moschen, 2010; Hebbard 
and George, 2011). The progression of steatosis to necroinflam-
matory injury and fibrosis in NASH livers appears to depend on 
­oxidative stress mediated by reactive oxygen species generated by 
­cytochrome P450 CYP2E1 and NADPH-oxidase enzymes (Liang 
et al., 2016; Abdelmegeed et al., 2017). Treatment with dietary anti-
oxidants such as the glutathione precursor N-acetylcysteine and vita-
min E has recently been shown to prevent increases in serum ALT, 
­suppress hepatic production of TNF, and improve NASH pathol-
ogy (Baumgardner et al., 2008a, 2008b; Sanyal et al., 2010). Lipid 
peroxidation resulting from ROS action on accumulated fats has 
also been linked to NASH progression. Highly reactive short-chain 
­aldehydes such as malondialdehyde and 4-hydroxynonenal (4HNE), 
which are the end products of lipid peroxidation, accumulate in 
steatotic livers and can react with cellular proteins to form adducts, 
especially in the mitochondria. These adducted proteins may have 
impaired function and may also be recognized as foreign haptens by 
the immune system triggering an autoimmune response involving 
the formation of autoantibodies. Consistent with this hypothesis, 
studies of high fat feeding using genetically manipulated mice made 
steatotic by loss of the peroxisome proliferator–activated receptor 
α (PPARα) and unable to degrade 4HNE as a result of deletion 
of glutathione-S-transferase A4-4 have shown greater progression 
of liver pathology relative to wild-type mice or mice lacking each 
gene separately (Ronis et al., 2017). In addition, prior immuniza-
tion with 4HNE-adducted albumin has been shown to exacerbate 
liver injury in a mouse model of NASH utilizing a methionine- and 
choline-deficient diet (Sutti et al., 2016). Damage to hepatocytes in 
steatotic livers has also recently been linked to release of extracellu-
lar microvesicles/exosomes containing micro RNAs, and to release 
of damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs), which appear 
to play a role in development of inflammation including inflam-
masome activation in other parenchymal cells and resident macro-
phages (Wan et al., 2016; Cannito et al., 2017).
Development of fibrosis subsequent to NASH appears to 
involve activation of hepatic stellate cells by the cytokine transform-
ing growth factor β (TGF-β) and factors associated with disruption 
of lipid homeostasis including the sphingosine metabolite, sphin-
gosine 1-phosphate (Basaranoglu et al., 2013; Mercer et al., 2017). 
Stellate cell activation is associated with inappropriate secretion of 
matrix components, particularly collagen, as a result of regenera-
tive wound-healing responses to chronic liver injury. Proliferative 
regenerative responses also ultimately promote development of 
hepatocellular carcinomas in NASH patients (Dooley et al., 2009; 
Matsuzaki, 2009; Nejak-Gowen and Monga, 2011).
Alteration in Drug Pharmacokinetics  
and Metabolism in Obesity and NAFLD
Obesity and fatty liver disease can have significant effects on drug 
pharmacokinetics, metabolism, and therapeutic efficacy with the 
potential to result in adverse drug reactions (Hanley et al., 2010; 
Merrell and Cherrington, 2011).
The most significant change in drug pharmacokinetics asso-
ciated with obesity is likely to be in volume of distribution (Vd), 
and this determines loading dose selection. Vd estimates the 
extent to which a drug distributes into extravascular tissues and 
this in turn will depend on the drug’s physiochemical proper-
ties, binding to plasma proteins, and tissue blood flow (see Chap. 
7, “Toxicokinetics”). The Vd of lipid-soluble drugs that partition 
readily into adipose tissue is likely to be significantly increased in 
obesity because obese individuals have a larger fat compartment 
into which the drug can distribute. In contrast, Vd for hydrophilic 
drugs that do not readily partition into fat may be relatively unaf-
fected (Hanley et al., 2010). For example, while the Vd for the 
highly lipophilic chemotherapeutic drug docetaxel is increased by 
more than 400 L in the obese, the Vd for the water-soluble antibiotic 
daptomycin is increased by only 2 to 4 L. There are little data to 
suggest that obesity significantly alters drug binding to albumin or 
other plasma proteins. However, reductions in tissue blood flow and 
altered ­cardiovascular function have been observed in obesity and 
may further alter Vd. Increases in Vd in obesity may significantly 
alter drug ­efficacy. For example, the disposition of lipid-soluble oral 
contraceptives such as ethinyl estradiol has been shown to be altered 
in obesity and increased weight may be associated with increased 
risk of failure of contraception. In such circumstances drug loading 
dose should be adjusted by total body weight or BMI.
The major influence determining the steady-state plasma con-
centration of a drug in a maintenance dose regimen is clearance 
(CL). This in turn depends on rate of metabolism and expression 
of drug transporters. Obesity and NAFLD appear to have variable 
effects on hepatic phase I and II drug metabolism and on transport-
ers. However, significant species differences in regulation of these 
enzymes and transporters and lack of appropriate animal models 
for NAFLD/NASH make extrapolation of much of the experimen-
tal data to the clinic problematic (Merrell and Cherrington, 2011). 
Obesity and NAFLD have been shown to increase expression of 
the cytochrome P450 enzyme CYP2E1 in both animal models and 
human clinical studies. CYP2E1 is involved in the metabolism 
of ethanol, solvents, and volatile anesthetics such as halothane

Toxic Effects of Calories
Chapter 28
1373
and enflurane. In contrast, hepatic expression of CYP1A2 that 
metabolizes approximately 15% of therapeutic drugs including 
anticoagulants, antidepressants, antihypertensive drugs, and cyclo-
oxygenase-2 inhibitors appears to be consistently suppressed. The 
effects of NAFLD/NASH on expression of other cytochrome P450 
enzymes are inconsistent. However, increases have been observed 
in expression of other phase I enzymes including NAD(P)H qui-
none oxidoreductase, the mitochondrial form of epoxide hydrolase, 
and several aldehyde dehydrogenases in animal models of NAFLD. 
Less is known about the effects of NAFLD/NASH on drug con-
jugation and transport. Decreased expression of sulfotransferases 
has been reported in NASH patients, but effects on drug gluc-
uronidation are inconsistent and glutathione conjugation appears 
mixed despite observations of GSH depletion in human NAFLD 
patients. Recent studies in experimental rat models of NAFLD sug-
gest decreased expression of hepatic uptake transporters such as 
the sodium/taurocholate co-transporting polypeptide (NTCP) and 
the organic anion transporting polypeptides (OATPs) and increased 
expression of efflux transporters, such as the multidrug resistance–
associated proteins Mrp2, Mrp3, and Mrp4 (Lickteig et al., 2007; 
Fischer et al., 2009). This was accompanied by a proportional shift 
in elimination of acetaminophen metabolites from bile to urine 
(Lickteig et al., 2007).
Drug elimination as measured by half-life is affected by both 
Vd and CL and thus may also be altered in obesity. Half-life is cal-
culated using the following formula: t1/2 = (ln 2 × Vd)/CL, and 
thus changes in both Vd and CL can influence drug half-life. For 
example, the t1/2 of the antianxiety drug diazepam is markedly 
increased in obese subjects as a result of increased Vd even though 
CL is unchanged.
Endocrine Dysfunction in Obesity, 
Metabolic Syndrome, and NAFLD
A wide spectrum of endocrine disruption is associated with obesity 
and MetS. Obesity in pregnancy can result in many complications 
including gestational diabetes, pregnancy-associated hyperten-
sion, preeclampsia, and fetal abnormalities including neural tube 
defects, spina bifida, heart defects, and cleft palate (Kulie et al., 
2011). In addition, delays in milk production and decreased dura-
tion of breast-feeding have been associated with obesity in women 
as a result of hormonal and metabolic effects on mammary gland 
development during pregnancy.
As discussed above, hyperglycemia resulting from systemic 
insulin resistance provokes a compensatory increase in insulin 
secretion from the pancreas in obese individuals. Hyperinsulinemia 
then appears to have secondary effects on other endocrine systems. 
For example, growth hormone (GH) secretion is dramatically sup-
pressed by obesity in both adults and children, but can be reversed by 
weight loss (Kreitschmann-Andermahr et al., 2010). Mechanisms 
appear to involve direct feedback effects of insulin on the pitu-
itary and a reduction in secretion of the endogenous GH-releasing 
peptide ghrelin that is produced by the stomach and hypothalamic 
centers. In addition, although reductions in GH lead to a decrease 
in hepatic synthesis and serum concentrations of total insulin-like 
growth factor 1 (IGF-1) in the obese, paradoxically obesity results 
in a suppression of IGF-binding proteins and thus an increase in free 
IGF-1. Free IGF-1 can also exert a negative feedback on GH secre-
tion. In addition to effects on the GH–IGF axis, hyperinsulinemia 
also appears to increase adrenal androgen production and reduce 
plasma concentrations of sex hormone–binding globulin (SHBG) 
in obese prepubertal girls (Burt Solorzano and McCartney, 2010). 
Increased serum concentrations of free androgens appear to explain, 
in part, why childhood obesity is associated with earlier pubertal 
development. Rodent studies of high-fat feeding have demonstrated 
accelerated vaginal opening that was reversed by both androgen 
receptor blockade and normalization of glucose homeostasis with 
metformin. Hyperandrogenization also appears to explain the 
increased incidence of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) in obese 
adolescent girls with MetS, anovulatory cycles, and subfertility in 
obese women of childbearing age. Increased adipose tissue mass 
also results in increased estrogen production as a result of andro-
gen aromatization in fat tissues. This may also contribute to accel-
erated puberty in girls. Surprisingly, in obese boys, data suggest 
that puberty may be delayed. This may also be related to increased 
aromatization of androgens in adipose tissue because negative feed-
back of estrogens at the level of the hypothalamic–pituitary axis 
may result in reduced luteinizing hormone secretion and reduced 
testosterone production (hypogonadotropic hypogonadism). In 
addition to suppression in GH and gonadotropin secretion, hypo-
thyroidism is common in individuals with MetS. Reduced thyroid 
hormone concentrations may exacerbate NASH progression in the 
liver by increasing triglyceride synthesis, reducing fatty acid oxida-
tion, and increasing hepatic cholesterol concentrations by reducing 
conversion to bile acids (Loria et al., 2009).
Obesity and Cancer Risk
Increased BMI is well known to be associated with signifi-
cantly increased risk of a number of cancers. These include 
sex-steroid-dependent endometrial, breast, and prostate cancer, 
GI tract ­cancers such as esophageal adenocarcinoma, and colon 
cancer and renal cancer (Table 28-1). Several mechanisms have 
been proposed related to endocrine and metabolic disturbances 
associated with obesity (Roberts et al., 2010). As described ear-
lier, systemic ­insulin resistance results in hyperinsulinemia and 
reduces plasma IGF-1-binding protein levels to increase free 
IGF-1 concentrations. Insulin and IGF-1 signaling interact to 
stimulate cell proliferation via activation of MAP-kinase cas-
cades resulting in increased phosphorylation of ERK and via 
activation of Wnt-β-catenin pathways. In addition, they exert 
antiapoptotic effects through PI-3 kinase pathways. Increased 
Table 28-1  
Estimated Risk Ratios* for Cancer in Relation to BMI
CANCER TYPE
MEN
WOMEN
Colon cancer
1.24
1.09
Gallbladder cancer
—
1.59
Leukemia
1.08
1.17
Malignant melanoma
1.17
—
Multiple myeloma
1.11
1.11
Esophageal adenocarcinoma
1.52
1.51
Renal cancer
1.24
1.34
Thyroid cancer
1.33
1.14
Prostate cancer
1.03
—
Postmenopausal breast cancer
—
1.12
Endometrial cancer†
—
1.73
*Per increase in BMI by 5 kg/m2 (Roberts et al., 2010).
†For BMIs above 27 kg/m2.

1374
Toxic Agents
unit V
sex steroid concentrations in obesity promote growth of tumors 
in the mammary gland, endometrium, and prostate. Adipokines 
may also play a role in promotion of obesity-associated cancers. 
Leptin that is increased as fat mass increases is proproliferative, 
antiapoptotic, and proinflammatory and promotes new blood ves-
sel formation (angiogenesis). In contrast, adiponectin that is sup-
pressed in obesity has the opposite properties and is inversely 
associated with the presence of cancer. Additional potential asso-
ciations between obesity and cancer may involve depletion of 
cellular antioxidant systems as a result of the low-grade chronic 
systemic inflammation that accompanies morbid obesity and the 
possibility that mesenchymal stromal cells arising from expand-
ing white adipose tissue may be recruited to tumors to promote 
angiogenesis and drive tumor progression (Roberts et al., 2010).
HEALTH BENEFITS AND LIFE 
EXTENSION ASSOCIATED WITH 
CALORIC RESTRICTION
The opposite of overfeeding is caloric restriction (CR) (also known as 
dietary restriction). Over the past two decades, experimental CR has 
been repeatedly shown to increase life span and reduce age-related 
disease in comparison with ad libitum feeding in a wide variety of 
organisms including yeast, nematodes, fruit flies, fish, many rodent 
species, and dogs (Smith et al., 2010). Recently, Colman et al. (2009) 
have reported similar findings in rhesus monkeys and a multisite 
human randomized clinical research study is currently in progress 
funded by the National Institute on Aging (NIA): Comprehensive 
Assessment of Long-Term Effects of Reducing Intake of Energy 
(the CALERIE study, available at: http://calerie.dcri.duke.edu/index.
html). Preliminary data suggest replication of many of the results from 
animal studies, including reduced fat and lean mass; reduced insu-
lin; reduced energy expenditure; lower core body temperature; and 
improved lipid profiles. It has been suggested that the increased health 
and longevity ­associated with CR are related to reduced energy flow, 
increased insulin sensitivity, and reduced inflammation (Ye and Keller, 
2010). Studies in yeast, Caenorhabditis elegans, and Drosophila have 
suggested that the life span–enhancing effects of CR are mediated 
through activation of a family of histone deacetylases known as the 
sirtuins (Sir), which act as sensors of nutrient flux (Smith et al., 2010). 
Intensive studies are underway to identify CR mimetics that might 
have the same benefits as CR on long-term health and longevity with-
out the necessity for imposed food restriction. Most work has focused 
on the grape polyphenol resveratrol that has been shown to activate 
Sir2 and to mimic CR effects to increase life span in yeast, C. elegans, 
Drosophila, and fish in the absence of nutrient alteration. A second 
CR mimetic receiving significant attention is rapamycin, an inhibitor 
of the nutrient signaling mediator target of rapamycin (TOR).
TREATMENT OF OBESITY
Lifestyle Modification: Dieting 
and Exercise
Attaining a healthy body composition usually requires trimming 
excess body fat by reductions in total caloric intake, modifica-
tions in diet composition, and increases in total energy expenditure 
(TEE) via increased physical activity. This combined strategy is 
intended to develop a metabolic state in which energy expenditure 
exceeds energy intake, and which in turn requires total body energy 
requirements to come from utilization of body fat stores, thereby 
burning body fat and improving body composition.
Adhering to almost any commercially available diet plan on 
the market can achieve body weight loss and reduction of total fat 
mass. For example, people who use the Atkins diet, which is a diet 
high in protein and fat and very low in carbohydrates, lose weight. 
The major problem is sustaining a healthy body composition. Most 
dieters return to their predieting weight and body composition (or 
worse) because they never achieve a true lifestyle change that meets 
their expectations. Comprehensive lifestyle changes that promote 
sustainability include two major and closely linked components: 
(1) learning to consume only the number of calories from high-
quality foods necessary to support basal body energy requirements, 
plus energy needs to maintain physical activity; and (2) selecting a 
reasonable physical activity plan that fits into the dieters’ overall 
lifestyle patterns. Sustaining healthy body composition after signifi-
cant weight loss seems to occur only in those individuals who can 
find a way to limit their intake of a healthy diet that they find accept-
able in terms of taste, costs, and ease (food availability and ease and 
speed of preparation), plus an exercise regime that is acceptable 
in terms of access (e.g., equipment, facilities, and walking trails), 
appropriateness (e.g., age-related and intensity levels), and time 
(e.g., duration required and timing within a workday). Thus, los-
ing weight and getting a healthy body composition comes down to 
energy balance, that is, consuming only enough energy to maintain 
a given body composition. Maintaining a healthy body composition 
requires that energy intake equals energy expenditure. Promoting 
health in the context of a healthy body composition can be best 
achieved by including a physical activity plan, and this usually leads 
to healthier muscle, improved insulin sensitivity, normalization of 
blood lipid profiles, and improved cardiovascular measures.
Determining the energy needs is the easiest part of a plan, 
whereas limiting caloric intake, increasing physical activity, and 
sustaining these components of a plan are more difficult. In terms 
of energy, 3500 cal is stored in 1 lb of fat. So, to lose or take off that 
pound of fat, the body needs to be forced to “burn” 3500 cal from 
adipose tissue. That pound of fat was formed over time and under 
conditions in which calorie intake exceeded caloric output. The 
energy in food eaten can be “cost accounted” roughly as follows: 
(1) energy required to digest and absorb food; (2) energy utilized 
to support basal functions such as pumping blood and breathing; 
(3) energy for body functions other than basal metabolism, such as 
walking and playing golf; and (4) nonutilized food calories, such 
as food components not fully digested or absorbed. Most generally 
healthy people have similar energy expenditure needs as described 
in points 1, 2, and 4 above, although there clearly are individual 
differences. The energy expenditure of a body at rest is termed the 
basal metabolic rate (BMR) and it can be estimated by the Harris–
Benedict equations (Roza and Shizgal, 1984). Energy expenditures 
also differ by age, gender, and body size (height and weight). For 
example, per the Harris–Benedict equations, a man and a woman 
(each healthy and normal body composition) of age 66 years, weigh-
ing 160 lb, and 70 in. tall would have a BMR of 1528 and 1372 cal, 
respectively. However, if they were each age 18 years, their BMR 
would be 1854 and 1598 cal, respectively. No matter what a person’s 
excess weight might be, there will always be the need for energy 
to meet the BMR. The energy needs of BMR could be met by diet 
or, in the case of overweight individuals, body energy stores such 
as fat. Because there are other nutrient needs besides energy (e.g., 
nitrogen, amino acids, essential fatty acids, vitamins, minerals, and 
trace elements), an overweight individual will always have needs 
for a healthy diet, even for the short term, so fasting is usually not 
a long-term option to burn all excess stored body fat. Thus, to burn 
excess body fat, daily energy expenditure needs to exceed the energy 
expenditure of BMR and this comes mainly from physical activity.

Toxic Effects of Calories
Chapter 28
1375
The public tends to overestimate the energy expenditure for 
various physical activities. It also finds it difficult to practically 
translate the often-recommended amount of physical activity 
(30 minutes of activity per day) into a daily regimen. Part of this is 
due to the difficulty in determining the energy expenditure amount, 
because the energy expended by an individual on 30 minutes of 
physical activity differs according to body weight, body composi-
tion, health, physical conditioning, the activity itself (e.g., walk-
ing, jogging, running, or swimming), and intensity of the activity 
(e.g., running at 6 mph vs. 4 mph). In addition, many overweight 
people are usually not accustomed to physical activity at the inten-
sity level and duration needed to induce the body to burn body 
fat stores that lead to significant body fat reduction. This, when 
combined with the necessary changes in the diet composition and 
reductions in caloric intake, makes it difficult to lose body fat and 
more difficult to maintain a healthy body composition. The most 
common physical activity used in weight loss programs is walk-
ing. Walking 30 minutes at a rate of 4 mi/h for the 160-lb man or 
woman described above will burn approximately 180 cal. So, if an 
overweight individual were to maintain the same caloric intake (and 
same diet) and just increase his or her activity level to 30 minutes of 
walking at 4 mi/h (a total of 2 mi/day), the calculated fat loss would 
be 1 lb every 20 days. If he or she also reduced the caloric intake by 
180 cal a day and has the same walk schedule, he or she theoreti-
cally would reduce the time to lose 1 lb of weight to about 10 days. 
Thus, the way to reduce body fat (adipose tissue) is to consume less 
calories than expended (energy deficit) and the rate of fat loss is 
directly related to the level of the energy deficit (i.e., caloric intake 
vs. caloric expenditure).
Complicit in any plan to burn body fat stores is that some 
portion of the total energy expenditure (TEE) must be met by 
fat stores. This requires a diet intake situation that (1) provides 
fewer calories than required to meet BMR + any physical activity 
expenditure; (2) reduces or prevents lipogenesis; and (3) promotes 
lipolysis. There are several ways and several commercially avail-
able diet systems in which this can be accomplished. One of the 
most widely used diet systems, the Atkins diet, claims to accom-
plish this by increasing protein (and consequently fat) and limiting 
carbohydrates.
Following a meal containing an abundance of simple car-
bohydrates, blood glucose levels rise and glucose gets converted 
into glycogen by the liver and stored there for future energy use. 
Maximal glycogen storage is between about 8 and 14 hours, 
depending on factors such as an individual’s metabolism. As glu-
cose enters cells, blood glucose concentrations would fall if not 
for the liver converting the glycogen back to glucose and releas-
ing it back into the blood. This is a mechanism for maintaining 
glucose in the normal range between meals. Glucose is the body’s 
energy source of choice. Use of glucose as the primary energy 
source seems to be prioritized by cell and organ type, with nerve 
cells having the highest priority. This means that if body glucose 
stores become scarce, the brain will be the last organ able to use 
glucose as its primary source. In this case, if another carbohy-
drate-containing meal is not consumed and blood glucose levels 
dropped to very low levels, lower priority organs (such as muscle) 
would need another source of energy and this source is fatty acids 
released from fat stores (lipolysis). Just like glycogen is the stor-
age form for glucose, fat is the storage source for fatty acids and 
tissues can easily burn fatty acids when glucose is absent. As liver 
glycogen stores become minimal, amino acids are converted to 
glucose (gluconeogenesis). This can support nerve cell metabo-
lism for a while, but eventually the brain will switch from burning 
pure glucose and start to utilize ketone bodies produced in the 
liver from fatty acids as an additional energy source. High ketone 
levels in the blood and tissues are known as ketosis.
Insulin has a major influence on carbohydrate, fat, and protein 
metabolism. Under conditions of adequate carbohydrate intake, 
insulin causes excess sugar not utilized as fuel to be stored as fat 
and prevents utilization of fat as an energy source. Thus, a high-­
carbohydrate diet. In theory, the low carbohydrate, high protein 
intake promoted in the Atkins diet forces the body to burn more 
fat. This would call for the body to switch from using pure carbo-
hydrates for fuel to using more fat for fuel and the source of this 
fat is the adipose tissue. Thus, when insulin levels are normal, the 
body will begin to burn its own fat as fuel, thereby resulting in body 
weight loss. In addition to these potential metabolic effects, the 
high dietary fat content is thought to reduce appetite and thus total 
caloric intake. The combination of altered metabolism and reduced 
caloric intake leads to weight loss and better body composition.
Theoretically, environmental factors (such as diet composi-
tion, dietary intake, and physical activity) are the key factors in 
­obesity treatment. However, genetics can also play a major role. For 
example, Bouchard et al. (1983) have reported that genetic charac-
teristics can be responsible for substantial differences or heteroge-
neity in the response to training or physical activity and this may 
be an important obstacle to achieving a healthy body composition 
in some people. So, although research has shown that obesity can 
be reversed by the combination of consuming a healthy diet and 
reducing caloric intake to below calories expended, maintaining 
a healthy body composition with a caloric intake equal to energy 
expenditure often is as complicated as the factors leading to obesity 
in the first place.
Clinical and basic research studies have shown that ade-
quate physical activity is essential to maintaining good physical 
health, and a sedentary lifestyle leads to several common chronic 
health problems. However, the mechanisms underlying the posi-
tive effects of physical activity or the negative effects of insuf-
ficient activity are not known. An ongoing NIH study, “Molecular 
Transducers of Physical Activity in Humans,” aims to determine 
the molecular changes produced by “movement” (i.e., physical 
activity) and how these changes improve cellular and organ func-
tions (Robinson et al., 2017). Current literature in the field of 
physical activity as it relates to body composition, health, and 
disease suggests there is a healthy “fitness range” for individuals 
based upon genetics and issues such as age, sex, body composi-
tion, diet, and total caloric intake. These factors are important in 
understanding human development, health status, and the effects 
of medications and toxicants.
Toxic Effects of Dieting
There are potential toxic effects associated with some diet plans. 
Dieting as prescribed by dieticians, nutritionists, or physicians 
is based on the use of a healthy diet that meets the daily nutrient 
needs of the body, but at a reduced caloric intake and with increased 
moderate physical activity. The overarching premise is to provide 
adequate nutrients for normal cellular function while reducing 
caloric intake to a level that forces the use of fat stores as an energy 
source to meet the energy expenditure above the caloric intake. If 
the diet does not include all the required nutrients (an imbalanced 
diet), metabolism will suffer and with time this can result in health 
problems. This is true in the case of deficiency of specific nutrients 
(deficiency disorders such as anemia or osteoporosis) or toxicity 
caused by excesses of a nutrient (such as thyroid impairment, vita-
min deficiencies, and mental confusion). Some popular diet plans 
call for excess intake of a particular food and these can not only alter

1376
Toxic Agents
unit V
metabolism but also interfere with medications. For example, the 
popular grapefruit diet can lead to inhibition of drug-­metabolizing 
enzymes such as the cytochrome P450 CYP3As that metabolize 
60% of all therapeutic medications. This may increase drug con-
centrations to toxic levels, increase drug–drug interactions, and 
result in potential health problems (Ameer and Weintraub, 1997; 
Kiani and Imam, 2007).
Another potential adverse effect of dieting is known as the 
yo-yo effect or weight cycling. This occurs with repeated dieting 
interspersed with periods of no dieting. This is caused when a dieter 
starts one diet and loses a significant amount of body weight and 
body fat, but cannot maintain the diet and stops to return to the 
prediet routine. The fat and body weight are regained, often to an 
even greater body fat content. In fact, the yo-yo experience may 
result in a condition in which the dieter is more efficient in gain-
ing weight. This causes the dieter to select another diet plan, loss 
of weight, failure to maintain the diet, and return to overweight 
or obese conditions. There are often periods of depression and 
fatigue associated with this cycling behavior and the end results are 
extreme emotional and physical ramifications.
Drug Therapy for Weight Loss
In addition to the diet plans described earlier, many overweight 
individuals turn to drug therapy to help lose body weight. Appetite 
suppressants, for example, sympathomimetics such as diethyl-
propion, attempt to lessen the psychological motivation for food, 
usually by acting on central nervous system appetite control cen-
ters, such as those in the hypothalamus (Guaraldi et al., 2011). 
Although sympathomimetics can be used for long periods of time, 
their appetite-reducing effects tend to decrease after a few weeks 
in many people. Thus, appetite suppressants are often used in the 
early stages of a weight loss program. People are likely to lose 
weight while taking sympathomimetics, but the weight loss is 
generally temporary without modifications in diet composition, 
eating behavior, and physical activity. Short-term use is usually 
accompanied by minor side effects such as thirst, irritability, con-
stipation, ­stomach pain, dizziness, dryness of mouth, heightened 
sense of well-being, headache, irritability, nausea, nervousness or 
restlessness, trembling or shaking, and trouble sleeping. However, 
long-term use of appetite suppressants often lead to more serious 
side effects: intracerebral hemorrhage, acute dystonia, myocar-
dial injury, psychosis, cerebral arteritis, cardiac arrhythmias, heart 
valve damage, and even fatal pulmonary hypertension. These side 
effects have led to the withdrawal of several such products from 
the market. Drug interactions are also known to occur, especially 
with high blood pressure medicine, stimulants, MAO inhibitors 
(e.g., furazolidone, linezolid, phenelzine, selegiline, and tranyl-
cypromine), any other weight loss medicine, and decongestants 
such as are commonly found in over-the-counter cough and cold 
medicines.
Surgical Interventions
Surgery is another avenue to improve body composition in obesity. 
One of the most radical surgical treatments is the class operations 
known as bariatric surgeries. The end goal is to limit food intake 
by reducing the capacity of the stomach, and also having patients 
feel satiated. Bariatric surgery is a term that includes several surgi-
cal procedures (such as sleeve gastrectomy, gastric plication, gastric 
banding, and gastric bypass surgery); all are aimed at helping obese 
patients lose weight. Weight loss is achieved by resecting and link-
ing the small intestines to a small stomach pouch (gastric bypass sur-
gery), removal of a portion of the stomach (sleeve gastrectomy), or 
reducing the size of the stomach with an implanted medical device 
(gastric banding) or sutures (gastric plication). These procedures are 
generally credited with significant long-term loss of body fat and 
body weight, which leads to improvement of secondary conditions 
caused by obesity, including type 2 diabetes, risk of cardiovascular 
disease, and the rate of mortality (Robinson, 2009). Very promis-
ing preliminary results concerning bariatric surgery bear watching 
in the future, suggesting the procedure may have effects in a wide 
range of areas, including changes in the gut microbiome and type 2 
diabetes mellitus in nonobese patients (Nguyen and Varela, 2017).
These operations are most commonly used to treat morbid 
obesity and the comorbidities associated with it. Thus, bariatric 
surgery may be recommended for people with a BMI greater than 
40. These procedures have also been used successfully with obese 
individuals with BMI 30 to 40, especially when there are serious 
coexisting medical conditions such as hypertension, impaired glu-
cose tolerance, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, and obstructive 
sleep apnea. Most bariatric procedures result in relatively rapid 
weight loss, which is also associated with gallstones, and many 
surgeons prefer to remove the gallbladder at the time of bariatric 
surgery. Malabsorption and nutritional deficiency can occur because 
of reduced absorptive area. This can reduce calcium and vitamin 
absorption. Poor calcium absorption can occur because calcium 
transporters located in areas of the intestine (duodenum) may be 
removed with bariatric surgery. This can cause metabolic bone dis-
ease (osteopenia) and secondary hyperparathyroidism that increase 
in bone turnover. Combined, these conditions decrease bone mass 
and increase risk of fracture. Other deficiencies including iron and 
micronutrients such as vitamin B12, fat-soluble vitamins, thiamine, 
and folate are common. Many patients will need to take a daily 
multivitamin pill for life to compensate for reduced absorption of 
essential nutrients. Because patients cannot eat a large quantity of 
food, physicians typically recommend a diet that is relatively high 
in protein and low in fats and alcohol.
Liposuction is another surgical procedure widely used to 
improve body composition by physically and surgically removing 
body fat. It is the most common “plastic surgical procedure” in the 
United States. However, there are significant risks with this proce-
dure and these are mainly associated with (1) the aggressiveness 
with which the procedure is performed, especially the amount of 
tissue sucked from the body; (2) the venues in which the procedures 
are performed; and (3) the amount of anesthesia used to sedate 
patients during increasingly lengthy procedures. The mortality rate 
of the late 1990s was approximately 20 per 100,000 or 1 per 5000 
cases (de Jong and Grazer, 2001).
ECONOMIC, SOCIOLOGICAL, AND LEGAL 
ASPECTS OF THE OBESITY EPIDEMIC
Health Insurance and Obesity
Obesity is not considered an illness for most insurance purposes. 
However, obesity can affect the cost of health insurance because as 
a group, obese people have a significantly greater risk of cardiovas-
cular disease, hypertension, type 2 diabetes, and other health issues 
than lean people. Thus, insurance companies factor obesity into the 
cost of first-time insurance purchasers. Furthermore, ­people who 
are already insured may unknowingly not have sufficient insurance 
to cover health problems associated with obesity. Several health 
insurance companies use BMI as a measure of obesity and use BMI 
to compute disease risk and health insurance premiums. Obesity 
can result in high premiums and in the case of morbidly obese 
individuals, insurers may decline their application. Obesity is also

Toxic Effects of Calories
Chapter 28
1377
regarded by insurance companies as a substantial risk for both life 
and disability policies.
Mortality statistics for life insurance were the earliest indicator 
that the cost of obesity to the individual was decreased life span and 
increased illness, particularly diseases affecting the cardiovascu-
lar and musculoskeletal systems. The prevalence of coronary heart 
disease rises with increases in the BMI in both men and women. 
Hypertension and diabetes in the obese add further to the risks 
of vascular disease. Cigarette smoking also greatly augments the 
health risks of obesity in both sexes.
The risk of death and medical problems increase with the 
degree or severity of obesity (as indicated by fat mass or BMI). 
The type of obesity (as indicated by body shape or fat distribution) 
is another aspect of obesity considered by insurance companies. 
Abdominal obesity has been positively correlated with the risk of 
heart disease and stroke. Thus, some insurance companies set rates 
based in part on fat distribution. Disability insurance rates are also 
affected by body composition, as cardiovascular disease or mus-
culoskeletal illness associated with obesity greatly increases the 
chances of disabilities. These factors are used in decision making 
as to whether to insure an individual and the cost of premiums. 
Clearly, costs increase proportionally with the degree of obesity.
Changing the Environment: Family  
and Community Approaches to Healthy 
Eating and Physical Activity
The development of obesity within an individual, a community, or 
a country is complex and the central cause(s) or reason(s) underly-
ing the rapid rise in obesity in the United States and the world is 
not well understood. The end results in terms of body composition 
and secondary medical problems associated with obesity are better 
understood than the root causes of the obesity epidemic. One factor, 
however, that has received much attention relates to basic practices 
that were common in past decades when the general population was 
leaner but are lacking now when obesity is so prevalent.
Prior to 1970, the average BMI was 25.1 for men and 24.9 for 
women in the United States. Physical education (PE) classes were 
a regular feature of school curriculums; most meals were prepared 
at home using fresh produce, meats, and dairy products. School 
lunches were prepared at schools. It was common for children to 
walk or ride bicycles to school and to participate in games requiring 
physical activity during school recess and after school and on week-
ends. There were no computer games and fast food restaurants did 
not supply such a large proportion of the daily total calories. In the 
1990s and 2000s, there are few schools with PE classes and fewer 
meals cooked from fresh components consumed at home and the 
lifestyle of today’s children and adults is far more sedentary than 
that prior to 1970. Therefore, by 2002, average BMI for U.S. men 
had risen to 27.8 and average BMI for U.S. women to 28.1.
One approach to fighting the obesity issue is to bring back 
many of those practices used in the past. There are initiatives to 
establish community gardens, build community walking and rid-
ing trails, and teach people cooking and shopping skills that lead 
to healthier meal preparation. School systems are starting to return 
to PE classes on a regular basis and remove high-density foods and 
drinks from vending machines. Although these efforts have been 
increasing in effort throughout the United States, it is still too early 
to confirm their effectiveness in reversing the obesity trend.
Food security and access to quality foods are an important 
issue throughout the United States, regardless of whether in rural 
America or in the inner city. In many areas, there is ready access 
only to convenience food stores where there is a lack of fresh 
vegetable and meats and the prices are higher than in a conventional 
supermarket. The type of food available is poor quality and energy 
dense, which leads to obesity. These areas have been termed “food 
deserts.” Providing access to higher-quality fresh food to people 
living in these areas will improve nutrition, and when combined 
with education on how to select and prepare the food and linked to 
some form of physical activity it is hoped that body composition 
and health will improve in these areas.
Food Labels
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is responsible for 
assuring that foods sold in the United States are properly labeled 
(see Chap. 27, “Food Toxicology: Fundamental and Regulatory 
Aspects”). This applies to foods produced domestically and foods 
from foreign countries. The Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic 
Act (FD&C Act) and the Fair Packaging and Labeling Act are the 
­federal laws governing food products under the FDA’s jurisdic-
tion. The Nutrition Labeling and Education Act (NLEA), which 
amended the FD&C Act, requires most foods to bear nutrition 
labeling. The FDA requires food labels that bear nutrient con-
tent claims and ­certain health messages to comply with specific 
requirements.
Food labeling is required for most prepared foods, such as 
breads, cereals, canned and frozen foods, snacks, desserts, and 
drinks. Nutrition labeling for raw produce (fruits and vegetables) 
and fish is voluntary. Dietary supplements are a special category of 
products under the general umbrella of foods, but which has sepa-
rate labeling requirements. “Functional foods” or “nutraceuticals” 
are regulated by the FDA under the authority of the FD&C Act, but 
they are not specifically defined by law. Evidence-based updates of 
labeling requirements occur when “new data on the associations 
between nutrients and chronic diseases, health-related conditions, 
physiological endpoints, and/or maintaining a healthy dietary pat-
tern reflects current public health conditions in the United States.” 
Revisions in the format and appearance of the Nutrition Facts label 
was last performed in 2016 and full industry-wide compliance with 
the new regulations must occur by July 2019.
Food labels can be an important factor to help consumers in 
their food choices that can help prevent obesity and other diseases. 
Federal law requires that a minimal amount of information be listed 
on food packaging, including ingredients and nutrition data. The 
FDA monitors labeling language for such issues as fat, protein, car-
bohydrate, and other nutrient contents and the purported ability of a 
particular food to prevent medical problems. Suspicious or doubtful 
claims or misleading statements about nutrition and health benefits 
on food packages can be challenged by the FDA and companies that 
receive warning letters have 15 days to inform the agency of cor-
rective action. Although there has been a formal process by which 
a health claim can be made, foods generally are not permitted to 
make disease-fighting claim. The types of claims often challenged 
by the FDA include warding off maladies such as arthritis, cancer, 
and heart disease.
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 estab-
lishes requirements for nutrition labeling of standard menu items 
for chain restaurants, similar retail food establishments, and chain 
vending machine operators. The most important information that 
must be provided for standard menu items is the number of calories 
in each standard menu item and a statement on the menu that puts 
the calorie information in the context of a recommended total daily 
caloric intake. In addition to restaurant menus, food sold from vend-
ing machines operated by persons who own or operate 20 or more 
vending machines must disclose the number of calories in a clear 
and conspicuous manner.

1378
Toxic Agents
unit V
Governmental and Corporate Issues
There has been increasing pressures from local, state, and federal 
governments to regulate various aspects of food as a means of 
promoting health and reducing obesity and the secondary conse-
quences of obesity. Food labeling is just one example of govern-
ment intervention, whereby food processors and restaurants must 
provide a measure of nutrient and/or caloric content. New York 
City was the first to pass a law requiring calorie counts to be posted 
next to prices on menus in some restaurants so consumers would 
also know the “caloric cost” of each food selection, with the hope 
that they will make healthy food choices. California became the 
first state to prohibit restaurants from using “artery-clogging trans 
fats” in preparing their food. Airlines and the FAA are dealing with 
complaints from passengers being “infringed on” by overlapping 
obese passengers and obese passengers complaining about abuse 
taken from leaner passengers. In an effort to reduce insurance costs 
and improve work performance, there is also a trend for the busi-
ness community to set standards associated for overweight and 
obese workers in a manner similar to that employed for smokers. 
Civil rights advocates and others are concerned that there is a grow-
ing impetus for government intervention and one wonders if the 
time will come when “big brother” mandates what and how much 
one can eat.
REFERENCES
Abdelmegeed MA, Choi Y, Godlewski G, et al. Cytochrome P450-2E1 
­promotes fast food-mediated hepatic fibrosis. Sci Rep. 2017;7:39764.
Ameer B, Weintraub RA. Drug interactions with grapefruit juice. Clin 
Pharmacokinet. 1997;33:103–121.
Aoki R, Kamikado K, Suda W, et al. A proliferative probiotic Bifidobacterium 
strain in the gut ameliorates progression of metabolic disorders via 
microbiota modulation and acetate elevation. Sci Rep. 2017;7:43522.
Bakker-Arkema RG, Davidson MH, Goldstein RJ, et al. Efficacy and safety 
of a new HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor atorvastatin, in patients with 
hypertriglyeridemia. JAMA. 1996;275:128–133.
Barker DJ, Winter PD, Osmond C, et al. Weight in infancy and death from 
ischemic heart disease. Lancet. 1989;2:577–580.
Basaranoglu M, Basaranoglu G, Senturk H. From fatty liver to fibrosis: a 
tale of “second hit.” World J Gastroenterol. 2013;19:1158–1165.
Baumgardner JN, Shankar K, Hennings L, et al. A new rat model for nonal-
coholic steatohepatitis utilizing overfeeding of diets high in polyunsatu-
rated fat by total enteral nutrition. Am J Physiol. 2008a;294:G27–G38.
Baumgardner JN, Shankar K, Hennings L, et al. N-Acetylcysteine attenu-
ates progression of liver pathology in a rat model of non-alcoholic steato-
hepatitis. J Nutr. 2008b;138:1872–1879.
Bouchard C. Human adaptability may have a genetic basis. In: Landry 
F, ed. Health Risk Estimation, Risk Reduction and Health Promotion. 
Proceedings of the 18th Annual Meeting of the Society of Prospective 
Medicine. Ottawa: Canadian Public Health Association; 1983:463–476.
Boyle JG, Salt IP, McKay GA. Metformin action on AMP-activated protein 
kinase: a translational research approach to understanding a potential 
new therapeutic target. Diabet Med. 2010;27:1097–1106.
Browning JD, Szczepaniak LS, Dobbins R, et al. Prevalence of hepatic ste-
atosis in an urban population in the United States: impact of ethnicity. 
Hepatology. 2004;40:1387–1395.
Burt Solorzano CM, McCartney CR. Obesity and the pubertal transition in 
girls and boys. Reproduction. 2010;140:399–410.
Cannito S, Morello E, Bocca C, et al. Microvesicles released from fat-laden 
cells promote activation of hepatocellular NLRP3 inflammasome: a pro-
inflammatory link between lipotoxicity and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. 
PLoS One. 2017;10:1371.
Caviglia JM, Gayet C, Ota T, et al. Different fatty acids inhibit apolipo-
protein B100 secretion by different pathways: unique roles for endo-
plasmic reticulum stress, ceramide and autophagy. J Lipid Res. 2011;52: 
1636–1651.
Cho N, Momose Y. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma ago-
nists as insulin sensitizers: from the discovery to recent progress. Curr 
Top Med Chem. 2008;8:1483–1507.
Cohen JC, Horton JD, Hobbs HH. Human fatty liver disease: old questions 
and new insights. Science. 2011;332:1519–1523.
Colman RJ, Anderson RM, Johnson SC, et al. Caloric restriction 
delays disease onset and mortality in rhesus monkeys. Science. 
2009;325(5937):201–204.
Cook S, Weitzman M, Auinger P, et al. Prevalence of a metabolic syndrome 
phenotype in adolescents: findings from the third National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey 1999–2002. J Pediatr. 2008;152:160–164.
Cornier MA, Dabelea D, Hernandez TL, et al. The metabolic syndrome. 
Endocr Rev. 2008;29:777–822.
de Jong RH, Grazer FM. Perioperative management of cosmetic liposuc-
tion. Plast Reconstructr Surg. 2001;107:1039–1044.
Deshmukh M, Lee HW, McFarlane SI, et al. Antihypertensive medications 
and their effects on lipid metabolism. Curr Diab Rep. 2008;8:214–220.
Divoux A, Clement K. Architecture and the extracellular matrix: 
the still unappreciated components of adipose tissue. Obes Rev. 
2011;12:e494–e503.
Dooley S, Weng H, Mertens PR. Hypotheses on the role of TGF beta in 
the onset and progression of hepatocellular carcinoma. Dig Dis. 2009; 
27:93–101.
Dulloo AG, Jacquet J, Solinas G, et al. Body composition phenotypes in 
pathways to obesity and the metabolic syndrome. Int J Obes. 2010; 
34:S4–S17.
Fischer CD, Lickteig AJ, Augustine LM, et al. Experimental non-alcoholic 
fatty liver disease results in decreased hepatic uptake transporter expres-
sion and function in rats. Eur J Pharmacol. 2009;613:119–127.
Franck N, Gummesson A, Jernas M, et al. Identification of adipo-
cyte genes regulated by caloric intake. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
2011;96:E413–E418.
Friedman JM, Leibel RL. Tackling a weighty problem. Cell. 1992;69: 
217–220.
Gerstein HC, Yusuf S, Bosch J, et al. Effect of rosiglitazone on the frequency 
of diabetes in patients with impaired glucose tolerance or impaired fast-
ing glucose: a randomized controlled trial. Lancet. 2006;368:1096–1105.
Giordano A, Murano I, Mondini E, et al. Obese adipocytes show ultra-
structural features of stressed cells and die of pyroptosis. J Lipid Res. 
2013;54:2423–2436.
Gropper SS, Smith JL, Groff JL. Body composition and energy expenditure. 
In: Gropper SS, Smith JL, Groff JL, eds. Advanced Nutrition and Human 
Metabolism. Belmont, CA: Thomson Wadsworth; 2005:519–550.
Guaraldi F, Pagotto U, Pasquali R. Predictors of weight loss and mainte-
nance in patients treated with antiobesity drugs. Diabetes Metab Syndr 
Obes. 2011;4:229–243.
Gustafson B. Adipose tissue, inflammation and atherosclerosis. J Atheroscler 
Thromb. 2010;17:332–341.
Halberg N, Khan T, Trujillo ME, et al. Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha 
induces fibrosis and insulin resistance in white adipose tissue. Mol Cell 
Biol. 2009;29:4467–4483.
Hanley MJ, Abernethy DR, Greenblatt DJ. Effect of obesity on the phar-
macokinetics of drugs in humans. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2010;49:71–87.
Hebbard L, George J. Animal models of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. 
Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011;8:35–44.
Khan S, Wang CH. ER stress in adipocytes and insulin resistance: mecha-
nisms and significance. Mol Med Rep. 2014;10:2234–2240.
Keesey RE, Hirvonen MD. Body weight set-points: determination and 
adjustment. J Nutr. 1997;127:1875S–1883S.
Kiani J, Imam SZ. Medicinal importance of grapefruit juice and its interac-
tion with various drugs. Nutr J. 2007;6:33.
Knowler WC, Barrett-Connor E, Fowler SE, et al. Reduction in the inci-
dence of type 2 diabetes with lifestyle intervention or metformin. N Engl 
J Med. 2002;346:393–403.
Kreitschmann-Andermahr I, Suarez P, Jennings R, et al. GH/IGF-1 regula-
tion in obesity—mechanisms and practical consequences in children and 
adults. Horm Res Pediatr. 2010;73:153–160.
Kulie T, Slattengren A, Redmer J, et al. Obesity and women’s health. An 
evidence-based review. J Am Board Fam Med. 2011;24:75–85.

Toxic Effects of Calories
Chapter 28
1379
Lara-Castro C, Garvey T. Intracellular lipid accumulation in liver and mus-
cle and the insulin resistance syndrome. Endocrinol Metab Clin North 
Am. 2008;37:841–856.
Lara-Castro C, Newcomer BR, Rowell J, et al. Effects of short term very 
low-calorie diet on intramyocellular lipid and insulin sensitivity in non-
diabetic and diabetic subjects. Metabolism. 2008;57:1–8.
Lecka-Czernik B. Bone loss in diabetes: use of antidiabetic thiazolidinedio-
nes and secondary osteoporosis. Curr Osteoporosis Res. 2010;8:178–184.
Lenard NR, Berthoud HR. Central and peripheral regulation of food intake 
and physical activity: pathways and genes. Obesity. 2008;16:S11–S22.
Liang S, Kisseleva T, Brenner DA. The role of NADPH oxidases in liver 
fibrosis and the activation of myofibroblasts. Front. Physiol. 2016;7:17.
Lickteig AJ, Fischer CD, Augustine LM, et al. Efflux transporter expres-
sion and acetaminophen metabolite excretion are altered in rodent 
models of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Drug Metab Dispos. 
2007;25:1970–1978.
Loomba R, Sirlin CB, Schwimmer JB, et al. Advances in pediatric nonalco-
holic fatty liver disease. Hepatology. 2009;50:1282–1293.
Loria P, Carulli L, Bertolotti M, Lonardo A. Endocrine and liver interaction: 
the role of endocrine pathways in NASH. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 
2009;6:236–247.
Ludwig J, Viggiano TR, McGill DB, et al. Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis: 
Mayo Clinic experiences with a hitherto unnamed disease. Mayo Clin 
Proc. 1980;55:434–438.
Marecki JC, Ronis MJJ, Badger TM. Ectopic fat disposition and insulin resis-
tance develop after overfeeding of a high fat diet to prepubertal rats despite 
increased adiponectin signaling, J Nutr Biochem. 2011;22:142–152.
Matsuzaki K. Modulation of TGF beta signaling during progression of 
chronic liver diseases. Front Biosci. 2009;14:2923–2934.
McFarlane SI, Muniyappa R, Francisco R, et al. Clinical review 145: pleio-
tropic effects of statins: lipid reduction and beyond. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab. 2002;87:1451–1458.
McMillen IC, Robenson JS. Developmental origins of the metabolic 
syndrome: prediction, plasticity and programming. Physiol Rev. 
2005;85:571–633.
Mercer KE, Pulliam CF, Pedersen KB, et al. Soy protein isolate inhibits 
high fat-induced hepatic tumor promotion in DEN-treated mice. Exp Biol 
Med. 2017; 242:635-644.
Merrell M, Cherrington NJ. Drug metabolism alterations in nonalcoholic 
steatohepatitis. Drug Metab Rev. 2011;43:317–334.
Mifflin MD, St Jeor ST, Hill LA, et al. A new predictive equation for 
resting energy expenditure in healthy individuals. Am J Clin Nutr. 
1990;51:241-247.
Neel JV. Diabetes mellitus a “thirfty” genotype rendered detrimental by 
“progress”? Am J Hum Genet. 1962;14:352–362.
Nejak-Gowen KN, Monga SP. Beta catenin signaling, liver regeneration 
and hepatocellular cancer: sorting the good from the bad. Semin Cancer 
Biol. 2011;21:44–58.
Nguyen NT, Varela JE. Bariatric surgery for obesity and metabolic disor-
ders: state of the art. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017;14:160–169.
Nickerson JG, Momken I, Benton CR, et al. Protein-mediated fatty acid 
uptake: regulation by contraction, AMP-activated protein kinase and 
endocrine signals. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. 2007;32:865–873.
Nord RH, Rayne RK. Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry vs underwater 
weighing comparison of strengths and weaknesses. Asia Pac J Clin Nutr. 
1995;4:173–175.
Olson RE. Discovery of the lipoproteins, their role in fat transport and their 
significance as risk factors. J Nutr. 1998;128:439S–443S.
O’Rahilly S, Farooqi IS. Human obesity: a heritable neurobehavioral dis-
order that is highly sensitive to environmental conditions. Diabetes. 
2008;57:2905–2910.
Palee S, Chattipakorn S, Phromminitikul A, et al. PPAR gamma activator, 
rosiglitazone: is it beneficial or harmful to the cardiovascular system? 
World J Cardiol. 2011;26:144–152.
Pan DA, Lilloja S, Kriketos AD, et al. Skeletal muscle triglyceride levels are 
inversely related to insulin action. Diabetes. 1997;46:983–988.
Pan M, Cederbaum AI, Zhang YL, et al. Lipid peroxidation and oxidant 
stress regulate hepatic apolipoprotein B degradation and VLDL produc-
tion. J Clin Invest. 2004;113:1277–1287.
Postic C, Girard J. Contribution of de novo fatty acid synthesis to hepatic 
steatosis and insulin resistance: lessons from genetically engineered 
mice. J Clin Invest. 2008;118:829–838.
Ratner R, Goldberg R, Haffner S, et al. Impact of intensive lifestyle and 
metformin therapy on cardiovascular disease risk factors in the diabetes 
prevention program. Diabetes Care. 2005;26:977–980.
Reaven GM. Banting lecture 1988, role of insulin resistance in human dis-
ease. Diabetes. 1988;37:1595–1607.
Roberts DL, Dive C, Renehan AG. Biological mechanisms linking obesity 
and cancer risk: new perspectives. Annu Rev Med. 2010;61:301–316.
Robinson MK. Editorial, surgical treatment of obesity—weighing the facts. 
N Engl J Med. 2009;361:520.
Robinson MM, Dasari S, Konopka AR, et al. Enhanced protein transla-
tion underlies improved metabolic and physical adaptations to different 
exercise training modes in young and old humans. Cell Metab. 2017: 
25:581–592.
Ronis MJJ, Mercer KE, Engi B, et al. Global deletion of glutathione-
S-transferase A4 exacerbates developmental nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. 
Am J Pathol. 2017;187:418–430.
Roza AM, Shizgal HM. The Harris–Benedict equation reevaluated: rest-
ing energy requirements and body cell mass. Am J Clin Nutr. 1984;40: 
168–182.
Ruderman NB, Myers MG, Chipkin SR, Tornheim K. Hormone–fuel inter-
relationships: fed state, starvation and diabetes mellitus. In: Kahn CR, 
Weir GC, King GL, Jacobson AM, Moses AC, Smith RJ, eds. Joslin’s 
Diabetes Mellitus. Boston, MA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2005: 
127–144.
Sanyal AJ, Chalasani N, Kowdley KV, et al. Pioglitazone, vitamin E, or pla-
cebo for nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:1675–1685.
Shankar K, Harrell A, Kang P, et al. Carbohydrate-responsive gene expres-
sion in the adipose tissue of rats. Endocrinology. 2010;151:153–164.
Shankar K, Harrell A, Liu X, et al. Maternal obesity at conception pro-
grams obesity in the offspring. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 
2008;294:R528–R538.
Shen W, Gaskins HR, McKintosh MK. Influence of dietary fat on intestinal 
microbes, inflammation, barrier function and metabolic outcomes. J Nutr 
Biochem. 2014;25:270–280.
Shulman GI, Barrett EJ, Sherwin RS. Integrated fuel metabolism. In: Porte 
D, Sherwin RS, Baron A, Ellenberg M, Rifkin H, eds. Ellenberg and 
Rifkin’s Diabetes Mellitus. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2003:1–14.
Smith DL, Nagy T, Allison DB. Calorie restriction: what recent results sug-
gest for the future of aging research. Eur J Clin Invest. 2010;40:440–450.
Speakman JR. Thrifty genes for obesity, an attractive, but flawed idea and 
an alternative perspective: the “drifty gene” hypothesis. Int J Obes. 2008; 
32:1611–1617.
Speliotes E, Yerges-Armstrong LM, Wu J, et al. Genome-wide associa-
tion analysis identified variants associated with nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease that have distinct effects on metabolic traits. PLoS Genetics. 
2011;7:e1001324.
Stipanuk M. Nutrients: history and definitions. In: Stipanuk M, ed. Biochemical, 
Physiological, Molecular Aspects of Human Nutrition. St. Louis, MO: 
Saunders Elsevier; 2006:3–12.
Sutti S, Bruzzi S, Albano E. The role of immune mechanisms in alcoholic 
and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis: a 2015 update. Expert Rev Gastroenterol 
Hepatol. 2016;10:243–253.
Tilg H, Moschen AR. Evolution of inflammation in nonalcoholic fatty 
liver disease: the multiple parallel hits hypothesis. Hepatology. 
2010;52:1836–1846.
Tontisirin K, Maclean WC, Warwick P. Food Energy: Methods of Analysis 
and Conversion Factors. Report of a technical workshop. Vol 77 of FAO 
Food and Nutrition Paper, Issue 77 of Food Energy, Rome, December 
3–6, 2002; 2003. Rome: FAO.
Virtue S, Vidal-Puig A. Adipose tissue expandability, lipotoxicity and the 
metabolic syndrome—an allostatic perspective. Biochem Biophys Acta. 
2010;1801:338–349.
Wan X, Xu C, Yu C, Li Y. Role of NLRP3 inflammasome in the progression 
of NAFLD to NASH. Can J Gastroenterrol Hepatol. 2016;2016:6489012.
Ye J, Keller JN. Regulation of energy metabolism by inflammation: a feed-
back response in obesity and calorie restriction. Aging. 2010;2:361–368.

This page intentionally left blank