# 29 Nanoparticle Toxicology
# Casarett & Doull's Toxicology, 9th Edition
# Pages: 1400-1449
# Unit: Unit V Toxic Agents

29
chapter
Nanoparticle Toxicology
David B. Warheit, Günter Oberdörster,  
Agnes B. Kane, Scott C. Brown, Rebecca D. Klaper, 
and Robert H. Hurt
INTRODUCTION
Since the classic talk by Richard Feynman (1960) entitled “There 
Is Plenty of Room at the Bottom,” nanotechnology has grown to a 
multibillion dollar industry worldwide, with 1300 nanotechnology-
enabled products in commercial use by 2010 (Woodrow Wilson 
Center, 2012). The potential of adverse effects from exposure to 
“nanophase materials” was already pointed out earlier (Oberdörster 
and Ferin, 1992; Oberdörster et al., 1992), and concerns about 
human and environmental health and safety of engineered nanoma-
terials (ENMs) were initially raised in 2003 (Colvin, 2003). Since 
then, toxicity of high volume, commercial nanomaterials including 
nanosilver, fullerenes, quantum dots, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), 
graphene-based materials, and metal oxide nanoparticles (NPs) 
has been summarized in several reviews (Donaldson et al., 2004; 
Borm et al., 2006; Nel et al., 2006; Boczkowski and Hoet, 2009; 
Krug and Wick, 2011; Kunzmann et al., 2011; Sanchez et al., 2012). 
New ENMs and composites are continually emerging with poten-
tial for significant commercial applications in energy generation, 
environmental sensing and remediation, aerospace and defense, and 
medical diagnosis and therapy. Examples of nanoscale materials of 
different shapes and sizes are depicted in Fig. 29-1. Investigations 
of the magnitude of release of manufactured nanomaterials and their 
subsequent fate, transport, transformation, and potential for human 
and environmental exposure and toxicity (Fig. 29-2) have been 
areas of active research (Mueller and Nowack, 2008; Krug, 2014).
The United States National Nanotechnology Initiative (NNI, 
http://www.nano.gov/) defines nanotechnology as the understand-
ing and control of matter at the nanoscale at dimensions between 
approximately 1 and 100 nm, where unique phenomena enable 
novel applications. Roco (2005) defined the sizes as ranging from 
the intermediate length scale between a single atom or molecule and 
Introduction
Regulatory Oversight
Nanomaterial Basics
Perspectives: Engineered 
Nanoparticles versus Ambient 
Particulate Matter
Properties and Behaviors of ENPs 
versus Larger Particles
Classes of ENMs
Physicochemical Properties of 
Nanomaterials Relevant for 
Toxicity
Particle Size, Distributions, Geometry, 
and Dimensions
Surface Charge, Steric Interactions, 
and Agglomeration
Surface Area and Reactivity
Surface Chemistry, Surface 
­Morphology, and Surface 
­Impurities
Unique Properties
Biopersistence
Chemical Transformation
The Nanomaterial Biological 
Interface
Toxicity Mechanisms
Caveats in Nanotoxicology 
Assays
Safety Considerations in 
Nanomaterial Design
Case Study: Designing Safer 
Sunscreens
Mammalian Toxicology
Introduction
Concepts of Nanotoxicology
Dosemetrics
Portals of Entry
Dosing of the Respiratory Tract
Respiratory Tract Deposition
Respiratory Tract Clearance and 
Disposition of NP: Nanomaterials
Nanomaterials and the Brain
Elimination of Nanomaterials
Case Study: MWCNT
Bolus-type Exposures
Inhalation Studies
Critical Appraisal of CNT In Vivo 
Studies
Biological Degradation of Carbon 
Nanomaterials
Toxicity Testing
In Vitro Dosimetry
Predictive Toxicology
Development of a Set of Screening 
Tools that Reflect Important 
­Characteristics or Toxicity 
Pathways of the Complex Systems 
Described Above
Designing Alternative In Vitro  
Methods for Screening 
Pulmonary Toxicity of Fine 
and Nanoscale Particles
Read Across—Nanogrouping
Transition, Human— 
Eco-nanotoxicology
Ecotoxicology of ENMS
Environmental Uses and Exposures 
to Nanomaterials
Ecological Risk Assessment of 
Manufactured Nanomaterials
Toxicity of Manufactured 
Nanomaterials
Complications of Assays
Ecotoxicity of Nanomaterials
Mechanisms of Toxicity
References

1382
Toxic Agents
unit V
about 100 molecular diameters or about 100 nm, and emphasizes 
the ability to measure and transform at this nanoscale and to exploit 
the properties and functions specific for the nanoscale.
Although the NNI defines nanotechnology as a facilitator of 
unique properties for novel applications, it is noted that nanoma-
terials are frequently defined by dimensions alone. For instance, 
the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) Technical 
Committee on Nanomaterials (TC 229) defines a nanomaterial as a 
material with any external dimension in the nanoscale or having an 
internal structure or surface structure in the nanoscale (ISO/TC, 2015). 
ISO further describes subsets of nanomaterials and properties 
resulting from nanomaterials that are nanoenabled and nanoen-
hanced. These terms emphasize that materials at the nanoscale do 
not always have dramatically different properties than larger sized 
materials and that distinctions need to be made between augmented 
and unique properties. Many material properties may simply be 
enhanced due to nanoscale size or surface area, whereas a more 
limited set of properties are uniquely enabled at the nanoscale, for 
instance, because of quantum confinement effects or the onset of 
atypical catalytic activity.
Nanoscale materials
Nanometers
10–1
1
10
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
Bucky-ball
Nano-onion
Carbon
nanotube 
0.36 nm
2.25 nm
ZnO nanorods
1 µm
Graphene
nm–µm variable
variable
0.34 nm
Sodium
molecule
Fructose
Protein
Virus
Bacteria
Macrophage
Daphnia
Baseball
Figure 29-1.   Length scales for natural and synthetic structures (above) and some examples of engineered nanomaterials of varying size and shape (below).
Exposure
pathways
Receptor
interactions
Risk assessment
Predictive
models
Dispersion, transformation
Air, water, food, soil, sediment
Exposure assessment
Environment; human
Hazard characterization
Eco/Human toxicity
Risk characterization
Bioinformatics
Predicting nanostructure-induced responses
Sources
ENM synthesis
Characterization—Properties
Life cycle releases
From Cradle 
to 
Grave
Figure 29-2.   Research phases for assessing human and environmental safety of engineered nanomaterials.

Nanoparticle Toxicology
Chapter 29
1383
Nevertheless, the continuing introduction of nanoscale mate-
rials into consumer products, such as TiO2 in sunscreen creams, 
antibacterial Ag in textiles, quantum dots in televisions, multi-
walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) in sports equipment together 
with increasing numbers of publications reporting toxic responses 
mostly observed in in vitro studies, has led to increasing concerns 
and more public awareness about potential adverse health effects, 
fostered particularly also by alarmist headlines in the popular 
press and online media. Unrealistic high doses as well as ques-
tionable study designs are most often to blame. Thus, questions 
should be raised regarding actual versus perceived risk of nano-
technology applications, what is hype, what is reality? To provide 
answers to these questions is one of the goals of the subdiscipline 
of nanotoxicology.
Nanotoxicology can be defined as the science of studying 
adverse effects of nanomaterials on living organisms and the envi-
ronment. As illustrated in Fig. 29-2, there are multiple occasions 
for exposures to nanomaterials of humans and the environment and 
there is a serious need for investigation of the potential to cause 
adverse effects. The need of more toxicological research with 
the goal of characterizing risks associated with nanotechnology 
becomes even more urgent when considering the many beneficial 
and promising applications of nanotechnology for the betterment of 
human life, also for prophylactic, therapeutic, and diagnostic medi-
cal applications. The applications of nanotechnology for human 
health defines the new field of nanomedicine, and the development 
of new nanoenabled medical technologies must be accompanied by 
nanotoxicity studies to characterize undesirable effects and ensure 
the safety of new therapies and medical devices.
The field of nanotoxicology evolved from research on ambi-
ent airborne ultrafine particles (UFPs), particles up to about 100 
nm in any of three dimensions from diverse anthropogenic and 
natural emission sources, including tailpipe emissions, power 
plants, volcanic eruptions, forest fires, and others, as summarized 
in Table 29-1, which gives examples of three classes: natural NPs, 
unintentional anthropogenic NPs (or “incidental” NPs), and inten-
tional or engineered anthropogenic NPs. The same toxicological 
concerns and problems need to be addressed for UFPs and ENMs; 
they require similar research strategies with respect to study design 
and ­characterizing effects and underlying mechanisms at the pri-
mary portal of entry and in remote secondary organs. However, 
not only well-established respiratory tract and air pollution 
Table 29-1  
Ultrafine/Nanoparticles (<100 nm): Natural and Anthropogenic Sources
NATURAL
ANTHROPOGENIC
UNINTENTIONAL
INTENTIONAL
Gas-to-particle conversions
Internal combustion engines
Engineered nanoparticles:
Forest fires
Power plants
(controlled size and shape, designed for 
functionality) metals, semiconductors, 
metal oxides carbon, polymers needles, 
-tubes, -shells, -rings, -platelets; untreated, 
coated
Volcanoes (hot lava)
Incinerators
Viruses
Airplane jets
Biogenic magnetite: magnetotactic bacteria; 
protoctists, mollusks, arthropods, fish, birds, 
human brain, meteorite
Metal fumes (smelting, welding, etc.)
Polymer fumes
Other fumes
Ferritin (12.5 nm)
Heated surfaces
(Nanotechnology applied to many products: 
cosmetics, medical, fabrics, electronics, 
optics, displays, etc.)
Microparticles (<100 nm) (activated cells)
Frying, broiling, grilling
Electric motors
SOURCE: From Oberdörster et al. (2007a, 2007b).
toxicology (see Chaps. 15 and 31) form the basis for nanotoxicol-
ogy, but findings and knowledge accumulated in other traditional 
fields of research provide useful complementary information and 
foundations for nanotoxicology: for example, virology (nanosized 
­structures–cell interactions), metal and polymer-fume toxicology 
(small ­particle size and systemic effects), silica toxicology (par-
ticle surface ­reactivity), fiber toxicology (particle shape and biop-
ersistence), radionuclide toxicology (chemistry and biokinetics), 
and lung deposition studies/modeling (respiratory tract dosimetry) 
(Oberdörster et al., 2007a, 2007b). Input from these research areas 
can help in the design of studies and interpretation of results of 
nanotoxicological research. For example, a major challenge is to 
correlate the distinct physicochemical characteristics of engineered 
nanostructures with their toxicological behavior, as will be dis-
cussed later.
Of utmost importance for nanotoxicology, as for toxicology 
in general, are dose-related issues. Administered doses are mostly 
extraordinarily high when compared to doses achieved in vivo 
under realistic exposure scenarios. Slikker et al. (2004) stressed 
that the dose-dependent mechanisms are due to saturation processes 
underlying toxic responses between typical high acute experimental 
doses and lower human doses from realistic exposures (Fig. 29-3). 
Although high doses are justifiable for hazard characterization, 
ignoring real-world exposure situations may lead to erroneous con-
clusions about associated risks and causative mechanisms. Thus, 
consideration of the impact of dose, dose rate (influenced by dosing 
method in vitro and in vivo), and dosimetry should always be given 
highest priority when assessing nanomaterial toxicity. Dosimetry 
involves quantifying or calculating the amount of nanomaterials 
per body, per organ, per cell (microdosimetry), tissue or airway 
generation (inhalation route of exposure). Dosimetry should not be 
confused with “dosemetric,” which is defining a dose in terms of an 
inherent property (physical [number, mass, surface area of ENMs], 
chemical, reactivity) of nanostructures. Neither should dosimetry 
or dosemetric be mixed up with “exposure.” These issues will be 
discussed in more detail later.
The goals of nanotoxicology are to identify and characterize a 
hazard of ENMs for purposes of risk assessment for humans and the 
environment. This requires a highly multidisciplinary team approach, 
covering expertise in toxicology, biology, chemistry, physics, mate-
rial science, geology, exposure assessment, ­physiological-based 
pharmacokinetic (PBPK), and fate and transport modeling. Clinical

1384
Toxic Agents
unit V
expertise is also necessary to develop testing strategies, establish 
toxicity ranking, determine “safe” exposure levels, and derive pre-
ventive exposure guidelines. As depicted in Fig. 29-2, exposures 
throughout the life cycle of ENMs, from their source to their dis-
posal, must be considered. Dispersion state is an important modi-
fier of ENM–receptor interactions, as are physical and chemical 
transformation of the materials that occur in air, water, food, and 
soil prior to exposure. Identifying underlying mechanisms of such 
interactions will aid in assessing risk and establishing preventive 
measures. Developing predictive models is a distant goal for both 
human and eco-nanotoxicology.
REGULATORY OVERSIGHT
The uncertainty associated with the potential risks of nanotech-
nology led the Organization for Economic Co-Operation and 
Development (OECD) Chemical Committee to establish the 
Working Party of Manufactured Nanomaterials (WPMN) in 2006. 
The WPMN remains the leading international forum on regulatory 
policy and oversight for nanomaterials and addresses issues related 
to the risk assessment and risk management of nanomaterials 
regarding human and environmental health and safety. The WPMN 
comprises international governmental policymakers and subject 
matter experts including observers from environmental NGOs, 
unions, UN groups, the International Organization Standardization 
(ISO), and industry.
In September of 2013, the OECD Council on the Safety 
Testing and Assessment of Manufactured Nanomaterials recom-
mended that members manage the risks of manufactured nanoma-
terials, applying the existing international and national chemical 
regulatory frameworks or other management systems adapted to 
consider the specific properties of manufactured nanomaterials. It 
also recommended that in the testing of manufactured nanomateri-
als, apply the OECD Test Guidelines, adapted as appropriate and in 
regards to the Mutual Acceptance of Data (MAD) principle in the 
assessment of chemicals (OECD, 2013).
Member countries have moved forward with the Council 
Recommendation by integrating nanomaterials into their chemicals 
regulatory programs. Several jurisdictions have also implemented 
information collections rules or registries for nanomaterials to 
acquire information on their prevalence and uses in commerce. 
However, the application and definition varies largely.
The European Union was the first region to provide a regu-
latory definition of a nanomaterial in legal text. The European 
Commission’s (EC) Recommended Definition of a Nanomaterial 
defined nanomaterial as “a natural incidental or manufactured mate-
rial containing particles, in an unbound state or as an aggregate or 
an agglomerate and where, for 50% or more of the particles in the 
number size distribution, one or more external dimensions is in the 
size range 1 nm–100 nm” (European Commission, 2011a, 2011b). 
Because some traditional nanomaterials are less than 1 nm, it was 
clarified that fullerenes (a form of carbon containing a large sphe-
roidal molecular consisting of a hollow cage of atoms); graphene 
flakes (free-standing flake consisting of small number of well-
defined, stacked graphene layers of extended lateral dimension); 
and single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs—having a diameter 
close to 1 nm with a tube length many times longer) with minimum 
dimensions below 1 nm are considered by derogation. This defini-
tion faced technical hurdles from the start as robust methods for 
determining number percent distributions of nanomaterials derived 
from bulk powders and suspensions were not in place (Linsinger 
et al., 2012; Brown et al., 2013; Amenta et al., 2014; Rauscher et al., 
2014, 2015). The number percent metric was also criticized since at 
50% by number, the larger sized populations of particles would con-
tribute the most surface area, and potentially the dominant contribu-
tion to effects. Fig. 29-4 provides an illustration of the difference 
between a number percent and a mass or volume percent metric 
and demonstrates the surface area discrepancy. A revision to this 
definition is anticipated in late 2018 or in 2019 with accompanying 
guidance documentation.
Despite uncertain metrology, soon after the release of the EC 
recommended definition, several countries within Europe began 
national inventories and reporting rules borrowing aspects of the 
EC recommended definition of a nanomaterial. This was imple-
mented to avoid capturing specific classes of materials based on 
applications, potential for release, or incidental production. France, 
Conceptual depiction of factors for considering
dose-dependent transitions in determinants of toxicity
% toxic response
[Human exposure range]
[Typical acute experimental dose range]
-Log dose-
Saturation of metabolic
enzymes
Saturation of binding sites
Saturation of receptors or
transporter proteins
Saturation of defense or
repair enzymes
Figure 29-3.   Conceptual depiction of factors for considering dose-dependent transitions in determinants of toxicity. (From Slikker et al. [2004].)

Nanoparticle Toxicology
Chapter 29
1385
Belgium, Denmark, and Norway require the reporting of nanoma-
terials or articles containing nanomaterials. The EC developed a 
nano-observatory in 2017, for public outreach and information shar-
ing on nanomaterials in commerce. Outside of Europe, both Canada 
and the United States have also moved forward with reporting rules; 
however, unlike Europe they did not choose to move forward with a 
regulatory definition. Other regions of the world are following suit 
including Taiwan and South Korea.
The regulatory actions that have taken place to date are largely 
monitoring activities, in part due to marked uncertainty in the sci-
ences as well as the uses, quantities, and diversity of nanomaterials 
in commerce. After over a decade of research, the vast body of the 
scientific literature remains questionable. Publishing bias and poor 
quality research are significant concerns further complicated by 
increasing information accessibility to the public. Claims of poten-
tial adverse effects continue to influence public perception despite 
related concerns of research quality and human relevance. A large 
fraction of nanotoxicology research fails to meet basic levels of 
scientific rigor and reporting (Krug, 2014). The preferential use of 
non-guideline methods and the reluctance of scientific journals to 
accept “no effects data” remain concerns hindering a balanced out-
look (Warheit and Donner, 2015).
Early outputs from national commercial nanomaterial monitor-
ing efforts indicate that the largest application of nanosized materials 
are for coatings and inks that have safely been used in commerce 
for decades. The identification of these applications largely results 
from the scope of the definitions applied in those reporting efforts 
being simply focused on the size of the relevant constituent particles. 
The US EPA’s Section 8A rule notably sets a precedent and narrows 
the reporting requirement to nanoscale materials possessing unique 
and novel properties while applying a mass percent cutoff including 
agglomerates and aggregates. These criteria significantly narrow the 
scope of materials and possess far fewer metrology challenges.
NANOMATERIAL BASICS
Perspectives: Engineered Nanoparticles 
versus Ambient Particulate Matter
A large body of publications on the toxicology of airborne ambi-
ent particulate matter (PM) has shown that they can elicit adverse 
effects not only in the respiratory tract but also in secondary organs 
and systemically (see Chap. 31 on Air Pollution). An extensive 
critical review of the health effects of fine particulate air pollution 
(Pope and Dockery, 2006) pointed out that exposure to the smallest 
fraction of PM, referred to as UFPs or PM0.1, particles smaller than 
0.1 µm or 100 nm, has been associated with effects in the cardiovas-
cular and central nervous system as a consequence of their trans-
location to and distribution via blood circulation and neurons. It is 
noteworthy that the definition of UFPs is based on the same maxi-
mum dimension (100 nm) as the US NNI and ISO/TC 229 (2015) 
definition of nanomaterials. As will be discussed later, translocation 
of UFP and engineered nanoparticles (ENPs) has been clearly dem-
onstrated, but only small amounts are translocating, and thus direct 
interaction of the translocated particles with organs beyond the lung 
may not be the sole explanation for their effects. Epidemiological 
studies have demonstrated that a major factor for inducing adverse 
effects from ambient particulate air ­pollution—including UFP—is 
susceptibility such as pre-­existing disease (asthma, cardiovascular 
disease, diabetes), age (very young, elderly), or genetic background 
(polymorphism).
A recent comprehensive review assesses and compares epide-
miological and toxicological research of ambient UFP versus ENM 
(Stone et al., 2017). Effects and underlying mechanisms of cardio-
vascular, CNS, and other organs targeted by inhalation exposures 
to both types of particles are described, summarized by a workshop 
of experts who identified 19 lessons which are meant to facilitate 
knowledge exchange between different disciplines. Gaps in a num-
ber of key areas are identified where additional research will facili-
tate simultaneously both the ambient and engineered nanoparticle 
research. The authors point out the opportunity to apply knowledge 
from ENM toxicology to inform ambient PM health risk research 
and vice versa.
Properties and Behaviors of ENPs versus 
Larger Particles
Table 29-2 contrasts differences between NPs (<100 nm) and larger 
particles (>500 nm) in terms of some general characteristics, trans-
location propensity, interactions with cells, and effects, assuming 
inhalation exposure and the respiratory tract as the portal of entry. 
Biological systems do not perceive a precise boundary at the 100 nm 
size threshold, but rather a gradual transition between nano- and 
larger-sized particles, and therefore, the 100 to 500 nm size is shown 
but not covered in the table. Particle scientists tend to refer to this 
transition zone as the intermediate zone between particle size scale 
dominated by surface interactions (smaller particles) and size scales 
predominantly dominated by gravity or internal interactions (larger 
particles). The general phenomena explain why granular sugar read-
ily flows like a liquid when poured but fine powdered sugar and 
flour do not. This is also the same consideration that explains why 
nanoscale particles can form dispersions that do not settle unlike 
coarser materials. For a variety of reasons, the range of 0 to 100 was 
used; however, the applicable transition size range depends on the 
particle shape, density, and other system factors that are beyond the 
scope of this chapter and not covered in the table.
Marked differences—which will be discussed in the follow-
ing sections—between the smaller and larger size classes are as 
follows: The high number and surface area per unit volume of NPs, 
which enhance the chemical reactivity (e.g., as catalysts) of small 
particles and potentially increase their biological/toxicological 
activity toward cells and tissues; the underlying mechanisms for 
deposition of inhaled particles in the respiratory tract, which is gov-
erned by diffusion or Brownian motion for NP versus sedimenta-
tion, impaction, and interception for larger particles; and differences 
Not nano
Not nano
Nano
50% nano by volume distribution
50% nano by number
distribution
Nano
Figure 29-4.   Schematic illustration of the differences between volume and 
number distribution. (Reproduced from Brown et al. [2013].)

1386
Toxic Agents
unit V
with regard to the extent and impact of adsorptions and adsorbed 
conformation/activity of proteins and lipids (corona formation) for 
larger versus smaller particles at the primary portal of entry and 
secondary target sites.
Mucociliary and alveolar macrophage-mediated elimination 
following deposition in the respiratory tract is efficient for both 
nano- and larger particles once they are internalized by macro-
phages. NPs inhaled and deposited as singlets, however, are too 
small to be efficiently recognized and phagocytized by alveolar 
macrophages (Oberdörster et al., 2005; Semmler-Behnke et al., 
2007; Geiser et al., 2008)—unless they are aggregated or agglom-
erated to form larger particles—and thus overall alveolar macro-
phage-mediated clearance in the lung is poor. In contrast, uptake 
by epithelial cells and translocation into blood and lymphatic cir-
culation occurs regularly for NPs, and only under heavy overload 
conditions for larger particles. Uptake of nanosized particles into 
sensory nerve endings of the tracheobronchial tree has also been 
described (Hunter and Undem, 1999), which is unlikely to occur 
for large particles.
Differences in cell entry mechanisms between NPs and larger 
particles and intracellular distribution to mitochondria and the 
nucleus are discussed in subsequent sections. With regard to the 
type of effects induced at the primary site of entry, there does not 
seem to be a fundamental difference. However, effects in secondary 
organs are more likely to develop, possibly aided by a direct effect 
of translocated NP.
Manufactured NPs show a range of other size-dependent 
properties and behaviors. Among these are nanoenabled proper-
ties such as depressed melting points, size-dependent electronic 
band gaps, quantum mechanical effects giving rise to size-tunable 
fluorescence in quantum dots (semiconductor NPs), and confined 
plasmon resonance, which shifts the light absorption and scatter-
ing in a way that alters the colors of nanoscale materials from their 
larger-sized counterparts, giving rise—for example—to nanosilver 
particles that appear yellow and to gold NPs that appear red. Unique 
size-dependent properties of NPs form the basis for many of their 
technological uses, but the significance of many of these properties 
for biological effects still needs to be evaluated.
Classes of ENMs
Manufactured nanomaterials cover an enormous range of chemi-
cal compositions, and geometries, ranging from simple isometric 
forms (particles), one-dimensional (1D) forms (nanofibers, tubes, 
rods, wires), and two-dimensional (2D) forms (plate-like or disk-
like materials typically referred to as “nanosheets,” for very thin 
and flexible forms, or “nanoplatelets” for thicker stiff materials). A 
large fraction of the stable elements in the periodic table have now 
been cast into NP forms, or incorporated as part of a nanocomposite 
structure. Nanomaterials can be manufactured from metals, metal 
oxides, sulfides or selenides, carbon, polymers, or from biological 
molecules including lipids, carbohydrates, peptides, proteins, and 
nucleic acid oligomers. Fig. 29-5 presents a nanomaterial classifi-
cation system based on a matrix involving geometry (particles, 1D 
forms, 2D forms) and chemistry (metals, semiconductors, ceram-
ics, carbons, polymers; Duncan, 2011; Cassee et al., 2011; Feng 
and Liu, 2011; Rosenthal et al., 2011; Tran and Nguyen, 2011). 
The combination of geometry and chemistry gives rise to a vast 
Table 29-2  
What Is Different: Nanoparticles versus Larger Particles (respiratory tract as portal-of-entry)
NANOPARTICLES (<100 nm)
LARGER PARTICLES (>500 nm)
General characteristics
Ratio: number or surface area/volume or mass
High
Low
Agglomeration in air, liquids
Likely (dependent on medium and surface)
Less likely
Deposition mechanism in respiratory tract
Diffusion; throughout resp. tract
Sedimentation, impaction, 
interception; throughout resp. tract
Protein/lipid adsorption in vitro
Very effective and important
Less effective
Protein/lipid adsorption in vivo
Yes
Some
Translocation to secondary target organs
Yes
Generally not (to liver under “overload”)
Clearance
 • Mucociliary
Probably yes
Efficient
 • By alveolar macrophages
Poor
Efficient
 • Into or across lung epithelium
Yes
Mainly under overload
 • Lymphatic
Yes
Under overload
 • Blood circulation
Yes
Under overload
 • Sensory neurons (uptake + transport)
Yes
Not likely
Cell entry/uptake
Yes (caveolae; clathrin; lipid rafts; diffusion)
Yes (primarily phagocytic cells)
 • Mitochondria
Yes
No
 • Nucleus
Yes (<40 nm)
No
Effects (caveat: dose!)
At secondary target organs
Yes
(No)
At portal of entry (resp. tract)
Yes
Yes
 • Inflammation
Yes
Yes
 • Oxidative stress
Yes
Yes
 • Activation of signaling pathways
Yes
Yes
 • Genotoxicity, carcinogenicity
Probably yes
Some
SOURCE: Data from Oberdörster et al. (2009).

Nanoparticle Toxicology
Chapter 29
1387
number of potential nanomaterials. Not all are, or will be commer-
cially significant and find widespread use, but a great many have 
been synthesized and characterized in R&D laboratories around 
the world. Nanomaterials may be adhered to surfaces such as bio-
medical implants to enhance their function and biocompatibility, or 
incorporated into nanostructured solids or composites to improve 
strength, conductivity, and durability. Nanomaterials are often inte-
grated into complex, active structures for chemical or biological 
sensors or other devices.
There are many approaches for synthesizing and manufactur-
ing nanomaterials. Some methods use high-temperature processing 
in the vapor phase, such as inert gas condensation, flame synthe-
sis, or “floating catalyst” chemical vapor deposition (Zhang et al., 
2011). These processes produce dry powders that can lead to occu-
pational exposures when reactors are opened to extract products or 
the powdered materials are handled or transferred. Other methods 
such as physical or chemical vapor deposition grow nanostruc-
tures on substrates. Substrate-bound nanostructures are less likely 
to cause exposures of concern, but can become detached during 
processing or use. A large class of methods uses solution process-
ing, also known as “colloidal synthesis” (Tran and Nguyen, 2011). 
These methods involve reagent addition to liquid solvents to nucle-
ate NPs that remain suspended in the liquid. This class of methods 
is less likely to lead to inhalation exposures, but they can occur if 
the liquid is sprayed or nebulized to produce mists, or if the NPs 
are dried into powders or transferred onto substrates and dried for 
further processing (Hallock et al., 2009).
Finally, most nanotoxicology research has focused on a lim-
ited set of simple nanomaterials with high manufacturing volume 
or the potential for high manufacturing volume in the near term 
(including ZnO, TiO2, fullerenes, CNTs, nanosilver, quantum dots). 
Increasingly, the nanotoxicology field will have to focus on more 
complex nanomaterials under development, especially as techno-
logical applications for those materials approach commercializa-
tion (Maynard et al., 2011). It will be a major challenge for the 
nanotoxicology field to acquire the data necessary for risk assess-
ment on the many new nanoproducts that are anticipated over the 
coming decades. Finally, as nanoscience progresses, there will be 
less emphasis on simple geometries and chemistry (see Fig. 29-6) 
and more emphasis on complex material structures that combine 
­nanoelements into active or smart structures (Dvir et al., 2011). 
Early examples of this are the synthesis of two-component or 
“­dumbbell-shaped” NPs composed of gold and iron oxide (Xu 
et al., 2008) or iron–platinum nanowires (Wang et al., 2007). 
Geometry
Chemistry
Isometric particles
1D; ﬁbers/tubes
Silver, gold nanoparticles 
Iron, cobalt, nickel magnetic NPs 
Copper NP conducting inks
2D; plates, disks
Gold or platinum 
nanowires
CdSe/ZnS quantum dots 
(see example) 
Metals
Semiconductors
Ceramics
Carbons
Polymers
Examples:
Zinc oxide, titanium dioxide 
pigments and sun screens, 
cerium oxide catalysts 
Fullerenes, carbon black, 
carbon nanohorns
Biodegradable polymer 
nanobeads for medical 
applications, branched dendrimers 
Si, ZnO semiconducting 
nanowires, nanorods 
Plate-like 
semiconductor 
nanocrystals
Electrospun ceramic 
nanoﬁbers for 
composite ﬁllers 
Electrospun 
polymer nanoﬁbers 
Carbon nanotubes 
Carbon nanoﬁbers 
Graphene, graphene oxide 
few-layer graphene 
(example) 
Nanoclays
MoS2 nanosheets
h-BN nanosheets
 Silver nanoplates
Graphene
Shell for
efﬁciency
and stability
Semiconductor
core
Quantum
dot
2–12 nm
Organic caps
or ligands
Single-walled carbon
nanotube
Figure 29-5.   Classification of nanomaterials by geometry and chemistry. The examples in this matrix illustrate the diversity in engineered nanomaterials, 
a diversity that continues to increase as new nanomaterials are synthesized.
Diameter (nm)
% surface molecules
1
60%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
10
100
1000
10000
Figure 29-6.   Fraction of molecules in a particle that lie on its surface as a 
function of particle size. (From Fissan [2008].)

1388
Toxic Agents
unit V
Understanding the toxicological profile of complex nanoassemblies 
will also present a major challenge to the field in the future.
The classification and categorization of nanomaterials for 
regulatory purposes has proven to be a challenge. Several expert 
workshops on grouping and categorization of nanomaterials have 
been conducted. In general, it is concluded that at present nano-
materials need to be considered on a case by case basis, applying 
information from bulk chemistry, surface chemistry, and shape. The 
increasing complexity of ENM design involving components from 
various material classes (e.g., metals, polymers, and metal oxides) 
integrated in increasingly intricate structural assemblies further 
challenges universal read-across and categorization schemes.
Physicochemical Properties of 
Nanomaterials Relevant for Toxicity
For chemical substances existing as liquids or gases, physico-
chemical frameworks exist for predicting exposure, biopersistence, 
and for screening potential toxicological consequences primarily 
through phase partitioning behavior (e.g., water solubility, octa-
nol-water partitioning, vapor pressure, boiling and melting point 
[USEPA, 1997]). For finely divided solid particulate materials 
the evaluation becomes more complex. While multi-micrometer-
sized particles may have little potential for migration or exposure, 
nanosized materials share attributes from both larger particles and 
molecules that draw concerns. Some ENMs can exhibit prolonged 
dispersion and Brownian motion like molecular solutes; however, 
they also have solid surfaces that are susceptible to hydration, ion-
ization, adsorption, and transformation process. The later results in 
the stability and compartmental behavior of ENMs being largely 
dependent on environmental factors and history. The transport 
behavior of nanomaterials tends to be extrinsic, stochastic, and 
relatively irreversible in nature. Moreover, for extremely small 
nanomaterials (e.g., on the order of 10 nm) traditional, intrin-
sic, physical–chemical properties such as conductivity and light 
adsorption can become extrinsic in nature and dependent on inter-
actions with molecules in the environment among other systemic 
factors. These unique attributes give rise to the use of ENMs for 
sensing applications, but further complicate their characterization 
and categorization as chemical substances.
Fig. 29-7 summarizes the nanomaterial properties known or 
thought to be relevant to biological responses. These properties are 
discussed in more detail in the section below, or in some cases in 
later sections on mammalian toxicity and ecotoxicity.
Particle Size, Distributions, Geometry, and Dimensions  
Nanomaterials exist as populations of particles with variations in 
dimensions and morphology. The distribution of sizes and shapes 
impacts transport and exposure phenomena and can influence 
­cellular uptake. Particle size, although used to define nanomate-
rials, is not an intrinsic property and can change substantially in 
the ­environment through dissolution, precipitation, agglomeration, 
and heteroagglomeration processes. Agglomeration is the process 
wherein two or more similar particles weakly stick to one another 
through physical interactions. Heteroagglomeration is the process 
where particles of different compositions similarly form weak asso-
ciations. Monitoring and predicting particle size distributions under 
real exposure scenarios can be challenging, and typically only size 
distributions thought to be characteristics of the nanomaterial at key 
times are reported (e.g., as prepared, as delivered). For biomedical 
applications, nanoparticles of narrow size distributions are typically 
desired for consistent delivery or excretion. Dispersed particles 
in the circulation less than 5 nm are cleared via renal excretion, 
­particles less than 50 nm are excreted via the hepatobiliary route.
The geometry and dimensions of nanomaterials are also 
important in cellular uptake, systemic translocation, potential 
Figure 29-7.  Physicochemical and functional NP properties of relevance for toxicology. (From Robert Hurt [2018].)
Nanoparticle
Solid oxide
formation
Sulfide,
selenide
formation
O2, ROS
GSH, other
reducing agents
Soluble
products
Chemical phase
transformations
(oxidation, reaction with sulfide, selenide)
Dissolution
(simple, hydrolytic, oxidative, reductive)
Redox reactions
(mediated by quinone functional
groups, electron/hole pairs)
Adsorption
Small molecules, proteins (corona formation),
lipids (binding, extraction from membranes)
H2O
O2
e–
e–
HO-
H2O
OH. + H+
O2.– 
hole
NH
N
N
H
N
N
H2N
O
O
OH
O
HO
O
H
N

Nanoparticle Toxicology
Chapter 29
1389
toxicity, and excretion. Nanomaterials can enter target cells by 
passive diffusion, direct physical penetration, or active, receptor-­
mediated uptake by endocytosis or phagocytosis depending on their 
size and extent of agglomeration. For example, small NPs up to 
50 nm in diameter appear to enter cells and subcellular ­organelles, 
including ­mitochondria and the nucleus, by passive diffusion 
(Geiser et al., 2005; Chithrani, 2010). SWCNTs have been shown 
to directly puncture bacterial cells leading to osmotic lysis and 
death (Kang et al., 2007; Akhavan and Ghaderi, 2010). SWCNT 
have been reported to translocate from the alveoli into the intersti-
tium of the lung where they promote collagen deposition and inter-
stitial fibrosis (Wang et al., 2011a). Rigid, long, high-aspect ratio 
(needle-like) nanomaterials, similar to amphibole asbestos fibers 
(Palomaki et al., 2011), are recognized by macrophages; how-
ever, they undergo incomplete uptake or frustrated phagocytosis 
if they are longer than the macrophage diameter (Shi et al., 2011), 
resulting in impaired clearance from the lung, lysosomal disrup-
tion, and activation of the inflammasome resulting in the release 
of pro-inflammatory cytokines (Hamilton et al., 2009; Donaldson 
et al., 2010). High-aspect ratio materials (i.e., particulates with sig-
nificantly greater lengths relative to ­diameters—e.g., fibers) with 
2D structure (nanosheets) also show geometry-dependent cellular 
interactions. These include spontaneous cell membrane penetration 
initiated at near-atomically thin edges and corners of the 2D sheets 
(Li et al., 2013), or for nanosheets with large lateral dimension, 
impaired macrophage uptake (Sanchez et al. 2012), and lung injury 
at high doses (Roberts et al., 2016).
Surface Charge, Steric Interactions, and Agglomeration  
NPs have a strong tendency to form agglomerates in the dry state, 
and in many cases also in liquid suspension (Fig. 29-8). This ten-
dency is a natural consequence of small size, which leads to inter-
molecular attractive forces that are strong relative to gravity or 
to other forces that disrupt aggregates. Attractive forces between 
particles are determined by size, density, chemistry, electronic 
structure, morphology, and surface charge. In water, van der Waals 
forces and hydrophobic forces drive the agglomeration of many NP 
types. To obtain stable dispersions of non-agglomerated nanoma-
terials, it is typically necessary to add macromolecular coatings 
(caveat: by doing so it will change particle property potentially 
affecting toxicity) that prevent particle–particle attachment through 
steric hindrance, or to impart an electrical charge on the NP surfaces 
that lead to particle–particle repulsion. A common indicator of sur-
face charge is the “zeta potential” which is the electrical potential 
at the outer surface of the liquid shell (including, adsorbates, ions, 
solutes, and solvent molecules) that travels with the particle dur-
ing its motion. A common rule of thumb is that the zeta poten-
tial must be >30 mV or <−30 mV for repulsion to be sufficiently 
strong to avoid agglomeration and maintain a uniform dispersion. 
In physiological fluids or seawater, sodium chloride and other ions 
“screen” the particle surface charge and lower the zeta potential, 
often causing aggregation. This property is a complicating factor 
in nanotoxicology assays (discussed below) and is a challenge for 
some biomedical applications. NPs may also adsorb molecules 
from their environment that increase stability (Nel et al., 2009). 
Following injection or inhalation, NPs become coated with biomol-
ecules such as serum albumin, an amphiphilic protein that carries 
poorly soluble molecules in the blood, or phospholipids in lung 
surfactant lining the alveoli as discussed in detail subsequently. For 
drug delivery applications (De Jong and Borm, 2008), NPs may be 
coated with biocompatible surfactants such as sodium cholate, or 
by biocompatible polymers such as phospholipid-polyethylene gly-
col (PEG) that stabilize colloidal suspensions of NPs through steric 
hindrance—a mechanism separate from electrostatic repulsion as 
indicated by zeta potential.
Surface Area and Reactivity  At the nanoscale, chemical and 
physical forces govern the assembly of atoms or molecules resulting 
Figure 29-8.   Agglomeration and aggregation of nanoparticles in liquids and as dry powders. (Modified from Jiang et al. [2009].)
Important parameters: Primary particle size (nm); hydrodynamic diameter (nm); zeta
potential (mV, measure of surface charge); double layer thickness (nm); steric forces
Primary
particle
Primary particle
+ ++
+
+
+
++–
–
–
–
– –
–
Agglomerates
Primary particles held by weak
van der Waals forces
Electrical double layer
(thickness depends on
solution ionic strength)
Liquid dispersions
Dry powders
Hydrodynamic
diameter
Weak repulsive forces in liquid
resulting in agglomeration
(low surface charge; thinner double layer;
no steric forces)
Repulsive forces dominant
(high surface charge; thicker double layer;
steric forces)
Aggregates
Primary particles held by strong
chemical bonds (sintered)
Agglomerated
Aggregates

1390
Toxic Agents
unit V
in nanostructures with a high surface-to-volume or surface-to-mass 
ratio. For example, 5 nm spherical NPs have 1000 times the sur-
face area of 5 μm particles of the same chemical composition and 
at the same airborne mass concentration. This high surface area 
of suspended NPs at equivalent mass concentrations is responsible 
for increased surface reactivity, increased adsorption of chemi-
cals, strong catalytic activity (on an equivalent mass basis), and 
enhanced dissolution rates. As particle diameter decreases below 
~100 nm, the number of exposed surface molecules increases 
sharply (Fig.  29-9; Oberdörster et al., 2005). The large number 
of exposed surface molecules or atoms exposes surface defects, 
vacant sites, and dangling chemical bonds that enhance chemical 
and redox reactivity. Thus, the NP surface can have higher surface 
area, higher surface energy (e.g., through surface curvature), and 
higher surface reactivity relative to the same mass of micron-sized 
particles of the same chemical composition (Fenoglio et al., 2011). 
Determining specific surface reactivity—e.g., ROS generating 
capacity per unit NP surface area—has been suggested as a mea-
sure to group ENMs (Oberdörster and Kuhlbusch,  2018).
Surface Chemistry, Surface Morphology, and Surface 
Impurities  The surface chemistry of NPs strongly influences 
the mode and type of interactions with biotic systems. High sur-
face area, high surface curvature, and exposed surface atoms or 
molecules promote increased dissolution and release of ions from 
metallic or metal oxide NPs relative to bulk particles of the same 
chemical composition in fluids. As an example, Ag+ ions can be 
slowly released from nanosilver particles in aqueous environ-
ments through oxidation by dissolved O2 (Liu and Hurt, 2010). 
This ion release accounts for much of the bactericidal properties 
of clothes, toys, and medical devices coated or impregnated with 
nanosilver particles. Metal ions are toxic to bacteria and aquatic 
organisms by inhibition of enzymes and transport proteins. Silver 
ions have been shown to induce swelling of the lamellae of trout 
gills due to inhibition of carbonic anhydrase and Na+/K+ ATPase 
activity (Scown et al., 2010). ZnO NPs are incorporated into sun-
screens where they absorb ultraviolet (UV) light; however, in water, 
Zn2+ ions are rapidly released and cause acute toxicity (Xia et al., 
2008a). Surface hydrophilicity of charged NPs increases their abil-
ity to be suspended in water, whereas surface hydrophobicity of 
fullerenes or graphene repels water and enables these hydropho-
bic nanomaterials to partition into lipid membranes and gain entry 
into target cell (Sayes et al., 2005; Titov et al., 2010). TiO2 NPs 
are used in sunscreens because they absorb UV radiation, but their 
small size reduces the scattering of visible light, and the sunscreens 
appear transparent to the human eye. UV absorption can also lead 
to formation of electron/hole pairs that react on the particle sur-
face to generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as superoxide 
anion (O2
−) from molecular oxygen (O2) (Schilling et al., 2010). 
Surface defects, especially on crystalline NPs, expose electron 
donor/acceptor active groups that donate an electron to molecular 
oxygen, generating superoxide anions, or accept electrons from 
water producing the highly reactive hydroxyl radical. Spontaneous 
or photoactivated generation of electrons can occur based on the 
semiconducting properties of fullerenes and some metal oxide NPs 
(Xia et al., 2006).
Industrial nanomaterials are synthesized through a wide range 
of chemical processes and are purified to differing degrees. It is not 
uncommon to receive nanomaterials that contain residual surfac-
tants, ions, acids, bases, and other potential reaction contaminants. 
Due diligence is required to determine whether these residual mate-
rials are key contributors to observed outcomes.
Catalytic oxidation on
carbon defect and edge sites
GSH
O2
–
–
–
GSSH
Antioxidant
deactivation
Surface oxide
intermediates
Oxidative release of metal
ions in aerobic environments
nAg
Ag+
Reduced
oxygen species
O2, H+
Photochemical activity in crystalline
titanium dioxide (anatase) nanoparticles
UV
e–
hole+
e-acceptor
e-donor
Redox cycling of metal catalyst
residues in carbon nanotubes
Ascorbate
Fe2+ + H2O2
Fe3+ + OH– + OH•
Fe
Figure 29-9.   Examples of biological reactivity of nanoparticles.

Nanoparticle Toxicology
Chapter 29
1391
For instance, CNTs are synthesized in the presence of metal 
catalysts, usually iron, nickel, or cobalt, and may contain redox-
active metal residues that can undergo redox cycling and iron-
catalyzed generation of highly reactive hydroxyl radical (OH•) via 
Fenton chemistry (Kagan et al., 2006; Guo et al., 2007). The high 
surface area of ENMs can adsorb organic molecules such as polycy-
clic aromatic hydrocarbons that are potentially carcinogenic (Yang 
et al., 2006) and quinones that also participate in redox cycling and 
generation of free radicals (Nel et al., 2006). Cationic NPs that have 
surface amide groups and cationic dendrimers are especially cyto-
toxic because they induce membrane damage, especially in lyso-
somes where the “proton sponge effect” leads to accumulation of 
water and chloride ions and osmotic rupture (Xia et al., 2008b).
In summary, surface properties are major determinants of 
biological reactivity due to (1) high surface area, (2) surface 
charge, (3) hydrophobicity and partitioning into lipid membranes, 
(4) ­dissolution and release of metal ions, and (5) redox activity lead-
ing to generation of ROS (Nel et al., 2006, 2009; Xia et al., 2008b; 
Stone et al., 2009).
Unique Properties  NPs also have the potential to display 
unique electronic and magnetic properties relative to micron-sized 
particles. NPs may interact with energy differently from larger 
sized materials due to changes in electronic structure, and increas-
ing dominance of surface versus bulk contributions to properties 
making parameters, commonly thought of as being intrinsically a 
function of environment. As previously mentioned, it is this sur-
face sensitivity that gives rise to the use of nanomaterials as sen-
sors (e.g., metal-oxide semiconductor field-effect transistors) in 
a wide range of potential applications. The small size and shape 
of nanomaterials can also lead to changes in electronic structure 
that in turn impacts how the nanomaterial interacts with electro-
magnetic energy. For example, noble metal NPs show preferred 
wavelengths for absorption and scattering of light due to resonant 
electron oscillations. This “­confined plasmon resonance” phenom-
enon is shown by 40 to 100 nm diameter gold or silver NPs and 
leads to color shifts that impart a yellow color to nanosilver and 
a red color to some types of nanogold (Tran and Nguyen, 2011). 
Ferromagnetic NPs (e.g., iron, nickel, cobalt, and some oxides) less 
than about 10 nm in diameter exhibit the property of superparamag-
netism. These particles respond strongly to an external magnetic 
field but have no permanent magnetic moment in the absence of 
the field because thermal energy is sufficient to cause fluctuations 
in the small magnetic dipole associated with each particle (Cole 
et al., 2011). This property is exploited for contrast enhancement 
in diagnostic MRI and for hyperthermia induced by an external 
magnetic field to kill tumors targeted by magnetic NPs (Fortin 
et al., 2007). Although these properties are evident for some nano-
materials, unique ­properties—distinct from larger sized forms of 
the material—do not automatically appear with the scaling of size.
Biopersistence  Biopersistence of ENMs is an important factor 
in their environmental and biological toxicity. Biopersistence is 
determined by mechanical clearance and dissolution processes; the 
latter not only produces biologically active soluble species (as dis-
cussed above), but can also degrade the particle and eventually clear 
it from biological tissues. ZnO NPs are an excellent example of an 
ENM that can exhibit acute cellular toxicity due to rapid release 
of Zn2+ ions. The rate of dissolution of metal oxides is increased 
by natural organic matter in the aqueous environment (Xia et al., 
2008b); therefore, these NPs have low biodurability and it is 
predicted that they would not bioaccumulate in the environment. 
Following uptake by macrophages at the site of entry, metallic and 
metal oxide NPs reach the acidic phagolysosomal compartment 
where release of metal ions is accelerated. Intracellular release of 
Zn2+ or Ni2+ ions, for example, is linked with significant acute tox-
icity to target cells in the lungs (Liu et al., 2007; Xia et al., 2008b; 
Pietruska et al., 2011). Even metallic nickel NPs which are insol-
uble can undergo oxidation by O2 following exposure to produce 
soluble surface oxides. This slow oxidation dissolution process 
produces sustained intracellular release of Ni2+ ions that cause per-
sistent inflammation (Lu et al., 2009) and activation of the HIF1-α 
signaling pathway in human lung epithelial cells (Pietruska et al., 
2011), which has been linked to nickel carcinogenicity (Costa 
et al., 2005). Jakubek et al. (2009) reported that release of yttrium 
ions in trace levels from CNTs displaces Ca2+ from voltage-gated 
calcium channels with implications for neuronal activity. So far, 
no chronic rodent carcinogenicity assays have been conducted to 
assess whether inhalation of metal or metal oxide NPs can induce 
lung cancer or neurological disease.
In contrast, carbon nanomaterials are not easily oxidized 
under most environmental conditions. They are potentially bio-
durable, raising concern that they could bioaccumulate in the 
environment or be biopersistent in the lungs and other organs fol-
lowing inhalation during occupational exposure or direct injection 
or implantation in biomedical applications (Bianco et al., 2011). 
Some commercial types of long, rigid, high aspect ratio CNTs have 
been shown to induce toxicological endpoints similar to carcino-
genic asbestos fibers (Sanchez et al., 2009) as discussed in detail 
below. Biopersistence in the lungs and pleural or peritoneal spaces 
is an important physicochemical characteristic of asbestos and man-
made mineral fibers associated with carcinogenicity (Bernstein 
et  al., 2005). Several recent studies have shown that carboxyl-
ated SWCNTs undergo oxidative degradation in the presence of 
the plant enzyme, horseradish peroxidase, and H2O2 (Allen et al., 
2008, 2009), or following exposure to phagolysosomal simulant 
fluid containing H2O2 to mimic the lysosomal compartment of mac-
rophages (Liu et al., 2010c). Oxidized or nitrogen-doped MWCNTs 
also showed both exfoliation of the concentric tubes and shorten-
ing in the presence of horseradish peroxidase and H2O2 (Zhao 
et al., 2011). Other studies (Dresselhaus and Terrones, 2013) showed 
that N-doped MWCNTs did not show an inflammatory response. 
Oxidatively degraded SWCNTs did not induce lung inflamma-
tion or toxicity following pharyngeal aspiration in mice (Kagan 
et al., 2010), providing proof-of-principle for deliberate design of 
engineered CNTs that are biodegradable and less likely to induce 
acute or chronic disease following inhalation or injection for tumor 
imaging or drug delivery (Bianco et al., 2011). Graphene oxide 
nanosheets have also been shown to be degraded in the presence 
of horseradish peroxidase and H2O2 (Kotchey et al., 2011) or by 
Shewanella bacteria that chemically reduce graphene oxide to gra-
phene (Salas et al., 2010). These studies provide novel approaches 
for biodegradation of ENMs and prevention of long-term adverse 
environmental and health impacts.
Chemical Transformation  The dissolution and degradation 
processes discussed above are a subset of the larger class of “chem-
ical transformation” that nanomaterials can undergo in the natural 
environment or in biological tissue. Most nanomaterials are synthe-
sized with the input of chemical or thermal energy and when trans-
ferred into environmental or biological fluid phases they seek to 
release this free energy by chemical transformation into more sta-
ble phases. Chemical transformations include dissolution to soluble 
molecular species, degradation to complex solid debris, or chemical 
reaction to form new solid phases that include sulfides, selenides, 
or oxides (Liu et al., 2012; Lowry et al., 2012). Such transforma-
tions can dramatically alter nanomaterial properties, and require

1392
Toxic Agents
unit V
that studies of hazard and risk be extended beyond the pristine par-
ticles to include the transformation products. Transformations can 
occur between the points of synthesis and exposure during nano-
material processing, handling, storage, use, or upon release into the 
natural environment. These transformations complicate nanotoxi-
cology studies, because nanoparticle properties become a complex 
function of sample history, which in many cases is unknown and 
uncontrolled. Transformation can also occur after exposure through 
contact with biological fluids or tissues causing the potential toxic 
properties of particles to evolve over time.
One of the most studied nanomaterials in the transformation 
literature is metallic nanosilver. Nanosilver has been shown to 
undergo oxidative dissolution in the presence of atmospheric O2 
accompanied by Ag+ ion release (Liu and Hurt, 2010), and because 
the silver ion is more toxic than the particles in many biological 
systems, the location and extent of this ion release is a key factor 
determining nanosilver toxicity. Further transformations include 
chemical or photochemical reduction of the silver ions back to 
nanosilver particles, referred to as “secondary particles” (Glover 
et al., 2011); reaction with reduced sulfur species to form the stable 
and highly insoluble silver sulfide (Lowry et al., 2012); and reaction 
to form solid selenides (Liu et al., 2012). These transformations are 
thought to play a role in the formation of silver-containing solid 
deposits in tissue that give rise to argyria, which is a skin discolor-
ation phenomenon that has been observed in humans exposed orally 
to high doses of nanosilver (Liu et al., 2012).
Insights into the novel findings of bioprocessing and bio-
transformation of ENMs at subcellular, almost atomic levels are 
addressed by Graham and colleagues (2014, 2017).
THE NANOMATERIAL BIOLOGICAL 
INTERFACE
The high surface area of NPs provides a platform for adsorption 
of a variety of biological molecules including proteins, lipids, and 
nucleic acids. Dawson and his coworkers described in detail rapid 
binding of proteins in biological fluids to the surface of NPs that 
they defined as the “protein corona” (Lynch et al., 2007). The pro-
tein corona is a dynamic interface between the NP and its local 
environment that governs its initial interaction with target cells 
(Dutta et al., 2007; Walczyk et al., 2010). The interaction of nano-
materials with blood plasma proteins has been investigated in most 
detail due to its importance in drug delivery, circulation time, organ 
distribution, and clearance (Karmali and Simberg, 2011). Protein 
adsorption is related to surface charge, hydrophobicity, and radius 
of curvature; however, NPs of diverse chemical composition and 
structure (e.g., iron oxide NPs, polymeric NPs, and CNTs) avidly 
adsorb albumin, complement, fibrinogen, immunoglobulins, and 
apolipoproteins (Nel et al., 2009). Protein adsorption and dissocia-
tion is a complex, dynamic phenomenon (Cedervall et al., 2007a, 
2007b). Quantitative techniques to predict and characterize pro-
tein adsorption have been developed (Xia et al., 2010). The con-
sequences of protein adsorption to NPs are less clear; although, 
depending on the NP surface, proteins may denature, resulting in 
the loss of normal structure and function, or altered enzyme activ-
ity, or unfolding that exposes new antigenic determinants. NPs of 
diverse chemical composition also induce protein fibrillation or 
aggregation to form amyloid fibrils in an acellular system (Linse 
et al., 2007). An important potential pathological consequence of 
serum protein adsorption to NPs is binding of fibrinogen leading to 
formation of blood clots (Khandoga et al., 2010).
NPs that are inhaled into the respiratory tract or ingested into 
the gastrointestinal tract encounter a mucus layer that provides a 
natural barrier to penetration of particulates and microorganisms. 
Mucus is a complex glycoprotein composed of hydrophilic, dis-
persed regions and hydrophobic, globular domains. NPs may adhere 
to mucins causing enlargement of the pore size with increased sus-
ceptibility to penetration of microorganisms (Shvedova et al., 2007; 
Wang et al., 2011b). Smaller, charged NPs may be repelled by the 
hydrophilic domains and will not be able to penetrate the mucus 
layer (Cone, 2009; Lai et al., 2009; Wang et al., 2011b). Aquatic 
organisms (Klaine et al., 2008) and bacterial biofilms (Rodrigues 
and Elimelech, 2010) are surrounded by similar extracellular barri-
ers that may prevent NP penetration. If inhaled NPs deposit in the 
alveoli of the lungs, they encounter the lung lining fluid covering a 
thin film of surfactant lipids. Natural or synthetic lung lining fluid, 
which is a mixture of serum albumin and dipalmitoylphosphatidyl-
choline, binds readily to a range of NPs and enhances their disper-
sion for use in toxicological assays (Sager et al., 2007; Porter et al., 
2008).
Some ENP-types also bind nucleic acids and have been pro-
posed as gene delivery devices (Chou et al., 2011). Depending on 
their chirality, SWCNTs may show sequence-specific DNA binding 
(Tu et al., 2009). Graphene oxide nanosheets preferentially bind 
single-stranded RNA or DNA and protect it from enzymatic degra-
dation (Lu et al., 2010). Small graphene oxide nanosheets can also 
intercalate into double-stranded DNA and induce DNA breaks in 
the presence of Cu2+ ions (Ren et al., 2010). Size-dependent binding 
of gold NPs into the major groove of DNA has also been reported 
(Schmid, 2008).
TOXICITY MECHANISMS
The emerging nanotechnology industry has generated fear and dis-
trust among the public about unpredictable toxicity and unintended 
consequences of human exposure to ENMs (Bainbridge, 2002; 
Cobb and Macoubrie, 2004). Despite these concerns, there has not 
yet been an outbreak of human disease associated with exposure to 
ENMs, although potentially long latency periods between exposure 
and manifestation of effects require continued vigilance to prevent 
future problems. The mechanistic pathways associated with toxic-
ity that have been discovered using various in vitro and in vivo 
assays may be predictable based on the physicochemical properties 
of ENMs (Meng et al., 2009; Nel et al., 2009). Some of these tox-
icity pathways were identified by studying UFPs associated with 
ambient air pollution (Xia et al., 2006), whereas others are the con-
sequence of intracellular release of toxic metal ions. These are in 
vitro results, but not validated with relevant exposures (Xia et al., 
2008b). Oxidative stress due to direct generation of ROS at the sur-
face of NPs or indirectly by target cells following internalization of 
NPs (Unfried et al., 2007) is a common mechanism responsible for 
toxicity of ENMs. The most vulnerable subcellular organelles and 
physiological functions that can be perturbed by exposure to ENPs 
are summarized in Table 29-3. Depending on the dose, duration of 
exposure, type of NP, and the target cell, the cellular responses may 
be minimal and reversible, involve activation of adaptive responses, 
or severe, leading to significant changes in cell structure and func-
tion that may culminate in cell death (Meng et al., 2009). Specific 
examples of toxicity endpoints induced by exposure to ENMs will 
be used to summarize our current understanding of mechanisms 
relevant for nanotoxicology. Most of the mechanistic studies use a 
variety of in vitro cellular toxicity assays and relatively high con-
centrations for 24 to 48 hours of exposure. As discussed in detail 
below, extrapolation from these short-term, high-concentration 
exposures in vitro to chronic, low-dose exposures in vivo is prob-
lematic. Given the wide range of ENMs currently in commercial

Nanoparticle Toxicology
Chapter 29
1393
production or in the early development stages, understanding toxic-
ity pathways is essential for developing a rationale strategy for in 
vitro screening and prioritization for chronic animal testing based 
on new principles for toxicity testing in the 21st century (Simmons 
et al., 2009; Walker and Bucher, 2009; Silbergeld et al., 2011).
The cell wall of bacteria and the plasma membrane of eukary-
otic cells are the initial barriers to penetration of NPs into target 
cells. Both gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria have thick cell 
walls composed of complex lipids and peptidoglycans, respectively. 
Bacteria do not actively take up particulates; however, several 
investigators have shown direct physical penetration of bacterial 
cell walls especially by SWCNTs (Kang et al., 2007, 2008; Liu 
et al., 2009), graphene and graphene oxide nanowalls (Akhavan and 
Ghaderi, 2010), and zinc oxide NPs (Liu et al., 2009). Carbon nano-
materials are proposed to act as “nanodarts” creating holes in the 
plasma membrane, resulting in extracellular release of cytoplasmic 
contents as assessed by efflux of ribosomal RNA and decreased 
survival (Liu et al., 2009).
A wide range of NPs have been designed to facilitate deliv-
ery of imaging agents, genes, proteins, and drugs into mammalian 
cells: metallic and iron oxide NPs, silica NPs, quantum dots, bio-
compatible polymers, liposomes, micelles, and dendrimers (Chou 
et al., 2011). Target cells may recognize untargeted NPs that bind 
to surface scavenger receptors (Kanno et al., 2007; Hirano et al., 
2008), lectin receptors (Zhang and Monteiro-Riviere, 2010), and 
Toll-like receptors that recognize hydrophobic domains (Seong 
and Matzinger, 2004). NPs can also be designed to target specific 
cell surface receptors triggering internalization by phagocytosis, 
macropinocytosis, or endocytosis mediated by clathrin, caveolae, 
or lipid rafts (Nel et al., 2009; Lajoie and Nabi, 2010). In order to 
facilitate gene, protein, or drug delivery, NPs can be engineered to 
escape from endosomes or lysosomes by coating with pH-sensitive 
polymers, viral capsids, cations, or biodegradable carriers (Chou 
et al., 2011).
Eukaryotic cells can actively internalize a variety of ENPs 
using energy-dependent, receptor-mediated endocytosis or phago-
cytosis (Zhao et al., 2011). Following endocytosis or phagocytosis, 
NPs follow a well-defined intracellular pathway usually leading to 
fusion with lysosomes (Oh and Swanson, 1996). The kinetics and 
mechanisms of cell uptake vary, depending on the target cell, size, 
shape, and surface modifications (Chithrani, 2010). Most NPs and 
microparticles are stored in membrane-bound vesicles, endosomes, 
or phagosomes; however, a subset of NPs including mesoporous 
silica NPs and superparamagnetic iron oxide NPs coated with chi-
tosan undergo exocytosis or release from endothelial cells (Slowing 
et al., 2011) and macrophages (Serda et al., 2010). Exosomes are 
derived from sorting endosomes and multivesicular bodies; smaller 
NPs show greater exocytosis than particles in the range of 30 to 50 nm 
(Chithrani, 2010; Serda et al., 2010). Selective coating of NPs to 
favor delivery to exosomes can be exploited for drug delivery to 
vascularized tumors or to promote cell–cell transfer of genes and 
proteins (Slowing et al., 2011).
NPs that are recognized by surface receptors may activate 
cell-type-specific signaling pathways leading to cell proliferation 
or death by apoptosis, stress-related signaling, or calcium-mediated 
signal transduction events (Unfried et al., 2007). Dysregulated intra-
cellular calcium ion homeostasis may be the consequence of influx 
across a damaged plasma membrane permeability barrier or release 
of calcium ions from the major intracellular storage sites, mitochon-
dria, and endoplasmic reticulum. Sustained elevation in intracellular 
calcium can cause cell death by necrosis (Xia et al., 2006).
In addition, small polystyrene NPs and metallic NPs and den-
drimers have been shown to enter a variety of target cells by passive 
diffusion in an energy-independent process (Lesniak et al., 2005; 
Geiser et al., 2005). Following uptake by diffusion, these small NPs 
are not compartmentalized into membrane-bound vesicles or lyso-
somes but are found free in the cytoplasm where they may second-
arily enter the mitochondria or even the nucleus.
Mitochondria are the site of aerobic respiration and generation 
of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Small NPs have been observed 
inside mitochondria (Li et al., 2003; Xia et al., 2006) where they 
may disrupt electron transport in the inner mitochondrial membrane 
and generate excess endogenous ROS. Direct or indirect generation 
of ROS in target cells exposed to a variety of engineered or ambient 
NPs is a major mechanism leading to cell toxicity and cell death 
(Nel et al., 2006; Unfried et al., 2007). Excess ROS that are not 
detoxified by endogenous antioxidant defenses can damage cellu-
lar membranes via lipid peroxidation, inactivate structural proteins, 
enzymes, and ion pumps, and damage nuclear DNA. A “hierarchi-
cal stress response” to oxidant-induced injury has been proposed 
by Nel et al. (2006). Low levels of ROS can activate transcription 
factors leading to upregulated expression of antioxidant defense-
related genes. The second tier of response to ROS is activation of 
redox-sensitive transcription factors that upregulate genes involved 
in inflammation, pro-inflammatory cytokines, and chemokines 
(Albrecht et al., 2004). Finally, high or sustained production of 
ROS can lead to irreversible mitochondrial injury and cell death by 
apoptosis or necrosis (Nel et al., 2006).
Endocytosis and phagocytosis of NPs by target cells usually 
results in fusion with and sequestration in membrane-bound lyso-
somes (Russell et al., 2009; Chithrani, 2010). Uptake of quantum 
dots, CNTs containing metal catalyst residues, or metallic and 
metal oxide NPs provides a pathway for intracellular delivery of 
toxic metal ions by a “Trojan horse mechanism” (Limbach et al., 
2005). In the acidic environment of lysosomes, cadmium ions can 
be released from quantum dots, redox-active iron from iron oxide 
NPs, and other toxic metal ions including nickel from CNTs or 
metallic and metal oxide NPs (Liu et al., 2008; Pietruska et al., 
2011). This mechanism may also be exploited to release drug car-
goes into the cytoplasm following NP-mediated delivery (De Jong 
and Borm, 2008).
Cellular uptake of long, rigid, high aspect ratio nanomateri-
als including CNTs, metallic nanowires, and nanorods is especially 
hazardous for target cells in the lungs (Donaldson et al., 2010). 
Macrophages are the initial cells to phagocytize inhaled particulates 
deposited in the airways or alveoli (Geiser and Kreyling, 2010). 
Rigid, high aspect ratio ENMs show similar interactions with mac-
rophages as amphibole asbestos fibers. If they are longer than the 
diameter of macrophages (~10 μm), rigid elongated nanostructures 
show incomplete uptake or phagocytosis with prolonged genera-
tion of ROS by the respiratory burst mechanism of phagocytes 
Table 29-3  
In Vitro Mechanisms of Nanoparticle Toxicity
	 1.	 Damage to cell wall and plasma membrane
	 2.	 Interference with electron transport and aerobic respiration
	 3.	 Induction of oxidant stress
	 4.	 Activation of cell signaling pathways
	 5.	 Perturbed ion homeostasis
	 6.	 Release of toxic metal ions from internalized nanoparticles
	 7.	 Disruption of lysosomal membrane integrity
	 8.	 Incomplete uptake or frustrated phagocytosis
	 9.	 Interference with cytoskeletal function
	10.	 DNA and chromosomal damage

1394
Toxic Agents
unit V
and extracellular release of damaging lysosomal enzymes. Rigid, 
high aspect ratio nanomaterials also cause permeabilization of the 
lysosomal membrane, resulting in the release of cathepsins into the 
cytoplasm and activation of the inflammasome (Hamilton et al., 
2009). Cathepsins are proteases active at neutral pH and can cleave 
precursors of pro-inflammatory cytokines that can initiate inflam-
matory reactions in the lungs (Biswas et al., 2011) as well as acti-
vate procaspases leading to death by apoptosis (Boya and Kroemer, 
2008). Activation of the inflammasome, the cytoplasmic protein 
complex where this proteolytic cleavage and activation occurs, is 
also triggered by uptake of crystalline minerals including silica and 
asbestos fibers (Dostert et al., 2008).
Incomplete sequestration of long, rigid, high aspect ratio 
NPs in lysosomes may also promote their release into the cyto-
plasm, resulting in physical interference with cytoskeletal func-
tion. Cytoskeletal disruption can cause impaired cell motility; for 
example, macrophage-mediated clearance of asbestos fibers and 
high aspect ratio NPs is impaired, resulting in sustained lung injury, 
inflammation, and fibrosis (Donaldson et al., 2010) as discussed 
below. In other organs, NP-mediated interference with cytoskeletal-
mediated transport may occur, for example, impaired bile transport 
and secretion by hepatocytes (Johnston et al., 2010a). In divid-
ing cells, high aspect ratio NPs may physically interfere with the 
mitotic apparatus, resulting in chromosomal mis-segregation and 
polyploidy (Sargent et al., 2010).
Finally, NPs may translocate into the nucleus by diffusion 
through nuclear pores or via nucleocytoplasmic transport (Unfried 
et al., 2007). Quantum dots (Hoshino et al., 2004), silicon diox-
ide NPs (Chen and von Mikecz, 2005), and gold NPs (Pante and 
Kann, 2002) have been detected in the nucleus. Small gold NPs may 
intercalate into DNA (Schmid, 2008) and generate ROS that may 
induce oxidative DNA damage (Kang et al., 2010). Silicon dioxide 
NPs have been shown to induce intranuclear protein aggregates of 
histones, topoisomerase I, and fibrillarin, although the functional 
consequences of this intranuclear protein aggregation are unknown 
(Unfried et al., 2007).
CAVEATS IN NANOTOXICOLOGY ASSAYS
The unique physical and chemical properties of solid materials at 
the nanoscale contribute to serious technical limitations and poten-
tially misleading results using conventional toxicology assays 
(Petersen et al., 2014; Rosslein et al., 2015). Due to their high sur-
face area and hydrophobicity, NPs can adsorb vital dyes, cell cul-
ture micronutrients, or released cytokines (Monteiro-Riviere and 
Inman, 2006; Casey et al., 2007, 2008; Guo et al., 2008; Stone et al., 
2009). High surface area carbon nanomaterials such as SWCNTs 
and graphene have the greatest potential to adsorb aromatic amino 
acids, vitamins, and fluorescent dyes by π–π interactions with their 
hydrophobic graphenic surfaces (Guo et al., 2008). Adsorption of 
bacterial lipopolysaccharide or endotoxin (a component of the cell 
wall of gram-negative bacteria) is a major concern because even 
low levels of endotoxin can activate macrophages and dendritic 
cells (Vallhov et al., 2006). Genotoxicity endpoints are especially 
sensitive to NP-induced artifacts; for example, particle agglomer-
ates interfere with the comet assay, used to detect DNA breaks, and 
cytochalasin B used in the cytokinesis-arrested micronucleus assay 
can interfere with NP uptake (Doak et al., 2009; Stone et al., 2009; 
Magdolenova et al., 2014; Evans et al., 2017). NP agglomerates 
in physiological saline may also induce greater cytotoxicity than 
well-dispersed NPs; however, controls must be included to rule out 
toxicity of the dispersant (Wick et al., 2007). In all toxicological 
studies, well-characterized positive and negative reference samples 
should be included over a range of doses and exposure times using 
standardized methodology (Pal et al., 2015).
ENMs are highly complex and have unique chemical and 
physical properties relative to bulk materials of the same chemi-
cal composition. Complete materials characterization is required 
for adequate interpretation of toxicological studies (Warheit, 2008; 
Stone et al., 2009; Azhdarzadeh et al., 2015). Nanotoxicologists 
must collaborate with chemists, engineers, and materials scien-
tists in an interdisciplinary research team in order to understand 
the chemical, physical, and structural properties responsible for 
biological interactions and potential toxicity of nanomaterials. The 
relevance of in vivo extrapolation from high-dose, short-term, in 
vitro toxicity assays is discussed in more detail below.
SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS IN 
NANOMATERIAL DESIGN
In principle, it should be possible to engineer NPs with desirable 
surface properties for commercial or biomedical applications, for 
example, to control their size and geometry in order to prevent indis-
criminate entry into cells and frustrated phagocytosis. Capping or 
coating of NPs using antioxidants such as tocopheryl-polyethylene-
glycol-succinate (Yan et al., 2007) may decrease toxicity. Release 
of toxic metal ions from quantum dots and iron oxide NPs can be 
minimized using inorganic shells or biocompatible polymers such 
as chitosan or alginate (De Jong and Borm, 2008). CNTs, fuller-
enes, and graphene are easily surface functionalized; for example, 
covalent functionalization with carboxyl groups has been reported 
to decrease toxicity of these pristine carbon nanomaterials (Sayes 
et al., 2005, 2006; Sasidharan et al., 2011). There is evidence that 
CNTs are less pathogenic if short in length, or if entangled to hide 
their fibrous nature (Poland et al., 2008). A long-term goal of mech-
anistic nanotoxicology is to reveal structure–activity relations that 
may allow the design of safe nanomaterials through re-engineering 
or reformulation (Hutchison, 2008).
CASE STUDY: DESIGNING SAFER 
SUNSCREENS
Zinc oxide and TiO2 NPs are widely used in sunscreens because they 
show less scattering of visible light and appear transparent, while 
effectively absorbing UV light in both the UVB and UVA wave-
lengths (Wang and Tooley, 2011). Due to its rapid dissolution in water 
releasing Zn2+ ions, zinc oxide NPs are considered as potential envi-
ronmental toxicants (Kahru and Dubourguier, 2010). Xia et al. (2011) 
deliberately doped zinc oxide NPs with iron (1% to 10% by weight) 
that significantly retarded release of Zn2+ ions in water and physiolog-
ical saline solutions. Zn2+ ions inhibit hatching of zebrafish embryos. 
Pristine zinc oxide NPs also inhibited hatching; however, iron-doped 
NPs were less inhibitory in this assay. Similarly, iron-doped zinc NPs 
induced significantly less lung injury and inflammation than pristine 
zinc oxide NPs following intratracheal instillation in rodents. This 
study provides proof-of-principle for safe design of ENPs to mini-
mize potential environmental toxicity and adverse health effects.
TiO2 NPs are used commercially in sunscreens, cosmetics, 
catalysts, and photocatalytic coatings for buildings and windows. 
Nanosized TiO2 is found in small concentrations (typically <30% 
number and less than 1% mass) in food stuffs and personal care 
products (Weir et al., 2012; Warheit et al., 2015). In 2010, 5000 
metric tons of TiO2 NPs were produced (Landsiedel et al., 2010) 
and have been detected in effluents from waste water treatment 
plants where they may enter surface water (Westerhoff et al., 2011).

Nanoparticle Toxicology
Chapter 29
1395
The potential of zinc oxide and TiO2 NPs to induce phototox-
icity and penetrate into the dermis has been a concern for human 
safety of sunscreens (Wang and Tooley, 2011). These mineral-based 
sunscreens cause less skin irritation and produce fewer allergic 
reactions than chemical-based sunscreens. The pristine NPs used 
in sunscreens form aggregates 30 to 150 nm in diameter; in this 
size range, these NPs are photoreactive and may generate ROS. 
Although uncoated TiO2 NPs exhibit phototoxicity, following coat-
ing with hydrophobic stabilizers used in sunscreen formulations, no 
phototoxicity was detected in a cell culture assay system (Schilling 
et al., 2010). A series of skin penetration studies using both ex vivo 
and in vivo models also showed that these NPs do not penetrate 
deeper than the outer most layer or stratum corneum of intact skin 
(Schilling et al., 2010). However, TiO2 NPs suspended in cyclopen-
tasiloxane fluid used in cosmetics did penetrate into hair follicles 
of shaved skin of micropigs (Senzui et al., 2010). Finally, young 
pigs were exposed to UVB light producing sunburn and an in vitro 
skin perfusion system was used to assess penetration of sunscreens 
containing zinc oxide or TiO2 NPs. Only superficial penetration into 
the upper layers of the epidermis was observed and no zinc or tita-
nium above untreated control levels was observed in the perfusate 
(Monteiro-Riviere et al., 2011). Finally, 36 weekly applications of 
sunscreens containing TiO2 or zinc oxide nanoparticles plus ultra-
violet radiation applied to hairless mice did not induce any adverse 
systemic effects or skin tumors in comparison to mice exposed only 
to ultraviolet radiation (Osmond-McLeod et al., 2016). Collectively, 
these in vitro and in vivo toxicology assays suggest that the benefits 
of protection against carcinogenic UV light radiation provided by 
sunscreens formulated with zinc oxide or TiO2 NPs outweigh the 
minimal risks associated with phototoxicity, DNA damage, and skin 
penetration into shaved or sunburned skin.
MAMMALIAN TOXICOLOGY
Introduction
Nanotoxicology, the science of effects of ENMs on living organ-
isms, is a rapidly growing discipline aimed at identifying and 
characterizing nanomaterial toxicity that will serve—in combina-
tion with exposure data—the ultimate goal of performing a mean-
ingful risk assessment (National Academy of Sciences, 1983). 
Many ENMs exhibit unique and desirable catalytic, optical, struc-
tural, or electronic properties that make them attractive in diverse 
technological areas, including multiple manufacturing industries 
and environmental and medical applications. At the same time, 
concerns have been raised regarding potential acute and chronic 
adverse effects due to their physicochemical properties in combina-
tion with nanostructures, for example, an elongated fiber-like shape 
of CNTs (Johnston et al., 2010b).
CNTs are a prime example of the two opposing faces of nano-
materials: Many highly desirable properties that are suitable for 
numerous beneficial applications contrast with reports of serious 
adverse effects in experimental animals. For example, the excitement 
about future uses of CNTs in biomedical applications for delivery of 
drugs, genes, and biosensors or as tissue engineering scaffolds (Liu 
et al., 2008, 2010b; Liang and Chen, 2010) is dampened by reports 
of inflammatory fibrogenic and even mesotheliogenic effects in 
laboratory rodents (Shvedova et al., 2005; Takagi et al., 2008; 
Jacobsen et al., 2008; Poland et al., 2008; Sakamoto et al., 2009). 
Results of a number of in vitro studies in different cell systems also 
revealed an oxidative stress-inducing pro-inflammatory potential of 
CNTs (Monteiro-Riviere et al., 2005; Pacurari et al., 2008; Hirano 
et al., 2010; Vankoningsloo et al., 2010; Sanchez et al., 2011); however, 
other in vitro studies did not confirm such effects (Fenoglio et al., 
2006; Flahaut et al., 2006; De Nicola et al., 2007; Pulskamp et al., 
2007).
As discussed earlier, a common problem with in vitro studies 
is that very high doses/concentrations in culture media are used 
that have no relevance for realistic in vivo conditions. Moreover, 
results of in vitro assays can be misleading due to interference of the 
nanomaterials to be tested with the testing reagents, adsorption of 
induced mediators (Worle-Knirsch et al., 2006; Han et al., 2011), or 
interference with optical measurements (Pfaller et al., 2010); gen-
eral problems related to sensitivity and reliability of in vitro systems 
have also been discussed (Jones and Grainger, 2009). A most recent 
example of reliability problems of in vitro assays in evaluating the 
toxicity of CNTs is described by Haniu et al. (2011) who reported 
contradictory results of increased as well as decreased cell viability 
as well as either no or high cytokine release when the same CNT 
and the same cell type were dosed using different dispersants for 
pretreatment.
Concepts of Nanotoxicology
The previous section discussed the importance of physicochemical 
properties of ENM. Fig. 29-8 summarizes several of these properties 
that are known to affect biological/toxicological effects. The size 
and size distribution are important determinants—­aerodynamic—
for the deposition efficiency of inhaled materials throughout the 
respiratory tract (see Fig. 29-8). The quality of dispersion in liquid 
media can be determined by measuring the hydrodynamic diam-
eter, which is important information for in vitro studies and the 
ENM behavior in blood and lymph circulation. The shape of ENM 
(tubes, fibers, planes) influences their aerodynamic and hydrody-
namic behavior and is of special significance for cellular uptake, for 
example, a fiber shape of straight nanotubes with a length exceed-
ing the diameter of alveolar macrophages so that they cannot be 
completely phagocytosed (frustrated or incomplete phagocytosis) 
resulting in potent activation and release of inflammatory media-
tors (Kane and Hurt, 2008). Individual NPs tend to agglomerate 
(held together by relatively weak forces, e.g., Van der Waals forces) 
or they are aggregated when produced (sintered together or firmly 
bundled in the case of fibers) (ISO/TS 27687, 2008; Teleki et al., 
2008; Taurozzi et al., 2011). Oftentimes, larger structures in the 
form of agglomerated aggregates are formed (Fig. 29-8), both in 
the airborne state and as liquid suspensions.
The terms “agglomeration” and “aggregation” are often 
used interchangeably, yet ISO/DIS (2011) defines them as based 
on the forces that keep the primary particles together (agglomer-
ates: weakly bound with external surface area similar to the sum 
of ­surface areas of individual components; aggregates: strongly 
bonded or fused with the external surface significantly smaller than 
the sum of calculated surface areas of individual components). Both 
agglomerates and aggregates are also termed “secondary particles” 
(ISO/DIS, 2011).
The formation of agglomerates of aerosols (coagulation) 
depends on their number concentration in the airborne state and is a 
function of time (Hinds, 1982). The effect of such time-­dependent 
agglomeration on decreasing the number of airborne particle 
concentration and on increasing the overall particle size is illus-
trated in Table 29-4 assuming simple monodisperse coagulation in 
still, undisturbed air. For example, it takes only 20 minutes for a 
very high number concentration of 1014 particles/cm3 to decrease 
by half, whereas it takes 231 days if the initial concentration is only 
100 particles/cm3. Similarly, in order to double the initial particle 
size because of a resulting increase in the agglomerate particle size,

1396
Toxic Agents
unit V
it takes 140 μm for the initially very high concentration, but 4 years 
for the low concentration. This dramatic shift in particle size distri-
bution needs to be considered when high concentrations of airborne 
NPs are measured close to their source.
The agglomeration and the aggregation state of ENM will 
­significantly influence their bulk and apparent density. For example, 
the specific density of TiO2 is ~4 g/cm3, whereas the bulk density 
(density of a powdered material including interparticle spaces) 
of  nano-TiO2 depending on primary particle size ranges from 
0.13 to 0.54 g/cm3. Bulk density—interchangeably also described 
as apparent or packing density—can be measured by pouring the 
ENM powder into a fixed volume of a graduated cylinder (freely 
settled). The volume of the measured mass/cm3 includes the par-
ticle volume, the interparticle void volume, and any internal pore 
volume. Using multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) as 
an example, the specific density of the base material, carbon, is 
~2 g/cm3, but the bulk density of MWCNT was reported as rang-
ing between 0.043 and 0.31 g/cm3 (Ma-Hock et al., 2009; Pauluhn, 
2010). The density achieved by packing of individual agglomerate 
structures of different MWCNTs obviously plays an important role 
for differences of the bulk or packing density, as do the dimen-
sions of length and diameter, the straightness of the tubes, and the 
form and size of tangled structures. Knowledge of bulk density is 
important for understanding the aerodynamic behavior of ENM and 
their deposition in the respiratory tract. In simple general terms, 
the aerodynamic diameter (Dae) of an aerosol is correlated with the 
physical geometric particle diameter (Dgeom) as D
D
ae
geom
=
× ρ  
(ρ = material density in g/cm3). For particles below 1 µm, a slip-
correction factor needs to be added. For highly agglomerated ENM, 
it is preferable to replace the true material density with the value 
of bulk or apparent density in order to more accurately estimate the 
aerodynamic diameter.
A low bulk density obviously increases the volume of ENM 
after uptake into cells relative to the volume occupied by the same 
mass of non-agglomerated material. A volumetric overload concept 
for alveolar macrophages has been proposed by Morrow (1988), 
who suggested that when a phagocytized volume of 60% of the 
normal macrophage volume is reached, movement and clearance 
function of macrophages is completely abolished, and that a retar-
dation of the clearance function of macrophages starts when ~6% 
of the cell’s volume is exceeded by phagocytized particles. Pauluhn 
(2010) applied this concept of volumetric overload to results of his 
subchronic inhalation study with MWCNT in rats for estimating an 
occupational exposure level (OEL). However, a recent review of this 
concept by Borm et al. (2015) concluded that a volumetric overload 
of macrophages does not apply to ultrafine poorly soluble particles. 
Instead, the particle surface area correlates best with the induced 
alveolar inflammation and retarded macrophage clearance function.
Surface characteristics of ENM are a critical determinant for 
interpreting dose–response relationships (surface area as dosemet-
ric), and for nanomaterial cell interactions. Uptake into cells is 
influenced by their surface charge, surface reactivity, the chemistry 
of surface coatings (functional groups, polymeric coatings), and 
also surface defects to the material as-synthesized, or introduced 
during surface functionalization or processing such as acid purifica-
tion or ultrasonication for dispersion.
Solubility and solubilization rate are of interest because the 
shortened biopersistence of NP in the organism terminates any 
NP-size-related effects. Zinc oxide is an example of an NP that 
undergoes rapid dissolution, thereby giving rise to high ionic zinc 
concentrations and induction of inflammation and oxidative stress 
(Xia et al., 2008b) in contrast to poorly soluble CeO2 or TiO2 NPs. 
Many ENPs are insoluble in the as-produced form (e.g., metallic 
Ag+ and Ni2+ metallic NPs), and do not undergo simple dissolution, 
but can undergo chemical oxidation, a kind of nano-corrosion, in 
solution, in tissue, or in the environment to produce soluble spe-
cies (e.g., Ag+ and Ni2+) in a process that gradually degrades and 
eliminates the particle state (Liu and Hurt, 2010; Liu et al., 2010a; 
Pietruska et al., 2011). Such NPs can act via a “Trojan Horse” mech-
anism in that they are taken up into cells and subsequently dissolve, 
thereby creating a very high intracellular ionic metal concentration 
that is cytotoxic (Limbach et al., 2007). The same ionic concentra-
tion outside the cell will elicit no or only a modest response because 
of selective cell barriers preventing metal ions from entering the 
cell. The results by Xia et al. (2008b) and Limbach et al. (2007) are 
based on in vitro studies. Donaldson et al. (2009) have cautioned 
that great care should be taken in interpreting that oxidative stress 
induction by particles observed in vitro will also occur in vivo. This 
is not to say that the “Trojan Horse” effect does not occur in vivo; it 
has been described and is being used in designing drug delivery via 
NP for therapeutic applications (Kreuter, 2004; Iezzi et al., 2012). 
The cautionary note is more generally directed toward the extrapo-
lation of in vitro-based oxidative stress results to in vivo conditions.
It is a major challenge for nanotoxicological studies that many 
of these properties, once they have been determined for a given 
ENM, are not stable but can change when prepared for toxicologi-
cal testing or during storage or testing. The fact that alterations can 
occur through oxidation or dissolution (above), or through adsorp-
tion of proteins and lipids once they have been taken up into differ-
ent compartments of the organism, has become an important area 
of research (Cedervall et al., 2007a, 2007b; Lundqvist et al., 2008; 
Monopoli et al., 2011), yet methods to study these changes on the 
surface of ENMs in vivo still need to be developed.
Dosemetrics
Given the importance of physicochemical properties of ENM as 
determinants of their biological/toxicological properties, the ques-
tion of the proper dosemetrics has been raised. Toxicologists are 
used to thinking in units of mass or molarity when characterizing a 
dose or concentration. However, several in vitro and in vivo studies 
with NP have shown that expressing dose–response relationships 
on a convenient mass basis may not be as informative as the surface 
area of the NP (Oberdörster et al., 1992; Donaldson et al., 1996; 
Table 29-4  
Time for Number Concentration to Halve and Particle 
Size to Double by Simple Monodisperse Coagulation
STARTING AIRBORNE 
CONCENTRATION 
(number/cm3)
TIME TO REACH 
HALF THE CONC. 
(½ Ns)
TIME TO DOUBLE 
PARTICLE SIZE  
(ND = 0.125 Ns)
1014
20 μs
140 μs
1012
2 ms
14 ms
1010
0.2 s
1.4 s
108
20 s
140 s
106
33 min
4 h
104
55 h
16 days
102
231 days
4 year
SOURCE: Data from Hinds (1982).

Nanoparticle Toxicology
Chapter 29
1397
Tran et al., 2000). Fig. 29-10 shows the pulmonary inflammatory 
dose–response relationships of two sizes of TiO2 particles induced 
by intratracheal instillation in rats. A significantly greater influx 
of inflammatory neutrophils into the lung was induced by 25 nm 
TiO2 per unit mass than by 250 nm TiO2. The result is a very steep 
dose–response for the nanosized TiO2 and a flatter dose–response 
for the larger TiO2. Likewise, there was a clear separation of the 
dose–response when based on the number as dosemetric; however, 
when the same data were expressed based on particle surface area, 
a common dose–response relationship emerged (Fig. 29-10).
Although the concept of particle surface area as dosemetric 
is biologically plausible because it is the surface of particles that 
interacts with cell structures, the total surface area may only be a 
surrogate of the actual biologically relevant surface. As was dis-
cussed above, there are a number of surface properties (Fig. 29-8) 
that affect interaction with cells. Thus, identifying a biologically 
available surface area will be of great value for defining a proper 
dosemetric. At present, the specific surface area of ENMs (m2/g) 
is most commonly measured by vapor adsorption, in which the 
number of vapor molecules (usually nitrogen) adsorbed on solid 
surfaces is quantified over a range of standard conditions and the 
surface area estimated by application of the BET theory (Brunauer 
et al., 1938). Both the external and existing inner surface (porosity) 
in pores larger than the nitrogen molecule are determined by this 
technique. There is a need for standardization of the method with 
regard to the use of nitrogen or other gases (Kr; Ar) because differ-
ent molecule sizes will “see” and report different surface areas in 
molecular-sized pores (<0.4 nm). Measurements of BET surface 
area can also contribute to differentiation between agglomerated 
and aggregated structures; for example, agglomerated NPs have 
essentially the same specific surface area as the same mass of indi-
vidual primary particles, whereas aggregated particles have a some-
what lower specific surface area than the same mass of primary 
particles (ISO/TS 27687, 2008). The measured surface area can 
then be converted to a BET equivalent particle size for nonporous 
spherical particles (Teleki et al., 2008).
In addition to mass, number, and surface area as dimensions 
for a dosemetric, the volume of NPs has been suggested as another 
dosemetric. This suggestion is based on the interpretation of earlier 
long-term inhalation studies in rats in which very high concentra-
tions of different poorly soluble particles of low cytotoxicity had 
resulted in highly overloaded alveolar macrophages so that their 
normal clearance function was severely impaired or had come to 
a standstill. Based on the results of these studies, Morrow (1988) 
formulated a “particle overload” hypothesis: When the volume of 
phagocytized particles in alveolar macrophages exceeds 6% of the 
normal macrophage volume, their physiological clearance function 
becomes impaired; if the phagocytized volume reaches 60%, the 
clearance function ceases completely. For certain ENMs the volume 
that they occupy can be very high, for example, larger agglomer-
ates of MWCNT, forming a loosely packed (low specific density) 
structure that takes up a large volume when taken up by alveolar 
macrophages in the lung. Pauluhn (2010) has applied this volumetric 
overload concept to results of a well-performed subchronic rat inha-
lation study for estimation of a human occupational exposure limit.
Follow-up studies to the mechanistic basis of lung particle 
overload points to particle surface area of agglomerated phago-
cytized nano and larger particles as dosemetric, which appears to 
correlate better with the impaired clearance function of alveolar 
macrophages rather than the phagocytized volume (Oberdörster 
et al., 1994; Tran et al., 2000). Borm et al. (2015) pointed out in 
a recent update that a volumetric overloading of alveolar macro-
phages following repeated inhalation by rats of high concentrations 
of poorly soluble ultrafine particles (TiO2) does not correlate with 
the induced alveolar inflammation or the impaired alveolar macro-
phage clearance function. Rather, the surface area of the retained 
phagocytized particles should be considered the appropriate dose-
metric for UFP. Thus, deriving OELs for ENMs from results of 
chronic rodent inhalation studies based on the volumetric lung par-
ticle overload concept is scientifically not justified. Yet—as pointed 
out before—it is important to remember that not only physical—
volume, surface area—but also chemical—surface associated—
properties of NPs are critical determinants of effects resulting from 
NP–cell interactions (Fig. 29-8).
Among the different dosemetrics discussed in this section, par-
ticle number is of particular importance with respect to characteriz-
ing exposure. Exposure concentrations in the air are expected to be 
very low, which makes it difficult to determine the precise concen-
tration based on measuring mass. However, a low mass of NP con-
sists of a huge number of particles that can reliably be measured in 
the airborne state using scanning mobility particle sizers or concen-
tration particle counters. Thus, NP number as an exposure-metric 
Million lung lavage neutrophils 
8
6
4
2
0
A
8
6
4
2
0
108
109
1010
1011
Number
1012
1013
0
500
1000
Mass, µg
1500
2000
B
8
6
4
2
0
0
50
100
Surface, cm2
150
200
250
C
Fine TiO2 (250 nm)
Ultraﬁne (25 nm) TiO2
Saline
Figure 29-10.  Inflammatory cell response (neutrophil number in lung 
lavage of rats 24 hours after intratracheal instillation of two sizes of TiO2 
particles expressed by different dosemetrics. Particle-mass (A); -number 
(B);  -surface area (C). (Reproduced with permission from Oberdörster 
et al. [2007a].)

1398
Toxic Agents
unit V
for mainly isometric-type NP is a valuable component for exposure 
characterization.
Table 29-5 shows the correlation among the different dosemet-
rics of different 50-nm-sized isometric NPs, with specific material 
densities ranging from 21 to 1 g/cm3. Volume is not listed in this 
table because it depends on the bulk or packing density, which is 
different from the material density because of additional void spaces 
between the packed NP. Surface area and number per unit mass and 
per 100 µg/m3 air volume vary greatly. The table also shows that a 
200-fold change of particle size from 5 nm to 1000 nm results in a 
more than six orders of magnitude change in number concentration 
with only a 20-fold change in surface area for all NP (shown for 
polystyrene in Table 29-5). However, although these correlations 
can readily be established for dry powders, even when they consist 
of polydispersed particle sizes, these correlations will change upon 
inhalation and disposition in the body because of different deposi-
tion and biodistribution efficiencies in the lungs and other organs.
Portals of Entry
The respiratory tract, the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, and skin are 
the main organs of direct exposure to ENM. For medical appli-
cation, injection (intravenous, intramuscular, subcutaneous, and 
other) will also be an important entry route into the organism. 
Intake via the respiratory tract is the most prevalent exposure route 
for occupational exposures; additives of ENM to food (TiO2; SiO2) 
and potential contamination of food from nanoenabled packaging 
materials result in exposure via GI tract (Jani et al., 1990, 1994; 
Hoet et al., 2004; FAO/WHO, 2009; Loeschner et al., 2011). Based 
on available data, translocation of nanomaterials in vivo across 
GI-tract epithelial cells seems to be limited. Trouiller et al. (2009), 
however, described DNA damage in bone marrow cells follow-
ing very high gavage dosing of rats. Skin exposure via cosmet-
ics and skin-care products occurs, although penetration of healthy 
skin by NP has not been demonstrated (Schneider et al., 2009; 
Monteiro-Riviere et al., 2011; Prow et al., 2011). Some penetration of 
quantum dots (~30 nm) applied to the skin of mice after UV 
radiation-induced sunburn was found (Mortensen et al., 2008). 
Because the respiratory tract is a major route for humans to expo-
sure of nanomaterials, the following sections will focus on this 
portal of entry to discuss biokinetics, effects, and concepts for in 
vivo and in vitro toxicity testing.
Dosing of the Respiratory Tract
The following sections focus on the respiratory tract as portal-of-
entry of airborne ENM.
Dosing of the respiratory tract of laboratory rodents as the 
portal-of-entry for airborne ENMs is mostly and conveniently done 
by intratracheal instillation (rats) or oropharyngeal aspiration and 
intranasal instillation (mice), which administer materials as a bolus 
in a second or less. However, inhalation is the only physiological 
method and should be considered the gold standard for exposure 
to airborne materials. Obvious major differences between bolus-
type and inhalation exposures relate to the dose rate (see discussion 
later), use of anesthesia, the distribution of administered material 
within the respiratory tract, and the need for special expertise and 
equipment required for inhalation but not bolus-type exposures. 
Although most of the differences between inhalation- and instil-
lation-type delivery are well known and have been discussed in 
a Society of Toxicology (SOT)-sponsored White Paper (Driscoll 
et al., 2000), the limitations of using and interpreting results from 
bolus-type dosing are most often not considered (Table 29-6). This 
white paper concluded with several recommendations when intra-
tracheal instillation can be applied. These included evaluation of 
comparative toxicity involving screening, ranking, range finding of 
doses, comparison to reference material; also, evaluation of mate-
rial not respirable by rodents. In order to minimize interference of 
clumping and localized inflammation, only <~100 μg/rat should be 
used. The authors also mention situations when instillation should 
Table 29-5  
Mass/Number/Surface Area Correlations for Selected NPs
AIRBORNE CONC.  
OF 100 μg/m3
PARTICLE  
TYPE
DIAMETER  
(nm)
DENSITY  
(g/cm3)
SPC. SRF. AREA  
(m2/g)
SPC. NUMBER  
(#/g)
SURFACE  
(cm2/m3)
NUMBER  
(#/m3)
Pt
50
21.09
5.69
7.24 ×1014
5.69
7.24 ×1010
Gold
50
19.3
6.22
7.91 ×1014
6.22
7.92 ×1010
Ag
50
10.5
11.43
1.46 ×1015
11.43
1.46 ×1011
Cu
50
8.9
13.48
1.72 ×1015
13.48
1.72 ×1011
Al
50
2.7
44.44
5.65 ×1015
44.44
5.65 ×1011
TiO2(R)
50
4.23
28.37
3.61 ×1015
28.37
3.61 ×1011
TiO2(A)
50
3.9
30.77
3.92 ×1015
30.77
3.92 ×1011
C
50
2.26
53.10
6.76 ×1015
53.10
6.76 ×1011
Polystyrene
50
1.05
114.3
1.46 ×1016
114.3
1.46 ×1012
5
1143.0
1.46 ×1019
1143.0
1.46 ×1015
10
571.4
1.82 ×1018
571.4
1.82 ×1014
100
57.14
1.82 ×1015
57.14
1.82 ×1011
1000
5.71
1.82 ×1012
5.71
1.82 ×108

Nanoparticle Toxicology
Chapter 29
1399
not be considered: for determining deposition pattern in lung to 
mimic inhalation; toxic effects in the upper respiratory tract; not 
to use for materials that react with vehicle; they also cautioned that 
short-term clearance (mucociliary) is not reflected accurately.
Of special importance is the tremendous difference in the 
delivered dose rate: Bolus-type delivery occurs within a fraction of 
a second, whereas inhalation at realistic concentrations takes hours 
to months of exposure in order to deposit the same dose in the lung. 
Treating a dose delivered by bolus to be the same as a dose that has 
accumulated in the lung over a life-long exposure is scientifically 
not justifiable and needs to be discouraged (Oberdörster, 2012). 
Inundating cells abruptly with an extraordinarily high dose does 
overwhelm the cell’s defense mechanisms and leaves no time for 
developing adaptive responses. Consequently, underlying mecha-
nisms of effects induced by such unrealistic high doses are differ-
ent from those induced by relevant doses and dose rates (Slikker 
et al., 2004, see Fig. 29-3). With respect to the administered dose 
rate, Fig. 29-11 (Baisch et al., 2014) illustrates a tremendous dif-
ference of inducing a pulmonary inflammation by either intratra-
cheally instilling (~0.5 second duration) 200 µg of TiO2 NP versus 
­depositing the same dose by inhalation over a period of 4 hours 
or 4 days (4 × 4 hours). The difference in dose rate is four to five 
orders of magnitude, with a strong inflammatory response at the 
highest dose rate (instillation) and no response at the lowest dose 
rate (inhalation).
Evidence that extremely high doses acutely administered 
within a very short time overwhelm the organism’s or the cell’s 
defenses so an adaptive response cannot be mounted was presented 
in a rat inhalation study with nanosized particles using exposure to 
UFPs (~18 nm count median diameter) of polytetrafluoroethylene 
(PTFE) fumes (Johnston et al., 2000). PTFE fumes, similar to metal 
fumes, when freshly generated consist of nanosized particles, which 
are highly reactive and are known to give rise to polymer fume 
and metal fume fever in occupationally exposed workers (Drinker 
et al., 1927a, 1927b; Drinker and Drinker,1928; Lee and Seidel, 
1991; Seidel et al., 1991). When groups of rats were exposed for 
5 minutes on each of 3 days to either filtered air or to a concen-
tration (~50 µm3) of these PTFE fumes, followed on day 4 by a 
15-minute exposure of both groups to the same concentration of 
PTFE fumes, the pre-exposed rats survived without any significant 
Table 29-6  
Instillation versus Inhalation
ADVANTAGES
DISADVANTAGES
 • Low cost
 • Non-physiological
 • Simple technique
 • Invasive delivery
 • Less material needed
 • Very high dose rate
 • Delivered dose is known
 • Usually also high dose, overwhelming lung defenses
 • Ranking of toxicities
 • Bypassing upper respiratory tract
 • Avoiding fur contamination (handling hazard)
 • Different distribution in lower resp. tract: more central, 
more heterogeneous, less uniform
 • Lower risk to investigators
 • Nonrodent-respirable aerosol can be delivered (human health relevant)
 • Focal high lung burdens
 • Specific areas of lung can be dozed (larger animals)
 • Potential impact of vehicle on distribution, effects, 
material to be tested
 • Screening for deciding concentr. for inhalation
 • Potential confounder of anesthesia
 • Identifying toxic components of mixture
 • Multiple instillations to reduce heterogeneity
Note: Qualitatively, both methods yield similar results for variety of biologic endpoints (pulmonary inflammation; fibrosis; ­susceptibility to ­infection, 
­allergic sensitization, PSP lung tumors), but requires ­thorough understanding of differences between both methods to avoid misinterpretation of 
­instillation results. 
SOURCE: Data from Driscoll et al. (2000).
Dose-rate–Response correlation:
Achieving same lung burden of 200 µg nano TiO2 (25 nm)
Pulmonary response 24 h after end of dosing
0
10
20
30
Instill.—0.5 s
Control 1.01 +/−0.26
10–1
100
101
102
103
104
105
Dose rate (µg/min)
% lavage neutrophils
Inhal.—4 × 4 h
Inhal.—4 h
Figure 29-11.  Dose-rate–response correlation. Deposition of 200 μg nano-
TiO2 in the lungs of rats either by instillation (high dose rate) or by inha-
lation (low dose rate) induces widely differing pulmonary inflammatory 
responses as determined by the appearance of inflammatory neutrophils 
in lung lavage. (Figure provided by G. Oberdörster based on Baisch et al, 
2014.)
adverse pulmonary responses (not significantly different from rats 
that were sham exposed on all days), whereas the filtered air pre-
exposed rats died within 3 hours after the 15-minute PTFE exposure 
(Fig. 29-12A). Estimated deposited dose of PTFE in the lung was 
only ~60 ng. Further lung tissue analyses revealed that the PTFE pre-
exposed rats had mounted a strong “adaptive” response (increased 
antioxidant and chemokine mRNA), whereas nonadapted rats were 
unable to induce such a response (Fig. 29-12B). Evidence for such 
adaptation following inhalation exposure to nanosized particles in 
humans was already reported eight decades ago when Drinker et al. 
(1927b) described that repeat exposure to zinc oxide fumes induced 
“resistance” in human subjects. Adaptive responses are important 
physiological protective mechanisms, which need to be considered

1400
Toxic Agents
unit V
Sham
n = 5
* p < 0.05(ANOVA)
PMN
Protein
0
20
40
60
80
100
Protein, mg/mL
% neutrophils in lung lavage
Adapted
n = 6
Non adapted
n = 6
0
2
4
6
8
*
*
MT
0
10
20
30
40
50
Relative mRNA abundance
MnSOD
MIP-2
Sham
Adapted
Non adapted
A
B
Figure 29-12.  Preventing acute pulmonary injury in rats from inhalation 
of polymer fume (PTFE, nanosized particles, ~18 nm count median diam-
eter by inducing adaptation with repeated 5-minute PTFE pre-exposures on 
each of 3 days prior to 15 minutes to exposure on day 4). (A) Adapted rats 
show no inflammatory response assessed by neutrophil cells in lung lavage; 
nonadapted rats develop severe lung injury after 15-minute PTFE exposure. 
Control rats were sham-exposed on all 4 days. (B) Change in relative abun-
dance of lung mRNA in PTFE adapted and nonadapted and sham-exposed 
control rats (Johnston et al., 2000).
NM physicochemical
properties:
• Size
• Surface size and chemistry
• Charge
• Surface hydrophobicity
• Redox activity
• Others
Body compartment
media:
• Respiratory tract lining ﬂuid
• Gastrointestinal milieu
• Plasma proteins
• Other mucosal membranes
• Intra/extracellular ﬂuid
Protein/lipid adsorption and desorption patterns
Biodispersion across barriers and in target tissues/cells
Determine
Determine
“Concept of differential adsorption”
Altered plasma composition in disease state is
likely to change adsorption pattern
+
Figure 29-13.  Physicochemical properties of nanomaterials influence the 
adsorption of proteins and lipids from different organs, which affect the 
biodistribution of nanomaterials. (Used with permission from Müller RH, 
Keck CM. Drug delivery to the brain realization by novel drug carriers. 
J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2004;May:4(5):471–83.)
when interpreting results of nanomaterial toxicity testing. However, 
the organism’s capacity to adapt may not only be compromised by 
sudden very high acute exposures of short duration (high dose and 
high dose rate) but may also be impaired in susceptible parts of the 
population.
Despite the limitations of bolus-type delivery, they may be 
viewed as “proof-of-principle” or “hypothesis-forming studies,” 
with the findings to be confirmed by subsequent inhalation stud-
ies. Although results from bolus-type studies are useful for toxicity 
ranking against known positive or negative control ENMs, they can-
not be used for quantitative risk assessment. Other in vivo bolus-
type deliveries involve intravenous, intraperitoneal, or intrapleural 
injections. If used for safety assessment of medicinal applications 
of ENMs, including CNTs, an appropriate range of doses should be 
applied. However, if intravenous or intracavitary injections are used 
to simulate doses resulting from translocation of inhaled CNTs after 
deposition in the lung, results have to be viewed with caution. The 
amount of NPs translocating from the lung to the blood circulation 
and subsequently to secondary organs is very low, on the order of 
1% to 3% (Kreyling et al., 2002, 2009). Furthermore, the transloca-
tion rate from the lung is very low; it occurs over hours and days, 
which contrasts with the immediate very high dose rate of injec-
tion. Bolus-associated problems have been discussed above, and 
confirmation of results from such “proof-of-principle” studies by 
follow-up inhalation studies should be mandatory.
The pretreatment of ENMs in preparation of bolus-delivery 
dosing is an additional difference compared to inhalation and may 
raise some concern: The recommendation to use dispersants in order 
to administer the materials in a well-dispersed mode (Fubini et al., 
2010; Taurozzi et al., 2011) results in the coating of the treated 
nanomaterials that changes their surface properties and renders 
them different relative to their pristine state when inhaled under 
real-world exposure conditions. Although inhaled ENMs will also 
be coated by lipids and proteins of the lung lining fluid once depos-
ited, such protein corona is likely to change upon translocation to 
interstitial and blood compartments based on the “concept of dif-
ferential adsorption” (Müller and Heinemann, 1989). This concept 
states that the physicochemical properties of nanomaterials, such 
as size, surface properties, shape, dissolution, and others when in 
contact with media in the different body compartments determine 
protein and lipid adsorption and desorption patterns and thereby 
influence biodistribution across barriers and in target tissues and 
cells (Fig. 29-13). This concept has been further developed more 
recently by Dawson’s group (Cedervall et al., 2007a; Lundqvist 
et al., 2008; Walczyk et al., 2010) who describe the formation of 
hard and soft protein coronas around NPs upon incubation with 
blood plasma. Future studies have to show how pretreatment of 
ENMs for bolus-type in vivo administration will affect both biodis-
tribution and effects. In vitro experiments with various cell types 
have already demonstrated that the use of different dispersants with 
MWCNTs resulted in contradictory results (Haniu et al., 2011).
The three different methods of bolus-type dosing of the 
respiratory tract—intranasal instillation; intratracheal instillation; 
oropharyngeal aspiration—represent a convenient way to obtain 
first or preliminary data about effects in the respiratory tract. The 
limitations and caveats of using these modes of administration—
as pointed out in the preceding paragraphs—should be taken into 
account when interpreting the results. Immediate short-term inflam-
matory responses will be induced, and these early bolus-associated 
effects are likely to also influence long-term effects. For example,

Nanoparticle Toxicology
Chapter 29
1401
when Li et al. (2007) compared pulmonary responses to inhaled and 
intratracheally instilled MWCNTs in rats, they observed a much 
lower response in terms of pulmonary pathology after inhalation 
despite a higher lung burden from inhalation compared to instilla-
tion. It is of interest, though, that in another study similar inflamma-
tory, granulomatous, and fibrotic responses were observed in mice 
following inhalation and oropharyngeal aspiration of SWCNTs. 
In fact, inhalation exposure was more potent than aspiration of an 
equivalent mass (estimated) of SWCNTs 1 to 28 days after inhala-
tion exposure to a high concentration (5 mg/m3, 4 days @ 5 h/day) 
or oropharyngeal aspiration of 5 and 10 μg (Shvedova et al., 2008). 
The authors suggested that the similarity of responses between 
inhalation and aspiration exposure to SWCNTs in mice may be 
due to smaller SWCNT structures by inhalation of a dry aerosol 
versus aspiration of a suspension containing micrometer-sized 
agglomerates. However, both the Li et al. (2007) and Shvedova 
et al. (2008) studies only estimated the doses deposited in the lung 
upon inhalation based on inhaled concentration and size distribution 
and retained doses were not confirmed by actual measurements. In 
addition, the inhalation exposure by Li et al. was carried out with a 
static system; that is, MWCNTs were introduced into the exposure 
chamber as an aerosol and kept there for 90 minutes to slowly settle 
down while the rats were exposed. This makes it very difficult to 
determine the actual exposure concentration because it continually 
decreased, and changes in particle size due to rapid settling of the 
aerodynamically larger particles will occur. A dynamic exposure 
system with continuously generated aerosol is the standard and 
­preferred method for inhalation exposures.
Respiratory Tract Deposition
Inhalation by humans of airborne ENM at the workplace or when 
handling powders of ENM results in significant deposition in the 
three compartments of the respiratory tract: the nasopharyngeal 
region from nose/mouth to the larynx; the tracheobronchial region 
from larynx to terminal bronchioles; and the alveolar region from 
the first generation of respiratory bronchioles (bronchioles with 
some alveoli) to the last generation of alveolar ducts. The depo-
sition efficiency of inhaled particles depends on several particle 
characteristics, the anatomical structure of the airways, and breath-
ing parameters. Particle size, size distribution, density, and shape 
are most important for their aerodynamic and thermodynamic 
diameter, which govern deposition in the respiratory tract by iner-
tial impact, gravitational settling, and displacement by diffusion. 
In addition, interception (in particular for elongated structures or 
fibers) and electrostatic image forces (positive charge on particles 
attracted by negative epithelial surface) play a role in certain condi-
tions (see Chap. 15).
Because in vivo toxicological studies are mostly performed in 
experimental animals, and because of anatomical and some physi-
ological differences in the respiratory system, knowledge about 
variations in the behavior of inhaled particles is essential for inter-
preting results of animal inhalation studies with respect to dosimet-
ric extrapolation to humans. Several particle deposition models have 
been developed based on mathematical modeling and supported by 
results of numerous human studies using inhalation of benign par-
ticles of different sizes. The two most frequently used models are the 
extensive international commission on radiation protection (ICRP) 
(1994) model for humans, and a user-friendly (computer) Multiple 
Path Particle Dosimetry (MPPD) model for rats and humans 
(Asgharian et al., 1999) (available at: MPPD, 2018). Each of these 
models is based on results of an extensive database of particle depo-
sition studies in humans (ICR Panel MPPD) and in rats (MPPD). 
These data have been incorporated into mathematical equations 
describing airborne particle behavior due to impaction, sedimenta-
tion, and diffusion for different airway geometrics in humans and 
rats. There is good general agreement between results of the two 
models, although some quantitative differences exist. It should be 
kept in mind that these are still models to estimate the deposition 
in the respiratory tract, depending on particle parameters, airway 
geometrics, and breathing modes. Interindividual time values can be 
very different from the averages that are calculated by the models.
Fig. 29-14 compares the deposition fractions for mono-
dispersed particles of sizes from about 1 nm to 20 µm diameter 
between humans and rats based on the MPPD model, assuming 
unit density material. For both species nasal breathing is assumed, 
which is the obligatory mode for rats. For NPs below 100 nm (in 
the thermodynamic size range, less than ~0.5 μm), there is only a 
small difference in deposition between nasal- and oral-breathing 
mode, whereas these differences become more pronounced for 
larger particles in the aerodynamic size range (starting at ~0.5 μm). 
The mechanisms by which inhaled particles are depositing changes 
from diffusion (due to bombardment of particles by air molecules) 
as exclusive mechanism for airborne single NPs to gravitational 
sedimentation and inertial impaction for the larger particles. 
Comparing deposition efficiencies between rats and humans, not 
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
Deposition fractions
Deposition fractions
Deposition
mechanisms
TB
TB
Nasal
Nasal
Total
Total
Rats
Humans
0
10–4
10–3
10–2
Particle diameter, µm
10–1
100
101
102
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
10–4
10–3
10–2
10–1
100
101
102
Particle diameter, µm
Diffusion
Impaction
Sedimentation
Alveolar
Alveolar
Figure 29-14.  Model predictions of deposition fractions for different par-
ticle sizes in humans and rats. Nanosized particles are left of dashed line 
(<100 nm); their deposition is governed by diffusion (Brownian motion of 
air molecules). (Figure provided by B. Asgharian.)

1402
Toxic Agents
unit V
only similarities but also differences become obvious: Qualitatively, 
size-dependent deposition fractions are similar; for example, there 
is a lowest point of deposition for inhaled particles in both species 
around the size of 0.5 µm, which is due to the fact that at this size 
the combined impact of diffusional displacement and gravitational 
settling is minimal, so they are most persistent in the air. Of interest 
is that—contrary to a general misconception—the smallest inhaled 
particles (<5 nm) are not depositing in the most distal areas of the 
lung, but in the upper extrathoracic region. Thus, the nasal filtering 
capacity is effective for both the smallest and largest particles.
Obvious differences between rats and humans are the maxi-
mum size of particles that are respirable, that is, will reach the alve-
olar region. In rats, this is about 5 µm aerodynamic size, in humans 
about 15 μm. Although these sizes are outside the range of single 
NP, airborne NPs occur for the most part as agglomerates, which 
can reach µm size equivalent aerodynamic diameters. The concept 
of rat versus human respirability also applies to smaller μm size 
particles. Even for submicron-sized particles, rat/human deposition 
fractions are not necessarily the same. Thus, if a rat inhalation study 
is designed to simulate a human exposure scenario with an aerody-
namic median particle size of 5 µm, not much of the aerosol will 
reach the rat’s alveolar region. Instead, attempts should be made to 
streamline the particle size for the rat study such that the deposited 
dose in the alveolar region is similar between the two species rela-
tive to alveolar surface area.
The deposition curves in Fig. 29-14 imply that inhaled par-
ticles of ~20 nm have similar deposition efficiencies in all three 
regions of the respiratory tract. However, a more judicious analysis 
reveals that the alveolar region actually receives the least amount 
of these NPs when the deposited dose is expressed per unit surface 
area (Fig. 29-15). The data in this figure are derived from the MPPD 
model, assuming an 8-hour exposure to 20 nm monodispersed TiO2 
NPs under nasal-breathing conditions for rats and humans. As can 
be seen, the deposited dose normalized for surface area is less than 
1 ng/cm2 in the alveolar region, and is highest for the extrathoracic 
nasopharyngeal region. This result should also serve as a reminder 
that realistic in vivo doses to cells of the respiratory tract are mostly 
orders of magnitude lower than doses that are typically applied in 
vitro to lung epithelial cell cultures. Moreover, the deposited dose 
in Fig. 29-15 had accumulated over an 8-hour exposure, which is 
different from a high in vitro dose rate, similar to dose rate differ-
ences between in vivo instillation and inhalation (see Fig. 29-10).
The development of deposition hotspots in the respira-
tory tract during particle inhalation is often cited as justification 
for using high doses in vitro studies (Phalen et al., 2006). These 
hotspots occur at the bifurcations (carinal ridges) of the upper 
generations of the tracheobronchial region where due to impac-
tion more particles per unit surface will deposit compared to the 
average deposition per unit surface over the length of the airways 
(Fig. 29-16). Concentrations up to several 100-fold higher than 
on average in the airway may be accumulated for larger particles. 
However, as Balásházy et al. (2003) pointed out using computer 
modeling, the size of the area receiving the highest concentration 
is the size of square (patch) with a sidelength of only 0.1 nm, and 
airborne NPs are contributing to these hotspots to a lesser degree 
only: for a patch size of 1 mm the enhancement factor is about 
30-fold for 1 to 100 nm particles. In the alveolar region where the 
airflow is very low, no deposition hotspots for NPs exist (Balásházy 
et al., 2008). This non-homogeneous deposition and formation of 
hotspots seems to correlate with predilection sites for bronchial 
carcinoma (Schlesinger and Lippmann, 1978; Balásházy et al., 
2003), which is further enhanced by less effective mucociliary 
clearance at carinal ridges.
Respiratory Tract Clearance and 
Disposition of NP: Nanomaterials
Once NP are deposited in the respiratory tract, they will encounter 
physiological clearance mechanisms in the nasal–oropharyngeal, 
tracheobronchial, and alveolar region as described under “Particle 
Distribution of deposition enhancement factors of 5 µm-diameter
unit density particles for a 60 L/min ventilation
10% ≤ EF < 30%
30% ≤ EF < 50%
50% ≤ EF <70%
70% ≤ EF <90%
EF ≥ 90%
EF ≤ 10%
Figure 29-16.  Distribution of hotspots of deposition on carinal ridges of 
the bronchial region in the human respiratory tract. The enhancement factor 
is largest for aerodynamically large particles, but is very low for airborne 
nanosized particles. (From Balásházy et al. [2003].)
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
1000
Human
Rat
573
139
26.9
39.0
0.18
0.72
ng/cm2
Ext-thor.
Tr-bronch.
Alveolar
Deposition per unit surface area (cm2) over 8-hour exposure
at 100 µg/m3 (nasal breathing, resting conditions)
Nanoparticle size: CMD = 20 nm; GSD = 1.0
Density: ρ = 1 g/cm3
Figure 29-15.  Deposited amount of inhaled nanoparticles of 20 nm diam-
eter (density 1 g/cm3) in the three regions of the respiratory tract of humans 
and rats, calculated with the Multiple Path Particle Dosimetry model (see 
text). Assumed is an inhaled concentration of 100 µg/m3 over an 8-hour 
exposure with nasal breathing under resting conditions. Deposition is 
­normalized per cm2 of surface area of a specific airway region.

Nanoparticle Toxicology
Chapter 29
1403
Clearance” in Chap. 15. However, there are several differences 
that separate NP from larger particles, as indicated in Table 29-2. 
Alveolar macrophages generally are attracted to deposited particles 
by chemotactic signals generated at the site of deposition, for exam-
ple, C5 via activation of complement by particles (Warheit et al., 
1988a, 1988b). Nanosized particles may be too small to generate 
such signal; studies in rodents with inhaled particles ranging from 
nano- to micro-size have shown that in vivo macrophage surveil-
lance in terms of phagocytosis and clearance of nanosized particles 
is rather poor (Oberdörster et al., 2005; Semmler-Behnke et al., 
2007; Geiser et al., 2008), so that deposited NP will interact with 
epithelial cells. Uptake into the pulmonary interstitium occurs, and 
there is evidence that some of the interstitialized NP reenter the air-
ways, possibly the smaller conducting airways, from where they are 
cleared via the mucociliary escalator (Semmler-Behnke et al., 2007).
Translocation into the interstitium and subsequently into blood 
and lymph circulation distinguishes nanoparticles from micropar-
ticles. Fig. 29-17 depicts the blood compartment as a plenum from 
which any tissue/organ can be reached by circulating NP. However, 
the amount of NP translocating from the lung to the blood circula-
tion and accumulation in secondary organs is very low, as results 
from rat inhalation studies with NP have shown, about 1% to 2% 
of the lung deposit (Kreyling et al., 2002, 2009; Semmler-Behnke 
et al., 2007). Long-term retention studies with radioactive iridium 
NPs (15 to 20 nm) have shown that clearance of NP in extrapul-
monary organs following the initial accumulation is very efficient 
so that after 6 months, with the exception of liver and spleen, only 
minor amounts—below the level of detection—were still pres-
ent. Liver and spleen also had decreased sharply to levels of less 
than 0.05% of the initial lung burden. In general, the overall pat-
tern of long-term clearance from the lungs of rats was similar to 
that of microparticles with retention halftimes of 70 to 90 days. 
Elimination of NP from the body occurred via feces (Semmler 
et al., 2004) and via urine for smaller NPs (see below). Despite the 
low translocation rates of NP from the portal of entry to second-
ary organs and efficient clearance, it has to be considered that a 
continuous exposure may result in significant accumulation in some 
secondary organs. Significant efforts should, therefore, be made to 
design studies to assess the biokinetic behavior of ENM following 
relevant exposures.
Biokinetic studies have shown that organs with major reticulo-
endothelial system (RES) functions, such as liver and spleen, take 
up most circulating NP. Coating NP with PEG prevents this uptake 
by phagocytes and thereby the circulation time is increased, which 
may be desirable for medical diagnostic or therapeutic applications 
(Ballou et al., 2004). Other RES organs for accumulation of nano-
materials include the bone marrow and the developing organism in 
utero. Like the liver and spleen, the bone marrow can receive simi-
larly high or even higher doses of blood-borne NPs (Rinderknecht 
et al., 2007). As a major RES organ, studies need to be designed to 
determine responses of stem cells in bone marrow upon interaction 
with ENM in vivo. A recent study in mice after administration of 
very high doses in drinking water of TiO2 NP (~25 nm) for 5 days 
reported induction of DNA double strand breaks in bone marrow 
cells (Trouiller et al., 2009). The authors interpreted this finding 
as secondary to a systemic inflammatory response; multiple other 
organs also showed oxidative stress responses and genotoxicity. The 
authors did not attempt to determine the amount of TiO2 in different 
organs, which would have strengthened the study.
Organs with tight endothelial junctions, in particular the cen-
tral nervous system, will not likely accumulate blood-borne NPs, 
unless the tight blood–brain barrier is damaged or NP surface has 
been specially modified (Kreuter, 2004). For example, coating NP 
with the surfactant polysorbate 80 made it possible to deliver a drug 
loaded into NP across the blood–brain barrier (BBB), to the brain. 
Translocation across the BBB was facilitated via the endothelial 
low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor, and coating of the NP with 
ApoE-lipoprotein achieved the same result. The drug was either 
released to diffuse into the brain after NP uptake into the endothelial 
cells or via NP transport into the brain (Kreuter, 2004). In either 
case, the mechanism for drug delivery may be based on a “Trojan 
Horse” effect in which the coated NP mimic lipoprotein particles. 
Neurons
Exposure media
Uptake pathways
Translocation
and distribution
Excretory
pathways
Air, water, clothes
Air
Food, water
Skin
GI-tract
Blood
(platelets, monocytes,
endothelial cells)
Liver
Lymph
Bone marrow
Spleen
Urine
Feces
Deposition
Inhalation
Other sites
(e.g., muscle,
placenta)
Breast milk
Heart
Sweat/exfoliation
Drug delivery
Injection
Conﬁrmed routes
Potential  routes
Lymph
Respiratory tract
CNS
PNS
Neurons
Neurons
Exposure and biokinetics of nanoparticles
Kidney
Ingestion
Nasal
Trach-
bronchial Alveolar
Figure 29-17.  Exposure and biokinetics of nanoparticles’ routes of exposure and biokinetics (uptake, distribution, elimination) of nanomaterials. Translocation 
rates in general are very low (see text). (Modified from Oberdörster et al. [2005].)

1404
Toxic Agents
unit V
This underlines again the importance of protein adsorption (corona 
formation) for the biodistribution of NP following uptake into the 
organism.
Nanomaterials and the Brain
Fig. 29-18 depicts four basic translocation pathways of inhaled NP 
from the upper and lower respiratory tract into the CNS. In addi-
tion to the blood circulation, which does not efficiently contribute 
to CNS translocation because of the very tight blood–brain barrier, 
there is uptake into the lymphatic system—again feeding back into 
the blood circulation—and transport in or next to sensory neurons 
from the upper respiratory tract. Perineural translocation along the 
olfactory nerve will deliver NP into the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), 
as reported by Czerniawska (1970) and Zhang et al. (2006). To 
what degree transport into brain tissue may be inhibited due to a 
cerebrospinal brain barrier needs to be assessed in further studies. 
The most efficient pathway of NP translocation to the CNS appears 
to be via olfactory sensory neurons from the nasal olfactory mucosa 
directly to the olfactory bulb (Oberdörster et al., 2009). The dis-
covery of this nose to brain connection as an NP passageway goes 
back to early studies demonstrating this pathway for polio virus 
~30 nm transport from the nose to the brain in nonhuman primates 
following intranasal instillation (Brodie and Elvidge, 1934; Bodian 
and Howe, 1941), and subsequently visualized by transmission 
electron microscopy (TEM), with silver-coated gold NP (50 nm) 
instilled intranasally into squirrel monkeys (De Lorenzo, 1970). 
More recent inhalation studies with insoluble carbon NP (~36 nm) 
and poorly soluble Mn-oxide NP (~30 nm) confirmed the olfactory 
nerve system as an efficient mechanism for airborne NP to reach 
the CNS (Oberdörster et al., 2004; Elder et al., 2006). Inflammatory 
responses in the olfactory bulb and several brain regions were 
induced by 12 days of manganese oxide exposure at concentrations 
that are lower than those experienced by arc welders after exposure 
to a mixture of nanosized particles—including manganese oxides. 
Other nasal instillation studies in mice, applying enormous high 
doses, reported oxidative stress and inflammatory responses (Wang 
et al., 2008a, 2008b). Results of epidemiological studies of impaired 
cognitive function and of neurodegenerative brain pathology asso-
ciated with exposure to traffic-related particles raised the question 
as to whether ambient UFPs as constituents of urban air pollution 
may be etiologically involved (Calderon-Garciduenas et al., 2011; 
Weuve et al., 2012). Whether such etiological link exists is still to 
be investigated. The plausibility of a respective hypothesis is sup-
ported by findings that loss of olfactory function has been described 
as a common characteristic of neurodegenerative diseases, that is, 
Parkinson, Alzheimer, and Huntington disease (Moberg and Doty, 
1997; Kovács, 2004; Barrios et al., 2007; Doty, 2008).
In the same study by Trouiller et al. (2009) mentioned before, 
the authors had also exposed pregnant mice to TiO2 NP in drink-
ing water for 10 days. The offspring had a higher frequency of 
DNA deletions in the retina when examined at 20 days of age. 
Due to the extraordinarily high dose of 500 mg/kg and the lack 
of verifying TiO2 in fetal tissues, these results have to be inter-
preted with caution. Other studies evaluated exposure of the fetus 
to NP size-dependent translocation across the placenta in mice, 
with smaller quantum dots transferring more readily than larger 
ones (Chu et al., 2010). Takeda et al. (2009) injected TiO2 NP sub-
cutaneously in pregnant mice (100 μg/mouse on each of 4 days). 
They identified TiO2 NP in testis and brain of the six-week-old 
male offspring. The authors also observed reduced daily sperm 
production and apoptotic cells in the olfactory bulb of these off-
spring. Results of this bolus-type injection study may be viewed 
as a proof-of-­principle study for demonstrating placenta penetra-
tion because of the non-physiological mode of delivery of a high 
dose and high dose rate; however, the same group had reported in 
a mouse inhalation study with diesel exhaust the presence of UFPs 
in the brain of offspring and increased apoptosis of Purkinje cells 
in the cerebellum (Sugamata et al., 2006).
A more recent proof of principle inhalation study using con-
centrated ambient UFP for postnatal (day 4 to 13) exposure of mice 
pups found striking inflammatory effects and microglial activation 
and persistent male-specific enlargement of lateral ventricles (ven-
triculomegaly), associated with repetitive and impulsive behavioral 
effects (Allen et al., 2017). The authors concluded that these results 
indicate risk factors for autism spectrum disorder and also for other 
neurodevelopmental disorders.
Elimination of Nanomaterials
Elimination pathways for ENM from the body (Fig. 29-17) include 
mainly feces and urine. Urinary excretion is restricted to nano-
structures <5.5 nm in size for metal-based NP (Choi et al., 2007), 
limited by the hydrodynamic diameter of the particle that may 
From respiratory tract to brain:
Potential translocation pathways of nanoparticles
CSF: Cerebrospinal ﬂuid
BBB: Blood–brain barrier
CSBB: Cerebrospinal
 
brain barrier
Inhaled nanoparticles
Alveolar region/
Tr.-bronch. reg.
Brain
Olfactory bulb
Trigem. ganglion
BBB
Neurons
CSBB
Perineural
Nose
Olfactory mucosa
Nasopharyngeal mucosa
Blood
CSF
Lymph
Figure 29-18.  From the respiratory tract to the brain: Potential translocation pathways of inhaled nanomaterials from the upper and lower respiratory tract. 
Note that the BBB is very tight and that neuronal pathway circumvent this barrier. (Used with permission from Oberdorster, G., A. Elder, et al. Nanoparticles 
and the Brain: Cause for Concern? J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2009;Aug:9(8):4996–5007.)

Nanoparticle Toxicology
Chapter 29
1405
change in circulation due to protein adsorption. This general prin-
ciple appears to be different for circulating fibrous structures of 
ENM. Singh et al. (2006) and Lacerda et al. (2008) reported that 
even 20 to 30 nm diameter MWCNTs with length between 0.5 and 
2 µm were collected in urine of rats following intravenous appli-
cation. They explain this phenomenon by a hydrodynamic lining 
up of nanotubes so they will pass through glomerular pores. The 
fecal excretory clearance pathways consist of several inputs: One 
is mucociliary clearance of deposited particles from the airways 
into the GI tract; another is via hepatobiliary clearance of blood-
borne ENM via liver and bile into the small intestine. This elimina-
tion pathway is suggested by results from Semmler-Behnke et al. 
(2007), and it is also a well-known excretory path for heavy metals 
in the blood (Clarkson et al., 1988).
With regard to the CNS, no data on ENM elimination are avail-
able yet. It is conceivable that the CSF via its connections to the 
nasal lymphatic system (Czerniawska, 1970) and to the blood cir-
culation could be an excretory pathway for the brain, which needs 
to be investigated in future studies. Indeed, Segal (2000) concluded 
from their review on CSF barriers that the CSF may both act as a 
compartment for distribution of substances to many brain regions, 
but also can act as an elimination route for waste products into 
the blood circulation because the brain is considered to have no 
lymphatics.
However, recent studies in mice reported the discovery of a 
new cleansing system in the CNS, consisting of lymph-like para-
arterial and para-venous vessels in the CNS involving glia cells 
(Iliff et al., 2012). The authors coined the term “glymphatic system” 
for this clearance pathway in the brain, connecting to the CSF and 
clearing interstitial solutes and extra-cellular proteins and peptides 
such as amyloid beta. This newly discovered system, acting both as 
delivery (para-arterial) and also as clearance (para-venous) path-
way, plays an essential role in maintaining normal CNS physiology 
(Achariyar et al., 2016). It may well represent also the elusive clear-
ance route for NPs in the CNS.
Another clearance pathway of deposited ENM in the lung 
involves translocation via interstitium or lymph to the pleura and 
subsequent elimination via lymphatic openings (stomata) on the 
parietal pleura to mediastinal lymph nodes from where NP may 
enter the blood circulation via the right and left thoracic ducts. This 
pathway is of particular importance for fiber-shaped ENM because 
the size of the parietal stomata prevents efficient clearance of struc-
tures >10 μm in length. Indeed, collection of lymph from the right 
thoracic duct of dogs that had been dosed intrabronchially with 
amosite asbestos showed only fibers <9 μm in length appearing in 
the collected lymph (Oberdörster et al., 1988). As a consequence, 
the interaction of the retained longer fibers in the pleural cavity 
with mesothelial cells induce inflammatory and granulomatous 
responses and in long-term potentially mesothelioma (Donaldson 
et al., 2010). The following section discusses experimental in vivo 
data from bolus-type and of the toxicology of CNT that confirm 
the possibility of a mesotheliogenic response, but also caution to 
extrapolate directly to realistic inhalation exposures without fur-
ther verification. A critical appraisal of the available in vivo study 
concludes this section.
CASE STUDY: MWCNT
Bolus-type Exposures
As described in the previous paragraphs, bolus-type delivery has 
been the preferred method of dosing to identify as a first step of 
the potential hazard of ENM. The advantages and disadvantages 
need to be considered when interpreting the results, in particular 
the rationale for the administered dose levels causing potential 
bolus-associated responses should be critically considered. Several 
doses covering a reasonable range, also including a positive or 
negative control material for ranking purposes, should be part of 
a well-designed study. Knowledge about actual—if available—or 
anticipated exposure levels should be used to justify a selected dose 
range. Key is a careful physicochemical characterization of CNTs 
with respect to their original specification (pristine state) as well as 
any modification due to treatment (dispersants, sonification) prior 
to administration. Specifically, the presence of impurities (e.g., 
metals, organics, and amorphous carbon) needs to be considered.
Early intratracheal instillation studies in rats and mice with 
SWCNTs were performed with very high doses (up to 1.25 mg/rat 
and 0.5 mg/mouse), causing severe lung injury with rapid persistent 
granuloma formation including mortality (Lam et al., 2004; Warheit 
et al., 2004). Doses were so high to induce even physical block-
age of conducting airways. Pharyngeal aspiration of lower doses 
with purified SWCNTs in mice at lower doses caused interstitial 
fibrosis and granulomatous lesions, possibly due to the existence 
of large agglomerates in the administered suspension (Shvedova 
et al., 2005). Subsequent aspiration studies in mice confirmed these 
findings in mice, showing also that the responses were not affected 
by the metal content; however, the degree of dispersion influenced 
responses such that administration of the same mass dose of well-
dispersed SWCNTs caused greater and more persistent responses 
than poorly dispersed SWCNTs (Shvedova et al., 2008; Mercer 
et al., 2008).
MWCNTs delivered to rats by intratracheal instillation (0.5 to 
5 mg/rat) also induced inflammatory, granulomatous, and fibrotic 
responses; these responses were lower when the material was 
ground such that the length of the MWCNTs was reduced from 
6 to 0.7 µm (Muller et al., 2005). Another study compared pulmo-
nary responses to purified MWCNTs in mice when given either 
by instillation (50 μg/mouse) or inhalation (32.6 mg/m3, 6 h/day, 
up to 15 days, estimated to result in 70 to 210 μg in the lung) (Li 
et al., 2007). Despite the higher lung dose following inhalation, 
only moderate effects were induced, whereas instillation resulted 
in severe inflammation and alveolar wall destruction, demonstrating 
a stark difference between responses induced by the two modes of 
dosing with the physiological inhalation exposure avoiding the high 
bolus-related response. As already mentioned before, the results of 
both the Li et al. and Shvedova et al. studies have to be interpreted 
with caution because of the uncertainty of the deposited doses in the 
lung following inhalation.
Other studies with instilled high doses (up to 1.75 mg/rat) of 
MWCNTs in rats reported transient inflammatory responses with 
persistent alveolar wall thickening (Liu et al., 2008). Transient 
inflammation and granulomatous responses in rats were also 
reported by Kobayashi et al. (2010) at lower instilled MWCNT 
doses, whereas Porter et al. (2010) observed a rapid and persistent 
fibrotic response in mice following aspiration of purified MWCNTs 
in mice (10 to 80 μg/mouse) which was confirmed by morphometric 
(lung tissue) analysis (Mercer et al. 2011). Additional evaluations of 
MWCNT responses in rats and mice confirmed inflammatory, gran-
ulomatous, and fibrotic responses following instillation or aspira-
tion dosing (Han et al., 2010; Porter et al., 2010; Aiso et al., 2011).
Translocation of aspirated MWCNT to the pleura following 
aspiration in mice was also reported (Porter et al., 2010), including 
penetration into the intrapleural space of mice following aspira-
tion (Mercer et al., 2010). A 6-hour inhalation exposure of mice 
to a very high concentration of 30 mg/m3 confirmed that inhaled 
MWCNTs reaching the subpleural wall (space between peripheral

1406
Toxic Agents
unit V
alveoli and visceral pleura) are localized within subpleural macro-
phages (Ryman-Rasmussen et al., 2009a). In summary, bolus-type 
delivery of CNTs to the respiratory tract of rats and mice revealed 
induction of dose-dependent significant inflammatory, granuloma-
tous, and fibrogenic responses; they showed also that MWCNTs can 
reach subpleural and intrapleural sites.
Other bolus-type studies delivered MWCNTs into the perito-
neal cavity (intraperitoneal injection, or i.p.)—as a surrogate for 
the mesothelial lining of the pleural cavity—in order to expose 
mesothelial cells directly for assessing a mesotheliogenic response. 
Takagi et al. (2008) found, indeed, mesothelioma induction 1 year 
following very high intraperitoneal doses in p53 heterozygous 
mice, which was similar to the positive crocidolite asbestos con-
trol. A follow-up study with lower i.p. injection of 50 μg/mouse 
confirmed this finding (Kanno et al., 2010). Similarly, Sakamoto 
et al. (2009) induced peritoneal mesothelioma in rats, following 
high-dose MWCNT injection intrascrotally. Poland et al. (2008) 
also suggested an asbestos-like response after inducing mesothelial 
granuloma with amosite asbestos and with long, straight but not 
with short MWCNT 2 weeks after i.p. injection in mice. Follow-up 
i.p. studies showed the importance of lymphatic (Fig. 29-19) clear-
ance of fiber structures from the pleural cavity (Murphy et al., 
2011): Lymphatic stomata (Wang, 1975) in the parietal pleura with 
diameters of 3 to 10 μm in rodents (Shinohara, 1997) act as an 
effective clearance pathway for shorter fibers, whereas longer ones 
will be retained and induce inflammatory, oxidative stress responses 
progressing to mesothelioma. Such length-dependent pleural reten-
tion and lymphatic clearance was demonstrated by Murphy et al. 
(2011) after using i.p. injection of different types of MWCNTs and 
other nanotubes. Only long but not short or entangled MWCNTs 
caused significant mesothelial cell proliferation and granuloma for-
mation and fibrosis. Long, rigid MWCNTs also induced malignant 
mesotheliomas in rats following i.p. injection: thin curved or flex-
ible MWCNTs were less effective and the latent period for tumor 
induction was significantly prolonged (Rittinghausen et al., 2014). 
These i.p. injection studies in rodents clearly show the potential 
of CNTs, specifically MWCNTs, to induce severe adverse length-
dependent effects at mesothelial sites once they reach the pleural 
cavity. Appropriate inhalation studies in rodents need to be designed 
to determine the translocation of inhaled, generally highly agglom-
erated airborne CNTs from deposition sites in the lung to the pleura 
and to confirm the findings from bolus aspiration studies with well-
dispersed CNTs.
Inhalation Studies
Several rat inhalation studies with CNTs in rodents have been 
reported (Table 29-7). Some of these were of short duration 
(hours to a few days), and only three were designed as subchronic 
13-week inhalation studies (Ma-Hock et al., 2009; Pauluhn, 2010; 
Kasai et al., 2015) and two as 4-week inhalation studies (Oyabu 
et al., 2011; Morimoto et al., 2012). In addition, a 13-week inha-
lation study with carbon nanofibers has been reported (DeLorme 
et al., 2012). A detailed critical analysis of these four subchronic 
inhalation studies has been published by Oberdörster et al. (2015). 
All four studies were designed using three or four concentrations, 
with the higher concentrations causing significant inflammatory 
and fibrotic responses.
The authors conclude with a list of research needs to fill data 
gaps for improving design, analysis, interpretation, and extrapo-
lation to humans of results of rodent inhalation studies to refine 
meaningful risk assessments. One data gap identified is the lack of 
a 2-year inhalation study. Indeed, a follow-up study by Kasai et al. 
(2016), designed as a 2-year multidose whole-body inhalation study 
with MITSUI-7 MWCNT showed the induction of lung carcinomas 
at concentrations of 0.2 and 2 mg/m3 in male rats and at 2 mg/m3 in 
females. No mesotheliomas were induced at any exposure concen-
tration, and no lung tumors at the lowest concentration 0.02 mg/m3. 
This well-designed and executed study clearly showing a carcino-
genic response of this specific MWCNT is further discussed below.
Biokinetics of fibrous and nonﬁbrous solid particles in the lungs
Deposited dose
Alveoli
Interstitium
Lungs
Mediastinal,
lymph nodes 
Blood, liver, spleen, bone marrow
Trach.bronch.
tract
Hilar lymph
nodes
GI tract
Feces
Inhalation
Parietal pleura
stomata
Pleural
space 
Figure 29-19.   Important translocation pathways of deposited particles in the lung that reach the interstitium are via lymphatic channels to hilar lymph nodes; 
or migration toward the pleura with subsequent uptake into lymphatic openings (stomata) and clearance toward mediastinal lymph nodes. Both hilar and medi-
astinal lymph nodes drain into the right lymphatic duct to reach the jugular vein in the neck area.

Nanoparticle Toxicology
Chapter 29
1407
AUTHOR  
AND YEAR
CNT
SPECIES  
(EXPOSURE)
AEROSOL
CONCENTRATION 
(mg/m3)
DURATION
FINDINGS
Kasai et al. (2016)
MWCNT
Rats  
(whole-body)
MMAD 1.2–1.4 µm cyclone 
sieve method; dry aerosol 
generation
0.02; 0.2; 2.0
6 h/day; 
5 days/week 
for 104 weeks
Significant dose-dependent increase in lung adenomas 
and carcinomas in male rats at 0.2 and 2 mg/m3
No malignant mesotheliomas in males or females; 
~1×103 nanotubes in pleural lavage at 2 mg/
m3 significant mesothelial hyperplasia and focal 
fibrosis of the diaphragm in male rats at 2 mg/m3
Aggregates of MWCNTs in lungs: lung burdens were 
10 µg at 0.02 mg/m3; 152 µg at 0.2 mg/m3; 1798 µg 
at 2 mg/m3 in male rats
Li et al. (2007, 
2009)
MWCNT
Mouse 
(whole-body)
Powder; no info. static system
32.6 (average) 
decreasing from 
80 mg/m3 to 1 
mg/m3 in 90 
minutes
6 h/day  
(4 × 90 min) 
8; 16; 24 day 
(once every 
other day)
Moderate proliferation and thickening of alveolar 
wall
Lung lavage increase of protein, lactate 
dehydrogenase (LDH), alkaline phosphatase 
(ALP), and acid phosphatase (ACP)
Mitchell et al. 
(2007)
MWCNT
Mouse 
(whole-body)
Powder; mass median 
aerodynamic diameter (MMAD) 
0.7–1 μm and 1.8 μm
0.3; 1; 5
6/day
No lung inflammation or tissue damage; transient 
systemic immunosuppression; cytokine upregulation 
and oxidative stress in spleen
7; 14 days
Sargent et al. (2014)
MWCNT alone 
methylcholanthrene 
(10 µg/g BWip alone); 
methylcholanthrene 
followed by MWCNT 
inhalation after 1 week
Mouse 
(whole-body)
MMAD 1.59 µm
4.6–4.7; lung 
burden = 31.2 
µg/mouse
5 h/day; 
15 days; 
follow-up for 
17 months 
postexposure
14% of mice exposed to MWCNTs alone had lung 
adenocarcinomas; 22% of mice exposed to filtered 
air had lung adenocarcinomas; 62% of mice exposed 
to methylcholanthrene followed by MWCNTs had 
lung adenocarcinomas; 1.6% of mice exposed to 
methylcholanthrene alone and 9% of mice exposed 
to methylcholanthrene followed by MWCNTs had 
sarcomatous mesotheliomas
Shvedova et al. 
(2008)
SWCNT
Mouse 
(whole-body)
Powder; mass mode aerodynamic 
diameter 4.2 μm
5.5
5 h/day
Multifocal granulomatous pneumonia, interst. 
fibrosis; oxidative stress; K-ras mutation lung
4 days
Ryman-Rasmussen 
et al. (2009b)
MWCNT
Mouse 
(whole-body)
Collision jet nebulizer from 
suspension with pluronic F-68, 
MMAD ~0.16–0.21 μm
1; 30
6 hours
CNT embedded in subpleural wall and in subpleural 
macrophages; subpleural fibrosis; no pleural fibrosis 
or granuloma up to 154 weeks postinhalation
Ryman-Rasmussen 
et al. (2009b)
MWCNT
Mouse, OVA 
allergic model 
(whole-body)
Collision jet nebulizer from 
suspension with pluronic F-68; 
MMAD 0.714 µm
100
6 hours
MWCNT throughout lung in macrophages and 
epithelial cells; fibrosis in OVA sensitized mice, 
but not in normal mice; elevated platelet-derived 
growth (PDG) factor in nonsensitized mice; OVA and 
MWCNT act synergistically
(continued)
Table 29-7  
Carbon Nanotube Inhalation Studies in Rodents
Downloaded by [ Weill Cornell Medical College Library 82.154.40.205] at [05/19/19]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

1408
Toxic Agents
unit V
AUTHOR  
AND YEAR
CNT
SPECIES  
(EXPOSURE)
AEROSOL
CONCENTRATION 
(mg/m3)
DURATION
FINDINGS
Ma-Hock et al. 
(2009)
MWCNT
Rat  
(nose-only)
Powder MMAD 0.7–2.0 
geometric standard deviation 
(GSD) 2.1–3.6
0.1; 0.5; 2.5
6 h/day
Increased lung weights granulomatous inflammation 
fibrotic changes no lung lavage data LOAEL  
0.1 mg/m3
5 day/week
13 weeks
Pauluhn (2010)
MWCNT
rat (nose-only)
Powder
MMAD
2.74–3.41
GSD
1.98–2.14
0.1; 0.4; 1.5; 6.0
6 h/day
5 day/week
13 weeks
Increased lung weights neutrophils, increased in lung 
lavage; granulomatous inflammation; fibrosis
Pleural thickening (high conc.) NOAEL 0.1 mg/m3
Pothmann et al. 
(2015)
MWCNT
rat (nose-only)
Ball-milling and aerosol 
generation; MMAD 1.62 and 
2.3 µm; outer mean diameter 
= 11.8 and 12.1 nm; mean 
length=1.05 and 1.07 µm; 
median agglomerate size=376 
and 418 nm
0.066; 0.26; 
1.30
5 days
Lung inflammation 90 days after exposure at  
5.0 mg/m3 consistent with overload; clearance and 
recovery after exposure at 0.25 mg/m3
No genotoxicity detected in lungs, bone marrow, 
liver, kidney
0.06; 0.28; 4.84
90 days
Oyabu et al. (2011); 
Morimoto et al. 
(2012)
MWCNT (short)
Rat  
(whole-body)
Jet nebulizer, aqueous suspension 
with Triton-X:
0.37
6 h/day 
5 day/week
4 weeks
~70 μg lung deposition measured; retention T½ = 
54 days; slight increase in lung weight; increase of 
chemokines and myeloperoxidase in lung lavage
GMD
63 nm
GSD = 1.5
Geometric mean length (GML) 
= 1.1 μm
GSD = 2.7
70% single fibers
Morimoto et al. 
(2012)
SWCNT
Rat  
(whole-body)
Jet nebulizer, aqueous 
suspension, Tween 80 pretreated; 
bundles: (ropes): 0.2 × 0.7 μm 
90% well dispersed
0.03; 0.13
6 h/day 
Calculated lung burden: 1.8 and 8.8 μg; no significant 
changes in lung lavage neutrophils or protein, (ALP), 
chemokines, (CINCs), HO-1 level; no lung pathology
5 day/week
4 weeks
Table 29-7
(Continued)
Downloaded by [ Weill Cornell Medical College Library 82.154.40.205] at [05/19/19]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Nanoparticle Toxicology
Chapter 29
1409
The value of short-term inhalation studies for risk character-
ization can be questioned because such exposures to CNTs at realis-
tic low concentrations are not likely to reveal certain chronic effects 
if long latency periods are involved. Although unreasonable, very 
high concentrations with short exposures may be helpful for pur-
poses of hazard identification and toxicity ranking—which could 
be achieved at less cost and effort by bolus-type studies—they are 
not useful for deriving a no observed adverse effect level (NOAEL) 
or for quantitative risk assessment. Thus, beside a very costly 
2-year inhalation study, most meaningful and best justified for the 
risk assessment process would be a subchronic multiconcentration 
(minimum three concentrations) study with sufficient postexposure 
observation. However, short-term, even one-term, exposure to a 
relevant concentration is very useful for dosimetric purposes when 
determining the biodistribution from deposition sites in the lung 
to secondary organs. Of course, a prerequisite is the availability of 
sensitive detection methods, such as radioactive labeling (Kreyling 
et al., 2009) or use of a nonleachable catalyst firmly attached to or 
embedded within the CNTs.
The choice of the mode of inhalation exposure—whole-body 
or nose-only—is up to the investigator. Generally, for long-term 
chronic exposures, whole-body is preferred because the tight con-
finement of rodents during nose-only exposures induces additional 
stress, despite careful adaptation prior to starting exposures (Pare 
and Glavin, 1986; Sistonen et al., 1992; Udelsman et al., 1993; 
Fawcett et al., 1994; Rothenberg et al., 2000). The disadvantage of 
whole-body exposure is the contamination of the animals’ fur with 
aerosolized CNTs, which may lead to additional oral intake due to 
preening. However, the additional dose is very low, and GI-tract 
exposure is part of any inhalation exposure due to bronchial clear-
ance of the deposited material.
Most of the CNT inhalation studies were performed with 
MWCNTs; only two used SWCNTs. Exposure concentrations 
ranged from 0.1 to 32.6 mg/m3, either inhaled as one concentration 
only, or up to four concentrations; duration was from 6 hours to 13 
weeks. Outcomes (Table 29-7) range from no significant effects 
to severe pulmonary inflammation/oxidative stress responses; one 
study reported systemic effects including cytokine and oxidative 
stress responses in the spleen (Mitchell et al., 2007).
In an initiation-promotion study in mice, exposure to a sin-
gle injection of methylcholanthrene i.p. followed by inhalation of 
long, rigid MWCNTs for 15 days at 5 mg/m3, 62% of the mice 
developed lung adenocarcinomas after 17 months. Only 13% of 
mice exposed to filtered air, 22% exposed to methylcholanthrene 
alone, or 14% exposed to MWCNTs alone developed adenocarcino-
mas (Sargent et al., 2014). Sarcomatous peritoneal mesotheliomas 
were also found in 9% of the mice exposed to methylcholanthrene 
and MWCNTs. On the basis of this initiation-promotion inhala-
tion study, together with mesothelioma induction following i.p. 
(Nagai et al., 2011; Takagi et al., 2012) or intrascrotal injection 
(Sakamoto et al., 2009), the International Agency for Research on 
Cancer concluded that there was sufficient evidence for carcino-
genicity of this type of long, rigid MWCNT (Grosse et al., 2014). 
After consideration of additional mechanistic evidence (reviewed 
subsequently in Kuempel et al., 2017), this type of MWCNT was 
classified in Group 2B as possibly carcinogenic to humans. More 
recently, a similar type of MWCNT was evaluated for carcinoge-
nicity following transtracheal intrapulmonary spraying at a 1mg/
rat dose for 2 weeks. After 109 weeks, lung adenomas and carci-
nomas and malignant mesotheliomas were induced in the pleural 
or pericardial linings (Suzui et al., 2016). Lung carcinogenicity of 
long, rigid MWCNTs was also confirmed following inhalation in 
rats for 104 weeks at three concentrations. The lowest concentration 
of 0.02 mg/m3 did not induce a statistically significant increase in 
lung tumors compared to 13% at a dose of 0.2 mg/m3 and 16% at 
2 mg/m3 in male rats (Kasai et al., 2016). The authors calculate that 
1×109 nanotubes need to be deposited in the lungs to induce lung 
tumors; no tumors were induced at the lowest dose of 0.02 mg/m3 
in male rates. The total lung burdens in male rats exposed to 0.2 or 
2 mg/m3 of MWCNTs that significantly induced lung tumors were 
0.15 or 1.8 mg, respectively. These authors calculate that a worker 
exposed to 8.5 mg/m3 of MWCNTs for 45 years would have a lung 
burden of ~38 mg, which is equivalent to a lung burden of 150 µg in 
these male rats (Kasai et al., 2016). No mesothelioma were induced 
in this inhalation study. NIOSH has recommended prevention strat-
egies including engineering controls, worker training, and use of 
personal protective equipment to minimize workplace exposure to 
CNTs (Castranova et al., 2013).
Although bolus-type delivery did result in pleural effects and 
translocation of MWCNT toward pleural sites as discussed before, 
few pleural effects were seen except pleural thickening at the two 
highest exposure concentrations in the 13-week inhalation stud-
ies (Pauluhn, 2010). Following inhalation of long, rigid MWCNTs 
for 104 weeks, the highest dose of 2 mg/m3 induced parietal pleural 
mesothelial hyperplasia and focal fibrosis of the diaphragm in rats 
(Kasai et al., 2016). Although lung tumors were induced after inha-
lation of 0.2 or 2 mg/m3, no malignant mesotheliomas were found. 
Only 1000 nanotubes were recovered in pleural lavage fluid and this 
dose was most likely not sufficient to induce mesotheliomas (Kasai 
et al., 2016). Movement of inhaled MWCNT to subpleural sites was 
observed by Ryman-Rasmussen et al. (2009a) when individual fibers 
and very fine agglomerates (160 to 210 nm) were generated from a 
liquid suspension following a single 6-hour very high concentration 
exposure of 30 mg/m3. However, pleural fibrosis or granuloma did not 
develop up to 22 weeks postexposure. The small size of the aerosol 
as well as an extremely high dose may have been a factor in a deeper 
peripheral lung deposition. A follow-up 6-hour study by Ryman-
Rasmussen et al. (2009b) with inhaled MWCNT in an ovalbumin 
(OVA), allergic mouse model found a synergistic effect; MWCNT 
alone did not induce fibrosis in nonsensitized mice. This result is in 
contrast to their earlier study where a 6-hour exposure to a threefold 
lower concentration did induce subpleural fibrosis in mice (Ryman-
Rasmussen et al., 2009a). The larger aerosol size in the second study 
may have prevented significant deposition in the peripheral lung.
Regarding a comparison between MWCNT- and SWCNT-
induced pulmonary or secondary organ effects, the only medium-
term (4 weeks) SWCNT inhalation study in rats (Morimoto et al., 
2012) did not observe any effect; however, estimated lung burdens 
were just 1.8 and 8.8 μg, about the same as the lowest concentration 
in the Pauluhn (2010) study with MWCNTs that also did not show 
any effect (NOAEL).
Critical Appraisal of CNT In Vivo Studies
Several intrapleural injection studies with MWCNTs in mice have 
indicated that CNTs have a mesotheliogenic potential, discussed 
in the previous section. In addition, intratracheal instillation stud-
ies in rats and oropharyngeal aspiration studies with MWCNTs and 
SWCNTs have confirmed a pulmonary inflammatory and oxidative 
stress-inducing potential. These results have raised concern that 
CNTs may represent and give rise to another case of asbestos fiber 
toxicity and pathology, in particular insidious because of the decades-
long latency period from exposure to manifestation of mesothelioma. 
Controversy exists regarding the applicability of results of intracavi-
tary injection studies for regulatory purposes. European regulations 
for synthetic mineral fibers exonerate those from being classified as

1410
Toxic Agents
unit V
a carcinogen if it can be shown that the material fulfills one of the 
following conditions (EC Directive 97/69/EC, Nota Q, 1997):
 • a short-term biopersistence test by inhalation has shown that 
the fibers longer than 20 μm have a weighted half-time less 
than 20 days, or
 • a short-term biopersistence test by intratracheal instillation 
has shown that the fibers longer than 20 μm have a weighted 
half-time less than 40 days, or
 • an appropriate intraperitoneal test has shown no evidence of 
excess carcinogenicity, or
 • absence of relevant pathogenicity or neoplastic changes in a 
suitable long-term inhalation test.
This regulation is based on a number of experimental stud-
ies going back to Stanton et al. (1981) and Pott et al. (1987) that 
showed induction of tumors when different types of asbestos and 
persistent synthetic mineral fibers were directly injected into the 
pleural or peritoneal cavity. However, use of this test for regula-
tory purposes has not been established in the United States; the test 
has been criticized because of the massive doses being used lead-
ing to fibrotic reactions thereby interfering with an overwhelming 
physiological defense mechanisms. As to whether present European 
regulations will be applied to CNTs is questionable because they 
have been issued for man-made vitreous (silicate) fibers and the 
high bolus doses and associated caveats should be considered.
Still, results of CNT intracavitary injection, trans-tracheal 
spraying, and inhalation studies summarized in this section have 
defined the potential of CNTs to induce mesothelioma, depending 
on their dimensions, rigidity, or flexibility, and their agglomeration 
state. These appear to be in agreement with results from intraperi-
toneal injection studies, which did not show an adverse effect of 
short, straight MWCNTs because of effective removal by lymphatic 
clearance.
Obviously, given the importance of the physicochemical proper-
ties of CNTs for inducing adverse effects, it is of utmost importance to 
determine these properties, in particular as they appear in the airborne 
state at sites of human exposures, at occupational sites, or for the con-
sumer. Adding dispersants for testing purposes will change surface 
properties; conceptually, inhalation studies in experimental animals 
for purposes of hazard identification should mimic human exposure 
conditions with regard to airborne size distribution. Of course, dif-
ferences in respirability between humans and rats/mice have to be 
considered, and—if necessary—­adjustments be made without use of 
surface altering dispersants or harsh ­physical treatment.
Appropriately designed multidose subchronic inhalation stud-
ies, including a longer recovery period, are essential for deriv-
ing NOAELs; results can be used as basis for deriving OELs by 
applying rodent/human dosimetric adjustments (Fig. 29-20). Using 
results from bolus-type studies is difficult and raises questions, 
although the national institute for occupational safety and health 
(NIOSH, 2011) has combined results of fibrotic responses from 
diverse bolus-type and inhalation studies to derive a provisional rec-
ommended exposure level (REL) of 7 µg/m3. This REL is based on 
dose–response data from the available studies with bolus-type and 
short-term inhalation exposures and a subchronic inhalation study. 
Differences in lengths, use of dispersants, and impact of hugely dif-
ferent dose rates between the studies were not considered. NIOSH 
(2011) suggested, though, that the mass-based REL may not be suf-
ficiently sensitive for detecting CNTs by air sampling and calls for 
research to determine the most sensitive dosemetrics.
Collectively, the available in vivo toxicological database 
of MWCNTs has identified a fibrogenic and carcinogenic effect 
Dosimetric extrapolation of inhaled particles from rats to humans
Human
Rat
Exposure
[mg(m3)–1]
Exposure (HEC)
[mg(m3)–1]
Inhaled dose
[mg(kg)–1]
Inhaled dose
[mg(kg)–1]
Deposited dose
[µg(cm2)–1; µg(g)–1]
Deposited dose
[µg(cm2)–1; µg(g)–1]
Retained (accumulated) dose
[µg(g)–1; µg(cm2)–1]
Effects
Breathing
minute volume
Tidal volume, resp. rate
Resp. pause
Particle characteristics
Anatomy
Clearance
Retention
Regional uptake
(metabolism, T½)
Figure 29-20.  Dosimetric extrapolation of deposition and retention in the respiratory tract from rats to humans: The concept is to achieve the same retained 
dose in the lungs of humans as has been found at the end of a long-term chronic inhalation study in rats. According to the scheme above, use of a dosimetric 
extrapolation model for rats and humans (see text) allows to estimate the respective human equivalent concentration (HEC). (From Oberdörster [1989].)

Nanoparticle Toxicology
Chapter 29
1411
(hazard identification). SWCNTs also appear to be fibrogenic in 
the lungs. The old paradigm of dose–dimension–durability for fiber 
carcinogenicity may also apply to CNTs: they are quite durable 
(though some studies have now reported degradation of carboxyl-
ated SWCNT by peroxidases in vitro, see below), and their dimen-
sions in terms of length, diameter, and agglomeration/entanglement 
appear to be important for pulmonary effects. Of course, other 
properties (chemistry, surface reactivity) may play a role as well. 
There is an obvious and urgent need to perform additional long-
term (subchronic to chronic) inhalation studies to assess the carci-
nogenic potential of multiple types of CNTs and carbon nanofibers 
and derive protective OELs (Kuempel et al., 2017).
Biological Degradation of Carbon Nanomaterials  CNTs 
have been generally regarded as stable nondegradable materials, 
which has important implications for long-term health effects fol-
lowing inhalation into the lungs (Donaldson et al., 2006). Recently, 
however, SWCNT degradation has been observed in acellular 
assays that simulate the phagolysosome of macrophages, but only if 
the tubes have been surface carboxylated, which introduces collat-
eral defects in the side walls (Liu et al., 2010c). Carboxylated tubes 
are also susceptible to biodegradation by exposure to hydrogen per-
oxide and horseradish peroxidase (Allen et al., 2008, 2009; Kagan 
et al., 2010) or hypochlorite and the mammalian enzyme myeloper-
oxidase (Kagan et al., 2010). Kotchey et al. (2011) also reported that 
graphene oxide, but not reduced graphene oxide, is susceptible to 
oxidative attack by hydrogen peroxide and horseradish peroxidase. 
These observations may enable design of safer carbon materials 
(Yan et al., 2011) that are potentially biodegradable in order to mini-
mize adverse environmental and human health impacts. However, 
degradation of CNTs in vivo is still to be confirmed.
TOXICITY TESTING
Although numerous in vitro and in vivo studies have reported toxic 
effects of different ENMs, results are often conflicting and hazards 
are overstated due to poor understanding and knowledge about 
the appropriateness of applied doses and concentrations and their 
relevance to realistic exposures. This issue will be further discussed 
later. A conceptual testing paradigm is shown in Fig. 29-21. In order 
to perform risk assessment or to derive OELs, exposure and hazard 
data are required. To identify and characterize a hazard, in vitro 
and in vivo studies will be useful, and results should be derived 
via well-designed dose–response relationships. Key considerations 
for designing such studies include careful physicochemical char-
acterization of the ENM to be tested, justification of the method(s) 
of dosing, selection of target cells, tissues or animal species, and 
appropriate endpoints. Reference materials may also be included 
in order to rank unknown ENMs against a known positive and/or 
negative control. Whereas in vitro data alone permit toxicity rank-
ing, appropriately performed in vivo studies (using inhalation when 
dealing with airborne materials) will allow a full risk assessment 
because exposure and dosimetric extrapolation to humans can be 
performed. In the long term, in silico studies may be developed to 
assess a hazard, and in even a more distant future to predict human 
risk. Ideally, knowledge about anticipated human exposure would 
be necessary to inform both animal exposure studies as well as in 
vitro dosing.
In vivo animal studies obviously do not generally predict 
human exposures: the lower loops in Fig. 29-21 refer to dosimetric 
correlations between in vitro/in vivo and in vivo animals/in vivo 
humans, going in both directions with the goal to (a) inform the 
design of in vivo animal studies using available human exposure 
data, and (b) use exposure–dose–response information from ani-
mal studies to compare with human data. The upper one-directional 
animal-to-human loop refers to extrapolating effects and mecha-
nisms from relevant (based on dosimetric relevancy) animal studies 
to humans, with the goal to be predictive for deriving “safe” expo-
sure levels or OELs; thus, an animal study can be used to predict 
human equivalent exposure concentrations or OELs. An example 
for this approach is the recent subchronic rat inhalation study with 
MWCNT by Pauluhn (2010).
The following paragraphs focus on concepts and results of in 
vivo experiments as basis for use in the risk assessment process 
using as example CNTs. However, a need for in vitro studies should 
be stressed as far as uncovering underlying mechanisms of effects 
Positive
Benchmark
Nanomaterial
to be tested
Negative
Benchmark
Desirable: Quantitative Toxicity Endpoints; Retained Lung Burdens
Exposure–Dose–Response
Dosemetrics:  mass; surface area; volume; number
Comparative
Hazard Ranking
by appropriate Dosemetrics
Comparative
Risk Characterization (rat)
Subchronic “safe” Exposure Level
Human Equivalent
Concentration (HEC)
Chronic Exposure
Level (rat)
Occupational Exposure Level
OEL
intra-species   dosimetric
extrapolation to   chronic exposure
inter-species
dosim. extrapol.
Uncertainty    Factors
slope  analysis
NOAEL;  or BMD
in vitro–in vivo
comparison
dosimetry   validation
In vitro: acellular,
cellular, ATS
Figure 29-21.  Approach for comparative hazard and risk characterization of inhaled nanoparticles based on subchronic (3 months) rat inhalation studies. 
NOAEL: no observed adverse effect level; BMD: benchmark dose; OEL: occupational exposure level; ATS: alternative testing strategy. (From Oberdörster 
and Kuhlbusch [2018]).

1412
Toxic Agents
unit V
are concerned, provided that the caveats pointed out above are con-
sidered. In addition, despite these limitations, in vitro studies are 
useful for toxicity ranking of nanomaterials for the purpose of haz-
ard identification (Rushton et al., 2010). In contrast, the design of in 
vivo studies allows the full evaluation of exposure–dose–response 
relationships, which is necessary for the process of risk assessment 
(Fig. 29-21).
Some important points should be considered when design-
ing exposure–dose–response studies with CNTs in experimental 
animals. The major exposure route for CNTs to be expected is 
via inhalation at manufacturing sites and during distribution and 
usage (handling, refilling, disposal), although ingestion and der-
mal exposures also occur but have not received as much attention 
(Fig. 29-17). For medicinal applications, injection is an important 
route of exposure requiring specific awareness with respect to assur-
ing desired beneficial (pharmacological) outcomes yet avoiding 
undesirable (toxicological) responses (Kolosnjaj-Tabi et al., 2010). 
For example, Yang et al. (2010) concluded from their studies with 
SWCNT that the desired pharmacological target organelle for drug 
delivery by SWCNT are the cell lysosomes, whereas the mitochon-
dria are the target organelles for SWCNT toxicity. These aspects 
will not be discussed further.
In Vitro Dosimetry
The importance of dose rate for bolus-type delivery of ENM in vivo 
vis-à-vis inhalation has been stressed in previous sections. As most 
ENM toxicity studies are performed using in vitro assays, which 
are generally short term, dosing-related questions are highly rele-
vant. Teeguarden et al. (2007) pointed out that the dose received by 
the cell is a function of colloidal dynamics or “particokinetics” in 
the culture medium governed by diffusion and settling phenomena, 
which in turn is governed by particle and media properties that 
include particle size, agglomeration/aggregation state, shape, den-
sity, and charge. This is very different from chemicals dissolved 
in culture medium and requires a thorough evaluation of particle 
dosimetry in vivo. At equal mass concentrations in the medium, 
the magnitude of the cellular dose of ENM will differ significantly 
from those implied by the media concentration. This can give rise 
to significant misinterpretation of responses and is likely to con-
tribute to differences in results between different laboratories. For 
example, particles of the same material but of different sizes will 
settle onto cells in culture at different rates; and particles of the 
same size but different densities will also settle differently so that 
the time for particles to reach the cell layer at the bottom of a dish 
can vary widely. Similar to the aerodynamic behavior of airborne 
particles, the hydrodynamic behavior in culture medium expressed 
as their transport velocity shows a minimum of movement for inter-
mediate sizes where the combination of gravitational settling and 
diffusional movement is lowest.
Fig. 29-22 illustrates the different mechanisms that determine 
the in vitro particle kinetics for particle sizes from 1 nm to 1000 nm 
(Hinderliter et al., 2010). A typical U-shaped form depicting faster 
transport at both ends of the range of sizes and a slowest transport for 
particles around 20 to 60 nm is the result of the competing forces and 
particle and media characteristics. Temperature, mixing, and advec-
tion also add to the complexity of particle movement in the media. 
Teeguarden’s group developed an In Vitro Sedimentation Diffusion 
and Dosimetry (ISDD) model for predicting the in vitro behavior 
and cell doses of particles. Fig. 29-23 shows the results of example 
calculations from this model. It indicates that for large TiO2 particles 
(500 nm), the dose received by the cells in a dish with 3.1 mm media 
height is very fast. In contrast, 30 and 50 nm particles have a long 
deposition rate; only 50% of the media dose has reached the cells by 
Transport processes
Diffusion
1 nm
Faster
Faster transport
Faster transport
Particle diameter
Slower transport
Mixed
Media viscosity
Media density
Temperature
Particle density
Faster
Slower
Slower
1000 nm
100 nm
10 nm
Sedimentation
Net
transport
rates
D=
RT
NA6πµr
V= 2
9
g(ρp – ρf) r2
µ
Figure 29-22.  In vitro sedimentation, diffusion, and dosimetry (ISDD) model: particle transport/deposition processes for in vitro systems. (See text.) 
(Reproduced with permission from Hinderliter et al. [2010].)

Nanoparticle Toxicology
Chapter 29
1413
24 hours. TiO2 NP sizes in between still have not reached the full dose 
by 24 hours, whereas 200 nm TiO2 NP are fully settled by 10 hours.
Further advances in in vitro dosimetry have been reported 
by DeLoid et al. (2015, 2017), using computational fluid dynam-
ics and their new distorted grid (DG) model to estimate delivered 
dose-metrics. The authors state that these advanced models provide 
practical and robust tools for obtaining accurate dosemetrics and 
concentration profiles across the well, and that the DG model allows 
rapid modeling.
Results of the ISDD shown in Fig. 29-23 and DG prediction 
have to be verified by experiments. The value of these models lies 
in the clear separation between exposure (concentration in the cell 
medium), the deposited dose on the cell surface, and—depending 
on cellular uptake—the cellular dose. These doses can be expressed 
by different metrics: mass, number, or surface area of the nanomate-
rial. Knowledge about the time to deposit a certain dose allows to 
consider dose rate as a determinant for responses, as was discussed 
for in vivo exposures (Fig. 29-10). In vitro dosing is often perceived 
as a bolus-type delivery, similar to in vivo instillation or aspiration 
studies. However, as the results in Fig. 29-23 show, in vitro dosing 
with NP is not necessarily equivalent to an instantaneous bolus. 
The ISDD model allows to express the deposited dose per unit cell 
surface area of cultured epithelial cells of the respiratory tract and 
thereby (i) compare responses to the same in vivo dose per unit cell 
surface (based on MPPD model, Fig. 29-15), (ii) use in vivo derived 
doses from a given exposure concentration to design in vitro studies 
that include realistic doses, and (iii) use in vitro dosimetry results 
and response to verify in vivo. Likewise, doses applied in vitro to 
cells from secondary organs (e.g., CNS and bone marrow) can be 
estimated by the ISDD and DG model and better justified by results 
from in vivo biokinetic studies with respect to doses distributed to 
these secondary organs. An important difference, however, between 
in vivo inhalation and in vitro cell exposure is the pristine state of 
inhaled nanomaterials, whereas for in vitro exposures nanomateri-
als are either treated with dispersants to separate the particles and 
achieve spatially uniform dosing, or else culture media constituents 
(serum proteins) will adsorb to the NP surface to aid in their disper-
sion. Surface modification is known to affect responses of ENM 
(Haniu et al., 2011), and this possibility needs to be considered 
when designing and interpreting in vitro results.
An alternative in vitro methodology that avoids pretreatment 
of NP with surfactants or proteins prior to testing is exposure via 
an air-liquid interface (ALI) system (Holder et al., 2008; Savi et al., 
2008; de Bruijne et al., 2009; Lenz et al., 2009; Volckens et al., 
2009; Tang et al., 2011; Xie et al., 2012). Respiratory tract epi-
thelial cells are grown on porous culture cell inserts and exposed 
to NP generated the same way as done for in vivo inhalation stud-
ies. Before exposure, culture medium is withdrawn so that only the 
basal cell surface is in contact with the medium, and deposition 
of the aerosolized NP on the apical cell surface simulates realistic 
in vivo inhalation exposure. Various nano aerosol chamber devices 
have been developed for short or longer, repeated exposures of 
lung target cells at the ALI (Loret et al., 2016; Geiser et al., 2017). 
Comparative results between conventional in vitro and ALI expo-
sure seem to confirm the apparent advantage and greater sensitiv-
ity of the ALI system (Holder et al., 2008; Volckens et al., 2009). 
However, transition of cell cultures from growing in monolayer 
to the ALI system for exposure is likely to cause changes in gene 
expression, which needs to be considered using appropriate con-
trol groups (Ross et al., 2007). Other alternative exposure models 
for inhalation nanotoxicology include precision-cut rat lung slices 
(Sauer et al., 2014) and acellular human three-dimensional lung 
scaffolds (Wagner et al., 2014). Additional non-animal epithelial 
barrier models are being developed for evaluation of lung, intesti-
nal, and skin toxicity (Gordon et al., 2015) as static or microfluidic 
platforms (Blume et al., 2015; Mahto et al., 2015).
Predictive Toxicology
The NNI developed a comprehensive Environmental, Health, 
and Safety Research Strategy (NanoEHS research; NNI, 2011) 
in which urgent research needs for nanomaterial measurements, 
human exposure assessment, human health, environmental health, 
risk assessment and risk management methods, and for the input 
of informatics and modeling for NanoEHS research are discussed. 
This initiative of the U.S. Government’s interagency program for 
coordinating research and development and for enhancing com-
munication and collaborative activities in nanoscale science, engi-
neering, and technology emphasizes the NAS risk assessment 
paradigm (1983) as the basis for NanoEHS research. As illustrated 
in Fig. 29-21, data about hazard and exposure are key for the risk 
assessment process. Critical elements for hazard identification 
based on toxicity testing of ENM are detailed information about 
their physicochemical properties prior to any experiments, the 
selection of appropriate target cells, validation of in vitro assays in 
terms of correlation and relevancy to in vivo results, the inclusion 
of biokinetics in the design of in vivo studies, and the inclusion of 
realistic doses in the design of dose–response in vitro and in vivo 
studies. Biokinetic information is crucial for identifying potential 
secondary target organs based on significant accumulation of ENM. 
In order to determine relevant doses, information about exposures 
occurring at anticipated real-world exposure scenarios, either 
measured or estimated, is essential. With this information, expo-
sure–dose–response (in vivo, rodents) and dose–response (in vitro, 
target cells) relationships can be established to both characterize a 
hazard and assess a risk (see below). In terms of toxicity ranking, 
it is desirable to include reference materials in the study design so 
that a hazard can be expressed relative to a positive (high hazard) 
or negative (low hazard) control ENM. Mechanistic information 
discovered through in vitro assays will further aid in the character-
ization of hazard, provided that the mechanism is operative at rel-
evant doses/concentrations. High-dose and high-dose rate-induced 
mechanisms may not be considered relevant and may give rise to 
improper classification. An awareness of dosimetry-related aspects 
Exposure duration (h)
In vitro transport rates for TiO2 particles from 10 to 500 nm
Media height = 3.1 mm
Fraction of dose deposited
0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
5
10
15
20
25
10 nm
30 nm
50 nm
100 nm
200 nm
500 nm
Figure 29-23.  In vitro sedimentation, diffusion, and dosimetry (ISDD) 
model: prediction for in vitro transport rates for TiO2 particles from 10 to 500 
nm, assuming a media height in the culture dish of 3.1 mm. (Reproduced 
with permission from Hinderliter et al. [2010].)

1414
Toxic Agents
unit V
is of highest importance (Fig. 29-21) for the risk assessment pro-
cess, which often gets lost or is ignored because of a misconception 
of risk being analogous to hazard. Risk is a function of hazard and 
exposure, and neither aspect alone can determine risk.
The immediate goal of ENM toxicity testing is hazard char-
acterization and the establishment of respective predictive tests. 
These should ideally be based on validated in vitro studies, for 
example high throughput in vitro assays, so that ethically contro-
versial animal studies can be replaced if they only serve the purpose 
of hazard identification. A distant goal is the use eventually of in 
silico models. International workshops are trying to build a con-
sensus among multiple stakeholders for alternative testing strate-
gies for ENMs (Nel et al., 2013; Stone et al., 2014). However, at 
present, animal studies are still indispensable for obtaining crucial 
information about long-term effects of ENM and obtaining results 
for risk assessment. For example, available data from subchronic 
(3 months) inhalation studies (Ma-Hock et al., 2009; Pauluhn, 2010; 
DeLorme et al., 2012; Kasai et al., 2015) provide crucial informa-
tion for deriving a NOAEL or lowest observed adverse effect level 
(LOAEL) that can be used for dosimetric extrapolation of OELs 
for humans.
Fig. 29-20 depicts a conceptual approach for deriving a 
human equivalent concentration (HEC) from results of a long-term 
rat inhalation study. The HEC is based solely on the equivalency 
of the retained dose, expressed per unit mass, or epithelial surface 
area of the lung. The retained dose can be expressed by differ-
ent metrics, for example, rather than using the mass of ENM, as 
is conventional; the surface area or even the number of particles 
might be used. Pauluhn (2010) used the metric of particle volume 
retained in alveolar macrophages to estimate an OEL from the 
experimentally found NOAEL in a 3-month rat inhalation study 
with MWCNT. As was done in that study, it is highly desirable that 
the design of a rat study includes the measurement of the retained 
lung burden; if this is not available, the retained dose can be esti-
mated using a particle deposition and retention model with inputs 
of rat-specific breathing and airway parameters and the aerosol 
characteristics of the ENM used in the rat study. The same aerosol 
characteristics and human-specific airway and breathing param-
eters as inputs to a human model are then used to determine the 
HEC. It should be noted that this dosimetric extrapolation should 
not necessarily imply that the response in humans is the same as 
in rats. Differences in species sensitivity may require the use of 
an additional safety factor. The advantage of using the retained 
dose as the basis is that other particle size distributions specific 
to human exposures at a workplace can be used instead of the rat 
aerosol (Oller and Oberdörster, 2010).
Development of a Set of Screening Tools that Reflect 
Important Characteristics or Toxicity Pathways of the 
Complex Systems Described Above  In 2013, a committee 
of the National Academy of Sciences undertook an assessment of 
research progress on environmental health and safety aspects of 
ENMs (National Research Council, 2013). A major focus of the 
committee’s report was to provide general guidance on research 
strategies for implementing hazard identification methods and stud-
ies for a variety of ENMs. This includes a critical need for devel-
oping reliable and validated tools to identify and confirm toxicity 
pathways of complex systems and address mechanistic issues. This 
is important because of the necessity for developing a set of reli-
able and validated screening tools which is paramount for repro-
ducible testing of diverse nanoparticle types. In addition, toxicity 
results obtained from a variety of in vivo studies often have limited 
value for determining relevant health hazards, in large part because 
toxicological studies with ENMs are conducted at much higher 
doses than might be present from real-world exposures; or at best, 
they might reflect a short-term toxicological response. Time-course 
experiments would better simulate potential effects following 
exposures to nanomaterial types.
Alternatively, given the limitations of animal testing going 
­forward—and with a greater resistance to conducting in vivo experi-
ments, the applications of a spectrum of in vitro investigations could 
provide some useful mechanistic insights into toxicity pathways; 
however, several shortcomings to in vitro methodologies need to be 
addressed. Optimizing the relevance of in vitro studies to real-world 
toxicity considerations should require the utilization of experimen-
tal designs that necessitate dose–response behavior over a full range 
of doses, and should also require the duration of exposure using 
relevant cell-types (focusing on the route of exposure regimens) 
including time-course evaluations, concomitant with comparisons 
and validation with corresponding in vivo systems.
To summarize the suggested framework and research strategy, 
implementation of the following considerations would significantly 
improve the methodology for development of reliable and validated 
screening tools:
	 1.	 Rigorous physicochemical characterization of nanoparticle 
types and behavior through the life cycle
	 2.	 Dose–response characterization and careful attention to reli-
able dosimetry at relevant human exposure levels
	 3.	 Particularly for in vitro studies selection of relevant cell-types 
and cell models that reflect the route of human exposures
	 4.	 Time-course assessments that span acute to chronic exposure 
durations
	 5.	 Application of proper benchmark controls to improve interpre-
tation of toxicological outcomes (National Research Council, 
2013; Hussain et al., 2015)
DESIGNING ALTERNATIVE IN VITRO 
METHODS FOR SCREENING PULMONARY 
TOXICITY OF FINE AND NANOSCALE 
PARTICLES
The development of reliable and predictive aerosol-based in vitro 
lung toxicity assays for screening particulate/nanoparticulate mate-
rials might (in the future) limit the need for animal testing, par-
ticularly during the early phases of hazard evaluations. Additional 
benefits would include an enhanced capacity to screen several com-
pounds during the early phases of product development using cost-
effective and validated in vitro assays. In addition, reliable hazard 
data developed from these tests could serve as a bridge to the sub-
sequent implementation of longer-term particle inhalation studies, 
thereby obviating the need for conducting acute (in vivo) toxic-
ity studies, and significantly reducing the numbers of test animals. 
These goals are also consistent with the visions of the National 
Academy of Sciences—Toxicity in the 21st Century Committee 
which advocated a transformative paradigm shift in implementing 
safety studies by providing greater abilities to screen chemical haz-
ards at various life stages; to reduce testing costs, and use fewer 
animals, and to develop a robust scientific basis for assessing health 
effects of environmental agents.
As described earlier, the paradigm for these studies must include 
the following aspects: (1) dose–response studies—particularly to 
determine the slope of the toxicity curve; (2) address the shortcom-
ings/problems of static conditions of in vitro models vs. the dynamic 
conditions of in vivo effects; (3) the need for longer-term in vitro 
models—in order to assess a time-course response; (4) the questions

Nanoparticle Toxicology
Chapter 29
1415
of dose equivalency for estimating the effects of in vitro vs. in 
vivo exposures; and (5) the need for positive and negative benchmark 
materials—in order to adequately interpret the results of a particular 
study—and for purposes of ranking/grouping. At the present time, it 
seems that only hazard characterization (as the first step in the Risk 
Assessment Paradigm) can be adequately achieved utilizing current 
in vitro methodologies.
Unfortunately, the accuracy of predictive results from cur-
rently conducted in vitro lung toxicity screening studies has gen-
erally been unreliable (Sayes et al., 2007). Previously published 
results of comparative lung toxicity studies with identical particle-
types comparing submerged in vitro cell culture systems vs. in vivo 
(inhalation and instillation) techniques has demonstrated a lack of 
convergence between in vivo and in vitro effects using these cell 
culture methodologies. The toxicity studies used as barometers 
focused on similar endpoints (e.g., inflammation and cytotoxicity 
biomarkers) as representative indices for comparative purposes.
The lung is a complex organ system comprising many different 
cell-types (i.e., types I and II alveolar epithelial cells, macrophages, 
interstitial cells, vascular cells, etc.) (see Chap. 15); thus, the pul-
monary microenvironment and the complex interactions in the lung 
which occur following inhalation and subsequent deposition of par-
ticles are difficult to simulate when employing in vitro techniques. 
In addition, numerous studies have reported in vitro toxicity results 
using only single cell-types (e.g., A549 lung epithelial cells—or 
lung or peritoneal macrophages) (National Research Council, 
2013). However, these efforts generally represent simplified models 
and ignore the complex interactions in the lung microenvironment 
that occur following exposure to aerosols of particles, bacteria, 
etc. Recently, more complex in vitro systems are being developed, 
which can, in part, better simulate particle phagocytosis, an impor-
tant aspect in the simulation of lung defense responses to particles 
(Hussain et al., 2015). The development of such in vitro techniques 
will better facilitate (and hopefully expedite) the transition from the 
current animal-based inhalation testing system to one that is based 
primarily on human cell lines and in vitro assays. Such reproduc-
ible, accurate, and validated cell-based in vitro screening assays 
for assessing pulmonary and genetic toxicity will have important 
benefits (i.e., screening more compounds in a faster, more reliable, 
and less expensive manner) and may provide experimental designs 
to address mechanistic questions.
In an attempt to improve the efficacy of an in vitro method-
ological approach, a number of steps have been designed to better 
simulate the physiology of the distal lung microenvironment, con-
comitant with the implementation of an aerosol exposure system. 
Accordingly, this transition from a traditional “submerged” cell 
culture system to a more physiologically relevant ALI cell culture 
system, using Transwell® Permeable Support devices (microporous 
membranes), is useful for providing and maintaining pulmonary 
cell co-cultures (of rat lung epithelial cells and alveolar macro-
phages) and exposing the co-cultures to particulate aerosols in a 
humidified atmosphere.
Many fundamental issues require consideration for optimiza-
tion when facilitating a transition from an animal inhalation toxic-
ity set-up to an in vitro aerosol pulmonary toxicity study. These 
considerations include, but are not limited to, the following actions:
 • Determining the cell-types to be used in a co-culture system—
to better simulate the lung microenvironment
 • Transitioning from primary cell types collected from animals 
to immortalized cells derived from cell lines and tested for 
biological functionality
 • Determining the number or ratio of lung epithelial cells to 
alveolar macrophages in a co-culture plate
 • Determining the aerosol generation method for particles/
nanoparticles and appropriate and reproducible and quantifi-
able dosemetrics to be utilized for particle inhalation deposi-
tion assessments and for comparisons of results of one study 
to another
 • Demonstrating reproducibility for particle generation stud-
ies by measuring particle deposition on filters—and choosing 
appropriate filter-types and measurement methods to ensure 
validation of results
 • Deciding on the appropriate endpoints for assessing lung tox-
icity parameters, which can be benchmarked against in vivo 
results on the same particle-types
 • Validating effects, doses, and mechanism with in vivo test!
Three additional key experimental design features of a newly 
developed in vitro system should include:
 • Time-course protocol to assess the sustainability of any mea-
sured response
 • Exposure-dose–response assessments
 • Utilization of benchmark particulate control test materials, in 
order to develop a frame of reference for better interpretation 
of results
Based upon these challenges, one might be able to successfully 
transition from a submerged cell culture system to an ALI system, 
for providing co-cultures (of rat lung epithelial L2 cells and NR8383 
alveolar macrophages) applicable to in vitro cell exposures and tox-
icity assays. This more complex in vitro system can, in part, simu-
late particle phagocytosis and inflammation, important aspects in the 
assessments of lung defense responses to particles. A temperature- and 
humidity-controlled in vitro cell exposure chamber—the Nano-
Aerosol Chamber for In Vitro Toxicology (NACIVT) system—has 
been optimized to host and expose the epithelial–macrophage co-
cultures (n=24 samples) to aerosolized particulate atmospheres at the 
ALI. Particle atmospheres are generated from a source chamber prior 
to delivery to the NACIVT system at approximately 0.6 L/min (i.e., 
to each cell sample at ~25 mL/min). Particle concentration (mass/ 
volume) and aerosol size (MMAD) are sampled gravimetrically 
from the source chamber while particle deposition is measured by 
gravimetric analyses collected on filters in the NACIVT system. Cell 
metabolism/cytotoxicity assays (e.g., XTT/Lactate dehydrogenase 
[LDH) assays) and cytokine (e.g., IL-6) release assay have been 
developed and modified for use to assess toxicity/inflammatory end-
points. The XTT assay is a colorimetric assay designed to assess cell 
viability as a function of cell number based on metabolic activity.
Read Across—Nanogrouping
As more new nanomaterial types are being produced and entering 
commerce, the importance of adequately testing and assessing the 
hazards and potential risks of these particulates becomes critical. 
Of course, there is insufficient time and adequate funding to thor-
oughly evaluate the hazards of many of these new materials in vivo. 
Moreover, the trend away from animal testing makes the neces-
sity for developing a new strategy for hazard evaluation critically 
important. One recently proposed practical strategy for assessing 
potential hazards of nanoparticles involves the grouping of similar 
particle-types, to streamline testing for regulatory purposes. The 
conceptual design for this strategy is to group nanomaterials for 
assessment that are similar or complementary in physicochemical 
characteristics. Recently, the European Centre for Ecotoxicology 
and Toxicology of Chemicals Task Force (ECETOC) has proposed 
a methodology for the critical appraisal of existing concepts for 
the groupings of nanomaterials. These would include the properties

1416
Toxic Agents
unit V
and biophysical interactions of nanomaterials, specific types of use 
and exposure, uptake and kinetics, as well as possible early and 
apical biological effects (Arts et al., 2014). Subsequently, the group 
proposed a decision-making framework for the grouping and test-
ing of nanomaterials (Arts et al., 2015). This process was designed 
to cover all relevant aspects of a nanomaterial’s life cycle and 
biological pathways. The authors developed four (general) main 
nanogroups of materials for testing considerations. These included 
the following groups: (1) soluble nanomaterials; (2) biopersistent 
high aspect ratio nanomaterials; (3) passive nanomaterials; and 
(4) active nanomaterials. The proposed grouping was designed to 
provide a hazard and risk assessment tool and strategy that conceiv-
ably could be tested and ultimately contribute to the sustainable 
development of nanotechnological products.
In a subsequent publication, this proposed methodology was 
implemented by developing case studies for putting into practice, 
the decision-making framework for the grouping and testing of 
nanomaterial groups (Arts et al., 2016). Per the authors, case stud-
ies covering the following nanomaterials were implemented: carbo-
naceous nanomaterials, metal oxide and metal sulfate particulates, 
amorphous silica and organic pigments were subjected (with limi-
tation) to the decision-making framework for the potential group-
ing and testing of nanomaterials. The authors initially outlined two 
(physicochemical) tiers that relied exclusively on non-animal test-
ing methods, followed by a third testing tier, from which data from 
rat short-term inhalation studies were evaluated per the four groups 
outlined in the previous paragraph. To summarize, the authors 
concluded that the utility of this grouping strategy for nanomate-
rial hazard assessment was confirmed (with limitation). Of course, 
this methodological strategy, as well as hazard and risk results for 
nanomaterial-types, will require confirmation and substantiation by 
independent investigators and research groups, but this testable con-
cept represents an idea for organizing the testing and evaluation of 
new or untested nanomaterial-types, without the painstaking, time-
consuming, and expensive route of individual testing of new and 
current products in commerce, to which consumers will be exposed.
Transition, Human—Eco-nanotoxicology
The goals of nanotoxicology are to identify and characterize a 
hazard of ENMs for purposes of risk assessment for humans and 
the environment, and this requires a highly multidisciplinary team 
approach, covering expertise in toxicology, biology, chemistry, 
physics, material science, geology, exposure assessment, PBPK and 
fate and transport modeling, and medicine is necessary to develop: 
testing strategies, establish toxicity ranking, determine “safe” expo-
sure levels, and derive preventive exposure guidelines. As depicted 
in Fig. 29-24, exposures throughout the life cycle of ENMs, from 
their source to their disposal, have to be considered. Dispersion and 
intermediate transformations in air, water, food, and soil are impor-
tant modifiers of ENM–receptor interactions. Identifying underly-
ing mechanisms of such interactions will aid in assessing risk and 
establishing preventive measures. Developing predictive models is 
a distant goal for both human and eco-nanotoxicology.
ECOTOXICOLOGY OF ENMS
Environmental Uses and Exposures to 
Nanomaterials
As with many chemicals in the marketplace, it is estimated that 
a portion of the nanomaterials used in industry and consumer 
products will enter the greater environment during some part of 
their life cycle, either through waste during production or through 
product use. The exponential increase in use of ENMs in a multi-
tude of industries and consumer products has been documented by 
the Woodrow Wilson Center’s project on Emerging Technologies, 
which as of March 2011 estimated that self-identified nanomaterial 
products had grown from 54 to over 1300 in 5 years. This list likely 
underestimates the number of uses of nanomaterials as it only 
includes products easily identified as containing nanomaterials 
and does not include other known uses of nanomaterials, including 
industrial catalysts, wastewater treatment, in addition to environ-
mental cleanup technologies and pesticides, which would directly 
place nanomaterials into the environment. Most of the uses identi-
fied are in cosmetics, clothing (where nanomaterials are often added 
for antimicrobial and antiodor functions), personal care products, 
and sporting goods. The most common nanomaterials included in 
these products are silver and carbon nanomaterials. Other chemi-
cals used in personal care products, cosmetics, and clothing have 
been found to wash into the wastewater treatment system and end 
up in the aquatic environment either directly from the treatment 
facilities or through land applications of biosolids from wastewa-
ter treatment plants. It is anticipated that some of the nanomaterial 
components may have the same fate, and indeed a few documented 
cases indicate this may be possible (Wang et al., 2012) but a major-
ity of the estimates of potential environmental release of these 
chemicals is from modeling based on data from other compounds 
without regard to specific properties of nanomaterials compared 
to their bulk counterparts (Mueller and Nowack, 2008; Gottschalk 
et al., 2009, 2010). These studies estimate that concentrations in the 
environment can range from ng/L to μg/L, with many agglomerat-
ing into larger than nanosized units and much of the NP mass bind-
ing to solids and removed into biosolid waste. However, despite 
these removal potentials, it has been shown that NPs can be emitted 
through the wastewater process in the NP size range in significant 
quantities (Westerhoff et al., 2011).
Nanomaterials directly applied to a particular ecosystem, such 
as those for cleanup of environmental toxicants or as part of a pesti-
cide formulation may also lead to exposures. Nanoscale zero-valent 
iron and titanium dioxide are currently being evaluated as a removal 
technology to treat groundwater systems and some surface water or 
soil systems for metals, arsenic, organic chemicals such as chlo-
rinated solvents, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), and benzenes 
(Elliott and Zhang, 2001; Chen and von Mikecz, 2005; Quinn et al., 
2005). Poly(ethylene) glycol–modified urethane has been proposed 
for the sequestration and enhanced bioavailability for degradation 
of organic contaminants (Tungittiplakorn et al., 2005). Pesticide 
formulations containing carbon-based nanomaterials and others 
have been sent to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
for evaluation and are assumed to be in development.
Development
Behavior
Stress
Growth
Tumor incidence
Egg production
Survival
Reproduction
LD50, LC50
Genetic diversity
Mutation rate
Change in
recruitment 
Bacterial
diversity
Presence of
sensitive
species
Nutrient cycling
Degradation of
habitat
Missing food
chain links
Presence/
absence
of functional
groups
Individual
organism
measure
Population
measure
Community
measure
Ecosystem
measure
Figure 29-24.  Measures of ecological effect at the different levels.

Nanoparticle Toxicology
Chapter 29
1417
Ecological Risk Assessment of 
Manufactured Nanomaterials
One of the unusual aspects of the field of nanotechnology is the 
way in which the science of the risk of these materials to the envi-
ronment has been instigated relatively early in the adoption of the 
technology. For most other contaminants, the risk assessment has 
largely been retrospective often decades after the chemical has 
been in the marketplace and is now distributed across the globe into 
many environmental compartments. The goal of this science to date 
has been to determine how a particulate form of a chemical in a 
nanosize range influences its toxicity versus its larger bulk counter-
parts. A further goal is to determine how small changes in surface 
chemistries, size, shape, and structure affect the interaction with 
organisms in the environment with the goal of informing industry 
on safe development. However, there are issues in assessing the risk 
of nanomaterials that are unique to this class of potential contami-
nant, and therefore the process of assessing risk also has unique 
considerations (some that have been mentioned in dealing with 
human health considerations). The assessment of ecological risk 
is also more complicated than human health assessments, as there 
are more species involved and higher level impacts on populations, 
communities of organisms, and ecosystem function need to be 
considered. The methods to evaluate the potential impacts of nano-
materials at higher levels of organization (community, ecosystem) 
have not been developed as is the case with many other chemicals.
The basic framework used for ecological risk assessment 
(Fig. 29-25) (EPA EPA/630/R-95/002F) involves problem formu-
lation, analysis, and risk characterization. Problem formulation 
involves selecting endpoints of concern and developing a plan for 
determining impacts on important endpoints (such as a species 
decline and ecosystem changes). Analysis involves evaluating the 
potential for exposure to stressors and potential effects at those 
exposure levels. Risk characterization involves taking the informa-
tion on important endpoints and the analysis of exposure and effects 
data to determine the importance of a stressor. For nanomaterials, 
most of the ecological risk assessment research has been conducted 
as the analysis of effects of a limited number of commercially avail-
able materials, using traditional acute single-organism mortality 
endpoints of a few select species and with little information regard-
ing sublethal types of effects or other endpoints of concern at the 
community or ecosystem level. In addition, the concentrations of 
exposures are much higher than what is considered to be a probable 
environmental level. As such it is difficult to draw conclusions of 
the actual risk of many of even the most common materials and the 
conclusion is often that these particles may not cause any impact as 
no acute toxicity is seen. Nanomaterials may also be transformed 
within the environment, and therefore the toxicity of the initial 
nanomaterial may not provide a complete idea of the toxicity over 
the lifetime of the material (Nowack et al., 2012). Part of this is due 
to the relative newness of this field, the particulate nature of the 
potential toxicants, and other challenges surrounding the methods 
for determining toxicity, methods for measuring potential expo-
sures, and uncertainty in estimates of how the materials will be used 
in the future marketplace. Agencies involved in protecting public 
and environmental health in individual countries as well as interna-
tional agencies are grappling with methods to develop a structure 
to assess risk for all nanomaterials and make predictions regarding 
new ones as they come into the marketplace. This assessment may 
take time as methods’ development needs to progress with the field 
nC60
nC60
Nanoparticle
type
Hydrodynamic
diameter
C60-BCD
C60-BCD
SWCNT-low func
C60-OH
637.7 nm
103.7 nm
1.4 nm in one
dimension, µM in total
171.1 nm
C60-OH(24)
Single-walled nanotube unfunctionalized
Figure 29-25.   Example of the differences in larger particle agglomerates with nanomaterial. All three of these are fullerene particle; however, the unfunction-
alized particles are two to six times larger agglomerates in a pure water suspension compared with the functionalized counterparts. The stability in suspension 
also differs with functionalization (represented by the zeta potential).

1418
Toxic Agents
unit V
of nanotechnology as new materials are being developed. The cur-
rent state of the field is represented below, but the reader should 
keep in mind that it is rapidly changing.
Toxicity of Manufactured Nanomaterials
Complications of Assays  Traditionally, ecotoxicology assays 
follow standard protocols and involve a group of species that has 
been selected to be representative of various organisms in the envi-
ronment, including Daphnia, bacteria, fish, birds, and insects. The 
most standard assays involve 24- to 48-hour exposures and mortal-
ity endpoints such as LD50. Other standard assays for these species 
include month-long trials assessing growth and reproduction, tumor 
development, and other endpoints. Some issues arise in conducting 
these assays for nanomaterials, which is one of the reasons the cur-
rent toxicological information regarding nanomaterials is variable. 
Some of the major issues in toxicology assays include delivery of 
nanomaterials in media and approximating environmental condi-
tions, characterizing exposures, maintaining exposures throughout 
an assay, and determining the state of exposure throughout an assay. 
For example, many nanomaterials are not easily dispersible and 
aggregate substantially when introduced into common exposure 
media. A hydrophobic particle will aggregate with other particles 
in water and to an even greater extent when salts are introduced into 
the media as is the case with many aquatic systems. This causes 
several issues when determining toxicity. First, the nanomaterial 
aggregate may no longer be in the nanosize range (hydrodynamic 
diameter >100 nm). In some cases, this larger aggregate is never-
theless more toxic than its bulk chemical counterpart. This has not 
been shown with all nanomaterials, however, and is controversial. 
Second, the nanomaterials as they aggregate settle out of suspen-
sion, so depending on the organism involved the actual exposure 
may change over time as particles are effectively removed from 
suspension, or they may increase as some organisms (Daphnia) 
collect particles not only from the water column but from the bot-
tom of the vessel. Some researchers have attempted to suspend the 
nanomaterials using solvents or detergents for better distribution. 
Studies have shown that the solvent or detergent when not removed 
from the nanomaterials sufficiently can cause toxicity (Lovern and 
Klaper, 2006; Henry et al., 2007; Kovochich et al., 2009), and in 
others the data indicate that this smaller aggregate size created by 
the additive changes the toxicity (e.g., Lovern and Klaper, 2006). 
Researchers have attempted to circumvent this issue by either 
changing the surface chemistry of the nanomaterial to make it more 
readily suspendable by adding a hydrophilic functional group or 
by altering the exposure conditions to include organic material that 
assists in suspension. Each of these approaches raises its own issues 
for toxicology. Changing the surface chemistry of a nanomaterial 
can also change its toxicity (Klaper et al., 2010). The relationship 
between surface chemistry and toxicity is important to understand 
because surface functionalization is an important aspect of nano-
material formulation for industrial applications. So determining 
the impact of different surface chemistry changes is a necessary 
part of not only ecotoxicology but nanotoxicology in general. A 
bigger issue is that many coatings can cause toxicity on their own 
regardless of whether it is attached to the nanomaterial, and has 
also shown to be removed in certain cases by the organisms in the 
test media, or the environment the organism inhabits, which dra-
matically changes the properties of the nanomaterial through the 
experiment (Roberts et al., 2007). Is the toxicity then due to the 
original particle or now to the altered form of the nanomaterial?
As part of determining the dose an organism actually encoun-
ters is determining how much of any nanomaterial actually reaches 
the organism and is taken up into the organism and its tissues. There 
are several difficulties in quantifying uptake, including identifying 
the nanomaterial within the matrix of the organism versus inside the 
organism, for some nanomaterials the issue is distinguishing the 
nanomaterial from the matrix of the organism or environment either 
due to their small size relative to other aggregates in a sample, or 
because of the chemical similarity of the nanomaterial with the 
matrix (carbon-based nanomaterials in tissue, for example). Bulk 
extractions of these materials have provided some indication of 
potential concentrations (Westerhoff et al., 2011), but missing is the 
finer detail regarding location and structure of nanomaterials within 
a matrix, which is necessary to determine that the nanomaterial itself 
is causing an effect and not its byproduct or a secondary physiologi-
cal response. Another issue in conducting a normal ecotoxicological 
assay using nanomaterials is the issue of calculating the dose as 
a mass versus surface area as reported above. Most nanomaterials 
when reaching the environment are not in a spherical uniform form, 
which complicates any calculations of dose based on surface area.
The real adverse impacts of nanomaterials may not be due to 
ambient environmental concentrations that arise but may be due 
to some subset of materials that are persistent and biomagnify in 
the environment. Research indicates that various nanomaterials are 
taken up by organisms in the environment and much is excreted 
by the organism within hours (Lovern et al., 2008; Petersen et al., 
2009). In addition, gold nanomaterials and cadmium selenide quan-
tum dots have been shown to accumulate in tissues of organisms 
and are able to pass from one level to another in simple food chain 
experiments (Judy et al., 2011; Werlin et al., 2011). These include 
microbial food chains and those involving consumption of algae 
or bacteria into protozoa, herbivores, or detritivores. However, 
nanomaterials passing from one level to the next do not guarantee 
biomagnification up the entire food chain as seen in quantum dot 
studies using transfers from Daphnia to zebrafish or where proto-
zoa take up quantum dots and accumulate them to a greater extent 
than the media concentration but rotifers feeding on the protozoa 
do not show further increases in concentrations of nanomaterials 
(Holbrook et al., 2008; Lewinski et al., 2011).
Ecotoxicity of Nanomaterials
The studies on the toxicity of ENMs to date have largely focused 
on simple structures of fullerenes, CNTs, metal oxides, and gold 
and silver particles with a few examples of the impacts of nanoma-
terials with varying surface chemistries or functional groups. The 
major conclusion from these data is that toxicity varies with the 
type of nanomaterial and is not universal across materials. There 
are varying degrees of toxicity depending on the type of nanoma-
terial, organism studied, and the co-occurrence of other environ-
mental factors such as UV light, organic carbon, or low pH. The 
most common endpoints monitored in nanoecotoxicology are acute 
mortality measures with traditional toxicological models species 
such as Daphnia, zebrafish, trout, and Arabidopsis. Most studies 
find some degree of toxicity, but the concentrations of most nano-
materials that are needed to kill half of the sample population are in 
the mg/L range, which is far above the estimates of potential expo-
sures to any nanomaterial. Nanomaterials may enter other organ-
isms just as they do humans and other mammals, through external 
contact with outer tissues and breathing structures (gill, skin), and 
through ingestion. Nanomaterials have been shown to be ingested 
with and without food present in many circumstances, thus leading 
to contact with internal structures. The greatest damage measured 
has been to gill structures in fish and in digestive tissues in other 
species (Zhu et al., 2008; Bilberg et al., 2010). In terrestrial studies,

Nanoparticle Toxicology
Chapter 29
1419
plants have been shown to accumulate nanomaterials in root tissues 
and it is assumed that inhalation is possible in certain terrestrial 
situations but impacts on birds and mammals other than rats have 
not been demonstrated.
Fullerenes and CNTs were some of the first nanomaterials 
investigated for their potential environmental impact. Fullerenes 
have been shown to be lethal to Daphnia and microbial organisms 
(e.g., Lovern and Klaper, 2006; Zhu et al., 2006). However, eco-
toxicity studies have indicated that the damaging impacts of these 
nanomaterials can be dramatically impacted by the method of intro-
duction into exposure media. This includes introduction by solvent 
carriers or by altering the materials with surface chemistries that 
make them more water soluble. Unmodified fullerene nanomateri-
als may only be toxic at very high doses of mg/L and mg/kg of soil 
(Zhu et al., 2006; Li and Alvarez, 2011; Mouchet et al., 2011) and 
have been shown to have little impact on bacterial communities and 
protozoa (Johansen et al., 2008). However, increasing their solubil-
ity through either solvent or detergent introduction or by changing 
surface chemistry can also increase their toxicity to aquatic species 
(Klaper et al., 2010).
Silver nanomaterials are some of the most widely used mate-
rials and appear to demonstrate the greatest toxicity of materials 
investigated in the literature. Silver, in particular, is toxic at μg/L 
doses to a variety of organisms (George et al., 2011; Bilberg et al., 
2012). However, silver and other metal nanomaterials are subject 
to dissolution even with various coatings and their entire toxicity 
may be due to the ionic component of an exposure rather than the 
nanomaterial form (Kennedy et al., 2010). These metal ions may 
accumulate in the body of organisms after ingestion of nanoma-
terials and contribute to toxicity (Asharani et al., 2008; Li et al., 
2011). Rather than creating a free radical in media, the impacts of 
metal nanomaterials may be due to metal imbalance in cells after 
uptake and accumulation, leading to apoptosis and cellular disregu-
lation (Kao et al., 2012). However, it has been suggested that the 
dissolution and ionic form of the metals is not the sole reason for 
nanometal toxicities (Griffitt et al., 2007). Nanosilver and possibly 
other nanomaterials based on soft metals may also react with envi-
ronmental sulfides to produce silver sulfide nanomaterials, in which 
the silver bioavailability and toxicity is much reduced (Kim et al., 
2010; Liu and Hurt, 2010).
Mechanisms of Toxicity
As in mammalian toxicology studies, oxidative stress has been 
implicated as a major way in which nanomaterials exert toxicity 
either by generating free radicals within the suspension media or by 
changing the chemistry of the cells in which they come in contact. 
Metal oxide nanomaterials, in particular, have been found to gen-
erate oxidative stress. Hydroxyl radicals and oxidative stress have 
been found to increase over time in the presence of metal oxides 
and UV light (Yu et al., 2011). As in human tissues, the stimula-
tion of oxidative stress pathways alone is not an indication of harm 
and may be countered by adaptation by the organism to exposure. 
Mortimer et al. (2010) found that despite oxidative stress in initial 
assays, toxicity decreased over time in protozoa after exposure to 
metal oxide nanomaterials. However, Klaper et al. (2009) found 
that acute assays of oxidative stress do provide an early indicator of 
mortality of Daphnia in chronic assays for a variety of nanomaterial 
types. Metal oxide nanomaterials appear to have greater toxicity 
than their bulk counterparts. Titanium dioxide nanomaterials gen-
erate more ROS per gram than similar macroparticulates (Xiong 
et al., 2011). However, they do not differ from larger aggregates 
in their toxicity to developing fish (Zhu et al., 2008). Most studies 
Ecological risk assessment
Problem formulation:
What are we worried about
Risk assessment
Types of effects
(organism to ecosystem)
Exposure
potential
X
Figure 29-26.   Ecological risk assessment involves determining the types of 
concerns we have regarding a particular stressor and its impacts, determin-
ing the potential for exposure to environmental compartments, the types 
of potential impacts a stressor (in this case a nanomaterial) may have at 
those exposures, and using those two factors together to determine the risk 
to the environment. With most nanomaterials we are relatively certain that 
environments such as freshwater systems that are receivers of wastewater 
will be exposed and most likely agricultural areas that receive solid wastes. 
The level of exposure is still in question and we have only begun to exam-
ine the types of effects. We have some information on model species such 
as Daphnia and trout as to the chance of mortality and some physiological 
effects in the acute exposure but little information is available on chronic 
low-level exposures. As such, it is currently premature to determine the 
actual risk to the environment.
have found a greater difference among nanomaterials composed 
of different metal oxides than the difference between the bulk and 
nanomaterial form of these compounds.
Metal nanomaterials have been found to cause a suite of 
effects, which in fish include negative impacts on respiration, oxi-
dative stress, and development (Zhu et al., 2008; Shaw and Handy, 
2011), in Caenorhabditis elegans increased mortality and decreased 
reproduction (Wang et al., 2012) and inhibit algal growth (Peng 
et al., 2011). Differences among metal oxides may be a result of 
differential solubilities in media.
The toxicity of nanomaterials to aquatic organisms can be 
greatly dependent upon the interaction of nanomaterials with the 
media to which they are introduced (Figs. 29-26 to 29-28). For 
example, dissolution of metal oxides and metal nanomaterials is 
greatly impacted by the characteristics of the media such as pH 
and salt content. Li et al. (2011) found that zinc oxide nanomate-
rials were most toxic in ultrapure water followed by salt, lithium 
borate (LB), and phosphate buffer saline (PBS) buffers. In the envi-
ronment, toxicity may differ with the presence of organic matter, 
and the specific interaction of organic matter with a nanomaterial 
will differ depending on its composition. The degree of interac-
tion of nanomaterial and organic matter has been shown to impact 
toxicity (Gao et al., 2009). Toxicity of particles sorbed to natural 
organic matter can be significantly greater (Edgington et al., 2010) 
or diminished (Blinova et al., 2010). Toxicity of nanomaterials can 
be significantly impacted by the surface chemistry, capping agents, 
and coatings of the particles. Additions of functional groups have 
been shown to increase toxicity in some cases (Klaper et al., 2009, 
2010) and decrease toxicity in others (Allen et al., 2009). A few 
studies have also examined the influence of aging of nanomaterials 
in the environment on their toxicity.
Nanomaterials may also impact the bioavailability and toxic-
ity of other contaminants in the environment. Fullerene and CNT 
particles, in particular, have been shown to bind to various organic 
contaminants with the strength of the association dependent upon

1420
Toxic Agents
unit V
the compound. Sorption to these nanomaterials can increase con-
centrations of bound organics by up to 60%, which if ingested could 
increase their toxicity (Baun et al., 2008).
As many nanomaterial exposures in the environment will 
occur at relatively low levels (μg to ng/L exposures), it is important 
to use assays other than LD50 to indicate the most relevant envi-
ronmental effect. Including sublethal assays of physiology, assays 
of impacts of chronic low-level exposures, monitoring of alterna-
tive endpoints such as reproduction, growth, and at a higher level 
changes in community structure and ecosystem function, are essen-
tial. Nanomaterials cause a shift in overall behavior in Daphnia, 
which can indicate a greater susceptibility to predators and a greater 
energy cost leading to decreased reproduction (Lovern et al., 2007; 
Brausch et al., 2011). Various nanomaterials have been shown to 
impact development and physiology of fish species causing greater 
apoptosis in tissues, stress, and other impacts including structural 
effects (Chen et al., 2011; Shaw and Handy, 2011; Xiong et al., 
2011; Truong et al., 2012). As the immune response is the first inter-
action of foreign substances with an organism, it has been shown 
that nanomaterials are stimulatory to the immune system of fish in 
particular and have an effect that is equal to the response to bacterial 
cell components, which may indicate an eventual cost to the organ-
ism (Klaper et al., 2010; Jovanović et al., 2011). Nanomaterials 
also have the potential to be mutagenic and in flies cause mutations 
that alter the phenotype significantly into the second generation 
(Vecchio et al., 2012).
Measurements of impacts at the community and ecosystem 
level are uncommon for nanomaterials, as they are for chemical tox-
icants with a much longer toxicology history. The existing studies 
indicate that community structure is impacted by the same nanoma-
terials that show toxicity and developmental impacts such as metals 
and metal oxides. Cerium dioxide and silver nanomaterials have a 
significant impact on marine microbial communities and microbial 
communities in wastewater—decrease in degradation potential and 
productivity (Fabrega et al., 2011; García et al., 2012). They also 
cause shifts in decomposition communities in freshwater streams 
(Pradhan et al., 2011). Nanomaterials such as unfunctionalized 
fullerenes that have been shown to be less toxic exhibit no impact on 
soil community structure (Tong et al., 2007), macrophyte structure 
(Velzeboer et al., 2011), or mutagenesis across generations (Nyberg 
et al., 2008) but do cause shifts in community composition of soil 
bacteria (Johansen et al., 2008). The overall composition may also 
be altered as microbial communities on mucus secretions of carp 
are different in those that have been exposed to fullerenes (Letts 
et al., 2011). The overall community impact is greatly affected by 
complexity in environmental samples (Kang et al., 2009).
Ecosystem impacts may be impacted by these community 
effects as bacterial community function has a great impact on nutri-
ent cycling. CNTs have been shown to impact microbial activity 
(Chung et al., 2011), and fullerenes, silver, and CdSe quantum dots 
impact sediment bacterial oxidation of organics (Gao et al., 2009).
REFERENCES
Achariyar TM, Li B, Peng W, et al. Glymphatic distribution of CSF-derived 
apoE into brain is isoform specific and suppressed during sleep depriva-
tion. Mol Neurodegener. 2016;11(1):74.
Aiso S, Yamazaki K, Umeda Y, et al. Pulmonary toxicity of intratrache-
ally instilled carbon nanotubes in male Fischer 344 rats. Ind Health. 
2011;48(6):783–795.
Akhavan O, Ghaderi E. Toxicity of graphene and graphene oxide nanowalls 
against bacteria. ACS Nano. 2010;4:5731–5736.
Albrecht C, Borm PJ, Unfried K. Signal transduction pathways relevant 
for neoplastic effects of fibrous and non-fibrous particles. Mutat Res. 
2004;553:23–35.
Allen BL, Kichambare PD, Gou P, et al. Biodegradation of single-walled car-
bon nanotubes through enzymatic catalysis. Nano Lett. 2008;8:3899–3903.
Allen BL, Kotchey GP, Chen Y, et al. Mechanistic investigations of horse-
radish peroxidase-catalyzed degradation of single-walled carbon nano-
tubes. J Am Chem Soc. 2009;131:17194–17205.
Allen JL, Oberdorster G, Morris-Schaffer K, et al. Developmental neuro-
toxicity of inhaled ambient ultrafine particle air pollution: parallels with 
Figure 29-27.   Suspension characteristics can have a significant impact 
on toxicity. In this case single-walled nanotubes that have been functional-
ized with polyethylene glycol remain in suspension (on right) where their 
unfunctionalized counterparts do not (on left).
Figure 29-28.   Aquatic organisms, such as Daphnia magna, readily take 
up nanomaterials from the environment and their guts are rapidly filled with 
nanomaterials. Some of these materials have been found to cross the gut 
barrier and translocate into other tissues within the organism.

Nanoparticle Toxicology
Chapter 29
1421
neuropathological and behavioral features of autism and other neurode-
velopmental disorders. Neurotoxicology. 2017;59:140–154.
Amenta V, Aschberger K, Boix SA, Calzolai L, Emons H, et al. Towards a 
review of the EC Recommendation for a definition of the term “nanoma-
terial” Part 2: Assessment of collected information concerning the expe-
rience with the definition. Publications Office of the European Union. 
2014 JRC91377. doi:10.2787/97286. http://publications.jrc.ec.europa.
eu/repository/handle/JRC91377.
Arts JH, Hadi M, Irfan MA, et al. A decision-making framework for the 
grouping and testing of nanomaterials (DF4nanoGrouping). Regul 
Toxicol Pharmacol. 2015;71(2 suppl):S1–S27.
Arts JH, Hadi M, Keene AM, et al. A critical appraisal of existing con-
cepts for the grouping of nanomaterials. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 
2014;70(2):492–506.
Arts JH, Irfan MA, Keene AM, et al. Case studies putting the decision-
making framework for the grouping and testing of nanomaterials 
(DF4nanoGrouping) into practice. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2016;76: 
234–261.
Asgharian B, Miller FJ, Subramaniam RP. Dosimetry software to predict 
particle deposition in humans and rats. CIIT Activities. 1999;19(3):1–6.
Asharani PV, Lian Wu Y, Gong Z, Valiyaveettil S. Toxicity of silver nanopar-
ticles in zebrafish models. Nanotechnology. 2008;19(25):255102.
Azhdarzadeh M, Saei AA, Sharifi S, Hajipour MJ, et al. Nanotoxicology: 
advances and pitfalls in research methodology. Nanomedicine. 2015;10(18): 
2931–2952.
Bainbridge W. Public attitudes towards nanotechnology. J Nanopart Res. 
2002;4:461–470.
Baisch BL, Corson NM, Wade-Mercer P, et al. Equivalent titanium dioxide 
nanoparticle deposition by intratracheal instillation and whole body inha-
lation: the effect of dose rate on acute respiratory tract inflammation. Part 
Fibre Toxicol. 2014;11(1):5.
Balásházy I, Hofmann W, Helstracher T. Local particle deposition patterns 
may play a key role in the development of lung cancer. J Appl Physiol. 
2003;94:1719–1725.
Balásházy IW, Hofmann W, Farkas F, Madas BG. Three-dimensional model 
for aerosol transport and deposition in expanding and contracting alveoli. 
Inhal Toxicol. 2008;20(6):611–621.
Ballou B, Lagerholm BC, Ernst LA, Bruchez MP, Waggoner AS. Noninvasive 
imaging of quantum dots in mice. Bioconjug Chem. 2004;15:79–86.
Barrios FA, Gonzalez L, Favila R, et al. Olfaction and neurodegeneration in 
HD. Neuroreport. 2007;18:73.
Baun A, Sørensen SN, Rasmussen RF, Hartmann NB, Koch CB. Toxicity 
and bioaccumulation of xenobiotic organic compounds in the presence 
of aqueous suspensions of aggregates of nano-C(60). Aquat Toxicol. 
2008;86(3):379–387.
Bernstein D, Castranova V, Donaldson K, et al. Testing of fibrous particles: 
short-term assays and strategies. Inhal Toxicol. 2005;17:497–537.
Bianco A, Kostarelos K, Prato M. Making carbon nanotubes biocompatible 
and biodegradable. Chem Commun (Camb). 2011;47:10182–10188.
Bilberg K, Hovgaard MB, Besenbacher F, Baatrup E. In vivo toxicity of 
silver nanoparticles and silver ions in Zebrafish (Danio rerio). J Toxicol. 
2012;2012:293784.
Bilberg K, Malte H, Wang T, Baatrup E. Silver nanoparticles and silver 
nitrate cause respiratory stress in Eurasian perch (Perca fluviatilis). Aquat 
Toxicol. 2010;96(2):159–165.
Biswas R, Bunderson-Schelvan M, Holian A. Potential role of the inflam-
masome-derived inflammatory cytokines in pulmonary fibrosis. Pulmon 
Med. 2011;2011:105707.
Blinova I, Ivask A, Heinlaan M, Mortimer M, Kahru A. Ecotoxicity 
of nanoparticles of CuO and ZnO in natural water. Environ Pollut. 
2010;158(1):41–47.
Blume C, Reale R, Held M, et al. Temporal monitoring of differenti-
ated human airway epithelial cells using microfluidics. PLoS One. 
2015;10(10):e0139872.
Boczkowski J, Hoet P. What’s new in nanotoxicology? Implications for 
public health from a brief review of the 2008 literature. Nanotoxicology. 
2009.
Bodian D, Howe HA. Experimental studies on intraneural spread of polio-
myelitis virus. In: Bordley JI, ed. Bulletin of the Johns Hopkins Hospital. 
Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins Press; 1941:LXVIII248–267.
Borm P, Cassee FR, Oberdorster G. Lung particle overload: old school-new 
insights? Part Fibre Toxicol. 2015;12:10.
Borm PJA, Robbins D, Haubold S, et al. The potential risks of nano-
materials: a review carried out for ECETOC. Part Fibre Toxicol. 
2006;3(11).
Boya P, Kroemer G. Lysosomal membrane permeabilization in cell death. 
Oncogene. 2008;27:6434–6451.
Brausch KA, Anderson TA, Smith PN, Maul JD. The effect of fullerenes 
and functionalized fullerenes on Daphnia magna phototaxis and swim-
ming behavior. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2011;30(4):878–884.
Brodie M, Elvidge AR. The portal of entry and transmission of the virus of 
poliomyelitis. Science. 1934;79(2045):235–236.
Brown SC, Boyko V, Meyers G, Voetz M, Wohlleben W. Toward advancing 
nano-object count metrology: a best practice framework. Environ Health 
Perspect. 2013;121(11–12):1282–1291.
Brunauer S, Emmett PH, Teller E. Adsorption of gases in multimolecular 
layers. J Am Chem Soc. 1938;60:309–319.
Calderon-Garciduenas L, Engle R, Mora-Tiscareno A, et al. Exposure to 
severe urban air pollution influences cognitive outcomes, brain volume 
and systemic inflammation in clinically healthy children. Brain Cogn. 
2011;77:345–355.
Casey A, Herzog E, Davoren M, et al. Spectroscopic analysis confirms 
the interactions between single walled carbon nanotubes and vari-
ous dyes commonly used to assess cytotoxicity. Carbon. 2007;45: 
1425–1432.
Casey A, Herzog E, Lyng FM, et al. Single walled carbon nanotubes induce 
indirect cytotoxicity by medium depletion in A549 lung cells. Toxicol 
Lett. 2008;179:78–84.
Cassee FR, van Balen EC, Singh C, et al. Exposure, health and ecologi-
cal effects: review of engineered nanoscale cerium and cerium oxide 
associated with its use as a fuel additive. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2011;41: 
213–229.
Castranova V, Schulte PA, Zumwalde RD. Occupational nanosafety con-
siderations for carbon nanotubes and carbon nanofibers. Acc Chem Res. 
2013;46(3):642–649.
Cedervall T, Lynch I, Foy M, et al. Detailed identification of plasma 
proteins adsorbed on copolymer nanoparticles. Angew Chem Int Ed. 
2007b;46:5754–5756.
Cedervall T, Lynch I, Lindman S, et al. Understanding the nanoparticle-
protein corona using methods to quantify exchange rates and affinities 
of proteins for nanoparticles. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007a;104: 
2050–2055.
Chen J, Dong X, Xin Y, Zhao M. Effects of titanium dioxide nano-particles 
on growth and some histological parameters of zebrafish (Danio rerio) 
after a long-term exposure. Aquat Toxicol. 2011;101(3–4):493–499.
Chen M, von Mikecz A. Formation of nucleoplasmic protein aggregates 
impairs nuclear function in response to SiO2 nanoparticles. Exp Cell Res. 
2005;305:51–62.
Chithrani DB. Intracellular uptake, transport, and processing of gold nano-
structures. Mol Membr Biol. 2010;27:299–311.
Choi HS, Liu W, Misra P, et al. Renal clearance of quantum dots. Nat 
Biotechnol. 2007;25(10):1165–1170.
Chou LY, Ming K, Chan WC. Strategies for the intracellular delivery of 
nanoparticles. Chem Soc Rev. 2011;40:233–245.
Chu M, Wu Q, Yang H, et al. Transfer of quantum dots from pregnant mice 
to pups across the placental barrier. Small. 2010;6(5):670–678.
Chung H, Son Y, Yoon TK, Kim S, Kim W. The effect of multi-walled 
carbon nanotubes on soil microbial activity. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 
2011;74(4):569–575.
Clarkson TW, Friberg L, Nordberg GF, Sager PR, eds. Biological 
Monitoring of Toxic Metals. New York: Plenum Press; 1988:686.
Cobb MD, Macoubrie J. Public perceptions about nanotechnology: risks, 
benefits and trust. J Nanoparticle Res. 2004;6(4):395–405.
Cole AJ, Yang VC, David AE. Cancer theranostics: the rise of targeted mag-
netic nanoparticles. Trends Biotechnol. 2011;29:323–332.
Colvin VL. The potential environmental impact of engineered nanomateri-
als. Nat Biotechnol. 2003;21:1166–1170.
Cone RA. Barrier properties of mucus. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2009;61:75–85.
Costa M, Davidson TL, Chen H, et al. Nickel carcinogenesis: epigenetics 
and hypoxia signaling. Mutat Res. 2005;592:79–88.

1422
Toxic Agents
unit V
Czerniawska A. Experimental investigations on the penetration of 198Au 
from nasal mucous membrane into cerebrospinal fluid. Acta Otolaryngol. 
1970;70:58–61.
de Bruijne K, Ebersviller S, Sexton KG, et al. Design and testing of electro-
static aerosol in vitro exposure system (EAVES): an alternative exposure 
system for particles. Inhal Toxicol. 2009;21(2):91–101.
De Jong WH, Borm PJ. Drug delivery and nanoparticles: applications and 
hazards. Int J Nanomed. 2008;3:133–149.
De Lorenzo A. The olfactory neuron and the blood-brain barrier. In: 
Wolstenholme G, Knight J, eds. Taste and Smell in Vertebrates. London: 
J. & A. Churchill; 1970:151–176.
De Nicola M, Gattia D, Bellucci S, et al. Effect of different carbon nano-
tubes on cell viability and proliferation. J Phys Condens Matter. 
2007;19(39):395013.
DeLoid GM, Cohen JM, Pyrgiotakis G, et al. Advanced computational mod-
eling for in vitro nanomaterial dosimetry. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2015;12:32.
DeLoid GM, Cohen JM, Pyrgiotakis G, Demokritou P. Preparation, charac-
terization, and in vitro dosimetry of dispersed, engineered nanomaterials. 
Nat Protoc. 2017;12(2):355–371.
DeLorme MP, Muro Y, Arai T, et al. Ninety-day inhalation toxic-
ity study with a vapor grown carbon nanofiber in rats. Toxicol Sci. 
2012;128(2):449–460.
Doak SH, Griffiths SM, Manshian B, et al. Confounding experimental con-
siderations in nanogenotoxicology. Mutagenesis. 2009;24:285–293.
Donaldson K, Aitken R, Tran L, et al. Carbon nanotubes: a review of their 
properties in relation to pulmonary toxicology and workplace safety. 
Toxicol Sci. 2006;92:5–22.
Donaldson K, Beswick PH, Gilmour PS. Free radical activity associated 
with the surface of particles: a unifying factor in determining biological 
activity? Toxicol Lett. 1996;88(1–3):293–298.
Donaldson K, Borm PJ, Castranova V, Gulumian M. The limits of testing 
particle-mediated oxidative stress in vitro in predicting diverse patholo-
gies: relevance for testing of nanoparticles. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2009;6:13.
Donaldson K, Murphy FA, Duffin R, Poland CA. Asbestos, carbon nano-
tubes and the pleural mesothelium: a review and the hypothesis regarding 
the role of long fibre retention in the parietal pleura, inflammation and 
mesothelioma. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2010;7(1):5.
Donaldson K, Stone V, Tran CL, Kreyling W, Borm PJA. Nanotoxicology 
(editorial)—a new frontier in particle toxicology relevant to both the 
workplace and general environment and to consumer safety. Occup 
Environ Med. 2004;61:727–728.
Dostert C, Petrilli V, Van Bruggen R, et al. Innate immune activation 
through Nalp3 inflammasome sensing of asbestos and silica. Science. 
2008;320:674–677.
Doty RL. The olfactory vector hypothesis of neurodegenerative disease: is 
it viable? Ann Neurol. 2008;63:7.
Dresselhaus MS, Terrones M. Carbon-based nanomaterials from a histori-
cal perspective. Proceedings of the IEEE. 2013;101(No. 7):1522–1535.
Drinker K, Drinker PRM. Metal fume fever: V. Results of the inhalation by 
animals of zinc and magnesium oxide fumes. J Ind Hyg. 1928;10:56–71.
Drinker P, Finn JL, Thomson RM. Metal fume fever II: resistance 
acquired by inhalation of zinc oxide on two successive days. J Ind Hyg. 
1927a;9:98–105.
Drinker P, Thomson RM, Finn JL. Metal fume fever IV: threshold doses of 
zinc oxide preventive measures and the chronic effects of repeated expo-
sures. J Ind Hyg. 1927b;9:331–345.
Driscoll K, Costa DL, Hatch G, et al. Intratracheal instillation as an expo-
sure technique for the evaluation of respiratory tract toxicity: uses and 
limitations. Toxicol Sci. 2000;55:24–35.
Duncan R. Polymer therapeutics as nanomedicines: new perspectives. Curr 
Opin Biotechnol. 2011;22:492–501.
Dutta D, Sundaram SK, Teeguarden JG, et al. Adsorbed proteins influence 
the biological activity and molecular targeting of nanomaterials. Toxicol 
Sci. 2007;100(1):303–315.
Dvir T, Timko BP, Kohane DS, Langer R. Nanotechnological strategies for 
engineering complex tissues. Nat Nanotechnol. 2011;6:13–22.
EC Directive 97/69/EC, Nota Q. EU Commission, directive dated 5 
December 1997. Available at: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/
LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:31997L0069:EN:HTML.
Edgington AJ, Roberts AP, Taylor LM, et al. The influence of natural 
organic matter on the toxicity of multiwalled carbon nanotubes. Environ 
Toxicol Chem. 2010;29(11):2511–2518.
Elder A, Gelein R, Silva V, et al. Translocation of inhaled ultrafine man-
ganese oxide particles to the central nervous system. Environ Health 
Perspect. 2006;114:1172–1178.
Elliott D, Zhang W. Field assessment of nanoparticles for groundwater 
treatment. Environ Sci Technol. 2001;35:4922–4926.
European Commission. E.C. Commission Recommendation of . . . . on the 
Definition of the Term “Nanomaterial”. Brussels: European Commission; 
2011a.
European Commission. E.C. Commission recommendation on the defini-
tion of nanomaterial. Official J European Union. 2011/696/EU. 2011b 
(adopted).
Evans SJ, Clift MJ, Singh N, et al. Critical review of the current and 
future challenges associated with advanced in vitro systems towards 
the study of nanoparticle (secondary) genotoxicity. Mutagenesis. 
2017;32(1):233–241.
Fabrega J, Luoma SN, Tyler CR, Galloway TS, Lead JR. Silver nanopar-
ticles: behaviour and effects in the aquatic environment. Environ Int. 
2011;37(2):517–531.
Fawcett TW, Sylvester SL, Sarge KD, Morimoto RI, Holbrook NJ. Effects 
of neurohormonal stress and aging on the activation of mammalian heat 
shock factor 1. J Biol Chem. 1994;269(51):32272–32278.
Feng L, Liu Z. Graphene in biomedicine: opportunities and challenges. 
Nanomedicine (Lond). 2011;6:317–324.
Fenoglio I, Fubini B, Ghibaudi EM, Turci F. Multiple aspects of the interac-
tion of biomacromolecules with inorganic surfaces. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 
2011;63:1186–1209.
Fenoglio I, Tomatis M, Lison D, et al. Reactivity of carbon nanotubes: 
free radical generation or scavenging activity? Free Radic Biol Med. 
2006;40:1227–1233.
Feynman R. There’s Plenty of Room at the Bottom. Classic talk given on 
12/29/59 at the American Physical Society at Caltech. First published in 
Caltech Engineering and Science, February 1960;23(5):22–36.
Fissan H. Nachhaltige nanotechnologie. In: Nordrhein-Westfälische Akad-
emie der Wissenschaften. Herstellung: Ferdinand Schöningh, Paderborn; 
2008.
Flahaut E, Durrieu MC, Remy-Zolghadri M, Bareille R, Baquey CH. 
Investigation of the cytotoxicity of CCVD carbon nanotubes towards 
human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Carbon. 2006;44(6): 1093–1099.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations/World Health 
Organization. FAO/WHO Expert Meeting on the Application of 
Nanotechnologies in the Food and Agriculture Sectors: Potential Food 
Safety Implications. Meeting Report. Rome; 2009:104.
Fortin JP, Wilhelm C, Christin JS. Size-sorted anionic iron oxide nanomag-
nets as colloidal mediators for magnetic hyperthermia. J Am Chem Soc. 
2007;129:2628–2635.
Fubini B, Ghiazza M, Fenoglio I. Physico-chemical features of engi-
neered nanoparticles relevant to their toxicity. Nanotoxicology. 2010; 
4(4):347–363.
Gao J, Youn S, Hovsepyan A, et al. Dispersion and toxicity of selected man-
ufactured nanomaterials in natural river water samples: effects of water 
chemical composition. Environ Sci Technol. 2009;43(9):3322–3328.
García A, Delgado L, Torà JA, et al. Effect of cerium dioxide, tita-
nium dioxide, silver, and gold nanoparticles on the activity of micro-
bial communities intended in wastewater treatment. J Hazard Mater. 
2012;199–200:64–72.
Geiser M, Casaulta M, Kupferschmid B, et al. The role of macrophages in 
the clearance of inhaled ultrafine titanium dioxide particles. Am J Respir 
Cell Mol Biol. 2008;38:371–376.
Geiser M, Jeannet N, Fierz M, Burtscher H. Evaluating adverse effects of 
inhaled nanoparticles by realistic in vitro technology. Nanomaterials 
(Basel). 2017;7(2):49.
Geiser M, Kreyling WG. Deposition and biokinetics of inhaled nanopar-
ticles. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2010;7:2.
Geiser M, Rothen-Rutishauser B, Kapp N, et al. Ultrafine particles cross 
cellular membranes by nonphagocytic mechanisms in lungs and in cul-
tured cells. Environ Health Perspect. 2005;113:1555–1560.

Nanoparticle Toxicology
Chapter 29
1423
George S, Xia T, Rallo R, et al. Use of a high-throughput screening approach 
coupled with in vivo zebrafish embryo screening to develop hazard rank-
ing for engineered nanomaterials. ACS Nano. 2011;5(3):1805–1817.
Glover RD, Miller JM, Hutchison JE. Generation of metal nanoparticles 
from silver and copper objects: nanoparticle dynamics on surfaces 
and potential sources of nanoparticles in the environment. ACS Nano. 
2011;5(11):8950–8957.
Gordon S, Daneshian M, Bouwstra J, et al. Non-animal models of epithelial 
barriers (skin, intestine and lung) in research, industrial applications and 
regulatory toxicology. ALTEX. 2015;32(4): 327-78.
Gottschalk F, Sonderer T, Scholz RW, Nowack B. Modeled environ-
mental concentrations of engineered nanomaterials (TiO(2), ZnO, 
Ag, CNT, Fullerenes) for different regions. Environ Sci Technol. 
2009;43(24):9216–9222.
Gottschalk F, Sonderer T, Scholz RW, Nowack B. Possibilities and limi-
tations of modeling environmental exposure to engineered nanoma-
terials by probabilistic material flow analysis. Environ Toxicol Chem. 
2010;29(5):1036–1048.
Graham UM, Jacobs G, Yokel RA, et al. From dose to response: In vivo 
nanoparticle processing and potential toxicity. Adv Exp Med Biol. 
2017;947:71–100.
Graham UM, Tseng MT, Jasinski JB, et al. In vivo processing of ceria 
nanoparticles inside liver: impact on free-radical scavenging activity and 
oxidative stress. Chempluschem. 2014;79(8):1083–1088.
Griffitt RJ, Weil R, Hyndman KA, et al. Exposure to copper nanoparticles 
causes gill injury and acute lethality in zebrafish (Danio rerio). Environ 
Sci Technol. 2007;41(23):8178–8186.
Grosse Y, Loomis D, Guyton KZ, et al. Carcinogenicity of fluoro-edenite, 
silicon carbide fibres and whiskers, and carbon nanotubes. Lancet Oncol. 
2014;15(13):1427–1428.
Guo L, Liu X, Vaslet C, Hurt RH, Kane AB. Iron bioavailability and 
redox activity in diverse carbon nanotube samples. Chem Mater. 
2007;19:3472–3478.
Guo L, Von Dem Bussche A, Buechner M, et al. Adsorption of essential 
micronutrients by carbon nanotubes and the implications for nanotoxicity 
testing. Small. 2008;4:721–727.
Hallock MF, Greenlay P, DiBerardinis L, Kallin D. Potential risks of 
nanomaterials and how to safely handle materials of uncertain toxicity. 
J Chem Health Saf. 2009;16:16–23.
Hamilton RF, Wu N, Porter D, et al. Particle length-dependent titanium diox-
ide nanomaterials toxicity and bioactivity. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2009;6:35.
Han GH, Andrews R, Gairola CG. Acute pulmonary response of mice to 
multi-wall carbon nanotubes. Inhal Toxicol. 2010;22:340–347.
Han X, Gelein R, Corson N. Validation of an LDH assay for assessing 
nanoparticle toxicity. Toxicology. 2011;287:99–104.
Haniu H, Saito N, Matsuda Y, et al. Effect of dispersants of multi-walled 
carbon nanotubes on cellular uptake and biological responses. Intl J 
Nanomed. 2011;6:3295–3307.
Henry TB, Menn FM, Fleming JT, et al. Attributing effects of aqueous C60 
nano-aggregates to tetrahydrofuran decomposition products in larval 
zebrafish by assessment of gene expression. Environ Health Perspect. 
2007;115(7):1059–1065.
Hinderliter PM, Minard KR, Orr G, et al. ISDD: a computational model 
of particle sedimentation, diffusion and target cell dosimetry for in vitro 
toxicity studies. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2010;7:36.
Hinds WC. Time for number concentration to halve and particle size to 
double by simple monodisperse coagulation. In: Aerosol Technology. 
New York: John-Wiley; 1982:235–239.
Hirano S, Fujitani Y, Furuyama A, Kanno S. Uptake and cytotoxic effects 
of multi-walled carbon nanotubes in human bronchial epithelial cells. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2010;249(1):8–15.
Hirano S, Kanno S, Furuyama A. Multi-walled carbon nanotubes injure 
the plasma membrane of macrophages. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
2008;232(2):244–251.
Hoet PHM, Bruske-Hohlfeld I, Salata OV. Nanoparticles: known and 
unknown health risks. J Nanobiotechnol. 2004;2(12):12–27.
Holbrook RD, Murphy KE, Morrow JB, Cole KD. Trophic transfer of 
nanoparticles in a simplified invertebrate food web. Nat Nanotechnol. 
2008;3(6):352–355.
Holder AL, Lucas D, Goth-Goldstein R, Koshland CP. Cellular response 
to diesel exhaust particles strongly depends on the exposure method. 
Toxicol Sci. 2008;103(1):108–115.
Hoshino A, Fujioka K, Oku T, et al. Physicochemical properties and cellular 
toxicity of nanocrystal quantum dots depend on their surface modifica-
tion. Nano Lett. 2004;4(11):2163–2169.
Hunter DD, Undem BJ. Identification and substance P content of vagal 
afferent neurons innervating the epithelium of the guinea pig trachea. Am 
J Respir Crit Care Med. 1999;159:1943–1948.
Hussain SM, Warheit DB, Ng SP, et al. At the crossroads of nanotoxicol-
ogy in vitro: past achievements and current challenges. Toxicol Sci. 
2015;147(1):5–16.
Hutchison JE. Greener nanoscience: a proactive approach to advancing 
applications and reducing implications of nanotechnology. ACS Nano. 
2008;2:395–402.
ICRP. Annals of the ICRP, Human Respiratory Tract Model for Radiological 
Protection. ICRP Publication 66, Pergamon; 1994;24:1–3.
Iezzi R, Guru B, Glybina IV, et al. Dendrimer-based targeted intravitreal 
therapy for sustained attenuation of neuroinflammation in retinal degen-
eration. Biomaterials. 2012;33:979–988.
Iliff JJ, Wang M, Liao Y, et al. A paravascular pathway facilitates CSF flow 
through the brain parenchyma and the clearance of interstitial solutes, 
including amyloid beta. Sci Transl Med. 2012;4(147):147ra111.
ISO/DIS 26824. Particle characterization of particulate systems—Vocabulary. 
ISO/TS; 2011.
ISO/TC 229. Nanotechnologies—Vocabulary—Part 1: Core Terms. ISO/
TS 80004-1:2015 (en). Available at: https://www.iso.org/obp/ui#iso:std: 
iso:ts:80004:-1:ed-2:v1:en. 2015.
ISO/TS 27687. Nanotechnologies—Terminology and definitions for nano-
objects—Nanoparticle, nanofibre and nanoplate. ISO/TS; 2008.
Jacobsen NR, Pojana G, White P, et al. Genotoxicity, cytotoxicity, and 
reactive oxygen species induced by single-walled carbon nanotubes and 
C(60) fullerenes in the FE1-Mutatrade mark-Mouse lung epithelial cells. 
Environ Mol Mutagen. 2008;49(6):476–487.
Jakubek LM, Marangoudakis S, Raingo J, Liu X, Lipscombe D, Hurt RH. 
The inhibition of neuronal calcium ion channels by trace levels of yttrium 
released from carbon nanotubes. Biomaterials. 2009;30:6351–6357.
Jani PU, Halbert GW, Langridge J, Florence AT. Nanoparticle uptake by the 
rat gastrointestinal mucosa: quantitation and particle size dependency. 
J Pharm Pharmacol. 1990;42:821–826.
Jani PU, McCarthy DE, Florence AT. Titanium dioxide (rutile) particle 
uptake from the rat GI tract and translocation to systemic organs after 
oral administration. Int J Pharm. 1994;105:157–168.
Jiang J, Oberdörster G, Biswas P. Characterization of size surface charge, 
and agglomeration state of nanoparticle dispersions for toxicological 
studies. J Nanopart Res. 2009;11:77–89.
Johansen A, Pedersen AL, Jensen KA, et al. Effects of C60 fullerene 
nanoparticles on soil bacteria and protozoans. Environ Toxicol Chem. 
2008;27(9):1895–1903.
Johnston CJ, Finkelstein JN, Mercer P, et al. Pulmonary effects induced by 
ultrafine PTFE particles. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2000;168:208–215.
Johnston HJ, Hutchison GR, Christensen FM, et al. A critical review of 
the biological mechanisms underlying the in vivo and in vitro toxicity of 
carbon nanotubes: the contribution of physico-chemical characteristics. 
Nanotoxicology. 2010a;4(2):207–246.
Johnston HJ, Semmler-Behnke M, Brown DM, et al. Evaluating the uptake 
and intracellular fate of polystyrene nanoparticles by primary and hepa-
tocyte cell lines in vitro. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2010b;242:66–78.
Jones CF, Grainger DW. In vitro assessments of nanomaterial toxicity. Adv 
Drug Deliv Rev. 2009;61(6):438–456.
Jovanović B, Anastasova L, Rowe EW, et al. Effects of nanosized titanium 
dioxide on innate immune system of fathead minnow (Pimephales prome-
las Rafinesque, 1820). Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2011;74(4):675–683.
Judy JD, Unrine JM, Bertsch PM. Evidence for biomagnification of gold 
nanoparticles within a terrestrial food chain. Environ Sci Technol. 
2011;45(2):776–781. [Epub December 3, 2010].
Kagan VE, Konduru NV, Feng W. Carbon nanotubes degraded by neutrophil 
myeloperoxidase induce less pulmonary inflammation. Nat Nanotechnol. 
2010;5:354–359.

1424
Toxic Agents
unit V
Kagan VE, Tyurina YY, Tyurin VA, et al. Direct and indirect effects of sin-
gle walled carbon nanotubes on RAW 264.7 macrophages: role of iron. 
Toxicol Lett. 2006;165:88–100.
Kahru A, Dubourguier HC. From ecotoxicology to nanoecotoxicology. 
Toxicology. 2010;269:105–119.
Kane AB, Hurt RH. Nanotoxicology: the asbestos analogy revisited. Nat 
Nanotechnol. 2008;3(7):378–379.
Kang B, Mackey MA, El-Sayed MA. Nuclear targeting of gold nanopar-
ticles in cancer cells induces DNA damage, causing cytokinesis arrest 
and apoptosis. J Am Chem Soc. 2010;132(5):1517–1519.
Kang S, Herzberg M, Rodrigues DF, Elimelech M. Antibacterial effects of 
carbon nanotubes: size does matter! Langmuir. 2008;24:6409–6413.
Kang S, Mauter MS, Elimelech M. Microbial cytotoxicity of carbon-based 
nanomaterials: implications for river water and wastewater effluent. 
Environ Sci Technol. 2009;43(7):2648–2653.
Kang S, Pinault M, Pfefferle LD, Elimelech M. Single-walled carbon 
nanotubes exhibit strong antimicrobial activity. Langmuir. 2007;23: 
8670–8673.
Kanno J, Takagi A, Nishimura T, Hirose A. Mesothelioma induction 
by micrometer-sized multi-walled carbon nanotube intraperitoneally 
injected to p53 heterozygous mice. Toxicologist. 2010;114:A1397.
Kanno S, Furuyama A, Hirano S. A murine scavenger receptor MARCO 
recognizes polystyrene nanoparticles. Toxicol Sci. 2007;97:398–406.
Kao YY, Chen YC, Cheng TJ, Chiung YM, Liu PS. Zinc oxide nanopar-
ticles interfere with zinc ion homeostasis to cause cytotoxicity. Toxicol 
Sci. 2012;125(2):462–472.
Karmali PP, Simberg D. Interactions of nanoparticles with plasma proteins: 
implication on clearance and toxicity of drug delivery systems. Expert 
Opin Drug Deliv. 2011;8:343–357.
Kasai T, Umeda Y, Ohnishi M, et al. Thirteen-week study of toxicity of 
fiber-like multi-walled carbon nanotubes with whole-body inhalation 
exposure in rats. Nanotoxicology. 2015;9:413–422.
Kasai T, Umeda Y, Ohnishi M, et al. Lung carcinogenicity of inhaled multi-
walled carbon nanotube in rats. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2016;13:53.
Kennedy AJ, Hull MS, Bednar AJ, et al. Fractionating nanosilver: impor-
tance for determining toxicity to aquatic test organisms. Environ Sci 
Technol. 2010;44(24):9571–9577.
Khandoga A, Stoeger T, Khandoga AG, et al. Platelet adhesion and fibrino-
gen deposition in murine microvessels upon inhalation of nanosized car-
bon particles. J Thromb Haemost. 2010;8:1632–1640.
Kim BY, Rutka JT, Chan WC. Nanomedicine. N Engl J Med. 
2010;363:2434–2443.
Klaine SJ, Alvarez PJ, Batley GE, et al. Nanomaterials in the environ-
ment: behavior, fate, bioavailability, and effects. Environ Toxicol Chem. 
2008;27:1825–1851.
Klaper R, Arndt D, Setyowati K, Chen J, Goetz F. Functionalization impacts 
the effects of carbon nanotubes on the immune system of rainbow trout, 
Oncorhynchus mykiss. Aquat Toxicol. 2010;100(2):211–217.
Klaper R, Crago J, Barr J, Arndt D, Setyowati K, Chen J. Toxicity bio-
marker expression in daphnids exposed to manufactured nanoparticles: 
changes in toxicity with functionalization. Environ Pollut. 2009;157(4): 
1152–1156.
Kobayashi N, Naya M, Ema M, et al. Biological response and morpho-
logical assessment of individually dispersed multi-wall carbon nano-
tubes in the lung after intratracheal instillation in rats. Toxicology. 
2010;276(3):143–153.
Kolosnjaj-Tabi J, Hartman KB, Boudjemaa S, et al. In vivo behavior of 
large doses of ultrashort and full-length single-walled carbon nanotubes 
after oral and intraperitoneal administration to Swiss mice. ACS Nano. 
2010;4(3):1481–1492.
Kotchey GP, Allen BL, Vedala H, et al. The enzymatic oxidation of gra-
phene oxide. ACS Nano. 2011;5:2098–2108.
Kovács T. Mechanisms of olfactory dysfunction in aging and neurodegen-
erative disorders. Ageing Res Rev. 2004;3:215.
Kovochich M, Espinasse B, Auffan M, et al. Comparative toxicity of C60 
aggregates toward mammalian cells: role of tetrahydrofuran (THF) 
decomposition. Environ Sci Technol. 2009;43(16):6378–6384.
Kreuter J. Influence of the surface properties on nanoparticle-mediated 
transport of drugs to the brain. J. Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2004;4:484–488.
Kreyling WG, Semmler M, Erbe F, et al. Translocation of ultrafine 
insoluble iridium particles from lung epithelium to extrapulmonary 
organs is size dependent but very low. J Toxicol Environ Health A. 
2002;65(20):1513–1530.
Kreyling WG, Semmler-Behnke M, Seitz J, et al. Size dependence of the 
translocation of the inhaled iridium and carbon nanoparticle aggregates 
from the lung of rats to the blood and secondary target organs. Inhal 
Toxicol. 2009;21(S1):55–60.
Krug HF. Nanosafety research—are we on the right track? Angew Chem Int 
Ed. 2014;53:12304–12319. doi:10.1002/anie.201403367.
Krug HF, Wick P. Nanotoxicology: an interdisciplinary challenge. Angew 
Chem Int Ed. 2011;50:1260–1278.
Kuempel ED, Jaurand MC, Møller P, et al. Evaluating the mechanistic 
evidence and key data gaps in assessing the potential carcinogenic-
ity of carbon nanotubes and nanofibers in humans. Crit Rev Toxicol. 
2017;47(1):1–58.
Kunzmann A, Andersson B, Thurnherr T, et al. Toxicology of engineered 
nanomaterials: focus on biocompatibility, biodistribution and biodegra-
dation. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011;1810:361–373.
Lacerda L, Soundararajan A, Singh R, et al. Dynamic imaging of function-
alized multi-walled carbon nanotube systemic circulation and urinary 
excretion. Adv Mater. 2008;20:225–230.
Lai SK, Wang YY, Hanes J. Mucus-penetrating nanoparticles for drug and 
gene delivery to mucosal tissues. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2009;61:158–171.
Lajoie P, Nabi IR. Lipid rafts, caveolae, and their endocytosis. Int Rev Cell 
Mol Biol. 2010;282:135–163.
Lam GW, James JT, McCluskey R, Hunter RL. Pulmonary toxicity of sin-
gle-wall carbon nanotubes in mice 7 and 90 days after intratracheal instil-
lation. Toxicol Sci. 2004;77:125–134.
Landsiedel R, Ma-Hock L, Kroll A, et al. Testing metal-oxide nanomateri-
als for human safety. Adv Mater. 2010;22:2601–2627.
Lee KP, Seidel WC. Pulmonary response of rats exposed to polytetrafluo-
roethylene and tetrafluoroethylene hexafluoropropylene copolymer fume 
and isolated particles. Inhal Toxicol. 1991;3:237–264.
Lenz AG, Karg E, Lentner B, et al. A dose-controlled system for air-liquid 
interface cell exposure and application to zinc oxide nanoparticles. Part 
Fibre Toxicol. 2009;6:32.
Lesniak W, Bielinska AU, Sun K, et al. Silver/dendrimer nanocomposites as 
biomarkers: fabrication, characterization, in vitro toxicity, and intracel-
lular detection. Nano Lett. 2005;5:2123–2130.
Letts RE, Pereira TC, Bogo MR, Monserrat JM. Biologic responses of 
bacteria communities living at the mucus secretion of common carp 
(Cyprinus carpio) after exposure to the carbon nanomaterial fullerene 
(C60). Arch Environ Contam Toxicol. 2011;61(2):311–317.
Lewinski NA, Zhu H, Ouyang CR, et al. Trophic transfer of amphiphilic 
polymer coated CdSe/ZnS quantum dots to Danio rerio. Nanoscale. 
2011;3(8):3080–3083.
Li D, Alvarez PJ. Avoidance, weight loss, and cocoon production assess-
ment for Eisenia fetida exposed to C60 in soil. Environ Toxicol Chem. 
2011;30(11):2542–2545.
Li JG, Li QN, Xu JY, et al. The pulmonary toxicity of multi-wall carbon 
nanotubes in mice 30 and 60 days after inhalation exposure. J Nanosci 
Nanotechnol. 2009;9:1384–1387.
Li JG, Li WX, Xu JY, et al. Comparative study of pathological lesions 
induced by multiwalled carbon nanotubes in lungs of mice by intratra-
cheal instillation and inhalation. Environ Toxicol. 2007;22:415–421.
Li M, Zhu L, Lin D. Toxicity of ZnO nanoparticles to Escherichia coli: 
mechanism and the influence of medium components. Environ Sci 
Technol. 2011;45(5):1977–1983.
Li N, Sioutas C, Cho A, et al. Ultrafine particulate pollutants induce oxi-
dative stress and mitochondrial damage. Environ Health Perspect. 
2003;111:455–460.
Li X, Fan Y, Watari F. Current investigations into carbon nanotubes for bio-
medical application. Biomed Mater. 2010;5(2):22001.
Li Y, Yuan H, von dem Bussche A, et al. Graphene microsheets enter cells 
through spontaneous membrane penetration at edge asperities and corner 
sites. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013;110:12295–12300.
Liang F, Chen B. A review of biomedical applications of single-walled car-
bon nanotubes. Curr Med Chem. 2010;17:10–24.

Nanoparticle Toxicology
Chapter 29
1425
Limbach LK, Li Y, Grass RN, et al. Oxide nanoparticle uptake in human 
lung fibroblasts: effects of particle size, agglomeration, and diffusion at 
low concentrations. Environ Sci Technol. 2005;39:9370–9376.
Limbach LK, Wick P, Manser P, et al. Exposure of engineered nanopar-
ticles to human lung epithelial cells: influence of chemical composi-
tion and catalytic activity on oxidative stress. Environ Sci Technol. 
2007;41(11):4158–4163.
Linse S, Cabaleiro-Lago C, Xue WF, et al. Nucleation of protein fibrillation 
by nanoparticles. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007;104:8691–8696.
Linsinger T, Roebben G, Gilliand D, et al. Requirements on measurements 
for the implementation of the European Commission definition of the 
term “nanomaterial”. Publications Office of the European Union. 2012 
JRC73260. 
doi:10.2787/63490. 
http://publications.jrc.ed.europa.eu/
repository/handel/JRC73260.
Liu J, Hurt RH. Ion release kinetics and particle persistence in aqueous 
nano-silver colloids. Environ Sci Technol. 2010;44(6):2169–2175.
Liu J, Sonshine D, Shervani S, Hurt RH. Controlled release of biologically 
active silver from nanosilver surfaces. ACS Nano. 2010a;4(11):6903–6913.
Liu J, Wang Z, Kane A, Hurt RH. Chemical transformations of nanosilver in 
biological environments. ACS Nano. 2012;6(11):9887–9899.
Liu S, Ng AK, Xu R, et al. Antibacterial action of dispersed single-walled 
carbon nanotubes on Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis investigated 
by atomic force microscopy. Nanoscale. 2010b;2:2744–2750.
Liu S, Wei L, Hao L, et al. Sharper and faster “nano darts” kill more bac-
teria: a study of antibacterial activity of individually dispersed pristine 
single-walled carbon nanotube. ACS Nano. 2009;3:3891–3902.
Liu X, Guo L, Morris D, Kane AB, Hurt RH. Targeted removal of bioavail-
able metal as a detoxification strategy for carbon nanotubes. Carbon. 
2008;46:489–500.
Liu X, Hurt RH, Kane AB. Biodurability of single-walled carbon nanotubes 
depends on surface functionalization. Carbon. 2010c;48:1961–1969.
Liu Y, He L, Mustapha A, Li H, Hu ZQ, Lin M. Antibacterial activities 
of zinc oxide nanoparticles against Escherichia coli O157:H7. J Appl 
Microbiol. 2009;107:1193–1201.
Liu Z, Chen K, Davis C, et al. Drug delivery with carbon nanotubes for in 
vivo cancer treatment. Cancer Res. 2008;68(16):6652–6660.
Liu Z, Sun X, Nakayama-Ratchford N, Dai H. Supramolecular chemistry 
on water-soluble carbon nanotubes for drug loading and delivery. ACS 
Nano. 2007;1:50–56.
Loeschner K, Hadrup N, Ovortrup K, et al. Distribution of silver in rats fol-
lowing 28 days of repeated oral exposure to silver nanoparticles or silver 
acetate. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2011;8:18.
Loret T, Peyret E, Dubreuil M, et al. Air-liquid interface exposure to aerosols 
of poorly soluble nanomaterials induces different biological activation lev-
els compared to exposure to suspensions. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2016;13(1):58.
Lovern SB, Klaper R. Daphnia magna mortality when exposed to tita-
nium dioxide and fullerene nanoparticles. Environ Toxicol Chem. 
2006;25(4):1132–1137.
Lovern SB, Owen H, Klaper R. Electron microscopy of gold nanoparticle 
intake in the gut of Daphnia magna. Nanotoxicology. 2008;2(1):43–48.
Lovern SB, Strickler JR, Klaper R. Behavioral and physiological changes in 
Daphnia magna when exposed to nanoparticle suspensions (titanium dioxide, 
nano-C60, and C60HxC70Hx). Environ Sci Technol. 2007;41(12):4465–4470.
Lowry GV, Gregory KB, Apte SC, Lead JR. Transformations of nanomate-
rials in the environment. Environ Sci Technol. 2012;46(13):6893–6899.
Lu CH, Zhu CL, Li J, et al. Using graphene to protect DNA from cleavage 
during cellular delivery. Chem Commun (Camb). 2010;46:3116–3118.
Lu S, Duffin R, Poland C, et al. Efficacy of simple short-term in vitro assays 
for predicting the potential of metal oxide nanoparticles to cause pulmo-
nary inflammation. Environ Health Perspect. 2009;117:241–247.
Lundqvist M, Stigler J, Elia G, et al. Nanoparticle size and surface proper-
ties determine the protein corona with possible implications for biologi-
cal impacts. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008;105(38):14265–14270.
Lynch I, Cedervall T, Lundqvist M, et al. The nanoparticle-protein complex 
as a biological entity: a complex fluids and surface science challenge 
for the 21st century. Adv Colloid Interface Sci. 2007;134–135:167–174.
Ma-Hock L, Trenmann S, Strauss V, et al. Inhalation toxicity of multi-
wall carbon nanotubes in rats exposed for 3 months. Toxicol Sci. 2009; 
112:468–481.
Magdolenova Z, Collins A, Kumar A, et al. Mechanisms of genotoxicity: 
a review of in vitro and in vivo studies with engineered nanoparticles. 
Nanotoxicology. 2014;8(3):233–278.
Mahto SK, Charwat V, Ertl P, et al. Microfluidic platforms for advanced 
risk assessments of nanomaterials. Nanotoxicology. 2015;9(3): 
381–395.
Maynard AD, Warheit DB, Philbert MA. The new toxicology of sophisti-
cated materials: nanotoxicology and beyond. Toxicol Sci. 2011;120(suppl 
1):S109–S129.
Meng H, Xia T, George S, Nel AE. A predictive toxicological para-
digm for the safety assessment of nanomaterials. ACS Nano. 2009;3: 
1620–1627.
Mercer RR, Hubbs AF, Scabilloni JF, et al. Distribution and persistence 
of pleural penetrations by multi-walled carbon nanotubes. Particle Fibre 
Toxicol. 2010;7:28.
Mercer RR, Hubbs AF, Scabilloni JF, et al. Pulmonary fibrotic response 
to aspiration of multi-walled carbon nanotubes. Particle Fibre Toxicol. 
2011;8:21.
Mercer RR, Scabilloni J, Wang L, et al. Alteration of deposition pattern and 
pulmonary response as a result of improved dispersion of aspirated single 
walled carbon nanotubes in a mouse model. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol 
Physiol. 2008;294:L87–L97.
Mitchell LA, Gao J, Wal RV, et al. Pulmonary and systemic immune 
response to inhaled multiwalled carbon nanotubes. Toxicol Sci. 
2007;100(1):203–214.
Moberg PJ, Doty RL. Olfactory function in Huntington’s disease patients 
and at-risk offspring. Int J Neurosci. 1997;89:133.
Monopoli MP, Bombelli FB, Dawson KA. Nanobiotechnology: nanopar-
ticle coronas take shape. Nat Nanotechnol. 2011;6(1):11–12.
Monteiro-Riviere NA, Inman AO. Challenges for assessing carbon nanoma-
terial toxicity to the skin. Carbon. 2006;44:1070–1078.
Monteiro-Riviere NA, Nemanich RJ, Inman AO, Wang YY, Riviere JE. 
Multi-walled carbon nanotube interactions with human epidermal kerati-
nocytes. Toxicol Lett. 2005;155(3):377–384.
Monteiro-Riviere NA, Wiench K, Landsiedel R, et al. Safety evaluation 
of sunscreen formulations containing titanium dioxide and zinc oxide 
nanoparticles in UVB sunburned skin: an in vitro and in vivo study. 
Toxicol Sci. 2011;123:264–280.
Morimoto Y, Hirohashi M, Ogami A, et al. Pulmonary toxicity of well- 
dispersed multi-call carbon nanotubes following inhalation and intratra-
cheal instillation. Nanotoxicology. 2012;6(6):587–599.
Morrow PE. Possible mechanisms to explain dust overloading of the lungs. 
Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1988;10:369–384.
Mortensen LJ, Oberdörster G, Pentland AP, DeLouise LA. In vivo skin pen-
etration of quantum dot nanoparticles in the murine model: the effect of 
UVR. Nano Lett. 2008. Available at: http://pubs.acs.org/journals/nalefd/
index.html.
Mortimer M, Kasemets K, Kahru A. Toxicity of ZnO and CuO nanopar-
ticles to ciliated protozoa Tetrahymena thermophila. Toxicology. 
2010;269(2–3):182–189.
Mouchet F, Landois P, Datsyuk V, et al. International amphibian micro-
nucleus standardized procedure (ISO 21427-1) for in vivo evaluation 
of double-walled carbon nanotubes toxicity and genotoxicity in water. 
Environ Toxicol. 2011;26(2):136–145.
Mueller NC, Nowack B. Exposure modeling of engineered nanoparticles in 
the environment. Environ Sci Technol. 2008;42:4447–4453.
Muller J, Huaux F, Moreau N. Respiratory toxicity of multi-wall carbon 
nanotubes. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2005;207:221–231.
Müller RH, Heinemann S. In: Gurny R, Junginger HE, eds. Bioadhesion–
Possibilities 
and 
Future 
Trends. 
Stuttgart: 
Wissenschaftliche 
Verlagsgesellschaft; 1989:202–214.
Murphy FA, Poland CA, Duffin R, et al. Length-dependent retention of 
carbon nanotubes in the pleural space of mice initiates sustained inflam-
mation and progressive fibrosis on the parietal pleura. Am J Pathol. 
2011;178:2587–2600.
MPPD. 2018. Available at: https://www.ara.com/products/multiple-path- 
particle-dosimetry-model-mppd-v-304.
Nagai H, Okazaki Y, Chew SH, Misawa N, et al. Diameter and rigid-
ity of multiwalled carbon nanotubes are critical factors in mesothelial

1426
Toxic Agents
unit V
injury and carcinogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011;108(49): 
E1330–E1338.
National Academy of Sciences. Risk Assessment in the Federal Government: 
Managing the Process. Working Papers. Washington, DC: The National 
Academies Press. 1983.
National Nanotechnology Initiative (NNI). NNI Environmental, Health, 
and Safety Research Strategy. National Science and Technology Council 
Committee on Technology, Subcommittee on Nanoscale Science, 
Engineering and Technology; 2011.
National Research Council. Research Progress on Environmental, Health, 
and Safety Aspects of Engineered Nanomaterials. Washington, DC: 
National Academies Press; 2013.
Nel A, Xia T, Madler L, Li N. Toxic potential of materials at the nanolevel. 
Science. 2006;311:622–627.
Nel AE, Madler L, Velegol D, et al. Understanding biophysicochemical 
interactions at the nano-bio interface. Nat Mater. 2009;8:543–557.
Nel AE, Nasser E, Godwin H, et al. A multi-stakeholder perspective on the 
use of alternative test strategies for nanomaterial safety assessment. ACS 
Nano. 2013;7(8):6422–6433.
NIOSH. Current Intelligence Bulletin. Occupational Exposure to 
Carbon Nanotubes. 2011. Available at: www.cdc.gov/niosh/docket/
review/docket161A/.
Nowack B, Ranville JF, Diamond S, et al. Potential scenarios for nanomate-
rial release and subsequent alteration in the environment. Environ Toxicol 
Chem. 2012;31(1):50–59.
Nyberg L, Turco RF, Nies L. Assessing the impact of nanomateri-
als on anaerobic microbial communities. Environ Sci Technol. 2008; 
42(6):1938–1943.
Oberdörster G. Dosimetric principles for extrapolating results of rat inhala-
tion studies to humans, using nickel as an example. Health Phys. 1989; 
57(suppl 1):213–220.
Oberdörster G. Nanotoxicology: in vitro–in vivo dosimetry [letter to edi-
tor]. Environ Health Perspect. 2012;120:a13–a13.
Oberdörster G, Castranova V, Asgharian B, Sayre P. Inhalation exposure to 
carbon nanotubes (CNT) and carbon nanofibers (CNF): methodology and 
dosimetry. J Toxicol Environ Health B Crit Rev. 2015;18(3-4):121–212.
Oberdörster G, Elder A, Rinderknecht A. Nanoparticles and the brain: cause 
for concern? J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2009;9:4996–5007.
Oberdörster G, Ferin J. Metal compounds used in new technologies: 
metal oxides of ultrafine particles have increased pulmonary toxicity. 
In: Merian E, Haerdi W, eds. Metal Compounds in Environment & Life. 
Northwood, UR: Science & Technology Ltrs. and Science Reviews, Inc; 
1992:443–450.
Oberdörster G, Ferin J, Gelein R, et al. Role of the alveolar macrophage 
in lung injury: studies with ultrafine particles. Environ Health Perspect. 
1992;97:193–197.
Oberdörster G, Ferin J, Lehnert BE. Correlation between particle size, 
in vivo particle persistence, and lung injury. Environ Health Perspect. 
1994;102(suppl 5):173–179.
Oberdörster G, Kuhlbusch TAJ. In vivo effects: Methodologies and bioki-
netics of inhaled nanomaterials. NanoImpact. 2018;10:38–60.
Oberdörster G, Morrow PE, Spurny K. Size dependent lymphatic short term 
clearance of amosite fibers in the lung. Ann Occup Hyg. 1988;32(suppl, 
inhaled particles VI):149–156.
Oberdörster G, Oberdörster E, Oberdörster J. Nanotoxicology: an emerg-
ing discipline evolving from studies of ultrafine particles. Environ Health 
Perspect. 2005;113:823–839.
Oberdörster G, Oberdörster E, Oberdörster J. Correspondence: concepts of 
nanoparticle dose metric and response metric. Environ Health Perspect. 
2007a;115(6):A290.
Oberdörster G, Sharp Z, Atudorei V, et al. Translocation of inhaled ultrafine 
particles to the brain. Inhal Toxicol. 2004;16(6–7):437–445.
Oberdörster G, Stone V, Donaldson K. Toxicology of nanoparticles: a his-
torical perspective. Nanotoxicology. 2007b;1(1):2–25.
OECD Chemicals Committee. Recommendation of the Council on the Safety 
Testing and Assessment of Manufactured Nanomaterials. September 19, 
2013. Available at: http://acts.oecd.org/Instruments/ShowInstrumentView.
aspx?InstrumentID=298&Lang=en&Book=False.
Oh YK, Swanson JA. Different fates of phagocytosed particles after deliv-
ery into macrophage lysosomes. J Cell Biol. 1996;132:585–593.
Oller A, Oberdörster G. Incorporation of particle size differences between 
animal studies and human workplace aerosols for deriving exposure limit 
values. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2010;57:181–194.
Osmond-McLeod MJ, Oytam Y, Rowe A, et al. Long-term exposure to 
commercially available sunscreens containing nanoparticles of TiO2 and 
ZnO revealed no biological impact in a hairless mouse model. Part Fibre 
Toxicol. 2016;13:44.
Oyabu T, Myojo T, Morimoto Y, et al. Biopersistence of inhaled MWCNT 
in rat lungs in a 4-week well-characterized exposure. Inhal Toxicol. 
2011;23(13):784–791.
Pacurari M, Yin XJ, Ding M, et al. Oxidative and molecular interactions of 
multi-wall carbon nanotubes (MWCNT) in normal and malignant human 
mesothelial cells. Nanotoxicology. 2008;2(3):155–170.
Pal AK, Bello D, Cohen J, Demokritou P. Implications of in-vitro dosimetry 
on toxicological ranking of low aspect ratio engineered nanomaterials. 
Nanotoxicology. 2015;9(7):871–85.
Palomaki J, Valimaki E, Sund J, et al. Long, needle-like carbon nanotubes 
and asbestos activate the NLRP3 inflammasome through a similar mech-
anism. ACS Nano. 2011;5:6861–6870.
Pante N, Kann M. Nuclear pore complex is able to transport macromol-
ecules with diameters of about 39 nm. Mol Biol Cell. 2002;13:425–434.
Pare WP, Glavin GB. Restraint stress in biomedical research: a review. 
Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 1986;10:339–370.
Pauluhn J. Subchronic 13—week inhalation exposure of rats to multiwalled 
carbon nanotubes: toxic effects are determined by density of agglomerate 
structures, not fibrillar structure. Toxicol Sci. 2010;113:226–242.
Peng X, Palma S, Fisher NS, Wong SS. Effect of morphology of ZnO 
nanostructures on their toxicity to marine algae. Aquat Toxicol. 
2011;102(3–4):186–196.
Petersen EJ, Akkanen J, Kukkonen JVK, Weber WJ Jr. Biological uptake 
and depuration of carbon nanotubes by Daphnia magna. Environ Sci 
Technol. 2009;43(8):2969–2975.
Petersen EJ, Henry TB, Zhao J, et al. Identification and avoidance of poten-
tial artifacts and misinterpretations in nanomaterial ecotoxicity measure-
ments. Environ Sci Technol. 2014;48(8):4226–4246.
Pfaller TR, Colognato R, Nelissen I, et al. The suitability of different cellu-
lar in vitro immunotoxicity and genotoxicity methods for the analysis of 
nanoparticle-induced events. Nanotoxicology. 2010;4(1):52–72.
Phalen RF, Oldham MJ, Nel AE. Tracheobronchial particle dose consider-
ations for in vitro toxicology studies. Toxicol Sci. 2006;92(1):126–132.
Pietruska JR, Liu X, Smith A, et al. Bioavailability, intracellular mobilization of 
nickel, and HIF-1α activation in human lung epithelial cells exposed to metal-
lic nickel and nickel oxide nanoparticles. Toxicol Sci. 2011;124(1):138–148.
Poland C, Duffin R, Kinloch I, et al. Carbon nanotubes introduced into the 
abdominal cavity of mice show asbestos-like pathogenicity in a pilot 
study. Nat Nanotechnol. 2008:423–428.
Pope CAI, Dockery DW. Health effects of fine particulate air pollution: 
lines that connect. J Air Waste Manage Assoc. 2006;56:709–742.
Porter D, Sriram I, Wolfarth M, et al. A biocompatible medium for nanopar-
ticle dispersion. Nanotoxicology. 2008;2:144–154.
Porter DW, Hubbs AF, Mercer RR, et al. Mouse pulmonary dose- and time 
course-responses induced by exposure to multi-walled carbon nanotubes. 
Toxicology. 2010;269(2–3):136–147.
Pothmann D, Simar S, Schuler D, et al. Lung inflammation and lack of 
genotoxicity in the comet and micronucleus assays of industrial multi-
walled carbon nanotubes Graphistrength((c)) C100 after a 90-day nose-
only inhalation exposure of rats. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2015;12:21.
Pott F, Ziem U, Reiffer F-J, et al. Carcinogenicity studies on fibres, metal 
compounds and some other dusts in rats. Exp Pathol. 1987;32:129–152.
Pradhan A, Seena S, Pascoal C, Cássio F. Can metal nanoparticles be a 
threat to microbial decomposers of plant litter in streams? Microb Ecol. 
2011;62(1):58–68.
Prow TW, Grice JE, Lin LL, et al. Nanoparticles and microparticles for skin 
drug delivery. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2011;63(6):470–491.
Pulskamp K, Diabaté S, Krug HF. Carbon nanotubes show no sign of acute 
toxicity but induce intracellular reactive oxygen species in dependence 
on contaminants. Toxicol Lett. 2007;168(1):58–74.
Quinn J, Geiger C, Clausen C, et al. Field demonstration of DNAPL 
dehalogenation using emulsified zero-valent iron. Environ Sci Technol. 
2005;39(5):1309–1318.

Nanoparticle Toxicology
Chapter 29
1427
Rauscher H, Roebben G, Amenta V, et al. Towards a review of the EC 
Recommendation for a definition of the term “nanomaterial”; Part 1: 
Compilation of information concerning the experience with the defi-
nition. Publications Office of the European Union. 2014 JRC89369. 
doi:10.2788/36237. Available at: http://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/
repository/handle/JRC89369.
Rauscher H, Roebben G, Boix SA, et al. Towards a review of the EC 
Recommendation for a definition of the term “nanomaterial”; Part 3: 
Scientific-technical evaluation of options to clarify the definition and to 
facilitate its implementation. Publications Office of the European Union. 
2015 JRC95675. doi:10.2788/678452. Available at: http://publications.
jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/handle/JRC95675.
Ren H, Wang C, Zhang J, et al. DNA cleavage system of nanosized gra-
phene oxide sheets and copper ions. ACS Nano. 2010;4:7169–7174.
Rinderknecht A, Elder A, Prud’homme R, Gindy M, Harkema J, Oberdörster 
G. Surface functionalization affects the role of nanoparticle disposition. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007;175:A246.
Rittinghausen S, Hackbarth A, Creutzenberg O, et al. The carcinogenic 
effect of various multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) after intra-
peritoneal injection in rats. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2014;11:59.
Roberts AP, Mount AS, Seda B, et al. In vivo biomodification of lipid-
coated carbon nanotubes by Daphnia magna. Environ Sci Technol. 
2007;41(8):3025–3029.
Roberts JR, Mercer RR, Stefaniak AB. Evaluation of pulmonary and systemic 
toxicity following lung exposure to graphite nanoplates: a member of the 
graphene-based nanomaterial family. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2016;13:34.
Roco MC. Environmentally responsible development of nanotechnology. 
Environ Sci Technol. 2005;39:106A–112A.
Rodrigues DF, Elimelech M. Toxic effects of single-walled carbon nano-
tubes in the development of E. coli biofilm. Environ Sci Technol. 
2010;44:4583–4589.
Rosenthal SJ, Chang JC, Kovtun O, McBride JR, Tomlinson ID. Biocompatible 
quantum dots for biological applications. Chem Biol. 2011;18:10–24.
Ross AJ, Dailey LA, Brighton LE, Devlin RB. Transcriptional profiling of 
mucociliary differentiation in human airway epithelial cells. Am J Respir 
Cell Mol Biol. 2007;37:169–185.
Rosslein M, Elliott JT, Salit M, et al. Use of cause-and-effect analysis to 
design a high-quality nanocytotoxicology assay. Chem Res Toxicol. 
2015;28(1):21-30.
Rothenberg SJ, Parker RM, York RG, et al. Lack of effects of nose-only inhala-
tion exposure on testicular toxicity in male rats. Toxicol Sci. 2000;53:127–134.
Rushton EK, Jiang J, Leonard SS, et al. Concept of assessing nanoparticle 
hazards considering nanoparticle dosemetric and chemical/biological 
response metrics. J Toxicol Environ Health A. 2010;73(5):445–461.
Russell DG, Vanderven BC, Glennie S, Mwandumba H, Heyderman RS. 
The macrophage marches on its phagosome: dynamic assays of phago-
some function. Nat Rev Immunol. 2009;9:594–600.
Ryman-Rasmussen JP, Cesta MF, Brody AR, et al. Inhaled carbon nanotubes 
reach the subpleural tissue in mice. Nat Nanotechnol. 2009a;4:747–751.
Ryman-Rasmussen JP, Tewksbury EW, Moss OR, et al. Inhaled multiwalled 
carbon nanotubes potentiate airway fibrosis in murine allergic asthma. 
Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2009b;40(3):349–358.
Sager TM, Porter DW, Robinson VA, et al. Improved method to dis-
perse nanoparticles for in vitro and in vivo investigation of toxicity. 
Nanotoxicology. 2007;1:118–129.
Sakamoto Y, Nakae D, Fukumori N, et al. Induction of mesothelioma by a 
single intrascrotal administration of multi-wall carbon nanotube in intact 
male Fischer 344 rats. J Toxicol Sci. 2009;34(1):65–76.
Salas EC, Sun Z, Luttge A, Tour JM. Reduction of graphene oxide via 
­bacterial respiration. ACS Nano. 2010;4:4852–4856.
Sanchez V, Jachak A, Hurt RH, Kane AB. Biological interactions of gra-
phene-family nanomaterials: an interdisciplinary review. Chem Res 
Toxicol. 2012;25(1):15–34.
Sanchez VC, Pietruska JR, Miselis NR, Hurt RH, Kane AB. Biopersistence 
and potential adverse health impacts of fibrous nanomaterials: what 
have we learned from asbestos? Wiley Interdiscip Rev Nanomed 
Nanobiotechnol. 2009;1:511–529.
Sanchez VC, Weston P, Yan A, Hurt RH, Kane AB. A 3-dimensional in vitro 
model of epithelioid granulomas induced by high aspect ratio nanomate-
rials. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2011;8(1):17.
Sargent LM, Porter DW, Staska LM, et al. Promotion of lung adenocarci-
noma following inhalation exposure to multi-walled carbon nanotubes. 
Part Fibre Toxicol. 2014;11:3.
Sargent LM, Reynolds SH, Castranova V. Potential pulmonary effects of 
engineered carbon nanotubes: in vitro genotoxic effects. Nanotoxicology. 
2010;4:396–408.
Sasidharan A, Panchakarla LS, Chandran P, et al. Differential nano-bio 
interactions and toxicity effects of pristine versus functionalized gra-
phene. Nanoscale. 2011;3:2461–2464.
Sauer UG, Vogel S, Aumann A, et al. Applicability of rat precision-cut lung 
slices in evaluating nanomaterial cytotoxicity, apoptosis, oxidative stress, 
and inflammation. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2014;276(1):1–20.
Savi M, Kalberer M, Lang D, et al. A novel exposure system for the efficient 
and controlled deposition of aerosol particles onto cell cultures. Environ 
Sci Technol. 2008;42(15):5667–5674.
Sayes CM, Gobin AM, Ausman KD, et al. Nano-C60 cytotoxicity is due to 
lipid peroxidation. Biomaterials. 2005;26:7587–7595.
Sayes CM, Liang F, Hudson JL, et al. Functionalization density dependence 
of single-walled carbon nanotubes cytotoxicity in vitro. Toxicol Lett. 
2006;161:135–142.
Sayes CM, Reed KL, Warheit DB. Assessing toxicity of fine and nanopar-
ticles: comparing in vitro measurements to in vivo pulmonary toxicity 
profiles. Toxicol Sci. 2007;97(1):163-80.
Schilling K, Bradford B, Castelli D, et al. Human safety review of “nano” 
titanium dioxide and zinc oxide. Photochemical & photobiological 
­sciences. Photochem Photobiol Sci. 2010;9:495–509.
Schlesinger RB, Lippmann M. Selective particle deposition and broncho-
genic carcinoma. Environ Res. 1978;15:424–431.
Schmid G. The relevance of shape and size of Au55 clusters. Chem Soc Rev. 
2008;37:1909–1930.
Schneider M, Stracke F, Hansen S, Schaefer UF. Nanoparticles and 
their interactions with the dermal barrier. Dermato-Endocrinology. 
2009;1(4):197–206.
Scown TM, van Aerle R, Tyler CR. Review: do engineered nanoparticles 
pose a significant threat to the aquatic environment? Crit Rev Toxicol. 
2010;40:653–670.
Segal MB. The choroid plexuses and the barriers between the blood and the 
cerebrospinal fluid. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2000;20:183.
Seidel WC, Scherer KV Jr, Cline D Jr, et al. Chemical, physical, and toxi-
cological characterization of fumes produced by heating tetrafluoro-
ethene homopolymer and its copolymers with hexafluoropropene and 
perfluoro(propyl vinyl ether). Chem Res Toxicol. 1991;4:229–236.
Semmler M, Seitz J, Erbe F, et al. Long-term clearance kinetics of inhaled 
ultrafine insoluble iridium particles from the rat lung, including transient 
translocation into secondary organs. Inhal Toxicol. 2004;16(6/7):453–459.
Semmler-Behnke M, Takenaka S, Feretsch S, et al. Efficient elimination of 
inhaled nanoparticles from the alveolar region: evidence for interstitial 
uptake and subsequent re-entrainment onto airways epithelia. Environ 
Health Perspect. 2007;115(5):728–733.
Senzui M, Tamura T, Miura K, et al. Study on penetration of titanium diox-
ide (TiO(2)) nanoparticles into intact and damaged skin in vitro. J Toxicol 
Sci. 2010;35:107–113.
Seong SY, Matzinger P. Hydrophobicity: an ancient damage-associated 
molecular pattern that initiates innate immune responses. Nat Rev 
Immunol. 2004;4:469–478.
Serda RE, Mack A, van de Ven AL, et al. Logic-embedded vectors for intra-
cellular partitioning, endosomal escape, and exocytosis of nanoparticles. 
Small. 2010;6:2691–2700.
Shaw BJ, Handy RD. Physiological effects of nanoparticles on fish: a 
comparison of nanometals versus metal ions. Environ Int. 2011;37(6): 
1083–1097.
Shi X, von dem Bussche A, Hurt RH, Kane AB, Gao H. Cell entry of one-
dimensional nanomaterials occurs by tip recognition and rotation. Nat 
Nanotechnol. 2011;6:714–719.
Shinohara H. Distribution of lymphatic stomata on the pleural surface of the 
thoracic cavity and the surface topography of the pleural mesothelium in 
the golden hamster. Anat Rec. 1997;249:16–23.
Shvedova AA, Kisin ER, Mercer R, et al. Unusual inflammatory and fibro-
genic pulmonary responses to single walled carbon nanotubes in mice. 
Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2005;289:698–708.

1428
Toxic Agents
unit V
Shvedova AA, Kisin ER, Murray AR, et al. Inhalation vs. aspiration of sin-
gle-walled carbon nanotubes in C57BL/6 mice: inflammation, fibrosis, 
oxidative stress, and mutagenesis. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 
2008;295(4):L552–L565.
Shvedova AA, Sager T, Murray AR, et al. Critical issues in the evalua-
tion of possible adverse pulmonary effects from airborne nanoparticles. 
Nanotoxicology, Characterization, Dosing and Health Effects. New York 
and London: Informa Healthcare, USA Inc; 2007.
Silbergeld EK, Contreras EQ, Hartung T, et al. Nanotoxicology: “the end of 
the beginning”—signs on the roadmap to a strategy for assuring the safe 
application and use of nanomaterials. Altex. 2011;28:236–241.
Simmons SO, Fan CY, Ramabhadran R. Cellular stress response pathway 
system as a sentinel ensemble in toxicological screening. Toxicol Sci. 
2009;111:202–225.
Singh R, Pantarotto D, Lacerda L, et al. Tissue biodistribution and blood 
clearance rates of intravenously administered carbon nanotube radiotrac-
ers. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006;103(9):3357–3362.
Sistonen L, Sarge KD, Phillips B, et al. Mol Cell Biol. 1992;12:4104–4111.
Slikker W Jr, Andersen ME, Bogdanffy MS, et al. Dose-dependent transitions 
in mechanisms of toxicity. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2004;201(3):203–225.
Slowing II, Vivero-Escoto JL, Zhao Y, et al. Exocytosis of mesoporous 
silica nanoparticles from mammalian cells: from asymmetric cell-to-cell 
transfer to protein harvesting. Small. 2011;7:1526–1532.
Stanton MF, Layard M, Tegeris A, et al. Relation of particle dimension 
to carcinogenicity in Amphibole asbestoses and other fibrous minerals. 
JNCL. 1981;67:965–975.
Stone V, Johnston H, Schins RP. Development of in vitro systems for 
nanotoxicology: methodological considerations. Crit Rev Toxicol. 
2009;39:613–626.
Stone V, Pozzi-Mucelli S, Tran L, et al. ITS-NANO: prioritising nanosafety 
research to develop a stakeholder driven intelligent testing strategy. Part 
Fibre Toxicol. 2014;11:9.
Stone V, Miller MR, Clift MJD, et al. Nanomaterials versus ambient ultra-
fine particles: an opportunity to exchange toxicology knowledge. Environ 
Health Perspect. 2017;125(10):106002.
Sugamata M, Uhara T, Takano H, Oshio S, Takeda K. Maternal die-
sel exhaust exposure damages newborn murine brains. J Health Sci. 
2006;52(1):82–84.
Suzui M, Futakuchi M, Fukamachi K, et al. Multiwalled carbon nano-
tubes intratracheally instilled into the rat lung induce development 
of pleural malignant mesothelioma and lung tumors. Cancer Sci. 
2016;107(7):924–935.
Takagi A, Hirose A, Futakuchi M, Tsuda H, Kanno J. Dose-dependent 
mesothelioma induction by intraperitoneal administration of multi-
wall carbon nanotubes in p53 heterozygous mice. Cancer Sci. 2012; 
103(8):1440–1444.
Takagi A, Hirose A, Nishimura T, et al. Induction of mesothelioma in 
p53+/− mouse by intraperitoneal application of multi-wall carbon nano-
tube. J Toxicol Sci. 2008;33(1):105–116.
Takeda K, Suzuki K-i, Ishihra A, et al. Nanoparticles transferred from preg-
nant mice to their offspring can damage the genital and cranial nerve 
systems. J Health Sci. 2009;55(1):95–102.
Tang T, Gminski R, Könczöl M, Modest C, Armbruster B, Mersch-
Sundermann V. Investigations on cytotoxic and genotoxic effects of laser 
printer emissions in human epithelial A549 lung cells using an air/liquid 
exposure system. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2011.
Taurozzi JS, Hackley VA, Wiesner MR. Ultrasonic dispersion of nanopar-
ticles for environmental, health and safety assessment—issues and rec-
ommendations. Nanotoxicology. 2011;5:711–729.
Teeguarden JG, Hinderliter PM, Orr G, Thrall BD, Pounds JG. 
Particokinetics in vitro: dosimetry considerations for in vitro nanopar-
ticle toxicity assessments. Toxicol Sci. 2007;95(2):300–312.
Teleki A, Wengeler R, Wengeler L, Nirschl H, Pratsinis SE. Distinguishing 
between aggregates and agglomerates of flame-made TiO2 by high-­
pressure dispersion. Powder Technol. 2008;181:292–300.
Titov AV, Kral P, Pearson R. Sandwiched graphene—membrane superstruc-
tures. ACS Nano. 2010;4:229–234.
Tong Z, Bischoff M, Nies L, Applegate B, Turco RF. Impact of fuller-
ene (C60) on a soil microbial community. Environ Sci Technol. 2007; 
41(8):2985–2991.
Tran CL, Buchanan D, Cullen RT, Searl A, Jones AD, Donaldson K. 
Inhalation of poorly soluble particles. II. Influence of particle surface 
area on inflammation and clearance. Inhal Toxicol. 2000;12:1113–1126.
Tran TH, Nguyen TD. Controlled growth of uniform noble metal nano-
crystals: aqueous-based synthesis and some applications in biomedicine. 
Colloids Surf B Biointerf. 2011;88:1–22.
Trouiller B, Reliene R, Westbrook A, Solaimani P, Schiestl RH. Titanium 
dioxide nanoparticles induce DNA damage and genetic instability in vivo 
in mice. Cancer Res. 2009;69(22):8784–8789.
Truong L, Saili KS, Miller JM, Hutchison JE, Tanguay RL. Persistent 
adult zebrafish behavioral deficits results from acute embryonic expo-
sure to gold nanoparticles. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 
2012;155(2):269–274.
Tu X, Manohar S, Jagota A, Zheng M. DNA sequence motifs for struc-
ture-specific recognition and separation of carbon nanotubes. Nature. 
2009;460:250–253.
Tungittiplakorn W, Cohen C, Lion LW. Engineered polymeric nanoparticles 
for bioremediation of hydrophobic contaminants. Environ Sci Technol. 
2005;39(5):1354–1358.
Udelsman R, Blake MJ, Stagg CA, et al. Vascular heat shock protein expres-
sion in response to stress. J Clin Invest. 1993;91:465–473.
Unfried K, Albrecht C, et al. Cellular responses to nanoparticles: target 
structures and mechanisms. Nanotoxicology. 2007;1:52–71.
USEPA Chemical Assistance Manual for Premanufacture Notification 
Submitters. 1997 (OPPT United States Environmental Protection Agency, 
ed.), Vol. EPA 744-R-97-003, pp. 1–138. Available at: https://www.epa 
.gov/reviewing-new-chemicals-under-toxic-substances-control-act-tsca/
chemistry-assistance-manual.
Vallhov H, Qin J, Johansson SM, et al. The importance of an endotoxin-
free environment during the production of nanoparticles used in medical 
applications. Nano Lett. 2006;6:1682–1686.
Vankoningsloo S, Piret J-P, Saout C, et al. Cytotoxicity of multi-walled 
carbon nanotubes in three skin cellular models: effects of sonica-
tion, dispersive agents and corneous layer of reconstructed epidermis. 
Nanotoxicology. 2010;4(1):84–97.
Vecchio G, Galeone A, Brunetti V, et al. Mutagenic effects of gold 
nanoparticles induce aberrant phenotypes in Drosophila melanogaster. 
Nanomedicine. 2012;8(1):1–7.
Velzeboer I, Kupryianchyk D, Peeters ET, Koelmans AA. Community 
effects of carbon nanotubes in aquatic sediments. Environ Int. 2011;37(6): 
1126–1130.
Volckens J, Dailey L, Walters G, Devlin RB. Direct particle-to-cell depo-
sition of coarse ambient particulate matter increases the production of 
inflammatory mediators from cultured human airway epithelial cells. 
Environ Sci Technol. 2009;43(12):4595–4599.
Wagner DE, Bonenfant NR, Sokocevic D, et al. Three-dimensional scaf-
folds of acellular human and porcine lungs for high throughput studies 
of lung disease and regeneration. Biomaterials. 2014;35(9):2664–2679.
Walczyk D, Bombelli FB, Monopoli MP, et al. What the cell “sees” in bion-
anoscience. J Am Chem Soc. 2010;132:5761–5768.
Walker NJ, Bucher JR. A 21st century paradigm for evaluating the health 
hazards of nanoscale materials? Toxicol Sci. 2009;110:251–254.
Wang C, Hou Y, Kim J, Sun S. A general strategy for synthesizing FePt 
nanowires and nanorods. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2007;46:6333–6335.
Wang J, Chen C, Liu Y, et al. Potential neurological lesion after nasal instil-
lation of TiO(2) nanoparticles in the anatase and rutile crystal phases. 
Toxicol Lett. 2008a;183(1–3):72–80.
Wang J, Liu Y, Jiao F, et al. Time-dependent translocation and potential 
impairment on central nervous system by intranasally instilled TiO(2) 
nanoparticles. Toxicology. 2008b;254(1–2):82–90.
Wang NS. The preformed stomatas connecting the pleural cavity and the 
lymphatics in the parietal pleura. Am Rev Resp Dis. 1975;111:12–20.
Wang SQ, Tooley IR. Photoprotection in the era of nanotechnology. Semin 
Cutan Med Surg. 2011;30:210–213.
Wang X, Xia T, Ntim SA, et al. Dispersal state of multiwalled carbon 
nanotubes elicits profibrogenic cellular responses that correlate with 
fibrogenesis biomarkers and fibrosis in the murine lung. ACS Nano. 
2011a;5:9772–9787.
Wang Y, Westerhoff P, Hristovski KD. Fate and biological effects of sil-
ver, titanium dioxide, and C60 (fullerene) nanomaterials during simulated

Nanoparticle Toxicology
Chapter 29
1429
wastewater treatment processes. J Hazard Mater. 2012;201–202:16–22. 
[Epub November 7, 2011]. PubMed PMID: 22154869.
Wang YY, Lai SK, So C, et al. Mucoadhesive nanoparticles may disrupt the 
protective human mucus barrier by altering its microstructure. PLoS One. 
2011b;6:e21547.
Warheit DB. How meaningful are the results of nanotoxicity stud-
ies in the absence of adequate material characterization? Toxicol Sci. 
2008;101:183–185.
Warheit DB, Brown SC, Donner EM. Acute and subchronic oral toxicity 
studies in rats with nanoscale and pigment grade titanium dioxide par-
ticles. Food Chem Toxicol. 2015;84:208–224.
Warheit DB, Donner EM. How meaningful are risk determinations in the 
absence of a complete dataset? Making the case for publishing standard-
ized test guideline and “no effect” studies for evaluating the safety of 
nanoparticulates versus spurious “high effect” results from single investi-
gative studies. Sci Technol Adv Mater. 2015;16(3):034603.
Warheit DB, Hartsky MA, Stefaniak MS. Comparative physiology of rodent 
pulmonary macrophages: in vitro functional responses. J Appl Physiol. 
1988a;64(5):1953–1959.
Warheit DB, Laurence BR, Reed KL, Rouch DH, Reynolds GAM, Webb 
TR. Comparative pulmonary toxicity assessment of single-wall carbon 
nanotubes in rats. Toxicol Sci. 2004;77:117–125.
Warheit DB, Overby LH, George G, Brody AR. Pulmonary macrophages 
are attracted to inhaled particles on alveolar surfaces. Exp Lung Res. 
1988b;14:51–66.
Weir A, Westerhoff P, Fabricius L, Hristovski K, von Goetz N. Titanium 
dioxide nanoparticles in food and personal care products. Environ Sci 
Technol. 2012;46(4):2242–2250.
Werlin R, Priester JH, Mielke RE, et al. Biomagnification of cadmium sel-
enide quantum dots in a simple experimental microbial food chain. Nat 
Nanotechnol. 2011;6(1):65–71.
Westerhoff P, Song G, Hristovski K, Kiser MA. Occurrence and removal of 
titanium at full scale wastewater treatment plants: implications for TiO2 
nanomaterials. J Environ Monit. 2011;13:1195–1203.
Weuve J, Puett RC, Schwartz J, et al. Exposure to particulate air pol-
lution and cognitive decline in older women. Arch Intern Med. 
2012;172(3):219–227.
Wick P, Manser P, Limbach LK, et al. The degree and kind of agglomeration 
affect carbon nanotube cytotoxicity. Toxicol Lett. 2007;168:121–131.
Woodrow Wilson Center. 2012. Available at: http://www.nanotechproject.
org/inventories/consumer/analysis_draft/.
Worle-Knirsch JM, Pulskamp K, Krug HF. Oops they did it again! 
Carbon nanotubes hoax scientists in viability assays. Nano Lett. 2006; 
6(6):1261–1268.
Xia T, Kovochich M, Brant J, et al. Comparison of the abilities of ambient 
and manufactured nanoparticles to induce cellular toxicity according to 
an oxidative stress paradigm. Nano Lett. 2006;6:1794–1807.
Xia T, Kovochich M, Liong M, et al. Comparison of the mechanism of tox-
icity of zinc oxide and cerium oxide nanoparticles based on dissolution 
and oxidative stress properties. ACS Nano. 2008a;2:2121–2134.
Xia T, Kovochich M, Liong M, Zink JI, Nel AE. Cationic polystyrene nano-
sphere toxicity depends on cell-specific endocytic and mitochondrial 
injury pathways. ACS Nano. 2008b;2:85–96.
Xia T, Zhao Y, Sager T, et al. Decreased dissolution of ZnO by iron doping 
yields nanoparticles with reduced toxicity in the rodent lung and zebraf-
ish embryos. ACS Nano. 2011;5:1223–1235.
Xia XR, Monteiro-Riviere NA, Riviere JE. An index for characterization of 
nanomaterials in biological systems. Nat Nanotechnol. 2010;5:671–675.
Xie Y, Williams NG, Tolic A, et al. Aerosolized ZnO nanoparticles induce 
toxicity in alveolar type ii epithelial cells at the air-liquid interface. 
Toxicol Sci. 2012;125(2):450–461.
Xiong D, Fang T, Yu L, Sima X, Zhu W. Effects of nano-scale TiO2, ZnO 
and their bulk counterparts on zebrafish: acute toxicity, oxidative stress 
and oxidative damage. Sci Total Environ. 2011;409(8):1444–1452.
Xu C, Xie J, Ho D, et al. Au-Fe3O4 dumbbell nanoparticles as dual-­
functional probes. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2008;47:173–176.
Yan A, Von Dem Bussche A, Kane AB, Hurt RH. Tocopheryl polyethylene 
glycol succinate as a safe, antioxidant surfactant for processing carbon 
nanotubes and fullerenes. Carbon. 2007;45:2463–2470.
Yan L, Zhao F, Li S, Hu Z, Zhao Y. Low-toxic and safe nanomaterials by 
surface-chemical design, carbon nanotubes, fullerenes, metallofuller-
enes, and graphenes. Nanoscale. 2011;3:362–382.
Yang K, Zhu L, Xing B. Adsorption of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 
by carbon nanomaterials. Environ Sci Technol. 2006;40:1855–1861.
Yang Z, Zhang Y, Yang Y, et al. Pharmacological and toxicological target 
organelles and safe use of single-walled carbon nanotubes as drug car-
riers in treating Alzheimer disease. Nanomedicine. 2010;6(3):427–441.
Yu LP, Fang T, Xiong DW, Zhu WT, Sima XF. Comparative toxicity of 
nano-ZnO and bulk ZnO suspensions to zebrafish and the effects of 
sedimentation, •OH production and particle dissolution in distilled water. 
J Environ Monit. 2011;13(7):1975–1982.
Zhang LW, Monteiro-Riviere NA. Lectins modulate multi-walled carbon 
nanotubes cellular uptake in human epidermal keratinocytes. Toxicol In 
Vitro. 2010;24:546–551.
Zhang Q, Huang JQ, Zhao MQ, Qian WZ, Wei F. Carbon nanotube mass 
production: principles and processes. ChemSusChem. 2011;4:864–889.
Zhang QZ, Zha L-S, Zhang Y, et al. The brain targeting efficiency follow-
ing nasally applied MPEG-PLA nanoparticles in rats. J Drug Target. 
2006;14(5):281–290.
Zhao F, Zhao Y, Liu Y, Chang X, Chen C, Zhao Y. Cellular uptake, intracellular 
trafficking, and cytotoxicity of nanomaterials. Small. 2011;7:1322–1337.
Zhao Y, Allen BL, Star A. Enzymatic degradation of multiwalled carbon 
nanotubes. J Phys Chem A. 2011;115:9536–9544.
Zhu S, Oberdörster E, Haasch ML. Toxicity of an engineered nanoparticle 
(fullerene, C60) in two aquatic species, Daphnia and fathead minnow. 
Mar Environ Res. 2006;62(suppl):S5–S9.
Zhu X, Zhu L, Lang Y, Chen Y. Oxidative stress and growth inhibition in the 
freshwater fish Carassius auratus induced by chronic exposure to sublethal 
fullerene aggregates. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2008;27(9):1979–1985.

This page intentionally left blank