# 3. Mechanisms of Toxicity
# Casarett & Doull's Toxicology, 9th Edition
# Pages: 84-145
# Unit: Unit I General Principles of Toxicology

3
chapter
Mechanisms of Toxicity
Lois D. Lehman-McKeeman
Mechanisms of toxicity describe how an adverse effect occurs. 
Such events involve many molecular, biochemical, and cellular 
processes that may act in isolation or in a complex combination to 
produce a given response. Given the multitude of cells, organs, and 
pathways that underlie toxic mechanisms, it is unrealistic to discuss 
every possible mechanism of toxicity in this chapter. Such detailed 
information is provided in many of the chapters that follow, where 
emphasis is on a specific organ and the processes that render that 
organ sensitive or resistant to toxic insult. Rather, the focus of this 
chapter is to establish the fundamental concepts for how toxicity 
occurs, to illustrate how to apply these concepts to understanding 
mechanisms of toxicity, and to give examples of mechanisms of 
toxicity. Mechanistic toxicology data are also useful for developing 
more predictive biomarkers of toxicity, developing approaches to 
Step 1: Delivery to the Target
Absorption and Presystemic 
Elimination
Distribution of Toxicants Occurs by 
Passive or Active Processes
Elimination Processes Affect 
Delivery of Toxicants
The Balance between Metabolic 
Activation and Metabolic 
Detoxification Reactions 
Contributes to Toxicity
Formation of Electrophiles
Formation of Free Radicals
Formation of Nucleophiles
Formation of Redox-Active Reactants
Detoxification
Detoxification of Electrophiles
Detoxification of Free Radicals
Detoxification of Nucleophiles
Detoxification of Toxicants with No 
Functional Groups
Detoxification of Protein Toxins
When Detoxification Fails
Step 2: Reaction of the  
Ultimate Toxicant with  
the Target Molecule
Attributes of Target Molecules
Types of Reactions
Noncovalent Binding
Covalent Binding
Hydrogen Abstraction
Electron Transfer
Enzymatic Reactions
Effects of Toxicants on Target 
Molecules
Dysfunction of Target Molecules
Destruction of Target Molecules
Neoantigen Formation
Toxicity Not Initiated by Reaction 
with Target Molecules
Idiosyncratic Toxicity: When 
No Mechanism Explains the 
Outcome
Step 3: Cellular Dysfunction  
and Resultant Toxicities
Toxicant-Induced Cellular 
Dysregulation
Altered Gene Expression
Dysregulation of Transcription
Dysregulation of Signal Transduction
Dysregulation of Extracellular Signal 
Production
Dysregulation of Electrically Excitable 
Cells
Alteration in Neurotransmitter Levels
Toxicant–Neurotransmitter Receptor 
Interactions
Toxicant–Signal Transducer 
­Interactions
Toxicant–Signal Terminator 
­Interactions
Dysregulation of the Activity  
of Other Cells
Toxic Alteration of Cellular 
Maintenance
Mechanisms of Toxic Cell Death
Primary Metabolic Disorders  
Jeopardizing Cell Survival
Mitochondrial Permeability Transition 
and Necrotic Cell Death
Other Mechanisms of Cell Death
Apoptosis
Necroptosis
Ferroptosis
What Determines the Form of Cell 
Death?
Induction of Cell Death by Unknown 
Mechanisms
Step 4: Inappropriate Repair 
and Adaptation
Mechanisms of Repair
Molecular Repair
Cellular Repair
Tissue Repair
Mechanisms of Adaptation
Adaptation by Decreasing Delivery  
to the Target
Adaptation by Decreasing the Target 
Density or Responsiveness
Adaptation by Increasing Repair
Final and Irreversible Actions  
of Repair and Adaptation  
Failure
When Repair Fails
When Adaptation Fails
Toxicity Resulting from 
Inappropriate Repair  
and Adaptation
Tissue Necrosis
Fibrosis
Carcinogenesis
Research Approaches to 
Determine Mechanisms  
of Toxicity: A Case Study
Conclusions
Mechanisms of Toxicity  
and Adverse Outcome  
Pathways
The Importance of Mechanisms  
of Toxicity
Acknowledgments
References

66
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
antagonize or prevent toxicity, and gaining insight into fundamen-
tal physiologic, biochemical, and molecular processes that underlie 
normal and abnormal organ function. Knowledge of mechanisms 
of toxicity is also fundamental for developing risk assessments for 
chemical exposure, as such data are relevant to determining the 
likelihood that chemical exposure may cause harmful effects.
Given the sheer number of potential toxicants and the 
multitude of biological structures and processes that can be 
impaired, there are a tremendous number of possible toxic effects. 
Correspondingly, there are many pathways that may lead to toxic-
ity. However, the chapter is structured to demonstrate the course 
followed from the delivery of the toxicant to its target, to the reac-
tions within the target, and the resultant cellular dysfunction that 
manifests in toxicity. In this regard, mechanisms of toxicity can 
be simplified visually to a four-step process depicted in Fig. 3-1, 
and these steps, encompassing (1) delivery of the toxicant to its 
target; (2) interactions between the toxicant and its target or the 
microenvironment; (3) progression to cellular dysfunction; and 
(4) inappropriate repair or adaptation, serve as the organizational 
structure of this chapter. As a simple example of this scheme, the 
toxicity of tetrodotoxin, the puffer fish poison, is manifested by 
direct interaction with voltage-gated Na+ channels of neurons, 
and it causes skeletal muscle paralysis by blocking these chan-
nels. In this example, the delivery and interaction of the toxicant 
with its target are direct, and there are no repair mechanisms that 
can reduce or prevent the toxicity. In contrast to the tetrodotoxin 
example, a more complex path to toxicity involves all four steps 
outlined in Fig. 3-1A and expanded in Fig. 3-1B. Target delivery 
perturbs cell function and/or structure to initiate repair mechanisms 
at the molecular, cellular, and/or tissue levels, and adaptive mecha-
nisms may develop to diminish delivery, boost repair capacity, and/
or compensate for dysfunction. In the most complex example, even 
efforts to repair injury can be overwhelmed, with serious, irrevers-
ible consequences including cell death or chronic changes like 
fibrosis or cancer.
STEP 1: DELIVERY TO THE TARGET
Exposure at the target site is an absolute requirement for any 
mechanism of toxicity. Xenobiotic disposition, defined as the 
absorption, distribution, biotransformation, and elimination of a 
toxicant, is a critical determinant of target organ toxicity along 
with sensitivity of target sites to toxicity. Moreover, the kinetics 
that describe these processes contributes to the severity of a toxic 
response. The fundamental principles of disposition, biotrans-
formation, and kinetics are discussed in detail in other chapters 
(Chaps. 5, 6, and 7, respectively), but an overview is provided 
here with emphasis on how they contribute to toxic mechanisms. 
Fig. 3-2 also illustrates how these processes can increase or 
decrease toxicity.
Absorption and Presystemic Elimination
Absorption is defined as the process by which toxicants cross 
body membranes to enter the systemic circulation. It can occur 
from many sites, including the gastrointestinal tract, skin, or 
lungs, reflecting oral, dermal, or inhalation exposure, respectively. 
Absorption occurs along the entire length of the gastrointestinal 
Toxicant
T
O
X
I
C
I
T
Y
Delivery
Cellular
dysfunction,
injury
Alteration
of biological
environment
Interaction
with target
molecule
2b
2a
1
3
Inappropriate
repair and
adaptation
4
T
O
X
I
C
I
T
Y
1
Delivery
Absorption
Distribution
Metabolism
Excretion
Cell
Signaling
Gene
Expression 
Electrically
Excitable Cells 
Cell
Maintenance
Internal
Maintenance
External
Maintenance
Molecular
Cellular
Tissue
Protein
Lipid
DNA
Apoptosis
Proliferation
2
Interaction
with target
3
Cellular
dysfunction
4
Dysrepair
A
B
Figure 3-1.  Overview of critical events that contribute to the development of toxicity after chemical exposure. These fundamental processes serve as the basis 
for the organization of this chapter. Panel A shows more details of critical events underlying the four major processes outlined in this chapter. Panel B shows 
more details of the mechanistic events involved in toxic outcomes.

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
67
tract, and is usually determined by the extent to which the com-
pound exists in its nonionized, lipid-soluble form. In the skin, 
the stratum corneum layer of the epidermis is a major barrier to 
absorption, but once through this barrier, compounds are typically 
absorbed by diffusion into the venous or lymphatic capillaries to 
enter the systemic circulation. In the lungs, gases and vapors dif-
fuse quickly through the alveolar space and into the bloodstream. 
In contrast, aerosols and particles are absorbed throughout the lung 
based on their size and water solubility. Larger particles will be 
deposited in the upper regions of the tracheobronchiolar regions, 
and only the smallest particles can penetrate all the way into the 
alveolar sac. In all organs, the rate of absorption is determined by 
the concentration at the site of exposure, rate of dissolution of the 
chemical, the total area that is exposed, the vascular composition of 
the region, and physicochemical properties of the toxicant.
Presystemic elimination is a process by which a toxicant is 
eliminated prior to reaching the systemic circulation. In the case of 
the gastrointestinal tract, the epithelium may eliminate or modify 
a compound directly. This is the case for morphine which is con-
jugated with glucuronic acid in the small intestine. Additionally, 
many toxicants are absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract directly 
into the liver from the portal circulation where they are modified 
by biotransformation enzymes and excreted into bile. This is also 
referred to as first-pass metabolism, a process that reduces systemic 
exposure to a toxicant. At the same time, if a toxicant targets the 
liver, a significant first-pass effect will increase toxicity, as is the 
case for the mushroom-derived toxicant, α-amanitin. One approach 
to assessing the contribution of first-pass metabolism to toxicity is 
to administer the compound by intraperitoneal (IP) injection. Any 
compound that has a significant first-pass metabolism and targets 
organs other than liver will be much less toxic when administered 
by IP injection because it will be taken up by the mesenteric veins 
and delivered to the liver which will limit systemic exposure. In 
contrast, toxicants that affect the liver will likely become more toxic 
when injected by the IP route, whereas those compounds lacking 
significant first-pass metabolism would not show differential toxic-
ity based on the route of exposure.
There are also examples of presystemic elimination with 
respect to the skin and lungs. In the skin, the stratum corneum is 
not only a barrier but also, as a highly lipophilic layer, often limits 
the absorption of highly lipophilic compounds such as tetrachloro-
p-dibenzodioxin (TCDD). In the respiratory tree, the nasal mucosa 
often absorbs water-soluble compounds to prevent them from 
reaching the lung. For example, formaldehyde is highly retained 
in the nasal mucosa so that, despite its overall volatility, the nasal 
mucosa (rather than the lungs) is the predominant organ of toxicity.
Distribution of Toxicants Occurs by Passive 
or Active Processes
Tissue distribution is the process by which a toxicant reaches its 
target site. There are four properties that facilitate distribution to a 
target. These include the (1) porosity of the capillary endothelium, 
(2) presence of specialized transport processes, (3) potential for 
accumulation within cellular organelles, and (4) binding to proteins 
or other macromolecules.
The porosity of the capillary epithelium enables passive diffu-
sion of toxicants. In particular, the capillaries of the liver (sinusoids) 
and kidney (peritubular capillaries) have relative large fenestrae (50 
to 150 nm) that enable ready passage of even protein-bound com-
pounds. In contrast, the capillaries that form the blood–brain barrier 
are joined tightly and lack fenestrae to prevent significant distribu-
tion of hydrophilic compounds into the brain. Similarly, the semi-
niferous tubules of the testis are protected by a blood–testis barrier.
There are many specialized ion channels and transporters that 
influence xenobiotic distribution. For example, voltage-gated Ca2+ 
ion channels enable passage of cations such as lead into cells, and 
lithium (Li+) can enter cells through both voltage-gated and epithe-
lial Na+ channels. Transporter proteins regulate uptake and efflux of 
many xenobiotics and endogenous substrates. There are at least 52 
families of transporters identified in the human genome, represent-
ing nearly 400 unique proteins which function in energy-dependent 
processes to transport organic cations, organic anions, amino acids, 
nucleosides, and bile acids as substrates (Hediger et al., 2013). The 
role of these proteins in toxicant disposition is discussed extensively 
in Chap. 5, but examples are provided here to illustrate how trans-
porters determine target organs of toxicity. The mushroom toxin, 
α-amanitin, is taken up selectively in the liver by the Na-dependent 
bile acid transporter (sodium taurocholate cotransporting poly-
peptide, NTCP), whereas organic anion-transporting polypeptide 
(Oatp) 1B1/1B3 or its mouse homolog, Oatp1b2, controls hepatic 
uptake of microcystin, a toxin produced by blue-green algae. 
Genetically modified Oatp1b2-null mice are resistant to microcys-
tin toxicity because the toxicant is not delivered into the liver effi-
ciently. Additionally, the renal toxicity of ochratoxin is mediated by 
transport into renal tubules by organic anion transporters (Oat1 and 
Oat3), and similarly, renal toxicity of the antiviral drug adefovir is 
determined by OAT1-mediated uptake. Cisplatin and metformin are 
transported into cells by organic cation transporters (OCTs) includ-
ing OCT1 in liver and OCT2 in kidney (see Chap. 5).
Efflux transporters often reduce toxicity by removing toxicants 
from cells. In fact, one of the earliest transporters identified was 
Exposure site
Skin, GI tract, respiratory tract,
injection/bite site, placenta
Toxicant
Target molecule
(Protein, lipid, nucleic acid
macromolecular complex)
Target site
Ultimate
toxicant
D
e
l
i
v
e
r
y
Presystemic
elimination
Excretion
Detoxication
Distribution
away from target
Absorption
Reabsorption
Toxication
Distribution
toward target
Figure 3-2.  The process of toxicant delivery to the target is the first step in 
the development of toxicity. Factors illustrated on the left increase delivery 
to the target, whereas those on the right denote reduced delivery to the target.

68
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
the multidrug resistance protein-1 (MRP1), a transporter found to 
be upregulated and associated with resistance to chemotherapy in 
cancer cells. MRP1 is an efflux pump that transports chemothera-
peutic drugs out of cancer cells, an action that limits toxicity along 
with its efficacy. However, in brain, P-glycoprotein (MDR1) protects 
against toxicity by pumping toxicants out of the brain. In a classical 
example, mice with a spontaneously occurring mutation of the mdr1 
gene exhibited significantly greater toxicity to ivermectin, a neu-
rotoxic pesticide and antihelmintic drug (Schinkel, 1999), because 
these mice could not efficiently remove the toxicant from the brain.
In the examples above, xenobiotic transporters directly influence 
toxicity. However, some compounds that inhibit transporter activity 
may not be directly toxic, but rather alter the disposition of other 
toxicants or endogenous substrates to cause toxicity. For example, a 
drug that inhibits OATP1B1 may alter the disposition of other OATP 
substrates such as statins and increase the potential for statin-induced 
myopathy (Maeda, 2015). Similarly, inhibition of the bile salt export-
ing polypeptide (BSEP) can alter the normal biliary excretion of bile 
acids to increase the risk of cholestasis (Rodrigues et al., 2014).
Physicochemical properties of toxicants often contribute to 
their accumulation in cells or cellular organelles. For example, 
amphipathic molecules, defined as those containing hydrophilic and 
hydrophobic portions, can accumulate in lysosomes or mitochondria 
to produce toxicity. Accumulation in lysosomes usually occurs by 
a pH-dependent trapping mechanism leading to lysosomal changes 
such as phospholipidosis (described below). MPTP (1-methyl-
4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine) is a neurotoxicant that accu-
mulates in mitochondria. As a highly lipophilic molecule, MPTP 
can cross the blood–brain barrier where it is metabolized to MPP+ 
(1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium), a cation that is trapped in the mito-
chondria of dopaminergic neurons. The MPP+ ion is the ultimate 
toxicant as it inhibits complex I of the electron transport chain (coen-
zyme Q:cytocrome c oxidoreductase; see Fig. 3-18) in mitochondrial 
metabolism resulting in dysfunction and ultimately to cell death and 
neurodegeneration that resembles Parkinson disease–like symptoms.
Some chemicals accumulate in tissue storage sites that are 
not the major organ of toxicity and thereby prevent toxicity. For 
example, lead is deposited in bone where it substitutes for calcium 
in hydroxyapatite without adversely affecting bone, and highly lipo-
philic compounds such as chlorinated hydrocarbon insecticides will 
concentrate in fat (adipocytes), where they are generally nontoxic. 
Although such storage limits toxicity, any condition that causes 
these stored toxicants to be released or mobilized from the stor-
age site will increase the likelihood of toxicity. For example, if fat 
stores are mobilized as occurs with fasting, fat-soluble insecticides 
that concentrate in adipose can be released and distributed to the 
nervous system, their ultimate toxic site.
Finally, binding to proteins can influence distribution and tar-
get organ toxicity. Keratins are highly abundant proteins in skin and 
hair, and with a high level of cysteine residues, keratins sequester 
thiol-reactive metal ions including arsenic and mercury. Often, nail 
and hair contents of arsenic are used to estimate exposure to this 
toxic metal, and any release from the keratinocytes may lead to 
adverse skin lesions. In direct contrast, the metal-binding protein 
metallothionein binds numerous heavy metals with very high affin-
ity and protects against the toxicity of metals such as cadmium (dis-
cussed under Adaptive Repair).
Elimination Processes Affect Delivery of 
Toxicants
The route and rate of excretion largely depend on the physico-
chemical properties of the toxicant. The major excretory organs for 
non-volatile compounds are the liver and kidney, and both organs 
are most efficient at removing water-soluble, usually ionized com-
pounds. Important considerations for excretion of hydrophilic, 
ionized compounds include (1) compounds (<60 kDa) must be dis-
solved in plasma water to be filtered through the renal glomerulus; 
(2) transporters in liver or kidney are highly specialized to secrete and 
enhance excretion of water-soluble organic anions or cations; and (3) 
only water-soluble compounds are readily excreted in urine or bile.
The excretion of non-volatile highly lipophilic compounds 
is much less efficient than that of water-soluble compounds. 
Lipophilic compounds are readily absorbed by transcellular diffu-
sion, and many lipophilic compounds are eliminated slowly allow-
ing for accumulation in the body with repeated exposure. Examples 
of such compounds include polyaromatic hydrocarbons, poly-
halogenated biphenyls, and chlorinated hydrocarbon insecticides. 
Biotransformation may facilitate elimination of these compounds, 
but other processes for excretion of highly lipophilic compounds 
include excretion in the bile (in a lipid or phospholipid micelle), 
secretion directly into the intestinal contents, and excretion in milk 
lipids in mammary glands. In contrast, volatile lipophilic com-
pounds diffuse through pulmonary capillaries and be excreted in 
expired air.
Whereas excretory pathways reduce toxicant exposure, some 
toxicants are reabsorbed after initial elimination steps and this reab-
sorption may increase total exposure to the toxicant. In the kidney, 
reabsorption mechanisms are highly pH-dependent, as the generally 
acidic milieu of urine favors reabsorption of weak acids. However, 
altering urine pH can also be used to enhance excretion and thereby 
reduce toxicity. Acidification of urine favors the excretion of weak 
bases, whereas urinary alkalization will favor excretion of 
weak acids.
Toxicants delivered to the gastrointestinal tract by biliary 
excretion, intestinal secretion, or secretion from salivary glands and 
the pancreas are typically absorbed by diffusion across the intestinal 
mucosal. Enterohepatic circulation is a cycle in which a compound 
is excreted into bile to enter the intestine where it is modified to 
facilitate intestinal reabsorption rather than fecal elimination. This 
initiates a cycle in which the compound is reabsorbed in the intes-
tine, only to return to the liver where it is again excreted into bile, 
returns to the intestine, and is again reabsorbed. This cycle is fre-
quently observed with glucuronide conjugates because conjugation 
favors elimination into bile, with subsequent hydrolysis of the gluc-
uronide by β-glucuronidase activity of intestinal ­microorganisms, 
and the resulting aglycones are reabsorbed. Enterohepatic circula-
tion is especially important in bile acid homeostasis as nearly 95% 
of the bile acids in the gut return to the liver, and it is estimated 
that bile acids recycle about 20 times before being eliminated 
(Gonzalez, 2012).
Some glutathione (GSH) conjugates that are formed in liver 
are toxic to the kidney following hydrolysis of the GSH tripeptide 
by intestinal or pancreatic peptidases to liberate cysteine conju-
gated metabolites. Ultimately, the cysteine conjugates are further 
activated in the kidney to highly toxic moieties (Anders, 2004). The 
renal toxicity of trichloroethylene and hexachlorobutadiene occurs 
following GSH conjugation and illustrates this mechanism of reab-
sorption and activation of GSH conjugates (see Chap. 14).
The Balance between Metabolic Activation 
and Metabolic Detoxification Reactions 
Contributes to Toxicity
Although some xenobiotics are directly toxic, many others produce 
toxicity through metabolites formed following exposure. Table 3-1 
provides examples of compounds that are either directly toxic or

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
69
require metabolic activation, along with a brief summary of the 
mechanism of toxicity that develops. Biotransformation of xenobi-
otics that increases toxicity is referred to as metabolic activation or 
a toxification process. Metabolic activation is an important mecha-
nism of toxicity because it generates intermediates that adversely 
affect the microenvironment, alter cellular macromolecules and 
organelles, and/or stress endogenous protective mechanisms. As 
examples of these adverse outcomes, oxalic acid formed from 
ethylene glycol alters the microenvironment by causing systemic 
acidosis and hypocalcaemia and can obstruct renal tubules if it pre-
cipitates as calcium oxalate crystals. The organophosphate insec-
ticide parathion is oxidized to paraoxon and directly alters protein 
function by inhibiting acetylcholinesterase activity, and the roden-
ticide fluoroacetate is converted to fluorocitrate, a false substrate 
that inhibits aconitase. A final example is fialuridine, an antiviral 
drug that was withdrawn from clinical development because it was 
metabolized to a triphosphate metabolite that inhibited mitochon-
drial DNA synthesis by direct inhibition of DNA polymerase-γ. By 
this mechanism, fialuridine caused profound liver toxicity and in 
some cases death.
Another major feature of metabolic activation is that it often 
explains target organ specificity of a toxic outcome or contributes 
to species differences in toxicity. As an example, the fungal-derived 
toxicant, 4-ipomeanol, is metabolized to a reactive intermediate that 
in rodents is catalyzed by a cytochrome P450 enzyme, CYP4B1, an 
enzyme present in high levels in the lung. As a result, the reactive 
metabolite is mainly formed in rodent lungs where marked bron-
chiolar toxicity is observed. In contrast, ipomeanol is hepatotoxic in 
humans because it is metabolically activated in the liver rather than 
the lung (Parkinson et al., 2016). In this example, the same reactive 
metabolite causes toxicity, but species differences in the expression 
of the enzymes involved in forming the toxic metabolite determine 
the target organ affected.
Formation of Electrophiles  An electrophile is a molecule 
containing an electron-deficient atom with a partial or full posi-
tive charge that allows it to react by accepting electron pairs from 
electron-rich atoms in nucleophiles. Such reactants are often pro-
duced by insertion of an oxygen atom, which withdraws electrons 
from the atom it is attached to, making that atom electrophilic. 
This is the case when aldehydes, ketones, epoxides, arene oxides, 
sulfoxides, nitroso compounds, phosphonates, and acyl halides are 
formed. Consequently, a major outcome of metabolic activation is 
that electrophiles are often formed, and these metabolites are com-
monly involved in mechanisms of toxicity. Formation of many of 
these metabolites is catalyzed by cytochrome P450s (Chap. 6 pro-
vides extensive details and examples). Table 3-2 is also a broad 
list of toxic electrophilic metabolites, with details on the metabolic 
enzymes involved in their formation.
Cationic electrophiles may be produced as a result of hetero-
lytic bond cleavage. For example, 7,12-dimethylbenzanthracene and 
2-acetylaminofluorene, are hydroxylated to form benzylic alcohols 
and N-hydroxy arylamines (amides), respectively. These metabolites 
are then esterified, typically by sulfotransferases. Heterolytic cleav-
age of the C–O or N–O bonds of these esters results in a hydrosul-
fate anion and the concomitant formation of a benzylic carbonium 
ion or arylnitrenium ion, respectively (see Chap. 6). The antiestro-
gen tamoxifen undergoes similar activation by hydroxylation and 
sulfation to form a carbocationic metabolite. Dimethylnitrosamine 
(DMN) is C-hydroxylated by CYP2E1, after which it undergoes 
spontaneous decomposition and heterolytic cleavage of the C–N 
bond to form a methyl carbonium cation (+CH3), and this reac-
tive metabolite is the penultimate species involved in carcinogenic 
effects of DMN. In a similar process, the tobacco-specific nicotine-
derived nitrosamine ketone [(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-
1-butanone; referred to as NNK], the most potent carcinogen in 
tobacco, may generate either methyl carbonium or piridyloxobutyl 
carbonium cations, depending on the site of C-hydroxylation that 
initiates its decomposition.
Formation of Free Radicals  A free radical is a molecule or 
molecular fragment that contains one or more unpaired electrons 
in its outer orbital. Radicals are formed by three major actions, 
namely (1) accepting an electron, (2) losing an electron, or (3) 
homolytic fission of a covalent bond. These three reactions are 
summarized here.
	 1.	 Free radicals formed by accepting electrons: Fig. 3-3 illus-
trates the cycle by which xenobiotics can accept an electron 
from cellular reductases (such as cytochrome P450 reductase) 
to generate a free radical. In this figure, examples of paraquat 
and nitrofurantoin are presented. Once formed, free radicals 
typically transfer the extra electron to molecular oxygen, form-
ing a superoxide anion radical (O2
• ) and regenerating the parent 
xenobiotic, which is ready to gain a new electron. This cycle, 
referred to as “redox cycling,” ultimately amplifies the toxic 
response because one electron acceptor xenobiotic molecule 
can generate many O2
• molecules. The toxicity of O2
• results 
Table 3-1  
Types of Ultimate Toxicants and Their Sources
Direct-Acting Toxicants
Pb ions
Methylisocyanate
Tetrodotoxin
HCN
TCDD
CO
Toxicants Requiring Metabolic Activation
Amygdalin
→
HCN
Arsenate
→
Arsenite
Fluoroacetate
→
Fluorocitrate
Ethylene glycol
→
Oxalic acid
d-Limonene
→
d-Limonene-1,2-
epoxide
Hexane
→
2,5-Hexanedione
Acetaminophen 
→
N-Acetyl-p- 
benzoquinoneimine
CCl4
→
CCl3OO•
Benzo[a]pyrene (BP)
→
BP-7,8-diol-9,10-
epoxide
4-Ipomeanol
→
Enedial intermediate
Toxicants that Generate Reactive Oxygen or Nitrogen 
species
Hydrogen peroxide; diquat, 
doxorubicin, nitrofurantion
→
Hydroxyl radical (HO•)
Cr(V), Fe(II), Mn(II),  
Ni(II) 
Paraquat
O
NO
→
+
+
2
•
•
 
→
Peroxynitrite (ONOO−)
Endogenous Compounds as Ultimate Toxicants
Sulfonamides displace  
bilirubin
→
Bilirubin
CCl3OO• → unsaturated 
fatty acids
→
Lipid peroxyl or  
alkoxyl radicals  
and 4-hydroxynon-
2-enal
HO• → proteins 
→
Protein carbonyls

70
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
Table 3-2  
Toxicity Resulting from Formation of Electrophilic Metabolites
ELECTROPHILIC METABOLITE
PARENT TOXICANT
ENZYMES CATALYZING TOXICATION
TOXIC EFFECT
Nonionic electrophiles
Aldehydes, ketones
Acetaldehyde
Ethanol
ADH
Hepatotoxicity, cirrhosis
Zomepirac glucuronide  
(acylglucuronide)
Zomepirac
GT and isomerization
Multiple organs
2,5-Hexanedione
Hexane
CYP
Axonopathy
α,β-Unsaturated aldehydes, ketones
Acrolein
Allyl alcohol
ADH
Hepatic necrosis
Acrolein
Allyl amine
MAO
Vascular injury
Acrolein
Cyclophosphamide
CYP → sp. cl.
Hemorrhagic cystitis
Muconic aldehyde
Benzene
Multiple
Bone marrow injury
4-Hydroxynon-2-enal
Fatty acids
Lipid peroxidation
Oxidative stress
Quinones, quinoneimines
DES-4,4′-quinone
Diethylstilbestrol
Peroxidases
Carcinogenesis
N-Acetyl-p-benzoquinoneimine
Acetaminophen
CYP, peroxidases
Hepatic necrosis
Epoxides, arene oxides
Aflatoxin B1 8,9-epoxide
Aflatoxin B1
CYP
Carcinogenesis
2-Chlorooxirane
Vinyl chloride
CYP
Carcinogenesis
Bromobenzene 3,4-oxide
Bromobenzene
CYP
Hepatic necrosis
Benzo[a]pyrene 7,8-diol 9,10-oxide
Benzo[a]pyrene
CYP
Carcinogenesis
Sulfoxides
Thioacetamide S-oxide
Thioacetamide
FMO
Hepatic necrosis
Nitroso compounds
Nitroso-sulfamethoxazole
Sulfamethoxazole
CYP
Immune reaction
Phosphonates
Paraoxon
Parathion
CYP
ChE inhibition
Acyl halides
Phosgene
Chloroform
CYP
Hepatic necrosis
Trifluoroacetyl chloride
Halothane
CYP
Immune hepatitis
Thionoacyl halides
2,3,4,4-Tetrachlorothiobut-3-enoic 
acid chloride
Hexachlorobutadiene
Multiple enzymes
Renal tubular necrosis
GST → GGT → DP → CCβL
Thioketenes
Chloro-1,2,2-trichlorovinyl- 
thioketene
Hexachlorobutadiene
Multiple enzymes
Renal tubular necrosis
GST → GGT → DP → CCβL
Cationic electrophiles
Carbonium ions
Benzylic carbocation
7,12-Dimethylbenz-
anthracene
CYP → ST
Carcinogenesis
Carbonium cation
Diethylnitrosamine
CYP and spontaneous  
rearrangement
Carcinogenesis
Nitrenium ions
Arylnitrenium ion
AAF, DMAB
CYP → ST
Carcinogenesis
Sulfonium ions
Episulfonium ion
1,2-Dibromoethane
GST
Carcinogenesis
Metal ions
Mercury(II) ion
Elemental Hg
Catalase
Brain injury
Diaquo-diamino platinate(II)
Cisplatinum
Spontaneous rearrangement
Renal tubular necrosis
Abbreviations: AAF, 2-acetylaminofluorene; ADH, alcohol dehydrogenase; CCβL, cysteine conjugate β-lyase; ChE, cholinesterase; CYP, cytochrome 
P450; DMAB, N,N-dimethyl-4-aminoazobenzene; DP, dipeptidase; FMO, flavin-containing monooxygenase; GT, UDP-glucuronosyltransferase; GGT, 
gamma-glutamyltransferase; GST, glutathione S-transferase; ST, sulfotransferase.

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
71
from the fact that it is the initial compound in two important 
toxicity pathways, namely (1) formation of hydrogen peroxide 
(HOOH) and then hydroxyl radical (HO•) and (2) formation of 
peroxynitrite (ONOO−) and ultimately nitrogen dioxide (•NO2) 
and carbonate anion radical (CO2
•).
There are also endogenous sources of O2
•. This radical 
is generated in large quantities by NADPH oxidase (Nox) in 
activated macrophages and granulocytes during “respiratory 
burst,” and in smaller quantities by many other cells, such as 
endothelial cells and vascular smooth muscle cells (DiMeo 
et al., 2016). O2
•  is also produced by the mitochondrial elec-
tron transport chain, especially by complexes I and III (coen-
zyme Q: cytochrome c oxidoreductase and NADH:ubiquinone 
oxidoreductase, respectively).
	 2.	 Free radicals generated by losing electrons: Nucleophiles, 
which generate free radicals when they lose an electron, 
include compounds such as phenols, hydroquinones, amino-
phenols, aromatic amines, hydrazines, phenothiazines, and thi-
ols. These structures are prone to losing an electron to form free 
radicals in a reaction catalyzed by peroxidases. Some chemi-
cals, such as catechols and hydroquinones, may undergo two 
sequential oxidations, first producing semiquinone radicals by 
one electron loss followed by a second electron loss to form 
quinones. Quinones are both reactive electrophiles (Table 3-2) 
and electron acceptors with the capacity to initiate redox 
cycling or oxidation of thiols and NAD(P)H. Like peroxidases, 
oxyhemoglobin (Fe2+) can catalyze the oxidation of aminophe-
nols to semiquinone radicals and quinoneimines. This reaction 
concurrently oxidizes the Fe2+ to Fe3+ and forms methemo-
globin (MetHb) in the process. This oxidation reaction will 
increase the likelihood of toxicity because MetHb cannot carry 
oxygen.
	 3.	 Free radicals formed by homolytic bond fission: Reductive 
fission is a cleavage reaction in which two electrons in a bond 
are divided equally between the products. The hydroxyl radi-
cal (HO•) is a free radical generated by homolytic fission. For 
example, large amounts of HO• are formed from water with 
ionizing radiation. This mechanism is also exemplified by con-
version of CCl4 to the trichloromethyl free radical (Cl3C•) in 
a reaction catalyzed by an electron transfer from cytochrome 
P450 or the mitochondrial electron transport chain (reductive 
dehalogenation). The Fenton reaction describes the reductive 
homolytic fission of hydrogen peroxide (HOOH) to the harm-
ful HO• and the harmless HO− (hydroxide anion; Fig. 3-4). 
This reaction is a major toxicity mechanism for HOOH and 
its precursor O2
• that is catalyzed by transition metal ions, 
typically Fe(II), Cu(I), Cr(V), Ni(II), or Mn(II). HOOH is a 
direct or indirect by-product of several enzymatic reactions, 
including monoamine oxidase, acyl-coenzyme A oxidase, 
xanthine oxidase, aldehyde oxidase, and CYP2E1. It is also 
produced in large quantities by spontaneous or superoxide dis-
mutase (SOD)–catalyzed dismutation of O2
• . Importantly, the 
toxicity of chemicals that chelate transition metals including 
nitrilotriacetic acid and bleomycin involves Fenton chemistry. 
Furthermore, the pulmonary toxicity of inhaled mineral par-
ticles such as asbestos and silica is caused, at least in part, 
by the formation of HO• triggered by Fe ions on the particle 
surface.
Homolytic cleavage is also involved in free radical genera-
tion from peroxynitrite (ONOO−; Fig. 3-4). The facile reaction of 
ONOO− with CO2 yields nitroso-peroxycarbonate (ONOOCO2
−), 
which spontaneously homolyzes into two radicals, namely nitrogen 
dioxide (•NO2) and the carbonate anion radical (CO2
• ). Formation 
of ONOO− and the latter radicals are involved in the toxicity of O2
•  
and •NO. As •NO is the product of nitric oxide synthase (NOS), this 
mechanism is especially relevant in and around cells that express 
NOS constitutively (i.e., neurons and endothelial cells) as well as 
in cells that express the inducible form of NOS.
Formation of Nucleophiles  The formation of nucleophiles 
is a relatively uncommon mechanism for activating toxicants. 
Cyanide is formed from multiple sources including metabolism 
of amygdalin (laetrile, found in apricot or apple seeds) by bacte-
rial β-glucosidase (Table 3-1), from the epoxidation of acryloni-
trile with subsequent glutathione conjugation, and by thiol-induced 
decomposition of sodium nitroprusside. Carbon monoxide is a 
toxic metabolite of dihalomethanes that undergo oxidative deha-
logenation. Hydrogen selenide, a strong nucleophile and reduc-
tant, is formed from selenite by reaction with glutathione or other 
thiols.
Formation of Redox-Active Reactants  In addition to redox 
cycling already described, there are specific mechanisms that form 
redox-active reactants. For example, nitrite is formed from nitrate 
by bacterial reduction in the intestine or from esters of nitrous or 
nitric acids in reaction with glutathione, a reaction that can pro-
duce MetHb. Additionally, hydroxylated metabolites of dapsone, 
an antibiotic and primaquine, an antimalarial (dapsone hydroxyl-
amine and 5-hydroxyprimaquine, respectively) produce MetHb 
by a co-oxidation reaction. Xenobiotic radicals formed in redox 
cycling (e.g., those depicted in Fig. 3-3) as well as O2
• can reduce 
Fe3+ bound to ferritin and consequently release it as Fe2+ which 
catalyzes HO• formation (Fig. 3-4).
Overall, the most reactive metabolites are electrophiles and 
neutral or cationic free radicals. Similarly, free radicals with an 
extra electron (e.g., those shown in Fig. 3-3) cause damage by giv-
ing rise to the neutral HO• radical after the formation and subse-
quent homolytic cleavage of HOOH.
Detoxification  Biotransformation that prevents the formation 
of a toxic metabolite or eliminates it once formed is an impor-
tant mechanism that reduces the likelihood of toxicity. Any such 
process is called detoxification. Detoxification mechanisms are 
catalyzed mainly by biochemical mechanisms that include phase 
II biotransformation reactions such as glucuronidation, sulfa-
tion, and glutathione conjugation. These reactions, including the 
enzymes and cofactors required for activity are discussed in detail 
in Chap. 6. Examples of how detoxification mechanisms reduce the 
likelihood of toxicity are discussed here. Like many of the reac-
tions involved in metabolic activation, these reactions can differ 
½NADPH + H+
½NADP+
P450
Reductase
PQ2+
DR
NF
O2
O2•
PQ
DR
NF
•–
•–
•+
Figure 3-3.   Production of superoxide anion radical (O )
2
•  by paraquat 
(PQ2+), doxorubicin (DR), and nitrofurantoin (NF). Note that formation of 
O2
• is not the final step in the toxicity of these xenobiotics, because O2
• can 
yield the much more reactive hydroxyl radical (depicted in Fig. 3-4).

72
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
in organs or across species and can be important determinants of 
target organ toxicity and species differences in sensitivity to tox-
icity. Furthermore, an important concept in detoxification is that 
these processes, albeit protective, can be saturated. When protec-
tive mechanisms are overwhelmed and saturated, toxicity ensues.
Detoxification of Electrophiles  Specific mechanisms for 
the detoxification of electrophilic chemicals include epoxide 
­hydrolase-catalyzed biotransformation of epoxides and arene 
oxides to less toxic diols and dihydrodiols, respectively, and 
carboxylesterase-catalyzed hydrolysis of organophosphate ester 
pesticides. Quinones are reduced to hydroquinones by NAD(P)
H:quinone oxidoreductase (NQO1) and NRH:quinone oxidoreduc-
tase (NQO2). α,β-Unsaturated aldehydes (e.g., the lipid peroxida-
tion product 4-oxonon-2-enal) are reduced to alcohols or to their 
saturated derivative by carbonyl reductase, but they can also be 
oxidized to acids by aldehyde dehydrogenases.
An extremely important mechanism for the detoxification of 
electrophilic toxicants is conjugation with glutathione (Forman 
et al., 2009). Glutathione (GSH) is a tripeptide composed of gly-
cine, cysteine, and glutamic acid, with the glutamic acid linked to 
cysteine by a γ-carboxyl group (γ-glutamine-cysteinylglycine). It 
is a major non-protein sulfhydryl in most tissues, with constitu-
tive concentrations of 5 to 10 mM in the liver. Conjugation with 
GSH occurs spontaneously or can be catalyzed by glutathione 
S-transferases. From a mechanistic perspective, the functional activ-
ity of GSTs is a major determinant of species differences in toxicity, 
the most notable of which is the detoxification of epoxide interme-
diates of the fungal toxicant, aflatoxin B1 (AFB1). Very low doses 
of AFB1 are hepatotoxic and tumorigenic in rats but not in mice, 
even though both species form the reactive epoxide metabolites at 
similar rates. However, mice conjugate the epoxide metabolite with 
GSH up to 50-times faster than rats, thereby reducing the toxicity of 
the epoxide and limiting hepatotoxic and carcinogenic mechanisms. 
Some metal ions, including Ag+, Cd2+, Hg2+, and CH3Hg+, also 
readily react with and are detoxified by GSH conjugation.
Beyond biotransformation, covalent binding of electrophiles 
to proteins is a detoxification reaction provided the bound pro-
tein has no critical function and does not become a neoantigen 
or otherwise harmful. Carboxylesterases, for example, inactivate 
organophosphates not only by hydrolysis but also by covalent 
binding.
Detoxification of Free Radicals  Detoxification of O2
• is an 
important mechanism to prevent toxicity because it can otherwise 
be converted into much more reactive compounds. Detoxification 
of O2
• is achieved by the coordinated action that starts with super-
oxide dismutases (SOD), followed by reactions catalyzed by cata-
lase, glutathione peroxidase, or peroxiredoxin (Fig. 3-5). SODs are 
high-capacity enzymes located in the cytosol (Cu, Zn-SOD) and 
the mitochondria (Mn-SOD), which convert O2
• to HOOH (Fig. 
3-5). The HOOH is reduced to water by catalase in peroxisomes (or 
in the mitochondria in cardiac muscle), by glutathione peroxidases 
in the cytosol and mitochondria, and by peroxiredoxins in the cyto-
sol, mitochondria, and endoplasmic reticulum (Rhee et al., 2005). 
In contrast to O2
•, no enzyme eliminates HO•. Furthermore, HO• is 
ONOO–
CO2
ONOOCO–
2
–OH
•NO
•NO2
2H+
HOOH
O2
SOD
[HOOH]–
HO•
Fe(II), Cu(I), Mn(II), Cr(V), Ni(II)
Fe(III), Cu(II), Mn(III), Cr(VI), Ni(III)
O2
•–
CO3
•–
O2
•–
Fenton reaction
Figure 3-4.   Two pathways for toxicity of superoxide anion radical O2
• from conversion of ONOO− and HOOH (nonradical products) to •NO2,CO3
•, and HO• 
(radicals). Conversion of O2
•  to HOOH is spontaneous or is catalyzed by SOD. Homolytic cleavage of HOOH to hydroxyl radical and hydroxyl ion (Fenton 
reaction) is catalyzed by the transition metal ions shown. Hydroxyl radical is the ultimate toxicant for xenobiotics that form O2
•. In the other pathway, O2
• reacts 
avidly with nitric oxide (•NO), the product of •NO synthase (NOS), forming peroxynitrite (ONOO−). Spontaneous reaction of ONOO− with carbon dioxide 
(CO2) yields nitrosoperoxy carbonate that with homolytic cleavage forms nitrogen dioxide (•NO2) and carbonate anion radical (CO2
•). All three radical products 
indicated in this figure are oxidants, whereas •NO2 is also a nitrating agent.
2H+
HOOH
O2
SOD
GPX
PRX
2GSH
GSSG
2HOH
HOOH
O2
CAT
2HOH
Prx-(SH)2
PrxS2
2HOH
O2
•–
O2
•–
Figure 3-5.   Detoxification of superoxide anion radical (O )
2
• and HOOH. 
Superoxide dismutase (SOD) converts O2
•  to HOOH, which is further 
detoxified by glutathione peroxidase (GPX), peroxiredoxin (Prx-(SH)2), 
and catalase (CAT). When GPX reduces HOOH, it forms glutathione 
disulfide (GSSG), which is reduced back to GSH by glutathione reductase 
(requires NADPH; see Fig. 3-6). When Prx-(SH)2 reduces HOOH, its cata-
lytic thiol group (–R–S–H) is oxidized to a sulfenic acid group (–R–S–OH), 
which in turn reacts with another SH group of Prx, forming HOH and Prx 
disulfide (PrxS2). Finally, catalase converts HOOH into two moles of water. 
Catalase is a high-capacity system, whereas Prx and GPX can be saturated 
at high concentrations of HOOH.

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
73
extremely reactive, with such a short half-life (10−9 seconds), that 
affords little time for the HO• to reach and react with antioxidants. 
Therefore, the only effective protection against HO• is to prevent its 
formation by elimination of its precursor, HOOH, via conversion 
to water.
ONOO− (which is not a free radical oxidant) has a half-life of 
about 1 second and is significantly more stable than HO•. However, 
it can react with CO2 to form reactive free radicals (Fig. 3-4). 
Glutathione peroxidase and peroxiredoxins can detoxify ONOO− 
by reduction to nitrite (ONO−) the same way they reduce HOOH to 
water (Fig. 3-5). In addition, ONOO− reacts with oxyhemoglobin, 
heme-containing peroxidases, and albumin, all of which could be 
important sinks for ONOO−. Furthermore, a significant mecha-
nism for preventing ONOO− buildup is to eliminate its precursors. 
That is, ONOO− toxicity can be reduced by scavenging •NO by its 
reaction with oxyhemoglobin (forming metHb and nitrate) and by 
decreasing O2
• levels through the action of SODs.
Peroxidase-generated free radicals are eliminated by electron 
transfer from glutathione. This results in the oxidation of glutathi-
one, which is reversed by NADPH-dependent glutathione reductase 
(Fig. 3-6). This pathway illustrates the important role that gluta-
thione plays in the detoxification of both electrophiles and free 
radicals.
Detoxification of Nucleophiles  Nucleophiles are generally 
detoxified by conjugation at the nucleophilic functional group. 
Hydroxylated compounds are conjugated by sulfation, glucuroni-
dation, or rarely by methylation, whereas thiols are methylated or 
glucuronidated and amines and hydrazines are acetylated. These 
reactions prevent peroxidase-catalyzed conversion of the nucleo-
philes to free radicals and biotransformation of phenols, amino-
phenols, catechols, and hydroquinones to electrophilic quinones 
and quinoneimines. One alternative mechanism for the elimina-
tion of thiols, amines, and hydrazines is oxidation by flavin-
containing monooxygenases (see Chap. 6). Finally, a specific 
nucleophile detoxification mechanism is the biotransformation of 
cyanide to thiocyanate which is catalyzed by either of two sulf-
urtransferase enzymes, namely rhodanese or mercaptopyruvate 
sulfurtransferase.
Detoxification of Toxicants with No Functional Groups  
Biotransformation of compounds such as benzene and tolu-
ene occurs in two phases, wherein oxidative reactions introduce 
functional groups (i.e., hydroxyl or carboxyl moiety), a reaction 
most often by cytochrome P450 enzymes, after which the oxida-
tive metabolites are conjugated by glucuronidation or sulfation 
reactions. These processes are referred to as Phase I and Phase II 
metabolism, respectively. With some exceptions, the final prod-
ucts are inactive, highly hydrophilic organic acids that are readily 
excreted. Carbonyl reduction of ketones, aldehydes, and esters is 
catalyzed by at least five enzymes (e.g., carbonyl reductase, 3 mem-
bers of aldo-keto reductase superfamily, and 11-β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase-1). This enzyme reaction initiates detoxification 
of the potent carcinogen NNK, forming a nicotine-derived nitro-
samine alcohol that is readily glucuronidated and excreted into 
urine. Numerous NNK metabolites are excreted in urine and have 
been used as biomarkers of NNK exposure and lung cancer risk 
assessment, thereby demonstrating how understanding detoxifi-
cation mechanisms can be applied to predicting adverse effects 
(Yuan et al., 2014).
Detoxification of Protein Toxins  It is generally thought that 
extracellular and intracellular proteases are involved in the inacti-
vation of toxic polypeptides. Several toxins found in venoms, such 
as α- and β-bungarotoxin, erabutoxin, and phospholipase, contain 
intramolecular disulfide bonds that are required for their activ-
ity. These proteins are inactivated by thioredoxin, an endogenous 
dithiol protein that reduces the essential disulfide bond.
When Detoxification Fails  Although detoxification reac-
tions are generally protective, there are many mechanisms of 
toxicity that ensue when detoxification reactions are inadequate. 
The most important reason for such failure is that the exposure 
to the toxicant overwhelms vital detoxification processes. This 
will occur typically in a dose-dependent manner and results from 
saturation of detoxification enzymes, consumption of essential 
co-substrates, or depletion of cellular antioxidants such as GSH, 
ascorbic acid, and α-tocopherol. Thus, the dose-response rela-
tionship is an important quantitative aspect underlying most tox-
icity mechanisms. The exception to the fundamental principle that 
mechanisms of toxicity are dose related is idiosyncratic toxicity 
(discussed later in this chapter). Species differences in the abil-
ity to detoxify reactive compounds can also contribute to marked 
qualitative differences in toxic outcome even when exposures are 
similar, and examples of such differences are described through-
out this chapter.
Other notable examples of detoxification “failure” occur when 
a reactive toxicant inactivates a detoxicating enzyme. Some conju-
gation reactions that detoxify a reactive intermediate, are reversed 
to initiate toxicity. For example, 2-naphthylamine is N-hydroxylated 
and glucuronidated in liver, with the glucuronide eliminated in 
urine. However, in the urinary bladder, the glucuronide is hydro-
lyzed, and the released arylhydroxylamine is converted to the reac-
tive electrophilic arylnitrenium ion. Ultimately, 2-naphthylamine 
causes bladder cancer because of this local activation of a previ-
ously detoxified metabolite. In another example, isocyanates and 
isothiocyanates form labile GSH conjugates from which they can be 
released. Thus, methylisocyanate readily forms a GSH conjugate in 
POD
GR
2CPZ
2CPZ•+
2GS–
2GS•
2H+
GSSG
2GSH
NADPH + H+
NADP+
HOOH
2HOH
Figure 3-6.   Detoxification of peroxidase (POD)–generated free radicals such as chlorpromazine free radical (CPZ )
•
+  by glutathione (GSH). The by-products 
are glutathione thiyl radical (GS•) and glutathione disulfide (GSSG), from which GSH is regenerated by glutathione reductase (GR), a reaction that requires 
NADPH.

74
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
the lung after inhalation, and once formed, this conjugate is distrib-
uted to other tissues, where the reactive electrophilic parent com-
pound may be regenerated.
STEP 2: REACTION OF THE ULTIMATE 
TOXICANT WITH THE TARGET MOLECULE
Toxicity is initiated by a reaction between the ultimate toxicant and 
its target molecule (step 2a in Fig. 3-1), with subsequent events 
leading to dysfunction or injury. The determinants of interaction of 
the ultimate toxicant with the target molecule include (1) the attri-
butes of target molecules, (2) the types of reactions between ulti-
mate toxicants and target molecules, and (3) the effects of toxicants 
on the target molecules as illustrated in Fig. 3-7. Additionally, some 
toxicities result from alteration of the biological (micro)environ-
ment (step 2b in Fig. 3-1) in which critical endogenous molecules, 
cell organelles, cells, and organs function are perturbed.
Attributes of Target Molecules
There are three attributes of a target molecule that determine 
whether it is associated with or responsible for toxicity, and these 
critical elements are the ability to (1) react with the target and 
adversely affect its function, (2) reach an effective concentration at 
the target site, and (3) alter the target in a way that is mechanisti-
cally related to toxicity. This chapter will not present a compre-
hensive inventory of potential target molecules. However, the most 
prevalent and toxicologically relevant targets are macromolecules 
such as nucleic acids (especially DNA), proteins, and membrane 
lipids.
Although any endogenous compound may be a target, a key 
requisite is that the target molecule must be accessible to a suffi-
ciently high concentration of the ultimate toxicant. For example, 
direct interaction with thyroperoxidase, an enzyme involved in thy-
roid hormone synthesis, also converts some nucleophilic xenobiotics 
(such as methimazole, amitrole, and resorcinol) into reactive free 
radicals that inactivate thyroperoxidase. Such compounds reduce 
thyroxine (T4) levels through this inactivation and cause hypothy-
roidism. However, reactive metabolites may also diffuse from their 
site of formation to interact with more distant targets. For example, 
the arylnitrenium ion metabolite of N-methyl-4-aminoazobenzene 
is formed in the cytoplasm, but readily targets nuclear DNA. 
Similarly, vinyl chloride epoxide, formed in hepatocytes from vinyl 
chloride, reacts with DNA in neighboring endothelial cells, and this 
interaction is an initiating event in vinyl chloride-induced hepatic 
hemangiosarcoma.
Not all targets for chemicals contribute to the harmful effects. 
For example, carbon monoxide (CO) is toxic by preventing oxy-
gen to bind to ferro(Fe2+)hemoglobin, but CO also associates with 
the ferrous iron in cytochrome P450 with little or no consequence. 
Additionally, covalent binding to proteins, generally considered 
to be harmful, may be without adverse consequences or may be 
a form of detoxification if binding spares toxicologically relevant 
targets. For example, covalent binding of organophosphate insecti-
cides to plasma cholinesterase is a significant protective mechanism 
that counteracts phosphorylation of acetylcholinesterase. Similarly, 
although covalent binding of toxicants to various intracellular 
and structural proteins has been demonstrated, it is often uncer-
tain which modified protein(s) is/are toxicologically relevant. In 
this regard, comparison of covalent binding profiles between acet-
aminophen (APAP; 4′-hydroxyacetanilide) and its non-­hepatotoxic 
regioisomer, 3′-hydroxyacetanilide, was a strategy by which modi-
fications of proteins likely to be causally related to liver injury were 
identified. That is, covalent binding to proteins observed with the 
non-hepatotoxic isomer were considered to be inconsequential, 
whereas covalent binding to proteins by APAP that differed from 
the non-toxic isomer were more likely to contribute to toxicity 
(Cohen et al., 1997; Jaeschke and Bajt, 2006).
Types of Reactions
The major interactions between the toxicant and target molecules 
are noncovalent or covalent in nature, but other reactions including 
hydrogen abstraction, electron transfer, or enzymatic reaction can 
occur.
Noncovalent Binding  Examples of noncovalent binding that 
can lead to adverse effects include binding of strychnine to glycine 
receptors on motor neurons in the spinal cord, TCDD to the aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), saxitoxin to sodium channels, and 
warfarin to vitamin K 2,3-epoxide reductase. Non-covalent bind-
ing is attributed to apolar interactions or the formation of hydrogen 
and ionic bonds between toxicants and their targets including mem-
brane or intracellular receptors, ion channels, and some enzymes. 
Such forces also are responsible for the intercalation of chemicals 
such as acridine yellow and doxorubicin into the double helix of 
DNA. In most cases, noncovalent binding is reversible because of 
the comparatively low bonding energy. For example, compounds 
that bind to α2u-globulin to cause renal toxicity (described below), 
bind in a noncovalent manner by fitting into a hydrophobic binding 
pocket of this protein.
Covalent Binding  Covalent binding is of great toxicological 
importance because binding is essentially irreversible and perma-
nently alters endogenous molecules (Leung et al., 2012). Covalent 
adduct formation is common with electrophilic toxicants because 
they react with nucleophilic atoms in proteins and nucleic acids. 
In general, soft electrophiles prefer to react with soft nucleophiles 
(low charge-to-radius ratio in both), whereas hard electrophiles 
react more readily with hard nucleophiles (high charge-to-radius 
ratio in both). For example, a hard electrophile such as alkyl car-
bonium ion binds to similarly hard nucleophiles such as the oxy-
gen in nucleic acids. Metal ions such as silver and mercury are 
soft electrophiles that react covalently with soft nucleophiles, par-
ticularly thiol groups. Conversely, lithium, calcium, and barium 
metals are hard electrophiles that react preferentially with hard 
nucleophiles including carboxylate and phosphate anions. Metals 
Outcomes
• Dysfunction
• Destruction
• Neoantigen
  formation
Reactions
• Noncovalent binding
• Covalent binding
• H2 abstraction
• Electron transfer
• Enzymatic
Target Attributes
• Reactivity
• Accessibility
• Function
ULTIMATE
TOXICANT
TARGET
MOLECULE
Figure 3-7.   Reaction of the ultimate toxicant with the target molecule: 
the second step in the development of toxicity. The figure illustrates that the 
properties of the toxic molecule can influence the reaction with its target, 
the diversity of reactions that can occur with the target, and following the 
interaction of the toxicant with its target, the types of outcomes that are 
associated with the toxicity.

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
75
falling between these two extremes, such as chromium, zinc, and 
lead, exhibit universal reactivity with nucleophiles.
The covalent reaction between HOOH (a soft electrophile) and 
protein thiol groups is of special biological significance because it 
produces protein sulfenic acid (Prot-S-OH) as illustrated here:
Prot-SH
HOOH
Prot-S-OH
HOH
+
→
+
However, the S atom in a protein–sulfenic acid is electrophilic and 
will further react with another thiol group of the same protein, a 
different protein or glutathione (GSH), resulting in formation of an 
intramolecular disulfide, intermolecular disulfide, or a mixed disul-
fide of the protein and glutathione, respectively:
Prot -S-OH
Prot -SH
Prot -S-S-Prot
HOH
1
2
1
2
+
→
+
Prot-S-OH
GSH
Prot-S-SG
HOH
+
→
+
Hydroperoxides, including lipid hydroperoxides (LOOH; 
see Fig. 3-8), may also produce protein–sulfenic acids, protein–­
disulfides, and glutathionylated proteins, which represent 
­posttranslational modifications with a role in redox signaling 
(Forman et al., 2009).
Hydrogen Abstraction  Neutral free radicals, such as those gen-
erated in reactions depicted in Fig. 3-4, readily abstract H atoms 
from endogenous compounds, converting them into radicals. 
Abstraction of hydrogen from thiols (R-SH) creates thiyl radicals 
(R-S•), which on recombination with HO• forms sulfenic acids 
(R-S-OH) as described above. Radicals also remove hydrogen from 
CH2 groups of amino acids and convert them to carbonyls. These 
carbonyls can react covalently with amines, forming cross-links 
with other proteins or DNA. Abstraction of hydrogen from fatty 
acids produces lipid radicals and initiates lipid peroxidation.
Electron Transfer  As described earlier, some chemicals can 
oxidize the Fe2+ in hemoglobin to Fe3+, producing metHb, which 
is toxic by its reduced oxygen carrying capacity. Nitrite can oxi-
dize ferrous iron in hemoglobin, whereas dapsone hydroxylamine, 
5-hydroxy primaquine, and phenylhydrazine are co-oxidized with 
oxyhemoglobin, forming metHb and HOOH.
Enzymatic Reactions  Snake venoms contain enzymes that cause 
toxicity by generalized proteolytic degradation of many biomole-
cules. Many other toxins in nature inhibit important enzymes func-
tions to elicit toxicity. For example, the plant toxins ricin and abrin 
are N-glycosidases, and they hydrolyze a specific glycosidic bond 
in ribosomal RNA to block protein synthesis. Botulinum toxin is a 
Zn-protease that hydrolyzes the fusion proteins required for exocy-
tosis of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine preventing its release and 
leading to paralysis. The lethal factor component of anthrax toxin 
is also a Zn-protease, which inactivates mitogen-­activated protein 
kinase kinase (MAP2K), an integral kinase involved in many signal 
transduction pathways (discussed below). A final example of enzy-
matic reaction-mediated toxicity are bacterial toxins that catalyze 
the transfer of ADP-ribose from NAD+ to specific proteins. This 
mechanism is the basis for how diphtheria toxin blocks the function 
of elongation factor 2 (EF2) to inhibit protein synthesis.
This brief summary illustrates that chemical reactivity is a 
major feature by which most toxicants act on endogenous mole-
cules. It is also possible that more than one type of reactivity may 
occur with target molecules. For example, quinones are electron 
acceptors and initiate thiol oxidation or free radical reactions that 
lead to lipid peroxidation, but they may also act as soft electrophiles 
and bind covalently to protein thiols. Similarly lead ions are soft 
electrophiles that form coordinate covalent bonds with critical thiol 
groups in δ-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase to inhibit heme synthe-
sis. However, lead also can be a hard electrophile when it displaces 
calcium from membrane channels.
Effects of Toxicants on Target Molecules
The three major effects resulting from interaction of the ultimate 
toxicant with endogenous molecules are dysfunction of the targets, 
destruction of the target with complete loss of function, or altered 
immune responses to a modified target.
Dysfunction of Target Molecules  Some toxicants activate 
protein target molecules, mimicking endogenous ligands. This is 
the case for many drugs that are designed to be agonists of spe-
cific functions. Morphine activates opioid receptors, isoproterenol 
is an agonist of β2 adrenergic receptors, and clofibrate is an ago-
nist of the peroxisome proliferator–activated receptor α (PPARα). 
Although they are useful clinically, toxicity from these compounds 
is usually observed as exaggerated pharmacology, and the mecha-
nism of toxicity is a direct effect of receptor activation. Other 
non-drug examples are phorbol esters and lead ions that stimulate 
protein kinase C (PKC), an important pathway that regulates DNA 
replication and cell proliferation.
HO•
H2O
Lipid (LH), linolenic acid residue
Lipid radical (L•)
O2
Lipid radical, conjugated diene
Lipid peroxyl radical (LOO•)
LH
L•
Fe(II)
Fe(III)
HO–
Lipid hydroperoxide (LOOH)
Lipid alkoxyl radical (LO•)
Hydrogen abstraction
Diene conjugation
Oxygen addition
Hydrogen abstraction
Fenton reaction
Fragmentation
H H
R
[R = –(CH2)7–CO–]
R
•
H
R
H
R
H
HOO
R
H
•O
LH
L•
Lipid aldehyde
Ethane
R
H
O
R
• H
H
H
H
•
H
H
H
H
–O
•O
Figure 3-8.   Lipid peroxidation initiated by the hydroxyl radical (HO•), 
illustrating the many biochemical intermediates formed in this process. 
Many of the products, such as the radicals and α,β-unsaturated aldehydes, 
are reactive, whereas others, such as ethane, are nonreactive indicators of 
lipid peroxidation.

76
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
More commonly, chemicals inhibit the function of target mole-
cules. Several xenobiotics, such as atropine, curare, and strychnine, 
block neurotransmitter receptors by attaching to the ligand-binding 
sites, whereas others interfere with the function of ion channels. 
Tetrodotoxin (described earlier as a direct-acting toxicant) and saxi-
toxin inhibit opening of the voltage-activated sodium channels in 
neuronal membranes, whereas DDT and the pyrethroid insecticides 
inhibit their closure. Some toxicants block ion transporters, oth-
ers inhibit mitochondrial electron transport complexes, and many 
inhibit enzymes. Chemicals that bind to tubulin (e.g., vinblastine, 
colchicine, paclitaxel, trivalent arsenic) or actin (e.g., cytochalasin 
B or phalloidin) impair the assembly and/or disassembly of these 
important cytoskeletal proteins.
Protein function is impaired when conformation or structure 
is altered by interaction with the toxicant. Many proteins possess 
critical moieties, often thiol groups, which are essential for cata-
lytic activity or correct assembly of macromolecular complexes. 
Consequently, these proteins are sensitive to covalent and/or oxi-
dative modification of their thiol groups, and dysfunction causes 
impaired maintenance of the cellular energy and metabolic homeo-
stasis. There are numerous examples of enzymes whose ­function 
is inhibited by thiol-reactive compounds including pyruvate 
dehydrogenase, DNA repair enzymes (O6-methylguanine-DNA-
methyltransferase), ubiquitin-activating and ubiquitin-conjugating 
enzymes (E1 and E2, respectively), protein tyrosine phosphatases 
(PTPs), the lipid phosphatase PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homo-
logue), and caspases. Another extremely important thiol-reactive 
protein is Keap1, an intracellular partner of Nrf2. Covalent and/
or oxidative modification of thiol groups in Keap1 triggers the 
adaptive, cytoprotective electrophile stress response (discussed in 
detail later in this chapter). Finally, some thiol-reactive and oxidant 
chemicals (acrolein, methyl isocyanate, and chloroacetophenone) 
and corrosive gases (phosgene, chloropicrin, and chlorine) react 
with cysteine thiol groups of the TRPA1 receptor (transient recep-
tor potential cation channel A1) in sensory neurons, and this interac-
tion directly elicits irritation, pain, lacrimation, bronchial secretion, 
sneezing, coughing, and bronchospasm. If exposure is moderate, 
these responses are alerting and protective, but they become inca-
pacitating and detrimental when exaggerated at high exposure 
(Bessac and Jordt, 2010).
An extremely important mechanism of toxicity involves cova-
lent binding of chemicals to DNA that causes nucleotide mispair-
ing during replication. For example, covalent binding of aflatoxin 
8,9-oxide to N-7 of guanine causes it to pair with adenine rather 
than cytosine, forming an incorrect codon and consequently an 
incorrect amino acid in the protein. Such events are involved in 
aflatoxin-induced mutations of the Ras proto-oncogene and p53 
tumor suppressor gene that contribute to liver tumor development 
(discussed below). 8-Hydroxyguanine and 8-hydroxyadenine are 
produced by oxidative stress and particularly by binding of HO• to 
the DNA template, and these mutagenic bases also cause mispair-
ing and codon changes to alter amino acid sequences (Suzuki and 
Kamiya, 2016).
Destruction of Target Molecules  In addition to adduct for-
mation, toxicants alter the primary structure of endogenous mol-
ecules by means of cross-linking and ­fragmentation. Bifunctional 
electrophiles, such as 2,5-hexanedione, carbon disulfide, acro-
lein, 4-oxonon-2-enal, 4-hydroxynon-2-enal, and nitrogen mus-
tard alkylating agents, cross-link cytoskeletal proteins, DNA, 
or DNA with proteins. HOOH and hydroxyl radicals can also 
induce cross-linking by converting proteins into reactive elec-
trophiles (e.g., protein sulfenic acids and protein carbonyls, 
respectively), which react with a nucleophilic group (e.g., thiol, 
amine) in another macromolecule. Cross-linking imposes both 
structural and functional constraints on the linked molecules to 
alter function.
Free radicals such as Cl3COO• and HO• initiate peroxidative 
degradation of lipids by hydrogen abstraction from fatty acids. The 
lipid radical (L•) is then converted successively to lipid peroxyl 
radical (LOO•) by oxygen fixation, lipid hydroperoxide (LOOH) 
by hydrogen abstraction, and lipid alkoxyl radical (LO•) by the 
Fenton reaction (Fig. 3-8). Subsequent fragmentation gives rise 
to hydrocarbons such as ethane and reactive aldehydes such as 
4-hydroxynon-2-enal and malondialdehyde (MDA). Thus, lipid 
peroxidation is an important mechanism of toxicity because it not 
only destroys lipids in cellular membranes but also generates addi-
tional endogenous toxic free radicals (e.g., LOO• and LO•) and elec-
trophiles (e.g., 4-oxonon-2-enal and 4-hydroxynon-2-enal). These 
substances readily react with additional targets, such as membrane 
proteins, or diffuse intracellularly to more distant molecules includ-
ing DNA. Similarly, F2-isoprostanes are stable peroxidation prod-
ucts of arachidonic acid that are not only sensitive markers of lipid 
peroxidation but also potent pulmonary and renal vasoconstrictors 
(Basu, 2004). Numerous biomarkers have been identified based on 
this mechanistic understanding of lipid peroxidation, including end 
products of the reaction such as MDA along with lipid hydroxides 
such as hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (HETE) and hydroxycholes-
terols (Niki, 2014).
Several forms of DNA fragmentation are observed in toxic-
ity. Single-strand breaks (SSB) are typically initiated by hydroxyl 
radicals that cause H abstraction from deoxyribose in DNA and 
ultimately cleave the phosphodiester bond. Double-strand breaks 
(DSB), which are typically more toxic or lethal to the affected cell, 
are caused by multiple hydroxyl radical attacks on a short length of 
DNA, such as those that occur after ionizing radiation.
Neoantigen Formation  Haptens are small molecules that can 
elicit an immune response only when attached to a larger carrier, 
usually a protein. The protein carrier, often albumin, does not cause 
an immune response by itself. Accordingly, an immune-mediated 
mechanism of toxicity can occur after modification of proteins by 
toxicants. Some chemicals (e.g., penicillin, dinitrochlorobenzene, 
and nickel ion) are sufficiently reactive to bind to proteins spon-
taneously. Others are activated by biotransformation (Sullivan 
et al., 2015), as exemplified by CYP2E-catalyzed metabolism of 
halothane. In this example, trifluoroacetyl chloride is formed from 
halothane and binds as a hapten to microsomal and cell surface 
proteins in the liver, inducing a hepatitis-like immune reaction in 
sensitive patients. Another example of hapten-mediated immune 
activation is urushiol, which is the allergen found in poison ivy. 
Urushiol undergoes auto-oxidation in the skin to generate a reactive 
quinone that is the actual hapten.
Haptenized proteins released from cells may evoke antibody-
mediated (humoral) and/or T-cell-mediated (cellular) immune 
response (see Chap. 12). In the humoral response, B cells bind 
the complete antigen through membrane receptors and associate 
with T-helper cells (Th; CD4+). Antigen binding and cell surface 
costimulatory molecules on Th cells induce differentiation of B 
cells into plasma cells that synthesize and secrete antibody. By 
binding to the antigen, the antibody facilitates destruction of the 
antigen by phagocytosis. Although protective in nature, this reac-
tion can lead to harmful consequences, as is the case when penicil-
lin-bound haptens react with IgE-type antibodies on the surface of 
mast cells to trigger release of mast cell mediators (e.g., histamine 
and leukotrienes), which in turn may cause bronchoconstriction,

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
77
vasodilation, and plasma exudation. If not treated quickly, this is 
a serious adverse response that can lead to anaphylactic shock and 
possibly death.
An important toxic response seen with mechanisms of neo-
antigen formation is contact dermatitis. This reaction involves T 
cells as the main mediators, and there are two major phases of such 
reactions. In the sensitization phase, Th cells are activated by sig-
nals coming from antigen-presenting cells (APCs), including mac-
rophages and dendritic cells. APCs phagocytose the haptenized 
protein and then migrate to lymph nodes. APCs process the antigen 
into peptides, after which the processed antigen is externalized, 
and transferred to the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) 
on its surface. On reaching the lymph node, the APC presents 
the MHC-bound peptide to the T-cell receptor (TCR) of Th cells, 
and cell surface coactivator molecules (e.g., CD80 and CD86) on 
APCs bind to their counterparts (e.g., CD28) on T cells. This sig-
nal verifies that the antigen detected is foreign, and if it doesn’t 
occur, the T cell becomes functionally inert (anergic). However, 
on receiving both signals, the Th cells become specific to a specific 
antigen, and the Th cells express IL-2 to stimulate T-cell prolifera-
tion, differentiation, and release into the circulation. The second 
phase is the elicitation phase which begins on reexposure to the 
allergen. Antigen-specific T cells enter the exposure site (e.g., the 
skin), releasing IL-2 and other cytokines to activate cytotoxic T 
cells (CD8+) along with adhesion molecules at the site of allergen 
contact. While this response is protective against virus-infected 
cells and tumor cells, it causes inflammation and injury in cells 
containing xenobiotic neoantigens. This model also describes how 
contact allergens, such as nickel and urushiols, cause contact der-
matitis. By understanding the mechanism of action, methods to 
detect and predict compounds that could be contact allergens have 
been developed (see details of the local lymph node assay; see 
Chap. 12).
In addition to the above-described classical mechanism of neo-
antigen-initiated APC-mediated T-cell activation, xenobiotics may 
cause T-cell activation by more direct ways. For example, Ni ions 
may not only form coordinate covalent bonds with proteins, making 
them neoantigens, but also cross-link MHC of APC with the TCR 
of T cells, activating the latter. Moreover, some drugs (e.g., sulfa-
methoxazole) are converted into adduct-forming metabolites (e.g., 
nitroso-sulfamethoxazole) that trigger T-cell activation by APC acti-
vation, but also stimulate the TCR directly, without involvement 
of APCs.
Serious toxicities, including drug-induced lupus and agranulo-
cytosis, are thought to be mediated by immune reactions triggered 
by drug–protein adducts. The causative chemicals are typically 
nucleophiles, such as aromatic amines (e.g., aminopyrine, clozap-
ine, procainamide, and sulfonamides), hydrazines (e.g., hydralazine 
and isoniazid), and thiols (e.g., propylthiouracil, methimazole, and 
captopril). These substances can be oxidized by myeloperoxidase 
of granulocytes and monocytes or by the reactive oxygen/nitrogen 
species (ROS/RNS) system to produce HO•, ONOO−, or hypochlo-
rous acid (HOCl) and form reactive metabolites that bind to the 
surface proteins of these cells, making them antigens (Uetrecht and 
Naisbitt, 2013). The reactive metabolites may also activate mono-
cytes and thus promote additional immune reactions.
There is increasing evidence that some forms of liver tox-
icity, particularly those considered to be idiosyncratic in nature, 
may involve immune-mediated mechanisms (see the section 
“Idiosyncratic Toxicity”). Briefly, immune cells in liver protect the 
organ from the many foreign compounds it detoxifies (a concept 
called immune tolerance). However, activation of the immune sys-
tem by haptens or other antigens reduces or eliminates immune 
tolerance and toxicity can ensue. Toxicity observed with clinical 
use of immunomodulatory checkpoint inhibitors, such as pro-
grammed death receptor-1 (PD-1), is associated with activation 
of the immune system and loss of self-tolerance that develops by 
blocking the normal inhibitory signal of PD-1. Although these 
agents are useful in treating various types of cancer, they are also 
associated with a spectrum of immune-related toxicities, with tar-
get organs including liver, lung, and gastrointestinal tract (Day and 
Hansen, 2016).
Toxicity Not Initiated by Reaction  
with Target Molecules
Some xenobiotics not only interact with a specific endogenous target 
molecule to induce toxicity but also may alter the biological micro-
environment (see step 2b in Fig. 3-1). There are three important 
examples of toxicity mediated through changes in the microenvi-
ronment. First, solvents and detergents directly alter the lipid phase 
of cell membranes and destroy transmembrane solute gradients that 
are essential to cell functions. Second, chemicals that alter H+ ion 
concentrations in the aqueous biophase alter the microenvironment 
by disrupting essential acid–base balance. Examples include acids 
and substances biotransformed to acids, such as methanol and eth-
ylene glycol. Furthermore, uncouplers of oxidative phosphoryla-
tion such as 2,4-dinitrophenol and pentachlorophenol dissociate 
their phenolic protons in the mitochondrial matrix to dissipate the 
proton gradient that drives ATP synthesis. Such chemicals cause 
ATP depletion and death can ensue very quickly. Another impor-
tant microenvironment change caused by acid–base imbalance is 
elicited by numerous cationic amphiphilic drugs (e.g., chloroquine 
and amiodarone) that diffuse into lysosomes and accumulate there 
after being protonated at their amino groups. These compounds 
disrupt the normal processing of phospholipids and cause unique 
vesicular patterns in lysosomes that is the histopathologic hall-
mark of phospholipidosis. Finally, some xenobiotics cause harm 
merely by occupying a site or space. For example, some chemicals 
(e.g., the ethylene glycol–derived calcium oxalate) form water-
insoluble precipitates in renal tubules. Another important example 
of an obstructive mechanism of toxicity is the renal tubular block-
age resulting from crystals formed by melamine and its derivative 
cyanuric acid. Precipitation of melamine and cyanuric acid crys-
tals was established as the mechanism of acute renal failure and 
death in dogs and cats fed melamine-contaminated pet food, and a 
similar toxicity occurred in infants fed a melamine-contaminated 
formula. In this case, the mechanism of toxicity was established by 
first confirming that acute renal failure could be reproduced in rats 
dosed with melamine (Dobson et al., 2008). Histopathologic evalu-
ation of the kidney provided microscopic evidence of crystalline 
inclusions in proximal tubules capable of causing obstruction, and 
analysis of the crystal content by high-performance liquid chro-
matography-mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS) and Fourier transform 
infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) confirmed the presence of melamine 
and cyanuric acid. This case is also an example of how potential 
mechanisms can also be excluded as being causally related to tox-
icity. Specifically, cell culture studies with melamine and cyanuric 
acid showed that these compounds were not directly cytotoxic to 
renal proximal tubule cells, thereby giving more credence to the 
role of precipitation and obstruction in the ensuing toxicity. As 
such, the mechanistic work confirmed that melamine and cyanuric 
acid were present in the renal filtrate and re-formed an insoluble 
complex in the kidney tubules. This produced a physical blockage, 
leading to renal impairment which progressed rapidly to renal fail-
ure and death.

78
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
Idiosyncratic Toxicity: When No Mechanism 
Explains the Outcome
An idiosyncratic toxicity mechanism is one that characterized 
by its low, frequently rare incidence and its poor predictability. 
Idiosyncratic toxicity is most often described for adverse reac-
tions to drugs, and the liver and skin tend to be the most frequently 
affected organs. Idiosyncratic reactions do not follow the general 
outline of toxic mechanisms illustrated in Fig. 3-1, nor do they fol-
low the general rules regarding disposition and dose dependence 
outlined above. Rather, idiosyncratic reactions are distinguished 
from other adverse reactions because they do not show typical dose–
response relationships and concentration dependence. Idiosyncratic 
drug reactions are referred to as type B reactions, whereas more 
common, concentration-dependent reactions are type A reactions. 
Examples of drugs known to cause idiosyncratic toxicity include 
isoniazid (antituberculosis), ximelagatran (anticoagulant), azithro-
mycin (antibiotic), and carbamazepine (antiepileptic).
By their very nature, the mechanism of idiosyncratic reactions 
is not well-defined. However, there is emerging evidence that nonge-
netic and genetic factors contribute to susceptibility to such toxicity. 
Nongenetic factors could include current disease states, including 
infection, inflammation, and pregnancy. Numerous genetic factors 
including polymorphisms in drug metabolizing enzymes and drug 
transporters, enzymes that reduce ROS, and the MHC proteins have 
also been identified. In fact, there is growing evidence that immune-
mediated effects, particularly those involving the adaptive immune 
system, are highly likely to contribute to idiosyncratic responses, 
and there is a strong clinical association between specific human 
leukocyte antigen (HLA) allele polymorphisms and idiosyncratic 
drug reactions to drugs such as carbamazepine (Uetrecht and 
Naisbitt, 2013).
Although the low frequency and multifactorial nature of idio-
syncratic toxicity makes it difficult explain, there is a growing effort 
to predict this type of toxicity. However, research efforts have been 
directed toward developing in vitro and in vivo methods that predict 
intrinsic immunogenicity of drugs and chemicals, along with mod-
els that assess mitochondrial dysfunction, failure to adapt to modest 
injury, or inflammatory stress factors. Additionally, some mechanis-
tic approaches apply quantitative systems pharmacology (QSP) to 
evaluate multiple factors and biological processes simultaneously. 
QSP is an in silico modeling technique that leverages and assimi-
lates known physiology and the results of in vitro experiments in 
order to make predictions about how drugs affect biological pro-
cesses. This type of modeling is proposed as a potentially useful 
tool for predicting and explaining critical events that likely precede 
immune-mediated idiosyncratic liver injury (Kullack-Ublick et al., 
2017).
STEP 3: CELLULAR DYSFUNCTION AND 
RESULTANT TOXICITIES
Toxicity-induced cellular dysfunction is determined by the function 
of the target molecule. If the target molecule is involved in cellular 
signaling and regulation, then altered gene expression and/or cellu-
lar function will occur. However, if the target molecule is involved 
predominantly in essential processes, the resultant dysfunction may 
compromise cell survival, and the nature of cell death varies with 
the mechanism of cell dysfunction (Fig. 3-9).
The target molecule
as determinant of the effect
• Cell division → neoplasia, teratogenesis
• Apoptosis → tissue involution, teratogenesis
• Protein synthesis → e.g., peroxisome proliferation
Inappropriate
• Tremor, convulsion, spasm, cardiac arrythmia
• Narcosis, paralysis, paresthesia
E.g., inappropriate neuromuscular activity
e.g., hemostasis → bleeding
Impaired function of integrated systems
Altered gene
expression
Impaired
cell
function
Impaired
internal
maintenance
Impaired
external
maintenance
• ATP synthesis
• Ca2+ regulation
• Protein synthesis
Impaired
• Microtubular function
• Membrane function
Cell injury/death
Role of
the target
molecule
Cell regulation
(signaling)
Cell
maintenance
The effect
Figure 3-9.   The third step in the development of toxicity: alteration of cell functions. The major effects are manifested as altered regulation of cell signaling 
or maintenance of cell function, with specific effects including altered gene expression, impaired cell function, impaired intracellular homeostasis, and extracel-
lular homeostasis. Examples of such changes are included on the right side of the figure.

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
79
Toxicant-Induced Cellular Dysregulation
Transcriptional processes as well as numerous pathways involved 
in signal transduction cascades contribute to toxicant-induced alter-
ations in cell regulation and gene expression. There are many cel-
lular receptors that function to transmit signals to regulatory regions 
of genes and/or to functional proteins. Receptor activation may 
alter gene expression to increase or decrease protein expression. 
Additionally, the phosphorylation state of proteins can be altered, 
which will activate or inhibit their function. Programs controlling 
the fate of cells primarily affect gene expression, whereas those 
regulating the ongoing activities primarily influence the activity 
of functional proteins. Often, however, one signal evokes changes 
in both gene expression and cell function responses because of 
the complex branching and interconnection of many signaling 
networks.
Altered Gene Expression  Gene expression is the process by 
which information from a gene is used in the synthesis of a func-
tional gene product. The genetic information may be transcribed 
from DNA into messenger RNA (mRNA), which in turn is trans-
lated into proteins. There are other noncoding RNAs, including 
small interfering double-stranded RNA (siRNA) and microRNA 
(miRNA). miRNAs are short sequences, typically 20 to 25 base 
pairs in length, derived from regions of RNA transcripts that fold 
back on themselves to form short hairpins, whereas siRNAs are 
generated from longer regions of double-stranded RNA (Yokoi 
and Nakajima, 2013). The biogenesis of miRNAs is summarized 
in Fig. 3-10. Both siRNAs and miRNAs interfere with complemen-
tary nucleotide sequences to repress protein synthesis (discussed 
in detail below). Chemicals alter gene expression by affecting 
mRNAs, miRNAs, or both. Altered gene expression may also be 
affected directly at transcription, at signal transduction pathways, 
and at the synthesis, storage, or release of the extracellular signal-
ing molecules.
Dysregulation of Transcription  Gene transcription is con-
trolled largely by interplay between transcription factors (TFs) 
and the regulatory or promoter region of genes coding for mRNA 
and miRNA. By binding to distinctive nucleotide sequences in the 
promoter, ligand- and signal-activated TFs facilitate or impede 
the formation of the preinitiation complex to increase or repress 
transcription. Xenobiotics may interact with TFs (or other compo-
nents of the preinitiation complex) and/or may alter the promoter 
region of the gene.
Several endogenous compounds, such as hormones (e.g., ste-
roids and thyroid hormones) and vitamins (retinoids and vitamin D), 
influence gene expression by binding to and activating TFs or intra-
cellular receptors (Table 3-3). However, many xenobiotics also 
mimic these natural ligands to alter cellular processes. For exam-
ple, clofibrate and other fibric acid lipid-lowering drugs, phthalate 
esters, and the experimental compound Wy-14,643 ([4-chloro—
(2,3-xylidino)-2-pyrimidinylthio] acetic acid) substitute for 
polyunsaturated fatty acids as ligands for the peroxisome prolif-
erator–activated receptor α (PPARα), whereas xenoestrogens (e.g., 
DES, DDT, and bisphenol A) substitute for endogenous ligands of 
estrogen receptors (ERs). The polychlorinated hydrocarbon, tetra-
chloro-dibenzo-dioxin (TCDD) is a well-established ligand for the 
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR).
Ligand-activated TFs control many fundamental cellular pro-
cesses, and accordingly, adverse effects of compounds that act 
through TFs often result from perturbation of cell proliferation or 
by inducing cell death (Table 3-3). Glucocorticoid receptor ago-
nists (such as dexamethasone) induce apoptosis of lymphoid cells. 
Although this is desirable in the treatment of lymphoid malignan-
cies, it is an adverse response in many other conditions. TCDD pro-
duces thymic atrophy by inducing thymocyte apoptosis. Estrogens 
exert mitogenic effects through the ER in female reproductive 
organs, mammary gland, and liver, and prolonged exposure to 
estrogen and ER-mediated cell proliferation is involved in tumor 
formation in these organs. Furthermore, ER activation by diethyl-
stilbestrol (DES) is involved in the induction of vaginal adenocar-
cinoma characterized by delayed development in late puberty after 
transplacental exposure to the synthetic estrogen. This is an exam-
ple wherein stimulation of ERs during a critical prenatal period of 
differentiation reprograms estrogen target tissues, which increases 
the risk of benign and malignant abnormalities in the reproductive 
tract later in life (Al Jishi and Sergi, 2017).
TF-mediated toxicity can be defined mechanistically in 
genetically modified mouse models. For example, mice overex-
pressing estrogen receptor α (ERα) are exceedingly sensitive to 
DES-induced uterine adenocarcinoma, whereas ERα-knockout 
mice are resistant, demonstrating a role for ERα in tumorigenesis. 
Similarly, the mitogenic and hepatic tumor–promoting effects of 
peroxisome proliferators in rodents were confirmed to be receptor-
mediated because they are not observed in PPARα-null mice. No 
hepatocellular and peroxisomal proliferation is observed in human 
liver after exposure to fibrates, and humans express lower levels of 
PPARα that is often in nonfunctional forms. Furthermore, human-
ized mice (i.e., PPARα-null mice engineered to express human 
PPARα) do not show hepatocellular and peroxisomal prolifera-
tion when treated with fibrates, indicating that the human recep-
tor does not signal for proliferation in a manner similar to mice 
miRNA gene
5’
3’
RNA Pol II/III
Pri-microRNA
Cleavage
Exportin-5
Pre-microRNA
NUCLEUS
CYTOPLASM
TRBP
Dicer
Cleavage
DGCR8
Drosha
Degradation
3’
5’
5’
3’
5’
3’
Mature microRNA
RISC formation
Ago2
Figure 3-10.   Biogenesis of microRNAs (miRNAs). Genes encoding for 
miRNAs are much longer than the processed, mature miRNA. miRNAs are 
transcribed by RNA polymerases as large precursors termed pri-miRNA, 
which may be several kilobases long, but are cut shorter by an RNase 
(Drosha), assisted by its partner protein DiGeorge syndrome critical region 
in gene 8 (DGCR8), to become pre-miRNA (60 to 70 nucleotides in length). 
PreRNAs are then exported from the nucleus to the cytoplasm by the karyo-
pherin exportin 5 and Ran-GTP complex (ras-related nuclear protein; not 
shown) where it is cleaved further by Dicer, another RNAase, and its partner 
TRBP, and this cytoplasmic cleavage forms the mature miRNA. When a 
miRNA associates with Argonaute protein (Ago2), it forms the microRNA-
induced silencing complex (RISC). The miRNA binds with base pairing to 
the untranslated region (UTR) of the target mRNA and RISC downregulates 
its translation and/or enhances mRNA cleavage. Because miRNAs bind to 
their target mRNAs by partial complementarity over a short sequence, one 
miRNA may have hundreds of mRNA targets. Therefore, a single miRNA 
can silence the expression of many proteins.

80
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
Table 3-3  
Toxicants Acting on Ligand-Activated Transcription Factors: Examples of Ligands and Effects
LIGAND-ACTIVATED 
TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR  
(Gene Symbol)
ENDOGENOUS LIGANDS
EXOGENOUS LIGAND
EFFECTS OF AGONISTS
Aryl hydrocarbon receptor 
(AhR)
Kynurenine
TCDD
Thymic atrophy
Indole-3-carbinol; ITE
PCBs
Wasting syndrome
Microbial metabolites:  
3-methylindole,  
tryptamine
PAHs
Teratogenesis (cleft palate)
Hepatocarcinogenesis in rats
Enzyme induction (e.g., 
CYP1A1)
Peroxisome proliferator– 
activated receptor (PPARα; 
NR1C1)
Fatty acids
Fibrate esters (e.g., clofibrate)
Hepatocarcinogenesis in mice
Leukotriene B4
Phthalate esters (e.g., DEHP)
Peroxisome proliferation
Enzyme induction (e.g., 
CYP4A1,  
acyl-CoA oxidase)
Farnesoid X receptor (FXR; 
NR1H4)
Bile acids
Obeticholic acid
Inhibition of CYP7A1; inhibits  
bile acid synthesis and in-
creases  
cholesterol
Modulates fatty liver; involved 
in liver regeneration
Pregnane X receptor (PXR; 
NR1I2)
Pregnenolone
PCN, dexamethasone
Enzyme induction (e.g., 
CYP3A)
Progesterone
Spironolactone, cyproterone
Transporter induction (e.g., 
Oatp1a4, Mdr1, Mrp1, Mrp2, 
Mrp3)
Rifampicin
Constitutive androstane receptor 
(CAR; NR1I3)
3α,5α-Androstenol
TCPOBOP, phenobarbital*
Enzyme induction (e.g., CYP2B, 
CYP3A)
3α,5α-Androstanol  
(inhibitors)
Hepatocarcinogenesis in rodents
Estrogen receptor (ER; NR3A1)
17-β Estradiol
Ethynylestradiol
Mammary and hepatic  
carcinogenesis
Diethylstilbestrol
Bisphenol A
DDT, methoxychlor
Tamoxifen, raloxifene
Antagonists (breast cancer  
prevention)
Glucocorticoid receptor (GR; 
NR3C1)
Cortisol (human)
Dexamethasone
Apoptosis of lymphocytes
Corticosterone (rodent)
Prednisone
Teratogenesis (cleft palate)
Androgen receptor (AR; NR3C4)
Testosterone,  
dihydrotestosterone
DHEA
Muscle hypertrophy and bone 
growth
Cyproterone, flutamide  
(antagonists)
Reduce prostate growth
Retinoic acid receptors (RAR; 
NR1B1 and RXR; NR2B1)
All-trans-retinoic acid
13-cis-Retinoic acid
Teratogenesis (craniofacial,  
cardiac, thymic 
­malformations)
Abbreviations: ITE, 2-(1’H-indole-3’carbonyl)-thiazole-4-carboxylic acid methylester; TCPOBOP, 1,2-bis[2-(3,5-dichloropyridyloxy)]benzene; DHE, 
dihydroepiandrosterone.
*Phenobarbital indirectly activates CAR, not as a ligand.
SOURCES: AhR ligands described in Hubbard et al. (2015) and endogenous ligands adapted from Germain et al. (2006).

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
81
(Peters et al., 2012). Furthermore, transfection of rat PPARα into 
human hepatocytes does not render the cells responsive to PPARα 
ligands, suggesting additional species differences downstream of 
ligand binding.
In addition to altering the fate of specific cells, compounds 
that act on ligand-activated TFs can also evoke changes in the 
metabolism of endobiotics and xenobiotics by inducing overex-
pression of relevant metabolizing enzymes. For example, PPARα 
ligands induce lipoprotein lipase and enzymes involved in fatty 
acid oxidation. Unlike the hepatic proliferative effects of PPARα 
agonists, these effects occur not only in rodents but also in humans, 
and are the basis for using fibrates as lipid-lowering drugs. TCDD, 
phenobarbital, and pregnenolone 16α-carbonitrile (PCN) activate 
AhR, constitutive androstane receptor (CAR), and pregnane X 
receptor (PXR), respectively (Table 3-3). This activation induces 
specific cytochrome P450 enzymes (CYPs), and the major CYPs 
induced by AhR, CAR, and PXR agonists are the CYP1A, CYP2B, 
and CYP3A families, respectively. However, rodent and human 
CARs and PXRs exhibit low degrees of sequence conservation 
in their ligand-binding domains, and the low sequence homology 
accounts for marked species differences in the induction poten-
tial of their ligands. For example, TCPOBOP activates CAR more 
effectively in mice than in humans, and rifampicin activates PXR in 
humans more effectively than in rodents (Gonzalez and Yu, 2006). 
Furthermore, there is a broad group of xenobiotic-­metabolizing 
enzymes that are induced by these chemicals. For example, 
TCDD increases the expression of cytochrome P450 lAl, UDP-
glucuronosyltransferase-1, and several subunits of mouse and rat 
glutathione S-transferase in an AhR-dependent manner. CYP1A1 
is also strongly expressed in epithelial cells of the dioxin-induced 
cystic lesions in human skin such that immunohistochemical detec-
tion of CYP1A1 in skin has been applied as a biomarker of dioxin 
exposure (Saurat et al., 2012).
The mechanism of transcriptional regulation involves direct 
engagement with response elements in promoter regions. For exam-
ple, after TCDD binds to AhR, it is complexed with the nuclear 
translocator protein Arnt (also called HIF-1β), and the complex 
binds to the dioxin (or xenobiotic) response element (DRE or XRE) 
to initiate transcription (Fig. 3-11). The cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) 
gene, whose product is involved in the synthesis of inflammatory 
prostaglandins, also contains the DRE/XRE so it is transactivated 
by TCDD-activated AhR. Similarly, the ligand-activated PPARα, 
after dimerizing with RXR, upregulates the transcription of genes 
encoding enzymes involved in fatty acid transport and β-oxidation 
by interacting with the peroxisome proliferator response element 
(PPRE).
Transcriptional Dysregulation by Chemical Alteration of 
Regulatory Region of Genes  Xenobiotics may alter the regu-
latory gene regions through direct chemical interaction or by 
changing methylation patterns. For example, thalidomide causes 
developmental defects because it intercalates into GC boxes 
(GGGCGG) that are binding sites for several TFs including speci-
ficity protein 1 (Sp1) and early growth response protein 1 (Egr-1; 
Stephens et al., 2000). Genes that are essential for angiogenesis and 
normal limb development, including insulin-like growth factor-1 
(IGF-1) and fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF2), contain these GC 
boxes. Consequently, intercalation of thalidomide into the GC box 
sequence impairs the function of these target genes and disrupts 
normal signaling that is required for the critical timing of embry-
onic development.
Methylation of cytosine bases in CpG islands in the promoter 
regions of genes is a major epigenetic mechanism, which together 
with coupled histone modifications influences transcriptional activ-
ity of the downstream gene. The operational definition of an epi-
genetic mechanism is one that affects heritable traits that are not 
Ligands enter cell
Receptor binds
ligand
ARNT
DREs
CYP1A1
Other
factors?
mRNA
Other genes
New proteins
Translation
Other
gene products
Increased
cytochrome
P-4501A1
Proteosome
Degradation
DREs
AhR hsp90
hsp90
XAP2
Figure 3-11.   Mechanism of ligand-induced Ah receptor (AhR) activation and its translocation to the nucleus to regulate DRE-mediated gene transcription. 
In the absence of ligand, AhR is localized in the cytoplasm bound to a dimer of heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) and XAP2 (hepatitis B virus X–associated 
protein 2; also called immunophilin-like AhR interacting protein) and several other proteins which prevent proteolysis. When ligand binds to AhR, the protein 
is translocated to the nucleus where Hsp 90 dissociates and Arnt (also called hypoxia-inducible factor α; HIF-1α) binds to the receptor. The activated AhR/
ARNT heterodimer complex is then capable of interacting with DNA by binding to the dioxin (or xenobiotic)-responsive element (DRE or XRE), with the core 
sequence 5′-GCGTG-3′ within the consensus sequence 5′-T/GNGCGTGA/CG/CA-3′ in the 5′- regulatory region of a broad class of genes. (From Denison and 
Nagy [2003], with permission.)

82
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
explained by alterations in the DNA sequence. Thus, increased 
promoter methylation (hypermethylation) usually silences genes, 
whereas decreased methylation (hypomethylation) permits their 
activation. Importantly, when DNA replication occurs, the meth-
ylation pattern is copied from the parent strand to the daughter 
strand by DNA methyltransferase-1 (DNMT1), making the pattern 
heritable. Moreover, environmental conditions can alter promoter 
methylation to cause heritable changes in gene regulation. Altered 
promoter methylation has been implicated in chemically induced 
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in developmental deficiencies 
manifested postnatally or in subsequent generations, and in cancer. 
In the case of drug-induced lupus, several drugs, such as procain-
amide (antiarrhythmic) and hydralazine (antihypertensive), induce 
SLE that can reverse upon cessation of drug treatment. Both drugs 
induce global DNA hypomethylation in CD4+ T lymphocytes with 
concomitant overexpression of proteins important in inflammation. 
These changes increase T-cell activation that progresses to a sys-
temic and cutaneous autoimmune response (Vedove et al., 2009).
DNA methylation is also an important process in genomic 
imprinting that takes place during formation of germ cells. Most 
genes in both sperm and ova similarly undergo or avoid epigenetic 
alterations. Offspring carry maternal and paternal alleles of most 
genes. However, some imprinted genes are epigenetically altered 
(generally methylated and silenced) only in the male or female 
germ cells, so that only the paternal or the maternal gene copy 
is expressed in the offspring. This is the case for the insulin-like 
growth factor-2 gene, which is expressed only from the paternal 
allele. Because imprinted genes have only a single active copy, they 
are especially susceptible for epigenetic dysregulation. Prenatal 
exposure to chemicals such as TCDD, ethanol, and bisphenol A has 
been implicated in altered genomic imprinting and adverse effects 
in adulthood including endocrine disruption and obesity (Dolinoy 
et al., 2007).
Role of miRNAs in Toxicant-Induced Alterations in Gene 
Expression  miRNAs repress translation or increase mRNA deg-
radation to decrease gene and/or protein expression. Accordingly, 
any toxicant that increases miRNA activity will decrease gene 
expression, whereas a decrease in miRNA increases gene expres-
sion through the loss of repression. These small noncoding RNAs 
are derived through a multistep process (Fig. 3-10), and overall, 
they serve to regulate many fundamental cellular functions, result-
ing in a broad range of potential adverse effects on development, 
immune responses, metabolism, and diseases, as well as specific 
toxicological outcomes. There are at least 2500 mature miRNAs 
that have been identified in the human genome (Murakami and 
Kawada, 2017).
miRNAs contribute to many mechanisms of toxicity. A major 
miRNA in liver is miR-122, which comprises about 50% and 70% 
of the miRNAs in adult mouse and human liver, respectively. miR-
122 is regulated by liver-enriched TFs, including hepatocyte nuclear 
factors 6 (HNF6) and 4a (HNF4a) in a program that controls prolif-
eration and differentiation of both hepatocytes and biliary epithelial 
cells (cholangiocytes). miR-122 is also implicated to have a cen-
tral role in the development of fatty liver (steatosis) because genes 
involved in lipid biosynthesis are upregulated in miR-122 null mice. 
Similarly, miR-122 is decreased in a carbon tetrachloride-induced 
model of liver fibrosis in mice. Finally, loss of miR-122 has also 
been associated with increased incidence of hepatocellular carci-
noma. Although the target genes regulated by miR-122 are not fully 
identified, inflammatory genes such as Ccl2 (chemokine C-C motif 
ligand 2; also called macrophage chemoattractant protein 1; MCP1) 
and the profibrotic Kruppel-like factor 6 (KLF6) are regulated by 
miR-122. Additionally, validated targets of miR-122 with a role in 
carcinogenesis include cyclin G1, IGF1R, and Wnt 1 (Bandiera 
et al., 2015; Murakami and Kawada, 2017).
miRNAs also contribute to the regulation of drug-metabolizing 
enzymes. For example, CYP3A4, a constitutively abundant hepatic 
isozyme in most species, and CYP2E1 (involved in the formation 
of active metabolites of acetaminophen, carbon tetrachloride, and 
dimethylnitrosamine) are repressed by miR-27b and miR-378, 
respectively. The complexity of protein expression and regulation 
is underscored by the observation that although TFs control tran-
scriptional expression of miRNAs, miRNAs can also control the 
translational regulation of these TFs (Yokoi and Nakajima, 2011).
In kidney, miR-21 has been shown to be upregulated in mod-
els of both acute and chronic injury. It is one of the most highly 
expressed miRNA in healthy kidneys, where it is detected in the 
renal cortex. It is relatively inactive under normal conditions, but 
when there is kidney injury or toxicity, miR-21 expression increases 
markedly. Moreover, this miRNA plays an important role in the 
development of fibrotic conditions in the kidney (discussed below). 
PPAR-α, particularly in endothelial cells, is a known target for miR-
21, and during renal injury, PPAR-α expression decreases signifi-
cantly as a result miR-21 targeting (Loboda et al., 2016).
Dexamethasone downregulates the expression of the miRNA 
cluster miR-17-92, which regulates expression of the proapoptotic 
protein Bim. The downregulation of miR-17-92 increases transcrip-
tional activation of Bim, and this action contributes to glucocorti-
coid-induced apoptosis in lymphoid cells (Molitoris et al., 2011). 
Additional examples regarding the role of miRNAs in mechanisms 
of toxicity are discussed throughout the chapter, particularly in the 
sections summarizing fibrosis and carcinogenesis.
Dysregulation of Signal Transduction  In its most basic defi-
nition, signal transduction is the process by which a chemical or 
physical signal is transmitted through a cell in a stepwise series of 
events, often involving kinase or phosphatase activity, which modi-
fies protein activity by phosphorylation status to invoke a response. 
As such, many extracellular signaling molecules, including growth 
factors, cytokines, hormones, neurotransmitters, and some secreted 
proteins, engage intracellular signal transducing networks and ulti-
mately activate TFs.
A major signal transduction pathway is the mitogen-activated 
protein kinase (MAPK) pathway, which is also referred to as the 
extracellular signal–regulated kinase (ERK). Signaling in this path-
way is initiated by the binding of a signaling molecule to a cell 
surface receptor such as epidermal growth factor (EGF) binding to 
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR; Fig. 3-12). Mitogen bind-
ing causes Ras (a GTPase) to switch to GTP to phosphorylate and 
activate the kinase activity Raf, which in turn phosphorylates MEK 
which phosphorylates ERK. Raf, MEK, and ERK are also referred to 
as MAP3K (i.e., MAP kinase kinase kinase), MAP2K, and MAPK, 
respectively. There are numerous receptors and ligands that can acti-
vate this critical pathway that regulates cell division including IGF, 
fibroblast growth factor, and transforming growth factor α (TGF-
α). This important pathway is shown schematically before present-
ing the more complex interaction across signaling pathways, and is 
intended to illustrate how such a series of kinase activities in a cas-
cade can be affected by endogenous ligands or toxicants to perturb 
feedback regulation and signal amplification. Mutations in Ras and 
raf are also well described in carcinogenic mechanisms (discussed 
below).
Fig. 3-13 is a complex illustration of numerous networks with 
emphasis on those involved in cell cycle regulation, and identifies 
some signal-activated TFs that control transcriptional activity of 
genes that determine cell fate, with the MAPK pathway (4) shown 
in the middle of the figure. Once again, this chapter will not discuss

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
83
all potential signaling mechanisms that can be altered in a toxic 
response. However, pathways that are fundamental to understanding 
adverse effects are summarized here.
The lower portion of Fig. 3-13 indicates important TFs acti-
vated by signaling pathways. For example, c-Fos and c-Jun, which 
dimerize (called AP-1) to bind to the tetradecanoylphorbol acetate 
(TPA) response element (TRE), play an important role in regulat-
ing cell division because they activate cyclin D to drive the G1/ 
S-phase transition of the cell cycle. There are other signal-activated 
TFs that also upregulate transcription of cyclin D and induce cell 
proliferation including c-Myc, NF-κB (nuclear factor kappa–light 
chain enhancer of activated B cells), CREB (cAMP response ele-
ment binding protein), and STAT (signal transducer and activator of 
transcription). Major pathways converging on these TFs are shown 
in Fig. 3-13.
Signaling through the transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) 
signaling pathway is also an important pathway that influences cell 
growth, differentiation, and wound repair, and there are two trans-
membrane receptors (type I and type II) that function as serine/
threonine kinases required for its signal transduction (Fig. 3-14). 
TGF-β binds to its type II receptor, which recruits and phosphory-
lates the type I receptor, and this complex in turn phosphorylates 
and activates Smad proteins (Smad 2, 3) that are the ultimate TFs 
that regulate target gene expression. TGF-β is a master regulator 
of numerous programs involved in wound healing, and it plays a 
central role in the development and progression of fibrotic diseases 
(discussed below). Altered signaling through TGF-β receptors has 
been implicated in Loeys–Dietz syndrome (LDS), a genetic disease 
characterized by serious defects in connective tissue formation and 
organization that increases the risk of aortic aneurysms particularly 
in children (Loeys et al., 2006).
The Wnt and hedgehog (Hh) pathways (Figs. 3-15 and 3-16) 
are also important regulators of cell division and differentiation. 
Both pathways have critical roles in embryonic development, tissue 
regeneration, and carcinogenesis. Activation of Wnt and Hh path-
ways regulate cellular levels of β-catenin and Gli (glioma-associated 
transcription factor), respectively, which in turn control transcrip-
tion of numerous genes involved in cell cycle regulation, proteo-
somal activity, and cell differentiation. Wnt ligands are secreted 
proteins that bind to the cell surface receptor, frizzled (FZD) and 
the coreceptor, lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP). When 
Wnt is activated (Fig. 3-15), β-catenin escapes phosphorylation and 
degradation to translocate to the nucleus where it transcriptionally 
regulates many genes involved in cell cycle regulation, cell motility, 
and differentiation. Chemicals that influence Wnt signaling have 
numerous adverse effects including abnormal embryonic develop-
ment, cell proliferation, and carcinogenesis.
Hh ligands are modified by palmitate or cholesterol to bind 
to the membrane receptor Patched (Ptch). In the absence of ligand, 
Ptch inhibits the activity of Smoothened (Smo) to prevent signal 
transduction. However, when Hh binds to Ptch, Smo is activated, 
and downstream effects prevent normal degradation of Gli so that it 
accumulates and translocates to the nucleus to regulate gene expres-
sion (Fig. 3-16). Toxicants that activate or inhibit Smo can have 
significant adverse effects. For example, cyclopamine is a Smo 
inhibitor that disrupts normal development to cause birth defects 
including cyclopia (failure of two ocular orbits to form).
Signal transduction occurs through successive protein–pro-
tein interactions and protein phosphorylation reactions at hydroxyl 
groups in specific serine, threonine, or tyrosine residues. Most cell 
surface growth factor receptors are kinases that phosphorylate their 
downstream targets. In addition to the MAPK pathway already 
described, the PI3K pathway (Fig. 3-13) leads to phosphorylation 
of phosphatidylinositol (4,5)-bisphosphate (PIP2), a lipid commonly 
found in the plasma membrane, to generate phosphatidylinosi-
tol-3,4,5-triphosphate (PIP3). PIP3 subsequently recruits the protein 
kinase Akt (or protein kinase B) to the membrane for activation. 
PI3K signaling is quite complex and includes many branches that 
regulate intermediary metabolism, protein synthesis, autophagy 
(discussed below), and cell senescence. In addition, Akt may also 
indirectly activate the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), a 
ubiquitous protein kinase, whose phosphorylated products promote 
the trophic state of cells by boosting protein synthesis and restrain-
ing autophagy. Furthermore, Akt catalyzes the inactivating phos-
phorylation of glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3), a ubiquitous 
multifunctional constitutionally active protein kinase. Inactivation 
of GSK3α and GSK2β causes numerous effects ranging from 
promotion of glycogen synthesis to suppression of apoptosis (see 
later). Additionally, Akt inactivates the FoxO family of TFs, which 
prevents protein degradation in the skeletal muscle and promotes 
proliferation, thereby countering muscle atrophy.
Most intracellular signal transducer proteins exist in the 
phosphorylated and dephosphorylated state, with protein kinases 
and phosphatases catalyzing these reactions, respectively. Some 
growth factor receptors amplify their signals by inducing forma-
tion of HOOH. For example, by attacking protein thiolate groups 
and converting them into sulfenic acid groups (discussed above), 
E
G
F
R
GDP
GTP
RAS
RAS
Stimulus
Ligand
Binding
Raf
Raf
P
P
MEK
MEK
P
ERK
ERK
Transcription Factors
ACTIVATOR
MAP3K
MAP2K
MAPK
EFFECTOR
Figure 3-12.   The MAP kinase (MAPK) signal transduction pathway illustrat-
ing the cascade from receptor-mediated activation to transcriptional regula-
tion. The figure shows activation by the binding of the stimulus, epidermal 
growth factor (EGF) to the EGF receptor which activates Ras by convert-
ing it from its inactive GDP-bound form to the active GTP-bound state. 
This activation initiates a cascade of phosphorylation events (P) in MAP3K, 
MAP2K, and MAPK proteins (Raf, MEK, and ERK, respectively). The 
phosphorylated MAPK (ERK) moves into the nucleus and phosphorylates 
numerous transcription factors thereby enabling them to bind to cognate 
sequences in the promoter regions to facilitate transcription. In highlighting 
this cascade, the figure illustrates the cascade from the original stimulus to 
the activator of the pathway followed by the kinase activity, and finally the 
effector function. This pathway is a major regulator of cell cycle homeosta-
sis and it is illustrated in other figures. Mutations in this pathway are also 
involved in carcinogenic mechanisms (discussed in the chapter).

84
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
HOOH reversibly inactivates protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) 
and phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), a lipid phosphatase 
that specifically dephosphorylates PIP3 (see Fig. 3-13; Sies, 2014).
Chemically 
Altered 
Signal 
Transduction 
and 
Proliferation  Xenobiotics that facilitate phosphorylation of 
signal transducers often promote mitosis and tumor formation. 
Examples include phorbol esters and fumonisin B that activate 
protein kinase C (PKC). The activated PKC promotes mitogenic 
activity through two major phosphorylation reactions. These are 
the phosphorylation of Raf, the first protein kinase in the MAPK 
pathway (Fig. 3-12), and by phosphorylation of a protein phos-
phatase that dephosphorylates the TF c-Jun at specific sites (Thr 
231, Ser 234, and Ser 249), thereby permitting its binding to DNA. 
Chemicals that modulate PKC activity often mimic diacylglycerol 
(DAG), an endogenous activator of PKC. The other PKC activa-
tor is Ca2+, which can be mimicked by Pb2+. Lead ions increase 
PKC activity at picomolar concentrations, when Pb2+ occupies only 
high-affinity binding sites on PKC, but Pb2+ inhibits PKC activity 
at high, micromolar concentrations, where the low-affinity sites are 
also occupied.
1
2
3
4
5
4
IL-6
PRL
EPO
TNF
IL-1
ECM
JAK
PTP
–P
+P
ROS
MMS
Src
MEK
Raf
Ras
+P
+P
+P
MC-LR
OKA
CALY
6
7
TSH
FSH
LH
UV
As
ROS
SHR
FA
+P
–P
PKC
G
G
PLC
DAG  +   IP3
PMA
FB1
STAU
Pb2+
Ca2+
cAMP
AC
Membrane
receptors
+P
*
*
* Mediators of acute phase
protein expression
+P
NF-κB
NF-κB
STAT3
c-Myc
C/EBP
*
ERK
c-FOS
c-JUN
c-Myc
Egr1
CREB
ATF-2
Elk-1
SAP1
FoxM1
c-Myc
–P
+P
+P
+P
CaMK
Signal-
activated
transcription
factors
Ligands
Cell cycle progression
mitosis
† Mediates ECM formation
in ECM-producing cells
IKK
Akt
PI3K
EGF
TGF-α
IGF
EGF
TGF-α
IGF
PGF2α
NE
5-HT
PIP3
+P
+P
+P
+P
–P
SOCS
PTEN
PP2A
+P
+P
+P
PTP
GAP
PTP
IκB
IκB
PKA
FAK
Figure 3-13.   Selected signal transduction pathways to illustrate phosphorylation cascades, potential interactions across pathways, and ultimately transcriptional 
regulation of the cell cycle. The MAPK pathway illustrated in Fig. 3-12 is presented as activated by EGF in the middle of this figure (4) along with the numerous 
transcription factors it activates. The symbols of cell membrane receptors are numbered 1 to 7 and some of their activating ligands are indicated. G protein–cou-
pled receptors are depicted in the numbers at the top of the figure and include the (1) JAK-STAT pathway; (2 and 3) NF-κB activation; (4) phosphatidilinositol-
3-kinase (PI3K) and MAPK pathway; (5) integrin receptor–mediated activation of the focal adhesion kinase pathway that influences extracellular matrix (ECM) 
regulation; (6) phospholipase C activation of the protein kinase C (PKC) pathway; and (7) hormone-mediated activation of the cAMP and protein kinase A 
(PKA) pathway. The complexity of the figure illustrates the numerous interconnections between the pathways. For example, the G protein–coupled receptor (6) 
can relay signal into the MAPK pathway via PLC-catalyzed formation of second messengers that activate PKC, whereas signals from TNF and IL-1 receptors 
(2 and 3) are channeled into the PI3K–Akt–NF-κB pathway by phosphorylating IKK. The integrin receptor (5) can also engage the growth factor receptors 
and Ras as well as PI3K via FAK and the tyrosine kinase Src. For illustration purposes, the scheme is oversimplified. Virtually all components of the signaling 
network (e.g., G proteins, PKCs, and MAPKs) are present in multiple and functionally different forms whose distribution may be cell-specific. The pathways 
depicted are not equally relevant for all cells. In addition, these pathways determine the fate of cells, and they also control certain aspects of the ongoing cellular 
activity. Abbreviations and symbols: Circles represent G proteins, oval symbols protein kinases, rectangles transcription factors, wavy lines genes, and diamond 
symbols inhibitory proteins, such as protein phosphatases (PTP, PP2A) and the lipid phosphatase PTEN, the GTPase-activating protein GAP, and inhibitory 
binding proteins such as IκB and suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS). Arrowheads indicate stimulation or formation of second messengers (e.g., DAG, 
IP3, PIP3, cAMP, and Ca2+), whereas blunt arrows indicate inhibition. Phosphorylation and dephosphorylation are indicated by +P and −P, respectively. 
Abbreviations for interfering chemicals are printed in black (As, arsenite; CALY, calyculin A; FA, fatty acids; FB1, fumonisin B; MC-LR, microcystin-LR; 
OKA, okadaic acid; MMS, methylmethane sulfonate; PMA, phorbol miristate acetate; ROS, reactive oxygen species; SHR, SH-reactive chemicals, such as 
iodoacetamide; STAU, staurosporin).

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
85
Hyperphosphorylation of proteins may result not only from 
increased phosphorylation by kinases but also from decreased 
dephosphorylation by phosphatases. Inhibition of phosphatases, 
including the lipid phosphatase PTEN, appears to be the under-
lying mechanism of the mitogenic effect of various chemicals, 
oxidative stress, and ultraviolet (UV) irradiation. PTP and dual-
specificity phosphatases (i.e., enzymes that remove phosphate 
from phosphorylated tyrosine as well as serine and threonine 
residues) as well as PTEN contain a catalytically active cys-
teine that is susceptible to inactivation by HOOH via sulfenic 
acid formation and by covalent reaction with other SH-reactive 
chemicals (Forman et al., 2004). Indeed, xenobiotics such as the 
SH-reactive iodoacetamide, the organometal compound tributyl-
tin, arsenite, as well as HOOH cause phosphorylation of the epi-
dermal growth factor (EGF) receptor (Fig. 3-13) by interfering 
with the PTP that dephosphorylates and inactivates this receptor 
(Juarez et al., 2008).
Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) is the major soluble Ser/Thr 
phosphatase in cells and is likely responsible, at least in part, for 
reversing the growth factor–induced stimulation of MAPK, thereby 
keeping the extent and duration of MAPK activation under con-
trol (Juntilla et al., 2008). Several natural toxins are extremely 
potent inhibitors of PP2A, including the blue-green algae poison 
microcystin-LR and the dinoflagellate-derived okadaic acid. With 
chronic, low-dose exposure, both compounds are tumor promot-
ers. However, acute high-dose exposure to microcystin induces 
severe liver injury, whereas acute exposure to okadaic acid causes 
gastrointestinal effects associated with shellfish poisoning. In 
these acute conditions, hyperphosphorylation of proteins other 
than those involved in proliferative signaling (e.g., hepatocellular 
microfilaments in microcystin poisoning) is likely responsible for 
the toxicity.
Apart from phosphatases, there are also inhibitory binding 
proteins that can keep signaling under control. Such is the case for 
IκB, which binds to NF-κB, preventing its transfer into the nucleus 
and its function as a TF (Fig. 3-13). When phosphorylated by its 
designated IκB kinase (IKK), IκB is degraded by the proteasome 
to release NF-κB. The released NF-κB is a critical regulator of 
inflammatory processes. Through its signaling, a broad, pro-inflam-
matory program is controlled, including the release of cytokines 
(e.g., TNF and IL-1β), chemokines (e.g., MCP-1), cell adhesion 
molecules (e.g., ICAM-1, E-selectin, and P-selectin), enzymes pro-
ducing inflammatory lipid mediators (e.g., PLA2 and COX-2), and 
acute-phase proteins (e.g., C-reactive protein and α1-acid glyco-
protein; Karin, 2006). However, IKK can also be phosphorylated 
(activated) by other protein kinases, such as Raf (MAPK cascade) 
and Akt. NF-κB activation via Akt-mediated IKK phosphorylation 
is involved in the proliferative (and possibly carcinogenic) effect of 
arsenite, nicotine, and NNK.
Another pathway from which aberrant mitogenic signals may 
originate is the GTP/GDP-binding protein Ras. Signaling through 
Ras is normally terminated via stimulation of its own GTPase activ-
ity by a GTPase-activating protein (GAP; Fig. 3-13) that returns Ras 
into its inactive GDP-bound state. Fatty acids, which may accu-
mulate in response to phospholipase A activation and exposure to 
peroxisome proliferators, inhibit GAP and can delay the turning off 
of Ras, leading to increased cell proliferation. Finally, genotoxic 
carcinogens may mutate Ras, and if the mutation leads to loss of 
its GTPase activity, the result is sustained signaling of the MAPK 
pathway to increase the likelihood of malignant transformation (dis-
cussed below).
Chemically Altered Signal Transduction with Antiproliferative 
Effect  Cell proliferation is generally tightly controlled and is 
turned off when repair of injured cells is complete. However, 
an insult that decreases proliferative signaling after cell injury 
may compromise replacement of injured cells, and can direct a 
cell to apoptotic death (discussed below). Indeed, inhibitors of 
PKC (staurosporin), PI3K (wortmannin), and IκB degradation 
(gliotoxin) induce apoptosis. Similarly, TGF-β and glucocor-
ticoids increase IκB, which in turn decreases NF-κB activation 
and c-Myc expression, and both mechanisms may contribute to 
the apoptotic effect of TGF-β and glucocorticoids, particularly in 
lymphoid cells.
Dysregulation of Extracellular Signal Production  Hormones 
of the anterior pituitary exert mitogenic effects on endocrine organs 
by acting on cell surface receptors. Pituitary hormone production 
is under negative feedback control by hormones of the peripheral 
organs, and perturbation of this circuit adversely affects pituitary 
hormone secretion and, in turn, endocrine organ function. For 
example, xenobiotics that inhibit thyroid hormone production (e.g., 
the herbicide amitrole and the fungicide metabolite ethylenethio-
urea) or enhance thyroid hormone elimination (e.g., phenobarbital) 
reduce thyroid hormone levels and increase the secretion of thy-
roid-stimulating hormone (TSH) because of the reduced feedback 
inhibition. The increased TSH secretion stimulates cell division in 
the thyroid gland, which is responsible for the goiters or thyroid 
tumors caused by such toxicants (see Chap. 20). Decreased secre-
tion of pituitary hormone produces the opposite adverse effect, with 
apoptosis followed by involution of the target organ. For example, 
estrogens produce testicular atrophy in males by means of feedback 
inhibition of gonadotropin secretion.
TGFβRI
TGFβRII
Smad4
Smad2
Smad3
P
Smad2
Smad3
P
Smad4
Smad2
Smad3
P
Smad7
TGFβ
Figure 3-14.   The TGF-β signaling pathway. Transforming growth factor 
β (TGF-β) is a major regulator of cell differentiation, and it determines the 
extent of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a process that is 
central to the development of fibrosis (discussed later in the chapter). The 
TGF-β ligand binds to its type II receptor, which recruits a type I receptor 
dimer forming a heterotetrameric complex with the ligand. These recep-
tors are serine/threonine kinase receptors. The type II receptor phosphory-
lates serine residues of the type I receptor, which activates the protein. The 
signal transduction continues as the activated receptor kinase phosphory-
lates Smad 2/3 which recruits Smad 4, and this complex translocates to the 
nucleus. Smad 7 is a major negative regulator of this pathway.

86
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
Impaired Ongoing Cellular Activity  Ongoing control of special-
ized cells is exerted by signaling molecules acting on membrane 
receptors that transduce the signal by regulating Ca2+ entry into the 
cytoplasm or stimulating the enzymatic formation of intracellular 
second messengers. Ca2+ or other second messengers ultimately alter 
phosphorylation of functional proteins, changing their activity and, 
in turn, cellular functions almost instantly. Perturbation of ongoing 
cellular activity by chemicals may be due to an alteration in (1) the 
concentration of neurotransmitters, (2) receptor function, (3) intra-
cellular signal transduction, or (4) the signal-terminating processes.
Dysregulation of Electrically Excitable Cells  Many xenobi-
otics influence cellular activity in excitable cells, such as neurons 
and skeletal, cardiac, and smooth muscle cells. Cellular functions 
such as the release of neurotransmitters and muscle contraction are 
controlled by transmitters and modulators synthesized and released 
by adjacent neurons. Mechanistic details concerning altered regu-
lation of excitable cells is provided here as this information is not 
considered in other chapters of this book. These mechanisms are 
summarized in Fig. 3-17, and chemicals that interfere with these 
mechanisms are listed in Table 3-4.
Li+
β-cat
In absence of Wnt:
Wnt receptor complex is DISASSEMBLED
β-cat is degraded
In presence of Wnt:
Wnt receptor complex is ASSEMBLED
β-cat is stabilized
AJ complex
β-cat pool
APC
Axin
APC
TCF/LEF
Activation of target genes
β-cat destruction
complex is
ASSEMBLED
β-cat destruction
complex is
DISASSEMBLED
Cell cycle progression, mitosis
Embryonic development
Stem cell development
Carcinogenesis
Axin
Cd 2+
DCA
D
S
H
D
S
H
E3
WTX
Ub
Ub
Proteasomal
degradation
P
P
ADP
ATP
Nuclear
translocation
TCF/LEF
β-cat
β-cat
β-cat
β-cat
L
R
P
Wnt
FZD
FZD
R
L
P
CK1
GSK
GSK
CK1
β-cat
Figure 3-15.   The Wnt signaling pathway. The pathway is activated when Wnt binds to the cell surface receptor frizzled (FZD) and co-receptor lipoprotein 
receptor–related protein (LRP). In the absence of Wnt (left panel) intracellular proteins, including Axin, adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), casein kinase 1 
(CK1), and glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK) form the β-catenin (β-cat) destruction complex. The kinase members of this complex phosphorylate β-cat, tar-
geting it for ubiquitination by an E3 ubiquitin ligase and proteasomal degradation. On binding of Wnt to FZD and LRP (right panel) the Wnt receptor complex 
assembles, and with recruitment of Axin into this complex, β-cat escapes phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and degradation. β-cat accumulates, translocates 
into the nucleus, and is recruited to its target genes by TCF/LEF family of transcription factors. Wnt signaling upregulates the transcription of numerous genes. 
Chemicals that influence Wnt signaling may interfere with embryonic development, cell proliferation, and carcinogenesis. Abbreviations: DSH, disheveled; 
LEF, lymphoid enhancer–binding factor; TCF, T-cell factor; WTX, Wilms tumor suppressor.

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
87
A­lt­er­ed regulation of neural and/or muscle activity is the basic 
mechanism of action of many drugs and is responsible for toxici-
ties associated with drug overdosage, pesticides, and microbial, 
plant, and animal toxins (Tatti et al., 2017). As neurons are signal-­
transducing cells, the influence of toxic chemicals is seen not only 
on the neuron affected by the toxicant but also on downstream cells 
influenced by neuronal activity. Thus, the action of tetrodotoxin 
is to block voltage-gated Na+ channels in motor neurons (item 7 
in Fig. 3-17), but the observed effect is skeletal muscle paralysis. 
Similarly, tarantula venoms, including ceratotoxins (CccTx1-3) and 
In absence of Hh:
Patched exports sterol
Smoothened is inactive
Gli is repressed and degraded
In presence of Hh:
Patched cannot export sterol
Smoothened is active
Gli is derepressed and stabilized
Gli
Activation of target genes
Cell cycle progression, mitosis
Sterol
+P
Gli
Gli
E3
Ub
Ub
Cholesterol
25-OH-cholesterol
10-OH-cholesterol
SAG
P
Cyclopamine
Vitamin D3
SANT-1
Itraconazole
Nuclear
translocation
Cholesterol depletion
e.g., by diet, statins
MAP3K10
CK1
DYRK
GSK
Sufu
Gli
MAP3K10
CK1
DYRK
GSK
Sufu
ADP
ATP
Sterol
Ptch
Ptch
Smo
Smo
P
Proteasomal
degradation
Embryonic development
Stem cell development
Carcinogenesis
Hh
Gli
Figure 3-16.  The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway. Hh ligands are secreted proteins covalently modified by palmitate and cholesterol. They act in autocrine, 
paracrine, or endocrine manner through their membrane receptor Patched (Ptch), which is the key inhibitor of Hh signaling in the absence of ligand. When Hh 
ligands are absent (left panel), Ptch impedes the pathway by inhibiting the activity of Smoothened (Smo), a positive regulator of signaling. Ptch is a sterol pump 
that exports sterols (cholesterol or an oxysterol) to remove these activator molecules from Smo and rendering Smo inactive. The repression of Smo by Ptch 
incapacitates the downstream Hh effectors, the glioma-associated family of transcription factors (Gli). Binding of Hh to Ptch (right panel) abrogates its sterol-
exporting activity and Smo is activated. The active Smo suppresses Sufu to enable Gli activation, and activates mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase 
10 (MAP3K10), which in turn phosphorylates and inhibits DYRK, to prevent phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and proteasomal degradation of Gli. Active Gli 
translocates to the nucleus, and binds to its target genes. Hh signaling upregulates the transcription of numerous genes, including Ptch and Gli forming a posi-
tive feedback loop. It also induces secreted frizzled-related protein 1 (SFRP1) that binds Wnt proteins and inhibits Wnt signaling (Fig. 3-15), illustrating the 
interaction between the Wnt and Hh signaling pathways. Chemicals that activate or inhibit Smo may interfere with embryonic development. For example, the 
plant alkaloid cyclopamine inhibits Smo and causes the birth defect, cyclopia. Smo inhibitors are potentially anticarcinogenic, whereas Smo activators may 
promote carcinogenesis by increased Hh signaling. Abbreviations: SAG, smoothened agonist; SANT-1, smoothened antagonist 1.

88
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
phrixotoxin 3, also cause paralysis through inhibition of voltage-
gated Na+ channels (Bosmans et al., 2006). In contrast, cyclodiene 
insecticides, which block GABA receptors in the central nervous 
system (item 3 in Fig. 3-17), induce neuronal excitation and convul-
sions (Narahashi, 1992).
Alteration in Neurotransmitter Levels  Chemicals may alter 
synaptic levels of neurotransmitters by interfering with their syn-
thesis, storage, release, or removal from the vicinity of the recep-
tor. These mechanisms manifest toxicity that is associated with the 
physiologic activity of the neurotransmitter. That is, if synaptic 
levels of a neurotransmitter are increased, the resulting response 
is an exaggeration of the normal effects. In contrast, if synaptic 
levels of a neurotransmitter are decreased, the outcome is usu-
ally the opposite of the normal activity. For example, GABA is 
an inhibitory neurotransmitter, and decreased synthesis of GABA 
by hydrazine and isoniazid will cause convulsions (Chen et al., 
2016). Reserpine inhibits the neuronal storage of norepinephrine, 
5-­hydroxytryptamine, and dopamine, and depleting these trans-
mitters causes a variety of cardiovascular and neurologic effects. 
Skeletal muscle paralysis caused by botulinum toxin is due to 
inhibition of acetylcholine release from motor neurons to prevent 
stimulation of the acetylcholine receptors at the neuromuscular 
junction (receptor 1 in Fig. 3-17). In contrast, inhibition of ace-
tylcholinesterase by organophosphate or carbamate insecticides 
or chemical warfare agents (e.g., soman) prevents the hydrolysis 
of acetylcholine, resulting in massive stimulation of cholinergic 
receptors (receptors 1, 5, and 11 in Fig. 3-17) and a cholinergic 
crisis. Inhibition of the neuronal reuptake of norepinephrine by 
cocaine or tricyclic antidepressants is responsible for overexci-
tation of α1-adrenergic receptors on vascular smooth muscles, 
resulting in nasal mucosal ulceration and myocardial infarction in 
heavy cocaine abusers, whereas overstimulation of β1-adrenergic 
receptors contributes to life-threatening arrhythmias. Similar car-
diac complications may result from amphetamine abuse, because 
ATP
ATP
Gq PLC
AC
Gs
Na+[Ca2+]
Na+[Ca2+]
Ach
Glu
Cl–
GABA
Cl–
Gly
Ach
Op
+
+
+
+
+
K+
K+
Excitatory
receptors
linked to ion
channels
(fast signal
generators)
Inhibitory
receptors
linked to ion
channels
(fast signal
suppressors)
Ach
NE/E
5HT
–
–
PIP2
IP3
NE/E
+
+
+
+
–
–
+
–
cAMP
ATP
Protein
kinases
Excitatory receptors linked to enzyme (PLC, AC)
(slow signal generators)
Ca2+ - CM/TC
Ca2+
SR/EPR
DAG
Cation exporters
(fast excitatory signal terminators)
Voltage-gated
ion channels
(fast signal transducers)
9
8
7
1
2
3
4
5
6
11
14
12
13
10
+
–
+
–
+
–
+
–
+
–
+
–
+
–
+
–
+
–
–
–
–
+
K+
2K+
3Na+
3Na+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Na+
Exocytosis
Contraction
Metabolic, transport, and
transcriptional activation
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
Figure 3-17.   Signaling mechanisms for neurotransmitters. This simplified scheme depicts major cellular signaling mechanisms in neurons, muscle, and exo-
crine cells. Chemicals acting on the numbered elements are listed in Table 3-4. Fast signaling is initiated by the opening of ligand-gated Na+/Ca2+ channels 
(1, 2). The resultant cation influx decreases the inside negative potential (i.e., evokes depolarization) and triggers the opening of the voltage-gated Na+ and 
Ca2+ channels (7, 8). As a second messenger, Ca2+ activates intracellular Ca2+-binding proteins such as calmodulin (CM) and troponin C (TC), which in turn 
enhance the phosphorylation of specific proteins. The signal is terminated by channels and transporters (9, 10) that remove cations from the cells to reestablish 
the inside negative resting potential (repolarization) and restore the resting Ca2+ level. Fast signaling can be suppressed by opening the ligand-activated Cl− or 
K+ channels (3–6), which increase intracellular hyperpolarization to counteract opening of the voltage-gated Na+ and Ca2+ channels (7, 8). Signal transduction 
from other receptors (11–13) that are coupled to Gq proteins involves generation of the second messenger inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol 
(DAG) by phospholipase C (PLC), whereas signaling from receptor 14 that is coupled to Gs protein involves production of cyclic AMP (cAMP) by adenylyl 
cyclase (AC). These second messengers influence cellular activities by mobilizing Ca2+ from the sarcoplasmic or endoplasmic reticulum (SR and EPR), as is 
the case for IP3, or by activating protein kinases, as is the case for cAMP and DAG activation of PKA and PKC, respectively. The figure does not depict that 
inhibitory receptors 5 and 6 are Gi protein–coupled that function by opening K+ channels and inhibit AC. Abbreviations: Ach, acetylcholine; Glu, glutamate; 
GABA, γ-aminobutyric acid; Gly, glycine; Op, opioid peptides; NE, norepinephrine; E, epinephrine; 5HT, 5-hydroxytryptamine; G, G protein; PIP2, phospha-
tidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate. Positive and negative signs (circled) indicate activation and inhibition, r­es­pe­ct­iv­ely.

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
89
(continued)
RECEPTOR/CHANNEL/PUMP
AGONIST/ACTIVATOR
ANTAGONIST/INHIBITOR
NAME*
LOCATION
AGENT
EFFECT
AGENT
EFFECT
1. Acetyl-
choline 
nicotinic 
receptor
Skeletal 
muscle
Nicotine
Anatoxin-a
Cytisine
Ind: ChE inhibitors
Muscle fibrillation, 
and then paralysis
Tubocurarine, lophotoxin 
(from sea whip)
α-Bungarotoxin (banded 
krait venom)
α-Cobrotoxin (cobra 
venom)
α-Conotoxin (marine cone 
snail)
Erabutoxin b (banded krait 
venom)
Ind: botulinum toxin
Muscle paralysis
Neurons
See above
Neuronal activation
Pb2+, general anesthetics
Neuronal inhibition
2. Glutamate 
receptor
CNS neu-
rons
N-Methyl-d-aspartate
Kainate, domoate
Quinolinate
Quisqualate
Ind: hypoxia, HCN → 
glutamate release
Neuronal activation 
→ convulsion,  
neuronal injury  
(“excitotoxicity”)
Phencyclidine
Ketamine
General anesthetics
Neuronal inhibition 
→ anesthesia
Protection against 
“excitotoxicity”
3. GABAA 
receptor
CNS neu-
rons
Muscimol,  
avermectins,  
sedatives  
(barbiturates,  
benzodiazepines), 
general anesthetics 
(halothane), alcohols 
(ethanol)
Neuronal inhibition 
→ sedation, general 
anesthesia, coma, 
depression of vital 
centers
Bicuculline
Picrotoxin
Pentylenetetrazole
Cyclodiene insecticides
Lindane, TCAD
Ind: isoniazid
Neuronal activation 
→ tremor, convul-
sion
4. Glycine 
receptor
CNS neu-
rons, motor 
neurons
Avermectins (?),  
general anesthetics
Inhibition of motor 
neurons → paralysis
Strychnine
Ind: tetanus toxin
Disinhibition of 
motor neurons →  
tetanic convulsion
5. Acetyl-
choline 
M2 mus-
carinic 
receptor
Cardiac 
muscle
Ind: ChE inhibitors
Decreased heart rate 
and contractility
Belladonna alkaloids (e.g., 
atropine), atropine-like 
drugs (e.g., TCAD)
Increased heart rate
6. Opioid 
receptor
CNS 
neurons, 
visceral 
neurons
Morphine and conge-
ners (e.g., heroin, me-
peridine)
Ind: clonidine
Neuronal inhibition 
→ analgesia, central 
respiratory depres-
sion, constipation, 
urine retention
Naloxone
Antidotal effects in 
opiate intoxication
7. Voltage-
gated Na+ 
channel
Neurons, 
muscle 
cells, etc.
Aconitine, veratridine
Grayanotoxin  
(rhododendrons)
Batrachotoxin  
(poison dart frogs)
Scorpion toxins
Ciguatoxin (fish)
DDT, pyrethroids
Neuronal activation 
→ convulsion
Tetrodotoxin (pufferfish), 
saxitoxin (algae and  
cyanobacteria)
μ-Conotoxin
Local anesthetics
Phenytoin
Quinidine
Neuronal inhibition 
→ paralysis,  
anesthesia
Anticonvulsive ac-
tion
8. Voltage-
gated 
Ca2+ 
channel
Neurons, 
muscle 
cell, etc.
Maitotoxin (dinoflagel-
lates)
Atrotoxin (?)
Latrotoxin [?] (black 
widow spider)
Neuronal/muscular 
activation, cell injury
ω-Conotoxin Pb2+
Neuronal inhibition 
→ paralysis
Table 3-4  
Agents Acting on Signaling Systems for Neurotransmitters

90
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
amphetamine enhances the release of norepinephrine from adren-
ergic neurons and competitively inhibits neuronal reuptake of this 
transmitter. A hypertensive crisis can occur with the combined use 
of tricyclic antidepressants and monoamine oxidase inhibitors, 
drugs that block different mechanisms of norepinephrine elimina-
tion. Concomitant use of drugs that increase the concentration of 
serotonin (5-HT) by enhancing its neuronal release and decreas-
ing its neuronal reuptake (e.g., fluoxetine) or its biotransformation 
(e.g., monoamine oxidase inhibitors) induces serotonin syndrome 
with cognitive and behavioral changes, autonomic dysfunction, and 
neuromuscular abnormalities. Some cytotoxic antineoplastic drugs 
(e.g., cisplatin) and radiation cause nausea and emesis by induc-
ing release of 5-HT from enterochromaffin cells of the intestinal 
mucosa, which stimulates the 5-HT3 receptors (5-HT-gated cation 
channel, functionally similar to item 1 in Fig. 3-17) on the adja-
cent vagal afferent neurons, thereby evoking the vomiting reflex. 
Intestinal release of 5-HT and stimulation of vagal afferent neu-
rons are also involved in the emetic effect of ipecac syrup. The 
α2-adrenergic receptor agonist clonidine induces release in the 
brain of β-endorphin, an endogenous peptide that stimulates opioid 
receptors (item 6 in Fig. 3-17). This explains why clonidine intoxi-
cation mimics several symptoms of morphine poisoning, including 
depressed respiration and pinpoint pupils.
Toxicant–Neurotransmitter Receptor Interactions  Some 
chemicals interact directly with neurotransmitter receptors, includ-
ing (1) agonists that associate with the ligand-binding site on the 
receptor and mimic the natural ligand, (2) antagonists that occupy 
the ligand-binding site but cannot activate the receptor, (3) acti-
vators, and (4) inhibitors that bind to a site on the receptor that 
is not directly involved in ligand binding. In the absence of other 
actions, agonists and activators mimic, whereas antagonists and 
RECEPTOR/CHANNEL/PUMP
AGONIST/ACTIVATOR
ANTAGONIST/INHIBITOR
NAME*
LOCATION
AGENT
EFFECT
AGENT
EFFECT
  9. Voltage/
Ca2+- 
activated 
K+ chan-
nel
Neurons, 
smooth and 
skeletal 
muscle, 
cardiac 
muscle
Pb2+
Neuronal/muscular 
inhibition
Ba2+, apamin (bee venom), 
dendrotoxin, 20-HETE, 
hERG inhibitors (e.g.,  
cisapride, terfenadine)
Neuronal/muscular 
activation → convul-
sion/spasm vaso-
constriction, PMV 
tachycardia (torsade 
de pointes)
10. Na+, K+-
ATPase
Universal
Digitalis glycosides
Oleandrin
Chlordecone
Increased cardiac 
contractility,  
excitability
Increased neuro-
nal excitability → 
tremor
11. Acetyl-
choline 
M3 mus-
carinic 
receptor
Smooth 
muscle, 
glands
Ind: ChE inhibitors
Smooth muscle 
spasm, salivation,  
lacrimation
Belladonna alkaloids (e.g., 
atropine), atropine-like 
drugs (e.g., TCAD)
Smooth muscle  
relaxation →  
intestinal ­paralysis, 
decreased saliva-
tion, decreased 
­perspiration
Acetyl-
choline 
M1 mus-
carinic 
receptor
CNS  
neurons
Oxotremorine
Ind: ChE inhibitors
Neuronal activation 
→ convulsion
See above
12. Adren-
ergic α1 
receptor
Vascular 
smooth 
muscle
(Nor)epinephrine
Ind: cocaine, tyramine, 
amphetamine, TCAD
Vasoconstriction  
→ ischemia,  
hypertension
Prazosin
Antidotal effects in 
intoxication with α1-
receptor agonists
13. 5-HT2 
receptor
Smooth 
muscle
Ergot alkaloids  
(ergotamine,  
ergonovine)
Vasoconstriction  
→ ischemia,  
hypertension
Ketanserine
Antidotal effects in 
ergot intoxication
14. Adren-
ergic β1 
receptor
Cardiac 
muscle
(Nor)epinephrine
Ind: cocaine, tyramine, 
amphetamine, TCAD
Increased cardiac  
contractility and  
excitability
Atenolol, metoprolol
Antidotal effects in 
intoxication with β1-
receptor agonists
Abbreviations: ChE, cholinesterase; CNS, central nervous system; 20-HETE, 20-hydroxy-5,8,11, 14-eicosatetraenoic acid; Ind, indirectly acting (i.e., by 
altering neurotransmitter level); PMV, polymorphic ventricular; TCAD, tricyclic antidepressant.
*Numbering of the signaling elements in this table corresponds to those in Fig. 3-17. This table is simplified. Virtually all receptors and channels listed 
occur in multiple forms with different sensitivity to the agents. The reader should consult additional literature for more detailed information.
Table 3-4  
(Continued)

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
91
inhibitors block, the physiologic responses characteristic of endog-
enous ligands. For example, muscimol, a mushroom poison, is an 
agonist at the inhibitory GABAA receptor (item 3 in Fig. 3-17), 
whereas barbiturates, benzodiazepines, general anesthetics, and 
alcohols are activators. Thus, all these chemicals inhibit central 
nervous system activity, resulting in sedation, general anesthesia, 
and coma, and may ultimately inhibit the medullary respiratory 
center, depending on the dose administered. There are also simi-
larities in the responses evoked by agonist/activators on excitatory 
receptors and those elicited by antagonists/inhibitors on inhibitory 
sites. Glutamate receptor agonists and muscarinic receptor agonists 
cause neuronal hyperactivity in the brain and ultimately convul-
sions, as do inhibitors of GABAA receptor. Likewise, chemicals 
acting as agonists/activators on inhibitory receptors and those 
acting as antagonists/inhibitors on excitatory receptors may exert 
similar effects. Finally, the numerous subtypes of neurotransmitter 
receptors may be affected differentially by toxicants. For example, 
the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor is extremely sensitive 
to inhibition by lead ions, whereas the muscular nicotinic receptor 
subtype is not.
Some sensory neurons have membrane receptors that are 
stimulated by noxious chemicals and operate as ligand-gated cat-
ion channels. The transient receptor potential (TRP) channels open 
to enable Na+ and Ca2+ influx. TRPV1 is stimulated by capsaicin, 
the pungent ingredient of hot peppers, and mediates the burning 
sensation of the tongue and reflex stimulation of the lacrimal gland 
associated with exposure to pepper spray. However, the TRPA1 
receptor is activated by thiol-reactive and oxidant chemicals, such 
as the lacrimator compounds in tear gas, acrolein, methyl isocya-
nate, and corrosive gases. As described previously, these chemicals 
evoke considerable irritation and pain, along with lacrimation, bron-
chial secretion, sneezing, coughing, bronchospasm, and neurogenic 
inflammation through this receptor (Bessac and Jordt, 2010).
Toxicant–Signal Transducer Interactions  Many chemicals 
alter neuronal and/or muscle activity by acting on signal transduc-
tion processes. Voltage-gated Na+ channels (item 7 in Fig. 3-17), 
which transduce and amplify excitatory signals generated by 
ligand-gated cation channels (receptors 1 and 2 in Fig. 3-16), are 
activated by a number of toxins derived from plants and animals 
(Table 3-4) as well as some synthetic chemicals such as DDT, 
resulting in overexcitation (Narahashi, 1992). In contrast, chemi-
cals that block voltage-gated Na+ channels (such as tetrodotoxin 
and saxitoxin) cause paralysis. Na+ channels are also important 
in signal transduction in sensory neurons, as Na+-channel activa-
tors evoke an excited state, whereas Na+-channel inhibitors induce 
anesthesia.
Toxicant–Signal Terminator Interactions  The cellular sig-
nal generated by cation influx is terminated by removal of the cat-
ions through channels or by transporters (Fig. 3-17). Inhibition of 
cation efflux by Ba2+ may prolong excitation by blockade of Ca2+-
activated K+ channels (item 9 in Fig. 3-17) to cause potentially 
lethal neuroexcitatory and spasmogenic effects. The arachidonic 
acid metabolite 20-hydroxy-5,8,11,14-eicosatetraenoic acid (20-
HETE) also blocks Ca2+-activated K+ channels, causing vasocon-
striction. In fact, induction of 20-HETE production by cyclosporine 
in renal proximal tubular cells and the resultant decrease in renal 
cortical blood flow may contribute to the nephrotoxicity of cyclo-
sporine (Seki et al., 2005). Blockade of hERG channels (human 
Ether-a-go-go Related Gene), a voltage-gated K+ channel, causes 
prolonged delays in cardiac repolarization, as indicated by pro-
longed QT time in an ECG (see Chap. 18). Sustained QT prolon-
gation may evoke polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (torsade de 
pointes), which degenerates into ventricular fibrillation and death 
(Cubeddu, 2016). Several drugs that show sustained QT prolon-
gation (e.g., astemizole, cisapride, grepafloxacin, and terfenadine) 
have been withdrawn from clinical use because of serious side 
effects including death.
Glycosides from digitalis and other plants inhibit Na+,K+-
ATPase (item 10 in Fig. 3-17) and thus increase the intracellular 
Na+ concentration, which, in turn, decreases Ca2+ export by Ca2+/
Na+ exchange. The resultant rise in the intracellular concentration 
of Ca2+ enhances the contractility and excitability of cardiac mus-
cle. Failure of Na+,K+ pump function is also believed to contribute 
to neuronal damage resulting from hypoxia, hypoglycemia, and 
cyanide intoxication. Inasmuch as 70% of the ATP produced in neu-
rons is used to drive the Na+,K+ pump; cessation of ATP synthesis 
causes a cell to become or remain depolarized. The depolarization-
induced release of neurotransmitters such as glutamate from such 
neurons is thought to be responsible for the hypoxic seizures and 
further amplification of neuronal injury by the neurotoxic actions 
of glutamate.
Dysregulation of the Activity of Other Cells  While many 
signaling mechanisms also operate in nonexcitable cells, distur-
bance of these processes is usually less consequential. For example, 
rat liver cells possess α1-adrenergic receptors (item 12 in Fig. 3-17) 
whose activation evokes metabolic changes, such as increased gly-
cogenolysis and glutathione export, through elevation of intracellu-
lar Ca2+. However, no role in a toxic mechanism has been ascribed 
to xenobiotic interaction with these receptors.
Many exocrine secretory cells are controlled by muscarinic 
acetylcholine receptors (item 11 in Fig. 3-17). Salivation, lacrima-
tion, and bronchial hypersecretion after organophosphate insecti-
cide poisoning are due to stimulation of these receptors. In contrast, 
blockade of these receptors contributes to the hyperthermia charac-
teristic of atropine poisoning. Kupffer cells, resident macrophages 
in the liver, secrete inflammatory mediators that can harm neighbor-
ing cells. Because Kupffer cells possess glycine-gated Cl− channels 
(glycine receptors; item 4 in Fig. 3-17), the secretory function of 
these macrophages (e.g., secretion of inflammatory mediators) can 
be blocked by administration of glycine, which induces hyperpo-
larization via influx of Cl−. Such intervention alleviates ethanol-
induced liver injury (Yamashina et al., 2005).
Toxic Alteration of Cellular Maintenance
The major toxicity manifested by toxicant-induced alterations in 
cellular maintenance is cell death. This is usually an irreversible 
process that can disrupt the structural and functional integrity of 
the organ or organism, and it invokes numerous repair or adap-
tive processes to compensate for the loss of function. There are 
several different types of cell death that are distinguished by the 
morphological and biochemical alterations that accompany them. 
Understanding mechanisms of cell death provides for deeper rec-
ognition of the cellular processes that initiate this toxic outcome 
along with the compensatory changes that accompany these 
processes.
Mechanisms of Toxic Cell Death
Despite unique morphologic outcome and initiating events, there are 
three common, major events underlying cell death. These are ATP 
depletion, sustained rise in intracellular Ca2+, and overproduction 
of ROS and RNS. These events and the chemicals that may cause 
them are individually characterized, after which the features of dif-
ference pathways leading to cell death are discussed. Classically,

92
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
cell death was considered to occur via necrosis, a process deemed 
to be irreversible damage. However, there are now additional path-
ways that lead to cell death, many of which involve more complex 
signaling mechanisms and a specific, regulated program. These 
pathways are primarily differentiated by the agents that induce the 
effects and the mediators of cell death. Mitochondrial changes are 
at the core of every cell death, regardless of the pathways or media-
tors involved.
Primary 
Metabolic 
Disorders 
Jeopardizing 
Cell 
Survival  Cell viability is maintained by ATP as it supports inter-
mediary metabolism and is the major source of cellular energy. ATP 
is utilized in numerous biosynthetic reactions, activating endog-
enous compounds by phosphorylation and adenylation, and it is 
incorporated into cofactors as well as nucleic acids. It is required 
for muscle contraction and polymerization of the cytoskeleton, 
fueling cellular motility, cell division, vesicular transport, and the 
maintenance of cell morphology. ATP drives many different ion 
transporters, such as the Na+,K+-ATPase in the plasma membrane, 
the Ca2+-ATPase in plasma and ER membranes, and H+-ATPase 
in the membrane of lysosomes and neurotransmitter-containing 
vesicles. These pumps also support essential cell functions. For 
example, the Na+ concentration gradient across the plasma mem-
brane generated by the Na+,K+ pump drives Na+-glucose and 
Na+–amino acid cotransporters as well as the Na+/Ca2+ antiporter, 
facilitating the entry of these nutrients and the removal of Ca2+.
Chemical energy is released by hydrolysis of ATP to ADP and 
AMP. The ADP is rephosphorylated in the mitochondria by ATP 
synthase (Fig. 3-18). Oxidative phosphorylation is the process by 
which ATP is synthesized when coupled to the oxidation of hydro-
gen to form water. In addition to ATP synthase, oxidative phosphor-
ylation requires the (1) delivery of hydrogen in the form of NADH 
to the initial electron transport complex; (2) delivery of oxygen to 
the terminal electron transport complex; (3) delivery of ADP and 
inorganic phosphate to ATP synthase; (4) flux of electrons along the 
electron transport chain to O2, accompanied by ejection of protons 
from the matrix space across the inner membrane; and (5) return of 
protons across the inner membrane into the matrix space down an 
electrochemical gradient to drive ATP synthase.
Several chemicals impede the various steps in oxidative phos-
phorylation to disrupt mitochondrial ATP synthesis (Wallace, 2008; 
Caito and Aschner, 2015). These chemicals are divided into five 
groups (Table 3-5). Substances in class A interfere with the delivery 
of hydrogen to the electron transport chain. For example, fluoro-
acetate inhibits the citric acid cycle and the production of reduced 
cofactors. Class B chemicals, such as rotenone and cyanide, inhibit 
the transfer of electrons along the electron transport chain to oxy-
gen. Class C agents interfere with oxygen delivery to the terminal 
electron transporter, cytochrome oxidase. All chemicals that cause 
hypoxia ultimately act at this site. Chemicals in class D inhibit the 
activity of ATP synthase, the key enzyme for oxidative phosphory-
lation. At this site, the synthesis of ATP may be inhibited in one of 
four ways: (1) direct inhibition of ATP synthase, (2) interference 
with ADP delivery, (3) interference with inorganic phosphate deliv-
ery, and (4) deprivation of ATP synthase from its driving force, the 
controlled influx of protons into the matrix space. Protonophoric 
chemicals (uncouplers) such as 2,4-dinitrophenol and pentachlo-
rophenol import protons into the mitochondrial matrix, dissipating 
the proton gradient that drives the controlled influx of protons into 
the matrix, which in turn drives ATP synthase. Finally, chemicals 
causing mitochondrial DNA injury to impair synthesis of specific 
proteins encoded by the mitochondrial genome (e.g., subunits of 
complex I and ATP synthase) are listed in group E. These include 
many of dideoxynucleoside antiviral drugs such as zidovudine.
Glucose
Fatty acids
Pyruvate
Fatty acyl-CoA
ATP
SYN
ANT
Pi ADP
ATP
Electron
transport chain
O4
2
– 4H+
2H2O
O2
Acetyl-CoA
H+
e–
A
B
C
D
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
Substrates:
Products:
Inhibitors:
NADH + H+
NAD+ Citrate
cycle
PDH
βOX
Figure 3-18.   ATP synthesis (oxidative phosphorylation) in mitochondria. Arrows with letters A to D indicate the ultimate sites of action of four categories of 
agents that interfere with oxidative phosphorylation (Table 3-5). Toxicants that induce DNA damage (Class E, Table 3-5) are not illustrated. For simplicity, this 
scheme does not indicate the outer mitochondrial membrane and that protons are extruded from the matrix space along the electron transport chain at three 
sites. Abbreviations: βOX, beta-oxidation of fatty acids; e−, electron; Pi, inorganic phosphate; ANT, adenine nucleotide translocator; ATP SYN, ATP synthase 
(FoF1-ATPase).

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
93
ATP synthase is also present in the outer segment disk of the 
retinal rods as well as the plasma membrane of certain cells and the 
concentric membranes that form the myelin sheath around the axon 
of neurons. In plasma and myelin membranes, ATP is formed in the 
external membrane by ecto-ATP synthase. ATP supply to axons, 
through the ecto-ATP synthase in myelin, may explain why demy-
elinated axons die, that is, they have no ATP source. In contrast, 
myelinated axons are sensitive to hypoxia but can synthesize ATP, 
if required.
Impairment of oxidative phosphorylation is detrimental to cells 
because with failure of ADP rephosphorylation, ATP is depleted 
and there is accumulation of ADP and its breakdown products. The 
biochemical changes observed in hepatocytes exposed to KCN 
and iodoacetate illustrate the events involved in toxicant-induced 
impairment of oxidative phosphorylation. In response to these toxi-
cants, there is a rapid rise in cytosolic H+ and Mg2+ resulting from 
hydrolysis of adenosine diphosphates and triphosphates (existing as 
Mg salts) with cellular acidosis resulting from the release of phos-
phoric acid and Mg2+. Increased conversion of pyruvate to lactate 
also may contribute to acidosis. The lack of ATP compromises the 
operation of ATP-requiring ion pumps, leading to the loss of ionic 
and volume-regulatory controls. Furthermore, there is an increase 
Table 3-5  
Agents That Impair Mitochondrial ATP Synthesis*
Class A. Inhibitors of hydrogen delivery to the electron transport chain
	 1.	 Glycolysis (critical in neurons): hypoglycemia; iodoacetate, koningic acid, and NO+
	 2.	 Gluconeogenesis (critical in renal tubular cells): coenzyme A depletors (see below)
	 3.	 Fatty acid oxidation (critical in cardiac muscle): hypoglycin, 4-pentenoic acid, 4-ene-valproic acid
	 4.	 Pyruvate dehydrogenase: arsenite, DCVC, p-benzoquinone
	 5.	 Citrate cycle
	
(a)	 Aconitase: fluoroacetate, ONOO−
	
(b)	 Isocitrate dehydrogenase: DCVC
	
(c)	 Succinate dehydrogenase: malonate, DCVC, PCBD-Cys, 2-bromohydroquinone, 3-nitropropionic acid, cis-crotonalide  
fungicides
	 6.	 Depletors of TPP (inhibit TPP-dependent PDH and α-KGDH): ethanol (when chronically consumed)
	 7.	 Compounds that deplete coenzyme A (CoA)
	
(a)	 Thiol-reactive electrophiles: 4-(dimethylamino)phenol, p-benzoquinone
	
(b)	 Drugs enzymatically conjugated with CoA: salicylic acid (the metabolite of aspirin), valproic acid
	 8.	 Compounds that deplete NADH
	
(a)	 Alloxan, t-butylhydroperoxide
	
(b)	 Activators of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP): agents causing DNA damage (e.g., MNNG, hydrogen peroxide, ONOO−)
Class B. Inhibitors of electron transport
	 1.	 Inhibitors of electron transport complexes
	
(a)	 NADH–coenzyme Q reductase (complex I): rotenone, amytal, MPP+, paraquat
	
(b)	 Coenzyme Q–cytochrome c reductase (complex III): antimycin-A, myxothiazole
	
(c)	 Cytochrome oxidase (complex IV): cyanide, hydrogen sulfide, azide, formate, •NO, phosphine (PH3)
	
(d)	 Multisite inhibitors: dinitroaniline and diphenylether herbicides, ONOO−
	 2.	 Electron acceptors: CCl4, doxorubicin, menadione, MPP+
Class C. Inhibitors of oxygen delivery to the electron transport chain
	 1.	 Chemicals causing respiratory paralysis: CNS depressants (e.g., opioids), convulsants
	 2.	 Chemicals impairing pulmonary gas exchange: CO2, NO2, phosgene, perfluoroisobutene
	 3.	 Chemicals inhibiting oxygenation of Hb: carbon monoxide, methemoglobin-forming chemicals
	 4.	 Chemicals causing ischemia: ergot alkaloids, cocaine
Class D. Inhibitors of ADP phosphorylation
	 1.	 ATP synthase: oligomycin, cyhexatin, DDT, chlordecone
	 2.	 Adenine nucleotide translocator: atractyloside, DDT, free fatty acids, lysophospholipids
	 3.	 Phosphate transporter: N-ethylmaleimide, mersalyl, p-benzoquinone
	 4.	 Chemicals dissipating the mitochondrial membrane potential (uncouplers)
	
(a)	 Cationophores: pentachlorophenol, dinitrophenol, benzonitrile, thiadiazole herbicides, salicylate, CCCP, cationic amphiphilic 
drugs (bupivacaine, perhexiline), valinomycin, gramicidin, calcimycin (A23187)
	
(b)	 Chemicals permeabilizing the mitochondrial inner membrane: PCBD-Cys, chlordecone
	 5.	 Multisite inhibitor drugs: phenformin, propofol, salicylic acid (when overdosed)
Class E. Chemicals causing mitochondrial DNA damage
	 1.	 Antiviral drugs: zidovudine, zalcitabine, didanosine, fialuridine
	 2.	 Antibiotics: chloramphenicol (when overdosed), linezolid
	 3.	 Ethanol (when chronically consumed)
Abbreviations: CCCP, carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone; DCVC, dichlorovinyl-cysteine; α-KGDH, α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase; MNNG, 
N-methyl-N′-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine; MPP+, 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium; PCBD-Cys, pentachlorobutadienylcysteine; PDH, pyruvate dehydroge-
nase; TPP, thiamine pyrophosphate.
* The ultimate sites of action of these agents are indicated in Fig. 3-18.

94
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
in intracellular Na+ that follows acidosis and hypermagnesemia. 
The increase in Na+ likely results from failure of the ATP-requiring 
Na+ pumps, and this effect leads to the formation of plasma mem-
brane blebs, an early morphologic change in cell death. Although 
it contributes to acidosis, increased levels of intracellular phos-
phoric acid may be beneficial because it counteracts or prevents the 
rise in cytosolic Ca2+ by forming calcium phosphate. However, as 
discussed below, increased intracellular Ca2+ levels are generally 
very detrimental to cell viability. Biochemically, cellular acidosis 
directly decreases the activity of phospholipases and inhibits mito-
chondrial permeability transition (MPT; discussed in the section 
“Mitochondrial Permeability Transition and Necrotic Cell Death”). 
Finally, in its terminal stages, the intracellular pH rises, and this 
increases phospholipase activity, which enhances degradation of 
membrane phospholipids to initiate irreversible membrane damage.
Sustained Rise of Intracellular Ca2+  Intracellular Ca2+ levels are 
highly regulated. There is a 10,000-fold difference between extra-
cellular and cytosolic Ca2+ concentration that is maintained by the 
impermeability of the plasma membrane to Ca2+ and by transport 
mechanisms that remove Ca2+ from the cytoplasm. Ca2+ is actively 
pumped out of the cytosol across the plasma membrane and it is 
sequestered in the ER and mitochondria. Importantly, mitochon-
dria express a low-affinity Ca2+ transporter that plays a significant 
role in Ca2+ sequestration when the cytoplasmic concentrations rise 
into the micromolar range. Under such conditions, a large amount 
of Ca2+ accumulates in the mitochondria, where it is deposited as 
calcium phosphate. If toxicants open ligand- or voltage-gated Ca2+ 
channels or damage plasma membranes, Ca2+ readily moves down 
its concentration gradient from extracellular fluid into the cyto-
plasm. Similarly, toxicants may increase cytosolic Ca2+ by caus-
ing it to leak from the mitochondria or the endoplasmic reticulum 
(EPR) into the cytoplasm. They also diminish Ca2+ efflux through 
inhibition of Ca2+ transporters or depletion of their driving forces. 
Examples of chemicals that can cause a sustained rise in cytoplas-
mic Ca2+ levels are listed in Table 3-6.
Sustained elevation of intracellular Ca2+ is harmful because it 
will deplete energy reserves, alter microfilament structure, activate 
hydrolytic enzymes, and generate ROS and RNS. Increased intra-
cellular Ca2+ levels alter cellular energy balance because high cyto-
plasmic Ca2+ concentrations increase mitochondrial Ca2+ uptake 
by the Ca2+ uniporter. In doing so, the mitochondrial membrane 
potential (ΔΨm) is dissipated, and ATP synthesis is reduced. Ca2+ 
may also impair ATP synthesis by causing oxidative injury to the 
inner membrane by mechanisms described later. Furthermore, a 
sustained rise in cytoplasmic Ca2+ increases ATP consumption by 
forcing Ca2+-ATPases to work to eliminate the excess Ca2+.
A second mechanism by which an uncontrolled rise in cyto-
plasmic Ca2+ causes cell injury is microfilamental dissociation 
(Orrenius et al., 2015). The cell-wide network of actin filaments 
maintains cellular morphology by attachment of the filaments 
to actin-binding proteins in the plasma membrane. An increase 
of cytoplasmic Ca2+ causes dissociation of actin filaments from 
α-actinin and fodrin, proteins involved in anchoring the filaments 
to the plasma membrane. This mechanism leads to bleb formation 
in plasma membranes, a condition that predisposes the membrane 
to rupture.
Table 3-6  
Agents Causing Sustained Elevation of Cytosolic Ca2+
	A.	Chemicals inducing Ca2+ influx into the cytoplasm
	
I.	 Via ligand-gated channels in neurons
	
1.	 Glutamate receptor agonists (“excitotoxins”): glutamate, kainate, domoate
	
2.	 TRPV1 receptor (capsaicin receptor) agonists: capsaicin
	
3.	 TRPA1 receptor agonists: SH-reactive electrophiles, such as lacrimators (e.g., chlorobenzalmalonitrile), acrolein, methyl 
isocyanate, phosgene, chloropicrin
	
II.	 Via voltage-gated channels: maitotoxin, HO•
	
III.	 Via “newly formed pores”: maitotoxin, amphotericin B, chlordecone, methylmercury, alkyltins
	
IV.	 Across disrupted cell membrane
	
1.	 Detergents: exogenous detergents, lysophospholipids, free fatty acids
	
2.	 Hydrolytic enzymes: phospholipases in snake venoms, endogenous phospholipase A2
	
3.	 Lipid peroxidants: carbon tetrachloride
	
4.	 Cytoskeletal toxins (by inducing membrane blebbing): cytochalasins, phalloidin
	
V.	 From mitochondria
	
1.	 Oxidants of intramitochondrial NADH: alloxan, t-BHP, NAPBQI, divicine, fatty acid hydroperoxides, menadione, MPP+
	
2.	 Others: phenylarsine oxide, gliotoxin, •NO, ONOO−
	
VI.	 From the endoplasmic reticulum
	
1.	 IP3 receptor activators: γ-HCH (lindane), IP3 formed during “excitotoxicity”
	
2.	 Ryanodine receptor activators: δ-HCH
	B.	Chemicals inhibiting Ca2+ export from the cytoplasm (inhibitors of Ca2+-ATPase in cell membrane and/or endoplasmic 
reticulum)
	
I.	 Covalent binders: acetaminophen, bromobenzene, CCl4, chloroform, DCE
	
II.	 Thiol oxidants: cystamine (mixed disulfide formation), diamide, t-BHP, O2
• , and HOOH generators (e.g., menadione, diquat)
	
III.	 Others: vanadate, Cd2+, thapsigargin (specific SERCA inhibitor)
	
IV.	 Chemicals impairing mitochondrial ATP synthesis (see Table 3-5)
Abbreviations: DCE, 1,1-dichloroethylene; HCH, hexachlorocyclohexane; MPP+, 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium; NAPBQI, N-acetyl-p-benzoquinonei-
mine; SERCA, sarco/endoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase; t-BHP, t-butyl hydroperoxide.

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
95
A third event whereby high Ca2+ concentrations are deleteri-
ous to cells is activation of hydrolytic enzymes that degrade pro-
teins, phospholipids, and nucleic acids. Many integral membrane 
proteins are targets for Ca2+-activated neutral proteases, or calpains 
(Orrenius et al., 2015). Calpain-mediated hydrolysis of actin-
binding proteins may also initiate formation of membrane blebs. 
Other enzymatic alterations include the activation of a Ca2+-Mg2+-
dependent endonuclease to cause chromatin fragmentation and 
alteration of topoisomerase II activity to disrupt DNA cleavage. 
Changes in phospholipase activity increase the formation of fatty 
acid intermediates that have detergent-like activity to further disrupt 
the integrity of the cell membrane.
Overproduction of ROS and RNS  There are a number of xeno-
biotics that can directly generate ROS and RNS, such as chemi-
cals that cause redox cycling and transition metals (refer to Figs. 
3-3 and 3-4). In addition, overproduction of ROS and RNS can be 
secondary to intracellular hypercalcemia, as Ca2+activates enzymes 
that generate ROS and/or RNS by activating dehydrogenases in 
the citric acid cycle which accelerate hydrogen output and in turn 
increases the flux of electrons along the electron transport chain 
(see Fig. 3-18). This action increases the formation of O2
•  by the 
mitochondrial electron transport chain. Ca2+ also activates pro-
teases that convert xanthine dehydrogenase into xanthine oxidase, 
which generates O2
•  and HOOH. Finally, neurons and endothelial 
cells constitutively express NOS that is activated by Ca2+. Given 
the extremely high reactivity of •NO with O2
• , coproduction of these 
radicals will inevitably lead to formation of ONOO−, a highly reac-
tive oxidant (Calcerrada et al., 2011; Fig. 3-4).
An important mechanistic consideration in understanding cell 
death mechanisms is that the interplay between the three primary 
derangements in biochemistry discussed above do not remain iso-
lated but interact and amplify each other in a number of ways. This 
interplay, depicted in Fig. 3-19, includes the following:
 • Depletion of cellular ATP reserves that deprive the endoplas-
mic and plasma membrane Ca2+ pumps of fuel, causing eleva-
tion of Ca2+ in the cytoplasm. With the influx of Ca2+ into the 
mitochondria, the mitochondrial membrane potential (ΔΨm) 
declines, hindering ATP synthase.
 • Intracellular hypercalcemia that facilitates formation of ROS 
and RNS, which inactivates thiol-dependent Ca2+ pumps by 
oxidative damage to further exacerbate hypercalcemia.
 • Formation of ROS and RNS inhibits ATP synthesis. •NO is a 
reversible inhibitor of cytochrome oxidase; NO+ (nitrosonium 
cation, a product of •NO) S-nitrosylate and inactivate glycer-
aldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase, impairing glycolysis, 
whereas ONOO− irreversibly inactivates respiratory chain 
complexes I, II, III and aconitase (by reacting with their Fe-S 
center; Calcerrada et al., 2011).
 • Formation of ONOO− that induces DNA single-strand breaks, 
which activates poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP). As 
part of the repair strategy, activated PARP transfers multiple 
ADP-ribose moieties from NAD+ to nuclear proteins and 
PARP itself. This consumption of NAD+ severely compro-
mises ATP synthesis (see Fig. 3-18), increasing the need to 
resynthesize NAD+ further consumes ATP to ultimately cause 
a significant cellular energy deficit (Calcerrada et al., 2011).
However, the chain of events that contribute to the worsen-
ing metabolic conditions are somewhat cell- and toxicant-specific. 
For example, cyanide toxicity in neurons is associated with rapid 
depolarization and glutamate release, followed by Ca2+ influx 
through voltage-gated as well as glutamate-gated channels (see 
items 8 and 2, respectively, in Fig. 3-17). In contrast, in KCN- and 
iodoacetate-poisoned liver cells, early events center on cellular aci-
dosis, and the increase in cytoplasmic Ca2+ occurs somewhat later. 
Finally, a nitrosative stress also contributes to propagation of acet-
aminophen-induced hepatocellular injury. In this example, the ini-
tiating event is covalent binding of N-acetyl-p-benzoquinoneimine 
(NAPBQI) to mitochondrial proteins. This purportedly causes 
a surge in mitochondrial (O2
•) generation, followed by in situ 
formation of ONOO− which modifies mitochondrial proteins. 
With depletion of glutathione, covalent binding incapacitates the 
plasma membrane Ca2+ pump to increase intracellular Ca2+ levels 
which further reduces mitochondrial function and ATP production 
(Jaeschke and Bajt, 2006). The interplay of ATP depletion, intracel-
lular hypercalcemia, and overproduction of ROS and RNS involves 
multiple cycles that progressively aggravate biochemical dysfunc-
tion until the cell dies.
Mitochondrial Permeability Transition and Necrotic Cell 
Death  Mitochondrial permeability transition (MPT) is an abrupt 
change in mitochondrial membranes that results in formation of 
a nonspecific pore that opens when mitochondrial Ca2+ levels are 
high, especially when accompanied by decreased ΔΨm, genera-
tion of ROS and RNS, and depletion of ATP (Hurst et al., 2017). 
Formation of the pore, which results from misfolded proteins in 
both the inner and outer mitochondrial membranes, enables sol-
utes <1500 Da, and protons to readily enter into the mitochondrial 
matrix space, which in turn causes rapid and complete dissipation 
of ΔΨm, cessation of ATP synthesis, and osmotic influx of water. 
Collectively, these events produce biochemical dysfunction and 
mitochondrial swelling. Ca2+ in the mitochondrial matrix effluxes 
out of mitochondria through the pore to increase cytoplasmic Ca2+ 
concentrations. In the face of these changes, mitochondria are inca-
pable of synthesizing ATP and the organelle further wastes any 
remaining ATP because depolarization of the inner membrane con-
verts ATP synthase to an ATPase that hydrolyzes ATP. At this point, 
even glycolysis is compromised by the insufficient ATP supply to 
the ATP-requiring glycolytic enzymes (hexokinase and phospho-
fructokinase). If extensive, a complete bioenergetic catastrophe 
develops that culminates in necrotic cell death.
The histopathologic presentation of hepatic centrilobular necro-
sis is illustrated in Fig. 3-20. Morphologically, there is obvious loss of 
the nucleus, and individual cells are no longer obvious in the necrotic 
region. Such cellular loss is usually irreversible unless the organ can 
↑ ROS
↑ RNS
↓ NAD(P)H
↑ PARP
(DNA injury)
Inactivation of
MET complexes
↓ ∆ψm
↑ Ca2+
↓ Ca2+-ATPase
↓ Ca2+-ATPase
↓ ATP
↑ MET + ↓ ATP-Syn 
↑ NOS
↑ XO
Figure 3-19.   Interrelationship between the primary metabolic disorders 
(ATP depletion, intracellular hypercalcemia, and overproduction of ROS/
RNS) that ultimately cause necrosis or apoptosis. Abbreviations: ATP-Syn, 
ATP synthase; MET, mitochondrial electron transport; NOS, nitric oxide 
synthase; PARP, poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase; ROS, reactive oxygen spe-
cies; RNS, reactive nitrogen species; XO, xanthine oxidase; ΔΨm, mito-
chondrial membrane potential.

96
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
mount a repair process (discussed below). However, this final out-
come is preceded by a continuum of changes that begin with mito-
chondrial swelling (which can only be seen by electron microscopy) 
followed by a continuum of nuclear changes. The nuclear changes 
noted in necrotic cell death include (1) pyknosis characterized by 
shrunken and abnormally dark basophilic staining of the nucleus; 
(2) karyolysis, in which nuclei appear swollen and abnormally pale 
basophilic staining, and (3) karyorrhexis, the rupture and fragmenta-
tion of the nucleus (Table 3-7). Numerous imaging methods, includ-
ing confocal microscopy, can be used to detect the onset of the MPT 
in individual mitochondria within cultured living cells. Selective flu-
rophores that distribute to the cytoplasm such as calcein will redistrib-
ute into the mitochondria when MPT occurs. Similarly, fluorophores 
that monitor membrane potential, such as tetramethylrhodamine 
methylester, will be simultaneously released from the mitochondria. 
In this way, MPT is reflected by the mitochondrial presence of cal-
cein and the cytoplasmic appearance of the rhodamine methylester. 
Cyclosporin A (CsA) and trifluoperazine (TFP) have been shown to 
block the MPT in numerous models of cell death. Co-treatment or 
pretreatment with CsA or TFP prevents cell killing, thereby proving 
that the MPT is a causative factor in necrotic cell death.
Other Mechanisms of Cell Death  Although necrotic cell death 
is a common mechanism by which toxicants act, there are numer-
ous additional mechanisms by which cell death occurs. In the case 
of necrosis, the common steps outlined above occur in a somewhat 
uncontrolled cascade. However, other forms of cell death typically 
involve a program or more ordered cascade that ultimately triggers 
irreversible damage. These programs include apoptosis, necrop-
tosis, ferroptosis, and autophagy, and the general morphologic, 
biochemical, and molecular features of these pathways are sum-
marized in Table 3-7. While the necrotic cell swells and lyses, the 
apoptotic cell shrinks. Accordingly, apoptotic changes are mani-
fested as condensation of nuclear and cytoplasmic materials, after 
which the cell breaks into membrane-bound fragments (apoptotic 
bodies) that are phagocytosed (Zhivotovsky and Orrenius, 2001; 
Orrenius et al., 2011).
CV
Figure 3-20.   Photomicrograph depicting the morphological presentation 
of hepatocellular necrosis. There is a focal area of necrosis immediately sur-
rounding the central vein (CV) with evidence for loss of cell integrity and 
complete absence of nuclei in this region. The region outside this focal area of 
necrosis is generally normal. An apoptotic lesion would be more eosinophilic 
in nature and nuclei would still be present but potentially fragmented. (From 
https://www.niehs.nih.gov/research/resources/visual-guides/liverpath/ 
assets/images/i_k/jw103.jpg.)
Table 3-7  
Morphological, Biochemical, and Molecular Features of Cell Death Mechanisms
TYPE
MORPHOLOGICAL FEATURES
BIOCHEMICAL 
FEATURES
CORE REGULATORS
Cell Membrane
Nucleus
Cytoplasm
Positive
Negative
Autophagy
No change
No chromatin 
condensation
Accumulation 
of autophagic 
vacuoles
Substrate degradation
ATG5
ATG7
Beclin
Necrosis
Blebbing and 
rupture
Pyknosis,  
karyorrhexia, and 
karyolysis
Swelling
Lysosomal enzyme 
release
None: Pathologic stimulation
Apoptosis
Blebbing and 
rounding up
Pyknosis, frag-
mentation, and 
chromatin con-
densation
Reduction of 
cell volume
Phosphatidylserine 
exposure, activation 
of caspases, DNA 
fragmentation 
p53, Bax, 
Bak
Bcl-2, Bcl-XL
Necroptosis
Rupture
Moderate chro-
matin condensa-
tion
Swelling of cell 
and cytoplasmic 
organelles
Reduced ATP levels, 
activation of RIPK1, 
RIPK3, and MLKL, 
release of DAMPS
RIPK1
RIPK3
MLKL
Necrostatin
Caspase-8
Ferroptosis
No blebbing or 
rupture
No chromatin 
changes and nor-
mal size main-
tained
Small mito-
chondria with 
reduction and 
vanishing of 
mitochondria 
cristae
Iron and ROS accu-
mulation, GSH deple-
tion and NADPH 
oxidation, release of 
11-HETE and 15-
HETE
VDAC2
Ras
NOX
TFR1
p53
Gpx4
SLC7A11
Nrf2
Abbreviations: ATG, autophagy protein; MLKL, mixed lineage kinase domain like; RIPK, receptor interacting protein kinase; VDAC2, voltage-dependent 
anion channel 2.

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
97
Apoptosis  A scheme of the apoptotic pathways is presented in 
Fig. 3-21. Apoptosis is characterized by pyknotic change, cyto-
plasmic shrinkage, nuclear fragmentation, and blebbing of cell 
membranes. Ultimately, apoptotic cells disintegrate into membrane-
enclosed fragments called apoptotic bodies. Like necrosis, mito-
chondrial dysfunction and MPT contribute to apoptosis. However, 
a critical first step in apoptosis is the release of mitochondrial cyto-
chrome c (cyt c) from the mitochondria into the cytoplasm. Cyt c is 
a small, positively charged heme protein that normally resides in the 
mitochondrial intermembrane space where it is attached electrostati-
cally to cardiolipin. Peroxidation of cardiolipin by HOOH, a process 
catalyzed by cyt c, results in detachment of cyt c from the lipid, a crit-
ical first step for cyt c to be released into the cytoplasm (Orrenius et 
al., 2011). This release, which adversely affects ATP synthesis in the 
mitochondria, initiates the apoptotic cascade by causing the cytoplas-
mic adapter protein apoptotic protease activating factor (Apaf-1) to 
oligomerize and bind latent procaspase-9, forming a complex called 
the apoptosome, and facilitating its conversion to active caspase-9.
Extrinsic pathway
(Receptor-mediated)
Death ligand
Death receptor
Bid
Bax
Bcl-2
Apoptotic stimuli
Intrinsic pathway
(Mitochondria-mediated)
Bcl-XL
Bak
Type II cells
Type I cells
Caspase-8
Caspase-3
Death Substrates
Cyt. c
Smac
Omi
AIF
EndoG
XIAP
Caspase-9
Caspase-3
Apoptosis
Apoptosome
DISC
Figure 3-21.   The extrinsic and intrinsic pathways of apoptosis. In the intrinsic pathway (right) mitochondrial-mediated changes open the permeability transi-
tion pore spanning both mitochondrial membranes and/or cause release of cytochrome c (Cyt c) and other proapoptotic and antiapoptotic proteins. Cyt c release 
is facilitated by Bax and opposed by Bcl-2 protein. The released Cyt c forms a multi-protein complex known as the apoptosome and initiates activation of 
the caspase cascade through caspase-9. In the extrinsic pathway, apoptosis is initiated by receptor activation, and binding of TNF-α to TNF receptor 1 is the 
major extrinsic mediator of apoptosis. Additionally, activation of the Fas receptor (first apoptosis signal) which binds the Fas ligand (FasL), and TNF-related 
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) receptor also activate the extrinsic pathway. The interaction between Fas and FasL results in the formation of the death-
inducing signaling complex (DISC), which contains the Fas-associated death domain protein (FADD), caspase-8, and caspase-10. Caspase-8 is the major 
caspase involved in the extrinsic apoptotic pathway. The ligand-bound death receptors and the released Cyt c interact with specific adapter proteins (i.e., FADD, 
TRADD, and Apaf-1) through which specific initiator procaspases (PC, e.g., PC-8 and PC-9) become active caspases (C). The latter in turn cleave and activate 
other proteins, including Bid and the main effector procaspase-3 (PC-3). The active effector caspase-3 activates other effector procaspases (PC-6 and PC-7). 
Finally, C-3, C-6, and C-7 cleave specific cellular proteins, leading to morphological and biochemical features of apoptosis. (From Orrenius et al., 2011, with 
permission.)

98
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
There are two major pathways that lead to apoptosis in mam-
malian cells referred to as the extrinsic and intrinsic pathways 
(Fig. 3-21), and caspase activation is the hallmark of both pathways. 
The intrinsic pathway is initiated by signals for cell death acting 
directly on mitochondria and stimulate the release of proapoptotic 
proteins including cyt c, with subsequent activation of procaspase-9 
and activation of caspase-3. The extrinsic pathway is a receptor-
mediated pathway in which activation of caspases, particularly pro-
caspase-8, occurs after ligation of membrane receptors (Fas receptor 
[CD95] or tumor necrosis factor receptor-1 [TNFR1]). Procaspase-8 
is activated directly from receptor ligation through formation of the 
death-inducible signaling complex (DISC), and caspase-8 activates 
caspase-3, which in turn cleaves target proteins leading to apopto-
sis. As such, although the intrinsic and extrinsic pathways may be 
activated by different signals, they converge on caspase-3 activation.
Caspases are cysteine-aspartic proteases with a cysteine in the 
active site that cleaves target proteins only after an aspartate residue. 
They reside mostly in the cytoplasm in inactive forms (procaspases), 
which are activated by either dimerization (initiators) or proteolytic 
cleavage (effectors; Tummers and Green, 2017). Caspase activity 
is controlled by cytoplasmic proteins termed inhibitors of apopto-
sis proteins (IAPs; Finlay et al., 2017). The best characterized IAP 
is XIAP (X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis), which binds caspase-9, 
caspase-3, and caspase-7 to inhibit their activation. Accordingly, 
the release of cyt c occurs in concert with activation of proteins 
that physically remove the IAPs from the caspases just being acti-
vated. Activity of XIAP is blocked by binding to DIABLO (Smac) 
and HTRA2 (Omi) proteins released from mitochondria after pro-
apoptic stimuli. In addition to their role in facilitating cyt c activity, 
Smac and Omi, as residents of the mitochondrial intermembrane 
space, are jointly mobilized to promote the caspase cascade.
Caspases-8 and -9 are initiator caspases that carry the activation 
wave to the downstream effector caspases (caspases-3, -6, and -7), 
which cleave specific cellular proteins. It is the hydrolysis of these 
specific proteins that accounts directly or indirectly for the morpho-
logical and biochemical alterations in apoptotic cells. For example, 
proteolytic inactivation of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) 
prevents futile DNA repair and wasting of ATP, and cleavage of 
Beclin 1 aborts autophagy (discussed below). Hydrolytic activa-
tion of sterol regulatory element–binding proteins contributes to 
the externalization of phosphatidylserine (PS) onto the outer leaflet 
of the plasma membrane, and this change in PS (normally in the 
inner leaflet of the cell membrane) identifies the apoptotic cell to 
phagocytes. This switch in PS location also enables experimental 
detection of apoptotic cells with fluorescently labeled annexin V.
Apoptotic signaling is controlled by the Bcl-2 (B-cell lym-
phoma-2) family of proteins, which serves as a rheostat of sorts for 
apoptosis because its members either facilitate or inhibit apoptotic 
processes. Members that facilitate apoptosis include Bax (Bcl-
2-associated X protein) along with Bak, Bad, Bid, Bim, BNIP3, 
Puma, and Noxa, whereas those that inhibit are Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL 
(Walensky and Gavathiotis, 2011). Of these, Bax is a pivotal pro-
apoptotic protein. It acts through oligomerization that forms pores 
in the mitochondrial outer membrane (MOM), thereby facilitating 
release of cyt c and other intermembrane proapoptotic proteins via 
MPT. Moreover, mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization 
(MOMP) by Bax and its congeners is sufficient to evoke egress of 
cyt c from the mitochondria, and this action is responsible for cyt c 
release in apoptosis initiated at extramitochondrial targets, includ-
ing death receptors and nuclear DNA (see below). Bax and Bid 
proteins are also involved in cell death programs that are initiated 
by stimulation of death receptors (CD95 and TNFR1) at the cell sur-
face or in response to DNA damage. In contrast, the antiapoptotic 
proteins Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL are the dominant negative regulators of 
programmed cell death, and they act by forming dimers with death-
inducing counterparts to neutralize them. In simplest terms, Bax 
and Bcl-2 serve as the major proapoptotic and antiapoptotic regu-
latory proteins, such that relative levels and activity of these two 
proteins dictate the balance between cell survival and death.
DNA damage can also activate apoptotic processes through 
activation of the tumor suppressor gene p53. In the face of DNA 
damage, p53 is translocated to the nucleus where it regulates gene 
expression in a pleiotropic manner. In the case of apoptosis, p53 
increases expression of proapoptotic members of the Bcl-family 
of proteins. Cytoplasmic p53 can also abrogate the function of 
antiapoptotic proteins to favor apoptotic cell death (Green and 
Kroemer, 2009). DNA damage can cause mutations and cancer such 
that apoptotic death in the face of DNA damage is an important self-
defense mechanism against cancer. Furthermore, many antitumor 
drugs damage nuclear DNA and induce apoptosis primarily via a 
p53-dependent mechanism. At the same time, drug-induced apop-
tosis is responsible for the cytotoxicity in rapidly dividing cells, 
which is observed with cancer chemotherapeutic regimens.
Necroptosis  Another form of programmed cell death is necropto-
sis, which is an inflammation-related cell death. It is a programmed 
form of necrosis triggered by ligands of the death receptor fam-
ily, particularly members of the TNF receptor superfamily, and its 
development is regulated by receptor-interacting serine/threonine 
protein kinases 1 and 3 (RIPK1 and RIPK3) and the mixed lineage 
kinase domain-like protein (MLKL). Necroptosis is distinguished 
from necrosis in that it is a programmed process and although the 
cell membrane is disrupted, this process is also tightly regulated 
(Table 3-7). Furthermore, necroptosis can be initiated by the same 
death receptors that trigger the extrinsic apoptotic pathway, with a 
major distinction being that necroptosis occurs when caspase-8 is 
inhibited. In fact, basal levels of caspase-8 can suppress necroptosis 
(Zhou and Yuan, 2014).
Necroptosis is initiated by activation of TNFR1, Fas, and toll-
like receptors (Weinlich et al., 2017). In the case of TNFα, binding 
to TNFR1 initiates assembly of the molecular complex consisting 
of the TNF receptor–associated death domain (TRADD) along 
with TNF receptor–associated factor 2 (TRAF2) and cIAP1/2 that 
is associated with the intracellular domain of TNFR, and this in turn 
recruits RIPK1 (Fig. 3-22). Ultimately, the kinase activity of RIPK1 
recruits and phosphorylates RIPK3 into the signaling complex and 
this dimer subsequently phosphorylates the pronecroptotic protein 
MLKL to form the necrosome. Necroptosis is ultimately mediated 
by the complex of phosphorylated RIPK3 and oligomers of MLKL, 
with phospho-MLKL the most downstream effector of necropto-
sis. MLKL induces cell death by inserting into the lipid bilayer of 
the plasma membrane leading to permeabilization, rupture, and the 
release of damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) that can 
elicit immune responses. Activated MLKL can also translocate into 
intracellular membranes to cause similar rupture of the endoplasmic 
reticulum, lysosomes, or mitochondria. Although cell death is medi-
ated by MLKL, the activity of RIPK1 is required for necroptosis 
to occur because necrostatin-1, an endogenous protein that specifi-
cally inhibits the kinase activity of RIPK1, can completely block 
necroptotic cell death.
Necroptosis has been implicated in the pathology of many 
types of acute tissue damage, including myocardial infarction 
and ischemia-reperfusion injury. It is also implicated in many 
inflammation-related processes, including atherosclerosis, inflam-
matory bowel disease, and neurodegeneration (Pasparakis and 
Vandenabeele, 2015). There is also evidence that necroptosis plays 
a role in inflammatory-related liver toxicity (see Chap. 13).

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
99
Ferroptosis  Another recently recognized form of regulated cell 
death is ferroptosis, a process characterized by the accumulation 
of lipid peroxidation products and ROS that are derived specifi-
cally from iron metabolism (Xie et al., 2016). Accordingly, along 
with activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) 
pathway, iron metabolism and lipid peroxidation signaling are 
the central mediators of ferroptosis (Dixon and Stockwell, 2014). 
Excessive iron generates ROS by the Fenton reaction (Fig. 3-4), 
whereas other sources of ROS, including NADPH-dependent lipid 
peroxidation (Fig. 3-9) and depletion of GSH, contribute to fer-
roptotic cell death. Ferroptotic cell death is distinguished from 
necrosis, apoptosis, and necroptosis in that there is no change in 
nuclear size and no chromatin condensation, nor does the plasma 
membrane show frank rupture. Rather, ferroptosis is character-
ized by small mitochondria with reduction or complete loss of 
mitochondrial cristae along with rupture of the outer mitochon-
drial membrane (Table 3-7). Although the network of signaling 
pathways(s) controlling ferroptosis is not fully understood, fer-
roptosis is recognized as a nonapoptotic form of cell death for 
which toxicants that inhibit glutathione biosynthesis or the glu-
tathione-dependent antioxidant enzyme glutathione peroxidase 4 
(GPX4) are integrally involved. This process is also characterized 
by activation of the mitochondrial voltage-dependent anion chan-
nel (VDAC), particularly VDAC2/3, increased activity of NADPH 
oxidase activity that forms superoxide (O2
−), and inhibition of the 
cysteine/glutamate antiporter (SLC7A11). These three effects act 
individually or in concert to increase sensitivity to ferroptosis. In 
contrast, GPX4 activity has been shown to protect against ferrop-
tosis (Xie et al., 2016).
What Determines the Form of Cell Death?  The mode of cell 
death has consequences for the surrounding tissue. Moreover, many 
toxicants exert metabolic disturbances that involve MPT and prog-
ress to apoptotic, necroptotic, and ferroptotic changes. However, in 
general, the severity of the insult determines the mode of cell death. 
In particular, it appears that a severe toxic insult causes necrotic 
cell death rather than apoptosis because it incapacitates the cell to 
prevent it from a more deliberate form of programmed cell death. 
This incapacitation may result from the increasing number of mito-
chondria undergoing MPT, depletion of ATP, and lack of caspase 
activation.
In experimental models as distinct as Ca2+-exposed hepato-
cytes, Fas-stimulated T lymphocytes, and HOOH-exposed endo-
thelial cells, necrosis occurs instead of apoptosis when cells are 
depleted of ATP, whereas apoptosis takes place rather than necrosis 
when ATP depletion is alleviated by providing substrates for ATP 
generation (Lelli et al., 1998). Lack of ATP can prevent execution 
of the apoptotic program because apoptosis involves ATP-requiring 
steps such as activation of procaspase-9 in the apoptosome complex.
Failure of caspase activation can also result from direct action 
of reactive toxicants on these enzymes. The active site of caspases is 
composed of a pentapeptide with a reactive cysteine in it (QACXG). 
At high concentrations, soft electrophiles, disulfides (e.g., gluta-
thione disulfide), and oxidants can react with this cysteine, caus-
ing caspase inactivation and ablation of the apoptotic program, 
thereby favoring necrosis as the final outcome. Such a scenario has 
been demonstrated for cell death evoked by tributyltin, pyrrolidine 
dithiocarbamate, and arsenic trioxide (Orrenius, 2004). An impor-
tant concept in considering necrotic or apoptotic mechanisms of cell 
Caspase-8
Activation
APOPTOSIS
RIPK3
RIPK1
P
P
RIPK3
RIPK1
P
P
MLKL
P
RIPK1
TNF-α
TNFR1
TRADD
TRAF2
CIAP1/2
RIPK3
P
MLKL
MLKL
P
MLKL
P
NECROPTOSIS
Necrostatin
Necrosome
P
Figure 3-22.   The pathway regulating necroptosis. TNF-α-mediated necroptosis is initiated by binding of TNF-α to TNFR1. Under conditions of reduced 
or absent caspase-8 activity, phosphorylation of RIPK1 recruits RIPK3 which undergoes auto-phosphorylation and then recruits and phosphorylates MLKL 
to form an active complex termed the necrosome. RIPK3 and MLKL ultimately translocate to and destabilize the plasma membrane and initiate necroptotic 
cell death. Necroptosis has some features of necrosis, but this process causes release of intracellular contents, including damage-associated molecular patterns 
(DAMPs) that produce pro-inflammatory responses. It is distinguished from apoptosis because it is caspase-independent. The endogenous small molecule 
necrostatin is an inhibitor of necroptosis. Although a TNFα-mediated pathway is illustrated, other stimuli, including Fas ligand, lipopolysaccharide (LPS), 
Toll-like receptors (TLRs), and genotoxic stress can induce necroptosis through the activation of RIPK1. Abbreviations: RIPK, receptor-interacting protein 
kinase; MLKL, mixed lineage kinase domain-like protein.

100
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
death is that the number of mitochondria undergoing MPT (which 
probably depends on the degree of chemical exposure) determines 
the fate of the cell. According to this model, when only a few mito-
chondria develop MPT, they are removed by selective autophagy 
(mitophagy; see the section “Cellular Repair”) and the cell survives. 
When more mitochondria suffer MPT, the autophagic mechanism 
becomes overwhelmed, and proapoptotic factors are released to 
initiate caspase activation, and when MPT involves virtually all 
mitochondria, necrosis occurs (Orrenius et al., 2011). Based on the 
mechanistic understanding of necroptosis and ferroptosis, cell death 
mediated by these pathways involves triggering mechanisms that 
differ from necrosis or apoptosis, but they still converge on altered 
mitochondrial function.
Induction of Cell Death by Unknown Mechanisms  Some 
toxicants cause cell death by mechanisms other than necrosis or 
programmed cell death pathways. For example, chemicals that 
directly damage the plasma membrane, such as lipid solvents, 
detergents, and venom-derived hydrolytic enzymes will cause 
direct cell rupture (discussed earlier). Additionally, xenobiotics 
that damage the lysosomal membrane lead to tissue degradation by 
release of lysosomal hydrolases, as is the case for aminoglycoside 
antibiotics and hydrocarbons binding to α2u-globulin that injure 
renal tubular cells. Other mechanisms of cell death include destruc-
tion of the cytoskeleton, such as that observed with microfilament 
toxins (e.g., phalloidin and cytochalasins) and microtubule toxins 
(e.g., colchicine and 2,5-hexanedione), the protein phosphatase 
inhibitor, microcystin, and toxicants that disrupt protein synthesis 
(e.g., α-amanitin and ricin).
Impairment of External Cellular Maintenance  Toxicants may 
also interfere with cells that are specialized to provide support to 
other cells, tissues, or the whole organism. Chemicals acting on 
the liver illustrate this type of toxicity. Hepatocytes produce and 
release into the circulation a number of proteins and nutrients. They 
remove cholesterol and bilirubin from the circulation, converting 
them into bile acids and bilirubin glucuronides, respectively, for 
subsequent excretion into bile. Interruption of these processes may 
be harmful to the organism, the liver, or both. For example, inhi-
bition of hepatic synthesis of coagulation factors by dicoumarols 
(warfarin) does not harm the liver, but may cause death by hemor-
rhage. Although used clinically in anticoagulant therapy, this same 
mechanism is responsible for its rodenticidal action. In the fast-
ing state, inhibitors of hepatic gluconeogenesis, such as hypogly-
cin (the ackee fruit–derived causative agent of Jamaican vomiting 
sickness; methylene cyclopropyl alanine), may be lethal by limit-
ing the supply of glucose to the brain. Similarly, Reye syndrome, 
considered to result from hepatic mitochondrial injury caused 
by a combination of a viral disease (which may induce hepatic 
NOS) and intake of salicylate (Pugliese et al., 2008), causes not 
only hepatocellular injury but also severe metabolic disturbances 
(hypoglycemia and hyperammonemia) that affect other organs. 
Chemical interference with the β-oxidation of fatty acids or the 
synthesis, assembly, and secretion of lipoproteins overloads the 
hepatocytes with lipids, causing steatosis and hepatic dysfunction 
(Pessayre et al., 2012).
STEP 4: INAPPROPRIATE REPAIR  
AND ADAPTATION
The final steps in the development of toxicity are inappropriate 
repair and adaptation (Fig. 3-1). Progression of toxic lesions can be 
intercepted by repair mechanisms operating at molecular, cellular, 
and tissue levels as illustrated in Fig. 3-23. Cells and organisms 
also adapt to toxicity, which renders them more resistant to antici-
pated adverse effects.
Mechanisms of Repair
Molecular Repair  Damaged molecules may be repaired in 
numerous ways. Some chemical alterations, such as oxidation 
of protein thiols and methylation of DNA, are simply reversed. 
Hydrolytic removal of the damaged unit and insertion of a newly 
synthesized, correct unit often occur with chemically altered DNA 
or protein and peroxidized lipids. In some instances, the damaged 
molecule is totally degraded and resynthesized. This process is 
time-consuming but unavoidable in cases such as the regeneration 
of cholinesterase after organophosphate intoxication.
Repair of Proteins: Thiol Groups  As discussed earlier, thiol 
groups are essential for the function of many proteins. Oxidation 
of protein thiols, protein disulfides, protein–glutathione mixed 
disulfides, and protein sulfenic acids is reversed by reduction (Ray 
et al., 2012) (Fig. 3-24), and thioredoxins and glutaredoxins, small 
proteins that feature active cysteine residues, are the major endog-
enous protein-reducing enzymes. There are two isoenzymes of 
these proteins and thioredoxin reductase that are distinguished by 
intracellular location (cytosolic and mitochondrial, respectively) 
(Sies et al., 2017). When the catalytic thiol groups in these proteins 
are oxidized, they are reduced by NADPH generated by isocitrate 
dehydrogenase, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, and 6-phos-
phogluconate dehydrogenase. ROS may also oxidize methionines 
in proteins into sulfoxides (protein-Met-S=O), forming both the 
S and R epimers, which can be reduced by methionine sulfoxide 
reductase (Msr) A and B enzymes, respectively (Moskovitz, 2005). 
Msr enzymes reduce oxidized methionines with concurrent oxida-
tion of their catalytic cysteine to sulfenic acid (Msr-Cys-S-OH), and 
the modified Msr reacts with a neighboring thiol to form an intramo-
lecular disulfide or with glutathione to form a protein–glutathione 
disulfide. The activity of the oxidized enzyme is restored by reduc-
tion catalyzed by thioredoxin or glutaredoxin, with subsequent 
steps depicted in Fig. 3-24. Reduction of methionine sulfoxides 
in lens proteins (e.g., α-crystallin) is especially critical for main-
tenance of the transparency of the eye lens, and it has been shown 
that MsrA knockout mice develop cataract on repeated exposure 
to hyperbaric oxygen (Kantorow et al., 2012). Repair of oxidized 
hemoglobin (metHb) occurs by means of electron transfer from 
Repair
Tissue
Molecular
Cellular
Regeneration
of damaged
axons
Autophagy
of damaged
cell organelles
Protein
DNA
Lipid
ECM
reproduction
Apoptosis
Cell
reproduction
Figure 3-23.   Overview of cellular repair mechanisms. Dysfunction of 
these mechanisms results in disrepair, the fourth step in the development of 
numerous toxic injuries. Abbreviation: ECM, extracellular matrix.

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
101
cytochrome b5, which is then regenerated by a NADH-dependent 
cytochrome b5 reductase (metHb reductase). Species differences in 
this enzyme contribute to differences in sensitivity to metHb forma-
tion and hypoxia, with cats being most sensitive to this toxicity.
Repair of Proteins: Heat Shock Chaperones  Soluble intracel-
lular proteins such as cytosolic enzymes are typically folded into a 
globular form with hydrophobic amino acid residues folded inter-
nally, hydrophilic residues located externally, and a ligand (sub-
strate) binding site that resides in a hydrophobic cleft. Physical or 
chemical insults may evoke an unduly large opening of this cleft, 
leading to protein denaturation and aggregation. Molecular chaper-
ones such as the heat-shock proteins (Hsp; e.g., Hsp90, Hsp70, and 
Hsp40) can prevent protein unfolding by “clamping down” onto the 
exposed hydrophobic region of their client protein, using energy of 
ATP hydrolysis to execute a conformational change that is required 
for this maneuver. Hsp90 is critical for stabilizing the cleft and 
impeding further unfolding, which would eventually lead to deg-
radation of the protein by the ubiquitin–proteasome system (UPS) 
described below (Schopf et al., 2017). This important function can 
be blocked by compounds such as geldanamycin and herbimycin 
that promote degradation of Hsp90-bound proteins by the UPS.
The process of ubiquitination and the interaction with the heat-
shock protein response is illustrated in Fig. 3-25. Hsp 90 and Hsp70 
have opposing effects on protein stability. Hsp90 stabilizes proteins 
and prevents ubiquitination, whereas Hsp70 promotes ubiquitination 
and proteosomal degradation. Ubiquitin (Ub) is a small (8.6 kDa) 
protein that directs target proteins to proteosomal degradation when 
covalently linked to the target. Ubiquitination is a posttranslational 
protein modification that takes place in an enzymatic cascade com-
posed of three types of proteins—the E1 Ub-activating enzyme, the 
E2 Ub-conjugating enzyme, and the E3 Ub ligase. E1 first activates 
Ub by adenylating its terminal carboxyl group to form Ub-AMP, 
and then it transfers Ub from Ub-AMP to its catalytic SH group, 
forming a high-energy thioester bond between E1 and Ub. In the 
subsequent transthiolation reaction, Ub is transferred from E1 to 
the catalytic SH group of E2. Thereafter, E3 binds both the target 
protein and the Ub-charged E2 and catalyzes the transfer of Ub 
from E2 to the target protein, forming an isopeptide bond between 
the terminal carboxyl group of Ub and an ε-amino group of a lysine 
residue in the substrate. Multiple rounds of this process gener-
ate polyubiquitin chains. In general, mono-ubiquitination triggers 
endocytosis or autophagy of the protein, whereas substrates that are 
tagged with Lys48-linked Ub chains are recognized and degraded 
by the 26S proteasome into small peptides. In contrast, proteins 
with Lys63-linked Ub chains are essential components of signal-
ing pathways, functioning as scaffolds to assemble signaling com-
plexes, as is the case for NF-κB.
In the case of Hsp functions, dissociation of Hsp90 from the 
unfolding protein allows Hsp70 and its co-chaperone Hsp40 to 
recruit the E3 Ub ligases (e.g., CHIP and Parkin) to tag the protein 
with a polyubiquitin chain (Bedford et al., 2011) so that the protein 
is degraded in proteasomes. The 26S proteasome is large barrel-
shaped multiprotein complex that binds the ubiquitinated protein, 
deubiquitinates and unfolds it using ATP, and finally hydrolyzes 
the protein with its threonine-containing protease active sites into 
small peptides (Fig. 3-25). The UPS controls the cellular level of 
numerous regulatory proteins (e.g., p53, IκB, Nrf2, β-catenin, and 
cyclins) and has a prominent role in eliminating oxidized or oth-
erwise damaged and unfolded intracellular proteins (Kriegenburg 
et al., 2011). For example, the reductive dechlorination of CCl4 
Prot-SS
Prot1-SS-Prot2
Prot-SOH
Prot-[SH]2
Prot1-SH + Prot2-SH
Prot-SH + H2O
Prot-SSG
Prot-SH + GSH
Trx-[SH]2
Trx-SS
TrxR-SS
TrxR-[SH]2
NADPH + H+
NADP+
GSSG
2GSH
Grx-[SH]2
Grx-SS
GR-[SH]2
GR-SS
NADP+
NADPH + H+
Glutaredoxin pathway
Thioredoxin pathway
Figure 3-24.   Repair of proteins oxidized at their thiol groups. Protein disulfides (Prot-SS and Prot1-SS-Prot2) and protein sulfenic acids (Prot-SOH) are 
reduced by thioredoxin (Trx-[SH]2) or thioredoxin-like proteins. Protein–glutathione-mixed disulfides (Prot-SSG) are reduced by glutaredoxin (Grx-[SH]2), 
which is also called thioltransferase. The figure also indicates how Trx-[SH]2 and Grx-[SH]2 are regenerated from their disulfides (Trx-SS and Grx-SS, respec-
tively). Abbreviations: GSH, glutathione; GSSG, glutathione disulfide; GR-[SH]2 and GR-SS, glutathione reductase (dithiol and disulfide forms, respectively); 
TrxR-[SH]2 and Trx-SS, thioredoxin reductase (dithiol and disulfide forms, respectively).

102
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
by CYP2E1 causes the heme in the cytochrome to become cross-
linked to the trichloromethyl free radical it forms, and this inactive 
enzyme is eliminated by proteasomal degradation. Oligomerization 
and aggregation of damaged and unfolded proteins preclude the 
proteasome from degrading them. Such substrates can even trap 
proteasomes, rendering them nonfunctional. After ubiquitination, 
protein aggregates can also be eliminated by autophagy, a process 
described in more detail in the section “Cellular Repair.”
Repair of Lipids  Phospholipids containing fatty acid hydroperox-
ides are preferentially hydrolyzed by phospholipase A2, with the 
peroxidized fatty acids replaced by normal fatty acids. Peroxidized 
lipids (e.g., fatty acid hydroperoxides and phospholipid-associated 
hydroperoxides) may be reduced by the glutathione peroxidase–
glutathione–glutathione reductase system (see Fig. 3-26) or by the 
peroxiredoxin–thioredoxin–thioredoxin reductase system. NADPH 
is needed to repair the reductants that are oxidized in the process.
Repair of DNA  Damage to DNA is inevitable, as it occurs spon-
taneously during replication and it is frequently targeted by elec-
trophiles and free radicals. However, nuclear DNA is remarkably 
stable, in part because it is packaged tightly in chromatin and 
because complex repair mechanisms have evolved to correct 
adverse alterations. Mitochondrial DNA, however, lacks histones 
and efficient repair mechanisms and therefore is more prone to 
damage. The contribution of DNA damage and DNA repair mecha-
nisms are central to toxicity culminating in carcinogenic and muta-
genic effects (see Chaps. 8 and 9). However, the mechanisms of 
DNA repair, or the disruption of normal DNA repair mechanisms, 
remain an important aspect of understanding general mechanisms 
of toxicity and are summarized here.
Direct Repair  Certain covalent DNA modifications are 
directly reversed by enzymes such as DNA photolyase, which 
cleaves adjacent pyrimidines dimerized by UV light. The enzyme 
uses the energy of visible light to correct damage, so its func-
tion is restricted to light-exposed cells. Minor DNA adducts, 
such as methyl groups attached to the O6 position of guanine, are 
cleaved by O6-methyguanine-DNA-methyltransferase (MGMT). 
While repairing the DNA, this alkyltransferase inactivates itself 
by transferring the adduct onto one of its cysteine residues, after 
which the enzyme is subjected to ubiquitination and proteasomal 
degradation. Thus, like glutathione, which is depleted during 
detoxification of electrophiles, MGMT is consumed during the 
repair of DNA.
Excision Repair  Base excision and nucleotide excision 
are two major mechanisms for removing damaged bases from 
DNA (see Chaps. 8 and 9). Lesions that do not distort the helix 
typically are removed by base excision, in which the altered 
base is recognized by DNA glycosylase that hydrolyzes the 
Autophagy
HSP70
HSP90
Folded
Protein
Proteosome
Misfolded or Unfolded Protein
Unfolded Protein Response
Free Ubiquitin
E1
E1
ATP
PPi
Ubiquitin
Activation
AMP
E2
E2
E3
E3
Protein
Degradation
Deconjugation
PROTEOSOME
Ubiquitin
Conjugation
Ubiquitin
Ligase
Figure 3-25.   The role of heat-shock proteins (Hsps) in the unfolded protein response and the process of ubiquitination. Hsp90 and Hsp70 are central to recog-
nizing damaged or misfolded proteins. Hsp90 associates with misfolded proteins and acts as a protective chaperone, whereas binding of Hsp70 directs the mis-
folded protein for degradation through autophagy (Fig. 3-27), the unfolded protein response (Fig. 3-31), or proteasomal degradation. Proteins are marked for 
proteasomal destruction by the polyubiquitination pathway. Ubiquitin (Ub) is a small protein (8.6 kDa) that covalently links to a target protein (as a monomer 
or as a polymer of Ub units) to target it for degradation. Ubiquitination is a posttranslational protein modification that takes place in an enzymatic cascade com-
posed of three types of proteins—the E1 Ub-activating enzyme, the E2 Ub-conjugating enzyme, and the E3 Ub ligase. As shown in the figure, E1 first activates 
Ub in an ATP-consuming reaction by adenylating the terminal carboxyl group of Ub. In the subsequent transthiolation reaction, Ub is transferred from E1 to 
the catalytic SH group of E2. Thereafter, E3 binds both the target protein and the Ub-charged E2 and catalyzes the transfer of Ub from E2 to the target protein, 
forming an isopeptide bond between the terminal carboxyl group of Ub and the ε-amino group of a lysine in the substrate. Multiple rounds of ubiquitination 
generate polyubiquitin chains. In general, monoubiquitination triggers endocytosis or autophagy of the protein. Substrates that are tagged with Lys48-linked 
Ub chains are recognized and degraded by the 26S proteasome into small peptides, with the Ubs released for reuse. Proteins polyubiquitinated with Lys63-
linked Ub chains are generally not degraded but are essential components of signaling pathways, functioning as scaffolds to assemble signaling complexes.

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
103
N-glycosidic bond, releasing the modified base and creating an 
apurinic or apyrimidinic (AP) site in the DNA. For example, 
8-hydroxyguanosine, a major mutagenic product of oxidative 
stress, is removed from the DNA by a specific DNA glycosy-
lase. The AP site is recognized by the AP endonuclease, which 
hydrolyzes the phosphodiester bond adjacent to the abasic site. 
After its removal, the abasic sugar is replaced with the correct 
nucleotide by a DNA polymerase and is sealed in place by a 
DNA ligase.
DNA adducts are bulkier lesions, often produced by reactive 
intermediates (such as those from formaldehyde, aflatoxins, or ami-
nofluorene derivatives) and dimers caused by UV radiation. These 
adducts are removed by the nucleotide excision repair system (Yu 
et al., 2015). In this mechanism, proteins that recognize the dis-
torted double helix at the lesion unwind the DNA and excise a 
number of intact nucleotides on both sides of the lesion along with 
the one containing the adduct. The excised section of the strand is 
restored by insertion of nucleotides into the gap of the actions of 
DNA polymerase and ligase, using the complementary strand as 
a template. In contrast, lesions in the transcribed DNA strand that 
block RNA polymerase activity are removed by the transcription-
coupled repair system. This involves assembly of repair proteins to 
remove the stalled RNA polymerase before excising the damage 
and filling the gap. Resynthesis of the removed section of the strand 
is designated as unscheduled DNA synthesis. Overall, excision 
repair has a remarkably low error rate of less than one mistake in 
109 bases repaired.
PARP (poly-[ADP-ribose] polymerase) is another impor-
tant contributor to excision repair. PARP binds to damaged DNA 
caused by base damage or single-strand breaks (SSBs) and becomes 
activated. The active PARP cleaves NAD+ to use the ADP-ribose 
moiety of this cofactor for attaching long chains of polymeric ADP-
ribose to nuclear proteins, such as histones. The ADP-ribose unit 
contains two negative charges, so the poly(ADP-ribosyl)ated pro-
teins are also negatively charged, and the resultant electrorepulsive 
force between the charged proteins and DNA causes decondensa-
tion of the chromatin structure. This opens tightly packed chromatin 
and allows the repair enzymes to access and repair the damaged 
DNA. Thereafter, poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase gains access to 
the nucleus from its perinuclear localization and reverses the PARP-
mediated modification of nuclear proteins.
Nonhomologous End Joining  This process repairs double-
strand breaks (DSBs) that may be formed when two SSBs occur in 
close proximity, or when DNA with SSBs undergoes replication. 
This repair system directly ligates the broken ends without the need 
for a homologous template. DSBs are recognized by the Ku protein 
Lipid phase
HO-ASC-OH
O=ASC=O
Grx-[SH]2
Grx-SS
GSSG
2GSH
GR-[SH]2
GR-SS
NADP+
NADPH + H+
TOC-OH
TOC-O•
FA-CoA
LFTF
FA-OOH
FA-OH
Aqueous phase
Aqueous phase
GR-SS
GR-[SH]2
NADP+
NADPH + H+
2GSH
GSSG
GPX
H2O
•O-ASC-OH
Lipid
peroxidation
PL
PL-OO•
LPL
PL-OOH
Figure 3-26.   Repair of peroxidized lipids. Phospholipid peroxyl radicals (PL-OO•) from lipid peroxidation may abstract hydrogen from α-tocopherol 
(TOC-OH) and yield phospholipid hydroperoxide (PL-OOH). From the latter, the fatty acid carrying the hydroperoxide group is eliminated via hydrolysis cata-
lyzed by phospholipase (PLase), yielding a fatty acid hydroperoxide (FA-OOH) and a lysophospholipid (LPL). The former is reduced to a hydroxy fatty acid 
(FA-OH) by glutathione peroxidase (GPX), utilizing glutathione (GSH), or peroxiredoxins (not shown), whereas the latter is reacylated to phospholipid (PL) 
by lysophosphatide fatty acyl-coenzyme A transferase (LFTF), utilizing long-chain fatty acid–coenzyme A (FA-CoA). The figure also indicates regeneration 
of TOC-OH by ascorbic acid (HO-ASC-OH), regeneration of ascorbic acid from dehydroascorbic acid (O-ASC-O) by glutaredoxin (Grx-[SH]2), and reduction 
of the oxidized glutaredoxin (Grx-SS) by GSH. Oxidized glutathione (GSSG) is reduced by glutathione reductase (GR-[SH]2), which is regenerated from its 
oxidized form (GR-SS) by NADPH, the ultimate reductant. Abbreviations: TOC-O•, tocopheroxyl radical; •O-ASC-OH, ascorbyl radical.

104
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
(a heterodimer of Ku70 and Ku80) that binds to the DNA end. 
Ku then binds and activates DNA-dependent protein kinase cata-
lytic subunit (DNA-PKcs), leading to recruitment and activation of 
DNA polymerases and DNA ligase. Although the nonhomologous 
end joining is error-prone, it can operate in any phase of the cell 
cycle and is the mechanism for DSB repair in nondividing termi-
nally differentiated cells including neurons.
Recombination (or Postreplication) Repair  Homologous 
recombination can be used to repair postreplication gaps and 
DSBs (Li and Heyer, 2008). Postreplication gaps form when exci-
sion of a bulky adduct or an intrastrand pyrimidine dimer does 
not occur before DNA replication. At replication, two homolo-
gous (“sister”) yet dissimilar DNA duplexes are formed; one has 
a large postreplication gap in its daughter strand and an intact 
duplex synthesized at the opposite leg of the replication fork. This 
intact duplex is utilized to complete the postreplication gap in the 
damaged duplex, which is accomplished by recombination of the 
appropriate strands of the two homologous duplexes. After separa-
tion, the sister duplex that originally contained the gap carries in 
its daughter strand a section originating from the parent strand of 
the intact sister, which in turn carries in its parent strand a section 
originating from the daughter strand of the damaged sister. This 
strand recombination explains the phenomenon of “sister chro-
matid exchange,” which is indicative of DNA damage corrected 
by recombinational repair. Given this mechanism, homologous 
recombination can function only after replication (in S and G2 
phases), when sister chromatid sequences are available for use as 
templates (see below), and accordingly, recombination is not an 
option in nondividing cells.
Proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) is a central player in 
postreplication repair. PCNA binds to chromatin and slides along the 
DNA strand to tether the polymerase to the DNA template. PCNA is 
a platform for a wide variety of proteins that participate in DNA rep-
lication and damage. These include the MRN complex (the trimer of 
Mre11, Rad50, and Nbs1 proteins), which binds to the DSB and is 
involved in end processing by generation of single-stranded DNA, 
and the breast cancer susceptibility proteins BRCA1 and BRCA2, 
which assist the single-stranded DNA in invading the undamaged 
template in an ATP-dependent process (Gao et al., 2017).
In general, there is a limited role for RNA in DNA repair 
processes. However, there is emerging evidence that the machin-
ery involved in miRNA formation, beyond its role in translational 
repression (discussed above), is also involved in DNA dam-
age repair (Hawley et al., 2017). In human cells, there are novel 
miRNAs that appear to be derived from the vicinity of DSBs. 
Moreover, small RNAs, termed DNA damage-induced RNAs 
(diRNAs), are generated only after DNA damage, and although 
their precise function is not established, they are required for 
the proficient repair of such damage. The role of small RNAs in 
repairing DNA damage is an ongoing area of research, and it will 
be important to determine whether, and if so how, they are directly 
involved in DNA repair.
Cellular Repair  The ability to repair or remove damaged cells 
or organelles is important for preventing cellular dysfunction. 
Autophagic removal of damaged cell organelles may be viewed as 
a universal mechanism of cellular repair, whereas clearance and 
regeneration of damaged axons is a mechanism specific for nerve 
cells. Autophagy is a lysosomal process in which intracellular sub-
strates are degraded within the lysosomal compartment. It is a type 
of cell death mechanism, but one that is unique in its characteris-
tic presence of cytoplasmic vacuoles resulting from engulfment of 
cellular components (Table 3-7). Autophagy is a constitutive and 
rapid process, and most autophagosomes are very short-lived, with 
a half-life of no more than 10 minutes. It is also distinct from apop-
tosis and necrosis in that the clearance of “debris” is an intracel-
lular process, and there is no involvement of other phagocytic cells. 
Autophagy occurs by the engulfment of cellular constituents (mac-
roautophagy), membrane uptake of smaller amounts of cytoplasm 
and organelles (microautophagy), or chaperone-mediated events 
that enable specific protein substrates to be taken into the lysosome 
for degradation. Autophagy is also an important mechanism for 
survival in the fasting state.
With respect to toxicity, autophagy is an important mechanism 
for removing misfolded proteins from cells resulting from oxida-
tive stress or ER stress. ER stress is an adaptive mechanism that is 
designed to trigger transcriptional activation of a genetic program 
that will enhance autophagy and the capacity for normal protein 
folding in the ER. However, if excessive or prolonged, ER stress 
ultimately triggers cell death, typically in the form of apoptosis. 
While autophagy serves the purpose of cell restitution in all cells, 
it is particularly important in terminally differentiated cells, such 
as neurons and myocytes, where cell renewal by cell replication is 
not possible.
Autophagic removal of damaged cell organelles is a process 
that supports their quality control, disposal, and recycling. For 
example, deletion of depolarized mitochondria occurs through 
selective autophagy or mitophagy in cells exposed to mitochon-
drial poisons, such as the protonophoric uncoupler CCCP, val-
inomycin, and paraquat (see Table 3-6). There are five stages of 
autophagy starting with the initiation stage, followed by elonga-
tion, membrane closure, maturation and finally, degradation of 
cytoplasmic cargo (Fig. 3-27). Autophagy is mediated by the 
actions of a core group of kinases and other proteins including 
(a) the un-51-like kinase (ULK) complex, (b) the class II PI3K 
complex, (c) a ubiquitin-like conjugation system that requires 
autophagy-related proteins (ATGs) such as ATG7, ATG3, and the 
ATG12-ATG 5:Atg16L complex, (d) the ATG9 transmembrane 
protein involved in vesicle trafficking, and (e) vacuole membrane 
protein 1 (VMP1) that binds with Beclin-1 (Bcl-2-interacting pro-
tein-1; Petibone et al., 2017). Removal of damaged mitochondria 
by autophagy is important not only for maintaining a functional 
mitochondrial pool but also for limiting oxidative cell damage 
and preventing apoptosis, because injured mitochondria may be 
sources of ROS and apoptotic factors, such as cyt c, Smac, and 
AIF. Autophagy also contributes to structural restitution of liver 
cells as is the case for removal of peroxisomes after exposure 
to peroxisome proliferators and elimination of lipid droplets in 
hepatic steatosis.
Regeneration of Damaged Axons  It is generally recognized 
that neurons in the central nervous system have limited capacity 
to regenerate. In contrast, axonal damage in peripheral neurons 
can be repaired by axonal regeneration, a process that requires 
macrophages and Schwann cells. Macrophages remove debris by 
phagocytosis and produce cytokines and growth factors, which 
activate Schwann cells to proliferate and transdifferentiate to facil-
itate and support axonal regrowth. Distal to the injury, Schwann 
cells play an indispensable role in promoting axonal regenera-
tion by increasing their synthesis of cell adhesion molecules (e.g., 
N-CAM), elaborating proteins for basement membrane reconstruc-
tion, and by producing an array of neurotrophic factors (e.g., brain-
derived neurotrophic factor, glial cell line–derived neurotrophic 
factor, and nerve growth factor) and their receptors (Wong et al., 
2017). While comigrating with the regenerating axon, Schwann 
cells guide neuronal regrowth and provide trophic support to the 
axon to reinnervate the target cell.

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
105
In contrast to the peripheral nervous system, neurons in the 
central nervous system lose their intrinsic growth capacity post-
natally, which occurs simultaneously with increased expression of 
some neuronal growth inhibitory Krüppel-like TFs, such as KLF4. 
Accordingly, damage to central neurons is irreversible but is com-
pensated for in part by the large number of reserve nerve cells 
that can take over the functions of lost neurons. For example, in 
Parkinson disease, symptoms are not observed until there is at least 
an 80% loss of nigrostriatal neurons.
Tissue Repair  In tissues with cells capable of multiplying, dam-
age is reversed by deletion of the injured cells and regeneration 
of the tissue by proliferation. However, it is important to remove 
the damaged cells, and often, apoptotic processes contribute. As 
described above, apoptosis is a controlled, orderly process in which 
dead cells are removed without inflammation. This is in contrast to 
necrosis which is a less orderly process that ends with cell debris in 
the extracellular environment. The constituents of the necrotic cells 
attract inflammatory cells, and the ensuing inflammation ampli-
fies cell injury (described below). However, apoptosis may support 
tissue restoration only for tissues that are made up of constantly 
renewing cells (e.g., the bone marrow, the respiratory and GI epi-
thelium, and the epidermis of the skin), or of conditionally divid-
ing cells (e.g., hepatic and renal parenchymal cells). The role of 
apoptosis as a tissue repair strategy is markedly lessened in organs 
containing nonreplicating and nonreplaceable cells, such as the 
neurons, cardiac muscle cells, and female germ cells, because dele-
tion of such cells, if extensive, will decrease organ function.
Proliferation: Regeneration of Tissue  Repair of tissue injury 
involves regeneration of lost cells, reconstitution of the extracellular 
matrix (ECM), and reintegration of the newly formed elements. In 
organs such as liver, kidney, and lung, various types of cells are 
involved in the process of tissue restoration. Nonparenchymal cells 
of mesenchymal origin residing in the tissue, such as resident mac-
rophages and endothelial cells, and those migrating to the site of 
injury, such as monocytes, produce factors that stimulate parenchy-
mal cells to divide and stimulate some specialized cells (e.g., the 
stellate cells in the liver) to synthesize ECM molecules.
Replacement of Lost Cells by Mitosis  After tissue injury, 
repair is frequently mediated by cell proliferation (Fig. 3-28). DNA 
synthesis is increased, and this response is detected experimen-
tally as an increase in the expression of proteins associated with 
S-phase of the cell cycle (including immunohistochemical detec-
tion of Ki-67 and PCNA or by incorporation of substrates into the 
DNA template during S-phase such as bromodeoxyuridine [BrdU] 
or 3H-thymidine). Also, mitotic figures can be seen microscopi-
cally in cells. As early as 2 to 4 hours after administration of a low 
dose of carbon tetrachloride to rats, the mitotic index in the liver 
increases dramatically, indicating that cells already in the G2 phase 
progress rapidly to mitosis (M-phase). The mitotic activity of the 
hepatocytes culminates at 36 to 48 hours, after a full transit through 
the cycle, indicating that quiescent cells residing in G0 enter and 
progress to mitosis. In the CCl4 model, mitosis of nonparenchymal 
cells occurs later, after activation and replication of parenchymal 
cells. In severe toxic liver injury, when hepatocyte replication is 
impaired (e.g., in rats dosed with high dosages of galactosamine 
or acetylaminofluorene, and in humans intoxicated with acetami-
nophen), restoration of the liver may depend on stem cell–derived 
cells, called oval cells, which are located in the terminal bile duct-
ules. These cells proliferate and differentiate into both hepatocytes 
INITIATION
MEMBRANE
CLOSURE
MATURATION
DEGRADATION
ULK Complex
ULK1/2
P
ATG13
P
FIP200
Beclin1
P
ATG14L
VPS34
VPS15
P
Class III PI3K Complex
Lysosome
ELONGATION
ATG16L1
ATG10
ATG7
ATG12
ATG12
ATG5
ATG12
ATG5
E1
E2
E3
LC3
LC3
ATG4
ATG7
ATG3
E1
E2
LC3
Isolation membrane
with cargo
Autophagosome
Autolysosome
Phagophore
nucleation
PE
Figure 3-27.   The process of autophagy including the five major stages (initiation, elongation, membrane closure, maturation, and degradation). Autophagy 
is initiated by activation of the unc-51-like kinase (ULK) in a complex composed of ULK1, ULK2, autophagy-related proteins (ATG13), and FIP200, a 
scaffold protein. Additionally, phosphorylation of Beclin 1 is necessary for initiating the PI3 kinase complex, which is required for phagophore nucleation. 
The phagophore elongates around cytoplasmic components, including polyubiquitinated cargo, after which it closes to form the autophagosome. When the 
autophagosome fuses with a lysosome, the autolysosome is formed, after which the autophagosome inner membrane and its cytoplasmic cargo are degraded by 
acid proteases and hydrolases. The signal transduction pathways along with the cycle from initiation to degradation is illustrated. Abbreviations: PE, phospha-
tidylethanolamine; E1, E2, and E3, ubiquitin conjugating enzymes; LC3, microtubule-associated protein 1A/1B-light chain 3; VPS, vacuolar protein sorting.

106
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
and biliary epithelial cells (cholangiocytes) (Fausto et al., 2006; 
Shin and Kaestner, 2014). As these hepatic progenitor cells produce 
α-fetoprotein, the increase in serum α-fetoprotein is predictive of 
an improved outcome of acetaminophen-induced injury.
Hepatic sinusoidal endothelial cells originate from bone mar-
row progenitors, and when they are chemically injured (e.g., by 
monocrotaline) bone marrow–derived precursor cells move into 
the sinusoids and contribute to their replacement, as demonstrated 
in a rat model of hepatic sinusoidal obstruction syndrome (Harb 
et al., 2009). Accordingly, bone marrow infusion ameliorates, 
whereas myelosuppression aggravates, such liver injury. In an 
ozone-exposed lung, the nonciliated, bronchiolar Clara cells and 
alveolar type II pneumocytes proliferate and differentiate to replace 
damaged ciliated bronchial epithelial cells and type I pneumocytes, 
respectively (Tam et al., 2011). In some tissues, such as intestinal 
mucosa and bone marrow, stem cells first divide to provide self-
renewal and then differentiate to replace more mature cells lost 
through injury.
The liver is uniquely capable of regeneration, and it can fully 
regenerate in a matter of days after partial hepatectomy. In this 
model, there is a pattern of gene expression that programs this 
regeneration. Genes that are upregulated include those that code 
for TFs important in proliferative signaling, such as c-fos, c-jun, 
Egr1, and c-myc (see Fig. 3-13), the antiapoptotic protein Bcl-XL, 
and mdm2, a ubiquitin ligase that limits p53-dependent inhibition 
of the cell cycle (see Fig. 3-33). Some genes involved in cell cycle 
inhibition are temporarily overexpressed (e.g., the cyclin-dependent 
kinase inhibitor p21 and gadd45), providing an inhibitory signal 
that keeps tissue regeneration precisely regulated. Nevertheless, 
gene expression is reprogrammed so that DNA synthesis and mito-
sis gain priority over specialized cellular activities. For example, as 
a result of dedifferentiation, regenerating hepatocytes have reduced 
levels of cytochrome P450, some phase II conjugating enzymes, 
and PPARα. Similarly, hepatic stellate cells showed decreased 
accumulation of fat and vitamin A.
The regenerative process is initiated by the release of numer-
ous chemical mediators from damaged cells. Nonparenchymal 
cells, such as resident macrophages and endothelial cells, release 
cytokines and growth factors that promote and propagate the 
regenerative process. In the partial hepatectomy model, the ini-
tial or priming phase of liver regeneration is controlled by TNF-α 
and IL-6, whose hepatic mRNA and serum levels increase. TNF, 
secreted from Kupffer cells, acts on the macrophages in an auto-
crine manner, activating its receptor and the coupled signal trans-
duction network. This in turn activates NF-κB, which increases 
IL-6 expression. Secreted IL-6 exerts its action on the hepatocytes 
and through its receptor (Fig. 3-13) activates Janus kinase (JAK) 
and induces TFs (e.g., Stat3 and C/EBPβ) to activate several down-
stream target genes. This cytokine network promotes transition of 
the quiescent liver cells (G0) into cell cycle (G1) and makes them 
receptive to growth factors (“priming”). Growth factors, especially 
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), transforming growth factor-α 
(TGF-α), and heparin-binding epidermal growth factor–like growth 
factor (HB-EGF), initiate the progression of the primed cells in the 
cycle toward mitosis (Fausto et al., 2006; Michalopoulos, 2013). 
Despite its name, neither the formation nor the action of HGF is 
restricted to the liver. It is produced by resident macrophages and 
endothelial cells of various organs, including liver, lung, and kid-
ney, and in a paracrine manner activates receptors on neighboring 
parenchymal cells.
The communication between parenchymal and nonparenchy-
mal cells during tissue repair is mutual. For example, transform-
ing growth factor-α (TGF-α), a mitogen produced by regenerating 
hepatocytes, acts as an autocrine and a paracrine mediator on liver 
cells as well as on adjacent nonparenchymal cells. The mitogenic 
growth factors initiate signaling through the MAPK pathway and 
the PI3K–Akt pathway (Fig. 3-13), thereby activating numerous 
TFs (including c-Jun, c-Fos, c-Myc, FoxM1B, NF-κB, and Stat3), 
which ultimately induce cyclins and the protein phosphatase cdc25. 
Cyclins also activate Cdks by associating with them (Fig. 3-28), 
whereas cdc25 activates Cdk1 and Cdk2 by dephosphorylating two 
amino acid residues (Thr14 and Tyr15). The activated Cdks accel-
erate the cell cycle mainly by phosphorylation of retinoblastoma 
protein (pRb), which when phosphorylated is inactivated to enable 
cell cycle progression.
Although the regulation of proliferation by cytokines and 
growth factors is considered an essential part in the repair of most 
tissues, there are also tissue-specific features of repair. For example, 
in the liver, bile acids stimulate hepatocyte proliferation through 
activation of FXR (Huang et al., 2006). In mice subjected to partial 
hepatectomy, liver regrowth is accelerated by bile acid feeding, but 
is markedly delayed when FXR (Table 3-3) is deleted or recircula-
tion of bile acids from the intestine to the liver is prevented.
In addition to proliferation, cell migration also contributes 
to tissue repair. For example, when the mucosa of the GI tract is 
damaged, cells of the residual epithelium rapidly migrate to the 
site of injury where they elongate to reestablish the continuity of 
4/6
D
A
G0
S
2
2
1
1
G1
S
G2
M
Phase
Cyclin
Cdk
G1
G2
M
E
A
A
B
4/6
D
G0
Cdc25
–2P
–2P
–2P
–2P
Figure 3-28.   The cell division cycle and participating cyclins and cyclin-
dependent protein kinases. Most cells are normally in G0 phase, a differenti-
ated and quiescent state. After receiving signals to divide, they progress into 
the G1 phase of the cell division cycle. G0/G1 transition involves activation 
of immediate early genes for cells to acquire replicative competence, and 
the cells progress to the phase of DNA synthesis (S). After DNA replication, 
cells prepare further for mitosis in the G2 phase. Mitosis (M) is the shortest 
phase of the cell cycle (approximately 40 minutes out of the 40-hour-long 
cycle of hepatocytes) and most likely requires the largest energy expendi-
ture per unit of time. The daughter cells produced may differentiate and 
enter the pool of quiescent cells (G0), substituting for those which had been 
lost. Also illustrated are the cyclins and cyclin-dependent protein kinases 
(Cdk) that are required for DNA replication and cell division.

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
107
the surface even before this can be achieved by cell replication. 
Cell movement involves orderly dissociation of cadherin-mediated 
cell–cell contacts (involving β-catenin phosphorylation) and inte-
grin-mediated cell–ECM contacts at focal adhesions (involving 
phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase [FAK]), assembly of actin 
stress fibers, and formation of lamellopodia.
Mucosal repair is dictated not only by growth factors and cyto-
kines operative in tissue repair elsewhere but also by trefoil factors 
(TFFs). TFFs are small (7 to 12 kDa) protease-resistant proteins that 
are abundantly secreted from specific mucosal cells (e.g., intestinal 
goblet cells) and are associated with the mucous layer of the GI tract 
(Aihara et al., 2017). TFF expression is rapidly upregulated at the 
margins of mucosal injury by cytokine and growth factor signaling. 
Some growth factors (e.g., HGF and EGF) influence motility (moto-
gens) and proliferation (mitogens) of enterocytes, whereas TFFs are 
potent motogens. Although TFFs do not act alone, they are the only 
peptides shown to be essential for restitution of the injured intestinal 
mucosa. For example, dextran sodium sulfate (DSS) causes marked 
and diffuse colonic mucosal injury, but in TFF-3 null mice, an other-
wise nonlethal dose of DSS elicits severe toxicity that can be lethal.
Replacement of the Extracellular Matrix  The ECM is a bio-
chemical and structural support composed of a variety of proteins 
(such as collagen and elastin), proteoglycans (such as chondroitin 
sulfate), and glycosaminoglycans (such as hyaluronic acid). Each 
tissue has its own specific ECM composition, but in liver, stellate 
cells located in the space of Disse are major contributors to ECM 
production. Stellate cells store vitamin A and are generally at rest. 
However, these cells are activated during liver regeneration, when 
they undergo mitosis and transdifferentiate into myofibroblast-like 
contractile and secretory cells (Tsuchida and Friedman, 2017). 
Activation of stellate cells is mediated chiefly by two growth fac-
tors, namely platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and TGF-β. 
Both growth factors may be released from platelets which accumu-
late and degranulate at sites of injury, and TGF-β is also secreted 
from activated stellate cells. TGF-β is a major regulator of stel-
late cell transdifferentiation and stimulates the synthesis of ECM 
components and α-smooth muscle actin. As previously described, 
TGF-β acts through its Ser/Thr kinase receptor (Fig. 3-14), which 
phosphorylates the TFs Smad2 and 3 (Fabregat et al., 2016). 
TGF-β also plays a central role in ECM formation in other tissues. 
In kidney and lung, for example, TGF-β targets the mesangial cells 
and the septal fibroblasts, respectively. Remodeling of the ECM 
is aided by matrix metalloproteinases, which hydrolyze specific 
components of the matrix, as well as by tissue inhibitors of matrix 
metalloproteinases.
The way in which tissue regeneration is terminated after repair 
is unclear, but the gradual dominance of TGF-β, a potent anti-
mitogen, is a contributing factor in the termination of cell prolif-
eration. Additionally, ECM production may be halted by induction 
of Smad7 (an inhibitory Smad) (Fig. 3-14), which competitively 
inhibits phosphorylation of Smad2 and 3. However, although repair 
of the ECM helps to regenerate injured tissue, chronic stimulation 
by TGF-β also plays a role in fibrosis (discussed below).
Other Reactions to Tissue Injury  In addition to mediators that 
aid in the replacement of lost cells and the ECM, resident mac-
rophages and endothelial cells activated by cell injury produce 
other mediators that induce ancillary reactions with uncertain ben-
efit or harm to tissues. Such reactions include inflammation, altered 
production of acute-phase proteins, and generalized reactions such 
as fever.
Inflammation—Leukocyte 
Invasion  Alteration of the 
microcirculation and accumulation of inflammatory cells are the 
hallmarks of inflammation. These processes are largely initiated 
by resident macrophages secreting cytokines, such as TNF-α 
and interleukin-1 (IL-1), which increase capillary permeability 
through release of mediators from endothelial cells and fibroblasts 
(Brenner et al., 2013). In the face of toxicity, activated endothe-
lial cells facilitate the egress of circulating leukocytes into the 
injured tissue by releasing chemoattractants and simultaneously 
express selectins, a group of cell adhesion molecules that inter-
act with ligands on the surface of leukocytes, causing them to 
“roll” onto the capillary surface to facilitate transmigration into 
the damaged tissue. A strong interaction develops between inter-
cellular adhesion molecules (ICAM-1) expressed on endothelial 
cell membranes and integrins expressed on leukocyte membranes. 
This interaction is also essential for the subsequent transendothe-
lial migration of leukocytes. Chemoattractants involved in this 
response include cytokines (or chemokines), such as the MCP-1 
and IL-8, as well as lipid-derived compounds, such as platelet-
activating factor (PAF) and leukotriene B4 (LTB4). Ultimately, all 
types of cells near the injury express ICAM-1, thus promoting leu-
kocyte invasion, and the invading leukocytes synthesize additional 
chemotactic mediators to propagate the inflammatory response. 
The major regulators of this entire response include the proinflam-
matory mediators TNF-α and IL-1, which activate NF-κB and C/
EBP (Brenner et al., 2013).
Inflammation: ROS and RNS Production  Macrophages, as 
well as leukocytes, recruited to the site of injury undergo a respira-
tory burst, discharging free radicals and enzymes into the damaged 
tissue. The respiratory burst is a multifactorial and robust produc-
tion of ROS in the inflamed tissue, with NADPH oxidase (NOX2) 
responsible for the production of superoxide anion from NADPH 
to increase ROS (El-Benna et al., 2016). The superoxide anion 
generated by NOX2 activity can give rise to the hydroxyl radical 
(HO•) through the Fenton reaction. Moreover, nitric oxide synthase 
(NOS) also contributes to the respiratory burst by catalyzing the 
formation of the nitric oxide free radical (•NO) via oxidation of 
arginine to citrulline. Finally, myeloperoxidase (MPO) in granu-
locytes catalyzes for the formation of HOCl, a powerful oxidizing 
agent, from HOOH and chloride ion. Like HOOH, HOCl can also 
form HO• resulting from electron transfer from Fe2+ or from O2
•  to 
HOCl. All these reactive intermediates exert beneficial antimicro-
bial activity at the site of microbial invasion, but because they are 
so reactive, they can also damage the adjacent healthy tissues and 
thus contribute to propagation of tissue injury.
In some chemical-induced injuries, inflammation plays the 
leading role. For example, alpha-naphthylisothiocyanate (ANIT), 
a cholestatic chemical, causes neutrophil-dependent hepatocellu-
lar damage. ANIT acts on bile duct epithelial cells, causing them 
to release chemoattractants for neutrophils, which on invading the 
liver, injure hepatocytes. Kupffer cell activation, TNF release, and 
subsequent inflammation are also prominent and causative events in 
galactosamine-induced liver injury in rats (Stachlewitz et al., 1999).
Altered Protein Synthesis: Acute-Phase Proteins  Interleukins, 
including IL-6, IL-1, and IL-8 along with TNF-α, alter the tran-
scriptional activity of genes encoding a group of proteins referred 
to as acute-phase reactants, and these can be increased or decreased 
(positive and negative acute-phase proteins, respectively; Table 3-8). 
Many of the hepatic acute-phase proteins, such as C-reactive pro-
tein and hepcidin, are secreted into the circulation, where elevated 
levels in serum are diagnostic of tissue injury, inflammation, or 
neoplasm. Increased sedimentation of red blood cells, which is also 
indicative of these conditions, is due to enrichment of blood plasma 
with positive acute-phase proteins such as fibrinogen.
Apart from their diagnostic value, positive acute-phase pro-
teins may play roles in minimizing tissue injury and facilitating

108
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
repair. For example, many of them, such as α2-macroglobulin 
and α1-antiprotease, inhibit lysosomal proteases released from 
the injured cells and recruited leukocytes. Haptoglobin binds 
hemoglobin in blood, MT complexes metals in cells, heme 
oxygenase oxidizes heme to biliverdin, and opsonins facilitate 
phagocytosis. Upregulated acute-phase proteins may also be 
involved in the clearance of substances released on tissue injury. 
For example, induction of hepcidin triggers degradation of the 
iron efflux channel to decrease duodenal Fe2+ absorption and 
Fe2+ export from macrophages and which limits systemic avail-
ability of iron.
Downregulated acute-phase proteins include some plasma pro-
teins, such as albumin, transthyretin, and transferrin. Furthermore, 
hepatic enzymes (e.g., several forms of cytochrome P450 and glu-
tathione S-transferases), ligand-activated TFs (e.g., PPARα and the 
bile acid receptor FXR), and transporters such as bile acid trans-
porters on sinusoidal and canalicular membrane of hepatocytes and 
the bile canalicular export pump Mrp2 are also downregulated. The 
downregulation of hepatic metabolizing enzymes and transporters 
often alters the disposition and toxicity of bile acids and xenobiotics 
during the acute phase of tissue injury.
Although the acute-phase response is phylogenetically pre-
served, some of the acute-phase proteins are somewhat species 
specific. For example, during the acute phase of tissue injury or 
inflammation, C-reactive protein and serum amyloid A levels dra-
matically increase in humans but not in rats, whereas the concen-
trations of α1-acid glycoprotein and α2-macroglobulin increase 
markedly in rats but only moderately in humans.
Mechanisms of Adaptation
Adaptation is a biological process by which an organism devel-
ops increased tolerance to the harm itself. It involves responses 
acting to preserve or regain the biological homeostasis in the face 
of increased harm. Theoretically, adaptation to toxicity may result 
from biological changes causing (1) diminished delivery of the caus-
ative chemical(s) to the target, (2) decreased size or susceptibility 
of the target, (3) increased capacity of the organism to repair itself, 
and (4) mechanisms to compensate for the toxicant-inflicted dys-
function. Mechanistically, adaptation involves sensing the noxious 
chemical and/or the initial damage or dysfunction, with a response 
that limits the toxicity that typically occurs through altered gene 
expression. Such mechanisms are briefly outlined here.
Adaptation by Decreasing Delivery to the Target  Given 
that the first step in the development of toxicity is delivery of the 
ultimate toxicant to the target, some adaptive processes include 
those that decrease absorption, increase sequestration by intracel-
lular binding proteins, enhance their detoxification, or promote cel-
lular export.
Regulation of Iron Absorption  Adaptive mechanisms triggered 
by iron itself regulate intestinal absorption of this essential yet 
potentially harmful metal ion, with absorption adjusted to meet 
demand. Fe2+ is taken up from the intestinal lumen into entero-
cytes by the proton-coupled divalent metal transporter 1 (DMT1) 
localized in the luminal membrane, and it is exported across the 
basolateral membrane of these cells through the ferroportin iron 
Table 3-8  
Overview of Acute-Phase Proteins and their General Function
Positive Acute-Phase Proteins
Generalized function or Role in Acute-Phase Response
C-reactive protein
Facilitated phagocytosis of bacteria
Ceruloplasmin
Copper transport protein with antioxidant activity 
α2-macroglobulin
Inhibits thrombin and plasmin to reduce coagulation and fibrinolysis
α1-acid glycoprotein
Binds steroids, lipophilic, and acidic drugs; anti-inflammatory agent
Haptoglobin
Binds free hemoglobin to limit systemic iron availability
Hepcidin
Prevents release of iron bound by ferritin in the intestinal tract and in 
macrophages; increases internalization of ferritin
Ferritin
Iron-binding protein
Serum amyloid A
Chemotactic activity and inhibition of myeloperoxidase release 
α1-antitrypsin
Downregulates inflammation
Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 
Prevents plasminogen-mediated degradation of blood clots
Coagulation factors: fibrinogen,  
prothrombin, von Willebrand factor
Role in coagulation 
Negative Acute-Phase Proteins
Albumin
Major hepatic protein; decreased synthesis saves amino acids for  
synthesizing positive acute-phase reactants
Transferrin
Contributes to the regulation of free iron levels
Transthyretin
Binds and transports thyroid hormone
Retinol-binding protein
Binds and transports retinol
Antithrombin
A serine protease inhibitor (serpin) that inactivates clotting factors,  
kallikrein, plasmin, and trypsin

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
109
channel. High iron intake diminishes expression of both DMT1 and 
ferroportin in the enterocytes, whereas low intake has the opposite 
effect. DMT1 is regulated at the translational level by the intra-
cellular iron-regulatory proteins (IRPs) that contain a [4Fe-4S] 
cluster. Iron supply influences the Fe content of this cluster and in 
turn affects the capacity of IRP to bind to mRNAs containing the 
iron response element (IRE). In iron deficiency, loss of Fe from the 
[4Fe-4S] cluster allows the IRP1 apoprotein to bind to and protect 
DMT1 mRNA from enzymatic degradation and increase DMT1 
protein. Conversely, iron overload saturates IRP1 with Fe so that it 
cannot bind to and stabilize DMT1 mRNA, which decreases DMT1 
and limits Fe2+ absorption. DMT1 also mediates the transport of 
Cd2+ such that its overexpression in conditions of iron deficiency 
can also increase intestinal absorption of this toxic metal ion.
In addition to its uptake, Fe homeostasis is maintained by fer-
roportin, which allows efflux of iron from enterocytes and other 
cells that may store iron including macrophages (from phagocyto-
sis) and hepatocytes. Ferroportin in plasma membranes is regulated 
directly by the acute-phase reactant hepcidin (Table 3-8; Ganz, 
2011), which binds to ferroportin and triggers its internalization 
and lysosomal hydrolysis. Hepcidin is also regulated by iron supply, 
as iron deficiency decreases hepcidin expression, precluding fer-
roportin degradation, and in concert with upregulated DMT1, per-
mits increased iron absorption from the duodenum. In contrast, iron 
overload increases the secretion of hepcidin to increase degradation 
of ferroportin, and in concert with decreased synthesis of DMT1, 
shuts down iron absorption from the intestine. This system can also 
respond to toxicants. For example, the hepatotoxic herbicide diquat 
undergoes redox cycling and increases hepatic free-iron concentra-
tions. However, an adaptive increase in hepatic hepcidin mRNA 
decreases plasma iron levels (Higuchi et al., 2011) to provide an 
appropriate protective response.
Induction of Ferritin and Metallothionein  Adaptive cellular 
accumulation of the binding proteins ferritin and metallothionein 
(MT) is protective against iron and cadmium ions, respectively. 
Like DMT1, ferritin is regulated by IRP1 in the face of iron over-
load. However, apoIRP1 acts oppositely on ferritin mRNA to block 
its translation. Therefore, in iron overload, ferritin mRNA is mark-
edly increased. In this manner, ferritin is protective as it acts to bind 
and remove Fe2+ systemically.
MT is induced by cadmium, and elevated levels of MT protect 
the liver by restricting distribution of this toxic metal ion to sensitive 
intracellular targets. Induction of MT by Cd2+ is likely mediated by 
displacement of Zn ions from the protein which then activate metal-
responsive transcription factor 1 (MTF-1) to increase transcription 
of the MT gene. The adaptive response afforded by MT induction 
is illustrated by the fact that induction of the metal binding protein 
subsequently protects against highly toxic exposures to Cd2+.
The Electrophile Stress Response: Induction of Detoxification  
Adaptive increases in detoxification and cellular export have a 
major role in limiting toxicity. An important contributor to such 
adaptation is the Keap1-Nrf2 pathway, a cytosolic complex that 
senses thiol reactivity. The response is initiated by Nrf2 (NF-E2-
related factor-2), a TF that activates genes with an electrophile 
response element (EpRE) in their regulatory region (Fig. 3-29; 
Chartoumpekis et al., 2015). Normally Nrf2 is retained in the cyto-
plasm by Keap1, a cysteine-rich homodimeric protein. Keap1 keeps 
Nrf2 inactive by anchoring it to the cytoskeleton and maintains low 
intracellular levels by linking it to cullin 3, a component of E3 
ubiquitin ligase that directs it to proteasomal degradation. Many 
different thiol-sensitive compounds bind to Keap1 at its reactive 
cysteine thiol groups thereby forcing Keap1 to release Nrf2. This 
broad group of activators includes electrophiles, α,β-unsaturated 
aldehydes and ketones, isothiocyanates, thiol-reactive metal ions, 
and direct and indirect oxidants. On disruption of the Keap1–Nrf2 
complex, active Nrf2 translocates into the nucleus, forms a heter-
odimer with small Maf proteins, and activates genes through bind-
ing to EpREs.
There are many genes with EpRE motifs. The broad response 
is illustrated in Fig. 3-29 and includes (1) enzymes that detox-
ify xenobiotics, (2) enzymes that eliminate O2
• , (3) proteins that 
detoxify heme, (4) enzymes involved in the synthesis of GSH and 
its regeneration from GSSG, and (5) efflux transporters. It should 
be noted that the list of Nrf2-regulated genes provided here is an 
incomplete list, and other Nrf2-induced proteins of known toxico-
logical relevance are discussed later.
To provide an example of the broad, pleiotropic response 
initiated by Nrf2 activation, Fig. 3-30 illustrates Nrf2-mediated 
adaptive changes that facilitate elimination and detoxification 
of electrophilic chemicals in response to t-butylhydroquinone 
(tBHQ), a well-known inducer of this pathway. Additional com-
pounds that induce Nrf2 through thiol reactivity include butylated 
hydroxyanisole (BHA), sulforaphane (a compound in broccoli), 
curcumin (a compound in turmeric-containing 2 α,β-unsaturated 
ketone groups), resveratrol (a hydroquinone-type compound in red 
grapes), oltipraz (a dithiolenethione compound), and derivatives 
of oleanolic acid, such as 2-cyano-3,12-dioxooleana-1,9(11)-dien-
28-oic acid (CDDO). These chemicals have been shown to protect 
from toxicant-induced tissue injury and cancer. For example, treat-
ment with oleanolic acid or CDDO ameliorates acetaminophen-
induced hepatotoxicity and aflatoxin-induced hepatocarcinogenesis 
(Klaassen and Reisman, 2010). Moreover, CDDO has been evalu-
ated clinically for use in chronic kidney disease, and there is grow-
ing interest in Nrf2 activation in cancer chemoprevention (Cao 
et al., 2015).
Finally, the critical role of Nrf2 in adapting to toxicity is 
confirmed in Nrf2 knockout mice that are more sensitive to 
many toxicants including the hepatotoxicity of acetaminophen, 
the pulmonary toxicity of butylated hydroxytoluene or cigarette 
smoke, the neurotoxicity of 3-nitropropionic acid, and the car-
cinogenicity of benzo[a]pyrene (Klaassen and Reisman, 2010). 
Conversely, liver-specific deletion of Keap1 constitutively activates 
Nrf2 in hepatocytes, causing them to overexpress many detoxi-
fying enzymes and become resistant to acetaminophen-induced 
hepatotoxicity.
Adaptation by Decreasing the Target Density or 
Responsiveness  Decreasing the density and sensitivity of the 
xenobiotic target is an adaptation mechanism for several recep-
tors. Such alterations underlie the tolerance induced by opioids and 
drugs of abuse. There are several opioid receptors, but the major 
receptor for drugs like morphine or heroine is the µ-opioid receptor. 
This is a Gi protein–coupled inhibitory receptor, and stimulation 
by an agonist inhibits adenyl cyclase to decrease levels of cyclic 
AMP levels and PKA activity. Brief stimulation induces adapta-
tion manifested as receptor downregulation by loss of the receptor 
from the plasma membrane. Receptor downregulation is mediated 
by receptor internalization that facilitates lysosomal degradation 
rather than recycling back to the membrane (Bailey and Connor, 
2005). Additionally, there is an opening of K+ channels in neurons 
with opioid receptors to cause hyperpolarization. Tolerance to opi-
oids leads to the requirement for increasing doses of a drug such 
as morphine to maintain pharmacologic activity, and the need for 
higher or more frequent doses enhances abuse potential.

110
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
Adaptation by Increasing Repair  There are several repair 
mechanisms that can be induced after toxicant exposure. Some of 
these may aid in repairing damaged molecules, proteins, and DNA, 
others support regeneration of injured tissue.
The Electrophile Stress Response: Induction of Enzymes 
Repairing Oxidized Protein  In addition to enzymes that enhance 
detoxification, Nrf2 activation induces proteins that mediate pro-
tein repair. These include thioredoxin 1 (Trx1) and thioredoxin 
reductase 1 (TR1), which catalyze reduction of oxidized proteins, 
and several subunits of the proteasome complex. Trx1 and TR1 are 
also reduction partners for ribonucleotide reductase, thereby sup-
porting de novo synthesis of deoxyribonucleotides necessary for 
DNA synthesis. In this manner, induction of Trx1 and TR1 mediate 
repair of both protein and DNA.
Induction of Chaperones Repairing Misfolded Protein: The 
Heat-Shock Response  The role of heat-shock proteins has been 
previously described in the section “Repair of Proteins.” Regulation 
of these proteins to support adaptive responses is mediated by heat-
shock transcription factors (HSF), mainly HSF1, which transactivate 
genes that encode Hsp through heat-shock response elements (HSE). 
This process often takes place simultaneously with the electrophile 
response discussed above. HSF1, like Nrf2, normally resides in the 
cytoplasm, where it associates with Hsp90, Hsp70, and Hsp40. On 
heat- or chemical-induced protein damage, Hsps are sequestered 
by damaged proteins (Fig. 3-25), allowing HSF1 to translocate to 
the nucleus, where it forms a trimer and is phosphorylated. The 
chaperones Hsp90 and Hsp70, together with co-chaperone pro-
teins, are especially important in maintaining the integrity of hun-
dreds of proteins (Schopf et al., 2017) including those carrying out 
housekeeping functions and those involved in signaling and apop-
tosis. Therefore, induction of Hsps has pleiotropic effects beyond 
increased protection from cytotoxicity.
Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress and the Unfolded Protein 
Response  The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is the primary site 
where transmembrane and secretory proteins are folded. In this 
Ca2+-rich, oxidative environment, protein modifications including 
N-glycosylation at asparagine residues, formation of disulfide bonds, 
and folding assisted by EPR-resident chaperones occur. When 
there is damage to proteins being processed in the EPR by reactive 
metabolites (often produced in situ by CYP enzymes), generation of 
Keap1
Keap1
Ub
Ub
Nrf2
Keap1
Keap1
Nrf2
sMaf
Genes
Electrophiles
HS
HS
SH
SH
Oxidants
HS
S
S
S
E
EpRE
NQO1
AR
EH1
CES
GST
UGT
Xenobiotic
detoxication
SOD1
Catalase
GPX2
Srx1
GR
HO-1
ferritin
Heme
detoxication,
iron
sequestration
GCL
GGT
GSH
synthesis,
turnover
Mrp2
Mrp3
Mrp4
Export
from cells
Trx
TrxR
proteosome
Protein
repair,
removal
O2, HOOH
detoxication
•–
Figure 3-29.   Signaling by Keap1/Nrf2 mediates the electrophile stress response. Normally NF-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) is kept inactive and at a low intracel-
lular level by interacting with Keap1 that promotes its ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation. Electrophiles covalently bind to, whereas oxidants oxidize, 
the reactive thiol groups of Keap1, causing Keap1 to release Nrf2. Alternatively, Nrf2 release may follow its phosphorylation by protein kinases. After being 
released from Keap1, active Nrf2 accumulates in the cell, translocates into the nucleus, and forms a heterodimer with small Maf proteins to activate genes that 
contain electrophile response element (EpRE) in their promoter region. These include enzymes, binding proteins, and transporters functioning in detoxication 
and elimination of xenobiotics, ROS, and endogenous reactive chemicals, as well as some proteins that can repair or eliminate oxidized proteins (highlighted 
in blue). Induction of such proteins represents an electrophile stress response that provides protection against a wide range of toxicants. Abbreviations: AR, 
aldose reductase; CES, carboxylesterase; EH1, microsomal epoxide hydrolase; GCL, glutamate–cysteine ligase; GGT, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase; GPX2, 
glutathione peroxidase 2; GR, glutathione reductase; GST, glutathione S-transferase; HO-1, heme oxygenase 1; NQO1, NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase; 
Mrp2, Mrp3, and Mrp4, multidrug resistance protein 2, 3, and 4; SOD1, superoxide dismutase 1; Srx1, sulfiredoxin 1; UGT, UDP-glucuronosyltransferase; 
Trx, thioredoxin; TrxR, thioredoxin reductase.

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
111
ROS, and/or depletion of Ca2+ in the EPR lumen, there is accumula-
tion of unfolded or misfolded proteins, a condition known as EPR 
stress (Malhi and Kaufman, 2011; Carreras-Sureda et al., 2017). 
EPR stress can be triggered by high secretory activity, along with 
conditions that perturb protein maturation, calcium homeostasis, or 
redox balance. Additionally, it can also be induced by compounds 
that disturb different aspects of EPR homeostasis, including hap-
sigargin (which blocks SERCA-mediated Ca2+ uptake into EPR; 
see Table 3-6), tunicamycin (which inhibits N-glycosylation of 
proteins), castanospermine (which interferes with maturation of 
nascent glycoproteins by deglucosylation), and brefeldin A (which 
inhibits transport of proteins from EPR to Golgi). When the load of 
unfolded or misfolded proteins in the EPR exceeds the capacity of 
EPR-resident chaperones, these proteins trigger a complex adaptive 
response called unfolded protein response (UPR) that is designed to 
reduce the load of unfolded proteins and restore EPR homeostasis 
(Fig. 3-31). However, if EPR homeostasis cannot be restored, UPR 
switches to a proapoptotic pathway that eliminates damaged cells.
In the adaptive mode, UPR includes mechanisms to (1) reduce 
mRNA translation to decrease the functional load on the EPR, 
(2) increase transcription of EPR chaperones to boost the folding 
capacity, and (3) remove aberrant proteins via translocon peptide 
channels into the cytosol for proteasomal degradation. As noted 
above, the final option is to eliminate the affected cell via apoptosis 
if EPR stress is sustained or massive. The eukaryotic translation ini-
tiation factor 2α (eIF2α) and TF X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), 
ATF6, ATF4, and C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP; also called 
Gadd153) are the major regulators of this adaptive response.
There are three transmembrane EPR proteins that sense the 
overload of the EPR lumen with misfolded proteins and transduce 
SProt
Mrp2*
Mrp3*
Mrp4*
UGT*
NQO1*
NQO2*
CYP
OH
OH
1
O-GA
OH
2
O
O
(+)
(+)
3
OH
OH
SG
4
OH
OH
5
R
O•
6
GST*
GSH
GCL* Cys
e–
O2
HOOH
2HOH
SOD*
2GSH
GSSG
Cys
*GCL
Gpx*
HO•
2LOOH
Fe3+
Prot-CH2
Proteosome*
2L
2Prot-(SH)2
Prot-C=O
Prot-S-S
Prot-(SH)2
Trx*, TrxR*
Fe2+
2LOH
Gpx*
GSSG
2GSH
GR*
NADPH+H+
NADP+
G6PDH*
Ferritin*
Prot-SH
Keap1-SH
Export
O2
–•
Figure 3-30.   Adaptive changes in response to the t-butylhydroquinone (tBHQ)–induced electrophile stress. This figure illustrates the numerous proteins (i.e., 
enzymes, exporters, and repair proteins) that, when induced in response to the tBHQ-mediated electrophile stress, facilitate the detoxication and export of 
tBHQ and/or its metabolites, the detoxication of ROS formed during the biotransformation of tBHQ, and repair or removal of proteins damaged by the reactive 
metabolites. Proteins induced by Nrf2 are marked with an asterisk. tBHQ (designated as 1 in the aromatic ring) can be detoxified by glucuronidation (2), but 
cytochrome P450–catalyzed dehydrogenation to t-butylquinone (tBQ; 3), which contains electrophilic carbon atoms (+), is believed to be the actual inducer of 
electrophile stress response. tBQ can be detoxified by conjugation with glutathione (GSH) to form tBHQ-SG (4); it can covalently bind to SH groups in proteins 
(5), including Keap1, or by accepting an electron (e), tBQ can also form the t-butylsemiquinone radical (6), which passes the electron to molecular oxygen to 
form superoxide anion radical (O2
•), completing a redox cycle. In a process catalyzed by superoxide dismutase (SOD), O2
• can form HOOH (left side of figure), 
which is detoxified by GSH-peroxidase (GPX), or involved in the Fe2+-catalyzed Fenton reaction to form hydroxyl radical (HO•).

112
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
this signal to initiate the UPR (Fig. 3-31). These include PKR-like 
ER kinase (PERK), inositol-requiring enzyme 1α (IRE1α), a pro-
tein with kinase and endoribonuclease (RNase) activities, and the 
precursor form ATF6 (activating TF 6). Under normal conditions, 
the EPR-resident soluble chaperone BiP (or Grp78) inhibits UPR. 
However, when stressed, the unfolded proteins accumulating in the 
lumen of the EPR sequester BiP away from these sensors, thereby 
turning them on to signal for the UPR. PERK catalyzes the phos-
phorylation of the eIF2α, resulting in attenuation of translation and 
decreased synthesis of most (but not all) proteins. Upon activation, 
IRE1α undergoes dimerization and trans-autophosphorylation, 
which increases its RNase activity, enabling it to cleave and process 
the mRNA for XBP1 (X-box binding protein-1), and XBP1 upregu-
lates numerous genes involved in secretory function including ER 
chaperones and lipid synthesis. The third sensor ATF6 resides as 
a 90-kDa precursor protein in the EPR with its Golgi localization 
sequences masked by BiP. On dissociation from BiP, ATF6 trans-
locates to the Golgi where it is cleaved by SP1 and SP2 proteases 
(site-1 and site-2 proteases). This cleavage releases activating factor 
6 (ATF6), a potent TF that together with XBP1 activates transcrip-
tion of ER chaperone proteins that promote protein folding.
Overall, UPR serves to sustain cell survival. However, with 
excessive EPR stress, PERK, IRE1α, and ATF6 act in concert to 
initiate apoptosis (Carreras-Sureda et al., 2017). Mitochondria-
associated membranes (MAMs) are specialized membranes of the 
ER that are in close proximity to the mitochondrial outer membrane 
and facilitate communication between the EPR and mitochon-
dria. Core components of UPR, including PERK and IRE1α, are 
enriched in MAMs. Moreover, while PERK-catalyzed phosphoryla-
tion of eIF2α decreases the synthesis of most proteins, it can initiate 
cell death programs by complex regulation that ultimately induces 
the expression of the proapoptotic protein Bim along with the cell 
surface death receptor TRAIL-2, while inhibiting the expression of 
the antiapoptotic protein Bcl-2. Activated IRE1α may also initiate 
cell death by recruiting the adaptor protein TNF receptor–associ-
ated factor-2 (TRAF2), with subsequent activation of apoptosis 
signal-regulating kinase 1 (ASK1) and JNK. After phosphoryla-
tion, JNK activates proapoptotic Bim and inactivates antiapoptotic 
Bcl-2 proteins (Malhi and Kaufman, 2011). The IRE1α–TRAF2 
complex may also recruit and activate procaspase 12. Alternatively, 
Ca2+ released from the EPR can activate calpains, which cleave 
the EPR-associated procaspase-12 into active caspase-12. The latter 
then engages the caspase cascade by activating effector caspases to 
initiate apoptosis.
Induction of Enzymes Repairing DNA: The DNA Damage 
Response  Maintaining the fidelity of DNA is critical to cell sur-
vival, and DNA damage initiates numerous pathways for repair 
(discussed above). The tumor suppressor p53, regarded as the 
“guardian of the genome,” is also critical to DNA repair processes. 
Normally, p53 is kept inactive and at low levels in the cytoplasm 
by binding protein mdm2 (mouse double minute homolog 2), an 
E3 ubiquitin ligase that ubiquitinates p53 and facilitates its pro-
teasomal degradation. However, it is activated by several kinase 
pathways that signal in response to double-stranded DNA breaks. 
These pathways include the MRN complex (the trimer of Mre11, 
mRNA
Degradation
XBP1
Ligase
sXBP1
Cleaved
ATF6α
Chaperones
ERAD
CHOP
Translation
Attenuation
ATF4
GADD34
P
elF2α
elF2α
PP1
Chaperones
ERAD
Amino acid metabolism
Antioxidant stress response
CHOP
GADD34
ER
ATF6α
IRE1α
BiP
BiP
Misfolded Proteins
P
P
P
P
PERK
BiP
Figure 3-31.   Overview of the unfolded protein response (UPR). There are three main signaling branches in the UPR. Under normal conditions, BiP (binding 
immunoglobulin protein), a Hsp70 molecular chaperone, inhibits UPR. However, under endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, BiP dissociates from the UPR 
transducers to chaperone misfolded proteins into the ER lumen and initiate one of three branches of the UPR. Activating factor 6 (ATF6) translocates to the 
Golgi where it is processed to generate a transcription factor that targets genes involved in ER-associated protein degradation (ERAD). When activated, IRE1α 
forms an oligomer that processes the mRNA coding for X-box binding protein 1 (XBP1), another transcription factor that activates proteins involved in ERAD, 
ER chaperones, and lipid biosynthesis. Activation of PERK is associated with active dimer formation that phosphorylates eiF2α (eukaryotic initiation factor 
2α), which represses global translation while facilitating the activation of numerous factors including activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4). Activation of 
ATF4 drives the expression of genes involved in protein folding, amino acid biosynthesis, oxidative stress, autophagy, and apoptosis. (From Malhi H, Kaufman 
RJ. Endoplasmic reticulum stress in liver disease. J Hepatol. 2011;54:795–809; with permission.)

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
113
Rad50, and Nbs1 proteins) or the Ku protein (the dimer of Ku70 
and Ku80; see the section “Repair of DNA”) that bind and acti-
vate protein kinases including ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) 
and DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs), 
respectively, to phosphorylate and activate p53 (Batchelor et al., 
2009). With DNA damage and through the cascade that phospho-
rylates p53, it escapes from mdm2, allowing its activation, stabili-
zation, and translocation to the nucleus. p53 facilitates DNA repair 
by several mechanisms. First, it initiates cell cycle arrest at the G1/S 
interface by upregulating the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 
protein p21, thereby allowing more time for DNA repair. Second, 
it increases expression of numerous proteins directly involved in 
DNA repair. These include gadd45 (growth arrest and DNA dam-
age inducible) that interacts with histones and facilitates access of 
proteins (e.g., topoisomerase) to DNA, XPE, and XPC, members 
of the xeroderma pigmentosum group of proteins important in 
UV-induced DNA damage recognition, MSH2 (operating in mis-
match repair), PCNA to enable excision and the recombination 
repair processes, and ribonucleotide reductase to synthesize deoxy-
ribonucleotides needed to support DNA synthesis. Beyond their 
action on p53, the DNA damage–activated protein kinases (ATM, 
ATR, and DNA-PK) also phosphorylate histone H2AX adjacent to 
the damage, which then becomes ubiquitinated. These markings in 
turn recruit repair proteins (including BRCA1) and induce chro-
matin relaxation for better access of repair enzymes to the lesion.
Overall, DNA repair mechanisms and the more complicated 
DNA damage response (DDR) protect normal cells from DNA 
damage and potential transformation to cancer cells. However, 
these mechanisms may also provide a selective growth advantage 
by protecting cells from DNA damage associated with radiotherapy 
or chemotherapy, and contribute to an adaptive response that causes 
resistance to anticancer treatments (discussed below).
Adaptive Increase in Proliferative Responses to Promote 
Tissue Repair  In association with toxic injury, there is often a 
resulting signaling cascade to initiate tissue repair via cell replace-
ment. In this situation, phosphatases such as PTP and PTEN, 
which normally serve as brakes on growth factor receptor-initiated 
mitogenic signaling, play an active role (refer to Fig. 3-13). These 
enzymes, which contain reactive cysteine thiols in their active sites, 
are covalently modified and thereby inactivated by electrophiles. 
In this manner, the loss of their inhibitory activity on proliferative 
signaling cascades serves to amplify intracellular signaling for 
mitosis and survival.
NF-κB is also a converging pathway for proliferative signal-
ing, as it transactivates genes producing cell cycle acceleration (e.g., 
cyclin D1 and c-Myc) and inhibitors of apoptosis (e.g., antiapop-
totic Bcl proteins and the caspase IAPs; Karin, 2006). In addition, 
NF-κB also transactivates ferritin, GST, SOD1, HO-1, a protea-
some subunit, and gadd45, facilitating detoxification and molecular 
repair. Collectively, these roles of NF-κB explain its broad involve-
ment in tolerance to chemically induced tissue injury and adaptation 
to ionizing radiation.
Proliferating cells also need to increase protein synthesis, a pro-
cess controlled by the protein kinase mTOR (mammalian target of 
rapamycin). mTOR is a major regulator of general metabolic activity. 
It is activated by the MAPK pathway through phosphorylation of the 
MAPK isoform Erk and by the PI3K pathway through phosphory-
lation of Akt (see Fig. 3-13). These pathways are also activated in 
response to oxidant or electrophile exposure as they are held in check 
by controlled PTPs and PTEN (Fig. 3-13) such that inhibition of 
these phosphatases also increases signaling through Erk and Akt. In 
the cascade, Erk and Akt activate mTOR that in turn phosphorylates 
and regulates effectors of protein synthesis, such as the translation 
repressor protein 4EBP1 and the protein kinase S6K, which modi-
fies ribosomes increasing their translational efficiency (Shaw and 
Cantley, 2006). In contrast to its activation during cell proliferation, 
it is shutdown in conditions such as hypoxia to reduce ATP synthesis.
Adaptation to Hypoxia: The Hypoxia Response  Hypoxia-
inducible factor 1α (HIF-1α) is maintained at very low constitu-
tive intracellular levels because of continuous hydroxylation of its 
two proline residues by HIF-prolyl hydroxylases. Hydroxylation of 
the proline residues permits a ubiquitin ligase subunit (von Hippel 
Lindau protein [VHL]) to initiate proteasomal degradation. Under 
normal, non-stress conditions, HIF-1α is a short-lived protein with 
a half-life of less than 5 minutes. HIF-1α is also kept transcrip-
tionally inactive by hydroxylation at one of its asparagine residues 
by HIF-asparagine hydroxylases, which prevents interaction of 
HIF-1α with transcriptional coactivators, such as p300 and CREB-
binding protein (CBP). However, when O2 delivery is impaired and 
hypoxia persists for more than a few minutes, HIF-1α increases 
markedly (Ju et al., 2016). Moreover, HIF hydroxylases have a 
KM for O2 that is very close to ambient O2 concentration, so that 
when the O2 concentration falls, there is decreased hydroxylation 
of HIF-1α as well as its VHL-mediated ubiquitination for protea-
somal degradation, which increase the abundance and transcrip-
tional activity of HIF-1α. HIF hydroxylases are members of the 
Fe2+ and ascorbate-dependent dioxygenases and Fe2+ deficiency 
also impairs their activity. This feature explains why iron chela-
tors (deferoxamine) or Fe2+-mimicking metal ions (Co2+ and Ni2+) 
induce and activate HIF-1α (Maxwell and Salnikow, 2004).
In hypoxic conditions, HIF-1α dimerizes with HIF-1β (also 
called Arnt, which is the dimerization partner for AhR; Fig. 3-11). 
The HIF complex transactivates a vast array of genes containing 
the hypoxia response element (HRE). Many of the activated genes 
function to enable acclimatization to hypoxia (Harada, 2016). These 
include (1) erythropoietin (EPO) produced largely in kidney to acti-
vate erythropoiesis in bone marrow, (2) proteins involved in iron 
homeostasis (e.g., transferrin, TFR, ceruloplasmin, and heme oxy-
genase) to increase availability of iron for erythropoiesis, (3) vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and angiopoietin-2 to stimulate 
blood vessel growth, (4) proteins facilitating glycolysis including the 
glucose transporter GLUT1 and some glycolytic enzymes, (5) pro-
teins that correct acidosis caused by glycolytic overproduction of lac-
tate (e.g., a monocarboxylate transporter and a Na+/H+ exchanger for 
export of lactate and H+), (6) the REDD1 signal transducer protein 
that initiates a complex signaling pathway that leads to suspension of 
the ATP-consuming protein synthesis via inactivation of mTOR, and 
(7) a generalized response to promote ECM remodeling (e.g., matrix 
metalloproteinase-2) and cell migration and to induce autophagy and/
or apoptosis. As an example of an adaptive response to hypoxia, it has 
been shown that in mice housed in a low O2 environment (hypoxic 
preconditioning), HIF-1α is stabilized in the retina to induce hypoxia-
responsive genes (EPO and VEGF) upon which the retina becomes 
resistant to light toxicity (Grimm et al., 2005). Adaptation to hypoxia 
also occurs in response to high-altitude conditions, chronic cardio-
respiratory dysfunction, and ischemic preconditioning. The hypoxia 
response can develop as a result of toxicities that cause acute or sub-
acute conditions of hypoxia (e.g., respiratory muscle weakness after 
organophosphate intoxication and diquat-induced pulmonary injury) 
or as a delayed sequel to conditions of respiratory surface restriction 
as is seen in hard metal disease (see Chap. 15).
The Energy Stress Response to Adapt to Energy 
Depletion  Cells try to maintain ATP levels at all times. When 
the rephosphorylation of AMP and ADP to ATP does not keep 
up with the rate of ATP use, the ratio of AMP to ATP increases.

114
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) represents an adaptive 
cellular mechanism that responds to energy deficits to boost ATP 
production and limit ATP consumption (Hardie et al., 2006). The 
kinase is strongly activated by AMP, and it is phosphorylated by 
protein kinase LKB1 (or by the calmodulin-dependent protein 
kinase kinase [CaMKK] in neurons). Phosphorylated AMPK is 
activated and targets two sets of proteins that function to increase 
ATP production either from catabolism of glucose and fatty acids 
or by promoting mitochondrial ATP biogenesis, while concurrently 
reducing reactions that consume ATP. For example, to increase 
ATP levels AMPK increases (a) glucose uptake (via glucose trans-
porters GLUT4 and GLUT1), (b) glycolysis (via phosphorylation 
and activation of 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase [PFK-2]), and (c) fatty 
acid oxidation in mitochondria (via phosphorylation and inactiva-
tion of acetyl-CoA-carboxylase). Simultaneously, it induces an 
extensive program to reduce ATP consumption by broadly inhib-
iting (a) glycogen synthesis by phosphorylation and inactivation 
of glycogen synthase, (b) lipid synthesis by phosphorylating and 
inactivating acetyl-CoA-carboxylase, (c) cholesterol synthesis by 
phosphorylating and inactivating HMG-CoA reductase, (d) glu-
cose synthesis via decreased expression of key gluconeogenetic 
enzymes such as phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) 
and glucose-6-phosphatase, and (e) protein synthesis by inhibiting 
mTOR. AMPK-mediated modulation of cellular energy supply and 
consumption occurs largely through kinase-mediated phosphoryla-
tion reactions rather than transcriptional regulation, rendering this 
pathway a rapid, adaptive response.
In addition to the rapid AMPK-dependent reprogramming 
of cellular intermediary metabolism, there is an ultimate means 
for cells to generate fuel for ATP production in case of nutrient 
shortage. This slower process involves consumption of the cell’s 
own constituents (lipid droplets, glycogen particles, proteins, and 
organelles) by nonselective or bulk autophagy (Rabinowitz and 
White, 2010; Petibone et al., 2017) with lysosomal hydrolysis pro-
viding essential metabolic intermediates (amino acids, fatty acids, 
nucleosides, and carbohydrates). As discussed earlier, autophagy is 
a five-step process that involves a complex program of kinase activ-
ity including ULK-1, autophagy-related proteins (Atg), and focal 
adhesion kinase family-interacting protein of 200 kDa (FIP200), 
which is an initiator of autophagosome formation (Fig. 3-27). 
When nutrients are abundant, mTOR phosphorylates and inacti-
vates ULK-1 and Atg13, thereby inhibiting autophagy. However, 
in conditions of nutrient shortage, mTOR is inactivated by signal-
ing pathways, such as those activated by AMP and hypoxia, which 
releases inhibition of the ULK-1–Atg13–FIP200 complex, and in 
turn initiates autophagosome formation (Hosokawa et al., 2009). 
The important role that mTOR serves in switching autophagy on 
and off is further evidence of its role as key regulator of cellular 
energy homeostasis.
In surveying the major cellular adaptation mechanisms to 
toxicants herein, it should be easy to recognize that one toxic 
event may initiate several of these adaptive responses. For exam-
ple, cells exposed to a hypoxic environment can rapidly respond 
with both AMPK-mediated program of energy stabilization and 
HIF-1α-directed adaptation to oxygen shortage. Theoretically, an 
electrophilic toxicant that binds covalently to cellular macromol-
ecules can also generate oxidative stress, and would be expected 
to induce numerous adaptive processes, including the electrophile 
response, the heat-shock response, EPR stress, the DDR, and cell 
proliferation. Furthermore, if severe enough to compromise ATP 
synthesis, the energy stress response may be elicited. Such com-
plexity illustrates the broad underpinning of almost any mecha-
nism of toxicity.
Adaptation by Neurohumoral Mechanisms  There are numerous 
adaptive responses to dysfunctions of organs or organ systems that 
are mediated by humoral or neuronal signals between cells located 
in the same or different organs. For example, the rapid hyperventi-
lation evoked by acute hypoxia or HCN inhalation is mediated by 
a neural reflex initiated by glomus cells in the carotid body. These 
chemosensitive cells generate a Ca2+ signal via AMPK (Evans 
et al., 2005). In addition, CN−, mitochondrial electron transport 
inhibitors (e.g., rotenone, antimycin A, myxothiazole), uncouplers 
(e.g., 2,4-dinitrophenol), or ATP-synthase inhibitors (e.g., oligomy-
cin) as well as AMPK activators mimic the response to hypoxia in 
these cells.
Final and Irreversible Actions of Repair 
and Adaptation Failure
The most important consequences of inappropriate repair are irre-
versible organ failure, as is the case with necrosis or tissue changes 
that advance to fibrosis or carcinogenesis. Before discussing these 
final, irreversible effects, general principles concerning failure to 
repair or adapt are presented.
When Repair Fails  Although repair mechanisms operate at 
molecular, cellular, and tissue levels, they can fail to provide pro-
tection against injury. Toxicity is manifested when repair of the 
initial injury fails because the repair mechanisms become over-
whelmed, exhausted, or impaired. Failure occurs because the 
fidelity of the repair mechanisms is not absolute, as in the case 
for DNA repair. However, repair most often fails when damage 
overwhelms repair mechanisms, by depleting protective elements 
and exhausting the capacity for repair. For example, alkylation of 
DNA depletes MGMT, lipid peroxidation depletes α-tocopherol, 
and overproduction of oxidized or otherwise damaged proteins can 
exhaust the pool of ubiquitin. Sometimes toxicant-induced injury 
adversely affects the repair process itself. For example, ethanol 
generates ROS via CYP2E1 that impairs the proteasomal removal 
of damaged proteins. Autophagic removal of cell constituents may 
be compromised by lysosomotropic drugs that increase intralyso-
somal pH to reduce lysosomal hydrolase activity, a defect that may 
contribute to the mechanism of chloroquine-induced myopathy in 
rats. Thiol-reactive chemicals can inactivate ubiquitin-activating 
E1, E2, and E3 enzymes because each family contains a catalyti-
cally active cysteine, as well as lysosomal cysteine proteases (e.g., 
cathepsins B, H, and L), to compromise the clearance of damaged 
proteins by both the UPS and autophagy. These repair mechanisms 
are especially important in neurons, as genetic deletion of proteins 
mediating UPS and autophagy causes accumulation of intraneuro-
nal inclusions, neuronal loss, or neurodegeneration. In fact, there is 
growing evidence that human neurodegenerative diseases appear 
to be directly related to dysfunction of UPS and/or autophagy 
(Bedford et al., 2011; Menzies et al., 2017).
It is also possible that repair contributes to toxicity. This often 
occurs in a passive manner, when excessive amounts of NAD+ are 
cleaved by PARP in the process of repairing damaged DNA strands, 
or when too much NAD(P)H is consumed for the repair of oxidized 
proteins and endogenous reductants. Either event can compromise 
oxidative phosphorylation, which is also dependent on the supply of 
reduced cofactors, and exacerbate ATP depletion. However, repair 
also may play an active role in toxicity. This is often observed with 
chronic tissue injury, when repair processes progress to uncon-
trolled proliferation rather than remodeling. Such proliferation of 
cells may become neoplastic, whereas overproduction of ECM 
progresses to fibrosis. A specific case is when the cellular repair 
processes that normally degrade damaged proteins, such as the UPS

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
115
and the autophagy pathway, become inappropriately stimulated by 
adverse signaling, causing degradation of ordinary intracellular 
proteins. For example, glucocorticoids can cause dose- and time-
dependent muscle atrophy and wasting. The mechanism underlying 
muscle atrophy is reduced signaling through the IGF-1–PI3K–Akt 
pathways, which leaves FoxO TFs unchecked to regulate expression 
of muscle-specific ubiquitin ligases (MAFbx, also called atrogin-1, 
and MuRF1) that enhance muscle catabolism and wasting (Atherton 
et al., 2016).
When Adaptation Fails  As described in the previous sections, 
moderate oxidative stress activates NF-κB, AP-1, and Nrf2 to ini-
tiate adaptive protection. However, extensive oxidant exposure 
aborts these programs because it leads to oxidation of thiol groups 
in the DNA-binding domain of these TFs. Similarly, some other-
wise adaptive and protective mechanisms may be harmful under 
extreme conditions and numerous examples are provided here. 
For example, tubuloglomerular feedback is important in regulat-
ing glomerular filtration. However, with acute renal injury, tubular 
reabsorption is impaired and causes polyuria, which triggers tubu-
loglomerular feedback to further reduce glomerular blood flow and 
filtration. These seemingly protective events may precipitate anuric 
renal failure. It is also possible that an adaptive mechanism that is 
beneficial in the short term may become harmful when forced to 
operate for a prolonged time. For example, bulk autophagy likely 
contributes to the lethal wasting syndrome induced by TCDD. 
Chronic inflammation, tissue injury, or cancer may lead to iron 
deficiency and anemia because IL-6 upregulates hepcidin secre-
tion from the liver, which reduces intestinal iron absorption. As 
discussed earlier, NF-κB activation is indispensable for repair via 
proliferation of the acutely injured tissue. However, NF-κB also 
targets cytokines (e.g., TNF and IL-1β), which in turn further acti-
vate NF-κB through receptor signaling (see Fig. 3-13). This vicious 
cycle may lead to chronic inflammation and cancer when persistent 
tissue injury maintains NF-κB signaling (Karin, 2006). Sustained 
cell proliferation is causally related to neoplasia in a variety of 
models including phenobarbital-induced liver tumors in rodents 
and lung tumors associated with occupational exposure to silica. 
Sustained activation of HIF-1α in tumors facilitates invasiveness, 
in part by increasing VEGF expression and angiogenesis. In the 
kidney, HIF-1α may also be involved in fibrogenesis, as it targets 
critical genes that maintain the extracellular matrix (ECM) such as 
tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1).
Toxicity Resulting from Inappropriate 
Repair and Adaptation
Failure to repair involves molecular, cellular, and tissue dysfunc-
tion and can show species- and age-related differences. Some tox-
icities involve dysrepair at an isolated level. For example, hypoxia 
and dyspnea develop after exposure to metHb-forming chemicals if 
the amount of metHb produced overwhelms the capacity of metHb 
reductase. Because this repair enzyme is deficient at early ages, 
neonates are especially sensitive to chemicals that cause methemo-
globinemia. Ineffective reduction of metHb also contributes to the 
formation of Heinz bodies, which are protein aggregates formed 
in red blood cells as a function of oxidative stress and aging. As 
noted earlier, there are also species differences in metHb reductase 
activity that are responsible for differences in sensitivity to metHb 
formation.
Tissue Necrosis  Although cell death ensues when repair mecha-
nisms are inefficient or the molecular damage is not readily revers-
ible, progression to tissue necrosis can be interrupted by apoptosis 
and cell proliferation. Injured cells can initiate apoptosis, which 
counteracts the progression of the toxic injury. Apoptosis does this 
by preventing necrosis of injured cells and the consequent inflam-
matory response, which may cause additional injury by releasing 
cytotoxic mediators. A classic example illustrating the role of the 
inflammatory response in tissue necrosis is activation of Kupffer 
cells with administration of bacterial LPS (endotoxin) which 
greatly exacerbates the hepatotoxicity of galactosamine. In contrast, 
when the Kupffer cells are selectively eliminated by pretreatment 
of rats with gadolinium chloride, the necrotic effect of numerous 
hepatotoxicants is markedly alleviated (Nolan, 2010). Blockade 
of Kupffer cell function with glycine also protects the liver from 
numerous hepatotoxicants and is associated with decreased levels 
of pro-inflammatory cytokines (TNF-α) and increased levels of 
anti-inflammatory mediators such as IL-10 (Bruck et al., 2003).
Cell proliferation also serves to negate the loss of organ func-
tion when necrosis occurs. Early cell division is instrumental in the 
rapid and complete restoration of injured tissue and the prevention 
of necrosis. For example, if cell proliferation is blocked in liver, a 
normally non-necrogenic dose of a toxicant such as carbon tetra-
chloride causes hepatic necrosis (Mehendale, 2005).
The dose–response relationship that describes toxicant-
induced injury also contributes to the dose response for irrevers-
ible injury. In general, tissue repair increases up to a threshold dose 
that can limit or prevent irreversible injury. However, once that 
threshold is reached, toxicity and cell death progress rapidly. For 
example, with hepatotoxicants, apoptosis and cell proliferation are 
operative with latent tissue injury caused by low (non-necrogenic) 
doses of toxicants, but are inhibited with severe injury induced by 
high (necrogenic) doses. For example, 1,1-dichloroethylene, car-
bon tetrachloride, and thioacetamide induce apoptosis in the liver 
at low doses, but cause hepatic necrosis after high-dose exposure. 
Similarly, there is an early mitotic response in the liver to low-dose 
carbon tetrachloride, but this response is not observed with higher 
doses of the solvent.
Fibrosis
Fibrosis is characterized by excessive formation and deposition of 
excess connective tissue with abnormal composition of the ECM. 
In general, fibrotic conditions can develop in any organ, but those 
of note include liver, lung, kidney, and heart. Hepatic fibrosis, or 
cirrhosis, is associated with fatty liver disease as well as toxicants 
including chronic consumption of ethanol, treatment with metho-
trexate, and exposure to thioacetamide, carbon tetrachloride, and 
high levels of iron. Chronic fibrotic changes in the renal glomer-
ulus are associated with diabetic kidney disease, and pulmonary 
fibrosis is induced by drugs such as bleomycin and amiodarone 
and associated with prolonged inhalation of oxygen or mineral 
particles. Finally, drugs including doxorubicin may cause general-
ized cardiac fibrosis, whereas drugs acting as agonists on 5-HT2B 
receptors, such as fenfluramine, bromocriptine, and methysergide, 
cause valvular interstitial cell proliferation and heart valve fibro-
sis. Exposure to high doses of ionizing radiation induces fibrosis 
in many organs.
Physiologically, fibrosis is an exaggerated wound healing 
response which interferes with normal organ architecture and func-
tion. The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a fundamen-
tal process in fibrotic disease. This response is characterized by the 
phenotypic transformation of an epithelial cell into a fibroblast or 
myofibroblast. Although EMT is necessary for organ development 
and wound healing, it is uncontrolled in fibrosis, and cells that man-
ufacture the ECM during tissue repair overproduce the matrix in an 
uncontrolled manner.

116
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
As an end-stage disease, fibrosis is detrimental because (1) 
scars can compress and ultimately obliterate parenchymal cells and 
blood vessels; (2) deposition of basement membrane components 
between the capillary endothelial cells and the parenchymal cells 
presents a diffusional barrier that contributes to malnutrition of the 
tissue cells; (3) an increased amount of ECM alters the elasticity 
and flexibility of the whole tissue, compromising the mechanical 
function of organs such as the heart and lungs, and (4) fibrotic dis-
ease can change basic aspects of cell behavior, including cell polar-
ity, motility, and gene expression.
TGF-β is a central mediator of fibrotic disease. Its role as 
a mediator of fibrosis is well recognized, but additional factors 
including connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), platelet-derived 
growth factor (PDGF), and IL-4 also contribute to the process. 
TGF-β is highly overexpressed in several experimental models of 
fibrosis and in patients with active liver cirrhosis. Moreover, there 
is experimental evidence that subcutaneous injection of TGF-β 
induces local fibrosis, and transgenic mice engineered to overex-
press TGF-β develop severe hepatic fibrosis.
The fibrotic action of TGF-β is due to increased production and 
decreased degradation of ECM components. TGF-β stimulates the 
synthesis of individual ECM components in target cells via the Smad 
pathway (see Fig. 3-14). TGF-β also augments ECM formation by 
inhibiting ECM degradation by increasing the expression of inhibitor 
proteins that antagonize ECM-degrading enzymes, such as TIMP-1 
and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1). TGF-β also induces 
transcription of its own gene in target cells, suggesting that the TGF-β 
produced by these cells can amplify in an autocrine manner the pro-
duction of the ECM (Fabregat et al., 2016). There are also changes 
to the composition of the ECM in fibrotic diseases. Basement mem-
brane components, such as collagen IV and laminin, as well as the 
fibrillar-type collagens (collagens I and III), which confer rigidity to 
tissues, increase disproportionately during fibrogenesis.
In general, miRNAs contribute to fibrosis by affecting the 
EMT, and numerous miRNAs contribute to this process. Three 
major miRNAs involved in fibrotic disease are miR-21, miR-29, 
and miR-200, which are directly regulated by TGF-β activation 
of pSmad3 (Zou et al., 2017). Constitutively, miR-21 is highly 
expressed in the healthy kidney, but it is markedly overexpressed 
in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) and renal fibrosis. Major 
targets for miR-21 include matrix metalloprotease-9 (MMP-9) and 
Smad-7, and downregulation of these targets prevents ECM deg-
radation and inhibition of TGF-β signaling, respectively (Loboda 
et al., 2016). miR-29, which acts to repress collagen translation, is 
downregulated by TGF-β and in doing so, α-smooth muscle actin 
and collagen I are increased, particularly in the kidney (Roderburg 
et al., 2011). miR-200 is expressed in lung fibroblasts and is down-
regulated in fibrotic conditions. Decreased expression of miR-200 
exerts a profibrotic action by increasing expression of numerous 
mesenchymal markers.
Carcinogenesis
As there is an entire chapter dedicated to carcinogenesis (see Chap. 8), 
only those aspects relating directly to mechanisms associated with 
repair and adaptive processes are discussed here. A central feature 
of carcinogenic mechanisms is altered expression of proteins that 
function as proto-oncogenes and/or suppressor proteins. These 
important proteins can be altered by mutation resulting from direct 
DNA damage or by altered transcription leading to overexpression 
of proto-oncogenes or decreased expression of tumor suppressors.
Another important consideration is that genetic or epigene-
tic mechanisms are involved in carcinogenesis. DNA-reactive or 
genotoxic mechanisms bring about a qualitative change in gene 
expression, with expression of an altered gene product, a mutant 
protein or miRNA, and gain or loss in activity. In contrast, epigen-
etic mechanisms are non-DNA reactive (or non-genotoxic) and do 
not alter gene sequence, but rather, cause quantitative change in 
gene expression resulting in more or less gene product. Regardless 
of mechanism, cancer ultimately develops from cellular failures in 
apoptosis and/or from uncontrolled cell proliferation.
Genotoxic Mechanisms of Carcinogenesis  Chemicals that react 
with DNA may cause damage such as adduct formation, oxidative 
alteration, and strand breakage. As described above, these lesions 
are repaired or the injured cells are eliminated. If neither event 
occurs, a lesion in the parental DNA strand may induce a mutation 
in the daughter strand during replication. The mutation may remain 
silent if it does not alter the protein encoded by the mutant gene or if 
the mutation causes an amino acid substitution that does not affect 
the function of the protein. Alternatively, the genetic alteration may 
be incompatible with cell survival. The worst scenario occurs when 
the altered genes express mutant proteins that reprogram cells for 
multiplication and escaping apoptosis (i.e., immortalization). This 
trait is passed to daughter cells during mitosis, enabling sustained 
proliferation. Moreover, enhanced DNA replication and cell divi-
sion increases the likelihood of additional mutations that may fur-
ther augment their growth advantage. Ultimately, tumors arise from 
the nidus of rapidly proliferating transformed cells (Fig. 3-32).
The critical role of DNA repair in preventing carcinogenesis 
is exemplified by the human heritable disease xeroderma pigmen-
tosum (XP) in which affected individuals lack excision repair pro-
teins. These people are at high risk for developing sunlight-induced 
skin cancers, and they are also more prone to chemically induced 
DNA damage from recognized carcinogens including aflatoxin B1, 
aromatic amines, and polycyclic hydrocarbons (Giordano et al., 
2016).
Mutation of Proto-oncogenes  Proto-oncogenes are highly 
conserved genes that encode proteins that stimulate the progres-
sion of cells through the cell cycle or oppose apoptosis (Jonckheere 
et al., 2017). Under normal conditions, these important proteins are 
required for regulating growth, with essential roles in supporting 
embryogenesis, tissue regeneration, and growth factor responses. 
Mutations in proto-oncogenes can cause permanent activation and/
or overexpression of these proteins to favor neoplastic transforma-
tion. The altered gene is then referred to as an oncogene. Fig. 3-33 
depicts several proto-oncogene products that are involved in initiat-
ing the cell division cycle.
An example of mutational activation of an oncogene is the 
Ras family of proteins (H-Ras, K-Ras, and N-Ras). Ras proteins 
are G-coupled proteins with GTP/GDP-binding capacity as well 
as GTPase activity. Ras is activated downstream from growth fac-
tor receptors and protein tyrosine kinases and upstream from the 
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade (Figs. 3-12 and 
3-13). Ras functions as a molecular switch that is only active in the 
GTP-bound form. Mutations in Ras genes occur mainly in codons 
12, 13, or 61 and represent a dominant gain of function because they 
lock the protein in the permanently active GTP-bound form to drive 
uncontrolled cell division and transformation (Fig. 3-33). Activating 
mutations in Ras genes occur in approximately 20% of all human 
cancers, with K-Ras mutations being the most prevalent (Chang 
et al., 2016). Mutation of the K-ras oncogene is also mechanisti-
cally linked to pancreatic cancer (Jonckheere et al., 2017).
Activating mutations in the proto-oncogene b-Raf is another 
important example of genotoxic mechanisms of carcinogenesis. 
Raf proteins are protein kinases just downstream from Ras and 
are the first signal transducers in the MAP kinase pathway (see 
Fig. 3-12). These mutations are expressed in 15% to 30% of all

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
117
human tumors, and are particularly prevalent in malignant mela-
noma (with a frequency of nearly 60% of these tumors). The most 
common mutation (V600E) occurs within the activation segment of 
b-Raf. The increased kinase activity of the mutant b-Raf continu-
ally sends a Ras-independent proliferative signal down the MAPK 
pathway to promote neoplastic transformation (Roskoski, 2010).
While constitutive activation of oncogenes is a common initia-
tor of chemical carcinogenesis, overexpression resulting from gene 
amplification also can contribute to neoplastic cell transformation. 
Such an event can occur spontaneously or may be initiated by DNA 
strand breaks.
Mutation of Tumor Suppressor Genes  Tumor suppres-
sor genes encode proteins that inhibit the cell cycle progression 
or promote DNA repair or apoptosis when there is DNA damage. 
Fig. 3-33 depicts such proteins, which include cyclin-dependent 
protein kinase inhibitors (e.g., p15, p16, and p21), TFs including 
p53 and Smads, ATM and ATR that sense DNA damage to signal 
p53 activation, BRCA1 and BRCA2 that contribute to recombi-
national DNA repair, PTEN phosphatase that turns off the PI3K–
Akt pathway-mediated proliferative signaling, and the tuberous 
sclerosis complex-2 (TSC2) that prevents activation of mTOR. 
Uncontrolled proliferation occurs when the mutant tumor suppres-
sor gene can no longer suppress cell division. Inactivating mutations 
of specific tumor suppressor genes in germ cells are responsible 
for the inherited predisposition to cancer, as in familial retinoblas-
toma (pRb), Wilms tumor, familial polyposis, and Li–Fraumeni 
syndrome. Mutations of tumor suppressor genes in somatic cells 
contribute to nonhereditary cancers, with p53, p16, PTEN, and pRb 
showing high frequency of mutation in human cancer.
As described earlier, p53, otherwise referred to as the guard-
ian of the genome, controls cell cycle arrest to enable DNA repair 
(Fig. 3-34). The critical and essential role of p53 function is further 
illustrated in conditions in which it is deficient or defective. Cells 
that have no p53 are about a million times more likely to permit 
DNA amplification than are cells with a normal level of this sup-
pressor gene. Furthermore, mice with the p53 gene deleted develop 
tumors in 6 to 9 months. Mutations in the p53 gene are found in 
approximately 50% of human tumors and in a variety of induced 
cancers. The majority are missense mutations that alter amino 
acid sequence to yield an aberrant that cannot activate the essen-
tial tumor suppressor transcriptional response (Joerger and Fersht, 
2016). A classic example of carcinogen-mediated p53 mutation 
is the point mutation in codon 249 that predominates in human 
hepatocellular carcinomas arising from exposure to aflatoxin B1. 
There is compelling evidence that this mutation is causally related 
to aflatoxin-induced liver cancer in humans (Hussain et al., 2007; 
Wogan et al., 2012). However, this same mutation is not observed 
in rat liver following aflatoxin exposure.
The contribution of miRNA regulation to cancer is complex 
(Wang and Taniguchi, 2013). For example, p53 promotes the process-
ing of numerous miRNAs and specifically upregulates transcription 
of miRNA34a-c after DNA damage. The miRNA34 family regulates 
the G1/S cell cycle checkpoint, so in the presence of p53 mutation, 
this important checkpoint in cell cycle control is lost. Furthermore, 
direct damage to genes coding for miRNAs may also contribute to 
carcinogenesis. For example, amplification of miR-21, which nor-
mally represses the translation of PTEN, and deletion of miR-15 and 
miR-16, which normally represses translation of cdc25A, occur in 
spontaneous human malignancies. Loss of the repressive function of 
these miRNAs serves to disrupt cell cycle regulation.
Non-genotoxic Mechanisms in Carcinogenesis  Non-genotoxic 
carcinogens often stimulate sustained cell proliferation. This can 
occur by direct activity on proliferative signaling, such as PKC 
activation by phorbol esters or by protein phosphatase inhibition 
by okadaic acid. Additionally, sustained cell proliferation can be 
evoked by endogenous mitogens and hormones, including estro-
gens on mammary gland or liver cells, TSH on the follicular cells 
of the thyroid gland, and luteinizing hormone on Leydig cells in 
testes, and some toxicants that cause sustained cell injury (such 
as chloroform and d-limonene). There are also numerous xeno-
biotics, often microsomal enzyme inducers, that cause sustained 
proliferation, particularly in liver, to cause tumors in rodents but 
not in humans. Such compounds include phenobarbital and DDT 
along with peroxisome proliferators (e.g., fibrates, Wy-14643, and 
dihalogenated and trihalogenated acetic acids).
Role of Signaling in Carcinogenesis  As described under tis-
sue repair, cell injury evokes the release of mitogenic growth factors 
such as HGF and TGF-α from tissue macrophages and endothe-
lial cells. Although these growth factors are instrumental in tissue 
repair after acute cell injury, their continuous presence is poten-
tially harmful because they may ultimately transform the affected 
cells into neoplastic cells. Indeed, transgenic mice that overexpress 
TGF-α develop hepatomegaly at a young age and tumors by 12 
months (Fausto et al., 2006).
Role of DNA Methylation and Histone Modification in 
Carcinogenesis  Some non-genotoxic carcinogens alter DNA 
methylation. As discussed earlier, specific cytosine residues located 
Silent
C
E
L
L
S
U
R
V
I
V
A
L
C
E
L
L
D
E
A
T
H
DNA damage
DNA replication
Mutation
Activation of
oncogenic
proteins
Inactivation of
tumor suppressor
proteins
Neoplastic cell transformation
Clonal expansion
T U M O R
Genotoxic carcinogen
Repair
Repair
Figure 3-32.   The process of carcinogenesis initiated by genotoxic car-
cinogens. Genotoxic mechanisms require some form of DNA damage. 
Activating mutations of proto-oncogenes that encode permanently active 
oncoproteins and inactivating mutations of tumor suppressor genes that 
encode permanently inactive tumor suppressor proteins can cooperate in 
neoplastic transformation of cells.

118
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
in CpG islands in promoter regions can be methylated by DNA 
cytosine methyltransferases using S-adenosyl methionine as the 
methyl donor. Promoter methylation silences genes by weakening 
TF binding to the promoter and triggering secondary alterations in 
histone proteins, which renders the histone more compact, thereby 
reducing access of TFs and other proteins involved in transcrip-
tion initiation at the gene promoter. It is well documented that the 
normal methylation pattern of DNA is disrupted in cancer cells. 
Paradoxically, global DNA hypomethylation is observed in the 
face of hypermethylation of promoter regions of numerous tumor 
suppressor genes (Esteller, 2005), such as Cdk inhibitors (p15 and 
p16), the DNA repair enzyme MGMT, and the lipid phosphatase 
PTEN. Importantly, both global hypomethylation and tumor sup-
pressor gene hypermethylation intensify with increased malignancy 
of the tumor. The relevance of hypermethylation-induced silencing 
of tumor suppressor genes in carcinogenesis is supported by the 
finding that inhibitors of DNMTs (such as 5-aza-2′-deoxycytidine) 
can stop the growth of cancer cells and induce their differentiation 
by demethylating the dormant tumor suppressor genes to restore 
their expression (Esteller, 2005).
DNA methylation status can also be altered by non-geno-
toxic carcinogens. This is the case for ethionine, which depletes 
S-adenosyl-methionine (the methyl donor for DNMTs), and dietha-
nolamine, which inhibits cellular utilization of choline, a dietary 
source for methyl groups needed to convert homocysteine to methi-
onine. Additionally, on prolonged administration, the methylation 
status of Ras or Raf is altered by phenobarbital, whereas meth-
ylation of c-Jun, c-Myc, and IGF-2 is affected by treatment with 
dichloroacetic acid, dibromoacetic acid, or trichloroacetic acid.
Role of MicroRNAs in Non-genotoxic Mechanisms of 
Carcinogenesis  miRNAs can affect carcinogenic mechanisms 
through effects on DNA repair (described above) as well on 
Ras
GFs
Wnt
Hh
Raf
DHFR
TK
TS
POL
cA
cE
cdk1
cdc25
E2F
T  R  A  N  S  I  T  I  O  N
G0
S
G2
M
β-cat
Inhibition
by binding
P
Inhibition by
phosphorylation
Transcriptional
activation
Overexpression
or activation
Activating
mutation
Inactivating
mutation
cD
ATX, BP, UV
mdm2
pRb
p16
p21
p15
BP, ROS
BP, TCDD
P
DNA
damage
ARF
(p14)
TGF-β
Ras
Myc
E2F
p53
Gli
ATM
P
P
Activation by
phosphorylation
P
DENA
Smad
cdk4/6
Cell cycle accelerators
Oncogene proteins
and some inﬂuencing factors
Cell cycle decelerators
Tumor suppressor proteins
and some inﬂuencing factors
MC
Figure 3-33.   Key regulatory proteins controlling the cell division cycle along with relevant effects in the signaling cascades that regulate the cell cycle. The 
left side of the figure highlights proteins that accelerate the cell cycle and are oncogenic if permanently active or expressed at high level. In contrast, proteins 
on the right, represented by blue symbols, decelerate or arrest the cell cycle to suppress oncogenesis, unless they are inactivated (e.g., by mutation). Expression 
of cyclin D (cD) is increased, for example, by growth factors signaling through Ras proteins and the MAPK pathway as well as by Wnt and Hedgehog (Hh) 
ligands that ultimately signal through β-cat and Gli transcription factors, respectively. Carcinogens such as benzo[a]pyrene (BP), reactive oxygen species 
(ROS), and diethylnitrosamine (DENA) may cause mutation of the Ras or Raf gene that results in permanently active mutant proteins.

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
119
pathways considered to be non-genotoxic. The miR-17-92 cluster 
is considered oncogenic because its members promote mitosis by 
repressing the translation of PTEN and p21, and they inhibit apop-
tosis by repressing the proapoptotic protein Bim. miR-29b also tar-
gets the mRNAs of p21 and Bim, and miR-221/222 targets PTEN, 
TIMP-3 (metalloproteinase inhibitor 3), and Bim (Garofalo and 
Croce, 2011). The role of miRNAs in tumorigenesis induced by 
non-genotoxic carcinogens is well exemplified by PPARα-induced 
rodent hepatocarcinogenesis. In this example, treatment with 
Wy-14643 downregulates let-7c miRNA, which normally represses 
translation of c-Myc. Accordingly, the reduced levels of let-7c in 
response to Wy-14,643 increases c-Myc protein synthesis, which 
drives hepatocellular proliferation. Furthermore, c-Myc upregu-
lates the miR-17-92 cluster which in turn represses the translation 
of p21, an antimitotic cyclin-dependent kinase, and Bim, a pro-
apoptotic protein, and together, these actions permit mitosis while 
opposing apoptosis. In contrast to normal mice, PPARα-humanized 
mice (expressing the human PPARα) do not show downregulation 
of let-7c or hepatocellular proliferation with Wy-14,643 treatment, 
supporting a causative relationship between these events (Gonzalez 
and Shah, 2008).
Genotoxic and non-genotoxic mechanisms of carcinogenesis 
may not be mutually exclusive, but rather, they can complement 
or amplify each other. Increased mitotic activity, regardless of 
mechanism or pathway involved, increases the likelihood of car-
cinogenicity for two major reasons. First, increased mitotic activ-
ity increases the probability that mutations may occur because 
the shortened Gl phase allows less time for DNA repair. Although 
repair still may be feasible after replication, postreplication repair 
is error-prone. Second, increased proliferation enables clonal 
expansion of the initiated cells, and this facilitated growth contrib-
utes to tumor formation and progression. The action of estrogen-
induced tumors exemplifies the interaction between DNA-reactive 
and non-DNA-reactive mechanisms. Estrogen metabolites include 
reactive quinone and hydroquinone intermediates that can produce 
mutagenic free radicals via redox cycling. Concurrently, estrogens 
induce receptor-mediated cell proliferation. Similarly, genotoxic 
carcinogens can also cause epigenetic alterations. For example, 
2-acetylaminofluorene forms DNA adducts, but also increases 
DNA methylation in numerous genes that silences a variety of 
tumor suppressor proteins (Pogribny et al., 2011). p16, ARF, 
and MGMT are also hypermethylated in aflatoxin B1–induced 
+P
DNA damage
ATM
ATR
Chk1
Chk2
Mdm2
ARF
p53
+Ub
+P
+P
Apoptosis
Mit-mediated
• Bax, Puma, Noxa
• Apaf-1
DR-mediated
• Fas
• DR5
Antiapoptotic proteins
• IGFR (–)
• Bcl-2 (–)
• Survivin (–)
DNA repair
Nucleotide excision
• XPE
• XPC
Mismatch
• MSH2
• PCNA
RN reductase
Cell cycle arrest
In G1 phase
• p21
• Myc (–)
• miR-34
In G2 phase
• p21
• Gadd45
• 14-3-3s
• Cdk1 (–)
• CyclinB1 (–)
• Topoisomerase II
p300, CBP
Set9
USP7
+Met
+Ac
–Ub
Figure 3-34.   The role and regulation of the guardian of the genome: p53 tumor suppressor protein. When activated by DNA damage, p53 mediates cell cycle 
arrest, DNA repair, and apoptosis. p53 acts chiefly as a transcription factor that can activate the transcription of most target genes, while repressing some of 
others, such as those marked with (–) in the figure. For example, p53 transactivates p21 and gadd45 genes, but it represses the Cdk1 and cyclin B1 genes, p53 
also represses the genes of antiapoptotic proteins (e.g., Bcl-2 and IGF-1 receptor), to promote apoptosis. These (and other) p53-induced proapoptotic mecha-
nisms may be cell-specific, such that they are not necessarily occurring in the same cell at the same time. The intracellular level and activity of p53 depends 
primarily on the presence of mdm2 which inactivates p53 by ubiquitinating it. In fact, overexpression of mdm2 can lead to constitutive inhibition of p53 and 
thereby promotes oncogenesis even if the p53 gene is unaltered.

120
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
mouse lung tumor and in 7,12-dimethylbenzanthracene-induced 
skin tumor. Thus, epigenetic alterations evoked by genotoxic 
carcinogens may contribute to carcinogenesis after the initiating 
genotoxic event (Pogribny et al., 2011). Conversely, global DNA 
hypomethylation and tumor suppressor gene hypermethylation 
may increase the occurrence of mutations in cells exposed to non-
genotoxic carcinogens.
Failure to Execute Apoptosis Promotes Mutation and Clonal 
Growth  In many cases, initiated preneoplastic cells have much 
higher apoptotic activity than do normal cells (Fox and MacFarlane, 
2016), a mechanism designed to counteract clonal expansion. It 
follows then that inhibition of apoptosis is detrimental because 
it facilitates the fixing of mutations and allows for clonal expan-
sion of preneoplastic cells. This is the case for the pathogenesis of 
human B-cell lymphomas, in which there is chromosomal trans-
location associated with aberrantly increased expression of Bcl-2 
protein to override programmed cell death by inactivating the proa-
poptotic Bax protein. Increased levels of Bcl-2 are also detected 
in other types of cancer, and a high Bcl-2/Bax ratio in a tumor is a 
marker for poor prognosis.
RESEARCH APPROACHES TO DETERMINE 
MECHANISMS OF TOXICITY: A CASE 
STUDY
Understanding how all of the processes outlined in this chapter 
influence toxic outcome is fundamental to understanding mech-
anisms of toxicity. However, understanding how to apply these 
concepts to defining a mechanism of toxicity requires incorpo-
rating them into actual cases. Throughout this chapter, examples 
demonstrating how disposition influences toxicant exposure, how 
a toxicant interacts with and alters important cellular functions, 
how biochemical, cellular, and molecular processes dictates sensi-
tivity to toxicity and likelihood of repair and adaptation, and how 
species differences govern susceptibility to toxicity have been 
provided. As such, the examples provide specific cause–effect 
relationships, but in isolation, they are not an integrated example 
that illustrates a mechanism of toxicity as a continuum from the 
key events that initiate the toxic process to the final outcome of 
cell dysfunction or disease process. Throughout this textbook, 
there are many examples of toxic mechanisms focused on spe-
cific organ systems. However, to conclude this chapter, an exam-
ple of a comprehensive mechanism of toxicity and the research 
approaches used to define the mechanism are summarized. The 
case example is d-limonene-induced nephrotoxicity and carcino-
genicity, a classic and comprehensive example of a well-defined 
mechanism of toxicity that helped to establish how information 
on mechanisms of toxicity can inform human risk assessment 
(Lehman-McKeeman, 2018).
d-Limonene is an oil found in citrus, primarily oranges, and 
it is widely used in commerce as a flavor and fragrance. After oral 
dosing to rats, it produced evidence of renal toxicity, although only 
in males, and with chronic dosing, renal toxicity progressed to renal 
cell injury, cell proliferation, and ultimately to the development of 
renal tubular tumors. The first clue regarding toxic mechanisms was 
histopathologic evaluation of kidneys after single dosages of the 
compound. These studies showed evidence of droplets in the renal 
cortex, and specifically in proximal tubule cells, when evaluated by 
routine hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining. More specific stain-
ing methods for protein deposits (Mallory–Heidenhain staining) 
confirmed that these droplets were proteinaceous. Based on histo-
pathologic evidence of protein accumulation, the renal cortices from 
d-limonene-treated rats were analyzed to determine whether the 
protein accumulation was generalized to all filtered proteins or more 
specific to a few proteins. Based on two-dimensional gel electropho-
resis, only one protein was accumulating in male rat kidneys, and 
this protein was sequenced to confirm its identity as α2u-globulin.
The identification of α2u-globulin provided a foundation to 
understanding why renal toxicity was only seen in male rats because 
this protein is regulated by numerous hormones and is deemed to 
be a male rat-specific protein. Female rats have the α2u-globulin 
gene, but its expression is effectively repressed by estrogen. The 
next step in deducing the mechanism of toxicity was to determine 
how d-limonene caused α2u-globulin to accumulate in the renal 
cortex and how this protein could lead to renal toxicity. To address 
these issues, research efforts were directed toward establishing the 
fate of d-limonene and whether d-limonene or its metabolites inter-
acted with α2u-globulin.
The fate of d-limonene had been characterized based on 
metabolism profiles obtained from urine or in hepatocyte cultures. 
These metabolism studies suggested that there were no likely 
reactive metabolites or metabolites that would be expected to be 
directly toxic. The critical question was whether d-limonene or its 
metabolites were detected in the kidney, and if so, whether any of 
them bound to α2u-globulin. Such studies were facilitated by the 
use of radiolabeled d-limonene, and equilibrium dialysis experi-
ments showed that radioactivity was detected in a high-molecular-
weight fraction (protein) of male rat kidney homogenates. Based 
on evidence of protein binding, additional studies, gas-chromatog-
raphy–mass spectrometry (GC-MS) analyses were used to identify 
a d-limonene metabolite in the protein fraction, and the metabolite 
was one that had not previously been reported. Specifically, d-lim-
onene-1,2-epoxide was identified in the dialyzed protein fraction of 
male rat kidney homogenates, but this metabolite was not detected in 
kidney homogenates from d-limonene-treated female rats. Although 
it is generally considered that epoxides are unstable metabolites that 
either react covalently with macromolecules or are hydrolyzed to a 
corresponding diol metabolite by epoxide hydrolase (described pre-
viously; see Chap. 6), d-limonene-1,2-epoxide was an exception to 
this general rule because it is very stable, bound reversibly to renal 
proteins, and did not hydrolyze to its corresponding diol.
To address questions regarding how d-limonene-1,2-epoxide 
might cause α2u-globulin to accumulate, the protein was purified, 
and in vitro studies confirmed that the epoxide bound reversibly to 
α2u-globulin with a dissociation constant of approximately 10−7 M. 
Additional studies established that binding of d-limonene-1, 
2-epoxide to α2u-globulin reduced the lysosomal degradation of the 
protein relative to the native protein. Specifically, the rate of degra-
dation by renal cortical lysosomal lysates decreased by about 30%, 
and this change was specific to α2u-globulin because the lysosomal 
degradation of other proteins such as albumin was not altered by the 
presence of the epoxide and there were no changes in lysosomal 
cathepsin activity in d-limonene-treated rat kidneys.
Although the ligand–protein complex can be isolated from the 
kidney in vivo, one part of the mechanism that is not defined is 
where the interaction between d-limonene-1,2-epoxide and α2u-
globulin occurs. However, given that the complex appears to be 
localized in the renal phagolysosomal compartment, it is likely that 
the complex does not form in the kidney. Rather, the interaction 
probably occurs outside the kidney (in liver or blood), and follow-
ing glomerular filtration, the complex enters the proximal tubule 
cells by endocytosis and accumulates in the phagolysosomes after 
lysosomal fusion.
Collectively, the data summarized thus far indicate that 
formation of d-limonene-1,2-epoxide and its ability to bind to

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
121
α2u-globulin are key events that lead to the accumulation of pro-
tein and initiate d-limonene-induced renal toxicity (Fig. 3-35). 
However, as the duration of treatment continues, the lysosomes 
become enlarged, engorged with protein and polyangular in shape 
with ensuing cytotoxicity presenting as single cell necrosis in the 
P2 segment of the proximal tubule. Thus, necrosis is likely to be 
the mechanism of cell death, but it is unclear as to how an engorged 
lysosomal compartment is cytotoxic. Commensurate with cell 
necrosis, there is a dose- and time-dependent loss in renal func-
tion. Renal functional changes observed include reduced uptake of 
organic anions, cations, and amino acids, a mild proteinuria and 
increased levels of renal toxicity biomarkers, particularly gluta-
thione S-transferases (α and µ isoforms), have been reported. In 
response to cell death and functional changes, there is cell prolif-
eration in the kidney, most notably in the P2 segment of the proxi-
mal tubules, the site of the protein accumulation. With continued 
treatment, the cell proliferation continues, but does not fully restore 
renal function. The sustained increase in renal cell proliferation is 
believed to exert a promotional influence on the kidney, such that 
sustained cell turnover is mechanistically linked to the development 
of renal tubular tumors. Thus, α2u-globulin nephropathy begins as 
protein accumulation, but represents a continuum of changes that 
ultimately progress to renal tumors. The major events in this con-
tinuum are summarized in Fig. 3-35, with application and illustra-
tion of the four-component framework outlined for mechanisms of 
toxicity developed in this chapter (Lehman-McKeeman, 2018).
CONCLUSIONS
Mechanisms of Toxicity and Adverse 
Outcome Pathways
A “real world” application of mechanisms of toxicity is the devel-
opment of adverse outcome pathways (AOPs) to inform and facili-
tate toxicity testing and hazard identification. Basically, an AOP 
is a systematic approach that organizes and integrates a series of 
biological events such as those described throughout this chapter 
that are likely to lead to an adverse outcome. AOPs place emphasis 
on the key events, often called molecular initiating events that link 
a causal chain of endpoints to the final toxicity. These events are 
also organized into biological levels ranging from macromolecu-
lar effects to those observed at the cellular, organ, and organism 
level (Burden et al., 2015; Wittwehr et al., 2017). Overall, an AOP 
is a general pathway that is somewhat similar to that outlined at 
the beginning of this chapter (Fig. 3-1), and the molecular initi-
ating events include many of the fundamental mechanistic effects 
outlined in this chapter. However, the AOP approach provides for 
a systematic integration of existing knowledge on chemical mode 
of action, starting with a molecular initiating event and continu-
ing through numerous key events that culminate in a toxic effect 
(Fig. 3-36). Additionally, integration of mechanisms of toxicity 
into AOPs may be beneficial for prioritizing compounds for more 
defined toxicity testing in animals or as a stand-alone system for 
predicting toxicity. Currently, the proposed applications and utility 
of AOPs focus on their potential to (1) advance the use of in vitro, 
nonanimal methods in safety evaluation; (2) extrapolate across 
species, with emphasis on increasing confidence of human safety; 
and (3) identify potential mechanism-based biomarkers of toxicity. 
While these approaches may bring more integrated systems biol-
ogy approaches to assessing mechanisms of toxicity, the tools must 
be able to broadly integrate all aspects of toxic mechanisms pre-
sented in this chapter. That is, a useful tool will have to encompass 
the broad aspects of chemical disposition and biotransformation, 
and inform quantitative relationships describing when cellular pro-
tective mechanisms are overwhelmed thereby initiating or propa-
gating the chain of key events that lead to toxicity. The application 
of AOPs in mechanistic and predictive toxicology is an emerging 
area, but it is not yet clear whether, and if so how, these approaches 
will advance the application of mechanism of toxicity into hazard 
identification and risk assessment.
α2u-Globulin
degradation reduced
Binds to α2u-globulin
Proximal tubule cell injury;
reduced renal function
Compensatory cell
proliferation and hyperplasia
Renal neoplasia
2a
Interaction with
target
2b
Alteration of
environment
3
Cellular injury
4
Inappropriate
repair
1
Delivery
O
d-Limonene
exposure
Oxidation
d-Limonene-1,2-
epoxide
Increased accumulation of
α2u-globulin and increased
hyaline droplets in proximal
tubule cells
Figure 3-35.   The mode of action for d-limonene-induced hyaline droplet nephropathy and renal carcinogenesis. The key events in the mechanism of action by 
which d-limonene, a naturally occurring terpene (oil of orange), causes kidney cancer in male rats. The mechanism requires biotransformation to d-limonene-
1,2-epoxide which binds reversibly to α2u-globulin in male rats, and the interaction with the protein reduces its normal degradation in renal lysosomes leading 
to marked accumulation of the protein and histological evidence of hyaline droplets. With chronic exposure, there is sustained injury in the proximal tubules, 
with compensatory cell proliferation, which ultimately increases the risk of renal cancer. This syndrome is unique to male rats because only male rats synthesize 
α2u-globulin, and the renal syndrome described only occurs with this male rat-specific protein. In summarizing this mechanism, the components of the critical 
events involved in mechanisms of toxicity (Fig. 3-1) are also shown to illustrate how every step discussed in the chapter can be represented by the example of 
hyaline droplet nephropathy (also called α2u-globulin nephropathy).

122
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
The Importance of Mechanisms of Toxicity
In this chapter, a simplified scheme has been used as an overview 
of the development of toxicity (Fig. 3-1 A and B), and the poten-
tial events that follow toxicant exposure and contribute to toxicity 
have been presented. In completing the chapter, it should be read-
ily apparent that the route to toxicity can be considerably diverse 
and complicated, as described by the many examples throughout 
the chapter and by the comprehensive case study of d-limonene. 
This chapter is a compendium of the fundamental processes 
that determine toxicity and provides the foundation for more in-
depth understanding of specific toxicities that are discussed in 
detail throughout other chapters. The basic concepts of any toxic 
mechanism are essential to identifying key events associated with 
toxic outcome and inform species differences in toxicity, with 
particular emphasis on informing the human relevance of tox-
icity. Moreover, understanding mechanisms of toxicity provides 
opportunities and direction to identifying biomarkers of toxicity, 
tools to predict toxicity, and potential ways to mitigate adverse 
effects.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The editor and authors recognize the contributions of previous 
authors of this chapter: Zoltan Gregus and Curtis D. Klaassen 
(5th and 6th editions), and Zoltan Gregus (7th and 8th editions).
REFERENCES
Aihara E, Engevik KA, Montrose MH. Trefoil factor peptides and gastroin-
testinal function. Annu Rev Physiol. 2017;79:357–380.
Al Jishi T, Sergi C. Current perspective of diethylstilbestrol (DES) exposure 
in mothers and offspring. Reprod Toxicol. 2017;71:71–77
Anders MW. Glutathione-dependent bioactivation of haloalkanes and halo-
alkenes. Drug Metab Rev. 2004;36:583–594.
Atherton PJ, Greenhaff PL, Phillips SM, et al. Control of skeletal muscle 
atrophy in response to disuse: clinical/preclinical contentions and falla-
cies of evidence. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2016;311:E594–E604.
Bailey CP, Connor M. Opioids: cellular mechanisms of tolerance and physi-
cal dependence. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2005;5:60–68.
Bandiera S, Pfeffer S, Baumert TF, et al. miR-122—a key factor and thera-
peutic target in liver disease. J Hepatol. 2015;62:448–457.
Basu S. Isoprostanes: novel bioactive products of lipid peroxidation. Free 
Radic Res. 2004;38:105–122.
Batchelor E, Loewer A, Lahav G. The ups and downs of p53: understand-
ing protein dynamics in single cells. Nat Rev Cancer. 2009;9:371–377.
Bedford L, Lowe J, Dick LR, Mayer RJ, Brownell JE. Ubiquitin-like pro-
tein conjugation and the ubiquitin–proteasome system as drug targets. 
Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2011;10:29–46.
Bessac BF, Jordt SE. Sensory detection and responses to toxic gases: 
mechanisms, health effects, and countermeasures. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 
2010;7:269–277.
Bosmans F, Rash L, Zhu S, et al. Four novel tarantula toxins as selective 
modulators of voltage-gated sodium channel types. Mol Pharmacol. 
2006;69:419–429.
Brenner C, Galluzzi L, Kepp O, Kroemer G. Decoding cell death signals in 
liver inflammation. J Hepatology. 2013;59:583–594.
Bruck R, Wardi J, Aeed H, et al. Glycine modulates cytokine secretion, 
inhibits hepatic damage and improves survival in a model of endotox-
emia in mice. Liver Int. 2003;23:276–82.
Burden N, Sewell F, Andersen ME, et al. Adverse outcome pathways can 
drive non-animal approaches for safety assessment. J Appl Toxicol. 
2015;35:971–975.
Caito SW, Aschner M.Mitochondrial redox dysfunction and environmental 
exposures. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2015;23:578–95.
Calcerrada P, Peluffo G, Radi R. Nitric oxide-derived oxidants with a focus 
on peroxynitrite: molecular targets, cellular responses and therapeutic 
implications. Curr Pharm Des. 2011;17:3905–32.
Cao M, Onyango EO, Williams CR, et al. Novel synthetic pyridyl ana-
logues of CDDO-imidazolide are useful new tools in cancer prevention. 
Pharmacol Res. 2015;100:135–47.
Carreras-Sureda A, Pihan P, Hetz C. The unfolded protein response: at the 
intersection between endoplasmic reticulum function and mitochondrial 
energetics. Front Oncol. 2017;7:55.
Chang Y-Y, Pei-Ching L, Hung-Hsin L, et al. Mutation spectra of RAS gene 
family in colorectal cancer. Am J Surgery. 2016;212:537–544.
Chartoumpekis DV, Wakabayashi N, Kensler TW. Keap1/Nrf2 pathway 
in the frontiers of cancer and non-cancer cell metabolism. Biochem Soc 
Trans. 2015;43:639–44.
Toxicant
Properties
Interaction with
Molecular Targets
Cellular 
Responses
Organ
Responses
Toxicity
2a
Interaction
with target
2b
Alteration of
environment
3
Cellular injury
1
Delivery
4
Inappropriate
repair
Key Event 4
Key Event 3
Key Event 2
Key Event 5
Molecular
Initiating
Event (MIE)
Adverse
Outcome
(AO)
Molecular
Initiating
Event (MIE)
Adverse
Outcome
(AO)
Figure 3-36.   Overview of adverse outcome pathways. Adverse outcome pathways (AOPs) are a systematic organization of events that can lead to a toxic effect. 
Key events are those that are causally related to the final toxicity, and as illustrated can be organized into those observed at the molecular, cellular, and organ 
levels. Overall, an AOP is very similar to that outlined in Fig. 3-1, as highlighted in the figure.

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
123
Chen HY, Albertson TE, Olson KR. Treatment of drug-induced seizures. Br 
J Clin Pharmacol. 2016;81412–81419.
Cohen SD, Pumford NR, Khairallah EA, et al. Contemporary issues in 
toxicology: selective protein covalent binding and target organ toxicity. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1997;143:1–2.
Cubeddu LX. Drug-induced inhibition and trafficking disruption of ion 
channels: pathogenesis of QT abnormalities and drug-induced fatal 
arrhythmias. Curr Cardiol Rev. 2016;12:141–154.
Day D, Hansen AR. Immune-related adverse events associated with immune 
checkpoint inhibitors. BioDrugs. 2016;30:571–584.
Denison MS, Nagy SR. Activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor by 
structurally diverse exogenous and endogenous chemicals. Annu Rev 
Pharmacol Toxicol. 2003;43:309–334.
DiMeo S, Reed TT, Venditti P, Victor VM. Role of ROS and RNS sources 
in physiological and pathological conditions. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 
2016;2016:1245049.
Dixon SJ, Stockwell BR. The role of iron and reactive oxygen species in 
cell death. Nat Chem Biol. 2014;10:9–17.
Dobson RL, Motlagh S, Quijano M, et al. Identification and characteriza-
tion of toxicity of contaminants in pet food leading to an outbreak of 
renal toxicity in cats and dogs. Toxicol Sci. 2008;106:251–262.
Dolinoy DC, Das R, Weidman JR, Jirtle RL. Metastable epialleles, imprint-
ing, and the fetal origins of adult diseases. Pediatr Res. 2007;61:30R–37R.
El-Benna J, Hurtado-Nedelec M, Marzaioli V, et al. Priming of the neutro-
phil respiratory burst: role in host defense and inflammation. Immunol 
Rev. 2016;273:180–193.
Esteller M. Aberrant DNA methylation as a cancer-inducing mechanism. 
Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 2005;45:629–656.
Evans AM, Mustard KJ, Wyatt CN, et al. Does AMP-activated protein 
kinase couple inhibition of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation 
by hypoxia to calcium signaling in O2-sensing cells? J Biol Chem. 
2005;280:41504–41511.
Fabregat I, Moreno-Caceres J, Sanchez A, et al. TGF-beta signaling and 
liver disease. FEBS J. 2016;283:2219–2232.
Fausto N, Campbell JS, Riehle KJ. Liver regeneration. Hepatology. 
2006;43:S45–S53.
Finlay D, Teriete P, Vamos M, Cosford NDP, Vuori K. Inducing death 
in tumor cells: roles of the inhibitor of apoptosis proteins. F1000Res. 
2017;6:587.
Forman HJ, Fukuto JM, Torres M. Redox signaling: thiol chemistry defines 
which reactive oxygen and nitrogen species can act as second messen-
gers. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2004;287:C246–C256.
Forman HJ, Zhang H, Rinna A. Glutathione: overview of its protective 
roles, measurement, and biosynthesis. Mol Aspects Med. 2009;30:1–12.
Fox JL, MacFarlane M. Targeting cell death signalling in cancer: minimis-
ing “collateral damage.” British J Cancer. 2016;115:5–11.
Ganz T. Hepcidin and iron regulation, 10 years later. Blood. 
2011;117:4425–4433.
Gao Y, Mutter-Rottmayer E, Zlatanou A, Vaziri C, Yang Y. Mechanisms of 
post-replication DNA repair. Genes (Basel). 2017;8(2):pii: E64.
Garofalo M, Croce CM. MicroRNAs: master regulators as potential thera-
peutics in cancer. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 2011;51:25–43.
Germain P, Staels B, Dacquet C, et al. Overview of nomenclature of nuclear 
receptors. Pharm Rev. 2006;58:685–704.
Giordano CN, Yew YW, Spivak G, Lim HW. Understanding photodermato-
ses associated with defective DNA repair: syndrome with cancer predis-
position. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2016;75:855–870.
Gonzalez FJ. Nuclear receptor control of enterohepatic circulation. Compr 
Physiol. 2012;2:2811–2828.
Gonzalez FJ, Shah YM. PPARalpha: mechanism of species differences 
and hepatocarcinogenesis of peroxisome proliferators. Toxicology. 
2008;246:2–8.
Gonzalez FJ, Yu AM. Cytochrome P450 and xenobiotic receptor humanized 
mice. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 2006;46:41–64.
Green DR, Kroemer G. Cytoplasmic functions of the tumour suppressor 
p53. Nature. 2009;458:1127–1130.
Grimm C, Hermann DM, Bogdanova A, et al. Neuroprotection by hypoxic 
preconditioning: HIF-1 and erythropoietin protect from retinal degenera-
tion. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2005;16:531–538.
Harada H. Hypoxia-inducible factor 1–mediated characteristic features 
of cancer cells for tumor radioresistance. J Rad Res. 2016;57 (S1): 
i99–i105.
Harb R, Xie G, Lutzko C, et al. Bone marrow progenitor cells repair rat 
hepatic sinusoidal endothelial cells after liver injury. Gastroenterology. 
2009;137:704–712.
Hardie DG, Hawley SA, Scott JW. AMP-activated protein kinase—devel-
opment of the energy sensor concept. J Physiol. 2006;574:7–15.
Hawley BR, Lu W-T, Wilczynska A, Bushell M. The emerging role of 
RNAs in DNA repair. Cell Death Differ. 2017;24:580–587.
Hediger MA, Clemencon B, Burrier RE, Bruford EA. The ABCs of mem-
brane transporters in health and disease (SLC series): introduction. Mol 
Aspects Med. 2013;34:95–107.
Higuchi M, Yoshikawa Y, Orino K, Watanabe K. Effect of diquat-induced 
oxidative stress on iron metabolism in male Fischer-344 rats. Biometals. 
2011;24:1123–1131.
Hosokawa N, Hara T, Kaizuka T, et al. Nutrient-dependent mTORC1 asso-
ciation with the ULK-1–Atg13–FIP200 complex required for autophagy. 
Mol Biol Cell. 2009;20:1981–1991.
Huang W, Ma K, Zhang J, et al. Nuclear receptor-dependent bile acid signal-
ing is required for normal liver regeneration. Science. 2006;312:233–236.
Hubbard TD, Murray IA, Perdew GH. Indole and tryptophan metabolism: 
endogenous and dietary routes to Ah receptor activation. Drug Metab 
Dispo. 2015;43:1522–1535.
Hurst S, Hoek J, Sheu SS.Mitochondrial Ca2+ and regulation of the perme-
ability transition pore. J Bioenerg Biomembr. 2017;49:27–47.
Hussain SP, Schwank J, Staib F, et al. TP53 mutations and hepatocellular 
carcinoma: insights into the etiology and pathogenesis of liver cancer. 
Oncogene. 2007;26:2166–2176.
Jaeschke H, Bajt ML. Intracellular signaling mechanisms of acetamino-
phen-induced liver cell death. Toxicol Sci. 2006;89:31–41.
Joerger AC, Fersht AR. The p53 pathway: origins, activation in can-
cer and emerging therapeutic approaches. Annu Rev Biochem. 
2016;85:375–404.
Jonckheere N, Vasseur R, Van Seuningen I. The cornerstone K-RAS muta-
tion in pancreatic adenocarcinoma: from cell signaling network, target 
genes, biological processes to therapeutic targeting. Crit Rev Oncol 
Hematol. 2017;111:7–19.
Ju C, Colgan SP, Eltzschig HK. Hypoxia-inducible factors as molecular tar-
gets for liver diseases. J Mol Med. 2016;94:613–27
Juarez JC, Manuia M, Burnett ME, et al. Superoxide dismutase 1 
(SOD1) is essential for H2O2-mediated oxidation and inactivation of 
phosphatases in growth factor signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2008;105:7147–7152.
Juntilla MR, Li S-P, Westermarck J. Phosphatase-mediated crosstalk 
between MAPK signaling pathways in the regulation of cell survival. 
FASEB J. 2008;22:954–965.
Kantorow M, Lee W, Chauss D. Focus on molecules: methionine sulfoxide 
reductase A. Exp Eye Res. 2012;100:110–111.
Karin M. Nuclear factor-κB in cancer development and progression. 
Nature. 2006;441:431–436.
Klaassen CD, Reisman SA. Nrf2 the rescue: effects of the antioxidative/elec-
trophilic response on the liver. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2010;244:57–65.
Kriegenburg F, Poulsen EG, Koch A, et al. Redox control of the ubiquitin-
proteasome system: from molecular mechanisms to functional signifi-
cance. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2011;15:2265–99.
Kullack-Ublick GA, Andrade RJ, Merz M, et al. Drug-induced liver 
injury: recent advances in diagnosis and risk assessment. Gut. 
2017;66(6):1154–1164.
Lehman-McKeeman LD. α2u-Globulin nephropathy. In: McQueen C, 
ed. Comprehensive Toxicology. 3rd ed. Vol 14. Amsterdam: Elsevier; 
2018:436–451.
Lelli JL, Becks LL, Dabrowska MI, Hinshaw DB. ATP converts necrosis 
to apoptosis in oxidant-injured endothelial cells. Free Radic Biol Med. 
1998;25:694–702.
Leung L, Kalgutkar AS, Obach RS. Metabolic activation in drug-induced 
liver injury. Drug Metab Rev. 2012;44:18–33.
Li X, Heyer WD. Homologous recombination in DNA repair and DNA 
damage tolerance. Cell Res. 2008;18:99–113.

124
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
Loboda A, Sobczak M, Jozkowicz A, Dulak J. TGFβ1/Smads and 
miR-21 in renal fibrosis and inflammation. Mediators Inflamm. 2016; 
2016:8319283.
Loeys BL, Schwarze U, Holm T, et al. Aneurysm syndromes caused by 
mutations in the TGF-beta receptor. N Engl J Med. 2006;355(8): 
788–798.
Maeda K. Organic anion transporting polypeptide (OATP)1B1 and 
OATP1B3 as important regulators of the pharmacokinetics of substrate 
drugs. Biol Pharm Bull. 2015;38:155–168.
Malhi H, Kaufman RJ. Endoplasmic reticulum stress in liver disease. J 
Hepatol. 2011;54:795–809.
Maxwell P, Salnikow K. HIF-1, an oxygen and metal responsive transcrip-
tion factor. Cancer Biol Ther. 2004;3:29–35.
Mehendale HM. Tissue repair: an important determinant of final outcome of 
toxicant-induced injury. Toxicol Pathol. 2005;33:41–51.
Menzies FM, Fleming A, Caricasole A, et al. Autophagy and neurodegen-
eration: pathogenic mechanisms and therapeutic opportunities. Neuron. 
2017;93:1015–1034.
Michalopoulos GK. Principles of liver regeneration and growth homeosta-
sis. Comp Physiol. 2013;3:48–513.
Molitoris JK, McColl KS, Distelhorst CW. Glucocorticoid-mediated 
repression of the oncogenic microRNA cluster miR-17~92 contributes 
to the induction of Bim and initiation of apoptosis. Mol Endocrinol. 
2011;25:409–420.
Moskovitz J. Methionine sulfoxide reductases: ubiquitous enzymes 
involved in antioxidant defense, protein regulation, and prevention of 
aging-associated diseases. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005;1703:213–219.
Murakami Y, Kawada N. MicroRNAs in hepatic pathophysiology. 
Hepatology Res. 2017;47:60–69.
Narahashi T. Nerve membrane Na+ channels as targets of insecticides. 
Trends Pharmacol Sci. 1992;13:236–241.
Niki E. Biomarkers of lipid peroxidation in clinical material. Biochim 
Biophys Acta. 2014;1840:809–817.
Nolan JP. The role of intestinal endotoxin in liver injury: a long and evolv-
ing history. Hepatology. 2010;52:1829–1835.
Orrenius S. Mitochondrial regulation of apoptotic cell death. Toxicol Lett. 
2004;149:19–23.
Orrenius S, Gogvadze V, Zhivotovsky B. Calcium and mitochondria in 
the regulation of cell death. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015;460: 
72–81.
Orrenius S, Nicotera P, Zhivotovsky B. Cell death mechanisms and their 
implications in toxicology. Toxicol Sci. 2011;119:3–19.
Parkinson OT, Teitelbaum AM, Whittington D, et al. Species differences in 
microsomal oxidation and glucuronidation of 4-ipomeanol: relationship 
to target organ toxicity. Drug Metab Dispos. 2016;44:1598–1602.
Pasparakis M, Vandenabeele P. Necroptosis and its role in inflammation. 
Nature. 2015;517:311–320.
Pessayre D, Fromenty B, Berson A, et al. Central role of mitochondria in 
drug-induced liver injury. Drug Metab Rev. 2012;44:34–87.
Peters JM, Shah YM, Gonzalez FJ. The role of peroxisome proliferator-acti-
vated receptors in carcinogenesis and chemoprevention. Nat Rev Cancer. 
2012;12:181–195.
Petibone DM, Majeed W, Casciano DA. Autophagy function and its rela-
tionship to pathology, clinical applications drug metabolism and toxicity. 
J Appl Toxicol. 2017;37:23–37.
Pogribny IP, Muskhelishvili L, Tryndyak VP, Beland FA. The role of epi-
genetic events in genotoxic hepatocarcinogenesis induced by 2-acetyl-
aminofluorene. Mutat Res. 2011;722:106–113.
Pugliese A, Beltramo T, Torre D. Reye’s and Reye’s-like syndromes. Cell 
Biochem Funct. 2008;26:741–746.
Rabinowitz JD, White E. Autophagy and metabolism. Science. 
2010;330:1344–1348.
Ray PD, Huang B-W, Tsuji Y. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) homeo-
stasis and redox regulation in cellular signaling. Cell Signal. 2012;24: 
981–990.
Rhee SG, Chae HZ, Kim K. Peroxiredoxins: a historical overview and 
speculative preview of novel mechanisms and emerging concepts in cell 
signaling. Free Radic Biol Med. 2005;38:1543–1552.
Roderburg C, Urban GW, Bettermann K, et al. Micro-RNA profiling reveals 
a role for miR-29 in human and murine liver fibrosis. Hepatology. 
2011;53:209–218.
Rodrigues AD, Lai Y, Cvijic ME, et al. Drug-induced perturbations of the 
bile acid pool, cholestasis, and hepatotoxicity: mechanistic consider-
ations beyond direct inhibition of the bile salt export pump. Drug Metab 
Dispos. 2014;42:566–674.
Roskoski R Jr. RAF protein-serine/threonine kinases: structure and regula-
tion. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010;399:313–317.
Saurat JH, Kaya G, Saxer-Sekulic N, et al. The cutaneous lesions of dioxin 
exposure: lessons from the poisoning of Victor Yushchenko. Toxicol Sci. 
2012;125:310–317.
Schinkel AH. P-glycoprotein, a gatekeeper in the blood–brain barrier. Adv 
Drug Deliv Rev. 1999;36:179–194.
Schopf FH, Biebl MM, Buchner J. The HSP90 chaperone machinery. 
Nature Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2017;18:345–360.
Seki T, Ishimoto T, Sakurai T, et al. Increased excretion of urinary 20-HETE 
in rats with cyclosporine-induced nephrotoxicity. J Pharmacol Sci. 
2005;97:132–137.
Shaw RJ, Cantley LC. Ras, PI(3)K and mTOR signalling controls tumour 
cell growth. Nature. 2006;441:424–430.
Shin S, Kaestner KH. The origin, biology, and therapeutic potential of 
facultative adult hepatic progenitor cells. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2014;107: 
269–92.
Sies H. Role of metabolic H2O2 generation redox signaling and oxidative 
stress. J Biol Chem. 2014;289:8735–8741.
Sies H, Berndt C, Jones DP. Oxidative stress. Annu Rev Biochem. 
2017;86:715–748.
Stachlewitz RF, Seabra V, Bradford B, et al. Glycine and uridine pre-
vent d-galactosamine hepatoxicity in the rat: role of the Kupffer cells. 
Hepatology. 1999;29:737–745.
Stephens TD, Bunde CJ, Fillmore BJ. Mechanism of action in thalidomide 
teratogenesis. Biochem Pharmacol. 2000;59:1489–1499.
Sullivan A, Gibson A, Park BK, Naisbitt DJ. Are drug metabolites able 
to cause T-cell-mediated hypersensitivity reactions? Expert Opin Drug 
Metab Toxicol. 2015;11:357–366.
Suzuki T, Kamiya H. Mutations induced by 8-hydroxyguanine (8-oxo-
7,8-dihydroguanine), a representative oxidized base, in mammalian cells. 
Genes Environ. 2016;39:2. eCollection 2017.
Tam A, Wadsworth S, Dorscheid D, Man SF, Sin DD. The airway epithe-
lium: more than just a structural barrier. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2011;5: 
255–273.
Tatti R, Haley MS, Swanson OK, Tselha T, Maffei A.Neurophysiology and 
regulation of the balance between excitation and inhibition in neocortical 
circuits. Biol Psychiatry. 2017;81:821–831.
Tsuchida T, Friedman SL. Mechanisms of hepatic stellate cell activation. 
Nat Rev Gastorenterol Hepatol. 2017;14(7):397–411.
Tummers B, Green DR. Caspase-8: regulating life and death. Immunol Rev. 
2017;277:76–89.
Uetrecht J, Naisbitt DJ. Idiosyncratic adverse drug reactions: current con-
cepts. Pharmacol Rev. 2013;65:779–808.
Vedove CD, Del Giglio M, Schena D, Girolomoni G. Drug-induced lupus 
erythematosus. Arch Dermatol Res. 2009;301:99–105.
Walensky LD, Gavathiotis E. BAX unleashed: the biochemical transforma-
tion of an inactive cytosolic monomer into a toxic mitochondrial pore. 
Trends Biochem Sci. 2011;36:642–652.
Wallace KB. Mitochondrial off targets of drug therapy. Trends Pharmacol 
Sci. 2008;29:361–366.
Wang Y, Taniguchi T. MicroRNAs and DNA damage response: implications 
for cancer therapy. Cell Cycle. 2013;12:32–42.
Weinlich R, Oberst A, Beere HM, Green DR. Necroptosis in develop-
ment, inflammation and disease. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2017;18: 
127–136.
Wittwehr C, Aladjov H, Ankley G, et al. How adverse outcome pathways 
can aid the development and use of computational prediction models for 
regulatory toxicology. Toxicol Sci. 2017;155:326–336.
Wogan GN, Kensler TW, Groopman JD. Present and future directions of 
translational research on aflatoxin and hepatocellular carcinoma. A

Mechanisms of Toxicity
Chapter 3
125
review. Food Addit Contam Part A Chem Anal Control Expo Risk Assess. 
2012;29:249–257.
Wong KM, Babetto E, Beirowski B. Axon degeneration: make the Schwann 
cell great again. Neural Regen Res. 2017;12:518–524.
Xie Y, Hou W, Song X, et al. Ferroptosis: process and function. Cell Death 
Differ. 2016;23:369–379.
Yamashina S, Ikejima K, Enomoto N, et al. Glycine as a therapeutic 
immune-nutrient for alcoholic liver disease. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 
2005;29:162S–165S.
Yokoi T, Nakajima M. Toxicological implications of modulation of gene 
expression by microRNAs. Toxicol Sci. 2011;123:1–14.
Yokoi T, Nakajima M. microRNAs as mediators of drug toxicity. Annu Rev 
Pharmacol Toxicol. 2013;53:377–400.
Yu R, Lai Y, Hartwell HJ, Moeller BC, et al. Formation, accumulation and 
hydrolysis of endogenous and exogenous formaldehyde-induced DNA 
damage. Toxicol Sci. 2015;146:170–182.
Yuan JM, Butler LM, Stepanov I, Hecht SS. Urinary tobacco smoke-
constituent biomarkers for assessing risk of lung cancer. Cancer Res. 
2014;74:401–11.
Zhivotovsky B, Orrenius S. Current concepts in cell death. Curr Protoc Cell 
Biol. 2001;chap 18:unit 18.1.
Zhou W, Yuan J. Necroptosis in health and diseases. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 
2014;35:14–23.
Zou YX-Z, Liu T, Gong Z-C, et al. MicroRNAs-mediated epithelial-
mesenchymal transition in fibrotic diseases. Eur J Pharmacol. 
2017;796:190–206.

This page intentionally left blank