# 30 Ecotoxicology
# Casarett & Doull's Toxicology, 9th Edition
# Pages: 1452-1483
# Unit: Unit VI Environmental Toxicology

30
chapter
Ecotoxicology
Richard T. Di Giulio and Michael C. Newman
INTRODUCTION
Ecotoxicology is the science of contaminants in the biosphere and 
their effects on constituents of the biosphere (Newman, 2015). It 
follows from this definition that ecotoxicologists examine large-
scale ecological phenomenon (Preston, 2002) in addition to those 
normally addressed in toxicology: ecotoxicology has an overarch-
ing goal of explaining and predicting effect or exposure phenomena 
at several levels of biological organization (Fig. 30-1). Essential 
explanations and models include those applied in conventional 
toxicology and a range of environmental sciences.
Although Truhaut’s original definition of this new science 
encompassed effects to humans (Truhaut, 1977), most recent defi-
nitions of ecotoxicology do not. Relevant effects to nonhuman 
targets range from biomolecular to global. Taking on the classic 
toxicology vantage initially, suborganismal and organismal effects 
were emphasized during ecotoxicology’s nascent stage; how-
ever, studies of higher level effects and interactions are becoming 
increasingly commonplace as the science matures. Such indirect 
effects1 were initially considered problematic and reluctantly rel-
egated to secondary importance (Fleeger et al., 2003) relative to 
direct effects to individuals. Indirect effects are now known to be 
as or more important as direct effects to nonhuman targets (Fleeger 
et al., 2003; Chapman, 2004). As the need to predict major effects to 
populations, communities, ecosystems, and other higher level enti-
ties has become increasingly apparent, more cause–effect models 
relevant to these higher levels of biological organization are added 
1Indirect effects are effects of toxicants mediated by another ecosystem com-
ponent (Krivtsov, 2004), such as those that might occur to a flowering plant 
if a pesticide were to eliminate its primary insect pollinator.
to the conventional set of toxicology models applied by pioneering 
ecotoxicologists.
Contaminant chemical form, phase association, and move-
ment among components of the biosphere are also central issues 
in ecotoxicology because they determine exposure, bioavailability, 
and realized dose. The context of these biogeochemical studies 
has expanded in the last several decades to encompass issues of 
larger scale such as global movement and fractionation of persistent 
organic pollutants (POPs) (Wania and Mackay, 1996).
From a practical vantage, ecotoxicology informs decision 
makers about ecological risks associated with contamination. Risk 
to ecological entities is estimated or predicted by combining expo-
sure and effect information. Risk might involve diminished fitness 
of individuals, increased risk of local population extinction, a drop 
in species diversity, or reduced nutrient cycling or primary produc-
tivity. Because potential ecological endpoints are so diverse, the 
ecological risk framework tends to be more flexible than that of the 
conventional human health risk assessment (Fig. 30-2). This impor-
tant role of ecotoxicology in ecological risk assessment (ERA) is 
discussed in more detail in this chapter.
SOME DISTINCT ASPECTS OF EXPOSURE
Predicting exposure and effect is difficult for all relevant ecologi-
cal entities. In contrast to human toxicology in which information 
about a few species might be used to predict harm to one (humans), 
ecotoxicology commonly uses sparse information for a few species 
to predict effects to many species and their interactions. Identifying 
exposure pathways, bioavailability, bioaccumulation, and toxicant 
transfer for all at-risk ecological receptors requires considerable 
effort.
Introduction
Some Distinct Aspects of 
Exposure
Toxicant Effects
Molecular and Biochemical Effects
Gene Expression and 
Ecotoxicogenomics
Estrogen Receptor
Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor
Genomics and Ecotoxicogenomics
Protein Damage
Oxidative Stress
DNA Damage
Cellular, Tissue, and Organ Effects
Cells
Histopathology
Target Organs
Organismal Effects
Mortality
Reproduction and Development
Disease Susceptibility
Behavior
Cancer
Population
Community
Ecosystem to Biosphere
Approaches
Toxicity Tests
Biomarkers
Population
Community and Ecosystem
Landscape to Biosphere
Ecological Risk Assessment
Interconnections Between 
Ecosystem Integrity and 
Human Health
Acknowledgments
References

1434
ENVIRONMENTAL TOXICOLOGY
Unit VI
Relevant exposure routes are the conventional ingestion, inha-
lation, and dermal absorption. But unique features of exposure path-
ways must be accommodated for species that ingest a wide range 
of materials using distinct feeding mechanisms, breathe gaseous or 
liquid media using extremely different structures, and come into 
dermal contact with a variety of gaseous, liquid, and solid media.
Prediction of oral exposure can be compromised because spe-
cies feed on different materials; however, conventional principles 
regarding oral bioavailability remain relevant. As an example, some 
birds are uniquely at high risk of lead poisoning because they ingest 
and then use lead shot as grit. Shot are ground together in their 
gizzards under acidic conditions, releasing significant amounts of 
dissolved lead (Kendall et al., 1996). As true with humans (i.e., the 
ionic hypothesis of Mathews [1904]), the dissolved form of lead is 
more available to do harm than solid lead shot. Similar high risk of 
lead poisoning is present for some raptors feeding on game birds 
whose tissues can contain lead shot (Wayland and Bollinger, 1999). 
As another example, complex sorting of filtered materials on the 
gills of bivalve molluscs strongly influences the metal content and 
bioavailability of the material that eventually passes into their guts 
(Allison et al., 1998). Some invertebrate species have elaborate 
feeding structures that are also involved in respiration (e.g., lug-
worms and bivalve molluscs) or locomotion (copepods and other 
zooplankton species). Some zooplankton species feed and digest 
algal cells in such a way that only metals soluble in the algal cyto-
sol are readily bioavailable (Reinfelder and Fisher, 1991). Unlike 
most mammalian species, many invertebrate species are capable 
of sequestering large amounts of metals in intracellular granules 
(Mason and Nott, 1981). Incorporation of metals into granules by 
prey species reduces metal bioavailability to predators (Nott and 
Nicolaidou, 1993). Just as noted with 5-fluoruracil administration 
or chronic ethanol consumption, some pollutant exposures cause 
malabsorption by damaging the intestine wall. A relevant situation 
is intestinal damage to otters caused by ingestion during grooming 
of oiled fur (Lipscomb et al., 1996; Ormseth and Ben-David, 2000). 
The principles remain the same in all of these cases but critical 
exposure pathway details are different.
Many techniques applied to determining human oral bio-
availability are available to the ecotoxicologist; however, as just 
illustrated, modifications are needed for the many pathways for 
nonhuman species exposure. Typical are those associated with esti-
mating contaminant bioavailability in aquatic environments. As an 
example, biomimetic and related extraction methods used to pre-
dict human oral bioavailability can be modified to predict sediment-
bound contaminant bioavailabilities. Sediments are placed into 
contact with biomimetic solutions (Chen and Mayer, 1998; Leslie 
et al., 2002) or digestive fluids taken from organisms (Mayer et 
al., 1996; Weston and Maruya, 2002), and the amount of extracted 
contaminant used to estimate bioavailability.
Estimation of chemical speciation is central to predicting bio-
availability of water-associated contaminants. Speciation can deter-
mine the bioavailability of dissolved metals. Movements of nonionic 
and ionizable organic compounds across the gut or gills are strongly 
influenced by lipid solubility and the pH-partition theory, respec-
tively. Consequently, determination of a compound’s lipophilicity 
or calculation of pH- and pKa-dependent ionization facilitates some 
predictive capability for bioavailability (see Chap. 5, “Absorption, 
Distribution, and Excretion of Toxicants”). A common applica-
tion of this approach would be estimation of water pH effects on 
Hierarchical scale
Biotic and abiotic
Biotic
Abiotic
Biomolecule
Cell/tissue
Organ system
Organism
Population
Community
Organ
Chemical form/species
Phase association
Microenvironment
Habitat/environment
Ecosystem
Landscape
Continent
Biosphere
Figure 30-1.   Ecological scales relevant to ecotoxicology. Solely biological 
scales relevant to ecotoxicology range from the molecular to the community 
levels: solely abiotic scales range from the chemical to the entire habitat. 
Biotic and abiotic components are usually combined at levels above the 
ecological community and habitat. The ecological community and physico-
chemical habitat combined to form the ecosystem. Ecological systems can 
be considered at the landscape scale, such as the combination of marine, 
freshwater, and terrestrial systems at a river’s mouth. Recently, the conti-
nental and biospheric scales have become relevant as in the cases of ozone 
depletion, acid precipitation, and global warming.
Problem
formulation
Exposure
Effects
Analysis
Risk
characterization
Risk communication
Risk management
Planning with risk managers
and interested parties
Establish
Assessment end point
Conceptual model
Analysis plan
Characterize
Ecosystem qualities
Receptor qualities
Exposure proﬁle
Stressor-response proﬁle
Summarize
Risk estimation
Risk description
Uncertainties
Figure 30-2.   The general form of an ecological risk assessment including 
problem formulation, analysis, and risk characterization stages. Problem 
formulation is done in dialog with risk managers and stakeholders, and 
involves a clear statement of the ecological entity to be assessed, a concep-
tual model for the process, and a plan for conducting the assessment. The 
analysis stage involves exposure and effects characterizations. Using the 
context developed during problem formulation and information organized 
together in the analysis stage, a statement of risk and associated uncertain-
ties are made in the risk characterization stage.

Ecotoxicology
Chapter 30
1435
ammonia toxicity as the consequence of the ease with which union-
ized ammonia passes through gills relative to ionized ammonia 
(Lloyd and Herbert, 1960). The free ion activity model (FIAM) and 
biotic ligand model (BLM) state that uptake and toxicity of cationic 
trace metals are best predicted from the interaction of the free ion 
with ligands on biological surface (Campbell and Tessier, 1996; 
Erickson, 2013), although exceptions exist to this extension of the 
ionic hypothesis. Consequently, dissolved metal exposure assess-
ments often begin by estimating the amount of a metal present as the 
free ion. Normally, such calculations require only thermodynamic 
modeling based on measured concentrations of dissolved cations 
and anions. Lipid partitioning is often used to predict dissolved, non-
ionizing organic compound accumulation in and effects to aquatic 
biota. The propensity for an organic compound to accumulate in 
aquatic organisms increases with lipid solubility as often described 
with a simple quantitative structure–activity relationship (QSAR) 
(Neely et al., 1974; Mackay, 1982; Chiou, 1985; Connell, 1990). 
The log of the octanol–water partition coefficient (log Kow) is used 
to predict measures such as the bioconcentration factor (BCF; the 
quotient of the concentration in the organism and that in the water 
from which the organic compound is being accumulated):
BCF =
Organism
Water
C
C
.
Bioavailability, bioaccumulation, or exposure concentrations 
for sediment-associated toxicants are also approached by consid-
ering chemical speciation and phase partitioning. Metals in sedi-
ments are either incorporated into one of many solid phases or 
dissolved in the interstitial waters surrounding the sediment parti-
cles. Bioavailabilities of metals in these different forms are difficult 
to predict (Luoma, 1989) but, nonetheless, various schemes have 
been applied to that end. Bioavailable metals have been estimated 
by normalizing sediment metal concentrations to easily extracted 
iron and manganese concentrations because solid iron and man-
ganese oxides sequester metals in poorly bioavailable solid forms 
(Luoma and Bryan, 1978). Other chemical extraction methods have 
been applied with some success (Tessier et al., 1984). A pragmatic 
method for predicting sediment metal bioavailability has emerged 
that is based on the assumption that the sediment metal form of 
most concern is the dissolved metal. Further, for many metals and 
sediments, the dissolved interstitial metal concentrations are deter-
mined by equilibrium between solid (iron and manganese) sulfides 
and the interstitial water:
Cd
FeS
CdS
Fe
2
Solid
Solid
2
+
+
+
↔
+
.
Because the equilibrium so favors formation of metal sul-
fide (CdSSolid in this case) at the expense of FeSSolid, insignificant 
amounts of dissolved metal will be present in the interstitial waters 
if enough FeSSolid is present. This premise has given rise to a stan-
dard technique for determining whether sediments might contain 
enough metal to warrant concern (Di Toro et al., 1990). First, a 
sediment aliquot is extracted with cold hydrochloric acid. Then the 
amounts of sulfide (acid volatile sulfides [AVS]) and simultaneously 
extracted metals (SEM) are quantified in that extract. The difference 
between the SEM and AVS suggests whether or not enough metal 
will remain dissolved in the interstitial waters to warrant concern. 
This method has enjoyed wide application and was subsequently 
refined by Di Toro et al. (2005) by including metal partitioning to 
sediment organic matter. Further refinement remains to be done 
because metal exposure of organisms that ingest sediment particu-
lates is not fully defined by interstitial water concentrations alone 
(Lee et al., 2000).
Bioavailability and accumulation of sediment-associated 
organic compounds are predicted with tools similar to those 
described for waters. The bioavailability of ionizable organic com-
pounds can be approximated with the pH-partition hypothesis that 
relates the availability of an ionizable compound to the diffusion of 
its unionized form through membranes as determined by pH and 
pKa. Availability of nonionizing organic compounds for accumula-
tion can often be estimated with its log Kow and equilibrium parti-
tioning theory as described already for accumulation from waters. 
The challenge with nonionizing organic compounds becomes 
adequately defining the phases between which the compound is 
partitioning. This might be done by estimating the partitioning of 
the compound between sediment solid phases and the interstitial 
water as done by Di Toro et al. (1991). Descriptions of nonionizing 
organic compound bioaccumulation from sediments can also entail 
normalization of concentrations to phases thought to be dictating 
partitioning:
Biota sediment accumulation factor (BSAF)
g/kg lipid
g/kg
=
µ
µ
 organic carbon ,
where the mass of compound in the organisms is divided by kilo-
grams of organism-associated lipid and the mass of compound 
in the sediment is divided by kilograms of sediment-associated 
organic carbon.
Another issue of importance to the ecotoxicologist is the possi-
bility of biomagnification, the increase in contaminant concentration 
as it moves through a food web. Biomagnification occurs for many 
persistent organic pollutants (POPs) and some organometals such as 
methylmercury. MacDonald et al. (2002) conceptualize biomagnifi-
cation as environmental amplification involving sequential steps of 
solvent switching followed by solvent depletion. Solvent switching 
might involve partitioning of the compound from water into the lip-
ids in prey tissues. Next, after the predator ingests a prey, digestion 
of the prey lipids leads to POP partitioning into lipids of the predator 
tissues. The result of solvent switching and then depletion is a net 
increase in POP concentration in the predator relative to the prey. As 
will be described in the Section “Community,” biomagnification can 
result in harmful exposures to species situated high in the food web 
such as birds of prey.
TOXICANT EFFECTS
While determining exposure comprises one half of the risk assess-
ment paradigm, the other half, understanding chemical effects, 
lies at the heart of toxicology and, hence, comprises the focus of 
this chapter. The effects, or deleterious consequences of chemical 
exposures, can be enormously diverse as demonstrated by previous 
chapters, and investigated by numerous techniques. One approach 
to this complex topic of ecotoxicological effects, which we employ 
here, is to organize effects according to biological levels of organi-
zation. Thus, one may consider effects, in ascending order, at the 
subcellular (molecular and biochemical), cellular, organismal, pop-
ulation, community, ecosystem, or higher levels of organization. 
As noted earlier, an important distinction between traditional bio-
medical, or human health-oriented, toxicology and ecotoxicology 
is the emphasis by the latter on higher levels of biological organiza-
tion, specifically populations, communities, and ecosystems, while 
biomedical toxicology focuses on lower levels, from organismal 
and below. This difference arises from the focus of biomedical 
toxicology on one species and concerns for protecting the health of 
individuals of that species. Ecotoxicology, in contrast, deals with,

1436
ENVIRONMENTAL TOXICOLOGY
Unit VI
theoretically at least, all species, and in line with other aspects of 
natural resource management, the primary concern is one of sus-
tainability. That is, policies and regulations surrounding chemical 
effects in natural ecosystems are designed to protect ecological 
features such as population dynamics, community structures, and 
ecosystem functions. In this light, the individual organism is essen-
tially viewed as expendable, as long as these higher level variables 
are protected. An exception here is that of endangered or threatened 
species, where the loss of an individual may have unacceptable 
legal or ecological consequences.
While higher levels of organization comprise the ultimate 
focus of those concerned with chemical pollution of natural sys-
tems, the science of ecotoxicology includes studies across the entire 
hierarchy. Studies at lower levels (cellular and below) provide 
insights into mechanisms of toxicity that can be valuable for mak-
ing predictions among related compounds or species, and establish-
ing cause–effect relationships in field studies, for generating useful 
“biomarkers” of chemical exposure and effect, and for providing 
insights into higher level, often population level, effects. Studies at 
the organism level have historically played a dominant role in regu-
latory ecotoxicology; many traditional bioassays, described later, 
can be viewed as organismal-level queries. Again, understanding 
effects at the population and higher levels can be viewed as the 
ultimate goal of ecotoxicology. However, because these effects 
can require a relatively long time beyond the initial exposure of 
a system to emerge, their quantification is often difficult, and they 
generally do not serve to identify the nature of the stressor. Thus, 
the elucidation of effects of chemical pollutants, as well as other 
stressors, in natural systems draws on multiple approaches and con-
clusions are generally based on the weight of evidence available. 
Adams (2000) discusses examples of effects, or endpoints, that can 
be measured spanning levels of organization including their rela-
tive sensitivities and ecological relevancies, and the importance of 
integrating studies across levels of organization and mathematical 
approaches for accomplishing.
An important paradigm that has emerged recently for elucidat-
ing linkages across levels of organization is the “Adverse Outcome 
Pathway” (AOP) concept first described by Ankley et al. (2000). 
They define the AOP as “a conceptual construct that portrays exist-
ing knowledge concerning the linkage between a direct molecular 
initiating effect (e.g., a molecular interaction between a xenobiotic 
and a specific biomolecule) and an adverse outcome at a biologi-
cal level of organization relevant to risk assessment.” A general-
ized AOP is presented in Fig. 30-3. In the realm of ecotoxicology 
and ecological risk assessment, the population is the level gener-
ally of greatest relevance. Subsequent papers have addressed the 
development of the AOP concept, for example, in terms of underly-
ing principles (Villeneuve et al., 2014a), best practices for inter-
national harmonization of approaches and databases (Villeneuve 
et al., 2014b), and the integration of computational and modeling 
approaches (Perkins et al., 2015). The AOP concept provides per-
haps an unusual example of an approach originally developed by 
ecotoxicologists that has been adopted by the biomedical field (e.g., 
see Edwards et al., 2016).
In the following sections, we describe important chemical 
effects that have been addressed at different levels of biological 
organization in ecotoxicological contexts, including illustrative 
examples. It is beyond the scope of this chapter to provide discus-
sions of all chemicals that have received ecotoxicological atten-
tion. Other chapters in this text, particularly those in Unit V, provide 
detailed information for most classes of chemicals of concern as 
pollutants of natural systems, albeit in a primarily mammalian con-
text. Many of the effects described are relevant to other animals, 
and of course mammals do occur in natural systems! Some plant-
specific effects will be addressed herein. It should be noted that, 
while we have employed a biological level of organization approach 
as a meaningful way to organize and convey a complex array of 
information, the phenomena we have categorized into various levels 
are ultimately interwoven, as will become apparent.
Molecular and Biochemical Effects
This lowest level of organization includes fundamental processes 
associated with the regulation of gene transcription and translation, 
biotransformation of xenobiotics, and the deleterious biochemical 
effects of xenobiotics on cellular constituents including proteins, 
lipids, and DNA. These effects have been described elsewhere 
throughout this book in various contexts related to human health. 
Here we will highlight some aspects of subcellular effects that 
have received particular attention in the context of ecotoxicology. 
Adverse Outcome Pathway
Toxicant
Macro-Molecular
Interactions
Cellular
Responses
Organ
Responses
Organism
Responses
Population
Responses
Chemical
Properties
Anchor 1
(Initiating event)
Anchor 2
(adverse outcome at the
organism- or population-level)
Toxicity Pathway
Receptor/Ligand
Interaction
DNA Binding
Protein
Oxidation
Gene
Activation
Protein
Production
Altered
Signaling
Protein
Depletion
Altered
Physiology
Lethality
Impaired
Development
Impaired
Reproduction
Cancer
Structure
Recruitment
Extinction
Disrupted
Homeostasis
Altered Tissue
Development
or Function
Figure 30-3.   An adverse outcome pathway (AOP) is a conceptual framework that portrays existing knowledge concerning the linkage between a direct molecu-
lar initiating event and an adverse outcome at a level of biological organization relevant to risk assessment. (From Ankley et al. [2010]; used with permission 
from Wiley.)

Ecotoxicology
Chapter 30
1437
Research in this area has been performed for a variety of reasons, 
including the elucidation of mechanisms of adaptation and toxicity, 
understanding species similarities and differences (e.g., to compare 
selected wildlife species with standard mammalian models, and to 
identify particularly sensitive species), and developing useful bio-
markers of chemical exposure and toxicity for environmental assess-
ments. More in-depth discussions are provided in monographs such 
as Hoffman et al. (2003), Newman (2015), Mommsen and Moon 
(2005), Di Giulio and Hinton (2008), and Walker et al. (2012).
Gene Expression and Ecotoxicogenomics
A long-standing mechanistic issue in toxicology concerns chemical 
effects on gene and protein expression. Xenobiotics can affect gene 
transcription through interactions with transcription factors and/or 
the promoter regions of genes that bind transcription factors in the 
process of activating transcription. In the context of environmen-
tal toxicology, perhaps the most studied xenobiotic effects involve 
ligand-activated transcription factors. These intracellular receptor 
proteins recognize and bind specific compounds, thus forming a 
complex that binds to specific promoter regions of genes, thereby 
activating transcription of mRNAs, and ultimately translation of 
the associated protein. Two examples of substantial importance in 
ecotoxicology that illustrate these interactions involve the estrogen 
receptor (ER) and the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR).
Estrogen Receptor  A number of chemicals have been shown 
to perturb various components of the endocrine system, and the 
identification and elucidation of “endocrine disruptors” have been 
a subject of much research and regulatory action in recent years, 
in the contexts of both human and wildlife health (see Chap. 10, 
“Developmental Toxicology,” Chap. 20, “Toxic Responses of 
the Endocrine System,” and Chap. 21, “Toxic Responses of the 
Reproductive System”; Rotchell and Ostrander, 2003). Perhaps the 
most studied component of the vertebrate endocrine system in this 
context is the ER, particularly ER-α, and responses associated with 
it. The dominant natural ligand for this nuclear receptor is estra-
diol (E2); binding of E2 with ER produces a complex that can then 
bind to estrogen response elements (ERE) of specific genes that 
contain one or more EREs, thereby causing gene transcription (see 
Fig. 30-4). Genes regulated in this manner by E2–ER play various 
important roles in, for example, sexual organ development, behav-
ior, fertility, and bone integrity (Deroo and Korach, 2006).
A number of chemicals including certain drugs and environ-
mental pollutants can serve as ligands for ER; in most cases these 
“xenoestrogens” activate gene transcription, that is, similar to E2, 
acting as receptor agonists. The first xenoestrogen identified was 
diethylstilbestrol (DES), a drug used to prevent miscarriage in the 
1940s to the 1970s until it was discovered to have profound develop-
mental effects in some offspring of women receiving the treatment 
(Trimble, 2001). Since then, a number of environmental pollutants 
with estrogenic activity have been identified, including certain 
chlorinated hydrocarbon insecticides (e.g., DDT, methoxychlor, 
and endosulfan), surfactants (nonylphenol), some polychlorinated 
biphenyls (PCBs), bisphenol A (used in plastic manufacturing), and 
ethinyl estradiol, a synthetic estrogen used in birth control pills and 
observed in municipal effluents and surface waters (Shelby et al., 
1996; Larsson et al., 1999; van der Oost et al., 2003) (see Fig. 30-5). 
Cytoplasm
Estrogen
Protein 
Products
(eg, Vtg)
Nucleus
Transcription
mRNAs
Estrogen
receptor
Translation
Estrogen
ERE
ER
homodimer 
Estrogen
receptor
Figure 30-4.   A simplified model of estrogen receptor signaling including the estrogen receptor (ER), which on binding to native hormone ligand (estrogen) 
or xenoestrogen (see Fig. 30-5) forms the transcriptionally active ER homodimer complex that binds to genes containing estrogen response elements (ERE) 
and thereby upregulates transcription and translation of genes/proteins regulated by the system, such as vitellogenin (Vtg). (Figure kindly provided by Carla 
Rosenfeld, Duke University.)

1438
ENVIRONMENTAL TOXICOLOGY
Unit VI
With the exception of ethinyl estradiol, these pollutants exhibit rela-
tively low binding affinities to ER, as compared with E2 or DES 
(Shelby et al., 1996); however, environmental exposures may be 
sufficient to perturb reproduction or development.
Evidence for such “endocrine disruptions” by environmen-
tal xenoestrogens appears to be overall stronger for wildlife than 
for humans, likely due to instances of elevated exposures that are 
less prone to confounding factors than is typically the case for 
human exposures. Also, egg-laying vertebrates provide a unique 
biomarker of estrogen exposure that has contributed to ecotoxico-
logical studies in this area. Vitellogenin (Vtg) is a protein that is 
normally produced by the liver of females and transported via the 
bloodstream to the ovary where, as a key component of yolk, it 
provides nourishment to the developing embryo. The production of 
Vtg is regulated by the estrogen–ER system. Interestingly, males 
of egg-laying vertebrate species contain the molecular machinery 
to produce Vtg, but production and circulating levels are normally 
very low, due to low titers of estrogen. However, exposures of males 
to estrogen and xenoestrogens upregulate Vtg production, which 
can be readily measured in blood samples. Consequently, elevated 
Vtg in males of these species is a useful biomarker of estrogenic 
chemical exposures (Sumpter and Jobling, 1995; see the section 
“Biomarkers”). Examples include rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus 
mykiss) caged in surface waters below industrial or municipal 
effluent sources enriched in alkylphenolic surfactants in the United 
Kingdom (Harries et al., 1997) or natural and synthetic estrogens 
in Sweden (Larsson et al., 1999), whitefish (Coregonus lavare-
tus) caged near paper mill effluents in Finland (Mellanen et al., 
1999), and in tropical fish inhabiting a wastewater-impacted river 
in Brazil (Pimentel et al., 2016). While the bulk of research related 
to estrogenic compounds in natural systems has focused on fish, this 
approach has merit for other egg-laying vertebrates (Lorenzen et al., 
2003; Huang et al., 2005), and for some invertebrates that produce 
Vtg-like proteins (Porte et al., 2006).
Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor  The AhR is a member of the basic 
helix–loop–helix Per ARNT Sim (bHLH-PAS) family of receptors/
transcription factors that play roles in development, as sensors of 
the internal and external environment in order to maintain homeo-
stasis, and in establishment and maintenance of circadian clocks 
(Denison and Nagy, 2003; Hahn et al., 2005). The AhR is among 
the most intensively studied receptors in toxicology due to its role 
in regulating a number of genes coding for proteins involved in 
xenobiotic metabolism, and its responsiveness to a number of wide-
spread environmental contaminants, as well as some drugs and 
endogenous compounds. The AhR is a ligand-activated cytosolic 
receptor that on binding to a ligand traverses to the nucleus where 
it complexes with another transcription factor, the AhR nuclear 
translocator (ARNT) protein (Fig. 30-6), to form a transcription-
ally active dimer. This AhR–ARNT complex binds to promoter 
sequences of genes regulated by the AHR system; these promoters 
are most often referred to as “xenobiotic response elements” (XRE) 
or “dioxin response elements” (DRE).
Characterized genes that are upregulated by the AhR system 
in large part code for enzymes involved in the metabolism of lipo-
philic chemicals, including organic xenobiotics and some endog-
enous substrates such as steroid hormones. These enzymes include 
specific cytochrome P450s (mammalian CYP1A1, 1A2, and 1B1 
and their counterparts in other vertebrates), a glutathione transferase 
(GST), a glucuronosyl transferase (UDPGT), an alcohol dehydro-
genase (ALD), and a quinone oxidoreductase (NQO). In addition 
to these enzymes, AhR–ARNT upregulates the AhR repressor 
protein (AhRR), which then competes with AhR for ARNT. This 
results in a transcriptionally inactive complex and effectively pro-
vides a negative feedback loop for controlling AhR-mediated gene 
transcription (Hahn et al., 2005). The biotransformation enzymes 
regulated by the AhR system are described in detail in Chap. 6, 
“Biotransformation of Xenobiotics.” Briefly, they play key roles 
for transforming many lipophilic chemicals, including numerous 
17β-Estradiol
HO
OH
HO
OH
DES
Bisphenol A
HO
OH
Nonylphenol
OH
Methoxychlor
CH3O
C
H
CCl3
OCH3
C
H
CCl3
z’ DDT
CI
Cl
Endosulfan
CCl2
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
O
O
S
O
Figure 30-5.   Estrogen receptor agonists, including a native estrogen (17β-estradiol), the drug diethylstilbestrol (DES), a surfactant component (nonylphenol), 
an industrial intermediate (bisphenol A), and several pesticides (remainder).

Ecotoxicology
Chapter 30
1439
common organic contaminants, into more water-soluble, and hence 
excretable, products. However, this biotransformation activity can 
result in production of highly reactive products that are more toxic 
than their parent compounds, that is, “activation.”
Of particular relevance to the present discussion, however, is 
the ability of some ubiquitous pollutants to act as AhR ligands and 
markedly upregulate gene transcription via the AhR–ARNT signal-
ing pathway described above (Denison and Nagy, 2003). In some 
cases, this can be interpreted as an adaptive response—the organ-
ism is reacting to exposure to a lipophilic xenobiotic in order to 
enhance its elimination. However, as noted above, biotransforma-
tion can also lead to enhanced toxicity of some substrates. The two 
major classes of pollutants that have members that act as ligands 
for the AhR and upregulate gene expression (and thereby “induce” 
biotransformation enzymes) and have received the greatest attention 
in ecotoxicology are the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) 
and the polyhalogenated aromatic hydrocarbons (pHAHs); exam-
ples of both are provided in Fig. 30-7. The most studied pHAHs are 
particular “coplanar” PCBs and chlorinated dioxins. While some 
PAHs and pHAHs share the ability to activate the AhR, important 
differences between these classes exist. PAHs, whether they are 
ligands for the AhR or not, are overall very good substrates for the 
biotransformation systems upregulated via the AhR, which can act 
to both detoxify and enhance the toxicity of some PAHs (discussed 
in the section “Cancer” later in this chapter). In general, pHAH-type 
AhR ligands are more potent AhR ligands and enzyme inducers than 
Nu cl eus
Cytosol
CYP1A
CYP1B1
GST1a
NQO1
AHRR
etc
XRE
AHR
ARNT
AH R
ARNT
SRC-1
Transcription
SRC-1
p300
p300
AHR
AHR
ARNT
AHR agonist
Hsp90
Hsp90
p23
XAP2
Figure 30-6.   A simplified model of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) including activation by AHR ligands (see Fig. 30-7) which allows for dimerization 
with the AHR nuclear transporter (ARNT) that forms the transcriptionally active complex which binds to xenobiotic response elements (XRE) and thereby 
upregulates a number of genes, including several involved in biotransformation, indicated here, as well as the AHR repressor (AHRR) that provides negative 
feedback control of the system. Hsp90, XAP2, and p23 are chaperone proteins; SRC-1 and p300 are examples of coregulator proteins involved in transcription. 
(Figure kindly provided by Carrie Fleming and Carla Rosenfeld, Duke University.)
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
PCB 126
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
O
O
TCDD
O
O
BNF
BaP
3-MC
Figure 30-7.   Representative ligands of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor, including 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzodioxin (TCDD), a coplanar polychlorinated biphenyl 
(PCB 126), two polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (benzo(a)pyrene [BaP] and 3-methylcholanthrene [3-MC]), and a flavone (β-naphthoflavone [BNF]).

1440
ENVIRONMENTAL TOXICOLOGY
Unit VI
PAHs, but due to extensive halogenation are much poorer substrates 
for biotransformation. One of the most potent ligands for the AhR 
is the dioxin, 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzodioxin (TCDD), which is 
highly recalcitrant to biotransformation (Denison and Nagy, 2003).
In similarity with xenoestrogen-mediated inductions of Vtg 
via the ER, the inducibility of biotransformation enzymes via 
the AhR by xenobiotics has been used for biomonitoring. In this 
regard, enzymatic activities associated with the CYP1As have been 
the most widely used AhR-related biomarker, particularly an activ-
ity that appears highly specific for these CYPs, ethoxyresorufin 
O-deethylase (EROD), which is most often quantified in liver tissue 
of vertebrates. Elevated activities of EROD in various vertebrates 
have been associated with exposures to PCBs, dioxins, PAHs, and 
complex mixtures of these associated with, for example, harbor 
sediments, municipal effluents, paper mill effluents, refinery efflu-
ents, and crude oil spills (Custer et al., 2001; van der Oost et al., 
2003; Miller et al., 2005). Invertebrate AhR homologs examined do 
not bind to ligands similarly to vertebrate AhRs and do not dem-
onstrate protein inductions analogous to those observed in verte-
brates (Butler et al., 2001; Hahn, 2002; Chaty et al., 2004). PAH and 
pHAH toxicities and the potential roles played by their interactions 
with the AhR will be discussed at various points in subsequent sec-
tions of this chapter, and related discussions from a human health 
standpoint appear in other chapters.
Genomics and Ecotoxicogenomics  Advances in “omics”-
level technologies for comprehensive interrogation of biological 
structure, function, and system dynamics continue to revolutionize 
molecular biology. These advances have permeated many areas of 
biological research, including toxicology and environmental sci-
ence. We will briefly describe many of the techniques that are com-
monly used in these fields, since several omics technologies other 
than genomics are now in wide use.
Underlying genomics advances are very large projects to 
sequence the entire genomes of various species, such as the Human 
Genome Project that was completed in 2003 (Little, 2005). Other 
species that have been completely or largely sequenced include 
the mouse, rat, cow, dog, chimpanzee, chicken, zebrafish (Danio 
rerio), puffer fish (Fugu rubripes), medaka (Oryzias latipes), fruit 
fly (Drosophila melanogaster), a sea urchin (Strongylocentrotus 
purpuratus), a soil nematode (Caenorhabditis elegans), a yeast 
(Saccharomyces cerevisiae), and rice (Oryza sativa). The number of 
species with fully sequenced and annotated reference genomes con-
tinues to expand, as well as the tools available for genomic research 
(Kim et al., 2013; Louis et al., 2015; various Web sites, includ-
ing https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24124405). Although 
microarray-based platforms to detect single nucleotide polymor-
phisms (SNP chips) are still commonly used in large epidemiologic 
cohorts (Ha et al., 2014), most experimental toxicology and envi-
ronmental science laboratories are using more quantitative, high-
resolution sequencing techniques. New genomics technologies offer 
significantly higher resolution as compared to previous sequencing 
techniques, which enables increased detection of rare sequence (Cao 
et al., 2013) and structural variants (Hanscom and Talkowski, 2014) 
in somatic or germ cells, somatic rearrangements common in cancer 
(Quek et al., 2014), or previously unrecognized somatic mosaicism 
(Gajecka, 2016). Collectively, these new sequencing approaches 
are often referred to as “next-generation sequencing (NGS),” 
“massively parallel sequencing,” or “high-throughput sequencing” 
(Koboldt et al., 2013, Muzzey et al., 2015). The same sequencing 
technology employed in whole genome sequencing can be used to 
sequence short stretches of sequence at high resolution (“amplicon 
sequencing”) (Andersen et al., 2014), or a defined subset of the 
genome, such as coding regions in “whole exome sequencing” (Ku 
et al., 2012), or mitochondrial genomes in “mtGenome sequenc-
ing” (Ye et al., 2014; Peck et al., 2016). Sequencing technologies 
are evolving rapidly, leading to reduced costs and effort and mak-
ing their application to nontraditional models more practical (see 
review by Goodwin et al., 2016).
In addition to significant advances in genomics, available 
technology to interrogate the epigenome has rapidly expanded. The 
epigenome includes mitotically heritable changes in gene function 
that occur without changes in the DNA sequence (Jaenisch and 
Bird, 2003). Structural components of the epigenome that control 
compaction and accessibility of genomic regions include covalent 
modification of DNA, commonly methylation of the fifth position 
of cytosines (“DNA methylation”), posttranslational modifications 
to histone proteins contained within nucleosomes, and chroma-
tin remodeling proteins that alter the three-dimensional structure 
of chromatin (Callinan and Feinberg, 2006). Although previously 
measured by sequencing a small number of cloned alleles (Huang 
et al., 2013), now DNA methylation is more commonly measured in 
one of two ways (Yong et al., 2016): either in a subset of the genome 
using DNA methylation microarray techniques, or with next-gen-
eration bisulfite sequencing, of individual amplicons, a subset of 
the genome enriched for methylated DNA (“reduced-representation 
bisulfite sequencing”), or whole-genome bisulfite sequencing, all of 
which require prior modification of the DNA with sodium bisulfite. 
Sodium bisulfite treatment deaminates unmethylated, but not meth-
ylated, cytosines to uracils, which are then amplified as thymines as 
PCR and are detected as sequence changes when compared to the 
reference sequence (Huang et al., 2013). Posttranslational modifi-
cations (PTMs) to histone proteins can be measured locally using 
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), which uses antibodies to 
specific PTMs to enrich the sample for DNA associated with these 
marks (Rodriguez-Ubreva and Ballestar, 2014), and subsequent 
PCR of the region of interest; the same approach can be scaled to 
assess a subset of the genome using microarray technology (ChIP-
chip) or genome-wide with next-generation sequencing (ChIP-seq) 
(Schulz and Haussler, 2104). Newer peptide arrays enable discovery 
of novel proteins or protein complexes that are recruited to or inter-
act with individual or combinations of histone PTMs (Fuchs et al., 
2011; Rothbart et al., 2012).
Genome sequencing set the stage for genome-wide analysis 
of gene expression (“transcriptomics” to measure gene transcrip-
tion and “proteomics” to measure gene translation). The platform 
most commonly used in ecotoxicology is the expression microarray 
(Neumann and Galvez, 2002; Jyasundara et al., 2015). cDNAs for 
known genes can be spotted on glass slides, or chips, resulting in 
microarrays that can be employed to quantify relative levels, that 
is, expression, of mRNAs for those genes in samples of interest. In 
recent years, the microarray approach has been largely supplanted 
by the transcriptomics technique RNA-seq, which is more quan-
titative and higher resolution, as well as significantly less expen-
sive, laborious, and error-prone than microarrays (Wang et al., 
2010). Induced transcription can be distinguished from constitu-
tive transcription in real-time using new techniques that employ 
the labeled nucleotide bromouridine (Roberts et al., 2015). Also 
advancing rapidly are related analyses of global changes in proteins 
(the translation products of mRNAs), referred to as “proteomics,” 
and resulting metabolite profiles (amounts of sugars, lipids, amino 
acids, etc. in various tissues that are controlled in part by enzyme 
activities), referred to as “metabolomics.” These approaches often 
employ sophisticated mass-spectrometry techniques (Altelaar 
et al., 2013). Translation can be measured in real-time, too, using a 
technique called “ribosome profiling,” which employs capture and

Ecotoxicology
Chapter 30
1441
sequencing of transcripts undergoing active translation (Brar and 
Weissman, 2015).
A major complexity in all of these global analyses is the 
extremely large data sets that arise, for example, when one exam-
ines the responses of thousands of genes from organisms exposed 
to one or more concentrations of a chemical at one or more time 
points. This has led to the development and rapid expansion of the 
field of “bioinformatics” that includes the application of sophisti-
cated statistical and computing approaches for revealing biologi-
cally meaningful patterns of gene expression, such as relationships 
to cellular signaling pathways (Del Chierico et al., 2015).
Omics have spread into the science and applications of eco-
toxicology, collectively termed ecotoxicogenomics. As is the case 
for human health–oriented toxicogenomics, ecotoxicogenomics has 
great potential for elucidating impacts of chemicals of ecological 
concern and ultimately for playing an important role in Ecological 
Risk Assessments (ERAs) and regulatory ecotoxicology (Snape 
et al., 2004; Ankley et al., 2006; Watanabe and Iguchi, 2006). Specific 
areas to which this emerging field can contribute include prioritization 
of chemicals investigated in ERAs, identification of modes of action 
of pollutants, identification of particularly sensitive species and popu-
lations, and effect prediction at higher levels of organization. A recent 
study employed whole-genome sequencing, RNA-seq, and advanced 
bioinformatics analyses to elucidate molecular mechanisms underly-
ing the rapid evolutionary adaptation of Atlantic killifish (Fundulus 
heteroclitus) to severe pollution (Reid et al., 2016). Epigenome-wide 
analyses have also permeated ecotoxicology (Vandegehuchte and 
Janssen et al., 2011; Suarez-Ulloa et al., 2015). As in other areas 
of ecotoxicology, a major complexity faced by scientists apply-
ing omics techniques is the vast array of species of potential con-
cern. This is a particularly problematic issue in ecotoxicogenomics 
that requires substantial species-specific molecular information. 
However, as mentioned earlier, the number of ecologically relevant 
species for which this information is becoming available is expand-
ing rapidly, and is likely to accelerate as more genomes are fully 
sequenced and tools are refined. Moreover, as information grows, 
genomics and related approaches hold great promise for identify-
ing appropriate surrogate species for laboratory studies used in basic 
ecotoxicological research and in support of regulatory ecotoxicology 
(Benson and Di Giulio, 2006; Van Aggelen et al., 2010).
Protein Damage  The study of chemical effects on proteins, par-
ticularly enzymes, has a long history in toxicology. Of particular 
interest within ecotoxicology are the inhibitions of acetylcholin-
esterase (AChE) by certain pesticides and of delta-aminolevulinic 
acid dehydratase (ALAD) by lead. AChE degrades the neurotrans-
mitter acetylcholine, and in so doing controls nerve transmission 
in cholinergic nerve tracts. The widely used organophosphate and 
carbamate classes of insecticides kill by inhibiting AChE, and this 
mechanism is operative for “nontarget” organisms including inver-
tebrates, wildlife, and humans. (See Chap. 22, “Toxic Effects of 
Pesticides,” for a detailed discussion of these pesticides and AChE 
inhibition.) Of particular ecological concern have been the inges-
tions of AChE-inhibiting insecticides with food items or granular 
formulations (mistaken as seed or grit) by birds and exposures to 
aquatic animals from agricultural runoff (Mineau, 1991; Carr et al., 
1997; Wilson et al., 2001). In many field studies, effects of these 
insecticides on mortality, and relationships between AChE inhibi-
tion and mortality, have been of primary concern. However, rela-
tionships between AChE inhibition and important sublethal impacts 
such as behavior have also been observed (Sandahl et al., 2005).
ALAD catalyzes the rate-limiting step of heme synthesis, a 
key component of cytochromes, hemoglobin, and myoglobin, and 
ALAD activity is very sensitive to inhibition by lead (ATSDR, 
1999). This sensitivity has been exploited widely as a biomarker for 
lead exposure in humans and wildlife. In wildlife, concerns for lead 
exposure have included ingestion by birds of spent lead shot used 
in hunting (Kendall et al., 1996), accumulation of lead by wildlife 
living near highways (Birdsall et al., 1986), and aquatic organisms 
inhabiting surface waters contaminated by lead from mine runoff 
and other industrial activities (Schmitt et al., 2005). Many other 
enzymes have been observed to be inhibited by numerous pol-
lutants. In addition to enzyme inhibition, chemicals can damage 
proteins in other ways, including oxidative damage as described in 
section Oxidative Stress, and by forming stable adducts similar to 
those formed with DNA, described in section DNA Damage.
Oxidative Stress  The classic depiction of aerobic respiration 
shows molecular oxygen (O2) as the terminal electron acceptor, 
with its reduction resulting ultimately in water as high-energy 
intermediates (NADH, FADH2) are oxidized and cellular energy 
is captured as ATP. This reduction of O2 to H2O requires four elec-
trons that are sequentially added; this process is tightly coupled so 
that the one-, two-, and three-electron intermediates are released 
at low amounts (less than 0.1% of O2 inspired; Fridovich, 2004). 
These intermediates are, in sequence, the superoxide anion radi-
cal (O2
•) , hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and the hydroxyl radical 
( •OH) . This tight coupling is fortunate because these intermedi-
ates, produced during aerobic respiration and other O2-consuming 
or O2-producing processes (such as photosynthesis and CYP-
mediated biotransformations), are potentially deleterious products 
that can indiscriminately damage cellular components; hence, they 
are referred to as “reactive oxygen species” (ROS); see Chap. 3, 
“Mechanisms of Toxicity.” Some ROS, including O2
•  and •OH , 
are free radicals, that is, they possess an unpaired electron; among 
ROS, •OH  is particularly reactive and toxic. In order to defend 
themselves from the damaging effects of ROS, all aerobic organ-
isms have evolved complex antioxidant defense systems that 
include enzymatic and nonenzymatic components (Halliwell and 
Gutteridge, 1999). Antioxidant enzymes include superoxide dis-
mutases that convert O2
•  to H2O2, catalases and peroxidases that 
detoxify peroxides including H2O2, and enzymes involved in the 
production and maintenance of reduced glutathione (GSH) such as 
glutamate–cysteine ligase (GCL) and glutathione reductase (GR). 
Low-molecular-weight, nonenzymatic antioxidants include vita-
mins A, C, and E, and GSH.
Oxidative stress has been defined as “a disturbance in the 
prooxidant–antioxidant balance in favor of the former, leading to 
potential damage” (Sies and Cadenas, 1985)—that is, the point at 
which the production of ROS exceeds the capacity of antioxidants 
to prevent damage. Numerous environmental contaminants can act 
as prooxidants and enhance the production of ROS. The result-
ing oxidative damage can account wholly or partially for toxicity 
(Halliwell and Gutteridge, 1999). Mechanisms by which chemicals 
can enhance ROS production include redox cycling, interactions 
with electron transport chains (notably in mitochondria, micro-
somes, or chloroplasts), and photosensitization.
Redox cycling is perhaps the most common mechanism by 
which a diverse array of chemicals including many environmen-
tal pollutants generates intracellular ROS. Redox cycling chemi-
cals include diphenols and quinones, nitroaromatics and azo 
compounds, aromatic hydroxylamines, bipyridyliums, and certain 
metal chelates, particularly of copper and iron (Di Giulio et al., 
1989; Halliwell and Gutteridge, 1999). These include compounds 
of broad industrial use, many pesticides, ubiquitous elements, and 
metabolic products of numerous pollutants. In the redox cycle,

1442
ENVIRONMENTAL TOXICOLOGY
Unit VI
the parent compound accepts an electron from a reduced cofactor, 
such as NADH or NADPH; this reaction is typically catalyzed by a 
reductase such as xanthine oxidase or cytochrome P450 reductase 
(Kappus, 1986). In the presence of O2, the unpaired electron of the 
radical metabolite is donated to O2, yielding O2
•  and regenerat-
ing the parent compound; importantly, the parent compound can 
repeat this cycle until it is cleared or metabolized to an inactive 
product. In the course of each redox cycle, two potentially deleteri-
ous events occur—a high-energy reducing equivalent is expended 
(e.g., the oxidation of NADPH to NADP+) and an oxygen radical is 
produced. A generalized redox cycle that includes associations with 
cellular toxicities and antioxidant defenses comprises Fig. 30-8.
Additionally, pHAH AhR ligands such as coplanar PCBs and 
TCDD can enhance ROS production, possibly by inducing CYP1A 
activity and concomitantly interfering with electron flow medi-
ated by these enzymes (Schlezinger and Stegeman, 2001). PAHs 
can also upregulate CYP1A and can enhance the production of 
ROS-generating redox-active quinone metabolites, in contrast to 
uncoupling mechanisms proposed for pHAHs; Nebert et al. (2000) 
discuss potential mechanisms by which AhR agonists can produce 
oxidative stress. The herbicide paraquat is phytotoxic due to inter-
ference with chloroplast electron transport. Interestingly, it is a very 
potent lung toxicant because of its specific uptake by this tissue 
and subsequent redox cycling (Halliwell and Gutteridge, 1999). 
Another important mechanism particularly significant in aquatic 
systems is photosensitization. Ultraviolet (UV) radiation (specifi-
cally UVB and UVA) can penetrate surface waters to depths depen-
dent on the wavelength of the radiation and the clarity of the water. 
The UV radiation generates ROS and other free radicals via excita-
tion of photosensitizing chemicals, including common pollutants 
of aquatic systems (Larson and Weber, 1994). For example, due 
to photosensitization, many PAHs are orders of magnitude more 
acutely toxic to aquatic organisms in the presence of UV radiation 
than in its absence (Arfsten et al., 1996; Ankley et al., 1997). The 
ecological relevance of photosensitization, however, is controversial 
(McDonald and Chapman, 2002).
As noted, ROS are generally indiscriminant molecules and 
can potentially damage any cellular component. Well-characterized 
biochemical impacts of ROS include oxidations of unsaturated 
lipid components of membranes (“lipid peroxidation”), oxidations 
of amino acids and proteins (resulting in, e.g., the addition of car-
bonyl groups), and DNA oxidations resulting in products such as 
8-hydroxy-guanosine and thyme glycol (Halliwell and Gutteridge, 
1999). Another important impact is perturbed redox status (Schafer 
and Buettner, 2001). Healthy cells typically maintain high ratios of 
cofactors in their reduced, high-energy state relative to their oxidized 
state (e.g., NADH/NAD+, NADPH/NADP+, and GSH/GSSG), as 
the reduced forms are those most employed, for example, for energy 
production, biosynthesis, and antioxidant defense. The ROS can drive 
redox status to a more oxidized state by several direct and indirect 
mechanisms, potentially reducing cell viability. These ROS-mediated 
impacts and others have been associated with a number of human 
diseases including atherosclerosis, arthritis, cancer, and neurode-
generative diseases such as Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease, 
and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Halliwell and Gutteridge, 1999). 
With the exception of cancer (see Cancer section), the role of ROS 
in specific diseases in wildlife has received little attention. However, 
numerous studies have documented oxidative stress–mediated bio-
chemical and cellular effects in wildlife associated with environmen-
tal contamination (Winston and Di Giulio, 1991; Bainy et al., 1996; 
Livingstone, 2001; van der Oost et al., 2003; Dorval et al., 2005; 
Birnie-Gauvin et al., 2017). As with humans and various animal 
models for human disease, it is reasonable to assume that oxidative 
stress comprises an important mechanism accounting in part for the 
toxicity of diverse pollutants to free-living organisms. Also, oxidative 
stress is involved in the effects of air pollutants on plants and likely 
plays a role in forest diebacks observed downwind of industrialized 
areas (Richardson et al., 1989; Hippeli and Elstner, 1996).
DNA Damage  The importance of DNA as a molecular target 
in toxicology is indicated by the devotion of Chap. 9, “Genetic 
Toxicology,” of this text to genetic toxicology. As indicated, per-
haps the most pressing human health issue associated with xeno-
biotic–DNA interactions is cancer. Cancer is also an important 
health outcome associated with chemical exposures in wildlife, 
particularly for bottom-dwelling fish, as discussed in the section 
“Cancer” later in this chapter. Of greater concern in ecotoxicology 
versus human health are other, multigenerational effects of pollut-
ants on genetic structures and resulting phenotypes of populations 
and communities, through both direct effects on DNA (mutations) 
Oxidation of  DNA,
lipids, and proteins
GSSG
GSH
H2O + O2
H2O2 + O2
H2O
Covalent
binding to
DNA and
proteins
NADPH
NADP+
NADPH
NADP+
Parent
compound
Radical
metabolite
Redox
cycle
O2
Fe2+
SOD
Catalase
GPx
GR
HO•
O2
–•
Figure 30-8.   Overview of oxidative stress, including reactive oxygen species stimulation initially by redox cycling, key antioxidant defenses, and potential 
deleterious biochemical effects. “Parent compound” in redox cycle could include a number of chemicals such as quinones, nitroaromatics, azo dyes, paraquat 
and diquat, and transition metal chelates.

Ecotoxicology
Chapter 30
1443
and indirect effects (selection); this topic is discussed in the section 
“Toxicant Effects: Population.”
Chemical contaminants can damage DNA through several 
mechanisms, including by the formation of DNA–xenobiotic 
adducts, by causing strand breaks, and by oxidations of DNA 
bases. In the context of ecotoxicology, the most widely studied 
form of damage has been the formation of stable DNA adducts, 
particularly by PAHs. In order to form these adducts, PAHs must 
first be activated to reactive metabolites by enzyme systems such 
as the cytochrome P450s. The bulk of PAHs metabolized to various 
oxidized products (such as phenols, diols, and epoxides) is sub-
sequently conjugated by phase II enzymes (such as GSH, sulfate, 
and glucuronosyl transferases; see Chap. 6, “Biotransformation of 
Xenobiotics”); however, some fraction can react with DNA, mainly 
through covalent bonding with DNA bases. The most studied 
example of this is benzo(a)pyrene (BaP), which can be metabo-
lized to the highly reactive benzo(a)pyrene diol epoxide (BPDE) 
that can bond to DNA. In field studies, the resulting large adducts of 
DNA with BPDE and other activated PAHs and related compounds 
can be measured with the highly sensitive 32P-postlabeling assay 
(Phillips, 1997). This technique has been used extensively to moni-
tor DNA adducts in benthic fish and bivalves inhabiting systems 
contaminated with hydrocarbons, particularly PAHs (Maccubbin, 
1994; Reichert et al., 1998; Shugart, 2000; Amat et al., 2004). Other 
forms of DNA damage that have been investigated in ecotoxico-
logical studies include DNA strand breaks and oxidized DNA bases 
(Shugart, 2000; Malins et al., 2006).
Once DNA damage has occurred, whether from chemical 
exposures or other causes (respiration, UV radiation, viral inter-
actions, normal wear and tear), several subsequent outcomes 
can occur, including the following: the damage can be properly 
repaired, the damage can lead to cell death, or a resulting change in 
DNA structure (base sequence) can become fixed and passed on to 
daughter cells, that is, mutation occurs. Complex DNA repair sys-
tems have been elucidated in prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms 
(see Chap. 8, “Chemical Carcinogenesis,” and Chap. 9, “Genetic 
Toxicology”), and while these systems have received relatively little 
attention in species of ecological relevance, it is a safe assump-
tion that these conserved systems are qualitatively similar across 
diverse phyla. Overall, these systems exhibit a remarkable capacity 
for surveying the cellular genome, detecting damage such as oxida-
tions, adducts, and strand breaks, and repairing the damage by, for 
example, removing a damaged base and replacing it with the correct 
base. However, misrepair does sometime occur, with the result that 
an incorrect base is incorporated. Depending on the gene involved 
and the site within the gene, this change may lead to cell death, or 
may result in a mutation that may have no effect (occurs at non-
critical base sequence) or one that leads to functional change in the 
protein coded by the gene. Some chemicals cause cancer by mutat-
ing genes that play pivotal roles in cellular growth and differentia-
tion, particularly oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. Examples 
of discoveries of activated genes (in liver tumors) in field studies 
include the K-ras oncogene in tomcod (Microgadus tomcod) from 
the Hudson River, New York (Wirgin et al., 1989), and in winter 
flounder (Pseudopleuronectes americanus) collected from Boston 
Harbor (McMahon et al., 1990), and the retinoblastoma (Rb) tumor 
suppressor gene in the marine flatfish, dab (Limanda limanda), from 
the United Kingdom (du Corbier et al., 2005).
Cellular, Tissue, and Organ Effects
Cells  Cellular organelles that have received attention as targets 
in species of ecological interest include mitochondria, lysosomes, 
and nuclei. Most free-living organisms routinely experience energy 
deficits. For example, food resources are often highly depleted dur-
ing the winter for many animals, which adapt by conserving energy 
(by hibernating or lowering metabolism) or by storing energy 
beforehand (as the case for many migratory birds). Thus, effects of 
pollutants on mitochondrial energy metabolism can be of particu-
lar importance to wildlife. For example, Sokolova and coworkers 
(Sokolova, 2004; Cherkasov et al., 2006) have elegantly described 
the effects of cadmium on several aspects of mitochondrial func-
tion in isolated gill and hepatopancreas cells from the eastern oyster 
(Crassostrea virginica), and noted a marked synergy between the 
metal and increasing environmental temperatures. Lysosomes are 
involved in the degradation of damaged organelles and proteins, 
and also sequester a wide variety of environmental contaminants, 
including metals, PAHs, and nanoparticles (Moore, 2006). The 
accumulation of xenobiotics by lysosomes can elicit membrane 
damage, or “membrane instability,” which has been used as an 
early warning measure of pathological chemical effects in both 
invertebrates and vertebrates (Hwang et al., 2002; Kohler et al., 
2002; Moore et al., 2006).
In addition to specific damage to DNA bases described above, 
chemical effects on nuclei have been examined in ecological con-
texts with additional techniques. Micronuclei are chromosomal 
fragments that are not incorporated into the nucleus at cell division, 
and chemical exposures can markedly increase their frequency. 
Elevated micronuclei numbers have been observed, for example, 
in fish erythrocytes from polluted coastal sites in California (Hose 
et al., 1987) and in hemocytes in clams from a PCB-polluted har-
bor in Massachusetts (Dopp et al., 1996). Also, a standardized 
higher plant (Tradescantia) assay for micronuclei has been used 
for monitoring air pollution (Solenska et al., 2006). A cell-based 
assay that has been used widely in environmental applications is the 
comet assay. In this assay, cells are imbedded in agarose, lysed, and 
subjected to gel electrophoresis, and the features of the resulting 
“comet’s tail” on the gel used to assess DNA damage. With appro-
priate manipulations, the comet assay can be employed to detect 
and distinguish among a variety of genotoxicities including strand 
breaks, oxidative damage, and adducts (Moller, 2006). It has been 
used in a variety of field applications, particularly with bivalves 
(Steinert, 1999; Nigro et al., 2006), fish (Klobicar et al., 2010), and 
mice (Husby and McBee, 1999).
Histopathology  The detailed microscopic analysis of the struc-
ture of cells and tissues can provide important links among chemi-
cal exposures, cellular targets and mechanisms, and effects at the 
organismal level (Hinton, 1994). Moreover, the determination that 
tissue damage has occurred as demonstrated by histopathological 
analysis is extremely useful for inferring that a significant deleteri-
ous effect has occurred. However, the substantial expertise required 
for proper histopathological analyses of this nature and the often-
times time- and labor-intensive nature of these analyses has perhaps 
limited the application of this powerful approach in ecotoxicologi-
cal contexts. Nevertheless, histopathological analysis has played an 
important role in confirming chemically mediated tissue damage in 
numerous laboratory and field studies. For example, Pacheco and 
Santos (2002) integrated histopathological analysis with biochemi-
cal studies of the effects of various environmental contaminants on 
the European eel (Anguilla anguilla), and Devlin (2006) similarly 
incorporated this approach in studies of the effects of methylmer-
cury in fathead minnows (Pimephales promelas). Handy et al. 
(2002) relied on histopathology in a study of fish health in rivers 
in southern England. Wester et al. (2002) reviewed the application 
and potential contributions of histopathology in aquatic toxicology,

1444
ENVIRONMENTAL TOXICOLOGY
Unit VI
particularly in the context of small fish models. In subsequent sec-
tions concerning organismal-level impacts, other examples of the 
use of histopathology will be provided.
Target Organs  Descriptions of chemical impacts on all organ 
systems of the myriad species relevant to ecotoxicology are beyond 
the scope of this chapter. Other chapters in this volume address key 
target organs in the mammalian context, and much of this is rele-
vant to other vertebrates. Target organ toxicology is also the subject 
of comprehensive reviews by Schlenk and Benson (2001) concern-
ing marine and freshwater fish, and by Gardner and Oberdorster 
(2005) concerning reptiles. Relevant information in marine mam-
mals was reviewed in Vos et al. (2002). Although we are unaware 
of similar reviews for birds or invertebrates, understanding target 
organ toxicity can be crucial for these taxa as in the recent case of 
widespread renal poisoning of vultures exposed to the veterinary 
drug diclofenac during scavenging on cattle carcasses (Oaks et al., 
2004). Further, the unique properties of the avian respiratory sys-
tem and its utility for investigating respiratory system toxicity and 
air pollution were reviewed by Brown et al. (1997).
Another important target organ in ecotoxicology that is not 
covered elsewhere in this text is the respiratory organ of nonmam-
malian aquatic vertebrates and many invertebrates, the gill; gills of 
fish have received the most attention as targets of toxicants. The 
gill epithelium is the major site of gas exchange, ionic regulation, 
acid–base balance, and nitrogenous waste excretions for fish and 
other aquatic animals (Evans, 1987). Gills are immersed in a major 
exposure medium for these animals (surface water), so metaboli-
cally active epithelial cells are in direct contact with this medium. 
They also receive blood supply directly from the heart, through the 
ventral aorta. Thus, it is not surprising that gills comprise a very 
important target for many environmental pollutants, due to their 
critical physiological functions, central position in blood circula-
tion pathways, and intimate relationship with the environment. The 
basic structure of fish gills is composed of branchial arches from 
which extend numerous filaments; from the filaments extend the 
lamellae (Wendelaar Bonga and Lock, 2008). The lamellae are cov-
ered by a layer of epithelial cells that function in gas exchange, 
whereas the filament epithelium is dominated by other cell types, 
including pavement cells, mucous cells, and chloride cells; chloride 
cells are the primary location for ATPase activity and ion channels 
involved in ion transport.
Common structural lesions in gills caused by a diverse array 
of chemicals include cell death (via necrosis and apoptosis), rup-
ture of the epithelium, hyperplasia and hypertrophy of various cell 
populations that can lead to lamellar fusion, epithelial swelling, 
and lifting of the respiratory epithelium from the underlying tissue 
(Wendelaar Bonga and Lock, 2008). Chloride cells have received 
particular attention due to their key role in ionic homeostasis. For 
example, metals such as cadmium, copper, lead, silver, and zinc 
have been shown to interfere with their function in ion transport. 
In some cases, this may be due to inhibition of ATPase activities 
and/or increased membrane permeability (Spry and Wood, 1985; 
Wendelaar Bonga and Lock, 1992; Li et al., 1998; Rogers et al., 
2003; Bury, 2005). The stress response, which results in elevated 
blood concentrations of epinephrine and cortisol, and associated 
responses such as increased cardiac output and elevated blood 
pressure, can also perturb ionic balance by promoting passive loss 
of ions such as Na+ and Cl– (Wendelaar Bonga and Lock, 2008). 
A variety of contaminants have been shown to evoke the stress 
response in fish, sometimes concomitantly with perturbations in 
ionic balance (Hontela, 1997; Webb and Wood, 1998; Chowdhury 
et al., 2004). Also, gill damage appears to be the primary cause of 
the acute toxicity of PAH-mediated phototoxicity in fish (see the 
section “Oxidative Stress”). Weinstein et al. (1997) reported his-
topathological impacts of UV + fluoranthene in gills of fathead 
minnows including severe damage to mucosal cells, inflammation, 
and apparent accumulation of lipid peroxidation products; these 
effects likely resulted in respiratory stress and lethality. This study 
elegantly demonstrates a progression from biochemical mecha-
nism (oxidative stress) to target organ damage (gill respiration) to 
an important organismal impact (death). Mortality and important 
sublethal organismal impacts that have received substantial atten-
tion among ecotoxicologists are covered in the following section.
Organismal Effects
Mortality  In similarity with impacts on human health, chemical 
pollution of the environment does not in most cases attain levels 
sufficient to outrightly kill wildlife. Concern in the ecotoxicological 
context is overall more for long-term, chronic impacts on organ-
ismal variables such as survival, reproduction and development, 
behavior, and disease susceptibility, and how such impacts translate 
to impacts at population and higher levels of organization. However, 
numerous cases of wildlife mortalities (particularly birds and 
fish) due to exposures to chemical pollution have been observed, 
including cases associated with chronic oil discharges (Wiese and 
Robertson, 2004) and major oil releases from events such as the 
Exxon Valdez tanker wreck in Alaska (Peterson et al., 2003) and the 
1991 Gulf War (Evans et al., 1993), lead from spent shot (Clark and 
Scheuhammer, 2003) and mines (Henny, 2003), and pesticide expo-
sures (Mineau et al., 1999).The ingestion of lead ammunition frag-
ments when scavenging on carcasses results in fatal poisonings to 
endangered California condors (Wiemeyer et al., 1988; Cade, 2007). 
In this instance, death of an endangered individual condor was rel-
evant. Similarly, oriental white-backed vultures scavenging on cattle 
carcasses in South Asia consume enough of the veterinary anti-
inflammatory drug, diclofenac, to cause fatal kidney failure (Oaks et 
al., 2004; Balmford, 2013). While not a direct toxic chemical effect, 
hypoxia can be an important cause of fish and invertebrate mortal-
ity in aquatic systems; anthropogenic inputs of nutrients associated 
with sewage or fertilizers that enhance the growth of phytoplank-
ton can cause or exacerbate hypoxia (Paerl et al., 1999; Wu, 2002). 
While direct mortality may not be a commonplace effect of toxic 
chemicals in natural systems, mortality comprises a major endpoint 
in toxicity testing, discussed in section “Population.”
Reproduction and Development  Impacts on reproduction and 
development comprise perhaps the greatest concern among poten-
tial sublethal effects of xenobiotics on animals inhabiting natural 
systems. This is due to sensitivities of the physiological processes 
involved that have been described for a number of pollutants, and 
the importance of reproduction and development to population 
dynamics, a key ecological concern. Moreover, the discovery of the 
effects of some organochlorine insecticides on avian reproduction 
(particularly eggshell thinning) and resulting population crashes of 
several predatory bird species, and the public’s awareness through 
the publication of Carson’s Silent Spring in 1962, can be associ-
ated with the birth of ecotoxicology. Concern for reproductive and 
developmental effects has increased in recent years, with the wide-
spread detection of endocrine disruptors in the environment and the 
recognition of the inherent sensitivity of the developing organism.
A variety of environmental contaminants have been associated 
with reproductive and/or developmental effects in wildlife popula-
tions, with this association supported by controlled laboratory stud-
ies. Chlorinated hydrocarbons have continued to generate concerns, 
although many (DDT and other insecticides, and PCBs) have had

Ecotoxicology
Chapter 30
1445
their production and use sharply curtailed. For example, DDT, its 
major metabolite in birds (DDE), and PCBs have been associated 
with reproductive and developmental impacts in bird populations 
in the Great Lakes, southern California, the Puget Sound, and the 
Arctic (Fry, 1995; Custer et al., 1999; Bustnes et al., 2005). Also, 
alligators (Alligator mississippiensis) inhabiting a DDT-polluted 
lake in Florida have exhibited reproductive and developmental per-
turbations (Guillette et al., 2000). Evidence also indicates that PCBs 
impact marine mammal reproduction, including that of bottlenose 
dolphins (Tursiops truncatus) (Schwacke et al., 2002; Wells et al., 
2005).
Deleterious impacts on fish reproduction have been associ-
ated with environmental exposures to a number of contaminants. 
Case studies include PAHs (and other chemicals) accumulated in 
sediments in urban areas and harbors in the Puget Sound (Johnson 
et al., 1993) and northeastern United States (Johnson et al., 1994) 
or associated with oil spills such as the Exxon Valdez (Sol et al., 
2000) and the Deepwater Horizon spill (Xu et al., 2016). Other 
examples include effluents from bleached paper mills in various 
locations, including Canada (Munkittrick et al., 1991), and sele-
nium, for example, emanating from coal-fired power plant fly ash 
stored near freshwater lakes (Lemly, 2002) or in streams due to 
coal mine runoff (Holm et al., 2005). Notably, selenium produced 
severe developmental effects in water birds feeding in a created 
wetland in central California (Kesterson National Wildlife Refuge) 
that concentrated naturally occurring selenium (Ohlendorf, 2002). 
Additionally, severe developmental anomalies have also been 
observed in natural populations of marine gastropods exposed to 
tributyltin (TBT), which has been used extensively as an antifouling 
paint on ship hulls (Ruiz et al., 2005).
The developmental effects of dioxins (TCDD) and coplanar 
PCBs on vertebrate development have received substantial atten-
tion. To some extent, this work was motivated by analyses that 
indicated that these compounds were responsible for population 
crashes of Great Lakes’ fisheries (particularly lake trout, Salvelinus 
namaycush, in Lake Ontario) in the 1950s and 1960s, as well as for 
developmental impacts on other wildlife, particularly piscivorous 
birds and mammals in the region (Gilbertson et al., 1991; Cook 
et al., 2003). Laboratory investigations, largely with fish and bird 
models, have shown that embryo development is very sensitive to 
these compounds, and such effects likely underlaid the population 
crashes (Fairbrother et al., 1999; Cook et al., 2003). These inves-
tigations have included elegant mechanistic studies that revealed 
cardiac development was particularly sensitive to these chemi-
cals, and concluded that developmental perturbations are largely 
receptor mediated, that is, they are dependent on binding of the 
chemical (such as TCDD) with the AhR described earlier in this 
chapter (Hankinson, 1995; Heid et al., 2001; Tanguay et al., 2003; 
Antkiewicz et al., 2005). Much of the more recent work in this 
area has been done with zebrafish (D. rerio), a powerful model for 
molecular and developmental toxicology due to ease of visually 
examining development through a clear chorion, rapid develop-
ment (approximately 4 days from fertilization to hatch), and abun-
dant genetic information, including gene sequences (Carney et al., 
2006). For example, with a known gene sequence, one can design 
morpholinos to block translation of specific mRNAs; morpholinos 
are oligonucleotides with a modified “backbone” that renders them 
stable (resistant to DNA/RNAase activities) and thus able to tran-
siently block translation of specific protein targets. Carney et al. 
(2004) employed morpholinos to knock down AhR translation in 
zebrafish embryos, which greatly reduced the developmental tox-
icity of TCDD, confirming the role of the AhR in dioxin toxicity. 
Morpholinos were also employed to investigate the role of CYP1A; 
for example, its upregulation via TCDD activation of the AhR could 
enhance oxidative stress. Teraoka et al. (2003) observed marked 
reductions of TCDD toxicity with either AhR or CYP1A morpho-
linos, while Carney et al. (2004) observed protection with the AhR 
but not the CYP1A morpholino. While the role of CYP1A in dioxin 
effects on development remains unclear, pathways downstream of 
the AhR other than CYP1A are likely involved.
Similar concerns have emerged for the developmental effects 
of PAHs, particularly in fish. Hydrocarbons, in large part PAHs, 
associated with oil spills, contaminated sediments, paper mill efflu-
ents, and creosote used for wood treatment have profound devel-
opmental effects in fish embryos (Billiard et al., 1999; Carls et al., 
1999; Meyer et al., 2002). In many cases, the effects observed visu-
ally appear similar to those observed in fish embryos exposed to 
dioxins and coplanar PCBs, and include malformed hearts (“tube 
heart”), craniofacial deformities, hemorrhaging, and edema of the 
pericardium and yolk sac, the latter resulting in a distended, faintly 
blue yolk sac and hence a name given to this syndrome—“blue sac 
disease” (Spitsbergen et al., 1991). The mechanisms by which PAHs 
produce this effect are unresolved, and likely include more than a 
single mechanism—not surprising in light of the myriad of chemi-
cals comprising hydrocarbon/PAH mixtures in the environment. 
In some cases, effects appear to be AHR-independent. Incardona 
et al. (2005) concluded in studies with zebrafish and employing 
morpholinos that in weathered crude oil, tricyclic PAHs (such as 
phenanthrene and dibenzothiophene [DBT], the latter a sulfur- 
substituted PAH) accounted for the bulk of cardiovascular teratogen-
esis, and rather than mediating toxicity, the AHR–CYP1A pathway 
afforded some protection. Wassenberg and Di Giulio (2004a) and 
Wassenberg et al. (2005) observed marked synergies in the devel-
opmental toxicity to killifish (Fundulus heteroclitus) embryos 
between higher molecular weight PAHs that are AHR agonists 
(BaP and BNF) and PAHs that inhibit CYP1A (α-naphthoflavone 
[ANF], fluoranthene, DBT, and carbazole—a nitrogen-substituted 
PAH). Also, ANF enhanced the toxicity of a water-based extract of 
sediments contaminated with weathered creosote (Wassenberg and 
Di Giulio, 2004b). In subsequent studies with zebrafish embryos 
investigating the synergistic toxicity of BNF and ANF, the AHR 
morpholino provided protection, while the CYP1A morpholino 
enhanced toxicity (Billiard et al., 2006). Collectively, these PAH 
studies suggest that in the context of embryo toxicity, CYP1A plays 
a protective role, presumably by mediating metabolism and clear-
ance of these metabolically labile compounds. This is in contrast 
to the metabolism-resistant dioxin-like compounds, where CYP1A 
either appears to play a role in mediating toxicity or has no effect. 
For some PAHs, such as lower molecular weight (tricyclic) PAHs 
that have little or no activity as AHR ligands, developmental toxic-
ity appears AHR-independent, while the developmental toxicity of 
some higher molecular weight PAHs that are AHR agonists appears 
in part AHR-mediated. In addition, oxidative stress may play a 
role in the developmental toxicity of some PAHs to fish embryos 
(Bauder et al., 2005). PAHs comprise an important class of con-
taminants whose widespread occurrence is broadly associated with 
urbanization, population growth, and use of fossil fuels (Van Metre 
and Mahler, 2005).
Developmental abnormalities arising from toxicant expo-
sure are also of concern for invertebrate species. As an important 
example already mentioned, antifouling agents in paints applied to 
ship hulls leach into coastal waters, causing widespread imposex 
in many marine snails (Leung et al., 2006). Acting as endocrine 
disrupters, organotin compounds cause male characteristics such as 
a penis or vas deferens to develop in females. Often this imposition 
of male characteristics on females results in an individual snail’s

1446
ENVIRONMENTAL TOXICOLOGY
Unit VI
inability to reproduce and eventual collapse of impacted snail popu-
lations (Saavedra Alvarez and Ellis, 1990; Leung et al., 2006).
Contaminant effects on development are often difficult to dis-
cern in field studies due to the small size of embryos and the fact 
that developmental impact generally is lethal or greatly reduced sur-
vival. However, early life stages of most organisms are generally 
more sensitive to xenobiotics than other life stages; thus, develop-
mental impacts merit careful attention by ecotoxicologists.
Disease Susceptibility  Disease plays an important role in 
regulating and sometimes seriously impacting populations of free-
living organisms. Of great concern are interactions between disease 
organisms and environmental contaminants, particularly potential 
impacts of chemicals on immune systems that render organisms 
more susceptible to disease. The question is often raised about how 
chemical pollution elevates the role of disease in population viabil-
ity and dynamics.
Both field observational and laboratory experimental stud-
ies motivate this concern. For example, forensic evidence sug-
gested that pHAHs such as dioxins and PCBs may have played a 
role in mass mortalities of seals and other marine mammals in the 
Baltic Sea that were directly attributed to viral infections (Ross et 
al., 1996). Captive harbor seals (Phoca vitulina) fed fish from the 
Baltic Sea displayed a number of immune system deficits relative 
to seals fed fish from uncontaminated Atlantic Ocean sites, includ-
ing impaired natural killer (NK) cell activity, in vitro T-lymphocyte 
function, antigen-specific in vitro lymphocyte proliferative 
responses, and in vivo delayed-type hypersensitivity and antibody 
responses to ovalbumin. These effects were correlated with greater 
concentrations of TCDD equivalents in fish from the Baltic Sea. In 
a case–control study using long-term data from studies of marine 
mammal strandings in the United Kingdom, Hall et al. (2006) con-
cluded that each 1 mg/kg increase in total PCB concentrations in 
blubber resulted in an average increase in mortality due to infec-
tious disease of 2% in harbor porpoises (Phocoena phocoena). In 
a study of free-ranging logger-head sea turtles (Caretta caretta) 
collected in North Carolina, Keller et al. (2006) observed signifi-
cant correlations between selected immune responses (lysozyme 
activity and lymphocyte proliferation) and concentrations of PCBs 
and chlorinated insecticides (DDE and chlordanes); these correla-
tions were supported by in vitro studies with these chemicals in 
isolated turtle leukocytes. Similarly, Auffret et al. (2006) observed 
responses associated with immunosuppression in mussels (Mytilus 
galloprovincialis) that generally tracked chemical pollution gradi-
ents in the western Mediterranean Sea. Using available laboratory 
and field data, Loge et al. (2005) developed a model to assess the 
effects of environmental stressors, including chemicals, on disease 
susceptibility in migrant juvenile salmon in the Columbia River 
Basin, Washington. They concluded that chemical and nonchemi-
cal stressors contributed equally to disease-induced mortalities that 
were predicted to range from 3% to 18% of the population, depend-
ing on residence time.
Numerous laboratory studies have demonstrated chemical 
impacts on immune systems in animals of ecological relevance. 
These include effects of pesticides on amphibians (Albert et al., 
2007), PCBs on channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus) (Rice and 
Schlenk, 1995), heavy metals on rainbow trout (Sanchez-Dardon 
et al., 1999), PAHs on bivalves (Wootton et al., 2003), and flame 
retardants (polybrominated diphenyl ethers [PBDEs]) on American 
kestrels (Falco sparverius) (Fernie et al., 2005). Fairbrother et al. 
(2004) reviewed the literature concerning effects of chemicals on 
immune systems of birds, emphasizing potential impacts on wild-
life species, and Carlson and Zelikoff (2008) performed a similar 
review for fish. The potential effects of chemicals on immune func-
tion and disease susceptibility in wildlife is clearly a very important 
subject in ecotoxicology and one likely to see significant advances 
in the near future as powerful genomic tools become more available 
for representative species.
Behavior  The impacts of chemicals on animal behavior have 
received significant attention among ecotoxicologists. Relatively 
subtle effects on behaviors associated with, for example, mating 
and reproduction, foraging, predator–prey interactions, preference/
avoidance of contaminated areas, and migration have potentially 
important ramifications for population dynamics. However, diffi-
culties in objective quantifications of behaviors and laboratory to 
field extrapolations appear to have limited the application of this 
area to ecological risk assessments (ERAs), and by extension, per-
haps to funds available for basic research. In some cases, however, 
biochemical mechanisms underlying behavioral effects have been 
elucidated that may assist with these issues and provide useful bio-
markers for behavioral toxicants in field studies.
As noted by Rand (1985), chemicals causing behavioral effects 
in wildlife are often known from mammalian studies to be neuro-
toxicants. For example, in an early study, Grue et al. (1982) noted 
reduced nest attentiveness in female starlings dosed with the AChE-
inhibiting organophosphate insecticide dicrotophos; this study took 
advantage of the relative ease of attracting wild starlings to artificial 
nest boxes that is advantageous for detailed studies, a phenomenon 
that has been employed in subsequent avian ecotoxicological stud-
ies (Parker and Goldstein, 2000). Grue et al. (1997) and Walker 
(2003) reviewed the behavioral effects in birds of these and other 
neurotoxic insecticides.
Behavioral effects of insecticides have also been observed in 
fish. For example, Scholz et al. (2000) reported adverse impacts 
of the organophosphate diazinon on olfactory-mediated behaviors 
such as the alarm response and homing in the Chinook salmon 
(Oncorhynchus tshawytscha), and Sandahl et al. (2005) observed 
similar thresholds for the effects of another organophosphate (chlor-
pyrifos) on swimming and feeding behaviors and on AChE inhibi-
tion in coho salmon (O. kistich). The effects of pollutants, including 
pesticides, on fish behavior were reviewed by Scott and Sloman 
(2004).
Mercury, particularly as methylmercury, comprises another 
potent neurotoxicant that has been shown to perturb behavior in 
wildlife. For example, golden shiners (Notemigonus crysoleucas) 
fed diets containing methylmercury that resulted in tissue mercury 
concentrations consistent with those observed in this species in 
northern U.S. lakes exhibited perturbed predator avoidance behav-
iors (Webber and Haines, 2003). In a study employing fish captured 
in the field and brought into the laboratory for behavioral analysis, 
Smith and Weis (1997) observed that killifish captured from a mer-
cury-polluted tidal creek in New Jersey exhibited reduced feeding 
activity and greater mortality due to predation than killifish from 
an uncontaminated site. Using mercury concentrations in feathers 
as a marker for exposure, Heath and Frederick (2005) observed a 
negative correlation between mercury exposure and nesting activity 
among White Ibises (Eudocimus albus) in the Florida Everglades 
that may be related to behavioral effects. In studies with wild mink 
(Mustela vison) collected in Canada, Basu et al. (2005) observed sig-
nificant correlations between mercury concentrations in brains and 
densities of neurochemical receptors (cholinergic and dopaminergic) 
associated with animal behavior. The effects of mercury on wildlife, 
including behavioral impacts, were reviewed by Wolfe et al. (1998).
Environmental contaminants not generally thought of as neu-
rotoxicants have also been shown to perturb behavior. For example,

Ecotoxicology
Chapter 30
1447
cadmium and copper have been shown to impact olfactory neu-
rons and associated behaviors (preference/avoidance to chemicals, 
including pheromones) in several fish species (Saucier et al., 1991; 
Baker and Montgomery, 2001; Baldwin et al., 2003; Williams et al., 
2016). Copper exposure in zebrafish also led to loss of neurons in 
the peripheral mechanosensory system (“lateral line”), which could 
lead to altered behaviors associated with schooling, predator avoid-
ance, and rheotaxis (physical alignment of fish in a current) (Linbo 
et al., 2006). Carvalho and Tillitt (2004) reported loss of retinal 
ganglion cells in rainbow trout exposed to TCDD; these cells link 
the eye with the brain, and in this study deficits in visual acuity 
and prey capture rates were noted in TCDD-exposed fish. Clearly, 
numerous mechanisms of chemical toxicity can result in behavioral 
impacts, including direct toxicity to neurons, alterations in hor-
mones that modulate behaviors, and impaired energy metabolism. 
In some cases, impaired behavior may comprise a sublethal impact 
with substantive ecological consequence (Scott and Sloman, 2004).
Cancer  Beginning in the 1960s, numerous cases of cancer epizo-
otics in wildlife that are associated with chemical pollution, par-
ticularly in specific fish populations, have been reported in North 
America and northern Europe (Harshbarger and Clark, 1990; 
Vethaak, 1992). As in humans, cancer in these animals occurs 
largely in relatively older age classes and therefore is oftentimes 
considered a disease unlikely to directly impact population dynam-
ics or other ecological parameters. However, this may not always 
be the case, particularly in species that require many years to attain 
sexual maturity and/or have low reproductive rates. In any event, 
the occurrence of high incidences of cancer in wildlife populations 
raises serious concerns for environmental quality at those loca-
tions experiencing these epizootics. For these reasons, as well as 
for concerns for human health in these areas, and the advantages of 
alternative models such as fish for understanding chemical carci-
nogenesis, these epizootics have motivated substantial research in 
several areas relevant to human health and ecotoxicology.
In field studies of cancer outbreaks in aquatic and marine sys-
tems, typically only selected species exhibit elevated cancer rates 
associated with chemical contamination. A major contributor to this 
differential cancer susceptibility in wild fish populations is clearly 
lifestyle; benthic (bottom-dwelling) species such as brown bullhead 
(Ameriurus nebulosus) and white sucker (Catostomus commersoni) 
in freshwater systems, and English sole (Parophrys vetulus) and 
winter flounder (P. americanus) in marine systems generally exhibit 
the highest cancer rates in polluted systems (Baumann, 1998). The 
bulk of chemicals in these systems associated with cancer epizoot-
ics, such as PAHs, PCBs, and other halogenated compounds, reside 
in sediments; benthic fish live in contact with these sediments and 
prey in large measure on other benthic organisms. Thus, benthic fish 
experience greater exposures to carcinogens than other species in 
these systems. Inherent biological differences may also play a role 
in species susceptibilities to chemical carcinogenesis; for example, 
laboratory studies have revealed marked differences among fish 
species in their abilities to activate PAH procarcinogens to DNA 
adduct-forming metabolite as well as to detoxify them through 
phase II metabolism (Collier et al., 1992; Hasspieler et al., 1994; 
Ploch et al., 1998).
In their analysis of cancer epizootics in fish, Harshbarger and 
Clark (1990) concluded that cancers of the liver (hepatocellular 
neoplasms) had the strongest associations with chemical pollution, 
although cancers have been observed in other tissues in wild fish as 
well (Ostrander and Rotchell, 2005). PAHs appear to be the most 
implicated class of carcinogens associated with liver neoplasms 
in fish cancer epizootics. Studies implicating a key role for PAHs 
(and key PAH sources) include English sole in the Puget Sound 
(various urban and industrial sources; Malins et al., 1987), brown 
bullhead in the Black River, Ohio (a coal-coking facility; Baumann 
and Harshbarger, 1998), and in the Potomac River watershed near 
Washington, DC (various point and nonpoint discharges; Pinkney 
et al., 2001), and killifish in the Elizabeth River, Virginia (a wood 
treatment plant using creosote; Vogelbein et al., 1990). As stated 
earlier, PAHs appear to comprise a class of contaminant generally 
increasing in the environment. The metabolism of PAHs such as 
BaP to reactive metabolites that form DNA adducts that initiates 
carcinogenesis, or conversely to excretable conjugates, has been 
described earlier. It is noteworthy that the molecular and biochemi-
cal pathways underlying chemical carcinogenesis, such as PAH 
metabolism, DNA damage, and effects on oncogenes, are qualita-
tively similar between most fish and mammalian species examined.
This recognition of shared pathways has in part contributed to 
the use of various fish models for studying chemical carcinogen-
esis from a human health as well as from a broader environmental 
standpoint. An important historical event was the identification in 
Italy, France, and the United States during the 1950s and 1960s of 
aflatoxin as a potent liver carcinogen in farm-raised rainbow trout 
(Sinnhuber et al., 1977). Subsequently aflatoxin, a fungal toxin pro-
duced by Aspergillus flavus that is of concern where grains and 
nuts are stored in wet conditions, was found to be carcinogenic 
to mammals including humans. Thus, the rainbow trout observa-
tions led to the discovery of a new and important class of chemical 
carcinogens, and the recognition that fish can be very sensitive to 
chemical carcinogenesis. Since that time, other fish species have 
been employed for laboratory studies related to chemical carcino-
genesis, particularly medaka (O. latipes) and platyfish/swordtails 
hybrids (Xiphophorus spp.); zebrafish also show promise as a 
laboratory model (Ostrander and Rotchell, 2005). Compared with 
rodent models, fish models have advantages of reduced costs for 
propagation and housing, briefer time intervals between exposures 
and the expression of tissue changes indicative of carcinogenesis, 
and greater feasibility of performing large-scale studies with many 
animals to quantify dose–response relationships.
It is noteworthy that the great bulk of reports of elevated cancer 
rates in free-living animals occur in fish, with few reports of poten-
tially chemically related cancers to our knowledge in other verte-
brates. California sea lions (Zalophus californianus) stranded along 
the central California coast were found to have elevated cancer rates 
(18%), and concentrations of DDT and PCBs were greater in ani-
mals with cancer versus those determined to die of other causes 
(Ylitalo et al., 2005). Martineau et al. (2002) reported elevated can-
cer rates (also 18%) in carcasses of beluga whales (Delphinapterus 
leucas) stranded along the shores of the St. Lawrence River estu-
ary in Quebec, a system with elevated levels of PAHs. The authors 
noted that beluga was the only species of marine mammal among 
20 inhabiting this system that exhibited elevated cancer rates, and 
that cancers are rare worldwide in marine mammals. It is likely 
that elevated exposures play an important role in the relatively high 
frequency of reports of cancers in benthic fish; relative inherent 
sensitivities among mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, and fish 
are unclear.
Population
A population is a collection of individuals of the same species that 
occupy the same space and within which genetic information can 
be exchanged. The study of populations is a central theme in eco-
logical sciences and ecotoxicology is no exception. Assessment of 
toxicant effects on populations has been important in ecotoxicology

1448
ENVIRONMENTAL TOXICOLOGY
Unit VI
since its inception (Newman, 2001). A well-known, early instance 
is the sharp drop and then slow recovery of coastal populations 
of osprey (Spitzer et al., 1978) and brown pelican (Anderson et 
al., 1975) that occurred as a consequence of widespread DDT and 
DDE spraying and eventual banning. More recently, populations 
of Asian vultures scavenging on dead cattle dropped severely due 
to fatal poisoning by the veterinary drug diclofenac (Oaks et al., 
2004; Balmford, 2013). Another was the enhanced, genetically 
based tolerance of pest insect populations chronically sprayed 
with pesticides (Mallet, 1989). Industrial melanism, the premier 
example in biology textbooks of natural selection in populations, 
is another example of population ecotoxicology. Populations of the 
peppered moth (Biston betularia) in industrial regions shifted from 
a predominance of light colored to melanic individuals as surfaces 
became progressively darkened due to soot deposition. Predation 
by visual hunters, especially birds, had exerted strong selective 
pressure on a single gene locus coding for coloration (Grant, 2004; 
Van’t Hof et al., 2011).
Population ecotoxicology covers a wide range of topics with 
core research themes being (1) epidemiology of chemical-related 
disease, (2) effects on general population qualities including demo-
graphics and persistence, and (3) population genetics.
The level of belief warranted for possible contaminant-related 
effects in nonhuman populations is assessed by applying routine 
epidemiological methods. Many methods described in epidemi-
ology textbooks (Anders, 1993; Woodward, 2005) are applied to 
nonhuman populations although with a slightly different balance 
because much more experimental exposure data are potentially 
available for nonhuman populations than for human populations. 
Rules of thumb for gauging the level of belief warranted by evi-
dence that emerged from human epidemiology are also applied 
in population ecotoxicology. Hill’s nine aspects of human disease 
association (Hill, 1965; see Chap. 2, “Principles of Toxicology”) 
might be used directly or after minor modification. As an example, 
Fox (1991) (Table 30-1) modified such rules of thumb to accom-
modate slight differences in the subject matter and approaches in 
population ecotoxicology. Conventional epidemiological descrip-
tors and models are also applied. For example, Horness et al. (1998) 
quantified prevalence and relative risks for neoplastic liver lesions 
in English sole from areas with different sediment concentrations of 
PAHs. Logistic regression models were also used to identify rela-
tionships between these lesions and chemical and biological risk 
factors (Myers et al., 1994).
Defining and predicting alterations in population size, dynam-
ics, and demographic composition due to toxicant exposure have 
always been central in ecotoxicology and have become increas-
ingly so in the last 20 years as regulatory agencies such as the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency clearly reinforced their long-
standing commitment to understanding chemical exposure effects 
on natural population viability.
Protecting populations is an explicitly stated goal of several Congressional 
and Agency mandates and regulations. Thus it is important that ecological 
risk assessment guidelines focus upon protection and management at the 
population, community, and ecosystem levels . . . . 
Environmental Protection Agency (1991)
Ecological theory and research (e.g., Forbes and Calow, 1999) 
also indicate that metrics of effect to individuals are not especially 
reliable metrics of toxicant exposure effects to populations.
Models of exposed population dynamics suggest that reduc-
tions on population densities are not the only important changes 
brought about by chemical exposure. Some species populations 
fluctuate within a range of densities. These fluctuations are char-
acteristic of the species strategy for maintaining itself in various 
types of habitats and toxicant exposure could potentially change 
this range (Simkiss et al., 1993). Combined with decreases in popu-
lation densities driven by external forces such as weather events, 
these toxicant-induced modifications of the average population den-
sities and dynamics can increase the risk of a population’s density 
falling so low that local extinction occurs (Newman, 1995).
Demographic qualities can change with toxicant exposure in 
ways that influence the risk of local population extinction. Toxicants 
can change a species population’s vital rates, that is, age- and sex-
dependent death, birth, maturation, and migration rates, in com-
plex ways. These changes in combination determine the population 
density and distribution of individuals among ages and sexes dur-
ing exposure. The population’s ability to resist external forces that 
reduce its size is determined by these demographic features (Gard, 
Table 30-1  
A Summary of One Popular Set of Rules of Thumb (Data from Fox [1991]) for Assessing Plausibility of a Causal 
Association in an Ecological Epidemiology
RULE
DESCRIPTION
1. Strength of association
How strong the association is between the possible cause and the effect, for example, a very 
large relative risk
2. Consistency of association
How consistently is there an association between the possible cause and the effect, for  
example, consistent among several studies with different circumstances
3. Predictive performance
How good is the prediction of effect made from the presence/level of the possible cause
4. Monotonic trend
How consistent is the association between possible cause and effect to a monotonic trend (i.e., 
either a consistent increase or decrease in effect level/prevalence with an increase in exposure)
5. Inconsistent temporal sequence
The effect, or elevated level of effect, occurs before exposure to the hypothesized cause
6. Factual implausibility
The hypothesized association is implausible given existing knowledge
7. Inconsistency with replication
Very poor reproducibility of association during repeated field assessments encompassing  
different circumstances or repeated formal laboratory testing
NOTE : According to Fox (1991), the first four rules are most useful in supporting a causal hypothesis if found to be true (i.e., very strong, consistent,  
predictive, or monotonic association). The others are most useful for lessening belief in the causal hypothesis if true.

Ecotoxicology
Chapter 30
1449
1992; Sherratt et al., 1999; Kammenga and Laskowski, 2000; 
Aubone, 2004). Consequently, considerable research effort is being 
spent on demographic methods for predicting exposed population 
changes and risks of extinction.
Demography explores vital rates of populations composed of 
individuals that differ in age and sex. Individuals in field populations 
can also differ in their spatial distribution and this influences the 
impact of toxicants (Newman, 2001). Individuals of the same spe-
cies often are grouped into subpopulations within a habitat and all 
of these subpopulations together comprise a metapopulation (Fig. 
30-9). Subpopulations in the metapopulation have different levels of 
exchange and different vital rates that depend on the nature of their 
habitat. Spatial distances and obstacles or corridors for migration 
influence migration among patches; habitat quality determines vital 
rates. An inferior habitat, such as a grossly contaminated one, can 
act as a sink into which individuals migrate from nearby superior 
(source) habitat. Migration can rescue a subpopulation or reduce 
its risk of local extinction. An individual migrating from the con-
taminated habitat to an uncontaminated one can express an adverse 
effect despite its present distance from the contamination, that is, 
the action-at-distance hypothesis of ecotoxicology (Spromberg 
et al., 1998). The viability of the metapopulation can also be as 
strongly influenced by maintaining important migration corridors 
among subpopulations and protecting high-quality habitats (i.e., 
keystone habitats) as by the general level of contamination within 
the metapopulation’s habitat (Mauer and Holt, 1996; O’Connor, 
1996; Spromberg et al., 1998; Newman, 2001).
The genetics of exposed populations is studied to understand 
changes in tolerance to toxicants and to document toxicant influence 
on field populations. The capacity of some populations to become 
more tolerant of toxicants via selection is well documented. A few 
examples include increased tolerance of pine mice to endrin (Webb 
and Horsfall, 1967) and rats to warfarin (Partridge, 1979) after years 
of application of these chemicals for rodent control. More recently, 
Ownby et al. (2002) documented enhanced tolerance in populations 
of an estuarine fish chronically exposed to PAHs. Although geneti-
cally based increases in tolerance are well documented in wild 
populations, many exposed populations probably find themselves 
in situations in which they cannot adapt adequately because their 
genetic resources, nature of the toxicant, or spatial/temporal context 
within which the enhanced tolerance must evolve are inadequate. 
Also, in an ecotoxicological sense, all cases of increased tolerance 
do not fit the conventional context manifested in the examples just 
given. Some do not involve suborganismal changes to biochemi-
cal or anatomical features resulting in enhanced tolerance. For 
example, industrial melanism increases a peppered moth’s fitness 
in the presence of soot by reducing its likelihood of being taken by a 
predator. The dominant light form of this moth has a lowered fitness 
in the presence of dark soot, and genetically based changes in color 
increase its fitness. The selective mechanism here is ecological, that 
is, fitness relative to avoiding visual predators.
Genetic qualities are also used to infer past toxicant influ-
ence in an exposed population. For example, Mulvey et al. (2002, 
2003) showed distinct genetic qualities in estuarine fish popula-
tions exposed to high concentrations of PAHs. Another piece of 
evidence demonstrating past toxicant influence on populations can 
be a change in genetic diversity. A drop in genetic diversity in popu-
lations is thought to be an adverse effect because genetic diversity 
is required in populations to evolutionarily adapt to environmental 
changes. Toxicants can influence genetic diversity by purely sto-
chastic means. Genes can be lost in the population if the population 
is so drastically reduced in size that the chance of a rare gene being 
lost between generations becomes very high. Also, the average rate 
at which the frequency of a rare gene decreases through time due 
to genetic drift increases as the effective population size decreases. 
The effective population is the number of individuals contributing 
genes to the next generation so toxicant-related changes in demo-
graphic qualities can also accelerate genetic drift.
Community
An ecological community is an interacting assemblage of spe-
cies populations occupying a defined habitat at a particular time. 
Populations in a community interact in many ways and, because 
these many interactions are complex, a community has properties 
that are not predictable from those of its component populations. 
Some species have such a crucial role (keystone species) or numeri-
cal dominance (dominants) that they are essential to maintaining 
community structure.2 Other species contribute to the nature of 
the community in more subtle ways. Community qualities like the 
diversity of species are influenced by contaminants. These effects 
are of concern because a decrease in diversity can diminish a com-
munity’s ability to retain vital nutrients or resist stress such as that 
associated with drought (Tilman et al., 2006).
Ambiguity exists about the importance of all the species in 
a community relative to maintaining overall structure and balanc-
ing essential functions such as nutrient cycling, primary productiv-
ity, community respiration, and detritus processing. The redundant 
species hypothesis suggests that species function redundantly: if a 
species were lost, another with a similar function would increase 
in numbers to compensate. Only certain critical species such as 
dominant or keystone species are essential to the community. The 
rivet popper hypothesis suggests otherwise. Each species in a com-
munity is similar to one of the many rivets holding an airplane 
2In its most rudimentary context, community structure refers to the number 
of species present and the number of individuals present in each of these 
species. It can also refer to the distribution of species among different func-
tional groups such as decomposers, detritivores, primary producers, primary 
consumers such as herbivores, and secondary consumers such as carnivores 
that consume herbivores.
B
D
E
F
G
C
Barrier to migration
Barrier to migration
 Subpopulation
A
Inhabiting
keystone
habitat
Figure 30-9.   Metapopulations are composed of subpopulations that differ 
in their vital rates and tendency to exchange individuals. In this illustration, 
subpopulation A occupies a keystone habitat. The loss of subpopulation A 
would devastate the metapopulation. Also, loss of the migration corridor 
between subpopulations A, B, and D would devastate the metapopulation. 
In contrast, the loss of subpopulation F would not influence the metapopula-
tion to the same degree.

1450
ENVIRONMENTAL TOXICOLOGY
Unit VI
fuselage together. Each lost rivet contributes to a gradual weaken-
ing of the fuselage that will lead eventually to a failure in function. 
By analogy, each species disappearance diminishes a community’s 
functioning.
Ecotoxicologists remain divided about which hypothesis is 
most relevant. Pratt and Cairns (1996) argue from evidence and a 
conservative stance that the rivet popper is the most appropriate. 
Ecotoxicologists and regulators who pragmatically set standards 
based on concentrations that will not harm more than a specified 
percentage of species in a community (e.g., Stephan et al., 1985) 
assume that the redundant species hypothesis is more pertinent. 
Although the redundant species hypothesis is assumed to be correct 
in many ERAs (Solomon and Sibley, 2002), recent theory (Loreau, 
2004), modeling (Naeem et al., 1994), and experimental evidence 
(Tilman, 1996; Tilman et al., 1996; Salminen et al., 2001) seem 
to support the rivet popper hypothesis. Biodiversity tends to foster 
community stability and function.
Communities take on characteristic structures as predicted by 
the Law of Frequencies: the number of individual organisms in a 
community is related by some function to the number of species 
in the community (Fig. 30-10). Ecotoxicants3 can alter the result-
ing community structure in predictable ways by either directly 
impacting the fitness of individuals in populations that make up 
the community or altering population interactions. Community 
ecotoxicologists spend considerable effort trying to understand and 
predict ecotoxicant influences on community structure and essential 
functions.
Direct effects involve removal of a population or metapopu-
lation from the community by reducing the Darwinian fitness of 
individuals enough that the population falls below some critical 
3The conventional context for the term “toxicant” becomes difficult to retain 
without some qualification when dealing with populations, communities, 
and other higher level entities because an agent does not necessarily have to 
directly interact with the individual in order to harm it. As an example, an 
agent might eliminate a prey species, leading indirectly to the disappearance 
of a predator species that depended on it for sustenance. The “toxicant” did 
not poison the predator, yet it caused its demise nonetheless. A distinct term 
“ecotoxicant” is often applied to avoid confusion in such cases.
minimum size. Indirect effects can involve interference with inter-
species competition, predator–prey interactions, host–disease/par-
asite interactions, or symbiotic relationships such as pollination. 
The simplest competition model (Lotka–Volterra model) can be 
used to illustrate the potential for both direct and indirect effects 
on populations:
d
d
d
d
N
t
r N
N
K
N
K
N
t
r N
N
K
N
K
1
1
1
1
1
12
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
21
1
2
1
1
=
−
−






=
−
−

α
α
,




,
where N1 and N2 are the population sizes of competitors 1 and 2, K1 
and K2 the carrying capacities of the environment for competitors 
1 and 2, r1 and r2 the intrinsic rate of population increase (i.e., birth 
rate − death rate) for competitors 1 and 2, α12 the competition coef-
ficient quantifying the impact of the presence of competitor 2 on 
competitor 1, and α21 the impact of competitor 1 on competitor 2. 
Not only can exposure directly impact birth rates, death rates, and 
carrying capacity of each species, but it can also influence species 
persistence by shifting competition coefficients in favor of another 
species. Mathematically, it can be shown that the two competitors 
depicted in the Lotka–Volterra model can coexist only if two condi-
tions are met, K1 < K2/α21 and K2 < K1/α12. So, a population can be 
lost from a community as readily by changing its competitive inter-
actions as by directly changing its death and reproductive rates. 
Similar statements can be made about changes in predator–prey, 
host–disease, and various symbiotic interactions. As an example, 
concern expressed recently about unintended pesticide reductions 
in the number and diversity of pollinators in European farmlands 
(Newman et al., 2006) could be partially responsible for the recently 
reported decline in insect-pollinated plant species in Britain and the 
Netherlands (Biesmeijer et al., 2006). In another instance, reduced 
habitat cover and insect densities in European farmlands has had 
a significant impact on gray partridge populations (Rands, 1985; 
Chiverton, 1999). As another and final example involving preda-
tor–prey interactions, amphibian tadpole exposure to endosulfan, a 
chlorinated insecticide, increases the risk of predation by dragonfly 
larvae (Broomhall, 2002). None of these examples involves a direct 
poisoning by a toxicant, but instead, involves an ecotoxicant that 
adversely modifies species interactions.
Structural changes to communities can be detected in species 
abundance plots (see Fig. 30-10) or shifts in conventional commu-
nity metrics calculated from community samples taken in the prox-
imity of contaminated sites. Common metrics for species richness, 
diversity, and evenness are used to express changes in biodiversity. 
Richness is simply the number of species in the sampled commu-
nity, or if a relative number of species in different communities is all 
that is needed, the number of species expected in a specified sample 
size such as a rarefaction richness estimate of 12 species in a sample 
of 100 individuals from a community. Evenness is a measure of 
how equitably the individuals in a community are spread among the 
species. Finally, diversity (heterogeneity) indices combine the ele-
ments of richness and evenness into one number. Generally, but not 
always, ecotoxicants lower species richness, evenness, and over-
all diversity. The regulatory premise is that these changes reflect a 
diminished community.
Structural and functional qualities in communities have been 
combined to generate multimetric indices such as the Index of 
Biotic Integrity (IBI) (Karr, 1991). Ecological insight is used to 
select and then numerically combine community qualities such as 
species richness, health of individual animals in a sample, and the 
1–2 2–4 4–8
16–32 32–64
128–256
256–512
Number of individuals
Number of species
8–16
64–128
Figure 30-10.   Log-normal model of species abundance for an unexposed 
(solid line and red points) and toxicant-exposed community (dashed line and 
blue points). Communities have distinct structure as shown here with the 
typical log-normal species abundance model. As first described by data from 
Patrick (1973), ecotoxicants tend to lower the mode of the species abun-
dance curve and stretch the right tail outward. Ecotoxicants result in fewer 
intermediate abundance species and more extremely abundant species.

Ecotoxicology
Chapter 30
1451
number of individuals in a sample belonging to a particular func-
tional group, such as number of piscivorous fish. The IBI score for 
a study site is calculated and compared with that expected for an 
unimpacted site in order to estimate its biological integrity.
Another central theme in community ecotoxicology is toxicant 
transfer during trophic interactions. Toxicant concentrations can 
decrease (biodiminution), remain constant, or increase (biomagni-
fication) with each trophic transfer within a food web. Persistent 
organic pollutants (POPs) with moderately high lipid solubil-
ity (5 < log Kow < 7 or 8; Thomann, 1989; Connell, 1990) and 
minimal metabolic breakdown in an organism can biomagnify to 
harmful concentrations. Metals that biomagnify are mercury and 
the alkali metals, cesium and rubidium. Zinc, an essential metal 
that is actively regulated in individuals, can exhibit biomagnifica-
tion or biominification depending on whether ambient levels are 
below or above those required by the organism to function properly. 
Biominification is facilitated in a marine food web after sequestra-
tion in intracellular phosphate granules of molluscan prey species 
(Nott and Nicolaidou, 1993) and biomagnification by active regu-
lation in zinc-deficient terrestrial communities (Beyer, 1986). The 
biomagnification of mercury is enhanced by its microbial transfor-
mation to methylmercury. Biomagnification of the potassium ana-
logs, cesium and rubidium, is facilitated by the differences in their 
influxes and effluxes that favor retention in organisms (Rowan and 
Rasmussen, 1994; Campbell et al., 2005).
Quantifying the trophic position of a species in a community 
is essential to modeling biomagnification. Most trophic systems are 
not simple “food chains.” Most individuals in a community can feed 
on different species depending on their life stage, seasons, and rela-
tive abundances of prey species. These trophic interactions are best 
described as occurring in a trophic web, not a trophic chain.
Conveniently, trophic position of an individual within a com-
plex food web can be quantified with nitrogen isotopes. Generally, 
14N passes through biochemical pathways faster than 15N, resulting 
in excretion of waste with a slightly higher 14N/15N ratio than in 
ingested food. The relative amounts of 14N and 15N will be slightly 
biased toward the heavy isotope in tissues of a species relative to 
those of its food source(s). This discrimination between the heavy 
and light N isotopes continues through food webs, allowing the 
trophic position of each participating species to be estimated. The 
metric used for this purpose, the δ15N, expresses the quotient of 
these two isotopes in the biological tissue of interest relative to the 
quotient expected in the atmosphere:
δ15
15
14
15
14
N=1000
N
N
N
N
Tissue
Tissue
Air
Air






−






1 .
The change in toxicant concentrations within food webs is 
modeled using the  δ 15N, which quantifies trophic position of the 
species from which the tissue sample was taken (Fig. 30-11). Linear 
and exponential models are commonly applied:
Concentration
N
15
=
+
a
bδ
,
Concentration
1
or e
N
N
=
+
+
0
15
15
a
b
a
b
δ
δ
.
Ecosystem to Biosphere
Ecosystems are the functional unit of ecology composed of the eco-
logical community and its abiotic habitat. Systems ecologists try 
to describe and predict energy and mass cycling in and flow from 
ecosystems. The ecotoxicologist’s interest in ecosystems includes 
understanding how toxicants diminish an ecosystem’s capacity to 
perform essential functions and to understand toxicant movement 
enough to assess exposure within different ecosystem components.
Many of the effects described above for exposed communities 
are relevant here. As an example, Allred and Giesy (1988) dem-
onstrated that elevating cadmium concentrations in an artificial 
stream reduced decomposition rates of dead leaves. Odum (1985) 
suggested that other changes to be expected with increased ecosys-
tem stress include an increased loss of nutrients, increased com-
munity respiration, and an imbalance of primary production and 
respiration.
Studies of toxicant movement within ecological systems are 
conducted at extremely different scales (Fig. 30-12). Conventional 
ecosystem studies involve descriptions of contaminant concentra-
tions and movements in easily defined ecosystems such as lakes, 
forests, or fields. Some toxicants, especially those subject to wide 
dispersal by air or water, cannot be completely understood in this 
framework so a landscape scale might be chosen instead. As an 
example, acid precipitation might be examined in the context of 
an entire watershed, mountain range, or even a continental region. 
As another example (see Fig. 30-12, top right panel), the fish tis-
sue concentrations of a PCB congener and other persistent organic 
pollutants (POPs) were measured in high mountain region lakes 
of Europe. Concentrations for several were related to the altitude 
at which a lake sat. Called mountain cold-trapping, the relation-
ship between altitude and concentrations of the various POPs is 
determined by atmospheric movement of the POPs and each POP’s 
propensity to either volatilize or condense at a particular altitude-
dependent temperature regime (Blais et al, 2003; Wania and 
Westgate, 2008; Westgate and Wania, 2013). Still other ecotoxicants 
require a global context to fully understand their movements and 
accumulation. As an example, hexachlorobenzene concentration in 
tree bark collected worldwide showed a clear latitudinal gradient. 
Its global distribution and those of other sampled POPs were a func-
tion of their relative volatilities. The volatile hexachlorobenzene 
moved more readily toward the poles than less volatile POPs such 
as endosulfan and DDT. The differential global movement of POPs 
due to differences in volatility and partitioning behavior was called 
global distillation and fractionation (Simonich and Hites, 1995; 
Wania and Mackay, 1996). The balance between a POP’s tendency 
to condense or evaporate at different latitude-related temperatures 
Concentration
Octachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
and -dibenzofuran in Northern
Baltic food web
ΣDDT in Lake Malawi
(East Africa) food web
δ 15N
Figure 30-11.   Modeling ecotoxicant concentration versus trophic position 
as quantified with δ15N. Power models were applied to octachlorodibenzo-
p-dioxin/dibenzofuran concentrations in a North Baltic food chain (data 
from Broman et al. [1992]) and the ΣDDT (sum of primarily the p,p′ iso-
mers of DDD, DDE, and DDT) in food webs of Lake Malawi (data from 
Kidd et al. [2001]). Biomagnification and minification were evident for 
ΣDDT and octachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin/dibenzofuran, respectively.

1452
ENVIRONMENTAL TOXICOLOGY
Unit VI
determines its atmospheric mobility and its ultimate global deposi-
tion pattern (Wania and Mackay, 1996).
APPROACHES
Many approaches have been developed to detect and quantify con-
taminant effects. These span the levels of organization described 
above. Approaches widely applied in ecotoxicology include stan-
dardized toxicity tests deigned to meet regulatory needs and bio-
markers for organismal exposure and effects. For higher levels, a 
range of ecological methods exists for population, community, and 
ecosystem effects. Other techniques such as geographic informa-
tion system (GIS) analysis of impacts allow the ecotoxicologist to 
assess impact encompassing large spatial scales. These approaches 
and examples of their applications are described in this section.
Toxicity Tests
Toxicity testing encompassing representative animals and plants at 
different levels of organization offers a practical approach to char-
acterize chemical effects on biological systems. While it is widely 
known that toxicity tests cannot mimic the complex interactions 
and variable conditions of natural ecosystems, they address the 
potential direct effects of toxic substances on individual ecosystem 
components in a controlled and reproducible manner. A number 
of testing guidelines have been put forth by regulatory bodies and 
organizations worldwide to meet requirements for chemical reg-
istration or authorization (OECD, 1981; MAFF, 1985; U.S. EPA 
OPPTS, 1996a; ASTM International, 2006), with numerous sub-
sequent revisions. Different sets of guidelines apply to specific 
countries, regions, or products, and can differ significantly in their 
requirements. The harmonized guidelines put forth by the U.S. 
EPA Office of Prevention, Pesticides and Toxic Substances (U.S. 
EPA OPPTS, 1996a) were created in an attempt to lessen varia-
tions in testing requirements, and bring together requirements from 
the Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development 
(OECD), the U.S. EPA Office of Pollution Prevention and Toxics 
(OPPT), and the Office of Pesticide Programs (OPP).
Ecotoxicology tests feature a wide variety of aquatic (includ-
ing algae, invertebrates, tadpoles, bivalves, shrimp, fish), avian (quail, 
duck), and terrestrial species (soil microorganisms, crops, honey bees, 
earthworms, wild mammals). Species are selected based not only on 
their traditional use as laboratory animals, but also on ecological rel-
evance, which further complicates global harmonization of ecological 
testing. In addition, special considerations apply to testing of aquatic 
species due to the unmistakable differences in the way aquatic species 
are exposed to toxicants (U.S. EPA OPPTS, 1996b). For instance, 
water quality monitoring and investigation of the solubility and sta-
bility of the test substance under the conditions of testing, along with 
determination of nominal versus measured concentrations, are com-
mon practices in aquatic toxicology. Testing can be conducted in aque-
ous systems without renewal of the test substance (static), renewal at 
predetermined time intervals (static renewal), or continuous flow of 
test substance through the test compartment (flow-through).
Acute toxicity testing consists of single species exposed to var-
ious concentrations of the test substance. The most common end-
point in acute tests is death, although abnormal behavioral or other 
gross observations are commonly noted, and nonlethal endpoints 
occasionally apply (e.g., immobilization for daphnids and shell 
deposition in oysters). Variations in acute toxicity studies comprise 
testing of different species (such as fresh vs. saltwater fish, bob-
white quail vs. mallard duck), life stages (embryo, larva, juvenile), 
environmental influences (e.g., presence of organic material), or 
sediment exposures. Data from various test concentrations and time 
points are used to derive concentration–response curves and pre-
dicted values such as the LC50 (median lethal concentration), EC50 
(median effective concentration), or IC50 (median inhibition con-
centration). The LC50 represents the concentration of test substance 
killing 50% of the tested animals and EC50 the concentration of test 
substance affecting 50% of the test population during a specified 
period of time, such as growth; the IC50 is the concentration causing 
a 50% reduction in a nonquantal measurement (such as movement) 
for the test population. More quantitative values derived from acute 
tests are the lowest observed effect concentration (LOEC), that is, 
the lowest concentration where an effect is observed, and the no 
observed effect concentration (NOEC), the highest concentration 
resulting in no adverse effects.
Short-term laboratory studies conducted with single species 
are useful for rapid screening, provide information on thresholds 
for effects and selective and comparative toxicity, and can be used 
as range finders to guide subsequent, often more involved stud-
ies. Long-term and reproductive studies evaluate the effects of 
substances on organisms over extended periods of time and/or 
sequential generations (chronic toxicity, life cycle, reproduction). 
Endpoints include both quantal (such as mortality) and nonquantal 
(reproduction, growth) measurements, and can be used to derive 
additional values, other than previously mentioned in acute toxicity 
tests. These include the calculation of threshold values, such as the 
maximum acceptable toxicant concentration (MATC), which is the 
maximum chemical concentration not toxic to test organisms, and 
the BCF, which estimates the tissue concentration in relation to the 
average exposure concentration in the test medium (e.g., water).
Unique to ecotoxicology are the more elaborate microcosm, 
mesocosm, and field studies. Microcosms are representative aquatic 
HCH
Log depth
Concentration
PCB 138
Altitude
Log concentration
Latitude
HCB
Log concentration
1980
1996
Year
Temperate
Boreal
HCH
Concentration
Figure 30-12.   Examples of scales relevant to assessments of ecotoxicant 
distributions. The smallest scale example (top left) is the vertical distribu-
tion of α-hexachlorocyclohexane (HCH) in a stratified region of the Sea of 
Japan (data from Chernyak et al. [1995]). A slightly larger scale is reflected 
in the change in the polychlorinated biphenyl congener PCB 138 in tissues 
of fish inhabiting European lakes at different altitudes. (Top right panel, 
data from Fernandez and Grimait [2003].) Representing a subcontinental 
scale study is the temporal change in atmospheric α-hexachlorocyclohexane 
concentrations in temperate and boreal regions of central northern Europe. 
(Bottom left panel, data from Wania et al. [1999].) The largest scale encom-
passes the entire Earth, showing the influence of latitude on hexachloro-
benzene (HCB) concentration in tree bark. (Bottom right panel, data from 
Simonich and Hites [1995].)

Ecotoxicology
Chapter 30
1453
or terrestrial ecosystems created under laboratory conditions that 
include a number of relevant species (such as protozoa, plankton, 
algae, plants, and invertebrates). Simulated field studies or meso-
cosms can be created in the laboratory or in the field (e.g., artificial 
streams, ponds) or consist of enclosures of existing habitats, con-
taining representative soil, water, and biota. Lastly, full-scale field 
studies (aquatic organisms, terrestrial wildlife, pollinators) evaluate 
the effects of a substance on wildlife under real-life scenarios of 
actual use conditions of a product (e.g., pesticide field usage rate), 
and thus, are more complicated, subject to considerable variability, 
and require extensive background knowledge of the local popula-
tion and community dynamics.
As a final point, plant studies are a significant component of 
ecological toxicity testing, particularly for pesticide registration, 
and involve tiered testing of both target area and nontarget terres-
trial and aquatic plants. Target area plants are those that are present 
in the area where the substance will be routinely used (application 
area), but which are not anticipated to be affected. Nontarget plants 
are those outside of the intended use area. Endpoints of phytotoxic-
ity include seedling emergence and growth, vegetative vigor, and 
rhizobium–legume toxicity, among others, and central to the toxic-
ity testing with plants are the substrate and environmental condi-
tions, which greatly influence plant health.
Biomarkers
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC, 1989) defined a bio-
marker as “a xenobiotically induced variation in cellular or bio-
chemical components or processes, structures, or function that is 
measurable in a biological system or sample.” In the context of 
ecotoxicology, this definition has been modified slightly to refer 
to biochemical, physiological, or histological indicators of either 
exposure to or effects of xenobiotic chemicals at the suborganis-
mal or organismal level (Huggett et al., 1992). The term is most 
often employed to refer to molecular, physiological, and organis-
mal responses to contaminant exposure that can be quantified in 
organisms inhabiting or captured from natural systems. A response 
that is limited to laboratory studies falls outside the generally held 
concept of a biomarker.
By definition, biomarkers do not directly provide informa-
tion concerning impacts on the higher levels of organization that 
ecotoxicology ultimately endeavors to discern. Nevertheless, bio-
markers often provide important ancillary tools for discerning con-
taminant exposures and potential impacts of ecological importance. 
The development and use of biomarkers in ecotoxicology is moti-
vated by several factors. These include the inherent instabilities of 
many contaminants (such as PAHs and many pesticides) that make 
measures of exposure by direct tissue residue analysis difficult, 
the relative biological sensitivity of many biomarkers, the chemi-
cal specificity of some biomarkers that serve to contribute to the 
identification of chemicals having biological effects, and relatedly, 
the linkage of some biomarkers to underlying mechanisms of toxic 
action. Additionally, while populations and higher level effects are 
of greatest concern, variables associated with these levels are often-
times relatively insensitive to chemicals and other stressors, take 
long periods of time to become manifest, and/or have difficult or 
imprecise methods for their analysis. Thus, biomarkers can provide 
sensitive early warning signals of incipient ecological damage (van 
der Oost et al., 2003), in essence an ecological counterpart to the 
“canary in the coal mine” approach for preventing harm to coal min-
ers. However, biomarkers do not provide adequate stand-alone data 
in the context of ecological assessments of contaminant effects. At 
this time and for the foreseeable future, such assessments generally 
involve a “weight of evidence approach,” coalescing information 
obtained from chemical analyses, toxicity tests, biomarkers, and 
ecological indicators (sometimes referred to as “bioindicators”; see 
Adams et al., 1989). The AOP concept described earlier provides a 
more formal approach for linking data across levels of organization.
In earlier discussions, a number of contaminant effects at the 
organismal level and below that have been utilized as biomarkers 
were pointed out. These include effects with some degree of chemi-
cal specificity and relationship to a mechanism of toxicity (AChE 
inhibition by organophosphate and carbamate insecticides, ALAD 
inhibition by lead, DNA–PAH adducts), responses associated with 
exposures to chemicals acting through a common receptor (Vtg 
induction by ER agonists such as natural and synthetic estrogens, 
some surfactants, plasticizers, and pesticides; CYP1A induction by 
AhR agonists such as certain pHAHs and PAHs), and broader indices 
of cellular stress or tissue damage, such as markers of oxidative stress, 
lysosomal membrane stability, and histopathology. Numerous other 
identified mechanisms of toxicity, indices of chemical exposure, and 
cellular and organismal impacts have been exploited, with varying 
degree of success, as biomarkers (see reviews by Huggett et al., 1992; 
Peakall, 1992; Adams, 2000; van der Oost et al., 2003; Connon et al., 
2012). In addition, new biomarkers continue to emerge; for example, 
considerable attention is now being given to biomarkers arising from 
advances in genomic technologies, discussed in Section “Genomics 
and Ecotoxicogenomics.”
In considering the development or use of a selected biomarker, 
several issues and limitations warrant consideration. For example, 
while sensitivity is overall an advantage of many biomarkers, it can 
sometimes raise important questions surrounding interpretation. 
For example, some molecular and biochemical measures are very 
sensitive to chemical exposures, but their ramifications for organ-
ismal health are unclear. For this reason, some distinguish between 
biomarkers of exposure and biomarkers of effect (see reviews cited 
earlier in this chapter). However, this distinction is often blurred 
and is subject to an individual’s view of what constitutes a sig-
nificant biological chemical effect; some may say the formation of 
DNA adduct is a significant effect, while others will argue that such 
adducts only indicate exposure and will require tumor formation to 
occur before denoting an effect. Certainly most would agree that the 
tumor is a clearer marker of effect than the adducts, and something 
more readily grasped by policy makers and the general public. On 
the other hand, tumors are far less sensitive as a biomarker, a key 
raison d’etre; such trade-offs merit consideration.
Chemical specificity among biomarkers is also highly variable 
and is imbued with trade-offs. In some cases, such as where one 
has a good idea of the nature of contaminants likely to occur at a 
site, chemical-specific biomarkers will likely be most informative. 
In contrast, if such information is lacking, or mixtures encompass-
ing several classes of chemicals likely occur, nonspecific markers 
may be superior. In most cases, suites of biomarkers prove to be 
most effective, although the larger the suite, the more time-intensive 
and costly the analysis will be—another trade-off. Another impor-
tant consideration is the influence on the biomarker of variables 
other than those of concern (chemical contamination). Effects of 
environmental variables such as temperature, time of day or year, 
salinity and dissolved oxygen, and physiological variables such as 
sex, age, reproductive status, and nutritional status need to be con-
trolled for or at least understood and accounted for. Many biomark-
ers are invasive and require sacrifice of the organism in order to 
obtain needed tissues. This can be problematic, particularly in cases 
involving rare species or charismatic species such as marine mam-
mals. In such cases, and in others where feasible, the use of nonin-
vasive biomarkers is either preferred or required (Fossi and Marsili,

1454
ENVIRONMENTAL TOXICOLOGY
Unit VI
1997). In summary, biomarkers can provide powerful tools as early 
warning signals of ecological damage to assist in assessments of 
environmental contamination and in determining the effectiveness 
of various environmental management decisions such as cleanups. 
However, careful case-specific thought must go into the selection of 
biomarkers, and they rarely are efficacious alone.
Population
Population-level effects are quantified with both field and laboratory 
approaches (see Newman, 2001, 2013). Population density is the 
most common of field population qualities measured in surveys of 
contaminated habitats. Quadrat, mark-recapture, and removal-based 
methods are applied. The density of individuals in a series of ran-
dom quadrats within the area of interest is used to estimate densi-
ties in quadrat methods. The total population size can be estimated 
with knowledge of the total number of quadrats in the area of inter-
est. In cases in which individuals are mobile and capable of avoid-
ing being counted in a quadrat, a mark-recapture method might be 
applied instead. This involves marking a subset of individuals from 
the population, allowing them to randomly mix back into the popu-
lation, and resampling the population. The number of marked and 
unmarked individuals taken, and the total number originally marked, 
can be used to estimate population size. Removal-based methods 
involve repeated sampling of the population without replacement, 
noting how the number collected per unit of effort declines through 
the sequence of samplings, and extrapolating this trend down to the 
point (total number caught previous to a sampling) at which no more 
individuals will be taken. This point is an estimate of the population 
size. Obviously, this approach is useful only if sampling decreases 
the catch noticeably between sampling episodes.
As noted earlier in discussions of metapopulations, the spatial 
distribution of individuals in a habitat is important to understand. 
Fortunately, well-established methods are available for this task. 
Methods vary depending on whether the sampling units are discrete 
or arbitrary. An arbitrary unit might be the number of razor clams 
per square meter of beach or number of a zooplankton species per 
cubic meter of water. A discrete sampling unit might be the number 
of mallard ducks per pond or squirrels per oak tree. Some methods 
associated with discrete sampling units attempt to fit the spatial pat-
tern to a specific distribution. Methods for arbitrary sampling units 
include quadrat-based or distance-to-nearest-neighbor approaches 
as described by Krebs (1998).
Demographic surveys or experiments can be conducted for 
exposed populations. Some studies explore age-specific vital rates 
but others are designed to explore vital rates for different life ages 
such as nestling, fledgling, juvenile, and adult. Most result in data 
sets that can be analyzed profitably using either a simple life table 
or more involved matrix analysis. The matrix method allows one 
to describe the population state and also to understand the sensitiv-
ity of the population to effects occurring to vital rates for various 
ages or stages (Caswell, 2001). The value of such studies lies in 
the ability to integrate effects to several effects into a projection of 
population consequences. Demographic studies are becoming more 
common in ecotoxicology, especially with species amenable to lab-
oratory manipulation (Jansen et al., 2001; Tanaka and Nakanishi, 
2001; Chandler et al., 2004).
Conventional studies of increased tolerance after generations 
of exposure and molecular genetic surveys of exposed popula-
tions are the primary approaches by which genetic consequences 
are assessed. Increased tolerance is usually detected by subjecting 
individuals from the chronically exposed population and a naive 
population to toxicant challenge and formally testing for tolerance 
differences. A recent example is the study by Ownby et al. (2002) 
of enhanced tolerance for a PAH-exposed population of killifish 
from Elizabeth River (Virginia). Alternatively, a change associ-
ated with a tolerance mechanism might be examined in chroni-
cally exposed and naive populations. As an example, Meyer et al. 
(2003) found upregulated antioxidant defenses in the same popu-
lations of exposed Elizabeth River killifish studied by Ownby et 
al. (2002). Close examinations of population genetics associated 
with contaminated habitats are also used to infer consequences of 
multigenerational exposure. Continuing with the Elizabeth River 
killifish example, Mulvey et al. (2002, 2003) examined the genetic 
qualities of fish sampled within the Elizabeth River estuary using 
allozymes and mDNA. Clear evidence was found using both tools 
for the influence of contamination on the population genetics of 
killifish subpopulations within the estuary.
Community and Ecosystem
Most community and ecosystem effects studies by ecotoxicolo-
gists use modified methods developed in community and sys-
tems ecology (see Magurran [1988] for method descriptions). 
Recent books, for example, by Newman (2015) and Newman and 
Clements (2008) provide some details of ecotoxicological applica-
tions of these methods. Several general approaches are taken. The 
approach affording the most control and ability to replicate treat-
ments involves laboratory microcosms. A microcosm is a simpli-
fied system that is thought to possess the community or ecosystem 
qualities of interest. The experimental control and reproducibility 
associated with microcosms come at the cost of losing ecological 
realism. Is the laboratory microcosm actually responding in a way 
that provides insight about how the actual community or ecosystem 
would respond? Microcosm studies are so common throughout the 
ecotoxicological literature that standard methods have been pro-
posed for their execution (Taub, 1997).
As a microcosm example, Clarke (1999) established invertebrate 
communities in the laboratory to determine the influence of oil drill-
ing muds on offshore benthic communities. Relative to the issue of 
community redundancy discussed in the section “Community,” zinc-
amended soil microcosms were used in another case by Salminen 
et al. (2001) and provided minimal evidence to support the current 
reliance on the redundant species theory by ecological risk assessors.
Gaining back some realism by giving up some degree of 
­tractability, outdoor mesocosms are also applied to community 
and ecosystem ecotoxicology. Mesocosms are larger experimen-
tal systems, usually constructed outdoors that also attempt to 
simulate some aspect of an ecosystem such as community spe-
cies composition. Often, terrestrial ecotoxicologists apply the 
term enclosure instead of mesocosm for such experimental units. 
Aquatic ­mesocosms can be artificial ponds such as those developed 
by Woin (1998), streams such as those used by Kreutzweiser et al. 
(2000), or river segments such as those used by Culp et al. (2000). 
Terrestrial mesocosms can be pens, enclosures, or large soil plots 
depending on the effects being quantified. An example of a ter-
restrial mesocosm study is that conducted by Korthals et al. (1996) 
of the effects of long-term copper exposure to soil nematode com-
munities. The Canadian Experimental Lakes program is a unique 
series of whole-lake studies in which lakes are dosed with various 
agents and whole ecosystem fate and effects studied. Agents studied 
in this manner include radionuclides, acid rain, cadmium, climate 
warming, mercury, 17α-ethynlestradiol, excess nutrients, and PCBs 
(Blanchfield et al., 2009; Schindler, 2009).
Field studies are the third means of exploring effects at the 
community or ecosystem level. The high realism of associated

Ecotoxicology
Chapter 30
1455
findings from field studies is balanced against the difficulty of 
achieving true replication and sufficient control of other factors 
influencing the system’s response. Field studies can involve manip-
ulations such as introducing toxicant into replicate water bodies; 
however, the majority of field studies involve biomonitoring of an 
existing, notionally impacted, community or ecosystem. This might 
involve close examination of species composition and comparison 
to that expected or measured in a similar, but uncontaminated, 
system. Most biomonitoring efforts focus on community structure 
instead of function because it is generally thought that changes 
in community structure will be seen before those in functions. 
As examples, metal effects on invertebrate and plant community 
structure were studied by Peeters et al. (2000) and Strandberg et al. 
(2006), respectively. Despite the tendency to study community 
structure, study of functions can provide valuable insights as in the 
case of Day (1993), who found changes in photosynthesis in peri-
phytic algae in response to herbicide exposure. Because mesocosm 
and field studies involve data generation in the presence of many 
uncontrolled variables and poor replication or pseudoreplication, 
multivariate statistical techniques for recognizing patterns among 
locations or through time are commonly applied (e.g., Landis et al., 
1997; Kedwards et al., 1999).
Landscape to Biosphere
The creation and eventual convergence of several key technologies 
facilitate ecotoxicological study at the landscape to biosphere van-
tages. These same technologies have also allowed the emergence of 
large context, environmental disciplines such as landscape4 ecology 
(Forman and Godron, 1986), global ecology (Rambler et al., 1989), 
and global biogeochemistry (Butcher et al., 1992) that contribute 
concepts to large-scale ecotoxicology efforts.
Technologies for acquiring, processing, and analyzing large 
amounts of information have been essential. Archived and new 
imageries from satellites and high-altitude platforms are now inte-
grated with off-the-shelf geographic information system (GIS) soft-
ware with affordable computers. Much of this imagery is gathered 
with remote sensing technologies, that is, technologies that do not 
require physical contact with the feature being measured. However, 
arrays of sensors are rapidly coming together such as the network 
coastal observing systems that are quickly linking to form a read-
ily accessible real-time data stream for all of our oceans. Remote 
sensing data from satellites or aircraft provide information for wide 
spatial areas and the rapidly emerging, ground- or water-based 
observing system networks have begun to produce extremely rich 
data streams. Such technologies facilitate ecotoxicological explora-
tions at spatial scales that were impossible to consider only a few 
decades ago.
ECOLOGICAL RISK ASSESSMENT
Ecological risk assessment (ERA) applies ecotoxicological knowl-
edge in support of environmental decision making. The ERA 
approach is an adaptation of human risk assessment methods, nota-
bly those articulated in the National Academy of Sciences para-
digm (National Research Council, 1983). Adaptations are needed 
to accommodate differences in exposure pathways and the entities 
4A landscape is formally defined by Forman and Godron (1986) as a hetero-
geneous landscape that is “composed of a cluster of interacting ecosystems 
that is repeated in a similar form throughout.” Each ecosystem is a part of a 
whole landscape much as a tessera is part of a mosaic or a subpopulation is 
part of a metapopulation.
for which risk is to be estimated. Risk might be to an endangered 
or threatened species, or to a damaged natural resource for which 
remuneration might be required from a responsible party. In such 
cases, the ERA might estimate risk to individuals. Alternatively, as 
emphasized in the above EPA quote, the risk might be to a local 
species population or to the integrity of an ecological community. 
A widely dispersed ecotoxicant such as acid precipitation or widely 
used product such as the herbicide, atrazine, might require assess-
ment of risk at a landscape or subcontinental scale. A recent exam-
ple of such a risk assessment is that for atrazine, a herbicide used 
throughout North America (Solomon et al., 1996). Ecotoxicants 
requiring a global ERA might include greenhouse gases contrib-
uting to global warming, hydrofluorocarbons depleting the ozone 
layer, and persistent organic pollutants (POPs) that accumulate 
to harmful concentrations in polar regions far from their point of 
release at highly industrialized latitudes.
Adaptations are based on the context of an ERA. Some ERAs 
address existing situations. Considerable field information might 
be available for such a retroactive ERA and epidemiological meth-
ods might be applied advantageously. In contrast, predictive ERAs 
assess possible risk associated with a future or proposed toxicant 
exposure. In this case, the ERA might rely more heavily on expo-
sure modeling and laboratory-derived effects data. A special case 
of predictive risk assessment is a life cycle assessment in which 
“cradle-to-grave” predictions are done for a product that includes 
all aspects of its raw material extraction, manufacture, distribution, 
use, and final disposal. Finally, an ERA will be structured slightly 
differently if it compares the ecological risk of one or more options. 
An example would be the comparative risk associated with a spill of 
bunker oil versus Orimulsion® (a bitumen-based fossil fuel). Such 
a comparative risk assessment might draw insight and data from 
existing spill sites, laboratory tests, and exposure models. Despite 
adaptations and differing contexts, most ERAs have the same gen-
eral form (see Fig. 30-2).
Risk assessors, risk managers, and key stakeholders engage in 
initial planning together with the intention of formulating a clear 
statement of the problem. What valued ecological entity or quality 
is being assessed (assessment endpoint) is defined. A conceptual 
model is created that links the assessment endpoint and the toxicant, 
including descriptions of exposure pathways and possible effects. 
A clear statement of possible or predicted effects (risk hypothesis) 
is formulated. A clear formulation of the problem with concurrence 
of key stakeholders is critical to the ERA because of the diversity of 
possible assessment endpoints and exposure pathways.
Exposure characterization describes or predicts contact 
between the toxicant and the assessment endpoint. Depending on 
the ERA context, this could involve a simple calculation of aver-
age exposure, or a temporally and spatially explicit description of 
amounts present in relevant media. Toxicant sources, transport path-
ways, kinds of contact, and potential costressors are also defined.
Ecological effects characterization describes the qualities of 
any potential effects of concern, describes the connection between 
the potential effects and the assessment endpoint, and describes 
how changes in the level of exposure might influence the effects 
manifesting in the assessment endpoint. Normally, a statement 
about the strength of evidence associated with the descriptions is 
presented in the ecological effects characterization. As a common 
example of evidentiary uncertainty often requiring explanation 
is the measurement endpoint. It is not always desirable to derive 
effects information directly from an assessment endpoint such as an 
endangered species so uncertainty is introduced by gauging effects 
to a surrogate (measurement endpoint). Ecological effects charac-
terizations must describe the justifiable confidence in extrapolating

1456
ENVIRONMENTAL TOXICOLOGY
Unit VI
from measurement to assessment endpoints. As discussed earlier, 
the AOP approach is gaining traction as a powerful approach for 
ecological (and human health) risk assessments, particularly for 
effects characterization.
Risk characterization uses the analysis of exposure and eco-
logical effects to address the risk question(s) posed in the problem 
formulation. This can involve an explicit statement of risk, that is, 
the probability of a specified intensity of an adverse effect occurring 
to the assessment endpoint. Often, the information needed to make 
such an explicit statement is absent and a qualitative statement of 
the likelihood of an adverse effect is made instead. Regardless of 
whether a quantitative or qualitative statement of risk is produced, 
the risk characterization must provide details surrounding the state-
ment, including important uncertainties.
INTERCONNECTIONS BETWEEN 
ECOSYSTEM INTEGRITY AND HUMAN 
HEALTH
As noted at the beginning of this chapter, while the original defi-
nition of ecotoxicology included effects on humans, most subse-
quent treatments exclude discussions of humans except as a source 
of contaminants, with some notable exceptions (e.g., Newman, 
2015). This ecotoxicology chapter, imbedded in a book focused 
on human or biomedical toxicology, describes the younger sci-
ence of elucidating chemical effects in natural systems. While 
ecotoxicology has features distinct from biomedical toxicology, 
it is important to consider parallelisms in the two fields and, more 
broadly, interconnections between human health and ecologi-
cal integrity, or health. While obviously related, biomedical and 
ecological toxicology have historically exhibited relatively little 
coordination or collaboration among scientists across these fields. 
This is likely due to a number of reasons, including the different 
levels of biological organization considered, as well as different 
academic cultures populating the two fields. However, it is ques-
tionable if this gulf has been in the best interest of understanding 
chemical effects, and ultimately protecting both human and eco-
logical health. This concern has prompted several broad discus-
sions intended to bridge this divide and enhance interdisciplinary 
natural and social scientific research in these areas (see reviews by 
Costanza et al. [1992], Di Giulio and Monosson [1996], and Di 
Giulio and Benson [2002]).
This gulf has resulted in two fields that, while largely discon-
nected, parallel one another and share common paradigms such 
as dose–response, toxicokinetics, mechanisms of action, and risk 
assessment frameworks. However, by generally ignoring how chem-
icals and other anthropogenic stressors that degrade ecosystems can 
ultimately impact human health and well-being, and vice versa, an 
opportunity to holistically understand the results of environmental 
contamination is lost. Miranda et al. (2002) developed a conceptual 
model for elucidating the interconnections paradigm that links natu-
ral and social systems in a circular manner with continuous feed-
backs, as opposed to parallel linear models (exposure to response, 
in either humans or ecosystems) that dominate toxicology currently. 
In this conceptual model, the natural system produces both positive 
outputs (such as natural resources and raw materials) and negative 
outputs (e.g., hurricanes and disease vectors) to the social system. 
The culture and institution of the social system in turn transforms 
the natural system outputs in various ways and subsequently deliv-
ers various positive outputs (consumer goods, conservation efforts) 
and negative outputs (pollution, deforestation) to the natural system. 
These outputs influence the quantity and quality of life (human and 
nonhuman) of the natural system, and the circular flow of resources 
continually creates conditions that influence the well-being of indi-
viduals, societies, and ecosystems, now and in the future.
This rather abstract model formalizes the interconnections 
between human and ecological health that most of us intuitively 
sense. Some of these connections, in the context of environmental 
pollution, are obvious. Chemical contamination of seafoods valued 
by humans is one example. Others are less clear but potentially very 
significant, such as human impacts on aquatic systems that foster 
the propagation of human disease vectors, or human impacts on 
global climate that may concomitantly impact humans and ecosys-
tems in varied and complex ways. Also important to consider is the 
matter of human perceptions of their environment; people’s sense 
of the health of the environment in which they live (whether their 
perception is correct or not) can have substantial impacts on their 
mental and physical health (O’Keefe and Baum, 1996). As noted 
by Kendall et al. (2001), “the indirect effects of environmental pol-
lution may, in the end, be more important than the direct effects for 
human health.”
There are significant indications that these fields are converg-
ing and meaningful interactions are increasing. The concept of “One 
Health” has gained traction in recent years and is very relevant to 
this discussion (see Zinsstag et al. [2015]). This concept originally 
emphasized the role of animals in disease transmission to humans 
(zoonoses), but broadly recognizes the relationship between eco-
system health and human health. The EcoHealth Journal is devoted 
to this topic. The inclusion of an ecotoxicology chapter in this text 
is also favorable evidence. This trend is motivated in part by the 
genomics revolution that provides powerful methods for evaluating 
fundamental biological similarities across species, including those 
employed in biomedical and ecotoxicological research. Research 
in this area has revealed genetic similarities, or conservation, in 
many genes and the proteins they code for that are important to 
organismal adaptations and impacts due to environmental stressors, 
including chemicals (Eaton et al., 2006). Certainly many important 
species differences also exist that contribute to the great complex-
ity of understanding human–ecological interconnections, but as 
pointed out by Winston et al. (2002), “in the final analysis, the bio-
logical similarities across living systems are probably more impres-
sive than the differences.” Discussions among diverse scientists of 
the promises, limitations, and potential applications of genomics 
for elucidating cross-species extrapolations are provided by Benson 
and Di Giulio (2006). Such cross-fertilizations among biomedical 
and environmental scientists, as well as social scientists and policy 
makers, are likely to enhance all areas, and catalyze the integrated 
protection of human and ecosystem health.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
A special thanks to Drs Adriana M. Doi and Caren Weinhouse for 
their expert assistance. The editor and authors also recognize the 
contributions of previous authors of this chapter: Robert E. Menzer 
and Robert H. Cravey (2nd edition), Robert E. Menzer and Judd 
O. Nelson (3rd edition), Robert E. Menzer (4th edition), Ronald 
J. Kendall, Catherine M. Bens, George P. Cobb III, Richard L. 
Dickerson, Kenneth R. Dixson, Stephen J. Elaine, Thomas E. 
Lacher, Jr, Thomas W. LaPoint, Scott T. McMurry, Raymond 
Noblet, and Ernest E. Smith (5th edition), Ronald J. Kendall, 
Todd A. Anderson, Robert J. Baker, Catherine M. Bens, James A. 
Carr, Louis A. Chiodo, George P. Cobb III, Richard L. Dickerson, 
Kenneth R. Dixon, Lynn T. Frame, Michael J. Hooper, Clyde F. 
Martin, Scott T. McMurry, Reynaldo Patino, Ernest E. Smith, and 
Christopher W. Theodorakis (6th edition).

Ecotoxicology
Chapter 30
1457
REFERENCES
Adams SM. Evaluating effects of contaminants on fish health at multiple 
levels of biological organization: extrapolating from lower to higher lev-
els. Hum Ecol Risk Assess. 2000;6:15–27.
Adams SM, Shepard KL, Greeley MS, et al. The use of bioindicators 
for assessing the effects of pollutant stress on fish. Mar Environ Res. 
1989;28:459–464.
Albert A, Drouillard K, Haffner GD, Dixon B. Dietary exposure to low 
pesticide doses causes long-term immunosuppression in the leopard frog 
(Rana pipiens). Environ Toxicol Chem. 2007;26:1179–1185.
Allison N, Millward GE, Jones MB. Particle processing by Mytilus edulis: 
effects on bioavailability of metals. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol. 1998;22:149.
Allred PM, Giesy JP. Use of in situ microcosms to study mass loss and 
chemical composition of leaf litter being processed in a blackwater 
stream. Arch Hydrobiol. 1988;114:231.
Altelaar AF, Munoz J, Heck AJ. Next-generation proteomics: towards 
an integrative view of proteome dynamics. Nat Rev Genet. 2013;14: 
35-48.
Amat A, Pfol-Leskowicz A, Burgeot T, Castegnaro M. DNA adducts as a 
biomarker of pollution: field study on the genotoxic impact evolution of 
the Erika oil spills on mussels (Mytilus edulis) over a period of eleven 
months. Polycyclic Aromatic Compounds. 2004;24:713–732.
Anders A. Biostatistics for Epidemiologists. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 
1993.
Andersen JD, Pereira V, Pietroni C, et al. Next-generation sequencing of 
multiple individuals per barcoded library by deconvolution of sequenced 
amplicons using endonuclease fragment analysis. Biotechniques. 
2014;57:91–94.
Anderson DW, Jehl JR, Risebrough RW, et al. Brown pelicans: improved 
reproduction off the Southern California Coast. Science. 1975;190:806.
Ankley GT, Bennett RS, Erickson RJ, et al. Adverse outcome pathways: a 
conceptual framework to support ecotoxicology research and risk assess-
ment. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2010;29:730–741.
Ankley GT, Daston GP, Degitz SJ, et al. Toxicogenomics in regulatory eco-
toxicology. Environ Sci Technol. 2006;40:4055–4065.
Ankley GT, Erickson RJ, Sheedy BR, et al. Evaluation of models for pre-
dicting the phototoxic potency of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. 
Aquat Toxicol. 1997;37:37–50.
Antkiewicz DS, Burns CG, Carney SA, Peterson RE, Heideman W. Heart 
malformation is an early response to TCDD in embryonic zebrafish. 
Toxicol Sci. 2005;84:368–377.
Arfsten DP, Schaeffer DJ, Mulveny DC. The effects of near ultraviolet radi-
ation on the toxic effects of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in animals 
and plants: a review. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 1996;33:1–24.
ASTM International. Annual Book of ASTM Standards, Vol 11.05: 
Pesticides; Environmental Assessment; Hazardous Substances and Oil 
Spill Responses. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International; 2006.
ATSDR. Toxicological Profile for Lead. Washington, DC: U.S. Department 
of Health and Human Services, Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease 
Registry; 1999.
Aubone A. Loss of stability owing to a stable age structure skewed toward 
juveniles. Ecol Model. 2004;175:55.
Auffret M, Rousseau S, Boutet I, et al. A multiparametric approach for 
monitoring immunotoxic responses in mussels from contaminated sites 
in Western Mediterranean. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2006;63:393–405.
Bainy ACD, Saito E, Carvalho PSM, Junqueira VBC. Oxidative stress in 
gill, erythrocytes, liver and kidney of Nile tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus) 
from a polluted site. Aquat Toxicol. 1996;34:151–162.
Baker CF, Montgomery JC. Sensory deficits induced by cadmium in 
banded kokopu, Galaxias fasciatus, juveniles. Environ Biol Fishes. 
2001;62:455–464.
Baldwin DH, Sandahl JF, Labenia JS, Scholz NL. Sublethal effects of 
copper on coho salmon: impacts on nonoverlapping receptor pathways 
in the peripheral olfactory nervous system. Environ Toxicol Chem. 
2003;22:2266–2274.
Balmford A. Pollution, politics, and vultures. Science. 2013;339:653–654.
Basu N, Klenavic K, Gamberg M, et al. Effects of mercury on neurochemi-
cal receptor-binding characteristics in wild mink. Environ Toxicol Chem. 
2005;24:1444–1450.
Bauder MB, Palace VP, Hodson PV. Is oxidative stress the mechanism of 
blue sac disease in retene-exposed trout larvae? Environ Toxicol Chem. 
2005;24:694–702.
Baumann PC. Epizootics of cancer in fish associated with genotoxins in 
sediment and water. Mutat Res Rev Mutat Res. 1998;411:227–233.
Baumann PC, Harshbarger JC. Long term trends in liver neoplasm epizoot-
ics of brown bullhead in the Black River, Ohio. Environ Monit Assess. 
1998;53:213–223.
Benson WH, Di Giulio RT, eds. Emerging Molecular and Computational 
Approaches for Cross-Species Extrapolations. New York: Taylor & 
Francis; 2006.
Beyer WN. A reexamination of biomagnifications of metals in terrestrial 
food chains. Environ Toxicol Chem. 1986;5:863–864.
Biesmeijer JC, Roberts SPM, Reemer M, et al. Parallel declines in pollina-
tors and insect-pollinated plants in Britain and the Netherlands. Science. 
2006;313:351.
Billiard SM, Querbach K, Hodson PV. Toxicity of retene to early life stages of 
two freshwater fish species. Environ Toxicol Chem. 1999;18:2070–2077.
Billiard SM, Timme-Laragy AR, Wassenberg DM, Cockman C, Di Giulio 
RT. The role of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor pathway in mediating syn-
ergistic developmental toxicity of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons to 
zebrafish. Toxicol Sci. 2006;92:526–536.
Birdsall CW, Grue CE, Anderson A. Lead concentrations in bullfrog (Rana 
catesbeiana) and green frog (Rana clamitans) tadpoles inhabiting high-
way drainages. Environ Pollut. 1986;40A:233–247.
Birnie-Gauvin K, Costantini D, Cooke SJ, Willmore WG. A comparative 
and evolutionary approach to oxidative stress in fish: a review. Fish 
Fisheries. 2017;1–15.
Blais JM, Wilhelm F, Kidd KA, et al. Concentrations of organochlorine 
pesticides and polychlorinated biphenyls in amphopods (Gammarus 
lacustris) along an elevation gradient in mountain lakes of western 
Canada. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2003;22:2605–2613.
Blanchfield PJ, Paterson MJ, Shearer JA, Schindler DW. Johnson and 
Vallentyne’s legacy: 40 years of aquatic research at the Experimental 
Lakes Area. Can Fish Aquat Sci. 2009;66:1831–1836.
Brar GA, Weissman JS. Ribosome profiling reveals the what, when, 
where and how of protein synthesis. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2015;16: 
651–664.
Broman D, Naf C, Rolff C, et al. Using ratios of stable nitrogen isotopes 
to estimate bioaccumulation and flux of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-di-
oxins (PCDDs) and dibenzofurans (PCDFs) in two food chains from the 
Northern Baltic. Environ Toxicol Chem. 1992;11:331.
Broomhall S. The effects of endosulfan and variable water temperature on 
survivorship and subsequent vulnerability to predation in Litoria citropa 
tadpoles. Aquat Toxicol. 2002;61:243.
Brown RE, Brain JD, Wang N. The avian respiratory system: a unique 
model for studies of respiratory toxicosis and for monitoring air quality. 
Environ Health Perspect. 1997;105:188–200.
Bury NR. The changes to apical silver membrane uptake, and basolateral 
membrane silver export in the gills of rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus 
mykiss) on exposure to sublethal silver concentrations. Aquat Toxicol. 
2005;72:135–145.
Bustnes JO, Miland O, Fjeld M, et al. Relationships between ecological 
variables and four organochlorine pollutants in an artic glaucous gull 
(Larus hyperboreus) population. Environ Pollut. 2005;136:175–185.
Butcher SS, Charlson RJ, Orians GH, Wolfe GV. Global Biogeochemical 
Cycles. London: Academic Press; 1992.
Butler RA, Kelley ML, Powell WH, Hahn ME, Van Beneden RJ. An aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) homologue from the soft-shell clam, Mya 
arenaria: evidence that invertebrate AHR homologues lack 2,3,7,8-tet-
rachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin and beta-naphthoflavone binding. Gene. 
2001;278:223–234.
Cade TJ. Exposure of California condors to lead from spent ammunition. J 
Wildl Manage. 2007;71:2125–2133.
Callinan PA, Feinberg AP. The emerging science of epigenomics. Hum Mol 
Genet. 2006;15:R95–101.
Campbell LM, Fask AT, Wang X, Kock G, Muir DCG. Evidence for bio-
magnifications of rubidium in freshwater and marine food webs. Can J 
Fish Aquat Sci. 2005;62:1161–1167.

1458
ENVIRONMENTAL TOXICOLOGY
Unit VI
Campbell PGC, Tessier A. Ecotoxicology of metals in the aquatic environment: 
geochemical aspects. In: Newman MC, Jagoe CH, eds. Ecotoxicology: A 
Hierarchical Treatment. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 1996:11–58.
Cao CC, Li C, Huang Z, et al. Identifying rare variants with optimal depth 
of coverage and cost-effective overlapping pool sequencing. Genet 
Epidemiol. 2013;37:820–830.
Carls MG, Rice SD, Hose JE. Sensitivity of fish embryos to weathered 
crude oil: part I. Low-level exposure during incubation causes malforma-
tions, genetic damage, and mortality in larval Pacific herring (Clupea 
pallasi). Environ Toxicol Chem. 1999;18:481–493.
Carlson E, Zelikoff JT. The immune system of fish: a target organ of toxic-
ity. In: Di Giuio RT, Hinton DE, eds. The Toxicology of Fishes. Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2008:489–529.
Carney SA, Peterson RE, Heideman W. 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-
dioxin activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor/aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor nuclear translocator pathway causes developmental toxicity 
through a CYP1A-independent mechanism in zebrafish. Mol Pharmacol. 
2004;66:512–521.
Carney SA, Prasch AL, Heideman W, Peterson RE. Understanding dioxin 
developmental toxicity using the zebrafish model. Birth Defects Res A. 
2006;76:7–18.
Carr RL, Ho LL, Chambers JE. Selective toxicity of chlorpyrifos to several 
species of fish during an environmental exposure: biochemical mecha-
nisms. Environ Toxicol Chem. 1997;16:2369–2374.
Carson R. Silent Spring. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin; 1962.
Carvalho PS, Tillitt DE. 2,3,7,8-TCDD effects on visual structure and func-
tion in swim-up rainbow trout. Environ Sci Technol. 2004;38:6300–6306.
Caswell H. Matrix Population Models. Construction, Analysis, and 
Interpretation. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates; 2001.
Chandler GT, Cary TL, Bejarano AC, Pender J, Ferry JL. Population conse-
quences of fipronil and degradates to copepods at field concentrations: an 
integration of life cycle testing with Leslie matrix population modeling. 
Environ Sci Technol. 2004;38:6407.
Chapman PM. Indirect effects of contaminants. Mar Pollut Bull. 
2004;48:411.
Chaty S, Rodius F, Vasseur P. A comparative study of the expression of 
CYP1A and CYP4 genes in aquatic invertebrate (freshwater mussel, 
Unio tumidus) and vertebrate (rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss). 
Aquat Toxicol. 2004;69:81–93.
Chen Z, Mayer LM. Mechanisms of Cu solubilization during deposit feed-
ing. Environ Sci Technol. 1998;32:770.
Cherkasov AS, Biswas PK, Ridings DM, Ringwood AH, Sokolova IM. 
Effects of acclimation temperature and cadmium exposure on cel-
lular energy budgets in the marine mollusk Crassostrea virginica: 
linking cellular and mitochondrial responses. J Exp Biol. 2006;209: 
1274–1284.
Chernyak SM, McConnell LL, Rice CP. Fate of some chlorinated hydrocar-
bons in arctic and far eastern ecosystems in the Russian Federation. Sci 
Total Environ. 1995;75:160–161.
Chiou CT. Partition coefficients of organic compounds in lipid–water 
systems and correlations with fish bioconcentration factor. Environ Sci 
Technol. 1985;19:57.
Chiverton PA. The benefits of unsprayed cereal crop margins to grey par-
tridge Perdix perdix and pheasants Phasianu colchicus in Sweden. Wildl 
Biol. 1999;5:8.
Chowdhury MJ, Pane EF, Wood CM. Physiological effects of dietary 
cadmium acclimation and waterborne cadmium challenge in rainbow 
trout: respiratory, ionoregulatory, and stress parameters. Comp Biochem 
Physiol. 2004;139C:163–173.
Clark AJ, Scheuhammer AM. Lead poisoning in upland-foraging birds of 
prey in Canada. Ecotoxicology. 2003;12:23–30.
Clarke KR. Nonmetric multivariate analysis in community-level ecotoxi-
cology. Environ Toxicol Chem. 1999;18:118–127.
Collier TK, Singh SV, Awasthi YC, Varanasi U. Hepatic xenobiotic metabo-
lizing enzymes in 2 species of benthic fish showing different prevalences 
of contaminant-associated liver neoplasms. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
1992;113:319–324.
Connell DW. Bioaccumulation of Xenobiotic Compounds. Boca Raton, FL: 
CRC Press; 1990.
Connon RE, Geist J, Werner I. Effect-based tools for monitoring and pre-
dicting the ecotoxicological effects of chemicals in the aquatic environ-
ment. Sensors. 2012;12:12741–12771.
Cook PM, Robbins JA, Endicott DD, et al. Effects of aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor-mediated early life stage toxicity on lake trout populations in 
Lake Ontario during the 20th century. Environ Sci Technol. 2003;37: 
3864–3877.
Costanza R, Norton BG, Haskell BD, eds. Ecosystem Health. New Goals 
for Environmental Management. Washington, DC: Island Press; 1992.
Crollius HR, Weissenbach J. Fish genomics and biology. Genome Res. 
2005;15:1675–1682.
Culp JM, Lowell RB, Cash KJ. Integrating mesocosm experiments with 
field and laboratory studies to generate weight-of-evidence risk assess-
ments for large rivers. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2000;19:1167.
Custer TW, Custer CM, Dickerson K, et al. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocar-
bons, aliphatic hydrocarbons, trace elements, and monooxygenase activ-
ity in birds nesting on the North Platte River, Casper, Wyoming, USA. 
Environ Toxicol Chem. 2001;20:624–631.
Custer TW, Custer CM, Hines RK, et al. Organochlorine contaminants 
and reproductive success of double-crested cormorants from Green Bay, 
Wisconsin, USA. Environ Toxicol Chem. 1999;18:1209–1217.
da Fonseca RR, Albrechtsen A, Themudo GE, et al. Next-generation biol-
ogy: sequencing and data analysis approaches for non-model organisms. 
Mar. Genom. 2016;30:3013.
Day KE. Short-term effects of herbicides on primary productivity of periph-
yton in lotic environments. Ecotoxicology. 1993;2:123.
Del Chierico F, Ancora M, Marcacci M, et al. Choice of next-generation 
sequencing pipelines. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1231:31–47.
Denison MS, Nagy SR. Activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor by 
structurally diverse exogenous and endogenous chemicals. Annu Rev 
Pharmacol Toxicol. 2003;43:309–334.
Deroo BJ, Korach KS. Estrogen receptors and human disease. J Clin Invest. 
2006;116:561–570.
Devlin EW. Acute toxicity, uptake and histopathology of aqueous methyl 
mercury to fathead minnow embryos. Ecotoxicology. 2006;15:97–110.
Di Giulio RT, Benson WE. Interconnections Between Human Health and 
Ecological Integrity. Pensacola, FL: SETAC Press; 2002.
Di Giulio RT, Hinton DE, eds. The Toxicology of Fishes. Boca Raton, FL: 
CRC Press. 2008.
Di Giulio RT, Monosson E, eds. Interconnections between Human and 
Ecosystem Health. London: Chapman & Hall; 1996.
Di Giulio RT, Washburn PC, Wenning RJ, Winston GW, Jewell CS. 
Biochemical responses in aquatic animals: a review of determinants of 
oxidative stress. Environ Toxicol Chem. 1989;8:1103–1123.
Di Toro DM, Mahony JD, Hansen DJ, et al. Toxicity of cadmium in 
sediments: the role of acid volatile sulfide. Environ Toxicol Chem. 
1990;9:1487.
Di Toro DM, McGrath JA, Hansen DJ, et al. Predicting sediment metal 
toxicity using a sediment biotic ligand model: methodology and initial 
application. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2005;24:2410–2427.
Di Toro DM, Zarba CS, Hanson DJ, et al. Technical basis for establishing 
sediment quality criteria for nonionic organic chemicals using equilib-
rium partitioning. Environ Toxicol Chem. 1991;10:1541–1583.
Dopp E, Barker CM, Schiffmann D, Reinisch CL. Detection of micronuclei 
in hemocytes of Mya arenaria: association with leukemia and induction 
with an alkylating agent. Aquat Toxicol. 1996;34:31–45.
Dorval J, Leblond V, Deblois C, Hontela A. Oxidative stress and endo-
crine endpoints in white sucker (Catostomus commersoni) from a river 
impacted by agricultural chemicals. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2005;24: 
1273–1280.
du Corbier FA, Lyons BP, Stentiford GA, Rotchell JM. The role of the reti-
noblastoma gene in liver tumor development in fish. Environ Sci Technol. 
2005;39:9785–9790.
Eaton D, Gallagher E, Hooper M, et al. Species differences in response 
to toxic substances: shared pathways of toxicity—values and limitations 
of omic technologies to elucidate mechanism or mode of action. In: 
Benson WH, Di Giulio RT, eds. Emerging Molecular and Computational 
Approaches for Cross-Species Extrapolations. New York: Taylor & 
Francis; 2006.

Ecotoxicology
Chapter 30
1459
Edwards SW, Tan YM, Villeneuve DL, Meek ME, McQueen CA. Adverse 
outcome pathways—organizing toxicological information to improve 
decision making. J Pharmacol Exp Therapeut. 2016;336:170–181.
Environmental Protection Agency. Summary Report on Issues in Ecological 
Risk Assessment. EPA/625/3-91/018. Springfield, VA: NTIS; 1991.
Erickson RJ. The biotic ligand model approach for addressing effects of 
exposure water chemistry on aquatic toxicity of metals: genesis and chal-
lenges. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2013;32:1212–1214.
Evans DH. The fish gill: site of action and model for toxic effects of envi-
ronmental pollutants. Environ Health Perspect. 1987;71:47–58.
Evans MI, Syemens P, Pilcher CWT. Short-term damage to coastal bird 
populations in Saudi-Arabia and Kuwait following the 1991 Gulf War 
marine pollution. Mar Pollut Bull. 1993;27:157–161.
Fairbrother A, Ankley GT, Birnbaum LS, et al. Reproductive and develop-
mental toxicology of contaminants in oviparous animals. In: Di Giulio RT, 
Tillitt DE, eds. Reproductive and Developmental Effects of Contaminants 
in Oviparous Vertebrates. Pensacola, FL: SETAC Press; 1999:283–361.
Fairbrother A, Smits J, Grasman KA. Avian immunotoxicology. J Toxicol 
Environ Health Crit Rev. 2004;7B:105–137.
Fernandez P, Grimait JO. On the global distribution of persistent organic 
pollutants. CHIMIA. 2003;57:514.
Fernie KJ, Mayne G, Shutt JL, et al. Evidence of immunomodulation in 
nestling American kestrels (Falco sparverius) exposed to environmen-
tally relevant PBDEs. Environ Pollut. 2005;138:485–493.
Fleeger JW, Carman KR, Nisbet RM. Indirect effects of contaminants in 
aquatic ecosystems. Sci Total Environ. 2003;317:207.
Forbes VE, Calow P. Is per capita rate of increase a good measure of popula-
tion-level effects in ecotoxicology? Environ Toxicol Chem. 1999;18:1544.
Forman RTT, Godron M. Landscape Ecology. New York: Wiley; 1986.
Fossi MC, Marsili L. The use of non-destructive biomarkers in the study of 
marine mammals. Biomarkers. 1997;2:205–216.
Fox G. Practical causal inference for ecoepidemiologists. J Toxicol Environ 
Health. 1991;33:359.
Fridovich I. Mitochondria: are they the seat of senescence? Aging Cell. 
2004;3:13–16.
Fry DM. Reproductive effects in birds exposed to pesticides and industrial 
chemicals. Environ Health Perspect. 1995;103(suppl 7):165–171.
Fuchs SM, Krajewski K, Baker RW, et al. Influence of combinatorial his-
tone modifications on antibody and effector protein recognition. Curr 
Biol. 2011;21:53–58.
Gajecka M. Unrevealed mosaicism in the next-generation sequencing era. 
Mol Genet Genomics. 2016;291:513–530.
Gard TC. Stochastic models for toxicant-stressed populations. Bull Math 
Biol. 1992;54:827–837.
Gardner SC, Oberdorster E. Toxicology of Reptiles. Boca Raton, FL: Taylor 
& Francis; 2005.
Gilbertson M, Kubiak T, Ludwig J, et al. Great Lakes embryo mortality, 
edema, and deformities syndrome (GLEMEDS) in colonial fish-eating 
birds—similarity to chick edema disease. J Toxicol Environ Health. 
1991;33: 455–520.
Grant BS. Allelic melanism in American and British peppered moths. J 
Hered. 2004;95:97–102.
Grue CE, Gilbert PL, Seeley ME. Neurophysiological and behavioral 
changes in non-target wildlife exposed to organophosphate and carba-
mate pesticides: thermoregulation, food consumption, and reproduction. 
Am Zool. 1997;37:369–388.
Grue CE, Powell GVN, McChesney MJ. Care of nestlings by wild 
female starlings exposed to an organophosphate pesticide. J Appl Ecol. 
1982;19:327–335.
Guillette LJ, Crain DA, Gunderson MP, et al. Alligators and endocrine 
disrupting contaminants: a current perspective. Am Zool. 2000;40: 
438–452.
Ha NT, Freytag S, Bickeboeller H. Coverage and efficiency in current SNP 
chips. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014;9:1124–1130.
Hahn ME. Aryl hydrocarbon receptors: diversity and evolution. Chem Biol 
Interact. 2002;141:131–160.
Hahn ME, Merson RR, Karchner SI. Xenobiotic receptors in fish: struc-
tural and functional diversity and evolutionary insights. In: Mommsen 
TP, Moon TW, eds. Environmental Toxicology, Vol 6: Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology of Fishes. Amsterdam, the Netherlands: Elsevier; 
2005.
Hall AJ, Hugunin K, Deaville R, et al. The risk of infection from polychlo-
rinated biphenyl exposure in the harbor porpoise (Phocoena phocoena): 
a case–control approach. Environ Health Perspect. 2006;114:704–711.
Halliwell B, Gutteridge JMC. Free Radicals in Biology and Medicine. 3rd 
ed. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press; 1999.
Handy RD, Runnalls T, Russell PM. Histopathologic biomarkers in 
three spined sticklebacks, Gasterosteus aculeatus, from several riv-
ers in Southern England that meet the freshwater fisheries directive. 
Ecotoxicology. 2002;11:467–479.
Hankinson O. The aryl hydrocarbon receptor complex. Annu Rev Pharmacol 
Toxicol. 1995;35:307–340.
Hanscom C, Talkowski M. Design of large-insert jumping libraries for 
structural variant detection using Illumina sequencing. Curr Protoc Hum 
Genet. 2014;80:1–9.
Harries JE, Sheahan DA, Jobling S, et al. Estrogenic activity in five United 
Kingdom rivers detected by measurement of vitellogenesis in caged male 
trout. Environ Toxicol Chem. 1997;16:534–543.
Harshbarger JC, Clark JB. Epizootiology of neoplasms of bony fish of 
North America. Sci Total Environ. 1990;94:1–32.
Hasspieler BM, Behar JV, Di Giulio RT. Glutathione-dependent defense 
in channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus) and brown bullhead (Ameriurus 
nebulosus). Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 1994;28:82–90.
Heath JA, Frederick PC. Relationships among mercury concentrations, 
hormones, and nesting effort of White Ibises (Eudocimus albus) in the 
Florida Everglades. Auk. 2005;122:255–267.
Heid SE, Walker MK, Swanson HI. Correlation of cardiotoxicity mediated 
by halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons to aryl hydrocarbon receptor acti-
vation. Toxicol Sci. 2001;61:187–196.
Henny CJ. Effects of mining lead on birds: a case history at Coeur d’Alene 
Basin, Idaho. In: Hoffman DJ, Rattner BA, Burton GA Jr, Cairns J Jr, 
eds. Handbook of Ecotoxicology. 2nd ed. Boca Raton, FL: Lewis; 2003.
Hill AB. The environment and disease: association or causation? Proc R Soc 
Med. 1965;59:295.
Hinton DE. Cells, cellular responses, and their markers in chronic toxic-
ity. In: Malins DC, Ostrander GK, eds. Aquatic Toxicology: Molecular, 
Biochemical, and Cellular Perspectives. Boca Raton, FL: Lewis; 1994: 
207–239.
Hippeli S, Elstner EF. Mechanisms of oxygen activation during 
plant stress: biochemical effects of air pollutants. J Plant Physiol. 
1996;148:249–257.
Hoffman DJ, Rattner BA, Burton GA, Cairns J, eds. Handbook of 
Ecotoxicology. Boca Raton, FL: Lewis Publishers; 2003.
Holm J, Palace V, Siwik P, et al. Developmental effects of bioaccumulated 
selenium in eggs and larvae of two salmonid species. Environ Toxicol 
Chem. 2005;24:2373–2381.
Hontela A. Endocrine and physiological responses to xenobiotics in fish: 
role of glucocorticoid hormones. Rev Toxicol. 1997;1:1–46.
Horness BH, Lomax DP, Johnson LL, et al. Sediment quality thresholds: 
estimates from hockey stick regression of liver prevalence in English sole 
(Pleuronectes vetulus). Environ Toxicol Chem. 1998;17:872.
Hose JE, Cross JN, Smith SG, Diehl DL. Elevated circulating erythrocyte 
micronuclei in fishes from contaminated sites off southern California. 
Mar Environ Res. 1987;22:167–176.
Huang YW, Matthews JB, Fertuck KC, Zacharewski TR. Use of Xenopus 
laevis as a model for investigating in vitro and in vivo endocrine disrup-
tion in amphibians. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2005;24:2002–2009.
Huang Z, Bassil CF, Murphy SK. Bisulfite sequencing of cloned alleles. 
Methods Mol Biol. 2013;1049:83–94.
Huggett RJ, Kimerle RA, Mehrle PM Jr, Bergman HL, eds. Biomarkers: 
Biochemical, Physiological, and Histological Markers of Anthropogenic 
Stress. Boca Raton, FL: Lewis Publishers; 1992.
Husby MP, McBee K. Nuclear DNA content variation and double-strand 
DNA breakage in white-footed mice (Peromyscus leucopus) collected 
from abandoned strip mines, Oklahoma, USA. Environ Toxicol Chem. 
1999;18:926–931.
Hwang HM, Wade TL, Sericano JL. Relationship between lysosomal 
membrane destabilization and chemical body burden in eastern oysters

1460
ENVIRONMENTAL TOXICOLOGY
Unit VI
(Crassostrea virginica) from Galveston Bay, Texas, USA. Environ Toxicol 
Chem. 2002;21:1268–1271.
Incardona JP, Carls MG, Teraoka H, et al. Aryl hydrocarbon receptor- 
independent toxicity of weathered crude oil during fish development. 
Environ Health Perspect. 2005;113:1755–1762.
Jansen A, Forbes VE, Parker ED Jr. Variation in cadmium uptake, feeding 
rate, and life-history effects in the gastropod Potamopyrgus antipodarum: 
linking toxicant effects on individuals to the population level. Environ 
Toxicol Chem. 2001;20:2503.
Johnson L, Casillas E, Sol S, et al. Contaminant effects on reproductive suc-
cess in selected benthic fish. Mar Environ Res. 1993;35:165–170.
Johnson LL, Stein JE, Collier TK, Casillas E, Varanasi U. Indicators 
of reproductive development in prespawning female winter flounder 
(Pleuronectes americanus) from urban and nonurban estuaries in the 
northeast United States. Sci Total Environ. 1994;141:241–260.
Kammenga J, Laskowski R. Demography in Ecotoxicology. Chichester, 
UK: Wiley; 2000.
Kappus H. Overview of enzyme systems involved in bio-reduction of drugs 
and in redox cycling. Biochem Pharmacol. 1986;35:1–6.
Karr JR. Biological integrity: a long-neglected aspect of water resource 
management. Ecol Appl. 1991;1:66.
Kedwards TJ, Maund SJ, Chapman PF. Community level analysis of eco-
toxicological field studies: I. Biological monitoring. Environ Toxicol 
Chem. 1999;18:149.
Keller JM, McClellan-Green PD, Kucklick JR, Keil DE, Peden-Adams 
MM. Effects of organochlorine contaminants on loggerhead sea turtle 
immunity: comparison of a correlative field study and in vitro exposure 
experiments. Environ Health Perspect. 2006;114:70–76.
Kendall RJ, Anderson TA, Baker RJ, et al. Ecotoxicology. In: Klaassen CD, 
ed. Casarett and Doull’s Toxicology: The Basic Science of Poisons. 6th 
ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2001.
Kendall RJ, Lacher TE Jr, Bunck C, et al. An ecological risk assessment of 
lead shot exposure in non-waterfowl avian species: upland game birds 
and raptors. Environ Toxicol Chem. 1996;15:4–20.
Kidd KA, Bootsma HA, Hesslein RH, Muir DCG, Hecky RE. 
Biomagnification of DDT through the benthic and pelagic food webs of 
Lake Malawi, East Africa: importance of trophic level and carbon source. 
Environ Sci Technol. 2001;35:14–20.
Kim M, Lee KH, Yoon SW, et al. Analytical tools and databases for 
metagenomics in the next-generation sequencing era. Genomics Inform. 
2013;11:102–113.
Klobicar GI, Stambuk A, Pavlica M, Sertic Peric M, Kutuzovic Hackenberger 
B, Hylland K. Genotoxicity monitoring of freshwater environments using 
caged carp (Cyprinus carpio). Ecotoxicology. 2010;19:77–84.
Koboldt DC, Steinberg KM, Larson DE, et al. The next-generation sequenc-
ing revolution and its impact on genomics. Cell. 2013;155:27–38.
Kohler A, Wahl E, Soffker K. Functional and morphological changes of 
lysosomes as prognostic biomarkers of toxic liver injury in a marine flat-
fish (Platichthys flesus (L.)). Environ Toxicol Chem. 2002;21:2434–2444.
Korthals GW, Alexiev AD, Lexmond TM, Kammenga JE, Bongers T. Long-
term effects of copper and pH on the nematode community in an agroeco-
system. Environ Toxicol Chem. 1996;15:979.
Krebs CJ. Ecological Methodology. 2nd ed. New York: Benjamin 
Cummings; 1998.
Kreutzweiser DP, Capell SS, Scarr TA. Community-level responses by 
stream insects to NEEM products containing azadirachtin. Environ 
Toxicol Chem. 2000;19:855.
Krivtsov V. Investigations of indirect relationships in ecology and environ-
mental science: a review and the implications for comparative theoretical 
ecosystem analysis. Ecol Model. 2004;174:37.
Ku CS, Wu M, Cooper DN, et al. Exome versus transcriptome sequenc-
ing in identifying coding region variants. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 
2012;12:241–251.
Landis WG, Matthews RA, Matthews GB. Design and analysis of multi-
species toxicity tests for pesticide registration. Ecol Appl. 1997;7:1111.
Larson RA, Weber EJ. Reaction Mechanisms in Environmental Organic 
Chemistry. Boca Raton, FL: Lewis Publishers; 1994.
Larsson DGJ, Adolfsson-Erici M, Parkkonen J, et al. Ethinyloestradiol—an 
undesired fish contraceptive? Aquat Toxicol. 1999;45:91–97.
Lee B-G, Griscom SB, Lee J-K, et al. Influences of dietary uptake and reac-
tive sulfides on metal bioavailability from aquatic sediments. Science. 
2000;287:282.
Lemly AD. Symptoms and implications of selenium toxicity in fish: the 
Belews Lake case example. Aquat Toxicol. 2002;57:39–49.
Leslie HA, Oosthoek AJP, Busser FJM, Kraak MHS, Hermens JLM. 
Biomimetic solid-phase microextraction to predict body residues and tox-
icity of chemicals that act by narcosis. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2002;21:229.
Leung KMY, Kwong RPY, Ng WC, et al. Ecological risk assessments of 
endocrine disrupting organotin compounds using neogastropods in Hong 
Kong. Chemosphere. 2006;65:922–938.
Li J, Quabius ES, Wendelaar Bonga SE, Flik G, Lock RAC. Effects of 
water-borne copper on branchial chloride cells and Na+/K+-ATPase 
activities in Mozambique tilapia (Oreochromis mossambicus). Aquat 
Toxicol. 1998;43:1–11.
Linbo TL, Stehr CM, Incardona JP, Scholz NL. Dissolved copper trig-
gers cell death in the peripheral mechanosensory system of larval fish. 
Environ Toxicol Chem. 2006;25:597–603.
Lipscomb TP, Harris RK, Rebar AH, Ballachey BE, Haebler RJ. Exxon 
Valdez Oil Spill State/Federal Natural Resource Damage Assessment, 
Final Report. Pathological Studies of Sea Otters (Marine Mammal Study 
6–11). Anchorage, AK: U.S. FWS; 1996.
Little PFR. Structure and function of the human genome. Genome Res. 
2005;15:1759–1766.
Livingstone DR. Contaminant-stimulated reactive oxygen species pro-
duction and oxidative damage in aquatic organisms. Mar Pollut Bull. 
2001;42:656–666.
Lloyd R, Herbert DWM. The influence of carbon dioxide on the toxicity of 
unionized ammonia to rainbow trout (Salmo gairdneri Richardson). Ann 
Appl Biol. 1960;48:399.
Loge FJ, Arkoosh MR, Ginn TR, Johnson LL, Collier TK. Impact of envi-
ronmental stressors on the dynamics of disease transmission. Environ Sci 
Technol. 2005;39:7329–7336.
Loreau M. Does functional redundancy exist? Oikos. 2004;104:606.
Lorenzen A, Williams KL, Moon TW. Determination of the estrogenic and 
antiestrogenic effects of environmental contaminants in chicken embryo 
hepatocyte cultures by quantitative-polymerase chain reaction. Environ 
Toxicol Chem. 2003;22:2329–2336.
Louis A, Nguyen NTT, Muffato M, Crollius HR. Genomics update 2015: 
KaryoView and MatrixView provide a genome-wide perspective to multi-
species comparative genomics. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015;43:D682–D689.
Luoma SN. Can we determine the biological availability of sediment-bound 
trace elements? Hydrobiologia. 1989;379:176–177.
Luoma SN, Bryan GW. Factors controlling the availability of sediment-
bound lead to the estuarine bivalve Scrobicularia plana. J Mar Biol Assoc 
UK. 1978;58:793.
Maccubbin AE. DNA adduct analysis in fish: laboratory and field stud-
ies. In: Malins DC, Ostrander GK, eds. Aquatic Toxicology: Molecular, 
Biochemical, and Cellular Perspectives. Boca Raton, FL: Lewis 
Publishers; 1994:267–294.
Mackay D. Correlation of bioconcentration factors. Environ Sci Technol. 
1982;16:274.
MAFF (Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries). Guidance on 
Toxicological Study Data for Application of Pesticide Registration. No. 
59-Nousan-4200. Japan: Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries; 1985.
Magurran AE. Ecological Diversity and its Measurement. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press; 1988.
Malins DC, Anderson KM, Stegeman JJ, et al. Biomarkers signal contami-
nant effects on the organs of English sole (Parophrys vetulus) from Puget 
Sound. Environ Health Perspect. 2006;114:823–829.
Malins DC, Krahn MM, Brown DW, et al. Toxic chemicals in marine sedi-
ment and biota from Mukilteo, Washington: relationships with hepatic 
neoplasms and other hepatic lesions in English sole (Parophrys vetulus). 
J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr. 1987;74:487–494.
Mallet J. The evolution of insecticide resistance: have the insects won? 
Trends Ecol Evol. 1989;14:336.
Martineau D, Lemberger K, Dallaire A, et al. Cancer in wildlife, a case 
study: beluga from the St. Lawrence estuary, Quebec, Canada. Environ 
Health Perspect. 2002;110:285–292.

Ecotoxicology
Chapter 30
1461
Mason AZ, Nott JA. The role of intracellular biomineralized granules in 
the regulation and detoxification of metals in gastropods with special 
reference to the marine prosobranch Littorina littorea. Aquat Toxicol. 
1981;1:239.
Mathews AP. The relation between solution tension, atomic volume, and the 
physiological action of elements. Am J Physiol. 1904;10:290.
Mauer BA, Holt RD. Effects of chronic pesticide stress on wildlife popu-
lations in complex landscapes: processes at multiple scales. Environ 
Toxicol Chem. 1996;15:420.
Mayer LM, Chen Z, Findlay RH, et al. Bioavailability of sedimentary 
contaminants subject to deposit-feeder digestion. Environ Sci Technol. 
1996;30:2641.
MacDonald R, Mackay D, Hickie B. Contaminant amplification in the envi-
ronment. Environ Sci Technol. 2002;36:457A–462A.
McDonald BG, Chapman PM. PAH phototoxicity—an environmentally 
irrelevant phenomenon? Mar Pollut Bull. 2002;44:1321–1326.
McMahon G, Huber LJ, Moore MJ, Stegeman JJ, Wogan GN. Mutations 
in c-Ki-ras oncogenes in diseased livers of winter flounder from Boston 
Harbor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1990;87:841–845.
Mellanen P, Soimasuo M, Holmbloom B, Oikari A, Santti R. Expression of 
the Vitellogenin gene in the liver of juvenile whitefish (Coregonus laval-
etus L. s.l.) exposed to effluents from pulp and paper mills. Ecotoxicol 
Environ Saf. 1999;43:133–137.
Meyer JN, Nacci D, Di Giulio RT. Cytochrome P4501A (CYP1A) in killifish 
(Fundulus heteroclitus): heritability of altered expression and relation-
ship to survival in contaminated sediments. Toxicol Sci. 2002;68:69–81.
Meyer JN, Smith JD, Winston GW, Di Guilio RT. Antioxidant defenses in 
killifish (Fundulus heteroclitus) exposed to contaminated sediments and 
model prooxidants: short-term and heritable responses. Aquat Toxicol. 
2003;65:377.
Miller KA, Assuncao MGL, Dangerfield NJ, Bandiera SM, Ross PS. 
Assessment of cytochrome P450 1A in harbour seals (Phoca vitulina) 
using a minimally-invasive biopsy approach. Mar Environ Res. 2005;60: 
153–169.
Mineau P, ed. Cholinesterase-Inhibiting Insecticides: Their Impact on 
Wildlife and the Environment. Amsterdam, the Netherlands: Elsevier; 
1991.
Mineau P, Fletcher MR, Glaser LC, et al. Poisoning of raptors with organo-
phosphorus and carbamate pesticides with emphasis on Canada, US and 
UK. J Raptor Res. 1999;33:1–37.
Miranda ML, Mohai P, Bus J, et al. Policy concepts and applications. In: 
Di Giulio RT, Benson WH, eds. Interconnections between Human Health 
and Ecological Integrity. Pensacola, FL: SETAC Press; 2002.
Moller P. The alkaline comet assay: towards validation in biomonitor-
ing of DNA damaging exposures. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 
2006;98:336–345.
Mommsen TP, Moon TW. Environmental Toxicology. Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology of Fishes. Vol 6. Amsterdam, the Netherlands: 
Elsevier; 2005.
Moore MN. Do nanoparticles present ecotoxicological risks for the health 
of the aquatic environment? Environ Int. 2006;32:967–976.
Moore MN, Allen JI, McVeigh A. Environmental prognostics: an integrated 
model supporting lysosomal stress responses as predictive biomarkers of 
animal health status. Mar Environ Res. 2006;61:278–304.
Mulvey M, Newman MC, Vogelbein W, Unger MA. Genetic structure of 
Fundulus heteroclitus from PAH-contaminated and neighboring sites in 
the Elizabeth and York Rivers. Aquat Toxicol. 2002;61:195.
Mulvey M, Newman MC, Vogelbein W, Unger MA, Ownby DR. Genetic 
structure and mtDNA diversity of Fundulus heteroclitus populations 
from PAH-contaminated and neighboring sites. Environ Toxicol Chem. 
2003;22:671.
Munkittrick KR, Portt CB, van der Kraak GJ, et al. Impact of bleached kraft 
mill effluent on population characteristics, liver MFO activity, and serum 
steroid levels of a Lake Superior white sucker (Catostomus commersoni) 
population. Can J Fish Aquat Sci. 1991;48:1371–1380.
Muzzey D, Evans EA, Lieber C. Understanding the basics of NGS: from 
mechanism to variant calling. Curr Genet Med Rep. 2015;3:158–165.
Myers MS, Stehr CM, Olson OP, et al. Relationships between toxicopathic 
hepatic lesions and exposure to chemical contaminants in English sole 
(Pleuronectes vetulus), starry flounder (Platichthys stellatus), and white 
croaker (Genyonemus lineatus) from selected marine sites on the Pacific 
coast, USA. Environ Health Perspect. 1994;102:200.
Naeem S, Thompson LJ, Lawler SP, Lawton JH, Woodfin RM. Declining 
biodiversity can alter the performance of ecosystems. Nature. 
1994;6473:734–737.
National Research Council. Risk Assessment in the Federal Government: 
Managing the Process. Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences; 
1983.
Nebert DW, Roe AL, Dieter MZ, Solis WA, Yang Y, Dalton TP. Role of 
the aromatic hydrocarbon receptor and [Ah] gene battery in the oxidative 
stress response, cell cycle control, and apoptosis. Biochem Pharmacol. 
2000;59:65–85.
Neely WK, Branson DR, Blau GE. Partition coefficient to measure biocon-
centration potential of organic chemicals in fish. Environ Sci Technol. 
1974;8:1113.
Newman MC. Population Ecotoxicology. Chichester, UK: Wiley; 2001.
Newman MC. Quantitative Ecotoxicology. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 
2013.
Newman MC. Fundamentals of Ecotoxicology: The Science of Pollution. 
4th ed. Boca Raton, FL: Lewis Publishers; 2015.
Newman MC, Clements WH. Ecotoxicology: A Comprehensive Treatment. 
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2008.
Newman MC, Crane M, Holloway G. Does pesticide risk assessment in 
the European Union assess long-term effects? Rev Environ Toxicol. 
2006;187:1.
Nigro M, Falleni A, Del Barga I, et al. Cellular biomarkers for monitor-
ing estuarine environments: transplanted versus native mussels. Aquat 
Toxicol. 2006;77:339–347.
Nott JA, Nicolaidou A. Bioreduction of zinc and manganese along a mol-
luscan food chain. Comp Biochem Physiol. 1993;104A:235.
NRC (Nuclear Regulatory Commission). Biologic Markers in Reproductive 
Toxicology. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 1989.
Oaks JL, Gilbert M, Virani MZ, et al. Diclofenac residues as the cause of 
vulture population decline in Pakistan. Nature. 2004;427:630–633.
O’Connor RJ. Toward the incorporation of spatiotemporal dynamics into 
ecotoxicology. In: Rhodes OE Jr, Chesser RK, Smith MH, eds. Population 
Dynamics in Ecological Space and Time. Chicago, IL: University of 
Chicago Press; 1996:281–317.
Odum EP. Trends expected in stressed ecosystems. Bioscience. 
1985;35:419–422.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development). 
OECD Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals. Paris: OECD; 1981.
Ohlendorf HM. The birds of Kesterson Reservoir: a historical perspective. 
Aquat Toxicol. 2002;57:1–10.
O’Keefe MK, Baum A. Perceptions of ecosystem health, stress and human 
well-being. In: Di Giulio RT, Monosson E, eds. Interconnections between 
Human and Ecosystem Health. London: Chapman & Hall; 1996.
Ormseth OA, Ben-David M. Ingestion of crude oil: effects on digesta reten-
tion times and nutrient uptake in captive river otters. J Comp Physiol B. 
2000;170:419.
Ostrander GK, Rotchell JM. Fish models of carcinogenesis. In: Mommsen TP, 
Moon TW, eds. Environmental Toxicology, Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology of Fishes. Vol 6. Amsterdam, the Netherlands: Elsevier; 
2005.
Ownby D, Newman MC, Mulvey M, Unger M, Vogelbein W. Fish (Fundulus 
heteroclitus) populations with different exposure histories differ in tol-
erance of creosote-contaminated sediments. Environ Toxicol Chem. 
2002;21:1897.
Pacheco M, Santos MA. Biotransformation, genotoxic, and histopatho-
logical effects of environmental contaminants in European eel (Anguilla 
anguilla L.). Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2002;53:331–347.
Paerl HW, Pinckney JL, Fear JM, Peierls BL. Ecosystem responses to inter-
nal and watershed organic matter loading: consequences for hypoxia in 
the eutrophying Neuse river estuary, North Carolina, USA. Mar Ecol 
Prog Ser. 1999;166:17–25.
Parker ML, Goldstein MI. Differential toxicities of organophosphate and 
carbamate insecticides in the nestling European starling (Sturnus vul-
garis). Arch Environ Contam Toxicol. 2000;39:233–242.

1462
ENVIRONMENTAL TOXICOLOGY
Unit VI
Partridge GG. Relative fitness of genotypes in a population of Rattus nor-
vegicus polymorphic for warfarin resistance. Heredity. 1979;43:239.
Patrick R. Use of algae, especially diatoms in the assessment of water qual-
ity. ASTM Spec Tech Bull. 1973;528:76.
Peakall D. Animal Biomarkers as Pollution Indicators. New York: Chapman 
& Hall; 1992.
Peck MA, Brandhagen MD, Marshall C, et al. Concordance and repro-
ducibility of a next generation mtGenome sequencing method for 
high-quality samples using the Illumina MiSeq. Forensic Sci Int Genet. 
2016;24:103–111.
Peeters ETHM, Gardeniers JJP, Koelmans AA. Contribution of trace metals 
in structuring in situ macroinvertebrate community composition along a 
salinity gradient. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2000;19:1002.
Perkins E, Garcia-Reyero N, Edwards S, et al. The adverse outcome path-
way: a conceptual framework to support toxicity testing in the twenty-first 
century. In: Hoenig J, Peitsch MC. Computational Systems Toxicology. 
New York: Springer. 2015:1–26.
Peterson CH, Rice SD, Short JW, et al. Long-term ecosystem response to 
the Exxon Valdez oil spill. Science. 2003;302:2082–2086.
Phillips DH. Detection of DNA modifications by the 32P-postlabelling 
assay. Mutat Res. 1997;178:1–12.
Pimentel MF, Damasceno EP, Jimenez PC, et al. Endocrine disruption 
in Sphoeroides testudineus tissues and sediments highlights contami-
nation in a northeastern Brazilian estuary. Environ Monitor Assess. 
2016;188:298.
Pinkney AE, Harshbarger JC, May EB, Melancon MJ. Tumor prevalence 
and biomarkers of exposure in brown bullheads (Ameiurus nebulosus) 
from the tidal Potomac River, USA, watershed. Environ Toxicol Chem. 
2001;20:1196–1205.
Ploch SA, King LC, Kohan MJ, Di Giulio RT. Comparative in vitro and 
in vivo benzo(a)pyrene–DNA adduct formation and its relationship 
to CYP1A activity in two species of Ictalurid catfish. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 1998;149:90–98.
Porte C, Janer G, Lorusso LC, et al. Endocrine disruptors in marine 
organisms: approaches and perspectives. Comp Biochem Physiol. 
2006;143C:303–315.
Pratt JR, Cairns J Jr. Ecotoxicology and the redundancy problem: under-
standing effects on community structure and function. In: Newman MC, 
Jagoe CH, eds. Ecotoxicology. A Hierarchical Treatment. Boca Raton, 
FL: CRC Press; 1996:347.
Preston BL. Indirect effects in aquatic ecotoxicology: implications for eco-
logical risk assessment. Environ Manage. 2002;29:311.
Quek K, Nones K, Patch AM, et al. A workflow to increase verification rate 
of chromosomal structural rearrangements using high-throughput next-
generation sequencing. Biotechniques. 2014;57:31–38.
Rambler MB, Margulis L, Fester R. Global Ecology: Towards a Science of 
the Biosphere. Boston, MA: Academic Press; 1989.
Rand GM. Behavior. In: Rand GM, Petrocelli AR, eds. Fundamentals of 
Aquatic Toxicology. Washington, DC: Hemisphere; 1985:221–263.
Rands MRW. Pesticide use on cereals and the survival of grey partridge 
Perdix perdix chicks in a field experiment. J Appl Ecol. 1985;22:49.
Reichert WL, Myers MS, Peck-Miller K, et al. Molecular epizootiol-
ogy of genotoxic events in marine fish: linking contaminant exposure, 
DNA damage, and tissue-level alterations. Mutat Res Rev Mutat Res. 
1998;411:215–225.
Reid NM, Proestou DA, Clark BW, et al. The genomic landscape of rapid 
repeated evolutionary adaptation to toxic pollution in wild fish. Science. 
2016;354:1305–1308.
Reinfelder JR, Fisher NS. The assimilation of elements ingested by marine 
copepods. Science. 1991;251:794.
Rice CD, Schlenk D. Immune function and cytochrome P4501A activ-
ity after acute exposure to 3,3,4,4,5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB 126) in 
channel catfish. J Aquat Anim Health. 1995;7:195–204.
Richardson CJ, Di Giulio RT, Tandy NE. Free Radical Mediated Processes 
as Markers of Air Pollution Stress in Trees. Biologic Markers of Air-
Pollution Stress and Damage in Forests. Washington, DC: National 
Academy Press; 1989:251–260.
Roberts TC, Hart JR, Kaikkonen MU, et al. Quantification of nascent tran-
scription by bromouridine immunocapture nuclear run-on RT-qPCR. Nat 
Protoc. 2015;10-1198-211.
Rodriguez-Ubreva J, Ballestar E. Chromatin immunoprecipitation. Methods 
Mol Biol. 2014;1094:309–318.
Rogers JT, Richards JG, Wood CM. Ionoregulatory disruption as the acute 
toxic mechanism for lead in the rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss). 
Aquat Toxicol. 2003;64:215–234.
Ross P, De Swart R, Addison R, et al. Contaminant-induced immunotoxic-
ity in harbour seals: wildlife at risk? Toxicology. 1996;112:157–169.
Rotchell JM, Ostrander GK. Molecular markers of endocrine disruption in 
aquatic organisms. J Toxicol Environ Health B. 2003;6:453–495.
Rothbart SB, Krajewski K, Strahl BD, et al. Peptide microarrays to inter-
rogate the “histone code.” Methods Enzymol. 2012;512:107–135.
Rowan DJ, Rasmussen JB. Bioaccumulation of radioceasium by fish: the 
influence of physicochemical factors and trophic structure. Can J Fish 
Aquat Sci. 1994;51:2388–2410.
Ruiz JM, Barreiro R, Gonzalez JJ. Biomonitoring organotin pollution with 
gastropods and mussels. Mar Ecol Prog Ser. 2005;287:169–176.
Saavedra Alvarez MM, Ellis DV. Widespread neogastropod imposex in the 
Northeastern Pacific: implications for TBT contamination surveys. Mar 
Pollut Bull. 1990;21:244–247.
Salminen J, Van Gestel CAM, Oksanen J. Pollution-induced community 
tolerance and functional redundancy in a decomposer food web in metal-
stressed soil. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2001;20:2287.
Sanchez-Dardon J, Voccia I, Hontela A, et al. Immunomodulation by heavy 
metals tested individually or in mixtures in rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus 
mykiss) exposed in vivo. Environ Toxicol Chem. 1999;18:1492–1497.
Sandahl JF, Baldwin DH, Jenkins JJ, Scholtz NL. Comparative thresholds 
for acetylcholinesterase inhibition and behavioral impairment in coho 
salmon exposed to chlorpyrifos. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2005;24:136–145.
Saucier D, Astic L, Rioux P. The effects of early chronic exposure to 
sublethal copper on the olfactory discrimination of rainbow trout, 
Oncorhynchus mykiss. Environ Biol Fishes. 1991;30:345–351.
Schafer FQ, Buettner GR. Redox environment of the cell as viewed through 
the redox state of the glutathione disulfide/glutathione couple. Free Radic 
Biol Med. 2001;30:1191–1212.
Schindler DW. A personal history of the Experimental Lakes Project. Can J 
Fish Aquat Sci. 2009; 66: 1837–1847.
Schlenk D, Benson W. Target Organ Toxicity in Marine and Freshwater 
Teleosts. New York: Taylor & Francis; 2001.
Schlezinger JJ, Stegeman JJ. Induction and suppression of cytochrome 
P450 1A by 3,3,4,4,5-pentachlorobiphenyl and its relationship to oxida-
tive stress in the marine fish scup (Stenotomus chrysops). Aquat Toxicol. 
2001;52:101–115.
Schmidt 
CW. 
Toxicogenomics. 
Environ 
Health 
Perspect. 
2002;110:A750–A755.
Schmitt CJ, Whyte JJ, Brumbaugh WG, Tillitt DE. Biochemical effects 
of lead, zinc, and cadmium from mining on fish in the Tri-States 
district of northeastern Oklahoma, USA. Environ Toxicol Chem. 
2005;24:1483–1495.
Scholz NL, Truelove NK, French BL, et al. Diazinon disrupts antipredator 
and homing behaviors in Chinook salmon (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha). 
Can J Fish Aquat Sci. 2000;57:1911–1918.
Schwacke LH, Voit EO, Hansen LJ, et al. Probabilistic risk assessment of 
reproductive effects of polychlorinated biphenyls on bottlenose dolphins 
(Tursiops truncatus) from the southeast United States coast. Environ 
Toxicol Chem. 2002;21:2752–2764.
Schulz S, Haussler S. Chromatin immunoprecipitation for ChIP-chip and 
ChIP-seq. Methods Mol Biol. 2104;1149:591–605.
Scott GR, Sloman KA. The effects of environmental pollutants on complex 
fish behaviour: integrating behavioural and physiological indicators of 
toxicity. Aquat Toxicol. 2004;68:369–392.
Shelby MD, Newbold RR, Tully DB, Chae K, Davis VL. Assessing environ-
mental chemicals for estrogenicity using a combination of in vitro and in 
vivo assays. Environ Health Perspect. 1996;104:1296–1300.
Sherratt TN, Roberts G, Williams P, et al. A life-history approach to pre-
dicting the recovery of aquatic invertebrate populations after exposure to 
xenobiotic chemical. Environ Toxicol Chem. 1999;18:2512.
Shugart L. DNA damage as a biomarker of exposure. Ecotoxicology. 
2000;9:329–340.
Sies H, Cadenas E. Oxidative stress: damage to intact cells and organs. 
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 1985;311:617–631.

Ecotoxicology
Chapter 30
1463
Simkiss K, Daniels S, Smith RH. Effects of population density and cadmium 
toxicity on growth and survival of blowflies. Environ Pollut. 1993;81:41.
Simonich SL, Hites RA. Global distribution of persistent organochlorine 
compounds. Science. 1995;269:1861.
Sinnhuber RO, Hendricks JD, Wales JH, Putnam GB. Neoplasms in rain-
bow trout, a sensitive animal model for environmental carcinogenesis. 
Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1977;298:389–408.
Smith GM, Weis JS. Predator–prey relationships in mummichogs (Fundulus 
heteroclitus (L.)): effects of living in a polluted environment. J Exp Mar 
Biol Ecol. 1997;209:75–87.
Snape JR, Maund SJ, Pickford DB, Hutchinson TH. Ecotoxicogenomics: 
the challenge of integrating genomics into aquatic and terrestrial ecotoxi-
cology. Aquat Toxicol. 2004;67:143–154.
Sokolova IM. Cadmium effects on mitochondrial function are enhanced by 
elevated temperatures in a marine poikilotherm, Crassostrea virginica 
Gmelin (Bivalvia: Ostreidae). J Exp Biol. 2004;207:2639–2684.
Sol SY, Johnson LL, Horness BH, Collier TK. Relationship between oil 
exposure and reproductive parameters in fish collected following the 
Exxon Valdez oil spill. Mar Pollut Bull. 2000;40:1139–1147.
Solenska M, Micieta K, Misik M. Plant bioassays for an in situ monitor-
ing of air near an industrial area and a municipal solid waste—Zilina 
(Slovakia). Environ Monit Assess. 2006;115:499–508.
Solomon KR, Baker DB, Richards RP, et al. Ecological risk assessment 
of atrazine in North America surface waters. Environ Toxicol Chem. 
1996;15:31–76.
Solomon KR, Sibley P. New concepts in ecological risk assessment: where 
do we go from here? Mar Pollut Bull. 2002;44:279.
Spitsbergen JM, Walker MK, Olson JR, Peterson RE. Pathological altera-
tions in early life stages of lake trout, Salvelinus namaycush, exposed 
to 2,3,7,8-tetrachloro-para-dioxin as fertilized eggs. Aquat Toxicol. 
1991;19:41–71.
Spitzer PR, Risebrough RW, Walker W II, et al. Productivity of ospreys 
in Connecticut–Long Island increases as DDE residues decline. Science. 
1978;202:333.
Spromberg JA, John BM, Landis WG. Metapopulation dynamics: indirect 
effects and multiple distinct outcomes in ecological risk assessment. 
Environ Toxicol Chem. 1998;17:1640.
Spry DJ, Wood CM. Ion flux rates, acid–base status, and blood gases in 
rainbow trout, Salmo gairdneri, exposed to toxic zinc in natural soft 
water. Can J Fish Aquat Sci. 1985;42:1332–1341.
Steinert SA. DNA damage as a bivalve biomarker. Biomarkers. 
1999;4:492–496.
Stephan CE, Mount DI, Hansen DJ, Gentile JH, Chapman GA, Brungs WA. 
Guidelines for Deriving Numerical National Water Quality Criteria for 
the Protection of Aquatic Organisms and their Uses. Duluth, MN: U.S. 
EPA; 1985.
Strandberg B, Axelsen JA, Pedersen MB, Jensen J, Attrill MJ. Effect of a 
copper gradient on plant community structure. Environ Toxicol Chem. 
2006;25:743.
Sumpter JP, Jobling S. Vitellogenesis as a biomarker for estrogenic con-
tamination of the aquatic environment. Environ Health Perspect. 
1995;103(suppl 7):173–178.
Tanaka Y, Nakanishi J. Life history elasticity and the population-level effect 
of p-nonylphenol on Daphnia galeata. Ecol Res. 2001;16:41.
Tanguay RL, Andreasen EA, Walker MK, Peterson RE. Dioxin toxicity and 
aryl hydrocarbon receptor signaling in fish. In: Schecter A, Gasiewicz 
TA, eds. Dioxins and Health. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley; 2003:603–628.
Taub FB. Unique information contributed by multispecies systems: examples 
from the standardized aquatic microcosm. Ecol Appl. 1997;7:1103–1110.
Teraoka H, Dong W, Tsujimoto Y, et al. Induction of cytochrome P450 1A is 
required for circulation failure and edema by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-
p-dioxin in zebrafish. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003;304:223–228.
Tessier A, Campbell PGC, Auclair JC, Bisson M. Relationships between 
partitioning of trace metals in sediments and their accumulation in the 
tissues of the freshwater mollusc Elliptio complanata in a mining area. 
Can J Fish Aquat Sci. 1984;41:1463.
Thomann RV. Bioaccumulation model of organic chemical distribution in 
aquatic food chains. Environ Sci Technol. 1989;23:699.
Tilman D. Biodiversity: population versus ecosystem stability. Ecology. 
1996;77:350.
Tilman D, Reich PB, Knops JMH. Biodiversity and ecosystem stability in a 
decade-long grassland experiment. Nature. 2006;441:629–632.
Tilman D, Wedin D, Knops J. Productivity and sustainability influenced by 
biodiversity in grassland ecosystems. Nature. 1996;379:718.
Trimble EL. A guest editorial: update on diethylstilbestrol. Obstet Gynecol 
Surv. 2001;56:187–189.
Truhaut R. Ecotoxicology: objectives, principles and perspectives. 
Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 1977;1:151.
U.S. EPA OPPTS. OPPTS Harmonized Guidelines, Series 850—Ecological 
Effects Test Guidelines. Washington, DC: Office of Prevention, Pesticides, 
and Toxic Substances, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; 1996a.
U.S. EPA OPPTS. Ecological Effects Test Guidelines, OPPTS 850.1000. 
Special Considerations for Conducting Aquatic Laboratory Studies. EPA 
712–C–96–113. Washington, DC: Office of Prevention, Pesticides, and 
Toxic Substances, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; 1996b.
Van Aggelen G, Ankley GT, Baldwin WS, et al. Integrating omic technolo-
gies into aquatic ecological risk assessment and environmental monitor-
ing: hurdles, achievements, and future outlook. Environ Health Perspect. 
2010;118:1–5.
van der Oost R, Beyer J, Vermeulen NPE. Fish bioaccumulation and bio-
markers in environmental risk assessment. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 
2003;13:57–149.
Van Metre PC, Mahler BJ. Trends in hydrophobic organic contaminants in 
urban and reference lake sediments across the United States, 1970–2001. 
Environ Sci Technol. 2005;39:5567–5574.
Van’t Hof AE, Edmonds N, Dalikova M, Marec F, Saccheri IJ. Industrial 
melanism in British peppered moths has a singular and recent mutational 
origin. Science. 2011;332:958–960.
Vethaak ADT. Fish disease as a monitor for marine pollution: the case of the 
North Sea. Rev Fish Biol Fish. 1992;2:1–32.
Villeneuve DL, Crump D, Garcia-Reyero N, et al. Adverse outcome 
pathway (AOP) development I: strategies and principles. Toxicol Sci. 
2014a;142:312–320.
Villeneuve DL, Crump D, Garcia-Reyero N, et al. Adverse outcome pathway 
(AOP) development II: best practices. Toxicol Sci. 2014b;142:321–330.
Vogelbein WK, Fournie JW, Van Veld PA, Huggett RJ. Hepatic neoplasms 
in the mummichog Fundulus heteroclitus from a creosote-contaminated 
site. Cancer Res. 1990;50:5978–5986.
Vos JG, Bossart G, Fournier M, O’Shea T. Toxicology of Marine Mammals. 
New York: Taylor & Francis; 2002.
Walker CH. Neurotoxic pesticides and behavioural effects upon birds. 
Ecotoxicology. 2003;12:307–316.
Walker CH, Sibley RM, Hopkin SP, Peakall DB. Principles of Ecotoxicology. 
4th ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2012.
Wania DM, Mackay D. Tracking the distribution of persistent organic pol-
lutants. Environ Sci Technol. 1996;30:390A.
Wania DM, Mckay D, Li Y-F, Bidleman TF, Strand A. Global chemical 
fate of α-hexachlorocyclohexane. 1. Evaluation of a global distribution 
model. Environ Toxicol Chem. 1999;18:1390.
Wania F, Westgate JN. On the mechanism of mountain cold-trapping of 
organic chemicals. Environ Sci Technol. 2008;42:9092–9098.
Wassenberg D, Nerlinger A, Battle L, Di Giulio R. Effects of the PAH 
heterocycles, carbazole and dibenzothiophene, on in vivo and in vitro 
CYP1A activity and PAH-derived embryotoxicity. Environ Toxicol 
Chem. 2005;24:2526–2532.
Wassenberg DM, Di Giulio RT. Synergistic embryotoxicity of polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbon aryl hydrocarbon receptor agonists with cyto-
chrome P4501A inhibitors in Fundulus heteroclitus. Environ Health 
Perspect. 2004a;112:1658–1664.
Wassenberg DM, Di Giulio RT. Teratogenesis in Fundulus heterocli-
tus embryos exposed to a creosote-contaminated sediment extract and 
CYP1A inhibitors. Mar Environ Res. 2004b;58:163–168.
Watanabe H, Iguchi T. Using ecotoxicogenomics to evaluate the impact of 
chemicals on aquatic organisms. Mar Biol. 2006;149:107–115.
Wayland M, Bollinger T. Lead exposure and poisoning in bald eagles 
and golden eagles in the Canadian prairie provinces. Environ Pollut. 
1999;104:341.
Webb NA, Wood CM. Physiological analysis of the stress response asso-
ciated with acute silver nitrate exposure in freshwater rainbow trout 
(Oncorhynchus mykiss). Environ Toxicol Chem. 1998;17:579–588.

1464
ENVIRONMENTAL TOXICOLOGY
Unit VI
Webb RE, Horsfall F Jr. Endrin resistance in pine mouse. Science. 
1967;156:1762.
Webber HM, Haines TA. Mercury effects on predator avoidance behavior of 
a forage fish, golden shiner (Notemigonus crysoleucas). Environ Toxicol 
Chem. 2003;22:1556–1561.
Weinstein JE, Oris JT, Taylor DH. An ultrastructural examination of the 
mode of UV-induced toxic action of fluoranthene in the fathead minnow, 
Pimephales promelas. Aquat Toxicol. 1997;39:1–22.
Wells RS, Tornero V, Borrell A, et al. Integrating potential life-history and 
reproductive success data to examine relationships with organochlorine 
compounds for bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus) in Sarasota Bay, 
Florida. Sci Total Environ. 2005;349:106–119.
Wendelaar Bonga SE, Lock RAC. Toxicants and osmoregulation in fish. 
Neth J Zool. 1992;42:478–493.
Wendelaar Bonga SE, Lock RAC. The osmoregulatory system. In: Di 
Giulio RT, Hinton DE, eds. The Toxicology of Fishes. Boca Raton, FL: 
CRC Press. 2008.
Wester PW, van der Ven LTM, Vethaak AD, Girnwis GCM, Vos JG. Aquatic 
toxicology: opportunities for enhancement through histopathology. 
Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 2002;11:289–295.
Westgate JN, Wania F. Model-based exploration of the drivers of 
mountain cold-trapping in soil. Environ Sci: Processes Impacts. 
2013;15:2220–2232.
Weston DP, Maruya KA. Predicting bioavailability and bioaccumula-
tion with in vitro digestive fluid extraction. Environ Toxicol Chem. 
2002;21:962.
Wiemeyer SN, Scott LM, Anderson MP, Bloom PH, Stafford CJ. 
Environmental contaminants in California condors. J Wildl Manage. 
1988;52:238–247.
Wiese FK, Robertson GJ. Assessing seabird mortality from chronic oil dis-
charges at sea. J Wildl Manage. 2004;68:627–638.
Williams CR, MacDonald JW, Bammler TK, et al. Cadmium exposure dif-
ferentially alters odorant-driven behaviors and expression of olfactory 
receptors in juvenile coho salmon (Oncorhynchus kisutch). Toxicol Sci. 
2016;154:267–277.
Wilson L, Martin PA, Elliot JE, Mineau P, Cheng KM. Exposure of 
California quail to organophosphorus insecticides in apple orchards in 
the Okanagan Valley, British Columbia. Ecotoxicology. 2001;10:79–90.
Winston GW, Adams SM, Benson WH, et al. Biological bases of similari-
ties and differences. In: Di Giulio RT, Benson WH, eds. Interconnections 
Between Human Health and Ecological Integrity. Pensacola, FL: SETAC 
Press; 2002.
Winston GW, Di Giulio RT. Prooxidant and antioxidant mechanisms in 
aquatic organisms. Aquat Toxicol. 1991;19:137–161.
Wirgin I, Currie D, Garte SJ. Activation of the K-ras oncogene in liver 
tumors of Hudson River tomcod. Carcinogenesis. 1989;10:2311–2315.
Woin P. Short- and long-term effects of the pyrethroid insecticide fen-
valerate on an invertebrate pond community. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 
1998;41:137.
Wolfe MF, Schwarzbach S, Sulaiman RA. Effects of mercury on wildlife: a 
comprehensive review. Environ Toxicol Chem. 1998;17:146–160.
Woodward M. Epidemiology: Study Design and Data Analysis. 2nd ed. 
Boca Raton, FL: Chapman & Hall; 2005.
Wootton EC, Dyrynda EA, Ratcliffe NA. Comparisons of PAH-
induced immunomodulation in three bivalve mollusks. Aquat Toxicol. 
2003;65:13–25.
Wu RSS. Hypoxia: from molecular responses to ecosystem response. Mar 
Pollut Bull. 2002;45:35–45.
Xu EG, Mager EM, Grosell M, et al. Time- and oil-dependent transcrip-
tomic and physiological responses to Deepwater Horizon oil in mahi-
mahi (Coryphaena hippurus) embryos and larvae. Environ Sci Technol. 
2016;50:7842–7851.
Ye F, Samuels DC, Clark T, et al. High-throughput sequencing in mitochon-
drial DNA research. Mitochondrion. 2014;17:157–163.
Ylitalo GM, Sten JE, Hom T, et al. The role of organochlorines in cancer-
associated mortality in California sea lions (Zalophus californianus). 
Mar Pollut Bull. 2005;50:30–39.
Yong WS, Hsu FM, Chen PY. Profiling genome-wide DNA methylation. 
Epigenetics Chromatin. 2016;9:26.
Zinsstag J, Schelling E, Waitner-Toews MW, Tanner M., eds. One Health: 
The Theory and Practice of Integrated Health Approaches. Oxfordshire, 
UK: CABI; 2015.