# 31 Air Pollution
# Casarett & Doull's Toxicology, 9th Edition
# Pages: 1484-1527
# Unit: Unit VI Environmental Toxicology

31
chapter
Air Pollution*
Daniel L. Costa and Terry Gordon
AIR POLLUTION IN PERSPECTIVE
The second half of the 20th century was marked by remarkable 
changes in how the public viewed its relationship to the environ-
ment. In the 19th and early 20th centuries, national pride and pros-
perity in Western countries were often depicted as an expanse of 
urban factories with smokestacks belching opaque dark clouds 
of industrial effluent into a neutral blue sky. But the price of that 
unchecked human progress led to several air pollution catastrophes 
highlighting the profoundly detrimental impact that reckless pros-
perity could have on the environment. These images of “modern” 
life gradually gave rise to public outcry for governmental action 
to protect air quality and public health—a challenge to industry 
that had been focused on economic growth alone. The ensuing 50 
years of regulatory legislation in the United States and Western 
Europe along with cost efficient innovations by the private sector 
have remade this industrial image in most technologically devel-
oped nations.
Ironically, as regulatory control measures began to reduce 
emissions from stationary industrial sources of air pollution, high-
ways to “open spaces” and urban flight took many people to the sub-
urbs with its cleaner air and safe, comfortable lifestyle. Meanwhile, 
the developing world saw little of this growth and what grew was 
frequently cast-off old technology and variants of exploitation by 
the Western corporations attracted by abundant resources, a cheap 
work force, and fewer regulations or constraints. This situation has 
persisted in the 21st century but is evolving with broader globaliza-
tion of improved technology and communication.
The change in land use and demography in the United States 
in the 1950s and 1960s altered the national character and distri-
bution of air pollution. The commute from suburban home to city 
workplace back to suburban home led increasingly to congested 
thoroughfares, whose emissions contributed to a photochemical 
cauldron of oxidant air pollution around expanding metro-suburban 
areas. Moreover, postwar population growth and rising expectations 
Air Pollution in Perspective
A Brief History of Air Pollution and 
its Regulation
Tools to Assess Risks Associated 
with Air Pollution
Animal-to-Human Extrapolation: 
Issues and Mitigating Factors
Overarching Concepts
What Is an Adverse Health Effect?
Susceptibility
Exposure
Air Pollution: Sources and Personal 
Exposure
Indoor versus Outdoor
Indoor Air in the Developing World
Evolving Profile of Outdoor Air 
­Pollution
Epidemiologic Evidence of 
Health Effects
Outdoor Air Pollution
Acute and Episodic Exposures
Long-Term Exposures
Pollutants of Outdoor 
Ambient Air
Classic Reducing-Type Air  
Pollution
Sulfur Dioxide
Sulfuric Acid and Related  
Sulfates
Particulate Matter
Metals
Gas–Particle Interactions
Ultrafine Carbonaceous  
Matter
Chronic Effects and Cancer
Photochemical Air Pollution
Short-Term Exposures to  
Smog
Chronic Exposures to Smog
Ozone
General Toxicology
Pulmonary Function Effects
Inflammation of the Lung and Host 
Defense
Chronic Effects
Ozone Interactions with 
­Co-pollutants
Nitrogen Dioxide
General Toxicology
Pulmonary Function Effects
Inflammation of the Lung and Host 
Defense
Chronic Effects
Other Oxidants
Carbon Monoxide
Hazardous Air Pollutants
Accidental and “Fence-Line” 
Exposures
Aldehydes
Formaldehyde
Acrolein
The Multipollutant Reality 
of Air Pollution
Conclusions
Acknowledgments
References
*This chapter has been reviewed by the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency, and approved for publication. Approval does not signify that the 
contents necessarily reflect the views and the policies of the Agency.

1466
Environmental Toxicology
unit VI
for a better (peace-time) standard of living led to unrestrained con-
sumption, including inexpensive gasoline for commuting and rec-
reation. Similar patterns of unrestrained growth are occurring in 
developing nations throughout the world.
Today, the search is worldwide for cheap oil to fuel transporta-
tion and goods movement and international sources are increasingly 
prominent. For nontransportation sectors of industry and electricity 
generation, low cost and domestic availability have brought coal 
to the top of the energy pyramid in many countries. Other energy 
sources, natural gas and biomass in its varied forms, are being 
intensively explored to meet the energy demands of modern life. 
Most notable as a potential major resource is natural gas which is 
being recovered through less conventional methods (e.g., fracking), 
which has brought about a revolution in energy resources in the 
United States. Decades to come will see an evolution in our energy 
portfolio driven by cost and access, environmental impacts includ-
ing climate change, and technological innovation. Nevertheless, so 
long as organically derived fuel is combusted to derive energy, its 
potential for impact on air quality and on public health and the 
environment will remain.
While great strides have been made in balancing regulation 
and technology to reduce emissions from stationary and mobile 
sources, unsatisfactory air quality continues to impose a risk to 
public and environmental health in developing countries and even 
in highly developed countries throughout the world. For example, 
more than half the U.S. population resides in counties that are not 
in compliance with current National Ambient Air Quality Standards 
(NAAQS) (Fig. 31-1). These noncompliant areas correspond well 
with where people live and work and reflect the redistribution of 
population growth from major urban and industrial centers. Air pol-
lutants can also be transported across many miles such that previ-
ously pristine, rural areas have measurable pollution above their 
historic background levels. Indeed, as the developing world grows 
industrially, air pollution now is intercontinental with transport 
through the atmosphere via pathways close to the Earth’s surface as 
well as the upper atmosphere. Emissions of precursors of ozone can 
come from hundreds of miles away and contribute to local pollution 
levels; likewise other emissions such as sand storms in Asia can 
travel many thousands of miles from the original sources.
While episodes of extreme air pollution are rare in the Western 
world today, occasionally, unusual meteorological stagnations exag-
gerate typical air pollution patterns both in the levels of pollutants 
and their expanse (e.g., 1995 in the United Kingdom and Western 
Europe; 2017 in Delhi). Likewise, in specific locales prone to stag-
nations due to topography (e.g., Utah Valley through the 1980s to 
1990s) or where there exists a single dominant source (e.g., port 
areas, transport terminals, or smelters), repeated episodic or even 
patterned poor air quality can impact public health. From a broader 
public community perspective, typical exposures are characterized 
by prolonged periods of relatively low, cyclic levels of complex 
mixtures of photochemically transformed industrial and mobile 
emissions with occasional moderate excursions due to weather pat-
terns. As pollution now extends even into remote and wilderness 
areas, significant damage to flora and crops can also occur.
Counties Designated “Nonattainment”
for Clean Air Act’s National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) *
06/20/2017
Legend **
County Designated Nonattainment for 6 NAAQS Pollutants
County Designated Nonattainment for 1 NAAQS Pollutant
County Designated Nonattainment for 2 NAAQS Pollutants
County Designated Nonattainment for 3 NAAQS Pollutants
County Designated Nonattainment for 4 NAAQS Pollutants
County Designated Nonattainment for 5 NAAQS Pollutants
Figure 31-1.   Counties in the United States not in attainment (current as of July 2017) for the NAAQS criteria pollutants O3, PM2.5 and PM10, SO2, and Pb at 
their latest promulgated standard (available at: https://www.epa.gov/green-book). There were no designated nonattainment areas based on the 1971 NAAQS 
for CO and NO2. As of 2010 a revised NAAQS for NO2 was promulgated—designations are not completed. The composite map can be found at: https://www3.
epa.gov/airquality/greenbook/mapnpoll.html.

Air Pollution
Chapter 31
1467
The situation in many developing countries experiencing 
rapid population growth, industrialization, and economic expan-
sion is reminiscent of the urban, industrial pollution in the United 
States and Europe more than half a century ago. The lessons of 
Western industrial nations and the consequences of inadequate air 
pollution control in some countries have not necessarily outweighed 
economic drivers or public health concerns. For example, despite 
being a modern economic center, two marathoners died in Hong 
Kong in February 2006 while running on a weekend during a pro-
tracted period of severe air pollution. Just as in U.S. history, the 
urban air in rapidly industrialized nations simply reflects poor air 
quality management and the desire to prosper economically. Air 
pollutants levels in some of the developing urban centers can run 10 
or more times those of the U.S. today, and their expanding world-
wide distribution contributes substantially to the global burden of 
many air pollutants such as mercury, particulate matter, sulfate/SO2, 
and major global warming pollutants such as black carbon, CO2, 
and methane. One example of episodic air pollution occurs in India 
when the postharvest burning of agricultural residue and Diwali 
festival celebrations coincide. A willingness to balance worldwide 
economic growth and industrialization using lessons learned from 
the misadventures of the Second Industrial Revolution and the Age 
of the Automobile will determine the impact of the “new” global 
economy on the health of both the Earth and its inhabitants.
Over the last several decades, there has been growing aware-
ness and documentation of the disparities in health across the globe. 
These disparities are linked to poverty, access to clean food and 
water, as well as health care and education, autocratic governments, 
wars, and all that is associated with these population deficiencies 
and stressors. Globally scientists, physicians, and various public 
health agencies—led by the World Health Organization (WHO)—
have taken yearly accounting of disease, deaths, births, and vari-
ous related data to compile and publish a series of articles in The 
Lancet, every 2 to 3 years, providing a comprehensive assessment 
of global health that is called the Global Burden of Disease (GBD) 
(Murray, 2016). Air pollution—both indoor and outdoor—and 
tobacco smoke account for a large fraction of chronic cardiopul-
monary disease, the major cause of death in what is estimated as 8 
million deaths per year. Importantly, inhalation of toxic inhalants is 
among the five top killers around the planet.
The problem facing many parts of the developing world ties 
closely to national domestic culture and economy, as well as to the 
level of technological sophistication. Prime among these problems 
is exposure to carbon and soot from combustion of biomass in cook-
ing and heating in domestic stoves. Approximately 3 billion people 
worldwide use biomass for home cooking in households with little 
ventilation. Among the 7 to 8 million deaths per year resulting from 
these exposures are primarily women who are exposed day in and 
day out over many years, often with their infant children by their 
sides. Understanding the intersection of technological as well as 
socioeconomic and political challenges will be at the core of any 
resolution to these issues.
In the developed world, air pollution has a long history, but in the 
last century it has been largely tied to technological and energy evolu-
tion. Estimates of smoke, which could be seen with the naked eye, 
could be collected and compiled as general indices of haziness or the 
darkness of a spot on a filter. Many people experienced irritancy, chok-
ing or soot accumulation around their noses which eventually drove 
interest into learning whether the soot was unhealthy. Then when there 
were health symptoms, interest in causation over time drove science 
to focus more on individual pollutants associated with some source or 
haze to better understand the linkages with health and to aid in mitiga-
tion of effects. In turn, this knowledge was used to develop both public 
health standards and to establish regulatory controls—an evolution in 
public spirit and perseverance that took decades.
Despite the obvious complexities of urban air pollution, it 
was felt that single pollutant research and regulations were the 
best path to understanding what was going on, and indeed, this 
approach brought great strides in providing the compelling informa-
tion needed to drive both public and political sentiment. However, 
research agendas have advanced and have taken the challenge to 
study multipollutant interactions and transformation of individual 
pollutant components within complex photochemical, atmospheric 
systems—a truer reflection of real-world exposure complexities. 
These multipollutant approaches entail sophisticated statistical mod-
els and empirical study designs, all with the goal of a more complete 
systems-based understanding of air pollution and risk to maximize 
benefits while minimizing costs and unintended consequences.
This chapter presents an overview of the current state of 
knowledge regarding air pollution and its ensuing impacts on 
human health, and the role of toxicology and translational biology 
in unraveling the complexities to allow for informed assessment of 
risk. As such, the contextual complexities of regulatory decisions 
and risk assessment are also addressed. The intent is to provide the 
reader with both a fundamental knowledge and appreciation of the 
nature of the problem, how traditional and modern-day approaches 
aid in this understanding, as well as a sense of the uncertainties in 
need of future investigation to resolve issues even before they arise.
A Brief History of Air Pollution and its 
Regulation
For most of history, air pollution has been a problem of micro-
environments and domestic congestion. The smoky fires of early 
cave and hut dwellers choked the air inside their homes, and even 
when the emissions were vented outdoors, they simply combined 
with those of the neighbors to settle around the village on damp 
cold nights. With urbanization and a concomitant decrease in forest 
wood as a source of fuel to heat and cooking, the need for energy 
led to the burning of easily accessible, dirty coal and the ambient 
release of sulfurous, sooty smoke. Industrialization brought kilns 
to make quicklime for construction and metal smelters needed 
for the development of progressive “modern” cities, only to push 
smoke and chemical emissions into the air. Unfortunately, the city 
dwellers who worked near these industries had to endure the bad 
air, while those of wealth frequently had country homes to which 
they could escape. The poor quality of urban air has been captured 
historically by many writers including Charles Dickens, who noted 
London’s fogs in his writings, all the way back to the ancients like 
Seneca, the Roman philosopher, who in ad 61 wrote: “As soon as I 
had gotten out of the heavy air of Rome, and from the stink of the 
chimneys thereof, which being stirred, poured forth whatever pesti-
lential vapors and soot they had enclosed in them, I felt an altera-
tion to my disposition” (emphasis added: Miller and Miller, 1993).
Historically, efforts to regulate air pollution have, like today, 
competed with concerns for national, regional, and industrial econo-
mies, and as a result, they have evolved slowly. Early on, in the time of 
Greece and Rome, individual civil suits could be levied against local 
polluters, although these were of marginal success. Beginning in the 
13th century, community-based outcries received some recognition by 
governing officials; one example was the banning of “sea coal” from 
lime kilns and domestic heaters in London by Edward I. Enforcement, 
however, was not effective and the populace largely resigned itself to 
polluted air as part of urban life. By the 17th century, England, in the 
middle of several decades that some refer to as “the little ice age,” 
depleted its forest wood resources, which only increased reliance on

1468
Environmental Toxicology
unit VI
sea coal for domestic heating. Meanwhile Percival Pott’s discovery 
that chimney soot was related to the incidence of scrotal cancer in 
chimney sweeps led to some in the health community to recommend: 
“Fly the city, shun its turbid air; breathe not the chaos of eternal smoke 
. . .” (Brimblecombe, 1999)—essentially the same advice advanced 
by Seneca 1600 years earlier. In the late 18th century, the industrial 
revolution, which was powered by the burning of “cleaner” mined 
coal, added a second dimension to urban air pollution. These emis-
sions were more acidic and hung in the air longer than the fluffy soot 
of the cheaper sea coal. Continued soiling of buildings and damage to 
nearby crops brought community boards to address sanitary reforms 
to cut the worse of the pollution peaks and episodes, but any gains 
were soon offset by growth. By the end of the 19th century and into 
the early 20th century, power plants were being built to provide energy 
for factories and eventually to light homes in the Western world. Steel 
mills and other industries proliferated along riverbanks and lakeshores, 
oil refineries rose in port cities and near oil fields, and smelters roasted 
and refined metals in areas near large mineral deposits.
By 1925, air pollution was common to all industrialized nations 
in the Western hemisphere. However, people slowly grew less toler-
ant of the nuisance of acidic-soot corrosion of all exposed surfaces 
and the general discomfort that came with smoky air—this acidic, 
sooty form of air pollution was termed reducing air pollution because 
of its reducing chemical nature. Public surveys were initiated—in 
Salt Lake City in 1926, New York City in 1937, and Leicester, Great 
Britain, in 1939—to bring political attention to the problem and 
promote the implementation of controls (Miller and Miller, 1993). 
However, it was the cumulative impact of the great air pollution disas-
ters in the Meuse Valley, Belgium, in 1930; Donora, Pennsylvania, in 
1948; and the great London fog of 1952 that indicted air pollution as 
a health risk. In the United States, California was already leading the 
way with passage of the Air Pollution Control Act of 1947 to regulate 
the discharge of opaque smokes. Visibility problems in Pittsburgh 
during the 1940s had also prompted efforts to control smoke from 
local industries. At the national level, however, it was the initiative 
of President Truman that provided the federal impetus to deal with 
air pollution. His early efforts culminated in congressional passage 
of a series of acts starting with the Air Pollution Control Act of 1955 
under the Eisenhower administration.
The prosperity within North America in the late 1950s and the 
accompanying suburban sprawl introduced the third and perhaps 
most chemically complex dimension of air pollution. The term smog, 
though originally coined to describe the mixture of smoke and fog 
that hung over large cities such as London, was curiously adopted for 
the eye-irritating photochemical reaction products of auto exhaust 
that blanketed cities like Los Angeles and Mexico City. Early fed-
eral legislation addressing stationary sources was soon expanded 
to include automobile-derived pollutants in the United States (the 
Clean Air Act of 1963, amended in 1967, and the Motor Vehicle 
Air Pollution Control Act of 1965). The landmark Clean Air Act 
Amendments (CAAA) of 1970 evolved from the early legislation, 
and despite being only an amendment to the CAA, it was revolution-
ary. It recognized the problem of air pollution as a national issue and 
set forth a plan to control it. The Act charged the newly instituted 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA) with the respon-
sibility to protect the public from the hazards of polluted outdoor 
air. Seven “criteria” air pollutants (ozone (O3), sulfur dioxide (SO2), 
particulate matter (PM), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), carbon monoxide 
(CO), lead (Pb), and total hydrocarbons—the last now dropped from 
the list, leaving six criteria pollutants) were specified as significant 
health hazards in need of individual NAAQS. Sections 108 and 109 
of the CAA mandates a process for review of the NAAQS every 5 
years as to the adequacy of the existent standard to protect human 
health (Table 31-1), although adherence to this schedule has gener-
ally not been achieved due to the rigor of the process itself (U.S. 
EPA, 2005). The explosion in the literature databases for the criteria 
pollutants and the extensive review and commentary process has 
typically led to delays in completing the process on schedule. In 
2006, however, this process was streamlined through the creation 
of an Integrated Science Assessment (ISA) to replace each Criteria 
Document where the findings since the last assessment could be 
integrated with older studies (summarized with the foundation lit-
erature confined to tables and an appendix). This ISA is combined 
with a Risk and Exposure Assessment into a Policy Assessment to 
develop a range of proposed standards based on risk analyses. As 
per the CAAA of 1970, the U.S. EPA Administrator considers pro-
posals from both “evidence” and “risk” based assessments to estab-
lish policy and set the NAAQS. Regarding the Primary NAAQS, 
only health criteria can be considered in the development of the 
standard, including safety considerations for potentially susceptible 
groups. The Secondary NAAQS consider agricultural and structural 
welfare. Economic impacts are not to be involved in standard set-
ting process itself—only in assessing the cost of the implementation 
procedures. Other hazardous air pollutants (HAPs), of which there 
were 8 listed in 1970, were also to undergo health assessments to 
establish emission controls—today there are 188 (see the section 
“Hazardous Air Pollutants”). The CAAA of 1970 was by far the 
most far-reaching legislation to control air pollution to date.
Disasters involving HAPs have occurred and the accidental 
release of 30 tons of methyl isocyanate vapor into the air of the 
shanty village of Bhopal, India, on December 3, 1984, killed an esti-
mated 3000 people within hours of the release, with several thou-
sand delayed deaths and 200,000 injured or permanently impaired. 
The tragedy shocked the world, and raised the issue of HAPs in 
the United States to a new level of concern. While such a disaster 
Table 31-1  
National Ambient Air Quality Standards*
POLLUTANT
PRIMARY/
SECONDARY
AVERAGING
TIME LEVEL
Sulfur dioxide
Primary
1 hour
75 ppb
Secondary 
3 hours
0.5 ppm
Carbon 
monoxide
Primary
1 hour
35 ppm
8 hours
9 ppm
Ozone
Primary and 
secondary
8 hours
0.070 ppm
Nitrogen 
dioxide
Primary
1 hour
100 ppb
Annual
53 ppb
Particulates: 
PM10
Primary and 
secondary
24 hours
150 μg/m3
PM2.5
Primary and 
secondary
24 hours
35 μg/m3 
Annual
12 μg/m3
Lead
Primary and 
secondary
Rolling 
3-month 
average
0.15 μg/m3
*For detailed information regarding policy and precise statistical and 
time-based computations to achieve attainment, contact EPA Web 
site: http://www.epa.gov/air/criteria.html.

Air Pollution
Chapter 31
1469
has never struck the United States, accidental industrial releases or 
spills of toxic chemicals are surprisingly common, with 4375 cases 
recorded between 1980 and 1987, inflicting 11,341 injuries and 
309 deaths (Waxman, 1994). The Toxic Release Inventory (TRI) 
of 650 chemicals reported annually by industry is required by EPA 
and suggests a decrease in releases (approximately 9% in 10 years 
across land, water, and air), but these data are self-reported and do 
not include most of the 80,000 low-volume chemicals in use today.
The HAPs, which had been the stepsister of the criteria pol-
lutants for more than a decade after the passage of the 1970 CAA, 
have since garnered more public and policy attention. There is con-
cern not only for the acute effects of accidental releases of fugitive 
or secondary chemicals—such as phosgene, benzene, butadiene, 
and dioxin into the air of populated industrial centers—but also for 
potential chronic health effects, with cancer often being the focus of 
attention. The slow progress of regulatory decisions on HAPs (only 
eight between 1970 and 1990) led to a mandated acceleration of the 
process under the CAA amendment of 1990. Section 112(b) cur-
rently lists 188 chemicals or classes of chemicals for which special 
standards and risk assessments are required. The chemicals listed 
are those of greatest concern based on toxicity (including cancer) 
and estimated release volumes. Currently, there is a list of 33 HAPs 
from the list of 188 that are deemed to be of greatest concern, so-
called a list of the “dirty 30.” Emissions of HAPs are mandated 
for control to the maximal achievable control technology (MACT), 
and any residual health risk after MACT is to be considered in a 
separate quantitative risk assessment. The database for this pro-
cess utilizes existing knowledge or, if necessary, mandates further 
research by the emitter. While many of these chemicals are now 
better controlled in the United States than in the past, residual risk 
estimates are yet to be completed for many HAPs. The database 
from which these assessments are made is called the Integrated Risk 
Information System (IRIS; U.S. EPA, 2016) and currently contains 
754 chemicals which have completed assessments.
Emissions from motor vehicles include several HAPs (e.g., 
benzene and butadiene) as well as NAAQS pollutants (e.g., CO, 
NOx, and PM), but in the United States these are addressed primarily 
under the CAA Title II, Emission Standards for Mobile Sources. The 
health data may draw from IRIS but the regulatory aspect is specific 
to this legislation. The reduction of emissions from mobile sources 
is complex and involves both fuel formulation and engine/vehicle 
reengineering. Refinements in combustion engineering are ongoing 
making use of advanced computerized ignition and timing, but fuel 
properties have drawn most recent attention for improvement. For 
example, to reduce wintertime CO, several oxygenates (including 
ethers and alcohols) have been formulated into fuels both to reduce 
cold-start emissions and enhance overall combustion. Perhaps the 
most prominent of the ethers is MTBE (methyl tertiary butyl ether), 
which became a controversial additive in the early 1990s, arising in 
part from odor and reports of asthma-like reactions by some indi-
viduals during auto refueling. However, the controversy took an 
unexpected twist; MTBE was removed from fuel, not because health 
concerns associated with airborne exposure but rather due to leakage 
from service-station storage tanks. Ironically, this prescribed remedy 
for an air problem evolved into an unexpected problem: groundwater 
contamination. This example illustrates the broad complexity of all 
pollution control measures in that unappreciated factors can tran-
scend engineering or other targeted features if a broader systematic 
assessment is not undertaken. Nevertheless, fuel additives have been 
developed to boost octane ratings of fuels and/or improve engine 
performance and combustion (e.g., organic oxygenates, methyl-
cyclopentadienyl manganese tricarbonyl (MMT), and platinum 
compounds for diesel). These additives are reviewed under Title II 
because of concerns regarding the potential changes in combustion 
product reactivity or the introduction of metals into the environment, 
reminiscent of use of lead in fuels from the 1930s to the 1970s, when 
lead fuel additives were banned in the United States.
Internationally, the magnitude and control of air pollution 
sources vary considerably, especially among developing nations, 
which often forgo concerns for health and welfare because of cost and 
the desire to achieve prosperity. Fig. 31-2 illustrates the international 
variation in PM2.5 air pollution, including the world’s megacities with 
Annual mean PM2.5 (µg/m3)
<10
* The mean annual concentration of ﬁne suspended particles of less than 2.5 µm in diameters
   is a common measure of air pollution.
0 0.0075 0.0015
0.03 Killometers
10–19
20–39
40–59
60–99
≥100
Figure 31-2.   Concentration of PM2.5 in nearly 3000 urban areas in the world. Data are from the World Health Organization’s outdoor air pollution database 
from 2008 to 2015. An interactive map for the WHO database is available at: http://maps.who.int/airpollution/. (From WHO Map Production: Information 
Evidence and Research [IER]).

1470
Environmental Toxicology
unit VI
major air pollution problems. The political upheaval with the reuni-
fication of Eastern Europe revealed the consequences of decades of 
uncontrolled industrial air pollution, which today are largely recti-
fied. While vast improvements are now evident in this area, as indus-
tries are being modernized and emissions controlled, many Asian, 
African, and South American cities have virtually unchecked air pol-
lution fueled by the desire for economic growth and expansion of 
low-cost labor. Many nations have adopted WHO guidelines (WHO, 
2005) on air pollution as a rational basis for guiding control mea-
sures, but the lack of binding regulations and/or unconstrained eco-
nomic opportunities impede significant controls and improvements.
In addition to local socioeconomic and political concerns, 
emissions of air pollutants have spawned problems of “interna-
tional pollution.” Long-range transport of polluted air masses from 
one country to another has been anticipated as a global issue for 
many years (Wuebbles et al., 2007). This issue was the subject of 
some controversy between Canada and the United States in the 
late 1980s and into the 1990s as a result of the air mass transport 
of acid sulfates from industrial centers of the midwestern United 
States to southern Ontario. However, reduction in SO2 emissions 
somewhat relieved this tension (Fig. 31-3). Improvement in NOx, 
also a product of stationary source fossil fuel burning, is also appar-
ent. Long-range transport of air pollution also occurs on a global 
scale. Importantly, growing prosperity in China has led to enormous 
growth in its power sector and coal combustion resulting in trans-
oceanic transport of airborne mercury such that transported mercury 
now accounts for a majority of mercury deposition in waterways 
and land across the globe (Ci et al., 2012). Similarly, dust or sand 
storms originating in arid and semi-arid regions of Africa and Asia 
can also undergo global transport (Fig. 31-4).
1985
1985
2016
2016
Estimated Sulfate Ion Wet Deposition (kg/ha)
Estimated Nitrate Ion Wet Deposition (kg/ha)
0
2
4
6
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Figure 31-3.   Reduction in ambient particulate sulfate and nitrate concentrations between 1988 and 2008 in the eastern half of the United States (from 
CASTNet monitoring data). Sulfates and nitrates arising from industrial centers of the Midwest contribute to acid rain deposition (see Fig. 31-14). Sulfates are 
readily dispersed by winds toward the eastern half of the country. Nitrates arise from the industrial centers as well as from motor vehicles metropolitan areas 
and show both a local and dispersed pattern. (Adapted from Explore Nature National Park Service: https://nature.nps.gov/air/monitoring/wetmon.cfm.)
April 10, 2001
April 13, 2001
Figure 31-4.   Global images of an Asian dust cloud captured by NASA’s 
Earth-Probe TOMS satellite. The April 10, 2001 panel shows the dust cloud 
over China and traveling east and the April 13 panel shows the cloud reach-
ing the west coastline of North America. (Images courtesy of NASA’s 
GSFC/Earth Science Data and Information System [ESDIS].)

Air Pollution
Chapter 31
1471
TOOLS TO ASSESS RISKS ASSOCIATED 
WITH AIR POLLUTION
Risk assessment is a formalized process, originally described in the 
landmark 1983 National Research Council Report, whereby toxic-
ity, exposure, and dose-dependent outcome data can be systemati-
cally integrated to estimate risk to a population. Fig. 31-5 provides 
a modified version of the paradigm of the NAS (NRC, 2009), incor-
porating recent interest in providing evidence of “accountability” 
Accountability
Exposure
Exposure
Exposures
Sources
Transport and
transformation
Environmental
concentration
Exposure
assessment
Health
assessment
Legal considerations
Public health
considerations
Dose
Internal
dose
Biological
effects
Adverse
health effects
Relationships
(Source to receptor)
(Receptor response)
Response
Risk assessment
Risk management
Risk management
options
Risk
management
decision
Social,
economic,
& political
factors
Risk
characterization
Evaluation of exposure and public health improvement
–
–
Figure 31-5.   NRC risk assessment paradigm. Components of risk assessment within the left circle provide data to development of risk management as depicted 
in the right circle, modified to include an “accountability” component as a means to address air quality management impacts on the process risk reduction. 
(From the National Research Council [2009].)
that the regulations indeed do have impacts—presumably improve-
ment. The health database for any air pollutant may comprise data 
from animal toxicology, controlled human studies, and/or epidemi-
ology. But, because each of these research approaches has inherent 
strengths and limitations, an appropriate risk assessment of an air 
pollutant requires the careful integration and interpretation of data 
from all three methodologies. Thus, one should be aware of the 
attributes of each (Table 31-2).
Table 31-2  
Strengths and Weaknesses of Disciplinary Approaches for Obtaining Health Information
DISCIPLINE
POPULATION
STRENGTHS
WEAKNESSES
Epidemiology
Communities
Natural exposure
Difficult to quantify exposure
Many covariates
Diseased groups
No extrapolation
Isolates susceptibility trait
Minimal dose–response data
Long-term, low-level effects
Association vs. causation
Field/Panel groups
Good exposure data
Usually short-term
Fewer covariates
Volunteers
Focus on host traits
Expensive
Utilizes clinical evaluations
Clinical studies
Experimental
Controlled exposures
Artificial exposures
Diseased subjects
Few covariates
Acute effects only
Isolates susceptibility trait
Hazards
Cause–effect
Volunteers
Toxicology
Animals
Maximum control
Human extrapolation
Dose–response data
Realistic models of human disease?
Cause–effect
In vitro systems
Rapid data acquisition
In vivo extrapolation
Mechanisms
SOURCE: Modified from Boubel et al. (1994), with permission.

1472
Environmental Toxicology
unit VI
Epidemiologic studies reveal associations between exposure 
to a pollutant(s) and the health effect(s) in the community or popu-
lation of interest. Because data are garnered directly under real-
world exposure conditions and often involve large numbers of 
people, the data are of direct utility to regulators assessing pollut-
ant impacts. With proper design and analysis, studies can explore 
either acute or long-term exposures and theoretically can examine 
spatial and temporal patterns in mortality and morbidity, both acute 
and chronic, especially if these responses appear disproportion-
ately in population subsets (i.e., sensitive groups). Why, then, is 
this epidemiological approach to the study of air pollution not the 
exclusive choice of regulators in decision making? The problem is 
that it is difficult to control confounding personal variables in the 
population. Factors such as genetic diversity and lifestyle differ-
ences among individuals, and population mobility are difficult to 
control, but perhaps most problematic is the lack of adequate expo-
sure data—especially on a personal basis. Exposure assessment is 
often one of the major weaknesses of an epidemiologic study, not 
only because of the difficulties of assessing exposure (as a measure 
of dose) to the pollutant of interest, but also because it is difficult 
to segregate a single pollutant from correlated co-pollutants and 
other environmental influences, such as meteorology. Thus, only 
associations, and not causality, can be drawn between the broad-
based exposure data and effects observed in epidemiology stud-
ies. Causal relationships are sometimes inferred in the presence of 
strong statistical significance, but such determinations are likely to 
be criticized. However, advances in exposure estimation and study 
design and analysis (e.g., time series) have allowed epidemiologists 
to examine relationships with greater confidence and specificity. 
These models limit the impact of covariates and longer time-based 
influences and thus allow epidemiologists to tease out effects of 
short-term pollution not accessible formerly (Zeger et al., 2006). 
Similarly, newer approaches that employ field studies—sometimes 
called panel studies—incorporate time-series design and multiple-
regression analyses of more focused and complete exposure data 
(ideally personal) and targeted clinical endpoints in the exposed 
population under study. The endpoints often derive from empirical 
human and animal studies and therefore have a priori conceptual 
ties. The advent of new genetic approaches for characterizing poly-
morphisms of potentially influential traits opens the genomic door 
for assessing gene–environment interactions (London and Romieu, 
2009). Such studies have focused on individual genetic polymor-
phisms (Tujague et al., 2006) or utilized “fishing expedition–like” 
genome-wide approaches to discover polymorphisms associated 
with oxidative stress (Minelli et al., 2011) or lung cancer (Hosgood 
et al., 2015). These factors may well underlie a significant portion 
of the human susceptibility to air pollution. Novel approaches such 
as this are evident in the most recent studies of PM air pollution (see 
the section “Susceptibility”).
Studies that involve controlled human exposures have been 
used extensively to evaluate the criteria air pollutants regulated by 
the U.S. EPA. Because most people are exposed to these pollut-
ants in their daily lives, human volunteers can be ethically exposed 
to them in a highly controlled fashion (except for Pb, which has 
cumulative and irreversible effects). Exposures are conducted in a 
controlled environment (usually in a chamber or with a mask or 
mouthpiece) and are generally of short or limited repeat durations, 
given assurances that all responses are reversible. Clearly, data of 
this type are very valuable in assessing potential human risk, since 
they are derived from the species of concern (i.e., human) and are 
rooted in well-established clinical knowledge and experience.
Suspected “susceptible or sensitive” individuals representing 
potential higher-risk groups can also be studied to better understand 
the breadth of response in the exposed public. However, clinical 
studies have several practical limitations. Ethical issues are involved 
in every aspect of a clinical test; potentially irreversible effects and 
carcinogenicity are always of concern, along with the definition of 
an acceptable level of hyperresponsiveness in so-called sensitive 
individuals who volunteered to participate in the study. Likewise 
for any test subject, there are obvious restrictions on the invasive-
ness of biological procedures, although sophistication in medical 
technology has made accessible a large array of molecular biomark-
ers from peripheral blood and nasal, bronchial, and alveolar lavage 
fluids as well as biopsied cells from airway segments (Mirowsky 
and Gordon, 2015). With the advent of cutting-edge genomic and 
proteomic high-throughput technologies, new tools are emerging 
to identify responses in humans and the relationships to innate sus-
ceptibility. Obviously, the issue of cost, the limited numbers of sub-
jects that can be practically evaluated, and the inability to address 
chronic exposure issues remain constraints on human clinical test-
ing. Where partnerships with animal toxicology studies have been 
established, studies in laboratory animal species can sometimes pro-
vide ethical justification for at least limited direct human exposure 
for addressing critical questions. Analogously, in vitro studies in 
both human and animal cell and tissue systems, often augmented 
with similar genomic tools, allow the elucidation of mechanisms 
of toxicity. These basic biological responses inform extrapolation 
models that link animal data to humans, and they support the rel-
evance of nonhuman studies and preclude risks that may reside 
in human studies with some toxic air pollutants (see the section 
“Hazardous Air Pollutants”).
Animal toxicology is used to predict or corroborate, through 
plausible mechanisms, suspected effects in humans. In the absence 
of human data, animal toxicology constitutes the essential first 
step of risk assessment: hazard identification. Animal toxicology 
is often required before any controlled human exposure study can 
be conducted. It is particularly useful in elucidating pathogenic 
mechanisms involved in toxic injury or disease, providing basic 
knowledge that is critical to extrapolating databases across species, 
estimating uncertainties, and determining the relevance of informa-
tion to humans. Knowledge of the toxic mechanism(s) provides the 
underpinnings to the “plausibility” of findings in the human context 
and, under carefully defined and highly controlled circumstances, 
may allow quantitative estimates of risk to human populations. 
Animal toxicology studies have been used to investigate all of the 
criteria air pollutants and many of the HAPs as well. The strength of 
this discipline is that it can involve methodology that is not practical 
in human studies and can provide more rapid turnaround of essen-
tial toxicity data under diverse exposure concentrations and dura-
tions. The minimization of uncontrolled variables (e.g., genetic and 
environmental) may be the greatest strength of the animal bioassay.
Animal-to-Human Extrapolation: Issues 
and Mitigating Factors
The clear limitation of animal studies in human risk assessment lies 
in the unknowns of biology and exposure that weaken the extrapo-
lation of findings in animals to the day-to-day human life scenario. 
Ideally, a test animal is selected with knowledge that it responds 
in a manner similar to that of the human (homology). Qualitative 
extrapolation of homologous effects is not unusual with many toxic 
inhalants, but quantitative extrapolation is frequently clouded by 
uncertainties of the relative sensitivity of the animal or specific tar-
get tissue compared with that of the human. Uncertainties about 
the target tissue dose also loom large, constituting the first obstacle 
to quantitative extrapolation, see the section “Extrapolation.” With

Air Pollution
Chapter 31
1473
respect to the target tissue dose, however, most animal toxicologists 
make every effort to keep exposure concentrations at 5- to 10-fold 
that of the anticipated human exposure until appropriate dosimetric 
data can be ascertained. An often-overlooked issue is that the dose 
to the target (lung region) for the test animal is frequently less than 
that of the human under similar exposure conditions—especially 
when exposures are conducted during dormancy for the animals 
(Wichers et al., 2006). Most human inhalation studies involve exer-
cise exposure paradigms where increased ventilation augments 
dose. Thus, in the absence of exercise, higher doses may be needed 
to achieve a statistically significant group response among a limited 
pool of genetically similar animals (typically with an n of 6 to 10) 
to represent a large population effect. However, it must be appreci-
ated that mechanisms may well differ at different dose levels and 
some responses may be misleading if assessed only at the higher 
dose levels. Despite these limitations, however, animal studies 
have provided the largest database on a wide range of air toxicants 
and have proven utility in predicting adverse human responses to 
chemicals. New high-throughput technologies offer great promise 
in shortening the toxicity assessment process and reducing costs of 
both the test process and the consumption of animals, but it remains 
to be seen how this new technology aids in the quantitative assess-
ment of toxic inhalants.
To be effective, any health assessment should consider the 
strengths and weaknesses of the approaches selected to estimate 
actual toxic risk. In the larger picture, other scientific disciplines 
can be highly valuable to a more accurate assessment of the impact 
of air pollution on society. The atmospheric sciences, particularly 
the chemical and physical sciences, provide insights into exposure 
by better characterizing what is in the air. Better pollutant char-
acterization, linked to exposure assessment, can only strengthen 
epidemiological outcome associations. Similarly, better exposure 
characterization and dose estimates support toxicity evaluations 
based on biological test systems. In the latter case, the uncertain-
ties of dose relevancy can be reduced and linkages to defined pol-
lutant physicochemical attributes and interactions can be pursued. 
Recreating realistic exposure environments to the extent possible is 
invaluable to developing models to estimate human risk.
Lastly, studies of botanical responses to air pollutants are now 
appreciated more than ever. Not only are commercial and native 
vegetation affected by pollution but some plant species are being 
exploited as sensitive “sentinels,” warning of the impacts of pol-
lution on both human and environmental receptors. When consid-
ered collectively, economists can inform regulators and the public 
at large of the cumulative impact and adversity of pollution on our 
quality and standard of living (Martenies et al., 2015). Interestingly, 
some basic mechanisms (e.g., the involvement of antioxidants) 
between plants and animals have remarkable parallels.
The value of animal toxicology in inhalation studies is highly 
dependent on the ability to extrapolate or relate empirical findings 
to real-world human scenarios. Several factors of study design play 
into the process of extrapolation (e.g., exposure concentration, 
duration, and patterns), but most important is the selection of the 
animal species that will serve as the toxicological model. Therefore, 
this selection should involve more than considerations of cost and 
convenience. Whenever possible, effects that are homologous and 
involve the same mode of action between the study species and 
the human should guide the decision of the most appropriate test 
species. For example, if upper airway irritant responses like bron-
choconstriction are anticipated (e.g., SO2 or formaldehyde), then 
the guinea pig, with its human-like reactive airway reflexes, should 
be selected over the rat, which is not particularly responsive in 
this regard. However, if the underlying molecular events in tissue 
remodeling are of interest, then the rat or mouse might better serve 
as a model because of cellular mechanistic parallels with human 
tissue responses. In part, the availability of probes to aid in such 
studies could factor into the selection of the rodent strain as well. 
Additionally, as inbred strains of rats and mice differ in their neu-
trophilic responsiveness to deep lung inhalants (e.g., O3), contrast-
ing responsiveness or the mode of action may be more revealing 
and support one strain over another in its selection for study (Costa 
et al., 1985). Other innate differences in sensitivity among species 
may also relate to differences in lung structure, regional distribution 
of cell types having varied metabolism, genetic polymorphisms, or 
antioxidant defenses. Genetic control of responses such as inflam-
mation have been identified in mice where a specific Quantitative 
Trait Locus (QTL) on chromosome 17 (Inf2) exhibits a more robust 
neutrophilic response to O3 (Bauer and Kleeberger, 2010). Thus, 
when a test animal strain is selected where such nuances are unclear 
or unknown, the replication of responses in multiple species builds 
confidence in the finding as being homologous or having species-
conserved modes of action that are relevant to the human and bear 
careful consideration in a risk assessment.
An essential, but often overlooked, part of response extrapola-
tion from species to species is knowledge of the relative dosimetry 
of the pollutant along the respiratory tract. Significant advances in 
studies of the distribution of gaseous and particulate pollutants have 
been made with empirical and mathematical models, the latter of 
which incorporate parameters of respiratory anatomy and physiol-
ogy, fluid dynamics, and physical chemistry into predictions of depo-
sition and retention. Empirical models combined with theoretical 
models aid in relating animal toxicity data to humans and help refine 
the study of injury mechanisms due to better estimates of the target 
dose. Fig. 31-6 illustrates the application of such an approach to the 
reactive gas O3 and insoluble 0.6-μm spherical particles, as each is 
distributed along the respiratory tract of humans and rats. Anatomic 
differences between the species clearly affect the deposition of both 
gases and particles, but the relative distributions are quite similar. 
This is not surprising if one argues teleologically that the lungs of 
each species evolved with similar functional drivers (i.e., O2–CO2 
exchange and blood acid/base balance), mechanical impediments, 
and environmental stresses. One needs only a cursory review of the 
comparative lung physiology literature to appreciate the allometric 
consistency of the mammalian respiratory tract to meet the challenge 
of breathing air. This design coherency has provided the fundamental 
rationale for the use of animal models for the study of air pollutants. 
With knowledge of ventilation parameters, one should be able to 
compute nominal tissue doses based on lung surface area using avail-
able published data (Anjilvel and Asgharian, 1995).
OVERARCHING CONCEPTS
What Is an Adverse Health Effect?
Establishing criteria to define an “adverse effect” of air pollu-
tion is difficult. When relating a health effect to an air pollutant, a 
response must be appreciated at two levels—that of the individual 
person and that of the population. Clearly, an effect upon an indi-
vidual can be beyond an acceptable limit potentially putting that 
person’s overall health in jeopardy; but this response may be lost in 
an index reflecting a population-based response. The risk to a popu-
lation reflects the averaging of individual responses or risks and 
may be measured as a shift in the normal distribution of some index 
of response for that population. Hence, on average, the entire popu-
lation may be judged to be at some enhanced risk. These two forms 
of risk are clearly related, but most often in practice, the population

1474
Environmental Toxicology
unit VI
risk is considered most appropriate from a public health perspec-
tive. Generally, it is also most credibly quantifiable. However, 
subpopulations that carry some related risk factor may represent a 
more limited group with unusual risk that too may be quantifiable. 
Such a group is often called a susceptible subpopulation.
Defining an air pollutant effect as “adverse” within the range 
of effects that may result from exposure is not always straightfor-
ward. Clearly, in humans, some effects would pass uncontested 
as adverse, for example, death, acute life-threatening dysfunction 
or disease, irreversible impairments, and pain. In animal models, 
pathology has traditionally been the hallmark of an adverse effect. 
In either humans or animals, however, other effects that reflect 
minor and temporary dysfunctions or discomfort could be argued as 
not warranting significant or costly concern, especially if the effects 
are minor and transient with no long-term untoward outcomes. This 
vein of thought would simply attribute these effects to be within 
normal physiologic ranges and are readily compensated within 
functional or biochemical reserve. Thus, if one is to try to assess 
the impacts of air pollution on health, it is desirable that there exist 
some objective criteria to define what is indeed adverse based on the 
nature and the magnitude of the effect under evaluation. Moreover, 
distinguishing an air pollution effect from other adverse stimuli or 
disease processes can be complex and fraught with confounding 
factors, such as smoking and negative lifestyle factors.
0
5
10
15
20
Pulmonary
Tracheobronchial
Airway generation, l
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
Lung deposition
0% CO2
2%
4%
6%
8%
Rat
C
0
5
10
15
20
Pulmonary
Tracheobronchial
Airway generation, l
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
Lung deposition
Sedentary
Low
Light
Heavy
Maximal
Human
B
10–5
10–6
10–7
10–8
10–9
10–10
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
15
17
16
19
21
23
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
17
20
22
23
Generation
Rat
Human
TB
P
Human
Human
Rat
Rat
( No absorption in the URT)
1600.0
600.0
3.0
24.0
12.0
180.0
120.0
2.0
VT (mL)
 f (bpm)
A
Net dose
(µg/cm2–min)/(µg ambient O3/m3)
Figure 31-6.   Theoretical (normalized to the concentration in inspired air) uptake curves for the reactive gas ozone in a resting/exercising human and a rat 
(A). Likewise, the percent deposition in the airways of a 0.6-µm insoluble particle in the respiratory tracts of a resting/exercising human (B) and rat (C). Eight 
percent inspired CO2 in the rat augments ventilation up to threefold. Airway generation refers to that airway branch numbered from the trachea (0). (Panel A is 
from Overton and Miller [1987], and Panels B and C are from Martonen et al. [1992]. Reproduced with permission.)

Air Pollution
Chapter 31
1475
Not surprisingly, air pollution impacts have long been focused 
on the lung as the primary target organ. Regarding acute effects in 
humans, the American Thoracic Society in 1985 issued a position 
paper that attempted to define an adverse effect related to air pollu-
tion in terms of its impact on lung function (where, e.g., a 10% or 
more drop in FVC was deemed adverse); at that time, lung function 
was the primary human health effect that could be studied under 
controlled inhalation conditions. The definition of “adverse” was 
revised in 2000, because of the many advances in clinical medicine 
and empirical health sciences, to include seven broad areas: bio-
markers, quality of life, physiologic impacts, symptoms, clinical 
outcomes, mortality, and population health versus individual risk 
(ATS, 2000). The summary conclusion states that caution should be 
exercised in evaluating the many new biomarkers of effect (espe-
cially cell and molecular markers), as there is need for validation 
that small changes in these markers represent a progression along a 
course to disease or permanent impairment. Since that time, further 
advances in molecular markers and systems assessment of toxic 
pathways have opened a new dimension of evaluation of health 
outcomes where their detailed pathogenesis can be examined. Of 
course, many of the same questions arise as to the criteria used to 
define when a pathogenic process is qualitatively or quantitatively 
adverse, but clearly the ability to measure effects and understand 
their nature and relationship to chronic disease is advancing rapidly. 
The WHO has also provided a framework to categorize adverse 
effects in relation to benchmarks. In this framework, a scale is 
based upon the strength of evidence linking exposure and adverse 
changes ranging from a posited change to a clear clinical adverse 
effect. More recently, the European Respiratory Society (ERS) and 
the ATS wrote a joint statement that addresses adverse effects in 
additional target organs or systems, such as the reproductive and 
developmental systems, the brain, and cancer, that are altered by air 
pollution (Thurston et al., 2017).
Susceptibility
A common thread through these subject areas is the influential role 
of susceptibility, which can take the form of hyperresponsiveness 
or loss of reserve. What is a minor reversible effect in the major-
ity of individuals may be a dysfunction that cannot be reversed or 
compensated in certain individuals (Fig. 31-7). Obvious examples 
would be cardiopulmonary-compromised individuals who func-
tion with little or no reserve. In the end, however, the ATS, ERS, 
and WHO statements acknowledge the limits of definitions and the 
importance of value judgment in the final assessment. Implied in 
this position is that a loss in quality of life due to air pollution as 
well as enduring its associated effects may also be designated as 
adverse. As science continues to advance, especially in the realm 
of molecular biology where small signals can be detected that may 
forecast an adverse effect or otherwise may identify individuals 
or groups at risk, the definition of adverse will certainly need re-
examination (Thurston et al., 2017). That same sensitivity in mea-
surement that serves to predict an adverse effect must be separated 
from signals that are essential for homeostasis and the maintenance 
of life. Clearly, dissecting and defining these phenomena will have 
implications not only for assessing clinical adversity but also for 
predictive toxicology.
In actuality, there is no widely accepted definition for a “sus-
ceptible” individual and quite frequently the term is used inter-
changeably with “vulnerable.” The U.S. EPA, however, separates 
the two terms and utilizes “vulnerability” to refer to extrinsic 
(i.e., nonbiologic) factors (e.g., an increased exposure to ambient 
air pollutants because one’s school is located adjacent to a high 
traffic volume roadway), whereas “susceptibility” refers to intrin-
sic biologic factors such as genetics, age, or preexisting disease. 
Regardless of the precise definition, a susceptible subpopulation 
encompasses both intrinsic and extrinsic factors that increase the 
response to air pollution. As demonstrated in both toxicologic and 
epidemiologic studies, a combination of factors influences the inci-
dence and magnitude of adverse responses of susceptible subpopu-
lations to inhaled pollutants (Table 31-3). For example, over the last 
20 years, hundreds of publications have documented an association 
Level of biomarker
Severe
Effect
Clinical
Effect
Injury
Effect
Homeostasis
Exposure dose of an air pollutant
Figure 31-7.   Schematic illustration of the elements of the dose–response 
to an air pollutant(s) of a susceptible (blue curve) versus a healthy (red 
curve) individual. The hypothetical susceptible individual may be more sen-
sitive or may have a loss of reserve, either of which results in an inability 
to maintain homeostasis. The leftward shift or increased slope in the dose–
response curve suggests an increase in responsiveness. Either situation may 
contribute to sensitivity and the likelihood of enhanced progression from 
subtle to severe outcomes.
Table 31-3  
Factors That Influence the Response of Individuals 
or Subpopulations to Ambient Air Pollutants
SUSCEPTIBILITY FACTORS
VULNERABILITY/EXPOSURE 
FACTORS
Preexisting 
cardiopulmonary disease
Proximity to point source
Genetic factors
Proximity to high traffic volume 
roadway
Age
Occupation
Gender
Activity level
Race/Ethnicity
Use of air conditioning/building 
leakiness
Obesity
In utero exposure
Pregnancy
Geographic location (e.g., East vs. 
West coast of the United States)
Diabetes
Lower social economic status
SOURCE: Adapted from Table 4-1 of SO2 Integrated Science 
Assessment , 2010 (http://cfpub.epa.gov/ncea/cfm/recordisplay.
cfm?deid=198843).

1476
Environmental Toxicology
unit VI
between ambient PM levels and increases in cardiopulmonary mor-
bidity and mortality. Age has been consistently shown to influence 
health outcomes, and the association between ambient air pollu-
tion and increases in hospital admissions for asthma is driven by 
the response seen in children. Conversely, the association between 
episodic exposure to PM and cardiac mortality is strongest in those 
over 65 years of age.
Susceptible subpopulations that show exaggerated responsive-
ness to pollutants merit special mention. The existence of sensitive 
individuals and groups is well accepted among those who conduct 
air pollution health assessments, but relatively little is actually 
known about the host traits that render certain individuals sensi-
tive to inhaled particles and gases. This appreciation for sensitive 
populations is specifically noted in the CAA, where protection 
of these groups is mandated in the setting of the NAAQS in the 
United States. The WHO has a broader definition which encom-
passes issues that stand out in developing nations as well as those 
in prosperous countries. They use the term “vulnerability” as the 
degree to which a population, individual, or organization is unable 
to anticipate, cope with, resist, and recover from the impacts of 
disasters (WHO, 2002). There are some definable subgroups that 
are considered inherently more susceptible or vulnerable to air pol-
lution, including children, the elderly, and those with a preexisting 
disease (e.g., asthma, cardiovascular disease, and lung disease), 
but there are other social stressors which also come into play. The 
importance of susceptibility in air pollutant responses is gaining 
more and more attention, as test subject responses that were once 
considered “outliers” in empirical or observational studies may well 
be evidence of unusual responsiveness.
In some cases, susceptibility may simply reflect differences 
in dosimetry. Children spend more time outdoors than adults, are 
more active, and have basal ventilation rates that exceed adults 
on a volume-to-body weight ratio, and therefore may experience 
overall greater dose to the lungs. Certainly, rapidly growing tissues 
may also factor in and may have contributed, perhaps with dosim-
etry factors, to epidemiology findings showing that polluted urban 
air retards lung growth (Gauderman et al., 2004). Similarly, adult 
humans and animals with obstructive airway disease, for example, 
may have “hotspots” of particle deposition in the airways that 
exceed normal local tissue doses many-fold (Sweeney et al., 1995; 
Kim and Kang, 1997). Another often underappreciated aspect of 
susceptibility relates to the loss of functional reserve or compensa-
tion due to age or disease, perhaps altering a response threshold or 
impairing recovery and the re-establishment of homeostasis. For 
example, air pollution–induced changes in physiologic measure-
ments such as blood pressure or heart rate may be easily restored 
in a young healthy individual but not in a more fragile older person 
with cardiovascular disease.
As already noted, there is also growing interest in gene–­
environment interactions where genetic differences can influence 
the responsiveness to environmental stimuli. For example, because 
the variability in response to ozone was much greater among human 
subjects than within subjects exposed to ozone in a controlled clini-
cal exposure setting, research in the 1990s suggested that genetic 
factors influence the response to ozone (McDonnell, 1991). This 
observation was preceded by an animal study in which significant 
inter-strain differences were found in inbred mice exposed to high 
levels of ozone (Goldstein et al., 1973). Since these early studies, 
human (controlled exposure and epidemiology studies) and animal 
studies have clearly shown that the response to an inhaled pollutant 
is dependent on genetics. In humans, the null GSTM1 allele affects 
about 50% of the population and thus a defect in gene function may 
undermine antioxidant defenses in those individuals (McCunney, 
2005). A number of studies have shown that the null (deletion) 
GSTM1 genotype, in comparison to the normal wild-type allele, is 
associated with a greater response to ozone and that the observed 
pulmonary function changes are even larger if other gene variants 
involved in oxidative stress are present. Unfortunately, the majority 
of human studies have examined the contribution of only one or 
a handful of gene variants at a time. Current state-of-the-art tech-
niques, however, now permit the study of the individual and inter-
active role of numerous (and someday all) gene polymorphisms in 
the response to inhaled pollutants. Animal studies have advanced 
from classical quantitative linkage analysis studies of single sensi-
tive and resistant inbred mouse strains to haplotype mapping studies 
which take advantage of the complete sequencing or deep single 
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) analysis of multiple inbred mouse 
strains. Similarly, in human studies, we now have the capability to 
perform genome-wide association (GWA) studies which link up to a 
million SNPs or haplotypes with a given phenotype/disease in large 
(i.e., tens of thousands) population studies. Not surprisingly, these 
GWA studies have determined that individual gene polymorphisms 
contribute to only a small fraction of the variability in response or 
disease. Thus, at present, genetic susceptibility, as well as overall 
susceptibility, to inhaled pollutants is a complex concept that bears 
significantly on any response. Individual variations in response to 
ambient air pollution may reflect differences in dose, sensitivity, 
and/or compensation. As a result, outcomes among individuals may 
be similar, but the balance of contributing factors that underlie the 
individual response may be multifactorial.
The study of adverse effects in human volunteers undergoing 
controlled exposure to air pollutants is ethically limited, but it is 
even more so for compromised human subjects. Such studies of 
susceptibility are confined to subjects of only modest suspected risk 
such as mild asthmatics, healthy older adults, and asymptomatic 
cardiopulmonary subjects. Inroads have nevertheless been made 
in recent years because of more thorough prestudy assessments of 
potential risk factors, allowing researchers to design studies that 
need not carry undue risk of serious complications. New molecular 
methods also allow more sensitive assessment of putative biomark-
ers of response. Additionally, the development of more appropriate 
animal models of disease or dysfunction (e.g., obese or diabetic 
mouse models) provides a useful adjunct to explore susceptibility 
factors more extensively prior to study in humans. Hence, coordi-
nated studies in animals and human subjects are proving to be use-
ful to investigate specific questions such as the roles of pre-existing 
disease, diet (e.g., antioxidant content), exercise (as it relates to 
dosimetry), age, gender, and race. The goal of such susceptibility 
studies is to elucidate patterns, common factors, or pathways that 
may inform potential intervention or mitigation strategies as well as 
basic information to reduce the uncertainties regarding risk factors 
(Kodavanti et al., 1998).
To augment genome studies in humans, recent advances in 
molecular biology allow the assessment of phenotypic traits in 
animal models tied to identifiable genes that are homologous to 
humans. Natural variants in mouse genetics and specially bioengi-
neered transgenic and knockout mouse strains (and in some cases 
rats) are now widely used to explore the mechanistic basis of phe-
notypic responses to air pollutants. These new biological tools hold 
great promise in better understanding responses and establishing 
gene–environment interactions that may underlie variation in human 
responsiveness. Transgenic strains can be devised to express desired 
gene-linked traits using genes inserted from humans as well as other 
animal models, while knockout models with specific genes removed 
or silenced can be made devoid of specific traits to isolate respon-
siveness mechanisms to a toxic challenge. The use of CRISPR/Cas9

Air Pollution
Chapter 31
1477
technology to target and generate specific mutations in the mouse 
genome has significantly reduced the time and costs associated 
with the development of genetically modified mice. These engi-
neered animal models add to the availability of natural mutants that 
have been inbred historically to “fix” a desired genotype with a 
specific phenotype expression (Glasser and Nogee, 2006; Shapiro, 
2007). Current technology can also target specific genes for isolated 
expression in the lung (e.g., linked to surfactant protein C), and in 
some cases controlled by genes which an investigator can switch 
on or off using a pharmacologic or chemical pre-challenge. These 
advances allow the dissection of underlying mechanisms under very 
controlled scenarios and avoid the problems of having a gene inap-
propriately active or inactive through all life stages or throughout 
all body tissues.
The use of genetically modified animal models in air pollu-
tion research has generally lagged behind that of basic science and 
toxicology. The reasons for this are likely many, including practical-
ity and expenses, but may relate to the difficulties in incorporating 
such data into conventional risk-assessment paradigms. However, 
with recent interest in susceptible groups, there has been a defini-
tive upswing in the use of pharmacologically, naturally altered, or 
bioengineered animal models to more closely link mechanistic pro-
files to basic human biology. Ozone has been a common test pol-
lutant in these new studies, because more is known about O3 and 
its effects in humans than about any other air pollutant. Frequently, 
these studies address aspects of inflammation and antioxidant 
capacity relative to challenge by O3 and other oxidants (Bauer and 
Kleeberger, 2010; Groves et al., 2013). But with the current interest 
in PM health effects, these and other models are being redirected. 
Examples include strain differences and acid-coated PM (Ohtsuka 
et al., 2000); atherosclerosis-prone ApoE–/– mice and concentrated 
ambient PM (Chen et al., 2010). Among rats, the spontaneously 
hypertensive rat (SHR) and its variants have gained considerable 
popularity because hypertension is thought to be a human risk fac-
tor and because this rat model resembles human hypertension with 
serum oxidant imbalances, heart disease, as well as its sensitivity to 
lung injury from inhalants (Kodavanti et al., 2015). The curious are 
directed to the rapidly evolving literature in this area of research.
EXPOSURE
Air Pollution: Sources and Personal 
Exposure
Six major air pollutants (PM, O3, NOx, SO2, CO, and Pb) are con-
sidered ubiquitous to industrialized communities and are thought to 
carry the greatest risk to human and environmental health. Except 
for O3, these pollutants are emitted by anthropogenic combustion 
processes along with the myriad of special chemical compounds 
(mostly volatile organic compound [VOCs]) considered under the 
category of HAPs. There are many natural sources of air pollut-
ants as well (e.g., volcanoes, wildfires, windblown dust, and natural 
biogenic vapors), but it is the anthropogenic sources that emit pol-
lutants that concentrate where people live that raise concerns about 
their potential health impacts. These factors do not dismiss the sig-
nificance of potential risks posed by the natural emissions but put 
focus on the potential for human exposure and risk.
Great strides have been made in reducing the emissions of 
some pollutants. Airborne Pb is down 99% in the United States 
since it was removed from motor vehicle gasoline in 1973. Similar 
measures were taken throughout Europe in the 1970s and 1980s. 
The United Nations Environment Program has been actively advis-
ing all countries in the world to use only unleaded gasoline and 
currently only a small number of countries have not restricted 
the use of Pb in gasoline. What remains in ambient air emanates 
from a few isolated stationary sources and re-entrained Pb in road 
dust. Of the other five criteria pollutants, overall emissions in the 
United States have been cut 71% since 1970, while at the same 
time the U.S. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) has increased 246%. 
Energy consumption has increased 44%, and vehicle miles driven 
have increased 184% (2014 National Emissions Inventory [NEI] 
and 2017 Air Pollutant Emissions Trends) (U.S. EPA, 2018). The 
changing profile of pollutant emissions since 1900 is reflected 
in Figs. 31-8 and  31-9. From 1980 to 2015, air quality has con-
tinued to improve with reductions in ambient SO2 being largest 
(−84%) (Table 31-4). O3, which is formed in the air from emit-
ted precursors of both natural and man-made sources, has changed 
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
Thousand Metric Tons
Thousand Short Tons
1000
500
0
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
1990
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
Solvent utilization
On-road transportation
Non-road transportation
Non-industrial fuel combustion
Industrial sources
Other anthropogenic sources
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
Figure 31-8.   U.S. emission trend for volatile organic compounds (VOC) from 1990 to 2012. From Canada–United States Air Quality Agreement Progress 
Report 2014. Modified from Figure 17 of the Report which reports VOC source trends from a defined region in both countries known as the Pollutant Emission 
Management Area (PEMA), which includes central and southern Ontario, southern Quebec, and 18 U.S. states where emission reductions are most critical for 
reducing transboundary O3. Source: Canada–United States, Air Quality Agreement Progress Report 2014. Figure 17.

1478
Environmental Toxicology
unit VI
profile, while an oil refinery air shed might be dominated by VOCs 
and other carbonaceous products. In suburban areas, where the 
automobile is the main source of pollution, CO, VOCs, and NO2 
would prevail along with their primary photochemical product O3. 
NOx releases (including NO2) by stationary sources also contribute 
to the local O3 levels along with that derived secondarily from auto 
emissions. Importantly, in 2015 about 121 million people in the 
United States lived in counties that have violations of the NAAQS 
designed to minimize risks to the criteria pollutants, whereas in 
2014, 92% of the world population resided in places in which WHO 
air quality guidelines were exceeded.
Assessing exposure to an air pollutant has long rested on 
observational measures of what is in the air. Indeed, much of epide-
miology rests on the principle that what is in the air reflects what an 
individual is actually exposed to and ultimately inhaled. Exposure 
science is advancing rapidly and now utilizes approaches that range 
from novel statistical treatments of traditional exposure metrics to 
sophisticated models that systematically involve aerodynamic and 
microenvironmental characteristics to estimate or predict exposures 
to individuals or populations. The treatment of this subject is well 
beyond the scope of this chapter (Zou et al., 2009), but the concept 
is critical to any toxicological evaluation of air pollutants. It also 
bears heavily on the appropriate approach to conducting inhalation 
studies in animal models to study air pollutants. Typically, inha-
lation studies of animals typically involve square-wave exposure 
patterns, although it is well-appreciated that human exposures vary 
spatially and temporally. Moreover, animal studies are generally 
done during the workday (daytime), which is the nocturnal sleep 
time of most rodent models. In the latter case, one might expect 
different ventilation patterns in sleeping rodents as compared to 
humans in their daytime activities and perhaps inverted diurnal 
Comparison of Growth Areas and Emissions, 1970–2016
260%
240%
Gross Domestic
Product
Vehicles Miles
Traveled
Population
Energy Consumption
CO2 Emissions
Aggregate Emissions
(Six Common
pollutants)
220%
200%
180%
160%
140%
120%
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
–20%
–40%
–60%
–80%
70 80 90 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
253%
190%
58%
44%
25%
–73%
Figure 31-9.   Comparison of growth measures and emissions from 1970 to 2015. The U.S. population grew by more than 40% during this period. Energy con-
sumption and associated CO2 levels which historically tracked with population have tailed off in part due to the economic downturn between 2008 and 2012, 
but these have not rebounded due to conservation activities and alternate energy forces. Meanwhile, miles traveled have doubled and the economy has grown 
2.5 times. Yet, the six common criteria air pollutants fell by two-thirds are indicative of great advances in industrial and motor vehicle efficiencies. (From Air 
Quality—National Summary; U.S. EPA [2016]. Figure used with permission.)
Table 31-4  
Air Quality Trends in the United States from 1980 to 
2015
Pollutant
1980 vs. 
2015
1990 vs. 
2015
2000 vs. 
2015
Carbon monoxide
−84%
−77%
−60%
Lead
−99%
−99%
−91%
Nitrogen dioxide 
(annual)
−60%
−54%
−45%
Nitrogen dioxide  
(1-hour)
−59%
−47%
−31%
Ozone (8-hour)
−32%
−22%
−17%
PM10 (24-hour)
—
−39%
−36%
PM2.5 (annual)
—
—
−37%
PM2.5 (24-hour)
—
—
−37%
Sulfur dioxide  
(1-hour)
−84%
−81%
−69%
Note: The table, listing the % decrease in airborne concentrations of these 
criteria pollutants across the United States, shows that considerable 
progress has been made in improving air quality (https://www.epa.gov/
air-trends/air-quality-national-summary#Emissions%20Trends).
the least (–32%). Obviously, for any specific locality, air quality 
can vary depending on the emission profiles of local sources, geo-
graphic topography, and meteorology. In the vicinity of a smelter, 
SO2, metals, and/or PM, for example, may dominate the pollutant

Air Pollution
Chapter 31
1479
biochemical activities associated with feeding cycles. Such dif-
ferences may not have significant impacts on animal toxicological 
results, but the potential for differences needs to be appreciated and 
respected in translational or interpretational activities.
Indoor versus Outdoor  People in the United States (and in 
most industrialized nations) spend in excess of 80% of their time 
indoors while at work, school, and home or between these places 
in an automobile (Robinson and Nelson, 1995). Generally, the time 
spent indoors is disproportionately higher for adults, who have 
relatively less time to participate in outdoor activities, especially 
during the day, when outdoor pollutants are usually at their highest 
levels. The outdoor activity pattern for children is changing, how-
ever, and potentially has consequences such as the increased risk 
of obesity and other health/growth parameters. Perhaps the most 
significant risk factor in indoor air for children is the presence of 
asthma. With an asthma prevalence of nearly 10% in children, the 
risk of exposure to pollutants and allergens in concentrated form is 
particularly great.
As to the issue of total exposure, children and outdoor workers 
are thought to be more likely to encounter outdoor air pollution at 
its worst; in fact, the relatively high physical activity levels of these 
subgroups leads to larger doses of any given pollutant being deliv-
ered to the lungs. Thus, while it is important to characterize and 
track pollution levels in outdoor air, a realistic exposure estimate 
is perhaps best achieved when some indoor/outdoor proportional-
ity can be included as well as some indicator of physical activ-
ity. From these data, it would be possible to estimate lung dose, 
although uncertainties can increase with each increment of personal 
detail. Defining personal exposure can be extremely difficult, as 
personal monitoring is tedious, expensive, and can sometimes be 
confounded by other contributions to the indicator being moni-
tored. Hence, exposure measures are typically drawn from ambient 
measurements or derived from models developed from studies of 
groups of people carefully characterized across personal exposure 
modifiers—­exercise, personal lifestyles, etc.
The indoor environment has gained appreciation as a major 
contributor to total personal exposure. The energy crisis of the 1970s 
spurred efforts to increase home and building insulation, reduce 
infiltration of outside air, and minimize energy consumption. At the 
same time, indoor sources of air contaminants have been on the rise 
from household products and furnishings, which—when combined 
with poorly ventilated heating systems and overall reductions in 
air-exchange rates—give rise to potentially unhealthy indoor air 
environments. As people begin to notice patterns of odors, micro-
biologic growth, and even ill health, measures of indoor air become 
a significant part of environmental risk assessment. Personal expo-
sure has, therefore, come to include the myriad of potential sources, 
both outdoors and indoors.
It is clear now that indoor air can at times be more complex 
than outdoor air, a point often raised in challenging the legitimacy 
of studies that rely solely on outdoor monitoring data. Nevertheless, 
the national monitoring network for the criteria pollutants has been 
shown to reflect human exposure reasonably well for some pol-
lutants, especially those that are chemically nonreactive. Indeed, 
outdoor air permeates the indoor environment despite the reduced 
air exchange in most buildings. However, many variables deter-
mine how well components of the outdoor air infiltrate. The current 
evidence suggests that the average insulated home has about one 
air change per hour, resulting in indoor concentrations of pollut-
ants that range from 30% to 80% of that outdoors. For nonreactive 
gases (e.g., CO), there could likely be nearly a 1:1 indoor/outdoor 
ratio in the absence of a “sink” for that gas; the ratio for fine PM 
(less than 2.5 μm) could also be fairly high (approximately 0.4 to 
0.7), since these particles can easily penetrate through cracks and 
open spaces. In contrast, the indoor/outdoor ratio of O3 is low (less 
than 0.3) because of its reactivity. Obviously, household differences 
in the use of window ventilation and air conditioning can also be 
important variables. Not to be overlooked, of course, are indepen-
dent indoor sources of contamination where the ratio of an indoor 
pollutant to that outdoors can even exceed 1 (e.g., NO2). Particles 
and gases from tobacco smoke, unvented space heaters, and poorly 
vented fireplaces and wood stoves as well as fresh paint and clean-
ing agents can be significant indoor sources. Attention is also being 
directed toward the many and varied insidious sources of indoor 
contaminants: certain soils and construction masonry emit radon, 
gas cooking appliances emit NOx, sidestream tobacco smoke emits 
PM, CO, and a host of carcinogenic polyaromatics, and carpets, 
furnishings, dry-cleaned clothes, and household air fresheners can 
emit a wide range of VOCs. Responses appear also to be affected 
by ambient comfort factors such as temperature and humidity. 
Additionally, some of these chemicals can even interact with one 
another as has been found to occur with O3 diffused indoors react-
ing with VOCs emitted from household cleaners to form small par-
ticles. The complexity of these multiple sources underscores the 
importance of appreciating the total exposure scenario if we are to 
understand the nature of air pollution and its potential effects on 
human health (Fig. 31-10).
There remain two broadly defined illnesses that were iden-
tified in the 1980s that are largely unique to the indoor building 
environment (Brooks and Davis, 1992). The first is “Sick-Building 
Syndrome,” which is a collection of ailments defined by a set of 
persistent symptoms enduring at least 2 weeks (Table 31-5) and 
appears to occur in at least 20% of those exposed. The pattern is 
complaints by the building inhabitants, typically of unknown spe-
cific etiology sometimes even with ambient measurements, but is 
relieved sometime after an affected individual leaves the offend-
ing building (Hayes et al., 1995). Frequently but not always, this 
syndrome occurs in new, poorly ventilated, or recently refurbished 
office buildings. The suspected causes include combustion products, 
cleaning chemicals, biological emissions from mold, and vapor 
emissions from furnishings. The perception of irritancy to the eyes, 
nose, and throat ranks among the predominant symptoms that can 
become intolerable with repeated exposures. Controlled clinical 
studies have shown concentration- and duration-dependent worsen-
ing of sensory discomfort after exposure to a complex mixture of 22 
VOCs commonly found in the indoor environment (Molhave et al., 
1986). The many factors contributing to such responses are poorly 
understood but include various host susceptibility factors such as 
personal stress and fatigue, diet, and alcohol use. Current biomarkers 
of response used in the laboratory include sensory irritancy to the 
eyes in volunteer test subjects and sometimes in animals. However, 
in general, animal studies using standard measures of sensory irrita-
tion or other corporal endpoints have had limited success in assess-
ing sick-building syndromes (SBS) and related syndromes. Human 
perception factors are believed to be critical to the response patterns.
The second syndrome (building-related illnesses) is a group of 
illnesses, which in contrast to the SBS, consists of well-documented 
conditions with defined diagnostic criteria and generally recogniz-
able etiology. These illnesses typically call for conventional medical 
treatment strategies, since simply exiting the building where the ill-
ness was contracted may not readily reverse the symptoms. Several 
biocontaminant-related illnesses (e.g., Legionnaires disease, hyper-
sensitivity pneumonitis, humidifier fever) fall into this group, as do 
allergies to animal dander, dust mites, and cockroaches. Medical 
treatment and mitigation of exposure (source elimination or personal

1480
Environmental Toxicology
unit VI
protection) are generally needed to abate symptoms. Some typical 
outdoor pollutants can also be problematic indoors—most notably, 
CO from poorly vented heaters. Indoor exposures to NO2 can pose 
problems as well, especially in people who may be sensitive—such 
as asthmatics. At times, however, when the concentrations of CO, 
NO2, and many VOCs (passively emitted from new furniture or rugs, 
or from mold in the ventilation system) result in less discernible or 
definable signs and symptoms, the responses may be misdiagnosed 
as SBS, which can complicate assessment of the situation.
Many inhalants, such as NO2 and trichloroethylene (a VOC 
common to the indoor air arising from chlorinated water or dry-
cleaned clothes) have been shown in animal toxicology studies to 
suppress immune defenses and allow opportunistic pathogens to 
proliferate in the lung. The involvement of immunologic suppres-
sion is a particularly controversial, yet important attribute of indoor 
pollution because of its insidious nature and its implications for 
all building-related illnesses. This problem is further complicated 
in that complex indoor environments comprising of chemicals and 
biologicals (dust mites, fungi, molds, etc.) may also lead to unex-
pected interactions that, to date, remain virtually unstudied and thus 
are under-appreciated in the assessment of indoor pollution.
Recently, there have been incidents that highlight indoor air 
pollution. Post Hurricane Katrina (2005) deployment of trailers 
where people lived for extended periods resulted in exposure to 
formaldehyde from urea foam insulation with a myriad of effects on 
inhabitants—notably children. More recently, wallboard of Chinese 
origin, which had sulfate and other chemical components on the 
sealant surface paper that vaporized into the air, resulted in a wide 
array of symptoms among inhabitants as well as corrosion of some 
materials. Clearly, the indoor environment is not to be underesti-
mated as to its potential for impact on human health.
Indoor Air in the Developing World  Pollution of the 
indoor environment in the developing world is a major issue; in 
some parts of the world this issue actually overrides outdoor air 
pollution. In the more urbanized environments, there is indoor 
Sunlight (photochemistry)
Wind transport
Transport medium (air)
Transport medium
(groundwater)
Groundwater ﬂow
Inhalation
exposure
route
Release sources
Release source
(site leaching)
(volatization)
(combustion)
Exposure points
Water table
Figure 31-10.   Illustration of contributors to the total personal exposure paradigm showing how these indoor and outdoor factors interact.
Table 31-5  
Symptoms Commonly Associated with the Sick-
Building Syndromes
Eyes, nose, and throat irritation
Headaches
Fatigue
Reduced attention span
Irritability
Nasal congestion
Difficulty breathing
Nosebleeds
Dry skin
Nausea
SOURCE: Modified from Brooks and Davis (1992), with permission.

Air Pollution
Chapter 31
1481
infiltration of outdoor pollutants unhampered due to poor housing 
stock. Superimposed on the infiltration of ambient air pollutants 
are indoor emissions from cooking practices, the cultural use of 
incense, tobacco, and various other substances, like perfumes. In 
less developed communities, unvented or poorly vented cookstoves 
which burn biomass are used much as they have been for centu-
ries. The emissions from these cookstoves, used by approximately 
3 ­billion people worldwide, accumulate indoors exposing families, 
and especially women and children, to soot and account for 4.3 mil-
lion premature deaths around the world (Fig. 31-11). Chronic lung 
diseases, such as bronchitis, emphysema, and cancer, are major 
killers of exposed women, while children suffer from bronchitis 
and various other infectious lung diseases. The cookstove issue is 
the focus of a UN Foundation established in 2010 called the Global 
Alliance for Clean Cookstoves (UN Foundation, 2010), which is a 
multinational effort to replace existing dirty stoves with clean cul-
turally practical alternative cooking stoves and devices. The black 
carbon (soot) emitted from the dirty stoves is also believed to be a 
major contributor to global climate change.
Evolving Profile of Outdoor Air Pollution  Classically, ambi-
ent air pollution was distinguished on the basis of the chemical 
redox nature of its primary components. Dickens’s 18th-century 
“London’s particular” referred to a chilled, acrid fog resulting from 
the accumulation of SO2 and smoke from incomplete fossil fuel 
combustion during frequent meteorological inversions. This acidic 
mix reacts with surfaces, corroding metal, and eroding masonry, 
characteristic of reductive chemistry. These reducing-type atmo-
spheres have long been associated with smelting and related com-
bustion-based industries (as along the Meuse River in 1930 and 
Donora, Pennsylvania, in 1948) as well as with large, urban centers 
(e.g., London in 1952; New York in 1962) burning coal or other 
dirty fossil fuels for energy. In contrast, Los Angeles has always had 
a characteristically “oxidant-type” pollution consisting of NOx and 
other secondary photochemical oxidants, such as O3, aldehydes, 
and electron-hungry hydrocarbon radicals. By virtue of its regional 
topography and summer meteorology, Los Angeles is particularly 
prone to trap traffic emissions, while other areas, like Atlanta and 
regions of India, can be plagued by stagnant, humid summer air.
The classical types of air pollution were implicitly seasonal. 
Reducing-type air pollution occurred during winter periods of oil 
and coal combustion used for heating and power coupled with 
meteorological inversions, while the oxidant atmospheres occurred 
during the warmer months of spring and summer, when sunlight 
is most intense and can catalyze reactions among the constituents 
of auto exhaust. Today the urban distinctions between reducing 
and oxidant smogs have become largely an academic or historic 
exercise. Most U.S. urban areas have virtually eliminated smoky, 
sulfurous emissions (through regulation and a changing national 
industrial profile) and now with suburban sprawl have a prolif-
eration of automobiles that contribute tons of oxidant precursors 
into the ambient air. However, in the Midwest there remains still 
Deaths attributable to household air pollution (000s)
1600
IHD (adults)
Stroke (adults)
Lung cancer (adults)
COPD (adults)
ALRI (children <5 years)
1400
1200
1000
800
Deaths attributable to household air pollution (000s)
600
400
200
0
Africa
Americas*
Eastern Medit
erranean*
Europe*
High-income
countries
Southeast
Asia
Western
Paciﬁc*
* Low- and middle-income countries.
Figure 31-11.   Illustration of contribution of burning solid fuels to global mortality by region. The figure shows considerable region-by-region differences in 
total deaths that can be attributed to combustion of solid fossil fuels such as wood and other biomass materials. ALRI, acute lower respiratory infection; COPD, 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; IHD, ischemic heart disease. (Courtesy of the World Health Organization.)

1482
Environmental Toxicology
unit VI
relatively heavy industrial activity that continues to emit SO2, albeit 
much less than decades ago, but whose emissions are targeted for 
further reduction. These emissions continue to have important 
regional implications as they undergo complex cloud chemistry to 
form sulfate and impact visibility (regional haze) as well as contrib-
ute significantly to PM mass, the primary metric linked to human 
health effects (Zeger et al., 2006). The air above metropolitan areas 
in the eastern half of the United States is currently comprised of 
regional reducing pollutants that distribute and blanket a large 
segment of the country as well as temporally and spatially varied 
local source pollutants (HAPs) and secondary oxidant pollutants. 
Increasingly, oxidants and sulfates formed high in the atmosphere 
are transported across regions to other locales. In the East, sulfates 
may still predominate over nitrates in the air, in contrast to the 
Southwest United States, but nitrates occupy a higher ratio of the 
pollutant mix than ever due in large part to the growth in traffic and, 
thus, no longer the Northeastern air pollution is simply a sulfur-
based problem. Adding further to the complexity of the ambient 
air profile is that not only has the composition of the urban haze 
changed, but the ambient chemistry has affected its temporal pat-
terns. Long extended periods of O3 (8 to 12 hours) now prevail over 
wide areas such as southern California and the U.S. Southeast and 
even along the Northeast corridor. The prototypic spike pattern of 
an hour or two depicted for Los Angeles in the 1970s, and assumed 
to be the norm for photochemical processes, has changed. In part, 
the chemical mixes are different as is the distribution of the sources 
(motor vehicle traffic). Atmospheric conditions today also seem to 
promote transport across broad areas affecting background levels. 
As climate change progresses, there is expectation that the underly-
ing chemistry of O3 will be promoted further altering these patterns 
because the assumptions and data that led to current O3 control mea-
sures will be undermined.
Outside the United States, many international megacities 
remain plagued by the classic reducing and oxidant forms of air 
pollution. For example, uncontrolled industrial and coal-fired power 
plant emissions surrounding cities such as Beijing and the north-
ern sectors of Mexico City are dominated by sulfurous, particulate 
emissions, whereas southern Mexico City, Santiago, and Tokyo 
have substantially (although not exclusively) automobile-associated 
oxidant smogs. Impacts on health, visibility, and general welfare are 
clear and are bringing ever increasing public concern in an all too 
familiar scenario played out in the United States in the mid-to-late 
20th century. Urban air pollution is a worldwide problem, with the 
attributable yearly mortality for people exposed to O3 is estimated 
at 700,000 (Anenberg et al., 2010), whereas PM-related mortality 
is higher at 3.1 million per year (Lim et al., 2012).
EPIDEMIOLOGIC EVIDENCE OF 
HEALTH EFFECTS
Outdoor Air Pollution
Acute and Episodic Exposures  A number of air pollution 
incidents have been documented where pollutant concentrations 
rose to levels that are clearly hazardous to human health. Where 
a single chemical has been accidentally released (e.g., methyl iso-
cyanate in Bhopal, India), establishing the relationship between 
cause and ill effect is straightforward. However, most air pollution 
situations involve complex atmospheres, and establishing a specific 
cause other than the air pollution incident itself can be difficult. 
Three acute episodes of community air pollution are considered 
classic (Meuse Valley, Belgium, 1930; Donora, Pennsylvania, 
1948; London, United Kingdom, 1952). In each event, community 
inhabitants were clearly affected adversely; hospitalizations were 
concomitant with an elevated mortality rate. Likewise, each 
involved a meteorological inversion (cold air capped above by a 
blanket of warm air, with little or no vertical air mixing) that pre-
vailed for 3 to 5 days, during which time the concentration of an 
array of combustion pollutants rose well above the normal levels 
for these already heavily polluted areas. No actual measurements 
of pollution were made in the Meuse Valley and Donora, but crude 
daily averages of smoke and SO2 of the London smog incident were 
recorded—estimated at 4.5 mg/m3 and 1.34 ppm, respectively, on 
the worst day. Brief (on the order of hours) peaks of these pollut-
ants certainly were likely much higher. During the Meuse Valley 
episode, 65 people died, while in Donora the number was 20. These 
deaths are considered “excess” deaths when compared with normal 
mortality rates for that time of year that were likely already affected 
by the background air pollution.
The “London smog” of 1952 was a true disaster with an esti-
mated 4000 excess deaths during the event itself with perhaps thou-
sands more in the weeks to follow. Hospital admissions increased 
dramatically, mainly among the elderly and those with preexisting 
cardiac and/or respiratory disease. Even otherwise healthy pedes-
trians, their visibility limited to as little as 3 ft, covered their noses 
and mouths in an attempt to minimize their exposure to the acrid air. 
Many reports of sudden death were reported among workers com-
muting on bicycle or on foot with symptoms described as “choking.” 
People with preexisting cardiac and lung problems were particularly 
affected. It is ironic that 16 years earlier, shortly after the Meuse 
Valley episode, Firkert (1936) predicted that 3200 deaths would 
occur should a Meuse-like smog strike London. Although the London 
incident brought the issue of air pollution to the public conscious-
ness, additional episodes occurred with the 1956 and 1962 incidents 
being among the most notable. But none were of the magnitude seen 
in 1952. Interestingly, in December 1991, London experienced a 
winter inversion smog-alert, but one with a very different modern 
pollutant profile: NO2 at 423 ppb, black smoke at 148 μg/m3, and 
SO2 at 72 ppb (five, four, and two times the seasonal average, respec-
tively). The differences between this episode and previous episodes 
were that the air pollution was neither of the magnitude of earlier 
events nor was it completely dominated by coal emissions as traffic 
was at this point a major source of oxidant emissions (Anderson, 
1999). Overall increases in mortality and hospital admissions were 
not so apparent, but regional comparisons suggested impacts among 
the elderly and cardiopulmonary-impaired (mortality: ↑14% cardio-
vascular and ↑22% respiratory; ↑43% for respiratory admissions). 
Susceptible individuals are always the first to respond to these pol-
lution episodes, but the impacts eventually are widespread.
During the latter half of the 20th century, other cities expe-
rienced notable air pollution events; among these were New York 
City, Steubenville, Ohio; Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Athens, Greece, 
and major regions of Western Europe from the Netherlands to the 
Ruhr Valley of Germany. Major episodes of anthropogenic air 
pollution continue to decrease in the developed world, both in 
frequency and intensity, but “natural” events like the vegetation/
forest fires of Indonesia of 1997 and 1998, greater Moscow in 2009, 
northern California in 2009 and 2010 all saw significant impacts on 
wide regional air quality and public health. The impacts of these 
fires, like that of the U.S. Northwest in 2003, were tracked as their 
plumes dispersed across the country. Today, the particulate matter 
generated by wild fires contributes a large fraction of PM in North 
America, Europe, and Southeast Asia (Faustini et al., 2015; Crippa 
et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2016). It has been estimated that wild fire 
emissions can make up as high as 37% of ambient PM (U.S. EPA, 
2018a; NWCG Smoke Committee, 2014).

Air Pollution
Chapter 31
1483
So much had the air cleared in much of the United States from 
the late 1960s into the 1970s that many thought that the problem of 
industrial pollution was on its way to full resolution. Smoke from 
factory chimneys was less visible and the air epidemiology of the 
times showed little health impact. However, in the 1980s, it was 
realized that smoky skies were largely due to carbonaceous material 
and that more efficient burning had eliminated much of what could 
be seen in the air. But the sulfur in fuel emitted as sulfur dioxide 
reacted in clouds to form acidic sulfate and traveled great distances 
depositing and acidifying lakes and streams and at the same time 
painting the leaves and the ground resulting in defoliation of forests 
(Calvert et al., 1985). There were also new studies showing that acid 
haze with O3 was associated with emergency room visits among 
susceptible populations—for example, asthmatics (Bates and Sizto, 
1987). A series of studies showed acute effects of regional summer 
haze in areas of Central and Northeastern North America. These 
2- to 3-day episodes of haze were typified by increases in O3 and 
acid and neutralized (ammonium) sulfates, characteristic of the new 
generation of pollution in many U.S. urban areas. Interestingly, the 
apparent combined temporal or sequential patterns of O3 and sul-
fate were associated with the health effects, and neither constituent 
seemed to be acting alone. Similar results were reported for the 
upstate New York area as well (Thurston et al., 1992), but it seemed 
the acidity as [H+] of the haze was the active toxicant. Studies of 
children at summer camps, where children are active and outdoors 
most of the day, had reported decrements in daily measured pul-
monary function on days of haze when both O3 and acidity levels 
were elevated. The responses appeared to exceed those predicted by 
chamber studies of O3 alone suggesting dose differences or interac-
tions between haze components (Lippmann, 1989). Clinical studies 
in adolescent asthmatics and animal studies lent further support to 
the belief that H+ can affect airway function, particularly in the 
presence of O3. Studies in the South and Southwest similarly found 
effects in young asthmatics and diminished performance in athletes, 
but these appeared to relate more specifically to O3, since sulfate 
was less prominent in the ambient air of these regions. Yet these 
epidemiological and field studies showing associations with “acid” 
haze could not be replicated in the laboratory with either animal or 
human exposure studies. There could be any number of reasons for 
this lack of coherence but the exposure concentrations were often 
orders of magnitude more than in the ambient air. When refined 
acid measurements in ambient air were used, the consistency of the 
findings could not be reliably replicated. With no apparent impact 
on mortality in epidemiological studies, the focus of air pollution 
toxicology focused more and more on O3 where clinical and animal 
exposure studies easily could measure impacts on lung function. It 
was felt that O3 was the likely culprit and its ubiquity in urban air 
argued for greater and greater attention. Indeed, many health effects 
could be ascribed to oxidant/irritant properties of O3.
Of the many air pollution studies over the last 25 years, none 
have had more impact on the perception of pollutant risk and the 
direction of research today than a series of epidemiological stud-
ies that showed an association between PM mass concentration 
(as measured by the regulatory monitoring network in the United 
States) and daily mortality. These studies departed from conven-
tional epidemiological methods used for air pollution studies in 
the United States and utilized novel time-series analyses that could 
more easily blunt the impact of weather, smoking, and other vari-
ables that might obscure patterns in health variables linked to the 
air monitoring data. These studies showed significant and consistent 
associations between health outcomes of ambient PM at levels pre-
viously thought to be safe. Prior to this period, measurable effects of 
PM and SO2 were not easily detected below the 24-hour means for 
smoke and SO2 250 μg/m3 and 0.19 ppm, respectively. In fact, the 
new findings showed effects, as evidenced by increases in mortality 
and morbidity rates at or below contemporaneous NAAQS levels 
(1987: 50 μg/m3, annual mean; 150 μg/m3 daily maximum for PM 
of diameter less than 10 μm (PM10)). Time-series analyses are based 
on Poisson regression modeling to distinguish changes in daily death 
counts (or hospital admissions) associated with short-term changes 
in air pollution. The studies initially found effects with cruder mea-
sures of PM—total suspended particulates (TSP), which includes 
virtually all particles less than 100 μm in mass median aerodynamic 
diameter (MMAD—a median particle size normalizing the particle 
to unit density and spherical shape for aerodynamic comparison). 
These studies were followed with stronger associations with par-
ticles considered almost fully inhalable—PM10 (an MMAD at which 
PM is aerodynamically separated at an initial 50% efficiency at 10 
μm and increasingly at smaller sizes). Beginning in the mid-1990s, 
even stronger associations have been found with an analogous but 
fully and deeply respirable particle—PM2.5. As the PM diameter 
gets smaller, it better represents anthropogenic sources of pollution. 
The statistical methodology applied in these time-series studies had 
an advantage over conventional regression analyses in that it could 
detect short-term trends and minimize the effects of other pollutants 
and potential confounders with longer time constants (Schwartz, 
1991; reviewed by Pope and Dockery [2006]).
In contrast to the three epidemiologic studies used by the 
U.S. EPA to develop the 1987 PM10 NAAQS, there were more than 
30 such studies for the 1997 revision and the promulgation of the 
new index, PM2.5 NAAQS (15 μg/m3, annual mean; 65 μg/m3 daily 
maximum for PM of diameter less than 2.5 μm (PM2.5)). Today, 
there are hundreds of corroborating epidemiological studies with 
those looking at long-term outcomes being of greatest importance. 
Collectively, these studies show a significant health impact of PM, 
linked to mass and not necessarily sulfate or any other constitu-
ent, although there is some suggestion of prime PM properties. The 
most consistent attribute is the size—PM2.5 appears to be the most 
generalizable feature in health outcomes. In 2006, the PM NAAQS 
was revised keeping the annual PM2.5 NAAQS at 15 μg/m3, with a 
tightening of the daily maximum to 35 μg/m3. The NAAQS for PM 
is reviewed about every 5 years depending on legal or procedural 
issues as data accrue; an update on the primary (human) standards 
for PM2.5 (fine PM) and PM2.5–10 (coarse PM) is expected in the 2018 
timeframe. The PM NAAQS is specifically noted because of all the 
NAAQS, it has greatest impact on human health of any U.S. regula-
tion both in terms of cost or benefit. As a result, the health science 
(epidemiology, clinical human exposure and animal toxicology 
studies) is scrutinized more than any other U.S. regulatory decision.
PM stands as the preeminent air pollutant because of its health 
impact as well as the pollutant that opened the door to unsuspected 
targets of injury. The major health outcome revealed in the study 
of PM has been the involvement of the cardiovascular system as 
a prime target for adverse impact, and not the lung as historically 
assumed. While the heart, as part of the cardiopulmonary system, 
has always held an indirect role in health impacts or disease from air 
pollution, both epidemiological and toxicological studies now point 
to major cardiac involvement in PM-associated mortality. Current 
thinking is that cardiac-mediated effects are more germane to the 
PM-associated mortality findings than pulmonary effects (Brook et 
al., 2010). Not surprisingly, effects are most apparent in subpopula-
tions already compromised by cardiopulmonary and perhaps vascu-
lar diseases (e.g., diabetes). There exists no one generally accepted 
mechanism or mode of action to account for these findings (Brook 
et al., 2010; Cascio, 2016). However, several pathways have been 
proposed that attempt to link exposure and cardiac effects that may

1484
Environmental Toxicology
unit VI
or may not include pulmonary mediation. These potential mecha-
nisms are illustrated in Fig. 31-12.
From a toxicological perspective, it has been difficult to accept 
that the association between PM and health outcomes is not some-
how linked to particle composition rather than mass alone. The link-
age to mass and not composition is counterintuitive, especially in 
light of the fact that all PM is not constitutively identical. The actual 
“biochemical lesion” caused by PM is generally thought to involve 
oxidant mechanisms (generation of reactive oxygen and perhaps 
nitrogen species) by constituents or attributes (e.g., reactive surface 
area) of the particles at the cell or molecular level. Initially, there 
was a credibility hurdle (“biologically plausibility”) that day-to-day 
fluctuations in the mass concentration of about 10 μg/m3 airborne PM 
would result in an increase of about 0.6% to 1% (excess) mortality. 
However, there now exist several plausible hypotheses that have some 
degree of empirical support: metals, organics, nanosize with reactive 
surfaces, and constitutive oxidants to name those most prominent.
The experience with PM has expanded the thinking of the 
possible extrapulmonary effects of other air pollutants. Potential 
links to cardiovascular toxicity of several of the NAAQS pollutants 
have been demonstrated although not with the consistency of PM. 
Moreover, there are new data showing pollutant-related impacts on 
birth outcomes, postnatal development, and neurologic health. In 
the latter case, it is unclear if these effects are related to vascular 
impacts such as those caused by PM or to other systemic oxidant 
intermediates.
Long-Term Exposures  Epidemiologic studies of the chronic 
effects of air pollution are difficult to conduct by the very nature of 
the goal: outcomes associated with long-term exposures. Looking 
back in time with retrospective, cross-sectional studies was the 
common approach, but these studies were frequently confounded 
with unknown variables and inadequate historical exposure data. A 
good example of the problem of confounding is cigarette smoking. 
Without extensive information on both active and passive smoking, 
the ability to discern the impact of an air pollution disease out-
come such as chronic bronchitis and emphysema would be greatly 
impaired. Prospective studies, on the other hand, have the advan-
tage of more precise control of confounding variables, such as the 
tracking of urinary cotinine as an index of tobacco smoke expo-
sure, but they can be very expensive and require substantial time 
and dedication on both the part of the investigators as well as the 
study population. Depending on the study size and design, expo-
sure assessments can be complex, and the loss of subjects due to 
dropout is sometimes unpredictable.
Despite these deficiencies and problems, there are both retro-
spective and prospective epidemiology studies that have tackled the 
issue of long-term air pollution health effects. In general, these stud-
ies have suggested a positive association between urban pollution 
and progressive pulmonary impairments. On the one hand, cross-
sectional studies in the Los Angeles Air Basin have found evidence 
of accelerated “aging-like” loss of lung function in people living for 
extended periods in regions of high oxidant pollution when com-
pared with areas where sea air circulation lowers overall pollut-
ant concentrations (Detels et al., 1991). Similarly, exposure to SO2 
and PM in the Netherlands over a 12-year period was shown pro-
spectively to gradually impair lung function (Van De Lende et al., 
1981). Even rural areas in western Pennsylvania, which are swept 
by reducing-type pollutants transported from Midwestern industrial 
centers, have been shown to have a higher incidence of respira-
tory symptoms as determined from a questionnaire-based design 
(Schenker et al., 1983). While a negative impact of any specific pol-
lutant followed in these studies is difficult to dissect, the message 
that long-term exposure to air pollution contributes to deterioration 
of lung health seems clear.
Among the most detailed prospective epidemiologic studies 
of chronic health effects across a range of levels of air pollution 
has been the so-called Harvard Six Cities Study begun in the early 
1970s. The cities were chosen to represent a range of air quality 
based on SO2 and PM—it was designed as a study of “acid” air 
Chronic impact
Lung remodeling
cancer
PM Exposure
Ventilation
CNS
Deposition
Autonomic
dysfunction
Inﬂammation
Eicosanoids
Cyto/Chemokines
Growth factors
Reactive O2 & N2
Proteases
∆Clearance
& ∆PFTs
PM Dissolution—bio/chemical
Interactions (endotoxin, metals, PAHs)
Systemic inﬂammation
Systemic oxidants (reactive O2/N2)
Clotting dysfunction
Vascular injury/Atherosclerosis
Allergenic/Immune reactions
Figure 31-12.   Schematic of the multiple mechanisms thought to function in cardiopulmonary response(s) to air pollutants—derived from current hypothesized 
mechanisms for particulate matter.

Air Pollution
Chapter 31
1485
pollution. Early on in the study, there was great dependence on 
routine regional air-monitoring data, but over time the investiga-
tors themselves conducted the air analyses of exposure microen-
vironments (local and indoor). The initial design of these studies 
included the gathering of parental questionnaire data (including 
some 20,000 people) about the prevalence of respiratory problems 
in school children and has continued over 30 years along with peri-
odic assessments of pulmonary function. When compared across 
cities, [H+] (measured in four of the six cities) was correlated (Fig. 
31-13A) better than was sulfate with the prevalence of bronchitis 
in children age 10 to 12 (Speizer, 1989). However, as the assess-
ment program evolved, more detailed study revealed mortality 
associations with PM as represented in Fig. 13B–D. The role of 
[H+] in relation with acute mortality was less convincing than that 
associated with the sulfate or PM2.5 (sulfates co-associate with fine 
PM in the atmosphere) (Dockery et al., 1993). More importantly 
with regard to long-term health, this study showed very significant 
effects of PM on the life spans of people living in Steubenville, 
Ohio—the dirtiest of the industrial centers. Over a 15-year period, 
the average human life span was reduced by about 2 years due to 
PM exposure. These findings were corroborated by a prospective 
cohort-based mortality study using a database collected on over 
500,000 people by the American Cancer Society (ACS) across 151 
cities from 1982 to 1989 (Pope et al., 1995). The study showed 
a 15% to 17% increased mortality risk over 7 years due to PM, 
about equivalent to the risk of smoking over that period. Pope et al. 
(2002) later reported results of a 10- and again an 18-year follow-up 
study of the ACS cohort (Pope et al., 2011). Subsequent reports on 
AARP (Thurston et al., 2016) and large Medicare (Di et al., 2017) 
cohorts substantiated the earlier findings and demonstrated that 
cardiovascular effects are observed at very low levels of ambient 
PM2.5. These updated analyses, which included gaseous co-pollutant 
and new fine-particle measurements, and more comprehensive per-
sonal information on the enrollees, confirmed the linkage of health 
effects, including an increased risk of lung cancer, with PM2.5 expo-
sures. These findings reinforce the concerns for potential chronic 
health impacts of PM and the heightened risk of premature death 
from lifelong air pollution exposure. Similarly, a study that assessed 
the health impacts of air pollution in a large multiethnic cohort in 
North America observed that atherosclerosis and other cardiovas-
cular disease outcomes that might be considered underlying causes 
of cardiac mortality were significantly associated with long-term 
exposure to ambient PM (Kaufman et al., 2016).
POLLUTANTS OF OUTDOOR AMBIENT AIR
Classic Reducing-Type Air Pollution
The acute air pollution episodes of the 20th century showed that 
high concentrations of the reducing-type air pollution, character-
ized by SO2 and smoke, are capable of producing dramatic human 
health effects. Empirical studies in human subjects and animals 
have long stressed the irritancy of SO2 and its reaction products in 
these incidents, while the full potential for interactions among the 
S
H
L
W
PT
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Aerosol acidity (nmol/m3)
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.0
Rate ratio
S
H
L
W
P T
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Fine particles (µg/m3)
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.0
Rate ratio
A
C
S
H
L
W
P
T
B
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Sulfate particles (µg/m3)
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.0
Rate ratio
S
K
L
P
9
7
8
1.0
5
6
3
2
4
% prevalence bronchitis
0
10
20
30
40
H+ (nmoles/m3)
D
Figure 31-13.   Data from the Harvard Six Cities Studies indicating the superior relationship of PM10 and sulfate to mortality rates (A–C) in contrast to acid-
ity (D), which correlates better with the prevalence of bronchitis in children. Rate ratio is the mortality rate of each relative to Portage, Wisconsin (P); S = 
Steubenville, OH; W = Watertown, MA; H = Harriman, TN; L = St. Louis, MO; T = Topeka, KA. (Parts A to C reproduced with permission from Dockery 
et al. [1993] and Part D reproduced with permission from Speizer [1989].)

1486
Environmental Toxicology
unit VI
co-pollutants in the smoky, sulfurous soup has a mixed record of 
replication in the human exposure laboratory. Because of its his-
tory, SO2 is often thought of as the prototypic air pollutant of the 
industrial age, and as such it has a detailed historical literature base. 
It is an irritant gas that has a toxicology of its own and, through 
atmospheric reactions, can transform photochemically into sulfites 
or sulfates as a secondarily irritant particle. The impact of SO2 
emissions on irritancy, the formation of secondary particles that 
affect visibility, and resultant damaging acidification of the envi-
ronment have been the drivers of much regulation for coal-fired 
power plants since 1970. Levels are greatly reduced (more than 
80%) in the United States and continue to fall especially after the 
CAA 1990 and subsequent cross-state regulations.
Sulfur Dioxide 
General Toxicology  Sulfur dioxide is a water-soluble irritant gas. 
As such, it is absorbed predominantly in the upper airways. It is a 
sensory irritant and can stimulate bronchoconstriction and mucus 
secretion in a number of species, including humans. Early studies 
with relatively high exposure concentrations of SO2 showed airway 
cellular injury and subsequent proliferation of mucus-secreting 
goblet cells. This attribute of SO2 led to its use (more than 250 
ppm) in the production of laboratory animal models of bronchitis 
and airway injury (Kodavanti et al., 1998). Chronic exposure stud-
ies of experimental animals from mice to monkeys at levels still 
well-above ambient have yielded qualitative, if variable evidence 
of airway pathology (Alarie et al., 1970, 1972). Nevertheless, at 
even lower concentrations (<0.1 ppm), such as might be encoun-
tered near an industrial source, long-term residents may experience 
a higher incidence of bronchitis. Indeed, prior to the breakup of 
the Soviet Bloc, many eastern European cities were renowned for 
widespread public affliction with bronchitis; 20 years later, the 
prevalence of bronchitis was greatly reduced (von Mutius et al., 
1994). While other factors (diet, access to health care, other pol-
lutants) may well have been involved in this reversal, reductions in 
ambient smoke and SO2 are generally thought to be most important. 
The concentrations of SO2 likely to be encountered in the United 
States continue to decrease and as an annual average are consid-
erably less than 0.01 ppm. As such, not much new SO2-focused 
empirical research has been conducted in the past 30 years, but 
epidemiology has revealed hospitalizations and acute events asso-
ciated with brief (1 hour) SO2 spikes (as from stack downdrafts) in 
exposed sensitive groups.
Contributing to risk is the degree of penetration of SO2 into the 
lungs most notable during mouth as compared to nose breathing. 
Likewise, an increase in the airflow during deep rapid breathing by 
nose or mouth augments penetration of the gas into the deeper lung. 
As a result, persons exercising would inhale more SO2 and, as noted 
with asthmatics, would be more likely to experience greater irrita-
tion. Once deposited along the airway, SO2 dissolves into surface 
lining fluid as sulfite or bisulfite and is readily distributed through-
out the body and cleared by the kidneys.
Pulmonary Function Effects  The basic pulmonary response to 
inhaled SO2 is mild bronchoconstriction, which is reflected as a 
measurable increase in airflow resistance due to narrowing of the 
airways. Concentration-related increases in resistance have been 
observed in guinea pigs, dogs, and cats as well as humans consist-
ent with receptor-mediated sensory stimulation. Airflow resistance 
increased more when the gas was introduced through a tracheal 
cannula than via the nose, since nasal scrubbing of the water-sol-
uble gas was bypassed. Isolated nasal exposures increased airflow 
resistance through the nose largely as a result of mucosal swelling, 
but the irritant effect appeared to signal the more distal airways 
as well (Frank and Speizer, 1965; Nadel et al., 1965). Intravenous 
injection of atropine (a parasympathetic receptor blocker) or cool-
ing of the cervical vagal nerves abolishes bronchoconstriction in 
the cat model; rewarming of the nerve reestablishes the response. 
The rapidity of the response and its reversal nature emphasize the 
parasympathetic tonal change in airway smooth muscle. Studies in 
human subjects have confirmed the predominance of parasympa-
thetic mediation, but histamine from inflammatory cells may play 
a secondary role in the bronchoconstrictive responses of asthmatics 
to inhaled SO2 (Koenig et al., 1981; Sheppard et al., 1981), which 
raises health concern about this subpopulation when exposure is 
near point sources.
Chronic Effects  Only a few long-term studies have been con-
ducted with SO2 at levels approaching those found in ambient air 
and these studies were conducted long ago (Alarie et al., 1970, 
1972). Few effects were found other than mild mucosal changes. 
High levels of SO2 (200 to 350 ppm for 30 days or more) have 
altered airway mucus secretion, goblet cell topography, and lung 
function and have served as a means of developing animal models 
of bronchitis, but are of little relevance to ambient exposure (Reid, 
1963; Lewis et al., 1969).
Sulfuric Acid and Related Sulfates  In the United States, 
sulfate remains the predominant component of most PM east of 
the Mississippi River. Its health effects are puzzling in that, as dis-
cussed below, alone it seems to have less impact than might be 
anticipated. However, it may well work in concert with other com-
ponents of PM to elicit effects; nevertheless, because of its promi-
nence, it merits attention as a classic pollutant that despite all the 
studies remains a potential contributor to the comprehensive health 
outcome of exposure to PM.
The conversion of SO2 to sulfate is favored in the environ-
ment with subsequent ammonia neutralization to ammonium sul-
fate [(NH4)2SO4] or ammonium bisulfate [NH4HSO4]. During oil 
and coal combustion or the smelting of metal ores, sulfuric acid 
condenses downstream of the combustion processes with available 
metal ions and water vapor or in smoke plumes to form submicron 
sulfuric acid fume and sulfated fly ash. Further, photochemical reac-
tions also promote acid sulfate formation via both metal-dependent 
and independent mechanisms in clouds. Although the fine-particle 
sulfates may exist as sulfuric acid (the primary source of free H+), 
partially or fully neutralized forms of sulfate predominate due to the 
abundance of natural atmospheric ammonia. As fine PM sulfates are 
transported long distances, they may contribute to regional summer 
haze and pose a health hazard to certain groups such as asthmatics 
(Koenig et al., 1989), and may also stress the general environment 
as acid rain (Calvert et al., 1985) (Fig. 31-14). The reduction of 
sulfur emissions since the CAA and subsequent regulations (e.g., 
the 1990 Acid Rain Program and the 2012 Cross State Air Pollution 
Rule) continue to reduce the environmental acidification and vis-
ibility problems associated with transport and deposition of acidic 
products formed from stack emissions in North America.
General Toxicology  Sulfuric acid irritates by virtue of its abil-
ity to protonate (H+) receptor ligands and other biomolecules. This 
action can either directly damage membranes or activate sensory 
reflexes that initiate inflammation. Ammonia, which exists in free 
air at about 25 ppb and in much higher concentrations within the 
mammalian naso-oropharynx (in the human up to 350 ppm), is 
capable of neutralizing most of the inhaled irritant acidic sulfates 
(Utell et al., 1989). Neutralization can also be quite efficient in 
standard whole-body animal exposure-studies, in which excreta 
and bacteria in the chambers interact, giving rise to in-chamber

Air Pollution
Chapter 31
1487
ammonia concentrations up to 1100 ppb—more than enough to 
fully neutralize sulfuric acid droplets up to several mg/m3 (Higuchi 
and Davies, 1993).
Interestingly, there is considerable species variability in sen-
sitivity to sulfuric acid, with guinea pigs being quite responsive to 
acid sulfates, in contrast to rats which seem generally resistant. The 
reasons for this difference relate to sensory fiber network density 
in the airways, and probably not on differences in neutralization by 
ammonia in the airway. The sensitivity of healthy humans appears 
to fall somewhere in between, with asthmatic humans being per-
haps best modeled by the guinea pig. Overall, however, the collec-
tive data involving animals and humans are remarkably coherent 
(Amdur, 1989).
Unlike other irritants, such as O3, inhaled sulfuric acid does 
not appear to stimulate a classic neutrophilic lung inflammation. 
Rather, eicosanoid homeostasis appears to be disturbed resulting in 
macrophage dysfunction and altered host defense.
Pulmonary Function Effects  Sulfuric acid, like SO2, produces an 
increase in flow resistance in guinea pigs due to reflex airway nar-
rowing, or bronchoconstriction. Responsiveness to sulfuric acid is 
both species- (as noted above) and particle size–dependent. In guinea 
pigs, large particles induce upper airway narrowing and increased 
resistance. Some human asthmatics can have similar responses in a 
fog. But typically, only very high “mg” concentrations induce these 
effects thought largely due to the neutralization of acidity by ammo-
nia. Because of the predominantly neutralized form of sulfate in the 
atmosphere, sulfates have been largely thought not to be primary 
or singular bad-actors in air pollution incidents unless at very high 
concentrations—for example, London Smog (Amdur et al., 1978; 
Utell et al., 1984; Hackney et al., 1989; Koenig et al., 1989; Costa 
and Schlegele, 1998). The variability in asthmatics may well relate 
to differences in the degree of impairment or underlying inflamma-
tion in the subjects as has been shown in some animal models, but 
this hypothesis remains to be confirmed.
Effects on Mucociliary Clearance and Macrophage Function  
Sulfuric acid does alter the clearance of particles from the lung. 
Using insoluble, radioactively labeled ferric oxide particles as 
a probe exposure in donkeys, rabbits, and human subjects show 
impaired clearance after a single 1-hour exposure (Schlesinger, 
1984). Curiously, there appears to be a biphasic response to acid. 
In general, brief, single exposures of less than 250 μg/m3 acceler-
ate clearance, while high concentrations of more than 1000 μg/m3  
clearly depress clearance. With repeated daily exposures to low 
levels, there appears to be a cumulative (concentration times dura-
tion) dose-related depression of clearance. Longer-term exposure 
of rabbits to low-level acid also results in hyperplasia of airway 
mucosecretory cells (Gearhart and Schlesinger, 1989).
Collectively, there seems to be coherence in the data to rank 
sulfate irritancy: sulfuric acid > ammonium bisulfate > ammonium 
sulfate. Acidity [H+] appears to be the primary driver on most respi-
ratory effects. Nevertheless, in the complexity of summer haze, it 
remains unclear whether the bioactive form of H+ is more appropri-
ately assayed as free ion concentration (as pH) or as total available 
ion concentration (titratable H+).
Chronic Effects  As a fine aerosol, sulfuric acid deposits deeper 
along the respiratory tract, and its high specific acidity imparts 
greater effect on various cells (e.g., phagocytes and epithelial 
cells). As noted earlier, the primary concern with regard to chronic 
inhalation of acidic aerosols is the potential for bronchitis, because 
this has been a problem in occupational settings in which employ-
ees are exposed to sulfuric acid mists (e.g., battery plants). Studies 
in several animal models raise these concerns as cigarette smoke 
shows parallel responses. Related studies suggest that the airways 
of exposed animals become progressively more sensitive to chal-
lenge with acetylcholine, show a progressive decrease in diam-
eter, and experience an increase in the number of secretory cells, 
especially in the smaller airways (Schlesinger et al., 1992). While 
highly variable, the possibility that chronic irritancy by inhaled sul-
furic acid may elicit bronchitis-like disease in susceptible individu-
als (perhaps over a lifetime or in children as noted in the Six Cities 
Study) appears to be reasonable.
Particulate Matter
Particulate matter (PM) was referred to as “soot” in the “reducing-
type” air pollution of the classic episodes. The major constituents of 
this soot consisted of incompletely burned carbonaceous materials, 
*Shaded areas indicate individual states
with emissions of 1000 kilotons of
SO2 and greater.
Contours connect points of equal
precipitation pH.
4.8
4.7
4.6
4.5
4.4
4.3
4.2
Figure 31-14.   Areas in 1988 where precipitation in the east fell below pH 5: acid rain. The acidity of the air in the east is thought to result from air mass 
transport of fine sulfated particulate matter from the industrial centers of the Midwest. (From U.S. EPA [2000].)

1488
Environmental Toxicology
unit VI
acid sulfates, various metals, and silicates associated with the solid 
nature of the fuel. Metal compounds were abundant, with a con-
siderable amount of zinc in the form of zinc sulfate—as reported 
from post-episode analyses of the Donora PM. Soot is indicative of 
poorly (inefficiently) combusted fuel. Over time, combustion tech-
nology and improved fuels provided gains by increasing efficiency 
and minimization of gross soot emissions. Improvements in com-
bustion methods simultaneously reduced the size of emitted par-
ticles and overall less mass. A side benefit of the smaller particles 
was the reduction in light diffraction through the emissions and 
hence a less visible plume. As such, much of the early cleanup was 
largely achieved through technological improvements. Carbon in 
fuel that is not fully oxidized to CO2 persists as black carbon which 
typically is a mix of the elemental form with variable products of 
incomplete combustion—organic carbon. Oxidized sulfur becomes 
sulfate and many of the metals appear as oxides. As noted above, 
sulfate was long suspected as the essential culprit of most health 
impacts associated with stationary sources, but this relationship is 
less discernable in contemporary particle epidemiology and has no 
good evidence for adverse health effects at reasonable concentra-
tions in either human or animal toxicology studies.
In the last 20 years, PM has reemerged as the dominant soci-
etal issue in air pollution, overtaking O3 as the impact leader in 
health outcomes. Not that O3 is of minimal concern, but emergent 
epidemiology data consistently showed increased mortality, the 
adverse effect of greatest import having a major societal impact 
when viewed through cost/benefit analyses. As already noted, the 
collective studies showed health impacts (both morbidity and mor-
tality) at levels of PM thought to be “safe” with no apparent thresh-
old (reviewed in Pope and Dockery [2006]). Over time, science 
advances and re-analyses have confirmed the initial mortality find-
ings (U.S. EPA, 2009). In the United States, studies show that even 
with great reductions in PM, PM2.5 still accounts for about 5% of the 
total mortality burden; indeed, the World Health Organization esti-
mates that PM accounts for up to 7 million deaths a year worldwide. 
In the latter case, the deaths may be associated with incomplete 
combustion emissions from domestic burning of biomass.
Several hypotheses lend “biologic plausibility” to the findings 
and have been linked to an array of effects that have modes of action 
coherent with potential mortality. The impacts of PM on health have 
eventually been appreciated to be more systemic than originally 
thought, beyond the lung as the primary target organ. Significant 
impacts on the cardiovascular system have emerged and are now 
generally believed to be the predominant driver of air pollution–
related mortality outcomes. Further, there is an ever growing body 
of data suggesting impacts on neurologic and reproductive health, 
as well as the more expected impact on the lung—especially in 
children where chronically PM appears to impact lung growth and 
development (Gauderman et al., 2015).
Particulate matter in the atmosphere can be solid, liquid, or 
a combination of both with a mélange of variably combusted or 
photochemically derived organic compounds coexistent with inor-
ganic species and biological materials or associated compounds. 
The compositional matrix of PM can vary significantly over time 
and regionally likely due to varied emission sources and second-
ary transformations in the atmosphere, which are weather medi-
ated. Long-range transport of emissions or transformation products 
include sulfates from the oxidation of sulfur in fossil fuel emissions 
and complex organic compounds called secondary organic aerosols 
(SOA). Hence, these components comprise the regional matrix of 
PM, particularly in the case of sulfate in East Coast PM2.5. Particles 
in urban centers, notably in the Western United States, have SOA 
as the prime component. Particles of larger size (PM10) tend to have 
more local sources being that they are formed from dispersed dust 
and attrition of materials. Being of greater mass, the larger particles 
tend to “fall out” or settle from the air due to gravity (although 
winds can in fact carry these particles great distances—e.g., Sahara 
desert particles have been found on the U.S. East Coast). Particles 
in the range of 10 to 2.5 μm (PM10–2.5—coarse PM) are highly inhal-
able by humans but tend to deposit in the upper airways again due 
to their mass. In urban settings throughout the world, there is con-
siderable spatial and temporal heterogeneity of coarse PM while 
PM2.5 appears somewhat more homogenous throughout a regional 
air shed. The size designation of fine and coarse PM is based on 
their relative respirability—those in the range of PM10 are inhalable 
and deposit in the nasal cavity and larger thoracic airways while 
the PM2.5 is respirable and deposits in the deeper reaches (small 
airways and gas exchange areas) of the lung (see Chap. 15, “Toxic 
Responses of the Respiratory System”).
The foundational epidemiologic database contending that PM 
elicits both short- and long-term health effects is largely founded 
on data from monitoring networks used for PM regulation in North 
America and Europe. As such, the PM-associated effects appear to 
be dependent on the gravimetric measures that these networks yield. 
From this, it might then be argued that the effects are not influenced 
by particle composition (e.g., inorganic and organic components). 
Further, because the strength of the impacts increases with decreas-
ing particle size (e.g., total suspended particulate mass [pre-1978 
index], PM10, PM2.5), it appears that it is the mass concentration 
of PM, despite compositional complexity and variation, that is the 
index of choice. However, toxicologists argue that a mass-based 
relationship contradicts the basic tenets of conventional air pollu-
tion toxicology, which is rooted in the concept of chemical-specific 
toxicities. That is certainly born out with exposures due to prox-
imity to specific sources (e.g., a smelter or coke oven), but oddly 
data continue to show mass as a primary driver. On the other hand, 
source apportionment studies strongly suggest, at least epidemio-
logically, that particular PM sources, such as coal-fired power plants 
and high volume traffic, contribute to a greater share of the adverse 
health outcomes and toxicological studies from airsheds of varied 
compositional character provide refinement in the nature and causa-
tion of adversity. The mass driver which encompasses components 
and interactions among them seems at this point the exposure met-
ric for mortality.
A number of hypotheses that draw upon various physical and 
chemical attributes of PM have also been offered in search of a 
“biologically plausible” explanation for the reported epidemio-
logic observations. However, no one constituent has been identified 
as singularly determinant of the spectrum of health impacts. The 
smallest particles, which derive from anthropogenic combustion 
activities, appear to drive many of the health effects of particles. 
Prominently included among the causative hypotheses that tie toxic-
ity to particle characteristics are metals, organics, acidity, size dis-
tribution (focusing on the potentially unique bioactivity of ultrafine 
PM—PM less than 0.1 μm), PM oxidant activity or reactivity, and 
the presence of potentially toxic or allergenic biologicals. However, 
at present, there remains insufficient understanding of the relative 
importance of these theories to choose one over another, especially 
if the spectrum of health effects is included. As a result, there seems 
to be insufficient reason to unseat the PM mass-based correlation 
with health outcomes as the driver of regulatory policies. Although 
the animal and human toxicological database is growing rapidly 
with regard to the issue of causation, much remains to be learned 
before new regulatory indices can be considered.
From research directed initially toward potential occupational 
hazards, it is known that several metals and silicates that make up 
much of the inorganic phase of PM can be cytotoxic to lung cells. 
Organic constituents associated with black carbon, as well, can

Air Pollution
Chapter 31
1489
induce toxicity either directly or via metabolism products—some 
of which are genotoxic. Other PM attributes may also come into 
play. Studies focusing on very small, ultrafine particles suggest that 
although these particles are low in mass, they are high in number 
and thus provide substantial reactive particle surface to interact with 
biological substances or that they can more easily penetrate through 
the lung surface and impart their effects systemically. Less is known 
about the role of biologically derived ambient materials, such as 
endotoxin, glucans, plant glycoproteins, and bioallergen fragments, 
which may elicit rudimentary inflammatory responses in the lung. 
The involvement of biologicals may be greatest in agricultural and 
indoor exposure environments. There has been considerable interest 
in PM–co-pollutant interactions, but our knowledge in this area is 
somewhat limited and has spurred toxicologists to better access the 
experience and knowledge of atmospheric scientists as to the atmo-
spheric interactions that are most relevant to biologic outcomes.
Metals  There have been many conventional acute and chronic 
rodent inhalation studies conducted with specific metal compounds, 
often as oxides, chlorides, or sulfates. The varied toxicological 
effects of metal compounds are presented in detail in Chap. 23, 
“Toxic Effects of Metals.” However, it should be appreciated that 
the effects of metals delivered by inhalation may differ from their 
impacts when administered by other routes and as such inhalation 
exposures perhaps best relate to occupational exposures. Metals 
may arise from natural as well as anthropogenic activities, and as 
a result metals are a common constituent in ambient PM. The PM 
metal profiles vary geographically and by contributing sources; 
hence, they can differ appreciably in concentration and type and 
the size mode in which they occur. Coarse PM10–2.5 arises largely 
from natural sources and thus has prominent earthen metals such 
as iron, sodium, silica, and magnesium—usually in geologically 
stable oxide forms. On the other hand, fine (PM2.5) and ultrafine 
(PM0.1) are richer in combustion-derived metals, often reflecting the 
fuel source and nature of combustion. For example, diesel fuel may 
have vanadium, nickel, and perhaps zinc and iron, while coal may 
have zinc and selenium. Their chemical forms vary from water-
soluble metal salts and sulfates to oxide and phosphate forms. High 
temperatures and efficient combustion frequently take metals to 
their smallest size and most oxidized form—the oxides. Metals are 
also emitted from vehicles burning fuels to which metal compounds 
were added to alter functionality (e.g., lead, manganese, and plati-
num) or as engine wear and catalyst by-products. Similarly, met-
als may also be derived not from combustion processes but from 
brake (copper, iron), tire (zinc), and road (earthen silicates or dust 
re-dispersion) wear—again in the larger coarse mode. Metals have 
many biologic properties, some essential to life while others can be 
directly toxic to cells or act indirectly as pro-oxidants. Thus, metals 
have garnered considerable interest regarding their potential role in 
PM toxicity (Costa and Dreher, 1997).
Metal compounds can be separated nominally by physico-
chemical characteristics: those that are essentially water-insoluble 
(e.g., metal oxides and hydroxides such as those that might be 
released from high-temperature combustion sources or derived 
from the geocrustal matrix) and those that are soluble or somewhat 
soluble in water (often chlorides or sulfates such as those that might 
form under acidic conditions in a smoke plume or leach from acid-
hydrated silicate particles in the atmosphere). Solubility appears to 
play a role in the toxicity of many inhaled ambient-PM associated 
metals by enhancing metal bioavailability (e.g., nickel from nickel 
chloride versus nickel oxide), but insolubility also can be a critical 
factor in determining toxicity by increasing pulmonary residence 
time within the lung (e.g., insoluble cadmium oxide versus soluble 
cadmium chloride). Moreover, some metals, either in their soluble 
forms or when partially coordinated on the surface of silicate or 
bioorganic materials, can promote electron transfer to form reactive 
oxidants (Fenton chemistry). Complexes with particulate organic 
material in a partially hydrated form (as might be promoted by the 
presence of sea salt) have been shown to interact with poorly sol-
uble metals to free coordination sites to yield pro-oxidant activity 
(Kieber et al., 2005). Thus, caution is warranted in assessing inhaled 
PM-associated metals simply on the basis of their chemical form 
and concentration, as both their chemical and physical attributes 
and their potential interactions with co-contaminants in PM may 
influence their ultimate toxicity. Simply measuring total metal mass 
to estimate adverse effects in the lung can be misleading.
Perhaps the most compelling evidence for a role of soluble 
metals in PM toxicity derives from a series of U.S. studies on PM 
sampled in Utah Valley where a large open hearth steel mill went 
from full production to a 1 year hiatus due to a labor strike and 
then resumed its open hearth operations. These studies related the 
metal content of PM sampled in the air surrounding the plant show-
ing a substantial reduction in total PM as well as a reduction in its 
usual PM metal content during the strike period. Studies of hospital 
admissions for a variety of lung ailments and death rates showed 
reductions during the steel mill hiatus in operations which were 
mirrored in toxicological studies where PM extractions from the 
operational and shutdown periods were tested in human and animal 
lungs, as well as on human lung epithelial cells. All studies showed 
adverse effect correlations with plant operations and PM metal con-
tent (Pope, 1996; Dye et al., 2001; Ghio, 2004).
Gas–Particle Interactions  As already noted, gas–particle 
interactions can be extremely complex involving multiple compo-
nents of the particles, gases/vapors, and sunlight. While most of 
this chemistry occurs in the air, more than 50 years ago, generic 
binary interactions between particles and gases, in the absence of 
light, were shown to alter the toxicity of either the particle or the 
gas compared to acting alone. The guinea pig bronchoconstriction 
model used for many years by Amdur and associates showed early-
on that SO2 can interact with hydrated metal salts to potentiate par-
ticle irritancy. The mechanism(s) behind this interaction has yet to 
be fully discerned, but it appears to involve solubility of SO2 in a 
hydrated aerosol and the ability of the metal to catalyze the oxida-
tion of the dissolved SO2 to sulfate during inhalation. In the case 
of a sodium chloride aerosol, potentiation appeared to be governed 
primarily by the solubility of SO2 in the salt droplet and enhanced 
respiratory penetration. The metal salts of manganese, iron, and 
vanadium, however, were shown to rapidly catalyze the forma-
tion of acid sulfate that could then be quantified in the aerosol, and 
mediated the irritancy in the bioassay. Interestingly, similar stud-
ies in humans have been less revealing about such interactions and 
their toxic expression, but this in vivo bioassay database affirms the 
need to consider the complexity of the atmospheric challenge in 
estimating biological outcomes.
Complex chemistry also occurs within the effluent of the com-
bustion source. Using a laboratory scaled furnace, the emission mix 
of sulfuric acid and metal oxide particles common to metal smelting 
and coal combustion was used to explore potential plume interac-
tions that might impact respiratory irritancy (Amdur et al., 1986). 
These emitted metal oxide particles, once aged and cooled, were a 
mixture of respirable singlet and agglomerated ultrafine particles. 
Exposure of guinea pigs to 30 to 60 μg/m3 sulfuric acid combined 
with ultrafine zinc oxide produced progressive decreases in the dif-
fusing capacity for CO (DLCO), total lung capacity, and vital capac-
ity and increases in cells, protein, and a variety of enzymes in lavage 
fluid that were not completely resolved 96 hours after exposure 
(Amdur, 1989). It is unclear whether the acid was on the surface

1490
Environmental Toxicology
unit VI
of the particles or made the metal more soluble, but the combina-
tion was clearly more toxic than acid alone. Recently, atmospheric 
studies have suggested that acid sulfate may contribute to the dis-
solution of metals from particles and make them bioavailable for 
effects. This could show a role for sulfuric acid that is beyond its 
apparent minimal intrinsic impacts on the lung—except perhaps in 
some asthmatics.
Combustion studies using different coals again emphasized the 
significance of surface-associated acidic S-compounds. Ultrafine 
combustion particles from Illinois No. 6 coal had a layer of sulfuric 
acid adsorbed on the surfaces resulting in greater effects in guinea 
pigs than the more alkaline Montana lignite. Despite the greater 
sulfur content of the Montana coal, this alkaline ultrafine particle 
had neutralized the irritating sulfate (Chen et al., 1990). Similar 
studies using inert carbon black appear consistent with its role as 
carrier for reactive gases or reactive products of the interactions 
with pollutants such as O3 and various aldehydes, perhaps enhanc-
ing delivery of toxic materials to the deep lung (Jakab, 1992). The 
result of the latter study was enhanced infectivity when the car-
bon + gas pre-exposed test animals were subsequently exposed to 
pathologic bacteria.
Similar interactions may result from gaseous pollutants that 
impair the clearance of particles from the lung or otherwise alter 
their metabolism. Studies by Laskin at New York University in the 
1960s showed an intriguing interaction of SO2 and benzo(a)pyrene. 
It was thought that impaired clearance and greater residence time in 
the lung led to the enhanced probability of carcinogenic potential of 
the particle. Similarly, rats exposed to an urban 8-hour daily profile 
of O3 for 6 weeks, followed by a single exposure to asbestos, were 
found to retain three times as many fibers deep in the lung 30 days 
after exposure. The fibers were deposited in the distal airways and 
penetrated more deeply into airway tissues making them less acces-
sible to phagocytic removal (Pinkerton et al., 1989). These studies, 
together with those focusing on irritancy and infectivity, raise the 
prospect that realistic exposure scenarios of gaseous and particulate 
pollutants can interact through either chemical or physiologic mech-
anisms to enhance health risks of complex polluted atmospheres.
Ultrafine Carbonaceous Matter  Ultrafine ambient carbon par-
ticles (often called black or elemental carbon) are emitted during 
combustion and can mix with less well combusted carbonaceous 
material (sometimes called brown carbon or particles of incomplete 
combustion [PICs]) or may occur in a fairly pure form from high-
temperature pyrolysis. Black carbon, an older term, is measured dif-
ferently from elemental carbon, but both are highly correlated and 
often the terms are used interchangeably. The size of these particles 
allows them to slip (Brownian motion) between gas molecules mov-
ing primarily by diffusion. Agglomeration among themselves, on 
surfaces, or with larger particles in the air is their primary mode of 
dissipation. When concentrations exceed about a million particles 
per cubic centimeters, they rapidly agglomerate with each other to 
form larger clumps or chains of ultrafine particles. These agglomer-
ates are typified by diesel exhaust particles in the air. As an air pol-
lutant, therefore, elemental carbon particles generally do not exist 
as singlets except near their emission points—for example, traffic or 
other high temperature sources. Fine PM consist in part of agglom-
erates of these and other carbonaceous organic material (brown 
carbon or products of photo-oxidation known as secondary transfor-
mation), which if partially oxidized are variably (though mostly not) 
soluble in water. Some organic materials which exist in the vapor 
form may also condense on ultrafine black carbon (e.g., diesel PM).
Estimates of the carbonaceous (including organic) content of 
ambient fine PM vary considerably but are nominally considered 
to be about 10% to 60% of the total PM mass depending on the 
urban or regional area. The sources of organic carbon are varied 
and include the combustion products of natural smoke (e.g., for-
est fires), engine exhaust, and stationary sources (even fast-food 
exhaust emissions). Where there is a strong solar energy source, 
transformed condensates from volatile organic compounds (VOCs) 
in the air also can contribute substantially to PM mass. It has been 
estimated that diesel exhaust contributes about 7% of the primary 
fine urban PM load, but estimates in urban canyons vary widely. The 
higher use of diesel fuel for transportation in Europe and areas of 
concentrated trucking in the United States have led to estimates as 
high as 30% of local ambient fine PM mass. Elemental carbon has 
traditionally been associated with traffic. In the United States, black 
carbon is considered a better marker of older and off-road vehicles, 
but as new engine technology has emerged in 2007 and 2010 for 
diesels to meet new emission standards, black carbon emissions are 
substantially less (less than 99%). New automobiles also emit less 
black carbon as technology transfers to these vehicles. The expected 
result over the next 20 years, with the turnover of diesel-powered 
truck fleets in particular, is a great reduction in ambient levels of 
black carbon with California already showing these reductions as 
early adopters of the new technology.
Diesel exhaust particles vary widely in the ratio of organic and 
elemental carbonaceous materials, which in empirical studies has 
been shown to influence toxic outcomes, such as their inflammatory 
and carcinogenic potential (Singh et al., 2004; HEI, 2015a, 2015b). 
Some diesel particles also appear to have adjuvant activity when 
tested with bioallergens in both animals and humans (Diaz-Sanchez 
et al., 1999). When reacted in vitro with O3, there appears to be an 
enhancement of lung inflammation relative to the diesel or O3 alone 
(Madden et al., 2000). However, it is important to realize that die-
sel particles should not be equated with whole diesel exhaust that 
also contains significant amounts of gaseous pollutants: NOx, CO, 
and SOx as well as various VOCs and carbonyl irritants. Exposure 
to diluted diesel exhaust in humans reveals that the exhaust mix is 
inflammogenic in the lung (Salvi et al., 2000) and to a degree cyto-
toxic to airway cells (Ghio et al., 2012). The use of diesel particles 
alone in toxicology studies does not seem to display similar toxicity 
to the total exhaust, thus underscoring the potential importance of 
interactions among air pollutants as a critical consideration in air 
pollution toxicity (Mauderly and Samet, 2009).
Recent epidemiological and field studies with PM have focused 
on black or elemental carbon as an index of traffic and reported 
strong associations between traffic (through the carbon indicator) 
and adverse health effects. Ultrafine particles in the near-traffic envi-
ronment exist in extremely high numbers but contribute negligibly 
to mass, the metric which has proven to be most credible to date. 
However, the predominance of cardiovascular associations gives 
some credence to a hypothesis that ultrafine particles somehow find 
their way into the systemic circulation and/or trigger systemic inflam-
mation that links to the cardiovascular effects (Peters, 2006; Tong 
et al., 2010). The ultrafine mode of black carbon has been suggested 
to be more toxic than fine-mode PM2.5, perhaps due to enhanced 
surface reactivity or co-pollutant carrying capacity as noted above, 
but tissue penetration (Donaldson et al., 1998; Oberdorster et al., 
2002) has emerged as a hypothesis as well. The penetration of ultra-
fine particles from the lung into the circulation under experimental 
conditions has been reported, but appears to be composition depen-
dent (Kreyling et al., 2009); this unique potential of ultrafines to act 
through systemic penetration is intriguing but remains to be shown 
as a major contributing factor to ambient PM toxicity.
Pure elemental carbon itself is generally considered to be of 
low toxicity, although long-term, high-concentration exposure con-
ditions in rats can lead to lung “overload” where there is evidence of 
lung damage and carcinogenicity. Recent commercial introduction

Air Pollution
Chapter 31
1491
of “engineered” nanoparticles brings many of the same concerns as 
ultrafines by virtue of their similar sizes. Additionally, being “engi-
neered” particles, they may possess design features that “natural” 
combustion ultrafine (or nano) particles do not.
Internationally, the impact of black carbon remains complex 
as many of the older transportation and trucking vehicles being 
replaced are sold to the developing world so their contribution to 
global emissions will not fall as rapidly. Moreover, the use of two-
cycle engines and the domestic combustion of biomass in the rural 
developing world will continue to contribute greatly to the global 
load and health impact of black carbon and PM. Not fully appreci-
ated as an indirect impact of black carbon to air-related adverse 
health is via the impact of black carbon on climate. Black carbon 
from developing world, as well as older industrial world, sources 
undergoes significant intercontinental transport which in the 
Northern Hemisphere is preferentially north resulting in deposition 
on northern snow mass. Unlike CO2 which has long residency in 
the atmosphere, black carbon ultimately does deposit and hence is 
called a short-term climate forcer via its northern polar impacts. The 
impact on climate and secondary impacts on atmospheric chemis-
try link black carbon to potential worsening air health as climate 
evolves in the future through its contribution to the formation of 
other pollutants such as O3.
Chronic Effects and Cancer  In 2013, the WHO’s International 
Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) examined the published 
science and concluded that air pollution causes lung cancer (Straif 
et al., 2013). Moreover, based on published data, the committee 
concluded that the component of air pollution most likely respon-
sible was PM due to the complexity of carcinogenic components 
(polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons [PAHs]) that comprise PM. The 
cumulative epidemiology literature is largely consistent with this 
assessment (Hamra et al., 2014). Linked to the PM is its composi-
tion of complex organic compounds (e.g., PAHs), which in part 
are thought to be linked to diesel exhaust, which IARC designated 
as a primary human carcinogen in 2012 largely based on studies 
involving occupational exposures to diesels in mines (Silverman et 
al., 2012). Hence, the carcinogenicity issue appears to be generally 
accepted by the scientific community. It should be noted, however, 
that post 2007 heavy duty diesel engines have been re-engineered 
and most possess filters greatly (more than 99%) reducing PM and 
its empirical carcinogenicity (HEI, 2015a).
Cigarette smoking (also replete with PAHs) remains a con-
firmed cause of lung cancer and clearly associated with other sys-
temic cancers. The IARC assessments and U.S. cohort studies, such 
as that using the American Cancer Society (ACS) cohort (Pope 
et al., 2011), show a significant linkage between ambient PM and 
lung cancer in the United States even at the generally lower PM lev-
els compared other countries. Yet, at the same time, it has been dif-
ficult to separate PM cancer from those cancers that appear linked 
to the many hazardous air pollutants (HAPs) that occur in urban air 
and are also thought to be carcinogenic. Many suspect HAPs, but 
few (about 10%) of the more than 2800 compounds that have been 
identified in the air have been assayed for carcinogenic potency. 
Fig. 31-15 gives estimates of the relative contributions of various 
chemicals to the lung cancer risk for outdoor and indoor air (Loh 
Figure 31-15.   Relative contribution of individual airborne hazardous pollutants to lung cancer rates using California Office of Environmental Health and Hazard 
Assessment (OEHHA) and U.S. EPA unit risks (Loh et al., 2007). The symbols reflect unit risks for the inhalation route of exposure (except as noted for food) at 
home and outdoors. Bars represent 5% and 95% and boxes represent 25%, 50%, and 75%. PAH = polyaromatic hydrocarbons grouped into B2 (evidence of 
carcinogenicity in animal studies) and CD (less experimental evidence).

1492
Environmental Toxicology
unit VI
et al., 2007). Volatile and related halogenated organic and nitrogen-
containing compounds account for most of the compounds that have 
been studied with animal and genotoxicity bioassays. Most of these 
compounds are derived from combustion sources ranging from 
tobacco to power plants to incinerators to motor vehicles. Other 
potential carcinogens arise from mobile sources as organic emission 
products of incomplete combustion as well as their even more com-
plex atmospheric transformation products. Fugitive or accidental 
chemical releases also figure into the many chemicals in ambient 
and indoor air. The National Scale Air Toxics Assessment (NATA) 
is an assessment of the cancer and noncancer risks associated with 
ambient HAPs (U.S. EPA, 2018). The profile of outdoor carcino-
gens contrasts with that of indoor air, where the sources are thought 
to derive largely from environmental tobacco smoke and radon, 
with some contribution from off-gassed organics (e.g., adhesives, 
carpet polymers, and cleaning chemicals). Thus, human exposure 
to airborne toxicants is highly complex compositionally as well as 
in its temporal and spatial heterogeneity.
Despite all the evidence linking air pollution with lung cancer, 
the risk of any individual is a complex function of the carcinogenic 
nature of the substance, the amount, and nature of material depos-
ited in the lungs, which is itself a function of the concentration in 
the ambient air, the physical and chemical properties of the inhalant 
that may determine deposition efficiency, innate repair mechanisms, 
and the cumulative volume of air inhaled. A significant body of data 
suggests that the majority of lung cancer risk from ambient air pol-
lution lies within the PM fraction. Among the many potent chemi-
cals are the polycyclic organic chemicals, along with a group of less 
volatile organics sometimes referred to as “semi-volatiles” (includ-
ing nitroaromatics). These persistent organics associate with the PM 
matrix and thus could have a prolonged residence time at deposition 
sites within the respiratory tract. Genetic bioassays have revealed 
the potent mutagenicity, and presumably carcinogenicity, of various 
chemical fractions of ambient aerosols (Lewtas, 2007). Some of 
these compounds require metabolic transformation to activate their 
potency while others may be detoxified by their metabolism. Not to 
be forgotten are the VOCs noted earlier that are likely carcinogenic 
(e.g., benzene) and which are inhaled but have target tissues away 
from the lung—in the case of benzene, bone marrow leukemia.
Not to be undervalued is that the innate susceptibility of the 
individual (including genotype-driven characteristics and envi-
ronmental factors such as diet) is also likely to be important. The 
cells lining the respiratory tract turn over relatively quickly as 
they interface directly with the ambient environment with every 
breath. As such, their DNA would be vulnerable to carcinogenic 
or ­oxidant-induced replication errors from inhaled ­substances that, 
when fixed as mutations, could give rise to tumors. Co-pollutants, 
such as irritant gases, that initiate inflammation may promote this 
carcinogenic activity by damaging cells and enhancing their turn-
over. For example, there is experimental evidence that benzo(a)
pyrene inhaled by rats whose respiratory tracts have been chroni-
cally exposed to SO2 are prone to bronchogenic carcinomas. 
Likewise, epidermoid carcinomas were produced in mice that 
inhaled ozonized gasoline vapors, containing reactive organic 
products, but this occurred only if the mice had previously been 
infected with influenza virus and presumably had inflamed lungs. 
Many believe that the so-called rural–urban gradient of lung cancer, 
apparent even when corrected for cigarette smoking, is a product 
of such complex chemical–biological interactions. Thus, while the 
initiation of environmental lung cancer remains poorly understood, 
there is general sentiment for the opinion expressed early-on by 
Kotin and Falk (1963): “Chemical, physical and biological data 
unite to form a constellation that strongly implicates the atmosphere 
as one dominant factor in the pathogenesis of lung cancer.” At the 
time of this statement, however, even the role of tobacco smoke in 
cancer was not widely recognized.
To understand the role of inhaled particles in non-cigarette-
smoke-related lung cancer, chronic exposure studies have been 
conducted with a number of particles ranging from the relatively 
inert particles of titanium dioxide and carbon to the more complex 
particles of diesel exhaust and coal fly ash. Of these substances, 
diesel exhaust has been the most extensively studied (reviewed by 
Ghio et al. [2012] and HEI [2015b]). The primary concern with die-
sel has been the long-held suspicion that it can induce lung cancer 
(as noted now as an IARC—designated human carcinogen). While 
the assembled epidemiology data on diesel exhaust formed the basis 
of the IARC designation of diesel exhaust (including the PM and 
gases) as a primary carcinogen, the empirical studies of carcinoge-
nicity alone has long been suggested by several chronic exposure 
studies in animals and by in vitro data indicating mutagenicity in 
Salmonella bacteria and enhanced sister chromatid exchange rates 
in Chinese hamster ovary cells. (These latter genotoxic effects 
have been linked to the nitroarenes associated with the diesel PM.) 
Rodent studies, unfortunately, have not fully provided great insights 
as to the mechanisms involved other than the relatively generic—
mutation/inflammation—pathways, and it has only been at very 
high exposures in which mucociliary clearance has been sufficiently 
overwhelmed allowing in a progressive buildup of particles in the 
lungs leading to what has been termed “overload” (see below). By 
12 months into exposure, in the rat, clearance has ceased and there 
is concomitant inflammation, oxidant generation, epithelial hyper-
plasia, and fibrosis. Particle agglomerates within the alveolar lumen 
become the focus of inflammation, injury, and the eventual develop-
ment of adenosarcomas and squamous cell carcinomas. At lower 
concentrations, where the particle buildup (i.e., overload) does not 
occur, tumors do not develop.
“Overload” is a common finding at the highest exposure con-
centrations of chronic particle inhalation bioassays. While this 
phenomenon is not likely in humans exposed to ambient PM, it 
is a hypothesis worthy of consideration in a discussion of parti-
cle health effects, as it relates to the interpretation of toxicologi-
cal data relevant to product use and industrial exposures. Several 
poorly soluble particles (PSPs), such as titanium dioxide and toner 
carbon, have induced lung tumors in chronic rat bioassays under 
conditions of overload; tumors have not developed under similar 
conditions in mice and hamsters. Thus, rats seem to react more to 
this circumstance. Particles in the ultrafine mode seem particularly 
potent. In the rat, pathogenesis is qualitatively and temporally the 
same for all of the particle types tested. In contrast, the degree of 
active inflammation in the mouse and hamster under similar over-
load conditions appears less intense, and thus is an important dis-
tinction among the species that relates to their relative sensitivities. 
Such exposures do not typically demonstrate classic genotoxicity, 
although bulky adducts and other modifications to DNA have been 
described after in vivo exposure to carbon black and diesel exhaust 
(reviewed by Schins and Knaapen [2007]). In addition, mutation 
of the hprt (hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyltransferase) 
gene was found in rat epithelial cells cultured with bronchoalveolar 
lavage from chronic carbon black and titanium dioxide treated rats 
(Driscoll et al., 1997).
Even though these few studies have demonstrated inert par-
ticle-induced modifications to DNA, generalizing this finding to 
overload cancers, not surprisingly, remains controversial. Typically, 
the pathways leading to lung cancer by relatively inert and poorly 
soluble particles (e.g., carbon black and diesel exhaust particles) 
are thought to be secondary and involve pathways such as oxidative

Air Pollution
Chapter 31
1493
stress rather than a primary carcinogenesis mechanism such as 
DNA mutations (Greim et al., 2001). The closest analogy in humans 
would be coal miners who do not appear to have an enhanced risk 
of lung cancer except when smoking is not involved.
The issue, then, is whether rat bioassay cancer data under con-
ditions of overload are relevant to risk assessment. A review by 
an expert panel (Olin, 2000) concluded that rats, while apparently 
unique in this response, may represent a sensitive subgroup, and 
that tumorigenesis data from the rat bioassay under conditions of 
overload cannot be summarily dismissed as not relevant to the con-
sideration of cancer risk in humans. However, the data should be 
interpreted and weighed in the context of lower concentrations and 
the tumor incidence and pathology found therein.
Photochemical Air Pollution
Photochemical air pollution (notably O3) remains the most elusive 
of the criteria pollutants in ambient air to bring under regulatory 
control. It is estimated that more than 130 million Americans reside 
in areas not in compliance with the health-based standard and hence 
are at some risk of adverse health impacts. Ozone arises second-
arily from a series of complex reactions in the troposphere activated 
by the ultraviolet (UV) spectrum of sunlight. In addition to O3, it 
comprises a mixture of nitric oxides (NOx), aldehydes, peroxyace-
tyl nitrates (PAN), and a myriad of aromatics and alkenes along 
with analog reactive radicals and intermediates. If SO2 is present, 
sulfate particles may also be formed and, collectively, they yield 
“summer haze.” Likewise, the complex chemistry can generate 
organic PM, nitric acid vapor, and various condensates. Attempts 
to mitigate photochemical smog (especially O3) by controlling 
hydrocarbon and/or NOx emissions have proven difficult due to 
the complex stoichiometry of atmospheric photochemistry. Some 
progress has been made in controlling peak values in the United 
States (regulated by the pre-1997 1-hour NAAQS), but the longer 
time-framed 8-hour NAAQS has seen generally smaller prog-
ress. Because of particularly strong regulatory efforts in Southern 
California, however, the average number of high ozone days per 
year dropped by 33% between 2000 and 2010 in the Los Angeles–
Long Beach–Riverside metropolitan area, the most polluted part of 
the United States, in terms of ambient ozone levels, and high ozone 
days continue to decrease (American Lung Association, 2017). In 
2016, Los Angeles experienced fewer high ozone days than previ-
ously recorded.
From the point of view of the toxicology of photochemical 
air pollutant gases, O3 is by far the toxicant of greatest concern. It 
is highly reactive and more toxic than NOx, and because its gen-
eration is fueled through cyclic hydrocarbon radicals, it reaches 
greater concentrations than the hydrocarbon radical intermediates. 
The gaseous hydrocarbons, so integral to the chemistry, are no lon-
ger listed collectively as a criteria pollutant in the United States 
because they do not have a strong health-based driver. In general, 
the concentrations of the hydrocarbon precursors in ambient air do 
not reach levels high enough to produce acute toxicity, although 
some individual compounds fall under the HAPs rule. Rather, the 
importance of these hydrocarbons stems from their role in the chain 
of photochemical reactions.
Although O3 is of toxicological importance in the troposphere, 
in the stratosphere it plays a critical protective role. About 10 to 50 
km above the Earth’s surface, UV light directly splits molecular O2 
into atomic O•, which then combines with O2 to form O3. The O3 
also dissociates back but much more slowly. The result is an accu-
mulation of O3 to several ppm within a relatively thin strip of the 
stratosphere forming an effective “permanent” barrier by absorbing 
the short-wavelength UV in the chemical process. This barrier had 
in recent years been threatened by various anthropogenic emissions 
(Cl2 gas and certain chlorofluorocarbons) that enhance O3 degrada-
tion (creation of an “O3-hole”), but recent restrictions in the use of 
these degrading chemicals seem to have been effective in reversing 
this process, although recently concern is mounting that the hole 
may be growing again due to the release of other halogenated gases. 
The benefits of this stratospheric O3 are the reduction of excess UV 
light infiltration to the Earth’s surface and reduced skin cancer risk.
The impact of O3 in the troposphere, where its accumulation 
serves no known purpose, poses a threat to the respiratory tract 
when inhaled. Near the Earth’s surface, NO2 arising from combus-
tion processes efficiently absorbs the longer wavelength UV light 
spectrum, from which a free O atom is cleaved, initiating the fol-
lowing simplified series of reactions:
	
NO
UV light
O
NO
2 +
→
+
hv(
)
.
•
• 
(31-1)
	
O
O
O
• +
→
2
3. 
(31-2)
	
O
NO
NO
3
2
+
→
•
. 
(31-3)
This process is inherently cyclic, with NO2 regenerated by the 
reaction of the NO• and O3. In the absence of unsaturated hydrocar-
bons (olefins and substituted aromatics) arising from fuel vapor-
ization or combustion, as well as biogenic terpenes, this series of 
reactions would approach a steady state with little buildup of O3. 
The free electrons of the double bonds of unsaturated hydrocarbons 
are attacked by free atomic O•, resulting in oxidized compounds and 
radicals that react further with NO• to produce more NO2. Thus, the 
balance of the reactions sequence shown in Eqs. (31-1) to (31-3) is 
tipped to the right, leading to buildup of O3. This reaction is particu-
larly favored when the Sun’s intensity is greatest at midday, utilizing 
the NO2 provided by morning rush-hour traffic. Carbonyl com-
pounds (especially short-chained aldehydes) are also by-products 
of these reactions. Formaldehyde and acrolein account for about 
50% and 5%, respectively, of the total aldehyde content in urban 
atmospheres. Peroxyacetyl nitrate (CH3COONO2), often referred 
to as PAN, and its homologs also arise in urban air, most likely 
from the reaction of the peroxyacyl radicals with NO2. In the eve-
ning when the Sun’s intensity wanes, the second rush-hour peak of 
NO2 shifts the balance back by reacting with O3 slowly bringing the 
daytime peak concentration down. In assessing the excess adverse 
health effects of O3, it is important to determine the background 
level of ambient O3. Interestingly, background levels of ozone in 
North America are known to peak as high as 0.14 ppm (1 hour), 
particularly in high elevation regions such as Wyoming, although 
the contribution of these transient 1 hour levels of ozone to general 
public health is unclear. This high altitude peak concentration is 
thought to be due to a combination of high VOC levels, NOx, and 
the additional UV light reflected off snow cover. However, other fac-
tors such as season, thickness of boundary layers, vertical intrusions 
from the stratosphere, and long range transport also play roles in 
determining background levels of O3 in North America. The recent 
growth in natural gas fracking operations along the eastern range of 
the United States has resulted in fugitive losses of methane which 
may also be contributing to O3 formation. This issue is highly con-
troversial and shows the tenuous temporality of any intervention to 
reduce air pollutants formed secondarily due to complex chemistry.
Short-Term Exposures to Smog
During the 1950s to 1960s, early air pollution toxicologists were 
challenged by the complexity of photochemical air pollution to 
ascertain its potential both to adversely affect human health and to

1494
Environmental Toxicology
unit VI
determine what about these atmospheres was responsible for the 
effects. The focus was immediately placed on O3 because its toxic-
ity was found to be high even at low ppm concentrations. Concerns 
that the complex atmosphere might be even more hazardous led 
to a number of studies with actual (outdoor-derived) or synthetic 
(photolyzed laboratory–prepared) smog to assess the potency of 
the ambient-like pollution mixtures. When human subjects were 
exposed to real-world photochemical air pollution (Los Angeles 
ambient air pumped into a laboratory exposure chamber), they 
experienced changes in lung function similar to those described in 
controlled clinical studies of O3 alone (i.e., reduction in spiromet-
ric lung volumes), thus supporting the view that O3 was the pol-
lutant of primary concern. Acute animal studies using synthetic 
atmospheres (usually irradiated auto exhaust) provided supportive 
evidence indicating deep lung damage, primarily within the small 
airway and proximal alveolar epithelium.
As a result, O3 was the focus in many of early air pollution 
studies despite a modicum of evidence that co-pollutants might also 
be involved in eliciting the effects observed with smog. For exam-
ple, when guinea pigs were exposed to irradiated auto exhaust, air-
way resistance increased quickly, which contrasts with the pattern 
of O3-related dysfunction that expresses as an increase in breathing 
rate. Perhaps a more soluble irritant(s) was involved, such as reac-
tive aldehydes, but these pollutants were not monitored. With the 
potency of O3 so apparent, attention was drawn to its effects and 
less to the array of seemingly less dramatic effects of a complex 
atmosphere. Even today, the focus on smog is almost exclusively 
centered on O3 so it is not too surprising that the regulatory perspec-
tive is also tied to this single pollutant.
Chronic Exposures to Smog
Epidemiological studies in human populations as well as empiri-
cal studies in animals have attempted to link degenerative lung 
diseases with chronic exposure to photochemical air pollution. 
Cross-sectional and prospective field studies have suggested an 
accelerated loss of lung function in adults living in areas of high 
pollution; however, as with many such studies, there were problems 
with confounding factors (meteorology, poor exposure assessment, 
and confounding variables).
Studies conducted in children living in modern-day Mexico 
City, which has oxidant and PM levels far in excess of any city in 
the United States, have found abnormalities in the nasal epithelium 
using it as exposure surrogates for deep lung effects as would be 
assayed by invasive biopsy and lavage methodologies. Dramatic 
effects were reported in exposed children, consisting of severe 
epithelial damage and metaplasia as well as permanent remodel-
ing of the nasal epithelium. When children migrated into Mexico 
City from cleaner, nonurban regions, even more severe damage was 
observed, suggesting that the tissue remodeling in the permanent 
residents imparted some degree of incomplete adaptation. Because 
the children were of middle-class origin, these observations were 
less likely confounded by socio-economic variables (Calderon-
Garcidueñas et al., 1992). Changes in lung hyperinflation as esti-
mated by x-ray tomography and impaired lung function along with 
markers of oxidative stress have been reported among similarly 
exposed children living in Mexico City (Calderon-Garcidueñas et 
al., 2003; Hernández-Escobar et al., 2009) raising further concerns 
of long-term effects.
Many studies have focused on children living in variably pol-
luted areas of the Los Angeles basin showing the impact of air 
pollution—O3 and PM—on lung growth, lung function, and other 
growth-related variables from childhood through high school age. 
Recently, a study examined the improvement of many of these 
variables as air quality has improved in various communities over 
a 13-year period. Improved lung function could be attributed to 
decreases in PM, NO2, but less so with O3 which itself changed less 
than the other primary pollutants (Gauderman et al., 2015).
A now-classic synthetic smog animal study was undertaken 
at the Cincinnati EPA laboratory in the mid-1960s in an attempt to 
address the potential for long-term lung disease. Beagle dogs were 
exposed on a daily basis (16 hours) for nearly 6 years, followed by 
a clean-air recovery period of about 3 years (Lewis et al., 1974). A 
series of physiologic measurements were made on the dogs after the 
exposure, and after their 3-year recovery. They were then moved to 
the University of California at Davis. The lungs of the dogs then 
underwent extensive morphologic examination to correlate with the 
physiology measurements. The dogs had been exposed to non-irra-
diated auto exhaust, irradiated auto exhaust, SO2 plus sulfuric acid, 
the two types of exhaust plus the sulfur mixture, and a high and a 
low level of NOx. The atmospheres were quite complex with only 
the irradiated exhaust mixtures containing O3 and NO2 and all con-
tained CO. In short, all the mixture exposure groups had functional 
abnormalities, most of which persisted or worsened over the 3-year 
recovery period in clean air with enlargement of airspaces and 
loss of interalveolar septa consistent with emphysema and chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) (Hyde et al., 1978). The 
degenerative and progressive nature of the smog-induced lesions 
was reminiscent of lung disease with lifelong tobacco smoking.
Long-term “sentinel animal” studies in highly polluted cities 
have shown similar abnormalities, although some have been con-
founded by background infection due to the nature of the study. 
One such study, conducted in rats exposed for 6 months to the air 
of São Paulo, Brazil, found considerable airway damage, lung func-
tion alterations, and altered mucus rheology (Saldiva et al., 1992). 
This collage of effects is not unlike a composite of injury one might 
suspect from a mixed atmosphere of oxidants and acid PM in con-
trolled laboratory animal studies. Strangely enough, however, a 
7-week study in rats exposed to the polluted Mexico City air, which 
had induced significant lesions in children, did not reveal nasal or 
lung histopathology in F-344 rats (Moss et al., 2001). Thus, the evo-
lution of air pollution–induced lung disease has potentially many 
variables, but overall there is coherence that long-term exposure of 
children and experimental animals to urban polluted atmospheres 
has long-term negative consequences on lung health.
Ozone
General Toxicology  Ozone is the primary oxidant of concern 
in photochemical smog because of its inherent bioreactivity and 
its concentration relative to other reactive species. Approximately 
140 million Americans lived in areas not in compliance with the 
8-hour NAAQS in 2016. Progress has been made in reducing ambi-
ent O3 levels and Los Angeles, for example, has not exceeded the 
Stage 1 smog alert (1-hour peak of 0.20 ppm or more) since 1998; 
it has dropped the number of exceedances of the 0.075 ppm (2006) 
NAAQS in half from 1990 to 2011. Unlike SO2 and PM reductions 
that have largely been done at their source, mitigation strategies for 
O3 have been somewhat less successful despite significant reduc-
tions in automobile emissions. Reductions in O3 have been partially 
offset by population growth, which brings with it additional vehi-
cles and vehicle miles driven. With suburban sprawl and the down-
wind transport of air masses from populated areas to more rural 
environments, the geographic distribution of those exposed has also 
expanded, as has the temporal profile of individual exposure. In 
other words, ambient O3 exposures are no longer stereotyped as

Air Pollution
Chapter 31
1495
brief 1- to 2-hour peaks as in the 1960s and 1970s. Instead, O3 
forms over longer drive periods and transport of pollutants spreads 
the period of exposure to 6 hours or more at or near the NAAQS 
level. This important change in the exposure profile to O3 has given 
rise to concerns that cumulative impacts occur over an exposure of 
several hours rather than what one might experience with shorter 
pulse-like exposures. It is feared that many more people might 
be at risk than previously thought. With the 1997 revision of the 
U.S. O3 NAAQS to include an 8-hour daily average of 0.08 ppm, 
more cities and suburban areas found themselves in violation of 
the standard. If indeed the damage to the lung is cumulative over 
an 8-hour time period, then people in areas of compliance but with 
exposure levels near the standard may be affected. The most recent 
revision of the O3 NAAQS reduced the level to 0.07 ppm (2015). 
The American Lung Association estimates that nearly 50% of U.S. 
inhabitants live in counties that are not in O3 compliance (American 
Lung Association, 2017).
Ozone induces a variety of effects in humans and experimen-
tal animals at concentrations that occur in urban areas (reviewed 
by Lippmann [1989] and U.S. EPA [2013]). These effects include 
morphologic, functional, immunologic, and biochemical alterations 
mostly in the lungs. Because of its low water solubility, a substantial 
portion of inhaled O3 penetrates deep into the lung, but its reactiv-
ity is such that about 17% and 40% are scrubbed by the nasophar-
ynx of resting rats and humans, respectively (Gerrity et al., 1988; 
Hatch et al., 1994). The reason for the higher degree of scrubbing 
in humans is unclear, but the finding is reproducible. Moreover, the 
mouth appears to scrub as well as the nose. Nevertheless, regardless 
of species, the region of the lung that is predicted to have the great-
est O3 deposition (dose per surface area) is the centriacinar region, 
from the terminal bronchioles to the alveolar ducts, also referred to 
as the proximal alveolar ductal region (Overton and Miller, 1988). 
Because O3 penetration increases with increased tidal volume and 
flow rate, exercise increases the dose to the target area. Using 18O3 (a 
nonradioactive isotope of oxygen), Hatch et al. (1994) have shown 
that the dose to the distal lung and the degree of damage to the 
lung as determined by leakage of plasma protein into the alveolar 
space (as collected by bronchoalveolar lavage) in exercising human 
subjects are similar to the magnitude of inflammation and protein 
leak in rats exercising or at rest but exposed to higher ventilation-
adjusted concentrations. Thus, it is important to consider the role 
of exercise-associated dosimetry in a study of O3 or any inhalant 
before making cross-study comparisons, especially if that compari-
son is across species.
Animal studies indicate that the acute morphologic responses 
to O3 involves epithelial lining cells along the entire respiratory 
tract. The pattern of injury parallels the dosimetry profile, with the 
majority of damage occurring in the distal lung. Along the con-
ducting airways, ciliated cells appear to be most sensitive to O3, 
while Clara cells and mucus-secreting cells are the least sensitive. 
Studies in the rat nose indicate that O3 also is an effective mucus 
secretagogue. In the alveolar region, type 1 epithelial cells are 
very sensitive to O3 relative to type 2 cells, which have an active 
metabolic machinery and can also serve as the stem cells for the 
replacement of damaged type 1 cells. At lower concentrations (less 
than 0.8 ppm in the rat), a single exposure is followed by recovery 
with no residual pathology after a few days. In humans, a single 
exposure to high ambient levels of O3 results in airways that appear 
“sunburned” when a bronchoscope is used to peer into the human 
bronchus. What is uncertain is the impact of repeated “sun-burning” 
of the airways and lung.
Studies have shown particular sensitivity to O3-induced inflam-
mation in neonatal rats; effects decrease with age into adulthood. 
However, enhanced sensitivity to O3 again appears in older rats as 
evidenced by interstitial edema that is not seen in younger adult ani-
mals. Older rats have lower ascorbate in the lung and this diminish-
ment of antioxidant capacity may be in part responsible. Ascorbate 
in humans has been found to reduce the lung function effects in 
controlled exposures and other antioxidant compounds seem to 
have similar albeit varied impacts (Tashakkor et al., 2011). Elderly 
humans, however, seem less responsive to the lung function impacts 
of high ambient O3. The reasons for this are unclear, but caution 
is warranted in linking lung function and inflammation in the O3 
response.
The mechanisms by which O3 causes injury have been studied 
using cellular as well as cell-free systems. As a powerful oxidant, 
O3 seeks to extract electrons from other molecules. The surface fluid 
lining the respiratory tract and the cell membranes that underlie the 
lining fluid contain a significant quantity of polyunsaturated fatty 
acids (PUFA), either free or as part of the lipoprotein structures of 
the cell. The double bonds within these fatty acids have a labile, 
unpaired electron that is easily attacked by O3 to form ozonides that 
progress through a less stable zwitterion or trioxolane (depending 
on the presence of water); these ultimately recombine or decompose 
to lipohydroperoxides, aldehydes, and hydrogen peroxide. These 
pathways are thought to initiate propagation of lipid radicals and 
autooxidation of cell membranes and macromolecules (Fig. 31-16).
Evidence of free radical–related damage in vivo includes 
detection of exhaled breath pentane and ethane and tissue measure-
ments of diene conjugates. Damage to the air–blood interface dis-
rupts its barrier function and promotes inflammation. Inflammatory 
cytokines (e.g., interleukins 6, 8, and others, and TNF) are released 
from epithelial cells and macrophages that mediate early responses 
and initiate repair. This inflammatory process is generally transient, 
but it may also interact with neural irritant responses to affect lung 
function acutely. This latter response may have implications for 
those with preexistent inflammation or disease.
Pulmonary Function Effects  Exposure to O3 produces a vari-
ety of pulmonary function changes; unlike with the inflammation 
effect, humans appear to be more sensitive than most animal mod-
els. Although the human studies almost always involve exercise, 
their deficit in lung function occurs more rapidly and is more dra-
matic than animals that have been tested similarly. It is notewor-
thy that in controlled human studies involving O3, considerable 
interindividual differences in response have been observed that 
are linked to individual physical and biological features as well as 
PUFA
Ozone
Trioxolane
Carbonyl oxide
Aldehyde
Criegee ozonide
Hydroxyhydroperoxide
Aldehyde
Hydrogen
peroxide
O
RHC
CH–
O
O
+
RHC
O
O
O3
+
RHC
CH–
RHC
O
+
RCH
O
H2O2
+H2O
–H2O
RHC
O
O
O
RHC
CH–
OH
OOH
Figure 31-16.   Major reactions pathways of O3 with lipids in lung lining 
fluid and cell membranes. (Adapted with permission from U.S. EPA [2013].)

1496
Environmental Toxicology
unit VI
possibly genetic factors. Animal studies show similar host factors 
of susceptibility.
It is not entirely clear what mechanisms underlie the altered 
lung function (in terms of changes in FEV1) produced by O3. Chest 
pain/discomfort on deep breathing is thought to contribute to O3-
induced decreases in an effort-dependent lung function maneuver 
such as FEV1. These are thought to be vagally mediated and involve 
C-fiber stimulation; the responses can be abrogated by analgesics, 
such as ibuprofen and opiates, which also reduce pain and inflam-
mation (see below). Thus, pain reflexes involving C-fiber networks 
are thought to be important in the reduction in forced expiratory 
volumes. Animal studies also show a prominent role for vagal 
reflexes in altered airway responsiveness and bronchoconstriction. 
There is also evidence to implicate vagal reflexes in cardiac as well 
as corporal thermal regulation, at least in rodents, as part of a non-
specific defense mechanism decreasing ventilation.
Airway responsiveness to specific (e.g., allergen) and nonspe-
cific (e.g., cold air and inhaled methacholine) bronchoconstriction 
is another commonly used test of the pulmonary response to inhaled 
pollutants such as O3. These types of tests are very important 
because airway hyperresponsiveness is a central feature of asthma 
and asthmatics are a sizeable subpopulation (7% to 9% of the total 
population in the United States and 1% to 18% worldwide) that 
may be particularly sensitive to the adverse respiratory effects of 
inhaled pollutants. A number of animal models have demonstrated 
that O3 induces airway hyperresponsiveness and that innate factors 
such as genetics, diet, and obesity can modify this effect. For the 
most part, many of these studies have utilized O3 exposure concen-
trations that are far above ambient levels. Importantly, controlled 
human exposure studies have not only verified the findings of the 
high dose animal studies, but also demonstrated adverse effects at 
concentrations relevant to ambient O3 levels. Airway hyperrespon-
siveness to nonspecific agonists in humans has been reported after 
acute exposure to as little as 0.08 ppm O3. It is widely thought that 
hyperreactive airways may be a marker of predisposition to other 
pollutants or aeroallergens.
Inflammation of the Lung and Host Defense  The mecha-
nism by which O3 produces decrements in pulmonary function 
appears to be largely neurologic, but the cross-links with airway 
inflammation are unclear. For example, O3-induced lung dysfunc-
tion does not appear to be enhanced in asthmatics whose lungs are 
generally in a state of inflammation, yet asthmatics are more sensi-
tive to the bronchoconstrictive effects of both SO2 and sulfuric acid 
aerosols. It may be that inflammation sensitizes nerve endings to 
external irritants. Age and obesity in animal models suggests these 
factors may also play a role in the pulmonary response to O3. These 
studies have demonstrated that O3-induced lung injury and inflam-
mation is greater in neonatal compared to adult rabbits, rats, and 
mice (Vancza et al., 2009). Obesity predisposes mice to O3-induced 
inflammation and airway hyperresponsiveness as well (Williams 
et al., 2015). Because obesity is associated with ongoing systemic 
inflammation, it suggests that a preexisting physiologic or disease 
state enhances the adverse effects of O3.
Both human and animal studies have demonstrated that sen-
sitivity to O3 appears to have a genetic component as well. Studies 
in inbred stains of mice have shown that O3-induced pulmonary 
neutrophilia, airway hyperresponsiveness, and permeability are sig-
nificantly affected by SNPs in a single gene linked to the Toll-like 
receptor 4 (Tlr4) locus that has been associated with endotoxin sen-
sitivity (Kleeberger et al., 2000). Further research has determined 
that the participation of an innate immunity factor, such as Tlr4, in 
the multifaceted response to O3 involves the release of hyaluronan 
fragments that appear to directly activate the Tlr4 cascade in mice 
(Li et al., 2011). The role of genetic polymorphisms in the pul-
monary response to O3 is complicated, however, and many other 
pathways including TNF, IL-1, Nrf-2, and NF-κB can modulate the 
response to O3 in animal models (Bauer and Kleeberger, 2010).
The growth of genomic and proteomic technologies has made 
it possible to begin studies in humans to define genetic linkages 
to O3 sensitivity. These studies have typically focused on genes 
involved in oxidative stress pathways. For example, again using 
Mexico City as a backdrop, it was found that a polymorphism in 
glutathione-S-transferase Mu 1 (GSTM1) appears to convey O3 sen-
sitivity (Romieu et al., 2004). Similarly, functional polymorphisms 
in the catalase and myeloperoxidase genes have been associated 
with enhanced response to ambient ozone. More detailed, con-
trolled exposure O3 studies in humans have confirmed that genetic 
polymorphisms in these and other genes, including NAD quinone 
oxidoreductase (NQO), GSTP1, heme oxygenase-1, and tumor 
necrosis factor (TNF), which are associated with responsiveness to 
O3 and that gene–gene interactions are involved.
The strong epidemiologic evidence that O3 can exacerbate 
asthma (e.g., increased hospital admissions) is strong, but causal 
ties to exacerbated immune responses have depended on empirical 
exposure studies. The potential for O3 to influence allergic sensitiza-
tion and/or challenge-responses has received a significant amount of 
investigation in both human and animal studies. Controlled human 
exposure studies have shown that asthmatics respond in a manner 
not overly dissimilar from normal, but because asthmatics have less 
functional reserve, lung function deficits are more evident (Kehrl 
et al., 1999). There is also evidence of heightened airway respon-
siveness to nonspecific airway challenges—pharmacologic agents, 
cold air, exercise, etc. Exaggerated responsiveness to allergens in 
allergic subjects has also been reported but seems less consistent 
or antigen-dependent, with variable evidence of lung function 
impacts yet more demonstrable enhancement of inflammation with 
changes in immune cell phenotypes and oxidative stress (Alexis 
and Carlsten, 2014). Likewise, eosinophils and IL-4, central com-
ponents of allergic asthma, have also been reported to be increased 
in some but not all human chamber studies of O3 exposure (U.S. 
EPA, 2013). Diary studies of asthmatic nurses, which involve a 
broader range of susceptibility, however, report worsened allergy 
symptoms, as well as durations thereof, at concentrations of O3 near 
the NAAQS (Schwartz, 1992); similar results have reported in chil-
dren in Southern California (Malig et al., 2016).
Enhanced response to allergen challenge has also been noted 
in a number of animal species exposed to O3. Biochemical, cellular, 
and pulmonary function parameters of allergic response have all 
been observed to increase in sensitized animals exposed to O3 prior 
to antigen challenge. Ozone’s effect on allergic asthma also appears 
to occur at the sensitization stage in which repeated exposure to O3 
before or during the sensitization process exacerbates a range of 
allergic endpoints. Thus, in general, animal studies have shown the 
ability of O3 to enhance both attributes of the allergic process, while 
the evidence in humans lies only in the exacerbation of response 
and this attribute itself.
Regarding other immune responses, early research showed 
that exposure to O3 before a challenge with aerosols of infectious 
agents produced a higher incidence of infection than is seen in 
control animals (Coffin and Blommer, 1967). Studies show that 
this type of effect can be a direct result of altered phagocytosis 
by macrophages in O3-exposed mice previously infected with an 
aerosol of Streptococcus (group C) bacteria (Gilmour et al., 1993). 
The host resistance model has shown responsiveness to an expo-
sure as low as 0.08 ppm for 3 hours—perhaps the most sensitive

Air Pollution
Chapter 31
1497
model that exists for O3. The susceptibility of mice and hamsters to 
Klebsiella pneumoniae aerosol is also increased by prior exposure 
to O3. In the rat, altered microbe-killing may relate to membrane 
or receptor damage in macrophages, thus impairing the production 
of bactericidal agents such as superoxide anions. Overall, the rat 
appears less susceptible than mice because it has a more vigorous 
polymorphonuclear leukocyte (PMN) response to bacteria than do 
mice, which seems to compensate for macrophage impairments. 
This is yet another example of where susceptibility lies more in 
the inability to compensate than in the initial responsiveness to a 
given challenge. It is not clear whether O3’s impairment of bacterial 
infections in the lung also extends to viral infections. While ambi-
ent O3 has been associated with increased hospital admissions for 
viral and bacterial infections, animal studies show mixed results for 
O3’s effect on viral infections, although some of the contradictory 
findings may be a result of experimental design differences (e.g., O3 
exposure occurring before or after viral infection).
Chronic Effects  Morphometric studies of the centriacinar region 
of rat lungs exposed for 12 hours per day for 6 weeks to 0.12 or 0.25 
ppm O3 show hyperplasia and hypertrophy of type 1 alveolar cells 
(smaller and thicker cells) coupled with damage and alterations 
in ciliated and Clara cell populations in upstream small airways 
(Barry et al., 1988). A collective cross-protocol analysis of type 1 
cell hypertrophy was conducted, and type 1 cell thickness appeared 
to be linearly related to the O3 C × T (Chang et al., 1991, 1992). 
This finding suggested that over a season, the impact of O3 in the 
distal lung may be cumulative and perhaps more importantly may 
be without threshold. The biological significance of this change is 
unclear—it may be part of a compensatory response to “thicken” 
that part of the alveolar-duct junction that receives the greatest 
dose and is most affected. This response may thus protect because 
the thickened cells are smaller, offering less exposure-surface for 
the incoming O3 and therefore limiting membrane damage. When 
returned to clean air, most of this epithelial pathology regressed, 
but there was nonetheless evidence of residual interstitial remodel-
ing beneath the epithelium in the alveolar-duct region.
A long series of studies at the University of California, Davis 
has examined the structural and functional changes produced in non-
human primates exposed chronically to O3. Because of the greater 
similarity of monkey respiratory tract to that of humans, the bur-
den of extrapolation to humans is lessened and has proven impor-
tant in establishing causality for analogous epidemiology studies. 
Daily 8-hour exposures to 0.2 ppm O3 for 90 days produced cellular 
changes throughout the respiratory tract, including the nose. In the 
second phase of these studies, infant rhesus monkeys were cyclically 
exposed to 0.5 ppm O3 for 8 h/day for 5 days followed by several 
days of exposure to air. While the study design didn’t permit a direct 
comparison of the responsiveness of infant versus adult monkeys, the 
infant monkeys showed evidence of structural changes that parallel 
epidemiology studies in children. The infant monkeys also showed a 
significant interaction between sensitization to house dust mite anti-
gen and ozone. While antigen or O3 alone produced small changes in 
baseline airway resistance and airway responsiveness, antigen plus 
O3 produced more than additive effects on both parameters.
Studies involving episodic exposures of rats and monkeys 
using a pattern of alternating months of O3 (0.25 ppm) for 18 
months indicated a range of effects, notably thickening of inter-
stitial fibrous matrix (Tyler et al., 1988), suggesting loss of lung 
compliance. These interstitial changes were quantitatively similar 
for the continuous and intermittent exposure profile despite the 
twofold difference in the cumulative exposure dose (i.e., C × T). 
This would imply that a pattern of exposure resembling seasonal 
O3 patterns, with real-world relevance, might result in more seri-
ous lesions than predicted by dose alone—perhaps even more than 
would have occurred had the exposure been continuous. Hence, the 
concept of “more dose . . . more effect” may not hold in chronic epi-
sodic scenarios for O3, as it appears with uninterrupted exposures. 
The number of episodes experienced may well be more significant 
to long-term outcomes than total dose—a phenomenon not unlike 
that of repeated sun-burning and deterioration of the skin.
Studies of lung function in rodents exposed chronically to O3 
have yielded mixed results at relevant exposure concentrations. 
Generally, the observed dysfunction is reflective of stiffened or 
fibrotic lungs, particularly at higher concentrations. There have 
been two prominent chronic O3 studies—an EPA 18-month chronic 
study fashioned after a realistic urban exposure profile with a peak 
exposure of 0.25 ppm (Chang et al., 1992; Costa et al., 1995) and 
the National Toxicology Program (NTP)—Health Effects Institute 
(HEI, 1994–1995) study of 0.125 to 1 ppm for 20 months (square 
wave; 6 h/day; 5 days/week). From an environmental relevance 
perspective, the C × T doses for these studies were similar, but the 
urban profile study produced evidence for centriacinar interstitial 
fibrosis consistent with earlier evidence of the influence of exposure 
pattern. There was no general biochemical evidence for fibrosis, 
as reported in monkey and rat studies that had been conducted at 
higher O3 concentrations, perhaps due to the focal nature of the 
pathology. If one attempts to compare these results with the classic 
Cincinnati beagle study, one finds that the synthetic smog atmo-
sphere showed degenerative and not fibrotic lung lesions. However, 
it should be noted that the air pollutant mixture in the beagle study 
involved more than O3, was more complex, and had pollutants at 
significantly higher levels.
Paradoxically, O3 has the ability to induce tolerance to itself 
and is a curious phenomenon in light of pathologies seen in epi-
sodic and chronic exposures. Classic O3 tolerance takes the form of 
protection against a high or even lethal dose in rodents that has a 
pre-exposure to a very low initial challenge(s) several days before. 
This term, tolerance, is sometimes used to describe “adaptation” or 
acclimatization with repeated exposures to near-ambient levels of 
O3, and as such, has led to some confusion. However, with regard 
to “adaptation” to O3, the process begins during and immediately 
after the initial exposure and is fully expressed in 2 to 4 days. This 
adaptive phenomenon has been substantiated in humans with regard 
to diminished lung function and correlative inflammatory endpoints 
(Devlin et al., 1993). Lavage lactate dehydrogenase (LDH; a marker 
of cell injury) and elastase (enzymatically active against lung matrix 
material), interestingly, did not appear to adapt in one study car-
ried out over 2 weeks in humans. An analogous pattern of adapta-
tion of functional and biochemical endpoints (including LDH and 
elastase) also takes place in rodents with repeated exposures up 
to a week. But to date, the linkages between acute, adaptive, and 
long-term processes remain unclear, because both pathology and 
lung dysfunction do develop over longer periods of exposure in 
animals. The precise mechanism for O3 adaptation is not known 
and several theories abound, including changes in cell profiles, lung 
surface fluids, and induced antioxidants. Few studies have tackled 
the problem but in rats the adaptation of the neutrophilic response 
appears to be related to the induction of an endogenous acute-phase 
response (McKinney et al., 1998). However, adaptation to lung 
function changes in rats after chronic exposure appears linked to 
lung antioxidants such as ascorbic acid (Wiester et al., 2000). The 
human relevance of this finding is uncertain because ascorbic acid 
is not endogenously synthesized as it is in the rat. However, self-
administration of ascorbate has been shown to reduce O3-induced 
lung function decrements in adults (Mudway et al., 1999), while in

1498
Environmental Toxicology
unit VI
runners it did not enhance performance (Gomes et al., 2011). Yet 
in children, supplementation with ascorbate and α-tocopherol less-
ened nasal inflammatory responses to O3 in Mexico City (Sienra-
Monge et al., 2004). Despite these interesting findings, it remains 
unclear whether antioxidant supplements can protect humans from 
long-term O3 consequences given the many mechanisms that may 
be involved in the various responses. How supplementation may 
interplay with long-term adaptation and the likelihood of degenera-
tive disease prevention is unclear.
Ozone Interactions with Co-pollutants  The effects of O3 may 
be altered by co-pollutants in the mixture or may otherwise interact 
to yield a novel composite outcome. How such interactions can be 
studied is often debated. Smog exposures are often difficult to deduc-
tively disassemble into a comprehensible configuration. However, 
one approach simplifying the complexity of smog, yet addressing 
the issue of pollutant interactions involves a bottom-up assembly of 
likely interacting pollutants. The exposures of animals or humans 
may be to binary or “assembled” synthetic mixtures of pollutants that 
occur together in ambient air. As such, the most frequent combina-
tions involve interactions of O3 and NO2 or O3 and PM (e.g., ambi-
ent, sulfuric acid, or diesel particles). Not surprisingly, study designs 
involving temporal or spatial exposures add a level of complexity in 
interpretation that may or may not support either augmentation or 
antagonism of lung function impairment, lung pathology, or a host of 
other indices of injury. This complexity only emphasizes the need to 
carefully consider the myriad of factors that might affect outcomes as 
well as how the design compares to real-world exposures of concern.
Studies of O3 mixed with PM also have shown either enhanced 
or antagonistic responses that varied with exposure design. Studies 
of human volunteers exposed acutely with exercise to O3 and diesel 
exhaust particles showed enhanced deficits in lung function (Madden 
et al., 2014). Similarly, as noted above, field studies of children in 
camps and studies of asthma admissions in the Northeastern United 
States and in Canada suggested an interaction of acid aerosols and 
O3 resulting in augmented functional deficits to a composite ambient 
summer haze. Allergic mice, however, showed reduced lung infil-
tration of inflammatory cells to the O3 and diesel particle exposure, 
with no change in airways resistance; yet, airway hyperreactivity was 
increased (Farraj et al., 2010). Likewise, rabbits exposed intermit-
tently for 1 year to an O3 (0.1 ppm) and sulfuric acid (125 μg/m3) mix-
ture had a temporal shift in secretory cell number, increasing midway 
through the study and then decreasing—with no evidence of muco-
ciliary clearance dysfunction (Schlesinger et al., 1992). Studies of 
highly complex atmospheres such as one study involving acid-coated 
carbon combined with O3 at near-ambient levels similarly show varied 
evidence of interaction on lung function and macrophage receptor 
activity (Kleinman et al., 1999). Thus, as can be gleaned, the inter-
pretability of any multicomponent study is dependent on its statistical 
design and the ability to either separate or determine the nature of the 
interacting variables. The bottom line is that interactions are highly 
dependent on the conditions of exposure, endpoints selected for study, 
and a host of other factors. As the number of interacting variables 
increases, so does the difficulty in interpretation. Given the challenge 
that it is indeed the complex mixture to which people are exposed that 
we wish to evaluate, creative toxicological approaches to understand-
ing mixture responses will demand new systems perspectives if real 
progress is to be achieved (Mauderly, 2006).
Nitrogen Dioxide
General Toxicology  Nitrogen dioxide, like O3, is a deep lung 
irritant that can produce pulmonary edema if it is inhaled at high 
concentrations. It is a much less potent irritant and oxidant than 
O3, but NO2 can pose clear toxicological problems. Potential life-
threatening exposure is a real-world problem for farmers, as near-
lethal high levels of NO2 can be liberated from fermenting fresh 
silage. Being heavier than air, the generated NO2 and CO2 displace 
air and oxygen at the base of silo and diffuse into closed spaces 
where workers can inadvertently get exposed to very high con-
centrations perhaps with depleted oxygen. Typically, shortness of 
breath rapidly ensues with exposures nearing 75 to 100 ppm NO2, 
with delayed edema and symptoms of pulmonary damage. Not 
surprisingly, the symptoms are collectively termed “silo-filler’s 
disease.” NO2 is also an important indoor pollutant, especially in 
homes with unventilated gas stoves or kerosene heaters (Spengler 
and Sexton, 1983) or, in developing countries, with the unvented 
burning of biomass fuels (Kumie et al., 2009). Under such cir-
cumstances, very young children and their mothers who spend 
considerable time indoors may be especially at risk. In general, 
indoor environments with NO2 sources achieve concentrations far 
in excess of those observed outdoors at central monitoring sites. 
Peak levels of NO2 near high traffic volume roadways can be sev-
eral fold higher than away from roadways and are thus similar to 
peak levels observed indoors with unvented stoves (i.e., 0.2 to 0.5 
ppm). Interestingly, protocols that simulate an urban (rush-hour) or 
household (cooking) patterns of 2 daily peak exposures superim-
posed on a low continuous background concentration have elicited 
effects in experimental animals that continuous exposure to NO2 
did not evoke, suggesting an important dependency on exposure 
profile. Among the common air pollutants, empirical studies of 
NO2 have frequently shown greater effects with higher peak con-
centrations at equivalent C × T steady-state concentrations.
Although the distal lung lesions produced by acute NO2 are 
similar among species, there exist differences in species sensitivity. 
Where direct comparison is possible, guinea pigs, hamsters, and 
monkeys appear more sensitive than rats, although comparative 
dosimetry information might explain some of this difference. As 
in the case of O3, theoretical dosimetry studies indicate that NO2 
is deposited along the length of the respiratory tree, with preferen-
tial deposition in the distal airways. Not surprisingly, the pattern of 
damage to the respiratory tract reflects this profile: damage is most 
apparent in the terminal bronchioles, just a bit more proximal in the 
airway than is seen with O3. At high concentrations, the alveolar 
ducts and alveoli are also affected, with type 1 cells again show-
ing their sensitivity to oxidant challenge. In the airways of these 
animals, there is also damage to epithelial cells in the bronchioles, 
notably with loss of ciliated cells, as well as a loss of secretory 
granules in Clara cells. Thus, the pattern of injury of NO2 is quite 
similar to that of O3, although its potency is about an order of mag-
nitude lower.
Pulmonary Function Effects  Exposure of normal human sub-
jects to concentrations of less than or equal to 4 ppm NO2 for up 
to 3 hours produces no consistent effects on spirometry. However, 
a study has shown slightly enhanced airway reactivity with 1.5 to 
2.0 ppm. Interestingly, ascorbic acid pretreatment of human sub-
jects appeared to protect them from this hyperreactivity (Mohsenin, 
1987). Whether asthmatics have a particular sensitivity to NO2 is a 
controversial issue. A number of factors appear to be involved (e.g., 
exercise, inherent sensitivity of the asthmatic subject, and exposure 
method). Some studies have reported effects in some individuals at 
0.2 ppm, which approximates an indoor level in a household with 
an unvented gas stove. Meta-analyses, which have incorporated the 
findings of many studies to achieve a weight-of-evidence perspec-
tive, support a heightened effect of NO2 on asthmatics, but it’s not 
clear if the observed small but statistically significant changes in

Air Pollution
Chapter 31
1499
airway hyperresponsiveness in asthmatics exposed to NO2 below 
0.6 ppm are adverse. As for an appropriate animal model, only very 
high concentrations (10 ppm NO2) invoke an irritancy response in 
guinea pigs (tachypnea); these levels are well above those a person 
probably would encounter in everyday life. However, NO2 has been 
found to be associated with mortality in some time-series studies 
of air pollution attempting to tease out specific pollutant effects 
(focusing mainly on PM) (Gold et al., 2000; Samoli et al., 2006). 
These epidemiology studies have demonstrated that each 20 to 30 
ppb increase in NO2 results in a small but significant increase in 
acute cardiovascular and respiratory mortality. Similarly, NO2 has 
been associated with increased hospital admissions and emergency 
room visits, but these epidemiology studies are confounded by the 
co-exposure to multiple pollutants. Thus, as stressed elsewhere, it is 
important that epidemiology studies results be interpreted with cau-
tion when considering causality and that controlled human expo-
sure and animal studies be utilized, within ethical limits, to confirm 
the biologic plausibility of the effect of NO2, or any other pollutant, 
on the cardiopulmonary system. This caution obviously extends to 
many recent studies that have consistently linked adverse health 
outcomes with living near high traffic volume roadways. Because 
of the many constituents present in the exhaust of both gas and 
diesel combustion engines, as well as their ever changing chem-
istry, it is unclear from these studies whether NO2 is acting as a 
marker or surrogate for vehicular traffic rather than as an indica-
tion of a specific NO2 effect. These studies have found correlates 
with cardiovascular deaths, which have raised new questions of the 
mechanisms by which pollutants might affect health in susceptible 
subgroups (Rosenlund et al., 2006). Nevertheless, NO2 does appear 
as a reasonable proxy for traffic for both cancer and noncancer out-
comes in epidemiological studies, although the true nature of the 
NO2 role remains unclear (Faustini et al., 2014; Hamra et al., 2015).
Inflammation of the Lung and Host Defense  Unlike O3, 
NO2 does not induce significant neutrophilic inflammation in 
humans at exposure concentrations encountered in the ambient out-
door environment. There is some evidence for bronchial inflamma-
tion after 4 to 6 hours at 2.0 ppm, which approximates the highest 
transient peak indoor levels of this oxidant. Exposures at 2.0 to 5.0 
ppm have been shown to affect T lymphocytes, particularly CD8+ 
cells and natural killer cells that function in host defenses against 
viruses. Although these concentrations may be high, epidemiologic 
studies variably show effects of NO2 on respiratory infection rates in 
children, especially in indoor environments. Animal models, by con-
trast, have for years shown associations between NO2 and bacterial 
infection (Gardner, 1984). As noted for other effects, the incidence 
of infection in exposed models appears to be governed more by the 
peak exposure concentration than by exposure duration. The effects 
are ascribed to suppression of macrophage function and clearance 
from the lung, in the form of suppressed bactericidal and/or motil-
ity functions of macrophages from rabbits exposed to 0.3 ppm for 
3 days (Schlesinger, 1987). Similar effects have been reported in 
humans exposed to 0.10 ppm for 6.6 hours (Devlin et al., 1991).
Toxicological studies of the interaction of NO2 with viruses also 
suggest enhanced infectivity. Squirrel monkeys infected with nonle-
thal levels of A/PR-8 influenza virus and then exposed continuously 
to 5 or 10 ppm NO2 suffered high mortality rates (Henry et al., 1970). 
Other experiments suggest that exposure of squirrel monkeys for 5 
months to 5 ppm NO2 depresses the formation of protective anti-
bodies against the A/PR-8 influenza virus. Controlled human stud-
ies with virus challenges, however, have been inconclusive, perhaps 
because of low subject numbers. One study showed decreased virus 
inactivation by alveolar macrophages recovered from four of nine 
subjects when cultured and exposed for 3.5 hours to 0.6 ppm NO2 in 
vitro (Frampton et al., 1989). Thus, the potential for augmented risk 
of viral infection associated with NO2 exposure remains unclear and 
suggests a role for underlying host susceptibility. This concern would 
be greatest for children, especially during seasonal use of unvented 
gas-heaters, who have less mature pulmonary immune function.
Chronic Effects  Concern about the chronic effects of NO2 stem 
from early observations that a continuous 30-day, 30-ppm expo-
sure produces emphysema in hamsters. Whether the result of this 
continuous exposure scenario relates to cyclic human exposures at 
1/100th that level is unclear. On the one hand, an 18-month study 
in rats exposed to an urban pattern of NO2 in which a daily back-
ground of 0.5 ppm peaked at 1.5 ppm for 4 hours each day showed 
little ultrastructural damage to the distal lung (Chang et al., 1988). 
On the other hand, mice exposed for a year to a base level of 0.2 
ppm NO2 with a 1-hour spike of 0.8 ppm twice a day 5 days per 
week (Miller et al., 1987) displayed effects that differed between 
the base-only and peak-only exposure groups. The base level pro-
duced no effects, while the overlaid peaks induced slight functional 
impairment and augmented susceptibility to bacterial infection. 
Early studies (Ehrlich and Henry, 1968) showed that clearance of 
bacteria from the lungs is suppressed with 0.5 ppm NO2 through 
12 months of exposure. Interestingly, studies with a similar double 
diurnal peak design for NO2, with NO used as a negative control, 
showed more pronounced effects of NO on alveolar septal remod-
eling than did NO2 (Mercer et al., 1995). These and similar stud-
ies utilizing varied peak-plus-baseline NOx exposures indicate the 
importance of exposure profile for at least this pollutant.
Other Oxidants
While a number of other reactive oxidants have been identified in 
photochemical smog, most are short-lived because of their reaction 
with co-pollutants. Peroxyacetyl nitrate (PAN), which is thought 
to be responsible for much of the eye-stinging activity of smog, 
is known to exist in smog situations. It is more soluble and reac-
tive than O3, and hence rapidly decomposes in mucous membranes 
before it can penetrate into the respiratory tract. The cornea is a 
sensitive target and is prominent in the burning/stinging discomfort 
often associated with oxidant smogs. A few studies with high levels 
of PAN have shown that it can cause lung damage and have muta-
genic activity in bacteria, but it is not likely that these scenarios are 
relevant to ambient levels of PAN.
Carbon Monoxide
Carbon monoxide is classed toxicologically as a chemical asphyxi-
ant because its toxic action stems from its formation of carboxy-
hemoglobin, preventing oxygenation of the blood for systemic 
transport. The fundamental toxicology of CO and the physiologic 
factors that determine the level of carboxyhemoglobin attained in 
the blood at various atmospheric concentrations of carbon monox-
ide are detailed in Chap. 11, “Toxic Responses of the Blood.”
The normal concentration of carboxyhemoglobin (COHb) in 
the blood of nonsmokers is about 0.5%. This is attributed to endoge-
nous production of CO from heme catabolism, yet higher levels can 
be found in nonsmokers who are regularly exposed to secondhand 
smoke from cigarettes. Blood COHb is a function of the concentra-
tion in air, the length of exposure, and the ventilation of the exposed 
individual. Uptake is said to be ventilation-limited, implying that 
virtually all the CO inspired in a breath is absorbed and bound to 
the available hemoglobin. Thus, continuous exposure of human 
subjects to 30 ppm CO leads to an equilibrium value of 5% COHb.

1500
Environmental Toxicology
unit VI
The Haldane equation is used to compute the COHb equilibrium 
under a given exposure situation. The equilibrium values generally 
are reached after 8 hours or more of exposure, but the time required 
to reach equilibrium can be shortened by physical activity.
Carbon monoxide emissions from automobiles have progres-
sively decreased since the 1970s. Increased combustion efficiency 
and catalytic convertors have reduced emissions at the tailpipe by 
more than 98%. However, motor vehicles can still account for two-
thirds of urban CO. Depending on the location in a community, traffic 
density, vehicle types and age, and the urban structure, CO concen-
trations can vary widely. Concentrations predicted inside passenger 
compartments of motor vehicles in downtown traffic were almost 
three times those for central urban areas and five times those expected 
in residential areas. Occupants of vehicles traveling on expressways 
had CO exposures somewhere between those in central urban areas 
and those in downtown traffic, whereas concentrations in under-
ground garages, tunnels, and buildings directly over highways can 
still reach high levels but substantially less and slower to accumulate. 
But it must be kept in mind that there are many sources of CO—any-
where combustion is ongoing. Certainly both main and side-stream 
tobacco smoke are a source. Faulty home heating systems and mobile 
auxiliary heating sources emit CO which when used inappropriately 
(i.e., unventilated) can create life-threatening circumstances, and 
nowadays, these indoor exposures are the most significant CO threat 
to health with about 430 deaths a year in the United States.
No overt clinical human health effects have been demonstrated 
for COHb levels below 2%, while levels above 40% cause fatal 
asphyxiation. However, there is evidence that in some people COHb 
in the range of 2.0% to 2.4% can elicit acute cardiovascular effects. 
A 90-minute exposure to about 50 ppm CO would likely result in 
COHb levels of about 2.5%, with a resultant impairment of time-
interval discrimination even in healthy subjects; at approximately 
5% COHb, there is an impairment of other psychomotor faculties. 
At 5% COHb in nonsmokers (the median COHb value for smok-
ers is about 5%), however, maximal exercise duration and maximal 
oxygen consumption are reduced (Aronow, 1981). Clear cardiovas-
cular changes also may be produced by exposures sufficient to yield 
COHb in excess of 5%. These include increased cardiac output, arte-
riovenous oxygen difference, and coronary blood flow in patients 
without coronary disease. Decreased coronary sinus blood PO2 
occurs in patients with coronary heart disease, and this would impair 
oxidative metabolism of the myocardium. In the early 1990s, a series 
of studies in subjects with cardiovascular disease were conducted 
in several laboratories under the sponsorship of the Health Effects 
Institute (HEI) to determine the potential for angina pectoris when 
they exercised moderately with COHb levels in the range of 2% to 
6% (Allred et al., 1989). The results of these studies indicate that pre-
mature angina can occur under these conditions but that the potential 
for the induction of ventricular arrhythmias remains uncertain.
Carbon monoxide has been implicated as a potentially important 
co-pollutant of PM with potential human health effects at low ambi-
ent concentrations. Independent CO effects have been reported in 
some epidemiological studies of ambient air pollution, but its singu-
lar role versus indicator role (for traffic) continues to be debated. The 
fact that effects noted in these studies are cardiovascular and involve 
angina and effects on EKG patterns lend credence to a role for CO in 
epidemiologic health outcomes. Other data from epidemiologic stud-
ies have shown a linkage between CO and some general CNS indices 
as well as birth outcomes. The sensitivity of newer analysis methods 
for these population studies are revealing previously unappreciated 
health effects. Among these are preterm births, cardiac birth defects, 
and infant mortality in the postnatal period. Moreover, toxicological 
studies with animals also suggest potential developmental risks.
Reducing CO emissions from motor vehicles is a major goal 
because of its high hazard—a colorless and odorless non-irritant—
so technical combustion engineering advances are being pursued 
as well as changes in fuel formulations for specific seasonal condi-
tions. For example, the introduction of gasoline oxygenates such as 
MTBE in the 1990s and other ether derivatives constitute attempts 
to enhance fuel combustion and reduce CO emissions. The experi-
ence with MTBE (as noted earlier) has led to such gasoline reformu-
lations being approached with some caution with greater attention 
being placed on assessments of potential unexpected consequences. 
Biofuels, comprised primarily of ethanol at varied percentages, in 
gasoline or diesel fuel, are part of an effort to reduce fossil fuel 
consumption and enhance renewables. Another goal is reduction in 
emissions that deteriorate the atmosphere directly or indirectly but 
the data supporting this outcome remains inconclusive. Regardless, 
CO remains a toxic air pollutant both indoors (e.g., secondhand 
smoke and cook stoves) and outdoors (combustion engines), which 
merits considerable attention wherever there is combustion.
Hazardous Air Pollutants
Hazardous air pollutants (so-called air toxics or HAPs) represent 
an inclusive classification for air pollutants of anthropogenic ori-
gin that are generally of measurable quantity in the air, and are 
not covered in the so-called Criteria Pollutant list of the Clean Air 
Act (CAA) of 1970. They are covered under Section 112 of the 
CAA. For a variety of reasons, HAPs are regulated in the United 
States not by ambient concentration (due to their generally focal 
nature near sources or uneven national distribution, complexity of 
measurement) but rather by application of best available technol-
ogy to emission reduction, followed with an assessment of residual 
risk with that which is released. As such, most exposure estimates 
for these pollutants are derived from emission inventories that 
are modeled into the National Air Toxics Assessment (U.S. EPA, 
2016). The most recent NATA assessment (2015) used 2011 data 
on 180 of the 187 HAPs, plus diesel PM. The diverse nature of even 
30 of the 187 HAPs (the so-called “dirty 30”—Table 31-6) com-
plicates a general discussion of their toxicology because the group 
Table 31-6  
List of 30 Urban Air Toxics (“Dirty 30”)
ACETALDEHYDE
DIOXIN
MERCURY COMPOUNDS
Acrolein
Propylene dichloride
Methylene chloride 
(dichloromethane)
Acrylonitrile
1,3-Dichloropropene
Nickel compounds
Arsenic 
compounds
Ethylene dichloride 
(1,2-dichloroethane)
Polychlorinated biphenyls 
(PCBs)
Benzene
Ethylene oxide
Polycyclic organic matter 
(POM)
Beryllium 
compounds
Formaldehyde
Quinoline
1,3-Butadiene
Hexachlorobenzene
1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane
Cadmium 
compounds
Hydrazine
Tetrachloroethylene 
(perchloroethylene)
Chloroform
Lead compounds
Trichloroethylene
Chromium 
compounds
Manganese 
compounds
Vinyl chloride
SOURCE: From U.S. EPA (2016).

Air Pollution
Chapter 31
1501
includes various classes of organic chemicals (by structure, e.g., 
acrolein, benzene), minerals (e.g., asbestos), polycyclic hydrocar-
bon particulate material (e.g., benzo(a)pyrene), and various metals 
and metal compounds (e.g., mercury and beryllium compounds) 
and pesticides (e.g., carbaryl and parathion).
The focus to date on the HAPs has been on their potential 
carcinogenicity, as shown in chronic bioassays, mutagenicity tests 
in bacterial systems, structure–activity relationships, or—in a few 
special cases (e.g., benzene and asbestos)—their known carcino-
genicity in humans. Hazardous air pollutant cancers need not be, 
and generally are not, simply pulmonary in origin. Details on the 
systemic carcinogenicity of many of these chemicals can be found 
elsewhere in this text or in the literature (Loh et al., 2007). However, 
noncancer issues frequently relate to direct lung toxicants that, 
upon accidental release or fugitive emission, might put at risk those 
susceptible (e.g., children) or who have preexisting disease (e.g., 
asthma or other chronic lung or cardiac disease). The assessment of 
noncancer risk to a given air toxic whether to the lung or other organ 
system is determined via the computation of long-term risk refer-
ence exposure concentrations (RfCs). This RfC is that concentra-
tion to which an individual may be exposed over a lifetime without 
adverse, irreversible injury. The official computational process to 
HAP assessment is discussed in detail at www.epa.gov/risk/review-
reference-dose-and-reference-concentration-processes-document. 
This process remains hotly debated but attempts to use the latest and 
best data available to address potential risks to the diverse public. A 
short-term RfC method has been developed for exposures up to 30 
days that is sometimes used to assess noncancer applications. In the 
NATA assessment of toxic inhalants, acrolein ranks as the top risk 
based on emission inventories, the potential for exposure, and its 
inherent irritancy. Discussion of this topic and an approach to mixed 
exposures to noncancer HAPs has been reviewed (Costa, 2003).
Accidental and “Fence-Line” Exposures
The relationship between the effects associated with an accidental 
release of a large quantity of a volatile chemical into the air from 
a point source such as a chemical plant and the effects associated 
with a chronic low-level exposure over many years or a lifetime is 
not clear. Regarding cancer risk, which typically defaults to a lin-
earized model of dose and effect, the issue is fairly straightforward. 
Exposures must be minimized if not eliminated if cancer risk is to 
be kept as close to zero as possible. With noncancer risks, the roles 
of nonspecific or specific host defenses, thresholds of response, and 
repair and recovery after exposure complicate the assessment of 
risk. In large part, the issue here relates to a cumulative index, often 
a C × T. Can we better relate disease or injury to a cumulative dose 
or a peak concentration for any given or a protracted exposure? Is 
there an exposure peak beyond which a cumulative approach fails 
(i.e., the effect is concentration driven), or is concentration always 
the dominant determinant? Many of these questions have yet to be 
answered, not to mention their specificity with regard to individual 
compounds and tissues affected.
Methyl isocyanate provides a contrast between the catastrophic 
effects of a large accidental release versus long-term effects linked 
to cyclic or continuous fugitive releases of small amounts of chemi-
cal vapor. The reactive nature of methyl isocyanate with aqueous 
environments is of such magnitude that upon inspiration, almost 
immediate mucous tissue corrosion can be perceived. The vapor 
undergoes hydrolysis within the mucous lining of the airways to 
generate hydrocyanic acid, which destroys the airway epithelium 
and causes acute bronchoconstriction and edema. The damage is 
immediately life-threatening at concentrations above 50 ppm; at 
10 ppm, it is damaging in minutes. These concentrations are in 
the range of the dense vapor cloud that for several hours in 1984 
enshrouded the village of Bhopal (India) bordering a Union Carbide 
pesticide plant. Studies in guinea pigs have shown the immediate 
irritancy of this isocyanate, which in just a few minutes also results 
in significant pathology (Alarie et al., 1987). Rats exposed to 10 or 
30 ppm for 2 hours also showed severe airway and parenchymal 
damage, which did not resolve in surviving rats; transient effects 
were seen at 3 ppm. Even 6 months after exposure, the airway and 
lung damage remained, having evolved into patchy, mostly peri-
bronchial fibrosis with associated functional impairments (Stevens 
et al., 1987). There was also cardiac involvement secondary to the 
damage to the pulmonary parenchyma and arterial bed (i.e., pulmo-
nary hypertension and right-sided heart hypertrophy). This same 
spectrum of health effects has resulted in disability and the deaths 
of thousands of initial survivors since the incident.
In the United States, methyl isocyanate has been measured in 
the ambient air in Katawba Valley, Texas, as a result of small but 
virtually continual fugitive releases of the vapor into the community 
air (“fence-line”) from an adjoining region with several chemical 
plants. While these levels of methyl isocyanate are not sufficient to 
cause the damage seen in Bhopal, there is concern that low-level 
exposure over many years may have more diffuse, chronic effects. 
Residents complain of odors and a higher frequency of respiratory 
disorders, but clear evidence of injury or disease is lacking. Fence-
line exposures to a variety of industrial chemicals remain a sig-
nificant potential risk for many communities—often low-income 
or worker communities near one or more industrial sources. Silent 
continuous or periodic releases from pipelines or transfer points 
within facilities can disperse through communities unbeknownst to 
anyone. The advent of newer sensor technologies and better con-
duit systems for process operations is slowly reducing risks in more 
advanced nations but the exposure risks remain high elsewhere.
Phosgene is best known for its use as a war gas, but it is also 
a common intermediate reactant used in the chemical industry, 
particularly in pesticide formulation, and subject to accidental or 
low-level fugitive releases. Because of its direct pulmonary reactiv-
ity, it lends itself to use as a model pulmonary toxicant for studies 
addressing C × T relationships that can inform assessment of risk 
under varied exposure patterns. These studies suggest that there 
may be a threshold below which compensatory and other bodily 
defenses (e.g., antioxidants) may be able to cope perhaps with long-
term low-level tolerance, although as with O3 there is evidence of 
mild interstitial fibrosis. In rat studies, this threshold for acute toxic-
ity for phosgene appears to be at or below the current threshold limit 
value of 0.1 ppm for 8 hours, which suggests little or no margin 
of safety for workers. At higher concentrations, however, peaks in 
concentration (C) appear to be the primary determinants of injury 
triggering disease with duration of exposure being less important 
to the injury process. There can be some adaptation with time, but 
there is not sufficient recovery and hence the lesion appears to be a 
concentration-driven response exceeding that predicted arithmeti-
cally by C × T. This relationship appears to be different from that of 
acute exposures to O3 at ambient levels, which can be approximated 
by the C × T paradigm. Hence, the C × T concept for lung injury 
appears to function best at low ambient levels and less well for 
event exposures such as in accidents.
Aldehydes
Among the HAPs that have broader exposure potential for the pub-
lic, two aldehydes capture attention for their toxicity/irritancy and 
their ubiquity. These two aldehydes are formaldehyde (HCHO) and

1502
Environmental Toxicology
unit VI
acrolein (H2C=CHCHO). As carbonyl compounds, they are short-
chained (2 to 4 C) and are generated as photo-oxidation products of 
unsaturated hydrocarbons in the outdoor air, and as common inter-
mediates in chemical reactions, they can arise in the indoor envi-
ronment. Formaldehyde accounts for about 50% of the estimated 
total aldehydes in polluted air, while acrolein, the more irritating 
of the two, accounts for about 5% of the total. Other aldehydes, 
such as acetaldehyde (C3HCHO) and many other longer-chain 
aldehydes, make up the remainder, but they are not as intrinsically 
irritating, exist at low concentrations, and have less solubility in air-
way fluids. Formaldehyde and particularly acrolein are also found 
in mainstream tobacco smoke (about 90 and about 8 ppm, respec-
tively, per puff) and side-stream smoke as well. Formaldehyde is 
also an important indoor air pollutant and can often achieve higher 
concentrations indoors than outdoors due to off-gassing by new 
upholstery or other furnishings. In the United States, the formal-
dehyde off-gassing issue was highlighted in the controversy sur-
rounding the trailer homes provided to hurricane-displaced home 
owners post-hurricane Katrina.
Empirical studies have shown that formaldehyde and acrolein 
are competitive agonists for similar irritant receptors in the airways. 
Thus, irritation may be related not to “total aldehyde” concentration 
but to specific ratios of acrolein and formaldehyde. Their relative 
difference in solubility, with formaldehyde being somewhat more 
water-soluble and thus having more nasopharyngeal uptake, may 
distort this relationship under certain exposure conditions (e.g., 
exercise). However, acrolein is very reactive and may interact eas-
ily with many tissue macromolecules and, for example, can form 
DNA adducts.
Formaldehyde
Formaldehyde is a primary sensory irritant. Because it is very solu-
ble in water, it is absorbed in mucous membranes in the nose, upper 
respiratory tract, and eyes. The concentration–response curve for 
formaldehyde is steep: 0.5 to 1 ppm yields a detectable odor; 2 to 3 
ppm produces mild irritation; and 4 to 5 ppm is intolerable to most 
people. Formaldehyde is thought to act via sensory C-fibers that 
signal locally as well as through the trigeminal nerve to reflexively 
induce bronchoconstriction through the vagus nerve. In guinea 
pigs, a 1-hour exposure to about 0.3 ppm of formaldehyde induces 
an increase in airflow resistance accompanied by a decrease in 
compliance (Amdur, 1960). The no observed effect level (NOEL) 
using these lung function criteria is about 0.05 ppm. The general 
pattern of the irritant response and its rapid recovery is similar to 
that produced by higher concentrations of the irritant, SO2.
Two aspects of formaldehyde toxicology have brought it from 
relative obscurity to the forefront of attention in recent years. One is 
its near ubiquitous presence in indoor atmospheres as an off-gassed 
product of construction materials such as plywood, furniture, or 
improperly polymerized urea–formaldehyde foam insulation. In 
studies relating household formaldehyde levels to chronic effects, 
children were found to have significantly lower peak expiratory 
flow rates (about 22% in homes with 60 ppb) than did unexposed 
children, and asthmatic children were affected below 50 ppb. Also, 
there is epidemiologic evidence that links formaldehyde to asthma 
(McGwin et al., 2010) and an increase in lower respiratory tract 
infections in children (Roda et al., 2011).
A longtime concern regarding formaldehyde has been its 
potential carcinogenicity. In 2004, IARC concluded that formal-
dehyde was a “probable human carcinogen” based on evidence 
of nasopharyngeal cancer and possibly leukemia—based on ani-
mal studies (Cogliano, 2005). Nasal cancer had been induced 
empirically with formaldehyde vapor in a 2-year study where rats 
were exposed to 2, 6, or 14 ppm 6 hours per day, 5 days per week. 
Mice were much less sensitive than rats. The detection of DNA 
adducts in the noses of the two species paralleled the difference in 
the incidence of tumors. However, the risk associated with exposure 
to formaldehyde remains controversial because of its widespread 
industrial use. The reader is encouraged to sample the recent litera-
ture (e.g., Nielsen et al., 2017).
Acrolein
Because acrolein is an unsaturated aldehyde, it is more reactive 
than formaldehyde. It penetrates a bit deeper into the airways and 
may not have the same degree of sensory irritancy but it may cause 
more cellular damage. Concentrations below 1 ppm cause irrita-
tion of the eyes and the mucous membranes of the respiratory tract. 
Exposure of guinea pigs to more than or equal to 0.6 ppm revers-
ibly increased pulmonary flow resistance and tidal volume and 
decreased respiratory frequency (Murphy et al., 1963). The mecha-
nism of increased resistance appears to be mediated through a both 
local C-fiber and centrally mediated cholinergic reflexes (Bessac 
and Jordt, 2010).
Exposures of rats to 0.4, 1.4, or 4.0 ppm acrolein for 6 hours 
per day, 5 days per week for 13 weeks resulted in paradoxical 
effects on lung function (Costa et al., 1986). The lowest concentra-
tion resulted in hyperinflation of the lung with an apparent reduc-
tion in small-airway flow resistance, while the highest concentration 
resulted in airway injury and peribronchial inflammation and fibro-
sis. The intermediate concentration was functionally not different 
from the control, although airway pathology was evident. It appears 
that the high-concentration response reflected the cumulative irri-
tant injury and remodeling as a result of the repeated acrolein, while 
the low-concentration group had little overt damage and appeared to 
have slightly stiffened airways, perhaps a result of the protein cross-
linking action of acrolein. The pathology in these rats contrasts with 
that found in formaldehyde studies of similar duration where only 
upper airway involvement was observed. Ambient exposure to acro-
lein probably would be about 10% to 20% of the low concentration 
used in the subchronic study discussed above. Because of a lack of 
sufficient human data, these animal data were used to perform a risk 
assessment analysis which showed an excess risk to humans for the 
adverse effect of ambient levels of acrolein on pulmonary function 
(Woodruff et al., 2007). Ambient concentrations of acrolein are well 
below those found in mainstream and secondhand tobacco smoke 
and occupational exposure levels. As reviewed elsewhere (Bein 
and Leikauf, 2011; Henning et al., 2017), acrolein produces a wide 
range of adverse pulmonary effects including lung cancer that may 
be linked mechanistically to p53 (a tumor suppressor gene) DNA 
adducts and mutations, as well as cardiovascular effects.
Thus, as a class the aldehydes can be very irritating and may 
constitute a significant fraction of the discomfort and sensation 
experienced during an oxidant pollution episode, especially in 
mixed atmospheres containing particles.
THE MULTIPOLLUTANT REALITY  
OF AIR POLLUTION
The pollutant profiles of any community’s atmosphere vary consid-
erably in space and time. These pollutants are emitted locally and 
are mixed with pollutants transported over varied distances while 
undergoing photochemical transformation—hence the phrase: 
“urban soup.” For decades, these complexities have been daunt-
ing for toxicologists, and therefore scientists and risk assessors are

Air Pollution
Chapter 31
1503
prompted to adopt a reductionist approach—evaluating nominally 
one pollutant at a time. While the reductionist approach has been 
very successful in providing data to target pollutants of primary 
concern and improving public health, it is widely thought that there 
are likely chemical and physiological interactions between and 
among pollutants that are of public health consequence, but have 
not been appreciated. Indeed, interactions are more likely to be 
apparent as exposure concentrations decrease, and while we may 
be concerned about synergistic interactions as found with some 
particles and SO2, it may be that antagonisms also occur among 
pollutants that are prevalent. As the science and the statistical meth-
ods to look at interactions have improved, there is renewed interest 
in multipollutant toxicology.
Publications are revisiting this issue (Mauderly and Samet, 
2009; Buckley and Farraj, 2015; Davalos et al., 2017), where scien-
tists from all sectors are trying to determine whether there are better 
approaches to studying interactions (Dominici et al., 2010; Vedal 
and Kaufman, 2011), synthesizing or modeling findings to extract 
interactions (Johns et al., 2012), and then translating and imple-
menting the findings to reduce the components or factors central to 
mixture behavior in terms of health risk (Fann et al., 2011). There 
is yet to be consensus on approaches and most likely there will be 
more than one approach; however, the advances in the science and 
evolution of the air pollution scenario to one of lower background 
and dominant source contributors suggests that novel thinking is 
needed on this issue. Early toxicology studies that were focused on 
complex mixtures, some of which were photochemically altered 
(discussed earlier), along with epidemiology studies usually came 
to conclusions relevant to that mixture alone. But the revival of the 
PM story, and that it is itself a mixture of trace elements and organic 
and elemental carbon, has raised questions about the mix of key PM 
attributes that drive outcomes and how co-pollutants interplay in 
these outcomes. While single pollutant approaches to air pollution 
research, health assessments, and ambient air quality standard set-
ting have been successful in reducing global air pollution over past 
decades, there is a clear need for novel ideas to address this next 
dimension of air quality management via scientific and regulatory/
policy innovation.
CONCLUSIONS
In writing this textbook chapter on air pollution toxicology, the 
authors’ goal has been to relate empirical studies in animals as well 
as controlled studies in humans to provide biologic plausibility to 
health observations revealed or described through epidemiology. 
The breadth and complexity of the problem of air pollution—
from the development of credible databases to utilizing these data 
sources to inform regulatory action and decision making—have 
been the theme throughout the chapter. The classical and still most 
prominent air pollutants provide a foundation for understanding 
and appreciating the nuances and dissecting outcomes upon which 
defensible air pollution policy and decision making can be applied 
to public health. The key role of the toxicologist is to ask questions 
to provide understanding while developing sensitive and relevant 
assay methods. An understanding of air pollution exposure as well 
as basic biology is key to revealing the causality information needed 
to support decision making hand-in-hand with epidemiology.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The editor and authors recognize the contributions of previous 
author of this chapter: Mary Amdur (1st to 4th editions).
REFERENCES
Alarie Y, Ferguson JS, Stock MF, et al. Sensory and pulmonary irritation of 
methyl isocyanate in mice and pulmonary irritation and possible cyanide-
like effects of methyl isocyanate in guinea pigs. Environ Health Perspect. 
1987;72:159–168.
Alarie YC, Ulrich CE, Busey WM, et al. Long-term continuous exposure 
of guinea pigs to sulfur dioxide. Arch Environ Health. 1970;21:769–777.
Alarie YC, Ulrich CE, Busey WM, et al. Long-term continuous expo-
sure to sulfur dioxide in cynomolgus monkeys. Arch Environ Health. 
1972;24:115–128.
Alexis NE, Carlsten C. Interplay of air pollution and asthma immu-
nopathogenesis: a focused review of diesel exhaust and ozone. Int 
Immunopharmacol. 2014;23:347–355.
Allred EN, Bleeker ER, Chaitman BR, et al. Short-term effects of carbon 
monoxide exposure on individuals with coronary heart disease. N Engl J 
Med. 1989;321:1426–1432.
Amdur MO, Dubriel M, Creasia DA. Respiratory response of guinea pigs to 
low levels of sulfuric acid. Environ Res. 1978;15:418–423.
Amdur MO, Sarofim AF, Neville M, et al. Coal combustion aerosols and 
SO2: an interdisciplinary analysis. Environ Sci Tech. 1986;20:139–145.
Amdur MO. The response of guinea pigs to inhalation of formaldehyde and 
formic acid alone and with a sodium chloride aerosol. Int J Air Pollut. 
1960;3:201–220.
Amdur MO. Sulfuric acid: the animals tried to tell us: 1989 Herbert E. 
Stokinger lecture. Appl Ind Hyg Assoc J. 1989;4:189–197.
American Lung Association. State of the Air: Ozone Pollution. 2017. 
Available at: http://www.lung.org/our-initiatives/healthy-air/sota/key-
findings/ozone-pollution.html.
American Thoracic Society (ATS). What constitutes an adverse health 
effect of air pollution? Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2000;161:665–673.
Anderson HR. Health effects of air pollution episodes. In: Holgate ST, 
Samet JM, Koren H, Maynard RL, eds. Air Pollution and Health. 
London: Academic Press; 1999:461–484.
Anenberg SC, Horowitz LW, Tong DQ, West JJ. An estimate of the global 
burden of anthropogenic ozone and fine particulate matter on premature 
human mortality using atmospheric modeling. Environ Health Perspect. 
2010;118:1189–1195.
Anjilvel S, Asgharian B. A multiple-path model of particle deposition in the 
rat lung. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1995;28:41–50.
Aronow WS. Aggravation of angina pectoris by two percent carboxyhemo-
globin. Am Heart J. 1981;101:154–157.
Barry BE, Mercer RR, Miller FJ, et al. Effects of inhalation of 0.25 ppm 
O3 on the terminal bronchioles of juvenile and adult rats. Exp Lung Res. 
1988;14:225–245.
Bates DV, Sizto R. Air pollution and hospital admissions in southern 
Ontario: the acid summer haze effect. Environ Res. 1987;65:172–194.
Bauer AK, Kleeberger SR. Genetic mechanisms of susceptibility to ozone-
induced lung disease. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2010;1203:113–119.
Bein K, Leikauf GD. Acrolein—a pulmonary hazard. Mol Nutr Food Res. 
2011;55:1342–1360.
Bessac BF, Jordt SE. Sensory detection and responses to toxic gases: 
mechanisms, health effects, and countermeasures. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 
2010;7:269–277.
Boubel RW, Vallero D, Fox DL, Turner B, Stern AC. Fundamentals of Air 
Pollution. London, UK: Elsevier; 1994:107.
Brimblecombe P. Air pollution and health history. In: Holgate ST, Samet 
JM, Koren H, Maynard RL, eds. Air Pollution and Health. London: 
Academic Press; 1999:10.
Brook RD, Rajagopalan S, Pope CA III, et al. Particulate matter air pollu-
tion and cardiovascular disease: an update to the scientific statement from 
the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2010;121:2331–2378.
Brooks BO, Davis WF. Understanding Indoor Air Quality. Boca Raton, FL: 
CRC Press; 1992.
Buckley B, Farraj A. Conceptual model for assessing criteria air pollut-
ants in a multipollutant context: a modified adverse outcome pathway 
approach. Toxicology. 2015;335:85–94.
Calderon-Garcidueñas L, Mora-Tiscareno A, Fordham LA, et al. 
Respiratory damage in children exposed to urban pollution. Pediatr 
Pulmonol. 2003;36(2):148–161.

1504
Environmental Toxicology
unit VI
Calderon-Garcidueñas L, Osorno-Velazquez A, Bravo-Alvarez H, et al. 
Histopathological changes of the nasal mucosa in southwest metropolitan 
Mexico City inhabitants. Am J Pathol. 1992;140:225–232.
Calvert JG, Lazrus A, Kok GL, et al. Chemical mechanisms of acid genera-
tion in the troposphere. Nature. 1985;317:27–35.
Cascio WE. Proposed pathophysiologic framework to explain some 
excess cardiovascular death associated with ambient air particle pol-
lution: insights for public health translation. Biochim Biophys Acta. 
2016;1860:2869–2879.
Chang L, Huang Y, Stockstill BL, et al. Epithelial injury and interstitial 
fibrosis in the proximal alveolar regions of rats chronically exposed to 
a simulated pattern of urban ambient ozone. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
1992;115:241–252.
Chang L, Miller FJ, Ultman J, et al. Alveolar epithelial cell injuries by sub-
acute exposure to low concentrations of ozone correlate with cumulative 
exposure. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1991;109:219–234.
Chang LY, Mercer RR, Stockstill BL, et al. Effects of low levels of NO2 
on terminal bronchiolar cells and its relative toxicity compared to O3. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1988;96:451–464.
Chen LC, Lam HF, Kim EJ, et al. Pulmonary effects of ultrafine coal fly 
ash inhaled by guinea pigs. J Toxicol Environ Health. 1990;29:169–184.
Chen LC, Quan C, Hwang JS, Jin X, et al. Atherosclerosis lesion progres-
sion during inhalation exposure to environmental tobacco smoke: a com-
parison to concentrated ambient air fine particles exposure. Inhal Toxicol. 
2010;22(6):449–459.
Ci Z, Zhang X, Wang Z. Enhancing atmospheric mercury research in China 
to improve the current understanding of the global mercury cycle: the 
need for urgent and closely coordinated efforts. Environ Sci Technol. 
2012;46:5636–5642.
Coffin DL, Blommer EJ. Acute toxicity of irradiated auto exhaust: its indi-
cation by enhancement of mortality from streptococcal pneumonia. Arch 
Environ Health. 1967;15:36–38.
Cogliano VJ. IARC Monographs, leukemia, nasopharyngeal cancer, sinona-
sal cancer. Environ Health Perspect. 2005;113:1205–1208.
Costa DL. Issues that must be addressed for risk assessment of mixed expo-
sures: the EPA experience with air quality. J Toxicol Environ Health. 
2003;67:195–207.
Costa DL, Dreher KL. Bioavailable transition metals in particulate mat-
ter mediate cardiopulmonary injury in healthy and compromised animal 
models. Environ Health Perspect. 1997;105(suppl 5):1053–1060.
Costa DL, Kutzman RS, Lehmann JR, et al. Altered lung function and struc-
ture in the rat after subchronic exposure to acrolein. Am Rev Respir Dis. 
1986;133:286–291.
Costa DL, Schafrank SN, Wehner RW, et al. Alveolar permeability to 
protein in rats differentially susceptible to ozone. J Appl Toxicol. 
1985;5(3):182–186.
Costa DL, Schlegele E. Irritant air pollutants. In: Swift DL, Foster WM, 
eds. Air Pollutants and the Respiratory Tract. New York: Marcel Dekker; 
1998:119–145.
Costa DL, Tepper JS, Stevens MA, et al. Restrictive lung disease in rats 
chronically exposed to an urban profile of ozone. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med. 1995;151:1512–1518.
Crippa P, Castruccio S, Archer-Nicholls S, et al. Population exposure to 
hazardous air quality due to the 2015 fires in Equatorial Asia. Sci Rep. 
2016;6:37074.
Davalos AD, Luben TJ, Herring AH, Sacks JD. Current approaches used in 
epidemiologic studies to examine short-term multipollutant air pollution 
exposures. Ann Epidemiol. 2017;27:145-153.
Detels R, Tashkin DP, Sayre JW, et al. The UCLA population studies of 
CORD: X. A cohort study of changes in respiratory function associ-
ated with chronic exposure to SOx, NOx, and hydrocarbons. Am J Public 
Health. 1991;81:350–359.
Devlin RB, Folinsbee LJ, Biscardi F, et al. Attenuation of cellular and bio-
chemical changes in the lungs of humans exposed to ozone for five con-
secutive days. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1993;147:A71.
Devlin RB, McDonnell WF, Mann R, et al. Exposure of humans to ambient 
levels of ozone for 6.6 hours causes cellular and biochemical changes in 
the lung. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 1991;4:72–81.
Di Q, Wang Y, Zanobetti A, Wang Y, et al. Air pollution and mortality in the 
medicare population. N Engl J Med. 2017;376:2513–2522.
Diaz-Sanchez D, Garcia MP, Wang M, et al. Nasal challenge with diesel 
exhaust particles can induce sensitization to a neoallergen in the human 
mucosa. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1999;104(6):1183–1188.
Dockery DW, Pope CA, Xu X, et al. An association between air pollution 
and mortality in six U.S. cities. N Engl J Med. 1993;329(24):1753–1759.
Dominici F, Peng RD, Barr CD, Bell ML. Protecting human health from air 
pollution: shifting from a single-pollutant to a multipollutant approach. 
Epidemiology. 2010;21:187–194.
Donaldson K, Li XY, MacNee W. Ultrafine (nanometre) particle mediated 
lung injury. J Aerosol Sci. 1998;29:553–560.
Driscoll KE, Deyo LC, Carter JM, et al. Effects of particle exposure and 
particle-elicited inflammatory cells on mutation in rat alveolar epithelial 
cells. Carcinogenesis. 1997;18(2):423–430.
Dye JA, Lehmann JR, McGee JK, et al. Acute pulmonary toxicity of par-
ticulate matter filter extracts in rats: coherence with epidemiologic stud-
ies in Utah Valley residents. Environ Health Perspect. 2001;109(suppl 
3):395–403.
Ehrlich R, Henry MC. Chronic toxicity of nitrogen dioxide: I. Effect on resis-
tance to bacterial pneumonia. Arch Environ Health. 1968;17:860–865.
Fann N, Roman HA, Fulcher CM, et al. Maximizing health benefits and 
minimizing inequality: incorporating local-scale data in the design and 
evaluation of air quality policies. Risk Anal. 2011;31:908–922.
Farraj AK, Boykin E, Ledbetter A, Andrews D, Gavett SH. Increased lung 
resistance after diesel particulate and ozone co-exposure not associ-
ated with enhanced lung inflammation in allergic mice. Inhal Toxicol. 
2010;22:33–41.
Faustini A, Alessandrini ER, Pey J, et al. Short-term effects of particulate 
matter on mortality during forest fires in Southern Europe: results of the 
MED-PARTICLES Project. Occup Environ Med. 2015;72(5):323–329.
Faustini A, Rapp R, Forastiere F. Nitrogen dioxide and mortality: review 
and meta-analysis of long-term studies. Eur Respir J. 2014;44:744–753.
Firkert M. Fog along the Meuse Valley. Trans Faraday Soc. 1936;32: 
1192–1197.
Frampton MW, Smeglin AM, Roberts NJJ, et al. Nitrogen dioxide exposure 
in vivo and human macrophage inactivation of influenza virus in vitro. 
Environ Res. 1989;48:179–192.
Frank NR, Speizer FE. SO2 effects on the respiratory system in dogs: changes 
in mechanical behavior at different levels of the respiratory system dur-
ing acute exposure to the gas. Arch Environ Health. 1965;11:624–634.
Gardner DE. Oxidant induced enhanced sensitivity to infection in ani-
mal models and their extrapolation to man. J Toxicol Environ Health. 
1984;13:423–439.
Gauderman WJ, Avol E, Gilliland F, et al. The effect of air pollution on lung 
development from 10 to 18 years of age. N Engl J Med. 2004;351(11): 
1057–1067.
Gauderman WJ, Urman R, Avol SE, et al. Association of improved air qual-
ity with lung development in children. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:905–913.
Gearhart JM, Schlesinger RB. Sulfuric acid–induced changes in the physi-
ology and structure of the tracheobronchial airways. Environ Health 
Perspect. 1989;79:127–136.
Gerrity TR, Weaver RA, Bernsten J, et al. Extrathoracic and intratho-
racic removal of ozone in tidal breathing humans. J Appl Physiol. 
1988;65:393–400.
Ghio AJ. Biological effects of Utah Valley ambient air particles in humans: 
a review. J Aerosol Med. 2004;17:157–164.
Ghio AJ, Smith CB, Madden MC. Diesel exhaust particles and airway 
inflammation. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2012;18:144–150.
Gilmour MI, Park P, Doerfler D, Selgrade MK. Ozone-enhanced pulmonary 
infection with Streptococcus zooepidemicus in mice: the role of alveolar 
macrophage function and capsular virulence factors. Am Rev Respir Dis. 
1993;147:753–760.
Glasser SW, Nogee LM. Genetically engineered mice in understanding the 
basis of neonatal lung disease. Semin Perinatol. 2006;30:341–349.
Gold DR, Litonjua A, Schwartz J, et al. Ambient pollution and heart rate 
variability. Circulation. 2000;101(11):1267–1273.
Goldstein BD, Lai LY, Ross SR, Cuzzi-Spada R. Susceptibility of inbred 
mouse strains to ozone. Arch Environ Health. 1973;27:412–413.
Gomes EC, Allgrove JE, Florida-James G, Stone V. Effect of vitamin sup-
plementation on lung injury and running performance in a hot, humid, and 
ozone-polluted environment. Scand J Med Sci Sports. 2011;21:452–460.

Air Pollution
Chapter 31
1505
Government of Canada. 2014. Available at: http://www.ec.gc.ca/air/default.
asp?lang=En&n=D560EA62-1&offset=2&toc=hide.
Greim H, Borm PJA, Schins RPF, et al. Toxicity of fibers and particles. 
Report of the workshop held in Munich, Germany. Inhal Toxicol. 
2001;13:101–119.
Groves AM, Gow AJ, Massa CB, et al. Age-related increases in ozone-
induced injury and altered pulmonary mechanics in mice with pro-
gressive lung inflammation. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 
2013;305:L555–L568.
Hackney JD, Linn WS, Avol EL. Acid fog: effects on respiratory function 
and symptoms in healthy asthmatic volunteers. Environ Health Perspect. 
1989;79:159–162.
Hamra GB, Guh N, Cohen A, et al. Outdoor particulate matter exposure 
and lung cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Environ Health 
Perspect. 2014;122:906–911.
Hamra GB, Laden F, Cohen AJ, et al. Lung cancer and exposure to nitro-
gen dioxide and traffic: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Environ 
Health Perspect. 2015;123(11):1107–1112.
Hatch GE, Slade R, Harris LP, et al. Ozone dose and effect in humans and 
rats: a comparison using oxygen-18 labeling and bronchoalveolar lavage. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1994;150:676–683.
Hayes SM, Gobbell RV, Ganick NR, eds. Indoor Air Quality: Solutions and 
Strategies. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1995.
Health Effects Institute (HEI). Consequences of Prolonged Inhalation of 
Ozone on F344 Rats: Collaborative Studies. Studies I-XIII, Report #65. 
Boston, MA: Health Effects Institute; 1994–1995.
Health Effects Institute (HEI). Diesel Emissions and Lung Cancer: An 
Evaluation of Recent Epidemiological Evidence for Quantitative Risk 
Assessment. 2015a. Available at: https://www.healtheffects.org/system/
files/SR19-Diesel-Epidemiology-2015_0.pdf.
Health Effects Institute (HEI). Diesel Exhaust: Executive Summary. The 
Advanced Collaborative Emissions Study (ACES) Communication—
ACES. 2015b. Available at: https://www.healtheffects.org/publications/
air-pollution/diesel-exhaust/content.
Henning RJ, Johnson GT, Coyle JP, Harbison RD. Acrolein can cause car-
diovascular disease: a review. Cardiovasc Toxicol. 2017;17:227–236.
Henry MC, Findlay J, Spengler J, Ehrlich R. Chronic toxicity of NO2 in 
squirrel monkeys: III. Effect on resistance to bacterial and viral infection. 
Am Ind Hyg Assoc J. 1970;20:566–570.
Hernández-Escobar SA, Avila-Casado MC, Soto-Abraham V, et al. 
Cytological damage of nasal epithelium associated with decreased glu-
tathione peroxidase in residents from a heavily polluted city. Int Arch 
Occup Environ Health. 2009;82:603–612.
Higuchi MA, Davies DW. An ammonia abatement system for whole-
body animal inhalation exposures to acid aerosols. Inhal Toxicol. 
1993;5:323–333.
Hosgood HD III, Song M, Hsiung CA, et al. Interactions between house-
hold air pollution and GWAS-identified lung cancer susceptibility mark-
ers in the Female Lung Cancer Consortium in Asia (FLCCA). Hum 
Genet. 2015;134(3):333–341.
Hyde D, Orthoefer J, Dungworth D, et al. Morphometric and morphologic 
pulmonary lesions in beagle dogs chronically exposed to high ambient 
levels of air pollutants. Lab Invest. 1978;38(4):455–469.
Olin SS. The relevance of the rat lung response to particle overload for 
human risk assessment: A workshop consensus report. Inhal Toxicol. 
2000;12: 1–17.
Jakab GJ. Relationship between carbon black particulate-bound formalde-
hyde, pulmonary antibacterial defenses and alveolar macrophage phago-
cytosis. Inhal Toxicol. 1992;4:325–342.
Johns DO, Stanek L, Walker K, et al. Practical advancement of multipollut-
ant scientific and risk assessment approaches for ambient air pollution. 
Environ Health Perspect. 2012;120(9):1238–1242.
Kaufman JD, Adar SD, Barr RG, et al. Association between air pollution 
and coronary artery calcification within six metropolitan areas in the 
USA (the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis and Air Pollution): a 
longitudinal cohort study. Lancet. 2016;388(10045):696–704.
Kehrl HR, Peden DB, Ball B, Folinsbee LJ, Horstman DJ. Increased spe-
cific airway reactivity of persons with mild allergic asthma after 7.6 
hours of exposure to 0.16 ppm ozone. Allergy Clin Immunol. 1999;104: 
1198–204.
Kieber RJ, Skrabal SA, Smith BJ, Willey JD. Organic complexation of 
Fe(II) and its impact on the redox cycling of iron in rain. Environ Sci 
Technol. 2005;39:1576–1583.
Kim CS, Kang TC. Comparative measurement of lung deposition of inhaled 
fine particles in normal subjects and patients with obstructive airway dis-
ease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1997;155(3):899–905.
Kleeberger SR, Reddy S, Zhang LY, et al. Genetic susceptibility to ozone-
induced lung hyperpermeability. Role of toll-like receptor 4. Am J Respir 
Cell Mol Biol. 2000;22(5):620–627.
Kleinman MT, Mautz WJ, Bjarnason S. Adaptive and non-adaptive 
responses in rats exposed to ozone, alone and in mixtures, with acidic 
aerosols. Inhal Toxicol. 1999;11(3):249–264.
Kodavanti UP, Costa DL, Bromberg P. Rodent models of cardiopulmonary 
disease: their potential applicability in studies of air pollutant susceptibil-
ity. Environ Health Perspect. 1998;106(suppl 1):111–130.
Kodavanti UP, Russell JC, Costa DL. Rat models of cardiometabolic dis-
eases: baseline clinical chemistries, and rationale for their use in exam-
ining air pollution health effects. Inhal Toxicol. 2015;27(suppl 1):2–13.
Koenig JQ, Covert DS, Pierson WE. Effects of inhalation of acidic com-
pounds on pulmonary function in allergic adolescent subjects. Environ 
Health Perspect. 1989;79: 173–178.
Koenig JQ, Pierson WE, Horike M, Frank R. Effects of SO2 plus NaCl aero-
sol combined with moderate exercise on pulmonary function in asthmatic 
adolescents. Environ Res. 1981;25:340–348.
Kotin P, Falk HF. Atmospheric factors in pathogenesis of lung cancer. 
Cancer Res. 1963;7:475–514.
Kreyling WG, Semmler-Behnke M, Seitz J, et al. Size dependence of the 
translocation of inhaled iridium and carbon nanoparticle aggregates from 
the lung of rats to the blood and secondary target organs. Inhal Toxicol. 
2009;21(suppl 1):55–60.
Kumie A, Emmelin A, Wahlberg S, et al. Magnitude of indoor NO2 from 
biomass fuels in rural settings of Ethiopia. Indoor Air. 2009;19:14–21.
Lewis TR, Campbell KI, Vaughan TR Jr. Effects on canine pulmonary func-
tion: via induced NO2 impairment, particulate interaction, and subse-
quent SOx. Arch Environ Health. 1969;18:596–601.
Lewis TR, Moorman WJ, Yang YY, Stara JF. Long-term exposure to 
auto exhaust and other pollutant mixtures. Arch Environ Health. 
1974;21:102–106.
Lewtas J. Air pollution combustion emissions: characterization of causative 
agents and mechanisms associated with cancer, reproductive, and cardio-
vascular effects. Mutat Res. 2007;636:95–133.
Li Z, Potts-Kant EN, Garantziotis S, Foster WM, Hollingsworth JW. 
Hyaluronan signaling during ozone-induced lung injury requires TLR4, 
MyD88, and TIRAP. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27137.
Lim SS, Vos T, Flaxman AD, et al. A comparative risk assessment of burden 
of disease and injury attributable to 67 risk factors and risk factor clusters 
in 21 regions, 1990–2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of 
Disease Study 2010. Lancet. 2012;380(9859):2224–2260.
Lippmann M. Health effects of ozone: a critical review. J Air Pollut Control 
Assoc. 1989;39:67–96.
Liu JC, Mickley LJ, Sulprizio MP, et al. Particulate air pollution from 
wildfires in the western US under climate change. Clim Change. 
2016;138(3):655–666.
London SJ, Romieu I. Gene by environment interaction in asthma. Annu 
Rev Public Health. 2009;30:55–80.
Loh MM, Levy JI, Spengler JD, Houseman EA, Bennett DH. Research 
ranking cancer risks of organic hazardous air pollutants in the United 
States. Environ Health Perspect. 2007;115:1160–1168.
Madden MC, Richards J, Daily LA, et al. Effect of ozone on diesel 
exhaust particle toxicity in the rat lung. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
2000;168:140–148.
Madden MC, Stevens T, Case M, et al. Diesel exhaust modulates ozone-
induced lung function decrements in healthy human volunteers. Part 
Fibre Toxicol. 2014;11:37–47.
Malig BJ, Pearson DL, Chang YB, et al. A time-stratified case-crossover 
study of ambient ozone exposure and emergency department visits for 
specific respiratory diagnoses in California (2005–2008). Environ Health 
Perspect. 2016;124:745–753.
Martenies SE, Wilkins D, Batterman SA. Health impact metrics for air pol-
lution management strategies. Environ Int. 2015;85:84–95.

1506
Environmental Toxicology
unit VI
Martonen TB, Zhang Z, Yang Y. Interspecies modeling of inhaled particle 
deposition patterns. J Aerosol Sci. 1992;23(4):389–406.
Mauderly JL. Health hazards of complex environmental exposures: a diffi-
cult challenge to inhalation toxicology. Inhal Toxicol. 2006;18:137–141.
Mauderly JL, Samet JM. Is there evidence for synergy among air pollutants 
in causing health effects? Environ Health Perspect. 2009;117:1–6.
McCunney RJ. Asthma, genes, and air pollution. J Occup Environ Med. 
2005;47(12):1285–1291.
McDonnell WF. Intersubject variability in human acute ozone responsive-
ness. Pharmacogenetics. 1991;1:110–113.
McGwin G, Lienert J, Kennedy JI. Formaldehyde exposure and asthma in 
children: a systematic review. Environ Health Perspect. 2010;118: 313–317.
McKinney WJ, Jaskot RH, Richards JH, et al. Cytokine mediation of 
ozone-induced pulmonary adaptation. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 
1998;18:696–705.
Mercer RR, Costa DL, Crapo JD. Effects of prolonged exposure to low 
doses of nitric oxide on the alveolar septa of the adult rat lung. Lab Invest. 
1995;73(1):1–9.
Miller FJ, Graham JA, Raub JA, et al. Evaluating the toxicity of urban pat-
terns of oxidant gases: II. Effects in mice from chronic exposure to nitro-
gen dioxide. J Toxicol Environ Health. 1987;21:99–112.
Miller FW, Miller RM. Environmental Hazards: Air Pollution—A Reference 
Handbook. Contemporary World Issues. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO; 
1993:1–18.
Minelli C, Wei I, Sagoo G, et al. Interactive effects of antioxidant genes and 
air pollution on respiratory function and airway disease: a HuGE review. 
Am J Epidemiol. 2011;173:603–620.
Mirowsky J, Gordon T. Noninvasive effects measurements for air pollution 
human studies: methods, analysis, and implications. J Expo Sci Environ 
Epidemiol. 2015;25:354–380.
Mohsenin V. Effect of vitamin C on NO2-induced airway hyperresponsive-
ness in normal subjects. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1987;136:1408–1411.
Molhave LB, Bach B, Pederson O. Human reactions to low concentrations 
of volatile organic compounds. Environ Int. 1986;12:165–167.
Moss OR, Gross EA, James RA, et al. Respiratory tract toxicity in rats 
exposed to Mexico City air. Res Rep Health Effects Inst. 2001;(100):1–24.
Mudway IS, Krishna MT, Frew AJ, et al. Compromised concentrations 
of ascorbate in fluid lining the respiratory tract in human subjects after 
exposure to ozone. Occup Environ Med 1999;56(7):473–481.
Murphy SD, Klingshirn DA, Ulrich CE. Respiratory response of guinea pigs 
during acrolein inhalation and its modification by drugs. J Pharmacol 
Exp Ther. 1963;141:79–83.
Murray C, ed. Global, regional, and national life expectancy, all-cause mor-
tality, and cause-specific mortality for 249 causes of death, 1980-2015: a 
systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2015. Lancet. 
2016;388:1459–544.
Nadel JA, Salem H, Tamplin B, Tokiwa Y. Mechanism of bronchoconstric-
tion during inhalation of sulfur dioxide. J Appl Physiol. 1965;20:164–167.
National Research Council (NRC). Science and Decisions. Advancing Risk 
Assessment. Washington, DC: National Academies of Science; 2009.
Nielsen GD, Larsen ST, Wolkoff P. Re-evaluation of the WHO (2010) form-
aldehyde indoor air quality guideline for cancer risk assessment. Arch 
Toxicol. 2017;91:35–61.
NWCG Smoke Committee. 2014 EPA National Emission Inventory for 
Wildland Fire. 2014. Available at: https://www.frames.gov/files/5214/ 
1030/1118/SmoC_BP_2014_EPA_NEI_3-13-14.pdf.
Oberdorster G, Sharp Z, Atudorei V, et al. Extrapulmonary translocation of 
ultrafine carbon particles following whole-body inhalation exposure of 
rats. J Toxicol Environ Health A. 2002;65(20):1531–1543.
Ohtsuka Y, Clarke RW, Mitzner W, et al. Interstrain variation in murine sus-
ceptibility to inhaled acid-coated particles. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol 
Physiol. 2000;278(3):L469–L476.
Overton JH, Miller FJ. Modeling ozone absorption in the respiratory tract. 
80th Annual Meeting of the Air Pollution Control Association, paper no. 
87–99.4; 1987.
Overton JH, Miller FJ. Dosimetry modeling of inhaled toxic reactive gases. 
In: Watson AY, Bates RR, Kennedy D, eds. Air Pollution and Public 
Health. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 1988.
Peters A. Commentary: inflamed about ultrafine particles? Int J Epidemiol. 
2006;35:1355–1356.
Pinkerton KE, Brody AR, Miller FJ, Crapo JD. Exposure to low levels of 
ozone results in enhanced pulmonary retention of inhaled asbestos fibers. 
Am Rev Respir Dis. 1989;140(4):1075–1081.
Pope CA III. Particulate pollution and health: a review of the Utah valley 
experience. J Expo Anal Environ Epidemiol. 1996;6:23–34.
Pope CA III, Burnett RT, Thun MJ, et al. Lung cancer, cardiopulmonary 
mortality, and long-term exposure to fine particulate air pollution. JAMA. 
2002;287(9):1132–1141.
Pope CA III, Burnett RT, Turner MC, et al. Lung cancer and cardiovascu-
lar disease mortality associated with ambient air pollution and cigarette 
smoke: shape of the exposure-response relationships. Environ Health 
Perspect. 2011;119:1616–1621.
Pope CA III, Dockery DW. Health Effects of Fine Particulate Air Pollution: 
Lines that Connect. 2006 Critical Review. J Air Waste Manag Assoc. 
2006;56:709–742.
Pope CA III, Thun MJ, Namboodiri MM, et al. Particulate air pollution as a 
predictor of mortality in a prospective study of U.S. adults. Am J Respir 
Crit Care Med. 1995;151:669–674.
Reid L. An experimental study of hypersecretion of mucus in the bronchial 
tree. Br J Exp Pathol. 1963;44:437–440.
Robinson J, Nelson WC. National Human Activity Pattern Survey Data 
Base. Research Triangle Park, NC: U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency; 1995.
Roda C, Kousignian I, Guihenneuc-Jouyaux C, et al. Formaldehyde expo-
sure and lower respiratory infections in infants: findings from the PARIS 
cohort study. Environ Health Perspect. 2011;119:1653–1658.
Romieu I, Sienra-Monge JJ, Ramirez-Aguilar M, et al. Genetic polymor-
phism of GSTM1 and antioxidant supplementation influence lung func-
tion in relation to ozone exposure in asthmatic children in Mexico City. 
Thorax. 2004;59(1):8–10.
Rosenlund M, Berglind N, Pershagen G, et al. Long-term exposure 
to urban air pollution and myocardial infarction. Epidemiology. 
2006;17(4):383–390.
Saldiva PHN, King M, Delmonte VLC, et al. Respiratory alterations 
due to urban air pollution: an experimental study in rats. Environ Res. 
1992;57:19–33.
Salvi SS, Nordenhall C, Blomberg A, et al. Acute exposure to diesel exhaust 
increases IL-8 and GRO-alpha production in healthy human airways. Am 
J Respir Crit Care Med. 2000;161(2 pt 1):550–557.
Samoli E, Aga E, Touloumi G, et al. Short-term effects of nitrogen diox-
ide on mortality: an analysis within the APHEA project. Eur Respir J. 
2006;27(6):1129–1138.
Schenker MB, Samet JM, Speizer FE, et al. Health effects of air pollution due 
to coal combustion in the Chestnut Ridge region of Pennsylvania: results of 
cross-sectional analysis in adults. Arch Environ Health. 1983;38:325–333.
Schins RP, Knaapen AM. Genotoxicity of poorly soluble particles. Inhal 
Toxicol. 2007;19(suppl 1):189–198.
Schlesinger RB. Comparative irritant potency of inhaled sulfate aerosol: 
effects on bronchial mucociliary clearance. Environ Res. 1984;34:268–279.
Schlesinger RB. Intermittent inhalation of nitrogen dioxide: effects on rab-
bit alveolar macrophages. J Toxicol Environ Health. 1987;21:127–139.
Schlesinger RB, Gorczynski JE, Dennison J, et al. Long-term intermittent 
exposure to sulfuric acid aerosol, ozone, and their combination: altera-
tions in tracheobronchial mucociliary clearance and epithelial secretory 
cells. Exp Lung Res. 1992;18:505–534.
Schwartz J. Particulate air pollution and daily mortality in Detroit. Environ 
Res. 1991;56:204–213.
Schwartz J. Air pollution and the duration of acute respiratory symptoms. 
Arch Environ Health. 1992;47(2):116–122.
Shapiro SD. Transgenic and gene-targeted mice as models for chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease. Eur Respir J. 2007;29:375–378.
Sheppard DA, Saisho A, Nadel JA, Boushey HA. Exercise increases sul-
fur dioxide induced bronchoconstriction in asthmatic subjects. Am Rev 
Respir Dis. 1981;123:486–491.
Sienra-Monge JJ, Ramirez-Aguilar M, Moreno-Macias H. Antioxidant sup-
plementation and nasal inflammatory responses among young asthmatics 
exposed to high levels of ozone. Clin Exp Immunol. 2004;138(2):317–322.
Silverman DT, Samanic CM, Lumin JH, et al. The Diesel Exhaust in Miners 
study: a nested case–control study of lung cancer and diesel exhaust. 
J Nat Cancer Inst. 2012;104:855–868.

Air Pollution
Chapter 31
1507
Singh P, DeMarini DM, Dick CA, et al. Sample characterization of auto-
mobile and forklift diesel exhaust particles and comparative pulmonary 
toxicity in mice. Environ Health Perspect. 2004;112(8):820–825.
Speizer FE. Studies of acid aerosols in six cities and in a new multi-city 
investigation: design issues. Environ Health Perspect. 1989;79:61–68.
Spengler JD, Sexton K. Indoor air pollution: a public health perspective. 
Science. 1983;221:9–17.
Stevens MA, Fitzgerald S, Menache MG, et al. Functional evidence of per-
sistent airway obstruction in rats following a two-hour inhalation expo-
sure to methyl isocyanate. Environ Health Perspect. 1987;72:89–94.
Straif K, Cohen A, Samet J, et al. Air Pollution and Cancer. IARC Scientific 
Publication No. 161. Lyon, France: IARC; 2013.
Sweeney TD, Skornik WA, Brain JD, et al. Chronic bronchitis alters the 
pattern of aerosol deposition in the lung. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 
1995;151(2 pt 1):482–488.
Tashakkor AY, Chow KS, Carlsten C. Modification by antioxidant supple-
mentation of changes in human lung function associated with air pollutant 
exposure: a systematic review. BMC Public Health. 2011;11:532–543.
Thurston GD, Ahn J, Cromar KR, et al. Ambient particulate matter air pol-
lution exposure and mortality in the NIH-AARP diet and health cohort. 
Environ Health Perspect. 2016;124:484–490.
Thurston GD, Ito K, Kinney PL, Lippmann M. A multi-year study of air 
pollution and respiratory hospital admissions in three New York state 
metropolitan areas: results for 1988 and 1989 summers. J Expos Anal 
Environ Epidemiol. 1992;2:429–450.
Thurston GD, Kipen H, Annesi-Maesano I, et al. A joint ERS/ATS policy 
statement: what constitutes an adverse health effect of air pollution? An 
analytical framework. Eur Respir J. 2017;49(1): pii: 1600419.
Tong H, Cheng WY, Samet JM, Gilmour MI, Devlin RB. Differential car-
diopulmonary effects of size-fractionated ambient particulate matter in 
mice. Cardiovasc Toxicol. 2010;10:259–267.
Tujague J, Bastaki M, Holland N, et al. Antioxidant intake, GSTM1 poly-
morphism and pulmonary function in healthy young adults. Eur Respir 
J. 2006;27:282–288.
Tyler WS, Tyler NK, Last JA, et al. Comparison of daily and seasonal expo-
sures of young monkeys to ozone. Toxicology. 1988;50:131–144.
UN Foundation. 2010. Available at: http://www.unfoundation.org/assets/
pdf/global-alliance-for-clean-cookstoves-factsheet.pdf.
U.S. EPA. National Air Quality Emissions Trends Report, 1998. EPA 
454/R-00-003. Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; 
2000. Available at: https://nepis.epa.gov/Exe/tiff2png.cgi/000032KL.
PNG?-r+75+-g+7+D%3A%5CZYFILES%5CINDEX%20DATA%5C
00THRU05%5CTIFF%5C00000006%5C000032KL.TIF.
U.S. EPA. 2005. Available at: https://www.epa.gov/criteria-air-pollutants/
process-reviewing-national-ambient-air-quality-standards.
U.S. EPA. Integrated Science Assessment (ISA) for Particulate Matter. 
Final Report, December 2009. EPA/600/R-08/139F. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; 2009.
U.S. EPA. Integrated Science Assessment (ISA) of Ozone and Related 
Photochemical Oxidants. Final Report, February 2013. EPA/600/R-
10/076F. Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; 2013.
U.S. EPA. 2016. IRIS. Available at: https://www.epa.gov/iris.
U.S. EPA. 2018a. Available at: https://www.epa.gov/air-emissions-inventories.
U.S. EPA. 2018b. Available at: https://www.epa.gov/national-air-toxics-assessment.
Utell MJ, Mariglio JA, Morrow PE, et al. Effects of inhaled acid aerosols 
on respiratory function: the role of endogenous ammonia. J Aerosol Med. 
1989;2:141–147.
Utell MJ, Morrow PE, Hyde RW. Airway reactivity to sulfate and sulfu-
ric acid aerosols in normal and asthmatic subjects. J Air Pollut Control 
Assoc. 1984;34:931–935.
Van De Lende R, Kok TJ, Reig RP, et al. Decreases in VC and FEV1 
with time: indicators for effects of smoking and air pollution. Bull Eur 
Physiopathol Respir. 1981;17:775–792.
Vancza EM, Galdanes K, Gunnison A, Hatch G, Gordon T. Age, strain, and 
gender as factors for increased sensitivity of the mouse lung to inhaled 
ozone. Toxicol Sci. 2009;107:535–543.
Vedal S, Kaufman JD. What does multi-pollutant air pollution research 
mean? Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2011;183:4–6.
von Mutius E, Martinez FD, Fritzsch C, et al. Prevalence of asthma and 
atopy in two areas of West and East Germany. Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med. 1994;149(2 pt 1):358–364.
Waxman HA. Title III of the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments. In: Patrick 
DR, ed. Toxic Air Pollution Handbook. New York: Van Nostrand 
Reinhold; 1994:25–32.
WHO. The World Health Report 2002: Reducing Risks, Promoting Healthy 
Life. 2002. Available at: http://www.who.int/whr/2002/en/.
WHO. 
2005. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.who.int/phe/health_topics/
outdoorair/outdoorair_aqg/en/.
Wichers LB, Rowan WH, Nolan JP, et al. Particle deposition in sponta-
neously hypertensive rats exposed via whole-body inhalation: measured 
and estimated dose. Toxicol Sci. 2006;93(2):400–410.
Wiester MJ, Winsett DW, Richards JE, et al. Ozone adaptation in mice 
and its association with ascorbic acid in the lung. Inhal Toxicol. 
2000;12:577–590.
Williams AS, Mathews JA, Kasahara DI, et al. Innate and ozone-induced 
airway hyperresponsiveness in obese mice: role of TNF-α. Am J Physiol 
Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2015;308:L1168–L1177.
Woodruff TJ, Wells EM, Holt EW, Burgin DE, Axelrad DA. Estimating 
risk from ambient concentrations of acrolein across the United States. 
Environ Health Perspect. 2007;115:410–415.
Wuebbles DJ, Lei H, Lin J. Intercontinental transport of aerosols and pho-
tochemical oxidants from Asia and its consequences. Environ Pollut. 
2007;150:65–84.
Zeger SL, Irizarry R, Peng RD. On time series analysis of public health and 
biomedical data. Annu Rev Public Health. 2006;27:57–79.
Zou B, Wilson JG, Zhan FB, Zeng Y. Air pollution exposure assess-
ment methods utilized in epidemiological studies. J Environ Monit. 
2009;11:475–490.

This page intentionally left blank