# 32 Analytical and Forensic Toxicology
# Casarett & Doull's Toxicology, 9th Edition
# Pages: 1530-1549
# Unit: Unit VII Applications of Toxicology

32
chapter
Analytical and Forensic Toxicology
Bruce A. Goldberger, Dayong Lee, and Diana G. Wilkins
What is there that is not poison? All things are poison and nothing without 
poison. Solely the dose determines that a thing is not a poison.
—Paracelsus
It is impossible to consider the topic of forensic toxicology without 
discussing analytical toxicology in detail, as analytical toxicology 
has its roots in forensic applications. Therefore, it is logical to dis-
cuss these mutually dependent areas together. Analytical toxicol-
ogy involves the application of the tools of analytical chemistry to 
the qualitative and/or quantitative estimation of chemicals that may 
exert effects on living organisms. Generally, the chemical that is to 
be measured (the analyte) is a xenobiotic that may have been altered 
or transformed by metabolic actions of the organism. Frequently, 
the specimen that is to be analyzed consists of a matrix composed 
of body fluids or solid tissues removed from the organism. Both the 
identity of the analyte and the complexity of the matrix can present 
formidable problems to an analytical toxicologist.
Forensic toxicology involves the use of toxicology for the pur-
poses of the law (Cravey and Baselt, 1981). Although this broad 
definition includes a wide range of applications, such as regulatory 
toxicology and workplace urine testing to detect drug use, by far 
the most common application is to identify any chemical that may 
serve as a causative agent in inflicting injury or death on humans, or 
in causing damage to property. Frequently, as a result of such unfor-
tunate incidents, charges of liability or criminal intent are brought 
that must be resolved by the judicial system. At times, indirect or 
circumstantial evidence is presented in an attempt to prove cause 
and effect. However, there is no substitute for the unequivocal iden-
tification of a specific chemical substance that is demonstrated to 
be present in tissues from the victim at a sufficient concentration to 
explain the injury with certainty. For this reason, forensic toxicol-
ogy and analytical toxicology have long shared a mutually sup-
portive partnership.
To aid in deciding whether adverse effects of xenobiotics 
contribute to death, injury, or other harm to persons or property, 
great efforts are made to initiate and implement analytical proce-
dures in a forensically credible manner. Laws prescribing punish-
ment to drug-impaired drivers are evidence of attempts to mitigate 
impaired driving. The measurement of ethanol in blood or breath 
at specific concentrations is generally required to prove impair-
ment by this agent (Fisher et al., 1968). Similarly, the decade of 
the 1980s saw a growing response by society to the threat of drug 
abuse. Identification of drug users through testing urine for the pres-
ence of drugs or their metabolites, using methods and safeguards 
developed by forensic toxicologists, has become required by law 
(Department of Health and Human Services, 1988).
The diagnosis and treatment of health problems induced by 
chemical substances and the closely allied field of therapeutic drug 
monitoring also rely greatly on analytical toxicology. Although the 
analytes are present in biological matrices similar to those obtained 
for traditional forensic toxicology, the results must be reported rap-
idly to be of use to clinicians in treating patients. This requirement 
of a rapid turnaround time often limits the number of chemicals 
that can be measured because analytical methods, equipment, and 
personnel must all be available for a swift response to toxicologi-
cal emergencies. More recently, analytical toxicology methods have 
also been employed for the detection of drugs and other chemi-
cals used for the purpose of performance-enhancement, which can 
also require rapid reporting in selected settings, including athletic 
events.
Occupational toxicology and regulatory toxicology also 
require analytical procedures for their implementation or moni-
toring. In occupational toxicology, the analytical methods used to 
monitor threshold limit values and other criteria for estimating the 
exposure of workers to toxic hazards may utilize simple, nonspe-
cific, but economical screening devices. However, to determine the 
actual exposure of a worker, it is necessary to analyze blood, urine, 
breath, or another specimen by employing methods similar to those 
used in clinical or forensic toxicology. For regulatory purposes, a 
variety of matrices (e.g., food, water, and air) must be examined for 
Analytical Toxicology
Role in General Toxicology
Role in Forensic Toxicology
Toxicological Investigation  
of a Poison Death
Case History and Specimens
Toxicological Analysis
Interpretation of Analytical Results
Criminal Poisoning of the  
Living
Forensic Drug Testing
Human Performance Testing
Courtroom Testimony
Role in Clinical Toxicology
Role in Therapeutic Monitoring
Summary
Acknowledgments
References

1512
Applications of Toxicology
Unit VII
extremely small quantities of analytes. Frequently, this requires the 
use of sophisticated methodology with extreme sensitivity. Both 
of these applications of analytical toxicology impinge on forensic 
toxicology because an injury or occupational disease in a worker 
can result in a legal proceeding, as well as can occur with a violation 
of a regulatory law.
Other applications of analytical toxicology occur frequently 
during the course of experimental studies. Confirmation of the con-
centration of dosing solutions and monitoring of their stability often 
can be accomplished with the use of simple analytical techniques. 
The bioavailability of a dose may vary with the route of administra-
tion and the vehicle used. Blood concentrations can be monitored 
as a means of establishing this important parameter. In addition, an 
important feature in the study of any toxic substance is the charac-
terization of its metabolites as well as the distribution of the parent 
drug, together with its metabolites, to various tissues. This requires 
sensitive, specific, and valid analytical procedures. Similar analyti-
cal studies can be conducted within a temporal framework to gain 
an understanding of the dynamics of the absorption, distribution, 
metabolism, and excretion of toxic chemicals.
It is evident that analytical toxicology is intimately involved 
in many aspects of experimental and applied toxicology. Because 
toxic substances include all chemical types and the measurement 
of toxic chemicals may require the examination of biological or 
nonbiological matrices, the scope of analytical toxicology is broad. 
Nevertheless, a systematic approach and a reliance on the practical 
experience of generations of forensic toxicologists can be used in 
conjunction with the sophisticated tools of analytical chemistry to 
provide the data needed to better understand the hazards of toxic 
substances.
ANALYTICAL TOXICOLOGY
In light of the statement by Paracelsus five centuries ago, “All sub-
stances are poisons: there is none which is not a poison,” analyti-
cal toxicology potentially encompasses all chemical substances. 
Forensic toxicologists learned long ago that when the nature of a 
suspected poison is unknown, a systematic, standardized approach 
must be used to identify the presence of most common toxic sub-
stances. An approach that has stood the test of time was first sug-
gested by Chapuis in 1873 in Elements de Toxicologie. It is based 
on the origin or nature of the toxic agent (Petersen et al., 1923). 
Such a system can be characterized as follows:
	 1.	 Gases
	 2.	 Volatile substances
	 3.	 Corrosive agents
	 4.	 Metals
	 5.	 Anions and nonmetals
	 6.	 Nonvolatile organic substances
	 7.	 Miscellaneous
Closely related to this descriptive classification is the method 
for separating a toxic agent from the matrix in which it is embedded. 
The matrix is generally a biological specimen such as a body fluid 
or tissue. The agent of interest may exist in the matrix in a simple 
solution or may be bound to protein and other cellular constituents. 
The challenge is to separate the toxic agent in sufficient purity and 
quantity to permit it to be characterized and quantified. At times, the 
parent compound is no longer present in large enough amounts to be 
separated. In this case, known metabolites may indirectly provide a 
measure of the parent substance (Hawks and Chiang, 1986). With 
other substances, interaction of the poison with tissue components 
may require the isolation or characterization of a protein adduct 
(San George and Hoberman, 1986; Stockham and Blanke, 1988). 
Methods for separation have long provided a great challenge to ana-
lytical toxicologists. Over the previous 20 years, improved methods 
have become available that permit direct measurement of some ana-
lytes without prior separation from the matrix.
Gases are most simply measured by means of gas chroma-
tography. Some gases are extremely labile, and the specimen must 
be collected and preserved at temperatures as low as that of liquid 
nitrogen. Generally, the gas is carefully liberated by incubating the 
specimen at a predetermined temperature in a sealed container. 
The gas, freed from the matrix, collects in the empty “headspace” 
between the specimen and the sealed container, where it can be 
sampled and injected into the gas chromatograph. Other gases, such 
as carbon monoxide, interact with proteins. These gases can be 
carefully released from the protein, or the adduct can be measured 
independently, as in the case of carboxyhemoglobin.
Volatile substances are generally liquids of a variety of chemi-
cal types. The temperature at which they boil is sufficiently low 
such that older methods of separation employed microdistillation or 
diffusion techniques. Gas chromatography is the simplest approach 
for simultaneous separation and quantitation of volatile substances. 
The simple alcohols (e.g., ethanol) can be measured by injecting 
a diluted body fluid directly onto the analytical column of the gas 
chromatograph. A more common approach is to use the headspace 
technique, as is done for gases, after incubating the specimen in a 
sealed vial at an elevated temperature.
Corrosives include mineral acids and bases. Many corrosives 
consist of ions that are normal tissue constituents. Clinical chemical 
techniques can be applied to detect these ions when they are in great 
excess over normal concentrations. Because these ions are endog-
enous constituents, the corrosive effects at the site of contact of the 
chemical, together with other changes in blood chemistry values, 
can confirm the ingestion of a corrosive substance.
Metals are encountered frequently as occupational and environ-
mental hazards. Elegant analytical methods are available for most 
metals even when they are present at extremely low concentrations. 
Classic separation procedures involve destruction of the organic 
matrix by chemical or thermal oxidation. This leaves the metal to 
be identified and quantified in the inorganic residue. Unfortunately, 
this prevents the determination of the metal in the oxidation state 
or in combination with other elements, as it existed when the metal 
compound was absorbed. For example, the toxic effects of metallic 
mercury, mercurous ion, mercuric ion, and dimethylmercury are 
all different. Selected analytical methods must be capable of deter-
mining the speciation and relative amount of each form present to 
interpret the degree of toxicity. The analytical difficulty in doing so 
has resulted in the unfortunate practice of describing the toxicity of 
metals as if each metal existed as a single entity.
Toxic anions and nonmetals present an analytical challenge. 
With the exception of phosphorus, these agents are rarely encoun-
tered in an uncombined form. Some anions can be trapped in com-
bination with a stable cation, after which the organic matrix can be 
destroyed, as with metals. Others can be separated from the bulk of 
the matrix by dialysis, after which they are detected by colorimetric 
or chromatographic techniques. Still others are detected and mea-
sured by ion-specific electrodes.
The nonvolatile organic substances constitute the largest group 
of substances that must be considered by analytical toxicologists. 
This group includes drugs, both prescribed and illicit, pesticides, 
natural products, pollutants, and industrial compounds. These sub-
stances are solids or liquids with high boiling points. Thus, separa-
tion procedures generally rely on differential extractions of biological

Analytical and Forensic Toxicology
Chapter 32
1513
fluids and tissues (Fig. 32-1). These extractions often are inefficient, 
and recovery of the analyte from the matrix may be poor. When the 
nature of the analyte is known, immunoassay procedures, if avail-
able, are useful because they allow a toxicologist to avoid using sepa-
ration procedures. These compounds can be classified as follows:
	 1.	 Organic strong acids
	 2.	 Organic weak acids
	 3.	 Organic bases
	 4.	 Organic neutral compounds
	 5.	 Organic amphoteric compounds
Separation of the classes specified above is generally achieved 
by adjusting the acidity of the aqueous matrix and extracting with a 
water-immiscible solvent or a solid-phase sorbent material. Finally, 
a miscellaneous category must also be included to cover the large 
number of compounds that cannot be detected by the routine applica-
tion of the methods described above. Venoms and other toxic mix-
tures of proteins, or uncharacterized constituents, fall into this class. 
Frequently, if antibodies can be produced against the active constitu-
ent, an immunoassay may be the most practical means of detecting 
and measuring these highly potent and difficult-to-isolate substances. 
Unfortunately, unless highly specific monoclonal antibodies are used, 
the analytical procedure may not be acceptable for forensic purposes. 
Most frequently, specific analytical procedures must be developed for 
each analyte of this type. At times, biological endpoints are utilized 
to semiquantify the concentration of the isolated product.
ROLE IN GENERAL TOXICOLOGY
In almost all experimental studies in toxicology, an agent, generally 
a single chemical substance is administered in known amounts to an 
organism. It is universally acknowledged that the chemical under 
study must be either pure, or the nature of any contaminant well-
characterized, to enable interpretation of the experimental results 
with validity. However, it is a common practice to proceed with the 
experimental study without verifying the identity and purity of the 
compound. Not only does this practice lead to errors in establishing 
an accurate dose, but also, depending on the nature of the study, other 
erroneous conclusions may be drawn. For example, the presence of 
related compounds in the dosage form of a tricyclic antidepressant 
led to erroneous conclusions about the metabolic products of the drug 
when it was administered together with the unidentified contami-
nants (Saady et al., 1981). An even greater error may result when a 
small amount of a contaminant may be supertoxic. A well-publicized 
Test for metals
Spectroscopy
Residue
Tissue sample
(Minced)
Acidify & steam-distill
Discard
Evaporate, residue
contains acidic drugs
GC-MS
LC (HPLC)-MS/MS
Make basic & extract
with organic solvent
Screen
Immunoassay, GC-MS,
LC-HRMS
Acidify & extract
with organic solvent
Aqueous
Test for volatiles
GC-FID
GC-MS
Distillate
Extract with
acid
Organic
Make basic
extract with
organic solvent
Aqueous
Organic
Organic
Evaporate, residue
contains neutral drugs
GC-MS
LC (HPLC)-MS/MS
Organic
Evaporate, residue
contains basic drugs
GC-MS
LC (HPLC)-MS/MS
Aqueous
Discard
Aqueous
Figure 32-1.   A scheme of separation for poisons from tissues.

1514
Applications of Toxicology
Unit VII
example of this error involved the presence of dioxin in mixtures of 
the defoliants 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T (Panel on Herbicides, 1971) used 
during the Vietnam War as Agent Orange. Some of the adverse effects 
of Agent Orange are considered to be due to the low concentration 
of dioxin in those mixtures. Other researchers have reported that 
the toxicity of mixtures of polybrominated biphenyls may be due to 
the high toxicity of specific components, whereas other brominated 
biphenyls are relatively nontoxic (Mills et al., 1985).
A related application of analytical toxicology is the monitor-
ing of dosage forms or solutions for stability throughout the course 
of an experimental study. Chemicals may degrade when in contact 
with air, by exposure to ultraviolet or other radiation, by interaction 
with constituents of the vehicle or dosing solution, and by other 
means. Developing an analytical procedure by which these changes 
can be recognized and corrected is essential in achieving consistent 
and reliable results over the course of a study (Blanke, 1987; Peters 
et al., 2007).
Finally, analytical methods are necessary to determine the bio-
availability of a compound that is under study. Some substances 
with low water solubility are difficult to introduce into an animal, 
and a variety of vehicles may be investigated. However, a com-
parison of the blood concentrations for the compound under study 
provides a simple means of comparing the effectiveness of vehicles. 
Introducing a compound into the stomach in an oil vehicle may not 
be the most effective means of enhancing the absorption of that 
compound (Granger et al., 1987). Rather than observing dose–effect 
relationships, it may be more accurate to describe blood (or serum) 
concentration–effect relationships.
ROLE IN FORENSIC TOXICOLOGY
The duties of a forensic toxicologist in postmortem investigations 
include the qualitative and quantitative analysis of drugs or poisons 
in biological specimens collected at autopsy and the interpreta-
tion of the analytical findings with respect to the physiological and 
behavioral effects of the detected chemicals on the deceased at the 
time of injury and/or death.
The complete investigation of the cause or causes of sudden 
death is an important civic and legal responsibility. The responsibility 
of establishing the cause of death rests with the medical examiner or 
coroner, but success in arriving at the correct conclusion often depends 
on the combined efforts of the pathologist and the toxicologist. The 
cause of death in cases of poisoning cannot be proved beyond conten-
tion without toxicological analysis that confirms the presence of the 
toxicant in either body fluids or tissues of the deceased.
Many drugs or poisons do not produce characteristic patho-
logical lesions; their presence in the body can be demonstrated only 
by chemical methods of isolation and identification. If toxicological 
analyses are limited, deaths resulting from poisoning may be erro-
neously ascribed to an entirely different cause or poisoning may be 
designated as the cause of death without empirical proof. Thus, lim-
iting analysis may have significant legal and social consequences.
Additionally, a toxicologist can furnish valuable evidence 
concerning the circumstances surrounding a death. Such cases 
commonly involve demonstrating the presence of intoxicating con-
centrations of ethanol in victims of automotive or industrial acci-
dents, or measurements of concentrations of carbon monoxide in 
fire victims. Arson may be used to conceal homicide. The degree 
of carbon monoxide saturation of the blood may indicate whether 
the deceased died as a result of the fire or was dead before the 
fire started. Also, licit or illicit psychoactive drugs often play a sig-
nificant role in the circumstances associated with sudden or violent 
death. The behavioral toxicity of many illicit drugs may explain 
the bizarre or “risk-taking” behavior of the deceased that led to 
his or her demise. At times, a negative toxicological finding is of 
particular importance in assessing the cause of death. For example, 
toxicology studies may demonstrate that a person with a seizure 
disorder was not taking the prescribed medication and that this non-
compliance contributed to the fatal event.
Additionally, the results of postmortem toxicological testing 
provide valuable epidemiological and statistical data. Forensic 
toxicologists are often among the first to alert the medical com-
munity to new epidemics of substance abuse (Poklis, 1982) and the 
dangers of abusing over-the-counter drugs (Garriott et al., 1985). 
Similarly, they often determine the chemical identity and toxicity 
of novel analogs of psychoactive agents that are subject to abuse, 
including “designer drugs” such as “china white” (methylfen-
tanyl) (Henderson, 1988), “ecstasy” (methylenedioxymethamphet-
amine) (Dowling et al., 1987), and GHB (gamma-hydroxybutyric 
acid) (Andresen et al., 2011). Subsequently, several newer groups 
of designer drugs, including the synthetic cathinones and deriva-
tives such as 4-methylmethcathinone (mephedrone) and methylone 
(Cawrse et al., 2012; Prosser and Nelson, 2012), 3,4-methyl-
enedioxypyrovalerone and 5,6-methylenedioxy-2-aminoindane 
(MDAI) (Coppola and Mondola, 2012; Gallagher et al., 2012; 
Ross et al., 2012), and products containing synthetic cannabinoids, 
such as “K2” and “Spice” (Seely et al., 2012), among others, have 
emerged as new trends, particularly among young age groups 
(Rosenbaum et al., 2012). More recently, the increasing abuse of 
fentanyl, fentanyl analogs, and other synthetic opioids (Table 32-1) 
became a serious threat to the public health. Fentanyl is a synthetic 
opioid 50 to 100 times more potent than morphine, and carfent-
anil is a fentanyl analog estimated to be 10,000 times more potent 
morphine. These highly potent synthetic opioids contributed to 
Table 32-1  
List of Fentanyl Analogs and Other Synthetic Opioids 
Reported
FENTANYL ANALOGS
OTHER SYNTHETIC 
OPIOIDS
Acetylfentanyl
AH-7921
Acrylfentanyl
MT-45
4-ANPP
U-47700
Butyrylfentanyl
U-49900
Carfentanil
U-50488
Cyclopropylfentanyl
ortho-Fluorofentanyl
para-Fluorobutyryl fentanyl (FIBF)
para-Fluorofentanyl
Furanylfentanyl
Isobutyrylfentanyl
Methoxyacetylfentanyl
4-Methoxybutyrylfentanyl
4-Methylphenethylacetylfentanyl
3-Methylfentanyl
Beta-hydroxythiofentanyl
Valerylfentanyl

Analytical and Forensic Toxicology
Chapter 32
1515
approximately 20,000 overdose deaths in 2016, a fivefold increase 
from 3105 deaths in 2013 (O’Donnell et al., 2017).
Today, there are numerous specialized areas of study in the field 
of toxicology; however, it is the forensic toxicologist who is obliged 
to assist in the determination of the cause of death for a court of law 
and who has been historically recognized by the title “toxicologist.”
Until the 19th century, physicians, lawyers, and law enforce-
ment officials harbored extremely faulty notions about the signs and 
symptoms of poisoning (Thorwald, 1965). Unless a poisoner was 
literally caught in the act of the crime, there was no way to establish 
whether the victim died from poisoning. In the early 18th century, 
a Dutch physician, Hermann Boerhoave, theorized that various 
poisons in a hot, vaporous condition yield characteristic odors. He 
placed substances suspected of containing poisons on hot coals and 
evaluated their smells. Although Boerhoave was not successful in 
applying his method, he was the first to suggest a chemical method 
for proving the presence of poison.
White arsenic (arsenic trioxide) has been widely used with 
murderous intent for over a thousand years. Therefore, it is not sur-
prising that the first milestones in the chemical isolation and iden-
tification of a poison in body tissues and fluids were described for 
arsenic. In 1775, Karl Wilhelm Scheele, a Swedish chemist, dis-
covered that white arsenic is converted to arsenous acid by chlorine 
water. The addition of metallic zinc reduced the arsenous acid to poi-
sonous arsine gas. If gently heated, the evolving gas would deposit 
metallic arsenic on the surface of a cold vessel. In 1821, Serullas 
utilized the decomposition of arsine for the detection of small quan-
tities of arsenic in stomach contents and urine in poisoning cases. 
In 1836, James M. Marsh, a chemist at the Royal British Arsenal 
in Woolwich, applied Serullas’ observations in developing the first 
reliable method to determine the presence of an absorbed poison 
in body tissues and fluids such as liver, kidney, and blood. After 
acid digestion of the tissues, Marsh generated arsine gas, which 
was drawn through a heated capillary tube. The arsine decomposed, 
leaving a dark deposit of metallic arsenic. Quantitative measures 
were performed by comparing the length of the deposit from known 
concentrations of arsenic with those of the test specimens.
The 1800s witnessed the development of forensic toxicology as 
a scientific discipline. In 1814, Mathieiv J. B. Orfila (1787 to 1853), 
widely considered the “father of toxicology,” published Traité des 
Poisons, the first systematic approach to the study of the chemical 
and physiological nature of poisons (Gettler, 1977). Orfila’s role 
as an expert witness in many famous murder trials, particularly his 
application of the Marsh test for arsenic in the trial of the poisoner 
Marie Lafarge, aroused both popular and scholarly interest in the 
new science. As dean of the medical faculty at the University of 
Paris, Orfila trained numerous students in forensic toxicology.
The first successful isolation of an alkaloidal poison was per-
formed in 1850 by Jean Servias Stas, a Belgian chemist, using a 
solution of acetic acid in warm ethanol to extract nicotine from 
the tissues of the murdered Gustave Fougnie. As modified by the 
German chemist Fredrick Otto, the Stas–Otto method was quickly 
applied to the isolation of numerous alkaloidal poisons, including 
colchicine, coniine, morphine, narcotine, and strychnine. In the 
latter half of the 19th century, European toxicologists were in the 
forefront of the development and application of forensic sciences, 
providing valuable evidence of poisoning. A number of these trials 
became “causes célèbres” and the testimony of forensic toxicolo-
gists captured the imagination of the public and increased aware-
ness of the development and application of toxicology. It was 
thought that murderers could no longer poison with impunity.
In the United States, Rudolph A. Witthaus, professor of 
chemistry at Cornell University Medical School, made many 
contributions to toxicology and called attention to the new science 
by performing analyses for the city of New York in several famous 
morphine poisoning cases, including the murder of Helen Potts by 
Carlyle Harris and that of Annie Sutherland by Robert W. Buchanan. 
In 1911, Witthaus and Tracy C. Becker edited a four-volume work 
on medical jurisprudence, forensic medicine, and toxicology—the 
first standard forensic textbook published in the United States. In 
1918, the city of New York established a medical examiner’s sys-
tem, and the appointment of Alexander O. Gettler as toxicologist 
marked the beginning of modern forensic toxicology in this country. 
Although Gettler made numerous contributions to the science, per-
haps his greatest was the training and direction he gave to future 
leaders in forensic toxicology. Many of his associates went on to 
direct laboratories in medical examiner and coroner systems in 
major urban centers throughout the country.
In 1949, the American Academy of Forensic Sciences (AAFS) 
was established to support and further the practice of legal (foren-
sic) medicine in the United States. The members of the Toxicology 
Section represented the vast majority of forensic toxicologists work-
ing in medical examiners’ and coroners’ offices, as well as numer-
ous referral laboratories. Several other international, national, and 
local forensic science organizations, such as the Society of Forensic 
Toxicologists and the California Association of Toxicologists, 
offer a forum for the exchange of scientific data pertaining to ana-
lytical techniques and case reports involving new or infrequently 
used drugs and poisons. The International Association of Forensic 
Toxicologists (TIAFT) founded in 1963 with members from all 
regions of the world facilitates worldwide collaboration in resolv-
ing the technical problems confronting toxicology.
In 1975, the American Board of Forensic Toxicology (ABFT) 
was formed to examine and certify forensic toxicologists. One of 
the stated objectives of the board is “to make available to the judi-
cial system, and other publics, a practical and equitable system 
for readily identifying those persons professing to be specialists 
in forensic toxicology who possess the requisite qualifications and 
competence.” Those certified as Fellows of the Board must have 
a doctor of philosophy or science degree, have at least 3 years of 
full-time professional experience, and pass a written examina-
tion. Diplomates of the Board must have a bachelor’s or master’s 
degree, 3 years of full-time professional experience, and must pass a 
written examination.
In 1998, the ABFT began an accreditation program for foren-
sic toxicology laboratories. ABFT-accredited laboratories must con-
form to standards of having qualified, experienced personnel and 
forensically sound procedures for the handling of evidence, analysis 
of specimens, and reporting of results. Laboratories must pass bi-
annual on-site inspections, which include a review of laboratory 
procedures and casework.
TOXICOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION  
OF A POISON DEATH
The toxicological investigation of a poison death may be divided 
into three steps: (1) obtaining the case history and suitable speci-
mens, (2) the toxicological analyses, and (3) the interpretation of 
the analytical findings.
Case History and Specimens
Today, thousands of compounds are readily available that are 
lethal if ingested, injected, or inhaled. Usually, a limited amount 
of specimen is available on which to perform analyses; therefore, 
it is imperative that, before the analyses are initiated, as much

1516
Applications of Toxicology
Unit VII
information as possible concerning the facts of the case be col-
lected. The age, sex, weight, medical history, and occupation of 
the decedent as well as any treatment administered before death, 
the gross autopsy findings, the drugs available to the decedent, and 
the interval between the onset of symptoms and death should be 
noted. In a typical year, a postmortem toxicology laboratory will 
perform analyses for such diverse poisons as over-the-counter med-
ications (e.g., analgesics and antihistamines), prescription drugs 
(e.g., benzodiazepines and opioids), drugs of abuse (e.g., cocaine, 
marijuana, and methamphetamine), and gases (e.g., inhalants and 
carbon monoxide). Obviously, a thorough investigation of the death 
scene including a tentative identification of the administered poison 
is helpful prior to beginning the analysis (Ernst et al., 1982).
The pathologist at autopsy usually performs the collection of 
postmortem specimens for analysis. Specimens of many different 
body fluids and organs are necessary, as drugs and poisons display 
varying affinities for body tissues (Fig. 32-2). Therefore, detection 
of a poison is more likely in a tissue in which it accumulates. A large 
quantity of each specimen is needed for thorough toxicological anal-
ysis because a procedure that extracts and identifies one compound 
or class of compounds may be ineffective in extracting and identify-
ing others (Table 32-2). Autolytic and putrefactive changes, how-
ever, may reduce specimen quality and therefore alter the selection 
and utility of individual specimens on a case-by-case basis. Further 
improvements in our knowledge regarding degradation mechanisms, 
as well as specimen-handling protocols to increase storage stability, 
may enable the forensic toxicologist to circumvent possible analyti-
cal and interpretive difficulties (Dinis-Oliveira et al., 2010).
When collecting the specimens, the pathologist labels each 
container with the date and time of autopsy, the name of the dece-
dent, the identity of the sample, an appropriate case identification 
number, and his or her signature or initials. It is paramount that the 
handling of all specimens be authenticated and documented. A form 
developed at the collection site that identifies each specimen is sub-
mitted to the laboratory with the specimens. The form is signed and 
dated by the pathologist, and subsequently by any individual han-
dling, transferring, or transporting the specimens. In legal terms, this 
form constitutes a “chain-of-custody” of specimens documenting all 
transfers. The chain-of-custody enables a toxicologist to introduce 
his or her results into legal proceedings, having established that the 
specimens analyzed were obtained from the decedent.
Fluids and tissues should be collected before embalming, as 
this process will dilute or chemically alter the poisons present, ren-
dering their detection difficult or impossible. Conversely, methyl 
or ethyl alcohol may be a constituent of embalming fluid, thereby 
affecting interpretation of the analytical findings.
Although forensic toxicology laboratories typically receive 
blood, urine, liver tissue, and/or stomach contents for identification 
of xenobiotics, they have been increasingly called upon to meet the 
analytical challenges of many alternative types of samples (Skopp, 
2004; Flanagan et al., 2005; Kronstrand and Druid, 2006; Gallardo 
and Queiroz, 2008). Nontraditional matrices, such as bone marrow, 
hair, and nails, among others, may be submitted to the laboratory. For 
example, on occasion, toxicological analysis is requested for cases of 
burned, exhumed, putrefied, and skeletal remains. In such instances, 
it is necessary to analyze unusual specimens such as bone marrow, 
hair, nails, skeletal muscle, and even insects (Inoue and Seta, 1992). 
Numerous drugs have been successfully identified in bone marrow and 
bone washings from skeletal remains even after decomposition and 
burial (Benko, 1985; Drummer, 2010; Cartiser et al., 2011). Similarly, 
the vitreous humor of the eye is isolated and sequestered from putrefac-
tion, charring, and trauma; thus, it is a useful specimen for the detec-
tion of most drugs, anions, and even volatile poisons such as alcohols, 
ketones, and glycols (Coe, 1993; Bévalot et al., 2011). Hair analysis is 
a rapidly growing technique in forensic toxicology and has been used to 
measure individual exposure to heavy metals, such as arsenic, mercury, 
and lead, as well as many drugs of abuse and other pharmaceuticals, 
pesticides, and plastics (Hambidge, 1973; Yamaguichi et al., 1975; 
McKenzie, 1978; Baumgartner et al., 1981; Puschel et al., 1983; Suzuki 
et al., 1984; Marigo et al., 1986; Martz, 1988; Harkey and Henderson, 
1989; Schroeder and Nason, 1989; Strang et al., 1990; Shen et al., 
2002; Boumba et al., 2006). Analysis of hair for selected drugs has 
been utilized as an adjunct specimen in forensic settings for postmortem 
examinations for many years (Baumgartner et al., 1979; Couper et al., 
1995; Gaillard and Pepin, 1997; Pragst et al., 1997; Rollins et al., 1997; 
Yegles et al., 1997; Muller et al., 2000; Villain et al., 2005; Pragst and 
Balikova, 2006; Kintz, 2010; Barroso et al., 2011). Nails, another kera-
tinized matrix, have also been used to determine exposure to selected 
xenobiotics in both antemortem and postmortem cases (Palmeri et al., 
2000; Garside, 2010). Limited data are available to support a direct 
Blood
Bile
Brain
Heart
Kidney
Liver
Lung
Spleen
Muscle
Adipose
Vitreous
0
10
Cocaine, mg/mL or mg/kg
20
30
Figure 32-2.   Cocaine tissue distribution in a fatal poisoning. (Data drawn 
from Poklis et al. [1985].)
Table 32-2  
Suggested List of Specimens and Amounts to Be 
Obtained at Autopsy
SPECIMEN
QUANTITY
Brain
50 g
Liver
50 g
Kidney
50 g
Heart blood
25 mL
Peripheral blood
10 mL
Vitreous humor
All available
Bile
All available
Urine
All available
Gastric contents
All available
SOURCE: Data from SOFT/AAFS Forensic Toxicology Laboratory 
Guidelines (2006).

Analytical and Forensic Toxicology
Chapter 32
1517
correlation between quantitative hair and nail values and drug doses 
in forensic cases; however, qualitative results have been accepted as 
indicators of previous drug or xenobiotic exposure.
Finally, in severely decomposed bodies, the absence of blood 
and/or the scarcity of solid tissues suitable for analysis have led to 
the collection and testing of maggots (fly larvae) feeding on the 
body (Pounder, 1991). The fundamental premise underlying mag-
got analysis is that if drugs or intoxicants are detected, they could 
only have originated from the decedent’s tissues on which the larvae 
were feeding. Surprisingly, analysis of maggots is rather straight-
forward, requiring no special methodology beyond that routinely 
applied in toxicology laboratories. Case reports have documented 
the detection of numerous drugs and intoxicants in maggots col-
lected from decomposed bodies. The compounds detected include 
barbiturates, benzodiazepines, phenothiazines, morphine, and mala-
thion. Controlled studies in which maggots were allowed to feed 
on tissues to which drugs had been added have demonstrated the 
accumulation of propoxyphene, amitriptyline and nordiazepam, 
among others, in the larvae (Goff et al., 1993; Gagliano-Candela 
and Aventaggiato, 2001; Pien et al., 2004).
Toxicological Analysis
Before the analysis begins, several factors must be considered, 
including the amount of specimen available, the nature of the 
poison sought, and the possible biotransformation of the poison. 
In cases involving oral administration of the poison, the gastro-
intestinal (GI) contents are analyzed first because large amounts 
of residual unabsorbed poison may be present. The urine may be 
analyzed next, as the kidney is the major organ of excretion for 
most poisons and high concentrations of toxicants and/or their 
metabolites often are present in urine. After absorption from the 
GI tract, drugs or poisons are carried to the liver before entering 
the general systemic circulation; therefore, the first analysis of 
an internal organ is conducted on the liver. If a specific poison is 
suspected to have caused or contributed to a death, the toxicolo-
gist may first analyze the tissues and fluids in which the poison 
concentrates.
A thorough knowledge of drug biotransformation is often 
essential before an analysis is performed. The parent compound and 
any major pharmacologically active metabolites should be isolated 
and identified. In some instances, the metabolites provide the only 
evidence that a drug or poison has been administered. Many screen-
ing tests, such as immunoassays, are specifically designed to detect 
not the parent drug but its major urinary metabolite. An example of 
the relationship of pharmacokinetic and analytical factors is pro-
vided by cocaine. The major metabolites of cocaine biotransforma-
tion are benzoylecgonine and ecgonine methyl ester (Fig. 32-3). The 
co-ingestion of alcohol with cocaine results in the hepatic transester-
ification of cocaine to form cocaethylene (Hime et al., 1991), a psy-
choactive metabolite. The disposition of these compounds in various 
body fluids and tissues (including hair) is shown in Fig. 32-4. Thus, 
Benzoylecgonine
Cocaine
Norcocaine
Cocaethylene
Anhydroecgonine
methyl ester
Ecgonine methyl ester
N
COOH
OCOC6H5
H
CH3
N
COOCH3
OCOC6H5
H
H
N
COOCH3
OH
H
CH3
N
COOCH3
OCOC6H5
H
CH3
N
COOCH2CH3
OCOC6H5
H
CH3
N
COOCH3
CH3
CH3CH2OH
Smoking
Figure 32-3.   Biotransformation and pyrolysis products of cocaine.

1518
Applications of Toxicology
Unit VII
the initial testing of urine to determine cocaine use is performed 
with immunoassays specifically designed to detect the presence of 
benzoylecgonine, the major urinary metabolite. In contrast, if oral 
fluid (saliva) or hair is tested, parent cocaine, as well as metabolites, 
is also sought. To determine a profile of each analyte present in a 
specimen, chromatographic procedures such as gas chromatography 
(GC) and liquid chromatography (LC) coupled with mass spectrom-
etry (MS) or tandem MS are commonly used, which facilitates the 
simultaneous separation and quantification of each compound.
Besides GC- and LC-MS targeted analysis, clinical and foren-
sic toxicologists increasingly utilize high-resolution MS technolo-
gies including time-of-flight (TOF) and Orbitrap mass analyzers. 
This analytical advance offers retrospective data interrogation and 
versatile screening methods where new analytes can be rapidly 
included in the test panel (Wu et al., 2012; Kronstrand et al., 2014). 
The more recent generation of MS technologies interfaces quadru-
pole mass analyzer with TOF allowing higher resolution and greater 
mass accuracy for simultaneous screening and quantitative analy-
ses of over a hundred drugs and metabolites (Bidny et al., 2017). 
Such analytical development is imperative to address the growing 
complexity and transience of the recreational drug market as the 
popularity of synthetic psychoactive substances known as designer 
drugs or novel/new psychoactive substances (NPS) has exponen-
tially grown in the past decade (Pasin et al., 2017).
The analysis may be complicated by the normal chemical 
changes that occur during the decomposition of a cadaver. The 
autopsy and toxicological analysis should be started as soon after 
death as possible. The natural enzymatic and nonenzymatic pro-
cesses of decomposition and microbial metabolism may destroy a 
poison that was present at death or produce substances or com-
pounds with chemical and physical properties similar to those of 
commonly encountered poisons. As early as the 1870s, the so-called 
cadaveric alkaloids isolated from the organs of putrefied bodies were 
known to produce color test reactions similar to those produced 
by morphine and other drugs. These cadaveric alkaloids resulted 
from the bacterial decarboxylation of the amino acids ornithine and 
lysine, producing putrescine and cadaverine, respectively (Evans, 
1963). Similarly, during decomposition, phenylalanine is converted 
to phenylethylamine, which has chemical and physical properties 
very similar to those of amphetamine. The hydrolysis, oxidation, 
or reduction of proteins, nucleic acids, and lipids may generate 
numerous compounds, such as hydroxylated aliphatic and aromatic 
carboxylic acids, pyridine and piperidine derivatives, and aromatic 
heterocyclics such as tryptamine and norharmane (Kaempe, 1969). 
All these substances may interfere with the isolation, identification, 
and quantitation of the toxicants being sought. The concentration of 
cyanide and ethyl alcohol and the carbon monoxide saturation of the 
blood may be decreased or increased, depending on the degree of 
putrefaction and microbial activity. However, many poisons—such 
as arsenic, barbiturates, mercury, and strychnine—are extremely 
stable and may be detectable many years after death.
Before analysis, the purity of all chemicals used in laboratory 
procedures should be established. The purity of the primary refer-
ence material used to prepare calibrators and controls should be 
verified, and the salt form or degree of hydration should be deter-
mined (Blanke, 1989). All reagents and solvents should be of the 
highest grade possible and should be free of contaminants that may 
interfere with or distort analytical findings. For example, the chlo-
roform contaminants phosgene and ethyl chloroformate may react 
with primary or secondary amine drugs to form carbamyl chloride 
and ethyl carbamate derivatives (Cone et al., 1982). Specimen con-
tainers, lids, and stoppers should be free of contaminants such as 
plasticizers, which often interfere with chromatographic or GC/
LC-MS determinations. Care should be exercised to ensure a clean 
laboratory environment. This is of particular concern in the analysis 
of metals, as aluminum, arsenic, lead, and mercury are ubiquitous 
environmental and reagent contaminants.
Forensic toxicology laboratories analyze specimens by using a 
variety of analytical procedures. Initially, nonspecific tests designed 
to determine the presence or absence of a class or group of analytes 
may be performed directly on the specimens. Examples of tests 
used to rapidly screen urine are the FPN (ferric chloride, perchloric, 
and nitric acid) color test for phenothiazine drugs and immunoas-
says for the detection of amphetamines, benzodiazepines, and opi-
ate derivatives, among others. Positive results obtained with these 
tests must be confirmed by a second analytical procedure that iden-
tifies the particular drug. The detection limit of the confirmatory 
test should be lower than that of the initial nonspecific test. Some 
analytical procedures identify specific compounds. Even in such 
instances, a second test should be performed to identify and confirm 
the presence of the analyte. The second test should be based on a 
chemical or physical principle different from that of the first test. 
Such additional testing is performed to establish an unequivocal 
identification of the drugs or poisons present. Whenever possible, 
the most specific test for the compound of interest should be per-
formed. Today, GC-MS and LC-MS are the most widely applied 
methodology in toxicology and are generally accepted as unequivo-
cal identification for all drugs. Analyte identification is typically 
based on the retention time in the chromatographic system coupled 
with the characteristic ion fragmentation spectrum in the mass 
spectrometer. The analyte mass spectrum is the pattern of mass-to-
charge ion fragments and their relative abundance.
Analytical methods must be of sufficient rigor to provide 
accurate and reliable qualitative and quantitative data. Numerous 
approaches for the use of quality control have been suggested, 
and professional organizations have developed recommendations 
for the implementation of quality control in forensic laboratories 
(Goldberger et al., 1997; Ferrara et al., 1998; Scientific Working 
Group for Forensic Toxicology, 2013). The limit of detection, the 
lowest concentration of analyte reliably identified by the assay, and 
the specificity of all qualitative methods should be well documented. 
The laboratory must demonstrate that the assay response of blank or 
negative calibrators (controls) does not overlap with the response 
of the lowest-positive calibrator. In certain instances, qualitative 
identification of a poison or drug is sufficient to resolve forensic 
Percent
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Blood
Saliva
?
Urine
Hair
Cocaine
Ecgonine methyl ester
Benzoylecgonine
Cocaethylene
Figure 32-4.   Disposition of cocaine and cocaine metabolites in human 
fluids and hair. (Data redrawn from Spiehler [1994].)

Analytical and Forensic Toxicology
Chapter 32
1519
toxicology issues. However, most cases require reliable estimates 
of poison concentrations for forensic interpretation. For quantita-
tive analysis, the accuracy, precision, linearity, and specificity of the 
procedure must also be established. Linearity should be determined 
by using multiple drug-fortified calibrators whose concentrations 
bracket the anticipated concentrations in the biological specimen. 
Precision, which statistically demonstrates the variance in the value 
obtained, is determined by replicate analyses of a specimen of a 
known concentration. Additional assay parameters, such as analyte 
stability and recovery from the biological matrix, for example, can 
also be determined. For a variety of reasons, a quantitative result 
occasionally will deviate spuriously from the true value. Therefore, 
replicate quantitative determinations are highly recommended when 
sufficient specimen volume is available (Blanke, 1987).
When unusual samples such as bone marrow, fingernails, hair, 
and maggots are analyzed, the extraction efficiency of a proce-
dure may vary greatly, depending on the complexity of the matrix. 
Therefore, all calibrators and controls should be prepared in the 
same matrix type as the specimens and analyzed concurrently with 
the specimens. Often the matrix is “unique” or impossible to match, 
such as decomposed or embalmed tissue. In these instances, the 
method of “standard additions” may be used. Known amounts of 
the analyte of interest are added to specimen aliquots and these 
are analyzed. The concentration of poison in the test specimen is 
determined by comparing the proportional response of the “poison 
fortified” specimens to that of the test specimens.
Interpretation of Analytical Results
Once the analysis of the specimens is complete, the toxicologist 
must interpret his or her findings with regard to the physiological 
or behavioral effects of the toxicants on the decedent at the con-
centrations found. Specific questions may be answered, such as 
the route of administration, the dose administered, and whether the 
concentration of the toxicant present was sufficient to cause death 
or alter the decedent’s actions enough to cause his or her death. 
Assessing the physiological or behavioral meanings of analytical 
results is often the most challenging aspect confronted by the foren-
sic toxicologist.
In determining the route of administration, the toxicologist 
notes the results of the analysis of the various specimens. As a gen-
eral rule, the highest concentrations of a poison are found at the 
site of administration. Therefore, the presence of large amounts of 
drugs and/or poisons in the GI tract and liver indicates oral inges-
tion, while higher concentrations in the lungs than in other visceral 
organs can indicate inhalation or intravenous injection. The ratio or 
relative distribution of drugs in different tissues may also differenti-
ate oral from parenteral administration (Fig. 32-5). Drugs may also 
be detected in the tissue surrounding an injection site following 
intramuscular or intravenous injection. Smoking is a popular route 
of administration for abusers of controlled substances (illicit) such 
as cocaine, heroin, marijuana, and phencyclidine. Pyrolysis of these 
drugs leads to the inhalation not only of the parent drug, but also of 
characteristic breakdown products of combustion. For example, a 
major pyrolysis product of “crack” cocaine smoking is anhydroec-
gonine methyl ester (Martin et al., 1989) (Fig. 32-3). Thus, identi-
fication of relatively high concentrations of this compound along 
with cocaine or cocaine metabolites in urine or other body fluids or 
tissues may indicate smoking as the route of cocaine administration 
(Jacob et al., 1990).
The presence of a toxic material in the GI tract, regardless 
of the quantity, does not provide sufficient evidence to establish 
that agent as the cause of death. It is necessary to demonstrate that 
absorption of the toxicant has occurred and that it has been trans-
ported by the general circulation to the target organ in order to exert 
its lethal effect. This is established by blood and tissue analyses. 
An exception to the rule is provided by strong, corrosive chemicals 
such as sulfuric acid, lye, and phenol, which exert their deleterious 
effects by directly digesting tissue, causing hemorrhage and shock. 
The results of urinalysis are often of little benefit in determining 
the physiological effects of a toxic agent. Urine results establish 
only that the poison was present in the body at some time before 
death. Correlation of urine values with physiological effects is poor 
because of various factors that influence the rate of excretion of 
specific compounds and the urine volume.
The physiological effects of most drugs and poisons are gener-
ally correlated with their concentrations in blood or blood fractions 
such as plasma and serum. Indeed, in living persons, this associa-
tion is the basis of therapeutic drug monitoring. However, postmor-
tem blood has been described as a fluid resembling blood that is 
obtained from the vasculature after death. Therefore, interpretation 
of postmortem blood results requires careful consideration of the 
case history, the site of collection, and postmortem changes. The 
survival time between the administration of a poison and death may 
be sufficiently long to permit biotransformation and excretion of 
the agent. Blood values may appear to be nontoxic or consistent 
with therapeutic administration. Death from hepatic failure after 
an acetaminophen overdose usually occurs at least 3 to 4 days after 
ingestion. Postmortem acetaminophen concentrations in blood may 
be consistent with the ingestion of therapeutic doses. Therefore, 
fatal acetaminophen overdose is determined by case history, central 
lobular necrosis of the liver, and, if available, analysis of serum 
specimens collected from the decedent when he or she was admit-
ted to the emergency department (Price et al., 1991). Furthermore, 
emergency medical treatment—such as the administration of fluids, 
plasma extenders, bicarbonate, diuretics, and blood transfusions—
may dilute, remove, or enhance the elimination of toxic agents. 
Similarly, prolonged survival on a mechanical respirator, hemodi-
alysis, or hemoperfusion may substantially reduce initially lethal 
blood concentrations of poisons.
For a long time, it was generally assumed that postmortem 
blood drug concentrations were more or less uniform throughout the 
0
Brain
Liver
Kidney
10
Pentazocine, mg/kg
20
30
Oral
IV
Figure 32-5.   Comparison of pentazocine distribution in fatal poisonings 
due to intravenous injection and oral administration. (Data from Baselt 
[1982]; Poklis and MacKell [1982].)

1520
Applications of Toxicology
Unit VII
body. However, in the 1970s, several investigators noted that post-
mortem concentrations of digoxin in heart blood greatly exceeded 
those in simultaneously collected femoral blood. They also observed 
that postmortem blood concentrations, particularly in heart blood, 
exceeded the expected values at the time of death (Vorpahl and 
Coe, 1978; Aderjan et al., 1979). This postmortem increase in 
blood digoxin concentrations was apparently due to release of the 
drug from tissue stores, particularly the myocardium. Subsequently, 
other researchers demonstrated that for many drugs, blood concen-
trations in the same body vary greatly depending on the site from 
which the specimen is collected—subclavian vein, thoracic aorta, 
inferior vena cava, femoral vein, and so forth. For example, in a 
case of fatal multiple drug ingestion, analysis of postmortem blood 
collected from 10 different sites demonstrated imipramine concen-
trations that differed by as much as 760% (2.1 to 16.0 mg/L) (Jones 
and Pounder, 1987). In an extensive investigation, Prouty and 
Anderson (1990) demonstrated that postmortem blood drug con-
centrations were not only site-dependent but also increased greatly 
over the interval between death and specimen collection, particu-
larly in heart blood. This increase over the postmortem interval was 
most pronounced for basic drugs with large apparent volumes of 
distribution, such as tricyclic antidepressants.
In an overt drug overdose, postmortem blood concentrations 
are elevated sufficiently to render an unmistakable interpretation of 
fatal intoxication. However, in many cases, the postmortem redis-
tribution of drugs may significantly affect the interpretation of ana-
lytical findings. For drugs whose volume of distribution, plasma 
half-life, and renal clearance vary widely from person to person 
or that undergo postmortem redistribution, tissue concentrations 
readily distinguish therapeutic administration from drug overdose 
(Apple, 1989). Therefore, to provide expert opinions with a sound 
scientific foundation in regard to the role of a drug in the death of 
an individual, it is recommended that, in addition to heart blood, a 
peripheral blood specimen and tissues be analyzed.
The analysis of tissue specimens is important for the estima-
tion of a “minimal administered dose” or body burden of a drug or 
poison. In order to calculate a minimum body burden, it is necessary 
to analyze as many different body tissues and fluids as possible to 
determine the concentrations of the drug present. The concentration 
of drug in each separate specimen is then multiplied by the total 
weight or volume of that particular tissue or fluid. In this manner, 
the total amount of drug in each different tissue or fluid is deter-
mined. The amounts of drug in each separate tissue and fluid are 
then added together to give the total body burden or minimal admin-
istered dose. This simple approach has often proven extremely 
effective in resolving legal medical issues. For example, lidocaine 
is commonly administered in 50- to 100-mg bolus injections as an 
antiarrhythmic agent for ventricular arrhythmia during resuscita-
tion efforts. Because of poor circulation and tissue perfusion dur-
ing arrhythmias, lidocaine is not well distributed in the body of 
the victim of a fatal heart attack. Postmortem bloods often exceed 
50 mg/L in such cases, whereas values for effective antiarrhythmic 
prophylaxis do not exceed 5 mg/L. Therefore, a blood lidocaine 
value of 50 mg/L may be an artifact of resuscitation efforts or might 
represent a fatal overdose. Tissue distribution studies have resolved 
this issue in both accidental and homicidal poisoning with lidocaine 
(Poklis et al., 1984).
Postmortem toxicology results are often used to corroborate 
investigative findings. Improved methods for determining drug expo-
sure, with respect to longer timeframes, are advantageous because 
drug concentrations in plasma, urine, and liver often reflect only the 
dosage taken within (at most) the last several days prior to sampling. 
Compared to traditional biological matrices, keratinized tissues such 
as hair and nails provide a longer window of detection for drugs and 
other compounds due to their slow growth and possible permanent 
retention of drugs. The presence of certain xenobiotics and their 
metabolites has been demonstrated in human hair or nails at times 
when plasma and urine drug concentrations are not measurable 
(Rollins et al., 1997; Garside, 2010), which can provide evidence of 
exposure to these agents weeks, months, or even years prior to death. 
It has been suggested that for some xenobiotics, hair also serves to 
characterize the drug exposure over time. For example, the analysis 
of sequential sections of hair provides a reliable correlation with the 
pattern of arsenic exposure (Smith, 1964). Significant increases in 
the arsenic content of the root and the first 5 mm of the hair occur 
within hours after the ingestion of arsenic. The germinal cells are in 
relatively close equilibrium with circulating arsenic; thus, as arsenic 
concentrations in blood rise or fall, so does arsenic deposition in 
growing hair. Normal arsenic content in hair varies with nutritional, 
environmental, and physiological factors; however, the maximum 
upper limit of normal deposition with a 99% confidence limit in 
persons not exposed to arsenic is 5 mg/kg (Shapiro, 1967). Hair 
grows at a rate of approximately 1.06 cm per month (LeBeau et al., 
2011). Therefore, analysis of 1.0-cm segments provides a monthly 
pattern of exposure (Fig. 32-6). Such analyses can be performed in 
cases of homicidal poisoning to demonstrate that increases in arsenic 
deposition in the victim’s hair correlate with times when a poisoner 
had an opportunity to administer the poison. Continuously elevated 
hair arsenic values indicate chronic rather than acute poisoning as 
the cause of death. A similar approach using segmental analysis of 
hair has been used to determine patterns of exposure for various 
drugs and their metabolites; however, care must be taken in order 
to account for the potential effects of haircuts, chemical treatments, 
and other environmental insults that may have occurred to the hair 
during the timeframe of interest.
An extension of forensic toxicology is the analysis of impuri-
ties of illicit drug synthesis in biological specimens. Many drugs 
of abuse, particularly methamphetamine, are illicitly manufactured 
0
0
Proximal
Mar
Feb
Jan
1986
1985
Dec
Nov
Oct
Sept
Aug
Hair length (cm)
Distal
1
2
3
4
5
6
50
100
150
200
Hair arsenic, mg/kg
250
Figure 32-6.   Results of neutron activation analysis for arsenic in sequen-
tial sections of hair, demonstrating chronic arsenic poisoning. Increased 
exposure in the first two sections is consistent with fatal events. Lower val-
ues in section three are consistent with 2 weeks of hospitalization. (Data 
from Poklis and Saady [1990].)

Analytical and Forensic Toxicology
Chapter 32
1521
in clandestine laboratories. There are several popular methods of 
methamphetamine synthesis; when these are applied in clandestine 
laboratories, side reactions or incomplete conversion of the reac-
tants yield an impure mixture of methamphetamine and synthetic 
impurities. These impurities can be characteristic of a particular 
synthetic method, and their detection in biological specimens can 
indicate the use of an illicitly produced drug that is not a legal phar-
maceutical product, suggest the synthetic method that was used to 
produce the drug, point to a possible common source of illicit pro-
duction, and provide a link between manufacturers, dealers, and 
users. An example of impurity analysis was the detection of metab-
olites of α-benzyl-N-methylphenethylamine (BNMPA) in the urine 
of abusers of methamphetamine (Moore et al., 1996b) and in a case 
of fatal drug overdose involving methamphetamine (Moore et al., 
1996a). BNMPA is an impurity arising from the synthesis of meth-
amphetamine via the Leukart reaction using phenyl-2-propanone 
(P2P) synthesized from phenylacetic acid. Clandestine laboratories 
often must synthesize the P2P starting material, as its sale and dis-
tribution is regulated by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration.
As discussed above, a wide range of tissues are available for 
the purpose of identifying xenobiotics in postmortem specimens. In 
contrast, for many years, traditional specimens used for the detec-
tion and quantification of substances in antemortem biological 
specimens have been limited to whole blood, plasma, serum, and 
urine, largely due to their ease of collection and accessibility in the 
living. More recently, the advent of improved analytical techniques 
with greater sensitivity and selectivity, including GC-MS/MS and 
LC-MS/MS, have expanded the array of biological specimens in 
which substances can be detected. These specimens include oral 
fluid (saliva), sweat, meconium, amniotic fluid, breast milk, and 
semen among others. In oral fluid, for example, the pharmacokinet-
ics of many drugs and metabolites is closely aligned to that of blood 
pharmacokinetics, and thus can serve as an alternative matrix for 
illicit and therapeutic drug detection (Bosker and Huestis, 2009; 
Spiehler and Cooper, 2010), as well as detection of exposure to 
environmental toxicants and pesticides (Lanaro et al., 2011; Yang 
et al., 2011).
CRIMINAL POISONING OF THE LIVING
Over the past few decades, forensic toxicologists have become 
more involved in the analysis of specimens obtained from living 
victims of criminal poisonings. Generally, this increase in testing is 
a result of two types of cases: (1) administration of drugs to inca-
pacitate victims of kidnapping, robbery, or sexual assault and (2) 
poisoning as a form of child abuse.
For centuries, those severely intoxicated from alcohol often 
became victims of kidnapping, robbery, or sexual assault. The kid-
napping of drunks in seaports was a common way of obtaining sail-
ors for long commercial voyages such as those involved in whaling. 
Late in the 19th century, the mixing of the powerful hypnotic chlo-
ral hydrate with alcohol produced the legendary “Mickey Finn.” 
While alcohol is still often a primary factor in cases of alleged 
sexual assault, common drugs of abuse or other psychoactive drugs 
are often involved (Table 32-3). Of particular concern are the many 
potent inductive agents medically administered prior to general 
anesthesia. Many of these drugs, such as benzodiazepines and 
phenothiazines, are available today through illicit sources or legal 
purchase in foreign countries. When administered surreptitiously, 
they cause sedation and incapacitate the victim while also produc-
ing amnesia in the victim as to the events while drugged, without 
causing severe central nervous system depression. These cases often 
present a difficult analytical challenge to the toxicologist. Usually, 
the victim does not bring forth an allegation of assault until 24 hours 
to several days after the attack. Thus, the intoxicating drug may 
have been largely eliminated or extensively metabolized such that 
extremely low concentrations of drug or metabolites are present 
in the victim’s blood, urine, and/or hair specimens. Sophisticated, 
highly sensitive analytical methods such as GC-MS or LC-MS 
may be required to accurately identify drugs in such specimens. 
To provide guidance in the choice of analytical approaches to such 
cases, recommendations for the toxicological investigation of drug-
facilitated crimes including sexual assaults have been formulated 
(LeBeau et al., 1999; Society of Forensic Toxicologists).
Poisoning as a form of child abuse involves the deliberate 
administration of toxic or injurious substances to a child, usually by 
a parent or other caregiver. The victims of such poisonings range in 
age from a few months to the teens. Common agents used to inten-
tionally poison children have included syrup of ipecac, table salt, 
laxatives, diuretics, antidepressants, sedative-hypnotics, and narcot-
ics (Yin, 2010; American Association of Poison Control Centers, 
2011; Oral et al., 2011). The motivation for such heinous behavior 
is in the province of psychiatry, not toxicology. However, toxicolo-
gists must have some understanding of the nature of these poison-
ings to aid in the investigation of such cases. In some instances, it is 
a form of child battering committed by persons with low tolerance 
to the child’s upsetting behaviors. The poison may be given to an 
infant to stop its crying or be force-fed to older children as a form 
of punishment. Such behavior is characteristic of persons with a 
cultural background where violence toward children is common 
or who have severe personality disorders or other mental illnesses. 
“Munchausen syndrome by proxy” is another form of child poison-
ing (Murray, 1997). The term Munchausen syndrome (MS) is used 
to describe patients who seek admission to hospitals with appar-
ent illness along with plausible, dramatic, albeit fictitious medical 
histories. Such people seek medical treatment solely to assume the 
role of a patient and receive the attention derived from this decep-
tion. “MS by proxy” refers to the situation in which an individual, 
usually a parent, presents not himself or herself but a child with 
Table 32-3  
Distribution of Drugs of Abuse Encountered Urine 
Specimens in 1179 Cases of Alleged Sexual Assault*
RANK
DRUG/DRUG GROUP
INCIDENCE
1
No drugs found
468
2
Ethanol
451
3
Cannabinoids
218
4
Benzoylecgonine (cocaine 
metabolite)
97
5
Benzodiazepines
97
6
Amphetamines
51
7
Gamma-hydroxybutyrate 
(GHB)
48
8
Opiates
25
9
Propoxyphene
17
10
Barbiturates
12
*Thirty-five percent of the drug-positive specimens were positive for 
more than one drug.
SOURCE: Data from ElSohly and Salamone (1999).

1522
Applications of Toxicology
Unit VII
a fictitious illness often induced by physical or chemical means. 
The purpose of the poisoning is not to kill the child but to induce 
signs and symptoms of illness that will assure medical attention. 
Thereby, the parent as caregiver gains the craved attention. Given 
a fictitious case history and the obvious illness of the child, these 
cases are almost always and understandably misdiagnosed. Often, 
the child may be chronically poisoned at home and in the hospital 
for as long as a year before suspicion leads to the collection of 
specimens for extensive toxicological testing. Although the parent 
may not have intended such an outcome, some children have died 
from fatal poisoning in these situations. As in the case of sexual 
assault, sophisticated MS testing methods may be required to detect 
such chemicals as emetine and cephaeline, the emetic alkaloids in 
syrup of ipecac. Testing in these cases is best performed in a labora-
tory with forensic experience, as positive drug findings will usually 
result in some form of legal proceeding.
FORENSIC DRUG TESTING
Concerns regarding the potentially adverse consequences of sub-
stance abuse for the individual, the workplace, and society have 
led to widespread urine analysis for controlled or illicit drugs (Gust 
and Walsh, 1989). Currently, such testing is conducted routinely by 
the military services, regulated transportation and nuclear indus-
tries, many federal and state agencies, public utilities, federal and 
state criminal justice systems, and numerous private businesses and 
industries. Significant ethical and legal ramifications are associated 
with such testing. Those having positive test results may not receive 
employment, be dismissed from a job, be court-martialed, or suffer 
a damaged reputation.
To assure the integrity of workplace urine testing, two cer-
tification programs currently accredit forensic urine-testing labo-
ratories. Laboratories conducting testing of federal employees 
are required to be certified under the Department of Health and 
Human Services (HHS) Mandatory Guidelines for Workplace Drug 
Testing as published in the April 11, 1988, Federal Register, which 
has been periodically revised; the latest revision was published in 
the January 23, 2017, Federal Register where HHS allowed collec-
tion of an alternative specimen such as oral fluid (Department of 
Health and Human Services, 1988, 2017). The College of American 
Pathologists (CAP) also conducts a certification program for urine 
drug testing laboratories. The federal program regulates the process 
from specimen collection through testing to the reporting of results, 
whereas the CAP program allows flexibility in the construction of 
programs servicing a broad range of clients. Both programs involve 
proficiency testing and periodic on-site inspection of laboratories.
Forensic drug testing differs from other areas of forensic toxi-
cology in which urine or an alternative specimen is the only speci-
men analyzed and testing is performed for a limited number of drugs 
and metabolites. While urine remains as the most prevalent biologi-
cal matrix for forensic drug testing, the popularity of oral fluid as an 
alternative matrix is increasing because the collection is more con-
venient and less invasive (Tsanaclis et al., 2012). Under the federal 
certification program, analyses are performed for a limited num-
ber of classes or drugs of abuse (Table 32-4). While HHS-certified 
laboratories may typically analyze hundreds to thousands of urine 
specimens daily, only a relatively small number of those speci-
mens are positive for drugs. To handle this large workload, initial 
testing is performed by immunoassays on rapid, high-throughput 
chemistry analyzers. A confirmation analysis in HHS-certified labo-
ratories is performed by GC-MS and LC-MS/MS.
Proper forensic drug testing is a challenge to good laboratory 
management. As with all forensic activities, every aspect of the 
laboratory operation must be thoroughly documented—specimen 
collection, chain of custody, quality control procedures, method 
validation, testing, qualifications of personnel, and the reporting of 
results. The laboratory facility must be constructed and operated to 
assure total security of specimens and documents. Confidentiality 
of all testing results is paramount; only specifically authorized 
persons should receive the results. The presence of a controlled or 
illicit drug in a single random urine specimen is generally accepted 
as proof of recent or past substance abuse. However, positive urine 
drug findings are only evidence that, at some time before the col-
lection of the sample, the individual was administered the drug, 
self-administered it, or was exposed to it. Positive urine tests do not 
prove impairment from drug abuse or addiction.
Forensic drug test results are reported only as positive or nega-
tive for the drugs sought. Cutoff values are established for both 
Table 32-4  
Forensic Urine Drug Testing Analytes and Cutoff 
Concentrations
ANALYTE
CONCENTRATION (ng/mL)
INITIAL TEST
CONFIRMATORY 
TEST
Marijuana metabolites
50
∆-9-tetrahydrocannabinol-
9-carboxylic acid
–
15
Cocaine metabolite
150
Benzoylecgonine
–
100
Opiates
2000
Morphine
–
2000
Codeine
–
2000
Hydrocodone/
hydromorphone
300
Hydrocodone
–
100
Hydromorphone
–
100
Oxycodone/oxymorphone
100
Oxycodone
–
100
Oxymorphone
–
100
6-Acetylmorphine (heroin 
metabolite)
10
10
Phencyclidine
25
25
Amphetamines
500
Amphetamine
–
250
Methamphetamine
–
250
MDMA/MDA
500
MDMA
–
250
MDA
–
250
SOURCE: Department of Health and Human Services: Manda-
tory guidelines for federal workplace drug testing programs. Fed 
Reg. 53(69), 11983, April 11, 1988; revised: Fed Reg. 82(13), 
7920, October 1, 2017. https://www.federalregister.gov/docu-
ments/2017/01/23/2017-00979/mandatory-guidelines-for-federal-
workplace-drug-testing-programs.

Analytical and Forensic Toxicology
Chapter 32
1523
the initial and confirmation assays (Table 32-4). The cutoff value 
is a concentration at or above which the assay is administratively 
considered positive. Below the cutoff value, the assay is reported 
to be negative for that drug or drug class. Obviously, drugs may be 
present below the cutoff concentration. However, the use of cutoff 
values allows uniformity in the drug testing and reporting of results. 
All test reports indicate the drug tested and its cutoff value. The 
testing laboratories must be thoroughly familiar with all regulatory 
and analytical issues related to urine testing and devise strategies to 
resolve uncertainties.
Many individuals who are subject to regulated urine testing 
have devised techniques to mask their drug use either by physi-
ological means such as the ingestion of diuretics or by attempting 
to adulterate the specimen directly with bleach, vinegar, or other 
products that interfere with the initial immunoassay tests (Warren, 
1989; George and Braithwaite, 1996; Ferslew et al., 2003; Paul, 
2004; Burrows et al., 2005). Thus, specimens are routinely tested 
for adulteration by checking urinary pH, creatinine, and specific 
gravity, nitrates, chromates, and noting any unusual color or smell. 
A mini-industry has developed to sell various products that are 
alleged to “beat the drug test.” These products contain chemicals 
that, when added to a urine specimen, interfere with either the ini-
tial or confirmatory drug test (Dasgupta, 2007; Jaffee et al., 2007; 
Larson et al., 2008). For example, several of these products con-
tain glutaraldehyde, which will react with the nitrogen atoms of 
the antibody proteins of the immunoassay screening test, thereby 
cross-linking the antibodies and inactivating the assay. However, 
this disruption of the test is so complete that the immunoassay ana-
lyzer records almost no signal, thus indicating possible adulteration 
of the specimen. Another adulterant, for the marijuana metabolite 
urine test, contains sodium nitrite. In acidic urine, the nitrite salt is 
converted to nitrous acid that then converts the marijuana metabo-
lites to nitroso derivatives, rendering them undetectable by routine 
GC-MS analysis (Lewis et al., 1999). Often, the pH of the urine is 
insufficiently acidic for complete nitroso conversion of the tetrahy-
drocannabinol (THC) metabolite, THC-carboxylic acid. Thus, the 
urine will screen positive by the initial immunoassay. When urine 
is acidified to extract the THC acid metabolite for MS confirma-
tion testing, the metabolite is completely oxidized and undetectable. 
However, the deuterated THC–carboxylic acid added to the sample 
as the internal standard of the confirmation test is also completely 
destroyed. Failure to detect the internal standard readily alerts the 
analyst that an oxidant adulterant had been added to the urine. In 
such cases, a quantitative test for nitrite is performed. Nitrite may be 
present in urine from numerous internal and external sources such 
as foods, drugs, pathological conditions, and infection from nitrate-
reducing microorganisms. However, none of these sources produces 
urinary nitrite concentrations that even begin to approach those 
obtained by the addition of adulterant amounts of potassium nitrite 
equal to 1000 mg/L (Urey et al., 1998). Most chemical adulterants 
can be detected in urine by specific colorimetric tests that can be 
readily adapted to high-volume auto-analyzers (Table 32-5). Thus, 
the laboratories now routinely test not only for drugs of abuse but 
also for a wide variety of chemical adulterants. In most instances, 
a positive test result for adulteration has a consequence similar to 
a positive drug test.
There may be valid reasons other than substance abuse for pos-
itive drug findings, such as therapeutic use of controlled substances, 
inadvertent intake of drugs via food, and passive inhalation. For 
example, the seed of Papaver somniferum, poppy seed, is a com-
mon ingredient in many pastries and breads. Depending on their 
botanical source, poppy seeds may contain significant amounts of 
morphine. Several studies have demonstrated that the ingestion of 
certain poppy-seed foods results in the urinary excretion of readily 
detectable concentrations of morphine (ElSohly and Jones, 1989). 
Morphine is a major urinary metabolite of heroin. Therefore, to 
readily differentiate heroin abuse from poppy-seed ingestion, analy-
sis may be performed for 6-acetylmorphine, a unique heroin metab-
olite (Fehn and Megges, 1985).
Even over-the-counter medications may present poten-
tial problems for laboratories conducting urine drug testing. 
Methamphetamine may occur as a racemic mixture of d- and 
l-optical isomers. d-Methamphetamine, a Schedule II controlled 
substance, is a potent central nervous system stimulant subject 
to illicit drug abuse, while l-methamphetamine (l-desoxyephed-
rine) is an alpha-adrenergic stimulant available in over-the-coun-
ter Vicks® inhalers as a nasal decongestant. Cross-reactivity of 
l-­desoxyephedrine with the initial immunoassay screening test may 
occur after excessive use of the Vicks inhaler (Poklis and Moore, 
1995). Additionally, the most popular conformational GC-MS prod-
ucts for amphetamines are achiral. Therefore, if such analyses are 
performed, a “false-positive” result for d-methamphetamine may be 
reported. This dilemma is easily resolved if confirmation testing is 
done with a chiral GC-MS procedure, which can readily resolve the 
stereoisomers of methamphetamine (Fitzgerald et al., 1988).
HUMAN PERFORMANCE TESTING
Forensic toxicology activities also include the determination of the 
presence of ethanol and other drugs and chemicals in blood, breath, 
or other specimens and the evaluation of their role in modifying 
human performance and behavior. The most common application 
of human performance testing is to determine impairment while 
driving under the influence of ethanol (DUI) or drugs (DUID). 
Although operation of a motor vehicle is a common experience to 
most people, few appreciate the complexity of mental and physical 
functioning involved. A driver must simultaneously coordinate fine 
motor skills in tracking the road course and applying pressure to 
accelerator or brake—with visual attention immediately in front, 
to the horizon, and to the periphery of the vehicle—while continu-
ously judging distance, speed, and appropriateness of response to 
signals, traffic, and unexpected events. The threshold blood alco-
hol concentration (BAC) for diminished driving performance of 
these complex functions in many individuals is as low as 0.04 g/dL, 
the equivalent of ingestion of two beers within an hour’s time to 
Table 32-5  
Urine Adulterants Detected by Chemical Test
ADULTERANT
DETECTION METHOD
Acids, baking soda
pH
Bleach
Smell, color test
Detergents, diuretics, salt
Specific gravity
Diuretics
Creatinine, specific gravity
Glutaraldehyde
Color test, gas 
chromatography
Nitrite
Color test
Pyridinium chlorochromate
Color test, atomic absorption 
spectrophotometry 
(chromate), gas 
chromatography (pyridine)

1524
Applications of Toxicology
Unit VII
an average size person. The statutory definition of DUI in all 50 
states is a BAC of 0.08 g/dL; the state of Utah recently passed the 
law that lowers the legal threshold to 0.05 g/dL, which will take 
effect in December 2018 (Utah Department of Public Safety, n.d.). 
These concentrations are consistent with diminished performance 
of complex driving skills in the vast majority of individuals. Over 
the past half century, an enormous amount of data has been devel-
oped correlating blood ethanol concentrations with intellectual and 
physiological impairment, particularly of the skills associated with 
the proper operation of motor vehicles. Numerous studies have 
demonstrated a direct relationship between an increased BAC in 
drivers and an increased risk of involvement in vehicular acci-
dents (Council on Scientific Affairs, 1986). For example, alcohol-
impaired driving fatalities accounted for 28% of all motor vehicle 
traffic fatalities in the United States in 2016 (National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration, 2017).
During the past decade, there has been growing concern about 
the deleterious effects of drugs other than ethanol on driving perfor-
mance. Several studies have demonstrated a relatively high occur-
rence of drugs in impaired or fatally injured drivers (White et al., 
1981; Mason and McBay, 1984; Van der Linden et al., 2013). These 
studies tend to report that the highest drug-use accident rates are 
associated with the use of such illicit or controlled drugs as cocaine, 
benzodiazepines, marijuana, and phencyclidine. However, most 
studies test for only a few drugs or drug classes, and the repeated 
reporting of the same drugs may be a function of limited testing. 
Before “driving under the influence of drugs” testing is as readily 
accepted by the courts as ethanol testing, many legal and scien-
tific problems concerning drug concentrations and driving impair-
ment must be resolved (Consensus Report, 1985). The ability of 
analytical methodology to routinely quantify minute concentrations 
of drug in blood must be established. Also, drug-induced driving 
impairment at specific blood concentrations in controlled tests and/
or actual highway experience must be demonstrated.
COURTROOM TESTIMONY
The forensic toxicologist often is called upon to testify in legal 
proceedings. As a general rule of evidence, a witness may testify 
only to facts known to him or her. The witness may offer opinions 
solely on the basis of what he or she has observed (Moenssens et 
al., 1973). Such a witness is called a “lay witness.” In contrast, the 
toxicologist is referred to as an “expert witness.” A court recognizes 
a witness as an expert if that witness possesses knowledge or expe-
rience in a subject that is beyond the range of ordinary or common 
knowledge or observation. An expert witness may provide two types 
of testimony: objective testimony and “opinion.” Objective testi-
mony by a toxicologist usually involves a description of his or her 
analytical methods and findings. When a toxicologist testifies as to 
the interpretation of his or her analytical results or those of others, 
that toxicologist is offering an “opinion.” Lay witnesses cannot offer 
such opinion testimony, as it exceeds their ordinary experience.
Before a court permits opinion testimony, the witness must be 
“qualified” as an expert in his or her particular field. In qualifying 
someone as an expert witness, the court considers the witness’s edu-
cation, on-the-job training, work experience, teaching or academic 
appointments, and professional memberships and publications as 
well as the acceptance of the witness as an expert by other courts. 
Qualification of a witness takes place in front of the jury members, 
who consider the expert’s qualifications in determining how much 
weight to give to his or her opinions during their deliberations.
Whether a toxicologist appears in criminal or civil court, work-
ers’ compensation, or parole hearings, the procedure for testifying 
is the same: direct examination, cross-examination, and redirect 
examination. The attorney who has summoned the witness to testify 
conducts direct examination. Testimony is presented in a question-
and-answer format. The witness is asked a series of questions that 
allow him or her to present all facts or opinions relevant to the suc-
cessful presentation of the attorney’s case. During direct examina-
tion, an expert witness has the opportunity to explain to the jury the 
scientific bases of his or her opinions. Regardless of which side has 
called the toxicologist to court, the toxicologist should testify with 
scientific objectivity. Bias toward his or her client and prejudgments 
should be avoided. An expert witness is called to provide informed 
assistance to the jury. The jury, not the expert witness, determines 
the guilt or innocence of the defendant.
After direct testimony, the opposing attorney questions the 
expert. During this cross-examination, the witness is challenged as 
to his or her findings and/or opinions. The toxicologist will be asked 
to defend his or her analytical methods, results, and opinions. The 
opposing attorney may imply that the expert’s testimony is biased 
because of financial compensation, association with an agency 
involved in the litigation, or personal feelings regarding the case. 
The best way to prepare for such challenges before testimony is to 
anticipate the questions the opposing attorney may ask.
After cross-examination, the attorney who called the witness 
may ask additional questions to clarify any issues raised during 
cross-examination. This allows the expert to explain apparent dis-
crepancies in his or her testimony raised by the opposing attorney. 
Often, an expert witness is asked to answer a special type of ques-
tion, the “hypothetical question.” A hypothetical question contains 
only facts that have been presented in evidence. The expert is then 
asked for his or her conclusion or opinion based solely on this hypo-
thetical situation. This type of question serves as a means by which 
appropriate facts leading to the expert’s opinion are identified. 
These questions are extremely long and convoluted. The witness 
should be sure he or she understands all the facts and implications 
in the question. Like all questions, this type should be answered as 
objectively as possible.
ROLE IN CLINICAL TOXICOLOGY
Analytical toxicology in a clinical setting plays a role very similar 
to its role in forensic toxicology. As an aid in the diagnosis and 
treatment of toxic incidents, as well as in monitoring the effec-
tiveness of treatment regimens, it is useful to clearly identify the 
nature of the toxic exposure and measure the amount of the toxic 
substance that has been absorbed. Frequently, this information, 
together with the clinical state of the patient, permits a clinician to 
relate the signs and symptoms observed to the anticipated effects of 
the toxic agent. This may permit a clinical judgment as to whether 
the treatment must be vigorous and aggressive or whether simple 
observation and symptomatic treatment of the patient are sufficient.
A cardinal rule in the treatment of poisoning cases is to remove 
any unabsorbed material, limit the absorption of additional poison, 
and hasten its elimination. The clinical toxicology laboratory serves 
an additional purpose in this phase of the treatment by monitoring 
the amount of the chemical remaining in circulation or measuring 
what is excreted. In addition, the laboratory can provide the data 
needed to permit estimations of the total dosage or the effectiveness 
of treatment by changes in known pharmacokinetic parameters of 
the drug or other chemical ingested.
Although the instrumentation and the methodology used in 
a clinical toxicology laboratory are similar to those utilized by a 
forensic toxicologist, a major difference between these two appli-
cations is responsiveness. In emergency toxicology testing, results

Analytical and Forensic Toxicology
Chapter 32
1525
must be communicated to the clinician within hours to be meaning-
ful for therapy. A forensic toxicologist may carefully choose the 
best method for a particular test and conduct replicate procedures 
to assure maximum accuracy. A clinical laboratory cannot afford 
this luxury and may sacrifice accuracy for a rapid turnaround time. 
Additionally, because it is impossible to predict when toxicological 
emergencies will occur, a clinical laboratory must provide rapid 
testing 24 hours a day, every day of the year.
Primary examples of the usefulness of emergency toxicology 
testing are the rapid quantitative determination of acetaminophen, 
salicylate, alcohols, and glycol serum concentrations in instances 
of suspected overdose. Acetaminophen serum values related to the 
time after ingestion (see Chap. 33) not only indicate an overdose, 
but provide a prognosis for possible delayed hepatotoxicity and the 
need to continue administration of N-acetylcysteine antidote. In 
addition, continuous monitoring of serum values permits an accu-
rate pharmacokinetic calculation of the ingested dose (Melethil 
et al., 1981). Similarly, salicylate serum values related to the time 
after ingestion may indicate an overdose, providing a prognosis for 
possible delayed severe metabolic acidosis and the need for lifesav-
ing dialysis treatment. Continuous monitoring of serum salicylate 
values permits an accurate assessment of the efficacy of dialysis.
Ethanol is the most common chemical encountered in emer-
gency toxicology. Although relatively few fatal intoxications occur 
with ethanol alone, serum values are important in the assessment of 
behavioral, physiologic, and neurological function, particularly in 
trauma cases where the patient is unable to communicate and sur-
gery with the administration of anesthetic or analgesic drugs is indi-
cated. Intoxications from accidental or deliberate ingestion of other 
alcohols or glycols—such as methanol from windshield deicer or 
paint thinner, isopropanol from rubbing alcohol, and ethylene glycol 
from antifreeze—are often encountered in emergency departments. 
Following ingestion of methanol or ethylene glycol, patients often 
present with similar neurological symptoms and severe metabolic 
acidosis due to the formation of toxic aldehyde and acid metabo-
lites. A rapid quantitative serum determination for these intoxicants 
will indicate the severity of intoxication and the possible need for 
dialysis therapy. Alcohol infusion, in order to saturate the enzyme 
alcohol dehydrogenase, blocks the conversion of methanol and eth-
ylene glycol to their toxic metabolites. Continuous monitoring of 
serum values not only permits an assessment of the clearance of 
the intoxicant by dialysis, but also assures a proper infusion rate of 
alcohol for effective antidotal concentrations (Fig. 32-7). To provide 
effective service to the emergency department, laboratories should 
have available chromatographic methods for the rapid separation 
and detection of alcohols and glycols (Edinboro et al., 1993).
The utilization of the analytical capabilities of a clinical toxicol-
ogy laboratory has increased enormously in recent years. Typically, 
the laboratory performs testing not only for the emergency depart-
ment but also for a wide variety of other medical departments, as 
drugs and toxic chemicals may be a consideration in diagnosis. 
Urine is analyzed from substance abuse treatment facilities to moni-
tor the administration of methadone or other therapeutic agents and/
or to assure that patients do not continue to abuse drugs. Similarly, 
psychiatrists, neurologists, and physicians treating patients for 
chronic pain need to know whether patients are self-administering 
drugs before such patients undergo psychiatric or neurological 
examinations. Analysis for drugs of abuse in meconium and urine 
obtained from neonates is used to corroborate the diagnosis of with-
drawal symptoms in newborns and document fetal exposure to con-
trolled substances. Toxic metal determinations, such as blood lead 
concentration, are often performed to assess possible toxic metal 
exposure or severity of toxicity. Analysis of heavy metals in 24-hour 
urine specimens is often used to rule out toxic metal exposure as a 
cause of symmetrical peripheral neuropathy prior to the diagnosis of 
neurological disorders such as Guillian–Barré syndrome. The clini-
cal toxicology laboratory may often perform unique diagnostic tests 
that require sophisticated analytical capabilities such as GC-MS 
and LC-MS analysis for organic acids and amino acids to detect 
inborn errors of metabolism in infants and children. Methods for 
the analysis of abnormal organic acids will also detect acidic drugs 
and other intoxicants such as salicylates, ethylene glycol, GHB, and 
valproic acid. Another such diagnostic test requiring sensitive chro-
matography is the timed metabolism of lidocaine to its monoethylg-
lycinexylidide (MEGX) metabolite (O’Neal and Poklis, 1996). The 
rate of this conversion is a sensitive indicator of hepatic dysfunction 
and is often used to assess hepatic viability in donor livers prior to 
transplantation. MEGX formation may also be useful in monitoring 
the severity of the histological condition of patients with chronic 
hepatitis and cirrhosis (Shiffman et al., 1994).
ROLE IN THERAPEUTIC MONITORING
Historically, the administration of drugs for long-term therapy was 
based largely on experience. A dosage amount was selected and 
administered at appropriate intervals based on what the clinician 
had learned was generally tolerated by most patients. If the drug 
seemed ineffective, the dose was increased; if toxicity developed, 
the dose was decreased or the frequency of dosing was altered. At 
times, a different dosage form might be substituted. Establishing 
an effective dosage regimen was particularly difficult in children 
and the elderly.
The factors responsible for individual variability in responses 
to drug therapy include the rate and extent of drug absorption, dis-
tribution, and binding in body tissues and fluids, rate of metabolism 
and excretion, pathological conditions, and interaction with other 
drugs (Blaschke et al., 1985). Monitoring of the plasma or serum 
concentration at regular intervals will detect deviations from the 
average serum concentration, which, in turn, may suggest that one 
or more of these variables need to be identified and corrected.
With multiple administrations of a given drug at regular 
intervals, plasma drug concentrations will gradually increase and 
eventually reach a plateau over the course of therapy. The plateau 
is referred to as a steady-state condition, whereas the amount of 
drug absorbed is in equilibrium to the amount of drug eliminated. 
Dosage regimes are calculated so that plasma drug concentrations 
during steady-state conditions are within the therapeutic range, and 
monitoring such conditions assures that an effective concentration 
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
Concentration, mg/L
0
5
10
15
20
Time postingestion, h
25
30
35
40
Ethylene glycol
Ethanol
Hemodialysis
*
*
*
Figure 32-7.   Serum ethylene glycol and ethanol concentrations monitored 
during dialysis and ethanol infusion therapy. (Data from the Toxicology 
Laboratory, Medical College of Virginia Hospital, Richmond, VA.)

1526
Applications of Toxicology
Unit VII
is present. For drugs that have a defined correlation between serum 
concentrations and undesired toxic effects, the lowest serum con-
centration immediately prior to dosing (trough) and the highest 
expected serum concentration (peak) are monitored to assure effi-
cacy and minimize toxicity.
Because the drug being administered is known, qualitative 
characterization of the analyte generally is not required. Quantitative 
accuracy is required, however. Frequently, the methodology applied 
is important, particularly in regard to its selectivity. For example, 
methods that measure the parent drug and its metabolites are not 
ideal unless the individual analytes can be quantified separately. 
Depending on the drug, metabolites may or may not be active to 
a different degree than the parent drug. The cardiac antiarrhyth-
mic drug procainamide is acetylated during metabolism to form 
N-acetylprocainamide (NAPA). This metabolite has antiarrhythmic 
activity of almost equal potency to that of the parent drug procain-
amide. There is bimodal genetic variation in the activity of the 
N-acetyltransferase for procainamide, so that, in “fast acetylators,” 
the concentration of NAPA in the serum may exceed that of the par-
ent drug. For optimal patient management, information should be 
available about the concentrations of both procainamide and NAPA 
in serum (Bigger and Hoffman, 1985).
Because absolute characterization of the analyte is not neces-
sary for many drugs, immunoassay procedures are commonly used. 
This is particularly true of drugs with extremely low serum concen-
trations, such as cardiac glycosides, and drugs that are difficult to 
extract because of a high degree of polarity, such as the aminoglyco-
side antibiotics. In these cases, serum can be conveniently assayed 
directly by using commercially available kits for immunoassays.
The chromatographic methods in which an appropriate internal 
standard is added are favored when more than one analyte is to be 
quantified or if metabolites with structures similar to those of the 
parent drugs must be distinguished. Because the nature of drugs is 
varied, many different analytical techniques may be applied, includ-
ing atomic absorption spectrophotometry for measuring lithium used 
to treat manic disorders. Virtually all the tools of the analyst may be 
used for specific applications of analytical toxicology. Drugs that are 
commonly monitored during therapy are presented in Table 32-6.
SUMMARY
The analytical techniques employed by forensic toxicologists have 
continued to expand in complexity and improve in reliability and 
sensitivity. Many new analytical tools have been applied to toxico-
logical problems in almost all areas of the field, and the technology 
continues to open new areas of research. Forensic toxicologists con-
tinue to be concerned about conducting unequivocal identification 
of toxic substances in such a manner that the results can withstand 
a legal challenge. The issues of substance abuse, designer drugs, 
increased potency of therapeutic agents, and widespread concern 
about pollution, and the safety and health of workers present chal-
lenges to the analyst’s knowledge, skills, and abilities. As these 
challenges are met, analytical toxicologists will continue to play 
a substantial role in the expansion of the discipline of toxicology.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Editor and Authors acknowledge the previous contributions of 
Randy Baselt and Robert Cravey (1st and 2nd ed), Irving Sunshine 
(3rd ed), R.V. Blanke and Alphonse Poklis, (4th ed), and Alphonse 
Poklis (5th to 7th ed).
REFERENCES
Aderjan R, Bahr H, Schmidt G. Investigation of cardiac glycoside levels 
in human postmortem blood and tissues determined by a special RIA 
procedure. Arch Toxicol. 1979;42:107–114.
American Association of Poison Control Centers. Drugs used in child mal-
treatment. Prescrire Int. 2011;20(120):236–237.
Andresen H, Aydin BE, Mueller A, Iwersen-Bergmann S. An overview of 
gamma-hydroxybutyric acid: pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, 
Table 32-6  
Drugs Commonly Indicated for Therapeutic Monitoring
Antiarrhythmics
 Digoxin
 Digitoxin
 Lidocaine
 Procainamide and N-acetylprocainamide
 Quinidine
Antibiotics
 Amikacin
 Chloramphenicol
 Gentamicin
 Tobramycin
 Vancomycin
Anticancer
 Methotrexate
Anticonvulsants
 Carbamazepine
 Gabapentin
 Lamotrigine
 Levetiracetam
 Phenobarbital
 Phenytoin
 Primidone
 Topiramate
 Valproic acid
 Zonisamide
Antidepressants
 Amitriptyline and nortriptyline
 Doxepin and nordoxepin
 Fluoxetine and norfluoxetine
 Impramine and desipramine
 Paroxetine
 Sertraline and desmethylsertraline
Antipsychotics
 Clozapine
 Pimozide
Bronchodilators
 Caffeine
 Theophylline
Immunosuppressants
 Azathioprine
 Cyclosporine
 Mycophenolic acid
 Sirolimus
 Tacrolimus
Mood stabilizing
 Lithium

Analytical and Forensic Toxicology
Chapter 32
1527
toxic effects, addiction, analytical method, and interpretation of results. 
Drug Test Anal. 2011;3(9):660–668.
Apple FS. Postmortem tricyclic antidepressant concentrations: assessing 
cause of death using parent drug to metabolite ratio. J Anal Toxicol. 
1989;13:197–198.
Barroso M, Gallardo E, Vieira DN, López-Rivadulla M, Queiroz JA. Hair: 
a complementary source of bioanalytical information in forensic toxicol-
ogy. Bioanalysis. 2011;3(1):67–79.
Baselt RC. Disposition of Toxic Drugs and Chemicals in Man. 2nd ed. 
Davis, CA: Biomedical Publications; 1982:603–606.
Baumgartner A, Jones P, Baumgartner W. Detection of phencyclidine in 
hair. J Forensic Sci. 1981;26:576–581.
Baumgartner W, Jones P, Baumgartner W, Black C. Radioimmunoassay of 
hair for determining opiate-abuse histories. J Nucl Med. 1979;20:748–752.
Benko A. Toxicological analysis of amobarbital and glutethimide from 
bone tissue. J Forensic Sci. 1985;30:708–714.
Bévalot F, Gustin MP, Cartiser N, Le Meur C, Malicier D, Fanton L. 
Interpretation of drug concentrations in an alternative matrix: the case of 
meprobamate in vitreous humor. Int J Legal Med. 2011;25(3):463–468.
Bidny S, Gago K, Chung P, Albertyn D, Pasin D. Simultaneous screen-
ing and quantification of basic, neutral and acidic drugs in blood using 
UPLC-QTOF-MS. J Anal Toxicol. 2017;41:181–195.
Bigger JT Jr, Hoffman BF. Antiarrhythmic drugs. In: Gilman AG, Goodman 
LS, Rall TW, Murad F, eds. The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics. 
7th ed. New York: Macmillan; 1985:763.
Blanke RV. Quality assurance in drug-use testing. Clin Chem. 1987;33:41B–45B.
Blanke RV. Validation of the Purity of Standards. Irving, TX: Abbott 
Laboratories, Diagnostic Division; 1989.
Blaschke TF, Nies AS, Mamelock RD. Principles of therapeutics. In: 
Gilman AG, Goodman LS, Rall TW, Murad F, eds. The Pharmacological 
Basis of Therapeutics. 7th ed. New York: Macmillan; 1985:52.
Bosker WM, Huestis MA. Oral fluid testing for drugs of abuse. Clin Chem. 
2009;55(11):1910–1931.
Boumba VA, Ziavrou KS, Vougiouklakis T. Hair as a biological indicator of 
drug use, drug abuse or chronic exposure to environmental toxicants. Int 
J Toxicol. 2006;25(3):143–163.
Burrows DL, Nicolaides A, Rice PJ, Dufforc M, Johnson DA, Ferslew KE. 
Papain: a novel urine adulterant. J Anal Toxicol. 2005;29(5):275–295.
Cartiser N, Bévalot F, Fanton L, Gaillard Y, Guitton J. State-of-the-art of 
bone marrow analysis in forensic toxicology: a review. Int J Legal Med. 
2011;125(2):181–198.
Cawrse BM, Levine B, Jufer RA, et al. Distribution of methylone in four 
postmortem cases. J Anal Toxicol. 2012;36(6):434–439.
Chapuis E. Elements de Toxicologie, 1873, cited in Peterson F, Haines WS, 
Webster RW. Legal Medicine and Toxicology. 2nd ed. Vol 2. Philadelphia, 
PA: WB Saunders; 1923.
Coe JI. Postmortem chemistry update: emphasis on forensic applications. 
Am J Forensic Med Pathol. 1993;14:91–117.
Cone EJ, Buchwald WF, Darwin WD. Analytical controls in drug metabo-
lism studies: 11. Artifact formation during chloroform extraction of drugs 
and metabolites with amine substitutes. Drug Metab Dispos. 1982;10: 
561–567.
Consensus Report. Drug concentrations and driving impairment. JAMA. 
1985;254:2618–2621.
Coppola M, Mondola R. Synthetic cathinones: chemistry, pharmacology 
and toxicology of a new class of designer drugs of abuse marketed as 
“bath salts” or “plant food”. Toxicol Lett. 2012;211(2):144–149.
Council on Scientific Affairs. Alcohol and the driver. JAMA. 1986;255:522–527.
Couper FJ, McIntyre IM, Drummer OH. Detection of antidepressant and 
antipsychotic drugs in postmortem human scalp hair. J Forensic Sci. 
1995;40(1):87–90.
Cravey RH, Baselt RC. The science of forensic toxicology. In: Cravey 
RH, Baselt RC, eds. Introduction to Forensic Toxicology. Davis, CA: 
Biomedical Publications; 1981:3–6.
Dasgupta A. The effects of adulterants and selected ingested compounds on 
drugs-of-abuse testing in urine. Am J Clin Pathol. 2007;128(3):491–503.
Department of Health and Human Services, SAMHSA. Mandatory guide-
lines for federal workplace drug testing: final guidelines—notice. Fed 
Reg. 1988;53(69):11970–11989.
Department of Health and Human Services, SAMHSA. Mandatory 
guidelines for federal workplace drug testing programs. Fed Reg. 
2017;82(13):7920–7970.
Dinis-Oliveira RJ, Carvalho F, Duarte JA, et al. Collection of biological sam-
ples in forensic toxicology. Toxicol Mech Methods. 2010;20(7):363–414.
Dowling GP, McDonough ET, Bost RO. “Eve” and “ecstasy”: a report 
of five deaths associated with the use of MDEA and MDMA. JAMA. 
1987;257:1615–1617.
Drummer O. Drugs in bone and bone marrow. In: Jenkins A, ed. Drug 
Testing in Alternate Biological Specimens. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press; 
2010:131–136:chap 8.
Edinboro LE, Nanco CR, Soghoian DM, Poklis A. Determination of eth-
ylene glycol in serum utilizing direct injection on a wide-bore capillary 
column. Ther Drug Monit. 1993;15:220–223.
ElSohly MA, Jones AB. Morphine and codeine in biological fluids: 
approaches to source differentiation. Forensic Sci Rev. 1989;1:13–22.
ElSohly MA, Salamone SJ. Prevalence of drugs used in cases of alleged 
sexual assault. J Anal Toxicol. 1999;23(3):141–146.
Ernst MF, Poklis A, Gantner GE. Evaluation of medicolegal investiga-
tors’ suspicious and positive toxicology findings in 100 drug deaths. J 
Forensic Sci. 1982;27:61–65.
Evans WED. The Chemistry of Death. Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas; 
1963.
Fehn J, Megges G. Detection of O6-monoacetylmorphine in urine samples 
by GC-MS as evidence for heroin use. J Anal Toxicol. 1985;9:134–138.
Ferrara DS, Tedeschi L, Frison G, Brusini G. Quality control in toxicologi-
cal analysis. J Chromatogr B Biomed Sci Appl. 1998;713(1):227–243.
Ferslew KE, Nicolaides AN, Robert TA. Determination of chromate adul-
teration of human urine by automated colorimetric and capillary ion elec-
trophoretic analyses. J Anal Toxicol. 2003;27(1):36–39.
Fisher RS, Hine CH, Stetler CJ (Committee on Medicolegal Problems). 
Alcohol and the Impaired Driver: A Manual on the Medicolegal Aspects 
of Chemical Tests for Intoxication. Chicago, IL: American Medical 
Association; 1968.
Fitzgerald RL, Ramos JM, Bogema SC, Poklis A. Resolution of meth-
amphetamine stereoisomers in urine drug testing: urinary excretion of 
R(-)-methamphetamine following use of nasal inhalers. J Anal Toxicol. 
1988;12:255–259.
Flanagan RJ, Connally G, Evans JM. Analytical toxicology: guidelines for 
sample collection postmortem. Toxicol Rev. 2005;24(1):63–71.
Gagliano-Candela R, Aventaggiato L. The detection of toxic substances in 
entomological specimens. Int J Legal Med. 2001;114(405):19–203.
Gaillard Y, Pepin G. Screening and identification of drugs in human hair by high-
performance liquid chromatography-photodiode-array UV detection and 
mass gas chromatography-mass spectrometry after solid phase extraction. 
A powerful tool in forensic medicine. J Chromatogr. 1997;762:251–267.
Gallagher CT, Assi S, Stair JL, et al. 5,6-Methylenedioxy-2-aminoindane: 
from laboratory curiosity to “legal high”. Hum Psychopharmacol. 
2012;27(2):106–112.
Gallardo E, Queiroz JA. The role of alternative specimens in toxicological 
analysis. Biomed Chromatogr. 2008;22(8):795–821.
Garriott JS, Simmons LM, Poklis A, Mackell MS. Five cases of fatal 
overdose from caffeine-containing “look-alike” drugs. J Anal Toxicol. 
1985;9:141–143.
Garside D. Drugs-of-abuse in nails. In: Jenkins A, ed. Drug Testing in Alternate 
Biological Specimens. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press; 2010:43–63:chap 3.
George S, Braithwaite RA. The effect of glutaraldehyde adulteration of 
urine specimens on syva EMIT II drugs-of-abuse assays. J Anal Toxicol. 
1996;20(3):195–196.
Gettler AD. Poisoning and toxicology, forensic aspects: Part 1: historical 
aspects. Inform. 1977;9:3–7.
Goff ML, Brown WA, Omori AI, LaPointe DA. Preliminary observations of 
the effects of amitriptyline in decomposing tissue on the development of 
Parasarcophaga ruficornis (Diptera: Sarcophagidae) and implications of this 
effect to estimation of postmortem interval. J Forensic Sci. 1993;38:316–322.
Goldberger BA, Huestis MA, Wilkins DG. Commonly practiced qual-
ity control and quality assurance procedures for gas chromatography 
mass spectrometry analysis in forensic urine drug-testing laboratories. 
Forensic Sci Rev. 1997;9(2):59–80.

1528
Applications of Toxicology
Unit VII
Granger RH, Condie LW, Borzelleca JF. Effect of vehicle on the relative 
up-take of haloalkanes administered by gavage. Toxicologist. 1987;40:1.
Gust SW, Walsh JM. Drugs in the Workplace: Research and Evaluation 
Data. NIDA Research Monograph 91. Washington, DC: US Government 
Printing Office; 1989.
Hambidge KM. Increase in hair copper concentration with increasing dis-
tance from the scalp. Am J Clin Nutr. 1973;26:1212–1215.
Harkey MR, Henderson GL. Hair analysis for drugs of abuse. Adv Anal 
Toxicol. 1989;2:298–329.
Hawks RL, Chiang CN. Examples of specific drug assays. In: Hawks RL, 
Chiang CN, eds. Urine Testing for Drugs of Abuse. NIDA Research 
Monograph 73. Rockville, MD: US Department Health and Human 
Services, PHS, ADAMHA; 1986:93.
Henderson GL. Designer drugs: past history and future prospects. J Forensic 
Sci. 1988;33:569–575.
Hime GW, Hearn WL, Rose S, Cofino J. Analysis of cocaine and cocaeth-
ylene in blood and tissues by GC-NPD and GC-Ion Trap mass spectrom-
etry. J Anal Toxicol. 1991;15:241–245.
Inoue T, Seta S. Analysis of drugs in unconventional samples. Forensic Sci 
Rev. 1992;4:89–107.
Jacob P, Lewis ER, Elias-Baker BA, Jones RT. A pyrolysis product, anhy-
droecgonine methyl ester (methylecgonidine), is in the urine of cocaine 
smokers. J Anal Toxicol. 1990;14:353–357.
Jaffee WB, Trucco E, Levy S, Weiss RD. Is this urine really negative? A 
systematic review of tampering methods in urine drug screening and test-
ing. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2007;33(1):33–42.
Jones GR, Pounder DJ. Site-dependence of drug concentrations in postmor-
tem blood—a case study. J Anal Toxicol. 1987;11:186–190.
Kaempe B. Interfering compounds and artifacts in the identification of drugs 
in autopsy material. In: Stolman A, ed. Progress in Chemical Toxicology. 
Vol 4. New York: Academic Press; 1969:1–57.
Kintz P. Drug testing in hair. In: Jenkins A, ed. Drug Testing in Alternate 
Biological Specimens. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press; 2010:67–79:chap 4.
Kronstrand R, Brinkhagen L, Birath-Karlsson C, Roman M, Josefsson M. 
LC-QTOF-MS as a superior strategy to immunoassay for the compre-
hensive analysis of synthetic cannabinoids in urine. Anal Bioanal Chem. 
2014;406:3599–3609.
Kronstrand R, Druid H. Hair in postmortem toxicology. In: Kintz P, ed. 
Analytical and Practical Aspects of Drug Testing in Hair [International 
Science and Forensic Investigation]. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 
2006:223–240:chap 10.
Lanaro R, Costa JL, Fernandes LC, Resende RR, Tavares MF. Detection of 
paraquat in oral fluid, plasma, and urine by capillary electrophoresis for 
diagnosis of acute poisoning. J Anal Toxicol. 2011;35(5):274–279.
Larson SJ, Holler JM, Magluilo J Jr, Dunkley CS, Jacobs A. Papain adulter-
ation in 11-nor-delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol-9-carboxylic acid-positive 
urine samples. J Anal Toxicol. 2008;32(6):438–443.
LeBeau M, Andollo W, Hearn WL, et al. Recommendations for toxico-
logical investigation of drug-facilitated sexual assaults. J Forensic Sci. 
1999;44:227–230.
LeBeau M, Montgomery MA, Brewer JD. The role of variations in growth 
rate and sample collection on interpreting results of segmental analyses 
of hair. Forensic Sci Int. 2011;210(1–3):110–116.
Lewis SA, Lewis LA, Tuinman A. Potassium nitrite reaction with 11-nor-
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol-9-carboxylic acid in urine in relation to 
drug screening analysis. J Forensic Sci. 1999;44:951–955.
Marigo M, Tagliaro F, Poiesi C, Lafisca S, Neri C. Determination of mor-
phine in the hair of heroin addicts by high performance liquid chroma-
tography with fluorometric detection. J Anal Toxicol. 1986;10:158–161.
Martin BR, Lue LP, Boni JP. Pyrolysis and volatilization of cocaine. J Anal 
Toxicol. 1989;13:158–162.
Martz R. The identification of cocaine in hair by GC-MS and MS/MS. 
Crime Lab Dig. 1988;15:67–73.
Mason AP, McBay AJ. Ethanol, marijuana, and other drug use in 600 driv-
ers killed in single-vehicle crashes in North Carolina. J Forensic Sci. 
1984;29:987–1026.
McKenzie JM. Alteration of zinc and copper concentration of hair. Am J 
Clin Nutr. 1978;31:470–476.
Melethil S, Poklis A, Schwartz HS. Estimation of the amount of drug 
absorbed in acetaminophen poisoning: a case report. Vet Hum Toxicol. 
1981;23:421–423.
Mills RA, Millis CD, Dannan GA, et al. Studies on the structure-activity 
relationships for the metabolism of polybrominated biphenyls by rat liver 
microsomes. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1985;78:96–104.
Moenssens AA, Moses RE, Inbau FE. Scientific Evidence in Criminal 
Cases. Mineola, NY: Foundation Press; 1973.
Moore KA, Daniel J, Fierro M, et al. Detection of a metabolite of α-benzyl-
N-methylphenylamine synthesis in a mixed drug fatality involving meth-
amphetamine. J Forensic Sci. 1996a;41:524–526.
Moore KA, Ismaiel A, Poklis A. α-Benzyl-N-methylphenethylamine 
(BNMPA) an impurity of illicit methamphetamine synthesis: III. 
Detection of BNMPA and metabolites in urine from methamphetamine 
users. J Anal Toxicol. 1996b;20:89–92.
Muller C, Vogt S, Goerke R, Kordon A, Weinmann W. Identification of 
selected psychopharmaceuticals and their metabolites in hair by LC/ESI-
CID/MS and LC/MS/MS. Forensic Sci Int. 2000;113(1–3):415–421.
Murray JB. Munchausen syndrome/Munchausen syndrome by proxy. J 
Psychol. 1997;131:343–352.
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Traffic safety facts—2016 
data: alcohol-impaired driving, DOT HS 812 450, October 2017.
O’Donnell JK, Halpin J., Mattson CL, Goldberger BA, Gladden RM. Deaths 
involving fentanyl, fentanyl analogs, and U-47700—10 States, July-
December 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2017;66:1197–1202.
O’Neal CL, Poklis A. A sensitive HPLC assay for the simultaneous quan-
titation of lidocaine and its metabolites; monoethylglycinexylididie and 
glycinexylidide in serum. Clin Chem. 1996;42:330–331.
Oral R, Bayman L, Assad A, et al. Illicit drug exposure in patients evaluated for 
alleged child abuse and neglect. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2011;27(6):490–495.
Palmeri A, Pichini S, Pacifici R, Zuccaro P, Lopez A. Drugs in nails: physi-
ology, pharmacokinetics and forensic toxicology. Clin Pharmacokinet. 
2000;38(2):95–110.
Panel on Herbicides. Report on 2,4,5-T. In: A Report of the Panel on 
Herbicides of the President’s Science Advisory Committee. Executive 
Office of the President, Office of Science and Technology. Washington, 
DC: US Government Printing Office; 1971.
Pasin D, Cawley A, Bidny S, Fu S. Current applications of high-resolution 
mass spectrometry for the analysis of new psychoactive substances: a 
critical review. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2017; Epub ahead of print.
Paul BD. Six spectroscopic methods for detection of oxidants in urine: 
implication in differentiation of normal and adulterated urine. J Anal 
Toxicol. 2004;28(7):599–608.
Peters FT, Drummer OH, Musshoff F. Validation of new methods. Forensic 
Sci Int. 2007;165(2-3):216–224.
Petersen F, Haines WS, Webster RW. Legal Medicine and Toxicology. Vol 2. 
2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 1923.
Pien K, Laloup M, Pipeleers-Marichal M, et al. Toxicological data and 
growth characteristics of single post-feeding larvae and puparia of 
Calliphora vicina (Diptera: Calliphoridae) obtained from a controlled 
nordiazepam study. Int J Legal Med. 2004;118(4):190–193.
Poklis A. Pentazocine/tripelennamine (T’s and blues) abuse: a five year 
survey of St. Louis, Missouri. Drug Alcohol Depend. 1982;10:257–267.
Poklis A, MacKell MA. Toxicological findings in deaths due to pentazo-
cine: a report of two cases. Forensic Sci Int. 1982;20:89–95.
Poklis A, Mackell MA, Graham M. Disposition of cocaine in a fatal poison-
ing in man. J Anal Toxicol. 1985;9:227–229.
Poklis A, Mackell MA, Tucker EF. Tissue distribution of lidocaine after 
fatal accidental injection. J Forensic Sci. 1984;29:1229–1236.
Poklis A, Moore KA. Response of EMIT amphetamine immunoassays to 
urinary desoxyephedrine following Vicks inhaler use. Ther Drug Monit. 
1995;17:89–94.
Poklis A, Saady JJ. Arsenic poisoning: acute or chronic? Suicide or murder? 
Am J Forensic Med Pathol. 1990;11:226–232.
Pounder DJ. Forensic entomo-toxicology. J Forensic Sci Soc. 1991;31: 
469–472.
Pragst F, Balikova MA. State of the art in hair analysis for detection of drug 
and alcohol abuse. Clin Chim Acta. 2006;370(1–2):17–49.

Analytical and Forensic Toxicology
Chapter 32
1529
Pragst F, Rothe M, Hunger J, Thor S. Structural and concentration effects 
on the deposition of tricyclic antidepressants in human hair. Forensic Sci 
Int. 1997;84(1–3):225–236.
Price LM, Poklis A, Johnson DE. Fatal acetaminophen poisoning with 
evidence of subendocardial necrosis of the heart. J Forensic Sci. 
1991;36:930–935.
Prosser JM, Nelson LS. The toxicology of bath salts: a review of synthetic 
cathinones. J Med Toxicol. 2012;8(1):33–42.
Prouty BS, Anderson WH. The forensic science implications of site and 
temporal influences on postmortem blood-drug concentrations. J 
Forensic Sci. 1990;35:243–270.
Puschel K, Thomasch P, Arnold W. Opiate levels in hair. Forensic Sci Int. 
1983;21:181–186.
Rollins DE, Wilkins DG, Gygi SP, Slawson MH, Nagasawa PR. Testing for 
drugs of abuse in hair—experimental observations and indications for 
future research. Forensic Sci Rev. 1997;9:23–25.
Rosenbaum CD, Carreiro SP, Babu KM. Here today, gone tomorrow . . . and 
back again? A review of herbal marijuana alternatives (K2, Spice), syn-
thetic cathinones (bath salts), kratom, Salvia divinorum, methoxetamine, 
and piperazines. J Med Toxicol. 2012;8(10):15–32.
Ross EA, Reisfield GM, Watson MC, Chronister CW, Goldberger BA. 
Psychoactive “bath salts” intoxication with methylenedioxypyrova-
lerone. Am J Med. 2012;125:854–858.
Saady JJ, Narasimhachari N, Friedel RO. Unsuspected impurities in imip-
ramine and desipramine standards and pharmaceutical formulations. Clin 
Chem. 1981;27:343–344.
San George RC, Hoberman RD. Reaction of acetaldehyde with hemoglo-
bin. J Biol Chem. 1986;261:6811–6821.
Schroeder HA, Nason AP. Trace metals in human hair. J Invest Dermatol. 
1989;53:71–78.
Scientific Working Group for Forensic Toxicology. Standard practices 
for method validation in forensic toxicology. J Anal Toxicol. 2013;37: 
452–474.
Seely KA, Lapoint J, Moran JH, Fattore L. Spice drugs are more than 
harmless herbal blends: a review of the pharmacology and toxicology 
of synthetic cannabinoids. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatr. 
2012;39(2):234–243.
Shapiro HA. Arsenic content of human hair and nails: its interpretation. J 
Forensic Med. 1967;14:65–71.
Shen M, Xiang P, Wu H, Shen B, Huang Z. Detection of antidepressant and 
antipsychotic drugs in human hair. Forensic Sci Int. 2002;126(2):153–161.
Shiffman ML, Luketic VA, Sanyal AJ, et al. Hepatic lidocaine metabo-
lism and liver histology in patients with chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis. 
Hepatology. 1994;31:933–940.
Skopp G. Preanalytic aspects in postmortem toxicology. Forensic Sci Int. 
2004;142(2–3):75–100.
Smith H. The interpretation of the arsenic content of human hair. J Forensic 
Sci Soc. 1964;4:192–199.
Society of Forensic Toxicologists. Available at: www.soft-tox.org/dfcc.
Spiehler V. Society of Forensic Toxicology Conference on Drug Testing in 
Hair; October 29, 1994; Tampa, FL.
Spiehler V, Cooper G. Drugs-of-abuse testing in saliva and oral fluid. In: 
Jenkins A, ed. Drug Testing in Alternate Biological Specimens. Totowa, 
NJ: Humana Press; 2010:83–95:chap 5.
Stockham TL, Blanke RV. Investigation of an acetaldehyde-hemoglobin 
adduct in alcoholics: alcoholism. Clin Exp Res. 1988;12:748–754.
Strang J, Marsh A, Desouza N. Hair analysis for drugs of abuse. Lancet. 
1990;26:740.
Suzuki O, Hattori H, Asano M. Nails and hair as useful material for detec-
tion of methamphetamine of amphetamine abuse. Forensic Sci Int. 
1984;24:9–16.
Thorwald J. The Century of the Detective. New York: Harcourt; 1965.
Tsanaclis LM, Wicks JF, Chasin AA. Workplace drug testing, different 
matrices different objectives. Drug Test Anal. 2012;4:83–88.
Urey FM, Komaromy-Hiller G, Staley B, et al. Nitrite adulteration of work-
place urine drug-testing specimens: Part 1: sources and associated con-
centrations of nitrite in urine and distinction between natural sources and 
adulteration. J Anal Toxicol. 1998;22:89–95.
Utah Department of Public Safety. Commissioner Squires releases infor-
mation on .05 BAC change. n.d. Available at: https://publicsafety.utah.
gov/2017/03/31/commissioner-squires-releases-information-on-05- 
bac-change/.
Van der Linden T, Isalberti C, Silverans P, Legrand SA, Verstraete AG. 
Comparison of drug concentrations measured in roadside surveys and in 
seriously injured drivers in Belgium. Drug Test Anal. 2013;5:541–548.
Villain M, Concheiro M, Cirimele V, Kintz P. Screening method for ben-
zodiazepines and hypnotics in hair at pg/mg level by liquid chroma-
tography-mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry. J Chromatogr B Anal 
Technol Biomed Life Sci. 2005;825(1):72–78.
Vorpahl TE, Coe JI. Correlation of antemortem and postmortem digoxin 
levels. J Forensic Sci. 1978;23:329–334.
Warren A. Interference of common household chemicals in immunoassay 
methods for drugs of abuse. Clin Chem. 1989;35:648–651.
White JM, Clardy MS, Groves MH, et al. Testing for sedative-hypnotic 
drugs in the impaired driver: a survey of 72,000 arrests. Clin Toxicol. 
1981;18:945–957.
Wu AH, Gerona R, Armenian P, French D, Petrie M, Lynch LK. Role of 
liquid chromatography-high-resolution mass spectrometry (LC-HR/MS) 
in clinical toxicology. Clin Toxicol (Phila). 2012;50:733–742.
Yamaguichi S, Matsumoto H, Kaku S, Tateishi M, Shiramizu M. Factors 
affecting the amount of mercury in human scalp hair. Am J Pub Health. 
1975;65:484–488.
Yang SH, Morgan AA, Nguyen HP, Moore H, Figard BJ, Schug KA. 
Quantitative determination of bisphenol A from human saliva using 
bulk derivatization and trap-and-elute liquid chromatography coupled 
to electrospray ionization mass spectrometry. Environ Toxicol Chem. 
2011;30(6):1243–1251.
Yegles M, Mersch F, Wennig R. Detection of benzodiazepines and 
other psychotropic drugs in human hair in GC-MS. Forensic Sci Int. 
1997;84(1–3):211–218.
Yin S. Malicious use of pharmaceuticals in children. J Pediatr. 
2010;157(5):832–836.

This page intentionally left blank