# 33 Clinical Toxicology
# Casarett & Doull's Toxicology, 9th Edition
# Pages: 1550-1569
# Unit: Unit VII Applications of Toxicology

33
chapter
Clinical Toxicology
Louis R. Cantilena, Jr.*
HISTORY OF CLINICAL TOXICOLOGY
Historical Aspects of the  
Treatment of Poisoning
The history of poisons and poisoners dates back to ancient times. One 
of the earliest documented uses of poisons was for military use. The 
use of toxic smoke can be tracked to as early as 2000 bc in ancient 
India. Formulas for creating poisonous and noxious vapors have 
also been found from 1000 bc in Chinese writings. The incorpora-
tion of fire-generated arsenic-containing smoke from the burning of 
wood covered with pitch and sulfur containing material was report-
edly used by Sparta against Athens around 400 bc (Osius, 1957; 
Mayor, 2003). Documentation regarding the use of antidotes can 
be found in the Odyssey and Shastras from approximately 600 bc. 
What is considered to be the first documented use of a specific anti-
dote may be found in Homer’s Odyssey where it is suggested to 
Ulysses that he take moli to protect himself from poisoning. Moli 
may actually be Galanthus nivalis, a plant-derived cholinesterase 
inhibitor that might counteract the effects of the anticholinergic 
plant Datura stramonium (Plaitakis and Duvoisin, 1983).
Galen (129 to 200 ad) wrote three books called De Antidotis I, 
De Antidotis II, and De Theriaca ad Pisonem that described the 
development of a universal antidote known as alexipharmic or the-
riac by King Mithridates VI of Pontus who lived from 132 to 63 bc 
(Wax, 1997). The antidote reportedly contained 36 or more ingre-
dients that were ingested every day, conferring protection against a 
broad spectrum of poisons such as venomous stings and bites from 
vipers, spiders, and scorpions (Jarcho, 1972).
History of Clinical Toxicology
Historical Aspects of the Treatment 
of Poisoning
Modern Development of Effective 
Antidotes for Poisoning
Introduction of the Poison 
Control Center
Clinical Strategy for the 
Treatment of the Poisoned 
Patient
Clinical Stabilization
Clinical History in the Poisoned 
Patient
Physical Examination
Laboratory Evaluation
Radiographic Examination
Prevention of Further Poison 
Absorption
Enhancement of Poison Elimination
Use of Antidotes in Poisoning
Supportive Care of the Poisoned 
Patient
Case Examples of Specific 
Poisonings
Acetaminophen
Ethylene Glycol
Serum Chemistries
Valproic Acid
Salicylate
Summary
Acknowledgments
References
*Deceased
The refinement of theriac (antidote) formulations is docu-
mented for nearly 2000 years. Andromachus (1st century ad) was a 
physician to Nero and improved the Mithridates theriac by modify-
ing the formula to include up to 73 ingredients (Wax, 1997). The 
use of these ancient antidotes included treatment of acute poison-
ing and prophylactic treatment to make one “poison proof.” The 
Mithridates theriac with subsequent modifications remained in use 
until the early 20th century. William Heberden wrote Antitheriaka: 
An Essay on Mithridatium and Theriaca in 1745 in which he ques-
tioned the effectiveness of these products (Jarcho, 1972). Despite 
the skepticism concerning these antidote formulations, their use 
continued for two millenniums.
One of the earliest writings on the prevention of the gastro-
intestinal absorption of poisons was by Nicander (Major, 1934). 
In this ancient writing, the induction of emesis by ingestion of an 
emetic agent or mechanical stimulation of the hypopharynx was 
described as a method to prevent poison absorption. It would not be 
until the 1600s when the use of ipecacuanha for induction of emesis 
was recommended by William Piso (Reid, 1970).
The use of oral charcoal, now a mainstay in the treatment of 
many human poisonings, can be dated to early Greek and Roman 
civilization when wood charcoal was used for the treatment of mal-
adies such as anthrax and epilepsy (Cooney, 1995). The antidotal 
properties of charcoal were demonstrated in the 1800s by the French 
with dramatic demonstrations of a reduction in lethality when char-
coal was ingested with potentially lethal dosages of arsenic trioxide 
by Bertrand and strychnine by Touery (Holt and Holz, 1963). One 
of the earliest reported human studies examining the efficacy of 
charcoal in poisoning was in 1948 by the American physician Rand 
(Holt and Holz, 1963). As recently as the early 1960s, poison treat-
ment center employees were known to start their workday by burning 
toast to create a supply of poison absorbent (charcoal) for the day’s

1532
Applications of Toxicology
Unit VII
work. The use of superheated steam to treat the charcoal to enhance 
its absorption capacity was reported by Ostrejko, a Russian scientist 
in 1900 (Greensher et al., 1987). By the 1960s, the use of activated 
charcoal became routinely recommended for the treatment of patients 
poisoned with substances thought to be adsorbed by charcoal.
Modern Development of Effective 
Antidotes for Poisoning
The search for safe and effective antidotes has been challenging to 
say the least. From the time of the early, self-experimenting propo-
nents of effective antidotes to as recently as the later part of the last 
century, discovery, refinement, and determination of conditions to 
permit optimal use of antidotes has been less than ideal. Much the 
same could be said for the state of drug development more broadly 
during the same time period. It was not until the mid-20th century 
that a more informed scientific and systematic approach to drug 
development became possible and, in fact, became a requirement 
by newly created regulatory agencies in charge of controlling the 
sale and distribution of medicinal products.
The therapeutic area of poison treatments and prophylaxis 
presents several additional hurdles compared to drug development 
for other, more prevalent disease categories. These challenges 
include the inability to perform controlled human studies to evalu-
ate efficacy, in part due to the small numbers of poisoned patients 
available for enrollment in therapeutic trials and also due to the 
often-sporadic occurrence of specific poisonings. These realities 
make it difficult to easily perform acceptable evaluations of poison-
ing antidotes. In addition, when trying to transition the nonclinical 
data for poison treatments to humans, there are sometimes signifi-
cant interspecies differences encountered that make extrapolation 
of experimental efficacy or safety findings difficult. In recognition 
of these challenges, in 2002 the Food and Drug Administration 
enacted the Animal Efficacy Rule, which allows FDA to approve 
products for serious or life-threatening conditions caused by expo-
sure to lethal biological, chemical, radiological, or nuclear sub-
stances without human efficacy testing. The rule allows the sponsor 
of the product to demonstrate adequate efficacy of the product in a 
valid animal or in vitro model of the toxicity and not humans, for 
obvious ethical or in the setting of an infectious outbreak, logistic 
reasons. The human safety data is then determined by controlled 
clinical trials that involve administration of therapeutic dosages of 
the chem/bio/rad treatment agent in the absence of the poisoning to 
healthy volunteers (Gaffney, 2015).
INTRODUCTION OF THE  
POISON CONTROL CENTER
Advances in the field of clinical toxicology and improvements in the 
quality of care of the poisoned patient have paralleled the evolution 
of poison control centers (PCCs). The introduction of the poison 
center and subsequent formation of associations involving health-
care professionals who work in these centers brought with it an 
opportunity to share information through publications and national 
conferences that ultimately resulted in systematic enhancements 
in the treatment of the poisoned patient. One of the earliest local 
efforts to systematically collect, analyze, and distribute to physi-
cians, clinical information about poisoning was led by Jay Arena, 
MD, a Duke University pediatrician. In 1939, he published a case 
series detailing the clinical outcome of 50 cases of lye poisoning 
(Martin and Arena, 1939). Interest in clinical information regarding 
the treatment of poisoned patients and resultant patient outcomes 
was also growing in Europe during approximately the same time. 
During the 1940s, several European communities developed hos-
pital-based treatment facilities for poisoning (Manoguerra and 
Temple, 1984). This local poison information effort continued for 
several years as further realization of the growing importance of the 
problem of poisoning was appreciated. A study by the American 
Academy of Pediatrics completed in 1952 reported that more than 
half of childhood accidents involved unintentional poisoning in the 
United States. Possibly in response to this study, Edward Press, 
MD, and Louis Gdalman, RPh, started the first United States poi-
son control center (PCC) in Chicago, Illinois in 1953. Mr Gdalman 
collected toxicological information on more than 9000 commer-
cial and noncommercial products throughout the 1940s and early 
1950s. Their Chicago poison center provided telephone advice to 
healthcare professionals as well as collected poisoning data sys-
tematically during the telephone exchange. As more centers were 
created they grew to become valuable resources for information 
about product ingredients, potential toxicity, and recommendations 
for the treatment of poisoned patients. PCCs proliferated over the 
next two decades and peaked at 661 centers in 1978 (Scherz and 
Robertson, 1978). At the peak of this proliferation, each state in the 
United States had at least one poison center; several states had more 
than 20 poison centers active at the same time, but there was little 
standardization throughout the specialty. Information resources 
gradually evolved from collected experiences of the individual 
poison center to a centralized collection of product contents, toxici-
ties, and recommended treatments provided in a microfiche data-
base to today’s Internet-based globally available database that is 
frequently updated and incorporates consensus recommendations 
for various treatment protocols for specific poisonings. Through 
regionalization, consolidation, and certification, the number of 
PCCs decreased significantly over time to 55 centers in 2015 
(Mowry et al., 2016).
Today, poison centers are generally staffed by a medical direc-
tor (Medical Toxicologist), administrator or managing director, 
specialists in poison information, and educators for poison pre-
vention programs. The medical toxicologist, managing director, 
and specialists in poison information are healthcare professionals 
who are credentialed by their respective boards. The American 
Board of Medical Subspecialties offers a subspecialty certificate 
in Medical Toxicology to physicians who successfully complete 
the certifying examination. The American Board of Applied 
Toxicology (ABAT) offers a certification examination for nonphy-
sicians and the American Association of Poison Control Center 
(AAPCC) provides a certification of the specialists in poison infor-
mation who are usually nurses, pharmacists, or other healthcare 
personnel. The managing director of the poison center is usually 
either the same person as the medical director or a nonphysician 
certified by the ABAT. The nonphysician toxicologists are referred 
to as clinical toxicologists.
Poison centers provide a significant service to the general pub-
lic and to practicing healthcare providers. These services include 
direct information to patients with expert recommendations for 
needed treatment, critical diagnostic and treatment information for 
healthcare professionals, education for healthcare personnel, and 
poison prevention activities through public education. In recognition 
of this valuable service, the “Poison Control Center Enhancement 
and Awareness Act” was signed in 2000, which ensured that all 
citizens had toll-free access to a PCC, and it was subsequently 
amended to include partial federal funding in 2008 in part to serve 
as an early-warning system for potential chemical, biological, or 
radiologic terrorist attacks (Woolf et al., 2011). This funding was

Clinical Toxicology
Chapter 33
1533
recently extended through 2019 (Rep. Terry, 2014). Central data 
collection via the National Poison Data System (NPDS) in near 
real time has demonstrated the capability for the PCC network to 
serve in the early warning role (Wolkin et al., 2012). Recent report-
ing from this network shows that poisoning case data from PCCs 
are uploaded every 8 minutes on average supporting this role on a 
national level (AAPCC, 2017).
In addition to this public health alert capability, the ability for 
PCCs to provide data that can lead to the recognition of improper 
use of medications, emergence of new illicit drug exposures or 
practice, prescription product diversion, and product tampering 
events has been demonstrated. Several examples can be found that 
indicate that public access to a certified PCC is cost effective, in 
terms of overall healthcare expenditures. One early publication 
documented the economic consequence of a 1-year forced closure 
of the Louisiana State Poison Center several years ago. Without 
a poison center to call, residents of the community were left with 
the expensive alternative of visiting a nearby hospital’s emergency 
room or doctor’s office visit for possible treatment of their expo-
sure. It was estimated that the increased costs to the state for emer-
gency medical services (EMS) were $1.4 million for that year (King 
and Palmisano, 1991). Since that study, several other studies have 
shown that for each dollar spent to operate a PCC, a savings of 
approximately $3 to $7.67 can be realized for the healthcare system 
(Miller and Lestina, 1997; Blizzard et al., 2008).
In 2004, the Institute of Medicine (IOM) affirmed the value 
and need for a poison center system by their commissioned in-depth 
study of poison prevention and control services in the United States. 
Their report (IOM, 2004) recommended further standardization of 
the regional poison centers, partial federal funding for the poison 
center system to stabilize core functions of each center, and inte-
gration of PCCs with public health agencies at the federal, state, 
and local level including integration with the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention for chemical and biological terrorism 
preparedness. Since that time, other reports have shown the cost-­
benefit value of the national poison control system for these func-
tions (Lewin Group, 2012).
CLINICAL STRATEGY FOR THE  
TREATMENT OF THE POISONED PATIENT
The setting for the initial treatment of a seriously poisoned patient 
is usually in a hospital emergency room but can sometimes be in 
other, less ideal settings such as the battlefield, workplace, home, 
or street setting. In treatment environments that permit a complete 
assessment and initiation of treatments, most clinical toxicolo-
gists agree that a methodically executed, stepwise approach for the 
evaluation and treatment of the poisoned patient is recommended 
for optimal care (Ellenhorn, 1997a, 1997b; Hoffman, 2015). In this 
section, an overview of the general approach to the treatment of 
poisoned patients in the emergency department (ED) or acute inten-
sive care setting of a hospital will be described. Please note that 
once the patient is relatively stabilized, the early steps listed often 
are initiated in parallel. In that setting, the following general steps 
represent important elements of the initial clinical encounter for a 
poisoned patient:
	 1.	 Clinical stabilization of the patient
	 2.	 Clinical evaluation (history, physical, laboratory, radiology)
	 3.	 Prevention of further toxicant absorption
	 4.	 Enhancement of toxicant elimination
	 5.	 Administration of antidote (if available)
	 6.	 Supportive care, close monitoring, and clinical follow-up
Clinical Stabilization
The first priority in the treatment of poisoning is to stabilize the 
patient. Assessment of the patient’s airway (ability to move air into 
and out of the lungs), breathing (the presence of spontaneous respi-
rations), and circulation (adequate blood pressure and perfusion of 
vital organs) is the initial step of emergency treatment. Some poi-
soned patients, soon after even a potentially lethal exposure of the 
toxicant has occurred, will not show significant symptoms. Most 
poisoned patients, with a toxic exposure, will exhibit symptoms 
early in their presentation. For this reason, the initial triage of a 
poisoned patient can be difficult. On occasion, the patient is asymp-
tomatic on presentation but by history has had a potentially seri-
ous toxic exposure. Clinicians and medical support staff, who may 
not be knowledgeable about the toxic exposure level of a specific 
drug or chemical, may mistakenly stratify the patient to a lower 
treatment priority, which can have disastrous results. The improper 
stratification sometimes can include a delay in calling for a clinical 
toxicology consultation from a regional PCC or a regional poison 
treatment center. Some drugs, such as a benzodiazepine, can cause 
significant sedation early after exposure but often have a compara-
tively mild clinical course, whereas other chemicals, such as cam-
phor, show little clinical effects initially but can produce a fatal 
outcome. Some chemicals and drugs can cause seizures as part of 
their toxic-effect profile. Control of drug/toxicant-induced seizures 
can be an important component of the initial stabilization of the 
poisoned patient. A full discussion of the various methods avail-
able to treat abnormal conditions with a patient’s airway, breath-
ing, circulation, and control of toxicant-induced seizures is beyond 
the scope of this chapter. The reader is referred to textbooks of 
Emergency Medicine and Critical Care Medicine for further infor-
mation on this subject. After the initial stabilization of the patient, 
the remainder of the assessment and treatment steps can proceed. 
On occasion, especially in critically ill patients, treatment interven-
tions are initiated before a patient is completely stable.
Clinical History in the Poisoned Patient
The primary goal of obtaining the medical history in poisoned 
patients is to determine the substance the patient was exposed to 
and the extent and timing of exposure. Unfortunately, in contrast 
to most specialties of medicine, the clinical history from the ini-
tial clinical encounter with the poisoned patient is sometimes not 
available because either the patient is unresponsive and unable to 
provide the history or the history provided is unreliable. The history 
may be unreliable due to the inability of the patient to recall perti-
nent facts relating to the ingestion or exposure, or in the setting of 
an attempted suicide or a patient who has taken illegal substances, 
the patient often is not willing to provide an accurate history. For 
these reasons, additional sources for the clinical history are often 
incorporated to aid the clinical team in determining the exposure 
history. Examples of additional resources sometimes employed to 
obtain an informative clinical history include interviewing fam-
ily members and emergency medical technicians who were at 
the scene, searching an electronic medical record, or contacting a 
pharmacist who can sometimes provide a listing of prescriptions 
recently filled or an employer who can provide a list of chemi-
cals found in the work environment for an occupational exposure. 
Many times, identification of the exact substance responsible for 
the observed toxic effects is not known for hours to days after the 
ingestion, or on occasion detected during autopsy in fatal cases.
When estimating the extent of exposure to the poison, it is 
generally recommended that one maximize the estimated dose 
received. That is, one should assume that the entire contents of the

1534
Applications of Toxicology
Unit VII
prescription bottle were ingested, that the entire bottle of liquid was 
consumed, most of the body surface area was exposed to a topi-
cal chemical, or that the highest possible concentration of airborne 
contaminant was present for a patient poisoned by inhalation unless 
definite evidence exists to the contrary. Maximizing the potential 
dose or exposure level allows one to prepare adequately for the 
worst-case scenario, that is, the most clinically severe manifesta-
tions of the poisoning rather than underestimating the exposure and 
therefore the anticipated toxic effects and, as a result, be unprepared 
for a serious clinical presentation in a poisoned patient.
Once an appropriate estimate of the dose is made, the toxicolo-
gist can refer to various information resources to determine what 
the range of expected clinical effects might be from the estimated 
exposure. This is one of the most important early functions of the 
poison center. The estimation of expected toxicity greatly assists 
with the triage of poisoned patients. Poison information specialists 
working in the PCCs routinely give telephone recommendations 
regarding the level of medical care required for a given ingestion 
based on the expected clinical effects from the reported ingestion. 
The majority of in-the-home accidental pediatric exposures are 
treated with at-home observation and occasionally with the addi-
tional recommendation for home-administered activated charcoal if 
readily available. In the hospital setting, ED staff use the estimation 
of expected clinical effects to effectively triage the poisoned patient. 
For example, a 3-year-old patient who accidentally ingested 25 chil-
dren’s chewable multivitamins without iron would likely be triaged 
to a noncritical care area of the ED, whereas another similar patient 
who ingested a large amount of a potent anticholinergic medication 
would be triaged to a high-intensity care section of the ED.
Estimating the timing of the exposure to the poison is fre-
quently the most difficult aspect of the clinical history when treat-
ing the poisoned patient. Often the toxicologist must turn detective 
to determine the most likely window of time that the exposure 
occurred. For example, if a pediatric patient was being watched 
by a baby-sitter at all times except for a 20-minute period that 
preceded the onset of symptoms and the discovery of an open 
prescription bottle for a calcium channel blocking agent is found, 
then it is straightforward to assume that the ingestion occurred in 
that 20-minute window. Other situations require estimation of a far 
broader window for exposure. For a person found down with sev-
eral empty prescription bottles nearby who was not seen by anyone 
for the preceding 24 hours, one would not be able to accurately 
estimate the time of ingestion other than sometime in that 24-hour 
window. Therefore, in view of these often-encountered limitations, 
obtaining an accurate history in the poisoned patient can be very 
challenging and occasionally completely lacking. When the history 
is unobtainable or unreliable, the treating clinical toxicologist is left 
in the setting of empirical treatment of an “unknown ingestion” poi-
soning. This type of treatment will be discussed later in this chapter.
Physical Examination
One of the most important actions performed during the initial clin-
ical encounter in the treatment of the poisoned patient is the physi-
cal examination. A thorough examination of the patient is required 
to assess the patient’s condition, determine the patient’s mental 
status, and, if altered, determine possible nontoxicology expla-
nations for the abnormal mental status such as trauma or central 
nervous system infection. In addition, findings from the physical 
examination allow one to categorize the patient’s physical exami-
nation parameters into broad clinical presentation classes referred 
to as toxic syndromes. These toxic syndromes have been called 
toxidromes (Mofenson and Greensher, 1970; Holstege and Borek, 
2012; Hoffman, 2015). A toxidrome is a constellation of clinical 
signs and symptoms that, when taken together, are likely associated 
with exposure from certain toxicological classes of chemicals. The 
major toxic syndromes include narcotic, cholinergic, sympatho-
mimetic, anticholinergic, sedative-hypnotic, and withdrawal from 
ethanol/sedative-hypnotics and withdrawal from opioids. Table 33-1 
lists the clinical features of these major toxic syndromes.
Table 33-1 
Clinical Features of Toxic Syndromes
BLOOD PRESSURE
PULSE
TEMPERATURE
PUPILS
LUNGS
ABDOMEN
NEUROLOGICAL
Sympathomimetic
Incr.
Incr.
Slight Incr.
Mydriasis
NC
NC
Hyperalert, incr. 
reflexes
Anticholinergic
Slight incr. or NC
Incr.
Incr.
Mydriasis
NC
Decr. 
bowel 
sounds
Altered mental 
status
Cholinergic
Slight decr. or 
NC
Decr.
NC
Miosis
Incr.  
bronchial 
sounds
Incr. bowel 
sounds
Altered mental 
status
Opioid
Decr.
Decr.
Decr.
Miosis
NC or rales 
(late)
Decr. 
bowel 
sounds
Decr. level of 
consciousness
Ethanol-sedative 
hypnotics
Decr.
Decr.
Decr.
Variable
NC
Decr. 
bowel 
sounds
Agitation;  
decr. level of  
consciousness
Withdrawal from 
ethanol-sedative 
hypnotics
Incr.
Incr.
Incr.
Mydriasis
NC
Incr. bowel 
sounds
Agitation;  
hallucinations; 
seizures
Withdrawal from 
opioids
Incr.
Incr.
Variable
Mydriasis
NC
Incr. bowel 
sounds; 
vomiting
Anxious,  
piloerection

Clinical Toxicology
Chapter 33
1535
In certain treatment settings, the precise agent responsible for 
the poisoning is not known during the critically important phase of 
initial treatment of the poisoned patient. When the treating physi-
cians are able to categorize the patient’s presentation into a toxic 
syndrome, it permits initiation of rationale treatment based on the 
most likely category of toxicant responsible without knowing the 
specific chemical causing the poisoning. For example, if a patient 
presents with altered mental status, mydriasis (dilated pupils), mild 
hypertension, tachycardia, warm skin, dry mucous membranes, and 
diminished bowel sounds in the abdomen, the clinical toxicolo-
gist can characterize the patient’s presentation as consistent with 
the anticholinergic toxic syndrome. The treatment would then be 
directed at support of respiration and potentially administering a 
pharmacological antidote like physostigmine as well as additional 
situation-requiring supportive care.
Occasionally, a characteristic odor can be detected on the poi-
soned patient’s breath or clothing, which may point toward expo-
sure or poisoning by a specific chemical. Table 33-2 lists some of 
the better-recognized odors and the substance associated with the 
odor. Detection of one of these odors may provide an important 
historical clue as to the agent responsible for the poisoning.
Periodic re-examination of the patient is a very important 
aspect of clinical toxicology treatment procedures. Follow-up 
clinical examinations can help gauge the progression of the clini-
cal course of poisoning as well as determine the effectiveness of 
treatment interventions and assess the need for additional treatment 
procedures.
Laboratory Evaluation
A common misconception concerning the initial treatment of poi-
soned patients is that a definitive diagnosis of the specific agent 
or poison responsible for the patient’s clinical presentation is fre-
quently made based upon clinical laboratory testing in real time. 
Unfortunately, the availability of an assay to identify the specific 
drug or industrial chemical on a rapid turn-around basis (STAT, 
e.g., within 1 hour) is very limited. Table 33-3 lists drugs or other 
chemical tests that are typically available for STAT measurement 
in a medical center-type hospital facility (UCSF, 2017). As one can 
see, the number of chemicals for which quantitative detection is 
possible in a rapid turn-around timeline is extremely limited, com-
pared to the large number of possible chemicals that can poison 
patients. This further emphasizes the importance of recognizing 
clinical syndromes for poisoning and for the clinical toxicologist 
to be able to initiate general treatment and supportive care for the 
patient with poisoning from an unknown substance.
For the relatively few chemicals that can be quantified on a 
rapid turn-around basis in an ED setting, the quantitative measure-
ment can often provide both prognostic and therapeutic guidance. 
Several authors have suggested certain “action levels” for specific 
therapeutic drugs and chemicals, which when met or exceeded in 
the patient’s plasma should trigger specific interventions or predict 
likely clinical outcomes. In some cases, measurement of an indica-
tor of the biological effect of a poison provides sufficient infor-
mation to render definitive treatment to the patient. Measurement 
of methemoglobin concentration in a patient poisoned by one of 
many chemicals that can cause this chemical transformation of the 
hemoglobin molecule is sufficient to initiate treatment for methe-
moglobinemia without identification of the specific toxicant that 
caused the condition. Similarly, most hospital laboratories have the 
capability for rapid measurement of carboxyhemoglobin concen-
trations, which permits treatment of carbon monoxide poisoning 
based on the laboratory test measuring a surrogate marker for car-
bon monoxide exposure.
For some commonly ingested drugs, a nomogram has been 
established to predict the severity of the poisoning and is impor-
tant in some cases to guide therapeutic intervention based on the 
measured plasma concentration of the drug and the time elapsed 
from the expose. Proper use of such nomograms is necessary for the 
clinical management of poisoning cases where available.
The clinical usefulness of a drug plasma concentration mea-
sured by the clinical laboratory was suggested for salicylates 
approximately 50 years ago. In 1960, Done published a nomogram 
to predict the clinical outcome from poisoning with salicylates 
(Done, 1960). After years of routine clinical use, further investi-
gation led to the conclusion that the clinical utility of the Done 
nomogram was insufficient to recommend continued applicability 
to human salicylate poisoning. As a result, use of this nomogram 
in practice is no longer recommended (Dugandzic et al., 1989; 
American College of Medical Toxicology, 2015).
In 1975, Rumack and Matthew published a nomogram for acet-
aminophen poisoning shown in Fig. 33-1 (Rumack and Matthew, 
1975). This nomogram predicts clinical outcome and has maintained 
Table 33-2  
Characteristic Odors Associated With Poisonings
ODOR
POTENTIAL POISON
Apple blossoms
Chloroacetophenone (tear gas)
Bitter almonds
Cyanide
Carrots
Cicutotoxin (water hemlock)
Eggs
Hydrogen sulfide, mercaptans
Garlic
As, organophosphates, DMSO, 
thallium
Mothballs
Naphthalene, camphor
Pear-like
Paraldehyde, chloral hydrate
Rotten eggs
Hydrogen sulfide, mercaptans,  
N-acetylcysteine
Vinyl
Ethchlorvynol
Wintergreen
Methylsalicylate
Abbreviation: DMSO, dimethyl sulfoxide.
Table 33-3  
List of Tests that Are Commonly Measured in a 
Hospital Setting on a STAT Basis
Acetaminophen
Osmolality
Carbamazepine
Phenobarbital
Carboxyhemoglobin
Phenytoin
Digoxin
Procainamide/NAPA
Ethanol
Quinidine
Gentamicin
Salicylates
Iron
Theophylline
Lithium
Tobramycin
Magnesium
Valproic acid
Methemoglobin
Vancomycin
Abbreviation: NAPA, N-acetylprocainamide.

1536
Applications of Toxicology
Unit VII
its clinical utility over time as a valuable tool to guide the clinician 
in the decision as to whether or not to administer N-acetylcysteine 
(NAC), an antidote for significant acetaminophen ingestion. 
Laboratory evaluation of a patient potentially poisoned with acet-
aminophen is crucial to assess what hepatic injury may have already 
occurred and to determine the plasma concentration of acetamino-
phen for prognostic purposes. Accurate estimation of acetaminophen 
in the plasma should be done on samples drawn at least 4 hours 
after ingestion, when or past the time that peak plasma levels can 
be expected. Once an accurate plasma concentration of acetamino-
phen has been obtained at least 4 hours post ingestion, it should 
be plotted on the Rumack–Matthew nomogram (Fig. 33-1) to 
determine whether NAC therapy is indicated. This nomogram 
is based on a series of patients with and without hepatotoxicity 
and their corresponding acetaminophen plasma concentrations at 
presentation.
In the appropriate patient, the decision to treat an acetaminophen- 
poisoned patient is based on the plasma concentration of parent 
acetaminophen plotted on the nomogram. Although some authors 
recommend that NAC treatment only be administered to a patient 
with an acetaminophen plasma concentration in the “definite toxic” 
range, many clinical toxicologists agree that NAC should be given 
at or above the “probably toxic” action level due to the often present 
uncertainty in the clinical history with respect to the exact time of 
the ingestion. It should be noted, however, that proper use of this 
nomogram is required, namely that certain conditions should be 
met to apply the nomogram to a specific clinical case. The nomo-
gram was validated for a single acetaminophen ingestion, the time 
of ingestion is critically important to establish the X-axis coordi-
nate for the data point and the plasma concentration should have 
been obtained at least 4 hours after ingestion to assure that the peak 
plasma concentration of parent acetaminophen has occurred.
Similar, though, perhaps less well established, predictive rela-
tionships of drug plasma concentration and clinical outcome and/
or suggested concentrations that require therapeutic interventions 
are available for several other drugs including lithium, digoxin, 
iron, phenobarbital, and theophylline. Some authors have identified 
“action levels” or toxic threshold values for the measured plasma 
concentrations of various drugs or other chemicals (Ellenhorn, 
1997a, 1997b). Generally, these values represent mean concentra-
tions of the respective substance that have been shown to produce a 
significant harmful effect during a retrospective analysis of clinical 
case series. However, the pharmaco- (or toxico-) dynamic variabil-
ity for a given toxicant or for a combination of toxicants is signifi-
cant. For example, a patient with a “normal” or “nontoxic” digoxin 
level may display significant toxic effects and conversely a patient 
with an elevated or “toxic” plasma concentration of digoxin may 
not show any sign of harmful effects. The clinical toxicologist is 
required to critically evaluate the measured drug concentration in 
context of the clinical presentation of the patient and not react to 
the measured laboratory value alone. An additional confounding 
factor is the often-encountered co-ingestion of another substance 
in the poisoning. The applicability of exposure-response models 
to predict clinical severity in the presence of a second or multiple 
toxicants is unknown.
Because of the limited clinical availability of rapidly available 
“diagnostic” laboratory tests for poisons (Table 33-3), toxicologists 
can sometimes gain important insight into what potential drugs 
were ingested by performing simple calculations based on routine 
clinical laboratory data. Two examples of these laboratory-derived 
methods to potentially identify what substance was ingested are 
the anion gap (AG) and the osmol gap calculations. An elevated 
AG or osmol gap suggests a finite differential diagnosis for signifi-
cant exposures in a poisoned patient. Both calculations are used as 
diagnostic aids when the clinical history suggests poisoning and the 
patient’s condition is consistent with exposure to chemicals known 
to cause elevations of these parameters.
The AG is calculated as the difference between the serum 
Na ion concentration and the sum of the serum Cl and HCO3 ion 
concentrations.
AG
NamEq/L
(ClmEq/L
HCO mEq/L)
=
−
+
[
]
3
NormalAG ≤12
When there is laboratory evidence of metabolic acidosis (low 
blood pH and low serum HCO3) in a poisoned patient, the finding 
of an elevated AG would suggest systemic toxicity from a relatively 
finite list of chemicals. A popular clinical mnemonic (AT MUD 
PILES) is commonly employed as a memory aid for this differen-
tial diagnosis. Table 33-4 lists the more common chemicals that 
have metabolic acidosis with an elevated AG as part of the clinical 
presentation that are included in this pneumonic. Additional sub-
stances not included in this table, such as benzyl alcohol, carbon 
monoxide, hydrogen sulfide, metformin, phenformin, formic acid, 
and other organic or mineral acids, as well as the anti-seizure medi-
cation valproic acid, can also result in elevated AG with systemic 
metabolic acidosis.
The second calculated parameter from clinical chemistry val-
ues is the osmol gap. The osmol gap is calculated as the numerical 
difference between the measured serum osmolality and the serum 
osmolarity calculated from the clinical chemistry measurements of 
the serum sodium ion, glucose, and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) con-
centrations (Smithline and Gardner, 1976).
Osmol gap
measured serum osmolality (mOsm)
calculated serum osm
=
−
olarity (mOsm)
where calculated serum osmolarity = 2 × Na mEq/L + glucose 
mg/dL/18 + BUN mg/dL/2.8
Normal osmol gap < 10 mOsm
Hours after Ingestion
2
1000
500
400
300
200
100
50
10
5
1
4
8
12
16
20
24
No hepatic toxicity
Probable hepatic toxicity
Acetaminophen (µg/mL plasma)
Semilogarithmic plot
of plasma acetaminophen levels vs time
Figure 33-1.  Rumack–Matthew nomogram for acetaminophen poisoning. 
(From Rumack and Matthew [1975], with permission. Copyright American 
Academy of Pediatrics [1975].)

Clinical Toxicology
Chapter 33
1537
Note that the serum osmolality must be measured by freez-
ing point depression and not boiling point elevation as the latter 
method can fail to detect the osmolality contribution of volatile, 
low-molecular-weight substances due to vaporization of the sub-
stance during measurement.
An elevated osmol gap in the setting of a poisoned patient sug-
gests the presence of an osmotically active substance in the plasma 
that is not accounted for by the Na, glucose, or BUN concentrations. 
Table 33-5 lists several substances that when ingested can be associ-
ated with an elevated osmol gap in humans.
Although calculation of both the AG and the osmol gap can 
provide very useful information from readily available clinical 
chemistry measurements, these determinations must be interpreted 
cautiously in certain clinical settings. For example, even though 
a patient may have ingested a large, significantly toxic amount of 
methanol, if measured late in the clinical course of the exposure, 
the osmol gap may not be significantly elevated as most of the 
osmotically active methanol has left the plasma and has been bio-
transformed or cleared but is still producing serious clinical effects.
Radiographic Examination
The utility of the plain x-ray radiographic examination to diag-
nose specific poisonings is relatively limited. This is due primar-
ily to the lack of radiopacity of many oral forms of medication. 
Sometimes orally ingested toxicants can be visualized radiographi-
cally, depending on the specific substance ingested. Early radio-
graphic surveys of the radiopacity of oral medications revealed that 
the vast majority of commercially available tablets and capsules 
surveyed were essentially undetectable by a radiograph (Handy, 
1971; O’Brien et al., 1986). These and other studies have shown 
that relatively few formulations of drugs are radiopaque and would 
likely be detectable by plain x-ray of the abdomen. Generally, plain 
radiographs can detect a significant amount of ingested oral medi-
cation containing ferrous or potassium salts. However, a study of 
the in vitro and in vivo visualization of chewable oral formula-
tions of iron supplements showed that once the chewable iron was 
ingested, it was no longer detectable by plain abdominal radiograph 
(Everson et al., 1989). However, certain formulations that have an 
enteric coating or certain types of sustained release products are 
radiopaque and can be visualized (Savitt et al., 1987; Nelson et al., 
1993).
The most useful radiographs ordered during the initial man-
agement of the poisoned patient include the chest and abdominal 
radiographs and the computed head tomography study. For example, 
the abdominal radiograph has been used to detect recent lead paint 
ingestion in children due to pica for many years. Although the pres-
ence of radiographic evidence of lead-based paint chips probably 
underrepresented the proportion of children with moderate-to-severe 
lead poisoning in one study, an abdominal radiograph showing pica 
was associated with significantly elevated blood lead concentrations 
(McElvaine et al., 1992). Another situation in which an abdominal 
radiograph may be helpful is the setting of the ingestion of a halo-
genated hydrocarbon such as carbon tetrachloride or chloroform. 
If a sufficient amount of either liquid is ingested, it is likely that 
these organic solvents will be visualized as a radiopaque liquid in the 
gut lumen on the abdominal film relatively recently after ingestion 
(Dally et al., 1987). Finally, abdominal plain radiographs have been 
helpful in the setting where foreign bodies are detected in the gas-
trointestinal tract. The most common example of this is found when 
a toddler is being evaluated for potential oral ingestion of a foreign 
body, such as a watch battery. Early detection by plain radiograph 
is essential to localize the battery to determine which interventional 
approach is recommended (Kramer et al., 2015). Another example of 
an important use of radiography in the acute management of the poi-
soned patient is during the evaluation of an international traveler to 
the United States who becomes acutely ill with signs of severe sym-
pathomimetic excess and numerous foreign bodies are visualized 
throughout the gastrointestinal tract. This type of patient is referred 
to as a body packer who smuggles illegal substances, such as cocaine 
(as in this case) or heroin, by swallowing latex or plastic storage ves-
icles filled with the substance (McCarron and Wood, 1983; Beerman 
et al., 1986; Sporer and Firestone, 1997). Occasionally, these storage 
devices rupture and the drug is released into the gastrointestinal tract 
with serious and sometimes fatal results. Aside from these relatively 
uncommon situations, the overall clinical utility for detection and 
diagnosis of poisons by radiography is limited.
In contrast to the limited clinical utility of plain radiography 
for the identification of a specific poison or to diagnose poisoning, 
plain radiography and other types of diagnostic imaging in clinical 
toxicology can be extremely valuable for the diagnosis of toxicant-
induced pathology and to aid the clinical toxicologist in the ongo-
ing treatment and patient-management phases of the drug overdose. 
Detection of drug-induced noncardiac pulmonary edema as seen in 
some cases of serious intoxication with salicylates and opioid ago-
nists is an example of this occurrence (Stern et al., 1968; Heffner 
et al., 1990). Plain chest radiography can detect this abnormality, 
which would likely correlate with the findings observed during 
physical examination of the lungs. This radiographic finding would 
increase the severity stratification of the poisoning case and likely 
alter the planned therapeutic strategy for the patient.
Another example of the use of radiological imaging in clini-
cal toxicology is with computed tomography (CT) of the brain. 
Significant exposure to carbon monoxide (CO) has been associated 
with focal CT lesions of the brain consisting of low-density areas, 
Table 33-4 
Differential Diagnosis of Metabolic Acidosis with 
Elevated Anion Gap: “AT MUD PILES”
A
Alcohol (ethanol ketoacidosis)
T
Toluene
M
Methanol
U
Uremia
D
Diabetic ketoacidosis
P
Paraldehyde
I
Iron, isoniazid
L
Lactic acid
E
Ethylene glycol
S
Salicylate
Table 33-5 
Differential Diagnosis of Elevated Osmol Gap
Methanol
Ethanol
Ethylene glycol
Isopropanol
Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)
Mannitol
Propylene glycol

1538
Applications of Toxicology
Unit VII
also referred to as lucencies in the cerebral white matter and in the 
basal ganglia, especially the globus pallidus. This finding is not spe-
cific for CO poisoning and may be seen with other intoxications and 
disease conditions that cause relative hypoxemia or hypoglycemia. 
In the setting of CO intoxication however, these CT findings in the 
brain can be useful for estimating the prognosis for a patient who 
survives the initial phase of CO poisoning (Miura et al., 1985; Jones 
et al., 1994). Similar correlations have been shown with magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI). Finally, concurrent intracranial pathol-
ogy, such as trauma or hemorrhage, can be detected by CT or MRI 
of the brain to aid in the diagnosis of additional injury or pathology 
previously not appreciated during the early phases of treatment of 
the poisoned patient.
The initial clinical evaluation of the poisoned patient is a criti-
cally important phase of the therapeutic process to treat poisoned 
individuals. The physical, laboratory, and radiological examination 
all contribute to the initial diagnostic steps for poison treatment. 
The physical and laboratory examinations are generally utilized 
more from a diagnostic and acute management standpoint, whereas 
the radiological examination, with the exception of visualization of 
foreign bodies or radiopaque toxicants, tends to be more useful for 
detection and management of toxicant-induced pathology.
Prevention of Further Poison Absorption
During the early phases of treatment of a poisoned patient who has 
had a toxic exposure via the oral, inhalation, or the topical route, the 
opportunity to prevent further absorption of the poison to minimize 
the total amount of chemical that reaches the systemic circulation 
may be possible. For chemicals presented by the inhalation route, 
the main intervention to prevent further absorption is removal of the 
patient from the environment where the toxicant is found and to pro-
vide adequate ventilation and ensure oxygenation for the patient. For 
topical exposures, patient clothing containing the chemical must be 
removed and properly disposed in airtight wrappings or containers 
to ensure that the rescuers and healthcare providers are adequately 
protected from secondary exposure. Most topical exposures require 
gentle washing of the skin with water and mild soap taking care not 
to cause cutaneous abrasions of the skin that may enhance dermal 
absorption (Burgess et al., 1999; Braue et al., 2008).
The optimal time to intervene to prevent continued absorption 
of an oral poison is as soon as possible after the ingestion. Four 
primary methods are currently available for this purpose: induction 
of emesis with syrup of ipecac, gastric lavage, oral administration of 
activated charcoal, and whole-bowel irrigation. Historically, induc-
tion of emesis was accomplished by a variety of concoctions such 
as tartar emetic, an antimony salt, mustard mixed in water, concen-
trated solutions of copper and zinc salts, and various botanical sub-
stances. In hospitals, apomorphine injection was given even in the 
1980s to cause emesis in patients with a history of potentially toxic 
ingestion. Since the 1980s, the primary agent used to induce emesis 
to treat an oral ingestion of a potential toxicant is syrup of ipecac. 
This product is available as an over-the-counter (OTC) emetic in 
the United States since 1965 and, although a mainstay for poison 
center-directed induction of emesis for decades, today the agent is 
rarely used to treat poisonings. The reason for the decline in use is 
primarily the recognition of the overall low, and highly variable, 
effectiveness for syrup of ipecac as an agent for gastric decontami-
nation (Auerbach et al., 1986). In addition, reports of the potential 
adverse effects associated with ipecac use gained wider recognition, 
especially in terms of the risk for aspiration of gastric contents. 
Additionally, there were data to suggest that the administration 
of syrup of ipecac could result in a delay in the administration of 
activated charcoal, thought to be a more effective agent for pre-
vention of oral absorption of toxicants, as discussed below. The 
American Academy of Clinical Toxicology and the European 
Association of Poisons Centres and Clinical Toxicologists issued 
a position paper regarding the use of syrup of ipecac (Krenzelok 
et al., 1997) followed by an additional, similar consensus publica-
tion in 2004 (Krenzelok et al., 2004), which stated that the syrup 
of ipecac should not be used routinely in the management of the 
poisoned patient and that there was insufficient data to either sup-
port or exclude ipecac administration soon after poison ingestion. 
Many clinical toxicologists believe that there remains a limited role 
for the clinical use of syrup of ipecac, mainly in rural areas where 
the length of time before a poisoned patient can reach medical care 
is significant, especially when the substance ingested is poorly 
adsorbed to activated charcoal, as discussed below. Examples of 
substances poorly absorbable to activated charcoal include etha-
nol and other alcohols, ethylene glycol, potassium, mineral acids, 
iron and other metals (variable), and halides such as fluoride. The 
accepted contraindications for use of syrup of ipecac are (1) chil-
dren less than 6 months of age; (2) in the ingestion of a caustic agent 
(acid or alkali); (3) in a patient with a depressed level of conscious-
ness or gag reflex or when the toxicant ingested is expected to cause 
either condition within a short period of time; or (4) when there is a 
significant risk of aspiration of gastric contents such as for ingestion 
of a liquid hydrocarbon with high aspiration potential.
The use of gastric lavage, the technique of placing an oro-
gastric tube into the stomach and aspirating fluid then cyclically 
instilling fluid and aspirating until the effluent is clear, has also 
diminished in recent years. The reasons for the decline in the use of 
this technique include a growing appreciation of the risk of aspira-
tion during the lavage procedure and evolving evidence that the 
overall clinical effectiveness of gastric lavage may be more lim-
ited than originally thought. Like induction of emesis, where the 
efficacy of the procedure declines with increasing time interval 
between the use of the procedure and the time of ingestion, gastric 
lavage too appears to have this important limitation (Vale and Kulig, 
2004). Many toxicologists agree that if gastric lavage is to be used, 
to optimize effectiveness, it should be performed within 1 hour of 
ingestion of the oral poison. It is more likely to be recommended 
if the patient ingested a highly toxic substance, especially in the 
cases where it is likely that activated charcoal will not be effective 
for the substance ingested. Careful attention to the patient’s gag 
reflex prior to initiation of this procedure is important. If the patient 
does not exhibit a gag reflex, then endotracheal intubation must be 
performed to adequately protect the airway and prevent aspiration. 
It is essential that the orogastric tube be of sufficient size (36 to 40 
French for an adult; 22 to 28 French for a child) to be useful. Even 
with a large bore orogastric tube some tablets or capsules may not 
be able to pass through the tube. In the pediatric patient, there are 
practical limitations to the use of large bore tubes. In this case, 
­orogastric lavage may only be useful to attempt removal of liquid 
toxicant or possibly dissolved tablets or capsules.
As described earlier, the medicinal use of charcoal to prevent 
the absorption of orally ingested toxins dates back more than 150 
years. The first reported medicinal use of oral charcoal to adsorb an 
ingested toxicant is credited to the American physician, Hort, who, 
in 1834, used large amounts of powdered charcoal to successfully 
treat a patient poisoned with a chloride salt of mercury. A dramatic 
demonstration of the adsorptive effect of oral charcoal was that by 
Tourey, a French pharmacist who reportedly mixed a lethal dose 
of strychnine with charcoal and consumed the combination before

Clinical Toxicology
Chapter 33
1539
his colleagues at the French Academy in 1930 (Andersen, 1946). 
Early in vitro investigations of the adsorptive properties of activated 
charcoal demonstrated the effect of charcoal on various chemical 
substances in aqueous solutions (Andersen, 1946), the effect of pH 
on charcoal adsorption properties (Andersen, 1947), and the effect 
of activated charcoal on the adsorption of strychnine from gastric 
contents (Andersen, 1948).
During the last two to three decades, there has been an increas-
ing use of oral charcoal as a therapeutic intervention for oral poison-
ing. For many years, orally administered activated charcoal has been 
routinely incorporated into the initial treatment of a patient poi-
soned by the oral route. The term “activated” refers to the substan-
tially increased adsorptive capacity that results from the processing 
of charcoal obtained from the burning of carbonaceous substances 
such as wood pulp, sugars, organic material, and industrial wastes. 
The processing involves extensive treatment with steam, carbon 
dioxide, oxygen, zinc chloride, sulfuric acid, or phosphoric acid 
at temperatures of 500°F to 900°F to “activate” the residue oxida-
tion, which leads to a significant increase in surface area through 
creation of small pores in the material. Many organic molecules are 
significantly bound to activated charcoal. Generally, low-molecular-
weight and polar compounds such as ethanol tend to be less well 
bound to activated charcoal. Substances such as lithium, iron, and 
certain inorganic salts are also not appreciably bound.
In acute oral overdose, activated charcoal is typically admin-
istered at a dosage of 1.0 to 1.5 g/kg. When the patient is unable to 
safely drink, the charcoal is placed into the stomach via an orogas-
tric or nasogastric tube. Proper use of activated charcoal to prevent 
the absorption of orally administered toxicants requires that the 
patient’s gag reflex be intact and expected to remain so in order 
to minimize the risk for aspiration of the administered charcoal. 
Once a recommendation to use a single dose of activated charcoal 
routinely for oral poisonings, now many are more cautious regard-
ing the use of this moiety for decontamination (Chyka et al., 2005). 
The main reason cited for the reluctance is lack of definitive evi-
dence of improvement in patient clinical outcomes. Given the 
obvious limitations to conduct adequately statistically powered, 
randomized, controlled clinical trials, many toxicologists are more 
inclined to utilize this method for potentially serious ingestions with 
appropriate clinical caution (Juurlink, 2016).
The incorporation of the procedure of whole bowel irrigation 
for the treatment of the poisoned patient has gained acceptance in 
specific poisoning situations. Whole bowel irrigation is a procedure 
that cleanses the lumen of the gastrointestinal tract. The procedure 
is accomplished with a poorly absorbed, osmotically neutral poly-
ethylene glycol electrolyte solution that is administered orally to 
expel the contents of the intestines via the rectal route. This proce-
dure is similar to that used to prepare a patient for endoscopic medi-
cal procedures of the large intestine. A unique use of this procedure 
in the setting of poisoning is for removal of ingested packets of 
illegal drugs swallowed by people smuggling the material and hop-
ing to avoid detection by concealing the drugs in their intestines. 
Sometimes, the containers carried by body packers may leak and 
begin to cause symptoms that often lead the carrier to detection and 
treatment. Additional uses for this gastrointestinal decontamination 
technique are to prevent the ongoing absorption of sustained release 
formulations of drugs and for the early treatment of ingestions of 
substantial amounts of iron preparations or other orally ingested 
metallic poisons (Tenebein et al., 2004).
In summary, many clinical toxicologists agree that, for the 
prevention of further absorption following oral ingestion of most 
chemicals, the administration of oral activated charcoal provides 
an opportunity to lessen the systemic exposure of orally ingested 
toxicants that are likely to bind to charcoal, and if given in a timely 
fashion with appropriate clinical airway precautions. The other 
modalities described above have either a more limited role (whole 
bowel irrigation and gastric lavage) or a very rare place in gas-
tric decontamination (syrup of ipecac) for use in the treatment of 
a poisoned patient. Most poison treatment centers favor the use of 
activated charcoal without lavage for treatment of oral poisoning 
and drug overdose. Many PCCs recommend home use of activated 
charcoal for immediate treatment of potentially significant poison-
ings. The use of ipecac syrup is largely limited to individual patients 
in whom it is likely to make a difference in outcome, such as the 
patients in rural environments, hours away from more definitive 
medical treatment, in whom it appears to be the most effective 
method available in that particular set of circumstances, or in whom 
it is the only method available to attempt gastric emptying.
Enhancement of Poison Elimination
There are several methods available to enhance the elimination of 
specific poisons or drugs once they have been absorbed into the 
systemic circulation. The primary methods employed for this use 
today include alkalinization of the urine, hemodialysis, hemoper-
fusion, hemofiltration, plasma exchange or exchange transfusion, 
and the administration of oral activated charcoal serially during the 
treatment time course.
The use of urinary alkalinization results in the enhancement 
of the renal clearance of certain weak acids. The basic principle 
applied is to increase urinary filtrate pH to a level sufficient to 
ionize the weak acid and prevent renal tubule reabsorption of the 
molecule. This is also referred to as ion trapping. The ion-trapping 
phenomenon occurs when the pKa of the chemical is such that after 
the chemical undergoes glomerular filtration into the renal tubules, 
alteration of the pH of the urinary filtrate can ionize and “trap” the 
chemical in the urinary filtrate, lessening the extent to which it is 
reabsorbed. This increases the amount of toxicant that is eliminated 
in the urine per unit time, which is an indicator of the renal clear-
ance of the toxicant. A schematic representation of this is shown for 
salicylate in Fig. 33-2.
Clinical use of this alkalinization procedure requires adequate 
urine flow and close clinical monitoring including that of the pH of 
the urine. The procedure is accomplished by adding sterile sodium 
bicarbonate to sterile water with 5% dextrose for intravenous (IV) 
infusion and administering the mixture intravenously to titrate the 
urine pH to 7.5 to 8.5. The drugs for which this procedure has been 
shown clinically efficacious include salicylate compounds and phe-
nobarbital that have pKas of 3.2 and 7.4, respectively. The increase 
in total body clearance for salicylate, for example, by increasing 
urinary pH from 5.0 to 8.0 can be substantial. The AAPCC and the 
European Association of Poisons Centres and Clinical Toxicologists 
2004 Position Paper on Urinary Alkalinization recommend this pro-
cedure for moderately severe salicylate poisoning for a patient not 
meeting criteria for hemodialysis (Proudfoot et al., 2004).
Theoretically, there could be similar advantages to be gained 
from acidification of the urine regarding enhancement of clearance 
of drugs such as amphetamine and phencyclidine; however, there 
are significant adverse events associated with acidification such as 
acute renal failure and acidosis and electrolyte disturbances. For 
this reason, acidification of the urine is not recommended as a thera-
peutic intervention in the treatment of poisoning.
The dialysis techniques, either hemodialysis, continuous 
venous filtration, or peritoneal dialysis, rely on passage of the

1540
Applications of Toxicology
Unit VII
toxic chemical through a semipermeable dialysis membrane (or 
the patient’s peritoneal membrane for peritoneal dialysis) so that 
it can equilibrate with the dialysate and subsequently be removed. 
Hemodialysis incorporates a blood pump to pass blood in close 
proximity to a dialysis membrane to allow chemicals permeable 
to the membrane to pass through and reach equilibrium. In order 
for this method to be clinically beneficial, the chemical must have 
a relatively low volume of distribution, low protein binding, a rela-
tively high degree of water solubility, and low molecular weight. 
Use of hemodialysis to attempt to remove a chemical with the latter 
three characteristics but with a high volume of distribution, such as 
digoxin, would not be clinically beneficial, because the vast major-
ity of the drug is not in the physiological compartment (blood) 
accessible to the dialysis membrane. Therefore, despite hemodialy-
sis being able to effectively clear the digoxin in plasma during the 
dialysis run, most of the body burden of digoxin is located outside 
of the blood compartment and is not appreciably affected by the 
procedure. Similarly, if a drug is highly protein-bound, only a small 
percentage (the free fraction of the circulating toxicant) would be 
available to pass through the dialysis membrane and be cleared 
from the body. Some drugs, such as phenobarbital, can readily cross 
these membranes and go from a high concentration in plasma to a 
lower concentration in the dialysate. Phenobarbital has a relatively 
low volume of distribution (0.5 to 0.7 L/kg) and protein binding is 
also relatively low (30% to 50%), so the characteristics of the drug 
and its pharmacokinetic properties create appropriate conditions for 
the drug to be removed from the total body burden to make the 
technique valuable in serious cases of overdose (Brown et al., 1985; 
Cutler et al., 1987). Drugs and other chemicals for which hemodi-
alysis has been shown to be clinically effective in the treatment of 
poisoning by these agents is shown in Table 33-6.
The technique of hemoperfusion is similar to hemodialysis 
except that there is no dialysis membrane or dialysate involved 
in the procedure. The patient’s blood is pumped through a perfu-
sion cartridge where it is in direct contact with adsorptive mate-
rial (usually activated charcoal) that has a coating of material such 
as cellulose or a heparin-containing gel to prevent the adsorptive 
material from being carried back to the patient’s circulation. The 
principle characteristics for a drug or other chemical to be success-
fully removed by this technique are low volume of distribution and 
adsorption by activated charcoal. This method can be used success-
fully with lipid-soluble compounds and with higher-molecular-
weight compounds than for hemodialysis. Protein binding does not 
significantly interfere with removal by hemoperfusion. Because of 
the more direct contact of the patient’s blood with the adsorptive 
material, the medical risks of this procedure include thrombocyto-
penia, hypocalcemia, and leukopenia. This technique is primarily 
used for the treatment of serious toxic exposures to theophylline, 
colchicine, paraquat, meprobamate, and possibly amanita phalloi-
des toxin exposure. The technique is not often employed and, per-
haps for this reason, not all healthcare facilities actively stock the 
specialized, sterile hemoperfusion cartridge required for the proce-
dure. This limitation results in the procedure usually only available 
at major, metropolitan treatment centers.
The use of the technique of hemofiltration for the treatment of 
poisoning has been suggested as an additional modality for enhance-
ment of chemical elimination. During this procedure, the patient’s 
blood is delivered through hollow fiber tubes and an ultrafiltrate of 
plasma is removed by hydrostatic pressure from the blood side of 
the membrane. Different membrane pore sizes are available for use 
so the size of the filtered molecules can be controlled during the 
Renal plasma
Urinary ﬁltrate
Filtration
Reabsorption
1
pH 6.0
300
0.01
pH 8.0
300
Bicarbonate effect
Urinary alkalinization:  Salicylate excretion
OH
OH
O
OH
O–
O
OH
OH
OH
O–
O
O
Figure 33-2.  Ion-trapping schematic for salicylate in the renal tubule.
Table 33-6 
Chemicals for Which Hemodialysis Has Been Shown 
Effective as a Treatment Modality for Poisoning
Alcohols
Lithium
Antibiotics
Meprobamate
Boric acid
Metformin
Bromide
Methotrexate
Caffeine
Paraldehyde
Calcium
Phenobarbital
Chloral hydrate
Potassium
Carbamazepine
Salicylates
Diethylene glycol
Strychnine
Fluorides
Theophylline
Iodides
Thiocynates
Isoniazid
Valproic acid
Isopropanol

Clinical Toxicology
Chapter 33
1541
procedure. The perfusion pressure for the technique is either gener-
ated by the patient’s blood pressure (for arteriovenous hemofiltra-
tion) or by a blood pump (for venovenous hemofiltration). Needed 
fluid and electrolytes removed in the ultrafiltrate are replaced intra-
venously with sterile solutions. The procedure has the advantage of 
running continuously as opposed to the 4- to 6-hour limitation for a 
hemodialysis treatment cycle. One potential advantage of continu-
ous filtration versus intermittent hemodialysis is that the rebound 
phenomenon does not occur with continuous filtration. Rebound 
phenomenon is the observed sharp increase in plasma toxicant con-
centration shortly after hemodialysis is terminated due to redistribu-
tion of the toxicant from the nonvascular, tissue, compartment to the 
vascular space. This rebound is commonly seen during hemodialysis 
for lithium overdose (Bosinski et al., 1998). Thus far, clinical evi-
dence to support continuous filtration for enhancing total body clear-
ance of toxicants in poisoning cases is insufficient to encourage wide 
usage of the procedure (Goodman and Goldfarb, 2006).
The use of either plasma exchange or exchange transfu-
sions has been relatively limited in the field of clinical toxicology. 
Although the techniques afford the potential advantage of being 
able to remove high-molecular-weight and/or plasma protein–
bound toxicants, the clinical utility in poison treatment has been 
limited. Plasma exchange or plasma pheresis involves removal of 
plasma and replacement with frozen donor plasma, albumin, or both 
with IV fluid. The risks and complications of this technique include 
allergic-type reactions, infectious complications, and hypotension 
(Mokrzycki and Kaplan, 1994). Exchange transfusion involves 
replacement of a patient’s blood volume with donor blood. The use 
of this technique in poison treatment is relatively uncommon and 
mostly confined to the setting of inadvertent drug overdose in a 
neonate or premature infant in the setting of a neonatal intensive 
care unit.
Serial oral administration of activated charcoal, also referred 
to as multiple-dose activated charcoal (MDAC), has been shown 
to increase the systemic clearance of various drug substances. The 
mechanism for the observed increase in total body clearance asso-
ciated with the use of repeated doses of oral charcoal is thought to 
be translumenal efflux of drug from blood to the charcoal passing 
through the gastrointestinal tract (Berg et al., 1982). In addition, 
MDAC is thought to produce a further enhancement in clearance 
by interrupting the enteroenteric–enterohepatic circulation of drugs 
that undergo that pharmacological route of elimination and recircu-
lation. After systemic absorption, a drug may reenter the gut lumen 
by passive diffusion if the intraluminal drug concentration is lower 
than that in blood. The rate of this passive diffusion depends on the 
concentration gradient and the intestinal surface area, permeability, 
and blood flow. The activated charcoal in the gut lumen serves as a 
“sink” for toxicants. A concentration gradient is maintained and the 
chemical passes continuously into the gut lumen, where it is adsorbed 
to charcoal. The characteristics of chemicals that favor enhanced 
elimination by MDAC include (1) significant enteroenteric– 
enterohepatic circulation, including the formation of active recircu-
lating metabolites, (2) prolonged plasma half-life after an overdose, 
(3) small (<1.0 L/kg) volume of distribution, (4) limited (<60%) 
plasma protein binding, (5) a pKa that maximizes transport of the 
drug across cell membranes, (6) sustained-release/resin-form tab-
lets and/or capsules, and (7) onset of organ failure (e.g., kidney) that 
results in reduced capacity of the major route of elimination of the 
toxicant (for renally excreted chemicals) so that MDAC may make 
a considerable contribution to total body clearance.
The technique involves continuing oral administration of acti-
vated charcoal beyond the initial dosage (described above) every 2 
to 4 hours with approximately one-half the initial dose, or 0.5 g/kg. 
The charcoal is generally mixed as an aqueous slurry and a cathartic 
substance is not incorporated due to the potential for electrolyte 
abnormalities with repeated administration of cathartic agents. An 
alternative technique for MDAC is to give the activated charcoal 
via an orogastric tube or nasogastric tube a loading dose of 1.0 g/kg 
of an aqueous slurry of activated charcoal, followed by a continu-
ous infusion intragastrically of 0.2 g/kg/h. The duration of gastric 
infusion depends on the clinical status of the patient and repeated 
monitoring of plasma drug concentrations where indicated (Pollack 
et al., 1981; Van de Graaff et al., 1982; Park et al., 1983, 1986; 
Mofenson et al., 1985; Ohning et al., 1986; Ilkhanipour et al., 1992; 
Goulbourne et al., 1994; Chyka, 1995; Weisman, 1998).
Studies in animals and human volunteers have shown that 
MDAC increases drug elimination significantly, but few prospective 
randomized controlled clinical studies in poisoned patients have 
been published, demonstrating a significant reduction in patient 
morbidity or mortality when MDAC is employed. One study, how-
ever, does provide a striking example of clinical benefit from the 
use of MDAC (de Silva et al., 2003). The study showed that patients 
who intentionally poisoned themselves with yellow oleander seeds 
(a cardiac poison) and were randomized to MDAC (after all patients 
received an adequate initial single dose of activated charcoal) had a 
statistically improved outcome in both mortality and cardiac mor-
bidity. The early use of MDAC is an attractive alternative to more 
complex methods of enhancing toxicant elimination, such as hemo-
dialysis and hemoperfusion, although only in a relatively small sub-
set of patients. The decision to use MDAC depends on the clinical 
situation, including the specific chemical involved, the presence of 
contraindications (e.g., intestinal obstruction) to the use of MDAC, 
and the likely effectiveness of alternative methods of therapy. A 
list of chemicals for which MDAC has been shown as an effective 
means of enhanced body clearance is provided in Table 33-7.
Use of Antidotes in Poisoning
A relatively small number of specific antidotes are available for 
clinical use in the treatment of poisoning. There are several reasons 
for the overall paucity of available specific antidotes for poisonings. 
The two primary reasons are the practical difficulties in performing 
clinical research in poisoned patients, and the relatively small finan-
cial incentives for commercial development of poisoning antidotes. 
Shortly after the terrorist attack on the United States in 2001, the 
federal government put in place an FDA authorization to stimulate 
innovative development of therapeutic agents to treat chemical, bio-
logic, and radioactive attacks. In 2002, the FDA enacted the Animal 
Efficacy Rule (Animal Rule), a regulation that allows sponsors to 
attain FDA approval of some products based on safety testing in 
humans and efficacy testing only in animals (Gaffney, 2015). This 
rule is intended to allow FDA to approve products intended to treat 
serious or life-threatening conditions caused by exposure to lethal 
or permanently disabling toxic biological, chemical, radiological, or 
Table 33-7  
Drugs for Which Multiple Dose Activated Charcoal 
Has Been Shown Effective as a Treatment Modality 
for Poisoning
Carbamazepine
Nadolol
Dapsone
Phenobarbital
Digoxin
Salicylates
Digitoxin
Theophylline

1542
Applications of Toxicology
Unit VII
nuclear substances for the indications of treatment of chemical, bio-
logic, or radiologic mass poisonings, such as could be expected in a 
terrorist attack. For obvious reasons, testing of therapeutic agents for 
efficacy would not be possible for ethical and/or logistical reasons. 
The Animal Rule allows the sponsor to establish product efficacy 
in a validated animal model and then provide preapproval human 
safety data, in healthy human volunteers. The human safety data 
would involve administration of therapeutic dosages of the chem/
bio/rad treatment agent in the absence of the poisoning. The phar-
maceutical company-sponsor would also be expected to perform a 
field study post-approval, in the event that the indicated exposure 
occurs naturally for infectious outbreaks or during an attack.
In addition to the Animal Rule Act, the FDA has in place, since 
1983, the Orphan Drug Act that provides financial incentives to com-
panies who develop therapies for treatment of rare diseases, defined 
as affecting less than 200,000 persons in the United States (Orphan 
Drug Act, 2013). Several treatments for poisoning have been 
approved under the orphan regulations. Fomepizole (4-methylpyr-
azole), a chemical inhibitor of alcohol dehydrogenase, was approved 
as an antidote for ethylene glycol (and later methanol) poisoning 
via the Orphan Drug pathway in December 1997. Two chelating 
agents, insoluble Prussian blue and Pentetate Calcium Trisodium, 
were approved in 2003 and 2004, respectively, for the treatment of 
exposure to radioactive heavy metals. Another Orphan Drug Act 
approval was hydroxocobalamin, a cyanide chelating agent. This 
chemical was approved in the United States in December 2006 after 
being approved in Europe many years earlier. Despite these early 
successes, there have not been a large number of antidote products 
approved to this point in time as a result of this regulatory incentive.
The mechanism of action of various antidotes is quite differ-
ent. For example, a chelating agent for heavy metal poisoning or 
Fab fragments specific to digoxin or crotalid venom work by physi-
cally binding the toxicant, preventing the chemical from exerting 
a deleterious effect in vivo and, in some cases, facilitating body 
clearance of the chemical. In essence, the Fab fragments serve as 
biologically derived chelating agents to bind and render the spe-
cific chemical inactive. Other antidotes pharmacologically antago-
nize the effects of the toxicant at the endogenous receptor level. 
Such is the case with atropine, an antimuscarinic, anticholinergic 
drug used to pharmacologically antagonize at the receptor level, 
the effects of organophosphate insecticides or acetylcholinester-
ase-inhibiting nerve gases, which produce cholinergic, muscarinic 
effects, which if sufficient, can be lethal. Certain chemicals exert 
their antidote effects by chemically reacting with biological systems 
to increase the detoxifying capacity for the toxicant. For example, 
sodium nitrite is given to patients poisoned with cyanide to cause 
formation of methemoglobin, which serves as an alternative bind-
ing site for the cyanide ion, thereby making it less toxic to vital 
body systems. Other chemicals, such as l-carnitine, are available to 
mitigate the biochemical toxicity of high exposures to valproic acid 
(an antiseizure medication) at the level of the mitochondria. Just as 
in other therapeutic areas of drug development, basic research into 
fundamental mechanisms can reveal viable drug targets that can be 
exploited to produce a point of intervention for a drug/antidote to 
lessen the effects of a toxic exposure.
An example of an efficacious antidote with an uncertain mech-
anism is intravenous lipid emulsion (ILE) therapy. ILE as a product 
has been in clinical use for decades as a nutritional supplement for 
seriously ill patients who were not able to receive nutrition via their 
gastrointestinal tract. As an antidote, the 20% lipid emulsion solu-
tion is most often employed. The discovery of the beneficial effects 
of ILE comes from the anesthesiology community, through initial 
basic science work and then experimental clinical use in potentially 
fatal human accidental exposures. Briefly, the use of regional nerve 
block local anesthesia has been longstanding. A significant and 
potentially fatal adverse consequence of this procedure was inad-
vertent IV injection of a local anesthetic (LA) drug that results in 
high, likely cardiotoxic concentrations of the LA in the systemic 
circulation. There were no effective treatments readily available to 
prevent this toxicity once the misdirected injection had occurred. 
Because LA drugs are generally highly lipophilic, the anesthesiolo-
gists experimented with the immediate use of ILE in animal models 
and found a beneficial effect on survival (Weinberg et al., 1998). 
Subsequently, beneficial effects in patients having nerve block pro-
cedures, who experienced inadvertent IV administration of the anes-
thetic drugs, were published as case reports (Rosenblatt et al., 2006).
The current understanding of the mechanism of action is that 
the ILE serves as a lipid sink in the blood compartment, partitioning 
the LA predominantly into the lipid phase in blood (ILE), reduc-
ing the relative concentration of the cardiotoxic LA in the aqueous 
phase of the blood. This partitioning then decreases the fraction of 
the LA that is then available to penetrate target organ tissue and 
exert a deleterious effect. Other mechanisms proposed as either 
primary or contributory to the beneficial effect of ILE on LA toxic-
ity include enhancement of cardiac metabolism, that is, fatty acids 
from the ILE provide an energy source to cardiac myocytes; another 
possible mechanism is that ILE activates cardiac Ca and Na chan-
nels. While there is some evidence to support the energy enhance-
ment and ion channel mechanisms, the partitioning mechanism at 
this point in time is more strongly supported.
The use of ILE therapy is recommended for treatment of sig-
nificant systemic toxicity of LAs, including cardiac arrest from 
inadvertent IV administration of the LA. ILE use for the treatment 
of non-LA poisoning by lipophilic toxicants is not well supported 
by evidence (Cao et al., 2015; Levine et al., 2016). Despite the lack 
of evidence to support the use of ILE non-LA poisonings, many 
clinical toxicologists will recommend a therapeutic trial of this 
treatment in the setting of serious cardiovascular effects from lipo-
philic toxicants such as a calcium channel blocker or beta-blocker 
not responsive to first or second line treatments. More research is 
needed to fully understand the optimum use of ILE outside of intra-
venous poisoning with LA agents.
The time course for antidote onset of action is highly variable 
across currently available antidotes. Naloxone, given intravenously 
(IV), can have a dramatic effect on the level of consciousness of an 
opiate-poisoned patient within minutes of administration. Chelating 
agents such as desferoxamine may require multiple dosages over 
many days before a clinically detectable effect is seen.
The skillful therapeutic use of antidotes is essential to opti-
mize the treatment of the poisoned patient. Many antidotes have a 
relatively narrow safety margin or low therapeutic index. Excessive 
dosing with an antidote can in some instances be more harmful 
than the expected effects of the toxicant itself. An example of this 
is when physostigmine (a cholinergic agent) is given at an excessive 
dose or dosing rate to a patient with mild-to-moderate anticholiner-
gic poisoning, the antidote can cause a potentially fatal bradycardia 
that can progress to a fatal cardiac arrest. Some antidotes require an 
adjustment of their dosage based on a measured blood concentra-
tion of the chemical (e.g., digoxin Fab fragments), or based on the 
clinical assessment of the patient such as with sodium bicarbonate 
usage in a tricyclic antidepressant overdose. A significant part of 
the clinical training in the field of medical toxicology is devoted to 
learning how to use antidotes skillfully.
An important area of research in clinical toxicology has been 
in the study of prognostic indicators of poisoning severity and pre-
dictors for the level of treatment required. For practical reasons

Clinical Toxicology
Chapter 33
1543
much of this work has been retrospective in nature but has resulted 
in significant aids to guide the treatment rendered by clinical toxi-
cologists. Several authors have proposed “action levels” that are a 
threshold for a certain level of clinical intervention based upon a 
measured plasma concentration of the chemical or a clinical mani-
festation of the poisoning. One of the best examples of a quanti-
tative relationship between plasma concentrations and prognostic 
stratification is the previously mentioned nomogram used for acet-
aminophen concentration and risk of hepatotoxicity (Rumack et al., 
1981). As discussed below as a case example, this retrospective 
analysis of 662 patients with excess acetaminophen exposure was 
the basis of a nomogram to aid in the risk stratification for signifi-
cant hepatic toxicity that is still in use today. Similarly, a patient 
with a measured plasma valproic acid concentration of 900 mcg/mL 
after a single oral exposure would be expected to exhibit signifi-
cant toxicity. If the patient’s clinical condition correlated with the 
measured laboratory plasma concentration (i.e., laboratory error 
was unlikely), the patient would likely require aggressive treatment 
measures such as hemodialysis instead of only supportive care. Use 
of a patient-derived prognostic indicator that correlates with clinical 
outcome can also involve electrocardiographic measurements. An 
example of this is the case series study considering the publication 
that described the relationship of the QRS interval on the patient’s 
12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) and the severity of poisoning by 
tricyclic antidepressant drugs (Boehnert and Lovejoy, 1985). This 
important observational study helped to stratify patients poisoned 
with an overdose of first-generation tricyclic antidepressants into 
risk categories based on the drug-induced, lengthening of the QRS 
on the patient’s ECG to predict the eventual development of sei-
zures or cardiac arrhythmias in the course of the poisoning. This, 
like the Rumack–Matthew nomogram for acetaminophen, is still 
clinically useful more than 30 years after publication.
Another way that prognostic information is studied is when a 
constellation of clinical signs and symptoms is proven to correlate 
with a clinical outcome following exposure to a specific poison. An 
example of this would be a worker with a significant topical methanol 
exposure who demonstrates a metabolic acidosis with an elevated 
AG, an osmol gap, and visual symptoms. Based on clinical signs 
and symptoms, this patient would likely undergo hemodialysis even 
in the absence of a confirmatory measurement of the methanol con-
centration in serum. These relationships, the correlation of serious 
clinical effects with a valproic acid level above 900 mcg/mL or visual 
symptoms in a methanol-poisoned patient (Ellenhorn, 1997a, 1997b), 
have been derived from many years of observational study of poison-
ing outcomes by investigators in the field of clinical toxicology.
Early on in clinical toxicology, the majority of publications 
were primarily case reports making it difficult to determine the 
relative effectiveness of various treatments being assessed. There 
were also significant discrepancies in the initial management of 
the patients confounding the ultimate outcomes of the cases. The 
case series or meta-analysis type of scientific analysis was a helpful 
step to advance the study of clinical outcomes and assess the qual-
ity of treatment provided to poisoned patients. The highest level 
of evidence for establishing efficacy and safety for therapeutic 
interventions is the prospective, double blinded, controlled, clini-
cal trial. Whenever possible to successfully execute, these clinical 
investigations are most likely to result in objective data with the 
least confounding of results if properly conducted. These advan-
tages better enable clinicians to validate (or dismiss) new therapeu-
tic modalities and treatment strategies. Unfortunately, the ability to 
perform these trials in the evaluation of new treatments for poison-
ing is significantly limited due to ethical concerns when considering 
withholding effective treatment (placebo treatment), or the ability 
to effectively blind treatment groups in the poison treatment setting. 
In addition, the heterogeneity between individual poisoning cases 
would likely introduce potential unbalanced, confounding factors 
into the study that could lead to inaccurate results.
Supportive Care of the Poisoned Patient
Once the initial treatment phase in the clinical management of the poi-
soned patient has been successfully completed, the care of the patient 
is generally shifted to an inpatient hospital setting for those patients 
who will require admission. This supportive care phase of poison 
treatment is very important. Poisoned patients who are unstable or at 
risk for significant clinical instability during the later phases of their 
poisoning are generally admitted to a critical care unit for close moni-
toring. In addition, patients who are excessively sedated from their 
poisoning or those who require mechanical ventilation or invasive 
hemodynamic monitoring are also candidates for an intensive care 
stay. Not only are there certain poisonings that have delayed toxic-
ity such as acetaminophen, paraquat, and diphenoxylate, but there 
are also toxicants that exhibit multiple phases of toxicity that include 
delayed effects (i.e., ethylene glycol, salicylate, and buspirone).
Similar to other seriously ill, hospitalized patients, patients 
admitted for continued treatment of poisoning are at risk for nos-
ocomial infections, iatrogenic fluid and electrolyte disturbances, 
as well as potential harmful effects from the initial therapies that 
they received for treatment of their poisoning. For example, gastric 
lavage, or orogastric infusion of activated charcoal can cause aspira-
tion and lead to pneumonitis. Any drug that severely alters a patient’s 
mental status causing obtundation can allow aspiration of gastric 
contents associated with a loss of the gag reflex. Organ system dys-
function due to profound hypotension caused by a poisoning can 
result in delayed complications such as acute renal failure, hepatic 
failure, and permanent brain damage. Close clinical monitoring can 
detect later phase poisoning complications and allow an opportunity 
for prompt medical intervention to minimize patient morbidity and 
mortality. These are but a few of the reasons that close vigilance is a 
very important component of the support phase of poison treatment.
Another important component of the supportive care phase of 
poison treatment is the psychiatric assessment. For intentional self-
poisonings, a formal psychiatric evaluation of the patient should be 
performed prior to patient discharge. In many cases, it is not pos-
sible to perform a psychiatric interview of the patient during the early 
phases of treatment and evaluation. Once the patient has been stabi-
lized and is able to effectively communicate, the psychiatric evalua-
tion should be obtained prior to determining the patient’s disposition. 
Generally, a patient who has attempted suicide should be constantly 
observed until they have been evaluated by the psychiatric consultant 
and judged to be at low risk for being without constant surveillance.
CASE EXAMPLES OF  
SPECIFIC POISONINGS
Acetaminophen
A 16-year-old female patient arrives in the ED by ambulance after 
being found by a parent in what appeared to be an intoxicated state 
with empty pill bottles scattered about her room. The parent reports 
the patient was despondent recently after breaking up with her boy-
friend. The patient is tearful and reports abdominal pain and admits 
to drinking alcohol and taking over-the-counter (OTC) pills in an 
apparent suicide attempt. The estimated time of ingestion is 6 hours 
prior to arrival in the ED. The patient does not use prescriptions, 
OTC medications, or dietary supplements on a regular basis and

1544
Applications of Toxicology
Unit VII
is not known to have a history of regular consumption of alcoholic 
beverages or use illicit drugs. In addition, the patient did not have a 
history of psychiatric disorders or previous suicide attempt.
On physical examination the vital signs were blood pressure 
118/80 mm Hg, pulse 88/min and regular, respiratory rate 18/min, 
and temperature 37.0°C. She was awake and oriented to person, 
place and time, responded to questions appropriately with slightly 
slurred speech. Other pertinent findings included normal bowel 
sounds with mild epigastric tenderness. The neurological examina-
tion was only significant for slightly slurred speech.
Routine clinical laboratory studies were ordered STAT (elec-
trolytes, creatinine, BUN, glucose, complete blood count with dif-
ferential, coagulation studies, urine analysis, and urine toxicology 
screen) an ethanol level, salicylate level and a plasma acetamino-
phen level. Chest and abdominal radiography were normal.
The patient was given 1.5 g/kg oral activated charcoal as a slurry 
in a sorbitol cathartic and placed in the intensive monitoring section 
of the ED while the laboratory tests were being performed. Forty 
minutes later, the laboratory results returned and showed a mildly 
increased white blood cell count, liver transaminase values were 
elevated at approximately three times the upper limit of normal, and 
an acetaminophen concentration was 308 μg/mL. Salicylate was not 
detected; ethanol level was 89 mg/dL (just above the legal threshold 
for driving while intoxicated in most states). She denied taking any 
other medications with the acetaminophen and alcohol. Based on the 
Rumack–Matthew nomogram (Fig. 33-1), a plasma acetaminophen 
concentration of 308 μg/mL at approximately 6 hours after ingestion 
is well within the “probable hepatic toxicity” range, and therefore 
treatment with N-acetylcysteine (NAC) was required.
The patient received the first dose of IV NAC in the ED 
and was admitted to the medical ward to complete the treatment 
course of IV NAC. Hepatic transaminases remained elevated over 
the ensuing 2 days of the hospitalization, peaking at five times the 
upper limit of normal. The patient’s bilirubin remained within 
the normal range as did indices of synthetic hepatic function 
(coagulation pathway measurements). The patient was seen by 
the Psychiatry Consultation service, which determined she was 
not actively suicidal; she was discharged from the hospital 2 days 
after admission with scheduled psychiatric and medical follow-up 
appointments.
Acetaminophen has been used as an analgesic and antipyretic 
since the mid-1950s and has become more prominently recognized 
as a potential hepatotoxicant in the overdose situation since the 
original British reports in the late 1960s (Proudfoot and Wright, 
1970). Work on the mechanisms of the liver toxicity of this drug 
has provided a scientific basis for therapy (Mitchell et al., 1973).
The clinical presentation of patients poisoned with acetamino-
phen is sufficiently confusing in some cases; it is difficult to esti-
mate the time of ingestion. Due to the paucity of clinical symptoms 
with acute overdose, waiting for the appearance of symptoms is an 
inadequate strategy for the clinical decision-making process regard-
ing institution of treatment. Most clinicians will request an acet-
aminophen concentration be measured for any patient suspected of 
having a toxic exposure to any substance precisely for the reason 
highlighted above—that is the paucity of signs and symptoms asso-
ciated with an acetaminophen overdose makes inadvertent missing 
of a potentially fatal overdose until the window for maximum anti-
dote effectiveness has passed.
Acetaminophen in normal individuals is inactivated by sul-
fation (approximately 52%) and glucuronide conjugation (42%). 
About 2% of the drug is excreted unchanged. The remaining 4% 
is biotransformed by the cytochrome P-450 mixed-function oxi-
dase system. The P-450 isozyme responsible for acetaminophen 
biotransformation is CYP2E1. Metabolism by CYP2E1 results in a 
potentially toxic metabolite that is normally detoxified by conjuga-
tion with glutathione and excreted as the mercapturate. Evidence 
extrapolated from animal studies estimates that when 70% of 
endogenous hepatic glutathione is consumed, the toxic metabolite 
becomes available for covalent binding to hepatic cellular com-
ponents. However, patients who are concurrently using, or have 
recently used, chemicals that induce CYP2E1, such as in the case 
of chronic ethanol exposure or phenobarbital use, may produce 
more than 4% of the toxic metabolite. It is therefore important to 
determine, whenever possible, whether or not the patient’s CYP2E1 
system may be induced when assessing the risk of hepatic necro-
sis from acetaminophen overdose in any given individual. When 
there is evidence (medical history) of concurrent chemicals that 
induce CYP2E1, the treatment nomogram for acetaminophen does 
not directly apply, and interpretation by the treating physician must 
be modified to a lower threshold for treatment with NAC (Rumack 
et al., 1981).
Follow-up liver biopsy studies of patients who have recovered 
3 months to a year after hepatotoxicity have demonstrated no long-
term sequelae or chronic toxicity (Clark et al., 1973). A very small 
percentage (0.25%) of patients in the national multi-clinic study con-
ducted in Denver may progress to hepatic encephalopathy with subse-
quent death. The clinical nature of the acetaminophen overdose is one 
of sharp peaks of serum glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT) 
by day 3, with recovery to less than 100 IU/L by day 7 or 8. Patients 
with SGOT levels as high as 20,000 IU/L have shown complete recov-
ery and no sequelae 1 week after ingestion (Arena et al., 1978).
Laboratory evaluation of a potentially poisoned patient is 
crucial in terms of both hepatic measures of toxicity and plasma 
levels of acetaminophen. Accurate estimation of acetaminophen in 
the plasma should be done on samples drawn at least 4 hours after 
ingestion, when peak plasma concentrations are expected.
Once an accurate plasma level has been obtained, it should be 
plotted on the Rumack–Matthew nomogram to determine whether 
NAC therapy is indicated (Fig. 33-1). This nomogram is based on 
a series of patients with and without hepatotoxicity and their cor-
responding measured plasma acetaminophen concentrations.
Treatment should be instituted in any patient with a plasma con-
centration in the potentially toxic range. Some clinical toxicologists 
recommend withholding NAC treatment unless the plasma concen-
tration is at or above the “probably toxic” demarcation, but most 
often, due to the inherent uncertainty in the history regarding the time 
of ingestion (the x-axis of the Rumack nomogram), the more conser-
vative approach is recommended. Standard gastric decontamination 
measures with administration of activated charcoal in the case of a 
relatively recent oral ingestion should accompany the administration 
of IV NAC. The protective effect of NAC in oral acetaminophen poi-
soning was demonstrated when contrasted with controls not receiv-
ing antidotal therapy (Rumack et al., 1981; Smilkstein et al., 1988). 
Because NAC is most effective if it is given within 8 to 12 hours of 
acetaminophen ingestion, patients in whom blood levels cannot be 
obtained quickly should have NAC treatment instituted and therapy 
terminated only if levels are nontoxic. The dosing regimen for oral 
NAC is a loading dose of 140 mg/kg orally, followed by 70 mg/kg 
orally for 17 additional doses (Peterson and Rumack, 1977). The dos-
age regimen for IV NAC is 150 mg/kg loading dose over 15 minutes, 
followed by 50 mg/kg over the next 4 hours then 100 mg/kg over 
16 hours for a total dose of 300 mg/kg in 20 hours. Anaphylactoid 
reactions have been associated with the use of IV NAC; there-
fore, some authors do not recommend this route of administration 
for adults with asthma. Children can receive IV NAC but the vol-
ume required for the dilution can cause electrolyte abnormalities.

Clinical Toxicology
Chapter 33
1545
The advantage from using the IV form is that the complete dosage reg-
imen is completed in 20 hours in contrast to the 72-hour oral regimen. 
Children less than 9 to 12 years of age have a lower incidence of hepa-
totoxicity after an overdose than do adults, but are still treated with 
NAC according to the Rumack–Matthew nomogram. Patients with 
trivial or “nontoxic” acetaminophen ingestions should not be given 
NAC therapy because the antidote can produce clinical side effects.
Ethylene Glycol
A 37-year-old female was brought to the ED after being found 
unresponsive in her home. The patient was comatose and unre-
sponsive to pain and without obvious signs of trauma. At the scene, 
emergency medical personnel administered oxygen and naloxone 
and performed a finger stick for glucose (standard procedure for 
encountering a person with altered mental status and suspected 
toxic ingestion), which showed a normal value of 95 mg/dL. The 
patient’s spouse reported that she had been depressed and despon-
dent with the recent loss of her job. No empty pill bottles or liquid 
containers were found with her at home.
Upon arrival to the hospital, she remained comatose and had 
the following vital signs: blood pressure 105/65 mm Hg, pulse 
78/min, respiratory rate elevated at 32/min, and her body tem-
perature was normal. The remainder of the physical examination 
was significant as her pupils were 3 mm and sluggishly reactive to 
light; the lung and heart examinations were normal; the abdomi-
nal examination revealed diminished but present bowel sounds, 
no tenderness, organomegaly, or masses were detected. The rectal 
examination was normal; the stool was without detectable gross or 
occult blood. Neuro examination was nonfocal with a diminished 
gag reflex.
The patient was placed on a cardiac monitor, an IV line was 
started, clinical laboratory specimens were obtained, and she was 
placed on oxygen, given naloxone, thiamine, and one dose of dex-
trose (50%) intravenously. Similar to the EMSs, these treatments 
are standard for patients presenting with an altered mental status to 
an ED. Chest and abdominal radiography was without abnormality. 
A 12-lead ECG was also normal. Faced with the uncertainty of oral 
ingestion versus topical and inhalation exposure, a decision was 
made to proceed with gastric decontamination. Because no direct 
history from the patient was available, a mixed ingestion could 
not be ruled out as well. Because of a diminished gag reflex, the 
patient was endotracheally intubated to protect her airway before 
an orogastric tube was placed. Gastric lavage was performed and 
no blood or pill fragments were found. The gastric lavage fluid 
withdrawn from the stomach was bright yellow in appearance and 
slightly viscous. When a Wood’s lamp illuminated this fluid in a 
darkened room, fluorescence was observed. This finding suggests 
the presence of automotive antifreeze that contains ethylene glycol. 
Activated charcoal (2.0 g/kg) was placed via the orogastric tube 
into the stomach with a cathartic even though the efficacy for bind-
ing ethylene glycol is limited; the use of activated charcoal here 
was intended for other, potentially unknown coingestants. Clinical 
laboratory results returned showing the following:
Serum Chemistries 
Na = 140 mEq/L
K = 3.1 mEq/L
Cl = 94 mEq/L
HCO3 = 8 mEq/L
BUN = 12 mg/dL
Glucose = 100 mg/dL
Arterial blood gas:
pH = 7.20; pCO2 = 20 mm Hg; pO2 = 98 mm Hg
The complete blood count was normal, the urine analysis was 
normal, measured serum osmolarity was 330 mOsm/kg, and acet-
aminophen and salicylate levels were below the limits of detection, 
and the urine toxicology screen was negative.
The laboratory results were interpreted as follows: a metabolic 
acidosis with elevated AG (AG = 38; normal < 12) and an elevated 
osmol gap (40 mOsm; normal < 10 mOsm). These findings are con-
sistent with either methanol or ethylene glycol poisoning (Tables 
33-4 and 33-5). A blood sample for measurement of methanol and 
ethylene glycol was sent for analysis but based on the history and 
finding of fluorescent, yellow fluid in the stomach and the acid–base 
disorder detected, the working diagnosis of ethylene glycol poison-
ing was established. The patient was treated with IV fomepizole 
(4-methylpyrazole) and transfer to a nearby regional hospital that 
has hemodialysis capability was requested. Sodium bicarbonate 
was given intravenously for the profound metabolic acidosis and 
the patient was successfully transferred to the regional medical cen-
ter where she underwent hemodialysis shortly after arrival. After 4 
hours of hemodialysis, the acid–base and electrolyte abnormalities 
were corrected but the patient remained comatose. Approximately, 
9 hours after the blood specimen was sent from the first hospital, the 
laboratory reported a “toxic” serum ethylene glycol concentration 
of 366 mg/dL, a likely fatal exposure to ethylene glycol. The patient 
underwent a second 4-hour course of hemodialysis 8 hours follow-
ing the initial hemodialysis treatment to again correct a recurrence, 
although less severe, of her metabolic acidosis with the appearance 
of minor renal injury (serum creatinine increased to 1.8 mg/dL). 
She regained normal consciousness approximately 18 hours after 
arrival at the second hospital; her renal function recovered com-
pletely within 5 days. Subsequently, the patient admitted that she 
intentionally drank more than half a container of antifreeze with 
the intent of harming herself. She was evaluated by the psychiatry 
consultation service and transferred to their service for further care.
This case demonstrates the importance of utilizing the anion 
and osmol gap calculations in overdose patients as well as all 
available diagnostic tools (e.g., the Wood lamp) during the initial 
evaluation of a potentially poisoned patient. It also highlights the 
life-saving features of rapidly and competently applied therapeutic 
modalities in poisoning treatment. Without a readily available drug 
such as fomepizole (or sterile IV ethanol a substitute for fomepi-
zole that also inhibits the alcohol dehydrogenase enzyme) and the 
ability to rapidly transfer to a facility with definitive care capability 
(hemodialysis), this patient would have likely succumbed to her 
poisoning. Initiation of antidote therapy early and providing hemo-
dialysis to increase removal of the poison prior to receipt of the 
confirmatory laboratory test (measured serum concentration of the 
specific poison—ethylene glycol) was also required in this case. 
Although not considered diagnostic (Walker et al., 1986), the pres-
ence of both a metabolic acidosis with an AG and an osmol gap is 
highly suggestive of either methanol or ethylene glycol given the 
patient’s presentation despite a scant history. It is commonplace for 
hospital clinical laboratories to have to “send out” blood specimens 
for ethylene glycol and methanol analysis as these are not routinely 
performed on-site. A turn-around time of 6 to 12 hours for this test 
result to be available is typical in most settings.
Ethylene glycol exerts its primary toxicity after undergoing bio-
transformation by alcohol dehydrogenase to glycolic acid and then to 
glyoxylic and oxalic acid by the action of aldehyde dehydrogenase. 
Fig. 33-3 contains a schematic representation of the metabolism of 
ethylene glycol to its toxic metabolites. The latter two acid metabo-
lites are thought to be responsible for both the renal and the acid–base 
toxicity observed during poisoning by ethylene glycol (Swartz et al., 
1981). If untreated or treated too late, ethylene glycol poisoning can

1546
Applications of Toxicology
Unit VII
result in fatal cerebral edema with seizures as well as irreversible renal 
damage. Hemodialysis can remove the unmetabolized ethylene glycol 
and toxic, more polar metabolites, eliminating the substrate for pro-
duction of these harmful metabolites and the damaging metabolites 
themselves. Administration of an inhibitor or competing substrate for 
alcohol dehydrogenase can be instituted before and during transport 
of the patient to a healthcare facility where hemodialysis is available. 
Fomepizole (4-methylperazole) is a commercially available inhibi-
tor of alcohol dehydrogenase that is FDA approved for the treatment 
of methanol and ethylene glycol poisoning. Ethanol (sterile, for IV 
administration) or oral, nonsterile ethanol (when the IV formulation 
is not readily available) can also be given to effectively inhibit the 
metabolism of methanol or ethylene glycol and prevent the potentially 
devastating effects of the poisoning. Finally, in the specific case of 
methanol poisoning, the administration of folic acid in animal models 
has been shown to enhance the in vivo clearance of formate, the toxic 
metabolite of methanol (McMartin et al., 1977). Folate or folinic acid 
has been given to methanol-poisoned patients and is suggested to has-
ten formic acid metabolism, thereby accelerating its clearance (Noker 
et al., 1980). Many clinical toxicologists will include folic or folinic 
acid in their therapeutic regimen for methanol-poisoned patients. 
Poisoning with methanol or ethylene glycol is relatively common; 
several thousand cases per year are reported to the AAPCCs. A review 
of these cases has shown that even high exposures of either toxicant 
can be survivable, given early recognition of the poisoning and rap-
idly applied therapies (Kruse, 2012).
Valproic Acid
A 33-year-old male is brought to the ED after being found unre-
sponsive by his brother at home with two empty prescription pill 
bottles of extended release valproic acid at his side. He was last 
seen 8 hours prior to being found unresponsive and was then in nor-
mal health. No further history is available. The patient’s pharmacy 
confirmed that three monthly prescriptions, each containing 30, 
250 mg extended release valproic acid tablets had been dispensed 
within the preceding 3 months. A call to the office of the prescrib-
ing physician did not reach anyone who could verify the prescrip-
tion or provide past medical history for the patient.
The patient was unresponsive to verbal or tactile stimulation 
with vital signs: blood pressure 85/55 mm Hg, pulse 94/min, respira-
tory rate 20/min, and temperature 33.2°C. IV access was obtained 
and IV fluids were administered as rapidly as possible. Naloxone 
was administered without effect. The patient was placed on a car-
diac monitor that showed sinus rhythm. The remainder of the physi-
cal examination showed the patient to be without obvious signs of 
trauma; the skin was cool and without track marks. The pupils were 
2 mm and poorly reactive to light. Other significant findings included 
the examination of the abdomen, which showed diminished bowel 
sounds. The rectal examination was negative for occult blood. The 
neurological examination revealed coma without focal motor abnor-
malities and an absent gag reflex.
Initial clinical laboratory results showed mild metabolic acido-
sis with elevated serum lactate, an increased anion, slightly increased 
serum ammonia, normal glucose, liver function tests, and renal func-
tion tests. The chest and abdominal radiographs were normal. The 
12-lead ECG showed a prolonged QT interval without arrhythmia. 
The patient was endotracheally intubated to protect his airway prior 
to gastric lavage that yielded some pill fragments only. The patient 
was placed on a ventilator to support his respiration. Activated char-
coal (1.5 g/kg) was administered via the orogastric tube immediately 
following the lavage procedure. The blood pressure continued to 
remain low despite IV fluid administration. A STAT valproic acid 
serum measurement showed the concentration was 572 mcg/mL.
Blood pressure responded to low-dose vasopressors (IV 
dopamine) with continued IV fluid administration. A repeat serum 
valproic acid concentration was 890 mcg/mL at 2 hours post admis-
sion. Serial oral activated charcoal (every 4 hours) was initiated 
via the orogastric tube and hemodialysis was started 3 hours after 
admission. IV l-carnitine was given when a repeat serum ammonia 
concentration returned further elevated at 94 mg/dL. Subsequent 
measured plasma concentrations of vaproic acid gradually declined 
to <100 mcg/mL over the next 48 hours after one additional hemo-
dialysis session was conducted. The patient regained consciousness 
24 hours after admission and made a full recovery by hospital day 4. 
He was evaluated by the Psychiatry consult service, which accepted 
the patient in transfer to their inpatient service after he was medi-
cally cleared by the Toxicology service.
This case illustrates the significance of increasing plasma con-
centrations of the toxic substance despite gastric decontamination 
procedures. In this case, the most likely cause for this observation 
is the ingestion of an extended release formulation, which is phar-
maceutically designed to slowly dissolve in the gastrointestinal tract 
and provide for ongoing sustained release of the active drug product 
as opposed to immediate release of the drug. Other drug substances 
can demonstrate the “slow release” profile without having been for-
mulated in a special sustained release dosage form. Examples of 
these drug “bezoars” include salicylates and barbiturates as well as 
formulations of iron supplements. The presence of a drug bezoar or 
concretion can be dangerous because, without serial drug concen-
tration measurements, the treating team could erroneously stratify 
a patient based on the initial measured plasma concentration and be 
unprepared for severe toxicity or prolonged toxicity time course not 
expected from the initial concentration alone.
The use of l-carnitine is an example of the application of 
basic biochemical knowledge to apply and effective therapeutic 
Ethylene glycol metabolism
C
H
C
H
H
ADH
NAD+
↓NADH + H+
ALD
H
OH OH
Ethylene glycol
4-MP
inhibition
Glycolic acid
Oxalic acid
Glyoxylic acid
C
H
C
OH
H
OH O
C
C
OH
H
O
O
C
C
OH
HO
O
O
NAD+
NADH + H+
Acidosis kidney tox
Figure 33-3.  Metabolic pathway for the metabolism of ethylene glycol.

Clinical Toxicology
Chapter 33
1547
intervention. In the case of valproic acid intoxication, the biochemical 
effects of valproate on fatty acid metabolism in liver mitochondria, 
specifically the depletion of l-carnitine, are thought to be causative 
for the hyperammonemia often observed in moderate and severe 
cases of valproic acid intoxication (Bohan et al., 2001; Lheureux and 
Hantson, 2009). Based on these findings and other experimental data, 
the FDA has approved the use of IV l-carnitine for the treatment of 
valproic acid poisoning in the setting of hepatotoxicity, hyperammo-
nemia, large overdoses of valproate by history, or measured serum 
concentrations of valproic acid exceeding 450 mcg/mL.
Finally, the benefit of employing multiple methods simultane-
ously to enhance the elimination of a toxicant is also demonstrated 
in this case example. The total body clearance of valproic acid is 
known to be enhanced when serial oral activated charcoal is admin-
istered (Table 33-7). Hemoperfusion, or the more available method 
of hemodialysis has been shown to increase the total body clear-
ance of valproic acid in overdose (Guillaume et al., 2004). This 
recommendation is based, in part, on the finding that the plasma 
protein binding of valproic acid is easily saturated, and in large 
overdoses, the free fraction (unbound) drug increases from 10% 
to more than 30%, making more of the drug available for effective 
removal during hemodialysis. Both modalities were likely benefi-
cially employed in this potentially fatal valproic acid ingestion.
Salicylate
A 48-year-old female is brought to the ED by ambulance approxi-
mately 2 hours after a witnessed ingestion of approximately 35 aspi-
rin tablets (each 325 mg) at home in an apparent suicide attempt. 
The patient complained of upper abdominal discomfort, nausea, and 
ringing in her ears (tinnitus) and reported one episode of spontane-
ous emesis at home before transport. The patient has a significant 
past medical history for major depression disorder, mild osteoarthri-
tis, and hypothyroidism. Her current medications include the anti-
depressant agent sertraline, 50 mg per day and for hypothyroidism, 
levothyroxine 100 mcg per day. The patient has been a heavy ciga-
rette smoker (1.5 packs per day) for at least 20 years. No other infor-
mation about potential illicit substance or alcohol use is available.
Upon arrival in the ED, the vital signs were blood pressure 
130/74 mm Hg, pulse 113/min, respiratory rate elevated at 28/min, 
and body temperature slightly elevated at 38.0°C. She was awake, 
but oriented only to person. The remainder of the physical exami-
nation was significant for slightly dilated pupils (4 mm with nor-
mal reactivity to light); heart and lung examinations revealed 
an increased heart rate and a normal lung exam; the abdominal 
examination revealed normal bowel sounds and slight epigastric 
tenderness; no organomegaly or masses were detected. The rectal 
examination was normal; the stool was without detectable gross or 
occult blood. Neuro examination was altered mental status, non-
focal with a diminished gag reflex.
Clinical laboratory analysis upon arrival in the ED found the 
following abnormalities: white blood cell count mildly elevated, 
serum potassium was slightly low at 3.1 mEq/L, arterial pH 7.15 
and serum bicarbonate 11 mEq/L, consistent with a significant 
metabolic acidosis, anion gap calculation was 29 (normal < 12). At 
2.5 hours after the reported ingestion time, salicylate was 36 mg/dL 
(therapeutic concentrations 10 to 30 mg/dL), acetaminophen was 
not detected, serum creatinine 1.9 mg/dL, the urine pH was 5.0, 
and the urine toxicology screen was negative. Chest and abdominal 
radiographs were normal.
In the ED the patient received normal saline IV and two bolus 
dosages of 50 mEq sodium bicarbonate to treat her acidosis. IV 
anti-emetics were given for nausea. At 6 hours post ingestion, the 
salicylate level was 51.4 mg/dL and no therapeutic action was taken. 
Five hours later (approximately 11 hours post ingestion) the patient 
became restless and displayed a tremor in her upper extremities and 
cramps in her legs. The vital signs at that time were blood pressure 
150/105 mm Hg, pulse 144/min, respiratory rate elevated at 30/min, 
and body temperature slightly elevated at 38.5°C. A salicylate level 
at that time was 81 mg/dL. Thirteen hours after presentation the 
patient became significantly agitated, the heart rate increased to 
224/min. An arterial blood gas demonstrated pH 7.25, pCO2 12 
mm Hg, and calculated serum bicarbonate 6.6 mEq/L, indicating 
that the significant metabolic acidosis has continued. Endotracheal 
intubation and mechanical ventilation were initiated; hemodialysis 
was not performed on this patient. Following a dose of IV labetalol, 
given in an attempt to control heart rate, the patient suffered a car-
diac arrest from which she could not be resuscitated.
This unfortunate case demonstrates several potential pitfalls in 
the management of serious salicylate ingestion. First, the witnessed 
dose ingested was 35 tablets, each containing 325 mg, or more 
than 11 g of salicylate, which by risk stratification by estimated 
dose ingested should have alerted the ED staff that this ingestion 
was very likely to result in severe toxicity. The initial salicylate 
level was just above the upper limit of normal therapeutic values 
for salicylate. This lower than expected laboratory result may have 
steered the ED away from considering this to be a serious and 
potentially fatal ingestion and toward the obvious under-treatment 
that occurred. Gastric decontamination did not occur for unclear 
reasons. Perhaps the ED team assumed that the reported spontane-
ous emesis was sufficient to prevent significant absorption of the 
toxicant. Furthermore, the rising salicylate levels over time were 
apparently overlooked. This phenomenon is commonly seen with 
extended release formulations (not a factor in this case) or when 
there is the formation of a drug bezoar. Salicylates, in overdose, are 
well-known to form drug bezoars in the proximal gastrointestinal 
tract, which slowly dissolve over time, resulting in rising serum 
concentrations of salicylate over time. The result of formation of 
a drug bezoar is that, instead of rapid absorption and a relatively 
short apparent half-life, the ongoing absorption creates a prolonged 
and increasing systemic exposure profile for the drug being released 
from the bezoar. The end result is that the time course to peak toxic 
effects is delayed. Adequate dosage of activated charcoal upon 
arrival in the ED, and perhaps use of multi-dose activated char-
coal, would likely have reduced the amount of salicylate reaching 
the systemic circulation. The administration of two bolus doses 
of sodium bicarbonate was certainly inadequate to overcome the 
systemic acidosis observed and achieve the needed alkalinizing of 
the urine to enhance salicylate elimination. The patient should have 
received a continuous IV sodium bicarbonate infusion with track-
ing of her urine output and pH with a target pH of 8 for the urine. 
Involvement of Nephrology consultants to initiate hemodialysis to 
facilitate salicylate elimination should have also taken place once 
rising plasma concentrations of salicylate, coincident with clinical 
deterioration were apparent. In summary, this case reinforces the 
importance of timely application of the basic, stepwise, procedures 
available to treat severe, poison-induced toxicity, and demonstrates 
the potential consequences of underestimating poisoning severity.
SUMMARY
The practice of Clinical Toxicology encompasses the expertise of 
the specialties of Medical Toxicology, Applied Toxicology, and 
Clinical Poison Information Specialists. Basic and clinical science 
continues to provide new information that allows for more effec-
tive diagnosis and treatment of the poisoned patient. The evolution 
of the poison control (information) center and regional poisoning

1548
Applications of Toxicology
Unit VII
treatment centers has greatly aided advances in the field of Clinical 
Toxicology. The incorporation of evidence-based, outcome-driven 
practice recommendations has improved and standardized the eval-
uation of treatment modalities for poisonings. Application of a step-
wise approach to the poisoned patient as described in this chapter 
remains an essential approach to the effective evaluation and treat-
ment of the poisoned patient. This methodically performed, clinical 
diagnostic and therapeutic approach applied in a parallel fashion 
to the poisoned patient is essential, especially when the medical 
history is absent or likely unreliable. Skillful use of antidotes is 
an important component of the practice of Medical Toxicology. 
Continued research will increase the repertoire of effective treat-
ments for poisoning and ultimately improve patient outcomes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The editor and authors recognize the contributions of previous 
authors of this chapter: Eric G. Comstock (1st edition), Barry H. 
Rumack and Robert G. Peterson (2nd edition), Barry H. Rumack 
and Frederick H. Lovejoy, Jr. (3rd and 4th editions), and Wayne R. 
Snodgrass (5th edition).
REFERENCES
American Association of Poison Control Centers (AAPCC). National 
Poison Data System. 2017. Available at: http://www.aapcc.org/data- 
system/. Accessed March 31, 2017.
American College of Medical Toxicology. Guidance document: Management 
priorities in salicylate toxicity. J Med Toxicol. 2015;11(1):149–152.
Andersen AH. Experimental studies on the pharmacology of activated char-
coal: adsorption power of charcoal in aqueous solutions. Acta Pharmacol 
Toxicol (Copenh). 1946;2:69–78.
Andersen AH. Experimental studies on the pharmacology of activated char-
coal: the effect of pH on the adsorption by charcoal from aqueous solu-
tions. Acta Pharmacol Toxicol (Copenh). 1947;3:199–218.
Andersen AH. Experimental studies on the pharmacology of activated char-
coal. III. Adsorption from gastrointestinal contents. Acta Pharmacol. 
1948;4:275–284.
Arena JM, Rourk MHJ, Sibrack CD. Acetaminophen: report of an unusual 
poisoning. Pediatrics. 1978;61:68–72.
Auerbach PS, Osterloh J, Braun O, et  al. Efficacy of gastric emptying: 
gastric lavage versus emesis induced with ipecac. Ann Emerg Med. 
1986;15(6):692–698.
Beerman R, Nunez D, Wetli C. Radiographic evaluation of the cocaine 
smuggler. Gastrointest Radiol. 1986;11:351–354.
Berg MJ, Berlinger WG, Goldberg MJ, et  al. Acceleration of the body 
clearance of phenobarbital by oral activated charcoal. N Engl J Med. 
1982;307:642–644.
Blizzard J, Michels J, Richardson W, et  al. Cost-benefit analysis of a 
regional poison center. Clin Toxicol. 2008;46(5):450–456.
Boehnert MT, Lovejoy FH. Value of the QRS duration versus the serum drug 
level in predicting seizures and ventricular arrhythmias after an acute 
overdose of tricyclic antidepressants. N Engl J Med. 1985;313:474–479.
Bohan TP, Helton E, MacDonald I, et al. Effect of L-carnitine treatment for 
valproate-induced hepatotoxicity. Neurology. 2001;56:1405–1409.
Bosinski T, Bailie GR, Eisele G. Massive and extended rebound of serum 
lithium concentrations following hemodialysis in two chronic overdose 
cases. Am J Emerg Med. 1998;16:98–100.
Braue EH, Boardman CH, Hurst CG. Decontamination of chemical casual-
ties. In: Tuorinsky SD, ed. Medical Aspects of Chemical Warfare. 2nd ed. 
Washington, DC: United States Department of the Army, Office of the 
Surgeon General at TMM Publications, Borden Institute; 2008:527.
Brown TR, Evans JE, Szabo GK, et  al. Studies with stable isotopes II: 
phenobarbital pharmacokinetics during monotherapy. J Clin Pharm. 
1985;25:51–58.
Burgess JL, Kirk M, Borron SW, Cisek J. Emergency department haz-
ardous materials protocol for contaminated patients. Ann Emerg Med. 
1999;34:205–212.
Cao D, Heard K, Foran M, Koyfman A. Intravenous lipid emulsion in the 
emergency department: a systematic review of recent literature. J Emerg 
Med. 2015;48(3):387–397.
Chyka PA. Multiple-dose activated charcoal enhancement of systematic 
drug clearance: summary of studies in animals and human volunteers. 
J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 1995;33:399–405.
Chyka PA, Seger D, Krenzelok EP, Vale JA. Position statement: single dose 
activated charcoal. Clin Toxicol. 2005;43:61–87.
Clark R, Borirakchanyavat V, Davidson AR, et  al. Hepatic damage and 
death from overdose of paracetamol. Lancet. 1973;1:66.
Cooney DO. Activated Charcoal in Medical Applications. New York: 
Dekker; 1995.
Cutler RE, Forland SC, Hammond PG, Evans JR. Extracorporeal removal 
of drugs and poisons by hemodialysis and hemoperfusion. Annu Rev 
Pharmacol Toxicol. 1987;27:169–191.
Dally SL, Garneir R, Bismuth C. Diagnosis of chlorinated hydrocarbon 
poisoning by x-ray examination. Br J Indus Med. 1987;44:424–425.
de Silva HA, Foneska M, Pathmeswaran A, et al. Multiple dose activated 
charcoal for treatment of yellow oleander poisoning: a single-blind, 
randomized, placebo controlled trial. Lancet. 2003;361:1935–1938.
Done AK. Salicylate intoxication, significance of measurements of salicy-
late in blood in cases of acute intoxication. Pediatrics. 1960;26:800–807.
Dugandzic RM, Tierney MG, Dickinson GE, Dolan MC, McKnight DR. 
Evaluation of the validity of the Done nomogram in the management of 
acute salicylate intoxication. Ann Emerg Med. 1989;18(11):1186.
Ellenhorn MJ. Alcohols and glycols. In: Ellenhorn MJ, ed. Ellenhorn’s 
Medical Toxicology, Diagnosis and Treatment of Poisoning. 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia, PA: Williams & Wilkins; 1997a.
Ellenhorn MJ. Ellenhorn’s Medical Toxicology, Diagnosis and Treatment of 
Poisoning. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Williams & Wilkins; 1997b.
Everson GW, Oudjhane K, Young LW, et al. Effectiveness of abdominal 
radiographs in visualizing chewable iron supplements following over-
dose. Am J Emerg Med. 1989;7:459–463.
Gaffney A. FDA grants approval to new drug under rarely used animal rule 
pathway. 2015. Available at: http://www.raps.org/Regulatory-Focus/
News/2015/05/11/22135/FDA-Grants-Approval-to-New-Drug-Under-
Rarely-Used-Animal-Rule-Pathway/. Accessed March 30, 2017.
Goodman JW, Goldfarb DS. The role of continuous renal replacement 
therapy in the treatment of poisoning. Semin Dial. 2006;19(5):402–407.
Goulbourne KB, Cisek J, et al. Small-bowel obstruction secondary to acti-
vated charcoal and adhesions. Ann Emerg Med. 1994;24:108–109.
Greensher J, Mofenson HC, Caraccio TR. Ascendency of the black bottle 
(activated charcoal). Pediatrics. 1987;80:949–950.
Guillaume CP, Stolk L, Dejagere TF, et  al. Successful use of hemo-
dialysis in acute valproic acid intoxication. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 
2004;42(3):335–336.
Handy CA. Radiopacity of oral non-liquid medications. Radiology. 
1971;98:522–533.
Heffner JE, Harley RA, Schabel SI. Pulmonary reactions from illicit sub-
stance abuse. Clin Chest Med. 1990;11:151–162.
Hoffman RS. In: Hoffman RS, Howland MA, Lewin NA, et  al., eds. 
Goldfrank’s Toxicologic Emergencies. 10th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 
2015:Chap 3.
Holstege CP, Borek HA. Toxidromes. Crit Care Clin. 2012;28(4):479–498.
Holt LE, Holz PH. The black bottle: a consideration in the role of charcoal 
in the treatment on poisoning in children. J Pediatr. 1963;63:306–314.
Ilkhanipour K, Yealy K, Krenzelok EP, et al. The comparative efficacy of 
various multiple-dose activated charcoal regimens. Am J Emerg Med. 
1992;10:298–300.
Institute of Medicine (IOM). Forging a Poison Prevention and Control 
System. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2004.
Jarcho S. Medical numismatic notes. VII: Mithridates IV. Bull NY Cad Med. 
1972;48:1059–1064.
Jones JS, Lagasse J, Zimmerman G. Computed tomographic findings after 
acute carbon monoxide poisoning. Am J Emerg Med. 1994;12:448–451.

Clinical Toxicology
Chapter 33
1549
Juurlink DN. Activated charcoal for acute overdose: a reappraisal. Br J Clin 
Pharmacol. 2016;81(3):482–487.
King WD, Palmisano PA. Poison control centers: can their value be mea-
sured? South Med J. 1991;84:722–726.
Kramer RE, Lerner DG, Lin T, et al. Management of ingested foreign bodies 
in children: a clinical report of the NASPGHAN Endoscopy Committee. 
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2015;60(4):562.
Krenzelok EP, McGuigan M, Lheureuz P. Position statement: ipecac syrup. 
J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 1997;35(7):699–709.
Krenzelok EP, McGuigan M, Lheureuz P; and the American Academy of 
Clinical Toxicology and European Association of Poisons Centres and 
Clinical Toxicologists. Position paper: ipecac syrup. J Toxicol Clin 
Toxicol. 2004;42(2):133–143.
Kruse JA. Methanol and ethylene glycol intoxication. Crit Care Clin. 2012; 
28 (4): 661–711.
Levine M, Hoffman RS, Lavergne V, et al. Systematic review of the effect 
of intravenous lipid emulsion therapy for non-local anesthetics toxicity. 
Clin Toxicol. 2016;54(3):194–221.
Lewin Group. Final Report on the Value of the Poison Center System. 2012. 
Available at: http://www.aapcc.org/about/lewin-group-report/. Accessed 
March 31, 2017.
Lheureux PE, Hantson P. Carnitine in the treatment of valproic acid-induced 
toxicity. Clin Toxicol (Phila). 2009;47(2):101–111.
Major RH. History of the stomach tube. Ann Med Hist. 1934;6:500–509.
Manoguerra AS, Temple AR. Observations on the current status of poi-
son control centers in the United States. Emerg Med Clin North Am. 
1984;2:185–197.
Martin JM, Arena JM. Lye poisoning and stricture of the esophagus: a 
report of 50 cases. South Med J. 1939;32:286–290.
Mayor A. Greek Fire, Poison Arrows, and Scorpion Bombs: Biological and 
Chemical Warfare in the Ancient World. Woodstock, NY: Overlook Press; 
2003.
McCarron MM, Wood JD. The cocaine “body packer” syndrome. JAMA. 
1983;250:1417–1420.
McElvaine MD, DeUngria EG, Matte TD, et al. Prevalence of radiographic 
evidence of paint chip ingestion among children with moderate to severe 
lead poisoning. St. Louis, Missouri, 1989 through 1990. Pediatrics. 
1992;89:740–742.
McMartin KE, Martin-Amat G, Makar AT, et al. Methanol poisoning V: 
role of formate metabolism in the monkey. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 
1977;201:564–572.
Miller TR, Lestina DC. Costs of poisoning in the United States and savings 
from poison control centers: a benefit-cost analysis. Ann Emerg Med. 
1997;29(2):239–245.
Mitchell JR, Jollow DJ, Potter WZ, et al. Acetaminophen induced hepatic 
necrosis. J Pharm Exp Ther. 1973;187:185–194.
Miura T, Mitomo M, Kawai R, Harada K. CT of the brain in acute car-
bon monoxide intoxication: characteristic features and prognosis. Am J 
Neuroradiol. 1985;6:739–742.
Mofenson HC, Caraccio TR, Greensher J, et al. Gastrointestinal dialysis 
with activated charcoal and cathartic in the treatment of adolescent intox-
ications. Clin Pediatr. 1985;24:678–684.
Mofenson HC, Greensher J. The nontoxic ingestion. Pediatr Clin North Am. 
1970;17(3):583–590.
Mokrzycki MH, Kaplan AA. Therapeutic plasma exchange: complications 
and management. Am J Kidney Dis. 1994;23:817–827.
Mowry JB, Spyker DA, Brooks DE, Zimmerman A, Schauben JL. 2015 
annual report of the American association of poison control centers’ 
national poison data system (NPDS): 33rd annual report. Clin Toxicol. 
2016;54(10):924–1109.
Nelson JC, Liu D, Olson KR. Radiopacity of modified release medications. 
Vet Hum Toxicol. 1993;35:317.
Noker PE, Eells JT, Tephly TR. Methanol toxicity: treatment with folic 
acid and 5-formyl tetrahydrofolic acid. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 1980; 
4:378–383.
O’Brien RP, McGeehan PA, Helmeczi AW, et  al. Detectability of drug 
tablets and capsules by plain radiography. Am J Emerg Med. 1986; 
4:302–312.
Ohning BL, Reed MD, Blumer Jl, et al. Continuous nasogastric administra-
tion of activated charcoal for the treatment of theophylline intoxication. 
Ped Pharm. 1986;5:241–245.
Orphan Drug Act. Relevant excerpts. In: Administration USFaD, ed. 
21 CFR Part 316. Orphan Drugs: U.S. Government Publishing Office; 
2013.
Osius TG. The historic art of poisoning. Med Bull (Ann Arbor). 
1957;23:111–116.
Park GD, Radomski L, Goldberg MJ, et al. Effects of size and frequency 
of oral doses of charcoal on theophylline clearance. Clin Pharm Ther. 
1983;34:663–666.
Park GD, Spector R, Goldberg MJ, Johnson GF. Expanded role of char-
coal therapy in the poisoned and overdosed patient. Arch Intern Med. 
1986;146(5):969–973.
Peterson RG, Rumack BH. Treatment of acute acetaminophen poisoning 
with acetylcysteine. JAMA. 1977;237:2406–2407.
Plaitakis A, Duvoisin RC. Homer’s moly identified as Galanthus nivalis: 
physiologic antidote to stramonium poisoning. Clin Neuropharmacol. 
1983;6:1–5.
Pollack MM, Dunbar BS, Holbrook PR, Fields AI, et  al. Aspiration of 
activated charcoal and gastric contents. Ann Emerg Med. 1981;10: 
528–529.
Proudfoot AT, Krenzelok EP, Vale JA. Position paper on urine alkaliniza-
tion. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 2004;42:1–26.
Proudfoot AT, Wright N. Acute paracetamol poisoning. Br Med J. 
1970;2:557.
Reid DHS. Treatment of the poisoned child. Arch Dis Child. 1970;45: 
428–433.
Rep. Terry L. H.R. 3527. Poison Center Network Act. In: America tCotUSo, 
ed. 2014; 113–177.
Rosenblatt MA, Abel M, Fischer GW, Itzkovich CJ, Eisenkraft JB. 
Successful use of a 20% lipid emulsion to resuscitate a patient after 
a presumed bupivacaine-related cardiac arrest. Anesthesiology. 
2006;105(1):217–218.
Rumack BH, Matthew H. Acetaminophen poisoning and toxicity. 
Pediatrics. 1975;55:871.
Rumack BH, Peterson RC, Koch GG, et al. Acetaminophen overdose: 662 
cases with evaluation of oral acetylcysteine treatment. Arch Intern Med. 
1981;141:380–385.
Savitt DL, Hawkins HH, Roberts JR. The radiopacity of ingested medica-
tions. Ann Emerg Med. 1987;16:331–339.
Scherz RG, Robertson WO. The history of poison control centers in the 
United States. Clin Toxicol. 1978;12(3):291–296.
Smilkstein MJ, Knapp GL, Kulig KW, et  al. Efficacy of oral 
N-acetylcysteine in the treatment of acetaminophen overdose. N Engl J 
Med. 1988;319:1557–1562.
Smithline N, Gardner KD. Gaps: anionic and osmolal. JAMA. 1976;236: 
1594–1597.
Sporer KA, Firestone J. Clinical course of crack cocaine body stuffers. Ann 
Emerg Med. 1997;29:596–601.
Stern WZ, Spear PW, Jacobson HG. The roentgen findings in acute heroin 
intoxication. Am J Roentgenol. 1968;103:522–532.
Swartz RD, Millman RP, Billi JE, et  al. Epidemic methanol poison-
ing: clinical and biochemical analysis of a recent episode. Medicine. 
1981;60:373–382.
Tenebein M, Lheureuz P; and the American Academy of Clinical 
Toxicology and European Association of Poisons Centres and Clinical 
Toxicologists. Position paper: whole bowel irrigation. J Toxicol Clin 
Toxicol. 2004;42(6):843–854.
University of California San Francisco (UCSF). University of California 
San Francisco General Hospital Laboratory Lab Manual. 2017. Available 
at: http://labmed.ucsf.edu/sfghlab/test/StatServices.html. Accessed April 
11, 2017.
Vale JA, Kulig K. Position paper: gastric lavage. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 
2004;42(7):933–943.
Van de Graaff WB, Thompson WL, Sunshine I, et  al. Adsorbent and 
cathartic inhibition of enteral drug absorption. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 
1982;221:656–663.

1550
Applications of Toxicology
Unit VII
Walker JA, Schwartzbard A, Krauss EA, et al. The missing gap: a pitfall in 
the diagnosis of alcohol intoxication by osmometry. Arch Intern Med. 
1986;146:1843–1844.
Wax PM. Analeptic use in clinical toxicology: a historical appraisal. 
J. Toxicol Clin Toxicol. 1997;35:203–209.
Weinberg GL, VadeBoncouer T, Ramaraju GA, et al. Pretreatment or resus-
citation with a lipid infusion shifts the dose-response to bupivacaine-
induced asystole in rats. Anesthesiology. 1998;88(4):1071–1075.
Weisman RS. Theophylline. In: Goldfrank, ed. Goldfrank’s Toxicologic 
Emergencies. 6th ed. Stanford, CT: Appleton & Lange; 1998.
Wolkin AF, Martin CA, Law RK, Schier JG, Bronstein AC. Using poi-
son center data for national public health surveillance for chemical and 
poison exposure and associated illness. Ann Emerg Med. 2012;59(1): 
56–61.
Woolf AD, Karnes DK, Kirrane BM. Preserving the United States’ poison 
control system. Clin Toxicol (Phila). 2011;49(4):284–286.