# 34 Occupational Toxicology
# Casarett & Doull's Toxicology, 9th Edition
# Pages: 1570-1591
# Unit: Unit VII Applications of Toxicology

34
chapter
Occupational Toxicology
Peter S. Thorne
INTRODUCTION
Those who work full time over a working lifetime will spend about 
94,000 hours in the workplace. If that workplace is dusty or laden 
with chemicals or allergens, it has the potential to induce disease. 
The higher the exposures, the greater the likelihood of disease. For 
centuries scholars have recognized that the work environment plays 
a significant role in the occurrence of adverse human health effects. 
Early writings by Ulrich Ellenbog (1435 to 1499), Agricola (1494 
to 1555), and Paracelsus (1492 to 1541) revealed the toxic nature of 
exposures in mining, smelting, and metallurgy. A systematic treatise 
by Ramazzini (1633 to 1714) described the hazards as they applied 
to workers in over 50 common trades including miners, chemists, 
tinsmiths, tanners, pharmacists, grain sifters, stonecutters, sewage 
workers, and even corpse bearers. Legislation to protect worker 
health began in England with the Factory Act of 1833 which estab-
lished a factory inspectorate and limited child laborers 9 to 13 years 
old to a 48-hour work week and 14- to 18-year olds to a 68-hour 
work week.
Today we continue to be concerned with occupational health 
and safety in a wide variety of work environments and child labor 
remains a concern worldwide. There are an estimated 151.6 ­million 
children between the ages of 5 and 17 engaged in child labor and 
half of them do hazardous work (ILO, 2017). Although occupa-
tional settings in developed countries are safer now than in the 
past, the levels of risk deemed acceptable have decreased while the 
recognition of the causal link of exposures to chronic diseases or 
diseases with long latencies has increased. As new hazards arise 
with the emergence of new technologies, we must be prepared to 
assess the risks and protect the health of workers. With increased 
globalization and rising prosperity in many middle-income coun-
tries, there exists a responsibility to extend health protections to 
workers in developing nations who too often bear the burden of high 
exposures to occupational toxicants.
Occupational toxicology is the application of the princi-
ples and methodology of toxicology toward understanding and 
­managing chemical and biological hazards encountered at work. 
The objective of the occupational toxicologist is primary preven-
tion, that is to prevent adverse health effects in workers that could 
arise from exposures in their work environment. Because nonoc-
cupational exposures can act as confounders or can increase the 
susceptibility of individual workers, occupational toxicologists 
must evaluate the entire spectrum of exposures experienced by 
the work force under consideration. Occupational toxicology 
is a discipline that draws on industrial hygiene, epidemiology, 
occupational medicine, and regulatory toxicology. The occupa-
tional toxicologist must have an intimate knowledge of the work 
environment and be able to recognize and prioritize exposure 
hazards. Because the work environment can present exposures to 
complex mixtures, the occupational toxicologist must also rec-
ognize those that are particularly hazardous when occurring in 
combination.
It is often difficult to establish a causal link between a worker’s 
illness and job. First, the clinical manifestations of occupationally 
induced diseases are often indistinguishable from those arising 
from nonoccupational causes. Second, there may be a protracted 
but biologically predictable latent interval between exposure and 
the expression of disease. Third, diseases of occupational origin 
may be multifactorial with other environmental factors or personal 
(e.g., genetic, epigenetic, or behavioral) risk factors contributing to 
the disease process. Nevertheless, studies have repeatedly shown 
that the dose of toxicant is a strong predictor of the likelihood, 
severity, and type of health effect.
Introduction
Workplaces, Exposures, and 
Standards
The Nature of the Work Force
Determinants of Dose
Occupational Exposure Limits
Occupational Diseases
Routes of Exposure
Agents Associated With Diseases
Occupational Respiratory Diseases
Other Occupational Diseases
Toxicologic Evaluation of 
Occupational Agents
Evaluation of Occupational  
Risks
Establishing Causality
In Vitro Assays
Animal Toxicology Studies
Human Challenge Studies
Case Reports
Epidemiology Studies
Animal Toxicology Testing for 
Establishing Acceptable Levels 
of Exposure
Worker Health Surveillance
Linkage of Animal Studies and 
Epidemiologic Studies
Exposure Monitoring
Environmental Monitoring 
for Exposure Assessment
Biological Monitoring for Exposure 
Assessment
Conclusion
Acknowledgments
References

1552
APPLICATIONS TOXICOLOGY
Unit VII
WORKPLACES, EXPOSURES, 
AND STANDARDS
The Nature of the Work Force
The world’s labor force totals 3.45 billion people (World Bank, 
2017). This includes 803 million workers in China and 511 million 
workers in India. Approximately 31.3% of the global work force, 
some 1.1 billion people, work in agricultural production. Many of 
these workers are engaged in subsistence agriculture and fewer than 
half are waged workers (ILO, 2014). In contrast, the demograph-
ics and distribution of the work force in industrialized nations has 
undergone a progressive shift over the past three decades, moving 
away from jobs in heavy industry and agriculture toward jobs in the 
service sector and high-technology industries. In some instances, 
the manufacturing jobs have moved to less developed countries 
with less stringent worker health protection. There are currently 
153 million people in the United States in the civilian, paid work 
force (seasonally adjusted data). The civilian labor force participa-
tion rate is 62.9% (USDL, 2017c), a figure that has grown mark-
edly over the past 50 years owing to the increased entry of women 
into the labor force. The countries of the EU have an estimated 
234 million workers (European Commission, 2017), and Japan has 
about 66 million (Japan Monthly Statistics, 2017). The 1.3 billion 
workers in the labor force of China and India includes many jobs in 
manufacturing, minerals extraction, agriculture, and waste process-
ing (including electronic waste).
Fig. 34-1 shows the breakdown of employment in the United 
States. This illustrates that there are about 22.2 million work-
ers (14.9%) engaged in manufacturing, construction, mining 
and logging, and agriculture—occupations that have the poten-
tial for significant exposure to chemical and biological agents. 
Furthermore, there are occupations in the service sector, such as 
automobile repair; other repair and maintenance; work in gaso-
line stations, pipeline transportation, truck and rail transportation; 
waste management and remediation services; and employment in 
botanical gardens that can also include exposures to hazardous 
chemicals. Service-producing occupations (including government 
jobs) account for the majority (85.1%) of U.S. jobs. On average, 
employees in the service sector work 6.4 fewer hours per week 
than in the goods-producing sector. Farm work employs an esti-
mated 2.14 million workers 16 years of age and older, and the U.S. 
Bureau of Labor Statistics has documented an average of 40.4 
hours worked per week. Work in agriculture is markedly different 
from most other occupations in four fundamental ways. First, 44% 
of those employed in agriculture are self-employed or unpaid fam-
ily members. Second, the overwhelming majority of farm establish-
ments (90%) are small family farms with fewer than 20 employees 
and annual gross cash farm income less than $350,000 (USDA, 
2017). Third, although the annual national average hours worked 
per week is 40.4, many farmers, ranchers, and farm workers have 
periods (e.g., harvest time) when they work as many as 20 hours 
per day, 7 days per week. Fourth, according to a 1998, one-time 
U.S. government survey, there are in excess of 290,000 children 
who identify agricultural work as their major employment (GAO/
HEHS, 1998). Department of Labor data indicate that, on aver-
age, 128,500 hired farm workers between the ages of 14 and 17 
were working annually in crop production. The U.S. Fair Labor 
Standards Act establishes a 16-year minimum age for those occu-
pations in agriculture that the Secretary of Labor finds and declares 
to be particularly hazardous. The presence of children in the work 
force has important ramifications for body burdens, disease latency, 
toxicokinetics, and biotransformation of toxicants.
Determinants of Dose
Dose is typically defined as the amount of toxicant that reaches a 
target tissue over a defined time span and is available for interactions 
with metabolic processes. In occupational environments, exposure 
is often used as a proxy for dose. The response to a chemical is 
dependent upon both host factors and dose. Fig. 34-2 illustrates the 
pathway from exposure to subclinical disease or to adverse health 
effect and suggests that there are important modifying factors: con-
temporaneous exposures, genetic and epigenetic susceptibility, age, 
gender, nutritional status, and behavioral factors. These modifying 
factors can influence whether a worker remains healthy, develops 
subclinical disease that is repaired, or progresses to frank illness. 
Workplace health protection and surveillance programs (shown in 
blue) can reduce exposures, disrupt the exposure-dose pathway, 
or identify internalized dose and early effects before irreparable 
US labor market sector
Number employed (in millions)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Average work week (hours)
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
12.5
6.9
0.7
2.1
15.8
5.9
5.6
2.7
8.5
20.8
23.2
16.0
5.8
22.3
Construction
Mining and logging
Agriculture and related industries
Retail trades
Wholesale trades
Transport, warehousing, and utilities
Information services
Finance, insurance, and real estate
Professional and business services
Education and health services
Leisure and hospitality
Other services
Government
40.7
39.0
44.9
40.4
30.9
39.1
39.1
36.3
37.5
36.0
32.9
26.0
31.8
38.5
Manufacturing
Figure 34-1.   Hours worked and number employed in the U.S. civilian labor market. (From USDL [2017a, 2017b, 2017c].)

Occupational Toxicology
Chapter 34
1553
disease develops. These programs help to ensure a safe workplace 
and a healthier work force.
As illustrated in Fig. 34-2, dose is a function of exposure con-
centration, exposure duration, and exposure frequency. Individual 
and environmental characteristics can also affect dose. Exposure 
assessment is the process of quantifying the intensity, frequency, 
and duration of exposures and their determinants in order to bet-
ter estimate dose. Table 34-1 indicates determinants of dose for 
exposure via the inhalation and dermal routes. For determining 
inhalation exposures, environmental conditions such as concentra-
tion, particle size distribution, and properties of the chemical are 
important. However, respiratory rate and breathing volume as well 
as other host factors contribute. Protection afforded by personal 
protective equipment (especially respirators) will reduce but not 
eliminate exposure. The degree of exposure reduction for a par-
ticular respirator (the workplace protection factor) varies with res-
pirator design, fit, maintenance, manner of use, and environmental 
conditions from less than 5 to 10,000. A respirator with a workplace 
protection factor of 10, when used properly, will reduce particulate 
matter concentrations inside the mask to one-tenth that outside the 
mask. A commonly used two-strap fiber respirator for lowering par-
ticulate matter exposure, the N95, should reduce exposures by 95% 
but may fail to meet this criterion for submicron aerosols (Balazy 
et al., 2006).
Dermal exposures depend upon toxicant concentration; work 
conditions, including the degree and duration of wetness; and the 
ambient conditions at the work site (Table 34-1). Some determi-
nants of dermal dosing relate to the physicochemical properties of 
the chemical as they affect the percutaneous absorption rate. These 
include solubility, temperature, pH, molecular size, and chemical 
characteristics of the vehicle. Host factors also influence dermal 
absorption and distribution. Important factors include the surface 
area of the skin that is exposed, the integrity of the skin, blood flow, 
Modifying
factors
Healthy
worker
Subclinical
disease
Dose
Exposure
concentration
Exposure
duration
Exposure
frequency
Genetic
susceptibility
Additive or
synergistic
coexposure
Age, gender,
nutrition,
behavior
Engineering and
administrative
controls
Personal protective
equipment
Occupational health
standards
Biomonitoring
Screening
wellness programs
Surveillance
Repair
Progression
Adverse
health
effect
Figure 34-2.   Pathway from exposure to disease, showing modifying factors and opportunities for intervention.
Table 34-1  
Determinants of Toxicant Dose
Inhalation exposure
  Airborne concentration
  Particle size distribution
  Respiratory rate
  Tidal volume
  Other host factors
  Duration of exposure
  Chemical, physical, or biological properties of the  
hazardous agent
  Effectiveness of personal protective devices
Dermal exposure
  Concentration in air, droplets, or solutions
  Degree and duration of wetness
  Integrity of skin
  Percutaneous absorption rate
  Region of skin exposed
  Surface area exposed
  Preexisting skin disease
  Temperature in the workplace
  Vehicle for the toxicant
  Presence of other chemicals on skin
and biotransformation. Because the stratum corneum, the outer 
layer of the epidermis, is the principal barrier to dermal uptake, the 
thickness of this layer in the exposed area has great significance. As 
an example, the absorption of hydrocortisone through the plantar 
foot arch is only 4% than through the back and 0.3% than through 
scrotal skin (Bason et al., 1991). A classic human in vivo study 
(Maibach et al., 1971) using the pesticide parathion demonstrated

1554
APPLICATIONS TOXICOLOGY
Unit VII
a 12-fold range in percutaneous absorption between the anatomical 
site with the highest (scrotum) to that with the lowest (forearm) 
percent of dose absorbed. Trabaris et al. found 10-fold higher der-
mal fluxes of chloracetonitrite, a disinfection byproduct, for excised 
skin from the torso and dorsum as compared to the palm and scalp 
(Trabaris et al., 2012). The use of protective gloves and clothing 
or aprons and the application of barrier creams can greatly reduce 
exposure. For maximal protection, it is important that the glove be 
constructed of material tailored to the toxicant(s) of concern.
Occupational Exposure Limits
One of the roles of the occupational toxicologist is to contribute 
data to the process of establishing standards or determining the 
appropriateness of those standards. Workplace exposure limits 
exist for chemical, biological, and physical agents and are recom-
mended as guidelines or promulgated as standards in order to pro-
mote worker health and safety. For chemical and biological agents, 
exposure limits are expressed as acceptable ambient concentration 
levels (occupational exposure limits [OELs]) or as concentrations 
of a toxicant, its metabolites, or a specific marker of its effects in 
biological systems (biological exposure indices).
OELs are established as standards by regulatory agencies or as 
guidelines by research groups or professional organizations. In the 
United States, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration 
(OSHA) under the Department of Labor promulgates legally 
enforceable standards known as permissible exposure limits (PELs). 
These standards are determined and supported by the best scien-
tific evidence available and assure “to the extent ­feasible … that no 
employee will suffer material impairment of health or functional 
capacity” with regular exposure “for the period of his working life.” 
OSHA has defined an 8-hour time-weighted average (TWA) PEL 
(U.S. Federal Register, 1992) as the “employee’s average airborne 
exposure in any 8-hour work shift of a 40-hour work week which 
shall not be exceeded.” The TWA PEL is established as the highest 
level of exposure to which an employee may be exposed without 
incurring the risk of adverse health effects (OSHA, 1995). Although 
approximately 500 PELs have been promulgated, there are not 
enough to regulate exposures to the vast number of compounds to 
which workers are exposed, and some of the existing PELs do not 
reflect current knowledge.
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH), under the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
publishes recommended exposure limits (RELs) that are more 
frequently updated and are generally more stringent than PELs. 
NIOSH also performs research and disseminates information on 
workplace hazards and their prevention. Most developed countries 
have governmental inspectorate agencies analogous to OSHA that 
are responsible for establishing and enforcing OELs. In some coun-
tries, the insurance system also plays a significant role.
The European Commission has established legally enforceable 
binding occupational exposure limit values (BOELV) and biologi-
cal limit values (BLV) for the protection of health and safety in the 
workplace. Socioeconomic and technical feasibility factors are also 
considered in setting these values. The OELs are established based 
on recommendations of the Scientific Committee on Occupational 
Exposure Limits (SCOEL), which evaluates published scientific 
data on hazardous compounds for regulation and provides assess-
ment of exposure limits that “it believes will protect workers from 
chemical risks” (European Commission, 1995, 1998). Indicative 
Occupational Exposure Limit Values (IOELVs) are non-binding 
health-based OELs that do not consider technical or economic fea-
sibility. A first list of IOELVs was established in 2000 followed 
by second (European Commission, 2006) and third lists in 2006 
and 2009, respectively (European Commission, 2009). EU member 
countries may not promulgate OELs less stringent than these values.
The American Conference of Governmental Industrial 
Hygienists (ACGIH) is a non-profit scientific association that 
publishes OELs for chemicals and for physical agents. These take 
the form of threshold limit values (TLVs™) and biological expo-
sure indices (BEIs™). They are frequently revisited and generally 
reflect current knowledge in occupational toxicology and industrial 
hygiene. They are developed as guidelines and are not enforce-
able standards; however, many industries adopt TLVs and BEIs 
as internal OELs. As stated by the ACGIH, “The TLVs and BEIs 
represent conditions under which ACGIH believes that nearly all 
workers may be repeatedly exposed without adverse health effects” 
(ACGIH, 2017). These guidelines are health based and do not 
include consideration of technical feasibility or economic effects 
of implementation.
Three types of TLVs are suggested, depending on the time scale 
of adverse effects inducible by the toxicants. The time-weighted 
average TLV (TLV-TWA) is an OEL for exposures averaged over 
an 8-hour day, 5-day work week regimen. These are generally 
applied to toxicants that exert their effects over long periods. The 
short-term exposure limit (TLV-STEL) is an OEL for a 15-minute 
measurement period. The TLV-STEL should not be exceeded in 
any 15-minute sampling window and there should be 60 minutes 
or more between exposures in this range. The ceiling limit (TLV-C) 
represents a concentration that should never be exceeded. These 
are usually applied to toxicants that cause acute effects (such as 
asphyxia or potent sensory irritation) and for which real-time moni-
toring devices are available. BEIs are guidance values for biologi-
cal monitoring and represent “levels of determinants that are most 
likely to be observed in specimens collected from healthy workers 
who have been exposed to chemicals to the same extent as workers 
with inhalation exposure at the Threshold Limit Value” (ACGIH, 
2016). BEIs are recommended for analysis of urine, blood, and 
exhaled air. While hair, fingernails, adipose tissue biopsies, and 
other specimens are used in research and forensic toxicology, there 
are no BEIs for these.
It is important to recognize that OELs do not correspond to 
exposure conditions devoid of health risk. The concept of accept-
able exposure level must be understood as the level of exposure 
below which the probability of impairing the health of the exposed 
workers is acceptable. The process of deciding what is an accept-
able risk to occupational or environmental hazards blends the sci-
entific disciplines of exposure assessment and toxicology with often 
vexing policy issues. Historically, acceptable risk in a society is 
related to the general health of the population and to a host of fac-
tors that influence how risks are perceived. To determine that the 
risks from an occupational hazard are acceptable, it is necessary to 
characterize the hazard, identify the potential diseases or adverse 
outcomes, and establish the relationship between exposure inten-
sity or dose and the adverse health effects. If biological markers of 
exposure or early reversible effects are identified, this can aid in the 
risk-assessment process.
OCCUPATIONAL DISEASES
Routes of Exposure
Diseases arising in occupational environments involve exposure 
primarily through inhalation, ingestion, or dermal absorption. In 
the vast majority of work environments, inhalation of toxicants 
is a primary concern. Inhalation exposures can occur with gases,

Occupational Toxicology
Chapter 34
1555
vapors, liquid aerosols, particulate aerosols, fumes, and mixtures 
of these. Dermal exposures are also important and can arise from 
airborne materials as well as liquids splashed onto the skin, immer-
sion exposures, or from material handling.
Additional exposure hazards exist for infectious agents. 
Exposures leading to occupational infections may arise through 
inhalation or ingestion of microorganisms but can also arise from 
needle-sticks in health-care workers or through insect bites among 
farmers, natural resource workers, and others employed out of 
doors. Additionally, poisonings from toxic plants or venomous 
­animals can occur through skin inoculation (e.g., zookeepers, 
­horticulturists, or commercial divers).
Agents Associated With Diseases
There are a myriad of agents responsible for occupational diseases. 
While some act on a particular organ such as the liver or kidney, 
others can affect multiple organ systems. Table 34-2 presents a list 
of the major occupational diseases and examples of agents that 
cause them. This is not intended to be all-inclusive. Rather it is 
meant to highlight what are historically the most prevalent and 
widely recognized occupational diseases plus those that continue 
to be prevalent in the workplace. The toxicants listed are those for 
which there is a strong association with the disease or the most 
conclusive data to support causality. Examples are shown for can-
cer and for diseases of the lung and airways, heart, liver, kidney, 
skin, nervous system, immune system, and reproductive system. 
Several examples of occupational infectious diseases are also listed 
to highlight the fact that, in many work settings, infectious agents 
may constitute the major hazard and may coexist with chemical 
hazards. Concurrent chemical exposures may increase susceptibil-
ity to infectious agents. Most of the occupational diseases listed 
in Table 34-2 are associated with industrial chemicals. These are 
discussed in other chapters throughout this book.
(continued)
ORGAN SYSTEM OR 
DISEASE GROUP
DISEASE
CAUSATIVE AGENT
Lung and airways
Acute pulmonary edema, bronchiolitis obliterans
Nitrogen oxides, phosgene, diacetyl
Allergic rhinitis
Pollens, fungal spores
Asphyxiation
Carbon monoxide, hydrogen cyanide, inert gas dilution
Asthma
Toluene diisocyanate, α-amylase, animal urine proteins
Asthma-like syndrome
Swine barn environments, cotton dust, bioaerosols
Bronchitis, pneumonitis
Arsenic, chlorine
Chronic bronchitis
Cotton dust, grain dust, welding fumes
Emphysema
Coal dust, cigarette smoke
Fibrotic lung disease
Silica, asbestos
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Thermophilic bacteria, avian proteins, pyrethrum,  
Penicillium, Aspergillus
Metal fume fever
Zinc, copper, magnesium
Mucous membrane irritation
Hydrogen chloride, swine barn environments
Organic dust toxic syndrome
“Moldy” silage, endotoxin
Reactive airways dysfunction syndrome
Ammonia, chlorine, acetic acid
Upper respiratory tract inflammation
Endotoxin, peptidoglycan, glucans, viruses
Cancer
Acute myelogenous leukemia
Benzene, ethylene oxide
Bladder cancer
Benzidine, 2-naphthylamine, 4-biphenylamine
Gastrointestinal cancers
Asbestos
Hepatic hemangiosarcoma
Vinyl chloride
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Aflatoxin, hepatitis B virus
Mesothelioma, lung carcinoma
Asbestos, arsenic, radon, bis-chloro methyl ether
Skin cancer
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, ultraviolet irradiation
Skin
Allergic contact dermatitis
Natural rubber latex, isothiazolins, poison ivy, nickel
Chemical burns
Sodium hydroxide, hydrogen fluoride
Chloracne
TCDD†, polychlorinated biphenyls
Irritant dermatitis
Sodium dodecyl sulfate
Nervous system
Cholinesterase inhibition
Organophosphate insecticides
Neuronopathy
Methyl mercury
Parkinsonism
Pesticides, polychlorinated biphenyls, trichloroethylene, 
carbon disulfide
Peripheral neuropathy
N-hexane, trichloroethylene, acrylamide
Immune system
Autoimmune disease
Vinyl chloride, silica
Hypersensitivity
See entries for allergic rhinitis, asthma, hypersensitivity  
pneumonitis, allergic contact dermatitis
Immunosuppression
TCDD†, lead, mercury, pesticides
Renal disease
Indirect renal failure
Arsine, phosphine, trinitrophenol
Nephropathy
Paraquat, 1,4-dichlorobenzene, mercuric chloride
Table 34-2  
Examples of Occupational Diseases and the Toxicants That Cause Them

1556
APPLICATIONS TOXICOLOGY
Unit VII
ORGAN SYSTEM OR 
DISEASE GROUP
DISEASE
CAUSATIVE AGENT
Cardiovascular 
disease
Arrhythmias
Acetone, toluene, methylene chloride, trichloroethylene
Atherosclerosis
Dinitrotoluene, carbon monoxide
Coronary artery disease
Carbon disulfide
Cor pulmonale
Beryllium
Systemic hypotension
Nitroglycerine, ethylene glycol dinitrate
Liver disease
Fatty liver (steatosis)
Carbon tetrachloride, toluene
Cirrhosis
Arsenic, trichloroethylene
Hepatocellular death
Dimethylformamide, TCDD†
Reproductive 
system
Male
Chlordecone (Kepone), dibromochloropropane, hexane
Female
Aniline, styrene
Both sexes
Carbon disulfide, lead, vinyl chloride
Infectious 
diseases*
Arboviral encephalitides
Alphavirus, Bunyavirus, Flavivirus
Aspergillosis
Aspergillus niger, A. fumigatus, A. flavus
Cryptosporidiosis
Cryptosporidium parvum
Hepatitis B
Hepatitis B virus
Histoplasmosis
Histoplasma capsulatum
Legionellosis
Legionella pneumophila
Lyme disease
Borrelia burgdorferi
Psittacosis
Chlamydia psittaci
Tuberculosis
Mycobacterium tuberculosis hominis
*For more on occupational infectious diseases, see Douwes et al. (2003).
†TCDD = 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-para-dioxin.
Table 34-3 lists 39 agents that are known by the International 
Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) to be carcinogens in 
humans (Group 1) and for which there has been or is currently 
extensive occupational exposure. This list includes agents such 
as asbestos, arsenic, benzene, vinyl chloride, and coal tars. IARC 
Group 1 refers to agents or mixtures that are known to be carcino-
genic to humans based on sufficient epidemiologic evidence usually 
accompanied by limited or sufficient animal evidence.
Occupational Respiratory Diseases
Because inhalation generally represents the most significant route 
of exposure, many of the major occupational diseases affect the 
lung and airways. These diseases have been studied extensively 
and are largely responsible for the creation of the occupational 
regulatory framework. Deaths due to occupational lung diseases 
such as asbestosis, coal workers’ pneumoconiosis, silicosis, bys-
sinosis, and occupational asthma have been recognized for centu-
ries and led to important legislation such as the U.S. Occupational 
Safety and Health Act (1970). These occupational lung diseases 
continue to have significant associations with morbidity and mor-
tality worldwide but are diminishing steadily in the United States 
and Europe. Table 34-4 lists the U.S. age-adjusted death rate and 
annual deaths for 2014 and illustrates that while the death rates 
are fairly low, there are still about 1477 deaths per year attribut-
able to asbestos, silica, coal dust, and other pneumoconiotic dusts; 
2786 malignant mesothelioma deaths; and 141 deaths from hyper-
sensitivity pneumonitis. However, fatalities are just the tip of the 
iceberg as some occupational lung diseases exhibit slow progres-
sion yet may still be debilitating. Every year in the United States, 
there are 20,000 hospital discharges related to cases of asbestosis 
and 188,000 coal workers receive federal Black Lung Benefits 
(NIOSH, 2017c). The U.S. Mine Safety and Health Administration 
has compiled data on inspector- and mine operator-collected 
samples in coal mining operations and found that 29.3% of these 
exceeded the PEL for respirable quartz and 7.5% were over the 
PEL for respirable coal dust.
Many of the diseases listed in Table 34-2 are known by other 
names that refer to a particular occupation or agent. One example 
is hypersensitivity pneumonitis, an allergic lung disease marked by 
interstitial lymphocytic pneumonitis and granulomatous lesions. 
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis is also known as extrinsic allergic 
alveolitis, farmer’s lung disease, bagassosis (sugar cane), humidi-
fier fever, Japanese summer house fever, pigeon breeder’s lung, and 
maple bark stripper’s lung, depending upon the occupational setting 
in which it arises. Although we often think of these as the same 
disease, it is important to recognize that the exposures and physi-
ologic responses they induce are complex and may differ in the 
manifestation of the disease.
The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics tracks data for non-fatal 
occupational injuries and illnesses of which there were 3.3 mil-
lion in 2009. The vast majority of these were injuries (e.g., falls, 
slips, strains, sprains, back injuries, and roadway incidents), but 
there were still over 187,900 occupational illnesses reported in 2015 
(USDL, 2015). There were 17,200 reported respiratory conditions 
arising from exposure to toxic agents and dust diseases of the lung. 
The former category includes pneumonitis, pharyngitis, rhinitis, 
and acute lung congestion. Table 34-5 shows data for rates and 
cases in 2015 by industry division. Poisonings were rare whereas 
skin diseases occurred at rates as high as 4.3 per 10,000 workers per 
year. The manufacturing sector accounted for approximately 22% 
of all occupational illnesses. Industry codes with the highest respi-
ratory condition incidence rates were aquaculture (94.0 per 10,000); 
oilseed and grain farming (33.7 per 10,000); coal mining (24.1 
per 10,000); roasted nuts and peanut butter manufacturing (17.1 
per 10,000); and copper, nickel, lead, and zinc mining (14.2 per 
10,000). The rate for chemical manufacturing was much lower, 1.7 
cases per 10,000 workers, down by 50% since 2000.
Table 34-2
(Continued)

Occupational Toxicology
Chapter 34
1557
Table 34-3  
Occupational Exposure Agents Classified by IARC as Group 1 Definite Human Carcinogens
AGENT
INDUSTRIES AND OCCUPATIONS WHERE SOME WORKERS MAY BE EXPOSED
Particulate matter
Asbestos
Miners, abatement workers, construction workers, sheet metal workers, steam fitters, 
shipyard workers
Crystalline silica (quartz or cristobalite)
Stone and ceramics industry, foundries, construction, abrasives manufacturing
Erionite
Waste treatment workers, building materials manufacturing
Talc containing asbestiform fibers
Ceramics industry
Wood dust
Wood and wood-products industries, pulp and paper industry, wood working trades
Metals
Arsenic and arsenic compounds
Miners, nonferrous metal smelting, arsenical pesticide manufacturers and applicators
Beryllium
Specialty metallurgy workers, avionics, electronics, nuclear industry
Cadmium and cadmium compounds
Cadmium smelting, battery production, dyes and pigment making, electroplating
Gallium arsenide
Microelectronics manufacturing
Hexavalent chromium compounds
Chromate production plants, dye and pigment making, welders, tanners
Nickel compounds*
Nickel smelting, welding
Organic chemicals
Aflatoxins
Animal feed industry, grain handling and processing
4-Aminobiphenyl
Chemical industry, dyestuffs and pigment manufacturing
Benzene
Refineries, shoe industry, chemical, pharmaceutical and rubber industry, printing 
industry
Benzidine
Chemical industry, dyestuffs and pigment manufacturing
Benzo(a)pyrene
Coke oven emissions, coal tar pitch volatiles, diesel exhaust, ETS
Bis(chloromethyl) ether and  
chloromethyl ether (technical grade)
Chemical industry, laboratory reagent, plastic manufacturing
1,3-Butadiene
Chemical industry, petrochemical plants, styrene–butadiene rubber manufacturing
Coal tars and pitches
Coke production, coal gasification, refineries, foundries, road paving, hot tar roofing
Ethylene oxide
Chemical industry, dry vegetable fumigation, hospital sterilizing
Formaldehyde
Textiles, composite wood industry, chemical industry, medical laboratories
4,4′-Methylenebis(2-chloroaniline)  
[MOCA]
Epoxy resin manufacturing, polyurethane product fabrication
Mineral oils, untreated and mildly treated
Metal machining and honing, roll steel production, printing
2-Naphthylamine
Chemical industry, dyestuffs and pigment manufacturing
2,3,4,7,8-Pentachlorodibenzofuran
Hazardous waste processing, chlorophenoxy herbicide production and use, pulp and  
paper industry
3,4,5,3′,4′-Pentachlorobiphenyl‡  
[PCB126]
Hazardous waste processing, waterway dredging, transformer handling, pulp and paper  
industry
Shale oils or shale-derived lubricants
Mining and processing, cotton textile industry
Soot
Chimney sweeps, heating and ventilation contractors, firefighters, metallurgical workers
2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorobibenzo-para-dioxin  
(TCDD)
Hazardous waste processing, chlorophenoxy herbicide production and use, pulp and  
paper industry
Vinyl chloride
Plastics industry, production of polyvinyl chloride products and copolymers
Other agents with occupational exposure
Environmental tobacco smoke (ETS)
Restaurant, bar and entertainment industry; other smoke-exposed workers
Occupational exposures as a painter
Commercial painting
Leather dust
Garment industry, auto seat fabrication, saddle and tack manufacturing, 
Magenta dye (rosaniline, pararosaniline)
Dye manufacture, textile dying, commercial art and printing
Mustard gas
Production, soldiers, some research laboratories
Exposures in the rubber industry
Work in rubber manufacturing industries
Strong inorganic acid mists containing  
sulfuric acid
Steel industry, petrochemical industry, fertilizer industry, pickling industry
Physical agents
Ionizing radiation†
Radiology and nuclear medicine staff, nuclear workers, miners, hazardous waste workers
Solar radiation
Farmers, gardeners and landscapers, lifeguards, construction workers
*Certain combinations of nickel oxides and sulfides.
†Includes x-rays, γ-rays, neutrons, radon gas, and α and β particle-emitting substances internally deposited.
‡PCBs as a class are listed by IARC as Group 1, carcinogenic to humans as of 2016.
SOURCES: From IARC (n.d., 2016), Siemiatycki et al. (2004), and Cogliano et al. (2011).

1558
APPLICATIONS TOXICOLOGY
Unit VII
Toxic gas injuries are often characterized by leakage of both 
fluid and osmotically active proteins from the vascular tissue into 
the interstitium and airways. Important determinants of the severity 
and location of injury are the concentration and water solubility of 
the toxic gas or vapor. Anhydrous ammonia, with its extremely high 
solubility, primarily damages the eyes, sinuses, and upper airways. 
The vapors combine with water in the tissue and form ammonium 
hydroxide, quickly producing liquefaction necrosis. Chemicals with 
lower solubility, such as nitrogen dioxide, act more on the distal 
airways and alveoli and take longer to induce tissue damage.
Occupational asthma may be defined as a “disease char-
acterized by variable airflow limitation and/or airway hyperre-
sponsiveness and/or inflammation due to causes and conditions 
attributable to a particular occupational environment and not to 
stimuli encountered outside the workplace” (Bernstein et al., 2013). 
Workplace asthma is generally divided into allergic, non-allergic, 
and work-aggravated asthma. Data from the NIOSH Work-Related 
Occupational Lung Disease Surveillance System has shown that 
22% of occupational asthma cases represented aggravation of 
pre-existing asthma by workplace exposures. The U.S. National 
Health Interview Survey has provided data on the prevalence of 
asthma based upon usual industry (Table 34-6). These data indi-
cate that asthma prevalence is much higher for female than male 
workers and is highest in manufacturing of plastics and rubber; 
electrical equipment and appliances; chemicals; and transportation 
equipment. Among the service sectors asthma is prevalent among 
those engaged in health care and social assistance; education; and 
Table 34-4  
U.S. Deaths and Age-Adjusted Death Rates Attributed 
to Selected Occupational Lung Diseases for U.S. 
Residents Age 15 and Over, 2014
DISEASE
NUMBER OF 
DEATHS†
DEATH RATE PER 
MILLION WORKING 
AGE PEOPLE
Asbestosis
1221
4.39
Coal workers 
pneumoconiosis
363
1.26
Silicosis
84
0.30
Byssinosis
2
0.01
Other pneumoconioses*
139
0.48
Malignant 
Mesothelioma
2786
9.89
Hypersensitivity 
pneumonitis
141
0.49
*This includes aluminosis, berylliosis, stannosis, siderosis, and fibrosis 
from bauxite, graphite fibers, wollastonite, cadmium, portland ce-
ment, emery, kaolin, antimony, and mica.
†Includes underlying and contributing cause deaths.
SOURCE: From NIOSH (2017a).
Table 34-5  
Nonfatal Occupational Illnesses* Requiring Days Away From Work, 2015 (Number of Cases and Rate Per 10,000  
Full Time Workers)
INDUSTRY DIVISION
NUMBER
INCIDENCE RATES
TOTAL CASES
OVERALL
RESPIRATORY 
CONDITIONS** POISONINGS
SKIN DISEASES 
OR DISORDERS†
Goods Producing
49,700
24.6
1.3
0.2
3.3
Manufacturing
40,800
32.9
1.3
0.2
3.4
Construction
5100
8.6
0.8
0.2
2.3
Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing, and Hunting‡
3100
31.2
3.9
1.6
10.0
Mining, Quarrying, Oil and Gas Extraction
700
7.5
2.1
–
–
Service Providing§
90,900
12.0
1.2
0.2
2.0
Education and Health Services
37,300
23.6
3.0
0.1
3.7
Trade, Transportation and Utilities
23,700
10.6
0.7
0.1
1.3
Leisure, Entertainment, and Hospitality
10,400
10.8
1.2
0.3
2.4
Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate
3,600
4.9
0.4
–
0.5
Professional and Business Services
11,800
7.8
0.8
0.2
2.1
Information
1,900
7.8
0.3
–
0.8
State and Local Government
47,400
32.0
3.4
0.5
4.3
Total number of reported cases
187,900
17,200
2500
28,300
*Illnesses excludes injuries. Not shown are the rates for hearing loss and illnesses.
†These conditions are contact dermatitis, eczema, or rash caused by primary irritants and sensitizers or poisonous plants; oil acne; friction blisters, 
chrome ulcers; and inflammation.
‡Agricultural illnesses are grossly underreported because the data exclude farms with fewer than 11 employees.
§Includes auto repair, other repair, health care, hotel, personal, business, entertainment, educational, social, and engineering services.
**These conditions are pneumonitis; pharyngitis; rhinitis; acute congestions due to chemicals, dusts, gases, or fumes; and other dust diseases of the lung.
SOURCE: From USDL (2015).

Occupational Toxicology
Chapter 34
1559
Table 34-6  
U.S. Asthma Prevalence* by Current Industry and Sex for Selected Industries, Age 18 and Over  
(Annual Averages for 2004 to 2011)
ESTIMATED 
POPULATION
ASTHMA PREVALENCE (%)
INDUSTRY
TOTAL
FEMALE
MALE
Manufacturing
  Plastics and Rubber
613,195
7.7
11.8
5.9
  Electrical Equipment, Appliances, and Components
435,146
6.8
13.4
3.5
  Chemicals
1,077,030
6.2
10.1
4.2
  Transportation Equipment
2,000,534
6.0
7.5
5.6
  Miscellaneous Manufacturing
1,129,782
6.0
8.7
4.2
  Textile Products
182,064
5.4
8.3
‡
  Printing and Related Support Activities
661,067
4.8
7.7
3.5
  Furniture and Related Products
569,204
4.6
5.3
4.3
  Wood Products
496,446
4.2
7.2
3.4
  Food
1,640,559
4.1
6.0
2.9
Retail and Services
  Gasoline Stations
446,793
8.7
13.8
‡
  Health Care and Social Assistance
17,573,528
8.4
9.1
5.5
  Furniture and Home Furnishings Stores
532,896
8.1
13.1
4.8
  Education Services
13,160,030
7.8
8.8
5.8
  Electronics and Appliance Stores
590,657
7.5
10.5
6.3
  Personal Services†
1,997,487
6.7
8.1
3.1
  Public Administration
6,944,968
6.4
8.3
4.9
  Food and Beverage Stores
2,705,058
6.2
8.2
4.1
  Merchant Wholesalers Durable Goods
2,048,004
6.0
7.9
5.4
Transportation
3,923,650
5.3
9.6
4.1
Construction
10,262,670
4.4
6.0
4.2
Agriculture (Animal and Crop)
1,614,617
4.1
5.0
3.9
*Current asthma defined as those who have ever been told by a health professional that they had asthma and currently still have asthma.
†Barber shops, beauty salons, nail salons, laundry, funeral homes, and cemeteries.
‡Data suppressed due to standard error >50%.
SOURCE: From NIOSH (2015).
personal services. In retail, prevalence is highest among gasoline 
station workers and employees of furniture and home furnishings 
stores and businesses selling electronics and appliances.
There are a variety of industries in which there is increased 
risk of developing work-related asthma. In chemical-based indus-
tries, plastic and rubber polymer precursors, diisocyanates, reactive 
dyes, and acid anhydrides are recognized low-molecular-weight 
sensitizing compounds. Biocides and fungicides used in metal fab-
rication and machining, custodial services, lawn and turf growing, 
and agriculture are also chemicals associated with occupational 
asthma. A number of metals can induce sensitization and asthma, 
including chromium, cobalt, nickel, platinum, and zinc. Enzymes 
pose significant risks for occupational asthma (Heederik et al., 
2002). Examples include α-amylase among bakery workers and 
subtilisin, a protease used in laundry detergents. The enzyme pro-
duction industry has had to adopt strict environmental and process 
controls to reduce the incidence of occupational asthma in their 
production facilities.
Those working with animals or animal products are at 
increased risk of developing allergy (Elliott et al., 2005) and occu-
pational asthma (Pacheco et al., 2003). Lab animal workers have 
concurrent exposure to animal allergens and bacterial endotoxin 
and being allergic modifies the relationship between endotoxin 
exposure and respiratory symptoms (Newton et al., 2017). Animal 
handlers, processors, and laboratory technicians who work with 
animals can become immunologically sensitized to urine or sali-
vary proteins in many vertebrates; proteins in bat guano and bird 
droppings; animal dander; serum proteins in blood products; dust 
from horns, antlers, and tusks; or the shells of crustaceans. Very 
high rates of sensitization can occur in shellfish processors (Glass 
et al., 1998). Arthropods such as insect larvae, cockroaches, mites, 
or weevils are recognized inducers of work-related asthma. Plants 
and plant products (e.g., soy flour, spices, and coffee beans) can 
also cause asthma among workers. In a variety of occupations, 
exposure to fungi, especially of the genera Aspergillus, Penicillium, 
Rhizopus, Mucor, and Paecilomyces, is associated with allergic 
rhinitis and asthma. These are especially present in sawmills, 
woodchip handling, and composting facilities (Eduard et al., 1992; 
Duchaine et al., 2000). Apart from the contaminating microor-
ganisms, certain woods themselves produce chemical sensitizing 
agents. Examples include western red cedar, redwood, and some 
tropical hardwoods.
Asthma emerged in the 1980s as a major occupational health 
concern among health-care workers. In order to reduce the risk 
of hepatitis B and other infectious diseases, health-care workers 
adopted the use of natural rubber latex gloves for barrier protection. 
Proteins from the latex of the rubber tree, Hevea braziliensis, led to 
immunologic sensitization. Thirteen of these high-molecular-weight

1560
APPLICATIONS TOXICOLOGY
Unit VII
proteins have been characterized as allergens (Bernstein et  al., 
2003). People with latex allergy may also be sensitive to banana, 
avocado, chestnut, and kiwi due to cross-reactivity with the latex 
allergen fragment hevein (Radauer et al., 2011). Many other plants 
of less commercial value than Hevea produce a similar milky fluid 
when cut and have similar sensitizing properties. A shift to powder-
free, nitrile, and vinyl examination gloves has reduced the incidence 
of latex allergy among health-care workers and patients.
Studies of asthma prevalence in occupational settings with 
exposure to low-molecular-weight chemicals have suggested prev-
alence rates of 5% to 10% for toluene diisocyanate (Baur, 1996; 
Becklake et al., 2006), 3.2% to 18% for anhydrides (Venables et al., 
1985; Wernfors et al., 1986), 4% for plicatic acid from western red 
cedar (Chan-Yeung et al., 1984), and 54% in a platinum refinery 
(Venables et al., 1989). For high-molecular-weight allergens, prev-
alence among shellfish processors was estimated at 21% to 26% 
(Desjardins et al., 1995; Glass et al., 1998), 11% to 44% among 
lab animal workers (Cullinan et al., 1994; Fuortes et al., 1997; 
Hollander et al., 1997), and 5% to 7% among bakers exposed to 
wheat and α-amylase (Heederik et al., 2002).
Agricultural workers exposed to grain dust, cotton dust, or 
atmospheres in swine or poultry confinement barns may have 
reduced risk to developing allergy due to innate immune responses 
to inhaled endotoxin and microorganisms. However, they are at 
high risk for the development of an asthma-like syndrome. This 
syndrome is an acute nonallergic airway response characterized by 
self-limited inflammation with neutrophilic infiltrates and increased 
pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines (e.g., TNFα, IL-6, and 
IL-8), but it does not include persistent airway hyperreactivity, as in 
occupational asthma (Schenker et al., 1998). Asthma-like syndrome 
includes cough, mild dyspnea, fever, malaise, and cross-shift declines 
in lung function. Endotoxin in combination with other inflammatory 
bioaerosols is the likely etiologic agent (Douwes et al., 2003).
An emerging area of concern is adverse effects of respira-
tory exposures to manufactured nanomaterials. There are currently 
over 1800 consumer products that contain nanotechnology-based 
materials (Vance et al., 2015). Nanomaterials are engineered struc-
tures that have a primary size less than 100 nm in at least one 
dimension. Airborne nanoparticles generally form agglomerates 
in which groups of particles are held together by relatively weak 
forces (e.g., van der Waals). They may also aggregate forming clus-
ters that are fused, sintered, or chemically bonded to one another 
(Pettibone et al., 2008). Manufactured nanomaterials find appli-
cations in electronics, construction materials including wall and 
floor coverings, cosmetics, drug delivery, medical imaging, food 
products, packaging materials, textiles, and sporting equipment, 
to name a few. Occupational exposures occur in the manufacture 
of the nanomaterials and in their use in fabricating materials and 
consumer products. Exposures can also occur when nanomaterials 
are cut or shaped and when product waste is discarded. Engineered 
nanomaterials may be carbon-based, metal-based, or biological in 
nature. Biological actions of nanoscaled materials may differ from 
the comparable bulk materials or micron-sized particles (NIOSH, 
2013). Inhaled nanomaterials may induce pulmonary toxicity or 
they can cause adverse effects in other tissues through adsorption 
and transport, generation of toxic substances by their dissolution or 
degradation, or by crossing key physiological barriers, or cell and 
nuclear membranes (Kim et al., 2011). Mechanisms of nanotoxic-
ity include oxidative stress, inflammation, cytotoxicity, genotoxic-
ity, and developmental toxicity (Adamcˇaková-Dodd et al., 2014, 
2015). Metal and metal-oxide nanoparticles absorb materials from 
the airway surface fluid and acquire protein coronas that can affect 
their pulmonary clearance (Konduru et al., 2017). In early 2011, 
NIOSH issued a new guideline on TiO2, marking the first instance 
of two guidelines for the same compound based on particle size. 
In 2013, NIOSH issued a Current Intelligence Bulletin on carbon 
nanotubes and nanofibers that proposed an REL of 1 μg/m3 elemen-
tal carbon as an 8-hour time-weighted average (TWA) concentration 
(NIOSH, 2013). Research programs and regulatory bodies in the 
United States and the EU are studying the toxicity of nanomaterials 
in commercial use and conducting human health risk assessments.
Other Occupational Diseases
Occupational diseases of the skin are common but less often fatal 
than those of the respiratory system. Irritant dermatitis and allergic 
contact dermatitis have the highest incidence of reported skin con-
ditions. Table 34-5 shows data for rates of skin diseases or disorders 
in 2015 by industry division. These data indicate that agriculture, 
forestry, fishing, and hunting carry the highest risks with an inci-
dence rate of 10 per 10,000 full-time workers. The incidence for the 
goods-producing sector overall is 3.3 per 10,000, higher than the 
rate for service sector workers. In the service sector, the education 
and health services division has the highest rate of skin diseases. 
This is due to the high rate of skin disorders among workers in 
nursing care facilities (10.4 per 10,000) and assisted living facilities 
(9.4 per 10,000).
Occupational toxicants may induce diseases in a variety of 
body sites distant from the lung or skin. These include tumors aris-
ing in the liver, bladder, gastrointestinal tract, or hematopoietic sys-
tem and are attributable to a variety of chemical classes. Further 
discussion of other occupational diseases and the toxicants listed in 
Table 34-2 can be found in the relevant chapters in this book.
Nervous system damage can be central, peripheral, or both. 
It may be acute, as with some organophosphate exposures, or 
chronic, as with organomercury poisoning or acrylamide-induced 
neuropathy. Injury affecting the immune system may arise from the 
immunosuppressive effects of chemicals such as dioxins or toxic 
metals. Many occupational diseases of the immune system occur 
due to hypersensitivity leading to respiratory or dermal allergy or 
systemic hypersensitivity reactions. Autoimmune syndromes have 
been associated with occupational exposures to crystalline silica 
and vinyl chloride.
Occupational diseases of the cardiovascular system include 
atherosclerosis, a variety of arrhythmias, problems with coronary 
blood supply, systemic hypotension, and cor pulmonale (right ven-
tricular hypertrophy usually due to pulmonary hypertension as with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease). Liver diseases such as car-
bon tetrachloride-induced fatty liver and hepatocellular death due to 
toxic concentrations of acetaminophen have classically been used to 
illustrate chemical mechanisms of cellular injury leading to organ 
failure. These are thoroughly discussed elsewhere in this book. 
Occupational diseases of the reproductive system can be sex- and 
organ-specific, but several toxicants—including carbon disulfide, 
lead, and vinyl chloride—may affect both sexes.
Exposures to infectious agents are a part of a variety of occupa-
tions (Thorne et al., 2015). Veterinarians, health-care workers, and 
biomedical researchers studying infectious agents have exposures 
that are largely known and infection control strategies can limit 
their risks. For others, such as farmers and foresters, specific risks 
may be less obvious. Zoonotic diseases such as Q-fever, rabies, lep-
tospirosis, and brucellosis may affect abattoir workers, zookeepers, 
animal handlers, and veterinarians. Foresters, field biologists, and 
natural resource workers who spend time in wooded areas experi-
ence tick- and mosquito-borne illnesses at a higher frequency than 
that of the general population. These illnesses include the West Nile

Occupational Toxicology
Chapter 34
1561
Fever and other arboviral encephalitides, chikungunya, Dengue 
fever, Lyme disease, and ehrlichiosis. Occupational infections may 
arise as a result of work settings bringing people into close proxim-
ity with other people or animals, thus facilitating the transmission 
of microorganisms. Occupational infectious diseases attributable to 
the clustering of people affect workers in such facilities as day care 
centers, schools, health-care settings, correctional facilities, dor-
mitories, military barracks, or shelters for the homeless. Industrial 
settings can place large numbers of workers in a shared space, lead-
ing to increased transmission of diseases. This is especially true 
for diseases with annual outbreaks, such as influenza. Exposures 
to chemicals may increase the susceptibility of workers to infec-
tion through irritation of mucosa or the pulmonary epithelium or 
through immunosuppression leading to impaired host defense.
Both industrial and nonindustrial occupational environments 
may pose occupational hazards due to the presence of chemical 
or biological agents. Reports of work environments with ineffec-
tive ventilation or decreased ventilation rates and increased uti-
lization of synthetic building materials have demonstrated a rise 
in complaints associated with occupancy in buildings. In some 
cases, service sector workers in a problem building develop spe-
cific clinical conditions with recognized etiology. This is defined as 
building-related illness. In other cases, symptoms are nonspecific 
and disappear when the worker leaves the problem building. When 
this occurs with sufficient prevalence, it is termed sick building 
syndrome. This can arise from volatile and semivolatile chemicals 
released from office materials, building materials, floor coverings, 
furniture, cleaning products, and microorganisms. Office buildings 
and residential settings comprise a complex ecology consisting of 
people, molds, mites, volatile organic compounds of microbial and 
nonmicrobial origin, and sometimes plants, pets, cockroaches, and 
other vermin (Thorne and Heederik, 1999b). Molds, house dust 
mites, and animal proteins are potent human allergens that can lead 
to allergy and asthma. Exposure to chemicals and biomolecules 
such as endotoxin may enhance this process (Douwes et al., 2003). 
Workers in laboratory animal facilities exhibit a high prevalence 
of allergy to rodent urinary proteins. In some cases, the occupied 
space of a building may be clean and dry, but local amplification 
sites for molds may develop. These may arise in ventilation sys-
tems, utility closets, subfloors, or basements that serve as return air 
plenums, or in local sites of water damage. Such sites can become 
sources of microorganisms and aeroallergens of sufficient volume 
to generate significant bioaerosol exposures throughout the envi-
ronment. Airborne viruses, bacteria, and fungi are responsible for 
a variety of building-related illnesses arising from organisms that 
are pathogenic to humans. Nonpathogenic microorganisms may 
induce symptoms or diseases through inflammatory processes, by 
stimulating innate or adaptive immune response, or by releasing 
noxious odors, allergenic compounds, or bioactive macromolecules. 
These may combine with industrial chemicals released into the air 
to ­create complex exposure environments.
TOXICOLOGIC EVALUATION OF 
OCCUPATIONAL AGENTS
Evaluation of Occupational Risks
In most instances of prolonged exposure to low levels of chem-
icals, there is a continuum between being healthy and being ill. 
The exposures may impart biochemical or functional changes that 
are without signs or symptoms, subclinical changes, or in cases of 
more significant toxicity, manifest as clinical disease. The health 
significance of the identified changes resulting from exposure to 
a particular agent must be assessed in order to determine which 
effects are adverse. Following this assessment, one must consider 
the interindividual variability or susceptibility factors that influence 
the risks. There is no single dose–effect relationship but a distri-
bution of responses. Therefore, in order to recommend an accept-
able exposure level to an industrial chemical, one must attempt to 
define the risk associated with adverse effects in the most sensitive 
populations exposed. It then remains to be determined what propor-
tion of exposed subjects may still develop an adverse effect at the 
proposed acceptable exposure level. This acceptable risk level will 
vary according to a value judgment of the severity, permanence, 
and equity of the potential adverse effects and the characteristics of 
the most susceptible population. Clearly, inhibition of an enzyme 
without functional consequences will be viewed as more accept-
able than a chronic non-fatal disease and in turn a more serious 
toxic effect, such as teratogenicity leading to a congenital malfor-
mation in the offspring of the exposed individual.
Establishing Causality  In complex occupational environments, 
it may be difficult to establish a causal relationship between a toxic 
substance and a disease. For this reason a number of systematic 
approaches have been devised to help define causation. In 1890, 
Robert Koch proposed postulates for “proving” that a specific 
organism caused a specific disease. T. M. Rivers extended this 
approach to viruses in 1937. Sir Austin Bradford Hill suggested 
epidemiologic criteria for assessing causality in 1965 considering 
strength, specificity, consistency, temporality, exposure period, 
exposure gradients, and biological plausibility of the associations. 
These schema and modern weight-of-evidence determination cri-
teria led to systematized approaches for establishing strength of 
associations. U.S. EPA criteria for establishing weight-of-evidence 
are illustrated in Fig. 34-3. Note that extensive study is required 
to establish a clear causal link between exposure to a toxicant and 
an adverse health outcome. Fig. 34-4 provides a matrix to evalu-
ate the weight-of-evidence for a causal association between a 
Occupational epidemiology
studies
Occupational workforce
surveillance
In vitro toxicology testing
& QSAR modeling
Data Sources for Occupational Toxicology
In vitro animal models
Human challenge studies
Figure 34-3.   Data sources for occupational toxicology decision making.

1562
APPLICATIONS TOXICOLOGY
Unit VII
toxicant and an occupational disease (Donham and Thorne, 1994). 
Evidence from well-conducted in vitro studies, animal toxicology 
studies, controlled human challenge studies, case reports, and epi-
demiologic investigations is evaluated with regard to data quality 
and clarity of evidence in support of the establishment of causal-
ity. This evaluation is guided by seven criteria. If a chemical were 
thoroughly studied in animals, humans, and in vitro studies and it 
produced clear and convincing evidence of an exposure–response 
relationship in controlled studies that used appropriate models 
and relevant endpoints, it would constitute compelling evidence 
of a causal relationship between that chemical and that disease. 
Fig. 34-3 reminds us that a consortium of study types contributes 
data used for the evaluation of occupational hazards. These are dis-
cussed below.
In Vitro Assays  A number of useful in vitro assays have been 
developed over the past several decades in order to provide screen-
ing data and, in some cases, mechanistic insight without the need 
or expense of exposing animal or human subjects. While at this 
time there are few validated methods to determine complex toxi-
cologic responses such as pulmonary hypersensitivity or peripheral 
neuropathy, the U.S. Interagency Coordinating Committee on the 
Validation of Alternative Methods (ICCVAM) lists recommended 
test method protocols for acute systemic toxicity, endocrine dis-
ruptors, eye corrosion and irritation, pyrogenicity, and skin sen-
sitization (ICCVAM, 2017). Examples include the Direct Peptide 
Reactivity assay (OECD TG 442C) and the ARE-Nrf2 Luciferase 
(KeratinoSens) assay (OECD TG 442D) for predicting skin sen-
sitizers. These methods were approved initially by the European 
Centre for the Validation of Alternative Methods (ECVAM) and 
were then accepted by the 32-nation Organization of Economic 
Cooperation and Development (OECD). Another example is the 
Bovine Corneal Opacity and Permeability (BCOP) test used to 
assess the potential for chemicals and consumer products to induce 
eye injuries (OECD TG 437). In addition, quantitative structure–
activity relationships can help suggest potential toxicologic effects 
for an unstudied compound if structurally similar compounds have 
been evaluated.
Animal Toxicology Studies  Animal toxicology studies serve 
an important function in terms of identifying adverse effects, pro-
viding mechanistic data, establishing dose–response relationships, 
and aiding the process of establishing standards. Because animal 
studies can be conducted before there is any human exposure, 
these studies play an important role in hazard identification and 
prevention of human disease. There are numerous animal models 
for occupational injury and illness; these are described throughout 
this textbook in the context of the affected organ system and the 
classes of toxicants. Generation of animal toxicology data to pre-
dict health effects in workers is a central function of experimental 
toxicologists.
Toxicologic investigations using animals often serve to estab-
lish a tentative acceptable exposure level. Other important informa-
tion that may also be derived from these investigations concerns the 
relationships between the metabolic handling of the chemical and 
its interactions with target molecules (mechanism of action), identi-
fication of methods for biological monitoring of exposure and early 
health effects, and identification of preexisting pathologic states that 
may increase susceptibility to the chemical. However, animal test-
ing can provide only an estimate of the toxicity of a chemical for 
humans. Animals do not always respond to a chemical exposure in 
the same way as humans. For instance, there are very significant 
species and strain differences in responsiveness to aryl hydrocar-
bon receptor agonists such as polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins 
(Abnet et al., 1999; Boverhof et al., 2006). In some instances, inter-
species differences in metabolism or mechanism of action cause 
certain chemicals to induce cancer in rodents but not in humans. 
One such example is kidney cancer, attributable to the accumula-
tion of a rat-specific protein (α2u-globulin) in proximal tubular cells, 
and produced in male rats chronically exposed to unleaded gasoline 
(Hard et al., 1993). There are a few compounds for which predictive 
animal models have not been found.
Assessment
of exposure
to speciﬁc
agents
Consideration
or control of
confounders
Evidence of a
dose –
response
relationship
Consistent
results from
different
studies
Objective
clinical data
Endpoints
related to
human
pathology
Appropriate
subjects or
models
In vitro
studies
Animal
studies
Human
challenge
studies
Case studies
Epidemiology
studies
For each type of study listed in the ﬁrst column weight the quality of data from existing studies based on the criteria listed in the column
headings as follows:
0 No evidence or condition is not met
1 Equivocal evidence or condition is partially met
2 Some evidence or condition is mostly met
3 Clear evidence or condition is convincingly met
4 Squares shown in pink should be left blank
Figure 34-4.   Matrix for assessing the strength of an association between a toxicant and an occupational disease.

Occupational Toxicology
Chapter 34
1563
Human Challenge Studies  Controlled human challenge stud-
ies, or clinical exposure studies, are a useful approach for verifying 
findings from animal toxicology studies in humans and for estab-
lishing whether biotransformation pathways in the animal models 
represent those in exposed humans. Human challenge studies with 
occupational toxicants are usually designed to answer very specific 
questions regarding rates of uptake, biotransformation pathways, 
the time course of metabolite excretion during and after exposure, 
evaluation of the threshold concentration for sensory responses 
(odor, irritation of the nasal mucosa, etc.), and acute effects of 
toxicant exposure on perception, vigilance, and lung, cardiac, or 
neurobehavioral function. Human challenge studies help to estab-
lish biomarkers of exposure. For reversible conditions, they can 
be useful for testing therapeutic options. They may also be useful 
for investigating bronchial hyperresponsiveness to inhaled agents. 
Extreme caution must be exercised to ensure the safety of research 
subjects and the scientific benefits must be balanced against the 
risks to participants (National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, 
and Medicine, 2017). Idiosyncratic responses can cause a subject to 
be exceptionally sensitive. For inhalation studies, equipment mal-
function can result in overexposure, so real-time exposure moni-
toring is a necessity. In the past 25 years, there have been several 
serious injuries and fatalities associated with human challenge 
studies. These have been attributed to hypersensitivity reactions 
and generally used mock workplace simulations without rigorous 
control and monitoring of exposures, as is the current standard of 
practice. Thus, such studies should be undertaken only when the 
required data cannot be obtained through other means and under 
circumstances in which the risk for volunteers can reasonably be 
estimated as negligible.
Case Reports  When new toxicants, new combinations of toxi-
cants, or changes in process conditions occur in the workplace, 
a case or outbreak of cases can occur. These may be identified 
through workplace surveillance systems, OSHA 300 logs, or 
through workers associating their disease with workplace expo-
sures. In some cases, the problem is identified quickly and 
resolved, while others take years to resolve. These are often pub-
lished as case reports and may give rise to animal or epidemiologic 
studies. Cases of hypersensitivity pneumonitis among machinists 
exposed to metalworking fluids contaminated with mycobacteria 
is one example (Weiss et al., 2002; Thorne et al., 2006). Another 
example is diacetyl-induced bronchiolitis obliterans that was first 
recognized in workers manufacturing artificially flavored micro-
wave popcorn (Kreiss et al., 2002). NIOSH has a Health Hazard 
Evaluation (HHE) program in place in which employees or their 
authorized representatives (i.e., union officials) or employers at a 
job site can request an investigation to evaluate a potentially hazard-
ous situation (NIOSH, 2017b). This program issues HHE reports 
to disseminate information regarding the hazard. NIOSH also pub-
lishes NIOSH Alerts, Criteria Documents, Fatal Assessment and 
Control Evaluation Reports, and Current Intelligence Bulletins. It 
also publishes Joint Occupational Health Documents with similar 
entities in foreign governments. While useful for hazard identifica-
tion and mitigation, case reports and HHE reports generally do not 
establish incidence or prevalence of diseases associated with an 
occupational hazard.
Epidemiology Studies  Epidemiology studies help to unravel 
the associations between occupational diseases, exposures, and 
personal risk factors. Exposure may be characterized using a sur-
rogate measure such as job classification or via questionnaire, 
or more directly through exposure monitoring or biomonitoring. 
Adverse effects may be expressed in terms of mortality, incidence, 
or prevalence of clinical disease, irreversible or reversible func-
tional changes, or critical biological changes.
Several types of epidemiologic studies are used to gather data 
on the association of workplace exposures with human disease. 
Cross-sectional studies compare disease prevalence or health status 
between groups of workers classified according to job title, work 
site, or exposure status. Cohort studies compare exposed workers 
versus unexposed or less exposed workers either prospectively or 
retrospectively in order to associate the occurrence of disease with 
exposure. Because many occupational diseases have a long induc-
tion period or occur only rarely, prospective cohort studies may 
require a long time and need a large number of subjects to estab-
lish significant findings. Retrospective cohort studies can resolve 
the latency problem but require that relevant exposure data have 
been collected over time. In the absence of measured exposures, 
job titles, tasks routinely performed, and years of employment may 
allow categorical exposure classification (e.g., low, medium, and 
high). Exposure misclassification is frequently a problem in retro-
spective studies that reduces the likelihood of associating a disease 
with a particular exposure.
Case–control studies are useful for investigating rare diseases 
or diseases with long induction periods. As the name suggests, case–
control studies compare workers with disease to workers without 
disease with regard to their past exposure intensity, frequency, and 
duration, plus other postulated risk factors. In some instances where 
the exposure–disease relationship is not understood, it may be dif-
ficult to identify an appropriate control group. Case–control studies 
are strongest when accompanied by a rich data set of measured 
exposures to the candidate causative agents spanning the relevant 
exposure period. If exposure history is assessed by questionnaire 
after workers have developed adverse health effects, there arises the 
potential for recall bias in which those with disease may recall past 
exposures differently than those who are free of disease. Error can 
also arise due to selection bias if those who agree to participate in 
the study are not representative of the population of interest.
Characteristics of observational epidemiology studies are 
listed in Table 34-7. Occupational epidemiology studies assess 
relationships between exposures and human health outcomes and, 
therefore, are particularly useful for risk assessment. Confounding 
may arise due to exposures of risk factors not associated with the 
work environment.
Because measures of effect may be subtle and may overlay a 
background level of incidence, results generally require sophisti-
cated statistical comparisons between a group of exposed workers 
and a similar group of workers without the exposure of interest. 
Ideally, the group of unexposed workers should be matched on vari-
ables such as age, race, gender, socioeconomic status, and smoking 
habits. They should also undergo the same standardized clinical, 
biological, or physiologic evaluation at the same time as the exposed 
group. Comparison with the general population is ill-advised 
because an employed population is a highly selected group and may 
have a higher degree of physical fitness, called the healthy worker 
effect. Because occupational epidemiologic studies often last for 
several years, all methods of investigation—such as ­questionnaires, 
measurement instruments, and analytic techniques—must be vali-
dated and standardized before the start of the study. If results will be 
compared to prior or contemporaneous studies, the same question-
naires should be used. The number of subjects under study should 
be chosen based on a sample size calculation to be able to detect a 
difference between exposed and unexposed subjects (should there 
be a difference) and should take into account labor turnover and 
those declining participation in any aspects of the study. If expo-
sures are high enough to induce an adverse effect, it is expected that

1564
APPLICATIONS TOXICOLOGY
Unit VII
these studies may permit establishment of the relationship between 
integrated exposure (intensity × time) and frequency of abnormal 
results and, consequently, a redefinition of the OEL.
In most cases, occupational epidemiologic studies encom-
pass the collection of samples from the subjects or data obtained 
through interaction with the subjects. Because this often includes 
identifiable private information, the confidentiality of the data must 
be protected. U.S., EU, and international laws require that subjects 
must always have the right to refuse participation and investiga-
tors must have written consent from a duly informed participant 
obtained without coercion.
Animal Toxicology Testing for Establishing 
Acceptable Levels of Exposure
It is evident that certainty as to the complete safety of a chemi-
cal can never be obtained, regardless of the extent of toxicologic 
investigations performed on animals. Nevertheless, animal studies 
provide valuable data from which to estimate the level of exposure 
at which the risk of health impairment is acceptable. Table 34-7 
compares the information gained from animal studies to epidemiol-
ogy studies. To the extent possible, animal studies should employ 
species for which the metabolic pathways and disease processes 
reflect those of humans. Guidelines and protocols for assessing 
experimentally the toxicologic hazards of chemicals have been 
formulated by various national and international agencies. These 
tests include local and systemic acute toxicity tests, tests of toxic-
ity following repeated exposure, investigations of metabolism and 
mechanism of action, short-term tests for detecting potential muta-
gens and carcinogens, studies of effect on reproduction and of tera-
togenic activity, chronic studies to detect carcinogenesis and other 
long-term effects, interaction studies, tests for immunosuppression, 
and dermal and pulmonary hypersensitivity tests. The need for per-
forming these testing protocols should be carefully evaluated for 
the inclusion of any occupational toxicant to which workers will be 
exposed. In selecting the studies most appropriate for safety evalu-
ation, the toxicologist should be guided by an understanding of the 
following:
 • Physicochemical properties of the chemical
 • Potential for the generation of toxic derivatives when the 
chemical is submitted to heat, pH changes, and UV light
 • Conditions of use and route of exposure
 • Type of exposure (continuous, intermittent, or incidental)
 • Degree of exposure
Toxicologic information already available on other chemicals 
with similar chemical structure and reactive chemical groups can 
suggest potential hazards and reactivity.
Conclusions drawn from any toxicologic investigation are use-
ful only if the composition and physical state of the tested prepa-
ration is known. This would include the nature and concentration 
of impurities or degradation products, speciation of inorganic 
Table 34-7  
Comparison of Epidemiologic Studies and Experimental Exposure Studies
OBSERVATIONAL EPIDEMIOLOGIC STUDIES
EXPERIMENTAL ANIMAL EXPOSURE STUDIES
Toxicant exposure
Reflects true exposure among population at risk
Controlled to represent major toxicant of interest
Character
Complex and variable in space and time
Usually one or two test compounds 
May include nonoccupational exposures to 
toxicant or related compounds
May not reflect complexity of human exposures
Frequency and duration
Work day, work week, and years in that job may 
be task specific
Acute, subacute, subchronic, chronic
Exposure route
Inhalation, ingestion, percutaneous, or a 
combination
Injection, inhalation, oral, or dermal; rarely a 
combination by design
Appropriateness of dose
Reflect the actual range of exposure
Often doses studied are far higher than human 
exposures
Assessment
Environmental sampling or measurement of 
biomarkers
Measurement of administered dose with or 
without measurement of biomarkers
May be retrospective and based on employer 
records, group-based approaches, or 
questionnaires
Sampling of exposure chamber air for inhalation 
studies
Species considerations
Humans—cohorts or cases and controls
Laboratory animals, usually inbred strains of mice 
or rats
Must protect the safety and confidentiality of 
subjects
Must ensure proper care and use of animals
Representativeness
May exist a selection bias such that the study 
population may not represent the occupational 
work force
Experimental animal species may not represent 
humans
Relevance to human health
Directly relevant if appropriate outcomes are 
studied
Relevant if species differences are known 
Of limited relevance if species or strain effects 
on absorption, distribution, metabolism, and 
disease are unknown
Analytical challenges
Selection bias, misclassification, and confounding 
in characterization of outcomes
Control of genetics, feeding, and housing between 
exposed and control groups
Within- and between-subject variance may be high
Low variance in outcomes

Occupational Toxicology
Chapter 34
1565
compounds, characterization of physicochemical properties for 
inhaled materials, and characterization of the vehicle (the car-
rier, diluent, or excipient of the toxicant). Sensitive and specific 
methods of analysis of the chemical in solution, air, and biological 
material should also be available. The assessment of the toxicity of 
malathion illustrates this point. Malathion is an organophosphate 
insecticide that normally has relatively low human toxicity. This 
pesticide was responsible for an episode of mass poisoning among 
malaria workers in Pakistan because the specific product contained 
impurities (mainly isomalathion) capable of inhibiting tissue and 
plasma carboxyesterases (Aldridge et al., 1979) and inactivating 
acetylcholinesterase via formation of adducts (Doorn et al., 2003). 
The toxicity evaluation for malathion had not anticipated isomala-
thion coexposure. A recent study evaluated the pulmonary ­toxicity 
of inhaled aluminum nanowhiskers (Adamcˇaková-Dodd et al., 
2012). The manufacturer of this material stated they were Al2O3 
whiskers. Careful physicochemical analysis prior to toxicity evalua-
tion using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and transmission elec-
tron microscopy revealed they were actually mixed phase aluminum 
hydroxy structures containing Al(OH)3 and γ-AlOOH. Further, the 
whiskers were 100 to 400 nm in length, considerably shorter than 
the 2800 nm length claimed by the manufacturer.
The duration of tests necessary to establish an acceptable level 
for occupational exposure is primarily a function of the type of toxic 
action suspected. It is generally recognized that for systemically 
acting chemicals, subacute and short-term toxicity studies are usu-
ally insufficient for proposing OELs. Subacute and short-term tox-
icity tests are usually performed to find out whether the compound 
exhibits immunotoxic properties and cumulative characteristics. 
They also aid in the selection of the doses for long-term-exposure 
studies and the kind of tests that may be most informative when 
applied during long-term exposures. A number of studies have 
drawn attention to the fact that the reproductive system may also be 
the target organ of industrial chemicals (e.g., glycol ethers, styrene, 
lead, dibromochloropropane). Thus, studies designed to evaluate 
reproductive effects and teratogenicity should also be considered 
during routine toxicologic testing of occupational toxicants.
Information derived from exposure routes similar to those 
experienced by workers is clearly the most relevant. For airborne 
pollutants, inhalation exposure studies provide the basic data on 
which provisional OELs are based. Experimental methodology is 
much more complicated for inhalation studies than for oral admin-
istration experiments and requires more specialized equipment and 
expertise. For example, in the case of exposure to an aerosol, par-
ticle size distribution must be evaluated and the degree of retention 
in the respiratory tract of the animal species under study should be 
established. Ideally, particle size should be selected according to 
the deposition pattern of dry or liquid aerosols in the particular ani-
mal species used in order to represent human lung deposition with 
occupational exposures. Particle deposition and retention curves 
have been published for human, monkey, dog, rabbit, guinea pig, 
rat, and mouse (Schlesinger, 1985; Hsieh et al., 1999; Schroeter 
et al., 2013; Asgharian et al., 2014, 2016). It should also be kept in 
mind that the concentration of the material in the air and the dura-
tion of exposure do not give a direct estimate of the dose, because 
retained dose is also dependent on the minute volume and the pro-
portion of inhaled particles retained. Measurement of pulmonary 
dust retention following exposure to a radiolabeled or fluores-
cently tagged test aerosol should be performed prior to conducting 
acute, subchronic, or chronic studies. This allows one to assess 
deposition and determine whether the selected levels of exposure 
may overwhelm pulmonary clearance mechanisms (ILSI, 2000; 
Oberdörster, 2002).
The choice of studies to perform and their routes of adminis-
tration must be evaluated scientifically for each toxicant. Important 
considerations include its target sites and mechanism of action, 
metabolism, the nature of its adverse effects, and how workers 
are exposed to the toxicant. The morphologic, physiologic, and 
biological parameters that are usually evaluated, either at regular 
intervals in the course of the exposure period or at its termina-
tion, are described elsewhere in this book. Investigations that can 
make use of specific physiologic or biochemical tests, based on 
the knowledge of the principal target organ or function, produce 
highly valuable information and increase confidence in the OEL 
derived from them.
Worker Health Surveillance
The primary objective of worker health surveillance programs is 
to provide both periodic screening of general health and wellness 
plus health and exposure monitoring tailored to recognized haz-
ards of the workplace. The monitoring of exposures to toxicants in 
the workplace may play an important role in detecting excessive 
exposures before the occurrence of significant biological distur-
bances and health impairment. A scheme for biological monitoring 
of exposure and of early biological effects is possible only when 
sufficient toxicologic information has been gathered from in vitro, 
animal, or human studies on the mechanism of action and the 
metabolism of xenobiotics to which workers are exposed. When 
a new chemical is being used on a large scale, the careful clinical 
surveillance of workers and monitoring of workplaces should be 
instituted in order to address three aims: (1) to identify overexpo-
sure or adverse effects on the health of the workers and quickly 
intervene, (2) to evaluate the validity of an existing or proposed 
OEL, and (3) to test the validity of a proposed method for biologi-
cal monitoring.
Evaluation of the validity of the proposed OEL derived from 
animal experiments through workplace surveillance is the major 
aim because studies and observations on humans are the final basis 
for deciding whether an OEL set originally on the basis of ani-
mal toxicity testing is truly acceptable as one that will not produce 
excess health risks. This means that sensitive clinical, biochemi-
cal, physiologic, or behavioral tests for detecting an adverse effect 
of a toxicant should ideally be performed on the workers concur-
rent with exposure assessment. It is helpful if health surveillance 
programs can include the same biomarkers as used in prior animal 
or human exposure studies. Occupational toxicologists and occu-
pational physicians cannot rely solely on the standard diagnostic 
tools used in clinical medicine, as they were established primarily 
to reveal advanced pathologic states and not to detect early adverse 
effects at a stage when they are still reversible. For example, the 
measurement of serum creatinine is still a widely used clinical test 
for assessing renal integrity; yet it is known that the glomerular fil-
tration rate of the kidney must be reduced by more than 50% before 
serum creatinine rises significantly.
The main limitation of current OELs or BEIs is that some 
are based on limited experimental data or clinical studies in which 
only late effects have been investigated and correlated with past 
exposure. Furthermore, several BEIs are derived from the study 
of external–internal exposure relationships and not from relation-
ships between internal dose and early adverse effects. The validity 
of an OEL is much stronger if it is based on the study of dose–
response relationships in which the dose is expressed in terms of 
the ­cumulative target dose and the monitored effect reflects a critical 
biological event. However, for some chemicals and some adverse 
effects (e.g., induction of hypersensitivity and possibly genotoxic

1566
APPLICATIONS TOXICOLOGY
Unit VII
effects), the frequency of peak exposure may be more important for 
health risk assessment than the integrated dose. For example, long-
term low-level exposures to commercial enzymes rarely induce sen-
sitization. However, a single exposure to a high concentration can 
produce hypersensitivity and occupational asthma.
In cases where a surveillance program was not instituted before 
the introduction of a new chemical, it is more difficult to establish 
the efficacy of the OEL. In this situation, evaluation depends on 
retrospective cohort studies or case–control studies on workers 
who have already sustained exposure. Evaluation of a “no observed 
adverse effect level” (NOAEL) is difficult because information on 
past exposures is often incomplete and frank effects are generally the 
focus of retrospective or case–control studies. Provided that a satis-
factory assessment of past exposure is possible, cross-sectional stud-
ies that rely on preclinical signs of toxicity may, to a certain extent, 
overcome these difficulties. Whether or not clinical investigations 
are planned from the introduction of a new chemical or process, it is 
essential to keep standardized records of occupational histories and 
exposure. The need may arise for mortality or case history studies in 
order to answer an urgent question on a suspected risk.
Careful investigation of overexposures resulting from specific 
incidents such as containment breaches, chemical spills, or vessel 
or pipe ruptures can provide useful information. Although such 
observations are usually not helpful for determining the NOAEL 
in humans, they may indicate whether human symptomatology 
is similar to that found in animals and may suggest functional or 
biological tests that might prove useful for routine monitoring of 
exposed workers.
Linkage of Animal Studies and 
Epidemiologic Studies
In the field of occupational toxicology, perhaps more than in other 
areas of toxicology, cooperation between those conducting animal 
studies and studies of workers is helpful for examining risks asso-
ciated with overexposure to chemicals and other toxicants. A few 
examples will serve to illustrate the complementarity of these 
disciplines.
Several occupational carcinogens have been identified clearly 
through combined epidemiologic and experimental approaches. 
For example, the carcinogenicity of vinyl chloride was first dem-
onstrated in rats (Viola et al., 1971), and a few years later, epide-
miologic studies confirmed the same carcinogenic risk for humans 
(Creech and Johnson, 1974; Monson et al., 1974). This observation 
stimulated several investigations on the metabolism of vinyl chlo-
ride in animals and on its mutagenic activity in in vitro systems. 
Identification of vinyl chloride metabolites led to the conclusion 
that there is microsomal oxidation leading to the formation of an 
epoxide derivative, which acts as a proximate carcinogen (ATSDR, 
2006). This finding triggered further studies on the biotransforma-
tion of structurally related halogenated ethylenes, such as vinyl bro-
mide, vinylidene chloride, 1,2-dichloroethene, trichloroethylene, 
and perchloroethylene. Comparison of their oncogenic activity in 
relation to their metabolism suggested that an interplay between 
the stability and reactivity in reaching the DNA target and reacting 
with it after being formed would determine their genotoxic risk. It 
is now recognized that vinyl chloride is metabolized to 2-chloroeth-
ylene oxide which rearranges to 2-chloroacetaldehyde and produces 
promutagenic etheno-DNA adducts including etheno-guanine, 
etheno-cytosine, and lesser amounts of etheno-adenine (Bolt, 2005; 
ATSDR, 2006; NTP, 2016).
1,3-Butadiene is a known human carcinogen with more than 
75% of its use in the manufacture of synthetic rubber products. 
Experimental studies in rats and mice demonstrated carcinogenic-
ity, with mice being particularly sensitive. Subsequent to these 
findings, 1,3-butadiene was shown to follow the same metabolic 
pathway in humans as in rats and mice, forming mutagenic and 
carcinogenic epoxides. That led to cohort and case–control stud-
ies establishing 1,3-butadiene as a human carcinogen (ATSDR, 
2009; NTP, 2016). More recent studies have considered the relative 
importance of the metabolic pathway leading to the formation of 
the reactive ­metabolites, 3,4-epoxy-1-butene, 1,2:3,4-diepoxybu-
tane, and 3,4-epoxy-1,2-diol that react with DNA and with nuclear 
proteins. Under the assumption of a genotoxic mechanism and 
cross-species comparisons of DNA binding, these data facilitate a 
more informed cancer risk assessment. In vitro studies showed that 
human lymphocytes were less sensitive to 1,2:3,4-diepoxybutane-
induced chromosomal aberrations than mouse or rat cells (ATSDR, 
2009). In vivo studies revealed a higher rate of formation of epox-
ides in mice than rats. Inhaled 1,3-butadiene produced N7-guanine 
DNA adducts in lung tissue due to 3,4-epoxy-1,2-diol (Koivisto and 
Peltonen, 2001) and 1,2:3,4-diepoxybutane (Goggin et al., 2009). 
These cross links were more prevalent in mice than rats and in 
females than males which agreed with the enhanced susceptibility 
to cancers of female mice. On this basis, rats were judged to be a 
more predictive species than mice for human risk assessment. This 
work illustrates that the measurement of DNA adducts is a sensitive 
method for ­monitoring 1,3-butadiene metabolism via the epoxide-
forming pathway in workers.
In 1973, an outbreak of peripheral neuropathy occurred in 
workers exposed to the solvent methyl butyl ketone (2-hexanone, 
MBK) (McDonough, 1974; Allen et al., 1975). The same lesion 
was reproduced in animals (Mendell et al., 1974; Spencer et al., 
1975). Biotransformation studies were then undertaken in rats 
and guinea pigs and some MBK metabolites (2,5-hexanedione, 
5-hydroxy-2-hexanone) were also found to possess neurotoxic 
activity (Spencer and Schaumburg, 1975; DiVincenzo et al., 1977). 
Similar oxidation products are formed from n-hexane, the neurotox-
icity of which is probably due to the same active metabolite as that 
produced from MBK. Because methyl ethyl ketone (MEK) cannot 
give rise to 2,5-hexanedione, it was suggested as a replacement sol-
vent. Subsequent work demonstrated the potentiation of neurotoxic 
effects of n-hexane upon coexposure with MEK (Yu et al., 2002). 
Nevertheless, MEK remains a much less toxic solvent than MBK.
These examples demonstrate that studies of the metabolic han-
dling of occupational toxicants in animals are instrumental in the 
characterization of reactive intermediates and may suggest unsus-
pected risks or indicate new methods of biological monitoring. 
Conversely, clinical observations of workers may stimulate studies 
of the metabolism or the mechanism of toxicity of a toxicant in 
animals, thereby revealing the health significance of a biological 
disturbance.
Arsenic is one of the very few compounds for which there are 
limited data of predictive value from animal studies to human health 
effects. It has been used as a medicine since the time of Hippocrates. 
Initially used to treat ulcers, arsenicals achieved notoriety as medic-
inals for a wide variety of ailments, and then, in the first half of the 
20th century, for the treatment of syphilis and parasites. Many foods 
and beverages contaminated with arsenic have been associated with 
accidental and intentional poisonings. Inorganic pentavalent arsenic 
(arsenate) is readily absorbed across tissues and converted to the tri-
valent form (arsenite). This is then methylated to form monomethyl 
arsenic acid and dimethylarsenic acid (DMA) (ATSDR, 2007). 
These are primarily transported in the blood bound to sulfhydryl 
groups in proteins. The half-life in humans for arsenic compounds 
is 2 to 4 days and the major excretion is via the urine.

Occupational Toxicology
Chapter 34
1567
Inorganic arsenic was first noted as a human carcinogen by 
Hutchinson in 1887 (Hutchinson, 1887). Epidemiologic studies led 
to classification of arsenic by the IARC as a skin and lung carcino-
gen in 1980 (IARC, 1980). Since then, studies among occupation-
ally exposed populations and populations with high arsenic in their 
drinking water have shown conclusively that arsenic causes human 
cancers of the skin, lung, bladder, kidney, liver, nasal tissue, and 
prostate. There is also evidence for arsenic-associated cutaneous 
effects, cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease, diabetes mel-
litus, and adverse reproductive outcomes (EPA, 2000; WHO, 2001).
A large number of carefully executed cancer bioassays in 
mice, rats, beagles, and monkeys performed using sodium arse-
nate, sodium arsenite, lead arsenite, arsenic trioxide, and DMA 
were uniformly negative for cancer. A number of subsequent stud-
ies that tested for tumor-promotion activity following dosing with 
recognized tumor initiators also yielded negative results. The 2007 
ATSDR Toxicological Profile for arsenic stated, “First and most 
importantly, no animal model exists for the health effect of great-
est concern for human exposure: carcinogenicity in skin and other 
organs after oral exposure” (ATSDR, 2007). Studies since about 
2000, using organic arsenicals, susceptible transgenic mice, high-
dose in utero exposures, or administration of a co-carcinogen, have 
yielded lung adenomas and adenocarcinomas in mice and rats (Shen 
et al., 2003, 2007; Cui et al., 2006; Hughes, 2006). However, years 
of negative studies in standard animal carcinogenicity screens were 
problematic in the face of unquestionable oncogenic activity in 
humans.
The examples above demonstrate that the occupational toxi-
cologist cannot rely solely on animal or epidemiologic studies. 
A combined approach is necessary in order to identify, elucidate, 
and prioritize risks and to develop interventions and techniques for 
worker health surveillance.
EXPOSURE MONITORING
Two important applications of occupational toxicologic investiga-
tions are compared below: environmental monitoring and biologi-
cal monitoring. As described above under “Occupational Health 
Standards,” both are important in worker health surveillance and 
are essential elements of toxicology studies with dosing via the 
inhalation or dermal routes.
Environmental Monitoring for Exposure 
Assessment
An important objective of experimental and clinical investigations 
in occupational toxicology is the proposal of safe levels of expo-
sure. OELs must be reevaluated at regular intervals as new infor-
mation on the toxicity of industrial chemicals develops. Adherence 
to OELs may not protect everyone and, therefore, cannot supplant 
close medical surveillance of workers. Various private and offi-
cial institutions regularly review the toxicologic information on 
chemicals in order to propose or update permissible levels of expo-
sure. These include governmental and professional organizations 
worldwide. A critical element of establishing OELs is the accu-
rate assessment of exposure. Methodology for exposure assess-
ment must be specifically tailored to the agent under study and the 
environment in which it appears. To assess airborne exposures for 
compliance purposes, personal samples taken in the breathing zone 
are generally used. In a few specific environments, area samples 
form the basis of an exposure standard (e.g., the OSHA standard 
for exposure to raw cotton dust specifies use of the vertical elutria-
tor or an equivalent method). Occupational environmental surveys 
may employ area sampling to determine areas with higher or lower 
toxicant concentrations. However, concentrations determined from 
personal samples typically exceed area concentrations, depending 
on the work practices and environmental controls. For example, 
geometric mean concentrations of inhalable dust assessed from 159 
personal samples in dairy barns were 1.78 mg/m3, compared with 
0.74 mg/m3 for 252 area samples collected simultaneously in two 
locations in the same barns (Kullman et al., 1998). Thus, in this 
environment, area sampling alone would underestimate personal 
exposures by a factor of 2.4.
Repeated random sampling is theoretically the best approach 
to developing unbiased measures of exposure. However, this is 
rarely the approach that is taken. Variability in exposure, espe-
cially variability over time, is often large; therefore, a considerable 
number of repeated measurements are needed to obtain an accu-
rate proxy of the true exposure. When the number of repeats is 
insufficient, the slope of the exposure–response relationship will 
be biased, usually leading to considerable underestimation of the 
relationship (Heederik and Attfield, 2000). Studies have demon-
strated that approaches assessing exposures to groups rather than 
to individuals are more efficient in terms of measurement effort for 
obtaining a desired level of accuracy (Vermeulen and Kromhout, 
2005). In a group-based approach, workers are grouped by job 
title, task performed, or through exposure modeling studies to 
elucidate determinants of exposure, and the group mean is used 
as the average exposure for each worker (Kromhout et al., 1996). 
Further statistical modeling of the exposure data can reduce prob-
lems of bias and large temporal and spatial variability (Preller et al., 
1995; Tielemans et al., 1998). Whereas this approach is gaining 
acceptance among occupational epidemiologists for evaluating 
exposure–response data and assessing risks, it is not accepted for 
compliance monitoring.
Although one cannot assess dose directly through exposure 
monitoring, it does have several distinct advantages over biomoni-
toring. Exposure monitoring allows one to quantify workplace 
exposure by route through selective air monitoring in the breathing 
zone of the worker and dermal dosimetry using absorptive material 
affixed to the workers’ skin or clothing. Biomonitoring generally 
does not provide route-specific exposure data. Environmental moni-
toring techniques are generally less expensive and less invasive than 
techniques involving the collection and analysis of biological sam-
ples such as blood or urine. Thus, a larger population of workers can 
be studied for the same amount of money. New personal sampling 
devices incorporate GPS, accelerometers, and smartphone technol-
ogy to provide enhanced data on location and activity. Workers are 
accustomed to wearing personal samplers for exposure assessment 
and are generally quite willing to do so. However, they are often 
unwilling to give a blood or urine sample, fearing that the sample 
will be surreptitiously used for drug testing, DNA testing, or experi-
mentation. Another benefit of air sampling in the workplace is that 
spatial, temporal, and work practice associations can be established 
and can suggest better interventions and engineering controls to 
reduce exposures. Finally, analytic interferences and variabilities 
are generally lower with environmental samples than with biologi-
cal samples.
A fully validated sampling and analysis method requires 
­specification of the sampling methods; sample duration, handling, 
and storage procedures; the analytic method and measurement 
technique; the range, precision, accuracy, bias, and limits of detec-
tion; quality assurance issues; and known interferences. It is also 
­important to document intralaboratory and interlaboratory vari-
ability. Once a standard method is established, it must be closely 
­followed in every detail in order to assure consistency of results.

1568
APPLICATIONS TOXICOLOGY
Unit VII
The development of accurate and precise analytic methods 
for environmental assessment is an ongoing effort. NIOSH pub-
lishes the extensive NIOSH Manual of Analytical Methods (NIOSH 
NMAM, 2017) and these are widely used. The American Society 
for Testing Materials (ASTM) has also developed a rigorous system 
for the establishment of methods. It generally requires 5 or more 
years to establish a new ASTM method for exposure assessment. 
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) is a global 
federation of national standards bodies with 162 member countries. 
The subcommittee on workplace atmospheres is administered by 
the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). ISO has com-
pleted harmonization on a number of air sampling methods—for 
example, the determination of the number concentration of air-
borne inorganic fibers by phase contrast optical microscopy. The 
American Industrial Hygiene Association (AIHA) and the ACGIH 
have published compilations with descriptions of analytic devices 
and methodology (Cohen and McCammon, 2001; Anna, 2010). 
Methods have also been developed for bioaerosol exposure assess-
ment and these have been reviewed (Thorne and Heederik, 1999a; 
Heederik et al., 2003; Hess-Kosa, 2011).
Biological Monitoring for Exposure 
Assessment
Biomonitoring consists of the measurement of toxicants, their 
metabolites, or molecular signatures of effect in specimens from 
humans or animals, including urine, blood, feces, exhaled breath, 
hair, finger or toenails, bronchial lavage, breast milk, and adipose 
tissue. These may serve as biomarkers of exposure, biological 
effect, or susceptibility. New technologies are emerging that will 
allow measurement and monitoring of chemicals in the body and 
transmission of the data from indwelling biosensors. Biomonitoring 
data provide a measurement of exposure based upon internal-
ized dose and, thus, account for all exposures by all routes for the 
assessed analyte.
Depending on the chemical and the analyzed biological mate-
rial, the term internalized dose may have different meanings. The 
measured biomarker may reflect the amount of chemical absorbed 
shortly before sample collection, as with the concentration of a sol-
vent in exhaled air or in a blood sample obtained during the work 
shift. It may reflect exposure during the preceding day, as with 
the measurement of a metabolite in blood or urine collected after 
the end of exposure. For toxicants with a long biological half-life, 
the measured parameter may reflect exposure accumulated over a 
period of weeks or months as with arsenic in toenails. Internal dose 
may refer to the amount of chemical stored in one or in several body 
compartments or in the whole body (the body burden).
When biological measurements are available to assess the 
internal dose, they offer important advantages over monitoring the 
air of the workplace or measuring deposition of chemicals onto der-
mal patches. The greatest advantage is that the biological measure 
of exposure is more directly related to the adverse health effects 
than environmental measurements because it reflects the amount of 
toxicant absorbed. Therefore, it may offer a better estimate of the 
risk than can be determined from ambient monitoring. Biological 
monitoring accounts for uptake by all exposure routes. Many indus-
trial chemicals can enter the organism by absorption through the 
skin or the gastrointestinal tract as well as the lung. For example, 
some solvents (e.g., dimethylformamide) and many pesticide for-
mulations exhibit substantial exposure via the dermal route. In these 
situations, exposures determined through monitoring airborne con-
centrations alone underestimate true exposure. Monitoring of an 
early biomarker of effect is useful when the subjects are exposed 
to a complex mixture and the agents responsible for the effect are 
unknown or several agents are working in synergy.
Several factors can influence uptake. Personal hygiene habits 
vary from one person to another, and there is some degree of indi-
vidual variation in the absorption rate of a chemical through the 
lungs, skin, or gastrointestinal tract. Use of size-selective air sam-
pling to determine the inhalable or respirable fraction can strengthen 
the exposure estimate. However, biological factors such as ventila-
tory parameters can affect the strength of such a correlation since 
increased workload can markedly increase the respiratory uptake of 
an airborne toxicant. Because of its ability to encompass and evalu-
ate the overall exposure (whatever the route of entry), biological 
monitoring can also be used to test the overall efficacy of personal 
protective equipment such as respirators, gloves, barrier creams, or 
aprons. Another consideration with biological monitoring is the fact 
that nonoccupational exposures (through hobbies, residential expo-
sures, dietary habits, smoking, second jobs) may also be expressed 
in the biological sample. The organism integrates the total external 
(environmental and occupational) exposure into one internal load. 
Whereas this is beneficial for worker health and safety, it may be 
confounding in epidemiologic studies or compliance monitoring. 
Thus, while biomonitoring is an important exposure measurement 
tool for health risk assessment, it generally does not allow one to 
relate sources and levels of exposure to adverse health effects unless 
the exposures are unique to the workplace (Albertini et al., 2006).
The value of biological monitoring is heightened when the 
relationships between external exposure, internal dose, and adverse 
effects are established. Normally, biological monitoring of expo-
sure cannot be used for assessing exposure to substances that 
exhibit their toxic effects at the sites of first contact and are poorly 
absorbed. Examples include dermally corrosive compounds and pri-
mary lung irritants. In this situation, the only useful relationship is 
that between external exposure and the intensity of the local effects.
Relationships between air monitoring and biological monitor-
ing may be modified by genetic or external factors that influence the 
fate of an occupational toxicant in vivo. Metabolic interactions can 
occur when workers are exposed simultaneously to chemicals that 
are biotransformed through identical pathways. Exposure to chemi-
cals that modify the activity of the biotransformation enzymes (e.g., 
microsomal enzyme inducers or inhibitors) may also influence the 
fate of another compound. Furthermore, metabolic interferences 
may occur between occupational toxicants and alcohol, tobacco, 
food additives, prescription drugs, natural product remedies, or 
recreational drugs. Changes in any of several biological variables 
(weight, body mass index, pregnancy, diseases, immune status, etc.) 
may modify the metabolism of an occupational chemical. These 
factors have to be taken into consideration when the results of 
biomonitoring are interpreted. Whatever the parameter measured, 
whether it is the substance itself, its metabolite, or an early bio-
marker of effect, the test must be sufficiently sensitive and specific 
to provide meaningful data in the range of workplace exposures.
Some chemicals have a long biological half-life in various 
body compartments (e.g., lipophilic persistent organic pollutants) 
and the time of sampling may not be critical. For other chemicals, 
the time of sampling is critical because, following exposure, the 
compounds or their metabolites may be rapidly eliminated from 
the body. In these cases, the biological sample is usually collected 
during exposure, at the end of the exposure period, or sometimes 
just before the next work shift. When biological monitoring consists 
of the sampling and analysis of urine, it is usually performed on 
“spot” urine specimens or on the first morning void. It is a standard 
practice for most organic compounds to adjust the results for urine 
output by expressing the results per gram of creatinine in the urine.

Occupational Toxicology
Chapter 34
1569
Analyses performed on very dilute urine samples are not reliable. 
The WHO has specified acceptable limits for urine specimens of 
between 0.3 and 3.0 g/L creatinine or 1.010 to 1.030 specific gravity 
(ACGIH, 2016). When samples exhibit large interindividual vari-
ability or high “background” levels, the interpretation of a single 
measurement may be difficult. In such cases, it may be useful to 
analyze biological material collected before and after the exposure 
period and gauge exposure based upon the cross-shift change.
The majority of BEIs listed by the ACGIH refer to analysis of 
the parent compound or its phase I metabolite. Analytical advances 
over the past decade have yielded methods for detecting reactive 
intermediates of metabolism and macromolecular adducts that 
may induce mutations or cell cycle disruption. These methods are 
important for comparing human and animal toxicity data for risk 
assessment and may help to explain differential responses in animal 
models and susceptibility in human populations. These methods 
may also be useful for occupational health surveillance programs.
Environmental monitoring plays an important role in the 
evaluation and prevention of excessive exposure to toxicants in 
the workplace. However, the prevention of acute toxic effects on 
the respiratory tract, skin, or eye mucosa can only be achieved by 
keeping the concentration of the irritant substance below a toxic 
level or by eliminating the exposure. Local acute effects of chemi-
cals do not lend themselves to a biological surveillance program. 
Likewise, biological monitoring is usually not indicated for detect-
ing peak exposure to dangerous chemicals such as arsine (AsH3), 
carbon monoxide, or prussic acid (HCN). Furthermore, identifi-
cation of emission sources and the evaluation of the efficiency of 
engineering control measures are usually best performed by ambi-
ent air ­analysis. Table 34-8 lists the approaches most useful for 
controlling inhalation exposures in the workplace. These include 
process changes, engineering controls, and use of personal protec-
tive equipment. It should be emphasized that process changes and 
application of ­engineering controls are preferable to reliance on 
personal protective equipment.
In summary, environmental and biological monitoring should 
not be regarded as opposites but as complementary elements of 
an occupational health and safety program. They should be inte-
grated as much as possible to ensure low levels of contaminants and 
­optimal health for workers.
CONCLUSION
The working environment will always have the potential to over-
expose workers to toxicants. Recognition of these risks should not 
wait until epidemiologic studies have uncovered hazardous levels. 
A combined experimental, clinical, and epidemiologic approach is 
most effective for evaluating and managing the potential risks. One 
can then promulgate scientifically based occupational health stan-
dards, apply effective workplace controls to ensure adherence to 
those standards, and institute worker health surveillance programs 
to identify unexpected effects in susceptible individuals.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The editor and author recognize the contributions of previous 
authors of this chapter: Henry F. Smyth, Jr. (1st edition) and Robert 
R. Lauwerys (2nd to 5th editions).
REFERENCES
Abnet CC, Tanguay RL, Heideman W, Peterson RE. Transactivation activ-
ity of human, zebrafish, and rainbow trout aryl hydrocarbon receptors 
expressed in COS-7 cells: greater insight into species differences in toxic 
potency of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxin, dibenzofuran, and biphe-
nyl congeners. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1999;159(1):41–51.
ACGIH. 2016 TLVs® and BEIs®: Threshold Limit Values for Chemical 
Substances and Physical Agents and Biological Exposure Indices. Cincinnati, 
OH: American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists; 2016.
ACGIH. TLV™/BEI™ position statement. 2017. Available at: www.acgih 
.org/tlv-bei-guidelines/policies-procediures-presentations/tlv-bei-­
position-statement. Accessed October 22, 2017.
Adamcˇaková-Dodd A, Monick MM, Powers LS, Gibson-Corley KN, 
Thorne PS. Effects of perinatal inhalation exposure to copper nanopar-
ticles on murine dams and offspring. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2015;12:30.
Adamcˇaková-Dodd A, Stebounova LV, Kim JS, et al. Toxicity assessment of 
zinc oxide nanoparticles using sub-acute and sub-chronic murine inhala-
tion models. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2014;11:15.
Adamcˇaková-Dodd A, Stebounova LV, O’Shaughnessy PT, et al. Murine 
pulmonary responses after sub-acute exposure to aluminum oxide-based 
nanowhiskers. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2012;9:22.
Albertini R, Bird M, Doerrer N, et al. The use of biomonitoring data in 
exposure and human health risk assessments. Environ Health Perspect. 
2006;114:1755–1762.
Aldridge WN, Miles JM, Mount DL, Verschoyle RD: The toxicological 
properties of impurities in malathion. Arch Toxicol. 1979;42:95–106.
Allen N, Mendell JR, Billmaier DJ, et al. Toxic polyneuropathy due to 
methyl N-butylketone. Arch Neurol. 1975;32:209–218.
Anna DH, ed. The Occupational Environment: Its Evaluation, Control 
and Management. 3rd ed. Vol 1 & 2. Fairfax, VA: American Industrial 
Hygiene Association; 2010.
Asgharian B, Price O, Kabilan S, et al. Development of a Zealand white 
rabbit deposition model to study inhalation anthrax. Inhal Toxicol. 2016; 
28(2):80–88.
Asgharian B, Price OT, Oldham M, et al. Computational modeling of 
nanoscale and microscale particle deposition, retention and dosimetry in 
the mouse respiratory tract. Inhal Toxicol. 2014;26(14):829–842.
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). Toxicological 
Profile for Vinyl Chloride. Atlanta, GA: Department of Health and Human 
Services; 2006. Available at: http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/ToxProfiles/TP 
.asp?id=282&tid=51. Accessed October 20, 2011.
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). Toxicological 
Profile for Arsenic. Atlanta, GA: Department of Health and Human Services; 
2007. Available at: http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/ToxProfiles/TP.asp?id=22& 
tid=3. Accessed October 31, 2017.
ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). Draft 
Toxicological Profile for 1,3-Butadiene. Atlanta, GA: Department of Health 
and Human Services; 2009. Available at: https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/ 
toxprofiles/tp.asp?id=459&tid=81. Accessed October 31, 2017.
Balazy A, Toivola M, Adhikari A, et al. Do N95 respirators provide 95% 
protection level against airborne viruses, and how adequate are surgical 
masks? Am J Infection Control. 2006;34:51–57.
Bason M, Lammintausta K, Maibach HI. Irritant dermatitis (irritation). In: 
Marzulli FN, Maibach HI, eds. Dermatotoxicology. 4th ed. New York: 
Hemisphere; 1991:223–252.
Baur X. Occupational asthma due to isocyanates. Lung. 1996;174:23–30.
Table 34-8  
Control Approaches for Occupational Inhalation 
Hazards
Change the process to use or produce less hazardous 
compounds
Automate and enclose the process to isolate the compounds
Incorporate administrative and work practice controls to reduce 
duration or intensity of exposure
Install or upgrade local exhaust systems and dilution exhaust
Institute a comprehensive program for personal protective 
equipment use where necessary

1570
APPLICATIONS TOXICOLOGY
Unit VII
Becklake MR, Malo JL, Chan-Yeung M. Epidemiological approaches in 
occupational asthma. In: Bernstein IL, et al. eds. Asthma in the Workplace. 
3rd ed. New York: Taylor & Francis Group; 2006:37–77.
Bernstein DA, Biagini RE, Karnani R, et al. In vivo sensitization to purified 
Hevea brasiliensis proteins in health care workers sensitized to natural 
rubber latex. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2003;111:610–616.
Bernstein IL, Bernstein DI, Chan-Yeung M, Malo JL. Definition and clas-
sification of asthma in the workplace. In: Malo JL, et al. eds. Asthma in 
the Workplace. 4th ed. New York: Taylor & Francis Group; 2013:1–5.
Bolt HM. Vinyl chloride: a classical industrial toxicant of new interest. Crit 
Rev Toxicol. 2005;35:301–323.
Boverhof DR, Burgoon LD, Tashiro C, et al. Comparative toxicogenomic 
analysis of the hepatotoxic effects of TCDD in Sprague Dawley rats and 
C57BL/6 mice. Toxicol Sci. 2006;94:398–416.
Chan-Yeung M, Vedal S, Kus J, et al. Symptoms, pulmonary function and 
bronchial hyperactivity in western red cedar workers compared with 
those in office workers. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1984;130:1038–1041.
Cogliano VJ, Baan R, Straif K, et al. Preventable exposures associated with 
human cancers. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2011;103:1827–1839.
Cohen BS, McCammon CS Jr. eds. Air Sampling Instruments for Evaluation 
of Atmospheric Contaminants. 9th ed. Cincinnati, OH: American 
Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists; 2001.
Creech JL, Johnson HM. Angiosarcoma of the liver in the manufacture of 
polyvinylchloride. J Occup Med. 1974;16:150–151.
Cui X, Wakai T, Shirai Y, Hatakeyama K, Hirano S. Chronic oral exposure 
to inorganic arsenate interferes with methylation status of p16INK4a 
and RASSF1A and induces lung cancer in A/J mice. Toxicol Sci. 2006; 
91(2):372–381.
Cullinan P, Lowson D, Nieuwenhuijsen MJ, et al. Work related symptoms, 
sensitisation, and estimated exposure in workers not previously exposed 
to laboratory rats. Occup Environ Med. 1994;51:589–592.
Desjardins A, Malo JL, L’Archevçque J, et al. Occupational IgE-mediated 
sensitization and asthma due to clam and shrimp. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 
1995;96:608–617.
DiVincenzo GD, Hamilton ML, Kaplan CJ, Dedinas J. Metabolic fate and 
disposition of 14C-labeled methyl n-butyl ketone in the rat. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 1977;41:547–560.
Donham KJ, Thorne PS. Agents in organic dusts: criteria for a causal 
­relationship. Am J Ind Med. 1994;25:33–39.
Doorn JA, Thompson CM, Christner RB, Richardson RJ. Stereoselective 
inactivation of Torpedo californica acetylcholinesterase by isomalathion: 
inhibitory reactions with (1R)- and (1S)-isomers proceed by different 
mechanisms. Chem Res Toxicol. 2003;16:958–965.
Douwes J, Thorne PS, Pearce N, Heederik D. Biological agents—recogni-
tion. In: Perkins JL, ed. Modern Industrial Hygiene: Vol II. Biological 
Aspects. Cincinnati, OH: American Conference of Governmental 
Industrial Hygienists; 2003:219–292.
Duchaine C, Meriaux A, Thorne PS, Cormier Y. Assessment of particulates 
and bioaerosols in Eastern Canadian sawmills. Am Ind Hyg Assoc J. 
2000;61:727–732.
Eduard W, Sandven P, Levy F. Relationships between exposure to spores 
from Rhizopus microsporus and Paecilomyces variotii and serum IgG anti-
bodies in wood trimmers. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 1992;97:274–282.
Elliott L, Heederik D, Marshall S, Peden D, Loomis D. Incidence of allergy 
and allergy symptoms among workers exposed to laboratory animals. 
Occup Environ Med. 2005;62:766–771.
EPA. 40 CFR Parts 141 and 142, National primary drinking water regula-
tions; arsenic and clarifications to compliance and new source contami-
nants monitoring; proposed rule. Fed Reg. 2000;65(121):38888–38983.
European Commission. European Commission Directive 95/320/EC. 1995. 
Available at: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=C
ELEX:31995D0320:EN:HTML. Accessed October 23, 2011.
European Commission. European Commission Directive 98/24/EC. 1998. 
Available at: http://osha.europa.eu/en/legislation/directives/exposure-to- 
chemical-agents-and-chemical-safety/osh-directives/75. Accessed October 
22, 2011.
European Commission. EU Commission Directive 2006/15/EU. 2006. 
Available at: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=O
J:L:2006:038:0036:0039:EN:PDF. Accessed October 22, 2017.
European Commission. EU Commission Directive 2009/161/EU. 2009. 
Available at: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=O
J:L:2009:338:0087:0089:EN:PDF. Accessed October 22, 2017.
European Commission. Employment and Social Developments in Europe. 
7th ed. 2017. Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=73
8&langId=en&pubId=8030&furtherPubs=yes. Accessed October 22, 
2017.
Fuortes LJ, Weih L, Pomrehn P, et al. Prospective epidemiologic evaluation 
of laboratory animal allergy among university employees. Am J Ind Med. 
1997;32:665–669.
GAO/HEHS. Child Labor in Agriculture—Changes Needed to Better 
Protect Health and Educational Opportunities. GAO/HEHS-98-193. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Accountability Office; 1998:1–90.
Glass WI, Power P, Burt R, et al. Work-related respiratory symptoms and 
lung function in New Zealand mussel openers. Am J Ind Med. 1998; 
34:163–168.
Goggin M, Swenberg JA, Walker VE, et al. Molecular dosimetry of 
1,2,3,4-diepoxybutaneinduced DNA—DNA cross-links in B6C3F1 
mice and F344 rats exposed to 1,3-butadiene by inhalation. Cancer Res. 
2009;69(6):2479–2486.
Hard GC, Rodgers IS, Baetcke KP, et al. Hazard evaluation of chemicals 
that cause accumulation of α2 u-globulin, hyaline droplet nephropathy, 
and tubule neoplasia in the kidneys of male rats. Environ Health Perspect. 
1993;99:313–349.
Heederik D, Attfield M. Characterization of dust exposure for the study of 
chronic occupational lung disease: a comparison of different exposure 
assessment strategies. Am J Epidemiol. 2000;151(10):982–990.
Heederik D, Thorne PS, Doekes G. Health-based occupational exposure 
limits for high molecular weight sensitizers: how long is the road we 
must travel? Ann Occup Hyg. 2002;46(5):439–446.
Heederik D, Thorne PS, Douwes J. Biological agents: monitoring and 
evaluation of bioaerosol exposure. In: Perkins JL, ed. Modern Industrial 
Hygiene: Vol II. Biological Aspects. Cincinnati, OH: American Conference 
of Governmental Industrial Hygienists; 2003:293–327.
Hess-Kosa K. Indoor Air Quality: The Latest Sampling and Analytical 
Methods. 2nd ed. Boca Ratan, FL: Taylor & Francis Group; 2011.
Hollander A, Heederik D, Doekes G. Respiratory allergy to rats: exposure–
response relationships in laboratory animal workers. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med. 1997;155:562–567.
Hsieh TH, Yu CP, Oberdorster G. Deposition and clearance models of Ni 
compounds in the mouse lung and comparisons with the rat models. 
Aerosol Sci Technol. 1999;31:358–372.
Hughes MF. Biomarkers of exposure: a case study with inorganic arsenic. 
Environ Health Perspect. 2006;114:1790–1796.
Hutchinson J. Arsenic cancer. Br Med J. 1887;2:1280–1281.
IARC. Metals and Metallic Compounds. IARC Monographs on the Evaluation 
of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans. Vol 23. Lyon, France: International 
Agency for Research on Cancer; 1980.
IARC. 
IARC 
Monograph 
107: 
Polychlorinated 
Biphenyls 
and 
Polybrominated Biphenyls. Lyon, France; International Agency for 
Research on Cancer; 2016. Available at: http://monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/
Monographs/vol107/index.php. Accessed October 22, 2017.
IARC. Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans. 
n.d. Available at: http://monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/Monographs/PDFs/
index.php. Accessed October 22, 2017.
ICCVAM. 
2017. 
Available 
at: 
https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/pubhealth/ 
evaluation/test-method-evaluations/protocols/index.html. Accessed October 
29, 2017.
ILO. Key indicators of the labour market 2014. 2014. Available at: http://
www.ilo.org/global/industries-and-sectors/agriculture-plantations-other-
rural-sectors/lang--en/index.htm. Accessed October 22, 2017.
ILO. Global Estimates of Child Labour: Results and Trends, 2012–2016. 
Geneva: International Labour Office (ILO); 2017.
ILSI Risk Science Institute Workshop Participants. The relevance of the 
rat lung response to particle overload for human health risk assessment: 
a workshop consensus report. Inhal Toxicol. 2000;12:1–17.
Japan Monthly Statistics. Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, 
Statistics Bureau. August 2017. Available at: http://www.stat.go.jp/ 
english/data/getujidb/index.htm#g. Accessed October 22, 2017.

Occupational Toxicology
Chapter 34
1571
Kim JS, Adamcakova-Dodd A, O’Shaughnessy PT, Grassian VH, Thorne 
PS. Effects of copper nanoparticle exposure on host defense in a murine 
pulmonary infection model. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2011;8(1):29.
Koivisto P, Peltonen K. N7-guanine adducts of the epoxy metabolites of 
1,3-butadiene in mice lung. Chem Biol Interact. 2001;135-136:363–372.
Konduru NV, Molina RM, Swami A, et al. Protein corona: implications 
for nanoparticle interactions with pulmonary cells. Part Fibre Toxicol. 
2017;14(1):42.
Kreiss K, Hubbs A, Kullman G. Correspondence: bronchiolitis in popcorn-
factory workers. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:1981–1982.
Kromhout H, Tielemans E, Preller L, Heederik D. Estimates of individual 
dose from current measurements of exposure. Occup Hyg. 1996;3:23–39.
Kullman GJ, Thorne PS, Waldron PF, et al. Organic dust exposures from 
work in dairy barns. Am Ind Hyg Assoc J. 1998;59:403–413.
Maibach HI, Feldmann RJ, Milby TH, Serat WF. Regional variation in 
percutaneous penetration in man: pesticides. Arch Environ Health. 
1971;23:208–211.
McDonough JR. Possible neuropathy from methyl-n-butyl ketone. N Engl 
J Med. 1974;290:695.
Mendell JR, Saida K, Ganasia MF, et al. Toxic polyneuropathy produced by 
methyl-n-butyl ketone. Science. 1974;185:787–789.
Monson RR, Peters JM, Johnson MN. Proportional mortality among vinyl-
chloride workers. Lancet. 1974;2(7877):397–398.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Controlled 
Human Inhalation-Exposure Studies at EPA. Washington, DC: The 
National Academies Press; 2017. doi:10.17226/24618.
Newton AN, Davis M, Koehler K, et al. Atopy as a modifier of the rela-
tionships between endotoxin exposure and symptoms among laboratory 
animal workers. Ann Work Expo Health. 2017;61(8):1024–1028.
NIOSH. Current Intelligence Bulletin 65: Occupational Exposure to Carbon 
Nanotubes and Nanofibers; April 2013, DHHS (NIOSH) Publication 
Number 2013-145.
NIOSH. Work-Related Lung Disease Surveillance System (eWoRLD). 
2015-866 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, National Institute for Occupational 
Safety and Health, Respiratory Health Division, Morgantown, WV. 2015. 
Available at: https://wwwn.cdc.gov/eworld/Data/866. Accessed October 
22, 2017.
NIOSH. Work-Related Lung Disease Surveillance System (eWoRLD). 
2017-915 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, National Institute for Occupational 
Safety and Health, Respiratory Health Division, Morgantown, WV. 
2017a. Available at: https://wwwn.cdc.gov/eworld/Set/Work-Related-
Respiratory-Diseases/88. Accessed October 22, 2017.
NIOSH. Health Hazard Evaluations (HHEs). 2017b. Available at: https://
www.cdc.gov/niosh/hhe. Accessed October 22, 2017.
NIOSH. Coal Workers’ Health Surveillance Program. 2017c. Available 
at: 
https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/cwhsp/default.html. 
Accessed 
November 4, 2017.
NIOSH NMAM. NIOSH Manual of Analytical Methods. 5th ed. 2017. 
Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/NIOSH/NMAM. Accessed October 
31, 2017.
NTP (National Toxicology Program). 14th Report on Carcinogens. Research 
Triangle Park, NC: National Toxicology Program, U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services, 2016. Available at: https://ntp.niehs.nih.
gov/pubhealth/roc/index-1.html. Accessed November 4, 2017.
Oberdörster G. Toxicokinetics and effects of fibrous and nonfibrous par-
ticles Regul. Toxicol Pharmacol. 2002;27:123–135.
OSHA. Standard Interpretations: 10/06/1995—8-hour total weight 
average (TWA) permissible exposure limit (PEL). 1995. Available at: 
http://www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_table= 
INTERPRETATIONS&p_id=24470.
Pacheco KA, McCammon C, Liu AH, et al. Airborne endotoxin predicts 
symptoms in non-mouse-sensitized technicians and research scien-
tists exposed to laboratory mice. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2003; 
167:983–990.
Pettibone JM, Adamcakova-Dodd A, Thorne PS, et al. Inflammatory 
response of mice following inhalation exposure to iron and copper 
nanoparticles. Nanotoxicology. 2008;2(4):189–204.
Preller L, Kromhout H, Heederik D, Tielen MJM. Modeling long-term 
average exposure in occupational exposure-response analysis. Scand J 
Work Environ Health. 1995;21:504–512.
Radauer C, Adhami F, Fürtler I, et al. Latex-allergic patients sensitized to 
the major allergen hevein and hevein-like domains of class I chitinases 
show no increased frequency of latex-associated plant food allergy. Mol 
Immunol. 2011;48(4):600–609.
Schenker MB, Christiani D, Cormier Y, et al. Respiratory health hazards in 
agriculture. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1998;158(pt 2):S1–S76.
Schlesinger RB. Comparative deposition of inhaled aerosols in experi-
mental animals and humans: a review. J Toxicol Environ Health. 1985; 
15:197–214.
Schroeter JD, Asgharian B, Price OT, McClellan GE. Computational fluid 
dynamics simulations of inhaled ano- and microparticle deposition in the 
rhesus monkey nasal passages. Inhal Toxicol. 2013;25(12):691–701.
Shen J, Liu J, Xie Y, Diwan BA, Waalkes MP. Fetal onset of aberrant gene 
expression relevant to pulmonary carcinogenesis in lung adenocarci-
noma development induced by in utero arsenic exposure. Toxicol Sci. 
2007;95(2):313–320.
Shen J, Wanibuchi H, Salem EI, et al. Liver tumorigenicity of trimethy-
larsine oxide in male Fischer 344 rats: association with oxidative 
DNA damage and enhanced cell proliferation. Carcinogenesis. 2003; 
24(11):1827–1835.
Siemiatycki J, Richardson L, Straif K, et al. Listing occupational carcino-
gens. Environ Health Perspect. 2004;112(15):1447–1459.
Spencer PS, Schaumburg HH. Experimental neuropathy produced by 
2,5-hexanedione A major metabolite of the neurotoxic industrial sol-
vent methyl-n-butyl ketone. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1975;38: 
771–775.
Spencer PS, Schaumburg HH, Raleigh RL, Terhaar CJ. Nervous system 
degeneration produced by the industrial solvent methyl-n-butyl ketone. 
Arch Neurol. 1975;32:219–222.
Thorne PA, Adamcakova-Dodd A, Kelley KM, et al. Metalworking fluid 
with mycobacteria and endotoxin induces hypersensitivity pneumonitis 
in mice. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2006;173:759–768.
Thorne PS, Duchaine C, BlaisLecours P. Airborne bacteria and endo-
toxin. In: Yates MV, Nakatsu C, Miller R, Pollai S, eds. Manual of 
Environmental Microbiology. 4th ed. Washington, DC: ASM Press; 2015: 
3.2.6.1–3.2.6.20.
Thorne PS, Heederik D. Assessment methods for bioaerosols. In: Salthammer 
T, ed. Organic Indoor Air Pollutants—Occurrence, Measurement, 
Evaluation. Weinheim, Germany: Wiley/VCH; 1999a:85–103.
Thorne PS, Heederik D. Indoor bioaerosols—sources and characteristics. 
In: Salthammer T, ed. Organic Indoor Air Pollutants—Occurrence, 
Measurement, Evaluation. Weinheim, Germany: Wiley/VCH; 1999b: 
275–288.
Tielemans E, Kupper LL, Kromhout H, et al. Individual-based and group-
based occupational exposure assessment: some equations to evaluate 
­different strategies. Ann Occup Hyg. 1998;42(2):115–119.
Trabaris M, Laskin JD, Weisel CP. Effects of temperature, surfactants and 
skin location on the dermal penetration of haloacetonitriles and chloral 
hydrate. J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol. 2012;22(4):393-7.
USDA. United States Department of Agriculture. Economic Research 
Service: Farming and Farm Income. 2017. Available at: https://www.ers.
usda.gov/data-products/ag-and-food-statistics-charting-the-essentials/
farming-and-farm-income/. Accessed November 4, 2017.
USDL. Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor. 2015. 
Available at: https://www.bls.gov/iif/oshsum.htm. Accessed October 22, 
2017.
USDL. American Time Use Survey, Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. 
Department of Labor. 2017a. Available at: http://www.bls.gov/bls/ 
newsrels.htm#OEUS. Accessed October 18, 2017.
USDL. Employment Projections: Employment by Major Industry Sector, 
Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor. 2017b. Available 
at: https://data.bls.gov/cgi-bin/print.pl/emp/ep_table_201.htm. Accessed 
October 18, 2017.
USDL. The Employment Situation—August 2017, Bureau of Labor 
Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor. 2017c. Available at: http://www.bls. 
gov/bls/newsrels.htm#OEUS. Accessed October 18, 2017.

1572
APPLICATIONS TOXICOLOGY
Unit VII
U.S. Federal Register. June 12, 1992;57(114):26539–26590.
Vance ME, Kuiken T, Vejerano EP, et al. Nanotechnology in the real world: 
redeveloping the nanomaterial consumer products inventory. Beilstein J 
Nanotechnol. 2015;6:1769–1780.
Venables KM, Dally MB, Nunn AJ, et al. Smoking and occupational allergy 
in workers in a platinum refinery. Br Med J. 1989;299:939–942.
Venables KM, Topping MD, Howe W, et al. Interaction of smoking and 
atopy in producing specific IgE antibody against a hapten protein conju-
gate. Br Med J. 1985;290:201–204.
Vermeulen R, Kromhout H. Historical limitations of determinant based 
exposure groupings in the rubber manufacturing industry. Occup Environ 
Med. 2005;62:793–799.
Viola PL, Bigotti A, Caputo A. Oncogenic response of rat skin, lungs, and 
bones to vinyl chloride. Cancer Res. 1971;31:516–522.
Weiss LPC, Lewis R, Rossmoore H, et al. Respiratory illness in workers 
exposed to metal working fluid contaminated with nontuberculous myco-
bacteria—Ohio, 2001. Morb Mortal Wkly Rev. 2002;51:349–352.
Wernfors M, Nielsen J, Schültz A, Skerfving S. Phthalic anhydride-induced 
occupational asthma. Int Arch Allergy Appl Immunol. 1986;79:77–82.
WHO. Arsenic and Arsenic Compounds. 2nd ed. Environmental Health 
Criteria 224. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2001. Available at: 
http://whqlibdoc/ehc/WHO_EHC_224.pdf. Accessed October 23, 2011.
World Bank. Labor force, total. 2017. Available at: https://data.worldbank.
org/indicator/SL.TLF.TOTL.IN?view=chart. Accessed November 3, 2017.
Yu RC, Hattis D, Landaw EM, Froines JR. Toxicokinetic interaction of 
2,5-hexanedione and methyl ethyl ketone. Arch Toxicol. 2002;75(11-12): 
643–652.