# 35 Regulatory Toxicology
# Casarett & Doull's Toxicology, 9th Edition
# Pages: 1592-1605
# Unit: Unit VII Applications of Toxicology

35
chapter
Regulatory Toxicology
Gary E. Marchant*
WHAT IS REGULATORY TOXICOLOGY?
Regulatory toxicology is a subfield of regulatory science, which 
addresses the intersection of science with regulation, namely how 
the science of toxicology is developed, evaluated, and applied in 
regulatory decision-making. Toxicology is one of the most com-
mon fields of scientific knowledge utilized in regulatory science, 
as regulatory agencies often are required to identify and quantify 
the health risks of the products and activities they seek to regu-
late. Regulatory toxicology, which must straddle traditional sci-
entific methodologies with the public policy world of regulation, 
strains to adhere to the standards of good toxicological science 
while also providing relevant inputs to decision-making, which 
often asks questions that science cannot answer completely or with 
any certainty. It is the tension between these two different worlds 
of science and policy that raise many of the most important and 
challenging issues in regulatory toxicology, many of which are 
addressed in this chapter.
Over the past 50 years, the field of regulatory toxicology has 
grown enormously as the intersection between regulation and toxi-
cology has expanded dramatically. With the enactment of a series of 
environmental, health, and safety laws in the United States, Europe, 
and elsewhere in the 1970s and 1980s, regulatory agencies increas-
ingly rely on toxicological science to identify potential hazards, 
prioritize chemicals and other potentially toxic substances, and pro-
vide the data used for assessing and managing risk. Regulators are 
not merely consumers of toxicological studies but also help shape 
toxicology science in important ways. Regulatory programs have 
provided a major impetus for improvements in toxicology methods, 
and they have stimulated a demand for toxicology studies that meet 
various regulatory requirements. Some programs, such as regu-
latory programs for licensing drugs, devices, food additives, and 
pesticides, explicitly demand toxicology studies as a condition for 
marketing products. Other statutory and regulatory requirements, 
such as the recent program requiring agencies to screen chemicals 
for their endocrine disruptor capability, or agencies to evaluate the 
safety of new nanotechnology applications, are a major driver for 
the development of new types of toxicological assays.
Regulatory agencies have exercised important influence 
over the design and conduct of toxicology studies. For example, 
the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is 
What Is Regulatory Toxicology?
The Science/Policy Interface in 
Regulatory Toxicology
An Overview of Regulatory 
Approaches
Acceptable Risk
Balancing Approaches
Feasibility/Best Available 
Technology
Specific Regulatory 
Programs Utilizing 
Toxicological Data
Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA)
Food
Human Drugs and Biologicals
Medical Devices
Cosmetics
Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA)
IRIS Program
Pesticides
Industrial Chemicals
Hazardous Wastes
Toxic Water Pollutants
Drinking Water
Toxic Air Pollutants
Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA)
Consumer Product Safety 
Commission (CPSC)
Institutional Oversight and 
Controls
Advisory Committees
Peer Review
Risk Assessment Guidance/
Guidelines
Judicial Review
Congressional Oversight
Executive Oversight
Regulatory Influences on 
Toxicology
Testing Guidelines
Food and Drug Administration
Testing Requirements for Food 
­Additives
Environmental Protection Agency
Validation of Alternative Test 
Methods
Computational Toxicology
Animal Welfare Requirements
Animal Welfare Act
Public Health Service Policy
Acknowledgments
References
*The author acknowledges and appreciates the work of Professor Richard 
Merrill, a pioneer in the legal study of regulation, who authored earlier ver-
sions of this chapter and upon whose work this chapter builds.

1574
Applications of Toxicology
Unit VII
empowered by the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) to promul-
gate standards for different types of toxicology (and other scientific) 
investigations. Likewise, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) has long issued guidelines for laboratory studies submitted 
in support of food additives and drugs. Both agencies have adopted 
requirements governing laboratory operations and practice, known 
as Good Laboratories Practice (GLP). Communication between 
government officials and laboratory scientists flows in both direc-
tions. Government testing standards are influenced strongly by the 
prevailing consensus among toxicologists, many of whom work 
in regulatory agencies. Similar standards have been established 
at the international level through the Organization for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD).
THE SCIENCE/POLICY INTERFACE IN 
REGULATORY TOXICOLOGY
There are critical differences between the objectives and methods of 
science and regulatory policy. Science seeks to understand natural 
phenomena through objective, empirical, and neutral methodolo-
gies, and is cautious, incremental, and evidence-based. In contrast, 
government regulation seeks to affect human behavior and resolve 
human disputes; it is episodic, peremptory, and normative, pursu-
ing goals such as human welfare, safety, efficiency, and fairness.
Science is open-ended and can continue to study a problem 
indefinitely without coming to any final resolution. As the National 
Research Council noted, “the scientific process of seeking the truth, 
by design and to its credit, has no natural endpoint” (NRC, 2009). In 
contrast, regulation usually does not have the luxury of waiting until 
the science has matured, but rather must come to decisions based on 
legislative, political, and societal deadlines. This creates two prob-
lems. First, finality is essential for regulations, so that regulated 
entities and other stakeholders have certainty about the applicable 
regulatory requirements, which often involve significant resources 
and lead time to achieve compliance. Consequently, regulations 
are adopted as final decisions, which can only be reconsidered at 
significant administrative burden. Science meanwhile continues to 
develop, resulting in regulations that often become increasingly 
outdated in relationship to constantly evolving scientific data and 
understanding.
The second problem created by the need to adopt regulations 
on a set timetable is often that the scientific inputs into that regula-
tory decision remain uncertain and underdeveloped. This leads to 
what Alvin Weinberg referred to as the “regulator’s dilemma”: “the 
regulator, by law, is expected to regulate even though science can 
hardly help him; this is the regulator’s dilemma” (Weinberg, 1985). 
Regulatory agencies are therefore required to make numerous 
assumptions to fill the gaps in the available scientific data (NRC, 
1983). This then has the inevitable effect of making agency determi-
nations a mixture of science and policy, which can lead to confusion 
and obfuscation.
Scientists are often frustrated by the political and administra-
tive requirements (often referred to colloquially as “red tape”) asso-
ciated with regulatory utilization of toxicological data. A regulatory 
proposal incorporating scientific evidence has to pass through many 
layers within a regulatory office, including the agency scientists, 
economists, program officers, office of the general counsel, politi-
cal appointees, various centers, programs, and offices within the 
agency that are affected by the proposed decision, external advisory 
committees, and finally the agency head, subject at every stage to 
a bevy of internal control requirements and processes. When the 
agency has finally made its proposed decision, the proposal is often 
then scrutinized by the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs 
(OIRA) in the White House, courts conducting judicial review, 
Congressional oversight committees, and of course external stake-
holders and the media. At every step along this pathway, the scien-
tific findings of the agency are subject to challenge, prodding, and 
second-guessing.
This elaborate regulatory process has a number of implications. 
First, regulatory agencies tend to attempt to buttress their regulatory 
decisions with extensive analytical support. As a comparative study 
of US and European regulation observed, “American regulators, 
being more politically exposed than their European counterparts, 
have a greater need to support their actions through formal analyti-
cal arguments. Their demand for expertise necessitates a continu-
ing build-up of technical capabilities and the development of more 
sophisticated and detailed analytical methodologies. The structure 
of the American rule-making process subjects the analytical case for 
regulation to intense political scrutiny. Any weaknesses are quickly 
exploited, and the uncertainties and shortcomings of the relevant 
scientific base are readily exposed …” (Brickman et al., 1985). In 
response to these pressures, regulatory agencies will often com-
pile extensive scientific assessments of the toxicological and other 
data supporting their regulatory decisions, sometimes thousands of 
pages in length.
Another consequence of the highly politicized and adversarial 
nature of regulatory decision-making is that regulatory agencies 
have an incentive to overstate the scientific basis of their decisions. 
Although scientific data are a critical input into sound regulatory 
decision-making, the actual decision of how much protection to 
provide and which requirements or limits to impose is inevitably a 
normative policy decision, even if informed by scientific informa-
tion and knowledge. Yet, agencies receive greater deference from 
Congress, the White House, reviewing courts, and even the media 
and public if they justify their decision on scientific rather than 
policy or normative grounds. Accordingly, regulatory agencies are 
inclined to give disproportionate weight to scientific arguments and 
evidence in trying to justify their decisions, a tendency that has been 
labeled in the literature as the “science charade” (Wagner, 1995).
AN OVERVIEW OF REGULATORY 
APPROACHES
Different agencies and even different regulatory programs within 
the same agency use toxicological data in different ways. One 
important difference relates to the extent of premarket analysis 
or approval required before a new product may be commercial-
ized. Some products require premarket approval from a regulatory 
agency (e.g., drugs and medical devices by FDA and pesticides 
by EPA), other products require only premarket notification to the 
agency (e.g., new chemical substances), whereas still other products 
require no premarket activity with a regulatory agency (e.g., foods, 
cosmetics) before they can be sold commercially. There are also 
differences in who has the burden of proof to demonstrate safety 
or hazard. For example, the manufacturer of a new food additive 
has the burden to demonstrate to the FDA the lack of hazard before 
humans may be exposed, while laws such as the Occupational 
Safety and Health Act (1970) put the burden on regulators to show 
that a substance is hazardous before exposures can be restricted. 
The approach chosen by Congress for a particular type of product 
or activity greatly influences an agency’s ability to require com-
prehensive toxicological investigation prior to commercialization.
In determining what level of a substance to allow, regula-
tory agencies generally use one of three different approaches: (i)

Regulatory Toxicology
Chapter 35
1575
acceptable risk, (ii) balancing, or (iii) feasibility. The determination 
of which of these three approaches is used for a particular hazard is 
generally determined by the applicable statutory framework.
Acceptable Risk
This approach determines the level of risk a substance presents, and 
then seeks to lower that risk (if necessary) to a level that is “accept-
able.” Because these risk-based programs only consider health 
evidence, toxicological data play a central role in these regulatory 
programs. In making the determination of acceptable risk, agencies 
have traditionally distinguished between carcinogens and noncar-
cinogens in their approach. For noncarcinogenic chemicals, regula-
tors have generally embraced a standard safety assessment formula, 
built around the concept of acceptable daily intake (ADI) for the 
FDA or reference dose (RfD) or reference concentration (RfC) 
in the case of EPA. These levels are derived by applying a series 
of safety factors to the lowest “no observed adverse effect level” 
from animal experiments. Human exposures to a chemical that fall 
below the resulting ADI, RfD, or RfC are assumed to be “safe” or 
acceptable. This traditional approach to noncarcinogenic toxicants 
has not been considered appropriate for carcinogens. Regulators in 
the United States and many of their counterparts in other countries 
have operated on the premise that carcinogens as a class cannot be 
assumed to have “safe” or threshold doses. Furthermore, they have 
assumed that any chemical shown convincingly in animal studies to 
cause cancer should be considered a potential human carcinogen. 
Accordingly, for this group of compounds, regulators have generally 
assumed that no finite level of human exposure can be considered 
risk-free. As research has begun to illuminate the different mecha-
nisms by which chemicals may cause cancer, however, regulatory 
agencies have cautiously accepted the possibility that “safe” thresh-
olds may be established for at least some non-genotoxic carcinogens.
An example of an “acceptable” risk-regulatory program is the 
national ambient air quality program under the Clean Air Act (CAA). 
Under this program, EPA must set standards for criteria air pollut-
ants such as particulate matter, ozone, and carbon monoxide that 
protect against “adverse effects” in the most susceptible subgroup 
with an adequate margin of safety. EPA may only consider risk data 
in setting these standards; no consideration of costs or feasibility 
is permitted (Whitman v ATA, 2001). A more stringent form of the 
acceptable risk approach is a “zero” or “negligible” risk requirement, 
epitomized by the famous Delaney clause, enacted in 1958 as part of 
the Food Additives Amendment. The amendment itself requires that 
any food additive be found “safe” before the FDA may approve its 
use (Food Additive Amendment, 1958). The Delaney clause stipu-
lated that this finding may not be made for a food additive that has 
been shown to induce cancer in humans or in experimental animals. 
In 1996, Congress amended the provisions of the Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetics Act applicable to pesticide residues in food, revoking the 
Delaney proviso as it applies to food additives (but not color addic-
tives), and adopting a standard that, though not expressed in these 
words, is understood to permit a tolerance for a carcinogenic pesti-
cide if the estimated cancer risk is extremely small, on the order of 
one in one million (Food Quality Protection Act, 1996).
Balancing Approaches
Other regulatory programs require the agency to balance the health 
benefits of risk reduction against the costs of such reductions. 
These approaches known as cost-benefit or risk-benefit analysis 
generally require a quantified estimate of both the health risks and 
costs associated with various regulatory options, and the agency 
then chooses the regulatory option that offers the biggest estimated 
net benefit. Both toxicological and economic data play key roles in 
these statutory programs for calculating the benefits and costs of 
regulation, respectively. The original TSCA statute enacted in 1976 
is an example of a statute utilizing a balancing approach, requiring 
EPA to set standards for toxic substances based on a quantified cost-
benefit analysis (Corrosion Proof Fittings v EPA, 1991). The 2016 
amendments to TSCA generally eliminate consideration of costs 
and other non-risk factors in determining unreasonable exposures, 
thereby converting TSCA from a cost-benefit to an acceptable risk 
statute. Pharmaceutical drugs approved by the FDA continue to use 
a risk-benefit approach, whereby safety is determined by consider-
ing whether the health benefits of the drug exceed the health risks 
associated with the drug.
Feasibility/Best Available Technology
The third major approach requires the agency to reduce exposures 
to the lowest feasible level, or to require companies to install the 
best available technology. This approach does not explicitly rely on 
any health data, and this skirting of the complexities and uncertain-
ties of toxicological evidence is seen by some as a major advan-
tage of this approach. The consequence of ignoring health impacts, 
though, is that the resulting standards may overprotect or underpro-
tect health. An example of such a feasibility-based approach is the 
Clean Water Act’s effluent standards, which requires dischargers 
of pollutants to install the best available technology determined to 
be feasible for that industrial category. A program using a hybrid 
feasibility/acceptable risk approach is the Occupational Safety 
and Health Act, which directs the Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA) to set workplace standards for hazardous 
exposures to the level “which most adequately assures, to the extent 
feasible … that no employee will suffer material impairment of 
health or functional capacity” (Occupational Safety and Health 
Act, 1970). This language has been interpreted by OSHA and the 
courts as requiring the agency to set occupational health standards 
at the lowest exposure level that is technologically and economi-
cally feasible, to the extent necessary to reduce a “significant” risk 
(American Textile Manufacturers Institute v Donovan, 1982).
SPECIFIC REGULATORY PROGRAMS 
UTILIZING TOXICOLOGICAL DATA
At the federal level, four agencies are chiefly responsible for regu-
lating human exposure to toxic materials: the FDA, EPA, OSHA, 
and the Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC). Together 
they administer over two-dozen statutes whose primary goal is the 
protection of health. The statutes administered by these four agen-
cies utilize different regulatory approaches and require divergent 
safety benchmarks. This diversity has several explanations. The 
statutes were enacted in different eras. They originated with dif-
ferent political constituencies and remain under their influence. 
Perhaps most significant, statutory standards often reflect differ-
ences in the technical capacity to control different types of expo-
sures, and they embody different Congressional judgments about 
the economic implications of limiting exposures.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
The oldest of the major health regulation laws, the FFD&C Act, 
was originally enacted in 1906 and, as amended over time, now 
covers food for humans and animals, human and veterinary drugs, 
biologics, medical devices, cosmetics, and tobacco products.

1576
Applications of Toxicology
Unit VII
Food  The initial Food and Drug Act enacted in 1906 prohibited 
“adulterated” foods that contain “any poisonous or deleterious sub-
stance, which may render it injurious to health.” This provision, 
which remains in the statute to date [FFD&C Act § 402(a)], does 
not require premarket approval of foods and puts the burden of 
proof on FDA to demonstrate that a food meets the definition of 
“adulterated.”
Congress has since amended the act several times to strengthen 
the FDA’s ability to ensure the safety of foods (FFD&C Act, 1938). 
The most important of these amendments was the 1958 Food 
Additives Amendments that require the safety of food additives to 
be demonstrated prior to marketing (Food Additive Amendments, 
1958). The manufacturer of a food additive must submit a petition 
demonstrating that the substance is “reasonably certain to be safe”; 
no inquiry into the benefits of an additive is undertaken or autho-
rized (Cooper, 1978). The food additive regulations require that the 
quantity of the substance added to food does not exceed the amount 
reasonably required to accomplish its intended physical, nutritive, 
or other technical effect in food. Two categories of nonnaturally 
occurring food ingredients were exempted from this food additive 
requirement: (a) substances generally recognized as safe among 
experts qualified by scientific training and experience to evaluate 
safety; and (b) substances that either FDA or the US Department of 
Agriculture (USDA) had sanctioned for use in food prior to 1958 
(so-called “prior sanction” substances).
Separate regulatory standards have been developed for several 
classes of indirect food constituents. For example, a food-contact 
substance requires approval as a food additive if, when used as 
intended, it “may reasonably be expected to become a component 
of food.” In 1997 omnibus legislation that addressed most of FDA’s 
regulatory programs, Congress created a new premarket notification 
system for food-contact materials that permits the agency to delay 
introduction if it questions a material’s safety, but does not require 
affirmative agency approval (FDA Modernization Act, 1997).
In 2011, Congress enacted the FDA Food Safety Modernization 
Act (FSMA, 2011), which seeks to strengthen food safety by shift-
ing the focus of federal regulators from responding to contamination 
to preventing unsafe foods. The legislation mandates the FDA to 
establish comprehensive, science-based preventive controls across 
the food supply, which includes a requirement for food facilities to 
adopt and implement written preventive control plans, a mandate 
that FDA establish science-based, minimum standards for the safe 
production and harvesting of fruits and vegetables, and new author-
ity to prevent intentional contamination of food. The statute also 
gives FDA enhanced enforcement and inspection authority, autho-
rizes FDA to conduct mandatory recalls of unsafe foods, and new 
powers to ensure that imported products meet U.S. standards and 
are safe for U.S. consumers.
Human Drugs and Biologicals  Preclinical studies in animals 
play an important role in the FDA’s evaluation of human drugs and 
biologicals. The current law requires premarket approval, for both 
safety and efficacy, of all “new” drugs, a category that embraces 
virtually all prescription drug ingredients introduced since 1938 
(Hutt et al., 2007). Premarket approval of drugs for commercial 
use primarily relies on randomized controlled trials in human sub-
jects to establish safety and efficacy. However, animal and in vitro 
studies are the primary source of information about a substance’s 
biological effects before human trials are begun, and their results 
influence not only the decision whether to expose human subjects 
but also the design of clinical protocols.
The FDA reviews the clinical evidence before authorizing 
human clinical trials through review of an Investigational New 
Drug (IND) application. The IND must include (i) preclinical data 
to permit an assessment as to whether the product is reasonably safe 
for initial testing in humans, including animal pharmacology and 
toxicology studies (with the core battery of studies including the 
assessment of effects on cardiovascular, central nervous, and respi-
ratory systems, as well as acute toxicity, with other types of studies 
conducted on a case-by-case basis as warranted), in vitro and in 
silico data, and any previous experience with the drug in humans 
(often foreign use); (ii) manufacturing information to ensure that 
the company can adequately produce and supply consistent batches 
of the drug, including data on the composition, manufacturer, stabil-
ity, and controls used for manufacturing the drug; and (iii) clinical 
protocols and investigator information, including detailed protocols 
for proposed clinical studies, information on the qualifications of 
clinical investigators, and commitments to obtain informed consent 
from the research subjects and to obtain review of the study by an 
institutional review board (IRB).
Once an IND has been approved, the drug sponsor may pro-
ceed with human clinical studies consistent with the IND. The drug 
testing traditionally proceeds in three sequential phases. Phase 1 
involves 20 to 100 healthy volunteers or people with the disease/
condition and lasts several months, with the objective of evaluating 
drug safety and dosage. Phase 2 trials involve up to several hun-
dred patients with the disease/condition, and last several months 
to 2 years, with the purpose of evaluating efficacy and side effects. 
Finally, at least two Phase 3 trials are required, which involve 300 
to 3000 subjects who have the disease or condition, and these tri-
als take 1 to 4 years. In some cases, such as when the FDA grants 
accelerated approval to a therapeutic, the agency can require a post-
marketing study known as a Phase 4 study, to monitor the safety, 
efficacy, and side effects of the drug in clinical use.
Another category of drugs regulated by FDA is over-the-­
counter (OTC) drugs, which do not require a prescription. An OTC 
drug can receive regulatory authorization in two ways. First, the 
sponsor of an FDA-approved prescription drug can petition the 
FDA to change the status of the drug to OTC, a process referred to 
as an “Rx-to-OTC switch,” if certain requirements regarding safety, 
efficacy, risk-benefit ratio, and consumer understanding of label-
ing can be demonstrated. The second method is the FDA “mono-
graph” program, which consists of criteria for various categories 
of OTC drugs (e.g., antacid, cough/cold, dandruff shampoo, and 
sunscreens). A new product that meets the Monograph criteria for 
the relevant category of OTC drug can be marketed without FDA 
pre-approval.
Medical Devices  In 1976, Congress overhauled the FFD&C 
Act’s requirements for medical devices, providing the FDA major 
new authority to regulate their testing, marketing, and use. The 
elaborate new scheme contemplates three tiers of control, the most 
restrictive of which (class III) is premarket approval similar to that 
required for new drugs. To obtain FDA premarket approval of a 
class III device, the sponsor must demonstrate safety and efficacy. 
The bulk of the data supporting such applications will be derived 
from clinical studies but also will include toxicology studies of any 
constituents likely to be absorbed by the patient.
Cosmetics  The statutory provisions governing cosmetics do 
not require premarket approval of any ingredient, or demand that 
manufacturers test their products for safety, though many manufac-
turers routinely do so. The basic safety standard for cosmetics is 
similar to that for food ingredients: no product may be marketed if 
it contains “a poisonous or deleterious substance, which may ren-
der it injurious to health” [FFD&C Act § 601(a)]. The case law 
establishes that this language, too, bars distribution of a product

Regulatory Toxicology
Chapter 35
1577
that poses any significant risk of more than transitory harm when 
used as intended, but it places on the FDA the burden of proving a 
violation (Hutt et al., 2007). The FDA has brought few cases under 
this standard, in part because acute toxic reactions to cosmetics 
are readily detected and immediately result in abandonment of the 
offending ingredient. The FDA encourages cosmetic firms to par-
ticipate in its Voluntary Cosmetic Registration Program (VCRP), 
which is an online registration system that cosmetic manufactur-
ers, distributors, and packers can file information on their products 
that are currently being marketed to consumers in the United States 
and register their manufacturing and/or packaging facility loca-
tions in the VCRP database. The FDA also relies on the Cosmetic 
Ingredient Review (CIR), a private expert assessment body estab-
lished in 1976 and operated by the Personal Care Products Council. 
The CIR appoints an expert panel that conducts safety assessments 
of cosmetics ingredients that are subject to public review and com-
ment and then published as monographs.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
The EPA is responsible for administering most of the nation’s envi-
ronmental laws, which include protection of both human health and 
the environment. A comprehensive review of the EPA’s numerous 
programs is not possible here; the following summary focuses on 
those EPA activities in which toxicology evidence plays a central 
role: the agency-wide Integrated Risk Information System (IRIS) 
program, pesticide regulation, regulation of industrial chemicals, 
regulation of drinking water supplies, hazardous waste control, and 
regulation of toxic pollutants of water and of air.
IRIS Program  EPA’s IRIS provides an agency-wide scientific 
assessment program to evaluate the carcinogenic and noncarci-
nogenic human health risks of various chemicals. EPA prepares a 
Toxicological Review for a chemical, which goes through a series 
of internal and external reviews before being finalized, which is 
then used to derive an RfD and/or inhalation RfC for noncarcino-
genic effects, and a weight-of-evidence determination as well as 
oral and inhalation unit risks for carcinogenic effects. IRIS val-
ues are used to support a variety of agency regulatory programs, 
including many of those described below. EPA has established IRIS 
values for over 500 chemical substances. In response to a critical 
National Research Council study of EPA’s IRIS assessment of 
formaldehyde (NRC, 2011), the EPA has restructured its IRIS pro-
cess to adopt systematic review methods and information manage-
ment tools for study selection and analysis, and “data integration” 
approaches to develop overall hazard findings. In addition, IRIS 
assessments now derive organ-specific reference values (in addi-
tion to overall RfD and RfC values) when health effects data are 
available. The future of the IRIS program is in question, as both the 
Trump Administration and Congress are calling for major changes 
and possible funding cuts to the program.
Pesticides  Pesticides are subject to two types of regulation: 
(i) registration under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and 
Rodenticide Act (FIFRA, 1972), which is required for a pesticide 
to be marketed in the United States; and (ii) tolerance (under the 
FFD&C Act), which sets the allowable level of pesticide residue in 
food for human consumption. Pesticide residues on raw agricultural 
commodities for years were initially regulated by the EPA under a 
1954 amendment to the FFD&C Act, which allowed the agency to 
set tolerance levels based on weighing the potential adverse health 
effects of residues against the benefits of pesticide uses. If the con-
centration of a pesticide in a processed food exceeded the estab-
lished tolerance, or the pesticide was a carcinogen, the Delaney 
clause prohibited its approval for that use (Les v Reilly, 1992). This 
framework was revised by Congress in 1996 by the Food Quality 
Protection Act (FQPA) to exempt pesticide residues from the oper-
ation of the Delaney clause but also restricted the consideration of 
pesticide benefits in setting tolerances.
The FQPA integrated the standard for registration and tolerance 
of a pesticide to require a pesticide to be shown to be safe, a stan-
dard defined as “reasonable assurance of no harm” (Food Quality 
Protection Act, 1996). The 1996 amendments also introduced some 
additional novel elements to the tolerance process. First, it required 
EPA to determine the safe level of a pesticide residue in a cumulative 
context, considering “all anticipated dietary exposures and all other 
exposures for which there is reliable information” [21 USC § 346a(b)
(2)(A)(ii)]. This includes other nonoccupational sources of exposure, 
including food, drinking water, and residential exposures [21 USC § 
346a(b)(2)(D)(vi)]. EPA must also base its safety determination on 
a consideration of exposures to other pesticides that share the same 
mechanism of toxicity [21 USC § 346a(b)(2)(C)(i)(III)].
Second, the 1996 FQPA required EPA to give special consid-
eration to the health of infants and children, by ensuring “that there 
is a reasonable certainty that no harm will result to infants and chil-
dren from aggregate exposure to the pesticide chemical residue …” 
[21 USC § 346a(b)(2)(C)(ii)(I)]. To implement this requirement, the 
statute directs EPA to “use an additional 10-fold margin of safety 
in assessing the risks to infants and children to take into account 
potential for pre- and postnatal toxicity and the completeness of 
the toxicology and exposure databases.” EPA can deviate from 
the 10-fold margin of safety “only if, based on reliable data, the 
resulting margin would be safe for infants and children” [21 USC 
§ 346a(b)(2)(C)(ii)(I)]. EPA’s failure to provide a legally sufficient 
rationale for not applying the presumptive 10-fold extra safety fac-
tor for children has been found to be arbitrary and capricious by 
reviewing courts (Northwest Coalition for Alternatives to Pesticides 
v EPA, 2008; NRDC v EPA, 2011).
Third, EPA must develop a program to test for endocrine dis-
rupting effects of pesticides. There has been a flurry of research over 
the past couple of decades addressing the identification and mecha-
nisms of toxicity from endocrine-disrupting chemicals (Marty et al., 
2011). The FQPA required EPA to “develop a screening program, 
using appropriate validated test systems and other scientifically 
relevant information, to determine whether certain substances may 
have an effect in humans that is similar to an effect produced by a 
naturally occurring estrogen, or such other endocrine effect as the 
Administrator may designate” [21 USC § 346a(p)(1)]. Although 
EPA was required to establish this program by 1999, it did not meet 
this deadline.
EPA has been moving forward nevertheless and has created 
an Endocrine Disruptor Screening Program, which involves a two-
tier screening and testing process: In Tier 1 testing, EPA seeks to 
identify chemicals that have the potential to interact with the endo-
crine system. Tier 1 consists of 11 different assays, which are being 
applied to 67 pesticide ingredients on EPA’s initial list of chemi-
cals to be tested, which was released in 2009. EPA completed this 
first round of Tier 1 testing in September 2015 with results for 52 
chemicals (the other 15 chemicals on the original list were dropped 
because they are no longer in use). Of these 52 chemicals, 34 were 
found to have no significant endocrine disruptor activity, while the 
other 18 were found to have some activity and were selected for 
Tier 2 testing. EPA finalized in 2013 a second list of 109 additional 
chemicals to be tested in Tier 1 (of which 2 were subsequently 
removed from the list in 2014). In Tier 2, EPA will determine the 
endocrine-related effects caused by each chemical that indicated 
endocrine disruption activity in Tier 1, and obtain information

1578
Applications of Toxicology
Unit VII
about effects at various doses in order to enable risk assessment. 
The agency finalized three Tier 2 testing guidelines in August 2015 
(EPA, 2015a). Also in 2015, EPA published a proposal to allow 
companies to use high-throughput assays and computational toxi-
cology as an alternative screening method for endocrine disruptors 
(EPA, 2015b).
After the FQPA of 1996, the pesticide registration process now 
includes a broader review of the human health impacts from com-
mercial use of the pesticides on applicators and other individuals, as 
well as effects on the environment. The manufacturer of a pesticide 
must produce a variety of data from tests done according to EPA 
guidelines. EPA’s test guidelines, most recently revised in 2013, 
now encompass guidelines for several hundred types of tests recom-
mended for pesticides (40 CFR 158 and 161). These tests evaluate 
whether a pesticide has the potential to cause adverse effects on 
humans, wildlife, fish, and plants, as well as possible contamina-
tion of surface water or ground water from leaching, runoff, and 
spray drift. The potential human risks that are evaluated include 
both acute and chronic toxicity. The EPA then conditions the use of 
the pesticide on various protections to ensure that the pesticide is 
used safely, which are summarized on the pesticide label.
The EPA has been engaged in a comprehensive review of 
previously registered pesticides and “reregistration” of those that 
meet contemporary standards for marketing for approximately 
the past three decades. Under this program, many older pesticides 
have been subjected to comprehensive toxicology testing, includ-
ing carcinogenicity testing, for the first time, and the results have 
required modification of the terms of approved use and, in some 
instances, cancellation for several pesticides. The FQPA required 
EPA to review the registration (“reregistration”) and tolerance of 
older pesticides. In addition, EPA initiated a new program in 2006 
called “registration review” in which it intends to re-evaluate all 
pesticides every 15 years. Finally, EPA may initiate a “Pesticide 
Special Review” process whenever it discovers that the use of a 
registered pesticide may result in unreasonable adverse effects on 
people or the environment.
Industrial Chemicals  The Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) 
was promulgated in 1976 to regulate all chemical substances manu-
factured or processed in or imported into the United States, except 
for substances already regulated under other laws (e.g., pesticides, 
tobacco products, firearms, foods, drugs, and cosmetics). A chemical 
substance is defined broadly as “any organic or inorganic substance 
of a particular molecular identity.” Forty years after the initial adop-
tion of TSCA in 1976, in 2016 the Frank R. Lautenberg Chemical 
Safety for the 21st-Century Act was signed into law, the first major 
amendments to the TSCA statute (TSCA, 2016).
As amended, TSCA gives the EPA three main powers. First, 
the agency is empowered to restrict or even ban the manufacturing, 
processing, distribution, use, or disposal of a chemical substance 
when there is a reasonable basis to conclude any such activity poses 
an “unreasonable risk of injury to health or environment.” Prior to 
the 2016 amendments, the agency was instructed to balance the 
costs of restricting the substance against the health benefits of the 
proposed regulation and to choose “the least burdensome require-
ment” [TSCA § 6]. This trade-off approach to regulation proved a 
major challenge to the EPA and the agency exercised its regulatory 
authority under the original section 6 against only a handful of sub-
stances, and its most significant regulations, such as its attempted 
ban on asbestos products, have been struck down by the courts for 
failing to do an adequate cost-benefit analysis (Corrosion Proof 
Fittings v EPA, 1991). The statute itself imposes restrictions on two 
types of chemicals: mercury and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).
The 2016 amendments to TSCA seek to rejuvenate section 
6. The amended statute deletes the “the least burdensome require-
ment” provision, and requires EPA to undertake a prioritization 
process that involves screening existing chemicals based on factors 
such as hazard, exposure potential, persistence, and bioaccumula-
tion, but without considering cost. Any chemical that is found to 
“may present an unreasonable risk” based on this screening analysis 
must be categorized as high priority and is subject to a risk evalua-
tion. The risk evaluation is intended to determine whether a chemi-
cal presents an unreasonable risk, without considering costs or other 
non-risk factors. EPA must then promulgate a risk management 
standard for any chemical that is found to present an unreasonable 
risk in the risk evaluation.
The second major authority under TSCA is that if the EPA 
suspects that a chemical may pose an unreasonable risk but lacks 
sufficient data to take action, TSCA empowers the agency to require 
testing to develop the necessary data. Similarly, it may order testing 
if the chemical will be produced in substantial quantities that may 
enter the environment and/or result in significant human exposure 
whose effects cannot be predicted on the basis of existing data. In 
either case, the EPA must consider the “relative costs of the various 
test protocols and methodologies” and the “reasonably foreseeable 
availability of the facilities and personnel” needed to perform the 
tests [TSCA § 4]. The 2016 revisions to the TSCA testing author-
ity require EPA to use tiered testing and screening approaches, and 
to reduce and replace vertebrate animal testing when this can be 
scientifically justified.
Finally, to enable the EPA to evaluate chemicals before 
humans are exposed, TSCA requires the manufacturer of a new 
chemical substance to notify the agency 90 days prior to produc-
tion or distribution [TSCA § 5(a)(1)]. The manufacturer’s or dis-
tributor’s notice (called a pre-manufacturing notice or PMN) must 
include (i) chemical identification, including the Chemical Abstract 
(CA) name (when available), the chemical formula, and the molec-
ular structure of the substance, and any synonyms, trade names, 
or generic names for the chemical; (ii) information on the physi-
cal properties of the substance; (iii) amounts and identities of any 
impurities in the chemical substance; (iv) any byproducts that result 
from the manufacture, processing, use, and disposal of the new 
chemical substance; (v) production volume for the first 12 months 
of production and estimate of the maximum production volume for 
any consecutive 12-month period during the first 3 years of manu-
facture; (vi) intended use of the substance including the degree of 
containment; (vii) any information on manufacturing, processing, 
and use operations involving the new chemical substance or prod-
ucts containing the new substance; (viii) any hazard warning state-
ment, label, material safety data sheet (MSDS), or safety data sheet 
(SDS) available for the substance; (ix) anticipated environmental 
release and disposal information; and (x) (optionally), information 
on pollution prevention and recycling activities involving the new 
substance. In addition, the manufacturer must submit any hazard, 
toxicology, or safety data or studies it has on the substance.
Prior to the 2016 amendments, if EPA did not take action 
within 90 days, the manufacturer may proceed with commercializa-
tion of the chemical substance. Under the 2016 amendments, EPA 
must review all new chemicals and significant new uses (SNUs) 
and must make one of three findings: (1) that the new chemical or 
SNU presents an unreasonable risk of injury to health or the envi-
ronment, in which case the EPA must regulate those risks; (2) that 
there is insufficient information to make a reasoned evaluation of 
the chemical or SNU, in which case the agency must obtain addi-
tional information from the manufacturer; or (3) that the chemical 
or SNU is not likely to present an unreasonable risk.

Regulatory Toxicology
Chapter 35
1579
In contrast, the European Union (EU) is implementing a com-
prehensive regulatory program for chemical substances, known 
as the Registration, Evaluation, Authorization, and Restriction of 
Chemical substances (REACH) program. REACH puts the respon-
sibility for ensuring the safety of chemicals on the companies that 
produce, import, and use chemicals. The program applies to both 
new and existing chemicals, and is phased-in over an 11-year period 
based primarily on the production volume of individual chemicals. 
REACH employs a tiered-testing approach, with the amount of ini-
tial testing determined by production volume. A technical dossier is 
required for all registered chemicals; however, only chemicals with 
a production volume of 10 or more tons per year require a chemical 
safety assessment documented in a chemical safety report. REACH 
allows the use of alternative testing strategies to evaluate specific 
endpoints in lieu of experimental testing; however, whole animal 
testing requirements exist for each level based on production volume.
Hazardous Wastes  The two primary statutes regulating hazard-
ous wastes in the United States are the Resource Conservation and 
Recovery Act (RCRA, 1976) and the Comprehensive Environmental 
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA, 1980). With 
some exceptions, the primary purpose of CERCLA is the cleanup 
of contamination from pre-existing hazardous waste sites, whereas 
RCRA regulates the generation, transport, and disposal of new haz-
ardous wastes. Both RCRA and CERCLA have their own exten-
sive lists of substances and waste streams of toxic materials that 
are defined as hazardous wastes. In addition, under RCRA, wastes 
that meet any of four “characteristics” are also treated as hazardous 
wastes. The four characteristics are ignitability, corrosivity, reactiv-
ity, and toxicity, and EPA has identified standardized protocols for 
determining whether a particular waste stream meets one or more 
of these characteristics. Under RCRA, EPA has developed stan-
dards for generators, transporters, and those who treat, store, or dis-
pose hazardous wastes that are required to “protect human health 
and the environment.” The EPA’s regulations applicable to genera-
tors and transporters establish a manifest system that is designed to 
create a paper trail for every shipment of waste, from generator to 
final destination, to ensure proper handling and accountability. The 
agency has the broadest authority over persons who own or operate 
hazardous waste treatment, storage, or disposal facilities. Pursuant 
to the RCRA, it has issued regulations prescribing methods for 
treating, storing, and disposing of wastes; governing the location, 
design, and construction of facilities; mandating contingency plans 
to minimize negative impacts from such facilities; setting quali-
fications for ownership, training, and financial responsibility; and 
requiring permits for all such facilities (RCRA, 1976).
CERCLA, often referred to as Superfund, authorizes the 
cleanup of hazardous waste sites and provides for liability of per-
sons responsible for releases of hazardous waste at these sites. EPA 
can conduct cleanup of hazardous waste sites itself, and then seek 
recovery for the costs from potentially responsible parties (PRPs), 
or it can direct one or more PRPs to conduct cleanup, who may then 
seek contribution from other PRPs for their share of the cleanup. 
Under CERCLA, EPA has created the National Priorities List 
(NPL), which is a list of hazardous waste sites that are deemed 
the most hazardous sites and eligible for use of federal funds for 
long-term cleanup, and the National Contingency Plan (NCP), 
which provides the guidelines and procedures needed to respond 
to releases and threatened releases of hazardous substances, pol-
lutants, or contaminants. For sites on the NPL, EPA conducts a 
Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study to support the risk 
management process, which includes a site-specific human health 
and ecological risk assessment.
Toxic Water Pollutants  The EPA has had responsibility for 
regulating toxic water pollutants since 1972. As originally enacted, 
Section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act required 
the EPA to adopt standards for toxic water pollutants that provided 
an “ample margin of safety”—a difficult criterion to meet for most 
toxic pollutants and arguably impossible for any known to be car-
cinogenic. Given EPA’s difficulties in complying with this statutory 
directive, Congress amended the statute in 1977 to focus standards 
on economic cost and technologic feasibility. In 1987, Congress 
amended the statute again to toughen standards for toxic pollutants. 
Under the prior law, the EPA had developed health-based “water 
quality criteria” for 126 compounds it had identified as toxic. These 
criteria essentially described desirable maximum contamination 
levels, which, because the EPA’s discharge limits were technology-
based, generally were substantially lower than the levels actually 
achieved. The 1987 amendments gave what had been advisory cri-
teria real bite by requiring that states incorporate them in their own 
mandatory standards for water quality and impose additional efflu-
ent limits on operations discharging into below-standard water-
ways (Heineck, 1989).
Drinking Water  The 1974 Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) 
was enacted to ensure that public water supply systems “meet 
minimum national standards for the protection of public health.” 
Under the SDWA, the EPA is required to regulate any contaminants 
“which may have an adverse effect on human health.” Over time 
and several Congressional amendments, this system has evolved 
into a two-tier system in which EPA adopts for each contaminant a 
maximum contaminant level goal (MCLG) that represents the opti-
mal level to be achieved to ensure safety and the usually less strin-
gent, feasibility-based maximum contaminant level (MCL). Only 
the MCL is legally enforceable. As part of the 1996 Safe Drinking 
Water Amendments, Congress directed EPA to use the “best avail-
able science” in setting MCLGs and MCLs.
Toxic Air Pollutants  The original 1970 version of the Clean 
Air Act (CAA) provision for regulation of hazardous air pollutants 
(section 112) required the agency to set emission standards for indi-
vidual toxic pollutants that protect public health with “an ample 
margin of safety.” The implication of this language—that standards 
were to provide absolute safety without regard to the costs of emis-
sions control—generated intense debate from the beginning and 
contributed to the EPA’s glacial pace of implementation. The EPA 
finally attempted to escape the strict language of section 112 when 
it issued a standard for vinyl chloride in 1986 in which the agency 
claimed it could consider costs and declined to adopt a standard 
dictated solely by safety. A court ruled that the EPA had improperly 
considered costs, but it did make clear that in determining what 
emissions level was safe, even for a carcinogen, the EPA was not 
obligated to eliminate exposure but rather was to “decide what risks 
are acceptable in the world in which we live” (NRDC v EPA, 1987).
Amendments to the CAA in 1990 responded to the difficul-
ties presented by the strict health-based approach of old section 
112. The statute now provides a list of 188 hazardous air pollutants, 
which EPA may modify by adding or deleting items. The EPA must 
establish national emissions standards for sources that emit any of 
the listed pollutants with a two-tier system of regulation. The EPA 
must first issue standards that are technology-based, designed to 
require the “maximum achievable control technology” (MACT) 
[CAA § 112(d)(2)]. If the MACT controls are insufficient to protect 
human health with an “ample margin of safety,” the EPA must issue 
residual risk standards [CAA § 112(f)]. The 1990 Amendments 
essentially define “ample margin of safety” for carcinogens by 
requiring the EPA to establish added residual risk limits for any

1580
Applications of Toxicology
Unit VII
pollutant that poses a lifetime excess cancer risk of greater than 
one in one million. However, as subsequently clarified in a judi-
cial decision, while EPA must promulgate residual risk standards if 
the MACT standards do not reduce risks to one in one million, the 
residual risk standards are not required to reduce the risks to one in 
one million, but rather to 100 in one million (NRDC v EPA, 2008).
Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration (OSHA)
The 1970 Occupational Safety and Health Act requires employers 
to provide employees with safe working conditions and empowers 
OSHA to prescribe mandatory occupational safety and health stan-
dards (OSHA, 1970). OSHA’s most controversial actions involved 
its attempts to set occupational exposure limits for hazardous 
chemicals.
The Act specifies that in regulating hazardous occupational 
exposures, OSHA shall adopt the standard “which most adequately 
assures, to the extent feasible, on the basis of the best available 
evidence, that no employee will suffer material impairment of 
health or physical capacity” [OSHA § 6 (b)(5)]. Judicial challenges 
to OSHA standards have clarified OSHA’s responsibilities. In a 
famous case, the U.S. Supreme Court overturned OSHA’s benzene 
standard because the agency had not shown that prevailing worker 
exposure levels posed a “significant” health risk (Industrial Union 
Department, AFL-CIO, v American Petroleum Institute, 1980). 
This prerequisite proved a major obstacle when OSHA attempted 
to establish standards for 428 air contaminants in a single proceed-
ing in 1989. Although it found that OSHA’s generic approach to 
regulation was permissible in theory, a court vacated the standards 
because OSHA failed to show that each individual contaminant 
posed a “significant risk” at current levels (American Federation of 
Labor v OSHA, 1992). However, the Supreme Court earlier upheld 
OSHA’s cotton dust standard, rejecting arguments that the agency 
was obligated to balance the costs of individual standards against 
the benefits of reducing hazardous workplace exposures (American 
Textile Manufacturers Institute v Donovan, 1982). The end result 
of these judicial challenges is that OSHA may adopt standards that 
reduce a “significant” risk to workers down to levels that are tech-
nologically and economically feasible, but cannot base its standards 
on a cost-benefit analysis.
OSHA promulgates substance-specific occupational exposure 
limits known as Permissible Exposure Limits (PELs), where com-
pliance is measured with an 8-hour time-weighted average (TWA). 
For a few hazardous exposures (e.g., 1,3-butadiene, benzene, and 
ethylene oxide) OSHA has promulgated short-term exposure limits 
(STELs), which sets an average exposure limit for any 15-minute 
average that cannot be exceeded.
Another important standard promulgated and enforced by 
OSHA is the hazard communication standard (HCS). The HCS 
requires chemical manufacturers and importers to evaluate the haz-
ards of the chemicals they produce or import, and prepare labels 
and material safety data sheets (MSDSs) to convey the hazard 
information to their downstream customers; and requires employ-
ers with hazardous chemicals in their workplaces to provide labels 
and MSDSs for their exposed workers, and train them to handle the 
chemicals appropriately. As of 2016, the HCS has been harmonized 
with the United Nations’ (UN) Globally Harmonized System of 
Classification and Labeling of Chemicals (GHS). OSHA has pro-
vided detailed criteria in Appendix A to §1910.1200—Health Hazard 
Criteria for determining whether a substance is hazardous under the 
HCS. For example, any substance listed in the National Toxicology 
Program (NTP) “Report on Carcinogens” (latest edition) or the 
International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) “Monographs 
on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans” will be consid-
ered a carcinogen or possible carcinogen under the HCS.
In addition to the HCS and substance-specific exposure limits, 
OSHA also enforces more generic standards such as the general 
duty clause, the particles otherwise not regulated (total dust) stan-
dard, and the respiratory protection standard. Unlike EPA, OSHA 
does not have authority to require chemical safety testing.
Other organizations also issue occupational exposure limits, but 
unlike OSHA, these standards are guidance and not legally enforce-
able. For example, the American Conference of Governmental 
Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) publishes recommended but non-
enforceable exposure standards known as threshold limit values 
(TLVs) which can be for an 8-hour time-weighted average expo-
sure (TLV-TWA) or a 15-minute short-term time-weighted aver-
age (TLV-STEL). The TLV is a level that a worker can be exposed 
to day after day for a working lifetime without adverse effects. In 
addition, ACGIH also publishes threshold limit value–Ceiling limit 
(TLV-C) which is an absolute exposure limit that should not be 
exceeded at any time. The National Institute of Occupational Safety 
and Health (NIOSH) also publishes some Recommended Exposure 
Limits or RELs (although as of January 2017, NIOSH recommends 
a new value for carcinogens known as a Risk Management Limit 
for Carcinogens, or RML-CA).
Consumer Product Safety 
Commission (CPSC)
Of the four agencies discussed here, the CPSC has played the least 
important role in federal efforts to control toxic chemicals to date. 
The commission was created in 1972 by the Consumer Product 
Safety Act (CPSA, 1972) with authority to regulate products that 
pose an unreasonable risk of injury or illness to consumers. The 
commission is empowered to promulgate safety standards “to pre-
vent or reduce an unreasonable risk of injury” associated with a 
consumer product. If no feasible standard “would adequately pro-
tect the public from the unreasonable risk of injury” posed by a 
consumer product, the commission may ban the product [CPSA § 
8]. In assessing the need for a standard or ban, the agency must bal-
ance the likelihood that a product will cause harm, and the severity 
of harm it will likely cause, against the effects of reducing the risk 
on the product’s utility, cost, and availability to consumers.
The CPSC also administers the older Federal Hazardous 
Substances Act (FHSA, 1976). The FHSA authorizes the CPSC to 
regulate, primarily through prescribed label warnings, products that 
are toxic, corrosive, combustible, or radioactive or that generate 
pressure. The FHSA is unusual among federal health laws because 
it contains detailed criteria for determining toxicity. It defines 
“highly toxic” in terms of a substance’s acute effects in specified 
tests in rodents; substances capable of producing chronic effects 
thus fall within the “toxic” category. The FHSA contains another 
unique provision [FHSA § 2(h)(2)] specifically addressing the pro-
bative weight of animal and human data on acute toxicity: “If the 
[commission] finds that available data on human experience with 
any substance indicates results different from those obtained on ani-
mals in the above-named dosages or concentrations, the human data 
shall take precedence.”
The CPSC has prescribed labeling for products containing 
numerous substances that are acutely toxic. It has also acted to 
ban from consumer products several substances that pose a cancer 
risk, including asbestos, vinyl chloride as a propellant, benzene, 
tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane, and formaldehyde (Merrill, 
1981).

Regulatory Toxicology
Chapter 35
1581
In 2008, Congress adopted the Consumer Product Safety 
Improvement Act (2008), which significantly strengthened the 
CPSC’s enforcement authority, especially for children’s products, 
in response to a number of high-profile recalls of children’s toys. 
The Act imposes bans on products containing lead or phthalates that 
exceed stringent levels, and requires third-party testing of certain 
children’s products.
INSTITUTIONAL OVERSIGHT AND 
CONTROLS
As the previous subsection describes, regulatory agencies are 
required to evaluate and apply toxicological and other scientific 
data in a variety of statutory contexts. In addition to the statutory 
language, a number of internal and external institutional control 
mechanisms and processes greatly influence the agencies’ treat-
ment of toxicological data.
Advisory Committees
Regulatory agencies frequently rely on scientific advisory com-
mittees composed of external scientific experts to help guide their 
scientific determinations, including toxicological evaluations. For 
example, the EPA has a Scientific Advisory Board (SAB), estab-
lished by Congress in 1978, to advise the agency on the quality 
and relevance of the scientific and technical information being used 
in regulatory programs as well as to review the agency’s research 
programs. The SAB’s work is done by a relatively large number of 
subcommittees and panels that focus on special subjects. The EPA 
also has two other independent scientific advisory committees asso-
ciated with specific regulatory programs—the Clean Air Science 
Advisory Committee for air pollution, and the Science Advisory 
Panel for pesticides. These committees consist of external scientists 
who are appointed to serve on the committees for specified terms. 
Similarly, the FDA has over 50 external advisory committees that 
provide advice on the agency’s significant product approvals and 
other scientific issues.
Regulatory agencies are not required to automatically follow 
the advice of their external advisory committees, but frequently 
do. Failure to follow the independent advice of their own advisory 
committee tends to call into question the soundness of the agency’s 
scientific findings, whereas advisory committee endorsement of the 
agency’s position can provide important scientific credibility and 
political cover to the agency.
Peer Review
Beyond peer review by agency advisory committees, regulatory 
agencies frequently utilize external peer review of scientific reports 
and assessments. In December 2004, the Office of Management 
and Budget (OMB) formalized the requirement for peer review 
by issuing its Final Information Quality Bulletin for Peer Review 
(OMB, 2004). This Peer Review Bulletin requires federal regula-
tory agencies to ensure that all “influential scientific information” 
they disseminate is peer-reviewed. Influential scientific informa-
tion is defined as “scientific information the agency reasonably can 
determine will have or does have a clear and substantial impact on 
important public policies or private sector decisions.” The Bulletin 
specifically identifies “scientific assessments” as one type of infor-
mation subject to the peer review requirement, which are defined 
as “an evaluation of a body of scientific or technical knowledge, 
which typically synthesizes multiple factual inputs, data, models, 
assumptions, and/or applies best professional judgment to bridge 
uncertainties in the available information.” These assessments 
include, but are not limited to, state-of-science reports; technology 
assessments; weight-of-evidence analyses; meta-analyses; health, 
safety, or ecological risk assessments; toxicological characteriza-
tions of substances; integrated assessment models; hazard determi-
nations; or exposure assessments.
The Peer Review Bulletin directs agencies to choose a peer 
review mechanism that is appropriate and commensurate with how 
the information will be used, giving due consideration to the nov-
elty and complexity of the science involved, the relevance of the 
information to regulatory decision-making, the extent of prior peer 
reviews, and the expected benefits and costs of additional review. 
The Peer Review Bulletin requires the most rigorous peer review 
requirements for highly influential scientific assessments.
Risk Assessment Guidance/Guidelines
Regulatory agencies often adopt guidelines to promote consistency 
and predictability in their treatment of toxicological data and the 
conduct of risk assessment. For example, EPA has adopted risk 
assessment guidelines for carcinogenicity, mutagenicity, develop-
mental toxicity, chemical mixtures, exposure analysis, reproduc-
tive toxicity, neurotoxicity, and ecotoxicity. The genesis of EPA’s 
risk assessment guidelines was a series of “cancer principles” pre-
pared largely at the instigation of EPA lawyers in the mid-1970s 
(Albert, 1994). The agency lawyers were frustrated by the delays 
in regulating pesticides as a result of scientific disagreement about 
the mechanisms and causes of human cancer. In an attempt to cir-
cumvent such scientific disputes, the lawyers developed a series of 
17 “cancer principles” with the assistance of EPA scientists dur-
ing hearings on the pesticides heptachlor and chlordane. The 17 
principles were intended to be nonrebuttable guidelines that would 
govern and simplify carcinogenicity determinations.
Shortly thereafter, EPA began to develop a more comprehen-
sive set of guidelines for evaluating carcinogens. This led to EPA 
publishing its “interim” guidelines for carcinogenic risk assessment 
in 1976, which were subsequently updated and finalized in 1986 
(EPA, 1986). The 1986 guidelines primarily consisted of a series 
of “default options” that were intended as presumptive principles 
that would apply in the absence of sufficient data to establish an 
alternative assumption. Some of the most important default options 
included in EPA’s 1986 carcinogen guidelines are: (i) laboratory 
animals are assumed to be a valid surrogate for humans in assess-
ing risk; thus, positive cancer results in animal bioassays are taken 
as evidence of human carcinogenicity; (ii) humans are assumed to 
be as sensitive as the most sensitive animal species, strain, or sex 
evaluated in an appropriately designed animal bioassay; (iii) benign 
tumors are assumed to be as significant as malignant tumors; (iv) 
the dose–response of humans to potential carcinogens is assumed to 
be linear all the way to the zero exposure levels with no threshold; 
and (v) a given intake of a substance is assumed to have the same 
effect regardless of the rate or route of intake (EPA, 1986). Most of 
the default options selected by EPA were deliberately chosen to be 
“conservative,” in that they are intended to estimate the plausible 
upper-bound of actual risk (NRC, 1994).
EPA’s risk assessment guidelines not only promoted consis-
tency in risk assessment approach and procedure across the broad 
array of EPA regulatory programs, which use risk assessment, but 
also furthered the objective of efficiency, by sparing the agency the 
need to revisit the same controversial issues in each successive rule-
making proceeding (Wiltse and Dellarco, 1996). The courts were 
generally supportive of the predictability and consistency provided 
by the agency’s risk assessment guidelines, giving greater deference

1582
Applications of Toxicology
Unit VII
to EPA risk assessments that comported with the guidelines. As one 
court stated, “EPA’s specific enunciation of its underlying analytical 
principles, derived from its experience in the area, yields meaning-
ful notice and dialogue, enhances the administrative process, and 
furthers reasoned agency decision making” (Environmental Defense 
Fund, Inc, v Environmental Protection Agency, 1976).
Notwithstanding these benefits of risk assessment guidelines, 
EPA’s implementation of its guidelines was criticized in a 1994 
NRC report that found that EPA applied the default principles too 
rigidly and had failed to articulate clear criteria for departing from 
the defaults (NRC, 1994). EPA itself acknowledged that “[i]n prac-
tice, the agency’s assessments routinely have employed defaults 
and, until recently, only occasionally departed from them” (EPA, 
1996). EPA published draft revisions to its carcinogen guidelines in 
1996 (EPA, 1996) that were finalized in 2005 (EPA, 2005), which 
take a more flexible, data-based approach to default options. As 
explained by EPA, the revised guidelines “are intended to be both 
explicit and more flexible than in the past concerning the basis for 
making departures from defaults, recognizing that expert judgment 
and peer review are essential elements of the process” (EPA, 1996). 
The revised guidelines incorporate “a weight-of-the-evidence 
approach that considers all relevant data in reaching conclusions 
about the potential human carcinogenicity of an agent” (EPA, 
1996). In 2014, EPA published “Framework for Human Health Risk 
Assessment to Inform Decision Making,” which adopts a frame-
work for risk-based decision-making that maximizes the utility of 
risk assessment (EPA, 2014).
Judicial Review
Agency regulations are often subject to legal challenges by stake-
holders who disagree with the agency’s decision. Under the 
Administrative Procedure Act, such judicial review tends to be def-
erential to the agency’s decision, overturning the decision only if 
it is “arbitrary and capricious” or lacking “substantial evidence.” 
Nevertheless, a significant proportion of major agency regulations 
are overturned in whole or in part, or sent back to the agency for 
further explanation. Scientific determinations, such as toxicologi-
cal findings, are generally given the highest level of deference 
under a decision by the U.S. Supreme Court, which held that “[w]
hen examining this kind of scientific determination, as opposed to 
simple findings of fact, a reviewing court must generally be at its 
most deferential” (Baltimore Gas & Elec v NRDC, 1983).
Even with this deference to scientific determinations, there 
have been many important judicial decisions impacting the way 
regulatory agencies address toxicological information. One promi-
nent example was a challenge to the EPA’s decision to retain an 
MCLG of zero under the Safe Drinking Water Act for chloroform 
in the face of evidence, accepted by its own scientific advisory com-
mittee, that the mechanism by which chloroform produces tumors 
in rodents is threshold-limited. The reviewing court held that given 
its acceptance of the evidence of a threshold, the EPA was required 
by the SDWA’s “best available” evidence provision to base its deci-
sion on that evidence (Chlorine Chemistry Council v EPA, 2000). 
This ruling marks the first time that a court has directed a federal 
regulatory agency to recognize a “safe” finite level of exposure for 
an animal carcinogen. Another example of proactive judicial over-
sight is two recent decisions where the court second-guessed EPA’s 
determination that there was sufficient toxicological evidence to 
justify departing from the presumptive 10-fold extra safety factor 
to protect children in pesticide regulatory decisions (Northwest 
Coalition for Alternatives to Pesticides v EPA, 2008; NRDC v EPA, 
2011).
Congressional Oversight
Congress has ultimate oversight of regulatory agencies, both by 
delegating the authority to regulate in the form of statutes, and by 
controlling the purse strings for the agencies. Regulatory statutes 
determine many of the fundamental choices for regulatory programs 
by specifying what factors may be considered in adopting regula-
tory standards and the objectives of the standards in terms of the 
level of safety to be attained. Statutes differ greatly on these ques-
tions, with some mandating standards being based on technologi-
cal feasibility, whereas others specifying health-based regulation. 
The statutes can provide additional guidance that can influence the 
agency’s consideration of toxicological evidence, such as the 1996 
amendments to the Safe Drinking Water Act, which direct EPA to 
use “the best available, peer-reviewed science and supporting stud-
ies conducted in accordance with sound and objective scientific 
practices” (Safe Drinking Water Act, 1996).
Congress also controls regulatory programs through its budget-
ary authority. By controlling how much money is directed to spe-
cific activities or programs, Congress can directly influence agency 
priorities and emphasis. If Congress is not pleased with an agency’s 
actions, it can adopt appropriation riders prohibiting the agency from 
spending money on controversial topics. In the past, for example, 
Congress has prevented EPA from working on climate change or 
radiofrequency issues by imposing annual riders for a time period.
In addition to these primary legislative controls, Congress has 
a number of other ways it can influence agency decision-making. 
Congress can pressure agencies toward a preferred policy outcome 
through oversight hearings, letters to agency officials, and press 
releases. Congress has also adopted some oversight statutes to fur-
ther control agency rulemaking. The Congressional Review Act 
requires federal regulatory agencies to file final rules with Congress 
before the rules can become effective. If the regulation meets the 
definition of a major rule ($100-million impact on the economy), 
Congress has 60 days to introduce a resolution of disapproval that, 
if adopted by both the House and Senate, can nullify the agency’s 
rule, unless vetoed by the President. If a disapproval resolution is 
enacted, the rule may not take effect and the agency may issue no 
substantially similar rule without subsequent statutory authoriza-
tion. The Congressional Review Act was only used once prior to 
2017 to disapprove an agency regulation (OSHA ergonomic stan-
dard in 2001), the U.S. Congress has used this authority to disap-
prove more than ten agency rules in the first half of 2017.
Congress also enacted section 515 of the Treasury and General 
Government Appropriations Act of 2001, known as the Information 
Quality Act (IQA), which required the Office of Management and 
Budget (OMB) to promulgate guidance to agencies ensuring the 
quality, objectivity, utility, and integrity of information (including 
statistical information) disseminated by federal agencies (IQA, 
2001). Federal agencies were also required by the IQA to pub-
lish their own agency-specific guidelines no later than 1 year after 
OMB’s guidelines, and also provide a mechanism for stakehold-
ers to file petitions challenging agency actions that allegedly fail 
to comply with the data quality objectives. Private parties have 
challenged a number of scientific determinations by federal agen-
cies under this provision, but the courts have determined that the 
agency decisions on these petitions are not judicially reviewable 
(Salt Institute v Leavitt, 2006).
Executive Oversight
The Executive branch also exerts overview of regulatory decisions, 
particularly through the Office of Information and Regulatory 
Affairs (OIRA) within the White House OMB. OIRA reviews all

Regulatory Toxicology
Chapter 35
1583
draft significant regulations proposed by regulatory agencies, and 
although its review most often focuses on the economic aspects of 
the proposed rule, it also reviews the agency’s scientific assump-
tions and findings. Although OIRA cannot itself revise the pro-
posed regulation, it can hold up its publication until it has reached 
agreement with the agency on acceptable revisions.
The Executive Branch has other mechanisms for oversight 
and influence of regulatory science determinations by agencies. 
The White House under various Presidents has put out a series of 
Executive Orders providing regulatory guidance that agencies must 
follow to the extent consistent with the governing regulatory statute. 
For example, Executive Order 13563 issued by President Obama 
in January 2011 requires that federal regulations “must be based 
on the best available science. It must allow for public participation 
and an open exchange of ideas. It must promote predictability and 
reduce uncertainty. It must identify and use the best, most inno-
vative, and least burdensome tools for achieving regulatory ends. 
It must take into account benefits and costs, both quantitative and 
qualitative” (EO 13563, 2011).
The White House also issued a memorandum on Scientific 
Integrity in 2009 that required each regulatory agency to develop its 
own scientific integrity policy that implemented several principles 
of scientific integrity, including: “(a) The selection and retention 
of candidates for science and technology positions in the executive 
branch should be based on the candidate’s knowledge, credentials, 
experience, and integrity; (b) Each agency should have appropriate 
rules and procedures to ensure the integrity of the scientific process 
within the agency; (c) When scientific or technological information 
is considered in policy decisions, the information should be sub-
ject to well-established scientific processes, including peer review 
where appropriate, and each agency should appropriately and accu-
rately reflect that information in complying with and applying rel-
evant statutory standards …” (White House, 2009).
REGULATORY INFLUENCES ON 
TOXICOLOGY
This chapter has focused thus far on how toxicological data are 
used in federal regulatory programs. Yet, the relationship between 
regulation and toxicology is reciprocal, in that regulatory programs 
have also shaped and influenced the practice of toxicology. Modern 
toxicology has developed, in substantial part, in response to the 
information needs of contemporary regulation. But government 
regulation impinges on the discipline of toxicology in more direct 
ways as well. Regulatory agencies often prescribe the specific 
objectives and design of studies that are conducted to satisfy regu-
latory requirements. In addition, pressure to protect animals used 
in research has produced laws and regulations that govern toxicolo-
gists themselves.
Testing Guidelines
An agency’s influence over the conduct of toxicology studies 
depends on its regulatory responsibilities. An agency such as the 
FDA or the EPA, which must confirm the safety of new substances 
before marketing, can dictate the kinds of tests that manufacturers 
must conduct to gain approval. By contrast, an agency or program 
that has no premarket approval function has less leverage.
Agencies such as the FDA and EPA that have been authorized 
to require premarket approval for certain categories of products 
have generally specified the types of tests they require before they 
will consider the safety of a compound (e.g., tests for acute toxic-
ity, subchronic effects, and chronic effects). Within each of these 
categories, an agency might set out more detailed requirements, 
essentially enumerating its “base set” data demands. In addition, the 
agencies usually adopt guidelines that describe preferred or accept-
able methods for executing particular tests, such as a bioassay for 
carcinogenesis (FDA, 2000; EPA, 2011a). In addition, the EPA has 
established guidelines for several of the tests that it may mandate 
by rule or consent agreement for individual chemicals under TSCA 
§ 4 (EPA, 2011a). Multinational bodies such as the Organization 
for Economic Cooperation and Development have sought to secure 
multilateral adherence to standardized test guidelines and minimum 
testing requirements for new chemicals (Page, 1982).
Both the FDA and the EPA have adopted another set of require-
ments that specify laboratory procedures for conducting tests required 
or submitted for regulatory consideration. These GLP regulations 
prescribe essential but often mundane features of sound laboratory 
science, such as animal husbandry standards and record-keeping 
practices (EPA, 2011b, 2011c; FDA, 2011a). The GLP regulations 
including requirements for (i) organization and personnel responsi-
bilities (e.g., study director should be “a scientist or other professional 
of appropriate education, training, and experience, or combination 
thereof”); (ii) a quality assurance program; (iii) facilities; (iv) equip-
ment, reagents, and materials; (v) test systems; (vi) test and refer-
ence items; (vii) standard operating procedures; (viii) performance of 
study; (ix) reporting of results; and (x) archival storage of records and 
reports. All of these requirements are intended to contribute to sound-
regulatory decision-making by ensuring the quality and integrity of 
toxicology data submitted to support agency decisions.
Food and Drug Administration  The FDA exercises premar-
keting approval authority over several classes of compounds, of 
which the most important, for present purposes, are new human 
drugs and direct additives to food.
Toxicology Testing Requirements for Human Drugs  In 1962, 
Congress expressly authorized the FDA to exempt investigational 
drugs from the premarket approval requirement so that they could 
be shipped for use in clinical testing, subject to conditions the 
agency believed appropriate to protect human subjects [FFD&C Act 
§ 505(i)]. One condition that the FDA established was that an inves-
tigational drug first must have been evaluated in preclinical studies, 
which are then submitted to FDA as an Investigational New Drug 
(IND) application. This requirement appears in current regulations 
that amplify, in the text and in referenced guidelines, the types of 
tests that are to be performed and the design they should follow 
(FDA, 2011b). A drug’s sponsor is encouraged to consult agency 
personnel to get a precise understanding of what sorts of toxicology 
studies the agency expects prior to submitting the IND. Preclinical 
studies of substances that are candidates for use as human drugs 
must also meet the standards set by the FDA’s GLP regulations 
(FDA, 2011a). These regulations apply to all laboratories—uni-
versity, independent, and manufacturer-owned—in which such 
studies are conducted. The work of the International Conference 
on Harmonization of Technical Requirements for Registration of 
Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) highlights the trend toward 
international agreement on test methods. Since its founding in 1990, 
the ICH—comprising the pharmaceutical regulatory agencies and 
industries from the European Union, Japan, and the United States—
has issued over 50 harmonized guidelines on various aspects of 
pharmaceutical regulatory approval, including numerous guidelines 
on toxicology testing methods for human drugs.
Testing Requirements for Food Additives  The Food 
Additives Amendment and the Color Additive Amendments require 
premarket approval of new additives to human food. Both laws

1584
Applications of Toxicology
Unit VII
assume that laboratory studies in animals will provide the principal 
data for assessing safety. Thus, a petitioner must submit “full reports 
of investigations made with respect to the safety for use of such addi-
tives, including full information as to the methods and control used” 
[FFD&C Act § 409(c)]. The FDA has adopted regulations specifying 
the types of data that an applicant must submit (FDA, 2011c).
The FDA’s regulations contain only general statements about 
the need for and features of toxicology studies. For many years, the 
agency maintained an advice-giving system in which it prescribed 
the type and design of tests to be performed. In 1982, the FDA 
first codified this “common law” in Toxicological Principles for the 
Safety Assessment of Direct Food Additives and Color Additives 
Used in Food, known thereafter as the “Red Book.” The Red Book, 
revised in 2000, describes the types of tests the FDA believes nec-
essary to evaluate an additive’s safety (FDA, 2000). The agency’s 
requirements, which are in the form of guidelines rather than regu-
lations, are calibrated to the purposes for which the additive will 
be used, to estimated levels of human exposure, and to the results 
of sequential studies. Tests of food color and additives must also 
comply with the FDA’s GLP regulations (FDA, 2011a).
Environmental Protection Agency  The EPA’s premarket 
approval authority over pesticides places it, like the FDA, in a 
position to dictate the design and conduct of studies on such com-
pounds. The 1976 TSCA gave the EPA authority to mandate test-
ing of other chemicals in use or scheduled for introduction and to 
specify, by regulation, test standards.
Toxicology Requirements for Pesticides  The Federal Insecticide, 
Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) requires the submission 
of toxicology studies, as well as other types of investigations, to 
support the EPA’s evaluation of a pesticide [FIFRA § 136(b)]. The 
statute also requires the EPA to publish guidelines specifying the 
kinds of information that will be required to support the registration.
The agency has issued regulations outlining the procedures 
for submission of registration petitions and their basic content (40 
CFR part 158 and 161). The Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution 
Prevention (formerly the Office of Prevention, Pesticides, and 
Toxic Substances) has issued Harmonized Test Guidelines for all 
toxicology testing done under both FIFRA (pesticides) and TSCA 
(chemicals) (EPA, 2011a). For example, the Health Effects Test 
Guidelines (Series 870) include guidelines for approximately 50 dif-
ferent specific assays for acute toxicity, subchronic toxicity, chronic 
toxicity, genetic toxicity, neurotoxicity, and other toxicity testing. 
EPA has attempted to harmonize these guidelines whenever pos-
sible with applicable Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development (OECD) guidelines. Animal studies of pesticides must 
also comply with EPA’s own GLP regulations, which were inspired 
by the same investigations that led the FDA to promulgate its stan-
dards for testing laboratories and impose similar requirements.
Testing of Industrial Chemicals  The primary means by which 
the EPA may mandate health effects testing of new or existing 
industrial chemicals is Section 4(a) of the TSCA. Prior to the 2016 
amendments to the TSCA (TSCA, 2016), the agency was required 
to promulgate a regulation to require testing of a specific compound, 
but the 2016 amendments provide more flexibility and allow EPA 
to also require testing by administrative order. This obligation to 
order testing is triggered by an administrative finding that a chemi-
cal presents a potential risk (based on the suspicion of toxicity) 
or that humans or the environment will be exposed to substantial 
quantities. The statute creates an Interagency Testing Committee 
(ITC) with members from EPA, CPSC, FDA, Department of the 
Interior (DOI), OSHA, Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ), 
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), 
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), 
National Cancer Institute (NCI), National Science Foundation 
(NSF), Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry 
(ATSDR), National Library of Medicine (NLM), USDA, and the 
Department of Commerce to recommend a list of chemicals that 
should be tested and in what order of priority. Once the ITC has rec-
ommended a chemical substance for testing, the EPA is required by 
statute to either initiate testing or publish its reasons for not doing 
so within 12 months, although given the administrative burdens of 
such action the agency has frequently failed to meet this deadline.
Validation of Alternative Test Methods
Regulatory agencies have also been instrumental in encouraging the 
development of new safety test methods. Federal agency validation 
of new toxicological test methods was formalized and harmonized 
by the Interagency Coordinating Committee on the Validation of 
Alternative Methods (ICCVAM) Authorization Act of 2000, which 
permanently established the ICCVAM. Some 15 federal agencies 
participate in ICCVAM. Congress directed that one of the purposes 
of ICCVAM was to “ensure that new and revised test methods are 
validated to meet the needs of Federal agencies” [Pub L 106-545, 
§3(b)(4)]. In that regard, ICCVAM is directed to review and evaluate 
new or revised or alternative test methods and to provide test recom-
mendations to federal agencies. Each federal agency administering a 
program that “requires or recommends acute or chronic toxicological 
testing” is required to adopt an alternative test method recommended 
by ICCVAM unless the agency determines that the alternative test 
method would not be consistent with its statutory goals.
The ICCVAM statute also requires that each federal agency 
“that requires or recommends acute or chronic toxicological testing 
shall ensure that any new or revised acute or chronic toxicity test 
method, including animal test methods and alternatives, is deter-
mined to be valid for its proposed use prior to requiring, recom-
mending, or encouraging the application of such test method” [Pub 
L 106-545, §4(c)]. ICCVAM has established detailed criteria for 
the validation and regulatory acceptance of toxicological test meth-
ods (NIEHS, 1997). ICCVAM defines validation as “the process by 
which the reliability and relevance of a test method are evaluated 
for the purpose of supporting a specific use.” The ICCVAM criteria 
stipulate that test methods that have been validated according to the 
ICCVAM criteria are not automatically acceptable for regulatory 
agencies. The ICCVAM criteria thus specify a second set of criteria 
for regulatory acceptance, which address the existence of standard 
operating procedures for the test method, its cost-effectiveness, its 
utility for agency risk assessment, its potential for harmonization 
with similar testing requirements by other entities, and its potential 
for reducing the use of animals. The ICCVAM statute preserves 
the individual agency’s final authority to accept or reject a specific 
test method based on its statutory mandate and regulatory mission.
The ICCVAM process has now been used to validate a sig-
nificant number of alternative test methods, including for acute 
oral toxicity, dermal irritation, acute inhalation toxicity, endocrine 
disruptors, biologics testing, genetic toxicity, ecotoxicity, ocular 
irritation, allergic contact dermatitis, and reproductive and devel-
opmental toxicity. The ICCVAM Authorization Act also directs 
federal agencies to reduce, refine, and/or replace the use of animals 
in testing where feasible.
Computational Toxicology
Another area where regulatory demands and programs are push-
ing the development of new toxicology tests is the field of compu-
tational toxicology. Computational toxicology uses high-powered

Regulatory Toxicology
Chapter 35
1585
computers to discern patterns and findings from large data sets 
derived from quantitative structure–activity relationships, in vitro 
assays, and various ‘omic technologies (e.g., toxicogenomics, pro-
teomics, and metabolomics). The regulatory driver for computa-
tional toxicology is the need to evaluate much larger numbers of 
chemicals much quicker and at lower costs, and perhaps eventually 
even with more robust and relevant results, than traditional animal 
studies. The shift toward computational toxicology was boosted by 
a 2007 Natural Research Council report entitled Toxicity Testing in 
the 21st Century: A Vision and a Strategy, which endorsed greater 
reliance on computational methods (NRC, 2007). EPA has launched 
an ambitious program to implement computational methods into 
its regulatory programs, which is called the ToxCast program. The 
ToxCast program has so far screened over 1800 chemicals using 
over 700 high-throughput assays that cover a range of high-level 
cell responses and approximately 300 signaling pathways.
In 2008, EPA and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) 
signed a memorandum of agreement to work together to develop 
these new toxicological methods for regulatory applications 
(Collins et al., 2008), which grew into an inter-agency collaboration 
called Toxicology in the 21st century (Tox21). This federal collabo-
ration among EPA, NIH, including National Center for Advancing 
Translational Sciences and the National Toxicology Program at the 
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, and the Food 
and Drug Administration, has the objective of developing better 
toxicity assessment methods to quickly and efficiently test whether 
certain chemical compounds have the potential to disrupt processes 
in the human body that may lead to negative health effects. Using 
a high-throughput robotic screening system, the program is screen-
ing 10,000 environmental chemicals (called the Tox21 10K library) 
for their potential to disrupt biological pathways that may result in 
toxicity.
Animal Welfare Requirements
Researchers who conduct studies funded by federal agencies 
must comply with the Animal Welfare Act (AWA), and some are 
also subject to restrictions imposed by the Public Health Service 
(PHS). Recipients of grants from the Department of Education, the 
Department of Agriculture, or the EPA are subject only to the AWA. 
Those funded by the Department of Energy or by the PHS (which 
includes all research agencies within the Department of Health and 
Human Services, including the NIH) must also comply with PHS 
policies. Restrictions on animal use also appear in the GLP regula-
tions adopted by the FDA and the EPA (Reagan, 1986).
Animal Welfare Act  The AWA was initially adopted in 1966 
and has been subsequently amended several times (1970, 1976, 
1985, 1990, 2002, 2007, and 2008). It is administered by the 
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS), a part of the 
USDA. The AWA, which protects only warm-blooded animals and 
excludes birds, rats, and mice bred for research, requires all cov-
ered research facilities to register with APHIS and agree to comply 
with applicable AWA standards for humane treatment of animals. 
Each facility must file an annual report signed by a responsible offi-
cial that shows that “professionally acceptable standards governing 
the care, treatment, and use of animals” were followed for the year 
in question (Animal Welfare Act, 1988).
Pursuant to the AWA, APHIS has established specific require-
ments for the humane handling, care, and transportation of dogs and 
cats, guinea pigs and hamsters, rabbits, nonhuman primates, marine 
mammals, and other warm-blooded animals. The regulations gov-
erning facilities address living space, heating, lighting, ventilation, 
and drainage. The health and husbandry provisions address feeding, 
watering, sanitation, veterinary care, grouping of animals, and the 
number and qualifications of caretakers (APHIS, 2011).
The AWA requires each research facility to establish an 
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC), composed 
of three or more members, one of whom must be a veterinarian and 
one of whom must represent community interests and who may not 
be affiliated with the institution. In 1989, the APHIS expanded the 
responsibilities of the IACUC and increased the minimum size to 
five members, and must include a veterinarian, an animal research 
scientist, a nonscientist, and an individual not affiliated with the 
institution. At least one member of the IACUC must now review 
and approve the animal care and use components of all proposed 
research activities. Prerequisites to approval include the avoidance 
or minimization of discomfort, distress, and pain; the use of pain-
relieving drugs where appropriate; the consideration of pain-free 
alternatives; and euthanization when an animal would otherwise 
experience severe or chronic pain or distress that cannot be relieved.
The IACUC is also responsible for conducting semiannual 
inspections of the facility itself and of the program for humane care 
and use of animals. Committee reports are filed with the APHIS and 
with any federal agency funding the research.
Public Health Service Policy  The PHS Policy on Humane 
Care and Use of Laboratory Animals applies to research funded 
by the NIH and other federal agencies that uses any vertebrate 
animals, and thus has a broader reach than the AWA. The PHS 
policy requires each facility to submit an annual report, called an 
“Assurance,” which is evaluated by the NIH Office of Laboratory 
Animal Welfare (OLAW) to determine the sufficiency of animal 
care.
The PHS policy imposes two primary obligations on research-
ers as a condition for receiving federal funding: each institution 
must adopt an Institutional Program for Animal Care and Use, and it 
must establish an IACUC. The IACUC must review all applications 
for research funding and review the institution’s programs to ensure 
compliance with NIH standards. The Health Research Extension 
Act of 1985 requires that PHS-funded institutions provide training 
on methods to reduce animal suffering similar to that mandated by 
the AWA for its personnel. It also requires that researchers’ grant 
applications justify any proposed use of animals (NRC, 1988).
Research facilities subject to either the AWA or PHS may wish 
to consult a National Academy of Sciences’ report that details sug-
gestions for developing institutional compliance programs (NRC, 
1991). Scientists working with no federal funding who expect their 
research to be submitted to the FDA or the EPA are not subject to 
the AWA or PHS policies, but they must comply with the animal 
protection provisions of those agencies’ GLP regulations. These 
regulations prescribe adequate living conditions, detail require-
ments for veterinary treatment, and impose specific record-keeping 
requirements (EPA, 2011b, 2011c; FDA, 2011a).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The editor and author recognize the contributions of previous 
authors of the chapter: Rob S. McCutcheon (1st and 2nd editions), 
and Richard A. Merrill (3rd to 6th editions).
REFERENCES
Cases
American Federation of Labor v OSHA, 965 F2d 962 (11th Cir 1992).
American Textile Manufacturers Institute v Donovan, 452 US 490 (1982).
Baltimore Gas & Elec v NRDC, 462 US 87 (1983).

1586
Applications of Toxicology
Unit VII
Chemical Manufacturers Association v EPA, 899 F2d 344 (5th Cir 1990).
Chlorine Chemistry Council v EPA, 206 F3d 1286 (DC Cir 2000).
Corrosion Proof Fittings v Environmental Protection Agency, 947 F2d 1201 
(5th Cir 1991).
Environmental Defense Fund, Inc, v Environmental Protection Agency, 548 
F2d 998 (DC Cir 1976).
Industrial Union Department, AFL-CIO, v American Petroleum Institute, 
448 US 607 (1980).
Les v Reilly, 968 F2d 985 (9th Cir 1992).
Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., v United States Environmental 
Protection Agency, 595 F Supp 1255 (SD NY 1984).
Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., v United States Environmental 
Protection Agency, 824 F2d 1146 (DC Cir 1987).
Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., v United States Environmental 
Protection Agency, 529 F3d 1077 (DC Cir 2008).
Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., v United States Environmental 
Protection Agency, 658 F3d 200 (2nd Cir 2011).
Northwest Coalition for Alternatives to Pesticides v EPA, 544 F3d 1043 
(9th Cir 2008).
Salt Institute v Leavitt, 440 F3d 156 (4th Cir 2006).
Whitman v American Trucking Associations, Inc, 531 US 457 (2001).
Secondary Sources
Albert RE. Carcinogen risk assessment in the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency. Crit Rev Toxicol. 1994;24:75–85.
Brickman R, Jasanoff S, Ilgen T. Controlling Chemicals: The Politics 
of Regulation in Europe and the United States. Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press; 1985.
Collins FS, Gray GM, Bucher JM. Transforming environmental health pro-
tection. Science. 2008;319:906–907.
Cooper R. The role of regulatory agencies in risk-benefit decision-making. 
Food Drug Cosmet L J. 1978;33:755–757.
GAO. EPA Implementation of Selected Aspects of the Toxic Substances 
Control Act. Washington, DC: U.S. General Accounting Office; 1982.
Heineck D. New clean water act toxics control initiatives. Nat Resour 
Environ. 1989;4(1):10–12, 49–50.
Hutt PB, Merrill R, Grossman LA. Food and Drug Law: Cases and 
Materials. 3rd ed. Mineola, NY: Foundation Press; 2007.
Marty MS, Carney EW, Rowlands JC. Endocrine disruption: historical per-
spectives and its impact on the future of toxicology testing. Toxicol Sci. 
2011;120(S1):S93–S108.
Merrill R. CPSC regulation of cancer risks in consumer products: 1972–81. 
Va L Rev. 1981;67:1261.
National Research Council. Risk Assessment in the Federal Government: 
Managing the Process. Washington, DC: National Academy; 1983.
National Research Council. Use of Laboratory Animals in Biomedical and 
Behavioral Research. Washington, DC: National Academy; 1988.
National Research Council. A Guide for Developing Institutional Programs. 
Washington, DC: National Academy; 1991.
National Research Council. Science and Judgment in Risk Assessment. 
Washington, DC: National Academy; 1994.
National Research Council. Toxicity Testing in the 21st Century: A Vision 
and a Strategy. Washington, DC: National Academy; 2007.
National Research Council. Science and Decisions. Washington, DC: 
National Academy; 2009.
National Research Council. Review of the Environmental Protection 
Agency’s Draft IRIS Assessment of Formaldehyde. Washington, DC: 
National Academy; 2011.
Page NP. Testing for health and environmental effects: The OECD guide-
lines. Toxic Substances J. 1982;4:135.
Reagan K. Federal regulation of testing with laboratory animals: future 
directions. Pace Environ L Rev. 1986;3:165.
Wagner W. The science charade in toxic risk regulation. Columbia L Rev. 
1995;95:1613–1723.
Weinberg A. Science and its limits: the regulator’s dilemma. Issues Sci 
Tech. 1985;Fall:59–72.
Wiltse J, Dellarco VL.U.S. Environmental Protection Agency guidelines for 
carcinogen risk assessment: past and future. Mutat Res. 1996;365:3–15.
Statutory and Regulatory Materials
Animal Welfare Act, 7 USC § 2131 et seq (1988).
APHIS, Animal Welfare, 9 CFR Parts 2 & 3 (2011).
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, 
42 USC § 9601 et seq (1980).
Consumer Product Safety Act, 15 USC § 2051 et seq (1972).
Consumer Product Safety Improvement Act, 15 USC § 2051 et seq (2008).
EPA. Guidelines for carcinogen risk assessment. Fed Reg. 1986;51(185): 
33992–34003.
EPA. Proposed guidelines for carcinogenic risk assessment. Fed Reg. 
1996;61(79):17960–18011.
EPA. Notice of availability of the document entitled “Guidelines for car-
cinogen risk assessment”. Fed Reg. 2005;70(66):17766–17817.
EPA. Harmonized test guidelines. Available at: http://www.epa.gov/ocspp/
pubs/frs/home/guidelin.htm (2011a).
EPA. Good Laboratory Practice Standards (FIFRA), 40 CFR Part 160 (2011b).
EPA. Good Laboratory Practice Standards (TSCA), 40 CFR Part 792 (2011c).
EPA. Framework for Human Health Risk Assessment to Inform Decision 
Making. EPA-100/R-14/001 April 2014.
EPA. Final test guidelines; endocrine disruptor screening program test 
guidelines (Series 890); Three Tier 2 non-mammalian tests; notice of 
availability. Fed Reg. 2015a;80(164):5158–51560.
EPA. Use of high throughput assays and computational tools; endocrine 
disruptor screening program; notice of availability and opportunity for 
comment. Fed Reg. 2015b;80(118):35350–35355.
Executive Order 13563. Improving regulation and regulatory review, 76. 
Fed Reg. 2011;3821–3823.
FDA Food Safety Modernization Act (FSMA), Pub L No 111–353 (2011).
FDA Modernization Act, Pub L No. 105–115 (1997).
FDA. Toxicological Principles for the Safety Assessment of Food 
Ingredients: Redbook 2000. Washington, DC: U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration; 2000 (periodically updated).
FDA. Good Laboratory Practice for Nonclinical Laboratory Studies, 21 
CFR. Part 58 (2011a).
FDA. Investigational New Drug Application, 21 CFR Part 312 (2011b).
FDA. Food Additive Petitions, 21 CFR Part 171 (2011c).
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 21 USC § 321 et seq (1938).
Federal Hazardous Substances Act, 15 USC § 1261 et seq (1976).
Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act, 7 USC § 135 et seq 
(1972).
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC § 307.
Food Additive Amendments to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 
21 USC § 348 et seq (1958).
Food Quality Protection Act, Pub L No. 104–170 (1996).
ICCVAM Authorization Act of 2000, Pub L No. 106–545, 106th Congress.
Information Quality Act, Pub L No. 106–554, 31 USC § 3516 note (2001).
NIEHS. Validation and Regulatory Acceptance of Toxicological Test 
Methods: A Report of the ad hoc Interagency Coordinating Committee 
on the Validation of Alternative Methods. NIH Publication No. 97–3981. 
Research Triangle Park, NC: NIEHS; 1997.
Occupational Safety and Health Act, 29 USC § 651 et seq (1970).
OMB. Memorandum for the Heads of Departments and Agencies, M-05-
03 (2004). Available at: http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/memoranda/
fy2005/m05-03.pdf.
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 USCA § 6901 et seq (1976).
Safe Drinking Water Act, 42 USC §§ 300f to 300j-9 (1974, amended 1996).
Toxic Substances Control Act (2016), 15 USC § 2601 et seq.
White House. Memorandum for the Heads of Executive Departments and 
Agencies. Subject: Scientific Integrity (March 9, 2009).