# 4. Risk Assessment
# Casarett & Doull's Toxicology, 9th Edition
# Pages: 146-175
# Unit: Unit I General Principles of Toxicology

4
chapter
Risk Assessment
Elaine M. Faustman
INTRODUCTION AND HISTORICAL 
CONTEXT
In the 1970s U.S. Congress established a basic plan for environ-
mental laws that authorized regulatory actions to protect public 
health and the environment. These science-based actions provided 
the foundation for environmental and human health risk assess-
ment. Recent updates and revisions of these laws including the 
2016 Frank R. Lautenberg Chemical Safety from the 21st Century 
Act, which modified the 1976 Toxic Substance Control Act, have 
reinforced the need for toxicology evaluation. Toxicological 
research and toxicity testing constitute the scientific core of risk 
assessment, which is used for evaluating potential adverse health 
impacts from chemical exposures. Considerations for risk evalu-
ation were not new, since for decades the American Conference 
of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) set threshold 
limit values for occupational exposures and the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) established acceptable daily intakes 
(ADIs) for pesticide residues and food additives. In 1958, the U.S. 
Congress instructed the FDA in the Delaney Clause to prohibit 
the addition of all substances found to cause cancer in animals 
or humans to the food supply. Pragmatically, this policy allowed 
food sources that had nondetectable levels of these additives to 
be declared “safe.” As advances in analytical chemistry revealed 
that “nondetects” were not equivalent to “not present,” regulatory 
agencies were forced to develop “tolerance levels” and “accept-
able risk levels.” Risk assessment methodologies blossomed in the 
1970s with the rising need to address these issues and to provide a 
common framework for considering human and ecological health 
effects (Albert, 1994).
Risk assessment was defined as a specific activity in 1983 in 
the National Research Council (NRC) publication Risk Assessment 
in the Federal Government: Managing the Process (Red Book). 
This book detailed steps for hazard identification, dose–response 
assessment, exposure analysis, and characterization of risks (NRC, 
1983). These four basic framework steps now form the foundation 
framework for risk assessment and risk management approaches 
for many contexts such as children’s health and ecological health, 
and they provide a consistent context for risk assessment frame-
works across agencies nationally and worldwide. Risk assessment 
frameworks have been used by the Health and Safety Executive 
Risk Assessment Policy Unit of the United Kingdom (Great Britain 
and Health and Safety Executive, 1999) and by the World Health 
Organization (WHO) (NRC, 2009; WHO, 2010) and build from 
these common components. Fig. 4-1 illustrates a framework with 
bidirectional arrows demonstrating an ideal situation where mecha-
nistic research feeds directly into risk assessments and critical data 
uncertainty drives research. The common elements of the basic risk 
assessment framework are shown in red highlight. Initially, attention 
in risk assessment was focused on cancer risks; in subsequent years, 
noncancer endpoints were examined with similar methods and risk 
assessments were performed across life stages and for ecosystems. 
Continuing advances in toxicology, epidemiology, exposure assess-
ment, biologically based modeling of adverse responses, and mod-
eling of variability and uncertainty, as well as the rapidly growing 
areas of “-omics” including genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, 
metablomics, etc., have contributed to refinements in risk assess-
ment. Interest continues in biomarkers of exposure, effect, and 
susceptibility to link exposure to disease prediction (NRC, 1989a, 
1989b, 1992, 2017). Risk assessment links with the public policy 
Introduction and Historical 
Context
Definitions
Decision Making
Hazard Identification
Assessing Toxicity of Chemicals—
Introduction
Assessing Toxicity of Chemicals: 
Approaches
Structure–Activity Relationships
In Vitro and Short-Term Tests
Animal Bioassays
Use of Epidemiologic Data in Risk 
Assessment
Integrating Qualitative Aspects of 
Risk Assessment
Mode of Action and Adverse Outcome 
Pathways
Dose–Response Assessment
Integrating Quantitative Aspects of 
Risk Assessment
Threshold Approaches
Nonthreshold Approaches
Statistical or Probability Distribution 
Models
Models Derived from Mechanistic  
Assumptions
Toxicological Enhancements of the 
Models
Exposure Assessment
Risk Characterization
Variation in Susceptibility
Information Resources
Risk Perception and 
Comparative Analyses of Risk
Emerging Concepts
Public Health Risk Management
Summary
Acknowledgments
References

128
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
objectives from risk management often require extrapolations that 
go far beyond the observation of actual effects. Extrapolating data 
to address risks continues to generate controversy.
The National Academy of Sciences (NAS) 1994 report entitled 
Science and Judgment in Risk Assessment captured in its title the 
combination of qualitative and quantitative approaches essential for 
effective assessment of risks (NRC, 1994). The report discussed 
in detail the challenges and provided approaches for incorporat-
ing new scientific findings into the risk assessment process. It also 
highlighted ways to deal with uncertainty when insufficient scien-
tific information was available. To address these challenges, the 
Presidential/Congressional Commission on Risk Assessment and 
Risk Management (Risk Commission, 1997) formulated a com-
prehensive framework that (1) placed each environmental problem 
or issue into public health and/or ecological context and (2) proac-
tively called for engaging relevant stakeholders, often affected or 
potentially affected community groups, from the very beginning 
of the six-stage process shown in Fig. 4-2. This report emphasized 
that particular exposures and potential health effects must be evalu-
ated across sources and exposure pathways and in light of multiple 
endpoints, not just one chemical, in one environmental medium 
(air, water, soil, food, products), for one health effect at a time. 
The single-chemical, single-exposure approach had been the gen-
eral approach up to this time. The importance of defining the risk 
problem based on this initial input is critical to risk assessment. 
Problem formulation and scoping has now been defined as Phase 1 
for risk-based decision making and has been outlined by the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) (U.S. EPA, 1992a) and 
reinforced by Science and Decisions, the Silver Book (NRC, 2009).
DEFINITIONS
Risk assessment is the systematic scientific evaluation of potential 
adverse health effects resulting from human exposures to hazard-
ous agents or situations (NRC, 1983, 1994; Omenn, 2000). Risk 
is defined as the probability of an adverse outcome based on the 
exposure and potency of the hazardous agent(s). Although histori-
cally there have been differences in how the term hazard has been 
used, international risk harmonization activities have allowed for 
Research
Risk assessment
Risk management
Does the agent cause
adverse health effects?
• Structure–Activity analysis
• In vitro tests
• Animal bioassays
• Epidemiology
Hazard identiﬁcation
Development of
regulatory options.
• Control
• Substitute
• Inform
What is the relationship
between dose and response?
Age
Gene–Environment
Dose–Response assessment
What types, levels, and
duration of exposures are
experienced or anticipated?
Exposure assessment
Risk characterization 
• How robust is the
 evidence?
• How certain is the
 evaluation?
• Are susceptible
 populations
 characterized?
• Is there a relevant
 mode of action?
• What is the nature
 and estimated
 incidence of adverse
 effects in a given
 population?
Research
needs
Research
Laboratory and ﬁeld
measurements of
exposures.
Evaluation of
exposed populations
and observation of
adverse effects.
Evaluation of public
health, economic,
social, political
context for risk
management
options.
New mechanistic
understandings of
toxicity.
New genomic
information.
Policy decisions
and actions.
• Susceptibility
Figure 4-1.  Risk assessment/risk management framework. This framework shows, under the red highlight, the four key steps of risk assessment: hazard identifi-
cation, dose–response assessment, exposure assessment, and risk characterization. It shows an interactive, two-way process where research needs from the risk 
assessment process drive new research, and new research findings modify risk assessment outcomes. At the start of the risk assessment process, a risk problem 
is formulated and provides context for the assessment (Ecology RA). (Adapted from Calkins et al. [1980], NRC [1993, 1994a], Risk Commission [1997], and 
Gargas et al. [1999]; reprinted with permission from the National Academies Press, National Academy of Sciences.)
Engage
stakeholders
Evaluation
Actions
Decisions
Options
Risks
Problem/
context
Figure 4-2.  Risk management framework for environmental health from the 
U.S. Commission on Risk Assessment and Risk Management. The framework 
comprises six stages: (1) formulating the problem in a broad public health 
context; (2) analyzing the risks; (3) defining the options; (4) making risk 
reduction decisions; (5) implementing those actions; and (6) evaluating the 
effectiveness of the actions taken. Interactions with stakeholders are critical 
across all the stages and thus have been put at the center of the framework 
(Charnley and Omenn, 1997; Risk Commission, 1997).

Risk Assessment
Chapter 4
129
current consensus on hazard as reference to intrinsic toxic proper-
ties, whereas exposure becomes an essential consideration along 
with hazard for risk. Risk assessment requires an integration of 
both qualitative and quantitative scientific information. For exam-
ple, qualitative information about the overall evidence and nature 
of the endpoints and hazards is integrated with quantitative assess-
ment of the exposures, host susceptibility factors, and the magni-
tude of the hazard. A description of the uncertainties and variability 
in the estimates is a significant part of risk characterization and 
an essential component of risk assessment. Analogous approaches 
are applied to ecological risks, as demonstrated by EPA’s ecologi-
cal risk assessment guidelines (U.S. EPA, 1992a, 2004). Example 
objectives of risk assessment are outlined in Table 4-1.
The phrase “characterization of risk” reflects the combination 
of qualitative and quantitative analysis. The term “hazard char-
acterization” versus “hazard identification” has also been seen in 
both U.S. EPA (2012b) and WHO (1999) documents. This addi-
tion recognizes the difficulties in evaluating only hazard informa-
tion without dose–response information. Unfortunately, many users 
equate risk assessment with quantitative risk assessment, generating 
a number for an overly precise risk estimate, while ignoring crucial 
information about the uncertainties of the risk assessment, mode of 
action (MOA), and type of effect across species or context.
Risk management refers to the process by which policy actions 
are chosen to control hazards identified in the risk assessment stage 
of the framework (Fig. 4-2). Risk managers consider scientific 
evidence and risk estimates—along with statutory, engineering, 
economic, social, and political factors—in evaluating alternative 
options and choosing among those options (Risk Commission, 
1997).
Risk communication is the challenging process of making 
risk assessment and risk management information comprehen-
sible to the public, community groups, lawyers, local elected offi-
cials, judges, business people, labor, environmentalists, etc. (NRC, 
1989a, 1996, 2004; Morgan, 1993; Sandman, 1993; Fischhoff et al., 
1996). Such communication requires an understanding of the level 
of risk response needed, how and which individuals and organi-
zations should be informed, and what the audience hears versus 
what was intended as the risk communication message. Involving 
stakeholders in the initial problem formulation as well as in the 
translation of the bottom line has become an essential part of risk 
management. Part of this analytical–deliberative process is the cru-
cial, too-often neglected or delayed need for considering the fears, 
perceptions, priorities, and proposed remedies of these stakehold-
ers (Risk Commission, 1997; Drew et al., 2003, 2006; Judd et al., 
2005; Kramer et al., 2006; Cullen et al., 2008). Underestimating 
potential public and media attitudes toward local polluters, other 
responsible parties, and relevant government agencies may lead 
to what has been labeled “the outrage factor” (Sandman, 1993), 
greatly influencing the communication process and the choices for 
risk management. Sometimes the decision makers and stakeholders 
simply want to know the “bottom line”: whether a substance or a 
situation is “safe” or not. Others will be keenly interested in know-
ing how and why the risk estimates are uncertain and may be well 
prepared to challenge underlying assumptions about context and 
methodology. Stakeholders can also be part of a risk management 
solution (Judd et al., 2005; Drew et al., 2006). Perception of risk is 
further discussed at the end of this chapter.
DECISION MAKING
Risk management decisions are reached under diverse statutes in 
the United States. Table 4-2 lists examples of major environmental 
statutes and the year of initial enactment. Some statutes specify 
reliance on risk alone, whereas others require a balancing of risks 
and benefits of the product or activity. Risk assessments provide a 
valuable framework for priority setting within regulatory and health 
agencies, in the chemical development process within companies, 
and in resource allocation by environmental organizations. Similar 
approaches for risk assessment have been developed in many 
other countries and through such international organizations as the 
International Programme on Chemical Safety (IPCS) within the 
WHO. Within the IPCS, there are significant efforts toward global 
harmonization of risk assessment methodology (WHO, 2000, 
2006; WHO, 2004). The WHO Human Health Risk Assessment 
Toolkit: Chemical Hazards is an example (WHO, 2010). Their 
goals include use of a common risk assessment framework with 
acceptance of different risk assessment approaches through this 
common understanding and agreement on basic principles of test-
ing and evaluation. Table 4-2 lists the recent Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration (OSHA) Hazard Communication 
Standard 2015, which now uses the Globally Harmonized System 
of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals (GHS). This standard 
represents an arduous yet highly meritorious effort to harmonize 
global labeling of chemicals. This GHS labeling has provided a 
common language for countries to use in trade and manufacturing 
that facilitates safety in the workplace and for chemicals in transit. 
An emphasis on hazard and not risk has been one of the more con-
troversial issues across nations.
A major challenge for risk assessment, risk communication, 
and risk management is to work across disciplines to demonstrate 
the biological plausibility and clinical significance of the conclu-
sions from epidemiologic studies, animal bioassays, short-term in 
vitro and in vivo tests, and structure–activity studies of chemicals 
thought to have potential adverse effects. Biomarkers of expo-
sure, effect, or individual susceptibility can link the presence of a 
chemical in various environmental compartments to specific sites of 
potential action in target organs and to host health impacts and dis-
ease (NRC, 1989a, 1989b, 1989c, 1992, 2017; Adami et al., 2011). 
Mechanistic investigations of the actions of specific chemicals 
can help us penetrate the “black box” approach of simply count-
ing tumors, for example, in exposed animals in routine bioassays. 
Greater appreciation of the mechanisms and extent of individual 
variation in susceptibility to adverse health impacts among humans 
can improve protection of susceptible populations and better relate 
Table 4-1  
Example Objectives of Risk Assessment
	1.	 Protect human and ecological health
Toxic substances
	2.	 Prioritize testing needs
	3.	 Balance risks and benefits
Drugs
Pesticides
	4.	 Set target levels of risk
Food contaminants
Water pollutants
	5.	 Set priorities for program activities
Regulatory agencies
Manufacturers
Environmental/consumer organizations
	6.	 Inform green chemistry, life cycle analysis, and clinical 
alternatives
	7.	 Estimate residual risks and extent of risk reduction after 
steps are taken to reduce risks

130
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
findings in animals to the characterization of risk for humans. 
Identifying individual behavioral and social risk factors can be 
critically important both to the characterization of risk and to the 
reduction of risk.
HAZARD IDENTIFICATION
Assessing Toxicity of Chemicals—
Introduction
Throughout this book, a common toxicology paradigm (Fig. 4-3) 
forms the basis for our toxicity assessments. For risk assessment 
this paradigm is a critical underpinning where delivery represents 
exposure and absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion 
(ADME) determining the amount, rate, form, distribution, and fate 
of the chemical. The key initial impacts of the chemical interacting 
with the target link the early cellular dysfunction with early bio-
markers effect. Dysrepair is identified as endpoint impacts across 
levels of biological investigation with observations at the molecu-
lar, cellular, and tissue levels.
In order to assess the toxicity of chemicals, information from 
four example types of studies is used: structure–activity relation-
ships (SAR), in vitro or short-term studies, in vivo animal bioas-
says, and human epidemiologic studies. In many cases, toxicity 
information for chemicals is limited. For example, in 1998, the 
EPA evaluated high production volume (HPV) chemicals (those 
produced in excess of one million pounds per year) to ascertain 
the availability of chemical hazard data. The EPA study found that 
for 43% of these HPV chemicals, there were no publicly available 
studies for any of the basic toxicity endpoints (U.S. EPA, 1998a). In 
response, the EPA established a voluntary program called the HPV 
Challenge Program (U.S. EPA, 2011b). Industry participants in this 
program committed to filling the data gaps for HPV chemicals. 
Since its inception, there have been over 2200 chemicals sponsored 
for additional testing. International efforts such as the Organization 
for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and screen-
ing information data set (SIDS) program are also addressing data 
needs related to HPV chemicals, highlighted by the publication of 
their Manual for Investigation of HPV Chemicals (OECD, 2013).
Data requirements for specific chemicals can vary greatly by 
compound type, use, and applicable regulatory statutes. Introduced 
in 2003 and approved in 2006, the European Union released a 
regulatory framework for Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation 
and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH) (REACH, 2011). Under 
the REACH framework, since 2007, all stakeholders that sell or 
produce compounds in the European Union submit dossiers that 
include physical, chemical, and toxicological data as well as envi-
ronmental fate and transport information to inform risk assessment 
studies for all chemicals in use in Europe. The REACH data is avail-
able via the European Chemicals Agency registered substances list 
(ECHA, 2017). Chemical safety assessments are submitted prior 
to approval in an approach similar to premanufacturing notices 
(PMNs) in the United States for the EPA (U.S. EPA, 2011c).
Table 4-3 shows requirements and costs for one example class 
of chemicals, pesticides (Stevens, 1997; U.S. EPA, 1998b, 2000b), 
in the United States (40 CFR 158.340). It also illustrates current 
international efforts to align these testing guidelines by listing 
examples of the harmonized 870 test guidelines (U.S. EPA, 2010a; 
Patlewicz et al., 2013). The emphasis in REACH is on non–in vivo 
animal tests. Also, REACH has utilized the international globally 
harmonized labeling laws for hazard identification (GHS). Some 
of the successes from REACH have stimulated new changes in the 
Table 4-2  
Examples of Major Toxic Chemical Laws in the United States by Responsible Agency and Year of Initial Enactment
EPA
Air pollutants
Clean Air Act, 1970
Water pollutants
Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 1948
Drinking water
Safe Drinking Water Act, 1974
Pesticides
Fungicides, Insecticides & Rodenticides Act (FIFRA), 1947; Food Quality 
Protection Act (FQPA), 1996
Ocean dumping
Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act (MPRSA) or Ocean 
Dumping Act, 1972
Toxic chemicals
Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA), 1976; The Frank R. Lautenberg 
Chemical Safety for the 21st Century Act (2016)
Hazardous wastes
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), 1976
Abandoned hazardous wastes
Superfund (CERCLA), 1980
CEQ
Environmental impacts
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), 1969
OSHA
Workplace
Occupational Safety and Health (OSH) Act, 1970; Hazard Communication 
Standard (HCS) and Globally Harmonized Systems of Classification and 
Labelling of Chemicals (GHS, 2015).
FDA
Foods, drugs, and cosmetics
Food and Drugs Act, 1906; Food, Drugs and Cosmetics Act (FDC), 1938; 
FDA Modernization Act, 1997
CPSC
Dangerous consumer products
Consumer Product Safety Act (CPSA), 1972*
DOT
Transport of hazardous materials
Hazardous Materials Transportation Act (HMTA), 1975
Abbreviations: CEQ, Council for Environmental Quality (now Office of Environmental Policy); CPSC, Consumer Product Safety Commission; DOT, 
Department of Transportation; EPA, Environmental Protection Agency; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; OSHA, Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration.
*Note that numerous states have enacted reporting requirements related to toxic chemicals in children’s consumer products. The Washington Children’s 
Safe Product Act of 2008 is one example.

Risk Assessment
Chapter 4
131
United States via amendments for the Toxic Substances Control Act 
(TSCA). Recent release of the Integrated Chemical Environment 
(ICE) reference database provides a welcome integrated access to in 
vivo and in vitro data to support Tox21 activities (Bell et al., 2017).
Assessing Toxicity of Chemicals: 
Approaches
Structure–Activity Relationships
Given the cost of two to four million dollars and the 3 to 5 years 
required for testing a single chemical in a lifetime rodent carcino-
genicity bioassay, initial decisions on whether to continue develop-
ment of a chemical, to submit a premanufacture notice (PMN), or 
to require additional testing may be based largely on results from 
structure–activity relationships (SARs) and limited short-term 
assays.
A chemical’s structure, solubility, stability, pH sensitivity, 
electrophilicity, volatility, and chemical reactivity can be impor-
tant information for hazard identification. Historically, certain key 
molecular structures have provided regulators with some of the most 
readily available information on the basis of which to assess hazard 
potential. For example, 8 of the first 14 occupational carcinogens 
were regulated together by the OSHA as belonging to the aromatic 
amine chemical class. The EPA Office of Toxic Substances relies on 
SARs to meet deadlines to respond to PMN for new chemical manu-
facture under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA). Structural 
alerts such as N-nitroso or aromatic amine groups, amino azo dye 
structures, or phenanthrene nuclei are clues to prioritize chemicals 
for additional evaluation as potential carcinogens. SAR informa-
tion for specific noncancer health endpoints can be challenging. 
The database of known developmental toxicants limits SARs to a 
few chemical classes, including chemicals with structures related 
to those of valproic acid, retinoic acid, phthalate esters, and glycol 
ethers (NRC, 2000). More recently, -omic technologies have been 
used to supplement SAR relationship databases, as seen with the 
creation of the National Cancer Institute’s (NCI) gene expression 
database (NCI, 2017) and the U.S. EPA Computational Toxicity 
Program Screening Database (ToxCastTM) (U.S. EPA, 2017b).
SARs have been used for assessment of complex mixtures of 
structurally related compounds. Prominent applications have been 
the assessment of risks associated with 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-
p-dioxin (TCDD), related chlorinated and brominated dibenzo-
p-dioxins, dibenzofurans, and planar biphenyls, and chemicals 
generally present as mixtures in the environment. Toxicity equiva-
lence factors (TEFs) are used to evaluate health risks associated 
with closely related chemicals. For the TCDD class, this is based 
on a common mechanism of aryl hydrocarbon (Ah) receptor induc-
tion (U.S. EPA, 1994a). The estimated toxicity of environmental 
mixtures containing these chemicals is calculated as the sum of 
the product of the concentration of each chemical multiplied by its 
TEF value. The WHO has organized efforts to reach international 
consensus on the TEFs used for polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), 
T
O
X
I
C
I
T
Y
1
DELIVERY
Absorption
Toxicology
Paradigm
Distribution
Metabolism
Excretion
Cell
Signaling
Gene
Expression 
Electrically
Excitable Cells 
Cell
Maintenance
Internal
Maintenance
External
Maintenance
Molecular
Cellular
Tissue
Protein
Lipid
DNA
Apoptosis
Proliferation
2
INTERACTION
WITH TARGET
3
CELLULAR
DYSFUNCTION
4
DISREPAIR
Figure 4-3.  Toxicology paradigm. A common paradigm forms the basis for our toxicology assessments and subsequent translation for assessment of health 
risks. For risk assessment this paradigm is a critical underpinning where delivery represents exposure and absorption, distribution, metabolism, and elimination 
(ADME) determining the amount, the rate, the form and distribution of the chemical and its metabolites. The key initial impacts of the chemical interacting 
with the target links the early cellular dysfunction with early biomarkers effect. Disrepair is identified as endpoint which impacts across levels of biological 
investigation and observation at the molecular, cellular, and tissue levels.

132
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
Table 4-3  
Example EPA/FIFRA Requirements for Hazard Evaluation of Pesticides
REVISED 870 
GUIDELINE
TYPE OF  
TOXICITY STUDY
TEST SYSTEM
OBJECTIVE
APPROXIMATE  
COST/STUDY* (US$)
1100
Acute oral
Rats
Define toxic dose by ingestion
2,700
1200
Acute dermal
Rabbits
Define toxic dose by absorption through skin
2,000
1300
Acute inhalation
Rats
Define toxic dose by inhalation
6,800
2400
Ocular
Rabbits
Assess eye irritation/injury
2,000
2500
Skin irritation
Rabbits
Assess skin irritation/injury
130
2600
Sensitization
Guinea pigs
Assess allergic potential
4,000
6100–6855
Neurotoxicity†,‡
Hens/rats
Assess nervous system injury
34,000‡
5100–5915
Mutagenicity§
In vivo/in vitro
Determine genotoxic potential; screen for  
carcinogenicity
6,800
3050–3465
Range-finding§
Rats
Determine effects following repeated doses; set dose level
95,000
Subacute  
(28- to 90-day*)
Mice
95,000
Dogs
For longer studies
136,000
Rabbits
101,000
Rats
Identify target organs; set dose
258,000
Mice
Levels for chronic studies
258,000
4200–4300
Carcinogenicity/
chronic toxicity
Rats
Determine potential to induce tumors; define  
dose–response relationships (lifetime)
1,900,000
Mice
1,087,000
Dogs
Determine long-term toxic effects (1 year)
543,000
3550–3800
Reproduction and 
teratogenicity
Rats
Determine potential to cause fetal abnormalities and 
effects on development, fertility, pregnancy, and devel-
opment of offspring over at least two generations
686,000
Rabbits
7485
Toxicokinetics
Rats, mice
Determine and quantitate the metabolic fate of a  
pesticide
135,000
8600
Developmental 
neurotoxicity
Rats
Determine potential to cause adverse developmental 
outcomes following exposure during gestation and lac-
tation on gross neurological behavioral abnormalities 
and function, motor activity, neuropathology and brain 
weight measurements throughout post-natal develop-
ment and adulthood
700,000
*Indicates per assay cost using Consumer Price Index (CPI) conversion factors to determine 2010 value (oregonstate.edu/cla/polisci/sahr/sahr). Estimates 
were provided using guideline 81 series.
†Required for organophosphate insecticides only.
‡Additional neurotoxicity tests 81-7, 81-8, 82-6, 82-7, and 83-6 have been added to requirements for certain materials and can include tests such as func-
tional observational battery, motor activity, developmental landmarks, and learning and memory assessments (Sette, 1991). Costs listed for this type 
of study are only those for the initial study, not additional testing.
§Range-finding studies are not required, but provide justification for setting dose levels in required studies. EPA-required studies can include reverse muta-
tion assays in Salmonella, forward mutation assays in mammalian cells—for example, Chinese hamster ovary cells and mouse lymphoma L5178Y (the 
locus cells)—and in vivo cytogenetics (Dearfield, 1990).
SOURCES: Adapted from Stevens (1997), and updated with revised EPA 870 guideline information (U.S. EPA, 2010a, 2017). For details on changes in 
the health effects test guidelines reflective of the harmonization of the toxicology guidelines between the Office of Pollution Prevention and Toxics 
(OPPT) and the Office of Pesticide Programs (OPP), within the EPA and with the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) 
guidelines, see EPA (U.S. EPA, 2010a, 2017) (https://www.epa.gov/test-guidelines-pesticides-and-toxic-substances/series-870-health-effects-test-
guidelines).

Risk Assessment
Chapter 4
133
polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs), and polychlorinated 
dibenzofurans (PCDFs) for both humans and wildlife, and has 
updated its values and published the supporting database (Van den 
Berg et al., 1998, 2006; Haws et al., 2006). Under the auspices 
of the WHO, the dioxin-like PCB congeners have been assigned 
TEFs reflecting their toxicity relative to TCDD, which itself has 
been assigned a TEF of 1.0.
Computerized SAR methods have, in general, given disap-
pointing results in the U.S. National Toxicology Program (NTP) 
rodent carcinogenicity prediction challenges (Ashby and Tennant, 
1994; Omenn et al., 1995; Benigni and Zito, 2004). More success-
ful are the efforts of pharmaceutical companies using combinato-
rial chemistry and three-dimensional (3D) molecular modeling 
approaches to design ligands (new drugs) that can sterically fit 
into the “receptors of interest.” However, for environmental pol-
lutants where selective binding to specific receptors is rare, these 
applications of SAR have had limited success within risk assess-
ment. Applications for endocrine disrupting chemicals and evalu-
ation of their binding to hormone receptors have been a recent 
success from ToxCast, with a proposal for using receptor-bind-
ing assays for screening endocrine disruptor potential and as an 
acceptable approach without the additional need for assays such 
as the Hershberger assay (U.S. EPA, 2015). A renewed interest in 
quantitative SAR (QSAR) approaches has also resulted from the 
need to evaluate engineered nanomaterials where the tremendous 
number of unique new products has highlighted the necessity of 
using QSAR approaches to handle the avalanche of novel untested 
materials (Maynard et al., 2006; Liu et al., 2011; Nel et al., 2013).
Efforts within REACH have also emphasized the potential for 
use of SAR as similar chemicals are collectively evaluated using 
a concept of “read-across.” Substances whose physicochemical, 
toxicological, and ecotoxicological properties are similar can be 
grouped as a “category” of substances when they have a common 
functional group, common precursor or breakdown product, or a 
common pattern of potency.
In Vitro and Short-Term Tests
The next level of biological information obtained within the hazard 
identification process includes assessment of the test chemical in in 
vitro or short-term tests, ranging from bacterial mutation assays per-
formed entirely in vitro to more elaborate short-term tests, such as 
skin painting studies in mice or altered rat liver foci assays conducted 
in vivo. For example, EPA mutagenicity guidelines call for assess-
ment of reverse mutations using the Ames Salmonella typhimurium 
assay; forward mutations using mammalian cells, mouse lym-
phoma L5178Y, Chinese hamster ovary, or Chinese hamster lung 
fibroblasts; and in vivo cytogenetics assessment (bone marrow 
metaphase analysis or micronucleus tests) (U.S. EPA,1986, 2005a). 
Chap. 8 discusses uses of these assays for identifying chemical car-
cinogens and Chap. 9 describes in detail various assays of genetic 
and mutagenic endpoints. Other assays evaluate specific health end-
points such as developmental toxicity (Chap. 21) (Faustman, 1988; 
Whittaker and Faustman, 1994; Brown et al., 1995; Lewandowski 
et al., 2000; NRC, 2000; Spielmann et al., 2006), reproductive tox-
icity (Chap. 10) (Gray, 1988; Harris et al., 1992; Shelby et al., 1993; 
Yu et al., 2009), neurotoxicity (Chap. 18) (Atterwill et al., 1992; 
Costa, 2000), and immunotoxicity (Chap.  12) (ICCVAM, 1999, 
2011a). Less information is available on the extrapolation of these 
test results for noncancer risk assessment than for the mutagenic-
ity or carcinogenicity endpoints; however, mechanistic informa-
tion obtained in these systems has been applied to risk assessment 
(Abbott et al., 1992; U.S. EPA, 1994b; Leroux et al., 1996; NRC, 
2000; Smith et al., 2016a, 2016b).
Overall, progress in developing and validating new in vitro 
assays has been episodic with recent encouraging efforts especially 
due to U.S. EPA’s ToxCast program (Kavlock et al., 2012). In the late 
1990s, the Interagency Coordinating Committee on the Validation 
of Alternative Methods (ICCVAM) of the NTP reinvigorated the 
validation process in the United States as a result of Public Law 103-
43 and coordinated cross-agency issues relating to development, 
validation, acceptance, and national/international harmonization of 
toxicological test methods for use in risk assessments (ICCVAM, 
2017). The committee has put forth recommendations for over 40 
alternative safety testing methods using various short-term/in vitro 
assays such as the cell-free corrosivity test, and the mouse local 
lymph node assay for assessing chemical potential to elicit allergic 
reactions (ICCVAM, 1999, 2011a; NIEHS, 1999a, 1999b). In 2006, 
the committee released a document that reviewed in vitro acute 
toxicity methods.This review was led by the National Toxicology 
Program Center for the Evaluation of Alternative Toxicological 
Methods (United States) and Interagency Coordinating Committee 
on the Validation of Alternative Methods (United States) (NIEHS, 
2006). The European Centre on the Validation of Alternative 
Methods (ECVAM) is now known as the European Union Reference 
Laboratory for alternatives to animal testing (EURL-ECVAM, avail-
able at https://eurl-ecvam.jrc.ec.europa.eu/).
EURL-ECVAM has been very active given the visibility of 
animal rights issues in the European Union, and this Center was 
originally formed to “support the development, validation, and 
acceptance of methods that could reduce, refine, or replace [3 Rs] 
the use of laboratory animals.” Early successes of ECVAM are 
described in Hartung et al. (2003). However, a recent report for the 
Center for Alternatives for Animal Testing highlights the slow prog-
ress on full replacement of animal testing, especially for repeated 
dose toxicity testing, carcinogenicity, or reproductive toxicity testing 
(Adler et al., 2011; Hartung et al., 2011). It does highlight numer-
ous successes for evaluating sensitization and toxicokinetics (TK). 
Most recent successes have been driven by the European Union–
conceived free legislation for cosmetic testing. International efforts 
to reduce the number of animals required for chemical safety testing 
have been established between ICCVAM, Korea, Japan, Canada, 
and ECVAM (Table 4-4).
Table 4-4  
Example Assays Used for Evaluation of Cosmetics: 
Multiple OECD Guideline Studies Reviewed and 
Designed for These Endpoints
OECD 
GUIDELINES
TYPES OF 
TOXICITY STUDY
TEST SYSTEM
OBJECTIVE
OECD 439
Irritation
Skin Ethic 
EpiSkin®
Skin
OECD 492
Irritation
MatTek Epi 
Ocular®
Eye
OECD 437
Irritation  
Opacity,  
Permeability
Bovine 
Cornea and 
Opacity 
Permeability 
(BCOP)
Eye
Cornea
OECD 431
Corrosion
Skin Ethic 
EpiSkin®
Skin
OECD 435
Corrosion
Corrositex®
Skin

134
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
The validation and application of short-term assays are par-
ticularly important to risk assessment because such assays can be 
designed to provide information about mechanisms of effects, and, 
moreover, they are fast and inexpensive compared with lifetime bio-
assays (McGregor et al., 1999; Collins et al., 2008; NRC, 2017). 
Validation considerations for in vitro assays, like other kinds of 
tests, require determination of their sensitivity (e.g., ability to iden-
tify true carcinogens), specificity (e.g., ability to recognize non-
carcinogens as noncarcinogens), and predictive value for the toxic 
endpoint under evaluation. However, the recent NRC publication 
proposes a series of modified validation considerations that can 
further define pathways to regulation acceptance (NRC, 2017). The 
societal costs of relying on such tests, with false positives (noncar-
cinogens classified as carcinogens) and false negatives (true car-
cinogens not detected), are the subject of a value-of-information 
model for testing in risk assessment and risk management (Lave 
and Omenn, 1986; Lave et al., 1988; Omenn and Lampen, 1988).
Efforts to improve our ability to utilize short-term tests for 
carcinogenicity prediction include increased attention to improv-
ing the mechanistic basis of short-term testing. Examples of this 
approach include the development and application of several knock-
out transgenic mouse models as shorter-term in vivo assays to iden-
tify carcinogens (Nebert and Duffy, 1997; Tennant et al., 1999). 
Specific assays for evaluating mechanisms such as the function of 
the estrogen receptor are an example where in vitro test methods 
are used to predict endocrine disruptor actions (ICCVAM, 2011b, 
2012). The primary use of short-term tests in the United States con-
tinues to be for mechanistic evaluations with the hope of inform-
ing chemical-specific information or overall MOA. In that context, 
results from short-term assays have impacted risk assessments. For 
example, evidence of nonmutagenicity in both in vitro and in vivo 
short-term assays have played an essential role, allowing regulators 
to consider nonlinear cancer risk assessment paradigms for non-
genotoxic carcinogens (U.S. EPA, 1999). Mechanistic information 
from short-term in vitro assays can also be used to extend the range 
of biological observations available for dose–response assessment. 
In addition, for developmental toxicity assessment, assay methods 
that acknowledge the highly conserved nature of developmen-
tal pathways across species have accelerated the use of a broader 
range of model organisms and assay approaches for noncancer 
risk assessments (NRC, 2000). Toxicity Testing in the 21st Century 
and Toxicity Pathway-Based Risk Assessment emphasized such 
approaches for using model organisms and tiered toxicity strategies 
for risk assessment (NRC, 2007a, 2010, 2017).
Animal Bioassays
Animal bioassays have been a key component of the hazard identi-
fication process. See example guidelines for organ/ system-specific 
endpoints (U.S. EPA, 1991, 1988, 1996a, 1998c). A basic premise 
of risk assessment is that chemicals that cause tumors in animals 
can cause tumors in humans. All human carcinogens that have been 
adequately tested in animals produce positive results in at least 
one animal model. Thus, “although this association cannot estab-
lish that all chemicals and mixtures that cause cancer in experi-
mental animals also cause cancer in humans, nevertheless, in the 
absence of adequate data on humans, it is biologically plausible 
and prudent to regard chemicals and mixtures for which there is 
sufficient evidence of carcinogenicity in experimental animals as 
if they presented a carcinogenic risk to humans” (IARC, 2000)—a 
reflection of the “precautionary principle.” The U.S. EPA cancer 
guidelines (U.S. EPA, 2005a) also assume relevance of animal bio-
assays unless lack of relevance for human assessment is specifi-
cally determined. In general, the most appropriate rodent bioassays 
are those that test exposure and biological pathways of most rele-
vance to predicted or known human exposure pathways. Bioassays 
for reproductive and developmental toxicity and other noncancer 
endpoints have a similar rationale. The NTP serves as a resource 
for conducting, designing, and evaluating bioassays for cancer as 
well as noncancer evaluation. The NTP Office of Human Health 
Assessment and Translation serves as a resource to the public and 
regulatory agencies regarding the interpretation and assessment of 
adverse effects of chemicals (NTP, 2011b). The WHO International 
Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) has evaluated over 900 
agents “of which more than 400 have been identified as carcino-
genic, probably carcinogenic or possibly carcinogenic to humans” 
(WHO, 2011b).
Consistent features in the design of standard cancer bioassays 
include testing in two species and both sexes, with 50 animals per 
dose group and near-lifetime exposure. Important choices include 
the strains of rats and mice, the number of doses, and dose lev-
els (typically 90%, 50%, and 10–25% of the maximally tolerated 
dose [MTD]), and details of the required histopathology (number 
of organs to be examined, choice of interim sacrifice pathology, 
etc.). The NTP Web site lists details on study designs and protocols 
(NTP, 2011a, 2017a). Positive evidence of chemical carcinogenic-
ity can include increases in number of tumors at a particular organ 
site, induction of rare tumors, earlier induction (shorter latency) of 
commonly observed tumors, and/or increases in the total number 
of observed tumors. The NTP has added a perinatal exposure phase 
that includes gestation (in utero exposure via placenta) and postnatal 
lactation (via the mother’s milk) to more directly evaluate the sig-
nificance of early-life exposures for cancer incidence (NTP, 2017b).
The cancer bioassay, originally designed for hazard identifica-
tion, is frequently used to evaluate dose–response. The relatively 
limited number of evaluated doses and the use of high doses have 
caused issues for low-dose extrapolations and have limited the use of 
cancer bioassays as a “gold standard” for prediction of human car-
cinogenicity risk (McClain, 1994; Cohen, 1995; Risk Commission, 
1997; Rodericks et al., 1997; Capen et al., 1999; Rice et al., 1999). 
Tumors may be increased only at the highest dose tested, which is 
usually at or near a dose that causes systemic toxicity (Ames and 
Gold, 1990). Second, even without toxicity, the high dose may trig-
ger different events than do low-dose exposures and high doses can 
saturate important metabolism and elimination pathways.
Rats and mice give concordant positive or negative results 
in approximately 70% of bioassays, so it is unlikely that rodent/
human concordance would be higher (Lave et al., 1988). Haseman 
and Lockhart (1993) concluded that most target sites in cancer 
bioassays showed a strong correlation (65%) between males and 
females—especially for forestomach, liver, and thyroid tumors—
so they suggested, for efficiency, that bioassays could rely on a 
combination of male rats and female mice. Even when concordant, 
positive results are observed, there can still be large differences in 
potency, as observed in aflatoxin-induced tumors in rats and mice. 
In this example, an almost 100,000-fold difference in susceptibil-
ity to aflatoxin B1 (AFB1)–induced liver tumors is seen between 
the sensitive rat and trout species and the more resistant mouse 
strains. Genetic differences in the expression of cytochrome P450 
and glutathione S-transferases explain most of these species differ-
ences and suggest that humans may be as sensitive to AFB1-induced 
liver tumors as rats (Eaton and Gallagher, 1994; Eaton et al., 1995, 
2001). These species differences have been supported by research 
results (Groopman and Kensler, 1999; Kensler et al., 2011) and 
have been extended within epidemiologic studies to demonstrate 
the interaction of hepatitis C infection with AFB1 exposure to more 
fully explain elevated human liver cancer risks.

Risk Assessment
Chapter 4
135
Lifetime bioassays have been enhanced with the collection of 
such additional mechanistic data and with the assessment of mul-
tiple noncancer endpoints. It is feasible and desirable to integrate 
such information together with data from mechanistically oriented 
short-term tests and biomarker and genetic studies in epidemiology 
(Perera and Weinstein, 2000). In the example of AFB1-induced liver 
tumors, AFB1–DNA adducts have proved to be an extremely useful 
biomarker. A highly linear relationship was observed between liver 
tumor incidence (in rats, mice, and trout) and AFB1–DNA adduct 
formation over a dose range of five orders of magnitude (Eaton and 
Gallagher, 1994). Such approaches may allow for an extension of 
biologically observable phenomena to doses lower than those lead-
ing to frank tumor development, and help to address the issues of 
extrapolation over multiple orders of magnitude to predict response 
at environmentally relevant doses.
Table 4-5 presents some mechanistic details about rodent 
tumor responses that are no longer thought to be predictive of can-
cer risk for humans. This table lists examples of both qualitative 
and quantitative considerations useful for determining relevance of 
rodent tumor responses for human risk evaluations. An example of 
qualitative considerations is the male rat kidney tumors observed 
following exposure to chemicals that bind to α2u-globulin (e.g., 
unleaded gasoline, 1,4-dichlorobenzene, d-limonene). The α2u-
globulin is a male-rat-specific low-molecular-weight protein not 
found in female rats, humans, or other species, including mice and 
monkeys (McClain, 1994; Neumann and Olin, 1995; Oberdorster, 
1995; Omenn et  al., 1995; Risk Commission, 1997; Rodericks 
et al., 1997).
Table 4-5 also illustrates quantitative considerations important 
for determining human relevance of animal bioassay information. 
For example, doses of compounds so high as to exceed solubility 
in the urinary tract outflow lead to tumors of the urinary bladder in 
male rats following crystal precipitation and local irritation lead-
ing to hyperplasia. Such precipitates are known to occur following 
saccharin or nitrilotriacetic acid bioassay exposures (Cohen et al., 
2000). The decision to exclude saccharin from the NTP list of sus-
pected human carcinogens reaffirms the nonrelevance of such high-
dose responses for likely human exposure considerations (Neumann 
and Olin, 1995; NTP, 2016). A gross overloading of the particle 
clearance mechanism of rat lungs via directly administered parti-
cles, as was seen in titanium dioxide (TDO) exposures, resulted in 
the EPA’s delisting of TDO as a reportable toxicant for the Clean Air 
Act Toxic Release Inventory (Oberdorster, 1995; U.S. EPA, 2016).
Other rodent responses not likely to be predictive for humans 
include localized forestomach tumors after gavage. Ethyl acrylate, 
which produces such tumors, was delisted on the basis of extensive 
mechanistic studies (NTP, 2016). In general, for risk assessment, 
it is desirable to use the same route of administration as the likely 
exposure pathway in humans to avoid such extrapolation issues. 
Despite the example of forestomach tumors, tumors in unusual 
sites—such as the pituitary gland, the eighth cranial nerve, or the 
Zymbal gland—should not be immediately dismissed as irrelevant, 
because organ-to-organ correlation is often lacking (NRC, 1994). 
The EPA cancer guidelines provide a good list of considerations 
for evaluating relevance in the sections on evaluating weight of evi-
dence (U.S. EPA, 2005a).
Table 4-5  
Examples of Mechanistic Considerations for Carcinogens: Explanation for Special Cases of Rodent Bioassay Data 
Lacking Relevance for Human Risk Evaluation
SYSTEM
TARGET ORGAN
MECHANISM FOR SUSCEPTIBLE 
SPECIES
SPECIES DIFFERENCES
ILLUSTRATIVE CHEMICAL 
AGENTS
Urinary tract
Renal tumors in 
male rats
Chemicals bind to α2U globu-
lin, accumulation in target kid-
ney cells, increased necrosis, 
increased regenerative hyper-
plasia, renal tubular calcifica-
tion neoplasia
α2U-Globulin male rat-specific 
low-molecular-weight pro-
tein not found in female rats, 
humans, mice, monkeys
Unleaded gasoline, 1,4-dichlo-
robenzene, d-limonene,  
isophorone, dimethyl-methyl 
phosphonate, perchloro­
ethylene, pentachloroethane, 
hexachloroethane
Bladder
Reactive hyperplasia from 
cytotoxic precipitated  
chemicals
Rodent exposure levels exceed 
solubility, not relevant for 
human exposure
Saccharin, melamine, nitrilo-
triacetic acid, fosetyl-A2
Gastric
Forestomach
Direct oral gavage, local cyto-
toxicity, hyperplasia
Rodent gavage treatment, 
exposure conditions not rel-
evant for human exposure
BHA, propionic acid, ethyl 
acrylate
Endocrine
Thyroid gland 
tumors
Alteration in thyroid homeo-
stasis, decreased thyroid hor-
mone production, sustained 
increase in thyroid stimulat-
ing hormone (TSH), thyroid 
tumors
Lack of thyroid-binding pro-
tein in rodents versus humans, 
decreased t1/2 for T4, increased 
TSH levels in rodents
Ethylene bisdithiocarbamate, 
fungicides, amitrol, goitro-
gens, sulfamethazine
Respiratory
Rat lung
Overwhelming clearance 
mechanisms
High-dose effects seen with 
rodent models
Various particles, titanium 
dioxide
SOURCES: McClain (1994), Neumann and Olin (1995), Oberdorster (1995), Omenn et al. (1995), Risk Commission (1997), Rodericks et al. (1997), Da 
Rocha et al. (2014), and Yamada et al. (2017).

136
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
In an attempt to improve the prediction of cancer risks to 
humans, transgenic mouse models have been developed as possible 
alternative to the standard 2-year cancer bioassay. Transgenic mod-
els use knockout or transgenic mice that incorporate or eliminate 
a gene that has been linked to human cancer. The NTP evaluated 
some of these models and found the p53-deficient (p53+/− het-
erozygous) and Tg.AC (v-Ha-ras transgene) models to be particu-
larly useful in identifying carcinogens and mechanisms of action 
(Bucher, 1998; Chhabra et al., 2003). The use of transgenic models 
has the power to improve the characterization of key cellular and 
MOA of toxicological responses (Mendoza et al., 2002; Gribble 
et al., 2005). However, these studies have been used primarily for 
mechanistic characterization rather than for hazard identification. 
Transgenic models have been shown to reduce cost and time as 
compared with the standard 2-year assay, but they have also been 
shown to be somewhat limited in their sensitivity (Cohen, 2001). 
As stated in the current EPA cancer guidelines, transgenic models 
should not be used to replace the standard 2-year assay, but can be 
used in conjunction with other types of data to assist in the inter-
pretation of additional toxicological and mechanistic evidence (U.S. 
EPA, 2005a). An especially promising emerging area of research 
has been with the Collaborative Cross. A series of genetically 
defined (fully sequenced genomes, 20× coverage) mice referred 
to as the Collaborative Cross have been established to investigate 
genetic and environmental influences on toxicological response in 
mice (Chesler et al., 2008) and these strains have already improved 
our understanding of mammalian genes that predispose to cancer 
(Koturbash et al., 2011). In a similar manner, human cells have also 
provided a method to explore human diversity in response directly 
in vitro (Eduati et al., 2015).
Use of Epidemiologic Data in Risk Assessment
The most convincing lines of evidence for human risk are well-
conducted epidemiologic studies in which a positive association 
between exposure and disease has been observed (NRC, 1983). 
Environmental and occupational epidemiologic studies are fre-
quently opportunistic. Studies begin with known or presumed 
exposures, comparing exposed with nonexposed individuals, or 
with known cases, compared with persons lacking the particular 
diagnosis.
Table 4-6 shows examples of epidemiologic study designs 
and provides clues on types of outcomes and exposures evaluated. 
Although convincing, there are important limitations inherent in 
epidemiologic studies. Robust exposure estimates are often difficult 
to obtain as they are frequently done retrospectively (e.g., through 
retrospective job history records). Also, because many important 
health effects have long latency before clinical manifestations 
appear, reconsideration of relevant populations can be challenging. 
Another challenge for interpretation is that there are often exposures 
to multiple chemicals, especially when a lifetime exposure period is 
considered. There is frequently a trade-off between detailed infor-
mation on relatively few persons and very limited information on 
large numbers of persons. Contributions from lifestyle factors, such 
as smoking and diet, are important to assess as they can have a 
significant impact on cancer development. Human epidemiologic 
studies can provide both very useful information for hazard assess-
ment and quantitative information for data characterization. Good 
illustrations of epidemiologic studies and their interpretation for 
toxicological evaluation are available (Regalado et al., 2006; Gill 
et al., 2011).
Three example types of epidemiologic study designs— 
cross-sectional studies, cohort studies, and case–control studies—are 
detailed in Table 4-6. Cross-sectional studies survey groups of 
humans to identify risk factors (exposure) and disease, but are not 
useful for establishing cause and effect. Cohort studies can evalu-
ate individuals selected on the basis of their exposure to a chemi-
cal under study. Thus, based on exposure status, these individuals 
are monitored for development of disease. These prospective stud-
ies monitor over time individuals who initially are disease-free to 
determine the rates at which they develop disease. In case–control 
Table 4-6  
Example of Three Types of Epidemiologic Study Designs
METHODOLOGICAL 
ATTRIBUTES
TYPE OF STUDY
COHORT
CASE–CONTROL
CROSS-SECTIONAL
Initial classification
Exposure–nonexposure
Disease–nondisease
Either one
Time sequence
Prospective
Retrospective
Present time
Sample composition
Nondiseased individuals
Cases and controls
Survivors
Comparison
Proportion of exposed with dis-
ease
Proportion of cases with exposure
Either one
Rates
Incidence
Fractional (%)
Prevalence
Risk index
Relative risk–attributable risk
Relative odds
Prevalence
Advantages
Lack of bias in exposure; yields 
incidence and risk rates
Inexpensive, small number of 
subjects, rapid results, suitable for 
rare diseases, no attrition
Quick results
Disadvantages
Large number of subjects 
required, long follow-up, attrition, 
change in time of criteria and 
methods, costly, inadequate for 
rare diseases
Incomplete information, biased 
recall, problem in selecting con-
trol and matching, yields only 
relative risk—cannot establish 
causation, population of survivors
Cannot establish causation (ante-
cedent consequence), population 
of survivors, inadequate for rare 
diseases
SOURCES: Gamble and Battigelli (1978, 1991).

Risk Assessment
Chapter 4
137
studies, subjects are selected on the basis of disease status: disease 
cases and matched cases of disease-free individuals. Exposure his-
tories of the two groups are compared to determine key consistent 
features in their exposure histories. All case–control studies are ret-
rospective studies.
In risk assessment, epidemiologic findings can be judged by 
the following criteria: strength of association, consistency of obser-
vations (reproducibility in time and space), specificity (uniqueness 
in quality or quantity of response), appropriateness of temporal 
relationship (did the exposure precede responses?), dose–response, 
biological plausibility and coherence, verification, and analogy 
(biological extrapolation) (Hill, 1965; Faustman et al., 1997; WHO, 
1999; Adami et al., 2011). These same criteria have been used for 
evaluating MOAs where integrated considerations of both human 
and animal studies are done.
Epidemiologic study designs should also be evaluated for their 
power of detection, appropriateness of outcomes, verification of 
exposure assessments, completeness of assessing confounding fac-
tors, and general applicability of the outcomes to other populations 
at risk. Power of detection is calculated using study size, variability, 
accepted detection limits for endpoints under study, and a speci-
fied significance level (Healey, 1987; EGRET, 1994; Dean et al., 
1995). Meta-analysis is used with epidemiologic studies to combine 
results from different studies using weighting of results to account 
for sample size across studies. The importance and complexity of 
human studies for risk assessment are shown in evaluations with 
arsenic and dioxin (U.S. EPA, 2010b, 2010d).
Advances from the human genome project have increased 
sophistication of molecular biomarkers and have improved the mech-
anistic bases for epidemiologic hypotheses. This has allowed epide-
miologists to get within the “black box” of statistical associations 
and forward our understanding of biological plausibility and clinical 
relevance. “Molecular epidemiology,” the integration of molecular 
biology into traditional epidemiologic research, is an important 
focus of human studies where improved molecular biomarkers of 
exposure, effect, and susceptibility have allowed investigators to 
more effectively link molecular events in the causal disease path-
way. Epidemiologists can now include the contribution of potential 
genetic factors with environmental risk factors for the determination 
of the etiology, distribution, and prevention of disease. Highlighting 
the potential power of genetic information to epidemiologic studies, 
the Human Genome Epidemiology (HuGE) Network was launched 
in 1998, providing a literature database of published, population-
based epidemiologic studies of human genes (Khoury, 1999).
With the advance of genomics, the range of biomarkers has 
grown dramatically and includes identification of single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs), genomic profiling, transcriptome analysis, 
and proteomic analysis (Simon and Wang, 2006). Implications of 
these improvements for risk assessment are tremendous, as they 
provide an improved biological basis for extrapolation across the 
diversity of human populations and allow for improved cross-
species comparisons with rodent bioassay information because of 
evolutionarily conserved response pathways and ontologies (NRC, 
2000). In addition, genomics allows for “systems-based” under-
standing of disease and response, moving risk assessment away 
from a linear, single-event-based concept and improving the bio-
logical plausibility of epidemiologic associations (Toscano and 
Oehlke, 2005; NRC, 2010). Human databases such as SNP Track 
from the FDA provide current information on genes and proteins 
that contain polymorphisms that can affect human response, espe-
cially for drug response (U.S. FDA, 2017a, 2017b). An extensive 
battery of tools to link phenotypic and functional changes as well 
as drug toxicity and interaction information to genetics is available.
Integrating Qualitative Aspects of 
Risk Assessment
Qualitative assessment of hazard information should include a con-
sideration of the consistency and concordance of findings, includ-
ing a determination of the consistency of the toxicological findings 
across species and target organs, an evaluation of consistency 
across duplicate experimental conditions, and a determination of 
the adequacy of the experiments to consistently detect the adverse 
endpoints of interest.
Qualitative assessment of animal or human evidence is done 
by many agencies, including the EPA and IARC. Similar evidence 
classifications have been used for both the animal and human evi-
dence categories by both agencies. These evidence classifications 
have included levels of “sufficient, limited, inadequate, and no evi-
dence” (U.S. EPA, 1999, 1994b, 2005a), or “evidence suggesting 
lack of carcinogenicity” (IARC, 2000). For both agencies, these 
classifications are used for an overall weight-of-evidence approach 
for carcinogenicity classification. Current categories expand on 
these initial categories including “Group 4 probably not carcino-
genic to humans” (IARC, 2017) or “not likely to be carcinogenic to 
humans” (U.S. EPA, 2005a).
Weight of evidence is an integrative step used by the EPA 
to “characterize the extent to which the available data support the 
hypothesis that a chemical causes cancer in humans” (U.S. EPA, 
1999, 2005a). It is the process of “weighing” all of the evidence to 
reach a conclusion about carcinogenicity. The weight of evidence can 
consider both the quality and quantity of data as well as any underly-
ing assumptions. The evidence includes data from all of the hazard 
assessment and characterization studies such as SAR data, in vivo and/
or in vitro studies, and epidemiologic data. Using this type of infor-
mation and weight-of-evidence approach, the EPA includes hazard 
descriptors to define carcinogenic potential and to provide a measure 
of clarity and consistency in the characterization narrative: “carcino-
genic to humans,” “likely to be carcinogenic to humans,” “sugges-
tive evidence of carcinogenic potential,” “inadequate information to 
assess carcinogenic potential,” and “not likely to be carcinogenic to 
humans.” In this section, approaches for evaluating cancer endpoints 
are discussed for carcinogens. Similar weight-of-evidence approaches 
have been proposed for reproductive risk assessment (refer to suf-
ficient and insufficient evidence categories in the EPA’s guidelines 
for reproductive risk [U.S. EPA, 1996a] and considerations by NTP).
The Institute for Evaluating Health Risks defined an “evaluation 
process” by which reproductive and developmental toxicity data can 
be consistently evaluated and integrated to ascertain their relevance 
for human health risk assessment (Moore et al., 1995; Faustman 
et al., 2011). This evaluation process supported the implementation 
of EPA’s guidelines for developmental toxicity risk assessment (U.S. 
EPA, 1991) and for the NTP’s Office of Health Assessment and 
Translation (formerly CERHR) (NTP, 2011b). Application of such 
carefully deliberated approaches for assessing noncancer endpoints 
has helped avoid the tendency to list chemicals as yes or no (positive 
or negative) without human relevancy information. Application of 
systematic review methods for evaluation of chemicals at the NTP 
(Birnbaum et al., 2013; Rooney et al., 2014; NTP, 2017), EPA, and 
WHO is under assessment and modification to facilitate the method-
ological review of the ever-widening body of literature on chemical 
substructures and nonhuman studies (NTP, 2017).
Mode of Action and Adverse Outcome Pathways
In the 2005 EPA cancer guidelines the importance of using “weight 
of evidence” to arrive at insights for possible mode of action (MOA) 
was identified (U.S. EPA, 2005a). MOA information describes key 
events and processes leading to molecular and functional effects

138
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
that would in general explain the overall process of cancer devel-
opment. In many cases these could be plausible hypothesized 
MOAs for specific toxicity endpoints, but the detailed mechanistic 
nuances of the pathway might not yet be fully known. The EPA has 
used such MOA information to suggest nondefault approaches for 
cancer risk assessments and for evaluating toxicity of compounds 
with common MOAs in cumulative risk assessments (U.S. EPA, 
1996b, 1998a).
Within the EPA’s carcinogenic risk assessment guidelines, the 
MOA framework considers evidence from animal studies, relevance 
to humans, and life stage or population susceptibility (U.S. EPA, 
2005a). Chemical-specific adjustment factors for interspecies dif-
ferences and human variability have been proposed and build upon 
guidance developed by the WHO’s International Programme on 
Chemical Safety Harmonization Project (WHO, 2000). Critical to 
the MOA development is the use of “criteria of causality” consid-
erations, which build upon the Hill criteria used in epidemiology 
(Hill, 1965; Faustman et al., 1997; U.S. EPA, 1999; Klaunig et al., 
2003), and considerations of dose–response relationships and tem-
poral associations, as well as the biological plausibility, coherence, 
strength, consistency, and specificity of the postulated MOA.
Building on concepts from MOA analyses, Ankley proposed 
a structured framework for ecological risk assessment entitled 
Adverse Outcome Pathways that links biological events with 
adverse outcomes and disease (Ankley et al., 2010). This has gained 
applicability for human risk assessment as well and the OECD has 
developed a program to facilitate its development and distribution 
using a knowledge base and wiki facilitated IT site (OECD, 2017).
Fig. 4-4 shows how biomarkers and adverse-outcome path-
ways (AOPs) can be linked to describe adverse outcomes and dis-
ease pathogenesis. In this figure the initial exposure to a chemical 
is linked through a series of events including early molecular events 
known as molecular initiating events (MIEs) through responses 
at the cellular, organ, and ultimately to organism and population 
level adverse outcomes. By linking these events the AOP approach 
defines key event relationships that resemble the causal relation-
ships identified using MOA approaches. Perhaps most importantly 
for risk assessors is that these approaches allow for the identifica-
tion of a temporal series of events that can be evaluated in vivo and 
in vitro and across species using related biomarkers of exposure, 
biological effect, and response. It also can incorporate biomarkers 
of susceptibility. Fig. 4-4 shows these linkages and illustrates how 
information from methods such as structure–activity relationship 
assessments can link high- and medium-throughput assays with 
high content assay outcomes across in vitro assessments with bio-
markers of effect seen at the organ, organism, and population levels 
with adverse outcomes and disease. These useful concepts can pro-
vide both a qualitative and quantitative frame for risk assessment.
DOSE–RESPONSE ASSESSMENT
Integrating Quantitative Aspects of 
Risk Assessment
Quantitative considerations in risk assessment include dose–
response assessment, exposure assessment, variation in suscep-
tibility, and characterization of uncertainty. For dose–response 
assessment, varying approaches have been proposed including 
threshold versus nonthreshold endpoints. Traditionally, in the 
United States, threshold approaches have been applied for assess-
ment of noncancer endpoints, and nonthreshold approaches have 
been used for cancer endpoints. As we have learned more about 
Biomarkers
Key Initiating
Events
Exposure
Biological Response
Disease
Assessment Tools/
Methods
Toxicity Pathways
Chemical Properties
Regulatory Endpoints
Adverse Outcome Pathways (AOPs) and Biomarkers Link Responses and Disease Pathogenesis
QSAR:
Quantitative
Structure–Activity
Relationship
Adverse
Outcomes
Endpoints
Toxicant
Chemical
Properties
Macro-Molecular
Interactions
Cellular
Responses
Organ
Responses
Organism
Responses
Population
Responses
Impaired
Reproduction
Impaired
Development
Lethality
Altered Tissue
Development/
Function
Disrupted
Homeostasis
Altered Physiology
Protein Oxidation
DBA Binding
Receptor–Ligand
Interaction
Altered
Signaling
Protein
Production
Gene Activation
Structure
Extinction
Susceptibility
HTS
High
Throughput
Systems
MTS
Medium
Throughput
Systems
Bioassays
In Vitro
and
In Vivo
Figure 4-4.  Adverse outcome pathways (AOPs) and biomarkers link responses and describe disease pathogenesis. Relationships between AOPs and biomarkers 
of exposure, effect, susceptibility, and disease are illustrated across disease response. Methods used to collect information along the disease continuum include 
quantitative SAR (QSAR), high and medium throughput in vitro systems, and bioassays (other in vivo and in vitro assessments).

Risk Assessment
Chapter 4
139
nongenotoxic mechanisms of carcinogenicity, these processes have 
been evaluated using threshold approaches. Each approach and its 
inherent assumptions are discussed below, as are efforts to include 
more detailed mechanistic considerations to harmonize these 
approaches (Bogdanffy et al., 2001).
In general, human exposure data for prediction of human 
response to environmental chemicals are quite limited; thus, animal 
bioassay data have primarily served as the basis for most quantita-
tive risk assessments and have required extrapolation for human 
health risk prediction. The risk assessor, however, is normally inter-
ested in low environmental exposures when considering human risk, 
exposures that are well below the experimentally observable range 
of responses in most animal assays. Thus, methods for extrapolating 
from high dose to low dose as well as extrapolating from animal 
risk to human risk are required and comprise a major emphasis of 
dose–response assessment.
The fundamental basis of the quantitative relationships between 
exposure to a chemical and the incidence of an adverse response 
is the dose–response assessment. Analysis of dose–response rela-
tionships must start with the determination of the critical effects to 
be quantitatively evaluated. It is usual practice to choose the most 
robust data sets with adverse effects occurring at the lowest levels 
of exposure from studies using the most relevant exposure routes. 
The “critical” adverse effect is defined as the significant adverse 
biological effect that occurs at the lowest exposure level (Barnes 
and Dourson, 1988). The EPA has issued toxicity-specific guide-
lines that are useful in identifying such critical effects (for devel-
opmental toxicity [U.S. EPA, 1991], reproductive toxicity [U.S. 
EPA, 1996a], neurotoxicity [U.S. EPA, 1998c], and cancer [U.S. 
EPA, 1994b, , 1999, 2005a]). International Programme on Chemical 
Safety (IPCS) has compiled a document cited as the Principles for 
Modeling Dose–Responses for the Risk Assessment of Chemicals 
(WHO, 2006b). It outlines key concepts and considerations for 
dose–response evaluations within the context of a risk assessment.
Threshold Approaches
Approaches for characterizing threshold dose–response relation-
ships include identification of “no observed adverse effect level” 
(NOAEL) or “lowest observed adverse effect level” (LOAEL). On 
the dose–response curve illustrated in Fig. 4-5, the doses tested 
in the bioassay are given as F, G, H, and I. The statistical signifi-
cance of points G, H, and I is indicated using an asterisk (*). The 
NOAEL (F) is identified as the highest nonstatistically significant 
dose tested; in this example the NOAEL occurs at approximately 
2 mg/kg body weight. Point G is the LOAEL (~2.3 mg/kg body 
weight), as it is the lowest dose tested with a statistically significant 
effect. Lines A to D represent possible extrapolations below the 
point of departure (POD), which is represented on this figure as a 
square (■) and is labeled as point E. The POD is used to specify 
the estimated dose near the lower end of the observed dose range, 
below which extrapolation to lower exposures is necessary (U.S. 
EPA, 2005a). In Fig. 4-5, the POD occurs at 10% effective dose or 
ED10. The type of extrapolation below the POD is depending on the 
type of data available. The importance of choosing an appropriate 
POD and extrapolation type is discussed further in the following 
sections of this chapter. From these modeled approaches, model D 
shows a model where the threshold (T) represents the dose below 
which no additional increase in response is observed.
In general, most animal bioassays are constructed with suf-
ficient numbers of test animals to detect biological responses at the 
10% response range; however, this is also dependent on endpoint 
and the background rate of the endpoint in control animals. The risk 
assessor should always understand the biological significance of 
the responses being evaluated in order to place statistical observa-
tions in context. Significance thus usually refers to both biological 
and statistical criteria (Faustman et al., 1994) and is dependent on 
the number of dose levels tested, the number of animals tested at 
each dose, and background incidence of the adverse response in the 
nonexposed control groups. The NOAEL should not be perceived 
as risk-free, as several reports have shown that the response of 
NOAELs for continuous endpoints averages 5% risk, and NOAELs 
based on quantal endpoints can be associated with risk of greater 
than 10% (Allen et al., 1994a; Faustman et al., 1994).
As described in Chap. 2, approaches for characterizing dose–
response relationships include identification of effect levels such as 
LD50 (dose producing 50% lethality), LC50 (concentration produc-
ing 50% lethality), ED10 (dose producing 10% response), as well as 
NOAELs. NOAELs have traditionally served as the basis for risk 
assessment calculations, such as reference doses (RfDs) or accept-
able daily intake (ADI) values. RfDs or concentrations (RfCs) are 
estimates of daily exposure (oral or inhalation, respectively) to a 
chemical that is assumed to be without adverse health impact in 
humans. The ADIs are used by the WHO for pesticides and food 
additives to define “the daily intake of chemical, which during an 
entire lifetime appears to be without appreciable risk on the basis 
of all known facts at that time” (WHO, 1962; Dourson et al., 1985). 
RfDs (first introduced in Chap. 2) and ADI values typically are cal-
culated from NOAEL values by dividing by uncertainty factor (UF) 
and/or modifying factor (MF) (Dourson and Stara, 1983; Dourson 
and DeRosa, 1991; U.S. EPA, 1991):
RfD
NOAEL
UF
MF
ADI
NOAEL
UF
MF
=
×
=
×
,
.
60
50
40
30
20
% response
10
1
2
3
Dose (mg/kg BW)
T
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
*
*
*
A
4
5
Figure 4-5.  Dose–response curve. This figure is designed to illustrate a typi-
cal dose–response curve with points F to I indicating the biologically deter-
mined responses. Statistical significance of these responses is indicated 
with the symbol “*.” Point E (■) represents a dose near the lower end of the 
observed dose–response range, below which extrapolation to lower doses 
can occur for cancer risk estimates (U.S. EPA, 2005a). Point F is the high-
est nonstatistically significant response point; hence, it is the “no observed 
adverse effect level” (NOAEL) for this example. Point G is the “lowest 
observed adverse response level” (LOAEL). Point T represents a threshold 
for response curve D. Curves A to D show some options for extrapolating 
the dose–response relationship below the range of biologically observed 
data points and POD.

140
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
Tolerable daily intakes (TDIs) can be used to describe intakes 
for chemicals that are not “acceptable” but are “tolerable” as they 
are below levels thought to cause adverse health effects. These are 
calculated in a manner similar to ADI. Historically, dividing by the 
UFs allows for interspecies (animal-to-human) and intraspecies 
(human-to-human) variability with default values of 10 each. An 
additional UF is used to account for experimental inadequacies—
for example, to extrapolate from short-exposure-duration studies to 
a situation more relevant for chronic study or to account for inad-
equate numbers of animals or other experimental limitations. If only 
a LOAEL value is available, then an additional 10-fold factor is 
commonly used to arrive at a value more comparable to a NOAEL. 
For developmental toxicity endpoints, it has been demonstrated 
that the application of the 10-fold factor for LOAEL-to-NOAEL 
conversion is too large (Allen et al., 1994a). Traditionally, a safety 
factor of 100 would be used for RfD calculations to extrapolate 
from a well-conducted animal bioassay (10-fold factor for animal- 
to-human variability) and to account for human variability in 
response (10-fold factor for human-to-human variability).
MFs are values that can be used to adjust the UFs if data on 
mechanisms, pharmacokinetics, or relevance of the animal response 
to human risk are available. For example, if there is kinetic infor-
mation suggesting there is very similar metabolism for a particular 
compound in rats and humans, producing the same active target 
metabolite, then—rather than using a 10-fold UF to divide the 
NOAEL from the animal toxicity study to obtain a human relevant 
RfD—a factor of 3 for that UF might be used. Of particular interest 
is the addition of an extra 10-fold factor through the Food Quality 
Protection Act (FQPA) to ensure protection of infants and children 
(U.S. EPA, 1996b). Under this law an additional UF is added to 
ensure protection of children’s health and it is currently being used 
for determining allowable pesticide chemical residues. This factor 
is designed to take into account potential prenatal and postnatal tox-
icity and to overcome the incompleteness of toxicity and exposure 
data (FQPA, PL 104-170). Illustrative discussions on how such a 
legislatively mandated UF might be applied are available for chlor-
pyrifos (Schardein and Scialli, 1999; U.S. EPA, 2000b, 2016; Zhao 
et al., 2006).
To reduce uncertainty in calculating RfDs and ADIs, there 
has been a transition from the use of traditional 10-fold UFs to the 
use of data-derived and chemical-specific adjustment factors. Such 
efforts have included reviewing the human pharmacologic literature 
from published clinical trials (Silverman et al., 1999) and develop-
ing human variability databases for a large range of exposures and 
clinical conditions (Renwick, 1991, 1999; Johnson et al., 1997). 
Toward this goal, Renwick has separated the intraspecies and inter-
species UFs into two components: toxicokinetics (TK) and toxico-
dynamic (TD) aspects (Renwick, 1991, 1999; Johnson et al., 1997). 
Fig. 4-6 shows these distinctions. A key advantage of this approach 
is that it provides a structure for incorporating scientific information 
on specific aspects of the overall toxicological process into the RfD 
calculations; thus, relevant data can replace a portion of the overall 
“uncertainty” surrounding these extrapolations. Current WHO guid-
ance uses a 4.0- and 2.5-fold factor for the TK and TD interspecies 
components, respectively (WHO, 2005), and interindividual TK and 
TD factors of 3.16 (Renwick and Lazarus, 1998). The NAS publi-
cations (NRC, 2009, 2017) have emphasized the need to consider 
population variability and context in risk assessment. In examples 
described in this NRC report, high background incidence of cancers 
or other adverse health outcomes in the population should be con-
sidered before setting “acceptable” levels of additional risks (NRC, 
2009).
NOAEL values have also been utilized for risk assessment by 
evaluating a “margin of exposure” (MOE), where the ratio of the 
NOAEL determined in animals and expressed as mg/kg per day is 
compared with the level to which a human may be exposed. For 
example, consider the case where human exposures to a specific 
chemical are calculated to be solely via drinking water, and the 
total daily intake of the compound is 0.04 mg/kg per day. If the 
NOAEL for neurotoxicity is 100 mg/kg per day, then the MOE 
would be 2500 for the oral exposure route for neurotoxicity. Such 
a large value is reassuring to public health officials. Low values of 
MOE indicate that the human levels of exposure are close to levels 
for the NOAEL in animals. There is usually no factor included in 
this calculation for differences in human or animal susceptibility 
or animal-to-human extrapolation; thus, MOE values of less than 
100 have been used by regulatory agencies as flags for requiring 
further evaluation.
The NOAEL approach has been criticized on several points, 
including that (1) the NOAEL must, by definition, be one of the 
experimental doses tested and (2) once this is identified, the rest of 
the dose–response curve is ignored. Because of these limitations, 
an alternative to the NOAEL approach, the benchmark dose (BMD) 
method, was proposed (Crump, 1980). In this approach, the dose–
response is modeled and the lower confidence bound for a dose at a 
specified response level (benchmark response [BMR]) is calculated. 
The BMR is usually specified at 1%, 5%, or 10%. Fig. 4-7 shows 
the BMD using a 10% BMR (BMD10) and a 95% lower confidence 
10
Dynamics
Kinetics
Kinetics
10
Dynamics
Species
differences
Human
variability
Figure 4-6.  Toxicokinetic (TK) and toxicodynamic (TD) considerations inherent in interspecies and interindividual extrapolations. TK refers to the processes of 
absorption, distribution, elimination, and metabolism of a toxicant. TD refers to the actions and interactions of the toxicant within the organism and describes 
processes at organ, tissue, cellular, and molecular levels. This figure shows how uncertainty in extrapolation both across and within species can be considered 
as being due to two key factors: a kinetic component and a dynamic component. Challenges remain for extrapolating information on human variation to specific 
populations (NRC, 2009). Refer to the text for detailed explanations.

Risk Assessment
Chapter 4
141
bound on dose (BMDL10). The BMDx (with x representing the per-
cent BMR) is used as an alternative to the NOAEL value for RfD 
calculations. Thus, the RfD would be:
RfD
BMD orBMDL
UF
MF
.
=
×
•
x
x
The EPA has developed software for the application of BMD 
methods and a technical guidance document to provide guidelines 
for application of BMDs for both cancer and noncancer endpoints 
(U.S. EPA, 2000a, 2012a). The final guidance can be found at 
https://www.epa.gov/risk/benchmark-dose-technical-guidance. The 
EPA recently released an updated version (2.7) of its BMD software 
(U.S. EPA, 2017a).
The 2009 WHO guidelines for dose–response modeling for 
risk assessment also discuss BMD approaches (WHO, 2006b). 
Both the EPA and WHO guidelines distinguish NOAEL versus 
BMD-based approaches. Harmonization of approaches available 
for assessments is discussed in the WHO documents.
The BMD approach has been applied to study noncancer end-
points, including developmental (Allen et al., 1994a) and repro-
ductive toxicity (Auton, 1994). The most extensive studies with 
developmental toxicity have shown that BMD05 values were similar 
to a statistically derived NOAEL for a wide range of developmental 
toxicity endpoints and that results from using generalized dose–
response models were similar to biologically based dose–response 
(BBDR) models designed specifically to represent unique features 
of developmental toxicity testing (Faustman et al., 1999).
Advantages of the BMD approach include (1) the ability to 
take into account the dose–response curve; (2) the inclusion of a 
measure of variability (confidence limit); and (3) the use of a con-
sistent BMR level for RfD calculations across studies. Limitations 
in the animal bioassays include minimal number of test doses for 
evaluation, shallow dose responses, and use of study designs with 
widely spaced test doses will limit the utility of these assays for any 
type of quantitative assessments, whether NOAEL- or BMD-based 
approaches.
Nonthreshold Approaches
As Fig. 4-5 shows, numerous dose–response curves can be pro-
posed in the low-dose region of the dose–response curve if a thresh-
old assumption is not made. Because the risk assessor may need to 
extrapolate beyond the region of the dose–response curve for which 
experimentally observed data are available, the choice of models 
to generate curves in this region has received lots of attention. For 
nonthreshold responses, methods for dose–response assessments 
have models for extrapolation to de minimus (10−4 to 10−6) risk lev-
els at very low doses, far below the biologically observed response 
range and far below the effect levels evaluated for threshold 
responses.
The EPA cancer guidelines define the dose–response methods 
as requiring two steps: (1) defining the “POD” or the lowest dose 
associated with adverse effects within the range of the experimen-
tal data and (2) the extrapolation from the POD to low environ-
mentally relevant exposure levels based on experimental data. The 
extrapolation can be done with a linear model or a nonlinear model 
with this choice dependent on the amount and type of experimen-
tal data available. Risk estimates using the linear model (biologi-
cal response increases proportionally with level of exposure) are 
generally higher than those using nonlinear models. For example, 
in 2003, the EPA released the Dioxin Reassessment and used the 
BMD dose–response method. The reassessment used a POD based 
on a 1% response with a linear extrapolation model based on the 
position that the scientific data were inadequate to rule out the EPA’s 
standard default linear assumption. The EPA Dioxin Reassessment 
was evaluated in a National Academies Report in 2006 (National 
Academy of Science, 2006) and this review discussed remaining 
extrapolation issues. In the EPA’s recent draft of dioxin risk assess-
ment (U.S. EPA, 2010b) a revised TCDD cancer risk assessment is 
presented using the upper bound on the regression slope for esti-
mating cancer mortality risk from the epidemiology evaluation by 
Cheng et al. (2006). The top 5% of exposure estimates from this 
epidemiologic study were excluded as the dose-related changes in 
cancer mortality plateaued at high doses. The EPA lagged exposures 
by 15 years and adjusted cancer risk based on cumulative TCDD fat 
concentrations. Their analysis included an estimate of TCDD can-
cer risks above the TCDD background levels found in the NIOSH 
worker cohort analyzed by Cheng et al. (2006). Below the POD, the 
EPA assumed a default linear slope value. This document represents 
an example recent interpretation of cancer risk assessment by the 
EPA for data-rich compounds with multiple cancer risk estimates 
for animal and human studies as well as how extensive mechanistic 
and kinetic information is considered. This draft report provides 
insight into recent interpretations of the EPA cancer guidelines 
(U.S. EPA, 2005a). Increased attention has been given to the use 
of mechanistic data (such as biomarker data) to extend the POD to 
lower regions of the dose–response curve.
Statistical or Probability Distribution Models
Two general types of dose–response models exist for extrapolation: 
statistical (or probability distribution) and mechanistic models 
(Krewski and Van Ryzin, 1981). The distribution models are based 
on the assumption that each individual has a tolerance level for a 
test chemical and that this response level is a variable following a 
specific probability distribution function. These responses can be 
modeled using a cumulative dose–response function. Chap. 2 dis-
cusses the common normal distribution pattern (see Fig. 2-5). A log-
probit model estimates the probability of response at a specified 
Dose–response fitted to
experimental data
10
20
30
40
50
60
2
3
4
5
% Response
Dose
BMD10
BMDL10
Upper confidence limit
on estimated risk
Figure 4-7.  Illustration of benchmark dose (BMD) approach. This figure 
shows the BMDL10 and BMD10, the lower confidence limit and dose (ED10) 
associated with a 10% incidence of adverse response, respectively (Kavlock 
et al., 1995; U.S. EPA, 2005a, 2012a). For reference, points are labeled as 
described in the legend for Fig. 4-5.

142
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
dose (d); thus, P(d) =  ϕ [a + β log d], where ϕ is the cumulative 
function for a standard normal distribution of the log tolerances 
with standard deviations σ and mean μ, a equals μ/σ, and β equals 
the slope of the probit line (−1/σ). The probit curve at low doses 
usually assumes an S shape. Chap. 2 discusses determination of 
the LD50 value from such a curve. However, extrapolation of the 
experimental data from 50% response levels to a “safe,” “accept-
able,” or “de minimus” level of exposure—for example, one in a 
million risk above background—illustrates the huge gap between 
scientific observations and highly protective risk limits (sometimes 
called virtually safe doses [VSDs] or those corresponding to a 95% 
upper confidence limit on adverse response rates).
The log-logistic model was derived from chemical kinetic 
theory. The probability of response at dose d is defined as P(d) = 
[1 exp(a + β log d)]−1. Like the probit model, this model defines 
sigmoidal curves that are symmetrical around the 50% response 
level; however, the log-logistic curves approach the 0% and 100% 
response levels with a shallow curve shape. The logit and probit 
curves are indistinguishable in fitting the data in the region of the 
response curve where experimentally derived data are present 
(Brown, 1984; Hartung, 1987; Allen et al., 1994b).
Models Derived from Mechanistic Assumptions
This modeling approach designs a mathematical equation to 
describe dose–response relationships that are consistent with pos-
tulated biological mechanisms of response. These models are based 
on the idea that a response (toxic effect) in a particular biological 
unit (animal, human, pup, etc.) is the result of the random occur-
rence of one or more biological events (stochastic events).
Radiation research spawned a series of such “hit models” for 
cancer modeling, where a hit is defined as a critical cellular event 
that must occur before a toxic effect is produced. The simplest 
mechanistic model is the one-hit (one-stage) linear model in which 
only one hit or critical cellular interaction is required for a cell to 
be altered. For example, based on somatic mutation theory, a single 
mutational change would be sufficient for a cell to become cancer-
ous through a transformational event and dose-independent clonal 
expansion. The probability statement for these models is P(d) = 
1 − exp(−λd), where λd equals the number of hits occurring during 
a time period. Using this approach, a single molecule of a geno-
toxic carcinogen would have a minute but finite chance of causing 
a mutational event.
As theories of cancer have grown in complexity, so too 
have these hit-based mechanistic models. Multihit models have 
been developed that can describe hypothesized single-target 
multihit events, as well as multitarget, multihit events in car-
cinogenesis. The probability statements for these models are 
P d
x
x
k
x
k
d
( )
exp(
) /
( )
=
−
−
∫
1
Γ
d
λ
, where Γ(k) denotes the gamma 
function with k being the critical number of hits for the adverse 
response. The Weibull model has a dose–response function with 
characteristics similar to those of the multihit models, where the 
response equation is P(d) = 1 − exp[–λdk]. Here again, k is the 
critical number of hits for the toxic cellular response.
Armitage and Doll (1957) developed a multistage model 
for carcinogenesis that was based on these equations and on the 
hypothesis that a series of ordered stages was required before a cell 
could undergo mutation, initiation, transformation, and progression 
to form a tumor. This relationship was generalized by Crump (1984) 
by maximizing the likelihood function over polynomials, so that the 
probability statement is:
P d
d
d
d
k
k
( )
exp[ (
)].
=
−
−
+
+
+
+
1
0
1
1
2
2
λ
λ
λ
λ

If the true value of λ1 is replaced with λ1
* (the upper confidence 
limit of λ1), then a linearized-multistage model can be derived 
where the expression is dominated by d at low doses. The slope on 
this confidence interval, q1
*, has been used by the EPA for quantita-
tive cancer assessment. To obtain an upper 95% confidence interval 
on risk, the q1
* value (risk/Δ dose in mg/kg per day) is multiplied 
by the amount of exposure (mg/kg per day). Thus, the upper bound 
estimate on risk (R) is calculated as:
R
q
=
×
−
1
1
*[
(
/
) ]
(
/
)
risk mg kg per day
exposure mg kg per day
This relationship has been used to calculate a “VSD,” which 
represents the lower 95% confidence limit on a dose that gives an 
“acceptable level” of risk (e.g., upper confidence limit for 10–6 
excess risk). In the past the Integrated Risk Information System 
(IRIS) (U.S. EPA, 2011d) developed by the EPA has given q* values 
for many environmental carcinogens (U.S. EPA, 2011d). Because 
both the q1
*  and VSD values are calculated using 95% confidence 
intervals, the values are believed to represent conservative, protec-
tive estimates.
The EPA has utilized the LMS model to calculate “unit risk 
estimates” in which the upper confidence limit on increased indi-
vidual lifetime risk of cancer for a 70-kg human breathing 1 μg/m3 
of contaminated air or drinking 2 L per day of water containing 1 
ppm (1 mg/L) is estimated over a 70-year life span. The example 
given in Fig. 4-8 shows the calculation of incremental lifetime can-
cer risk (ILCR) of skin cancer using soil exposure and q* values 
for inorganic arsenic. If a POD-based approach is used for low-
dose extrapolation, the model would be used to extrapolate from 
the POD or upper confidence limit and these slopes would be con-
sidered for the q* values.
Toxicological Enhancements of the Models
Three exemplary areas of research that have improved the models 
used in risk extrapolation are time to tumor information, physio-
logically based TK modeling, and BBDR modeling (Albert, 1994). 
Chap. 7 discusses in detail improvements in our estimation of expo-
sure and offers approaches on how to model “target internal effec-
tive dose” in risk assessment rather than just using single-value 
“external exposure doses.” In this chapter we discuss the BBDR 
modeling.
BBDR modeling aims to make the generalized mechanistic 
models discussed in the previous section more clearly reflect spe-
cific biological processes. Measured rates are incorporated into the 
mechanistic equations to replace default or computer-generated 
values. For example, the Moolgavkar–Venson–Knudson (MVK) 
model is based on a two-stage model for carcinogenesis, where two 
mutations are required for carcinogenesis and birth and death rates 
of cells are modeled through clonal expansion and tumor formation. 
This model has been applied effectively to human epidemiologic 
data on retinoblastoma. In animal studies, kidney and liver tumors 
in the 2-acetylaminofluorene (2-AAF) “mega mouse” study, rat 
lung tumors following radiation exposure, rat liver tumors follow-
ing N-nitrosomorpholine exposure, respiratory tract tumors follow-
ing benzo[a]pyrene exposure, and mouse liver tumors following 
chlordane exposure have been modeled (Cohen and Ellwein, 1990; 
Moolgavkar and Luebeck, 1990).
There have been concerted research efforts to improve our 
mechanistic understanding of response at lower exposures. Two 
excellent examples of the use of biomarkers to supplement our 
exploration of these dose–response relationships are seen in Bailey 
et al. (2009) and Vlaanderen et al. (2011). Hormetic responses 
are U-shaped dose–response relationships where small doses of

Risk Assessment
Chapter 4
143
a chemical can be beneficial but high doses are toxic. These are 
discussed in Chap. 2. These responses pose challenges to risk 
assessors. In general, science-based mechanistic considerations of 
low-dose response are always critical. (See approaches used by the 
Institute of Medicine for vitamins and essential elements as these 
compounds consistently exhibit hormesis [Institute of Medicine, 
2008]).
Development of BBDR models for endpoints other than can-
cer is limited; however, several approaches have been explored in 
developmental toxicity, utilizing MOA information on cell cycle 
kinetics, enzyme activity, and cytotoxicity as critical endpoints 
(Faustman et al., 1989, 2005; Shuey et al., 1994; Leroux et al., 
1996; Gohlke et al., 2002, 2004, 2005, 2007; Daston et al., 2004). 
Approaches have been proposed that link pregnancy-specific TK 
models with temporally sensitive TD models for developmental 
impacts (Faustman et al., 1999). Unfortunately, there is a lack of 
specific, quantitative biological information on both kinetics and 
dynamics for most toxicants and endpoints (NRC, 2000; Faustman 
et al., 2005). The new NRC report titled Using 21st Century Science 
to Improve Risk-related Evaluations (NRC, 2017) may provide new 
ideas on how to identify mechanistic findings that link epidemiol-
ogy with mechanistic observations in in vitro and in vivo assays, 
hence new attention to mechanistic models may be forthcoming.
EXPOSURE ASSESSMENT
The primary objectives of exposure assessment are to determine 
source, type, magnitude, and duration of contact with the chemical(s) 
of interest. This is a critical element of the risk assessment process, 
as risk does not occur in the absence of exposure. However, it is 
also frequently identified as the key area of uncertainty in the over-
all risk determination. Here, the primary focus is on uses of expo-
sure information in quantitative risk assessment.
The primary goal of exposure calculations is not only to deter-
mine the type and amount of total exposure but also to find out 
specifically who may be exposed and how large a dose may be 
reaching target tissues. A key step in making an exposure assess-
ment is determining what exposure pathways are relevant for the 
risk scenario under development. Fig. 4-9 shows an example expo-
sure diagram used to illustrate possible exposure pathways from a 
hazardous chemical release. The subsequent steps entail quantita-
tion of each pathway identified as a relevant exposure and then sum-
marizing these pathway-specific exposures for calculation of overall 
exposure. Such calculations can include an estimation of total expo-
sures for a specified population as well as calculation of exposure 
for highly exposed individuals. The EPA has published numerous 
documents that provide detailed definitions and guidelines for 
determining such exposures (U.S. EPA, 1992b, 2008, 2011a), with 
the recognition that special considerations need to be adopted when 
assessing childhood exposures (U.S. EPA, 2005b, 2005c, 2008).
Conceptually, calculations are designed to represent “a plau-
sible estimate” of exposure of individuals in the upper 90th to 95th 
percentile of the exposure distribution. Upper bound estimations 
would be “bounding calculations” designed to represent exposures 
at levels that exceed the exposures experienced by all individuals in 
the exposure distribution and are calculated by assuming upper lim-
its for all exposure variables. A calculation for individuals exposed 
at concentrations near the middle of the exposure distribution is a 
A. Ingestion of arsenic from soil—point estimation method
Soil concentration × Ingestion rate × Exposure duration × Exposure frequency
Body weight × Averaging time
× Bioavailability × q*
= Lifetime cancer risk (ILCR)
   from skin cancer
× 0.09 × 1.50 (mg/kg per day)–1
= 1.8 × 10–4
2300 mg/kg × 100 mg per day × 30 years × 350 days per year
70 kg × 25,550 days
B. Ingestion of arsenic from soil—probabilistic methods
Slope factor, q*
q* (mg/kg per day)
1.50
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.0
×
×
Bioavailability
0.000
0.006
0.013
0.019
0.025
0.0
0.125  0.25 0.38 0.50
Bioavailability (–)
= ILCR skin cancer
0.000
0.075
0.149
0.223
0.298
0E+0 7.5E–6  1.5E–5  2.3E–5 3E–5
95th
percentile
95th percentile = 2.3 × 10−5
140
30
Body weight
Probability
0.000
0.004
0.008
0.012
0.016
60
90
110
Body weight, kg
×
Averaging time
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.0
2555
Averaging time, days
×
Ingestion rate
0.000
0.006
0.013
0.019
0.025
0
75
150
225
300
Ingestion rate,
mg per day
×
Exposure duration,
years
Exposure duration
0.000
0.028
0.055
0.083
0.110
0
25
50
75
100
×
Exposure frequency
0
100
200
300 400
Exposure frequency,
days per year
0.000
0.004
0.007
0.011
0.014
7000
0.000
0.010
0.020
0.030
0.040
0 1750
3500
5250
As concentration, mg/kg
Soil concentration
Probability
Figure 4-8.  Example of risk calculations for incremental lifetime cancer risk (ILCR) of skin cancer due to ingestion of arsenic in soil. (A) Point exposure esti-
mation method for calculation of ILCR. Point estimates for arsenic exposure input parameters are used in this example to calculate the ILCR. This exposure 
estimate is multiplied by the bioavailability of arsenic in soil to calculate the absorbed dose. Multiplication of the dose by the slope factor (q*) yields the lifetime 
risk. (B) Probabilistic exposure methods for calculating the ILCR from arsenic ingestion. In this example, the soil concentration, ingestion rate, exposure dura-
tion and frequency, body weight, and bioavailability are modeled as distributions. Note that q* and averaging time (years) are given as single-point estimations. 
This method yields a distribution of ILCR, with a 95th percentile upper confidence interval of 2.3 × 10−5. (Data from Calabrese et al. [1989], U.S. EPA [1989, 
1992b, 1999], Davis et al. [1990], Israeli and Nelson [1992], Brorby and Finley [1993], and Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry [2007].)

144
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
central estimate. Fig. 4-8 gives example risk calculations using two 
types of exposure estimation procedures (U.S. EPA, 1989, 1992b, 
2011a). Part A shows an example point estimation method for the 
calculation of arsenic (As) exposure via a soil ingestion route. In 
this hypothetical scenario, As exposure is calculated using point 
estimates for the upper 95th percent confidence limit of the arithme-
tic mean for each value in the lifetime average daily dose (LADD) 
equation. The LADD is calculated as follows:
LADD
Concentration of the
toxicant in soil
Contact
rate
Expo
=
×
×
sure
duration
Bodyweight
Lifetime
×
.
In this scenario, the average time (AT) is lifetime (25,550 
days) and the contact or ingestion rate (CR) is equal to 100 mg soil 
per day. The exposure frequency and duration (EDF) is equal to the 
exposure frequency (daily exposure = 365 days per year) times the 
exposure duration (30 years). To obtain the ILCR, the LADD must 
be multiplied by the bioavailability to obtain an absorbed dose and 
q* where the upper 95% CLM slope (q*) is 1.5× the change in risk 
per mg/kg body weight per day in this example.
Many exposures are now estimated using probability distri-
butions for exposures rather than single-point estimates for the 
factors within the LADD equation (Finley et al., 1994; Cullen and 
Frey, 1999). Such approaches can provide a reality check and can 
be useful for generating more realistic exposure profiles reflective 
of population exposures. Good sources for U.S. exposures can be 
obtained from the EPA Exposure Factors Handbook (U.S. EPA, 
2011a). Fig. 4-8 (Part B) shows how this is done using an example 
As risk scenario with soil As concentration, ingestion rate, exposure 
duration, frequency, body weight, and bioavailability modeled as 
distributed variables. Using Monte Carlo simulation techniques, an 
overall ILCR distribution can be generated and a 95th percentile for 
population risk obtained.
The FQPA of 1996 has highlighted the need for considerations 
of potential special risks for children and the need to evaluate child-
specific exposures as well as cumulative exposures and risks (U.S. 
EPA, 1996b). The EPA released a supplemental document with 
child-specific exposure factors to address the special considerations 
necessary when evaluating childhood exposures (U.S. EPA, 2008). 
Table 4-7 shows example exposure factors for drinking water intake 
for children and adults. The EPA Child-Specific Exposure Factors 
Handbook, which is online, provides useful information about such 
exposure distributions. The FQPA also identified the need to evalu-
ate total exposures by determining aggregate exposure measures for 
all exposures to a single substance. Cross-media exposure analyses, 
Uptake by
aquatic plants 
Water immersion and
Water surface
Shoreline exposure
Liquid
efﬂuents
Aquatic food
ingestion
Milk ingestion
Crop
ingestion
Water ingestion
Ground-water
ingestion
Exposure
to deposited
materials
Ingestion
Irrigation
Irrigation
Meat
Deposition
to crops 
Deposition
to ground 
Inhalation
and
Transpiration
Air
submersion
Gaseous and Particulate Efﬂuents
Chemical plant
Figure 4-9.  Exposure pathway schematic. Within the risk assessment process, a critical early step is the identification of the exposure pathway(s). To fully char-
acterize exposure, the site- and chemical-specific exposure pathways must be identified. This hypothetical exposure pathway schematic illustrated the various 
ways in which contaminants can move from the source through media to points of exposure. (Adapted from Sexton et al. [1992]; reproduced with permission 
from Taylor & Francis Group, LLC, http://www.taylorandfrancis.com.)

Risk Assessment
Chapter 4
145
such as those conducted for lead and mercury, are good examples 
of the value of looking at such total exposures in evaluating human 
risks, and complex models are available for some compounds (see 
the EPA’s integrated exposure uptake biokinetic [IEUBK] model 
for lead in children; U.S. EPA, 2010c). Cumulative exposures and 
cumulative risk refer to the total exposure and risks from a group of 
compounds. In the FQPA, chemicals with similar modes of toxic-
ity are evaluated using cumulative exposure and risk estimates. For 
example, the EPA is identifying and categorizing pesticides that act 
by a common MOA, and cumulative exposures to organophosphates 
with similar MOAs (cholinesterase inhibition) have been used as 
an example of a class of pesticides for which cumulative exposure 
and cumulative risk estimates are needed (U.S. EPA, 1996b, 1998b; 
ILSI, 1999; Ryan, 2010). The WHO has recently published a frame-
work for combined exposures (Meek et al., 2011).
Additional considerations for exposure assessments include 
how time and duration of exposure are evaluated in risk assess-
ments. In general, estimates for cancer risk use average exposure 
over a lifetime, as lifetime average daily dose (see LADD example 
above). In a few cases, short-term exposure limits (STELs) are 
required (e.g., ethylene oxide and occupational exposure limits) and 
characterization of brief but high levels of exposure is significant. 
In these cases exposures are not averaged over the lifetime and the 
effects of high, short-term doses are directly estimated. With devel-
opmental toxicity, a single exposure can be sufficient to produce an 
adverse developmental effect if exposures occur during a window of 
developmental susceptibility; thus, daily doses are used, rather than 
lifetime weighted averages (U.S. EPA, 1991; Weller et al., 1999). 
ExpoCast, a part of the EPA’s suite of computational tools, provides 
new insights on how to estimate population exposures and charac-
terize exposure variability (Wambaugh et al., 2013).
RISK CHARACTERIZATION
Risk characterization is a summary of the risk assessment com-
ponents and serves to outline the key findings and inform the risk 
manager in public health decisions. It is an analysis and integration 
of the conclusions from the hazard assessment, the dose–response 
assessment, and the exposure assessment. The EPA outlines the sci-
ence policy and elements for completing a risk characterization in 
its Risk Characterization Handbook (U.S. EPA, 2000d). As shown 
in Fig. 4-1, risk characterization considers the nature, estimated 
incidence, and reversibility of adverse effects in a given population; 
how robust the evidence is; how certain the evaluation is; if suscep-
tible populations are characterized; and if there is a relevant MOA.
For many years there has been an information sharing process 
aimed at harmonization of chemical testing regimes and clinical trial 
methodologies, so that data might be accepted in multiple countries. 
Efforts by the WHO and IPCS have included the Harmonization of 
Approaches to the Assessment of Risk from Exposure to Chemicals 
Project (WHO, 2011a). This project has the goal of globally har-
monizing but not standardizing the approaches to risk assessment 
by increasing understanding and developing basic principles and 
guidance on specific chemical risk assessment issues. The WHO 
has worked to harmonize dose–response methodologies (DRM) and 
released a report providing descriptive guidance for risk assessors in 
using DRM in hazard characterization (WHO, 2006b). Examples of 
other reports include those on terminology (WHO, 2004) and expo-
sure assessment (WHO, 2006a) and Uncertainty and Data Quality 
in Exposure Assessment (WHO, 2008).
Uncertainty analysis is an essential component in our final risk 
characterization and includes factors such as variability and lack of 
knowledge (NRC, 1994). Variability refers to true differences such 
as is reflected in temporal, spatial, or interindividual differences. It 
usually cannot be reduced with further study. Lack of knowledge can 
also be discussed as a source of uncertainty and these factors may be 
reduced with further study. For example, if only a few environmental 
samples are taken from a contaminated site for analysis, then uncer-
tainty can be reduced by taking further samples. Formal methods 
for dealing with uncertainty analysis are described in several refer-
ences including IPCS (WHO, 2008) and Bogen et al. (2009). Using 
probabilistic-based approaches (PRA) for exposure assessment and 
assuming distributional versus dichotomous data for exposure fac-
tors are one way of addressing uncertainty that is commonly applied.
Table 4-7  
Example Exposure Factor Handbook Information: Drinking Water Intake for Children
AGE GROUP
MEAN
INTAKE (mL PER DAY),  
95TH PERCENTILE
MEAN
INTAKE (mL/kg PER DAY), 
95TH PERCENTILE
Newborn (<1 month)
184
839
52
232
Infants (1 to <3 months)
227
896
48
205
Infants (3 to <6 months)
362
1056
52
159
Infants (6 to <12 months)
360
1055
41
126
Child (1 to <2 years)
271
837
23
71
Child (2 to <3 years)
317
77
23
60
Child (3 to <6 years)
380
1078
22
61
Child (6 to <11 years)
447
1235
16
43
Child (11 to <16 years)
606
1727
12
34
Child (16 to <18 years)
731
1983
11
31
Adult (18 to <21 years)
826
2540
12
35
SOURCES: Ershow and Cantor (1989) and U.S. EPA (2008, 2011a).

146
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
Variation in Susceptibility
Risk assessment methodologies incorporating human variability 
have been slow to develop. Generally, assay results utilize means 
and standard deviations to measure variation, or even standard 
errors of the mean. This ignores variability in response due to spe-
cific differences in age, sex, health status, and genetics. Default fac-
tors of 10× are overutilized to describe cross- and between-species 
differences and TK and TD data are rare. Nevertheless, EPA and 
OSHA are expected under the Clean Air Act and the Occupational 
Safety and Health Act to promulgate standards that protect the most 
susceptible subgroups or individuals in the population (Omenn 
et al., 1990; Cullen and Frey, 1999; Faustman and Omenn, 2006; 
Kramer et al., 2006; Cullen et al., 2008). Sensitive or susceptible 
populations have been defined and interpreted for the Clean Air Act 
and in this context “particularly sensitive citizens, such as bron-
chial asthmatics and emphysematics” are to be protected by the 
standards. This illustrates not only the importance but also the chal-
lenge to risk assessors to ensure protection for human populations.
Ecogenetics has been defined as the study of critical genetic 
determinants that define susceptibility to environmentally influ-
enced adverse health effects (Costa and Eaton, 2006). Ecogenetic 
variation can affect biotransformation systems that activate and 
detoxify chemicals or alter the response in target tissues. With the 
completion of the Human Genome Project in 2003, the identifica-
tion of human polymorphisms has greatly expanded our potential 
for understanding how genetic variability can impact biological 
response and susceptibility. There have been numerous activities 
initiated with the goal of understanding the linkage between genes 
and the environment. The following databases and initiatives are 
designed to identify polymorphisms, including single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNP), insertions, deletions, amplifications, and 
alternative splicing. These include the International HapMap 
Project (HapMap, 2009), the DNA Polymorphism Discovery 
Resource (National Human Genome Research Institute, 2010), the 
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) SNP data-
bases (NCBI, 2011a, 2011b), and the NIH GAIN program (National 
Human Genome Research Institute, 2010). Using the information 
from such databases, researchers can identify genetic similarities 
and differences in human beings with the goal of identifying genes 
that affect health, disease, and individual responses to medications 
and environmental factors (Omenn, 2012). Recent observations 
now demonstrate that not only genetics but also epigenetics is sig-
nificant (Sartor et al., 2012). Databases such as ENCODE provide 
detailed information on cross-species epigenetic signals for a range 
of conditions (Fingerman et al., 2010; NHGRI, 2017). SNP arrays 
are available that can easily identify and characterize approxi-
mately 1 × 106 SNPs in the human population. Arrays also exist 
that evaluate SNPs in pathways significant for drug metabolism 
enzymes and transporters. These are in FDA-approved pathways 
and have been used for evaluation of appropriate drug therapies. 
However, they are just starting to be used for environmental risk 
assessment (Guerrette et  al., 2011). Next-generation sequenc-
ing, where coverage of the genome can be extended to 40×, has 
revealed rare copy number variants that can be linked to disease and 
provide another level of understanding concerning human variation 
(Sudmant et al., 2010). It should be noted that this genetic infor-
mation on individuals can raise ethical, social, and legal concerns 
regarding protections of individuals and their rights (Hsieh, 2004). 
Recent legislation that protects individuals from discrimination on 
the basis of genetic variation helps to ensure protection and not 
exclusion for all workers (Human Genome Program, 2008; United 
States Act, 2008).
One of the key challenges for toxicologists doing risk assess-
ments will be the interpretation and linking of observations from 
highly sensitive molecular and genome-based methods with the 
overall process of toxicity (Eisen et al., 1998; Limbird and Taylor, 
1998; Andersen and Barton, 1999; NRC, 2000). The basic need for 
linkage of observations was highlighted in early biomarker work. 
The NRC reports on biomarkers (NRC, 1989a, 1989b, 1992) drew 
distinctions for biomarkers of effect, exposure, and susceptibil-
ity across a continuum of exposure, effect, and disease/toxicity. 
Biomarkers of early effects, such as frank clinical pathology, arise 
as a function of exposure, response, and time. Early, subtle, and pos-
sibly reversible effects can generally be distinguished from irrevers-
ible disease states. Chemical-specific biomarkers have the potential 
to provide critical information, but there is an inherent complexity 
in pulling the information together. If biomarkers are considered a 
reflection of exposure or disease state, then considerations have to 
be made regarding the interactions between genes and the environ-
ment and the difference between a population-based assessment and 
individual assessment (Groopman and Kensler, 1999; NRC, 2017).
Nowhere is the challenge for interpretation of early and highly 
sensitive response biomarkers clearer than in the complicated data 
from gene expression arrays (toxicogenomics). Our continued 
ability to monitor changes in response in thousands of genes has 
proven challenging for toxicologists. Emphasis on toxicity-based 
risk assessment methods and analysis has been strongly encour-
aged by several significant NAS reports (NRC, 2000, 2007a, 2007b, 
2010), as well as development and application of pathway-based 
methods (Yu et al., 2006). Toxicogenomics projects have confirmed 
the repeatability and cross-platform concordance of microarray 
data (Bammler et al., 2005; Guo et al., 2006; Nature Biotechnology 
Editorial, 2006; Patterson et al., 2006) and standards for data inter-
pretation (minimum information about a microarray experiment 
[MIAME]) have been accepted (Brazma et al., 2001).
Microarray analysis for risk assessment requires analyses 
beyond basic cluster analysis (Eisen et al., 1998) to arrive at a func-
tional interpretation and linkage to conventional toxicological (api-
cal) endpoints. Because of the vast number of measured responses 
with gene expression arrays, pattern analysis techniques are being 
used through pathway mapping platforms such as MAPPFinder 
and GenMAPP (Moggs et al., 2004; Currie et al., 2005) as well 
as big data approaches (Conesa et al., 2016). The Gene Ontology 
Consortium has developed a controlled vocabulary (ontology) for 
sharing biological information across species. Database users can 
then annotate their gene products with gene ontology (GO) terms, 
establishing a consistent description and definition across databases 
and studies, and this facilitates risk assessment. Through the power 
of GO terms, analysis methods are being developed to allow for 
a quantitative time- and dose-dependent interpretation of genomic 
response using systems-based approaches to integrate responses 
at the biological and cellular levels (Yu et al., 2006). An example 
of integrated analysis of multiple -omics data sets is Conceptgen 
(Sartor et al., 2010). The 2017 NRC report provides a new frame-
work for incorporating this information across various levels of 
biological observation.
Both the EPA and FDA have formally recognized the power of 
genomic information as well as its potential limitations. Both agen-
cies have issued interim policies guiding how to include genomic 
information into risk assessments and they have agreed to use 
genomic information in conjunction with (but not in isolation of) 
standard risk assessment data (U.S. EPA, 2011e; U.S. FDA, 2011). 
Extensive research efforts by the EPA Computational Toxicology 
program will facilitate future risk assessment uses (Kavlock et al., 
2012; U.S. EPA, 2012c).

Risk Assessment
Chapter 4
147
INFORMATION RESOURCES
There are numerous information resources available for risk assess-
ment and a few are listed below to provide the reader with exam-
ples, but not a comprehensive list of risk assessment resources and 
databases. Such resources include the Toxicology Data Network 
(NLM, 2017) from the U.S. National Library of Medicine; the 
NTP (NTP, 2011a), including the Report on Carcinogens and 
the Office of Health Assessment and Translation; the WHO IPCS 
(WHO, 2010); and the IARC (WHO, 2011b). The WHO Toolkit for 
Risk Assessment is especially user friendly for new risk assessors 
(WHO, 2010). The WHO, through its IPCS, produces useful risk 
documents entitled Concise International Chemical Assessment 
Documents that cover a variety of chemical substances (WHO, 
2011c). The Codex Alimentarius Commission created by the Food 
and Agriculture Organization of the UN (FAO) and the WHO pro-
duces guidelines and reports relevant for food safety and standards 
(FAO and WHO, 2011). The Integrated Risk Information Service 
(IRIS) is the EPA’s human health assessment program that evaluates 
health risks for over 500 chemical substances (U.S. EPA, 2011d). 
IRIS lists specific risk values used by the U.S. EPA. Additional 
databases are available from REACH.
There is a need for a note of caution for users of these risk- 
relevant databases, as with most databases there is a need to ­consider 
multiple contributions to differences between recommended values. 
These differences can be due to variations in how and when new 
scientific information is incorporated in the evaluations. Also, dif-
ferent regulatory drivers for national values or issues related to legal 
priorities or delays in implementing draft to final recommended 
values can occur. Such factors have contributed to differences in 
arsenic and dioxin risk estimates in the United States, for example, 
versus other observational values.
Recently, new toxicogenomic databases that identify and, in 
some cases, provide characterization of chemicals have become avail-
able. The NCBI (2011a, 2011b) provides access to an enormous set 
of biomedical and genomic information. The NCBI portfolio of com-
prehensive data and tools can be valuable for risk assessment and the 
aim to integrate with toxicologically relevant endpoints and disease 
is laudable. It contains information on chemicals and bioassays, data 
and software, DNA and RNA, protein domains and structures, genes 
and expression, genetic information databases linked with decision 
outcomes, genomes and gene maps, and cross-species homology. 
Resources covering databases and tools help in the study of SARs. 
A publicly available functional genomics data repository (Gene 
Expression Omnibus [GEO] database) supports MIAME-compliant 
data submission, and allows for easily accessible microarray- and 
sequence-based data, which are searchable for specific profiles of 
interest based on gene annotation or precomputed profile character-
istics. Also, variations such as data on genomic variation, interaction 
of genotypes and phenotypes, and the single-nucleotide polymor-
phisms (dbSNP) can be obtained through the NCBI. ACToR (U.S. 
EPA, 2017b), the EPA’s online database on chemical toxicity data 
and potential chemical risks to human health and the environment, is 
another useful resource for risk assessments (Judson et al., 2012). It 
allows users to search and query data including Toxicity Reference 
Database (ToxRefDB) (30 years and $2 billion worth of animal toxic-
ity studies), ToxCastDB (data from screening 1000 chemicals in over 
500 high-throughput assays), ExpoCastDB, and DSSTox (provides 
high-quality chemical structures and annotations). The ToxRefDB 
captures thousands of in vivo animal toxicity studies on hundreds 
of chemicals. Another curated Comparative Toxicogenomics 
Database (Comparative Toxicogenomics Database, 2017) includes 
data describing cross-species chemical and gene/protein interactions 
and chemical–disease and gene–disease relationships to illuminate 
molecular mechanisms underlying variable susceptibility and envi-
ronmentally influenced diseases. These data provide insight into 
complex chemical–gene/protein interaction networks (Davis et al., 
2013). These databases can be especially useful for hazard iden-
tification and mechanistic information; few emphasize exposure 
information.
RISK PERCEPTION AND COMPARATIVE 
ANALYSES OF RISK
It is well known that individuals respond differently to informa-
tion about hazardous situations and products (Fischhoff, 1981; 
Fischhoff et  al., 1993, 1996; Sandman, 1993; NRC, 1996; Risk 
Commission, 1997; Institute of Medicine, 1999; Slovic, 2010). 
Understanding these behavioral responses at the individual, com-
munity, and population levels is critical in stimulating construc-
tive risk communication and evaluating potential risk management 
options for risk assessment issues. In a classic study, students, 
League of Women Voters members, active club members, and sci-
entific experts were asked to rank 30 activities or agents in order 
of their annual contribution to deaths (Slovic et al., 1979, 2005). 
Club members ranked pesticides, spray cans, and nuclear power 
as safer than did other laypersons. Students ranked contraceptives 
and food preservatives as riskier and mountain climbing as safer 
than did others. Experts ranked electric power, surgery, swimming, 
and x-rays as more risky, but nuclear power and police work as 
less risky than did laypersons. From studies like these, we now 
know that there are cultural and gender differences in perception 
of risks. There are also group differences in perceptions of risk 
from chemicals among toxicologists, correlated with their employ-
ment in industry, academia, or government (Neal et  al., 1994). 
Recent risk perception research has emphasized the importance 
of knowing the balance between analytical thinking and “affect.” 
Our immediate emotional reaction can shape our initial risk per-
ceptions (“affect”), while our thoughtful, deliberate “analytical” 
thinking also impacts our risk understanding but the latter is a 
slower response. Understanding this balance can help us explain 
why there is a complex relationship between perceived risk and 
benefits (Slovic, 2010).
Psychological factors such as dread, perceived uncontrollabil-
ity, and involuntary exposure interact with factors that represent the 
extent to which a hazard is familiar, observable, and “essential” for 
daily living (Lowrance, 1976; Morgan, 1993). Fig. 4-10 presents a 
grid on the parameters controllable/uncontrollable and observable/
not observable for a large number of risky activities; for each of the 
two-paired main factors, highly correlated factors are described in 
the boxes.
Public demand for government regulations often focuses on 
involuntary exposures (especially in the food supply, drinking 
water, and air) and unfamiliar hazards, such as radioactive waste, 
electromagnetic fields, asbestos insulation, and genetically modi-
fied crops and foods. The public can respond negatively when they 
perceive that information about hazards or new technologies has 
been withheld or under-rated. This can explain some of the very 
strong responses to genetically modified foods, HIV-contaminated 
blood transfusions in the 1980s, or hazardous chemical and radio-
active wastes. Loss of trust is exemplified by Japanese reactions 
following the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear reactor meltdown (March 
2011), where initial perceived benefits of nuclear power were trans-
formed to distrust during follow-up actions and responses to the 
earthquake and tsunami.

148
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
Perceptions of risk led to the addition of an extra safety factor 
(default value 10) for children in the FQPA of 1996. Engineering-
based “as low as reasonably achievable” (ALARA) approaches 
also reflect the general “precautionary principle,” which is strongly 
favored by those who, justifiably, believe we are far from knowing 
all risks given frequently limited toxicity testing data (Roe et al., 
1997).
EMERGING CONCEPTS
In order for risk assessment to inform environmental risk man-
agement, there is a need to ensure that the initial “problem for-
mulation” of the risk question(s) is succinctly framed to answer 
questions in the real world. Environmental health is very dynamic 
and many divergent emerging environmental challenges such as cli-
mate change, energy shortages, and engineered nanoparticles will 
require an expansion of our context well beyond single-chemical, 
single-exposure scenarios. In order to accomplish this goal, several 
factors need to be considered. These factors include defining not 
only health but also well-being and sustainability and will require a 
context of global and international scale.
Well-being is increasingly being used to describe human 
health and the goal of sustainable environmental risk management. 
The WHO has championed the use of well-being rather than health 
to describe the Millennium Development Goals (WHO, 2011d). 
Well-being goes beyond “disease-free” existence to freedom from 
want (including food and water security) and fear (personal safety) 
and sustainable futures. Concepts such as food security (abundance 
and quality of foods), water security (plentiful supplies and high 
quality of water), and sustainability form internationally recognized 
environmental and developmental goals. Sustainability embraces 
the risk management concept that “development that meets the 
needs of the present, without compromising the ability of future 
generations” to thrive and hence well-being is one of the goals of 
environmental actions and decisions. Recognition that environmen-
tal problems are global is essential to our understanding of how 
we manage risks and how we address sustainability (Leiserowitz 
et al., 2006; Gohlke et al., 2008; Kite-Powell et al., 2008). Ocean 
health and air pollution are excellent examples of the need for 
understanding the global context where pollutants do not honor 
country and national borders. World Trade Organization (WTO) 
agreements have also placed risk assessment approaches in the 
forefront as tools for managers working to meet the global goals 
for sustainable trade and economic health. At the most basic level 
new risk assessments are being done with a new global empha-
sis (Carruth and Goldstein, 2004; EPA, 2011f). Reorganization of 
the EPA along management lines of sustainability now provides 
an integrative framework for working toward sustainability goals. 
As a response for this broader framing of health impacts, the EPA 
Office of Research and Development realigned its research within 
General aviation
Microwave ovens
Water ﬂuoridation
Saccharin
Water chlorination
Oral contraceptives
Nitrites
Polyvinyl chloride
Diagnostic
x-rays
IUDs
Antibiotics
Lead (autos)
Lead paint
Aspirin
Vaccines
DNA technology
Electric ﬁelds
DES
Radioactive waste
Nuclear reactor accidents
Uranium mining
Pesticides
Mercury
PCBs
Nuclear weapons fallout
Satellite crashes
Asbestos
insulation
Coal-burning pollution
Carbon monoxide
(autos)
Storage and
transport of liquiﬁed
natural gas
Black lung
Large dams
Skyscraper ﬁres
Nerve gas accidents
Underwater construction
Sport parachutes
Coal mining
High construction
Railroad collisions
Commercial aviation
Handguns
Dynamite
Fireworks
Alcohol-related accidents
Bicycles
Motorcycles
Recreational boating
Downhill skiing
Home swimming pools
Elevators
Chain saws
Tractors
Snowmobiles
Smoking (disease)
Power mowers
Skateboards
Not observable
Unknown to those exposed,
effect delayed, new risk, risks
unknown to science.
Controllable
Not dread, not global catastrophic,
consequences not fatal, equitable,
low risk to future generations,
easily reduced, risk decreasing,
voluntary.
Observable
Known to those exposed, effect
immediate, old risk, risks known
to science.
Uncontrollable
Dread, global catastrophic,
consequences fatal, not equitable,
high risk to future generations, not
easily reduced, risk increasing,
involuntary.
Nuclear weapons (war)
Auto racing
Auto accidents
Trampolines
Valium
Nitrogen fertilizers
Figure 4-10.  Perceptions of risk illustrated using a “risk space” axis diagram. Risk space has axes that correspond roughly to a hazard’s perceived “dreaded-
ness” and to the degree to which it is familiar or observable. Risks in the upper right quadrant of this space are most likely to provoke calls for government 
regulation.

Risk Assessment
Chapter 4
149
a structure of Chemical Safety for Sustainability; Sustainable and 
Healthy Communities; Safe and Sustainable Water Resources; and 
Air, Climate and Energy. Risk assessment is viewed as one of the 
critical approaches for integrating these goals and toxicology is one 
of the tools used within that approach (Teichman and U.S. EPA, 
2011). Further applications for alternatives assessment, life cycle 
analysis, and green chemistry open up new opportunities to enlarge 
the framing of our assessments (NRC, 2014a, 2014b).
PUBLIC HEALTH RISK MANAGEMENT
Associated with concepts of well-being and sustainability is a 
public health orientation to risk assessment and risk management. 
Public health as a discipline is very compatible with toxicology, 
where toxicological tests are performed to identify and characterize 
potential health risks and to prevent the unsafe use of such agents. 
Public health also has an emphasis on approaches for identifying, 
characterizing, and preventing risks.
Within public health risk management, there are three stages 
of prevention: primary, whose goal is prevention and risk or haz-
ard avoidance; secondary, whose goal is mitigation or prepared-
ness including risk or vulnerability reduction and risk transfer; and 
tertiary, where prompt response or recovery is an approach for 
decreasing residual risk or risk reduction (Frumkin, 2016). These 
three prevention stages frame many risk management actions. For 
example, in occupational health, a prevention hierarchy is applied 
that is related to these stages where initial preferred risk manage-
ment actions are substitution where the hazardous chemical or 
activities is removed and substituted with a safer chemical or pro-
cess option. Engineering controls with a focus on reducing work-
place exposures is a subsequent action. Administrative controls 
can be used to change job tasks and methods. The use of personal 
protective equipment (PPE) such as gloves, hats, protective gloves, 
and work clothes is usually considered after all other management 
efforts fail to meet occupationally safe levels. In a similar manner, 
pollution prevention can be related to these stages of prevention 
with initial elimination of the source of hazardous chemical.
The context for prevention actions can be supported by source 
reduction or a life-cycle analysis or alternatives analysis. If the for-
mer, the prevention activities would consider potential for adverse 
outcomes along the life of the product including manufacture as 
well as end-of-life disposal options. Sometimes when an alterna-
tives analysis is performed, only one stage of the life of a product 
is examined and a “regrettable substitution” can occur where the 
alternative is either less well studied or knowledge about use and 
fate and transport is missing (Goldman, 2016).
Hazard analysis frequently used in public health framework 
refers to both hazard identification and probability-based frequency 
of anticipated events. Capacity assessment has been used for iden-
tifying strengths and resiliency of a system to impact. Recent 
disasters such as Hurricane Katrina, the Gulf Oil Spill, and the 
Fukushima Daiichi nuclear reactor meltdown all point to the need 
for environmental risk assessment to be considered as a part of an 
even larger context in order to understand critical infrastructure for 
determining human and environmental risks. Life-cycle analysis, 
green chemistry, and built environment all require such a broad 
context for evaluation (Keim, 2002; NRC, 2009). Understanding 
population variability and vulnerability in a context of “built envi-
ronment” is also important. The “built environment” encompasses 
all man-made resources and infrastructure, including buildings, 
spaces, and transportation systems, which support human activity 
and have a strong influence on public health (Perdue et al., 2003). 
These types of frameworks can allow for easier consideration of 
public health concepts for sustainability, environmental disaster 
response, and life-cycle systems analysis than many of our tradi-
tional frameworks for environmental chemical risk assessment, 
which can be done in relative isolation.
SUMMARY
The NRC and Risk Commission frameworks for risk assessment 
and risk management continue to provide a consistent framework-
based approach for evaluating risks and taking action to reduce 
risks. The objectives of risk assessments vary with the issues, risk 
management needs, and statutory requirements. Hence, setting 
the context and problem formation for risk evaluation is essential 
(NRC, 2009). The frameworks are sufficiently flexible to address 
various objectives and to accommodate new knowledge while also 
providing guidance for priority setting in industry, environmental 
organizations, and government regulatory and public health agen-
cies. Risk assessment analyzes the science and, if incomplete, 
identifies uncertainty and provides approaches for moving forward 
with decisions (NRC, 2009). Toxicology, epidemiology, exposure 
assessment, and clinical observations can be linked with biomark-
ers, cross-species investigations of mechanisms of effects, and sys-
tematic approaches to risk assessment, risk communication, and 
risk management. New insights from the NRC “Using 21st century 
science to improve risk-related evaluations” provide suggestions 
on how to achieve integration (NRC, 2017). Advances in toxicol-
ogy are certain to improve the quality of risk assessments for a 
broad array of health endpoints as scientific findings substitute data 
for assumptions and help to describe and model uncertainty more 
credibly.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The editor and author recognize the contributions of previous 
authors of this chapter: Morton Corn (2nd edition), Robert A. Scala 
(4th edition), and Gilbert S. Omenn (5th to 8th editions).
REFERENCES
Abbott BD, Harris MW, Birnbaum LS. Comparisons of the effects of 
TCDD and hydrocortisone on growth factor expression provide insight 
into their interaction in the embryonic mouse palate. Teratology. 
1992;45:35–53.
Adami HO, Berry SC, Breckenridge CB, et al. Toxicology and epidemiol-
ogy: improving the science with a framework for combining toxicologi-
cal and epidemiological evidence to establish causal inference. Toxicol 
Sci. 2011;122:223–234.
Adler S, Basketter D, Creton S, et al. Alternative (non-animal) methods 
for cosmetics testing: current status and future prospects—2010. Arch 
Toxicol. 2011;85:367–485.
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry. Toxicological Profile 
for Arsenic. Atlanta, GA: Department of Health and Human Services; 
2007.
Albert RE. Carcinogen risk assessment in the US Environmental Protection 
Agency. Crit Rev Toxicol. 1994;24:75–85.
Allen BC, Kavlock RJ, Kimmel CA, Faustman EM. Dose-response assess-
ments for developmental toxicity: II. Comparison of generic benchmark 
dose estimates with no observed adverse effect levels. Fundam Appl 
Toxicol. 1994a;23:487–495.
Allen BC, Kavlock RJ, Kimmel CA, Faustman EM. Dose-response assess-
ment for developmental toxicity. 3. Statistical models. Fundam Appl 
Toxicol. 1994b;23(4):496–509.
Ames BN, Gold LS. Too many rodent carcinogens: mitogenesis increases 
mutagenesis. Science. 1990;247:970–971.

150
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
Andersen ME, Barton HA. Biological regulation of receptor–hormone 
complex C in relation to dose–response assessments of endocrine-active 
compounds. Toxicol Sci. 1999;48:38–50.
Ankley GT, Bennett RS, Erickson RJ, et al. Adverse outcome pathways: 
a  conceptual framework to support ecotoxicology research and risk 
assessment. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2010;29(3): 730-741.
Armitage P, Doll R. A two-stage theory of carcinogenesis in relation to the 
age distribution of human cancer. Br J Cancer. 1957;11:161–169.
Ashby J, Tennant RW. Prediction of rodent carcinogenicity of 44 chemicals: 
results. Mutagenesis. 1994;9:7–15.
Atterwill CK, Johnston H, Thomas SM. Models for the in vitro assess-
ment of neurotoxicity in the nervous system in relation to xenobiotic 
and neurotrophic factor-mediated events. Neurotoxicology. 1992;13: 
39–54.
Auton TR. Calculation of benchmark doses from teratology data. Regul 
Toxicol Pharmacol. 1994;19:152–167.
Bailey GS, Reddy AP, Pereira CB, et  al. Nonlinear cancer response at 
ultralow dose: a 40800-animal ED(001) tumor and biomarker study. 
Chem Res Toxicol. 2009;22:1264–1276.
Bammler T, Beyer RP, Bhattacharya S, et  al. Standardizing global gene 
expression analysis between laboratories and across platforms. Nat 
Methods. 2005;2:351–356.
Barnes DG, Dourson MJ. Reference dose (Rfd): description and use in 
health risk assessment. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 1988;8:471–486.
Bell SM, Phillips J, Sedykh A, et  al. An integrated chemical environ-
ment to support 21st-century toxicology. Environ Health Perspect. 
2017;125(5):054501.
Benigni R, Zito R. The second National Toxicology Program comparative 
exercise on the prediction of rodent carcinogenicity: definitive results. 
Mutat Res. 2004;566:49–63.
Birnbaum LS, Thayer KA, Bucher JR, Wolfe MS. Implementing system-
atic review at the National Toxicology Program: status and next steps. 
Environ Health Perspect. 2013;121(4):a108–a109.
Bogdanffy MS, Daston G, Faustman EM, et al. Harmonization of cancer 
and noncancer risk assessment: proceedings of a consensus-building 
workshop. Toxicol Sci. 2001;61:18–31.
Bogen KT, Cullen AC, Frey HC, Price PS. Probabilistic exposure analysis 
for chemical risk characterization. Toxicol Sci. 2009;109:4–17.
Brazma A, Hingamp P, Quackenbush J, et al. Minimum information about 
a microarray experiment (MIAME)—toward standards for microarray 
data. Nat Genet. 2001;29:365–371.
Brorby G, Finley G. Standard probability density functions for routine use 
in environmental health risk assessment. In: Society for Risk Analysis 
Annual Meeting. Savannah, GA; 1993.
Brown CC. High-to-low-dose extrapolation in animals. In: Rodricks 
JV, Tardiff RG, eds. Assessment and Management of Chemical Risks. 
Washington, DC: American Chemical Society; 1984:57–79.
Brown NA, Spielmann H, Bechter R. Screening chemicals for reproductive 
toxicity: the current alternatives: the report and recommendations of an 
ECVAM/ETS workshop. Altern Lab Anim. 1995;23:868–882.
Bucher JR. Update on National Toxicology Program (NTP) assays with 
genetically altered or “transgenic” mice. Environ Health Perspect. 
1998;106:619–621.
Calabrese EJ, Pastides H, Barnes R. How much soil do young children ingest: 
an epidemiologic study. In: Kostecki PT, Calabrese EJ, eds. Petroleum 
Contaminated Soils. Chelsea, MI: Lewis Publishers; 1989:363–397.
Calkins DR, Dixon RI, Gerber CR. Identification, characterization, and 
control of potential human carcinogens: a framework for federal deci-
sion-making. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1980;61:167–175.
Capen CC, Dybing E, Rice JM, Wilbourn JD, eds. Species Differences in 
Thyroid, Kidney and Urinary Bladder Carcinogenesis. IARC Scientific 
Publications No. 147. International Agency for Research on Cancer and 
World Health Organization; 1999.
Carruth RS, Goldstein BD. The asbestos case: a comment on the appoint-
ment and use of nonpartisan experts in World Trade Organization dispute 
resolution involving health risk. Risk Anal. 2004;24:471–481.
Charnley G, Omenn GS. A summary of the findings and recommendations 
of the commission on risk assessment and risk management (and accom-
panying papers prepared for the commission). Hum Ecol Risk Assess. 
1997;3:701–711.
Cheng H, Aylward L, Beall C, et al. TCDD exposure-response analysis and 
risk assessment. Risk Anal. 2006;26(4):1059–1071.
Chesler EJ, Miller DR, Branstetter LR, et al. The Collaborative Cross at 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory: developing a powerful resource for sys-
tems genetics. Mamm Genome. 2008;19:382–389.
Chhabra RS, Bucher JR, Wolfe M, Portier C. Toxicity characterization of 
environmental chemicals by the US National Toxicology Program: an 
overview. Int J Hyg Environ Health. 2003;206:437–445.
Cohen SM. Human relevance of animal carcinogenicity studies. Regul 
Toxicol Pharmacol. 1995;21:75–80 [discussion 81–86].
Cohen SM. Alternative models for carcinogenicity testing: weight of 
evidence evaluations across models. Toxicol Pathol. 2001;29(suppl): 
183–190.
Cohen SM, Arnold LL, Cano M, Ito M, Garland EM, Shaw RA. Calcium 
phosphate-containing precipitate and the carcinogenicity of sodium salts 
in rats. Carcinogenesis. 2000;21:783–792.
Cohen SM, Ellwein LB. Proliferative and genotoxic cellular effects in 
2-acetylaminofluorene bladder and liver carcinogenesis: biological mod-
eling of the EDO1 study. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1990;104:79–93.
Collins FS, Gray GM, Bucher JR. Toxicology. Transforming environmental 
health protection. Science. 2008;319(5865):906-907.
Comparative Toxicogenomics Database. Available at: http://ctd.mdibl.org/. 
2017.
Conesa A, Madrigal P, Tarazona S, et al. A survey of best practices for 
RNA-seq data analysis. Genome Biol. 2016; 17: 13.
Costa L, Eaton D. Introduction. In: Costa L, Eaton D, eds. Gene–
Environment Interactions: Fundamentals of Ecogenetics. Hoboken, NJ: 
Wiley; 2006.
Costa LG. Biochemical and molecular neurotoxicology. In: Maines MD, 
Costa LG, Reed DJ, eds. Current Protocols in Toxicology. New York: 
Wiley; 2000.
Crump KS. An improved procedure for low-dose carcinogenic risk assess-
ment from animal data. J Environ Pathol Toxicol. 1980;5:339–348.
Crump KS. A new method for determining allowable daily intakes. Fundam 
Appl Toxicol. 1984;4:854–871.
Cullen AC, Corrales MA, Kramer CB, Faustman EM. The application of 
genetic information for regulatory standard setting under the Clean Air 
Act: a decision-analytic approach. Risk Anal. 2008;28:877–890.
Cullen AC, Frey HC. Probabilistic Techniques in Exposure Assessment: A 
Handbook for Dealing with Variability and Uncertainty in Models and 
Inputs. New York: Plenum Press; 1999.
Currie RA, Bombail V, Oliver JD, et  al. Gene ontology mapping as an 
unbiased method for identifying molecular pathways and processes 
affected by toxicant exposure: application to acute effects caused by 
the rodent non-genotoxic carcinogen diethylhexylphthalate. Toxicol Sci. 
2005;86:453–469.
Da Rocha MS, Arnold LL, De Oliveira ML, et al. Diuron-induced rat urinary 
bladder carcinogenesis: Mode of action and human relevance evaluations 
using the International Programme on Chemical Safety framework. Crit 
Rev Toxicol. 2014;44(5):393-406.
Daston G, Faustman EM, Ginsberg G, et al. A framework for assessing 
risks to children from exposure to environmental agents. Environ Health 
Perspect. 2004;112:238–256.
Davis AP, Murphy CG, Johnson R, et  al. The comparative toxicoge-
nomics database: update 2013. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013;41(database 
issue):D1104–D1114.
Davis S, Waller P, Buschborn R. Quantitative estimates of soil ingestion 
in normal children between the ages of 2 and 7 years: population-based 
estimates using aluminum, silicon, and titanium as soil tracer elements. 
Arch Environ Health. 1990;45:112–122.
Dean AG, Dean JA, Coulombier D. Epi Info, Version 6: A Word Processing, 
Database, and Statistics Program for Public Health on IBM-Compatible 
Microcomputers. Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC); 1995.
Dearfield KL. Pesticide Assessment Guidelines. Subdivision F, Hazard 
Evaluation: Humans and Domestic Animals. Series 83-3. Washington, 
DC: Environmental Protection Agency; 1990.
Dourson MJ, Hertzberg RC, Hartung R, Blackburn K. Novel methods for 
the estimation of acceptable daily intake. Toxicol Ind Health. 1985;1: 
23–41.

Risk Assessment
Chapter 4
151
Dourson ML, DeRosa CT. The use of uncertainty factors in establishing 
safe levels of exposure. In: Krewski D, Franklin C, eds. Statistics in 
Toxicology. New York: Gordon & Breach; 1991:613–627.
Dourson ML, Stara JF. Regulatory history and experimental support of 
uncertainty (safety factors). Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 1983;3:224–238.
Drew CH, Grace DA, Silbernagel SM, et al. Nuclear waste transportation: 
case studies of identifying stakeholder risk information needs. Environ 
Health Perspect. 2003;111:263–272.
Drew CH, Kern M, Martin T, Blozek ML, Power M, Faustman EM. The 
Hanford Openness Workshops: fostering open and transparent long-term 
decision making at the department of energy. In: Leschine TM, ed. Long-Term 
Management of Contaminated Sites (Research in Social Problems and Public 
Policy, Volume 13). Emerald: Bingley, West Yorkshire UK; 2006;13–48.
Eaton DL, Bammler TK, Kelly EJ. Interindividual differences in response 
to chemoprotection against aflatoxin-induced hepatocarcinogenesis: 
implications for human biotransformation enzyme polymorphisms. Adv 
Exp Med Biol. 2001;500:559–576.
Eaton DL, Gallagher EP. Mechanisms of aflatoxin carcinogenesis. Annu 
Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 1994;34:135–172.
Eaton DL, Gallagher EP, Bammler TK, Kunze KL. Role of cytochrome 
P4501a2 in chemical carcinogenesis—implications for human variability 
in expression and enzyme-activity. Pharmacogenetics. 1995;5:259–274.
ECHA (European Chemicals Agency). Registered substances database. 
2017. Available at: https://echa.europa.eu/information-on-chemicals/
registered-substances. Accessed 23 January, 2017.
Eduati F, Mangravite LM, Wang T, et  al. Prediction of human popula-
tion responses to toxic compounds by a collaborative competition. Nat 
Biotechnol. 2015;33(9):933-40.
EGRET. Statistics and Epidemiology Research Corporation (SERC). 
Seattle, WA: Statistics and Epidemiology Research Corporation; 1994.
Eisen MB, Spellman PT, Brown PO, Botstein D. Cluster analysis and dis-
play of genome-wide expression patterns. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
1998;95:14863–14868.
Ershow AG, Cantor KP. Federation of American Societies for Experimental 
Biology. Life Sciences Research Office, and National Cancer Institute 
(US). Division of Cancer Etiology. Epidemiology and Biostatistics 
Program. Total Water and Tapwater Intake in the United States: 
Population-based Estimates of Quantities and Sources. Bethesda, MD: 
Life Sciences Research Office Federation of American Societies for 
Experimental Biology; 1989.
FAO, WHO. Codex Alimentarius Commission—International Food 
Standards. 2011. Available at: http://www.codexalimentarius.org/.
Faustman E, Omenn G. Risk assessment and the impact of ecogenetics. In: 
Costa L, Eaton D, eds. Gene–Environment Interactions: Fundamentals of 
Ecogenetics. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley; 2006.
Faustman EM. Short-term test for teratogens. Mutat Res. 1988;205:355–384.
Faustman EM, Allen BC, Kavlock RJ, Kimmel CA. Dose–response assess-
ment for developmental toxicity: I. Characterization of data base and 
determination of no observed adverse effect levels. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 
1994;23:478–486.
Faustman EM, Gohlke J, Judd NL, et al. Modeling developmental processes 
in animals: applications in neurodevelopmental toxicology. Environ 
Toxicol Pharmacol. 2005;19:615–624.
Faustman EM, Gohlke JM, Ponce RA, et  al. Experimental approaches 
to evaluate mechanisms of developmental toxicity. In: Hood R, ed. 
Developmental and Reproductive Toxicology: A Practical Approach. 3rd 
ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2011.
Faustman EM, Lewandowski TA, Ponce RA, Bartell SM. Biologically 
based dose–response models for developmental toxicants: lessons from 
methylmercury. Inhal Toxicol. 1999;11:101–114.
Faustman EM, Ponce RA, Seeley MR, Whittaker SG. Experimental 
approaches to evaluate mechanisms of developmental toxicity. In: Hood 
R, ed. Handbook of Developmental Toxicology. Boca Raton, FL: CRC 
Press; 1997;13–41.
Faustman EM, Wellington DG, Smith WP, Kimmel CS. Characterization of 
a developmental toxicity dose response model. Environ Health Perspect. 
1989;79:229–241.
Fingerman IM, McDaniel L, Zhang X, et al. NCBI epigenomics: a new pub-
lic resource for exploring epigenomic data sets. Nucleic Acids Research. 
2010;39(suppl 1):D908–D912.
Finley G, Proctor D, Scott P. Recommended distributions for expo-
sure factors frequently used in health risk assessment. Risk Anal. 
1994;14:533–553.
Fischhoff B. Cost–benefit analysis: an uncertain guide to public policy. Am 
N Y Acad Sci. 1981;363:173–188.
Fischhoff B, Bostrom A, Quandrel MJ. Risk perception and communica-
tion. Annu Rev Public Health. 1993;14:183–203.
Fischhoff B, Bostrom A, Quandrel MJ. Risk perception and communication. 
In: Detels R, Holland W, McEwen J, Omenn GS, eds. Oxford Textbook 
of Public Health. New York: Oxford University Press; 1996:987–1002.
Frumkin H. Introduction to environmental health. In: Frumkin H, ed. 
Environmental Health: From Global to Local. 3rd ed. San Francisco, CA: 
Wiley; 2016:3–25.
Gamble JF, Battigelli MC. Epidemiology. In: Clayton GD, Clayton FE, 
eds. Patty’s Industrial Hygiene and Toxicology. New York: Wiley; 
1978:113–127.
Gamble JF, Battigelli MC. Occupational epidemiology: some guide-
posts. In: Clayton GD, Clayton FE, eds. Patty’s Industrial Hygiene and 
Toxicology. New York: Wiley; 1991.
Gargas ML, Finley BL, Paustenback DJ, Long TF. Environmental health 
risk assessment: theory and practice. In: Ballantyne B, Marrs T, Syversen 
T, eds. General and Applied Toxicology. New York: Grove’s Dictionaries; 
1999:1749–1809.
Gill EA, Curl CL, Adar SD, et al. Air pollution and cardiovascular disease 
in the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 
2011;53(5):353–360.
Gohlke JM, Griffith WC, Bartell SM, Lewandowski TA, Faustman 
EM. A computational model for neocortical neuronogenesis predicts 
ethanol-induced neocortical neuron number deficits. Dev Neurosci. 
2002;24:467–477.
Gohlke JM, Griffith WC, Faustman EM. The role of cell death dur-
ing neocortical neurogenesis and synaptogenesis: implications from a 
computational model for the rat and mouse. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 
2004;151:43–54.
Gohlke JM, Griffith WC, Faustman EM. A systems-based computational 
model for dose–response comparisons of two mode of action hypoth-
eses for ethanol-induced neurodevelopmental toxicity. Toxicol Sci. 
2005;86:470–484.
Gohlke JM, Griffith WC, Faustman EM. Computational models of neocorti-
cal neuronogenesis and programmed cell death in the developing mouse, 
monkey, and human. Cereb Cortex. 2007;17:2433–2442.
Gohlke JM, Hrynkow SH, Portier CJ. Health, economy, and environ-
ment: sustainable energy choices for a nation. Environ Health Perspect. 
2008;116:A236–A237.
Goldman L. Environmental public health: from theory to practice. In: 
Frumkin H, ed. Environmental Health: From Global to Local. 3rd ed. 
San Francisco, CA: Wiley; 2016:725–746.
Gray TJB. Application of in vitro systems in male reproductive toxicology. 
In: Lamb JC IV, Foster PMD, eds. Physiology and Toxicology of Male 
Reproduction. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 1988:250–253.
Great Britain, Health and Safety Executive. Reducing Risks, Protecting 
People: Health & Safety Executive. Suffolk, UK: HSE Books; 1999.
Gribble EJ, Hong SW, Faustman EM. The magnitude of methylmercury-
induced cytotoxicity and cell cycle arrest is p53-dependent. Birth Defects 
Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2005;73:29–38.
Groopman JD, Kensler TW. The light at the end of the tunnel for chem-
ical-specific biomarkers: daylight or headlight? Carcinogenesis. 
1999;20:1–11.
Guerrette Z, Moreira EG, Griffith WC, et al. Cytochrome P450 3A5 geno-
type is correlated with acetylcholinesterase inhibition levels after expo-
sure to organophosphate pesticides. Abstract 2111. The Toxicologist 
CD—An Official Journal of the Society of Toxicology. 2011;120(March).
Guo L, Lobenhofer EK, Wang C, et al. Rat toxicogenomic study reveals 
analytical consistency across microarray platforms. Nat Biotechnol. 
2006;24:1162–1169.
HapMap. International HapMap Project. 2009. Available at: http://snp 
.cshl.org/index.html.en.
Harris MW, Chapin RE, Lockhart AC. Assessment of a short-term repro-
ductive and developmental toxicity screen. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 
1992;19:186–196.

152
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
Hartung R. Dose–response relationships. In: Tardiff RG, Rodricks JV, eds. 
Toxic Substances and Human Risk: Principles of Data Interpretation. 
New York: Plenum Press; 1987:29–46.
Hartung T, Blaauboer BJ, Bosgra S, et al. An expert consortium review 
of the EC-commissioned report “alternative (non-animal) methods for 
cosmetics testing: current status and future prospects—2010”. ALTEX. 
2011;28:183–209.
Hartung T, Bremer S, Casati S, et al. ECVAM’s response to the chang-
ing political environment for alternatives: consequences of the 
European Union chemicals and cosmetics policies. Altern Lab Anim. 
2003;31:473–481.
Haseman JK, Lockhart AM. Correlations between chemically related 
site-specific carcinogenic effects in long-term studies in rats and mice. 
Environ Health Perspect. 1993;101:50–54.
Haws LC, Su SH, Harris M, et al. Development of a refined database of 
mammalian relative potency estimates for dioxin-like compounds. 
Toxicol Sci. 2006;89:4–30.
Healey GF. Power calculations in toxicology. Altern Lab Anim. 
1987;15:132–139.
Hill AB. The environment and disease: association or causation. Proc R Soc 
Med. 1965;58:295–300.
Hsieh A. A nation’s genes for a cure to cancer: evolving ethical, social and 
legal issues regarding population genetic databases. Columbia J Law Soc 
Probl. 2004;37:359–411.
Human Genome Program. Breaking News: GINA Becomes Law May 2008. 
Genetics Privacy and Legislation. 2008. Available at: http://www.ornl.gov/
sci/techresources/Human_Genome/elsi/legislat.shtml. Accessed 2011.
IARC. IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to 
Humans. Lyon, France: World Health Organization; 2000.
IARC. Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans. 
Lyon, France: International Agency for Research on Cancer; 2017.
ICCVAM. The Murine Local Lymph Node Assay: A Test Method for 
Assessing the Allergic Contact Dermatitis Potential of Chemicals/
Compounds: The Results of an Independent Peer Review Evaluation. 
Research Triangle Park, NC: National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences; 1999.
ICCVAM. ICCVAM Test Method Evaluation Report on using the LLNA for 
Testing Pesticide Formulations, Metals, Substances in Aqueous Solutions, 
and Other Products. Research Triangle Park, NC: National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences; 2011a.
ICCVAM. Independent Scientific Peer Review Panel Report Evaluation of 
the LUMI-CELL®ER (BG1Luc ER TA) Test Method. Research Triangle 
Park, NC: National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences; 2011b.
ICCVAM. Validation of the BG1Luc Estrogen Receptor Transcriptional 
Activation Test Method. Research Triangle Park, NC: National Institute 
of Environmental Health Sciences. 2012. Available at: http://iccvam 
.niehs.nih.gov/methods/endocrine/end_eval.htm.
ICCVAM. Available at: https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/iccvam/docs/about_docs/
icatm-moc-mar11.pdf. 
ILSI. A Framework for Cumulative Risk Assessment. Washington, DC: 
International Life Science Institute; 1999.
Institute of Medicine. Toward Environmental Justice. Research, Education, 
and Health Policy Needs. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 
1999.
Institute of Medicine. Development of DRIs 1994–2004 Lessons Learned 
and New Challenges: Workshop Summary. Washington, DC: National 
Academies Press; 2008.
Israeli M, Nelson CB. Distribution and expected time of residence for 
United States households. Risk Anal. 1992;12:65–72.
Johnson DE, Wolfgang GHI, Gledin MA, Braeckman RA. Toxicokinetics 
and toxicodynamics. In: Sipes I, McQueen C, Gandolfi A, eds. 
Comprehensive Toxicology. Oxford, UK: Pergamon; 1997:169–181.
Judd NL, Drew CH, Acharya C, et al. Framing scientific analyses for risk 
management of environmental hazards by communities: case studies with 
seafood safety issues. Environ Health Perspect. 2005;113:1502–1508.
Judson RS, Martin MT, Egeghy P, et al. Aggregating data for computational 
toxicology applications: the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
aggregated computational toxicology resource (ACToR) system. Int J 
Mol Sci. 2012;13(2):1805–1831.
Kavlock RJ, Allen BC, Faustman EM, Kimmel CA. Dose response assess-
ments for developmental toxicity: IV. Benchmark doses for fetal weight 
changes. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1995;26:211–222.
Kavlock R, Chandler K, Houck K, et al. Update on EPA’s ToxCast program: 
providing high throughput decision support tools for chemical risk man-
agement. Chem Res Toxicol. 2012;25(7):1287–302.
Keim M. Intentional chemical disasters. In: Hogan D, Burstein J, eds. 
Disaster Medicine. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 
2002:340–348.
Kensler TW, Roebuck BD, Wogan GN, Groopman JD. Aflatoxin: a 50-year 
odyssey of mechanistic and translational toxicology. Toxicol Sci. 
2011;120(suppl 1):S28–S48.
Khoury MJ. Human genome epidemiology: translating advances in human 
genetics into population-based data for medicine and public health. 
Genet Med. 1999;1:71–73.
Kite-Powell HL, Fleming LE, Backer LC, et al. Linking the oceans to pub-
lic health: current efforts and future directions. Environ Health. 2008; 
7:S6.
Klaunig JE, Babich M, Baetcke K, et al. PPARα agonist-induced rodent 
tumors: modes of action and human relevance. Crit Rev Toxicol. 
2003;33:655–780.
Koturbash I, Scherhag A, Sorrentino J, et  al. Epigenetic mechanisms of 
mouse interstrain variability in genotoxicity of the environmental toxi-
cant 1,3-butadiene. Toxicol Sci. 2011;122:448–456.
Kramer CB, Cullen AC, Faustman EM. Policy implications of genetic infor-
mation on regulation under the Clean Air Act: the case of particulate mat-
ter and asthmatics. Environ Health Perspect. 2006;114:313–319.
Krewski D, Van Ryzin J. Dose-response models for quantal response toxic-
ity data. In: Csorgo M, Dawson D, Rao J, Seleh A, eds. Statistics and 
Related Topics. Amsterdam: North-Holland; 1981:201–229.
Lave LB, Ennever F, Rosenkranz HS, Omenn GS. Information value of the 
rodent bioassay. Nature. 1988;336:631–633.
Lave LB, Omenn GS. Cost-effectiveness of short-term tests for carcinoge-
nicity. Nature. 1986;334:29–34.
Leiserowitz AA, Kates RW, Parris TM. Sustainability values, attitudes, and 
behaviors: a review of multinational and global trends. Annu Rev Environ 
Resour. 2006;31:413–444.
Leroux BG, Leisenring WM, Moolgavkar SH, Faustman EM. A bio-
logically based dose–response model for development. Risk Anal. 
1996;16:449–458.
Lewandowski TA, Ponce RA, Whittaker SG, Faustman EM. In vitro models 
for evaluating developmental toxicity. In: Gad S, ed. Vitro Toxicology. 
New York: Taylor & Francis; 2000:139–187.
Limbird LE, Taylor P. Endocrine disruptors signal the need for receptor 
models and mechanisms to inform policy. Cell. 1998;93:157–163.
Liu R, Rallo R, George S, et al. Classification NanoSAR development for 
cytotoxicity of metal oxide nanoparticles. Small. 2011;7:1118–1126.
Lowrance WW. Of Acceptable Risk: Science and the Determination of 
Safety. Los Altos, CA: William Kaufmann; 1976.
Maynard AD, Aitken RJ, Butz T, et al. Safe handling of nanotechnology. 
Nature. 2006;444:267–269.
McClain RM. Mechanistic considerations in the regulation and classifica-
tion of chemical carcinogens. In: Kotsonis F, Mackey M, Hjelle J, eds. 
Nutritional Toxicology. New York: Raven Press; 1994:278–304.
McGregor DB, Rice JM, Venitt S. The Use of Short- and Medium-Term 
Tests for Carcinogens and Data on Genetic Effects in Carcinogenic 
Hazard Evaluation. Lyon, France: IARC; 1999.
Meek ME, Boobis AR, Crofton KM, et al. Risk assessment of combined 
exposure to multiple chemicals: a WHO/IPCS framework. Regul Toxicol 
Pharmacol. 2011;60(2):S1–S14.
Mendoza MA, Ponce RA, Ou YC, Faustman EM. p21(WAF1/CIP1) inhibits 
cell cycle progression but not G2/M-phase transition following methyl-
mercury exposure. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2002;178:117–125.
Moggs JG, Tinwell H, Spurway T, et  al. Phenotypic anchoring of gene 
expression changes during estrogen-induced uterine growth. Environ 
Health Perspect. 2004;112:1589–1606.
Moolgavkar SH, Luebeck G. Two-event model for carcinogenesis: 
biological, mathematical, and statistical considerations. Risk Anal. 
1990;10:323–341.

Risk Assessment
Chapter 4
153
Moore JA, Daston GP, Faustman EM. An evaluative process for assess-
ing human reproductive and developmental toxicity of agents. Reprod 
Toxicol. 1995;9:61–95.
Morgan GM. Risk analysis and management. Sci Am. 1993;269:32–41.
National Academy of Science. Health Risks from Dioxin and Related 
Compounds: Evaluation of the EPA Reassessment. Washington, DC: 
National Academies Press; 2006.
National Human Genome Research Institute. A DNA Polymorphism Discovery 
Resource. 2010. Available at: http://www.genome.gov/10001552.
Nature Biotechnology Editorial. Making the most of microarrays. Nat 
Biotechnol. 2006;24:1039–1039.
NCBI. dbSNP Short Genetic Variations. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/SNP/.
NCBI. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/. 2011b.
NCI. Available at: http://dtp.nci.nih.gov. 2017.
Neal N, Malmfors T, Slovic P. Intuitive toxicology: expert and lay judg-
ments of chemical risks. Toxicol Pathol. 1994;22:198–201.
Nebert DW, Duffy JJ. How knockout mouse lines will be used to study 
the role of drug-metabolizing enzymes and their receptors during repro-
duction, development, and environmental toxicity, cancer and oxidative 
stress. Biochem Pharmacol. 1997;53:249–254.
Nel AE, Nasser E, Godwin H, et al. A multi-stakeholder perspective on the 
use of alternative test strategies for nanomaterial safety assessment. ACS 
Nano. 2013;7(8):6422–6433.
Neumann DA, Olin SS. Urinary bladder carcinogenesis: a working group 
approach to risk assessment. Food Chem Toxicol. 1995;33:701–704.
NHGRI. The ENCODE project: encyclopedia of DNA elements. 2017. 
Available at: https://www.encodeproject.org.
NIEHS. Corrositex: An In Vitro Test Method for Assessing Dermal Corrosivity 
Potential of Chemicals. Washington, DC: ICCVAM; 1999a:33109–33111.
NIEHS. The Murine Local Lymph Node Assay: A Test Method for Assessing 
the Allergic Contact Dermatitis Potential of Chemicals/Compounds. 
Washington, DC: ICCVAM; 1999b:14006–14007.
NIEHS. ICCVAM Test Method Evaluation Report: In Vitro Cytotoxicity 
Test Methods for Estimating Starting Doses for Acute Oral Systemic 
Toxicity Tests. National Toxicology Program (NTP) Interagency Center 
for the Evaluation of Alternative Toxicological Methods (NICEATM), 
Interagency Coordinating Committee on the Validation of Alternative 
Methods (ICCVAM). Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health; 2006.
NLM. Available at: http://toxnet.nlm.nih.gov/. 2017.
NRC. Risk Assessment in the Federal Government: Managing the Process. 
Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 1983.
NRC. Improving Risk Communication. Washington, DC: National 
Academies Press; 1989a.
NRC. Biological Markers in Reproductive Toxicology. Washington, DC: 
National Academies Press; 1989b.
NRC. Biological Markers in Pulmonary Toxicology. Washington, DC: 
National Academies Press; 1989c.
NRC. Biological Markers in Immunotoxicology. Washington, DC: National 
Academies Press; 1992.
NRC Committee on Risk Assessment Methodology. Issues in Risk 
Assessment: Use of Maximum Tolerated Dose in Animal Bioassays for 
Carcinogenicity. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 1993.
NRC. Science and Judgement in Risk Assessment. Washington, DC: 
National Academies Press; 1994
NRC. Understanding Risk: Informing Decisions in a Democratic Society. 
Stern PC, Fineberg HV, eds. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 
1996.
NRC. Scientific Frontiers in Developmental Toxicology and Risk 
Assessment. Washington, DC: National Research Council; 2000.
NRC. Effective Risk Communication, The Nuclear Regulatory Commission’s 
Guidelines for External Risk Communication. Washington, DC: National 
Academies Press, 2004.
NRC. Toxicity Testing in the 21st Century: A Vision and a Strategy. 
Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2007a.
NRC. Applications of Toxicogenomic Technologies to Predictive Toxicology 
and Risk. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2007b.
NRC. Science and Decisions: Advancing Risk Assessment. Washington, 
DC: National Academies Press; 2009.
NRC. Toxicity Pathway-Based Risk Assessment Preparing for Paradigm 
Change: A Symposium Summary. Washington, DC: National Academies 
Press; 2010.
NRC. Sustainability Concepts in Decision-making: Tools and Approaches 
for the US Environmental Protection Agency. Washington, DC: National 
Academies Press; 2014a.
NRC. A Framework to Guide Selection of Chemical Alternatives. 
Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2014b.
NRC. Using 21st Century Science to Improve Risk-related Evaluations. 
Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2017.
NTP. Available at: http://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/. 2011a.
NTP, Office of Health Assessment and Translation (OHAT, Formerly 
CERHR). Available at: http://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/?objectid=497C419D-
E834-6B35-8AF15D389859AF07. 2011b.
NTP. 14th Report on Carcinogens; 2016.
NTP, Office of Health Assessment and Translation. OHAT Systematic 
Review. 2017a. Available at: https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/pubhealth/hat/
noms/index-2.html.
NTP, Guidance document for the developmental neurotoxicity testing arm 
of the modified one-generation study. 2017b. Available at https://ntp 
.niehs.nih.gov/ntp/test_info/mog_guidance_508.pdf
Oberdorster G. Lung particle overload: implications for occupational expo-
sure to particles. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 1995;12:123–135.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development). Manual 
for Investigation of HPV Chemicals; 2013. Available at: www.oecd.org.
OECD. Adverse Outcome Pathways. Molecular Screening and Toxicoge-
nomics; 2017. Available at: http://www.oecd.org/chemicalsafety/testing/
adverse-outcome-pathways-molecular-screening-and-toxicogenomics.htm.
Omenn GS. The genomic era: a crucial role for the public health sciences. 
Environ Health Perspect. 2000;108:A204–A205.
Omenn GS. Gene–environment interactions: eco-genetics and toxicoge-
nomics. In: Ginsburg GS, Willard HF, eds. Genomic and Personalized 
Medicine. 2nd ed. Elsevier: New York; 2012.
Omenn GS, Lampen A. Scientific and cost-effectiveness criteria in selecting 
batteries of short-term tests. Mutat Res. 1988;205:41–49.
Omenn GS, Omiecinski CJ, Eaton DE. Eco-genetics of chemical carcino-
gens. In: Cantor C, Caskey C, Hood L, eds. Biotechnology and Human 
Genetic Predisposition to Disease. New York: Wiley-Liss; 1990:81–93.
Omenn GS, Stuebbe S, Lave LB. Predictions of rodent carcinogenicity test-
ing results: interpretation in light of the Lave–Omenn value-of-informa-
tion model. Mol Carcinogen. 1995;14:37–45.
Patlewicz G, Roberts DW, Aptula A, Blackburn K, Hubesch B. Workshop: 
use of “read-across” for chemical safety assessment under REACH. 
Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2013;65(2):226–228.
Patterson TA, Lobenhofer EK, Fulmer-Smentek SB, et  al. Performance 
comparison of one-color and two-color platforms within the MicroArray 
Quality Control (MAQC) project. Nat Biotechnol. 2006;24:1140–1150.
Perdue WC, Stone LA, Gostin LO. The built environment and its relation-
ship to the public’s health: the legal framework. Am J Public Health. 
2003;93:1390–1394.
Perera FP, Weinstein IB. Molecular epidemiology: recent advances and 
future directions. Carcinogenesis. 2000;21:517–524.
REACH (Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of 
Chemicals). 2011. Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/environment/
chemicals/reach/reach_en.htm.
Regalado J, Perez-Padilla R, Sansores R, et al. The effect of biomass burn-
ing on respiratory symptoms and lung function in rural Mexican women. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2006;174(8):901–905.
Renwick AG. Safety factors and the establishment of acceptable daily 
intakes. Food Addit Contam. 1991;8:135–150.
Renwick AG. Toxicokinetics. In: Ballantyne B, Marrs T, Syversen T, 
eds. General and Applied Toxicology. New York: Grove’s Dictionaries; 
1999:67–95.
Renwick AG, Lazarus NR. Human variability and noncancer risk 
­assessment—an analysis of the default uncertainty factor. Regul Toxicol 
Pharmacol. 1998;27:3–20.
Rice JM, Baan RA, Blettner M. Rodent tumors of urinary bladder, renal 
cortex, and thyroid gland. IARC monographs: evaluations of carcino-
genic risk to humans. Toxicol Sci. 1999;49:166–171.

154
General Principles of Toxicology
Unit I
Risk Commission. The Presidential/Congressional Commission on Risk 
Assessment and Risk Management. Washington, DC: Government 
Printing Office; 1997.
Rodericks JV, Rudenko I, Starr TB, Turnbull D. Risk assessment. In: Sipes 
I, McQueen C, Gandolfi A, eds. Comprehensive Toxicology. Oxford, UK: 
Pergamon; 1997.
Roe D, Pease W, Florini K, Silbergeld E. Toxic Ignorance: The Continuing 
Absence of Basic Health Testing for Top-Selling Chemicals in the United 
States. Washington, DC: Environmental Defense Fund; 1997.
Rooney AA, Boyles AL, Wolfe MS, Bucher JR, Thayer KA. Systematic 
review and evidence integration for literature-based environmen-
tal health science assessments. Environmental Health Perspectives. 
2014;122(7):711–718.
Ryan PB. Exposure assessment, industrial hygiene, and environmental 
management. In: Frumkin H, ed. Environmental Health: From Global to 
Local. 2nd ed. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass; 2010.
Sandman PM. Responding to Community Outrage: Strategies for Effective 
Risk Communication. Fairfax, VA: American Industrial Hygiene 
Association; 1993.
Sartor MA, Dolinoy DC, Rozek LS, Omenn GS. Bioinformatics for high-
throughput toxico-epigenomics studies. In: Sahu SC, ed. Toxicology and 
Epigenetics. New York: Wiley; 2012.
Sartor MA, Mahavisno V, Keshamouni VG, et  al. ConceptGen: a gene 
set enrichment and gene set relation mapping tool. Bioinformatics. 
2010;26:456–463.
Schardein JL, Scialli AR. The legislation of toxicologic safety factors: the 
Food Quality Protection Act with chlorpyrifos as a test case. Reprod 
Toxicol Rev. 1999;13:1–14.
Sette WF. Pesticide Assessment Guidelines, Subdivision D, Hazard 
Evaluation, Human and Domestic Animals, Addendum 10. Neurotoxicity 
Series 81, 82, and 83 PB91-154617. Washington, DC: National Technical 
Information Services; 1991.
Sexton K, Selevan SG, Wagener DK, Lybarger JA. Estimating human expo-
sures to environmental pollutants: availability and utility of existing data-
bases. Arch Environ Health. 1992;47:398–407.
Shelby MD, Bishop JB, Mason JM, Tindall KR. Fertility, reproduction and 
genetic disease: studies on the mutagenic effects of environmental agents 
on mammalian germ cells. Environ Health Perspect. 1993;200:283–291.
Shuey DL, Lau C, Logsdon TR. Biologically based dose–response model-
ing in developmental toxicology: biochemical and cellular sequelae of 
5-fluorouracil exposure in the developing rat. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
1994;126:129–144.
Silverman KC, Naumann BD, Holder DJ. Establishing data-derived adjust-
ment factors from published pharmaceutical clinical trial data. Hum Ecol 
Risk Assess. 1999;5:1059–1089.
Simon R, Wang SJ. Use of genomic signatures in therapeutics development 
in oncology and other diseases. Pharmacogenomics J. 2006;6:166–173.
Slovic P. The Feeling of Risk: New Perspectives on Risk Perception. The 
Earthscan Risk in Society Series. Washington, DC: Earthscan, in associa-
tion with the International Institute for Environment and Development; 
2010.
Slovic P, Baruch F, Lichtenstein S. Rating the risks. Environment. 
1979;21:1–20, 36–39.
Slovic P, Peters E, Finucane ML, MacGregor DG. Affect, risk, and decision 
making. Health Psychol. 2005;24:S35–S40.
Smith MN, Grice J, Cullen, Faustman EM. A toxicological framework for 
the prioritization of children’s safe product act data. Int J Environ Res 
Public Health. 2016a;13(4):431.
Smith MT, Guyton KZ, Gibbons CF, et al. Key characteristics of carcino-
gens as a basis for organizing data on mechanisms of carcinogenesis. 
Environ Health Perspect. 2016b;124(6):713–721.
Spielmann H, Seiler A, Bremer S, et al. The practical application of three 
validated in vitro embryotoxicity tests—the report and recommendations 
of an ECVAM/ZEBET workshop (ECVAM workshop 57). Altern Lab 
Anim. 2006;34:527–538.
Stevens JT. Risk assessment of pesticides. In: Williams P, Hottendorf G, 
eds. Comprehensive Toxicology. Oxford, UK: Pergamon; 1997:17–26.
Sudmant PH, Kitzman JO, Antonacci F, et  al. Diversity of human copy 
number variation and multicopy genes. Science. 2010;330:641–646.
Teichman K, U.S. EPA. Presentation to the Science Advisory Board and 
Board of Scientific Counselors (Overview). 2011, June. Available at: 
http://my.brainshark.com/Dr-Kevin-Teichman-SAB-BOSC-Presentation- 
720933584.
Tennant RW, Stasiewicz S, Mennear J. Genetically altered mouse models 
for identifying carcinogens. In: McGregor DB, Rice JM, Venitt S, eds. 
The Use of Short- and Medium-Term Tests for Carcinogens and Data 
on Genetic Effects in Carcinogenic Hazard Evaluation. Vol. 146. Lyon, 
France: IARC; 1999:123–150.
Toscano WA, Oehlke KP. Systems biology: new approaches to old environ-
mental health problems. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2005;2:4–9.
United States Act. The Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 
(GINA). Public Law 110-233; May 21, 2008.
U.S. EPA. Guidelines for mutagenicity risk assessment. Fed Reg. 
1986;51:34006–34012.
U.S. EPA. Proposed guidelines for assessing female reproductive risk. Fed 
Reg. 1988;53:24834–24847.
U.S. EPA. Risk Assessment Guidance for Superfund. Vol 1: Human Health 
Evaluation Manual, Part A. Washington, DC: Office of Policy Analysis 
and Office of Emergency and Remedial Response; 1989.
U.S. EPA. Guidelines for developmental toxicity risk assessment. Fed Reg. 
1991;56:63798–63826.
U.S. EPA. Frameworks for Ecological Risk Assessment. EPA\630\R-92\001; 
1992a.
U.S. EPA. Guidelines for exposure assessment. Fed Reg. 1992b;57: 
22888–22938.
U.S. EPA. Health Assessment Document for 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-
p-Dioxin (TCDD) and Related Compounds. Washington, DC: Office of 
Research and Development; 1994a.
U.S. EPA. Guidelines for Carcinogen Risk Assessment (Draft Revisions). 
Washington, DC: Office of Health and Environmental Assessment; 
1994b.
U.S. EPA. Guidelines for reproductive toxicity risk assessment. Fed Reg. 
1996a;61:56278–56322.
U.S. EPA. Food Quality Protection Act (FQPA). Washington, DC: Office of 
Pesticide Programs; 1996b.
U.S. EPA. Chemical Hazard Availability Study. Washington, DC: Office of 
Pollution Prevention and Toxics; 1998a.
U.S. EPA. Guidance for identifying pesticides that have a common mecha-
nism of toxicity: notice of availability and solicitation of public com-
ments. Fed Reg. 1998b; 63:42031–42032.
U.S. EPA. Guidelines for Neurotoxicity Risk Assessment. EPA Technical 
Report. Risk Assessment Forum. Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency; 1998c.
U.S. EPA. Guidelines for Carcinogen Risk Assessment, Draft. 
NCEA-F-0644. Washington, DC: EPA; 1999.
U.S. EPA. Benchmark Dose Technical Guidance Document. External 
Review Draft. Washington, DC: Risk Assessment Forum; 2000a.
U.S. EPA. Chlorpyrifos: Re-evaluation Report of the FQPA Safety Factor 
Committee. HED Doc. No. 014077. Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency; 2000b.
U.S. EPA. Risk Characterization Handbook. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency Science Policy Council; 2000c.
U.S. EPA. Generic Ecological Assessment Endpoints (GEAE) for 
Ecological Risk Assessment. Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency; 2004.
U.S. EPA. Guidelines for Carcinogen Risk Assessment (Cancer Guidelines). 
Federal Register Notice. Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency; 2005a.
U.S. EPA. Policy on Evaluating Heath Risks to Children. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; 2005b.
U.S. EPA. Supplemental Guidance for Assessing Susceptibility from Early-
Life Exposure to Carcinogens. Federal Register Notice. EPA/630/R-
03/003F. Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; 
2005c.
U.S. EPA. Child-Specific Exposure Factors Handbook (Final Report). 
EPA/600/R-06/096F. Washington, DC: Office of Research and 
Development and the National Center for Environmental Assessment; 
2008.

Risk Assessment
Chapter 4
155
U.S. EPA. The Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution Prevention (OCSPP) 
Harmonized Test Guidelines: Series 870—Health Effects Test Guidelines. 
870 Series Final Guidelines. 2010a. Available at: http://www.epa.gov/
ocspp/pubs/frs/publications/Test_Guidelines/series870.htm.
U.S. EPA. EPA’s Reanalysis of Key Issues Related to Dioxin Toxicity and 
Response to NAS Comments Draft. 2010b. NAS comments are published 
by the National Research Council of the National Academies and avail-
able from the National Technical Information Service, Springfield, VA, 
and available at: http://www.epa.gov/ncea.
U.S. EPA. Integrated Exposure Uptake Biokinetic Model for Lead in 
Children. Windows® version (IEUBKwin v1.1 build 11). Washington, 
DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; 2010c. Available from the 
National Technical Information Service. Available at: http://www.epa 
.gov/superfund/lead/products.htm.
U.S. EPA. IRIS Toxicological Review of Inorganic Arsenic (Cancer) (2010 
External Review Draft). EPA/635/R-10/001. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency; 2010d.
U.S. EPA, Office of Research and Development. Presentations for the 
Science Advisory Board and Board of Scientific Counselors. In: 
Preparation for the June 29–30, 2011 Joint Meeting; 2001f. Available at: 
https://yosemite.epa.gov/sab/sabproduct.nsf/F53952681221F76F852578
AF007EE972/$File/SABBOSC+Presentations.pdf.
U.S. EPA. Exposure Factors Handbook: 2011 Edition. Final Report. 
Washington, DC: Office of Health and Environmental Assessment; 
2011a.
U.S. EPA. High Production Volume (HPV) Challenge. 2011b. Available at: 
http://www.epa.gov/hpv/.
U.S. EPA. PMN Forms and Information. New Chemicals. 2011c. Available 
at: http://www.epa.gov/oppt/newchems/pubs/pmnforms.htm.
U.S. EPA. Integrated Risk Information System (IRIS). 2011d. Available at: 
http://www.epa.gov/IRIS/.
U.S. EPA. Interim Genomics Policy. 2011e. Available at: http://www.epa 
.gov/spc/genomics.htm.
U.S. EPA. Benchmark Dose Technical Guidance. EPA/100/R-12/001. 2012a. 
Available at: https://www.epa.gov/risk/benchmark-dose-technical-guidance.
U.S. EPA. Integrated Risk Information System (IRIS): Glossary of IRIS 
Terms. 2012b. Available at: http://www.epa.gov/iris/help_gloss.htm.
U.S. EPA. Computational Toxicology Research. 2012c. Available at: 
http://www.epa.gov/ncct/.
U.S. EPA. Use of High-Throughput Assays and Computational Tools. 
Endocrine Disruptor Screening Program. Notice of Availability and 
Opportunity for Comment; 2015. Available at: https://www.federalregister.
gov/documents/2015/06/19/2015-15182/use-of-high-throughput-assays-
and-computational-tools-endocrine-disruptor-screening-program-notice.
U.S. EPA. TRI Chemical List Changes; 2016.
U.S. EPA. Benchmark Modelling Software, Version 2.7. 2017a. Available 
at: https://www.epa.gov/bmds/what-benchmark-dose-software-bmds.
U.S. EPA. ACToR. Washington, DC: Office of Health and Environmental 
Assessment; 2017b. Available at: https://actor.epa.gov/actor/home.xhtml.
U.S. FDA. Critical Path Initiative. Science & Research. Silver Spring, MD: 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration; 2011. Available at: http://www.fda 
.gov/ScienceResearch/SpecialTopics/CriticalPathInitiative/default.htm.
U.S. FDA. Pharmacogenetics. 2017a. Available at: https://www.fds.gov/
drugs/scienceresearch/researchareas/pharmacogenetics/ucm083378.
html.
U.S. FDA. SNP track. 2017b. Available at: https://www.fds.gov/sciencere-
search/bioinformaticstools/snptrack/default.htm.
Van den Berg M, Birnbaum L, Bosveld AT, et al. Toxic equivalency fac-
tors (TEFs) for PCBs, PCDDs, PCDFs for humans and wildlife. Environ 
Health Perspect. 1998;106:775–792.
Van den Berg M, Birnbaum LS, Denison M, et al. The 2005 World Health 
Organization reevaluation of human and mammalian toxic equiva-
lency factors for dioxins and dioxin-like compounds. Toxicol Sci. 
2006;93:223–241.
Vlaanderen J, Portengen L, Rappaport SM, et al. The impact of saturable 
metabolism on exposure–response relations in 2 studies of benzene-
induced leukemia. Am J Epidemiol. 2011;174:621–629.
Wambaugh JF, Setzer RW, Reif DM, et  al. High-throughput models for 
exposure-based chemical prioritization in the ExpoCast project. Environ 
Sci Technol. 2013; 47(15):8579–8588.
Weller E, Long N, Smith A. Dose–rate effects of ethylene oxide exposure 
on developmental toxicity. Toxicol Sci. 1999;50:259–270.
Whittaker SG, Faustman EM. In Vitro Assays for Developmental Toxicity. 
New York: Raven Press; 1994.
WHO. Principles in Governing Consumer Safety in Relation to Pesticide 
Residues: Report of a Meeting of a W.H.O. Expert Committee on 
Pesticide Residues, held jointly with the F.A.O. Panel of Experts on the 
Use of Pesticides in Agriculture. World Health Organization Technical 
Report Series No. 240. Geneva: WHO; 1962.
WHO. Principles for the Assessment of Risks to Human Health from 
Exposure to Chemicals. Environmental Health Criteria. World Health 
Organization, International Programme on Chemical Safety. Geneva: 
World Health Organization; 1999.
WHO. Joint IPCS/OECD Project on the Harmonization of Chemical 
Hazard/Risk Assessment Terminology (Harmonization Project). Geneva: 
World Health Organization; 2000.
WHO. IPCS Risk Assessment Terminology. Harmonization Project 
Document. Geneva: World Health Organization, International Program 
on Chemical Safety; 2004.
WHO. Chemical-Specific Adjustment Factors for Interspecies Differences 
and Human Variability: Guidance Document for Use of Data in 
Dose/Concentration–Response Assessment. Geneva: World Health 
Organization; 2005.
WHO. Principles of Characterizing and Applying Human Exposure 
Models. IPCS Harmonization Project Document No. 3. Geneva: World 
Health Organization; 2006a.
WHO. Principles for Modeling Dose-response for the Risk Assessment 
of Chemicals. Environmental Health Criteria Series, No. 234. Geneva: 
World Health Organization, International Program on Chemical Safety; 
2006b.
WHO. Uncertainty and Data Quality in Exposure Assessment. Geneva: 
World Health Organization, International Program on Chemical Safety; 
2008.
WHO. WHO Human Health Risk Assessment Toolkit: Chemical Hazards. 
IPCS Harmonization Project Document No. 8. International Programme 
on Chemical Safety, Inter-Organization Programme for the Sound 
Management of Chemicals. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2010.
WHO. IPCS Harmonization Project. Programmes and Projects. 2011a. 
Available at: http://www.who.int/ipcs/methods/harmonization/en/.
WHO. The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). 2011b. 
Available at: http://www.iarc.fr/.
WHO. 
Concise 
International 
Chemical 
Assessment 
Documents. 
International Programme on Chemical Safety (IPCS); 2011c. Available 
at: http://www.who.int/ipcs/publications/cicad/en/.
WHO. Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Health Topics. 2011d. 
Available at: http://www.who.int/topics/millennium_development_goals/en/.
Yamada T, Kondo M, Miyata K, et al. An evaluation of the human relevance 
of the lung tumors observed in female mice treated with permethrin 
based on mode of action. Toxicol Sci. 2017;157(2):465–486.
Yu X, Griffith WC, Hanspers K, et al. A system based approach to interpret 
dose and time-dependent microarray data: quantitative integration of GO 
ontology analysis for risk assessment. Toxicol Sci. 2006;92:560–577.
Yu XZ, Hong S, Moreira EG, Faustman EM. Improving in vitro Sertoli cell/
gonocyte co-culture model for assessing male reproductive toxicity: les-
sons learned from comparisons of cytotoxicity versus genomic responses 
to phthalates. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2009;239:325–336.
Zhao Q, Dourson M, Gadagbui B. A review of the reference dose for chlor-
pyrifos. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2006;44:111–124.

This page intentionally left blank