# 5 Absorption, Distribution, and Excretion of Toxicants
# Casarett & Doull's Toxicology, 9th Edition
# Pages: 178-211
# Unit: Unit II Disposition of Toxicants

5
chapter
Absorption, Distribution, and 
Excretion of Toxicants
Angela L. Slitt
INTRODUCTION
The disposition of a chemical or xenobiotic is defined as the com-
posite actions of its absorption, distribution, biotransformation, and 
elimination. This chapter focuses on the contribution of absorption, 
distribution, and elimination to xenobiotic toxicity, whereas Chap. 6 
is dedicated to biotransformation. The quantitative characterization 
of xenobiotic disposition is termed pharmacokinetics or toxicoki-
netics and is reviewed in Chap. 7.
The various factors and organs involved in affecting disposi-
tion of a toxicant are depicted in Fig. 5-1. The diagram is a pictoral 
overview of the processes of absorption, distribution, and excretion, 
and its complexity is intended to illustrate that, although they will 
be discussed separately, the processes that determine disposition 
are likely to occur simultaneously. Moreover, the disposition of any 
compound is a fundamental factor that contributes to its potential 
for toxicity. Specifically, the toxicity of a substance is usually in 
most circumstances directly dependent on the dose, where “dose” 
is defined as the amount that ultimately reaches the site or sites of 
action (tissue, cell, or molecular target). Therefore, the disposition 
of a chemical determines its concentration at the site of action such 
that the concerted actions of absorption, distribution, and elimina-
tion also determine the potential for adverse events to occur.
The skin, lungs, and alimentary canal are the main barriers 
that separate higher organisms from an environment containing a 
large number of chemicals (Fig. 5-1). Toxicants must cross one or 
several of these incomplete barriers to exert deleterious effects, and 
only chemicals that are caustic and corrosive (acids, bases, salts, 
oxidizers), which act directly at the point of contact, are exceptions 
to this generalization. A chemical absorbed into the bloodstream or 
lymphatics through any of the major barriers is distributed, at least 
to some extent, throughout the body, including the site where it 
produces damage. This site is called the target organ or target tissue. 
A chemical may have one or several target organs, and, in turn, 
several chemicals may have the same target organ or organs. For 
example, microcystins are an example of cyanotoxins present in 
harmful algal blooms that can selectively concentrate to the liver via 
transporter-mediated mechanisms that facilitate uptake into hepa-
tocytes and elicit toxicity through inhibition of protein phospha-
tases, PP1 and PP2A (Campos and Vasconcelos, 2010). However, 
it cannot be assumed that the tissue of highest concentration is 
also the target organ where toxicity will be observed. For example, 
dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) is a chlorinated hydrocar-
bon insecticide that achieves high concentrations in fat depots but 
is not overtly toxic to that tissue.
Poor absorption of a toxicant resulting from a low amount 
absorbed or from a low rate of absorption will limit or pre-
vent toxicity because a chemical may never attain a sufficiently 
high concentration at a potential site of action to cause toxicity. 
Fig. 5-2 depicts the example of microcystins, in which hepatotoxic-
ity is attenuated when mechanisms that result in accumulation are 
decreased, such as targeted deletion of a key transporter, Organic 
Introduction
Cell Membranes
Passive Transport
Simple Diffusion
Filtration
Special Transport
Facilitated Transport
Active Transport
Xenobiotic Transporters
Additional Transport Processes
Absorption
Absorption of Toxicants by the 
Gastrointestinal Tract
Absorption of Toxicants by the Lungs
Gases and Vapors
Aerosols and Particles
Absorption of Toxicants Through 
the Skin
Absorption of Toxicants After 
Special Routes of Administration
Distribution
Volume of Distribution
Storage of Toxicants in Tissues
Plasma Proteins as Storage Depot
Liver and Kidney as Storage Depots
Fat as Storage Depot
Bone as Storage Depot
Blood–Brain Barrier
Passage of Toxicants Across the 
Placenta
Redistribution of Toxicants
Excretion
Urinary Excretion
Fecal Excretion
Nonabsorbed Ingesta
Biliary Excretion
Exhalation
Other Routes of Elimination
Cerebrospinal Fluid
Milk
Sweat and Saliva
Computational and 
Experimental Approaches  
to Assess Xenobiotic 
Disposition
Absorption
Hepatobiliary Excretion
Classification Systems
Conclusion
Acknowledgments
References

160
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
anion transporting polypeptide 1b2 (Oatp1b2). In wild-type mice 
that expressed Oatp1b2, microcystin concentrated in liver and bind-
ing to protein phosphatase 1/2a was observed. However, in mice 
that lacked Oatp1b2 there was less MC in the liver, along with less 
binding of MC to protein phosphatase 1/2a and much less toxicity. 
Similarly, a chemical that is well absorbed but rapidly biotrans-
formed or eliminated from an organism is less likely to be toxic 
because rapid excretion prevents it from reaching a sufficiently high 
concentration at a potential site of action to cause toxicity. These 
are examples of how the disposition of toxicants contributes to the 
fundamental concept that the “dose makes the poison.”
The processes comprising xenobiotic disposition are interre-
lated and influence each other. The integrated relationship of these 
processes is illustrated in Fig. 5-1. In this chapter, the qualitative 
aspects of absorption, distribution, and excretion are presented with 
emphasis on the functional features and molecular determinants of 
these processes. As all these processes involve passage across bio-
logical membranes, we begin with a discussion of this important 
and ubiquitous barrier.
CELL MEMBRANES
Toxicants usually pass through a number of cells, such as the strati-
fied epithelium of the skin, the thin cell layers of the lungs or the 
gastrointestinal (GI) tract, capillary endothelium, and ultimately 
the cells of the target organ. The plasma membranes surrounding 
all these cells are remarkably similar. The basic unit of the cell 
membrane is a lipid bilayer composed primarily of phospholipids, 
glycolipids, and cholesterol. Mammalian cell plasma membranes 
contain four major phospholipids (phosphatidylcholine, phospha-
tidylethanolamine, phosphatidylserine, and sphingomyelin) and 
these together comprise more than half of the lipid in most mem-
branes. Phospholipids are amphiphilic, consisting of a hydrophilic 
polar head and a hydrophobic lipid tail. In membranes, the polar 
head groups are oriented toward the outer and inner surfaces of 
the membrane, whereas the hydrophobic tails are oriented inward 
and face each other to form a continuous hydrophobic inner space. 
The thickness of the cell membrane is about 7 to 9 nm. Numerous 
proteins are inserted or embedded in the bilayer, and some trans-
membrane proteins traverse the entire lipid bilayer, functioning as 
important biological receptors or allowing the formation of aqueous 
pores, ion channels, and transporters (Fig. 5-3). The fatty acids of 
the membrane do not have a rigid crystalline structure but are semi-
fluid at physiological temperatures. Overall, hydrophobic interac-
tions are the major driving force in the formation of membrane 
lipid bilayers, and the fluid character of membranes is determined 
largely by the structure and relative abundance of unsaturated fatty 
acids. The more unsaturated fatty acids the membranes contain, the 
more fluid-like they are, facilitating more rapid active or passive 
transport.
The membrane barrier is differentially permeable and regulates 
what enters into or exits from cells. Toxicants cross membranes either 
Blood and lymph
Lung
Skin
Lung
Bile
Kidney
Gastrointestinal
tract
Ingestion
Inhalation
Intravenous
Subcutaneous
Intramuscular
Intraperitoneal
Extracellular ﬂuid
Fat
Other organs
Soft tissues, bone
Urine
Feces
Expired air
Portal
blood
Dermal
Liver
Figure 5-1.  Summary of the disposition of toxicants as determined by absorption, distribution, and excretion in the body. Black lines represent major pathways 
of absorption into the body, blue designates distribution, and green lines identify pathways of final excretion (elimination) from the body, with the exception of 
enterohepatic circulation, which is designated in red.
Blood
Hepatocyte
Microcystin-LR
Oatp1b2
Oatp1b2
Microcystin-LR
Hepatotoxicity
Microcystin-LR
Microcystin-LR
Protection from injury
Figure 5-2.  Contribution of Oatp1b2 to microcystin-induced hepatotoxicity.

Absorption, Distribution, and excretion of Toxicants
Chapter 5
161
by passive processes in which the cell expends no energy or by mech-
anisms in which the cell provides energy to translocate the toxicant 
across its membrane. Physicochemical properties such as molecular 
weight, hydrophilicity, and polarity (total polar surface area) are deter-
minants for the ability of a chemical to permeate the cell membrane.
Passive Transport
Simple Diffusion  Many toxicants cross membranes by simple 
diffusion, following the principles of Fick’s law, which estab-
lishes that chemicals move from regions of higher concentration 
to regions of lower concentration without any energy expendi-
ture. Small hydrophilic molecules (up to about 600 Da) permeate 
membranes through aqueous pores (Benz et al., 1980), in a pro-
cess termed paracellular diffusion, whereas hydrophobic molecules 
diffuse across the lipid domain of membranes (transcellular diffu-
sion). The smaller a hydrophilic molecule is, the more readily it 
traverses membranes by simple diffusion through aqueous pores. 
Consequently, a small, water-soluble compound such as ethanol is 
rapidly absorbed into the blood from the GI tract and is distributed 
just as rapidly throughout the body by simple diffusion from blood 
into all tissues.
For larger organic molecules with differing degrees of lipid sol-
ubility, the rate of transfer across membranes correlates with lipophi-
licity. Lipid solubility is generally determined by the octanol/water 
partition coefficient, P, which is defined as the ratio of the concen-
tration of compound in organic and aqueous phases under equilib-
rium conditions. log P is also expressed as Kow or Pow. It is usually 
expressed in logarithmic form as log P, and numerous ­examples are 
listed in Table 5-1. The log P is an extremely informative physico-
chemical parameter relative to assessing potential membrane perme-
ability, with positive values associated with high lipid solubility. In 
contrast, charged molecules such as paraquat do not have a mea-
surable log P. As illustrated by the compounds in Table 5-1, amino 
acids such as glycine are highly water-soluble and have a negative 
log P, whereas the environmental contaminants DDT and 2,3,7,8-tet-
rachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) are very lipid soluble and have a 
high, positive log P. There are a variety of experimental methods for 
empirical determination of log P, along with computational tools that 
can be used to predict log P for any chemical (Mannhold et al., 2009).
Many chemicals are weak organic acids or bases, which in 
solution are ionized according to Arrhenius’ theory. The ionized 
form usually has low lipid solubility and thus does not permeate 
readily through the lipid domain of a membrane. There may be 
some transfer of organic anions and cations (depending on their 
molecular weight) through the aqueous pores, but this is a slow and 
inefficient process. In contrast, the nonionized form of weak organic 
acids and bases is lipid soluble to some extent, resulting in diffusion 
across the lipid domain of a membrane. The rate of movement of the 
nonionized form is proportional to its lipid solubility such that the 
extent to which a compound is nonionized determines its diffusion.
The molar ratio of ionized to nonionized molecules of a weak 
organic acid or base in solution depends on the ionization constant, 
which is defined as the pH at which a weak organic acid or base is 
50% ionized (denoted as pKa or pKb for acids and bases, respec-
tively). Like pH, pKa and pKb are defined as the negative logarithm 
of the ionization constant of a weak organic acid or base. An organic 
acid with a low pKa is relatively a strong acid, and one with a high 
pKa is a weak acid. The opposite is true for bases. The numerical 
value of pKa does not indicate whether a chemical is an organic 
acid or a base. Knowledge of the chemical structure is required to 
distinguish between organic acids and bases.
The cell membrane
Extracellular fluid
Cytoplasm
Phospholipid
Integral proteins
(Receptors,
Transporters)
Cholesterol
Ligand
Ion channel
Figure 5-3.  Schematic model of a biological membrane.
Table 5-1  
Octanol/Water Partition Coefficients (P) of Different 
Molecules Expressed as log P
COMPOUND
log P
Paraquat
Charged molecule
Cephalosporin C
−4.72
Glycine
−3.21
Glutathione
−3.05
Cysteine
−2.35
Glucose
−2.21
Ethylene glycol
−1.37
Lead acetate
−0.63
p-Aminohippuric acid
−0.25
Dimercaprol
0.18
Scopolamine
0.30
Aspirin (acetyl salicylic acid)
1.02
Colchicine
1.19
Atropine
1.32
Benzoic acid
1.88
Benzene
2.14
Salicylic acid
2.19
Methyl salicylate
2.34
2,4-D
2.73
Warfarin
2.89
Digitoxin
3.05
Parathion
3.47
DDT
6.76
TCDD
7.05
Abbreviations: 2,4-D, 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid; DDT, dichlorodi-
phenyltrichloroethane; TCDD, 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin.

162
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
The Henderson–Hasselbalch equation describes the derivation 
of pH as a function of the pKa in a biological system. Two equiva-
lent forms of this equation are as follows:
pH
p
ionized
nonionized
pH
p
nonionized
ioni
a
a
=
+
=
−
K
K
log
[
]
[
]
log[
]
[
zed]
Rearranging these equations enables determination of the 
extent to which a weak acid or base is ionized or nonionized at any 
pH as follows:
Foracids:p
pH
nonionized
ionized
Forbases:p
pH
a
a
K
K
−
=
−
=
log[
]
[
]
log[
]
[
]
nonionized
ionized
The effect of pH on the degree of ionization of an organic acid 
(benzoic acid) and an organic base (aniline) is illustrated in Fig. 5-4. 
According to the Brönsted–Lowry acid–base theory, an acid is a 
proton (H+) donor and a base is a proton acceptor. Thus, the ionized 
and nonionized forms of an organic acid represent an acid–base pair, 
with the nonionized moiety being the acid and the ionized moiety 
being the base. At a low pH, a weak organic acid such as benzoic 
acid is largely nonionized. At pH 4, exactly 50% of benzoic acid is 
ionized and 50% is nonionized because this is the pKa of the com-
pound. As the pH increases, more and more protons are neutralized 
by hydroxyl groups, and benzoic acid continues to dissociate until 
almost all of it is in the ionized form. For an organic base such as 
aniline, the inverse is true. At a low pH, when protons are abun-
dant, almost all of aniline is ionized. This form of aniline is an acid 
because it can donate protons. As the pH increases, ions from aniline 
continue to dissociate until almost all the aniline is in the nonion-
ized form, which is the aniline base. As transmembrane passage is 
largely restricted to the nonionized form, benzoic acid is more read-
ily translocated through a membrane from an acidic environment, 
whereas more aniline is transferred from an alkaline environment.
Lipid solubility can also be expressed as the distribution coef-
ficient, log D, which is the ratio of the sum of the concentrations of 
all forms of the compound (ionized plus un-ionized) in each of the 
two phases, one essentially always aqueous; as such, it depends on 
the pH of the aqueous phase, and log D = log P for nonionizable 
compounds at any pH. The major difference between log P versus 
log D is that log P is a constant for the molecule under its neu-
tral form, whereas log D takes into account all neutral and charged 
forms of the molecule. Because a charged form of the molecule 
might hardly enter the octanol phase, the distribution varies with 
pH. log D = log P in the pH region where the molecule is mostly 
unionized. However, a pH region where a significant fraction of 
the molecule is ionized, log D becomes a function of log P, pH, 
and pKa. Overall, log D is a parameter commonly used for in silico 
prediction of absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion 
(ADME), as well as toxicity properties.
Filtration  When water flows in bulk across a porous membrane, 
any solute small enough to pass through the pores flows with it. 
Passage through these channels is called filtration, as it involves 
bulk flow of water caused by hydrostatic or osmotic force. One 
of the main differences between various membranes is the size of 
these channels. In renal glomeruli, a primary site of filtration, these 
pores are relatively large (about 70 nm) allowing molecules smaller 
than albumin (approximately 60 kDa) to pass through. In contrast, 
there are no aqueous pores at cellular tight junctions, and channels 
in most cells are much smaller (3 to 6 Å), thereby only permit-
ting substantial passage of molecules with molecular weights of 
no more than a few hundred daltons (Schanker, 1962; Lin, 2006).
Special Transport
There are numerous compounds whose movement across mem-
branes cannot be explained by simple diffusion or filtration. Some 
compounds are too large to pass through aqueous pores or too 
insoluble in lipids to diffuse across the lipid domains of mem-
branes. Nevertheless, they are often transported very rapidly across 
membranes, even against concentration gradients. To explain these 
phenomena, specialized transport systems have been identified. 
These systems are responsible for the transport (both influx and 
efflux) across cell membranes of many nutrients, such as sugars and 
amino and nucleic acids, along with numerous foreign compounds 
(Table 5-2). Based on the sequencing of the human genome, 
approximately 1500 genes encode for transporters or transport-
related proteins (Hediger et al., 2013; Ye et al., 2014). However, 
not all of these genes contribute to the disposition of toxicants. 
Throughout this chapter, membrane-associated transporters known 
to contribute to the disposition and subsequent effects of xenobiot-
ics will be emphasized. Importantly, the role of xenobiotic trans-
porters in chemical disposition still remains an expanding research 
Acidic pH
COOH
pKa ≈ 4
[Nonionized]
[Ionized]
pH
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Neutral pH
pKa ≈ 5
NH3
+
NH2
COO–
1000
1
100
1
10
1
1
1
1
10
1
100
1
1000
1
10000
1
1000
1
100
1
10
1
1
10
1
100
1
Figure 5-4.  Effect of pH on the ionization of benzoic acid (pKa = 4) and aniline (pKa = 5).

Absorption, Distribution, and excretion of Toxicants
Chapter 5
163
field, and new information regarding their function, molecular 
regulation, and genetic polymorphisms continues to inform and 
modify traditional concepts in toxicology.
Facilitated Transport  Facilitated transport applies to carrier-
mediated transport that exhibits the properties of active transport 
except that the substrate is not moved against an electrochemi-
cal or concentration gradient, and the transport process does not 
require the input of energy (e.g., ATP). For this reason, metabolic 
poisons do not interfere with this transport. The transport of glu-
cose from the GI tract across the basolateral membrane of the 
intestinal epithelium, from plasma into red blood cells, and from 
blood into the central nervous system (CNS) occurs by facilitated 
diffusion via glucose transporters.
Active Transport  Active transport is characterized by (1) 
movement of chemicals against electrochemical or concentra-
tion gradients, (2) saturability at high substrate concentrations, 
(3) selectivity for certain structural features of chemicals, 
(4) competitive inhibition by chemical congeners or compounds 
that are carried by the same transporter, and (5) requirement for 
expenditure of energy, so that metabolic inhibitors block the 
transport process. Substances actively transported across cell 
membranes presumably form a complex with a membrane-bound 
macromolecular carrier on one side of the membrane. The com-
plex subsequently traverses to the other side of the membrane, 
where the substance is released. Afterward, the carrier returns to 
the original surface to repeat the transport cycle.
Xenobiotic Transporters  Significant advances in identifying 
and understanding the carrier-mediated transport systems for xeno-
biotics have been made in the recent years. In total, it is estimated 
that at least 5% of all human genes are transporter related, indica-
tive of the importance of the transport function in normal biological 
and toxicological outcomes (Hediger et al., 2004; Ye et al., 2014). 
Transporters mediate the influx (uptake) or efflux of xenobiotics 
and can be divided into two categories, determined by whether they 
mediate active or facilitated transfer of compounds. The first active, 
energy-dependent xenobiotic transporter identified was a phos-
phoglycoprotein overexpressed in tumor cells that showed resis-
tance to anticancer drugs. The gene conferred multidrug resistance 
(MDR) to the cells, and was also called P-glycoprotein (P-gp or 
MDR1; gene name MDR1). This transporter functions as an efflux 
pump, which in cancerous cells exudes cytotoxic drugs out of the 
tumor cells, and thus contributes to their resistance (Ambudkar 
et al., 1999). MDR1 was the first member of a large superfamily 
of transport proteins known as ATP-binding cassette (ABC) trans-
porters, with seven subfamilies of ABC transporters now identified 
(Box 5-1). These are classified as subfamilies A to G with 49 
genes in humans (Ueda, 2011). Many of these transporters play 
key roles in the homeostasis of numerous endogenous substrates. 
For example, ABCA1 is a major regulator of cholesterol in cells, 
mediating its efflux from liver, and ABCB4 specifically transports 
phospholipid substrates. In this chapter, transporters that play 
important roles in xenobiotic disposition and toxicity are described, 
with emphasis on the human genes and proteins. For example, in 
humans, the major form of MDR1 involved in xenobiotic transport 
is a single protein (ABCB1; MDR1), whereas in rodents there are 
two drug-transporting MDR1 homologs identified as Mdr1a and 
Mdr1b.
The second important ABC transport subfamily is the ABCC 
subfamily, which is also known as the multiresistant drug protein 
(MRP) family (see Box 5-1). ABCC1 (MRP1) was also originally 
isolated from multidrug resistant cells. Members of this family 
excrete chemicals from cells, with MRP2 and MRP3 particularly 
important in the efflux of xenobiotic metabolites, especially those 
conjugated with UDP-glucuronic acid or glutathione. For exam-
ple, the glucuronide metabolite of acetaminophen is a substrate for 
both MRP2 and MRP3 (Ghanem et al., 2005). The breast cancer 
resistance protein (BCRP) is a member of the ABCG subfamily 
(ABCG2) and was originally isolated from a breast cancer cell line. 
It is expressed in a variety of normal tissues (i.e., liver, kidney, and 
intestine) and contributes to the disposition of the efflux transport 
Table 5-2  
Distribution of Specialized Transport Systems in the Small Intestine of Man and Animals
SUBSTRATES
UPPER
MIDDLE
LOWER
COLON
Sugar (glucose, galactose, etc.)
++
+++
++
0
Neutral amino acids
++
+++
++
0
Basic amino acids
++
++
++
?
Gamma globulin (newborn animals)
+
++
+++
?
Pyrimidines (thymine and uracil)
+
+
?
?
Triglycerides
++
++
+
?
Fatty acid absorption and conversion to triglyceride
+++
++
+
0
Bile salts
0
+
+++
Vitamin B12
0
+
+++
0
Na+
+++
++
+++
+++
H+ (and/or HCO3
− secretion)
0
+
++
++
Ca2+
+++
++
+
?
Fe2+
+++
++
+
?
Cl–
+++
++
+
0
SOURCE: Data from Wilson (1962).

164
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
of numerous endogenous and xenobiotic sulfate conjugates. It is 
also highly expressed in numerous stem cells, particularly the side 
population of human bone marrow and other organs such as pla-
centa and mammary gland, where it is purported to provide protec-
tion from xenobiotics (van Herwaarden et al., 2007; Ni et al., 2010; 
Memon et al., 2014).
ABC transporters exhibit the characteristics of active trans-
port outlined above, and most notably, they require expenditure 
of energy to function. For most ABC transporters, the binding 
and hydrolysis of ATP provide the energy required to move their 
substrates across membranes. The typical structure of most ABC 
transporters consists of two types of structural domains including 
hydrophobic membrane spanning domain (MSD) and the hydro-
philic, intracellular nucleotide binding domain (NBD) where ATP 
binds and is hydrolyzed (Fig. 5-5). The typical structural organiza-
tion of the ABC transporter, as exemplified by MDR1, is a tan-
dem repeat of two domains (1 MSD followed by 1 NBD). The two 
repeated halves are joined by a polypeptide linker sequence. MRPs 
are distinguished from MDR1 in that they comprise five domains, 
with an extra MSD that comprises five transmembrane segments 
and an extracytosolic amino terminus, whereas BCRP is a “half-
transporter” and requires at least two NBDs to function as a drug 
efflux pump (Nakanishi et al., 2003). Functional BCRP is described 
to be in the form of homodimers or homomultimers, with homodi-
mer formation occurring through linkages at disulfide bridges at 
cysteine 603. These differences in structure account for differences 
in molecular weight (approximately 170, 190, and 70 kDa for 
MDR1, MRP1, and BCRP, respectively), but there is considerable 
 Box 5-1
 Human ABC Transporters: Gene Family Overview and Major Transporters Involved in Xenobiotic Disposition
ABC SUBFAMILY
GENES IN FAMILY
GENE SYMBOLS
A
12
ABCA1-10, 12, 13
B
11
ABCB1-11
C
13
ABCC1-13*
D
  4
ABCD1-4
E
  1
ABCE1
F
  3
ABCF1-3
G
  5
ABCG1, 2, 4, 5, 8
Bolded subfamily designations are those with a major role in xenobiotic disposition.
*ABCC13 is reported to be a pseudogene.
GENE SYMBOL
COMMON NAME
GENERAL FUNCTION
TOXICOLOGICAL IMPACT
ABCB1
Multidrug resistance 
protein/P-glycoprotein (MDR)
Efflux from gut, brain, and placenta; 
biliary excretion
Intestinal inhibition increases 
bioavailability
Loss of expression increases 
penetration to brain and fetus
ABCB11
Bile salt export pump (BSEP)
Bile salt transport
Inhibition associated with 
drug-induced liver injury
ABCC1
Multidrug resistance–­
associated protein 1 (MRP1)
Multidrug resistance in many tissues; 
export pump
Inhibition may improve drug-
refractory tumors
ABCC2
Multidrug resistance–­
associated protein 2 (MRP2)
Organic anion efflux, glucuronide  
and glutathione conjugates, and biliary 
excretion
Mediates efflux of drug-­
conjugates (i.e., NSAIDs) 
that can be deconjugated in 
­intestine and cause intestinal 
injury. Loss or inhibition can 
cause hyperbilirubinemia 
ABCC3
Multidrug resistance–­
associated protein 3 (MRP3)
Organic anion efflux, and glucuronide 
and glutathione conjugates
Some evidence for inhibition 
associated with drug-induced 
liver injury for TAK-875
ABCC4
Multidrug resistance–­
associated protein 4 (MRP4)
Nucleoside transport and organic anion 
efflux
Implicated in tenofovir 
­disoproxil fumarate–induced 
renal proximal tubular toxicity, 
which is observed in humans
ABCG2
Breast cancer resistance 
­protein (BCRP)
Organic anion efflux, many sulfate 
­conjugates, and biliary excretion
Not well described
Protection against 
­protoporphyria and diet-­
dependent phototoxicity

Absorption, Distribution, and excretion of Toxicants
Chapter 5
165
overlap in many of the xenobiotics that are transported by these 
proteins.
Members of the ABC transport family are expressed constitu-
tively in many cells, and collectively they play important roles in 
absorption from the GI tract and elimination into bile or into urine 
for a wide range of xenobiotics. They are also critical to maintaining 
the barrier function of numerous tissue sites including the blood–
brain barrier (BBB), the blood–testis barrier, and the maternal–fetal 
barrier or placenta. Hence, they play a central role in the disposition 
and toxicity of xenobiotics. Their function in absorption, distribu-
tion, and excretion will be discussed throughout the remaining sec-
tions of this chapter.
The second major family of xenobiotic transporters is the sol-
ute carriers (SLCs), which function predominantly as facilitative 
transporters. There are 43 SLC gene families identified, and many 
of the nearly 300 genes comprising the 43 distinct SLC families 
play important roles in the disposition of endogenous compounds, 
including glucose, neurotransmitters, nucleotides, essential metals, 
and peptides. Additionally, there are several families that are vital 
to xenobiotic disposition, regulating the movement of many diverse 
organic anions and cations across cell membranes (Hediger et al., 
2004; Klaassen and Aleksunes, 2010).
The major human solute carriers involved in xenobiotic dispo-
sition are summarized in Box 5-2. The organic anion–­transporting 
peptides (OATPs, SLCO family) are important membrane transport 
N
NBD2
NBD1
C
MSD2
MSD1
out
in
Cell membrane
Figure 5-5.  Diagrammatic representation of the structure of MDR1, illus-
trating the membrane spanning domain and ATP-binding domains (NBD).
 Box 5-2
 Major Members of the Human Solute Carrier Transporter Families Involved in Xenobiotic Disposition
TRANSPORTER
GENE FAMILY
HUMAN PROTEINS
GENE NAME
FUNCTION
TOXICOLOGICAL IMPACT
Organic anion 
transporting 
polypeptide 
(OATP)
SLCO
OATP1A2 
OATP1B1
OATP1B3
OATP1C1
OATP2A1
OATP2B1
OATP3A1
OATP4A1
OATP4C1
OATP5A1
OATP6A1
SLCO1A2 
SLCO1B1
SLCO1B3
SLCO1C1
SLCO2A1
SLCO2B1
SLCO3A1
SLCO4A1
SLCO4C1
SLCO5A1
SLCO6A1
Transport of organic 
anions, cations, and 
neutral compounds
1. OATP1B1: Decreased function due 
to polymorphisms can decrease hepatic 
extraction of substrates and leading to 
increased extrahepatic concentrations 
(example: statins); transport of chemicals 
of environmental concern (example: per-
fluoroalkyl substances) and microcystins
2. Oatp2b1: Transport of microcystins in 
rodents
3. OATP2B1: Expression in intestine 
and important bioavailability of organic 
anions
Organic cation 
transporter 
(OCT)
SLC22
OCT1
OCT2
OCT3
SLC22A1
SLC22A2
SLC22A3
Transport of organic 
cations
1. OCT1: Important for metformin up-
take into liver and efficacy
2. OCT2: Cisplatin dose-limiting neph-
rotoxicity
Organic cation/
carnitine trans-
porter (OCTN)
SLC22
OCTN1
OCTN2
SLC22A4
SLC22A5
Organic cations
OCTN2 specific for 
carnitine
Organic anion 
transporter 
(OAT)
SLC22
OAT1
OAT2
OAT3
OAT4
OAT5
SLC22A6
SLC22A7
SLC22A8
SLC22A11
SLC22A10
Transport of organic 
anions
OAT1: Antiviral drugs cidofovir and  
adefovir; methylmercury; ochratoxin A
Peptide trans-
porter (PEPT)
SLC15
PEPT1
PEPT2
SLC15A1
SLC15A2
Transport of 
dipeptides and 
tripeptides, and xe-
nobiotics
Aids in the renal excretion of beta-lactam 
antibiotics of the cephalosporin and 
penicillin classes, angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitors (ACE inhibitors), and 
amino acid–conjugated antiviral drugs 
(e.g., valacyclovir)
Multidrug and 
toxin extrusion 
transporter 
(MATE)
SLC47
MATE1
MATE2K
SLC47A1
SLC47A2
Efflux of organic 
cations;
MATE2K localized 
to kidney
Aids in metformin excretion 
Gene and protein members of the solute carrier families are compiled from Mizuno et al. (2003), Hagenbuch and Meier (2004), Sahi (2005), Lin (2006), 
Hagenbuch and Guo (2008), Kusuhara and Sugiyama (2009), and Klaassen and Aleksunes (2010).

166
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
proteins that mediate the sodium-independent transport of a wide 
range of compounds, including organic acids, bases, and neutral 
compounds. Although they are largely regarded as influx pumps, 
solutes can move bidirectionally, and these proteins appear to be 
especially important in the hepatic uptake of xenobiotics. In human 
liver, OATP1B1, OATP1B3, OATP1A2, and OATP2B1 have 
been identified, whereas the major Oatps in rat liver are Oatp1a1, 
Oatp1a4, and Oatp1b2. For OATPs, the mechanism of transport is 
anion exchange such that the cellular influx of an organic compound 
is thought to be coupled to the efflux of bicarbonate, glutathione, or 
glutathione conjugates.
The organic-anion transporter (OAT; SLC22) family is partic-
ularly important in the renal uptake of anions, and human proteins 
(OAT1-5) have been identified in the kidney, whereas Oat1 and 
Oat3 are the major transporters identified in rodent kidneys. The 
organic-cation transporter (OCT; also SLC22) family is important 
in both the renal and hepatic uptake of xenobiotics. In this fam-
ily, OCT1 is expressed and functionally important for uptake of 
cations into liver for human, rats, and mice (Hayer et al., 1999; 
Slitt et al., 2002; Wang et al., 2002; Alnouti et al., 2006). OCT2 
is expressed and functionally important for organic cation uptake 
into kidney for humans and rodents Motohashi and Inue, 2013. 
Novel organic-cation transporters (OCTNs; also SLC22) have 
also been identified which transport exogenous cations along with 
important endogenous compounds such as carnitine. OATs trans-
port substrates against an electrochemical gradient in exchange 
for intracellular dicarboxylates, such as α-ketoglutarate, whereas 
the driving force for OCT-mediated transport is the electrochemi-
cal gradient of the transported cation, typical of facilitated diffu-
sion (described above). Peptide transporters (PEPT1 and PEPT2; 
SLC15) are responsible for the transport of di- and tripeptides 
as well as drugs and toxicants such as the β-lactam antibiotics. 
Finally, the multidrug and toxin extrusion transporters (MATEs; 
SLC47) are a unique gene family of solute carriers expressed pre-
dominantly in liver and kidney that function specifically as cation 
efflux pumps.
Additional Transport Processes  Other forms of specialized 
transport have been proposed, but their overall importance is not 
as well established as that of active transport and facilitated diffu-
sion. Phagocytosis and pinocytosis are proposed mechanisms for 
cell membranes flowing around and engulfing particles. This type 
of transfer has been shown to be important for the removal of par-
ticulate matter from the alveoli by phagocytes and from blood by 
the reticuloendothelial system of the liver and spleen.
ABSORPTION
The process by which toxicants cross body membranes to enter 
the bloodstream is referred to as absorption. Xenobiotics pen-
etrate membranes during absorption by the same processes as 
do biologically essential substances such as oxygen, foodstuffs, 
and other nutrients. The main sites of absorption are the GI tract, 
lungs, and skin. However, absorption may also occur from other 
sites, such as the subcutis, peritoneum, or muscle, if a chemical is 
administered by special routes. Experimentalists and medical pro-
fessionals often distinguish between parenteral and enteral admin-
istration of drugs and other xenobiotics. Enteral administration 
includes all routes pertaining to the alimentary canal (sublingual, 
oral, and rectal), whereas parenteral administration involves all 
other routes (intravenous, intraperitoneal, intramuscular, subcu-
taneous, etc.).
Absorption of Toxicants by the 
Gastrointestinal Tract
The GI tract is one of the most important sites where toxicants 
are absorbed. Many environmental toxicants enter the food chain 
and are absorbed together with food from the GI tract. This site 
of absorption is also particularly relevant to toxicologists because 
accidental ingestion is the most common route of unintentional 
exposure to a toxicant (especially for children) and intentional 
overdoses most frequently occur via the oral route.
The GI tract may be viewed as a tube traversing the body. 
Although it is within the body, its contents remain outside of the 
body. Therefore, unless a noxious chemical has direct caustic or 
irritating properties, toxicants remaining in the GI tract may dam-
age the cells that make up the organ, but usually do not produce 
systemic injury until they are absorbed.
Absorption of toxicants can take place along the entire GI 
tract, even in the mouth and the rectum. Therefore, although the 
majority of drugs are given orally, drugs such as nitroglycerin are 
administered sublingually, whereas others are administered as rec-
tal suppositories. If a toxicant is an organic acid or base, it can be 
absorbed by simple diffusion in the part of the GI tract where it 
exists in its most lipid-soluble (nonionized) form. Because gastric 
juice is acidic (pH about 2) and the intestinal contents are nearly 
neutral, the lipid solubility of weak organic acids or bases can dif-
fer markedly in these two areas of the GI tract. It should also be 
noted that pH along the GI differs in the fed and fasting state. The 
Henderson–Hasselbalch equations (discussed above) determine the 
fraction of a toxicant that is in the nonionized (lipid-soluble) form 
and estimate the rate of absorption from the stomach or intestine. As 
illustrated in Fig. 5-3, a weak organic acid such as benzoic acid is 
present mainly in the nonionized (lipid-soluble) form in the stomach 
and predominantly in the ionized form in the intestine. Therefore, 
weak organic acids are absorbed more readily from the stomach 
than from the intestine. In contrast, organic bases (except very weak 
organic bases) are likely to be ionized and not lipid soluble in the 
stomach, but are more likely to be in the nonionized form in the 
intestine, suggesting that the absorption of such compounds occurs 
predominantly in the intestine rather than in the stomach. However, 
the Henderson–Hasselbalch calculations are not an absolute deter-
mination of absorption because other factors—including the mass 
action law, surface area, and blood flow rate—have to be taken into 
consideration in examining the absorption of weak organic acids or 
bases. For example, only 1% of benzoic acid is present in the lipid-
soluble form in the neutral pH of the intestine. Therefore, one might 
conclude that the intestine has little capacity to absorb this organic 
acid. However, absorption is a dynamic process. The blood keeps 
removing benzoic acid from the lamina propria of the intestine, and 
according to the mass action law, the equilibrium will always be 
maintained at 1% in the nonionized form, providing continuous 
availability of benzoic acid for absorption. Moreover, absorption 
by simple diffusion is also proportional to the surface area. The 
small intestine has a very large surface because the villi and micro-
villi increase the surface area approximately 600-fold, such that the 
overall capacity of the intestine for absorption of benzoic acid is 
quite large. Similar considerations are also valid for the absorption 
of all weak organic acids from the intestine.
Numerous xenobiotic transporters are expressed in the GI 
tract, where they function to increase or decrease absorption of 
xenobiotics (Fig. 5-6). There are a handful transporters in the intes-
tine that are considered to impact absorption and for which evi-
dence is strong that they impact bioavailability—namely, PEPT1, 
OATP2B1, and MDR1 (p-glycoprotein; PgP).

Absorption, Distribution, and excretion of Toxicants
Chapter 5
167
With regard to uptake, several proteins in the SLC families are 
expressed in the intestine where they are predominantly localized on 
the apical brush-border membranes of the enterocytes and increase 
uptake from the lumen into the enterocytes. In humans, recent 
proteomic analysis has characterized transporter abundance along 
the gastrointestinal tract in humans (Gröer et al., 2013; Drozdzik 
et al., 2014). Among the uptake transporters, PEPT1 relative protein 
abundance is higher than the other transporters for both jejunum 
and ileum. PEPT1 mediates the transport of peptide-like drugs such 
as antibiotics, particularly those containing a β-lactam structure. 
In the small intestine, OATP2B1 was detected but not OATP1A2. 
OCT1 and OCT3 proteins are detected in the intestinal tract, with 
OCT1 being significantly higher in expression and expressed on 
the basolateral membrane to contribute to xenobiotic uptake into 
enterocytes (Klaassen and Aleksunes, 2010; Tamai, 2012; Han 
et al., 2013).
MRP2 and MRP3 protein expression was higher in colon than 
in small intestine. OCTN1 and OCTN2 are also present in the intes-
tine, with OCTN2 specifically involved in the uptake of carnitine. 
The primary active efflux transporters such as MDR1, MRP2, and 
BCRP are also expressed on enterocyte brush-border membranes 
where they function to excrete their substrates into the lumen, 
thereby decreasing the net absorption of xenobiotics. MRP3 is also 
found in the intestine, but is localized to the basolateral membrane. 
The expression of the intestinal transporters varies across the GI 
tract. For example, MDR1 expression increases from the duodenum 
to colon, whereas MRP2 and most of the uptake transporters are 
expressed most highly in the duodenum and decrease in the termi-
nal ileum and colon. BCRP is found throughout the small intestine 
and colon.
The efflux transporters are particularly relevant to the disposi-
tion of toxicants, as there will be a net reduction in the absorption 
of chemicals that are substrates for these transporters, and this is 
a desirable outcome for toxic chemicals. For example, the dietary 
carcinogen, 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo (4,5-b) pyridine 
(PhIP), a heterocyclic amine produced during the cooking of meat, 
is a substrate for MRP2. Studies comparing the disposition of PhIP 
in wild-type and Mrp2-deficient rats showed that MRP is very 
important in limiting the oral absorption of this harmful compound 
(Dietrich et al., 2001). However, although limiting absorption of 
toxicants and carcinogens is beneficial, these transporters can also 
function to limit the oral absorption of drugs. For example, the 
immunosuppressive drug cyclosporine and the chemotherapeutic 
anticancer drugs paclitaxel (taxol), colchicine, and vincristine are 
not readily absorbed from the GI tract because they are good sub-
strates for MDR1.
The number of toxicants actively absorbed by the GI tract 
is low; most enter the body by simple diffusion. Although lipid-
soluble substances are absorbed by this process more rapidly and 
extensively than are water-soluble substances, the latter may also 
be absorbed to some degree. After oral ingestion, about 10% of 
lead, 4% of manganese, 1.5% of cadmium, and 1% of chromium 
salts are absorbed. If a compound is very toxic, even small amounts 
of absorbed material produce serious systemic effects. An organic 
compound that would not be expected to be absorbed on the basis 
of the pH-partition hypothesis is the fully ionized quaternary 
ammonium compound pralidoxime chloride (2-PAM; molecular 
weight 137 Da), yet it is absorbed almost entirely from the GI 
tract. The mechanism by which some lipid-insoluble compounds 
are absorbed is not entirely clear. It appears that organic ions of low 
molecular weight (<200 Da) can be transported across the mucosal 
barrier by paracellular transfer, that is, passive penetration through 
aqueous pores at the tight junctions or by active transport as dis-
cussed above.
Particles and particulate matter can also be absorbed by the 
GI epithelium. In this case, particle size is a major determinant of 
absorption, whereas factors such as the lipid solubility or ioniza-
tion characteristics are less important. For particles, size is inversely 
related to absorption such that absorption increases with decreasing 
particle diameter (Florence et al., 1995). This explains why metal-
lic mercury is relatively nontoxic when ingested orally and why 
powdered arsenic was found to be significantly more toxic than its 
coarse granular form (Schwartze, 1923). Large particles (greater 
than about 20 μm in diameter) enter intestinal cells by pinocyto-
sis, a process that is much more prominent in newborns than in 
adults, after which they are carried through the intestinal epithelium 
in intact vesicles and discharged into the interstices of the lamina 
propria. Absorption into gut-associated lymphoid tissue (such as 
Peyer’s patches) and the mesenteric lymph supply also plays a key 
role in systemic absorption of particles (Jani et al., 1990; Florence 
et al., 1995).There is increasing interest in particles of very small 
diameter that may be used in a variety of chemical and biological 
processes. Nanoparticles or nanomaterials are typically less than 
100 nm in size, and numerous issues have been raised regarding 
the toxic potential of these entities (Chap. 28). Early studies that 
compared size demonstrated that greater absorption of smaller 
(50 nm) particles compared to larger (100 nm) particles was observed, 
and with 300-nm particles being minimally absorbed. A multistep 
process is required for particles to translocate through the intestinal 
barrier. This includes translocation through the mucus layer, contact 
with enterocytes and potentially M cells, and uptake, which appear 
to occur through endocytosis. Surface characteristics of nanopar-
ticles also contribute to their absorption, with hydrophobic, nonion-
ized particles being more extensively absorbed than those modified 
to possess an ionized surface as is the case with larger particles, 
the gut-associated lymphoid tissue appears to be the predominant 
absorption pathway for nanoparticles from the GI tract (Stern and 
McNeil, 2008; Fröhlich, 2012). Overall, the absorption of a toxicant 
from the GI tract depends on its physical properties, including lipid 
Blood
Lumen
MRP3
OCT1,2
PEPT
1,2
OCTN
1,2
OATP
2B1
MDR1
BCRP
MRP2
OATP
1A2
Figure 5-6.  Schematic model showing the important xenobiotic transport 
systems present in the human gastrointestinal tract.

168
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
solubility and its dissolution rate. Although it is often generalized 
that an increase in lipid solubility increases the absorption of chemi-
cals, an extremely lipid-soluble chemical is unlikely to dissolve in 
the aqueous fluids within the GI tract, which limits its absorption 
from the GI tract. Similarly, if the toxicant is a solid and is relatively 
insoluble in GI fluids, it will also have limited contact with the GI 
mucosa and its rate of absorption will be low (Lipinski et al., 2001).
In addition to the characteristics of the compounds themselves, 
there are numerous additional factors relating to the GI tract itself 
that influence the absorption of xenobiotics. These factors include 
pH, the presence of food, digestive enzymes, bile acids, and bacte-
rial microflora in the GI tract, along with the motility and perme-
ability of the GI tract. Chemical resistance or lack of resistance to 
alteration by the acidic pH of the stomach, enzymes of the stom-
ach or intestine, or the intestinal microflora is extremely important. 
A toxicant may be hydrolyzed by stomach acid, biotransformed by 
enzymes in the GI tract, or modified by the resident microflora to 
new compounds with a toxicity different from that of the parent 
compound. For example, snake venoms, which are proteinaceous 
moieties, are much less toxic by the oral route relative to intrave-
nous exposure because they are degraded by digestive enzymes of 
the GI tract.
Intestinal microflora can also influence absorption and toxic-
ity of compounds. For example, a variety of nitroaromatic com-
pounds are reduced by intestinal bacteria to potentially toxic and 
carcinogenic aromatic amines. Nitroreduction of 2,6-dinitrotoluene 
to the mutagenic 2,6-diaminotoluene in the GI tract produces long-
term adverse effects, including mutagenicity and carcinogenicity, 
which are not observed in germ-free animals (Rickert et al., 1984). 
Similarly, the nitroaromatic perfume, musk xylene, can inhibit the 
activity of cytochrome P450 enzymes in the liver only after it is 
reduced to an amine derivative by resident microflora in the GI tract 
and subsequently absorbed (Lehman-McKeeman et al., 1997). It 
has also been shown that ingestion of well water with a high nitrate 
content produces methemoglobinemia much more frequently in 
infants than in adults. In this case, bacteria in the GI tract convert 
nitrate to nitrite, increasing the likelihood of methemoglobinemia 
(Mensinga et al., 2003). Infants are more susceptible to methemo-
globinemia because the higher pH of the neonatal GI tract is per-
missive for the growth of bacteria (such as Escherichia coli) that 
convert nitrate to nitrite. One example wherein intestinal microflo-
ras reduce the potential toxicity is that of the mycotoxin, deoxyni-
valenol, which is found in numerous grains and foodstuffs. Strict 
anaerobes detoxify this compound leading to the absorption of a 
less toxic reductive metabolite (Awad et al., 2010). The contribution 
of bacteria in the GI tract to other aspects of xenobiotic disposition, 
particularly enterohepatic circulation, is discussed in greater detail 
later in this chapter.
Chemicals, such as the chelator, ethylenediaminetetraacetic 
acid (EDTA), increase absorption of some toxicants by increasing 
intestinal permeability. An increase in permeability is thought to 
result from the chelation of calcium that is involved in the forma-
tion and maintenance of tight intercellular junctions (Ballard et al., 
1995) such that binding of calcium reduces the integrity of the cell 
junctions, allowing more paracellular absorption. Furthermore, 
simple diffusion is proportional not only to the surface area and 
the permeability but also to the residency time within various seg-
ments of the GI tract. Therefore, the rate of absorption of a toxicant 
remaining for longer periods in the intestine increases, whereas that 
with a shorter residency time decreases. Experiments have shown 
that the oral toxicity of some chemicals is increased by diluting the 
dose (Borowitz et al., 1971). This phenomenon may be explained by 
more rapid stomach emptying induced by increased dosage volume, 
which in turn leads to greater absorption in the duodenum because 
of the larger surface area there. Furthermore, some chemicals used 
as laxatives reduce absorption of xenobiotics by increasing intes-
tinal motility, whereas agents used as antidiarrheals may increase 
absorption by slowing intestinal motility.
The amount of a chemical that enters the systemic circulation 
after oral administration depends on several factors. The amount 
absorbed into the cells of the GI tract is important, and transporters 
can influence this amount by affecting the uptake or efflux from the 
cells. Further, before a chemical enters the systemic circulation, 
it can be biotransformed by the cells in the GI tract or extracted 
by the liver and excreted into bile with or without prior biotrans-
formation. This phenomenon of the removal of chemicals before 
entrance into the systemic circulation is referred to as presystemic 
elimination or first-pass effect. The lung can also contribute to the 
biotransformation or elimination of chemicals before their entrance 
into the systemic circulation, although its role is less well defined 
than that of the intestine and the liver. Chemicals that have a high 
first-pass effect will appear to have a lower absorption because they 
are eliminated as quickly as they are absorbed. For toxicants, a high 
first-pass effect will serve to limit exposure and typically minimizes 
toxic potential.
A number of other factors have been shown to alter absorp-
tion. For example, although lead and many other heavy metal 
ions are not absorbed readily from the GI tract, EDTA and other 
chelators increase the lipid solubility and thus the absorption of 
complexed ions. Thus, it is important not to administer a chelator 
orally when excess metal is still present in the GI tract after oral 
ingestion. Furthermore, metal ions can affect absorption of other 
ions. For example, cadmium decreases the absorption of zinc and 
copper, calcium decreases cadmium absorption, and magnesium 
decreases absorption of fluoride (Pfeiffer, 1977). Consumption 
of grapefruit juice can also influence GI absorption through the 
actions of naringin, a flavonoid that inhibits the function of several 
transporters including MDR1 (Pgp) (Bailey, 2010). By reducing 
MDR1-dependent efflux, grapefruit juice increases GI absorption of 
numerous drugs (such as calcium-channel blockers and cholesterol-
lowering agents), and, in some cases, this effect leads to toxic or 
adverse reactions resulting from increased exposure to the drugs. 
Alternatively, inhibition of OATPs reduces absorption and could 
limit toxicity. Atenolol, celiprolol, and fexofenadine are consid-
ered to be the most sensitive substrates to evaluate intestinal DDIs 
related to OATP inhibition (Yu et al., 2017). OATP inhibition in 
the gut has been reported for common juices, such as apple juice, 
grapefruit juice, and orange juice. Also, interestingly, decreased 
intestinal BCRP function can also impact absorption. Sulfasalazine 
and rosuvastatin exposure was higher in polymorphic individuals 
that have an ABCG2 421C/A mutation (Kashihara et al., 2017).
Species differences in absorption across the GI tract are widely 
recognized. As one example, absorption of nadolol after intraperi-
toneal and oral dosing was compared across species by calculating 
the exposure as plasma area-under-the-curve (AUC) and was found 
to be essentially complete in dogs, substantially less in humans, 
and limited in rats. Urinary and fecal excretion of nadolol support 
the bioavailability data, as the low oral absorption of nadolol in 
rats is consistent with the large amount of drug recovered in feces 
(Table 5-3). However, excretory data further indicate that in addi-
tion to the nonabsorbed portion of this compound, biliary and pos-
sibly nonbiliary sources also contribute to the fecal excretion of 
this compound. Similar comparisons across species provide fur-
ther evidence for species differences in the absorption of numer-
ous compounds, indicating that nadolol is not an exceptional case 
(Calabrese, 1984).

Absorption, Distribution, and excretion of Toxicants
Chapter 5
169
The factors that contribute to species differences in absorption 
are not fully understood. Anatomical considerations are likely to 
contribute to species differences in intestinal absorption, and sub-
stantial functional differences exist between species. Because most 
xenobiotics are transported across the GI mucosa by passive diffu-
sion, and because this transport is surface area- and site-dependent, 
it is likely that these factors will also contribute to species differ-
ences. Furthermore, species differences in the pH along the GI tract 
exist (Table 5-4), varying by as much as two pH units. The magni-
tude of this diversity can translate into differences up to two orders 
of magnitude in the concentration of the nonionized versus ionized 
moiety of a weak organic acid or base available for absorption. In 
addition, the GI absorption is often higher in dogs compared to 
other species because paracellular absorption is thought to occur to 
a greater extent in dogs.
Another factor that may result in species-dependent absorption 
of xenobiotics is the presence and function of the GI microflora. 
Bacteria in the GI tract are highly abundant, with strict anaerobes 
(oxygen intolerant) being the most prevalent. Approximately 1000 
bacterial species have been characterized along the gastrointestinal 
tract (Frank et al., 2007). The intestinal microflora impacts the bio-
availability of numerous drugs, such as diclofenac, lovastatin, and 
metronidazole (Enright et al., 2016). Use of germ-free mice indi-
cates that the presence of bacteria impacts the mRNA expression 
of biotransformation enzymes and transporters in the host intes-
tine (Fu et al., 2017). It should be noted that species differences in 
gut microflora composition are appreciable. In general, mice are 
considered to be an excellent model for studying changes in gut 
microbial diversity and much knowledge has been gained through 
using mice as a model species. However, although some similarities 
exist between the intestinal microflora of humans and mice for many 
common disease models (Nguyen et al., 2015), rats are suggested to 
better reflect the human gut composition (Wos-Oxley et al., 2012). 
Humanized rats even more closely reflect the gut microbiota of 
human donors (Wos-Oxley et al., 2012). As expected, nonhuman 
primates, chimpanzees, have a similar gut microbial composition 
as found in humans (Moeller et al., 2012).
Absorption of Toxicants by the Lungs
Toxic responses to chemicals can occur from absorption following 
inhalation exposure. Relevant examples include carbon monoxide 
poisoning and silicosis, an important occupational disease. These 
toxicities result from absorption or deposition of airborne poisons 
in the lungs.
A major group of toxicants that are absorbed by the lungs are 
gases (e.g., carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, and sulfur diox-
ide), vapors of volatile or volatilizable liquids (e.g., benzene and 
carbon tetrachloride), and aerosols. Because the absorption of 
inhaled gases and vapors differs from that of aerosols, aerosols are 
discussed separately below. However, the absorption of gases and 
vapors is governed by the same principles, and therefore the word 
gas is used to represent both in this section.
Gases and Vapors  A vapor is the gas form of substance that can 
also exist as a liquid or solid at atmospheric pressure and normal 
temperature. Most organic solvents evaporate and produce vapors, 
and some solids can also sublimate into a gaseous form. Vapor 
pressure is that exerted by a vapor above its own liquid in a closed 
system, such that liquids that have a high vapor pressure have a 
higher tendency to evaporate. A toxicant with a high vapor pressure 
at room temperature is considered to be volatile. Examples of the 
vapor pressure of several toxicants are presented in Table 5-5.
The absorption of inhaled gases takes place mainly in the 
lungs. However, when inhaled, gases first pass through the nose, 
filtering through delicately scrolled, simple epithelial-lined turbi-
nates, which serve to increase the surface area of exposure. Because 
the mucosa of the nose is covered by a film of fluid, gas molecules 
can be retained by the nose and do not reach the lungs if they are 
very water soluble or react with cell surface components. Therefore, 
the nose acts as a “scrubber” for water-soluble and highly reac-
tive gases, partially protecting the lungs from potentially injuri-
ous insults. Although these actions may serve to reduce systemic 
Table 5-4  
pH of the Gastrointestinal Contents of Various Species*
pH
SPECIES
STOMACH
JEJUNUM
CECUM
COLON
FECES
Monkey
2.8
6.0
5.0
5.1
5.5
Dog
3.4
6.6
6.4
6.5
6.2
Rat
3.8
6.8
6.8
6.6
6.9
Rabbit
1.9
7.5
6.6
7.2
7.2
*SOURCE: Data from Smith (1965).
Table 5-5  
Vapor Pressures of Common Solvents or Toxicants
SUBSTANCE
VAPOR PRESSURE 
(SI UNITS; kPa*)
VAPOR PRESSURE 
(mm Hg)
Ethylene glycol
0.5
3.75
Water
2.3
17.5
Ethanol
5.83
43.7
Chloroform
30
225
Acetaldehyde
98.7
740
Formaldehyde
435.7
3268
*SI units are the International System of Units for pressure with the 
Pascal (Pa) as the standard unit. All values obtained at 20°C.
Table 5-3  
Absorption and Excretion of Radioactivity in Rats, 
Dogs, and Humans After Nadolol Dosages*
SPECIES
DOSE 
(mg/kg)
PERCENT OF 
DOSE EXCRETED
PERCENT 
OF DOSE 
ABSORBED
ROUTE
URINE
FECES
Rat
20
ip
62
31
(100)
20
po
11
84
18
Dog
25
ip
75
12
(100)
25
po
76
28
102
Human
  2
ip
73
23
(100)
  2
po
25
77
34
po and ip denote oral and intraperitoneal administration, respectively.
*SOURCE: Data from Dreyfuss et al. (1978).

170
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
exposure or to protect the lungs, they also increase the risk that the 
nose could be adversely affected. Such is the case with formalde-
hyde (Kerns et al., 1983) and vinyl acetate (Bogdanffy et al., 1999), 
which cause tumors of the nasal turbinates in rats.
Absorption of gases in the lungs differs from intestinal and 
percutaneous absorption of compounds in that the dissociation of 
acids and bases and the lipid solubility of molecules are less impor-
tant factors in pulmonary absorption because diffusion through 
cell membranes is not rate-limiting in the pulmonary absorption 
of gases. There are at least three reasons for this. First, ionized 
molecules are of very low volatility, so that they do not achieve 
significant concentrations in normal ambient air. Second, type I 
pneumocytes (epithelial cells lining the alveoli; Chap. 15) are very 
thin and the capillaries are in close contact with the pneumocytes, 
so that the distance for a chemical to diffuse is very short. Third, 
chemicals absorbed by the lungs are removed rapidly by the blood, 
and blood moves very quickly through the extensive capillary net-
work in the lungs.
When a gas is inhaled into the lungs, gas molecules diffuse 
from the alveolar space into the blood and then dissolve. Except 
for some gases with a special affinity for certain body components 
(e.g., the binding of carbon monoxide to hemoglobin), the uptake 
of a gas by a tissue usually involves the simple physical process of 
dissolving. The end result is that gas molecules partition between 
two media, namely air and blood during the absorptive phase and 
blood and other tissues during the distributive phase. As the inspired 
gas remains in contact with blood in the alveoli, more molecules 
dissolve in blood until gas molecules in blood are in equilibrium 
with gas molecules in the alveolar space. At this equilibrium, the 
ratio of the concentration of chemical in the blood and chemical in 
the gas phase is constant. This solubility ratio is called the blood-
to-gas partition coefficient, and it is unique for each gas. Note that 
although the ratio is constant, the concentrations achieved vary in 
accordance with Henry’s law, which dictates that the amount of gas 
dissolved in a liquid is proportional to the partial vapor pressure 
of the gas in the gas phase at any given concentration before or at 
saturation. Thus, the higher the inhaled concentration of a gas (i.e., 
the higher the partial pressure), the higher the gas concentration 
in blood, but the blood:gas ratio does not change unless satura-
tion has occurred. When equilibrium is reached, the rate of trans-
fer of gas molecules from the alveolar space to blood equals the 
rate of removal by blood from the alveolar space. For example, 
chloroform has a relatively high blood-to-gas partition coefficient 
(approximately 20), whereas ethylene has a low coefficient (0.14). 
By comparison, a smaller percentage of the total ethylene in the 
lungs is removed into the blood during each circulation because the 
low blood-to-gas partition coefficient dictates that blood is quickly 
saturated with this gas. Therefore, an increase in the respiratory 
rate or minute volume does not change the transfer of such a gas to 
blood. In contrast, an increase in the rate of blood flow increases the 
rate of uptake of a compound with a low solubility ratio because of 
more rapid removal from the site of equilibrium, that is, the alveo-
lar membranes. It has been calculated that the time to equilibrate 
between the blood and the gas phase for a relatively insoluble gas 
is about 10 to 20 minutes.
A gas with a high blood-to-gas partition coefficient, such as 
chloroform, is readily transferred to blood during each respira-
tory cycle so that little if any remains in the alveoli just before the 
next inhalation. The more soluble a toxic chemical is in blood, the 
more of it will be dissolved in blood by the time equilibrium is 
reached. Consequently, the time required to equilibrate with blood 
is much longer for a gas with a high blood-to-gas partition coef-
ficient than for a gas with a low ratio. This has been calculated 
to take a minimum of 1 hour for compounds with a high solubil-
ity ratio, although it may take even longer if the gas also has high 
tissue affinity (i.e., high fat solubility). With highly soluble gases, 
the principal factor limiting the rate of absorption is respiration. 
Because the blood is already removing virtually all gases with a 
high solubility ratio from the lungs, increasing the blood flow rate 
does not substantially increase the rate of absorption. However, the 
rate can be accelerated greatly by increasing the rate of respiration.
The blood carries the dissolved gas molecules to the rest of 
the body. In each tissue, the gas molecules are transferred from 
the blood to the tissue until equilibrium is reached at a tissue con-
centration dictated by the tissue-to-blood partition coefficient. After 
releasing part of the gas to tissues, blood returns to the lungs to 
take up more of the gas. The process continues until a gas reaches 
equilibrium between blood and each tissue according to the tissue-
to-blood partition coefficients characteristic of each tissue. This 
equilibrium is referred to as steady state, and at this time, no net 
absorption of gas takes place as long as the exposure concentration 
remains constant.
AEROSOLS AND PARTICLES
Absorption of aerosols and particles is distinguished from gases 
and vapors by the factors that determine absorption from the 
inhalation route of exposure. The absorption of gases and vapors 
by inhalation is determined by the partitioning of the compound 
between the blood and the gas phase along with its solubility and 
tissue reactivity. In contrast, the important characteristics that affect 
absorption after exposure to aerosols are the aerosol size and water 
solubility of any chemical present in the aerosol.
The site of deposition of aerosols and particulates depends 
largely on the size of the particles. This relationship is discussed in 
detail in Chap. 15. In general, the smaller the particle, the further 
into the respiratory tree the particle will deposit (Fig. 5-7). Particles 
ranging from 5 μm or larger, described as “course particles,” usually 
are deposited in the nasopharyngeal region. Those deposited on the 
unciliated anterior or rostral portion of the nose tend to remain at 
the site of deposition until they are removed by nose wiping, blow-
ing, or sneezing. The mucous blanket of the ciliated nasal surface 
propels insoluble particles by the movement of the cilia. These par-
ticles and particles inhaled through the mouth are swallowed within 
minutes. Soluble particles may dissolve in the mucus and be carried 
to the pharynx or may be absorbed through the nasal epithelium 
into the blood.
Particulate matter with diameters of approximately 2.5 μm, 
referred to as “fine particles,” are deposited mainly in the tracheo-
bronchiolar regions of the lungs, from which they may be cleared by 
retrograde movement of the mucus layer in the ciliated portions of 
the respiratory tract (also known as the mucociliary escalator). The 
rate of cilia-propelled movement of mucus varies in different parts 
of the respiratory tract, although in general it is a rapid and effi-
cient transport mechanism. Toxicants or viral infections that dam-
age cilia may impair the efficiency of this process. Measurements 
have shown transport rates between 0.1 and 1 mm/min, resulting 
in removal half-lives between 30 and 300 minutes. Coughing and 
sneezing greatly increase the movement of mucus and particulate 
matter toward the mouth. Particles eventually may be swallowed 
and absorbed from the GI tract or expectorated.
Particles 1 μm and smaller penetrate to the alveolar sacs of 
the lungs. Ultrafine particles or nanoparticles, particularly those 
that are approximately 10 to 20 nm in size, have the greatest 
likelihood of depositing in the alveolar region. These extremely 
small particles may be absorbed into blood or cleared through

Absorption, Distribution, and excretion of Toxicants
Chapter 5
171
the lymphatics after being scavenged by alveolar macrophages 
(Oberdorster et al., 2005).
In addition to being a major determinant of lung deposition, 
as particle size decreases, the number of particles in a unit of space 
increases along with the total surface area of the particles. This rela-
tionship, illustrated in Table 5-6, indicates that nanoparticles have 
the propensity to deliver high amounts of particulates to the lung. 
However, it appears that the surface properties of nanoparticles may 
be more important determinants of toxic potential than their size or 
surface area. The contribution of nanoparticles to toxic responses, 
with special emphasis on their disposition (and factors that influ-
ence disposition including size, composition, surface structure, 
surface group modification, solubility, and aggregation), is a major 
area of toxicological and human health effects research (Nel et al., 
2006; Stern and McNeil, 2008).
The mechanisms responsible for the removal or absorption of 
particulate matter from the alveoli are less clear than those respon-
sible for the removal of particles deposited in the tracheobronchial 
tree. Removal appears to occur by three major mechanisms. First, 
particles may be removed from the alveoli by a physical process. 
As described earlier, it is thought that particles deposited on the 
fluid layer of the alveoli are aspirated onto the mucociliary escala-
tor of the tracheobronchial region. From there, they are transported 
to the mouth and may be swallowed. The origin of the thin fluid 
layer in the alveoli is probably a transudation of lymph and secre-
tions of lipids and other components by the alveolar epithelium. 
The alveolar fluid flows by an unknown mechanism to the terminal 
bronchioles. This flow seems to depend on lymph flow, capillary 
action, the respiratory motion of the alveolar walls, the cohesive 
nature of the respiratory tract’s fluid blanket, the propelling power 
of the ciliated bronchioles, and the surface tension within the fluid 
Nasal, pharyngeal, laryngeal
Diameter (µm)
0.8
1.0
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.0001 0.001 0.01
0.1
1
10
100
Regional deposition (%)
Tracheobronchial
Diameter (µm)
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.0001 0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
Regional deposition (%)
Alveolar
Diameter (µm)
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.0001 0.001
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
Regional deposition (%)
Nasal airway
Pharynx
Trachea
Bronchi
Nonrespiratory
bronchioles
Respiratory
bronchioles
Alveolar
ducts
Alveolar
sacs
Alveolar
capillary
bed
Pulmonary
veins
Pulmonary
arteries
Lymph nodes
Larynx
Figure 5-7.  Representation of particle distribution in the lungs relative to size. (From Oberdorster et al., 2005, with permission.)
Table 5-6  
Particle Number and Surface Area for 10 μg/m3 
Airborne Particles
PARTICLE 
DIAMETER (µm)
PARTICLES/mL AIR
PARTICLE SURFACE 
AREA (µm2/mL AIR)
5
0.15
12
2
2
30
0.5
153
120
0.02
2,400,000
3016
0.05
153,000,000
12,000
SOURCES: Modified from Oberdorster et al. (2005) and Nel et al. (2006).

172
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
layer. Second, particles from the alveoli may be removed by phago-
cytosis. The principal cells responsible for engulfing alveolar debris 
are the resident alveolar macrophages. These phagocytic cells are 
found in large numbers in normal lungs and contain many phago-
cytized particles of both exogenous and endogenous origin. They 
apparently migrate to the distal end of the mucociliary escalator and 
are cleared and eventually swallowed. Third, removal may occur 
via the lymphatics. The endothelial cells lining lymphatic capillar-
ies are permeable to very large molecules and particles (molecular 
weight >1000 kDa), although the rate of penetration is low when 
molecular weight exceeds 10 kDa. Nevertheless, the lymphatic 
system plays a prominent role in collecting high-molecular-weight 
proteins leaked from cells or blood capillaries and particulate mat-
ter from the interstitium and the alveolar spaces. Particulate matter 
may remain in lymphatic tissue for long periods, and this explains 
the phenomenon of “dust store of the lungs.”
In general, the overall removal of particles from the alveoli 
is relatively inefficient. The rate of clearance by the lungs can be 
predicted by a compound’s solubility in lung fluids. The lower the 
solubility, the lower the removal rate. Thus, it appears that removal 
of particles that enter the alveoli is largely due to dissolution and 
vascular transport. Some particles may remain in the alveoli indefi-
nitely. This may occur when long-lived alveolar macrophages 
phagocytose indigestible dust particles and secrete cytokines that 
stimulate the development of a local network of type I and III col-
lagen fibers to form an alveolar dust plaque or nodule.
Absorption of Toxicants Through the Skin
Skin is the largest body organ and provides a relatively good barrier 
for separating organisms from their environment. Overall, human 
skin comes into contact with many toxic chemicals, but exposure 
is usually limited by its relatively impermeable nature. However, 
some chemicals can be absorbed by the skin in sufficient quantities 
to produce systemic effects. For example, there are several insecti-
cides for which fatal exposures have occurred in agricultural work-
ers after absorption through intact skin (see Chap. 19). In addition, 
there are numerous chemicals that increase tumor development in 
other organs after dermal application.
The skin comprises two major layers, the epidermis and der-
mis (Fig. 5-8). The epidermis is the outermost layer and contains 
keratinocytes that are metabolically competent and able to divide. 
Proliferating keratinocytes in the stratum germinativum displace 
maturing keratinocyte layers upward until they reach the outermost 
layer, the stratum corneum. The stratum corneum contains densely 
packed keratinized cells that have lost their nuclei and are bio-
logically inactive. The stratum corneum is replaced approximately 
every 3 to 4 weeks in adult humans. This complex process involves 
dehydration and polymerization of intracellular matrix forming 
keratin-filled dried cell layers. During the process, the cell walls 
apparently double in thickness and transform into a dry, keratinous 
semisolid state with much lower permeability for diffusion of toxi-
cants. The stratum corneum is unique anatomically and represents 
the single most important barrier to preventing fluid loss from the 
body while also serving as the major barrier to prevent the absorp-
tion of xenobiotics into the body.
The dermis is situated beneath the epidermis and consists pri-
marily of fibroblasts. This region also contains the vascular net-
work that provides the dermis and epidermis with blood supply and 
serves to carry absorbed compounds into the body. Although the 
major anatomical area that controls absorption across the skin is 
the stratum corneum, compounds may also be absorbed through 
dermal appendages, including sweat and sebaceous glands and hair 
follicles found in the dermis. Sweat glands and hair follicles are 
scattered in varying densities on skin. These appendages account 
for no more than 1% of the total cross-sectional area of the total skin 
Hair shaft
Hair follicle
Papilla of hair
Nerve ﬁber
Blood and
lymph vessels
Sweat gland
Sweat pore
Vein
Dermis
Dermal papilla
Epidermis
Sensory nerve
ending for touch
Subcutis
(hypodermis)
Artery
Pacinian corpuscle
Stratum basale
Sebaceous gland
Stratum spinosum
Stratum corneum
Arrector pili muscle
Stratum germinativum
Pigment layer
Figure 5-8.  Diagram of a cross section of human skin illustrating the various layers, cellular composition, and blood supply (www.dentalarticles.com/visual/d/
skin-layers.php).

Absorption, Distribution, and excretion of Toxicants
Chapter 5
173
surface, and, in general, passage through these areas is much more 
rapid than passage through the stratum corneum. Ultimately, to be 
absorbed a chemical must pass the barrier of the stratum corneum 
and then traverse the other six layers of the skin (Dugard, 1983; 
Poet and McDougal, 2002).
In contrast to the complexity of the GI tract, the skin is a sim-
pler penetration barrier for chemicals because passage through the 
stratum corneum is the rate-determining step. All toxicants move 
across the stratum corneum by passive diffusion. In general, lipo-
philic (fat-soluble) compounds are absorbed more readily across 
the stratum corneum, whereas the penetration of hydrophilic 
(water-soluble) compounds is more limited. Nonpolar toxicants 
diffuse through the skin in a manner that is proportional to their 
lipid solubility and inversely related to molecular weight. However, 
although lipophilic compounds may pass more readily through the 
stratum corneum, their passage through the dermis may become 
rate-­limiting. Hydrophilic compounds are more likely to penetrate 
the skin through appendages such as hair follicles.
Human stratum corneum is significantly different in structure 
and chemistry in various regions of the body, and these differences 
affect the permeability of the skin to chemicals. Skin from the pal-
mar and plantar regions is much different from skin from other 
areas of the body in that the stratum corneum of the palms and 
soles is adapted for weight bearing and friction and there are no hair 
follicles present. The stratum corneum of the rest of the body sur-
face is adapted for flexibility and fine sensory discrimination. The 
permeability of the skin also depends on both the diffusivity and the 
thickness of the stratum corneum. Although the stratum corneum 
is much thicker on the palms and soles (400 to 600 μm in callous 
areas) than on the arms, back, legs, and abdomen (8 to 15 μm), it 
has much higher diffusivity per unit thickness. In contrast, the skin 
of the scrotum is characterized by a thin stratum corneum and a high 
diffusivity. Consequently, as illustrated by the comparative absorp-
tion of malathion across different human skin sites (Table 5-7), 
toxicants are likely to readily cross scrotal skin, whereas absorp-
tion across forehead skin is less extensive, and penetration across 
the palm is lowest because of the thickness of the stratum corneum 
and the lack of dermal appendages.
The second phase of percutaneous absorption consists of 
diffusion of the toxicant through the lower layers of the epider-
mis (stratum germinativum, spinosum, and granulosum) and the 
dermis. Despite possessing tight intercellular junctions, these cell 
layers are far inferior to the stratum corneum as diffusion barri-
ers. In contrast to the stratum corneum, they contain a porous, 
nonselective, aqueous diffusion medium. Toxicants pass through 
this area by diffusion and enter the systemic circulation through 
the numerous venous and lymphatic capillaries in the dermis. The 
rate of diffusion depends on blood flow, interstitial fluid move-
ment, and perhaps other factors, including interactions with dermal 
constituents.
There are several factors that can influence the absorption 
of toxicants through the skin, including (1) the integrity of the 
stratum corneum, (2) the hydration state of the stratum corneum, 
(3) temperature, (4) solvents as carriers, and (5) molecular size. 
Because the stratum corneum plays a critical role in determining 
cutaneous permeability, removal of this layer causes a dramatic 
increase in permeability of the epidermis for a variety of large or 
small molecules, both lipid-soluble and water-soluble (Poet and 
McDougal, 2002). Caustic agents, such as acids and alkalis, that 
damage the stratum corneum increase its permeability. The most 
frequently encountered penetration-enhancing damage to the skin 
results from burns and various skin diseases. Water also plays 
an extremely important role in skin permeability. Under normal 
conditions, the stratum corneum is partially hydrated, contain-
ing about 7% water by weight. This amount of water increases 
the permeability of the stratum corneum approximately 10-fold 
over the permeability that exists when it is completely dry. On 
contact with water, the stratum corneum can increase its weight 
of tightly bound water up to fivefold, which increases perme-
ability an additional two to threefold. In many studies, the site 
of application is covered with plastic wrap (occlusive applica-
tion), originally described by Draize et al. (1944), to hydrate the 
stratum corneum and enhance the absorption of some toxicants. 
Similarly, an increase in temperature will increase dermal pen-
etration by increasing dermal blood flow. This is particularly 
important for occupational exposures to chemicals such as insec-
ticides in which agricultural workers are likely to be working 
strenuously at relatively high temperatures. Such environmental 
conditions increase dermal penetration and may increase the risk 
of systemic toxicity.
Solvents used to dissolve compounds of interest can also 
influence dermal penetration. In general, lower absorption will be 
observed if a toxicant is highly soluble in the vehicle, whereas low 
solubility of the toxicant in the vehicle will tend to increase der-
mal penetration. In addition, solvents such as dimethyl sulfoxide 
(DMSO) facilitate the penetration of toxicants through the skin by 
increasing the permeability of the stratum corneum. Although the 
mechanism by which DMSO enhances skin permeability is not 
fully understood, it has been suggested that it (1) removes much of 
the lipid matrix of the stratum corneum, making holes on artificial 
shunts in the penetration barrier; (2) alters keratin configuration 
to change protein structure; and (3) functions as a swelling agent 
(Williams and Berry, 2004).
With respect to molecular size, it is generally recognized 
that compounds above 400 Da exhibit poor dermal penetration. 
As such, nanoparticles may exhibit higher dermal absorption 
and systemic exposures as a result of their small size. However, 
although nanoparticles appear to penetrate the skin as a function 
of their size, their overall absorption is relatively low. For nano-
materials, hair follicles can contribute to dermal penetration, and 
as a general rule, particles that are approximately 300 to 600 nm 
penetrate deeply in to hair follicles, where the extensive capil-
lary network around the follicles facilitates uptake (Lademann 
et al., 2011). Based on these features, nanoparticle formulations 
may facilitate absorption from the skin. In contrast, nanosized 
particles of titanium dioxide and zinc oxide, which are widely 
used in sunscreens, do not appear to penetrate beyond the stratum 
corneum, a feature that is consistent with their skin protective 
effects (Newman et al., 2009).
Table 5-7  
Absorption of Malathion Across Different Human 
Skin Regions
ANATOMICAL 
REGION
ABSORPTION 
(%)
STRATUM 
CORNEUM 
THICKNESS (µm)
HAIR 
FOLLICLES/
cm2
Scrotum
101.6
    5
  60
Forehead
23.2
  13
770
Hand (back)
12.5
  49
  18
Palm
5.8
400
—
SOURCE: Adapted from Poet and McDougal (2002).

174
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
Dermal absorption has been studied in most laboratory ani-
mals including rats, mice, rabbits, guinea pigs, primates, and pig, 
and dermal absorption varies widely across these species. As a 
general rule, dermal absorption across rodent skin is greater than 
human skin, whereas the cutaneous permeability characteristics of 
guinea pigs, pigs, and monkeys are more similar to those observed 
in humans (Wester and Maibach, 1993). Species differences in 
percutaneous absorption account for the differential toxicity of 
insecticides in insects and humans. For example, the LD50 of 
injected DDT is approximately equal in insects and mammals, 
but DDT is much less toxic to mammals than to insects when it is 
applied to the skin. This appears to be due to the fact that DDT is 
poorly absorbed through the skin of mammals but passes readily 
through the chitinous exoskeleton of insects. Furthermore, insects 
have a much greater body surface area relative to weight than 
mammals.
Species differences in dermal absorption of xenobiotics result 
from several anatomic, physiological, and biochemical factors 
(Dugard, 1983; Poet and McDougal, 2002). First, the composition 
and thickness of the stratum corneum along with the nature of the 
dermal appendages are highly variable across species. The stratum 
corneum is much thicker in humans than in most laboratory ani-
mals, making human skin typically less permeable than animal skin. 
However, the thinner stratum corneum in animals is often compen-
sated for by a relatively thick hair cover, diminishing direct con-
tact of the skin with a xenobiotic. Sweat and pilosebaceous ducts 
also vary across species. For example, eccrine sweat glands are 
located in the pads of the extremities of all mammals. However, the 
general body surface of humans contains 100 to 600/m2 of coiled 
tubular sweat glands, whereas rodents, rabbits, cats, and dogs have 
none. The number of pilosebaceous ducts in humans and pigs 
is similar (about 40/cm2), but rodents may have up to 100 times 
more. Another important potential rate-limiting step in the dermal 
absorption of chemicals is the cutaneous blood flow. In humans, 
the skin plays an important thermoregulatory function as opposed 
to furred animals. Consequently, there is a much more extensive 
vasculature in humans than in most mammals (Calabrese, 1984). 
Biotransformation reactions in skin can also facilitate absorption, 
and the presence of metabolizing enzymes is highly variable across 
species. Xenobiotic transporters, including members of the ABCC 
family and the SLCO and SLC families, have been identified in 
skin with expression predominantly in keratinocytes. Differences in 
levels or patterns of expression of these transporters may also con-
tribute to species differences in dermal absorption of toxicants (Kao 
et al., 1985; Baron et al., 2001; Hashimoto et al., 2013). Recently 
PgP and BCRP inhibition have been noted to increase the dermal 
absorption of dermal accumulation of regorafenib and its active 
metabolites M-2 and M-5, conceptually suggesting that inhibition 
of transport can impact distribution to skin (Fujita et al., 2017). It is 
not clear whether the impact is due to change in systemic inhibition 
levels or at the level of the skin, but the mechanism is potentially 
relevant to dermal toxicants.
Overall, commonly used laboratory animals are typically not 
good models of human absorption of toxicants. An example of 
the species differences and lack of concordance with human data 
for dermal absorption of the herbicide 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic 
acid (2,4-D) is illustrated in Table 5-8. As illustrated by these data, 
absorption through rat skin was higher than in other species. In gen-
eral, absorption through primate or pig skin is considered to most 
closely predict human dermal absorption (Wester and Maibach, 
1993). Additionally, in vitro methods using human skin may pro-
vide reasonable alternatives to the use of laboratory animals for 
evaluating dermal absorption of toxicants (Bronaugh et al., 1982).
Absorption of Toxicants After Special 
Routes of Administration
Toxicants usually enter the bloodstream after absorption through 
the skin, lungs, or GI tract. However, in studying the effects of 
chemicals in laboratory animals, other routes of administration 
may also be used. The most common routes are (1) intravenous, 
(2) intraperitoneal, (3) subcutaneous, and (4) intramuscular. The 
intravenous route introduces the toxicant directly into the blood-
stream, eliminating the process of absorption. Intraperitoneal injec-
tion results in rapid absorption of xenobiotics because of the rich 
peritoneal and mesenteric blood supply and the relatively large sur-
face area of the peritoneal cavity. In addition, this route of admin-
istration circumvents the delay and variability of gastric emptying. 
Intraperitoneally administered compounds are absorbed primarily 
through the portal circulation and therefore pass through the liver 
before reaching other organs. Subcutaneous and intramuscular 
injections usually result in slower absorption rates, but toxicants 
enter directly into the general circulation. The rate of absorption 
by these two routes can be altered by changing the blood flow to 
the injection site. For example, epinephrine causes vasoconstriction 
and will decrease the rate of absorption if it is coinjected intra-
muscularly with a toxicant. The formulation of a xenobiotic may 
also affect the rate of absorption, as toxicants are typically absorbed 
more slowly from suspensions than from solutions.
The toxicity of a chemical may or may not depend on the route 
of administration. If a toxicant is injected intraperitoneally, most 
of the chemical enters the liver via the portal circulation before 
reaching the general circulation. Therefore, with intraperitoneal 
administration, a compound may be completely extracted and bio-
transformed by the liver with subsequent excretion into bile with-
out gaining access to the systemic circulation. Propranolol (Shand 
and Rangno, 1972) and lidocaine (Boyes et al., 1970) are classi-
cal examples of drugs with efficient extraction during the first pass 
through the liver. A chemical with a high first-pass effect that is 
toxic in an organ other than the liver and GI tract is likely to be less 
toxic when administered intraperitoneally than when administered 
by other routes (intravenously, intramuscularly, or subcutaneously) 
because the intraperitoneal route favors extraction in the liver to 
reduce what is available systemically. In contrast, compounds with 
no appreciable biotransformation in the liver are likely to show 
similar toxicity independent of the route of administration if the 
rates of absorption are equal. Therefore, preliminary information on 
Table 5-8  
Comparison of Dermal Absorption of 2,4-D Across 
Species
SPECIES
WASH TIME 
(HOUR)
COLLECTION 
TIME (HOUR)
% ABSORBED
Rat
24
336
20
Rabbit
24
336
12
Monkey
24
336
6
Human
4
120
3.7
NOTE: Data from Ross et al. (2005) and represent application of the 
dimethylamine salt of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D). In all 
cases, the dose applied was 4 μg/cm2. For rats, rabbits, and monkeys, 
the application site was washed after 24 hours, whereas human skin 
was washed after 4 hours. The collection time denotes the interval over 
which data were collected to determine absorption.

Absorption, Distribution, and excretion of Toxicants
Chapter 5
175
the contribution of biotransformation and excretion of xenobiotics 
to toxic outcome can be derived by comparing toxic responses after 
administration by different routes.
DISTRIBUTION
After gaining entry into the bloodstream, regardless of route of 
exposure, a toxicant distributes to tissues throughout the body. The 
rate of distribution to organs or tissues is determined primarily by 
blood flow and the rate of diffusion out of the capillary bed into 
the cells of a particular organ or tissue, and usually occurs rapidly. 
The final distribution depends largely on the affinity of a xenobi-
otic for various tissues. In general, the initial phase of distribution 
is dominated by blood flow, whereas the eventual distribution is 
determined largely by affinity. The penetration of toxicants into 
cells occurs by passive diffusion or special transport processes, 
as discussed previously. Small water-soluble molecules and ions 
apparently diffuse through aqueous channels or pores in the cell 
membrane. Lipid-soluble molecules readily permeate the mem-
brane itself. Very polar molecules and ions of even moderate size 
(molecular weight of 50 or more) cannot enter cells easily except 
by special transport mechanisms because they are surrounded by a 
hydration shell, making their actual size much larger.
Volume of Distribution
A key concept in understanding the disposition of a toxicant is its 
volume of distribution (Vd), a primary determinant of the concen-
tration of a toxicant in blood that is used to quantify distribution 
throughout the body. It is defined as the volume in which the amount 
of drug would need to be uniformly dissolved in order to produce 
the observed blood concentration. Total body water is derived from 
that which is either extracellular or intracellular and represents 
three distinct compartments: plasma water and interstitial water 
comprise the extracellular compartment and are distinguished from 
intracellular water (Box 5-3). If a chemical distributes only to the 
plasma compartment (no tissue distribution), it has a high plasma 
concentration and hence a low Vd. In contrast, if a chemical distrib-
utes throughout the body (total body water), the effective plasma 
concentration is low and hence a high Vd. However, the distribution 
of toxicants is complex and under most circumstances cannot be 
simply equated with distribution into one of the water compart-
ments of the body. Binding to and/or dissolution in various stor-
age sites of the body, such as fat, liver, and bone, are usually more 
important factors in determining the distribution of chemicals.
Some toxicants do not readily cross cell membranes and 
therefore have restricted distribution, whereas other toxicants rap-
idly pass through cell membranes and are distributed throughout 
the body. Some toxicants selectively accumulate in certain parts 
of the body as a result of protein binding, active transport, or high 
solubility in fat. The target organ for toxicity may be the site of 
accumulation, but this is not always the case. If a toxicant accumu-
lates at a site other than the target organ or tissue, the accumulation 
is likely to be protective because plasma levels and consequently 
its concentration at the site of action are reduced. In this case, it is 
assumed that the chemical in the storage depot is toxicologically 
inactive. However, a chemical in a storage depot is also in equi-
librium with the free fraction of the toxicant in plasma, so that it 
is released into the circulation as the unbound fraction of toxicant 
is eliminated. Examples illustrating a wide range of Vd are noted 
in Table 5-9, and the factors that contribute to the Vd are discussed 
below.
Storage of Toxicants in Tissues
Because only the free fraction of a chemical is in equilibrium 
throughout the body, binding to or dissolving in certain body con-
stituents greatly alters the distribution of a xenobiotic. Some xeno-
biotics attain their highest concentrations at the site of toxic action, 
such as carbon monoxide, which has a very high affinity for hemo-
globin, and paraquat, which accumulates in the lungs. Other chemi-
cals concentrate at sites other than the target organ. For example, 
lead is stored in bone, but manifestations of lead poisoning appear 
in soft tissues. The compartment where a toxicant is concentrated, 
but is not the major site of toxicity for that chemical, is described as 
a storage depot. Toxicants in these depots are always in equilibrium 
with the free fraction in plasma, so that as a chemical is biotrans-
formed or excreted from the body, more is released from the stor-
age site. As a result, the biological half-life of stored compounds 
can be very long.
 Box 5-3
 Estimates of the Size of the Major Compartments That Contribute to Volume of Distribution
COMPARTMENT 
PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL
LITER IN 70-kg HUMAN
PLASMA CONCENTRATION AFTER 
1 g OF CHEMICAL (mg/L)
Plasma water
4.5
3
333
Total extracellular water
20
14
71
Total body water
55
38
26
Tissue binding
—
—
0–25
Table 5-9  
Examples of Factors That Contribute to Volume of 
Distribution (Vd)
COMPOUND
Vd (L/kg)
FACTORS INFLUENCING 
DISTRIBUTION
Warfarin
0.1
High plasma protein ­binding 
with little distribution into 
­tissues
Ethanol
0.5
Distribution in total body water
Propranolol
4.3
Distributed to peripheral tissues
Tamoxifen
50
Extensive distribution to 
­peripheral tissues and high 
­protein binding
Chloroquine
100
High tissue uptake and trapping 
in lysosomes

176
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
Plasma Proteins as Storage Depot  Binding of chemicals 
to plasma proteins is a major storage depot, and several different 
plasma proteins bind xenobiotics and some endogenous constitu-
ents of the body. As depicted in Fig. 5-9, albumin is the major pro-
tein in plasma and it binds many different drugs and xenobiotics. 
α1-Acid glycoprotein, although present at a much lower concen-
tration than albumin, is also an important protein in plasma, and 
compounds with basic characteristics tend to bind to it. Transferrin, 
a β-globulin, is important for the transport of iron in the body. The 
other major metal-binding protein in plasma is ceruloplasmin, 
which carries copper. The α- and β-lipoproteins are very impor-
tant in the transport of lipid-soluble compounds such as vitamins, 
cholesterol, and steroid hormones as well as xenobiotics. Plasma 
γ-globulins are antibodies that function specifically in immuno-
logical reactions. Overall, plasma proteins bind acidic compounds 
such as phenylbutazone, basic compounds such as imipramine, and 
neutral compounds such as digitoxin.
Albumin, present in the plasma at a concentration of 500 to 
600 μM, is the most abundant protein in plasma and serves as both 
a depot and multivalent transport protein for many endogenous 
and exogenous compounds. Protein–ligand interactions occur pri-
marily as a result of hydrophobic forces, hydrogen bonding, and 
Van der Waals forces. Because of their high molecular weight, 
plasma proteins and the toxicants bound to them cannot cross 
capillary walls. Consequently, the fraction of a toxicant bound 
to plasma proteins is not immediately available for distribution 
into the extravascular space or filtration by the kidneys. However, 
the interaction of a chemical with plasma proteins is a revers-
ible process, and as unbound chemical diffuses out of capillar-
ies, bound chemical dissociates from the protein until the free 
fraction reaches equilibrium between the vascular space and the 
extravascular space. In turn, diffusion in the extravascular space 
to sites more distant from the capillaries continues, and the result-
ing concentration gradient provides the thermodynamic force for 
continued dissociation of the bound fraction in plasma. Active 
transport processes are not limited by the binding of chemicals 
to plasma proteins.
The binding of toxicants to plasma proteins is usually deter-
mined by equilibrium dialysis or ultrafiltration. The total amount 
in plasma is determined prior to these separation methods, and the 
fraction that passes through a dialysis membrane or appears in the 
ultrafiltrate is the unbound (or free) fraction. The bound fraction is 
determined as the difference between the total and unbound frac-
tions. The extent of plasma protein binding varies considerably 
among xenobiotics. Some, such as antipyrine, are not bound; oth-
ers, such as secobarbital, are bound to about 50%; and some, such 
as warfarin, are 99% bound. For warfarin, the high protein binding 
is the single most important determinant of its Vd, which is limited 
to the plasma compartment (Table 5-9).
The binding of chemicals to plasma proteins is an important 
concept in toxicology for two reasons. Toxicity is typically mani-
fested by the amount of a xenobiotic that is unbound. Therefore, a 
compound with a high degree of plasma protein binding may not 
show toxicity when compared to one that is less extensively bound 
to plasma proteins. Ironically, a high degree of protein binding also 
tends to increase the risk of adverse effects resulting from interac-
tions with other highly bound compounds. In particular, severe toxic 
reactions can occur if a toxicant with a high degree of protein binding 
is displaced from plasma proteins by another chemical, increasing the 
free fraction of the toxicant in plasma. This interaction increases the 
equilibrium concentration of the toxicant in a target organ, thereby 
increasing the potential for toxicity. For example, if a compound is 
99.9% bound to plasma protein (0.1% free), then an interaction that 
decreases protein binding to 99.5%, which may seem to be a minor 
change, is effectively a fivefold increase in the free plasma concentra-
tion (0.5% free). Most research on the adverse interactions associated 
with binding of xenobiotics to plasma proteins have been conducted 
with drugs. For example, if a strongly bound sulfonamide is given 
Cu2+ (Ceruloplasmin)
Lithium carmine
Hemoglobin
(Haptoglobin)
Zn2+, lipids
Cholesterol
Vitamins A, K, D, E
Fe2+
(Transferrin)
Steroid hormones
(Transcortin)
Vitamin B12
Sialic acid
Thyroxine
Albumin
Bilirubin
Ca2+, Cu2+, Zn2+
Uric acid
Vitamin C
Adenosine
Tetracyclines
Chloramphenicol
Digitonin
Fatty acids
Suramin
Quinocrine
Penicillin
Salicylate
Para-aminosalicylate
Sulfonamides
Streptomycin
Acid dyes
Phenol red
Histamine
Triiodothyronine
Thyroxine
Barbiturates
α1
α2
β1
β2
γ
Figure 5-9.  Schematic representation of the electrophoretic separation of plasma proteins and xenobiotics that interact with these proteins.

Absorption, Distribution, and excretion of Toxicants
Chapter 5
177
concurrently with an antidiabetic drug, the sulfonamide may displace 
the antidiabetic drug and induce a hypoglycemic coma. Similarly, 
interactions resulting from displacement of warfarin can lead to inap-
propriate blood clotting and possible deleterious effects. Xenobiotics 
can also compete with and displace endogenous compounds that 
are bound to plasma proteins. The importance of this phenomenon 
was demonstrated in a notable clinical trial comparing the efficacy 
of tetracycline with that of a penicillin–sulfonamide mixture in the 
management of bacterial infections in premature infants (Silverman 
et al., 1956). The penicillin–sulfonamide mixture led to much higher 
mortality than did the tetracycline because the sulfonamide displaced 
a considerable amount of bilirubin from albumin. Free bilirubin then 
diffused into the brain of the newborns (because the BBB is not fully 
developed), causing a severe form of brain damage termed kernic-
terus. In addition to drugs, some chemicals, such as the insecticide 
dieldrin, also bind avidly to plasma proteins (99%). Therefore, it is 
to be expected that chemical–chemical interactions that alter plasma 
protein binding occur with many different xenobiotics.
Plasma protein binding can also give rise to species differences 
in the disposition of xenobiotics. For example, plasma protein bind-
ing of clofibric acid is considerably different between mice, rats, 
and humans and correlates with the half-lives of this compound 
in these species (Table 5-10). Because clofibric acid is primarily 
eliminated in all three species by renal glomerular filtration without 
tubular reabsorption, differences in the free fraction of this com-
pound in plasma across the species contribute to the observed spe-
cies differences in drug half-life. Additional factors that influence 
plasma protein binding across species include differences in the 
concentration of albumin, in binding affinity, and/or in competitive 
binding of endogenous substances.
Liver and Kidney as Storage Depots  The liver and kidney 
have a high capacity for acting as a storage depot for many chemi-
cals. These two organs probably concentrate more toxicants than do 
all the other organs combined, and, in most cases, active transport 
or binding to tissue components are likely to be involved.
Hepatic uptake of lead illustrates how rapidly the liver binds 
foreign compounds: just 30 minutes after a single dose, the concen-
tration of lead in liver is 50 times higher than the concentration in 
plasma (Klaassen and Shoeman, 1974). In humans OATP1B1 and 
OATP1B3 (Oatp1a1 and Oatp1b2  in rodents) largely contribute to 
the deposition of drugs and xenobiotics to the liver. For example, 
chemicals that have long half-lives, such as perfluorooctanoic acid 
(PFOA), preferentially deposit in the liver due to the high affinity of 
liver-enriched OATP transporters that preferentially transport cer-
tain perfluorinated chemicals into the liver for deposition (Weaver 
et al., 2010; Zhao et al., 2017).
In addition, some proteins can also sequester xenobiotics in the 
liver or kidney. For example, metallothionein (MT), a specialized 
metal-binding protein, sequesters both essential and toxic metals 
including zinc and cadmium (Cd) with high affinities in the kidney 
and liver. In the liver, Cd bound to MT serves to concentrate and 
sequester the heavy metal while preventing its excretion into bile. In 
the kidney, however, the Cd–MT complex is very toxic and is mech-
anistically involved in the chronic toxicity of Cd (Klaassen and 
Liu, 1997). Another protein that sequesters certain toxicants in the 
kidney is α2u-globulin. This protein, which is synthesized in large 
quantities only in male rats, binds to a diverse array of xenobiotics 
including metabolites of d-limonene (a major constituent of orange 
juice) and 2,4,4-trimethylpentane (found in unleaded gasoline). 
The chemical–α2u-globulin complex is taken up by the kidney, where 
it accumulates within the lysosomal compartment and damages 
the proximal tubule cells. Ultimately, the accumulation of this com-
plex in the kidney is responsible for male rat–specific nephrotoxic-
ity and carcinogenicity (Lehman-McKeeman, 2010).
As noted in Table 5-9, chloroquine has a very high Vd, which 
is determined largely by extensive storage in peripheral tissues. This 
compound is an example of a wide range of chemicals referred to 
as cationic amphiphiles. At physiological pH, chloroquine is non-
ionized, but once in cells, it is taken up into the acidic milieu of 
the lysosome where it becomes highly ionized (as per Henderson–
Hasselbalch equations) and is subsequently trapped in this com-
partment. A variety of xenobiotics share these attributes, which 
ultimately lead to lysosomal dysfunction and the accumulation 
of phospholipids, referred to as phospholipidosis (Hanumegowda 
et al., 2010).
Fat as Storage Depot  There are many organic compounds that 
are highly stable and lipophilic, leading to their accumulation in 
the environment. The lipophilic nature of these compounds also 
permits rapid penetration of cell membranes and uptake by tissues, 
and it is not surprising that highly lipophilic toxicants are distrib-
uted and concentrated in body fat where they are retained for a 
very long time. The environmental accumulation and potential 
toxicological significance of long-term storage of numerous com-
pounds including the pesticides aldrin, chlordane, DDT, dieldrin, 
endrin, heptachlor, mirex, and toxaphene, along with polychlori-
nated and polybrominated biphenyls, polybrominated flame retar-
dants, dioxins, and furans are a major issue in toxicology. There is 
extensive research efforts designed to assess the potential for these 
compounds to produce carcinogenic, developmental, and endocrine 
effects, which is directly related to their accumulation and storage 
in body fat (Jandacek and Tso, 2001).
Toxicants appear to accumulate in fat by dissolution in neutral 
fats, which constitute about 50% and 20% of the body weight of 
obese individuals and lean athletic individuals, respectively. Thus, 
toxicants with a high lipid/water partition coefficient may be stored 
in body fat, and higher amounts are likely to be retained in obese 
individuals. Storage lowers the concentration of the toxicant in 
the target organ such that toxicity is likely to be less severe in an 
obese person than in a lean individual. However, of more practical 
toxicological concern is the possibility that a sudden increase in the 
concentration of a chemical in blood and the target organ of toxic-
ity may occur if rapid mobilization from fat occurs. Several studies 
have shown that signs of intoxication can be produced by short-term 
starvation of experimental animals that were previously exposed to 
persistent organochlorine insecticides.
There have been numerous attempts to alter storage of lipo-
philic toxicants in adipose tissues in animal models and humans. 
Changes in body fat composition appear to be the most effective 
in reducing body burdens, and interventions designed to reduce 
the absorption of these compounds from the GI tract appear to be 
Table 5-10  
Plasma Protein Binding and Half-life of Clofibric Acid 
in the Mouse, Rat, and Man
SPECIES
PLASMA PROTEIN 
BINDING (%)
HALF-LIFE (HOURS)
Human
97
21
Rat
75
6
Mouse
45
2
SOURCE: Data from Cayen (1980).

178
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
somewhat helpful in reducing storage depots of persistent organic 
pollutants in fat (Jandacek and Tso, 2001).
Bone as Storage Depot  Compounds such as fluoride, lead, and 
strontium may be incorporated and stored in the bone matrix. For 
example, 90% of the lead in the body is eventually found in the 
skeleton. Skeletal uptake of xenobiotics is essentially a surface 
chemistry phenomenon, with exchange taking place between the 
bone surface and the fluid in contact with it. The fluid is the extra-
cellular fluid, and the surface is that of the hydroxyapatite crystals 
of bone mineral. Many of those crystals are very small, resulting in 
a large surface area relative to the mass of the bone. The extracel-
lular fluid brings the toxicant into contact with the hydration shell 
of the hydroxyapatite, allowing diffusion through it and penetration 
of the crystal surface. As a result of similarities in size and charge, 
F− may readily displace OH−, whereas lead or strontium may sub-
stitute for calcium in the hydroxyapatite lattice matrix through an 
exchange–adsorption reaction.
Foreign compounds deposited in bone are not sequestered 
irreversibly by that tissue. Toxicants can be released from the bone 
by ionic exchange at the crystal surface and dissolution of bone 
crystals through osteoclastic activity. An increase in osteolytic 
activity such as that seen after parathyroid hormone administration 
leads to enhanced mobilization of hydroxyapatite lattice, which 
can be reflected in an increased plasma concentration of toxicants. 
Ultimately, deposition and storage of toxicants in bone may or may 
not be detrimental. Lead is not toxic to bone, but the chronic effects 
of fluoride deposition (skeletal fluorosis) and radioactive strontium 
(osteosarcoma and other neoplasms) are well documented.
Blood–Brain Barrier
Access to the brain is restricted by the presence of two barriers: 
the blood–brain barrier (BBB) and the blood–cerebral spinal fluid 
barrier (BCSFB). Although neither represents an absolute barrier to 
the passage of toxic chemicals into the CNS, many toxicants do not 
enter the brain in appreciable quantities because of these barriers.
The BBB is formed primarily by the endothelial cells of blood 
capillaries in the brain (Fig. 5-10). Each endothelial cell forms a 
tight junction with adjacent cells, essentially forming a tight seal 
between the cells and preventing diffusion of polar compounds 
through paracellular pathways. Diffusion of more lipophilic com-
pounds through endothelial cell membranes is counteracted by 
xenobiotic efflux transporters present in the endothelial cells. Glial 
cells, particularly astrocytes, contribute to the BBB by secreting 
chemical factors that modulate endothelial cell permeability, and 
astrocytes and perivascular microglial cells extend processes that 
support the integrity of the BBB. For small- to medium-sized water-
soluble molecules, the tighter junctions of the capillary endothelium 
and the lipid membranes of the glial cell processes represent the 
major barrier. Although the absorption of lipid-soluble compounds 
is favored in the brain, such compounds must traverse the mem-
branes of the endothelial cells, not be substrates for xenobiotic trans-
porters, and then traverse the glial cell processes to enter the brain.
Although the BBB is a physical structure that limits distri-
bution to the brain, active transport processes also play a pivotal 
role in determining the concentration of xenobiotics in the brain. 
Numerous ATP-dependent transporters have been identified as part 
of the BBB, comprising various members of the ABC and SLC 
families (Fig. 5-10) (Kusuhara and Sugiyama, 2005; Deeken and 
Loscher, 2007; Miller, 2010). Efflux transporters including MDR1 
(PGP), BCRP, MRP1, MRP2, MRP4, and MRP5 are located on 
the apical (blood side) plasma membrane and function to move 
xenobiotics absorbed into the capillary endothelial cells out into 
the blood, thereby limiting distribution into the brain. Uptake trans-
porters including OATP1A2 and OATP1C1 are found on both the 
basolateral and apical sides of the endothelium, and can drive a 
concentrative efflux if coupled energetically to the electrical poten-
tial difference across the endothelial cell membrane. OATP1C1 is 
suggested to specifically transport thyroid hormone into the brain. 
Finally, uptake transporters on the apical membranes include OAT3 
and CTN2. In combination, these transporters can efficiently efflux 
a wide range of anionic, cationic, uncharged, and numerous drug 
conjugates from the brain.
PGP and BCRP are the two transporters that are known to sig-
nificantly impact brain penetration and neurotoxicity. The importance 
of transport processes to the maintenance of the BBB has been dem-
onstrated in genetically modified mouse models. Compounds that are 
substrates for MDR1 achieve much higher brain levels in P-gp null 
(Mdr1a−/−/Mdr1b−/−) mice relative to wild-type mice, and are likely 
to show increased toxicity as well. Seminal studies demonstrated 
that MDR1 null mice were far more sensitive to the insecticide, iver-
mectin, and the anticancer agent, vinblastine. The brain uptake of 
these compounds was increased 26- and 80-fold, respectively, and 
the sensitivity to neurotoxicity or lethality was increased up to 100-
fold (Schinkel et al., 1994; Lankas et al., 1997). Because PGP can 
limit impact penetration, screens for whether a new chemical entity is 
a PGP substrate are often conducted early in the discovery/develop-
ment process. BCRP also serves to pump drugs and xenobiotics from 
the capillary endothelial cells out into the blood. Use of knockout 
mice have illustrated the role of BCRP to limit brain penetration for 
various anticancer agents, such as sorafenib and erlotinib (Agarwal 
et al., 2011; de Vries et al., 2012). For some drugs, targeted deletion 
of both PGP and BCRP resulted in even greater brain penetration 
than for either deleted transporter alone (Kodaira et al., 2010).
The BCSFB is found between the circulating blood and the 
circulating cerebral spinal fluid in the brain (Fig. 5-11). It comprises 
Brain
Capillary
endothelium
Choroid plexus
epithelium
Blood
CSF
Tight
junctions
MRP
1,4
OATP
PEPT
2
OCT2
OCTN
2
MRP4
BCRP
MDR1
OAT
1,3
OATP
2B1
Figure 5-11.  Schematic model showing the xenobiotic transporting systems 
that contribute to the human blood–cerebral spinal fluid barrier.
Brain
Blood
Capillary
endothelium
Glial cell processes
Tight
junctions
MDR1
BCRP
OAT3
OCTN
2
MRP
1,2
MRP
4,5
OATP
1A2
OATP
1A2
OATP
1C1
Figure 5-10.  Schematic model showing the xenobiotic transporting systems 
that contribute to the human blood–brain barrier.

Absorption, Distribution, and excretion of Toxicants
Chapter 5
179
elements of the choroid plexus, the arachnoid membrane, and cer-
tain periventricular locations (including the area postrema). The 
choroid plexus has highly permeable endothelial cells on the blood 
side but is lined by epithelial cells on the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
side that form the barrier. Xenobiotic transporters also contribute 
to removing compounds that may enter the endothelial cells. Blood 
flow through the choroid plexus is about 10 times higher than in the 
brain, a feature that provides the high turnover of biological fluids 
necessary to support the dynamic changes in nutrients required for 
neuronal function. Furthermore, the protein concentration in CSF is 
much lower than that in other body fluids. The low protein content 
of the CSF also limits the movement of water-insoluble compounds 
by paracellular transport, which is possible in a largely aqueous 
medium only when such compounds are bound to proteins. In gen-
eral, toxicants achieve concentrations in the CSF that are no higher 
than the concentration of the unbound toxicant in the plasma. The 
BCSFB is more of an anatomical entity than a true barrier, but it 
does provide some protection against the distribution of toxicants to 
the CNS, thereby affording some protection against toxicity.
Xenobiotic transporters are also expressed in the epithelial 
cells of the choroid plexus, but within the BSCFB, MDR1, and 
MRP1 are thought to play the most important roles (Fig. 5-11). 
In this barrier, MDR1 is expressed on the luminal side, with efflux 
from the choroidal epithelial cells into the CSF. In contrast, MRP1 
is expressed on the basolateral side of the choroidal epithelium, 
catalyzing the transport of xenobiotics out of the cells and into the 
vascular compartment, and it has been suggested that MDR1 and 
MRP1 may play an important function to coordinate the absorp-
tion and secretion of toxicants into the CNS at the BSCFB (Deeken 
and Loscher, 2007). Members of the OATP, OAT, OCT, and PEPT 
families are also expressed in the choroid plexus (Klaassen and 
Aleksunes, 2010). The function of these proteins is not well char-
acterized, but studies in rodents suggest that Oatps, particularly 
Oatp1a4, play an important role in regulating xenobiotic concen-
trations in the CSF.
In addition to its role in regulating distribution of xenobiotics 
into the CNS, transporter function is also implicated in neurological 
diseases. MDR1 and BCRP contribute to the efflux of β-amyloid 
from the brain. This protein is known to accumulate in Alzheimer’s 
disease, and there is evidence that MDR1 levels are decreased in 
Alzheimer’s patients, with a concomitant increase in BCRP expres-
sion. There is also ongoing work to determine the potential for 
MDR1 to remove toxicants from the brain in a manner that may 
ultimately be protective against the development of Parkinson’s dis-
ease (Miller, 2010). These observations require more research, with 
particular emphasis on how altered transporter function or expres-
sion may be affected by toxicant exposures that could contribute to 
human diseases.
The effectiveness of the BBB varies from one area of the brain 
to another. For example, the cortex, the lateral nuclei of the hypo-
thalamus, the area postrema, the pineal body, and the posterior lobe 
of the hypophysis are more permeable than are other areas of the 
brain. It is not clear whether this is due to the increased blood sup-
ply to those areas, or because the BSCFB represents a more per-
meable barrier, or both. In general, the entrance of toxicants into 
the brain follows the same principle that applies to transfer across 
other cells in the body. Only the free fraction of a toxicant (i.e., 
not bound to plasma proteins) equilibrates rapidly with the brain. 
Lipid solubility plays an important role in determining the rate of 
entry of a compound into the CNS, as does the degree of ionization, 
as discussed earlier. Lipid solubility enhances the rate of penetra-
tion of toxicants into the CNS, whereas ionization greatly dimin-
ishes it. 2-PAM, a quaternary nitrogen derivative, does not readily 
penetrate the brain and is ineffective in reversing the inhibition of 
brain cholinesterase caused by organophosphate insecticides. Some 
very lipophilic compounds may enter the brain but are so efficiently 
removed by xenobiotic transporters that they do not reach appre-
ciable concentrations. This is particularly true for agents such as 
cyclosporin. TCDD, which is highly lipophilic, is also not readily 
distributed into the brain, but it is not known whether transporters 
influence its distribution to the brain. It is likely that strong binding 
to plasma proteins or lipoproteins, as well as the composition of 
the brain (mainly phospholipids), limits the entry of very lipophilic 
compounds into the brain. Some xenobiotics, although very few, 
may enter the brain by carrier-mediated processes. For example, 
methylmercury combines with cysteine, forming a sulfhydryl 
complex that is similar to methionine, which can be utilized as the 
large neutral amino acid carrier of the capillary endothelial cells for 
uptake into the brain (Clarkson, 1987).
The BBB is not fully developed at birth, and this is one rea-
son why some chemicals are more toxic in newborns than adults. 
The example of kernicterus resulting from increased brain levels 
of bilirubin in infants has been noted earlier. In addition, morphine 
is 3 to 10 times more toxic to newborn than to adult rats because 
of the higher permeability of the brain of a newborn to morphine. 
Similarly, lead produces encephalomyelopathy in newborn rats but 
not in adults, apparently because of differences in the stages of 
development of the BBB.
Passage of Toxicants Across the Placenta
The term placental barrier has been associated with the concept 
that the main function of the placenta is to protect the fetus against 
the passage of noxious substances from the mother. However, the 
placenta is a multifunctional organ that also provides nutrition 
for the conceptus, exchanges maternal and fetal blood gases, dis-
poses of fetal excretory material, and maintains pregnancy through 
complex hormonal regulation. Placental structure and function 
show more species differences than any other mammalian organ. 
Anatomically, the placental barrier consists of several cell layers 
interposed between the fetal and maternal circulations, but the 
number of cell layers varies across species and with the stage of 
gestation. The maximum number of cell layers in placentas is six 
(three maternal and three fetal layers), and when all six layers are 
present, the placenta is termed epitheliochorial (Table 5-11). Those 
in which the maternal epithelium is absent are referred to as syn-
desmochorial. When only the endothelial layer of the maternal tis-
sue remains, the tissue is termed endotheliochorial; when even the 
endothelium is gone (as in humans), the chorionic villi bathe in the 
maternal blood, and the tissue is called hemochorial. In some spe-
cies, the maternal layers are absent along with the fetal endothelial 
and connective tissue, and these are called hemoendothelial. Within 
the same species, the placenta may also change its histological clas-
sification during gestation. For example, at the beginning of gesta-
tion, the placenta of a rabbit has six major layers (epitheliochorial), 
and at the end it has only one (hemoendothelial). Overall, there are 
marked species differences in placental structure. The animal mod-
els that are most similar to the organization of the human placenta 
based on its hemochorial histological organization are rodents and 
primates, but the decidual nature of the rodent placenta still dif-
fers markedly from that of humans (Leiser and Kaufmann, 1994; 
Myllynen et al., 2005).
Most of the vital nutrients necessary for the development of the 
fetus are transported by active transport systems. For example, vita-
mins, amino acids, essential sugars, and ions such as calcium and 
iron are transported from mother to fetus against a concentration

180
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
gradient (Ganapathy et al., 2000). Like nutrients, toxic chemicals 
can be transported across the placental barrier or pass through the 
placenta via passive permeability. The only exceptions are a few 
antimetabolites that are structurally similar to endogenous purines 
and pyrimidines, which are the physiological substrates for active 
transport from the maternal to the fetal circulation. The placenta 
also has biotransformation capabilities that may prevent some toxic 
substances from reaching the fetus (Syme et al., 2004; Prouillac 
and Lecoeur, 2010). Among the substances that cross the placenta 
by passive diffusion, more lipid-soluble substances rapidly attain a 
maternal–fetal equilibrium. Under steady-state conditions, concen-
trations of a toxic compound in the plasma of the mother and fetus 
are usually the same.
Many foreign substances can cross the placenta, and the same 
factors that dictate the passage of xenobiotics across biological 
membranes are important determinants of the placental transfer. 
These include previously discussed attributes including degree of 
ionization, lipophilicity, protein binding, and molecular weight 
along with blood flow and the concentration gradient across the 
barrier. In addition to chemicals, viruses (e.g., rubella virus), cel-
lular pathogens (e.g., syphilis spirochetes), and globulin antibodies 
can traverse the placenta. In this regard, the placental barrier is not 
as precise an anatomical unit like the BBB. The human placenta 
includes the syncytiotrophoblast and cytotrophoblast layers. The 
apical membrane of the syncytiotrophoblast, which forms a con-
tinuous epithelial layer, is bathed in maternal blood and the baso-
lateral surface is in contact with the discontinuous cytotrophoblast 
layer, the stromal tissue, or the fetal vasculature. To reach the fetus, 
toxins must traverse the apical and basolateral membranes of the 
syncytiotrophoblast as well as the endothelium of the fetal capil-
laries. Xenobiotic transporters are differentially expressed in these 
various cells and contribute to the barrier function that restricts dis-
tribution of toxicants to the fetus. The transporters are also critical 
to the movement of nutrients from the maternal circulation to the 
fetus along with the transfer of toxicants or waste products from 
the fetus back to the maternal circulation. Of the various cells in the 
placenta, the syncytiotrophoblasts appear to have the most exten-
sive cohort of xenobiotics transporters (Fig. 5-12). In particular, 
BCRP is highly expressed in these cells. In fact, BCRP expression 
is highest in the human placenta relative to any other organ. BCRP, 
MDR1 (PGP), and several MRPs are also expressed on the apical 
border of the syncytiotrophoblast where they play important roles in 
protecting the fetus from toxicants while regulating the movement 
of essential nutrients. Several uptake transporters are also expressed 
on the apical membrane, including OCTNs and OATPs. In contrast, 
the efflux transporter MRP5 is expressed on the basolateral side of 
the synctiotrophoblast along with uptake transporters including 
OAT4, OCT3, and OATP2B1. Expression of transporters in other 
cells of the placenta is less characterized, but it appears that the cyto-
trophoblasts express MRP1 and OAT4 (Klaassen and Aleksunes, 
2010; Prouillac and Lecoeur, 2010).
There are several examples illustrating that placental transport-
ers protect the developing fetus from toxicant exposure and pos-
sible abnormal development. For example, the fetal concentration 
of the antibiotic nitrofurantoin is increased fivefold in Bcrp-null 
mice, demonstrating that it limits fetal exposure to this drug (Zhang 
et al., 2007). Furthermore, homozygous offspring of female MDR1 
null mice (Mdr1a−/−/Mdr1b−/−) develop cleft palate when treated 
with a photoisomer of avermectin, whereas heterozygous litter-
mates showed intermediate susceptibility and wild-type mice were 
resistant to this adverse effect (Lankas et al., 1998). Finally, it has 
been shown that some anticonvulsants, including known develop-
mental toxicants such as valproic acid and phenytoin (see Chap. 10), 
inhibit OCTN2 function in human placental membrane vesicles 
(Wu et al., 2004). This transporter is critical for the uptake of car-
nitine, leading to the hypothesis that inhibition of carnitine uptake 
by valproic acid (or other drugs) with subsequent fetal deficiency 
of carnitine may be involved in the adverse developmental effects 
associated with a variety of anticonvulsant drugs.
Despite the presence of biotransformation systems and xenobi-
otic transporters designed to nourish and protect the fetus, the trans-
fer of xenobiotics across the placenta can still occur. One important 
consequence of placental transfer is that of transplacental carcino-
genesis. In this case exposing the mother during gestation increases 
Table 5-11  
Features of the Placental Barrier Based on Separation of Fetal and Maternal Blood
MATERNAL TISSUE
TYPE
SPECIES
ENDOTHELIUM
CONNECTIVE TISSUE
EPITHELIUM
Epitheliochorial
Pig, horse, donkey
+
+
+
Synepitheliochorial
Cow, sheep, goat
+
+
−
Endotheliochorial
Cat, dog, elephant
+
−
−
Hemochorial
Human, monkey
−
−
−
Hemoendothelial
Rat, rabbit, guinea pig
−
−
−
Fetal layers that separate maternal and fetal blood also include the endothelial, connective tissue, and epithelial components in all types of placentas. In 
the hemoendothelial type, only the fetal epithelium is present.
SOURCES: Modified from Morris et al. (1994) and Enders and Carter (2004).
Maternal blood
Syncytiotrophoblast
Fetal blood
Cytotrophoblast
BCRP
MDR1
MRP
1,2,3
OCTN
1,2
OATP
4A1
MRP
1
OAT
4
OATP
2B1
OCT
3
OAT
4
MRP
5
Figure 5-12.  Schematic model showing the transport systems that contrib-
ute to the barrier function of the human placenta.

Absorption, Distribution, and excretion of Toxicants
Chapter 5
181
the likelihood of tumor development in the offspring later in life 
(see Chap. 8). The most well-known transplacental carcinogen in 
humans is diethylstilbestrol (Newbold and McLachlan, 1996), but 
other compounds such as the antiviral drug zidovudine (Diwan 
et al., 1999) and inorganic arsenic (Waalkes et al., 2003; Tokar 
et al., 2011) induce tumors in mice when exposed to these chemi-
cals only during gestation.
Redistribution of Toxicants
The most critical factors that affect the distribution of xenobiot-
ics are the organ blood flow and its affinity for a xenobiotic. The 
initial phase of distribution is determined primarily by blood flow 
to the various parts of the body. Therefore, a well-perfused organ 
such as the liver may attain high initial concentrations of a xenobi-
otic. However, chemicals may have a high affinity for a binding site 
(e.g., intracellular protein or bone matrix) or to a cellular constitu-
ent (e.g., fat), and with time, will redistribute to these high-affinity 
sites. For example, although 50% of a dose of lead is found in the 
liver 2 hours after administration, 1 month later, 90% of the lead 
remaining in the body is associated with the crystal lattice of bone. 
Similarly, persistent organic pollutants do not distribute rapidly to 
fat but accumulate selectively in adipose tissue over time.
EXCRETION
Toxicants are eliminated from the body by several routes. The kid-
ney is perhaps the most important organ for the excretion of xenobi-
otics because more chemicals are eliminated from the body by this 
route than by any other (see Chap. 14). Biotransformation to more 
water-soluble products is usually a prerequisite to the excretion 
of xenobiotics through urine (see Chap. 6). The second important 
route of elimination of many xenobiotics is through feces, and the 
third, primarily for gases, is through the lungs. Biliary excretion of 
xenobiotics and/or their metabolites is most often the major source 
of fecal excretion, but a number of other sources can be significant 
for some compounds. All body secretions appear to have the ability 
to excrete chemicals; toxicants have been found in sweat, saliva, 
tears, and milk.
Urinary Excretion
The kidney is a very efficient organ for the elimination of toxicants 
from the body. The functional unit of the kidney is the nephron, 
comprising the glomerulus, a capillary tuft that initiates the pro-
cess of filtration of the blood, and tubular elements within the renal 
cortex and medulla that function to produce and concentrate urine. 
Toxic compounds are excreted in urine by the same mechanisms 
the kidney uses to remove the end products of intermediary metab-
olism from the body, including glomerular filtration, tubular excre-
tion by passive diffusion, and active tubular secretion. In general, 
the excretion of small molecular weight (<350 Da), water-soluble 
compounds is favored in urine.
The kidney receives about 25% of the cardiac output, about 
20% of which is filtered at the glomeruli. The glomerular capil-
laries have large pores (approximately 70 nm), which filter com-
pounds up to a molecular weight of about 60 kDa (smaller than 
albumin). Thus, the degree of plasma protein binding affects the 
rate of glomerular filtration because protein–xenobiotic complexes, 
particularly those bound to albumin, will not be filtered. Glomerular 
filtration rates vary considerably across species, ranging from a high 
of approximately 10 mL/min/kg in mice to about 1.8 mL/min/kg in 
humans. This difference appears to be determined by the relative 
number of nephrons per kilogram of body weight, with mice being 
the highest (Lin, 1995; Walton et al., 2004).
A toxicant filtered at the glomerulus may remain in the tubular 
lumen and be excreted in urine. Depending on the physicochemical 
properties of a compound, it may be reabsorbed across the tubu-
lar cells of the nephron back into the bloodstream. The principles 
governing the reabsorption of toxicants across the kidney tubules 
are the same as those discussed earlier in this chapter for passive 
diffusion across cell membranes. Thus, toxicants with a high lipid/
water partition coefficient are reabsorbed efficiently, whereas polar 
compounds and ions are excreted in urine. The pH of urine may 
vary but it is usually slightly acidic (approximately 6 to 6.5). Just as 
the Henderson–Hasselbach calculations determine the absorption of 
nonionized compounds from the GI tract, they also determine uri-
nary excretion. In this case, urinary excretion of the ionized moiety 
is favored, such that bases are excreted to a greater extent at lower 
pH whereas excretion of acids predominates at higher urinary pH. 
A practical application of this knowledge is illustrated by the treat-
ment of phenobarbital poisoning with sodium bicarbonate. The per-
centage of ionization is increased markedly within physiologically 
attainable pH ranges for a weak organic acid such as phenobarbital 
(pKa = 7.2) such that alkalinization of urine increases the fraction of 
drug in the ionized state, thereby increasing the urinary excretion of 
phenobarbital. Similarly, excretion of salicylate can be accelerated 
by administering sodium bicarbonate. In a similar manner, urinary 
acidification can be used to increase the excretion of a weak base 
such as phencyclidine (PCP) in drug abusers.
Toxic chemicals can also be excreted from plasma into urine 
by passive diffusion through the tubule. This process is probably 
of minor significance because filtration is much faster than excre-
tion by passive diffusion through the tubules, providing a favor-
able concentration gradient for reabsorption rather than excretion. 
Exceptions to this generalization may be some organic acids 
(pKa ≈ 3–5) and bases (pKa ≈ 7–9) that would be largely ionized 
and thus trapped at the pH of urine (pH ≈ 6). For renal excretion of 
such compounds, the flow of urine is likely to be important for the 
maintenance of a concentration gradient, favoring excretion. Thus, 
diuretics can hasten the elimination of weak organic acids and bases 
because they increase urine flow.
Xenobiotics can also be excreted into urine by active secre-
tion. This process involves the uptake of toxicants from the blood 
into the cells of the renal proximal tubule, with subsequent efflux 
from the cell into the tubular fluid from which urine is formed. 
Fig. 5-13 illustrates the various families of transporters expressed 
in the human kidney that are directly involved in xenobiotic dis-
position. There are numerous other transporters such as specific 
glucose transporters that play a role predominantly in the flux of 
endogenous substances, which are not presented here. Transporters 
may be expressed on the apical cell membrane where efflux pumps 
contribute to tubular secretion and influx pumps are important for 
reabsorption. Transporters localized to the basolateral membranes 
serve to transport xenobiotics to and from the systemic circulation 
or the renal tubular cells and also contribute to reabsorptive and 
excretory processes. Renal functional activity, as may be altered by 
toxicant exposure, can also be evaluated by determining the renal 
clearance of transporter substrates such as the widely used organic 
anion p-aminohippurate (PAH).
Recent proteomic analysis has shed light on the transporters 
expressed in human kidney cortex (Prasad et al., 2016). OAT1-4, 
OCT2, OCTN1 and OCTN2, PgP, MRP2, MRP4, MATE1, and 
SGLT2 were detected above the limit of detection, whereas BCRP 
and MATE2-K proteins were detectable but were below the lower 
limit of quantification. Transporters expressed on the basolateral 
side of the renal tubules in humans that contribute mainly to uptake 
into the kidney and subsequent excretion include OATs, OCTs,

182
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
and OATP4C1. The OAT family is a major contributor to urinary 
excretion as these proteins mediate the renal uptake of organic 
acids such as p-aminohippurate (PAH) and the renal exchange of 
dicarboxylates. In humans, OAT1, OAT2, and OAT3 are expressed 
on the basolateral membrane, whereas OAT4 is localized to the 
brush-border membrane. Similarly, in rodents, Oat1 and Oat3 are 
localized to the basolateral membranes. Although the OATs play an 
important role in the physiological exchange of metabolites in the 
kidney, they can also contribute to the development of renal toxic-
ity. In particular, the clinical use of antiviral drugs cidofovir and 
adefovir is limited by nephrotoxicity that is mediated by the accu-
mulation of these drugs in the proximal tubule by OAT1 (Ho et al., 
2000). Additionally, OAT1 mediates the uptake of methylmercury 
and ochratoxin A, and as such, may play a role in the nephrotoxic-
ity associated with these toxicants (Rizwan and Burckhardt, 2007).
The OCT transporter family is responsible for uptake of some 
cations, particularly those of low molecular weight into the kid-
ney. Substrates for OCTs include endogenous compounds such as 
choline, tetraethylammonium (TEA), and certain cationic drugs 
including cisplatin, cimetidine, metformin, and acyclovir. OCT2 
is highly expressed in the human kidney, whereas Oct1 and Oct2 
are expressed on the basolateral membranes of the rodent kidney 
(Shitara et al., 2005). The antineoplastic drug, cisplatin is a sub-
strate and inhibitor of OCT2, and the dose-limiting nephrotoxicity 
associated with this drug may be directly related to uptake-medi-
ated concentration of drug in the proximal tubule epithelium (Zolk 
and Fromm, 2011). A second cation transporter family is OCTN, 
which has two members OCTN1 and OCTN2 that are localized 
to the brush-border membranes in the human and rodent kidney. 
Substrates include cations such as TEA, and OCTN2 is particularly 
important in the renal reabsorption of carnitine, which is an essen-
tial cofactor for fatty acid β-oxidation.
Peptide transporters, localized to the brush-border membrane 
of the proximal tubule, are important for the reuptake of dipeptides 
and tripeptides. Two transporters PEPT1 and PEPT2 have been 
identified in the human and rodent kidney, with PEPT1 localized in 
the upper region of the proximal tubule (pars convoluta) and PEPT2 
expressed in the lower region (pars recta) of the convoluted tubule. 
Examples of PEPT1 and PEPT2 substrates are peptide-like drugs, 
such as beta-lactam antibiotics of the cephalosporin and penicillin 
classes, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE inhibitors), 
and amino acid–conjugated antiviral drugs (valacyclovir). In PEPT2 
knockout mice urinary excretion of the antibiotic cefadroxil was 
markedly increased due to almost complete lack of reabsorption 
from urine.
MDR1, MRP2, and MRP4 are efflux transporters localized 
to the luminal brush border of the proximal tubule, where they 
pump xenobiotics out of the cells and into the tubular fluid, thereby 
enhancing excretion. In general, these efflux transporters work in 
concert with uptake transporters to accomplish the urinary excre-
tion of xenobiotics. For example, following OAT-mediated uptake 
of adefovir works in concert with MRP4 to transport the poten-
tially toxic drug out of the cell and into the tubular fluid. Similarly, 
MATE1 and MATE2K are expressed on the apical membrane of 
renal tubular cells and contribute to the functional coordination of 
the urinary excretion of cationic compounds. There is a recognized 
interplay between OCT2-mediated uptake of organic cations, such 
as metformin, followed by the secretion into the tubular fluid by 
MATE1 and MATE2K. This is particularly important in the case 
of metformin because the drug does not undergo extensive hepatic 
metabolism and is eliminated from the body almost exclusively by 
urinary excretion (Zolk and Fromm, 2011).
Finally, Bcrp is expressed at high levels in the apical brush 
border of the rat and mouse kidney and is functional in the rodent 
kidney and is also detected in the human kidney (Huls et al., 2008). 
Loss of Bcrp in the rodent kidney is associated with decreased 
urinary excretion of the Bcrp substrates (11)C-SC-62807 and 
6-hydroxy-5,7-dimethyl-2-methylamino-4-(3-pyridylmethyl) ben-
zothiazole sulfate (E3040S) (Mizuno et al., 2004; Takashima et al., 
2013). The contribution of BCRP with respect to renal excretion 
and contribution to toxic responses remains to be fully evaluated.
As in all active transport systems, there is competition for renal 
secretion of xenobiotics. This fact was taken advantage of during 
World War II, when penicillin was in short supply. Penicillin is 
actively secreted by the organic acid systems (OATs) of the kid-
ney. To lengthen its half-life and duration of action, another acid 
was sought to compete with penicillin for renal secretion, and pro-
benecid was successfully introduced for this purpose. Uric acid 
is also secreted actively by renal tubules, and a unique member 
of the OAT family, the urate transporter (URAT1; SLC22A12) is 
expressed only in the kidney where it functions specifically as a 
mechanism for reabsorption of urate. Various uricosuric drugs 
Glomerular ﬁltrate
Excretion
Reabsorption
Blood
MATE
1,2K
MDR
1
MRP
2,4
OCT
2
OATP
4C1
OAT
1,2,3
Blood
OAT
4
URAT
1
OCTN
1,2
PEPT
1,2
MRP
1,3,5,6
Figure 5-13.  Schematic model showing the transport systems in the human proximal tubule of the kidney.

Absorption, Distribution, and excretion of Toxicants
Chapter 5
183
including probenecid and phenylbutazone inhibit URAT1 to facili-
tate the excretion of uric acid from the body.
Because many functions of the kidney are incompletely devel-
oped at birth, some xenobiotics are eliminated more slowly in new-
borns than in adults, and therefore may be more toxic to newborns. 
For example, the clearance of penicillin by premature infants is only 
about 20% of that observed in older children. In contrast, some 
compounds, such as cephaloridine, are nephrotoxic in adult animals 
but not in newborns. The reduced toxicity results directly from the 
lack of active uptake of cephaloridine by the kidneys in newborns, 
such that the chemical is not concentrated in the tubules.
The renal proximal tubule reabsorbs small plasma proteins that 
are filtered at the glomerulus. This largely occurs by pinocytosis at 
the brush-border membrane of the proximal tubule epithelium. If 
a toxicant binds to those small proteins, it can be carried into the 
proximal tubule cells and exert toxicity. As discussed previously, 
cadmium bound to MT is readily taken up by the kidney and is the 
major cause of Cd-induced nephrotoxicity (Klaassen and Liu, 1997). 
Similarly, chemicals such as limonene and 2,4,4-trimethyl pentane 
bind to the male-rat-specific protein, α2u-globulin, and are taken up 
by the proximal tubule to produce hyaline droplet nephropathy and 
eventually renal tumors in male rats (Lehman-McKeeman, 2010).
Species differences in regard to the urinary excretion of weak 
organic acids and bases are observed frequently, as the pH of urine 
varies widely among species. Differences in renal clearance also 
can occur for compounds filtered at the glomeruli because of differ-
ences in plasma protein binding. Similarly, differences in xenobiotic 
transporter expression, regulation, and function can contribute to 
differences in the renal excretion of toxicants.
Additional factors affecting the excretion of xenobiotics are 
exemplified by the disposition of griseofulvin in rats and rabbits 
(Table 5-12). Rabbits metabolize griseofulvin to 6-demethylgriseo-
fulvin (a phase-I metabolite), a low-molecular-weight species that 
is predominantly excreted in urine. In contrast, rats metabolize gris-
eofulvin to many conjugates (phase-II metabolites) that are high-
molecular-weight species (>350) that are preferentially excreted 
in bile. In this example, species differences in biotransformation 
ultimately determine the route of excretion of griseofulvin.
Fecal Excretion
Fecal excretion, the second major pathway for the elimination of 
xenobiotics, is a complex process that is not as well understood as 
urinary excretion. Excretion of toxicants via the feces can result 
from direct elimination of nonabsorbed compounds in the GI tract, 
from delivery to the GI tract via the bile, and from secretion into 
intestinal luminal contents from the enterocytes.
Nonabsorbed Ingesta  In addition to undigested material, 
varying proportions of nutrients and xenobiotics that are present 
in food or are ingested voluntarily (drugs) pass through the ali-
mentary canal unabsorbed, contributing to fecal excretion. The 
physicochemical properties of xenobiotics and the biological char-
acteristics that facilitate absorption were discussed earlier in this 
chapter. Although most chemicals are lipophilic to some extent 
and thereby available for absorption, it is rare for 100% of a com-
pound to be absorbed. However, some macromolecules and some 
high-molecular-weight compounds that are essentially completely 
ionized are not absorbed at all. For example, the absorption of poly-
mers or quaternary ammonium bases is quite limited in the intes-
tine. Consequently, most of a dose of orally administered sucrose 
polyester, cholestyramine, or paraquat can be found in feces. The 
nonabsorbed portion of xenobiotics contributes to the fecal excre-
tion of most chemicals to some extent. One other factor contribut-
ing to fecal excretion is intestinal secretion, which likely occurs 
by passive diffusion out of enterocytes or via transporter-mediated 
processes.
Biliary Excretion  The biliary route of elimination is a significant 
source contributing to the fecal excretion of xenobiotics and is even 
more important for the excretion of metabolites. The liver plays 
an important role in removing toxic chemicals from blood after 
absorption from the GI tract because blood from the GI tract passes 
via the portal circulation through the liver before reaching the gen-
eral circulation. A compound can be extracted by the liver, thereby 
preventing its distribution to other parts of the body. The liver is 
also the main site for biotransformation of toxicants, and metabo-
lites may be excreted directly into bile. In this manner, the liver 
can remove xenobiotics and their metabolites before entering the 
general circulation, which is referred to as the “first-pass effect.” 
Furthermore, xenobiotics and/or their metabolites excreted into 
bile enter the intestine and may be excreted with feces. However, 
if the physicochemical properties favor reabsorption, an enterohe-
patic circulation may ensue (discussed below).
Toxic chemicals bound to plasma proteins are fully available 
for active biliary excretion. The factors that determine whether a 
chemical will be excreted into bile or into urine are not fully under-
stood. However, as a general rule, low-molecular-weight com-
pounds (<325) are poorly excreted into bile, whereas compounds or 
their conjugates with molecular weights exceeding approximately 
325 can be excreted in appreciable quantities. Glutathione and gluc-
uronide conjugates have a high predilection for excretion into bile, 
but there are marked species differences in the biliary excretion of 
foreign compounds with consequences for the biological half-life 
of a compound and its toxicity. Table 5-13 provides examples of 
species differences in biliary excretion, and demonstrates that spe-
cies variation in biliary excretion is also compound specific. It is 
therefore difficult to categorize species into “good” or “poor” bili-
ary excretors, but, in general, rats and mice tend to be better biliary 
excretors than are other species (Klaassen and Watkins, 1984).
Foreign compounds excreted into bile are often divided into 
three classes on the basis of the ratio of their concentration in bile 
versus that in plasma. Class A substances have a ratio of nearly 1 
and include sodium, potassium, glucose, mercury, thallium, cesium, 
and cobalt. Class B substances have a ratio of bile to plasma greater 
than 1 (usually between 10 and 1000). Class B substances include 
bile acids, bilirubin, lead, arsenic, manganese, and many other 
xenobiotics. Class C substances have a ratio below 1 (e.g., inulin, 
albumin, zinc, iron, gold, and chromium). Compounds rapidly 
excreted into bile are usually class B substances. However, a com-
pound does not have to be highly concentrated in bile for biliary 
Table 5-12  
Urinary and Biliary Excretion of Griseofulvin and/or 
Metabolites in Rats and Rabbits
RATS*
RABBITS*
URINE
BILE
URINE
BILE
Total
12
77
78
11
Phase I metabolites
ND
23
70
  3
Phase II metabolites
ND
54
  8
  8
Abbreviation: ND, not determined.
*Expressed as percent of dose.
SOURCE: Data from Symchowicz et al. (1967), with permission.

184
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
excretion to be of quantitative importance. For example, mercury is 
not concentrated in bile, yet bile is the main route of excretion for 
this slowly eliminated substance.
Biliary excretion is regulated predominantly by xenobiotic 
transporters present on the canalicular membrane, which include 
MRP2, BCRP, MDR1 (PGP), MATE1, and BSEP (Fig. 5-14). 
MRP2 is extremely important in biliary excretion because it is 
largely responsible for the transport of organic anions includ-
ing glucuronide and glutathione conjugates of many xenobiotics. 
BCRP has particular affinity for sulfated conjugates of toxicants, 
whereas MDR1 (PGP) transports a variety of substrates, but primar-
ily organic bases into bile. MATE1 is specifically involved in biliary 
excretion of organic cations, and BSEP is critical for the secretion 
of bile salts and the regulation of bile flow.
The important contribution of MRP2 to biliary excretion of 
toxicants was established in part by the characterization of two nat-
urally occurring mutant strains of rat, the Groningen/Yellow trans-
port deficient (TR−) rat and the Eisai hyperbilirubinemic (EHBR) 
rat, both of which lack functional Mrp2 protein. These rats are phe-
notypically similar to humans suffering from Dubin–Johnson syn-
drome, a rare inherited disorder associated with mutations in MRP2 
and characterized by chronic conjugated hyperbilirubinemia. The 
mutant rats also present with conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, show 
reduced biliary excretion of glutathione, and are defective in the 
normal biliary excretion of glucuronide and glutathione conjugates 
of many xenobiotics. A Mrp2−/− null mouse has been engineered, 
and like its mutant rat counterparts, shows marked reductions in bile 
flow, biliary glutathione concentrations, and reduced ability to elim-
inate xenobiotics. For example, plasma levels of the food-derived 
carcinogen, PhIp, increased 1.9-fold in Mrp2−/− null mice compared 
to wild-type controls, demonstrating that functional Mrp2 plays a 
role in reducing exposure to toxic chemicals (Vlaming et al., 2006). 
Finally, species differences in Mrp2 function may contribute to the 
qualitative differences observed across species in biliary excretion. 
In a direct comparison of the transport of 2,4-dinitrophenyl-S-gluta-
thione (DNP-SG) across canalicular membrane vesicles from vari-
ous species, clearance ranged from a high rate of 64.2 μL/min/mg 
protein in rats to a low of 3.8 μL/min/mg protein in humans, with 
intermediate values for other species including mouse, guinea pig, 
rabbit, and dog (Ishizuka et al., 1999). Such differences in trans-
porter function and expression are likely to contribute to species 
differences in biliary excretion illustrated in Table 5-13.
Although the highest levels of BCRP are found in the placenta, 
the transporter is expressed on the bile canalicular membrane of 
hepatocytes where it preferentially transports sulfate conjugates of 
xenobiotics (Maliepaard et al., 2001). Known substrates for BCRP 
include estrone 3-sulfate and 4-methylembelliferone sulfate and 
methotrexate. MDR1 (PGP) is important in the biliary elimination 
of compounds such as doxorubicin and vinblastine. Bcrp knockout 
along with Mrp2 and Mrp3 (triple knockout) can cause diclofenac-
induced liver injury (Lagas et al., 2010).
As described earlier, MATE1 and MATE2K are involved in the 
urinary excretion of organic cations such as metformin. MATE1, 
but not MATE2K, is also expressed on the bile canaliculus, where 
it also functions to transport organic cations into bile. In the case of 
metformin, a drug that works to inhibit gluconeogenesis in the liver, 
biliary excretion reduces hepatic drug concentrations, and thereby 
limits pharmacological activity.
The biliary excretion of xenobiotics mediated by MRP2, BCRP, 
and MDR1 usually results in increased excretion of toxicants out of 
hepatocytes and into bile. In doing so, these transporters increase 
excretion of xenobiotics and generally limit the likelihood of toxicity 
in the liver. However, adverse reactions can occur if the function of 
these transporters is inhibited, as evidenced by the examples illus-
trated above for the genetic mutant or knockout models. Furthermore, 
although BSEP does not appear to play a major role in the excretion 
of xenobiotics, some compounds can inhibit the function of this 
transporter, thereby decreasing the biliary excretion of bile acids 
and leading to cholestasis (defined as a decrease in bile flow with 
increased serum bilirubin) and cholestatic liver injury (Arrese and 
Ananthanarayanan, 2004). For example, inhibition of BSEP by the 
pharmaceutical agent troglitazone and to a much greater extent, tro-
glitazone sulfate competitively inhibits BSEP function, leading to 
Table 5-13  
Biliary Excretion of Xenobiotic Conjugates Across Species
(MOLECULAR WEIGHT)
INDOCYANINE 
GREEN, (775)
PHENOLPHTHALEIN 
GLUCURONIDE, (495)
SULFADIMETHYOXINE  
n-GLUCURONIDE, (487)
STILBESTROL 
GLUCURONIDE, (445)
% EXCRETED IN BILE
Rat
82
54
43
95
Dog
97
81
43
65
Rabbit
97
13
10
32
Guinea pig
Not done
  6
12
20
SOURCE: Data modified from Lin (1995).
Blood (sinusoidal)
OATP
1B1,3
OATP
1A2
OATP
2B1
OAT
2
OCT
1
NTCP
MRP
3,4,6
Hepatocyte
MDR
1
Biliary
excretion
BSEP
MATE
1
MRP
2
BCRP
Figure 5-14.  Schematic model showing the xenobiotic transporting systems 
present in the human liver.

Absorption, Distribution, and excretion of Toxicants
Chapter 5
185
intrahepatic cholestasis, which may contribute to the hepatotoxicity 
of troglitazone. The inhibitory properties of 24 Most-drug-induced 
liver injury (DILI)-, 28 Less-DILI-, and 20 No-DILI-concern drugs 
were identified using United States National Center for Toxicological 
Research Liver Toxicity Knowledge Base (NCTR-LTKB). Overall, 
drug potency for inhibiting BSEP or mitochondrial activity generally 
correlated across human DILI concern categories. However, drugs 
that caused both BSEP inhibition and mitochondrial inhibition were 
associated with more severe human DILI and restrictive product 
safety labeling (Aleo et al., 2014). Furthermore, inhibition of BSEP 
contributes to the cholestasis observed with steroids such as estra-
diol. Collectively, the ability of a chemical to interfere with the nor-
mal function of BSEP may be involved in hepatotoxicity (Morgan 
et al., 2010). Also species differences in BSEP inhibition must be 
considered for evaluating potential toxicity in preclinical models. A 
well-known example is bosentan-induced hepatotoxicity, which is 
observed in humans but not in rats. The suspected mechanism that 
explains the difference in toxicity is that bosentan is an inhibitor of 
human BSEP, but not rat Bsep (Fig. 5-15).
Although the transporters located on the canalicular membrane 
are directly responsible for biliary excretion of xenobiotics, other 
xenobiotic transporters localized to the sinusoidal membranes are 
also important in determining hepatic concentrations of toxicants 
and thereby contribute to hepatic disposition and biliary elimina-
tion. Transporters present on sinusoidal membranes include the 
ABC transport family members MRP3, MRP4, and MRP6, along 
with OATPs, OATs, and OCT. The Na+/taurocholate cotransport-
ing polypeptide is also found on the sinusoidal membrane where it 
functions specifically in the uptake of bile acids into the liver.
MRP3 transports many of the same organic anions that are 
substrates for MRP2 from the liver into the blood circulation. It has 
been shown to be important in the excretion of acetaminophen and 
morphine glucuronide conjugates from the liver into blood (Borst 
et al., 2006). In humans, it is upregulated during cholestasis and in 
patients with Dubin–Johnson syndrome, and in a similar manner, it 
is increased in TR− and EHBR rats. The increase in MRP3 is recog-
nized as a compensatory response that helps to protect hepatocytes 
from toxic chemicals for cells deficient in MRP2. MRP4 is specifi-
cally involved in the cellular efflux of purine analogs, nucleoside 
antiviral drugs, and cyclic nucleotides, including cAMP and cGMP. 
It has also been shown to be a carrier for some xenobiotics includ-
ing conjugated and unconjugated compounds (Borst et al., 2006). 
A major role for MRP6 in xenobiotic disposition has not been estab-
lished, but mutations in human MRP6 are associated with pseudo-
xanthoma elasticum, a hereditary disease affecting the elasticity of 
connective tissues (Bergen et al., 2007).
Transporters that are localized to the sinusoidal membranes of 
hepatocytes also contribute to hepatic uptake and efflux. OATPs con-
tribute to the uptake of many organic anions. OATP1B1, OATP1B3, 
and OATP2B1 in human versus Oatp1a1 and Oatp1b2 in rodent con-
tribute to hepatic uptake. Thus, uptake transporters also contribute to 
disposition to the liver and the hepatobiliary clearance of xenobiot-
ics. In addition, the efficacy of hepatic extraction of drugs and xeno-
biotics from blood can impact extra-hepatic concentrations of drug 
and cause potential adverse drug toxicities. A well-known example 
of dysfunction hepatic extraction causing toxicity is statin-induced 
myopathy corresponding to OATP1B1 and OATP1B3. Fig. 5-16  
depicts hepatic OATP–mediated uptake of statins is decreased; the 
Blood
Ntcp
Bile Acids
Bsep/Abcb11
Bile
Blood
Ntcp
Bile Acids
Bsep/Abcb11
Bile
Rat
Bosentan
Bosentan
BA
BA
BA
BA
BA
Human
Figure 5-15.  Schematic model species difference in bosentan hepatotoxicity.
Blood
Bile
OATP1B1
Liver
Muscle
Statin
Blood
Bile
OATP1B1*
Liver
Muscle
Statin
Statin
Normal OATP1B1 Function
Dysfunctional OATP1B1 Function
Figure 5-16.  Schematic model showing contribution of OATP1B1 in statin-
induced myotoxicity.

186
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
net result is increased blood statin levels and the potential for statins 
to be taken up via skeletal muscle OATP2B1 and impair mitochon-
drial function resulting in rhabdomyolysis (Knauer et al., 2010). 
Certain OATP variants that decrease OATP protein function have 
been associated with increased plasma exposure and statin-induced 
myopathy (SEARCH Collaborative Group et al., 2008; Niemi 
et al., 2011; Canestaro et al., 2014; Tornio et al., 2015). Several plant 
toxins, including phalloidin (from mushrooms) and microcystin-LR 
(from blue–green algae), are transported by the OATP1B proteins, 
and Oatp1b2-null mice are resistant to hepatotoxicity induced by 
both of these toxins (Lu et al., 2008). In addition to statins, Oatps 
exhibit broad substrate specificity and are important for the hepatic 
uptake of numerous drugs and xenobiotics, along with a variety of 
hormones, including thyroxin, and hormone conjugates. In addition 
to OATPs, OAT2 is expressed in liver and transports small organic 
anions such as indomethacin, salicylate, and prostaglandins (Anzai 
et al., 2006). OCT1 is also expressed in human and rodent liver, and 
contributes to the uptake of organic cations. This includes numer-
ous endogenous compounds such as choline and dopamine, as 
well as cationic xenobiotics such as metformin. Oct1 null mice are 
generally resistant to lactic acidosis than is caused by metformin 
(Wang et al., 2003), suggesting a role for this uptake transporter (along 
with the biliary transporters highlighted above) in the elimination and 
toxic potential of this compound. In concert, the OATPs, OAT, and 
OCT family of transporters are important in the uptake of toxicants 
into the liver, a step that will also influence the contribution of hepatic 
metabolism, efflux into the bile, or efflux back into the circulation.
An important concept relating to biliary excretion is the phe-
nomenon of enterohepatic circulation. After a compound is excreted 
into bile, it enters the intestine where it can be reabsorbed or elimi-
nated with feces (illustrated in Fig. 5-14). Many organic compounds 
are conjugated with UDP-glucuronic acid, sulfate, or glutathione 
(see Chap. 6) before excretion into bile, and these polar metabo-
lites are not sufficiently lipid soluble to be reabsorbed. However, 
enzymes found in the intestinal microflora may hydrolyze glucuro-
nide and sulfate conjugates, liberating a more lipophilic moiety and 
increasing the likelihood of reabsorption. Intestinal reabsorption 
of the liberated xenobiotic completes a cycle in which the com-
pound can return to the liver, where it can again be metabolized and 
excreted back into bile. Repeated enterohepatic cycling can lead 
to very long half-lives of xenobiotics in the body. Therefore, it is 
often desirable to interrupt this cycle to hasten the elimination of a 
toxicant from the body (Genius, 2011). This principle has been uti-
lized in the treatment of dimethylmercury poisoning; ingestion of a 
polythiol resin binds the mercury and thus prevents its reabsorption 
(Magos and Clarkson, 1976).
An increase in hepatic excretory function also has been 
observed after pretreatment with some drugs (Klaassen and 
Watkins, 1984). For example, it has been demonstrated that phe-
nobarbital increases plasma disappearance of bromosulfophthalein 
(BSP) by enhancing its biliary excretion. The increase in bile flow 
caused by phenobarbital is an important factor in increasing the 
biliary excretion of BSP. However, other factors including induc-
tion of phase-II enzymes (see Chap. 6) and xenobiotic transporters 
may also enhance biliary elimination. Induction of metabolizing 
enzymes and transporters works in concert to increase the clearance 
of a toxicant from the plasma. In particular, induction of these pro-
cesses increases the capacity for a xenobiotic to be (1) taken up into 
the liver; (2) metabolized to conjugates that are likely to be excreted 
into bile; and (3) excreted into bile and removed from the general 
circulation. However, not all microsomal enzyme inducers increase 
bile flow and excretion, as agents such as 3-methylcholanthrene and 
benzo[a]pyrene are relatively ineffective in this regard.
The toxicity of some compounds can also be directly related to 
their biliary excretion. For example, the intestinal toxicity of several 
xenobiotics and drugs is increased by their excretion into bile. In 
the intestine deconjugation can occur, which can result in high con-
centrations of the chemical in the intestine. This has been observed 
in patients on nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory and cancer drugs. 
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs cause intestinal ulcerations 
that can be abolished by bile-duct ligation (Duggan et al., 1975). 
More recently, irinotecan, an anticancer drug, has been found to 
induce severe GI toxicity (severe diarrhea) in humans and rats. The 
mechanism for the effect of this drug involved metabolism to an 
active metabolite that was a good substrate for MRP2. The excre-
tion into bile mediated by MRP2 results in high concentrations of 
the toxic metabolite in the intestinal lumen and toxicity ensues. The 
toxicity of irinotecan can be modulated by inhibiting MRP2 func-
tion (Chu et al., 1997).
Many xenobiotic transporters are not expressed early in devel-
opment, and the hepatic excretory system is not fully developed in 
newborns. Transporter expression in rodent liver is both age and 
isoform specific (Cui et al., 2012). As a result, there are numerous 
examples of compounds that are more toxic to newborns than to 
adults (Klaassen and Slitt, 2005). For example, ouabain is about 
40 times more toxic in newborn than in adult rats. This is due to 
an almost complete inability of the newborn rat liver to remove 
ouabain from plasma by Oatp1a4. The development of hepatic 
excretory function can be promoted in newborns by administering 
microsomal enzyme inducers. In humans, less is known, but there 
is evidence also for ontogenic differences in transporter expression. 
When comparing protein expression from human liver samples, 
OCT1, OATP1B3, and P-gp were differentially expressed in neonates 
versus adults. OCT1 protein expression increased about fivefold with 
age (Prasad et al., 2016). Expression of MRP2, OATP1B1, and 
OATP1B3 in liver was lower in pediatric samples than adults. In 
intestine, MDR1 and MRP2 expression was similar between neo-
nates and adults, and OATP2B1 expression in neonates was signifi-
cantly higher than in adults.
Finally, the plasma clearance or biliary excretion of organic 
acids such as BSP, indocyanine green (ICG), or DBSP has been 
used to evaluate liver function. In particular, ICG is a valuable diag-
nostic agent in clinical practice. It is injected intravenously after 
which its disappearance from plasma is easily monitored. A change 
in plasma clearance of ICG does not distinguish between changes 
in hepatic blood flow or cellular function, but is highly suggestive 
of reduced hepatic function, including reduced biliary excretion, 
consistent with liver dysfunction or injury (Sakka, 2007).
Exhalation
Substances that exist predominantly in the gas phase at body tem-
perature are eliminated mainly by the lungs. Because volatile liq-
uids are in equilibrium with their gas phase in the alveoli, they may 
also be excreted via the lungs. The amount of a liquid eliminated 
via the lungs is proportional to its vapor pressure. A practical appli-
cation of this principle is seen in the breath analyzer test for deter-
mining the amount of ethanol in the body. Highly volatile liquids 
such as diethyl ether and certain volatile anesthetics (nitrous oxide) 
are excreted almost exclusively by the lungs.
No specialized transport systems have been described for the 
excretion of toxic substances by the lungs. Some xenobiotic trans-
porters, including MRP1 and MDR1, have been identified in the 
lung, but overall, compounds excreted via exhalation in the lung 
are most likely to be eliminated by simple diffusion. Elimination 
of gases is roughly inversely proportional to the rate of their

Absorption, Distribution, and excretion of Toxicants
Chapter 5
187
absorption. Therefore, gases with low solubility in blood, such as 
ethylene, are rapidly excreted, whereas chloroform, which has a 
much higher solubility in blood, is eliminated very slowly by the 
lungs. Trace concentrations of highly lipid-soluble anesthetic gases 
such as halothane and methoxyflurane may be present in expired 
air for as long as 2 to 3 weeks after a few hours of anesthesia. 
Undoubtedly, this prolonged retention is due to deposition in and 
slow mobilization from adipose tissue of these very lipid-soluble 
agents. The rate of elimination of a gas with low solubility in blood 
is perfusion-limited, whereas that of a gas with high solubility in 
blood is ventilation-limited.
Other Routes of Elimination
Cerebrospinal Fluid  A specialized route of removal of toxic 
chemicals from a specific organ is represented by the cerebrospi-
nal fluid (CSF). All compounds can leave the CNS with the bulk 
flow of CSF through the arachnoid villi. In addition, lipid-soluble 
toxicants also can exit at the site of the BBB. As discussed earlier, 
toxicants also can be removed from the CSF by active transport, 
using the transport systems present in the BCSFB.
Milk  The secretion of toxic compounds into milk is extremely 
important because (1) a toxic material may be passed with milk 
from the mother to the nursing offspring and (2) compounds can 
be passed from cows to people via dairy products. Toxic agents 
are excreted into milk by simple diffusion. Because milk has an 
acidic pH (about 6.5), basic compounds may be concentrated in 
milk, whereas acidic compounds may attain lower concentrations 
in milk than in plasma (Findlay, 1983; Wilson, 1983). More impor-
tant, about 3% to 4% of milk consists of lipids, and the lipid content 
of colostrum after parturition is even higher. Lipid-soluble xenobi-
otics diffuse along with fats from plasma into the mammary glands 
and are excreted with milk during lactation. Many of the same 
compounds that accumulate in fat such as aldrin, chlordane, DDT, 
polychlorinated and polybrominated biphenyls, dibenzo-p-dioxins, 
and furans (Van den Berg et al., 1987; Li et al., 1995) have been 
found in human breast milk, and milk can be a major route of their 
excretion. More recently, other compounds of environmental expo-
sure concern such as nitromusk perfume ingredients, bisphenol A 
(BPA) and tetrabromobisphenols, polybrominated diphenyl ethers 
(PBDEs), and alternative halogenated flame retardants (AFRs) have 
been detected in milk, but it is unclear as to whether the presence 
of these compounds is directly responsible for possible adverse 
effects (Leibl et al., 2000; Nakao et al., 2015; Cˇechová et al., 2017). 
Species differences in the excretion of xenobiotics with milk are to 
be expected, as the proportion of milk fat derived from the circula-
tion versus that synthesized de novo in the mammary gland differs 
widely among species. Metals chemically similar to calcium, such 
as lead, and chelating agents that form complexes with calcium also 
can be excreted into milk to a considerable extent.
Some transporters are detected in mammary epithelial tissue. 
For example, OCT1, OCT3, OCTN1, OCTN2, OATP-A, OATP-B, 
OATP-D, OATP-E, MRP1, MRP2, MRP5, MDR1, CNT1, CNT3, 
ENT1, ENT3, NCBT1, PEPT1, and PEPT2 transcripts were detected 
in lactating mammary epithelial cells (MEC) purified from pooled 
fresh breast milk samples. OCT1, OCTN1, PEPT2, CNT1, CNT3, 
and ENT3 were more than fourfold higher than nonlactating MEC. 
Little is known about whether the latter transcripts that are detected 
are expressed at an appreciable level that impacts function. There 
is evidence in Oct1/2 knockouts that milk-to-plasma concentration 
ratio (M/P) of terbutaline and metformin was significantly decreased 
compared to control mice (Ito et al., 2014). BCRP is expressed in 
the alveolar epithelial cells of mammary glands and actively secretes 
a variety of compounds into milk. Endogenous compounds such as 
vitamin B12 (riboflavin) are actively transported into breast milk by 
BCRP, as well as numerous toxicants including heterocyclic amines 
and aflatoxin. BCRP is considered to be a predominant transporter 
to efflux chemicals to breast milk (Ito et al., 2015). The contribution 
of BCRP to toxicants in the mammary gland and breast milk is para-
doxical in that secretion into the milk is likely to be protective to the 
mother, while simultaneously increasing the potential for exposure 
in suckling infants or dairy consumers to a variety of toxic chemicals 
(Van Herwaarden and Schinkel, 2006; Vlaming et al., 2009).
Sweat and Saliva  The excretion of toxic agents in sweat and 
saliva is quantitatively of minor importance. Again, excretion 
depends on the diffusion of the nonionized, lipid-soluble form of 
an agent. Toxic compounds excreted into sweat may produce der-
matitis. Substances excreted in saliva enter the mouth, where they 
are usually swallowed to become available for GI absorption.
COMPUTATIONAL AND EXPERIMENTAL 
APPROACHES TO ASSESS XENOBIOTIC 
DISPOSITION
In general, the empiric determination of xenobiotic absorption, 
distribution, and elimination in experiments involving laboratory 
animals or studies in human subjects is the most reliable means by 
which disposition can be studied. However, such studies may require 
the development of sophisticated analytical methods, the use of 
radioactive compounds, and in the case of human studies, controlled 
laboratory conditions and constant monitoring. As such, these types 
of studies are not always practical or feasible, and a variety of com-
putational models, nonanimal tools, or in vitro cellular systems 
have been developed to predict dispositional attributes of drugs and 
toxicants. A brief overview of several of the most widely used tools 
is presented here, but it is noted that this is a dynamic and rapidly 
changing field. In general, these models are particularly useful in 
studying absorption and excretion, particularly biliary excretion. 
Tissue distribution, with particular emphasis on target organ dosim-
etry, can also be assessed with pharmacokinetic models (Chap. 7).
Absorption  A variety of models are used to estimate log P 
because the lipid solubility is an important, general feature of any 
toxicant (Mannhold et al., 2009). Additionally, based on the general 
principles outlined earlier, computational tools to estimate perme-
ability have been developed. One such model predicts poor absorp-
tion as a function of the calculated log P (C log P), the molecular 
weight, and the presence of hydrogen bond donors and acceptors. 
The concept based on these four elements is referred to as the “rule 
of 5” because the determinants are based on multiples of 5 and 
include (1) molecular weight greater than 500; (2) C log P greater 
than 5; (3) more than 5 H-bond donors; and (4) 10 H-bond accep-
tors (Lipinski et al., 2001).
The human colon adenocarcinoma cell line, Caco-2, is widely 
used to evaluate xenobiotic permeability. These cells form a con-
fluent epithelial monolayer with well-defined tight junctions and 
typical microvilli on the apical surface. A variety of xenobiotic 
transporters are expressed on Caco-2 cells. The uptake transporters 
OATP2B1, PEPT1, and OCTN2 are expressed on the apical mem-
brane along with efflux transporters MDR1, MRP2, and BCRP. 
On the basolateral membrane, efflux transporters MRP3, MRP4, 
and MRP6 have been identified (Sun et al., 2008). Caco-2 cells are 
specifically used to estimate the fraction of xenobiotic that will be 
absorbed in the GI tract. Movement across the apical (A) and baso-
lateral (B) membranes is also used to determine whether a xenobiotic

188
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
is substrate or inhibitor of xenobiotic transporters. Transport in the 
A→B direction is indicative of absorption, whereas movement in 
the B→A direction suggests that carrier-mediated efflux is favored. 
Madin–Darby canine kidney (MDCK) and MDCKII–low express-
ing (MDCKII-LE) cell lines have become preferred cell lines to 
assess permeability. For example, MDCKII-LE PgP protein expres-
sion is about 20% of that present in wild-type MDCKII cells, and 
the functional efflux capacity is less than 10% of that observed in 
MDCKII wild-type cells (Di et al., 2011).
Another model used to predict absorption utilizes artificial 
membranes such as that exemplified by the parallel artificial mem-
brane permeability assay (PAMPA). As an artificial membrane, this 
system lacks transporters or paracellular pathways and is most use-
ful for assessing the non-energy-dependent diffusion of toxicants.
Dermal exposure can be evaluated in a variety of in vitro systems, 
either with skin biopsy samples or with models developed to represent 
human skin. Mathematical models, with emphasis on the lipid matrix 
as the principal pathway of permeation, have also been developed and 
used with increasing frequency. Such methods emphasize log P and 
molecular size in model development (Lian et al., 2008).
Hepatobiliary Excretion  Xenobiotic transporter function can 
be evaluated with membrane vesicles isolated from specific organs 
or with expressed cell systems. The development of a variety of 
transporter-deficient models, particularly in mice, has also proved 
to be very useful for assessing transporter contribution to toxic-
ity as has been described throughout this chapter (Klaassen and 
Lu, 2008). The latter tools along with more sophisticated primary 
hepatocyte culture models are typically utilized to aid in the pre-
diction of transporter-mediated effects in absorption and excre-
tion processes. For example, the use of sandwich-cultured human 
hepatocytes (SCHH) have become a standard tool to aid in the pre-
diction of biliary excretion and drug-induced liver injury. Briefly, 
when hepatocytes are cultured between two layers of gelled colla-
gen (hence the sandwich configuration), they retain molecular and 
biochemical characteristics more consistent with their properties 
in the whole organ than monolayer cultures of cells. These fea-
tures include the formation of canalicular networks necessary for 
biliary excretion. This system has been optimized to assess toxi-
cant accumulation, estimate biliary excretion, and investigate the 
interplay between metabolism and transport, and has proved to be 
a useful in vitro system to aid in the evaluation of hepatobiliary 
disposition (Swift et al., 2010). When compared to in vivo models, 
such as monkey, rat, and dog, SCHH displayed good predictability 
to monkey and human for drugs with no significant active uptake 
and improved predictability when scaled to take extended clearance 
into account (Kimoto et al., 2017).
Classification Systems  Classification systems have evolved 
to utilize physiochemical properties to predict solubility, disposi-
tion, and excretion. These systems are predominantly used in the 
pharmaceutical industry; however, their likely usefulness in the 
field of toxicology is to aid in understanding/predicting disposition 
for chemicals of environmental concern or predict the impact of 
active pharmaceutical ingredients excreted and present in sewage 
(Daughton, 2014). In 2005, the Biopharmaceutics Drug Disposition 
Classification System (BDDCS) was described with the purpose 
to aid in the prediction of drug disposition characteristics at early 
stages of drug discovery and development (Wu and Benet, 2005). 
The BDDCS was further updated in 2011 to include 927 drugs and 
aid in prediction of transporter-mediated effects (Benet et al., 2011).
The Extended Clearance Classification System (ECCS) was 
described in 2015 (Varma et al., 2015) and uses known physico-
chemical properties and in vitro/in silico data readily available in 
early drug discovery, namely molecular weight, ionization, and 
measured/calculated in vitro permeability (Fig. 5-17). It is used to 
predict absorption trends, impact of intestinal and hepatic first-pass 
effect on new molecular entities oral profiles, drug clearance rate–
determining step, and extent of metabolism. The ECCS classifies 
molecules into six classes, which are as follows (Fig. 5-17):
	 1.	 ECCS Class 1A: These molecules are either acids or zwitter-
ions that have high permeability and low molecular weight 
(<400 Da). ECCS Class 1A molecules typically have good 
oral absorption and intestinal or hepatic first pass does not 
limit their oral bioavailability. The clearance rate–determining 
step of this class is metabolism.
	 2.	 ECCS Class 1B: This is a class of molecules that are acids 
or zwitterions. They have high permeability and molecular 
weight (≥400 Da). The oral profile of these molecules is 
mainly influenced by their intestinal and hepatic first-pass 
effect. The rate-determining step is active hepatic uptake 
mediated by OATP1B1/OATP1B3. Once in the liver, they are 
metabolized and have a high extent of metabolism (≥70%).
Intravenous
Subcutaneous
Intramuscular
Intraperitoneal
Dermal
Inhalation
Blood and lymph
Expired air
Urine
Feces
Ingestion
Gastrointestinal
tract
Lung
Skin
Extracellular fluid
Other organs
Lung
Kidney
Bile
Liver
Portal
blood
Soft tissues, bone
Fat
Figure 5-17.  Schematic model showing the extended clearance classification system.

Absorption, Distribution, and excretion of Toxicants
Chapter 5
189
	 3.	 ECCS Class 2: These are either basic or neutral chemicals 
with high membrane permeability. The oral profile of ECCS 
Class 2 is influenced by intestinal and hepatic first-pass effect 
because many ECCS Class 2 molecules are metabolized by 
CYP3A4, which is highly expressed in human intestine and 
liver. Metabolism is the rate-determining step of their clear-
ance mechanism. Similar to ECCS classes 1A and 1B, ECCS 
Class 2 molecules have a high extent of metabolism (≥70%).
	 4.	 ECCS Class 3A: These are acids and zwitterions with low 
molecular weight (<400 Da) and low permeability. The oral 
profile of these molecules is determined by their intestinal 
permeability and affinity to uptake intestinal transporters, for 
example, PEPT1 and OATP2B1. The rate-determining step is 
renal elimination.
	 5.	 ECCS Class 3B: These molecules are either acids or zwitter-
ions with low permeability and high molecular weight (≥400 
Da). Their oral absorption is governed by their intestinal 
­permeability and affinity to uptake and efflux intestinal trans-
porters. Their clearance rate–determining step is active hepatic 
uptake and/or renal elimination. The hepatic uptake is typically 
mediated by OATP1B1 and OATP1B3, and once in the liver 
they are excreted in the bile as unchanged drug. If renally elimi-
nated, they are also excreted in the urine as unchanged drug.
	 6.	 ECCS Class 4: These molecules are either basic or neutral 
chemicals. They have low membrane permeability with oral 
absorption as a key determinant of their oral bioavailability. 
Renal elimination is the rate-determining step of their clear-
ance mechanism. Similar to classes 3A and 3B, they have a 
low extent of metabolism (<30%).
CONCLUSION
Humans are in continuous contact with toxic chemicals. Toxicants 
are in the food we eat, the water we drink, and the air we breathe. 
Depending on their physical and chemical properties, toxic chemi-
cals may be absorbed by the GI tract, the lungs, and/or the skin. 
Fortunately, the body has the ability to biotransform and excrete 
these compounds into urine, feces, and air. However, when the rate 
of absorption exceeds the rate of elimination, toxic compounds 
may accumulate and reach a critical concentration at a certain tar-
get site, and toxicity may ensue. Whether a chemical elicits toxicity 
depends not only on its inherent potency and site specificity but 
also on whether, and if so how, it is absorbed, distributed, and elim-
inated. Therefore, knowledge of the disposition of chemicals is of 
great importance in judging the toxicity of xenobiotics. For exam-
ple, for a potent CNS suppressant that displays a strong hepatic 
first-pass effect, oral exposure is of less concern than is exposure by 
inhalation. Also, two equipotent gases, with the absorption of one 
being perfusion rate-limited and that of the other being ventilation 
rate-limited, will exhibit completely different toxicity profiles at a 
distant site because of differences in the concentrations attained in 
the target organ.
Many chemicals have very low inherent toxicity but can be 
metabolically activated into toxic metabolites, and toxicity may 
be determined by the rate of formation of toxic metabolites. 
Alternatively, a very potent toxicant may be detoxified rapidly by 
biotransformation. The fundamental and overarching concept is 
that adverse effects are related to the unbound concentration of the 
“toxic chemical” at the site of action (in the target organ), whether 
a chemical is administered or generated by biotransformation in 
the target tissue or at a distant site. Accordingly, the toxic response 
exerted by chemicals is critically influenced by the rates of absorp-
tion, distribution, biotransformation, and excretion.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The editor and author recognize the contributions of previous 
authors of this chapter: Curtis D. Klaassen (1st to 3rd editions), 
Karl Rozman and Curtis D. Klaassen (4th to 6th editions), and Lois 
Lehman-McKeeman (7th and 8th editions).
REFERENCES
Agarwal S, Sane R, Ohlfest JR, Elmquist WF. The role of the breast cancer 
resistance protein (ABCG2) in the distribution of sorafenib to the brain. 
J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2011;336:223–233.
Aleo MD, Luo Y, Swiss R, et al. Human drug-induced liver injury severity is 
highly associated with dual inhibition of liver mitochondrial function and 
bile salt export pump. Hepatology. 2014;60:1015–1022.
Alnouti Y, Petrick JS, Klaassen CD. Tissue distribution and ontog-
eny of organic cation transporters in mice. Drug Metab Dispos. 
2006;34:477–482.
Ambudkar SV, Dey S, Hrycyna CA, Ramachandra M, Pastan I, Gottesman 
MM. Biochemical, cellular and pharmacological aspects of the multidrug 
transporter. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 1999;39:361–398.
Anzai N, Kanai Y, Endou H. Organic anion transporter family: current 
knowledge. J Pharmacol Sci. 2006;100:411–426.
Arrese M, Ananthanarayanan M. The bile salt export pump: molecular 
properties, function and regulation. Pflugers Arch. 2004;449:123–131.
Awad Wa, Ghareeb K, Bohm J, Zentek J. Decontamination and detoxifi-
cation strategies for the Fusarium mycotoxin deoxynivalenol in animal 
feed and the effectives of microbial biodegradation. Food Add Contam. 
2010;27:510–520.
Bailey DG. Fruit juice inhibition of uptake transport: a new type of food-
drug interaction. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2010;70:645–655.
Ballard ST, Hunter JH, Taylor AE. Regulation of tight-junction permeabil-
ity during nutrient absorption across the intestinal epithelium. Annu Rev 
Nutr. 1995;15:35–55.
Baron JM, Holler D, Schiffer R, et al. Expression of multiple cytochrome 
P450 enzymes and multidrug resistance-associated transport proteins in 
human skin keratinocytes. J Invest Dermatol. 2001;116:541–548.
Benet LZ, Broccatelli F, Oprea TI. BDDCS applied to over 900 drugs. 
AAPS J. 2011;13(4):519–547.
Benz R, Janko K, Länger P. Pore formation by the matrix protein (porin) 
to Escherichia coli in planar bilayer membranes. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 
1980;358:13–24.
Bergen AA, Plomp AS, Hu X, deJong PT, Gorgels TG. ABCC6 and pseudo-
xanthoma elasticum. Pflugers Arch. 2007;453:685–691.
Bogdanffy MS, Manning LA, Sarangapani R. High-affinity nasal extrac-
tion of vinyl acetate vapor is carboxylesterase dependent. Inhal Toxicol. 
1999;11:927–941.
Borowitz JL, Moore PF, Him GKW, Miya TS. Mechanism of enhanced drug 
effects produced by dilution of the oral dose. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
1971;19:164–168.
Borst P, Zelcer N, van de Wetering K. MRP2 and 3 in health and disease. 
Cancer Lett. 2006;234:51–61.
Boyes RN, Adams HJ, Duce BR. Oral absorption and disposition kinetics of 
lidocaine hydrochloride in dogs. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1970;174:1–8.
Bronaugh RL, Stewart RF, Congdon ER, Giles ALJr. Methods for in vitro 
percutaneous absorption studies. I. Comparison with in vivo results. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1982;62:474–480.
Campos A, Vasconcelos V. Molecular mechanisms of microcystin toxicity 
in animal cells. Int J Mol Sci. 2010;11:268–287.
Calabrese EJ. Gastrointestinal and dermal absorption: interspecies differ-
ences. Drug Metab Rev. 1984;15:1013–1032.
Canestaro WJ, Austin MA, Thummel KE. Genetic factors affecting statin 
concentrations and subsequent myopathy: a HuGENet systematic review. 
Genet Med. 2014, 16:810–819.
Cayen MN. Metabolic disposition of antihyperlipidemic agents in man and 
laboratory animals. Drug Metab Rev. 1980;11:291–323.
Čechová E, Vojta Š, KukuČka P, et al. Legacy and alternative halogenated 
flame retardants in human milk in Europe: implications for children’s 
health. Environ Int. 2017;108:137–145.

190
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
Chu XY, Kato Y, Niinuma K, et al. Multi-specific organic anion transporter 
(cMOAT) is responsible for the biliary excretion of the camptothecin 
derivative irinotecan, CPT-11 and its metabolites in rats. J Pharmacol 
Exp Ther. 1997;281:304–314.
Clarkson TW. Metal toxicity in the central nervous system. Environ Health 
Perspect. 1987;75:59–64.
Cui JY, Gunewardena SS, Yoo B, et al. RNA-Seq reveals different mRNA 
abundance of transporters and their alternative transcript isoforms during 
liver development. Toxicol Sci. 2012;127:592–608.
Daughton CG. Eco-directed sustainable prescribing: feasibility for 
reducing water contamination by drugs. Sci Total Environ. 2014; 
493:392–404.
Deeken JG, Loscher W. The blood-brain barrier and cancer: transporters, 
treatment and Trojan horses. Clin Cancer Res. 2007;13:1663–1674.
de Vries NA, Buckle T, Zhao J, et al. Restricted brain penetration of the 
tyrosine kinase inhibitor erlotinib due to the drug transporters P-gp and 
BCRP. Invest New Drugs. 2012;30:443–449.
Di L, Whitney-Pickett C, Umland JP, et al. Development of a new 
permeability assay using low-efflux MDCKII cells. J Pharm Sci. 
2011;100:4974–4985.
Dietrich CG, Rudi de Waart D, Ottenhoff R, Schoots IG, Oude Elferink 
RPJ. Increased bioavailability of the food-derived carcinoge 2-amino-
1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5]pyridine in MRP2-deficient rats. Mol 
Pharmacol. 2001;59:974–980.
Diwan BA, Riggs CW, Logsdon D, et al. Multiorgan transplacental and 
neonatal carcinogenicity of 3′-axido-3′-deoxythymidine in mice. Toxicol 
Appl Pharmacol. 1999;161:82–99.
Draize JH, Woodard G, Calvery HO. Methods for the study of irritation and 
toxicity of substances applied topically to the skin and mucous mem-
branes. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1944;82:377–390.
Dreyfuss J, Shaw JM, Ross JJ. Absorption of the adrenergic-blocking agent, 
nadol, by mice, rats, hamsters, rabbits, dogs, monkeys and man: unusual 
species differences. Xenobiotica. 1978;8:503–510.
Drozdzik M, Gröer C, Penski J, et al. Protein abundance of clinically rele-
vant multidrug transporters along the entire length of the human intestine. 
Mol Pharm. 2014;11:3547–3555.
Dugard PH. Skin permeability theory in relation to measurements of per-
cutaneous absorption in toxicology. In: Marzulli FN, Maibach HI, eds. 
Dermatotoxicology. 2nd ed. New York: Hemisphere; 1983:91–116.
Duggan DE, Hooke KF, Noll RM, Kwan KC. Enterohepatic circulation of 
indomethacin and its role in intestinal irritation. Biochem Pharmacol. 
1975;24:1749–1754.
Enders AC, Carter AM. What can comparative studies of placental structure 
tell us?—a review. Placenta. 2004;25(suppl A): S3–S9.
Enright EF, Gahan CG, Joyce SA, Griffin BT. The impact of the gut 
microbiota on drug metabolism and clinical outcome. Yale J Biol Med. 
2016;89:375–382.
Findlay JWA. The distribution of some commonly used drugs in human 
breast milk. Drug Metab Rev. 1983;14:653–686.
Florence AT, Hillery AM, Hussain N, Jani PU. Factors affecting the oral 
uptake and translocation of polystyrene nanoparticles: histological and 
analytical evidence. J Drug Target. 1995;3:65–70.
Frank DN, St Amand AL, Feldman RA, Boedeker EC, Harpaz N, Pace NR. 
Molecular-phylogenetic characterization of microbial community imbal-
ances in human inflammatory bowel diseases. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2007;104:13780–13785.
Fröhlich E. The role of surface charge in cellular uptake and cytotoxicity of 
medical nanoparticles. Int J Nanomedicine. 2012;7:5577–5591.
Fu ZD, Selwyn FP, Cui JY, Klaassen CD. RNA-Seq profiling of intesti-
nal expression of xenobiotic processing genes in germ-free mice. Drug 
Metab Dispos. 2017;45(12):1225–1238.
Fujita KI, Masuo Y, Yamazaki E, et al. Involvement of the transporters 
P-glycoprotein and breast cancer resistance protein in dermal distribu-
tion of the multikinase inhibitor regorafenib and its active metabolites. 
J Pharm Sci. 2017;106: 2632–2641.
Fullmer CS. Intestinal interactions of lead and calcium. Neurotoxicology. 
1992;13:799–807.
Ganapathy V, Prasad PD, Ganapathy ME, Leibach FH. Placental trans-
porters relevant to drug disposition across the maternal-fetal interface. 
J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2000;294:413–420.
Genius SJ. Elimination of persistent toxicants from the human body. Human 
Exp Toxicol. 2011;30:3–18.
Ghanem CI, Ruiz ML, Villanueva SS, et al. Shift from biliary to urinary 
elimination of acetaminophen-glucuronide in acetaminophen-pretreated 
rats. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2005;315:987–995.
Gröer C, Brück S, Lai Y, et al. LC-MS/MS-based quantification of clini-
cally relevant intestinal uptake and efflux transporter proteins. J Pharm 
Biomed Anal. 2013;85:253–261.
Hagenbuch B, Guo C. Xenobiotic transporters of the human organic anion 
transporting polypeptides (OATP) family. Xenobiotica. 2008;38:778–801.
Hagenbuch B, Meier PJ. Organic anion transporting polypeptides of the 
OATP/SLC21 family: phylogenetic classification as OATP/SLCO super-
family, new nomenclature and molecular/functional properties. Pflugers 
Arch. 2004;447:653–665.
Han TK, Everett RS, Proctor WR, et al. Organic cation transporter 1 (OCT1/
mOct1) is localized in the apical membrane of Caco-2 cell monolayers 
and enterocytes. Mol Pharmacol. 2013;84:182–189.
Hanumegowda UM, Wenke G, Regueiro-Ren A, et al. Phospholipidosis as 
a function of basicity, lipophilicity and volume of distribution of com-
pounds. Chem Res Toxicol. 2010;23:749–755.
Hashimoto N, Nakamichi N, Uwafuji S, et al. ATP binding cassette trans-
porters in two distinct compartments of the skin contribute to transdermal 
absorption of a typical substrate. J Control Release. 2013;165:54–61.
Hayer M, Bönisch H, Brüss M. Molecular cloning, functional characteriza-
tion and genomic organization of four alternatively spliced isoforms of 
the human organic cation transporter 1 (hOCT1/SLC22A1). Ann Hum 
Genet. 1999;63:473–482.
Hediger MA, Clémençon B, Burrier RE, Brufordd EA. The ABCs of mem-
brane transporters in health and disease (SLC series): introduction. Mol 
Aspects Med. 2013;34:95–107.
Hediger MA, Romero MF, Peng J-B, et al. The ABCs of solute carriers: 
physiological, pathological and therapeutic implications of human mem-
brane transport proteins. Pflugers Arch. 2004;447:465–468.
Ho ES, Lin DC, Mendel DB, Cihlar T. Cytotoxicity of antiviral nucleo-
tides adefovir and cidofovir induced by the expression of the human renal 
organic anion transporter I. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2000;11:383–393.
Huls M, Brown CD, Windass AS, et al. The breast cancer resistance protein 
transporter ABCG2 is expressed in the human kidney proximal tubule 
apical membrane. Kidney Int. 2008;73:220–225.
Ishizuka H, Donno K, Shiina T, et al. Species differences in the trans-
port activity for organic anions across the bile canalicular membrane. 
J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1999;290:1324–1330.
Ito N, Ito K, Ikebuchi Y, et al. Organic cation transporter/solute carrier fam-
ily 22a is involved in drug transfer into milk in mice. J Pharm Sci. 2014, 
103(10):3342–3348.
Ito N, Ito K, Ikebuchi Y, et al. Prediction of drug transfer into milk consider-
ing breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP)-mediated transport. Pharm 
Res. 2015;32(8):2527–2537.
Jandacek RJ, Tso P. Factors affecting the storage and excretion of toxic 
lipophilic xenobiotics. Lipids. 2001;36:1289–1305.
Jani P, Halbert GW, Langridge J, Florence AT. Nanoparticle uptake by the 
rat gastrointestinal mucosa: quantitation and particle size dependency. 
J Pharm Pharmacol. 1990;42:821–826.
Kao J, Patterson FU, Hall J. Skin penetration and metabolism of topically 
applied chemicals in six mammalian species, including man: an in vitro 
study with benzo(a)pyrene and testosterone. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
1985;81:502–516.
Kashihara Y, Ieiri I, Yoshikado T, et al. Small-dosing clinical study: pharma-
cokinetic, pharmacogenomic (SLCO2B1 and ABCG2), and interaction 
(atorvastatin and grapefruit juice) profiles of 5 probes for OATP2B1 and 
BCRP. J Pharm Sci. 2017;106:2688–2694.
Kerns WD, Pavkov KL, Donofrio DJ, Gralla EJ, Swenberg JA. 
Carcinogenicity of formaldehyde in rats and mice after long-term inhala-
tion exposure. Cancer Res. 1983;43:4382–4392.
Kimoto E, Bi YA, Kosa RE, Tremaine LM, Varma MVS. Hepatobiliary 
clearance prediction: species scaling from monkey, dog, and rat, and 
in vitro-in vivo extrapolation of sandwich-cultured human hepatocytes 
using 17 drugs. J Pharm Sci. 2017;106:2795–2804.
Klaassen CD, Aleksunes LM. Xenobiotic, bile acid and cholesterol trans-
porters: function and regulation. Pharmacol Rev. 2010;62:1–96.

Absorption, Distribution, and excretion of Toxicants
Chapter 5
191
Klaassen CD, Liu J. Role of metallothionein in cadmium-induced hepato-
toxicity and nephrotoxicity. Drug Metab Rev. 1997;29:79–102.
Klaassen CD, Lu H. Xenobiotic transporters: ascribing function from gene 
knockout and mutation studies. Toxicol Sci. 2008;101:186–196.
Klaassen CD, Shoeman DW. Biliary excretion of lead in rats, rabbits and 
dogs. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1974;29:434–446.
Klaassen CD, Slitt AL. Regulation of hepatic transporters by xenobiotic 
receptors. Curr Drug Metab. 2005;6:309–328.
Klaassen CD, Watkins JB. Mechanisms of bile formation, hepatic uptake, 
and biliary excretion. Pharmacol Rev. 1984;36:1–67.
Knauer MJ, Urquhart BL, Meyer zu Schwabedissen HE, et al. Human skel-
etal muscle drug transporters determine local exposure and toxicity of 
statins. Circ Res. 2010, 106:297–306.
Kodaira H, Kusuhara H, Ushiki J, Fuse E, Sugiyama Y. Kinetic analysis 
of the cooperation of P-glycoprotein (P-gp/Abcb1) and breast cancer 
resistance protein (Bcrp/Abcg2) in limiting the brain and testis penetra-
tion of erlotinib, flavopiridol, and mitoxantrone. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 
2010;333:788–796.
Kusuhara H, Sugiyama Y. Active efflux across the blood-brain barrier: role 
of the solute carrier family. NeuroRx. 2005;2:73–85.
Kusuhara H, Sugiyama Y. In vitro-in vivo extrapolation of transporter-
mediated clearance in the liver and kidney. Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 
2009;24:37–52.
Lademann J, Richter H, Schanzer S, et al. Penetration and storage of 
particles in human skin: perspectives and safety aspects. Eur J Pharm 
Biopharm. 2011;77:465–468.
Lagas JS, Sparidans RW, Wagenaar E, Beijnen JH, Schinkel AH. Hepatic 
clearance of reactive glucuronide metabolites of diclofenac in the mouse 
is dependent on multiple ATP-binding cassette efflux transporters. Mol 
Pharmacol. 2010;77:687–694.
Lankas GR, Cartwright ME, Umbenhauer D. P-glycoprotein deficiency in a 
subpopulation of CF-1 mice enhances avermectin-induced neurotoxicity. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1997;143:357–365.
Lankas GR, Wise LD, Cartwright ME, et al. Placental p-glycoprotein defi-
ciency enhances susceptibility to chemically induced birth defects in 
mice. Reprod Toxicol. 1998;12:457–463.
Lehman-McKeeman LD. α2u-Globulin nephropathy. In: Schnellman 
RG, ed. Comprehensive Toxicology. 2nd ed. New York: Elsevier; 
2010:507–521.
Lehman-McKeeman LD, Johnson DR, Caudill D. Induction and inhibition 
of mouse cytochrome P450 2B enzymes by musk xylene. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 1997;142:169–177.
Leibl B, Mayer R, Ommer S, Sonnichsen C, Koletzko B. Transition of 
nitro musks and polycyclic musks into human milk. Adv Exp Med Biol. 
2000;478:289–305.
Leiser P, Kaufmann R. Placental structure: in a comparative aspect. Exp 
Clin Endocrinol. 1994;102:122–134.
Li X, Weber LWD, Rozman KK. Toxicokinetics of 2,3,7,8-tetrachloro-
dibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) in female Sprague–Dawley rats including 
placental and lactational transfer to fetuses and neonates. Fundam Appl 
Toxicol. 1995;27:70–76.
Lian G, Chen L, Han L. An evaluation of mathematical models for predict-
ing skin permeability. J Pharm Sci. 2008;97:585–598.
Lin JH. Species similarities and differences in pharmacokinetics. Drug 
Metab Dispos. 1995;23:1008–1021.
Lin JH. Tissue distribution and pharmacodynamics: a complicated relation-
ship. Curr Drug Metab. 2006;7:39–65.
Lipinski CA, Lombardo F, Dominy BW, Feeney PJ. Experimental and 
computational approaches to estimate solubility and permeability in 
drug discovery and development settings. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2001; 
46:3–26.
Lu H, Choudhuri S, Ogura K, et al. Characterization of organic anion 
transporting polypeptide 1b2-null mice: essential role in hepatic uptake/­
toxicity ophalloidin and microcystin-LR. Toxicol Sci. 2008;103:35–45.
Magos L, Clarkson TW. The effect of oral doses of a polythiol resin on the 
excretion of methylmercury in mice treated with cystein, d-penicillamine 
or phenobarbitone. Chem Biol Interact. 1976;14:325–335.
Maliepaard M, Scheffer GL, Faneyte IF, et al. Subcellular localization and 
distribution of the breast cancer resistance protein transporter in normal 
human tissues. Cancer Res. 2001;6:3458–3464.
Mannhold R, Poda GI, Ostermann C, Tetko IV. Calculation of molecular 
lipophilicity: state-of-the-art and comparison of log P methods on more 
than 96,000 compounds. J Pharm Sci. 2009;98:861–893.
Memon N, Bircsak KM, Archer F, et al. Regional expression of the 
BCRP/ABCG2 transporter in term human placentas. Reprod Toxicol. 
2014;43:72–77.
Mensinga TT, Speijers GJ, Meulenbelt J. Health implications of 
exposure to environmental nitrogenous compounds. Toxicol Rev. 
2003;22:41–51.
Miller DS. Regulation of P-glycoprotein and other ABC drug transporters at 
the blood-brain barrier. Trends Pharm Sci. 2010;31:246–254.
Mizuno N, Niwa T, Yotsumoto Y, Sugiyama Y. Impact of drug trans-
porter studies on drug discovery and development. Pharmacol Rev. 
2003;55:425–461.
Mizuno N, Suzuki M, Kusuhara H, et al. Impaired renal excretion of 
6-hydroxy-5,7-dimethyl-2-methylamino-4-(3-pyridylmethyl) benzothia-
zole (E3040) sulfate in breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP1/ABCG2) 
knockout mice. Drug Metab Dispos. 2004;32:898–901.
Moeller AH, Degnan PH, Pusey AE, Wilson ML, Hahn BH, Ochman H. 
Chimpanzees and humans harbour compositionally similar gut entero-
types. Nat Commun. 2012;3:1179.
Morgan RE, Trauner M, van Staden CJ, et al. Interference with bile salt 
export pump function is a susceptibility factor for human liver injury in 
drug development. Toxicol Sci. 2010;118:485–500.
Morris FH Jr, Boyd DH, Mahendran D. Placental transport. In: Knobel E, 
Neill JD, eds. The Physiology of Reproduction. New York: Raven Press; 
1994:813–861.
Motohashi H, Inui K. Organic cation transporter OCTs (SLC22) and 
MATEs (SLC47) in the human kidney. AAPS J. 2013 Apr;15:581–588 
doi: 10.1208/s12248-013-9465-7.
Myllynen P, Pasanen M, Pelkonen O. Human placenta: a human organ 
for developmental toxicology research and biomonitoring. Placenta. 
2005;26:361–371.
Nakanishi T, Doyle LA, Hassel B, et al. Functional characterization of 
human breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP, ABCG2) expressed in the 
oocytes of Xenopus laevis. Mol Pharmacol. 2003;64:1452–1462.
Nakao T, Akiyama E, Kakutani H, Mizuno A, Aozasa O, Akai Y, Ohta S. 
Levels of tetrabromobisphenol A, tribromobisphenol A, dibromobisphe-
nol A, monobromobisphenol A, and bisphenol a in Japanese breast milk. 
Chem Res Toxicol. 2015;28(4):722–728.
Nel A, Xia T, Madler L, Li N. Toxic potential of materials at the nanolevel. 
Science. 2006;311:622–627.
Newbold RR, McLachlan JA. Transplacental hormonal carcinogenesis: 
diethylstilbestrol as an example. Prog Clin Biol Res. 1996;394:131–147.
Newman MD, Stotland M, Ellis JI. The safety of nanosized particles in 
titanium dioxide and zinc oxide-based sunscreens. J Am Acad Dermatol. 
2009;61:685–692.
Nguyen TL, Vieira-Silva S, Liston A, Raes J. How informative is the mouse 
for human gut microbiota research? Dis Model Mech. 2015;8:1–16.
Ni Z, Bikadi Z, Rosenberg MF, Mao Q. Structure and function of the human 
breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP/ABCG2). Curr Drug Metab. 
2010;11:603–617.
Niemi M, Pasanen MK, Neuvonen PJ. Organic anion transporting polypep-
tide 1B1: a genetically polymorphic transporter of major importance for 
hepatic drug uptake. Pharmacol Rev. 2011;63:157–181.
Oberdorster G, Oberdorster E, Oberdorster J. Nanotoxicology: an emerg-
ing discipline evolving from studies of ultrafine particles. Environ Health 
Perspect. 2005;113:823–839.
Pfeiffer CJ. Gastroenterologic response to environmental agents—­
absorption and interactions. In: Lee DHK, ed. Handbook of Physiology. 
Section 9: Reactions to Environmental Agents. Bethesda, MD: American 
Physiological Society; 1977:349–374.
Poet TS, McDougal JN. Skin absorption and human risk assessment. Chem 
Biol Interact. 2002;140:19–34.
Prasad B, Johnson K, Billington S, et al. Abundance of drug transporters 
in the human kidney cortex as quantified by quantitative targeted pro-
teomics. Drug Metab Dispos. 2016;44:1920–1924.
Prouillac C, Lecoeur S. The role of the placenta in fetal exposure to xenobi-
otics: importance of membrane transporters and human models for trans-
port studies. Drug Metab Dispos. 2010;38:1623–1635.

192
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
Rickert DE, Butterworth BE, Popp JA. Dinitrotoluene: acute toxicity, 
oncogenicity, genotoxicity and metabolism. CRC Crit Rev Toxicol. 
1984;13:217–234.
Rizwan AN, Burckhardt G. Organic anion transporters of the SLC22 fam-
ily: biopharmaceutical, physiological and pathological roles. Pharm Res. 
2007;24:9181–2004.
Ross JH, Driver JH, Harris SA, Maibach HI. Dermal absorption of 2,4-D: a 
review of species differences. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2005;41:82–91.
Rowland IR, Mallet AK, Wise A. The effect of diet on mammalian gut flora 
and its metabolic activities. CRC Crit Rev Toxicol. 1985;16:31–103.
Sahi J. Use of in vitro transporter assays to understand hepatic and renal 
disposition of new drug candidates. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol. 
2005;1:409–427.
Sakka SG. Assessing liver function. Curr Opin Crit Care. 2007;13:207–214.
Schanker LS. Passage of drugs across body membranes. Pharmacol Rev. 
1962;74:501–530.
Schinkel A, Smith JJM, van Tellingen O, et al. Disruption of the mouse 
mdr1a p-glycoprotein gene leads to a deficiency in the blood–brain bar-
rier and to increased sensitivity to drugs. Cell. 1994;47:491–502.
Schwartze EW. The so-called habituation to arsenic: variation in the toxicity 
of arsenious oxide. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1923;20:181–203.
SEARCH Collaborative Group, Link E, Parish S, et al. SLCO1B1 vari-
ants and statin-induced myopathy—a genomewide study. N Engl J Med. 
2008;359:789–799.
Shand DG, Rangno RE. The deposition of propranolol: I. Elimination dur-
ing oral absorption in man. Pharmacology. 1972;7:159–168.
Shitara Y, Sato H, Sugiyama Y. Evaluation of drug–drug interaction in the 
hepatobiliary and renal transport of drugs. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 
2005;45:689–723.
Silverman WA, Andersen DH, Blanc WA, Crozier DN. A difference in mor-
tality rate and incidence of kernicterus among premature infants allotted 
to two prophylactic antibacterial regimens. Pediatrics. 1956;18:614–625.
Slitt AL, Cherrington NJ, Hartley DP, Leazer TM, Klaassen CD. Tissue 
distribution and renal developmental changes in rat organic cation trans-
porter mRNA levels. Drug Metab Dispos. 2002;30:212–219.
Smith HW. Observations on the flora of the alimentary tract of animals and 
factors affecting its composition. J Pathol Bacteriol. 1965;89:95–107.
Stern ST, McNeil SE. Nanotechnology safety concerns revisited. Toxicol 
Sci. 2008;101:4–21.
Sun H, Chow ECY, Liu S, Du Y, Pang KS. The Caco-2 cell mono-
layer: usefulness and limitations. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol. 
2008;4:395–411.
Swift B, Pfeifer ND, Brouwer KLR. Sandwich-cultured hepatocytes: an in 
vitro model to evaluate hepatobiliary transporter-based drug interactions 
and hepatotoxicity. Drug Metab Rev. 2010;42:446–471.
Symchowicz S, Staub MS, Wong KKA. Comparative study of griseo-
fulvin-14C metabolism in the rat and rabbit. Biochem Pharmacol. 
1967;16:2405–2411.
Syme MR, Paxton JW, Keelan JA. Drug transfer and metabolism by the 
human placenta. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2004;43:487–514.
Takashima T, Wu C, Takashima-Hirano M, et al. Evaluation of breast can-
cer resistance protein function in hepatobiliary and renal excretion using 
PET with 11C-SC-62807. J Nucl Med. 2013, 54:267–276.
Tamai I. Oral drug delivery using intestinal OATP transporters. Adv Drug 
Deliv Rev. 2012;64:508–514.
Tokar EJ, Qu W, Waalkes MP.Arsenic, stem cells and the developmental 
basis of adult cancer. Toxicol Sci. 2011;120(suppl 1):S192–S203.
Tornio A, Vakkilainen J, Neuvonen M, et al. SLCO1B1 polymorphism 
markedly affects the pharmacokinetics of lovastatin acid. Pharmacogenet 
Genomics. 2015, 25:382–387.
Ueda K. ABC proteins protect the human body and maintain optimal health. 
Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2011;75:401–409.
Van den Berg M, Heeremans C, Veerhoven E, Olie K. Transfer of polychlo-
rinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans to fetal and neonatal rats. 
Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1987;9:635–644.
Van Herwaarden AE, Schinkel AH. The function of breast cancer resistance 
protein in epithelial barriers, stem cells and milk secretion of drugs and 
xenotoxins. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2006;27:10–16.
van Herwaarden AE, Wagenaar E, Merino G, et al. Multidrug transporter 
ABCG2/breast cancer resistance protein secretes riboflavin (vitamin B2) 
into milk. Mol Cell Biol. 2007;27:1247–1253.
Varma MV, Steyn SJ, Allerton C, El-Kattan AF. Predicting clearance 
mechanism in drug discovery: Extended Clearance Classification System 
(ECCS). Pharm Res. 2015;32:3785–3802.
Vlaming ML, Lagas JS, Schinkel AH. Physiological and pharmacological 
roles of ABCG2 (BCRP): recent findings in Abcg2 knockout mice. Adv 
Drug Deliv Rev. 2009;61:14–25.
Vlaming MLH, Morhmann K, Wagenaar E, et al. Carcinogen and antican-
cer drug transport by Mrp2 in vivo: studies using Mrp2 (Abcc2) knockout 
mice. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2006;318:319–327.
Waalkes MP, Ward JM, Liu J, Diwan BA. Transplacental carcinogen-
esis of inorganic arsenic in drinking water: induction of hepatic, ovar-
ian, pulmonary and adrenal tumors in mice. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 
2003;186:7–17.
Walton K, Dorne JLCM, Renwick AG. Species-specific uncertainty factors 
for compounds eliminated principally by renal excretion in humans. Food 
Chem Toxicol. 2004;42:261–274.
Wang DS, Jonker JW, Kato Y, Kusuhara H, Schinkel AH, Sugiyama Y. 
Involvement of organic cation transporter 1 in hepatic and intestinal dis-
tribution of metformin. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2002;302:510–515.
Wang DS, Kusuhara H, Kato Y, Jonker JW, Schinkel AH, Sugiyama Y. 
Involvement of organic cation transporter 1 in the lactic acidosis caused 
by metformin. Mol Pharmacol. 2003;63:844–848.
Weaver YM, Ehresman DJ, Butenhoff JL, Hagenbuch B. Roles of rat renal 
organic anion transporters in transporting perfluorinated carboxylates 
with different chain lengths. Toxicol Sci. 2010;113:305–314.
Wester RC, Maibach HI. Animal models for percutaneous absorption. In: 
Wang RGM, Knaak JB, Maibach HI, eds. Health Risk Assessment—
Dermal and Inhalation Exposure and Absorption of Toxicants. Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press; 1993:89–103.
Williams AC, Berry BW. Penetration enhancers. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 
2004;56:603–618.
Wilson JT. Determinants and consequences of drug excretion in breast milk. 
Drug Metab Rev. 1983;14:619–652.
Wilson TH. Mechanisms of Absorption. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders; 
1962:40–68.
Wos-Oxley M1, Bleich A, Oxley AP, et al. Comparative evaluation of estab-
lishing a human gut microbial community within rodent models. Gut 
Microbes. 2012;3(3):234–249.
Wu CY, Benet LZ. Predicting drug disposition via application of BCS: 
transport/absorption/ elimination interplay and development of a bio-
pharmaceutics drug disposition classification system. Pharm Res. 
2005;22:11–23.
Wu SP, Shyu MK, Liou HH, Gau CS, Lin CJ. Interaction between anti-
convulsants and human placental carnitine transporter. Epilepsia. 
2004;45:204–210.
Xu J, Liu Y, Yang Y, Bates S, Zhang J. Characterization of oligomeric 
human half-ABC transporter ATP-binding cassette G2. J Biol Chem. 
2004;279:19781–19789.
Ye AY, Liu Q-R, Li C-Y, Zhao M, Qu H. Human transporter database: 
comprehensive knowledge and discovery tools in the human transporter 
genes. PLoS ONE. 2014;9:e88883.
Yu J, Zhou Z, Tay-Sontheimer J, Levy RH, Ragueneau-Majlessi I. Intestinal 
drug interactions mediated by OATPs: a systematic review of preclinical 
and clinical findings. J Pharm Sci. 2017;106:2312–2325.
Zhang Y, Wang H, Unadkat JD, Mao Q. Breast cancer resistance protein 
limits fetal distribution of nitrofurantoin in the pregnant mouse. Drug 
Metab Dispos. 2007;35:2154–2158.
Zhao W, Zitzow JD, Weaver Y, et al. Organic anion transporting polypep-
tides contribute to the disposition of perfluoroalkyl acids in humans and 
rats. Toxicol Sci. 2017;156:84–95.
Zolk O, Fromm MF. Transporter-mediated drug uptake and efflux: impor-
tant determinants of adverse drug reactions. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 
2011;89:798–805.