# 6 Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
# Casarett & Doull's Toxicology, 9th Edition
# Pages: 212-419
# Unit: Unit II Disposition of Toxicants

6
chapter
Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Andrew Parkinson, Brian W. Ogilvie, David B. Buckley, 
Faraz Kazmi and Oliver Parkinson
INTRODUCTION
The overall fate or disposition of a xenobiotic, which encom-
passes its absorption, distribution, metabolism, and elimination 
or ADME (an acronym commonly used by the pharmaceutical 
industry), is determined by three major factors, namely passive 
diffusion across biological membranes or between cells (i.e., 
transcellular and paracellular passive diffusion, respectively), 
facilitated transport by uptake and/or efflux transporters, and 
biotransformation (invariably called metabolism in the case of 
drugs). In the case of xenobiotics that permeate cells with a high 
rate of passive diffusion, which enables them to be absorbed from 
the gastrointestinal tract, lung, or skin (depending on the route 
of exposure), biotransformation plays a key role in their elimina-
tion. Without biotransformation, a highly permeable xenobiotic 
excreted in urine or bile will be reabsorbed in the kidney or intes-
tine rather than eliminated in urine or feces. If a xenobiotic can 
permeate cells with a high rate of passive diffusion but it cannot 
be biotransformed at an appreciable rate then the xenobiotic can 
have a long residency time in the body. Dioxin (2,3,7,8-tetrachol-
orodibenzo-p-dioxin or TCDD) illustrates this principle. Dioxin 
Introduction
Principles of Xenobiotic 
Biotransformation
Hydrolysis, Reduction, and 
Oxidation
Hydrolysis
Carboxylesterases
Cholinesterases (AChE and BChE)
Paraoxonases (Lactonases)
Prodrugs and Alkaline Phosphatase
Peptidases
β-Glucuronidase
Epoxide Hydrolases
Reduction
Azo- and Nitro-Reduction
Carbonyl Reduction: AKRs, SDRs, and 
Others
Disulfide Reduction
Sulfoxide and N-Oxide Reduction
Quinone Reduction: NQO1 and NQO2
Dihydropyrimidine Dehydrogenase
Dehalogenation
Dehydroxylation: mARC, Cytochrome 
b5, b5 Reductase, and Aldehyde 
Oxidase
Aldehyde Oxidase—Reduction Reactions
Oxidation
Alcohol, Aldehyde, and Ketone 
­Oxidation–Reduction Systems
Alcohol Dehydrogenase
Aldehyde Dehydrogenase
Dimeric Dihydrodiol Dehydrogenase
Molybdenum Hydroxylases  
(Molybdoenzymes)
Xanthine Oxidoreductase
Aldehyde Oxidase
Amine Oxidases
Aromatization
Peroxidase-Dependent  
Cooxidation
Flavin Monooxygenases
Cytochrome P450
Endogenous Biomarkers of  
Cytochrome P450
Activation of Xenobiotics by  
Cytochrome P450
Inhibition of Cytochrome P450
Induction of Cytochrome P450: Xe-
nosensors
Conjugation
Glucuronidation and Formation  
of Acyl-CoA Thioesters
Sulfonation
Methylation
Acetylation
Amino Acid Conjugation
Glutathione Conjugation
Thiosulfate Sulfurtransferase 
(Rhodanese)
3-Mercaptopyruvate 
Sulfurtransferase
Unusual Conjugation Reactions
Phosphorylation
Acknowledgments
References
permeates cells with a high rate of passive diffusion, but it is 
largely resistant to biotransformation. For this reason, dioxin and 
numerous other polyhalogenated aromatic hydrocarbons (PCDFs, 
PCBs, PBBs, etc.), industrial chemicals present in the environ-
ment, are renowned for their persistence in the body and for their 
bioaccumulation in the food chain. The lesson from dioxin and 
related compounds, namely that halogenation is not an obstacle to 
passive permeation but is an obstacle to biotransformation, is not 
lost on the pharmaceutical industry. Many drugs are fluorinated 
(and some are chlorinated, brominated or iodinated) at meta-
bolically labile sites to slow their rate of biotransformation and 
thereby prolong their residency time in the body in order to extend 
their therapeutic effect, which may make once-a-day dosing at a 
low dose feasible (Obach et al., 2016).
In all previous versions of this chapter, biotransformation has 
been described as an enzymatic process of chemical modification 
that changes the physicochemical properties of a xenobiotic from 
those that favor absorption and distribution (i.e., high passive per-
meability associated with high lipophilicity) to those that favor 
elimination (i.e., low passive permeability associated with high 
hydrophilicity). This rationalization of biotransformation is still

194
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
valid but it overlooks an important principle, namely that facilitated 
transport also plays a key role in the disposition of xenobiotics, 
including those whose elimination is determined by their rate of 
biotransformation. Facilitated transport resolves a conundrum that 
has long been overlooked in drug metabolism circles: If biotransfor-
mation converts a lipophilic xenobiotic to hydrophilic metabolites, 
how do the hydrophilic metabolites get out of the cell that forms 
them? The short answer is: They are transported out of the cell. In 
many cases transporters play an important role in the elimination 
of drugs whose systemic clearance is primarily determined by their 
rate of biotransformation in the liver. The opposite is also true: In 
many cases biotransformation plays an important role in the elimi-
nation of drugs whose systemic clearance is primarily determined 
by their rate of transporter-mediated uptake into liver. Whether 
biotransformation (with support from transporters) or facilitated 
transport (with support from biotransformation) plays the key role 
in the elimination of a drug depends on the physicochemical proper-
ties of the xenobiotic. The following information on the importance 
of physicochemical properties comes largely from studies of drug 
disposition, but the principles apply to all xenobiotics.
Charge is an obstacle to membrane permeation by passive dif-
fusion. There are several drugs that resemble the neurotransmitter 
acetylcholine, CH3CO‒O‒C2H4‒N+(CH3)3, inasmuch as they con-
tain one or more quaternary ammonium ions (R1,R2,R3,R4N+) and 
are used to block neurotransmission by acetylcholine (nicotinic or 
muscarinic acetylcholine receptor antagonists such as alcuronium, 
atracurium, cisatracurium, doxacurium, metocurine, mivacurium, 
pancuronium, rocuronium, tubocurarine, and vecuronium) or inhibit 
the hydrolysis of acetylcholine (acetylcholinesterase inhibitors such 
as edrophonium, neostigmine, and pyridostigmine). All of these 
drugs have extracellular targets (acetylcholinesterase in the neuro-
muscular gap junction or acetylcholine receptors on synaptic cell 
surfaces) and they are all administered by intramuscular (IM) or 
intravenous (IV) injection because their permanent positive charge 
(due to the quaternary ammonium ion) is an obstacle to oral absorp-
tion from the gastrointestinal tract. (Pyridostigmine is administered 
orally but at 30 times the IV dose.) Xenobiotics with a permanent 
positive charge do not permeate membranes with a high rate of pas-
sive diffusion but they can enter cells if they are substrates for an 
uptake transporter. Because of its permanent positive charge, tetra-
methylammonium ion, (CH3)4N+, does not permeate membranes 
with a high rate of passive diffusion; however, it is transported into 
hepatocytes and is used in vitro as a probe/index substrate for hepatic 
organic cation transporter-1 (OCT1).1 Metformin, a natural product 
used to treat type 2 diabetes, is widely used as an in vitro probe/index 
substrate for OCT2, a renal organic cation transporter. Metformin 
does not have a single permanent positive charge, but it does have a 
pair of basic nitrogen atoms with high pKa(B) values (10.3 and 12.3), 
each of which is >99.9% ionized at pH 7.4, which results in a minis-
cule percentage of drug in the nonionized state in blood.
Drugs with a permanent charge are the minority. The majority 
of drugs contain one or more ionizable groups, such as a carbox-
ylic acid moiety (R–COOH ⇌ R–COO− + H+) or a basic amine 
(R–NH3
+ ⇌ R–NH2 + H+). Only the nonionized form of these 
drugs permeates cell membranes with a high rate of passive 
diffusion. The ionized and nonionized (neutral) forms are in pH-
dependent equilibrium. The pH producing equal amounts of the ion-
ized and nonionized form of an ionizable group is defined as pKa(A) 
in the case of acids and pKa(B) in the case of bases. Physiological 
pH values range widely: pH 1.5 to 3 in the fasted stomach, pH 3 to 
5 in the fed stomach, pH 5 to 8 in the small intestine, pH 4 to 5 in 
lysosomes, pH 5 to 6 in endosomes, pH 7.2 in cytosol, and pH 7.4 
in blood (Newton and Kluza, 1978). Consequently, for compounds 
with ionizable groups, the ratio of ionized-to-neutral drug varies 
throughout the body. Studies of drug permeation across artificial 
phospholipid membranes (the parallel artificial membrane perme-
ation assay or PAMPA), which are devoid of transporters, reaffirm 
the lesson from permanently charged drugs, namely, that perme-
ation of membranes with a high rate of passive diffusion is a prop-
erty of the nonionized form of a drug, which is favored by low pH 
in the case of acidic drugs and high pH in the case of basic drugs 
(Ruell et al., 2003).
In addition to charge, two other physicochemical proper-
ties impact the permeation of drugs by passive diffusion, namely 
log P and topological polar surface area (TPSA). log P is a mea-
sure of the lipophilicity of the nonionized form of a drug. log P 
is the octanol–water partition ratio (the ratio of the concentration 
of nonionized drug in octanol vs. the concentration of nonionized 
drug in water) expressed on a log10 scale. Incidentally, log D, the 
distribution coefficient, takes into account the concentration of ion-
ized drug in water, which is pH dependent; hence, log D values 
for compounds with ionizable groups vary with pH, whereas log P, 
which applies only to the nonionized drug, is a constant. Permeation 
of membranes by passive diffusion increases with increasing log P. 
However, increasing log P can come at the expense of aqueous solu-
bility; hence, drugs with a log P >5 often show poor oral bioavail-
ability because they do not dissolve in gastrointestinal fluid. This 
consideration generally has limited applicability to xenobiotics like 
dioxin where prolonged exposure to low concentrations, rather than 
once-a-day dosing to a drug at high concentrations, is the norm.
TPSA is an overall measure of the number of oxygen and 
nitrogen atoms that bind water by functioning as hydrogen donors 
or hydrogen acceptors. For example, dimethylamine, (CH3)2NH, 
has one hydrogen donor that can form a hydrogen bond with the 
oxygen atom of water, (CH3)2NH ||||| OH2, and one hydrogen 
acceptor (the lone pair of electrons on nitrogen) that can form 
a hydrogen bond with a hydrogen atom in water, (CH3)2HN: ||||| 
H–O–H. Trimethylamine, dimethylamine, and methylamine each 
has one hydrogen acceptor (the lone pair of electrons on nitro-
gen) and zero, one, and two hydrogen donors, respectively; their 
respective TPSA values are 3, 12, and 26 Å2. Hydrogen bonding to 
water affects membrane permeation by passive diffusion because 
only the desolvated (water-free) form on the nonionized drug 
can permeate membranes with a high rate of passive diffusion. 
Accordingly, the rate of membrane permeation by passive diffu-
sion (and the extent of oral absorption of nontransported drugs) 
decreases with increasing TPSA (Palm et al., 1997; Price et al., 
2009; Smith and Dalvie, 2012). As a general rule, a TPSA > 75 
Å2 restricts membrane permeation by passive diffusion of acidic 
drugs, whereas a TPSA > 100 Å2 restricts membrane perme-
ation by passive diffusion of basic drugs. The difference reflects 
the property of phospholipid membranes, which are negatively 
charged. As such, basic drugs are attracted electrostatically to 
membranes, whereas acidic drugs are repelled. In effect, the equi-
librium between the ionized and nonionized form of a drug occurs 
close to the membrane in the case of basic drugs and away from 
the membrane in the case of acidic drugs. Transporters play a key 
role in the disposition of drugs with a high TPSA. If any drug 
with a TPSA greater than 140 Å2 is absorbed from the intestine 
1Alternative names for the transporters mentioned throughout this chapter are 
as follows: ASBT (SLC10A2), BCRP (ABCG2), BSEP (ABCB11), MATE1 
(SLC47A1), MATE2-K (SLC47A2), MRP1 (ABCC1), MRP2 (ABCC2), 
MRP3 (ABCC3), MRP4 (ABCC4), MRP5 (ABCC5), MRP6 (ABCC6), 
MRP7 (ABCC10), MRP8 (ABCC11), NTCP (SLC10A1), OAT1 (SLC22A6), 
OAT3 (SLC22A8), OATP1A2 (SLCO1A2), OATP1B1 (SLCO1B1), 
OATP1B3 (SLCO1B3), OATP2B1 (SLCO2B1), OCT1 (SLC22A1), OCT2 
(SLC22A2), P-gp (ABCB1 and MDR1), and URAT1 (SLC22A12).

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
195
and distributes into tissues, it is probably a substrate for one or 
more transporters (Palm et al., 1997; Ertl et al., 2000; Shitara 
et al., 2013).
The roles of passive diffusion, transport, and biotransforma-
tion in the disposition of acidic and basic drugs in humans (based 
on studies of drug pharmacokinetics) are compared and contrasted 
in Figs. 6-1 and 6-2, respectively. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs) are carboxylic acid-containing drugs with physi-
cochemical properties that generally favor membrane permeation 
by passive diffusion (they have pKa(A) values ranging from 2.5 to 
5.0 with log P values >1 and, in most cases, TPSA values <75 Å2). 
Likewise, antidepressant drugs are aliphatic amine–containing 
drugs with physicochemical properties that favor membrane per-
meation by passive diffusion (in most cases they have pKa(B) values 
in the 8.5 to 10.5 range with log P values >1 and, with few excep-
tions, TPSA values <100 Å2). As shown in Table 6-1, all NSAIDs 
have a small volume of distribution (0.1 to 0.3 L/kg, which is less 
than the volume of body water) and they have a short Tmax (the time 
to reach maximum plasma levels after oral dosing). The low volume 
of distribution of NSAIDs is attributable partly to their extensive 
binding to albumin and other plasma proteins (>99% in the major-
ity of cases) and partly to their extensive ionization (>99%) at pH 
7.4, both of which disfavor passive diffusion into tissues. The short 
Tmax of some NSAIDs is consistent with their absorption from the 
stomach (pH 1.5 to 3 in the fasted state) and duodenum (pH 5 to 6), 
two sites with low pH, which favors the nonionized form of NSAIDs 
and, hence, their absorption by passive diffusion. Oral absorption 
of NSAIDs is delayed in the fed state due, in part, to the increase 
in gastric pH (to pH 3 to 5) and the delay in gastric emptying time.
In contrast, as shown in Table 6-2, antidepressant drugs have 
a large volume of distribution (>10 L/kg, which is more than 
total body water) and, in most cases, a relatively long Tmax. The 
large volume of distribution of antidepressants is attributable to 
their rapid permeation of tissues by passive diffusion and their 
extensive partitioning into phospholipid membranes and ion par-
titioning of the charged (cationic) species into acidic organelles 
like lysosomes (pH 4 to 5) and, to a lesser extent, endosomes 
(pH 5 to 6). Following their absorption from the small intestine, 
antidepressants and many other classes of cationic amphiphilic 
drugs (CADs) reach high organ-to-blood levels (>10-fold) in the 
liver, lung, and kidney, the organs with the highest concentration 
of phospholipids and lysosomes. Ion partitioning of such drugs 
into lysosomes (and their direct complexing with phospholipids) 
often impairs the lysosomal metabolism of phospholipids and 
mucopolysaccharides, which is why CADs are renowned for 
causing phospholipidosis and/or mucopolysaccharidosis. CADs 
(positively charged) are also renowned for adsorbing to melanin, 
a negatively charged pigment in the uveal gland of the eye and 
other pigmented cells.
Transporters, such as OATP2B1 and OATP1A2, play an 
important role in the intestinal absorption of acidic drugs with 
a high TPSA, such as statins, many of which permeate mem-
branes with a low rate of passive diffusion (Shirasaka et al., 
2010, 2011; Varma et al., 2011). They also play a key role in 
the intestinal absorption of certain basic drugs, such as aliskerin, 
atenolol, and celiprolol, and zwitterionic drugs, such as cipro-
floxacin and fexofenadine—drugs whose intestinal absorption by 
OATPs is partially inhibited by large volumes of orange and apple 
ACIDIC DRUG
R–COOH ←
→ R–COO– + H+
STOMACH
DUODENUM
SMALL
INTESTINE
FECES
Transporters
URINE
KIDNEY
SYSTEMIC
CIRCULATION
LIVER
TISSUES
BILE
R–COOH (>90%)
R–COO– → Metabolites
Acyl glucuronidation
Amino acid conjugation
CYP2C9 and CYP2C8
R–COOH (10%)
RCOO– (>99%)
and metabolites
Entero-
hepatic
circulation
Parent and
metabolites
Parent and metabolites
Hepatic uptake (OATP)
Renal uptake (OAT)
Renal efflux
Canalicular efflux
Sinusoidal efflux
Intestinal uptake (OATP)
Passive diffusion
Parent and
metabolites
Glomerular
filtration
Tubular
secretion
High PPB (to albumin)
Blood-to-plasma
conc. ratio ∼0.5
Small volume
of distribution
(< extra-
cellular water)
pKa(A) 3–5  log P >1  TPSA <75 Å2
Figure 6-1.  Role of passive diffusion, transport, and biotransformation in the disposition of a lipophilic acidic xenobiotic. OAT, organic anion transporter; 
OATP, organic anion transporting polypeptide; PPB, plasma protein binding; TPSA, topological polar surface area.

196
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
Table 6-1  
Volume of Distribution (Vd) of Carboxylic Acid–Containing Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs) and 
Plasma Tmax in the Fasted and Fed State in Human Subjects
NSAID (R–COOH)
PHYSICOCHEMICAL PROPERTIES*
Vd (L/kg)†
PLASMA Tmax (h)‡
pKa(A)
TPSA (Å2)
log P
FASTED§
FED§
Diclofenac
4.0
49
4.3
0.12
0.5
1.5
Dexketoprofen
3.9
55
3.6
0.24
0.6
1.5
Ibuprofen fast-acting
4.9
40
3.8
0.15
0.7
1.4
Bromfenac
3.8
80 
3.7
0.26
0.8
2.4
Suprofen
4.0
54
3.5
0.17
0.9
1.6
Naproxen sodium
4.2
47
3.0
0.10
1.3
3.2
Ibuprofen
4.9
37
3.8 
0.15
1.3
2.0
Aspirin (salicylic acid)
3.0
58
2.0
0.15
1.7
2.7
Ketoprofen (racemic)
3.9
54
3.6
0.11
1.9
4.8
Naproxen
4.2
47
3.0
0.10
1.9
1.9
Diflunisal
2.7
58 
3.9
0.10
2.4
3.1
*Physicochemical properties are from https://chemicalize.com. pKa(A) is the pKa of the acidic group (the pH at which the drug is 50% ionized and 50% 
nonionized). TPSA stands for topological polar surface area, which is an overall measure of the number of oxygen and nitrogen atoms that bind water 
by functioning as hydrogen donors or hydrogen acceptors. log P is the octanol-water partition coefficient, which is log10 of the ratio of the concentra-
tion of nonionized drug in octanol versus the concentration of nonionized drug in water.
†Values for the volume of distribution (Vd) are from Davies and Skjodt (2000).
‡Plasma Tmax is the time to reach the maximum observed plasma level of drug following oral dosing. Values are from Moore et al. (2015).
§In the fasted and fed state, gastric pH is 1.5 to 3 and 3 to 5, respectively.
BASIC DRUG
R–NH3
+ ←
→ R–NH2 + H+
STOMACH
DUODENUM
SMALL
INTESTINE
FECES
Transporters
URINE
KIDNEY
SYSTEMIC
CIRCULATION
LIVER
TISSUES
BILE
R–NH3
+ (>99%)
R–NH2 (Parent)
Metabolites
FMO, MAO
AO, UGT, NAT
CYP2D6
CYP3A4
R–NH3
+ (>90%)
R–NH2 (>10%)
Entero-
hepatic
circulation
Metabolites
Parent and metabolites
Canalicular efflux
Sinusoidal efflux
Passive diffusion
Metabolites
Glomerular
filtration
Reabsorption
of parent
High PPB (to α1-AGP)
Blood-to-plasma
conc. ratio ∼1
Large volume
of distribution
(> total body
water)
pKa(B) 8–10  log P >1  TPSA <100 Å2
R–NH3
+ in
lysosomes
Figure 6-2.  Role of passive diffusion, transport, and biotransformation in the disposition of a lipophilic basic xenobiotic. α1-AGP, α1-acid glycoprotein; AO, 
aldehyde oxidase; CYP, cytochrome P450; MAO, monoamine oxidase; NAT, N-acetyltransferase; PPB, plasma protein binding; TPSA, topological polar sur-
face area; UGT, UDP-glucuronosyltransferase.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
197
juice (Dolton et al., 2012). The systemic clearance of statins and 
other drugs with a high TPSA (including certain basic and zwit-
terionic drugs) is largely determined by transporter (OATP1B1 
and OATP1B3)-mediated uptake into liver, followed by hepatic 
biotransformation or transporter-mediated efflux into bile (by 
P-glycoprotein [P-gp], BCRP, MRP2, BSEP, and/or MATE1) 
(Shitara et al., 2013). Acidic drugs that undergo biliary excretion 
(i.e., transporter-mediated uptake from blood coupled with trans-
porter-mediated efflux into bile) can potentially be reabsorbed 
by intestinal uptake transporters, which gives rise to enterohe-
patic circulation. Such recycling of acidic drugs is analogous to 
the enterohepatic circulation of bile acids (lipophilic carboxylic 
acids), which are synthesized in the liver, effluxed into bile by 
BSEP, reabsorbed from the small intestine by ASBT (in conjunc-
tion with OSTα/β), and actively transported back into the liver by 
NTCP and OATP1B1 to begin the process again (Kuipers et al., 
2014). Transporter (ASBT)-mediated reabsorption in the kidney 
similarly prevents the loss of bile acids in urine due to glomerular 
filtration.
Because carboxylic acid–containing drugs are extensively ion-
ized at pH 7.4, they are predicted NOT to enter tissues with a high 
rate of passive diffusion, which is consistent with their low volume 
of distribution. However, various acidic drugs such as NSAIDs, 
statins, and the anticonvulsant valproic acid enter the brain due to 
transport by OATPs (including OATP2B2 and OATP1A2, which are 
also expressed in the small intestine) and/or one or more members 
of the family of monocarboxylate transporters (MCTs) (Sanchez-
Covarrubias et al., 2014; Vijay and Morris, 2014). Uptake transport-
ers (OATs) also play a role in the tubular secretion of NSAIDs and 
other acid drugs. Biotransformation might be assumed to play a 
negligible role in the disposition of acidic drugs but, in many cases, 
biotransformation plays a key role in the disposition of acidic drugs 
and the metabolites of acidic drugs (particularly acyl glucuronides) 
play a key role in the toxicity and drug interaction potential of acidic 
drugs (discussed in the sections “Glucuronidation and Formation of 
Acyl-CoA Thioesters” and “CYP2C8”). Transporters also play a 
key role in the disposition of zwitterionic drugs. Zwitterionic drugs 
are predominantly cations in the stomach, which does not favor 
their absorption by passive diffusion, and are both negatively and 
positively charged in the small intestine and blood, which disfavors 
intestinal absorption and tissue distribution by passive permeation. 
Certain zwitterionic drugs target the brain, such as the anticonvul-
sants gabapentin and pregabalin, which are transported across the 
blood–brain barrier by members of the family of large amino acid 
transporters (LATs).
Interestingly, many antihistamines are also lipophilic aliphatic 
amines (pKa(B) > 8) that, like antidepressants, have physicochemi-
cal properties that favor membrane permeation with a high rate of 
passive diffusion (i.e., log P >1 and TPSA <100 Å2). Some antihis-
tamines, such as chlorpheniramine and diphenhydramine, readily 
enter the CNS and cause sedation, but others are prevented from 
entering the CNS because they are substrates for the efflux trans-
porter P-gp (a component of the blood–brain barrier). Desloratadine 
and terfenadine are examples of lipophilic amines that, because they 
are P-gp substrates, are nonsedating antihistamines (Raeissi et al., 
1999; Chen et al., 2003). Many drugs classified as neutrals contain 
an amine group with a pKa(B) < 7; they are predominantly nonion-
ized at pH 7.4. Aromatic amines and amides fall into this class. 
Many of them permeate membranes with a high rate of passive 
diffusion and biotransformation plays a key role in their elimina-
tion. However, in contrast to amine-containing drugs with a pKa(B) 
> 8, amine-containing drugs with a pKa(B) < 7 do not partition 
Table 6-2  
Volume of Distribution (Vd) and Plasma Tmax of Aliphatic Amine–Containing Antidepressant Drugs  
(Amphiphilic Cationic Amines or CADs) in Humans
ANTIDEPRESSANT
PHYSICOCHEMICAL PROPERTIES*
Vd (L/kg)
Tmax (h)
pKa(B)
TPSA (Å2)
log P
Amitriptyline
8.7
3.2
2.9
15†
2–4†
Clomipramine
9.2
6.5
4.9
12–17†
2–4†
Citalopram
9.8
36
3.8
12–16‡
2–4§
Imipramine
9.2
6.5
4.3
10–20†
3–4†
Desipramine
10.0
15
3.9
22†
3–6†
Maprotiline
10.5
12
4.4
23–70†
3–8†
Nortriptyline
9.8
21
4.2
14–40†
3–24†
Sertraline
9.9
12
5.2
20‡
4.5–8.4§
Fluoxetine
9.8
21
4.2
14–100‡
6–8§
Paroxetine
9.8
40
3.2
13‡
6–10§
*Physicochemical properties are from https://chemicalize.com. pKa(B) is the pKa of the basic group (the pH at which the drug is 50% ionized and 50% 
nonionized). TPSA stands for topological polar surface area, which is an overall measure of the number of oxygen and nitrogen atoms that bind water 
by functioning as hydrogen donors or hydrogen acceptors. log P is the octanol-water partition coefficient, which is log10 of the ratio of the concentra-
tion of nonionized drug in octanol versus the concentration of nonionized drug in water.
†Values from Jack (1992).
‡Values from Catterson and Preskorn (1996).
§Values from Ciraulo et al. (2011).

198
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
extensively into phospholipid membranes or lysosomes; hence, they 
have moderate volumes of distribution (usually <5 L/kg) in contrast 
to the aliphatic amines classified as CADs (with volumes of distri-
bution >10 L/kg).
These considerations apply to all xenobiotics, not just drugs. 
For example, dioxin permeates membranes with a high rate of 
passive diffusion, which is consistent with its lack of ionizable 
groups at physiologic pH values, and its high log P (>5) and 
low TPSA (18 Å2). But there are exceptions (or apparent excep-
tions) especially among certain natural products. For example, the 
aminoglycoside antibiotics gentamicin, tobramycin, and amika-
cin contain four or five cationic sites, and have strongly negative 
log P values and very high TPSA values (200 to 330 Å2). They 
are administered intravenously or intramuscularly due to their 
low oral bioavailability. Aminoglycosides do not diffuse through 
membranes but they get into various cells by a passive process, 
namely endocytosis: an invagination of the plasma membrane 
that occurs when the four or five positively charged sites on the 
aminoglycoside form a complex with a corresponding number of 
negatively charged sites on the phospholipid membrane. Some 
drugs, such as sildenafil (Viagra), permeate membranes with a 
higher rate of passive diffusion than would be predicted from their 
TPSA value, but this is due to internal hydrogen bonding, which 
effectively reduces TPSA, a measure of external hydrogen bond-
ing to water. In the case of sildenafil, internal hydrogen bonding 
reduces its predicted TPSA by 20 Å2 (from 118 to 98 Å2), which 
enables sildenafil to be completely absorbed from the intestine. 
However, oral bioavailability of parent drug is less than 100% 
due to presystemic biotransformation of sildenafil in the small 
intestine and liver.
The final point in the preceding paragraph warrants further 
consideration because several factors, including biotransformation, 
can contribute to an absolute oral bioavailability of less than 100%. 
Absolute oral bioavailability is usually determined by comparing 
systemic exposure to parent drug following oral administration 
(AUCpo) and intravenous (IV) administration (AUCiv) with adjust-
ment for dose (if necessary):
Absolute oral bioavailability
AUC
Dose
AUC
Dose
po
iv
iv
p
(%) =
⋅
⋅
⋅
100
o
where AUC is the area under the plasma concentration versus time 
curve, a measure of systemic exposure. Absolute oral bioavailabil-
ity is a pharmacokinetic term that applies only to the parent drug. 
There are several reasons why absolute oral bioavailability may be 
less than 100%:
	 1.	 The drug may be partially or completely insoluble in the 
gastrointestinal tract at the dose administered orally. In this 
case, absorption of both parent drug and drug-derived mate-
rial (parent + metabolites) is less than 100%. In this case, oral 
absorption may decrease with increasing dose (due to precipi-
tation of the drug at high doses), which gives rise to an infra-­
proportional dose–exposure relationship.
	 2.	 The drug may permeate membranes or pass between cells with 
a low rate of passive diffusion and the drug is not efficiently 
transported by an intestinal uptake transporter. Once again, 
oral absorption of both parent drug and drug-derived mate-
rial is less than 100%. The intestine is the therapeutic target 
for some drugs, such as linaclotide, an agonist of gluanylate 
cyclase 2 (expressed on the cell surface of intestinal epithe-
lial cells) and is used to treat constipation and irritable bowel 
syndrome. Linaclotide has a very low log P (close to ‒6) and 
very high TPSA (726 Å2)—properties that strongly disfavor 
passive permeation of membranes—and is not absorbed from 
the gastrointestinal tract.
	 3.	 The drug may permeate membranes with a high rate of passive 
diffusion or be efficiently transported by an intestinal uptake 
transporter, but it is biotransformed in the small intestine, liver 
or, in principle, the lung (three presystemic organs). In this 
case, oral absorption of parent drug is less than 100%, but oral 
absorption of drug-derived material (parent + metabolites) is 
100% (all of the drug is absorbed but the parent drug under-
goes presystemic biotransformation). Sildenafil is one of a 
large number of drugs that are completely absorbed from the 
intestine but undergoes significant presystemic (or first-pass) 
metabolism.
	 4.	 The drug may permeate membranes with a high rate of passive 
diffusion or is a substrate for an intestinal uptake transporter, 
but its intestinal absorption is restricted by one or more intesti-
nal efflux transporters, such as P-gp. For highly soluble, highly 
permeable drugs, efflux by intestinal transporters can be satu-
rated at high doses, which gives rise to a supra-proportional 
dose–exposure relationship.
In the case of drugs that are substrates for both the intestinal 
efflux transporter P-gp and the drug-metabolizing enzyme CYP3A 
(the major cytochrome P450 enzyme in the intestine and a major 
enzyme in the liver), oral absorption of parent drug can be espe-
cially reduced because efflux by P-gp slows the rate of intestinal 
absorption, which increases the extent of metabolism by intesti-
nal CYP3A (Raeissi et al., 1999; Benet, 2009). This transporter–
enzyme interplay underscores the importance of BOTH transporters 
and drug-metabolizing enzymes to the overall disposition of certain 
drugs and other xenobiotics.
Extrinsic factors that impact the oral bioavailability of drugs 
include (1) aqueous solubility, which is affected by pH, food, 
bile acids, and drug formulation); (2) uptake by intestinal trans-
porters, which are inhibited by compounds in apple and orange 
juice, and uptake by hepatic transporters, which are inhibited 
by drugs such as rifampin); (3) efflux by intestinal transporters 
such as P-gp, which can be inhibited by some drugs and induced 
by others; and (4) biotransformation by intestinal enzymes such 
as CYP3A, which is inhibited by compounds in grapefruit juice, 
and hepatic enzymes, many of which are inhibited by some drugs 
and induced by others. In addition to drugs that cause inhibition 
or induction, genetic polymorphism (an intrinsic factor) can also 
affect the activity of transporters and drug-metabolizing enzymes. 
For a growing number of transporters and drug-­metabolizing 
enzymes, genetic polymorphisms have been identified that 
decrease their activity (loss-of-function allelic variants or gene 
deletion) or increase it (gain-of-function allelic variants or gene 
duplication).
Biotransformation has traditionally been divided into two 
phases. Phase 1 biotransformation involves oxidation, reduction, 
and hydrolysis, which result in the introduction or exposure of func-
tional groups such as –OH, –NH2, –SH, or –COOH. Phase 2 bio-
transformation involves conjugation of the xenobiotic or its Phase 
1 metabolite(s) with an acid (glucuronic acid or sulfonic acid) or 
zwitterion (glutathione or amino acids such as glycine, taurine, and 
glutamine). Phase 1 biotransformation facilitates the elimination 
of xenobiotics by increasing their TPSA and lowering their log P, 
both of which decrease membrane permeation by passive diffu-
sion and decrease the likelihood of the excreted metabolites being

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
199
reabsorbed from the small intestine or kidney. Phase 1 biotransfor-
mation also produces metabolites that potentially undergo Phase 2 
biotransformation. Phase 2 biotransformation facilitates the elimi-
nation of xenobiotics by adding an ionizable group (often an acidic 
moiety that is predominantly [>99%] negatively charged above pH 
7) that is associated with relatively large increases in TPSA and 
decreases in log P. Phase 1 biotransformation increases TPSA by up 
to 24 Å2 and decreases log P by up to 1.5 units. Phase 2 biotransfor-
mation increases TPSA by as much as about 160 Å2 and decreases 
log P by as much as 3.5 units. The effects of common pathways 
of Phase 1 and Phase 2 biotransformation on TPSA and log P are 
summarized in Table 6-3.
In general, the physicochemical properties of metabolites 
formed by Phase 1 biotransformation are similar to those of the 
parent compound because Phase 1 biotransformation results in 
relatively modest changes in TPSA and log P (Table 6-3). In 
the case of drugs with high passive permeability, their Phase 
1 metabolites (formed in the small intestine or liver) are often 
present in the systemic circulation (Smith and Dalvie, 2012). 
In fact several drugs on the market today are pharmacologically 
active Phase 1 metabolites of previously approved drugs (such 
as desloratadine, the N-dealkylated metabolite of loratadine). In 
contrast, conjugated metabolites formed by Phase 2 biotransfor-
mation do not permeate membranes with a high rate of passive 
diffusion. Their elimination from the site of formation is medi-
ated by transporters. In the case of Phase 2 metabolites formed 
in the liver, the conjugates can be effluxed into bile by transport-
ers on the canalicular membrane (such as MRP2 and BCRP) or 
effluxed into blood (with subsequent elimination in urine) by 
transporters on the sinusoidal membrane (such as MRP1, MRP3, 
MRP4, MRP5, and MRP6) (Zamek-Gliszczynski et al., 2006). 
The efflux of Phase 2 metabolites into bile versus blood (the 
so-called vectorial route of elimination) can occur in a species-
dependent manner. In the same species, treatment with drugs 
that induce the expression of transporters can affect the vectorial 
route of elimination of Phase 2 metabolites (Slitt et al., 2003). 
Accordingly, Phase 2 metabolites of drugs can sometimes be 
observed as circulating metabolites in humans but not rodents 
(or vice versa) even though humans and rodents form the same 
Phase 2 metabolite.
Table 6-3  
Effects of Common Phase 1 and Phase 2 Biotransformation Reactions on log P and Topological Polar 
Surface Area (TPSA) of Xenobiotics
REACTION
EXAMPLE
CHANGE in log P*
CHANGE in TPSA (Å2)*
Hydroxylation—aliphatic
R‒CH3 → R‒CH2OH
‒1.5
20
Hydroxylation—aromatic
Benzene (Ø) → phenol (Ø-OH)
‒0.3
20
Alcohol dehydrogenation
R‒CH2OH → R‒CHO
‒0.2
‒3
Aldehyde oxidation
R‒CHO → R‒COOH
+0.2
20
Epoxidation
‒1.1
13
O-demethylation
R‒CH2O‒CH3 → R‒CH2OH
‒0.6
11
N-demethylation
R‒CH2NH‒CH3 → R‒CH2NH2
‒0.4
14
N-oxygenation
R1,R2,R3N → R1,R2,R3N‒O
‒1.1
24
N-hydroxylation
R1,R2NH → R1,R2N‒OH
‒0.4
11
Hydrolysis
‒0.1
11
‒0.4
2
O-methylation
Catechol → O-methylcatechol
+0.6
‒6
N-acetylation
R‒NH2 → R‒NH‒COCH3
‒0.2
3
O-sulfonation
Phenol → phenol sulfate
‒0.5
43
O-glucuronidation
R‒OH → R‒O‒glucuronide
‒1.5
96
N-glucuronidation
R–NH2 → R‒NH‒glucuronide
‒1.8
93
Acyl-glucuronidation
R‒COOH → R‒COO‒glucuronide
‒1.8
96
Glutathionylation (addition 
of glutathione)
Diethyl maleate → DEA-glutathione 
‒3.5
159
Glycine conjugation
Benzoic acid → hippuric acid
‒1.1
29
Cholic acid → glycocholic acid
Taurine conjugation
Cholic acid → taurocholic acid
‒1.6
46
*Changes in log P and TPSA were determined from https://chemicalize.com.

200
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
Conjugations with glucuronic acid, sulfonic acid, glutathione, 
and various amino acids are not the only Phase 2 biotransformation 
reactions. Acetylation and methylation are Phase 2 biotransforma-
tion reactions but with a notable difference: they do not add an 
ionizable group to the xenobiotic. In contrast to all other pathways 
of Phase 2 biotransformation, methylation actually decreases TPSA 
and increases log P (Table 6-3), which can slow the overall rate 
of xenobiotic elimination from the body. Acetylation of a basic 
amine (R–NH2 → R–NH–CO–CH3) has a modest effect on TPSA 
and log P (Table 6-3), but it can greatly lower the pKa(B) of the 
nitrogen atom from one that favors partitioning into phospholipid 
membranes and lysosomes (pKa(B) > 8) to one that does not sup-
port such partitioning (pKa(B) << 7). In this case, acetylation can 
decrease the volume of distribution and thereby promote xenobiotic 
elimination.
By facilitating the elimination of Phase 2 metabolites in bile or 
urine (via blood), transporters play an important role in the elimi-
nation of xenobiotics that permeate membranes with a high rate of 
passive diffusion, although the rate of metabolism generally deter-
mines the overall rate of elimination of the xenobiotic (i.e., metab-
olism represents the rate-limiting step in elimination). As noted 
above, the interplay between intestinal efflux transporters like P-gp 
and intestinal drug-metabolizing enzymes like CYP3A can increase 
the extent of metabolism and decrease oral absorption of highly 
permeable drugs and other xenobiotics. What about xenobiotics that 
permeate membranes with a low rate of passive diffusion, such as 
drugs with a high TPSA, but which are absorbed, distributed, and 
eliminated because they are substrates for transporters? It might be 
assumed that drugs whose systemic clearance depends on facili-
tated transport (i.e., drugs for which transporter-mediated uptake 
into liver or kidney represents the rate-limiting step in systemic 
clearance) are slowly biotransformed if, in fact, they are biotrans-
formed at all. It seems reasonable to assume that drug-metabolizing 
enzymes would have evolved NOT to metabolize low permeability 
xenobiotics because such compounds already have a high TPSA 
and/or low log P, so there would be little advantage to increasing it 
further. It is perhaps surprising, therefore, that several drugs whose 
permeation into liver is dependent on uptake transporters (namely, 
OATP1B1 and OATP1B3) are among the most rapidly metabolized 
drugs by the human liver microsomal cytochrome P450 (Phase 1 
biotransformation), as shown in Fig. 6-3.
This feature may have evolved for the following reason. In the 
case of xenobiotics that permeate membranes with a high rate of 
passive diffusion, the unbound concentration of xenobiotic inside 
the cell cannot be greater than the unbound concentration outside 
the cells because they are in rapid equilibrium. However, in the 
case of xenobiotics that do not permeate cells rapidly by passive 
diffusion but are actively transported into cells (such as cells in the 
small intestine and liver), the unbound intracellular concentration 
can be much greater than the unbound extracellular concentration. 
(Emphasis is placed on the unbound concentration because the total 
intracellular concentration of a xenobiotic, including those that 
permeate membranes with a high rate of passive diffusion, is usu-
ally much higher than its total extracellular concentration because 
xenobiotics inside the cell partition into phospholipid membranes 
and organelles and/or bind extensively to various proteins and other 
cellular constituents.) A xenobiotic that is transported into the small 
intestine or liver can be eliminated either by transporter-mediated 
efflux or by biotransformation. Many of the drugs that are trans-
ported into the liver, such as the statins, are indeed effluxed into 
bile by canalicular transporters. But high rates of biotransforma-
tion of xenobiotics that are substrates for uptake transporters may 
have evolved as a second mechanism to protect cells from high and 
potentially toxic intracellular levels of xenobiotics that are trans-
ported into the liver. When xenobiotics with low passive permeabil-
ity are transported into hepatocytes, it seems reasonable to assume 
that their unbound intracellular concentration would be higher than 
its unbound extracellular concentration. But several drugs with 
these properties are metabolized so quickly (in addition to being 
effluxed into bile) that their intracellular unbound concentration is 
actually lower than their unbound extracellular concentration.
CYP3A enzymes are often involved in the biotransforma-
tion of drugs that are substrates for the efflux transporter P-gp or 
are substrates for the hepatic OATP uptake transporters. As noted 
above, the interplay between intestinal P-gp and intestinal CYP3A 
increases the extent of biotransformation of various drugs during 
their intestinal absorption and, as shown in Fig. 6-3, some of the 
drugs transported into the liver by OAPT1B1/3 are rapidly metabo-
lized by hepatic CYP3A enzymes. CYP3A is unusual for its abil-
ity to metabolize high-molecular-weight xenobiotics with a high 
TPSA, but it is not alone. Many acidic drugs with a high molecular 
weight and high TPSA (including glucuronide conjugates of drugs) 
are substrates for CYP2C8. CYP2C9 also metabolizes numer-
ous acidic drugs but with a preference for low-molecular-weight 
compounds. Humans and cynomolgus monkeys evolved CYP2C 
enzymes capable of biotransforming acidic drugs. In contrast, dogs 
are renowned for expressing CYP enzymes that, in general, do not 
biotransform acidic drugs. Rats and mice (the other two non-clinical 
species widely used in drug safety and toxicological testing) are 
intermediate in their ability to biotransform acidic drugs by CYP 
enzymes. It is difficult to know what evolutionary pressures led to 
these species differences in CYP-dependent biotransformation of 
acidic compounds, but gastric pH offers a potential insight. Humans 
and cynomolgus monkeys have low gastric pH (pH 1.5 and 2.1, 
respectively) compared with mice, rats, and dogs (pH 3.8, 4.4, 
and 4.5, respectively); hence, humans and cynomolgus monkeys 
are more likely to absorb acidic xenobiotics by passive diffusion 
Eletriptan
Lopinavir
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Sensitive in vivo CYP3A
index substrates
OATP transporter substrates
metabolized by CYP3A
Intrinsic clearance (CLint) by human liver microsomes
(mL/min/mg protein)
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
Saquinavir
Tacrolimus
Ritonavir
Atorvastatin
Erythromycin
Midazolam
Buspirone
Felodipine
Triazolam
Sildenafil
Figure 6-3.  Intrinsic metabolic clearance by human liver microsomes of 
drugs that are sensitive in vivo CYP3A probe substrates and OATP substrates 
(drugs whose uptake into hepatocytes is largely dependent on facilitated 
transport, not passive diffusion). Intrinsic clearance values (determined with 
human liver microsomes) are from Evans et al. (2003) for eletriptan, from 
Hyland et al. (2001) for sildenafil, from De Bruyn et al. (2016) for lopinavir, 
saquinavir, and ritonavir, from Park et al. (2008) for atorvastatin, and from 
Tseng et al. (2014) for all other substrates. Sensitive in vivo CYP3A probes 
are drugs whose plasma AUC increase fivefold or more when coadminis-
tered with a strong CYP3A inhibitor. A complete list of sensitive CYP3A 
probe substrates (and strong CYP3A inhibitors and inducers) can be found 
at the University of Washington Drug Interaction Database (https://www.
druginteractioninfo.org).

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
201
from the stomach than many other species (Beasley et al., 2015). 
It is conceivable that species differences in gastric pH provided an 
evolutionary pressure for the selection of acid-metabolizing CYP 
enzymes in humans and cynomolgus monkeys. Species differences 
in gastric pH are partly responsible for species differences in the 
composition of the intestinal microbiome (Beasley et al., 2015), 
which in turn influences the biotransformation of certain xenobiot-
ics and bile acids (Klaassen and Cui, 2015).
In summary, the overall fate or disposition of a xenobiotic, 
which encompasses its absorption, distribution, metabolism, 
and elimination (ADME), is determined by three major factors, 
namely passive diffusion, facilitated transport, and biotrans-
formation (metabolism). In most cases, all three processes are 
involved. Xenobiotics that rapidly permeate membranes by pas-
sive diffusion are biotransformed inside cells. Such xenobiotics 
do not require uptake transporters to enter cells, but they require 
efflux transporters to facilitate the elimination of certain metabo-
lites, notably those formed by Phase 2 biotransformation reac-
tions (except methylation and acetylation). Xenobiotics with low 
passive permeability that are transported into cells, resulting in 
potentially high intracellular concentrations, can be eliminated 
by efflux transporters, but in several cases they are rapidly bio-
transformed to lower their intracellular concentration and further 
facilitate their elimination by efflux transporters. A few xenobiot-
ics permeate membranes with a high rate of passive diffusion but 
they are neither substrates for Phase 1 or Phase 2 biotransforming 
enzymes nor substrates for uptake and efflux transporters. Such 
xenobiotics will be absorbed quickly but eliminated slowly, as is 
the case with dioxin and other persistent polyhalogenated aro-
matic hydrocarbons.
This chapter describes some fundamental principles of xeno-
biotic biotransformation, and describes the major enzyme systems 
involved in the biotransformation (or metabolism) of drugs and 
other xenobiotics. The examples given are biased toward drugs and 
human enzyme systems for two reasons. First, many of the funda-
mental principles of xenobiotic biotransformation stem from such 
studies. This is especially true of drugs with a narrow therapeutic 
index (where the toxic dose is not much greater than the thera-
peutic dose), which have revealed a large number of genetic and 
environmental factors that affect xenobiotic biotransformation and, 
hence, drug toxicity. Second, adverse drug events (ADEs) are one 
of the leading causes of death in the United States. Lazarou et al. 
(1998) estimated that in 1994 over 2 million hospitalized patients 
had serious ADEs (also known as adverse drug reactions or ADRs) 
and 106,000 had fatal outcomes, placing ADEs only behind heart 
disease, cancer, stroke, and pulmonary disease as a leading cause of 
death. Of the 548 new chemical entities approved by the Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) between 1974 and 1999, about 10% 
(56 drugs) required black box warnings or were withdrawn from 
the market because of ADEs that included hepatotoxicity, cardio-
toxicity (several as a result of drug–drug interactions), myelotox-
icity, immunotoxicity, and warnings to pregnant women (Lasser 
et al., 2002; Thomas, 2002). Between 1998 and 2005 the number of 
serious ADEs reported voluntarily to the FDA through the Adverse 
Events Reporting System (AERS), known as MedWatch reports, 
increased 2.6-fold (from 34,966 in 1998 to 89,842 in 2005) and 
the number of ADE-related fatalities increased 2.7-fold (from 5519 
in 1998 to 15,107 in 2005) (Moore et al., 2007). These increases 
in ADE incidence were four times greater than the increase in the 
total number of outpatient prescriptions written during the same 
period. In many cases, xenobiotic biotransformation is central to 
understanding these ADEs.
PRINCIPLES OF XENOBIOTIC 
BIOTRANSFORMATION
It is difficult to make categorical statements about xenobiotic 
biotransformation because there is an exception to every rule. 
Nevertheless, the following points, which might be considered 
principles or rules, apply in the majority of cases:
Point 1 Xenobiotic biotransformation or drug metabolism is the 
process of converting lipophilic (fat-soluble) chemicals, which are 
readily absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and other sites, into 
hydrophilic (water-soluble) chemicals, which are readily excreted 
in urine or bile. There are exceptions even to this most basic rule. 
For example, acetylation and methylation are biotransformation 
reactions that result in a nominal increase or a small decrease in the 
water solubility of xenobiotics, as shown in Table 6-3. As a general 
rule, xenobiotics with a log D7.4 > 0 require biotransformation to 
facilitate their elimination (Williams et al., 2003a).
Point 2 The biotransformation of xenobiotics is catalyzed by 
various enzyme systems that can be divided into four categories 
based on the reaction they catalyze:
	 1.	 Hydrolysis (e.g., carboxylesterase)
	 2.	 Reduction (e.g., carbonyl reductase)
	 3.	 Oxidation (e.g., cytochrome P450 [CYP])
	 4.	 Conjugation (e.g., UDP-glucuronosyltransferase [UGT])
The mammalian enzymes involved in the hydrolysis, reduction, 
oxidation, and conjugation of xenobiotics are listed in Table 6-4, 
together with their principal subcellular location. The conjugation 
reactions include glucuronidation, sulfonation (often called sulfa-
tion), acetylation, methylation, conjugation with glutathione (GSH; 
mercapturic acid synthesis), and conjugation with amino acids (such 
as glycine, taurine, and glutamine). Examples of the major chemical 
groups that undergo biotransformation together with the enzymes 
that commonly mediate their biotransformation are given in Table 6-5 
(Williams et al., 2003a; Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010).
Xenobiotic biotransformation is generally catalyzed by 
enzymes, but there are exceptions. For example, hydrolysis of cer-
tain carboxylic and phosphoric acid esters, reduction of sulfoxides 
to sulfides (e.g., rabeprazole), isomerization involving enol–keto 
tautomerization (e.g., thalidomide), and the conjugation of certain 
xenobiotics with GSH can occur nonenzymatically at an appre-
ciable rate. Certain reactions are catalyzed by gastric acid, such 
as the hydrolysis of esters and the conversion of indole-3-carbinol 
to a dimer that is a potent agonist of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor 
(AhR) and, consequently, an inducer of various enzymes including 
certain CYP enzymes (CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP1B1, and CYP2S1) 
(Grose and Bjeldanes, 1992).
Point 3 In general, individual xenobiotic-biotransforming 
enzymes are located in a single organelle. In Table 6-4, some 
enzymes are listed with two or more subcellular locations. 
However, in such cases, the enzyme name generally refers to two or 
more enzymes, each with its own distinct subcellular location. For 
example, the epoxide hydrolase located in microsomes is the same 
enzyme located in the plasma membrane but is a different enzyme 
from the epoxide hydrolase located in cytosol (i.e., they are distinct 
gene products). From a practical perspective, it is noteworthy that 
during the homogenization of tissue and the preparation of subcel-
lular fractions, a certain degree of cross-contamination of organelles 
occurs. For example, microsomes contain detectable levels of mono-
amine oxidase (MAO) and other outer mitochondrial enzymes, such 
as the mitochondrial amidoxime-reducing component (mARC) due

202
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
to their contamination with the outer mitochondrial membrane. In 
contrast, some xenobiotic-biotransforming enzymes are present in 
two or more subcellular locations. Some CYP enzymes, such as 
CYP2E1, are present in microsomes and the inner mitochondrial 
membrane, which has implications for the site of xenobiotic toxic-
ity, as discussed in the section “CYP2E1.”
Point 4 In general, xenobiotic biotransformation is accom-
plished by a limited number of enzymes with broad substrate 
specificities. In humans, for example, two CYP enzymes—namely, 
CYP2D6 and CYP3A4—metabolize 40% of drugs (n = 860) and 
21% of natural products/endobiotics (n = 331 compounds) (Rendic 
and Guengerich, 2015). The broad and sometimes overlapping sub-
strate specificities of xenobiotic-biotransforming enzymes preclude 
the possibility of naming the individual enzymes after the reac-
tions they catalyze (which is how most other enzymes are named). 
Many of the enzymes involved in xenobiotic biotransformation 
are arranged in families and subfamilies and named according to 
nomenclature systems based on the primary amino acid sequence of 
the individual enzymes. CYP2D6, for example, is in CYP family 2, 
subfamily D, and gene number 6. Some enzymes are given the same 
name across all mammalian species, whereas others are named in a 
species-specific manner. For example, some CYP enzymes, such as 
CYP1A1, CYP1A2, and CYP1B1, are so named in all mammalian 
species, whereas CYP enzymes in the CYP2, CYP3, and CYP4 
families (with certain exceptions such as CYP2E1) are named in a 
species-specific manner. The convention of using italic and regular 
Table 6-4  
General Pathways of Xenobiotic Biotransformation and Their Major Subcellular Location
REACTION
ENZYME OR SPECIFIC REACTION
LOCALIZATION
Hydrolysis
Carboxylesterase
Butyrylcholinesterase
Acetylcholinesterase
Paraoxonases
Alkaline phosphatase
Peptidase
β-Glucuronidase
Epoxide hydrolase
Microsomes, cytosol, lysosomes, blood
Plasma, most tissues
Erythrocytes, most tissues
Plasma, microsomes, inner mitochondrial 
membrane
Plasma membrane
Blood, lysosomes
Microsomes, lysosomes, microflora
Microsomes, plasma membrane, cytosol
Reduction
Azo- and nitro-reduction
Carbonyl (aldo-keto) reduction
Disulfide reduction
Sulfoxide reduction
Quinone reduction
Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase
Reductive dehalogenation
Dehydroxylation (mARC)
Dehydroxylation (aldehyde oxidase)
Microflora
Cytosol, microsomes, blood
Cytosol
Cytosol
Cytosol, microsomes
Cytosol
Microsomes
Mitochondria
Cytosol
Oxidation
Alcohol dehydrogenase
Aldehyde dehydrogenase
Aldehyde oxidase
Xanthine oxidoreductase
Class I Amine Oxidases
MAO-A and B
PAO
SMOX
Class II Amine Oxidases (CuAOs)
SSAOs (e.g., AOC3)
DAOs
LOs
Peroxidases
Flavin-monooxygenases
Cytochrome P450
Cytosol
Mitochondria, cytosol
Cytosol
Cytosol
Outer mitochondrial membrane, platelets
Cytosol, peroxisomes, plasma
Cytosol, nucleus
Cytosolic, membrane-associated forms
Microsomes, extracellular matrix
Extracellular matrix
Microsomes, lysosomes, saliva
Microsomes
Microsomes, mitochondria
Conjugation
UDP-glucuronosyltransferase
Acyl-CoA synthetase
Sulfotransferase
Glutathione transferase
Amino acid transferase
N-acetyltransferase
Methyltransferase
Microsomes
Mitochondria
Cytosol
Cytosol, microsomes, mitochondria
Mitochondria, microsomes
Mitochondria, cytosol
Cytosol, microsomes, blood
Abbreviation: mARC, mitochondrial amidoxime-reducing complex.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
203
Table 6-5  
Common Chemical Groups and Enzymes Possibly Involved in Their Metabolism
CHEMICAL GROUP
ENZYME(S)
REACTION(S)
CHEMICAL GROUP
ENZYME(S)
REACTION(S)
Alkane R
CH2
R
CYP
Hydroxylation,  
dehydrogenation
Aldehyde 
C
O
R
H
CYP, ALDH, 
­aldehyde oxidase
Oxidative de-formylation, 
oxidation to carboxylic acid
Alkene 
C
C
R
R
R
R
CYP, GST
Epoxidation,  
glutathionylation
Aliphatic amide R
C
O
NH
R
Amidase (esterase)
Hydrolysis
Alkyne 
C
C
R
R
CYP
Oxidation to ketocarbenes 
and carboxylic acid
Aniline 
NH2
CYP, NAT, UGT, 
­peroxidase, SULT
N-hydroxylation,  
N-acetylation,  
N-glucuronidation,  
N-oxidation, N-sulfonation
Aliphatic alcohol R
CH2 OH
CYP, ADH, 
­catalase, UGT, 
SULT 
Oxidation, glucuronidation 
and sulfonation
Aromatic azaheterocycles 
N
N
UGT, CYP, aldehyde 
oxidase
N-glucuronidation,  
hydroxylation, N-oxidation, 
ring cleavage, oxidation
Aliphatic amine R
NH2
CYP, FMO, MAO, 
UGT, SULT, MT, 
NAT, peroxidase
N-dealkylation,  
N-oxidation, deamination,  
N-glucuronidation,  
N-carbamoyl glucuronidation,  
N-sulfonation, N-methylation, 
N-acetylation
Carbamate 
R
O
C
O
NH
R
CYP, esterase
Oxidative cleavage,  
hydrolysis
Amidine HN CR NH2
CYP
N-oxidation
Ester 
C
O
R
O
CH2
R
CYP, esterase
Oxidative cleavage,  
hydrolysis
Arene 
R
CYP
Hydroxylation and 
­epoxidation
Ether R
CH2 O
CH2 R
CYP
O-dealkylation
Carboxylic acid R COOH
UGT, amino acid 
transferases, acyl-
CoA synthetase
Glucuronidation, amino 
­acylation, Coenzyme A 
thioesterification
Ketone R
CH2
C
R
O
CYP, FMO, SDR, 
AKR
Baeyer–Villiger oxidation, 
reduction
Epoxide 
O
R
R
H
H
Epoxide hydrolase, 
GST
Hydrolysis, 
­glutathionylation
Phenol 
OH
CYP, UGT, SULT, 
MT
Ipso-substitution, 
­glucuronidation, 
­sulfonation, methylation
Lactone 
C
O
O
Lactonase 
­(paraoxonase)
Hydrolysis (ring opening)
Thioether R
CH2 S
CH2 R
CYP, FMO
S-dealkylation, S-oxidation
Abbreviations: ADH, alcohol dehydrogenase; AKR, aldo-keto reductases; ALDH, aldehyde dehydrogenase; FMO, flavin monooxygenase; GST, glutathione S-transferase; MT, methyltransferase; SDR, short-chain 
dehydrogenases/reductases; SULT, sulfotransferase; UGT, UDP-glucuronosyltransferase.
SOURCE: Data from Williams et al. (2003a).
Downloaded by [ Weill Cornell Medical College Library 82.154.40.205] at [05/19/19]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

204
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
letters to distinguish between the gene and gene products (mRNA 
and protein), respectively, and the convention of using lower case 
letters to designate mouse genes and gene products will not be fol-
lowed in this chapter.
The structure (i.e., amino acid sequence) of a given xenobiotic-
biotransforming enzyme may differ among individuals, which can 
give rise to differences in rates of drug metabolism. In general, a 
variant form of a xenobiotic-biotransforming enzyme (known as an 
allelic variant or allelozyme) has diminished enzymatic activity or 
level of expression compared with that of the wild-type enzyme, 
although this is not always the case (see the sections “Alcohol 
Dehydrogenase,” “Aldehyde Oxidase,” “Cholinesterases (AChE 
and BChE),” “Carboxylesterases,” “Epoxide Hydrolases,” “Flavin 
Monooxygenases,” “Glutathione Conjugation,” “Paraoxonases 
(Lactonases),” “Sulfonation,” “CYP1A1, CYP1A2, and CYP1B1,” 
“CYP2C8,” “CYP2C19,” and “CYP3A5”). The impact of amino 
acid substitution(s) on the catalytic activity of a xenobiotic-bio-
transforming enzyme may be substrate-dependent, such that an 
allelic variant may interact normally with some substrates (and 
inhibitors) but interact atypically with others.
The broad substrate specificity of xenobiotic-biotransforming 
enzymes makes them catalytically versatile but slow compared with 
most other enzymes (with the exception of hydrolytic reactions). 
The sequential oxidation, conjugation, and transport of a xenobiotic 
tend to proceed quicker at each subsequent step, which prevents the 
accumulation of intracellular metabolites.
Point 5 Hydrolysis, reduction, and oxidation expose or intro-
duce a functional group (such as −OH, −NH2, −SH, or −COOH) 
that can be converted to a water-soluble conjugate (see Table 6-5). 
For subsequent conjugation, the functional group introduced or 
exposed by hydrolysis, reduction, or oxidation must be nucleophilic 
(in the case of glucuronidation, sulfonation, methylation, acetyla-
tion, and conjugation with glycine or taurine) or electrophilic (in 
the case of glutathionylation). The first three reactions (hydrolysis, 
reduction, and oxidation) are called Phase 1 reactions, and the con-
jugation reactions are called Phase 2 reactions. These terms were 
originally coined to distinguish biotransformation reactions that 
could potentially increase the toxicity of a xenobiotic (by forming 
a reactive metabolite), which was attributed to Phase 1 biotrans-
formation, from those that resulted in only detoxication, which 
was attributed to Phase 2 biotransformation (Williams, 1959). 
However, on a case-by-case basis, ALL biotransformation reactions 
are capable of increasing the toxicity of xenobiotics. Formation of 
hepatotoxic acyl glucuronides of carboxylic acid–containing drugs 
such as NSAIDs involves conjugation with glucuronic acid (a Phase 
2 biotransformation reaction). In the United States, NSAIDs and 
other carboxylic acid–containing drugs represent the largest cat-
egory of drugs whose clinical development was halted or whose 
regulatory approval was subsequently withdrawn because of liver 
toxicity in humans (Fung et al., 2001). Although Phase 1 biotrans-
formation often precedes Phase 2 metabolism, some drugs, such 
as acetaminophen (Tylenol), are conjugated directly (by glucuron-
idation and sulfonation), whereas other drugs, such as the lipid-
lowering drug gemfibrozil and the NSAID diclofenac, undergo 
Phase 1 metabolism (by CYP [CYP2C8]) after Phase 2 metabolism 
(glucuronidation) (Ogilvie et al., 2006; Tornio et al., 2014).
Point 6 Oxidation, reduction, hydrolysis, methylation, and 
acetylation generally cause a modest increase (or a small decrease 
in the case of methylation) in the water solubility of a xenobiotic, 
whereas glucuronidation, sulfonation, glutathionylation, and amino 
acid conjugation generally cause a marked increase in hydrophilic-
ity, as shown in Table 6-3. The impact of biotransformation on the 
physiochemical properties and disposition of xenobiotics and their 
metabolites has been discussed in the section “Introduction.” For a 
drug to be absorbed by passive diffusion in the gut (so that it can be 
orally effective and distribute throughout the body) it must generally 
have a log P of 0 to 5 and a calculated total polar surface area (TPSA) 
less than 100 Å2 (Smith and Dalvie, 2012). Water-soluble drugs 
(those with a negative log P) might be orally active if their absorption 
is mediated by an intestinal drug transporter. Extremely lipophilic 
drugs (log P > 5) tend to be too insoluble or they dissolve too slowly 
to be well absorbed from the intestine unless the dose is particularly 
low. Drugs must undergo desolvation (i.e., they must dissociate from 
water molecules) to penetrate the lipid bilayer of cells. Drugs begin 
to lose their lipoidal permeability when their TPSA increases above 
about 75 Å2 and lose it entirely at a TPSA of about 140 Å2. When 
drugs meet the aforementioned criteria (log P = 0−5, TPSA < 100 
Å2), their metabolites formed by oxidation, reduction, hydrolysis, 
methylation, or acetylation also tend to meet these same criteria; 
hence, the metabolites formed by these reactions, such as the parent 
drug, readily diffuse across biological membranes down a concentra-
tion gradient (unless their diffusion into tissues such as the brain is 
restricted by efflux transporters). Metabolites formed by conjugation 
reactions (other than methylation and acetylation) contain a nega-
tively charged glucuronide, sulfate, or amino acid (glycine or taurine) 
moiety (or a zwitterionic GSH moiety) and consequently have a much 
lower log P and a much greater TPSA than the parent drug, so much 
so that they cannot readily diffuse passively across biological mem-
branes. The elimination of such conjugates from the liver (where they 
are largely formed) requires active transport across the canalicular 
(apical) membrane so that they can be eliminated in bile or across 
the sinusoidal (basolateral) membrane, which enables their trans-
port into blood (where they are generally highly bound to albu-
min given their anionic nature [negative charge]) and then to the 
kidney for elimination in urine (by either glomerular filtration or 
possibly active transport [tubular secretion]). Drug conjugates 
are actively transported into bile primarily by MRP2 on the cana-
licular membrane and actively transported into blood primarily by 
MRP1 (in the case of GSH conjugates) and MRP3 (in the case of 
glucuronide and sulfate conjugates) on the sinusoidal membrane, 
although on a case-by-case basis other transporters may be involved 
(Borst et al., 2006).
Point 7 Not all biotransformation reactions are catalyzed by 
the mammalian enzymes listed in Table 6-4. Some biotransforma-
tion reactions are catalyzed by enzymes that participate in inter-
mediary (endobiotic) metabolism, whereas others are catalyzed by 
enzymes in the gut microbiota (largely anaerobic bacteria in the 
colon) (Klaassen and Cui, 2015). This principle is illustrated in 
Fig. 6-4 for three xenobiotics that are all converted to benzoic acid 
and then hippuric acid. The conversion of toluene to hippuric acid 
is catalyzed by some of the xenobiotic-biotransforming enzymes 
listed in Table 6-4: microsomal CYP converts toluene to benzoic 
acid in three oxidative steps (R–CH3 → R–CH2OH → RCHO → 
RCOOH), which introduces a functional group (namely, –COOH) 
that is conjugated with glycine to produce hippuric acid, which 
is excreted in urine. Cinnamic acid is also converted to benzoic 
acid but, in this case, the reaction is catalyzed by the mitochondrial 
enzymes involved in the β-oxidation of fatty acids. Quinic acid is 
also converted to benzoic acid, but this reductive, multistep reac-
tion is catalyzed by gut microbiota. Incidentally, the conversion of 
benzoic acid to hippuric acid is of historical interest because it is 
generally recognized as the first xenobiotic biotransformation reac-
tion to be discovered (in dogs by Woehler in 1828, and in humans 
by Ure in 1841).

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
205
Some drugs are intentionally designed to be biotransformed 
by endobiotic-metabolizing enzymes. For example, the anti-HIV 
drug zidovudine (AZT) is converted to a triphosphate nucleoside 
by enzymes in the salvage pathway (nucleoside kinase, nucleoside 
monophosphate kinase [NMK], and nucleoside diphosphate kinase 
[NDK]). HIV reverse transcriptase inhibitors, such as zidovudine, are 
administered as nonphosphorylated analogs to facilitate their absorp-
tion and cellular uptake. Conversely, some drugs are administered 
as a phosphorylated prodrug (e.g., fosamprenavir) to promote their 
water solubility and rate of dissolution. The luminal surface of the 
small intestine contains high levels of alkaline phosphatase, which 
hydrolyzes prodrugs such as fosamprenavir and thereby releases 
the active drug at the surface of the enterocyte, where it is readily 
absorbed. Generally speaking, kinase and alkaline phosphatase are 
not usually considered to be xenobiotic-biotransforming enzymes.
Point 8 Just as some xenobiotics are biotransformed by the 
so-called endobiotic-metabolizing enzymes (Point 7), certain endo-
biotics are biotransformed by the so-called xenobiotic-metabolizing 
enzymes. For example, the same CYP enzymes implicated in xeno-
biotic biotransformation also contribute to the hepatic catabolism 
of steroid hormones, and the same UGTs that conjugate xenobi-
otics also glucuronidate bilirubin, thyroid hormones, and steroid 
hormones. Interestingly, the CYP and UGT enzymes that play a 
major role in steroid metabolism (namely, CYP3A4 and UGT1A1) 
display positive homotropic cooperativity (i.e., the enzymes have 
Hill coefficients >1) such that the rate of metabolism of steroid 
hormones by these enzymes is slow at low substrate concentrations 
but increases dramatically as the concentration of steroid hormone 
increases. Benzoic acid, a xenobiotic, is conjugated with glycine (as 
shown in Fig. 6-4), and so are bile acids (endobiotics). Certain leu-
kotrienes are GSH conjugates. Conjugates of endogenous substrates, 
such as the glucuronide and sulfate conjugates of steroid and thyroid 
hormones, tend to be transported out of the hepatocyte by MRP2, 
the same canalicular transporter that transports drug conjugates into 
bile. From the few examples in Points 7 and 8, it is apparent that, on 
a case-by-case basis, there is often no clear-cut distinction between 
endobiotic- and xenobiotic-biotransforming enzymes.
The human genome project has helped to establish that what 
were once thought to be two distinct enzymes, one involved in the 
metabolism of endobiotics and one involved in the metabolism of 
xenobiotics, are in fact one and the same enzyme. For example, the 
microsomal enzyme known as 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 
is identical to the xenobiotic-metabolizing enzyme known as micro-
somal carbonyl reductase (gene symbol HSD11B1; aka SDR26C1). 
Likewise, hepoxilin A3 hydrolase was thought to represent a fifth class 
of epoxide hydrolases, but was subsequently identified as the same 
enzyme as soluble epoxide hydrolase (sEH) (Cronin et al., 2011).
Point 9 Several xenobiotic-biotransforming enzymes are induc-
ible, meaning their expression can be increased (upregulated) usu-
ally in response to exposure to high concentrations of xenobiotics. 
Induction is mediated by ligand-activated receptors (so-called xeno-
sensors) that are activated by xenobiotics (ligands) to DNA-binding 
proteins that upregulate the transcription of various genes encod-
ing xenobiotic-biotransforming enzymes, especially CYP enzymes, 
which are usually induced to the greatest extent (in terms of fold 
increase). The major xenosensors are the aryl hydrocarbon receptor 
Glycine conjugation
Cytosol
Chain shortening by
fatty acid β-oxidation
Mitochondria
Cytochrome P450
Microsomes
Reductive metabolism and aromatization by gut microﬂora of
human and old-world monkeys, but not new-world monkeys,
rat, mouse, rabbit, dog, and several other species.
Hippuric acid
CO
NHCH2COOH
Benzoic acid
COOH
Toluene
CH3
Cinnamic acid
COOH
Quinic acid
HO
COOH
OH
OH
HO
Figure 6-4.  Examples of xenobiotic biotransformation by different enzyme systems: a xenobiotic biotransforming enzyme (cytochrome P450), an endobiotics 
metabolizing enzyme, and gut microbiota.

206
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
(AhR), which induces CYP1 enzymes, the constitutive androstane 
receptor (CAR), which induces CYP2B, CYP2C, and CYP3A 
enzymes, the pregnane X receptor (PXR), which also induces 
CYP2B, CYP2C, and CYP3A enzymes, and the peroxisome prolif-
erator–activated receptor α (PPARα), which induces CYP4 enzymes 
in rodents. CAR and PXR are closely related nuclear receptors, and 
they tend to be activated by the same ligands and bind to the same 
DNA-response elements (i.e., the same discrete regions of DNA that 
control gene expression), for which reason there is said to be consid-
erable crosstalk between these two xenosensors. Certain xenosen-
sors are activated by endogenous ligands (e.g., bilirubin, bile acids, 
and fatty acids activate CAR, PXR, and PPARα, respectively), and 
certain nuclear receptors, such as the vitamin D receptor (VDR), 
can mimic PXR and induce CYP3A4, which inactivates the active 
metabolite of vitamin D. These examples illustrate how xenosensors 
are not just involved in xenobiotic disposition but also play a role in 
endobiotic homeostasis. Two proteins called Kelch-like ECH-related 
protein 1 (KEAP-1) and nuclear factor E2 p45-related factor-2 
(Nrf2) function as xenosensors inasmuch as they induce enzymes 
in response to oxidative stress, which is often associated with xeno-
biotic biotransformation. Binding of the transcription factor Nrf2 
to the region of DNA known as the antioxidant response element 
(also known as the electrophilic response element [EpRE]) induces 
enzymes that detoxify electrophiles and metabolites that generate 
reactive oxygen species, including glutathione transferase (GST; 
GSTA1), microsomal epoxide hydrolase (mEH), aldo-keto reductase 
(AKRs; AKR7A2 and AKR7A3, also known as aflatoxin aldehyde 
B1 reductases 1 and 2), NAD(P)H-quinone oxidoreductase (NQO1, 
also known as DT-diaphorase), microsomal heme oxygenase, and 
glutamate–­cysteine ligase (GCL), which catalyzes the rate-limiting 
step in GSH synthesis. Induction of GCL increases the rate of GSH 
synthesis under conditions of oxidative stress and a decrease in GSH 
concentration (Lee and Johnson, 2004). Experiments in wild type and 
Nrf2 knockout mice revealed that activation of AhR leads to activa-
tion of Nrf2, which contains an AhR-response element in its promoter 
region; hence, AhR agonists such as dioxin induce enzymes under the 
direct control of AhR (such as CYP1A1) as well as enzymes under 
the control of Nrf2 (such as NQO1 and the other enzymes mentioned 
above) (Yeager et al., 2009). Induction of Nrf2 via activation of AhR 
protects mice from the hepatotoxic effects of dioxin (Lu et al., 2011).
Induction is a reversible, adaptive response to xenobiotic 
exposure. The induced enzymes (and transporters) usually acceler-
ate the elimination of the xenobiotic that triggered the induction 
process, in which case the xenobiotic is said to be an autoinducer 
(one that induces its own metabolism). However, xenobiotics often 
induce enzymes that are not capable of metabolizing them, in which 
case the induction is said to be gratuitous. Induction is a pleiotro-
pic response: activation of AhR, CAR, PXR, PPARα, and Nrf2 all 
results in alterations in the expression of numerous genes.
Suppression (downregulation) of drug-metabolizing enzymes 
is often associated with inflammatory diseases (such as arthritis), 
cancer, infectious diseases (both bacterial and viral), vaccination, 
and treatment with certain proinflammatory biologics (therapeutic 
proteins). These disease processes activate nuclear factor kappa-B 
(NF-κB) (and other nuclear receptors), which suppresses the 
expression and induction of CYP and other xenobiotic-metabolizing 
enzymes because activated NF-κB suppresses all four xenosensors 
(AhR, CAR, PXR, and PPARα), as well as several other nuclear 
receptors. By reversing the disease process—such as lessening the 
inflammation associated with rheumatoid arthritis—some biolog-
ics (large drug molecules such as monoclonal antibodies and other 
types of therapeutic proteins) can reverse the suppression of drug-
metabolizing enzymes and restore their activity to normal (predis-
ease) levels (Morgan, 2009; Huang et al., 2010).
Point 10 The ability of certain xenobiotic-biotransforming 
enzymes to metabolize hormones and other endobiotics (Point 8) and 
the ability of certain xenobiotics to induce xenobiotic-biotransform-
ing enzymes (Point 9) have implications for understanding an impor-
tant mechanism by which certain xenobiotics can alter homeostasis 
or cause toxicity. Persistent exposure to xenobiotics that are enzyme 
inducers (especially CAR and PPARα activators) can increase the 
rate of steroid hormone oxidation by CYP and increase the rate of 
thyroid hormone glucuronidation and sulfonation that, in rodents, can 
lead to the development of Leydig cell tumors (due to elevated levels 
of LH and FSH) and thyroid follicular tumors (due to elevated levels 
of thyroid-stimulating hormone [TSH]), respectively (Grasso et al., 
1991). Persistent exposure to enzyme inducers can also cause liver 
tumors, although the mechanism is not fully understood. Activation 
of certain xenosensors (CAR or PPARα) is critical to liver tumor 
development in mice, although upregulation of xenobiotic-biotrans-
forming enzymes is less important than other xenosensor-dependent 
events, such as, in the case of the CAR activator phenobarbital, altered 
DNA methylation of numerous genes, upregulation of GADD45B 
(an antiapoptotic factor) and MDM2 (a negative regulator of the 
tumor suppressor p53), and the downregulation of gap junctional 
proteins (connexin 32), which diminishes cell–cell communication 
(Omiecinski et al., 2011b; Elcombe et al., 2014; Lake et al., 2015).
Phenobarbital, Wy-14643, methapyrilene, and Ponceau S are 
representatives of four classes of nongenotoxic rodent tumori-
gens (tumor promoters) that cause hepatocellular hyperplasia 
and hypertrophy in association with proliferation of the endo-
plasmic reticulum, peroxisomes, mitochondria, and lysosomes, 
respectively (Grasso et al., 1991). In the first two cases, the hepa-
tocellular changes depend on activation of CAR (in the case of 
phenobarbital) and PPARα (in the case of Wy-14643). Prolonged 
activation of these receptors in rodents results in the development 
of liver and/or thyroid tumors. However, this is thought to be a 
rodent-specific phenomenon because, in the case of phenobarbital 
and other enzyme-inducing antiepileptic drugs (EIAEDs), there is 
compelling epidemiological evidence that these chemicals do not 
cause liver tumors in humans even after >30 years of treatment 
(Parkinson et al., 2006; Elcombe et al., 2014; Lake et al., 2015).
The major UGT responsible for conjugating bilirubin is 
UGT1A1, which is inducible by CAR activators such as pheno-
barbital and scoparone (6,7-dimethylesculetin). At one time, the 
­management of neonatal jaundice included treatment with phe-
nobarbital to induce bilirubin conjugation, but this practice has 
been discontinued. However, the Chinese herbal Yin Zhi Huang 
(active ingredient scoparone) is still used to treat neonatal jaun-
dice. Bilirubin is also a CAR agonist, and high levels of bilirubin 
induce UGT1A1 and bilirubin/bilirubin glucuronide transporters 
(MRP2 and MRP3) to increase the rate of bilirubin elimination 
when ­bilirubin levels are elevated (e.g., during hemolytic anemia).
Although prolonged activation of PXR in rats is associated 
with thyroid tumor promotion due to induction of triiodothyronine 
(T3) glucuronidation (Richardson and Klaassen, 2010), this effect 
is thought not to occur in humans. However, prolonged activation of 
PXR by rifampin in humans (which induces hepatic and intestinal 
CYP3A4) is associated with osteomalacia caused by an enhanced 
rate of conversion of the active metabolite of vitamin D to inactive 
metabolites by CYP3A4 (Xu et al., 2006; Zhou et al., 2006a).
Point 11 Xenobiotic biotransformation can alter the bio-
logical properties of a xenobiotic. It can make the xenobiotic less 
toxic (detoxication), but in some cases it can make it more toxic 
­(activation). The oxidation of ethanol (alcohol) to acetaldehyde is an 
example of xenobiotic activation, and the subsequent oxidation of 
acetaldehyde to acetic acid is an example of detoxication. The bio-
transformation of drugs can result in (1) a loss of pharmacological

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
207
activity (e.g., the conversion of acetaminophen to acetaminophen 
glucuronide and the conversion of morphine to morphine-3-glucuro-
nide), (2) no change in pharmacological activity (e.g., the conver-
sion of fluoxetine to its N-demethylated metabolite norfluoxetine), 
or (3) an increase in pharmacological activity (e.g., the conversion 
of codeine to morphine, as well as the conversion of morphine to 
morphine-6-glucuronide). When the parent drug is pharmacologi-
cally active, diminished metabolism (due to a genetic deficiency or 
enzyme inhibition) can result in an exaggerated pharmacological 
response (Type A toxicity) (Aronson and Ferner, 2003),2 such as 
the prolonged or increased hypotension caused by debrisoquine, 
alprenolol, bufuralol, metoprolol, propranolol, and timolol in indi-
viduals lacking CYP2D6 (Turner et al., 2001; Ingelman-Sundberg, 
2005). When a metabolite is the pharmacologically active compo-
nent, diminished formation (due to a genetic deficiency or enzyme 
inhibition) can result in little or no pharmacological response (Type 
F toxicity) (Aronson and Ferner, 2003), such as the diminished 
effects of codeine, an analgesic, and tamoxifen, an antiestrogen 
drug, in individuals lacking CYP2D6 and the diminished effects of 
clopidogrel, an antiplatelet drug, in individuals lacking CYP2C19 
(discussed in the sections “CYP2D6” and “CYP2C19”).
Point 12 In many cases, the toxicity of a xenobiotic is due to the 
parent compound (the compound that was absorbed), in which case 
xenobiotic biotransformation serves as a detoxication mechanism. 
This principle is underscored by the clinical observation that the 
incidence of ADEs is often higher in individuals with a poor metabo-
lizer (PM) phenotype (discussed in Point 24). However, xenobiotic-
biotransforming enzymes can convert certain xenobiotics to reactive 
metabolites (e.g., electrophiles and radicals), and this activation 
process plays an important role in chemical toxicity and chemical 
mutagenicity/carcinogenicity; the former often involves the cova-
lent binding of reactive metabolites to critical cellular nucleophiles 
such as proteins, whereas the latter involves covalent binding to one 
or more purine or pyrimidine bases in DNA. Formation of reactive 
metabolites can also lead to irreversible CYP inhibition (a process 
known as metabolism-dependent inhibition [MDI] or time-dependent 
inhibition [TDI]), which is an important cause of drug–drug inter-
actions. As illustrated in Fig. 6-5, carboxylic acid–containing drugs 
(especially the acetic and propionic acid–containing NSAIDs that 
cause liver toxicity) can be converted to reactive acyl glucuronides 
and/or acyl-CoA thioesters, whereas many neutral and basic drugs 
are converted by CYP to electrophilic metabolites or carbon-centered 
radicals that may cause liver toxicity (or damage to the cells har-
boring the activating CYP). Several nitrogen- and sulfur-containing 
drugs can be activated by peroxidases to heteroatom-centered radicals 
that can cause blood dyscrasias such as agranulocytosis/neutropenia, 
aplastic anemia, and thrombocytopenia (Tang and Lu, 2010; Walsh 
and Miwa, 2011). In Fig. 6-5, the scheme depicting the formation and 
toxicity of reactive metabolites is an oversimplification. Furthermore, 
some drugs can be converted to two or more reactive metabolites. 
The diuretic tienilic acid, for example, contains a carboxylic acid 
group that is converted to a reactive acyl glucuronide and acyl-CoA 
thioester, and a furan (a neutral group) that is converted by CYP to an 
epoxide and other reactive metabolites (such as an enedial). Tienilic 
was withdrawn from the market due to hepatotoxicity.
CYP is particularly effective at converting proximate carcino-
gens to ultimate carcinogens by converting the former to electro-
philic metabolites that bind to and mutate DNA, thereby leading to 
mutations and tumor initiation. The Ames bacterial mutagenicity 
assay, which is representative of several mutagenicity tests, is per-
formed in the absence and presence of CYP (i.e., liver microsomes) 
to evaluate the mutagenic potential of both the parent compound 
and any electrophilic metabolites, respectively. Although such in 
vitro assays help to identify compounds that can be metabolized to 
reactive metabolites, they can potentially provide misleading infor-
mation on the identity of the enzymes responsible for activating 
Metabolic activation of
xenobiotics to reactive
metabolites
Acidic drugs
(R-COOH)
Neutral and
basic drugs
Acyl-CoA
synthetase
UGT
Acyl-CoA
thioester
Acyl
glucuronide
Peroxidases
Heteroatom-
centered
radicals
CYP
Electrophiles
Liver toxicity
CYP inactivation
Carbon-
centered
radicals
Blood
dyscrasias
Liver toxicity
Figure 6-5.  Some major pathways of metabolic activation of xenobiotics to reactive metabolites that cause toxicity.
2Aronson and Ferner classified adverse drug effects into types A to F as follows: Type A, exaggerated pharmacological effects involving the intended phar-
macological target (Type A1) or an unintended (off-target) pharmacological target (Type A2); Type B, idiosyncratic reaction (rare, not closely related to dose 
or time); Type C, chemical reactions with macromolecules (e.g., alkylating agents); Type D, delayed effect (e.g., carcinogenicity); Type E, discontinuation 
symptoms; and Type F, failure of therapy (Aronson and Ferner 2003).

208
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
compounds in vivo because they detect activation but not deactiva-
tion and they do not measure the overall balance between activation 
and deactivation. For example, CYP1A1 is more active than other 
CYP enzymes at activating benzo[a]pyrene to reactive metabolites, 
but in vitro mutagenicity assays conceal the fact that CYP1A1 is 
even more active than other CYP enzymes at converting this car-
cinogen to inactive metabolites that can be eliminated from the 
body. Consequently, metabolism of benzo[a]pyrene by CYP1A1 
would seem to be a liability based on in vitro mutagenicity assays 
but induction of CYP1A1 in vivo protects against benzo[a]pyrene 
toxicity and carcinogenicity, whereas deletion of CYP1A1 (i.e., 
CYP1A1 knockout mice) has a potentiating effect (discussed in 
the sections on “CYP1A1, CYP1A2, and CYP1B1” and “Enzyme 
Induction and Chemical Carcinogenesis”). Polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons (PAHs; combustion pollutants and components of 
tobacco smoke), aromatic amines (industrial chemicals), aflatoxin 
(a mycotoxin), cooked food pyrolysis products, and tobacco-spe-
cific nitrosamines are all examples of proximate carcinogens that 
require metabolic activation to form electrophilic, DNA-binding 
metabolites (ultimate carcinogens).
Certain anticancer drugs require activation by xenobiotic-
metabolizing enzymes in order to exert their antineoplastic effects. 
For example, cyclophosphamide is activated by CYP (CYP2B6 
and CYP3A4), and canfosfamide is activated by GST, namely, 
GSTP1-1, which is often overexpressed in tumors thereby confer-
ring resistance against certain anticancer drugs (see the section 
“Glutathione Conjugation”) (Gonzalez and Tukey, 2006)
Liver microsomes are widely used in three in vitro systems to 
investigate the potential of drugs or drug candidates to be converted 
to reactive metabolites. First, liver microsomes from Aroclor 1254–
treated (induced) rats are used in the Ames bacterial mutagenicity 
assay. A limitation of this assay is that it is well suited to identify 
reactive metabolites formed by CYP but not by other xenobiotic-
biotransforming enzymes, examples of which are given in the section 
“Conjugation.” This limitation has been addressed through genetic 
engineering of Salmonella typhimurium so that test bacteria express 
one or more human xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes (Iwata et al., 
1998; Glatt and Meinl, 2004b). Second, human and rat liver micro-
somes are widely used to assess the formation of reactive metabo-
lites that bind covalently to microsomal protein or GSH (or a related 
nucleophile such as N-acetylcysteine [NAC]). This system does a 
poor job of distinguishing hepatotoxic drugs from nonhepatotoxic 
drugs (Obach et al., 2008), but the distinction is improved when 
covalent binding is assessed in human hepatocytes and dose is taken 
into account (Bauman et al., 2009; Nakayama et al., 2009). Third, 
human liver microsomes are widely used to evaluate a drug candi-
date’s potential to cause irreversible inhibition of the major drug-
metabolizing CYP enzymes. False-negative results can occasionally 
occur when metabolism by a non-CYP enzyme is instrumental to 
CYP inactivation, such as the need to glucuronidate gemfibrozil and 
clopidogrel in order to inactivate CYP2C8. In such cases of so-called 
system-dependent inhibition the use of human hepatocytes offers 
advantages over human liver microsomes (Parkinson et al., 2010).
Structural alerts (functional groups) for the bioactivation of 
xenobiotics to reactive metabolites that cause toxicity and/or CYP 
inactivation include the following (which is not an exhaustive list): 
(1) acetic and propionic acids (activated by UGT and/or acyl-CoA 
synthetase), (2) nitro aromatics (activated by reductases and/or 
CYP), and (3) a large number of functional groups that are activated 
by CYP and, in some cases, peroxidases: acetylenes, activated aro-
matics, 3-alkly indoles, anilines, cyclopropylamines, formamides, 
furans, hydrazines, pyrroles, sulfonylureas, thiazolidinones, thio-
amides, thiophenes, and thioureas (Walsh and Miwa, 2011).
Point 13 The toxicity and potential carcinogenicity of 
­electrophilic metabolites produced by CYP and other xenobiotic-
biotransforming enzymes are reduced and often altogether elimi-
nated by their conjugation with GSH, which is often described as a 
noncritical cellular nucleophile. Conjugation with GSH can occur 
both enzymatically (by GST) and nonenzymatically. In the majority 
of cases, conjugation with GSH represents a detoxication reaction, 
one that protects critical cellular nucleophiles, such as protein and 
DNA, from covalent modification. However, there are cases (e.g., 
the fumigants methylbromide and dibromoethane) where conju-
gation with GSH actually produces a DNA-reactive (mutagenic) 
metabolite. Activation of haloalkanes and dihaloalkanes (which 
are used industrially as fumigants) is usually catalyzed by the theta 
class of GSTs (Josephy, 2010). Depletion of GSH or genetic defi-
ciency of a particular GST can predispose to certain drug toxici-
ties. For example, the genetic loss of glutathione transferase mu 1 
(GSTM1) predisposes to the hepatotoxic effects of carbamazepine 
and valproic acid, two antiepileptic drugs (Saruwatari et al., 2010), 
whereas the combined loss of GSTM1 and glutathione transferase 
theta 1 (GSTT1) is a risk factor for hepatotoxicity from troglitazone, 
an antidiabetic drug withdrawn from the market (Ikeda, 2011).
As mentioned in Point 9, several Phase 2 enzymes including 
GSTs and enzymes involved in GSH synthesis are under the control 
of Nrf2, which allows cells to respond to oxidative stress and reac-
tive metabolites by increasing the cytoprotective effects of GSH-
dependent processes. Such induction is a possible mechanism by 
which administration of low doses of acetaminophen to mice for 8 
days, which causes Nrf2 activation (Goldring et al., 2004), protects 
them from a subsequent high hepatotoxic dose of acetaminophen 
(Shayiq et al., 1999). This finding may explain why some indi-
viduals who misuse opioid/acetaminophen drugs (such as Percocet 
[oxycodone/acetaminophen] and Vicodin [hydrocodone/acetamino-
phen]) can consume 3 to 19 g of acetaminophen per day for 1 to 14 
years (and in one case as much as 50-g acetaminophen per day) — 
doses well in excess of the maximum daily recommended dose of 
4 g/day—without developing liver damage (Shayiq et al., 1999).
Point 14 The biotransformation of some xenobiotics results 
in the production of reactive oxygen species, which can cause cell 
toxicity (including DNA damage) through oxidative stress and lipid 
peroxidation. GSH, GSTs, and glutathione peroxidases (GPXs) all 
limit the toxic effects of reactive oxygen species just as they limit 
the toxicity of reactive metabolites formed directly from xenobiot-
ics. Oxidative stress and the formation of electrophilic metabolites 
reduce GSH levels and thus result in the concurrent oxidation of 
KEAP-1, which then releases Nrf2, which in turn upregulates the 
expression of enzymes that detoxify electrophilic metabolites (e.g., 
epoxides) and those metabolites that generate reactive oxygen spe-
cies (e.g., quinones) (see Point 9). Certain xenobiotics and ischemic 
reperfusion injury cause an accumulation of unfolded proteins in 
the endoplasmic reticulum (where proteins are folded and post-
translationally modified), which gives rise to the unfolded protein 
response (UPR; also known as endoplasmic reticulum stress [ER 
stress]), which activates Nrf2 and Bax-inhibitor-1 (BI-1). The heme 
oxygenase induced by Nrf2 as well as BI-1 (which complexes with 
NADPH–cytochrome P450 reductase) protects cells from oxida-
tive stress by inhibiting the production of reactive oxygen species 
by CYP2E1 and other CYP enzymes (discussed in the section 
“CYP2E1”).
Point 15 The balance between activation and detoxication 
by xenobiotic-biotransforming enzymes is often a key determi-
nant of chemical toxicity, and is often the basis for organ or spe-
cies differences in toxicity. For example, aflatoxin is converted 
by liver microsomal CYP to a reactive epoxide that is thought to

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
209
be responsible for the hepatotoxic and hepatocarcinogenic effect 
of this mycotoxin. The fact that this reaction occurs in the liver 
explains why aflatoxin causes liver toxicity and liver tumors. On 
this basis, mice would be expected to be more sensitive than rats 
to the hepatotoxic effects of aflatoxin because mice catalyze the 
epoxidation of aflatoxin faster than rats. However, through GSH 
conjugation, mice also detoxify aflatoxin epoxide faster than rats. 
Consequently, despite their slower rate of activation, rats are more 
susceptible than mice to the toxic effects of aflatoxin. Coumarin is 
hepatotoxic to rats, but not to humans. This species difference is 
attributable to differences in the metabolites formed by CYP. Rats 
convert coumarin to a reactive epoxide that rearranges to a reactive 
aldehyde, whereas humans convert coumarin to the relatively non-
toxic metabolite 7-hydroxycoumarin (umbelliferone).
Point 16 Exposure to xenobiotics (especially drugs) is largely 
through oral ingestion, and the small intestine and liver are highly 
developed to limit systemic exposure to orally ingested xenobiotics, 
a process known as first-pass elimination (or presystemic elimina-
tion). The enterocytes at the tips of the small intestinal villi express 
various efflux transporters, such as P-gp, BCRP, and MRP2, which 
restrict intestinal absorption and limit systemic exposure to various 
xenobiotics including many drugs. The enterocytes express high 
levels of certain CYP and UGT enzymes, which biotransform a 
wide variety of xenobiotics. The liver expresses a number of uptake 
transporters that actively remove xenobiotics from the blood. They 
also express a number of efflux transporters that actively discharge 
xenobiotics or their metabolites (especially conjugates) into the bile 
canaliculus for biliary excretion, or that actively discharge xenobi-
otic metabolites (especially conjugates) across the sinusoidal mem-
brane back into the blood for urinary excretion. The liver expresses 
the largest number and, with few exceptions, the highest concentra-
tions of xenobiotic-biotransforming enzymes.
Although the liver contains higher concentrations of most 
xenobiotic-biotransforming enzymes, and because the number of 
hepatocytes in the liver exceeds the number of enterocytes in the 
small intestine, it might be assumed that, compared with the liver, 
the small intestine would make only a small contribution to first-
pass metabolism, but this is not the case in part because in the small 
intestine xenobiotics are recycled by P-gp, BCRP, and MRP2 on 
the luminal surface of enterocytes, which delays absorption and 
increases the opportunity for xenobiotic biotransformation by intes-
tinal enzymes such as CYP (especially CYP3A4), UGT, and sulfo-
transferase (SULT) (Benet, 2009). Furanocoumarins in grapefruit 
juice inhibit intestinal but not hepatic CYP3A4 and yet grapefruit 
juice increases systemic exposure to felodipine (a calcium channel 
blocker used to treat hypertension) and other drugs that undergo 
first-pass metabolism by CYP3A4 (Paine et al., 2006). The impact 
of the CYP3A4 inhibitor ketoconazole (an antifungal drug) on the 
disposition of the CYP3A4 substrate midazolam (an antianxiety/
sedative drug) depends on whether midazolam is given orally or 
intravenously. When midazolam is given intravenously, such that its 
clearance is dependent only on hepatic metabolism, ketoconazole 
causes a three- to fivefold increase in the area under the plasma con-
centration–time curve (AUC). However, when midazolam is given 
orally, ketoconazole causes a 10- to 15-fold increase in AUC, the 
difference reflecting the significant role of intestinal metabolism 
to the presystemic clearance of midazolam. In rats, administra-
tion of the general CYP inhibitor 1-aminobenzotriazole (ABT) by 
the intravenous route (which inhibits only hepatic CYP enzymes) 
and the oral route (which inhibits both intestinal and hepatic CYP 
enzymes) can be used to assess the relative role of the intestine 
and liver to the first-pass metabolism of a drug or other xenobiotic 
(Strelevitz et al., 2006; Boily et al., 2015).
The small intestine and liver are exposed to high concentra-
tions of xenobiotics, and they possess high levels of the enzymes 
that potentially convert xenobiotics to reactive or toxic metabolites. 
It is perhaps not surprising, therefore, that both tissues possess pro-
tective mechanisms to minimize the risk of xenobiotic toxicity and 
carcinogenicity. As already mentioned, both tissues have enzymes 
and transporters that facilitate the elimination of xenobiotics and 
their metabolites. In both tissues, several of the xenobiotic-biotrans-
forming enzymes and transporters are inducible, enabling the liver 
and the small intestine to respond to high levels of xenobiotics by 
enhancing the rate of xenobiotic biotransformation and elimina-
tion. In the small intestine, the enterocytes at the villus tips undergo 
extensive turnover (half-life of about 2 days), such that the mature 
cells that are exposed to high levels of xenobiotics and/or reactive 
metabolites are quickly lost (exfoliated) and replaced in a matter of 
days. In liver, high levels of GSH (5 to 10 mM), a large proportion 
of diploid (binucleated) cells, and a high regenerative capacity all 
protect the liver from xenobiotic toxicity or help the liver to repair 
chemical-mediated toxicity. In addition, severely damaged hepato-
cytes can undergo apoptosis (cell-programmed death) to eliminate 
precancerous cells (i.e., cells with extensive DNA damage).
Point 17 Some of the same mechanisms that protect the small 
intestine and liver from xenobiotic toxicity also protect certain 
organs such as the brain and reproductive organs. Xenobiotics that 
enter the systemic circulation are often excluded from the brain by 
the blood–brain barrier, which poses a physical barrier to xenobi-
otic transport (in the form of tight junctions) and a biochemical 
barrier notably in the form of the efflux transporters P-gp, BCRP, 
and MRP2. Germ cells in the testis are protected in part by a blood–
testis barrier, by high levels of GSH (and GST and GPX), and by 
high cell turnover (as in the case of enterocytes). The ovum, with 
virtually no cell turnover, possesses high levels of GSH (8 mM or 
more), which protects it from DNA-reactive electrophiles and from 
the oxidative stress that accompanies both xenobiotic exposure and 
fertilization. Efflux transporters and GSTs are often overexpressed 
in tumor cells as a result of chromosomal rearrangements that place 
the genes encoding these proteins under the control of a strong pro-
moter. The overexpression of a transporter and/or GST can confer 
resistance to certain cancer chemotherapeutic drugs (many of which 
are intended to be converted to reactive metabolites that damage 
DNA and kill tumor cells).
Point 18 In view of the important role of CYP in the meta-
bolic activation of proximate carcinogens to ultimate carcinogens, 
it may seem paradoxical to list CYP induction among the defense 
mechanisms that protect organisms from the carcinogenic effects 
of xenobiotics. Activation by CYP is definitely required for cer-
tain xenobiotics to exert their carcinogenic effects, and induction 
of CYP is associated with an increase in the toxicity of certain 
xenobiotics. However, contrary to expectation, treatment of rodents 
with a CYP inducer prior to treatment with a known proximate 
carcinogen (such as aflatoxin, various nitrosamines, or PAHs) is 
generally associated with a decrease, not an increase, in tumor inci-
dence (Parkinson and Hurwitz, 1991). The route of exposure to the 
carcinogen can affect the impact of enzyme induction; it protects 
against orally administered drugs but may increase the tumorige-
nicity of carcinogens applied directly to their site of action (Nebert 
et al., 2004), and prolonged treatment of rodents with an enzyme 
inducer after application of the initiating carcinogen can lead to an 
increase in tumor incidence because many enzyme inducers act as 
tumor promoters (see Point 10). Nevertheless, for the most part, 
enzyme induction provides protection against chemical toxicity and 
carcinogenesis (Nebert and Dalton, 2006; Shimada, 2006; Ma and 
Lu, 2007; Nebert et al., 2013).

210
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
Point 19 Although the small intestine and liver contain the 
highest concentrations, xenobiotic-biotransforming enzymes are 
nevertheless widely distributed throughout the body. In terms of 
specific content (i.e., the amount of enzyme on a per-milligram-
protein basis), some of the highest concentrations of xenobiotic-
metabolizing enzymes are to be found in nasal epithelium, a portal 
of entry for many volatile xenobiotics. The presence of high levels 
of xenobiotic-biotransforming enzymes in nasal epithelium is of 
interest because numerous xenobiotics cause nasal cytotoxicity and 
cancer in rodents (Jeffrey et al., 2006). Xenobiotic-biotransforming 
enzymes in the lung, eye, and skin can be especially important 
for the metabolism of drugs delivered by inhalation, eye drop, 
or topical application, respectively. The kidney expresses several 
xenobiotic-biotransforming enzymes, in addition to numerous 
transporters that actively secrete xenobiotics (especially acidic 
metabolites) into urine. The kidney also metabolizes GSH conju-
gates formed in the liver and converts them to mercapturic acids 
(N-acetylcysteine conjugates), which is discussed in the section 
“Glutathione Conjugation.”
Point 20 Species differences in xenobiotic-biotransforming 
enzymes are often the basis for species differences in both the 
qualitative and quantitative aspects of xenobiotic biotransforma-
tion and toxicity. As mentioned in Point 15, species difference in 
coumarin metabolism and toxicity (activation by epoxidation in 
rats, detoxication by aromatic hydroxylation in humans) reflects 
a species difference in hepatic microsomal CYP, whereas species 
differences in GST activity account for the difference between rats 
and mice in terms of their susceptibility to aflatoxin-induced liver 
toxicity. Species differences in the fetal expression of xenobiotic-­
biotransforming enzymes have raised questions about the suitabil-
ity of laboratory animals to assess the risk of human teratogenicity 
because human fetal liver expresses CYP3A7, an enzyme capable of 
activating aflatoxin to reactive metabolites, whereas no such enzyme 
is expressed in the fetus of rodents (Li et al., 1997; Pang et al., 
2012). Biotransformation, inhibition, and induction can occur in 
a species-specific manner. For example, furafylline, an antiasthma 
drug that was not approved, and omeprazole, a proton pump inhibi-
tor (antacid), are inhibitors and inducers of human CYP1A2, respec-
tively, but they do not inhibit or induce CYP1A2 in rodents. Such 
species differences are the impetus for the development of chimeric 
mice (in which the mouse hepatocytes are replaced with human 
hepatocytes) (Grompe and Strom, 2013) and so-called humanized 
mice, which involves substituting the murine genes that encode 
xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes (and the receptors that regulate 
their expression) with their human counterparts (Gonzalez, 2003; 
Gonzalez and Yu, 2006).
In some species, entire pathways of xenobiotic biotransfor-
mation are low or absent from a particular species. For example, 
cats and dogs are considered poor glucuronidators and poor 
acetylators of xenobiotics, respectively. Because of their inabil-
ity to ­glucuronidate drugs, cats are sensitive to acetaminophen 
­hepatotoxicity (Baillie and Rettie, 2011). Dogs are poor acid secre-
tors, which disfavors the gastric absorption of acidic drugs (see 
the section “Introduction”). Interestingly, although dogs can con-
jugate acidic drugs, they are poor metabolizers of acidic drugs in 
terms of oxidative biotransformation by CYP enzymes (Baillie and 
Rettie, 2011). Metabolism by gut microbiota can occur in a species-­
dependent manner. For ­example, as shown in Fig. 6-4, quinic acid 
(the perceived acid in coffee) is converted to benzoic acid in humans 
and old-world monkeys but not in new-world monkeys, mice, rats, 
and most other laboratory animals (Adamson et al., 1970).
Point 21 In sexually mature rats and, to a lesser extent, mice 
there are marked gender differences in the expression of certain 
xenobiotic-biotransforming enzymes (both oxidative and conju-
gating enzymes) (Waxman and Holloway, 2009). In other species, 
including humans, gender differences either do not exist or gener-
ally represent less than a twofold difference, whereas the differences 
in rodents can be an order of magnitude or greater (Parkinson et al., 
2004; Soldin et al., 2011). Against a large background of interindi-
vidual variation in each gender, it is often difficult to discern gender 
differences in xenobiotic biotransformation in humans, although, in 
general, women appear to have lower CYP1A2 and higher CYP3A4 
activity than men (Parkinson et al., 2004). Few drugs are dosed on 
the basis of gender, but in 2014 the FDA recommended that, due to 
their slower rate of metabolism, women should be administered half 
the dose administered to men for zolpidem (Intermezzo, a sedative) 
and zolpidem-containing drugs like Ambien, Edluar, and Zolpimist 
(FDA, 2018). It is particularly interesting that, compared with men, 
women appear to have a higher incidence of idiosyncratic drug tox-
icity (Walgren et al., 2005), which has been the cause of a number 
of drug withdrawals and black box warnings (see Point 22).
Point 22 Idiosyncratic drug reactions (IDRs) are rare adverse 
events (generally <0.1%) that do not involve an exaggerated phar-
macological response, do not occur in most patients at any dose, and 
typically do not occur immediately after exposure but do so after 
weeks or months of repeated administration (Walgren et al., 2005). 
IDRs are also known as Type B or hypersensitivity reactions and 
they can be divided into allergic and nonallergic IDRs (Aronson and 
Ferner, 2003). Allergic IDRs tend to develop relatively quickly (in 
days or weeks) and, after the drug is discontinued, patients respond 
robustly when rechallenged with the same or a closely related drug, 
whereas the latter tend to develop relatively slowly (with symptoms 
sometimes appearing after 6 months or more of drug treatment) 
and patients may or may not respond to rechallenge with the drug. 
Clinical characteristics suggest that IDRs are immune mediated, and 
there is substantive evidence that most, but not all, IDRs are caused 
by chemically reactive species (Uetrecht and Naisbitt, 2013). The 
major targets are skin, liver, and bone marrow. Drugs that were 
withdrawn from the U.S. market or carry a black box warning for 
idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity are listed in Table 6-6. The drugs are 
structurally diverse and fall into numerous therapeutic classes.
Several factors predispose to some, but not all, IDRs including 
gender (women are often more prone than men), age (the elderly are 
more prone than infants although infants are more prone to IDRs 
involving valproic acid), ethnicity, viral infection (a particularly 
strong predisposing factor), and other disease states (such as diabetes 
and obesity), possibly alcohol consumption, comedications that cause 
pharmacokinetic drug–drug interactions, genetic polymorphisms in 
xenobiotic-biotransforming enzymes and transporters (discussed 
in Point 23), and genetic polymorphisms that affect immune func-
tion, especially allelic variants of human leukocyte antigens (HLA 
haplotypes), part of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) 
(Alfirevic and Pirmohamed, 2010; Chalasani and Bjornsson, 2010; 
Uetrecht and Naisbitt, 2013; Roth and Lee, 2017; Roth et al., 2017).
One of the best understood IDR is the skin hypersensitivity 
reaction to the anti-HIV drug abacavir, which is determined in a 
highly predictable manner by an individual’s HLA subtype (Alfirevic 
and Pirmohamed, 2010). Abacavir binds to the antigen-presenting 
groove of MHC I molecule in patients carrying the B*5701 allele 
(in patients of all ethnic groups). In vitro studies have demonstrated 
that treatment of antigen-presenting cells positive for B*5701, but 
not for the related alleles B*5702 or B*5801, with abacavir can 
stimulate a CD8+ T-cell response. Topical exposure to abacavir 
(patch test) reveals activated CD8+ T cells in skin biopsies. Genetic 
testing for B*5701 is highly predictive; abacavir hypersensitivity 
is almost never seen in individuals without the B*5701 allele and

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
211
it is seen in about half of B*5701-positive carriers. Genetic test-
ing for B*5701 prior to abacavir treatment is required by the FDA 
and is cost effective (the cost of treating the severe skin lesions 
that occur in 5% to 9% of abacavir-treated patients outweighs the 
costs of genetic testing). Another strong association (odds ratio 
>1000) between HLA alleles (HAL B*1502) and IDR is seen with 
carbamazepine-induced skin lesions (Stevens–Johnson syndrome 
[SJS] and toxic epidermal necrolysis [TEN]) in Han Chinese, Thai, 
Malay, and Indian populations. However, B*1502 is neither predic-
tive of SJS/TEN in Japanese or Caucasian populations (in whom 
HLA-A*3101 is a moderate risk factor) (McCormack et al., 2011) 
nor predictive of other carbamazepine-induced IDRs such as mac-
ulopapular exanthema or drug reaction with systemic symptoms 
(DRESS) in Asian populations (Alfirevic and Pirmohamed, 2010).
Hypersensitivity to abacavir is unusual for two reasons 
(Uetrecht and Naisbitt, 2013). First, an individual’s HLA haplotype 
Table 6-6 
Drugs That Have Been Withdrawn or Carry a Black Box Warning for Idiosyncratic Hepatotoxicity*
DRUG NAME
TYPICAL DAILY 
DOSE
INDICATION
REACTIVE METABOLITE AND 
EVIDENCE OF METABOLISM-
DEPENDENT ENZYME INHIBITION
INDUCTION†, IMMUNOLOGICAL AND 
OTHER MECHANISTIC ASPECTS
Drugs Withdrawn
 Benoxaprofen
300–600 mg
NSAID
Acyl glucuronide
Inducer (rat AhR and PPARα agonist)
 Bromfenac
25–50 mg
NSAID
Acyl glucuronide
 Iproniazid
25–150 mg
Depression
Multiple. MDI of MAO-B
Anti-MAO-B and antimitochondria
 Nefazodone
200 mg
Depression
Quinoneimine. MDI of CYP3A4
 Tienilic acid
250–500 mg
Diuretic
Thiophene epoxide, sulfoxide. MDI 
of CYP2C9
Anti-LKM2 (anti-CYP2C9)
 Troglitazone
400 mg
Diabetes
Quinone methide, sulfenic acid, 
α-ketoisocyanate
Inducer (CAR/PXR agonist)
Black Box Warnings
 Acitretin
25–50 mg
Psoriasis
No. Acitretin, a retinoid, is esterified 
to etretinate
Etretinate was withdrawn in 2002
 Bosentan
125–250 mg
PAH
No
Inhibits BSEP. Inducer (PXR agonist)
 Dacarbazine
140–315 mg
Melanoma, 
lymphoma
Methyl diazohydroxide and methyl 
cation (CH )
3
+
Hepatotoxic to laboratory animals
 Dantrolene
300–400 mg
Muscle relaxant
Nitro-reduction intermediates bind 
to GSH
Inducer (AhR agonist)
 Felbamate
1200 mg
Epilepsy
2-Phenylpropenal (atropaldehyde)
Inducer (PXR agonist)
 Flutamide
750 mg
Prostate cancer
Nitro-reduced, nitrogen radicals 
and ortho-quinoneimines bind to 
protein and GSH‡
Inhibits mitochondrial respiration
 Gemtuzumab
9 mg/m2
AML
Reductive activation to a diradical
Designed to intercalate and bind DNA
 Isoniazid
300 mg
Tuberculosis
Multiple. MDI of CYP1A1, 2A6, 
2C19, and 3A4
Radicals formed by myeloperoxidase
 Ketoconazole
200 mg
Fungal 
­infections
Dialdehyde
Auto-inhibitor (inhibits CYP3A4)
 Naltrexone
50 mg
Alcoholism, 
­addiction
No
 Nevirapine
200–400 mg
AIDS
Quinonemethide. MDI of CYP3A4§
Inducer (PXR agonist)
 Pemoline
37.5–112.5 mg
Hyperactivity
No
 Tolcapone
300 mg
Parkinsonism
Nitro reduction and then 
quinoneimine formation
Uncouples mitochondrial respiration
 Trovafloxacin
100–500 mg
Antibiotic
No, but it has a lipophilic 
­difluorinated side chain present 
in a toxic fluoroquinolone—now 
withdrawn
Eosinophilia suggests an immune-
mediated hepatitis
 Valproic acid 
(VPA)
1000–4200 
mg
Epilepsy
CoA thioesterification and 
­epoxidation of 4-ene-VPA
Disrupts mitochondrial β-oxidation
Abbreviations: AhR, aryl hydrocarbon receptor; AIDS, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; AML, acute myeloid leukemia; anti-LKM2, auto-antibodies 
against liver and kidney microsomes (anti-LKM1 contains antibodies against CYP2D6, whereas anti-LKM2 contains antibodies against CYP2C9); 
BSEP, bile salt export pump (a bile canalicular transporter); CYP, cytochrome P450; GSH, glutathione; MAO, monoamine oxidase; MBI, mechanism-
based inhibitor (aka suicide inactivator); NSAID, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug; PAH, pulmonary arterial hypertension; PPARα, peroxisome 
proliferator–activated receptor alpha; PXR, pregnane X receptor; VPA, valproic acid.
*Data adapted from Walgren et al. (2005).
†The receptor agonist assignment is based on the CYP-induced enzyme (CYP1A for AhR; CYP2B, CYP2C, and/or CYP3A for CAR/PXR; CYP4A for PPARα).
‡Wen et al. (2008).
§Chen et al. (2008).

212
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
(the expression of B*5701) is the dominant determining factor. 
In other words, sensitivity is observed in all subjects carrying the 
B*5701 allele. Second, the parent drug, which binds to the anti-
gen-binding grove of B*5701, rather than a (reactive) metabolite, 
appears to be the precipitating factor. In other IDRs, especially 
drug-induced liver injury (DILI), there is evidence that a reactive 
metabolite triggers the idiosyncratic response by forming a protein 
adduct (hapten) that triggers an acquired immune response (activa-
tion of killer T cells and/or antibody-producing B lymphocytes). 
There is strong evidence, such as the production of antibodies 
against drug-modified proteins, that the idiosyncratic DILI caused 
by halothane (an anesthetic) and tienilic acid (a diuretic) is due to 
the formation of reactive metabolites, which is why, during the 
process of drug development, considerable attention is devoted to 
avoiding drug candidates that are converted to reactive metabolites 
that bind covalently to protein (see Point 12) (Obach et al., 2008; 
Bauman et al., 2009; Nakayama et al., 2009; Tang and Lu, 2010; 
Ikeda, 2011; Park et al., 2011; Walsh and Miwa, 2011). However, 
formation of reactive metabolites (which occurs in all individuals) is 
insufficient to account for the rarity of idiosyncratic DILI. For many 
drugs that cause idiosyncratic DILI, HLA haplotype is a factor but 
not to the extent seen with abacavir (Alfirevic and Pirmohamed, 
2010; Uetrecht and Naisbitt, 2013).
In several cases, the drugs that cause idiosyncratic liver injury 
(those listed in Table 6-6) have closely related structures that do not 
cause idiosyncratic DILI. For example, rosiglitazone and piogli-
tazone contain the same thiazolidinedione ring that in troglitazone 
is converted to a reactive metabolite, and yet, of these three antidia-
betic drugs, only troglitazone has been withdrawn from the market 
because of idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity. This difference may be due 
to the much larger daily dose of troglitazone (300 mg) compared 
with rosiglitazone (4 to 8 mg) and pioglitazone (15 to 45 mg). 
Uetrecht (2001) has proposed the general rule that drugs admin-
istered at a daily dose of 10 mg or less do not cause idiosyncratic 
toxicity, and this rule is consistent with the dosing information 
shown in Table 6-6. Both dose (more than 50 mg/day) and extent of 
hepatic metabolism (greater than 50%) are now recognized as risk 
factors for idiosyncratic drug-induced liver injury (Lammert et al., 
2008; Chalasani and Bjornsson, 2010; Lammert et al., 2010). Other 
examples of closely related drugs where one does and one does 
not cause hepatotoxicity include tolcapone/entacapone, ticlopidine/
clopidogrel, amineptine/tianeptine, tamoxifen/toremifene, ibuf-
enac/ibuprofen, ebrotidine/famotidine, and niperotidine/ranitidine 
(Walgren et al., 2005). Labetalol (an antihypertensive drug) has 
two chiral centers and is a racemic mixture of four enantiomers, 
one of which is dilevalol. Labetrol carries a black box warming for 
hepatotoxicity; dilevalol was not approved by the FDA because it 
caused a high incidence of liver toxicity during clinical trials. In 
some cases, the difference is thought to be due to differences in 
dose (which is invariably higher for the drug partner that causes 
hepatotoxicity), but in other cases the basis for the difference is not 
known. Furthermore, more than 20 drugs (many of which do not 
cause idiosyncratic toxicity) bind covalently to their pharmacologi-
cal target, including aspirin, omeprazole (and other proton pump 
inhibitors), clopidogrel, and second-generation inhibitors of EGFR-
linked tyrosine kinase (such as afatinib, dacomitinib, and neratinib) 
(Singh et al., 2011).
Just as the acquired immune system can be activated by drugs 
that cause Type B toxicity (idiosyncratic toxicity), so the innate 
immune system can be activated by drugs that cause Type C (off-
target) toxicity (Aronson and Ferner, 2003). For example, acet-
aminophen (Tylenol), which is a leading cause of acute liver failure 
in humans (Kaplowitz, 2005), is activated to a reactive metabolite 
(N-acetylbenzo-p-quinoneimine) that binds covalently to mitochon-
drial proteins, which leads to cell death. The cell damage (necrosis) 
caused by acetaminophen results in the release of cellular constitu-
ents such as fragmented DNA (and other molecules that make up 
the so-called danger-associated molecular pattern [DAMP]) that 
bind to toll-like receptors and other receptors that activate macro-
phages, which in turn recruit neutrophils and monocytes to the site 
of injury (Jaeschke et al., 2012). Whether activation of the innate 
immune system in this way is detrimental (by leading to a second 
round of hepatocellular damage) or beneficial (by limiting dam-
age and promoting tissue repair) is controversial. In fact, the acute 
liver toxicity caused by acetaminophen is not an IDR (Uetrecht and 
Naisbitt, 2013). However, it is noteworthy that, in the case of Type 
C toxicity, the innate immune system is activated by cellular com-
ponents released from damaged cells (DAMP) and not by the drug 
or its metabolites (although in the example given it is recognized 
that the reactive metabolite of acetaminophen plays a critical role 
in causing the cell damage that subsequently activates the innate 
immune system). This contrasts with the direct role of the drug and/
or its metabolites (including reactive metabolites) in Type B toxic-
ity. In the case of idiosyncratic toxicity, the drug/metabolite plays a 
key role in activating the acquired immune system.
Point 23 The same dose of drug (or any other xenobiotic) 
administered to humans often results in large interindividual differ-
ences in exposure to the parent compound (typically measured as 
the plasma AUC). This variation can reflect genetically determined 
differences in the activity of xenobiotic-biotransforming enzymes 
or transporters (genetic polymorphisms) or environmental factors, 
such as drug–drug interactions.
The study of the causes, prevalence, and impact of heritable 
differences in xenobiotic-biotransforming enzymes is known as 
pharmacogenetics. It is the basis for the concept of individual-
ized or personalized medicine, whereby the dosage of drugs with a 
narrow therapeutic index (such as anticancer drugs) is adjusted in 
accordance with an individual’s genotype (i.e., drug-metabolizing 
potential).
Genetic variation in a xenobiotic-metabolizing enzyme pro-
duces four discernible phenotypes: poor metabolizers (PMs), inter-
mediate metabolizers (IMs), extensive metabolizers (EMs), and 
ultrarapid metabolizers (UMs), which arise from the expression of 
no functional alleles (−/−) for PMs, one nonfunctional allele and 
one partially functional allele or two partially active alleles (−/* 
or */*) for IMs, one or two functional alleles (+/−, +/*, or +/+) 
for EMs, and gene duplication ([+/+]n) for UMs. This traditional 
classification scheme has been revised on the basis of an activity 
score, which assigns to each allelic variant a functional activity 
value from one (for the wild-type or *1 allele) to zero (for any com-
pletely nonfunctional allele), as shown in Table 6-7 (Zineh et al., 
2004; Gaedigk et al., 2008).
For those enzymes that are polymorphically expressed, such 
as CYP2D6, the incidence of the PM (and UM) genotype can 
vary widely from one ethnic group to the next. For example, the 
CYP2D6 PM genotype is common among Caucasians but not 
Asians, whereas the converse is true of the CYP2C19 PM genotype.
When the clearance of a drug is largely determined by a poly-
morphically expressed enzyme, such as CYP2D6, exposure to the 
parent drug follows the rank order: PMs > IMs > EMs > UMs. 
Exposure to metabolites (especially the maximum concentration, 
Cmax) follows the opposite rank order. The difference in exposure 
between PMs and EMs (i.e., the fold increase in Cmax or AUC asso-
ciated with the PM phenotype vs. the EM phenotype) depends 
on fractional metabolism (fm), a measure of how much of the 
drug’s clearance is determined by CYP2D6 (or whatever enzyme

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
213
is responsible for metabolizing the drug in question) and the 
hepatic extraction ratio (EH, the ratio of blood clearance to hepatic 
blood flow) (Kirby and Unadkat, 2010). For low-extraction drugs 
(EH < 0.3), the fold increase in AUC (AUCPM/AUCEM) approximates 
to 1/(1 − fm); hence, the impact of the polymorphism increases 
dramatically as fm approaches unity. If CYP2D6 accounted for 
half of the clearance of a low-extraction drug (fm = 0.5), exposure 
to that drug would increase twofold in CYP2D6 PMs. However, 
if CYP2D6 accounted for 90% of a drug’s clearance (fm = 0.9), 
then exposure to that drug would increase 10-fold in CYP2D6 PMs. 
This is why PMs are often at increased risk of ADEs either due 
to an exaggerated pharmacological response to the drug or due to 
its toxic side effects. An exception is omeprazole and other proton 
pump inhibitors, which actually provide improved control over gas-
troesophageal reflux disease (GERD) in CYP2C19 PMs compared 
with EMs (Furuta et al., 2005).
There are a minority of cases where the UMs, not the PMs, 
are at increased risk, especially in cases where the polymorphic 
enzyme catalyzes the formation of a pharmacologically active 
or toxic metabolite. For example, CYP2D6 converts the prodrug 
codeine to the active metabolite morphine, and there are reports of 
morphine intoxication in CYP2D6 UMs, one case being the death 
of a baby being breastfed by a CYP2D6 UM mother who was pre-
scribed codeine (Gasche et al., 2004; Koren et al., 2006).
Many cases have now been described where the PM phenotype 
requires dosage adjustment to prevent off-target (Type C) toxic-
ity or an exaggerated pharmacological response (Type A toxicity)
(Aronson and Ferner, 2003). For example, CYP2D6 PMs are at 
increased risk for perhexiline hepatotoxicity and at increased risk 
for an exaggerated pharmacological response to debrisoquine and 
sparteine, three drugs that were not approved in the United States 
because of the high incidence of adverse events in the PMs. In con-
trast, when drugs are converted to active metabolites by CYP2D6, 
PMs derive inadequate therapeutic effect (Type F toxicity). For 
example, CYP2D6 converts codeine to morphine; hence, codeine 
is a less effective analgesic in PMs. Similarly, CYP2D6 converts the 
breast cancer drug tamoxifen to endoxifen (which is 30- to 100-fold 
more potent than tamoxifen in suppressing estrogen-dependent cell 
proliferation); hence, CYP2D6 PMs are at increased risk for breast 
cancer recurrence following tamoxifen adjuvant therapy (Goetz 
et al., 2005). Other examples of genetic polymorphisms that affect 
drug disposition in humans include CYP2C8 (repaglinide and pacli-
taxel), CYP2C9 (warfarin), CYP2C19 (clopidogrel, omeprazole, 
lansoprazole, and pantoprazole), CYP3A5 (tacrolimus), UGT1A1 
(irinotecan), UGT2B7 (morphine), thiopurine methyltransfer-
ase (TPMT) (6-mercaptopurine), N-acetyltransferase 2 (NAT2) 
(isoniazid), catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) (levodopa), 
­dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD) (5-fluorouracil), the 
efflux transporter P-gp (digoxin), and the hepatic uptake transport-
ers OATP1B1/3 (various statins) (Robert et al., 2005; Giacomini 
and Sugiyama, 2006; Relling and Giacomini, 2006). Details of 
these genetic polymorphisms are given later in the chapter. Many 
of the drugs identified within parentheses have a narrow therapeutic 
index. Some victim drugs have a high therapeutic index; hence, they 
are therapeutically effective in PMs to UMs and cause roughly the 
same incidence of adverse effects regardless of genotype. However, 
Table 6-7  
The Relationship between Genotype and Phenotype for the Polymorphically Expressed Enzyme CYP2D6 with Active 
(wt), Partially Active (*x), and Inactive (*y) Alleles
GENOTYPE
ALLELES
CONVENTIONAL
ACTIVITY SCORE*
ACTIVITY SCORE 
PHENOTYPE†
Duplication of active alleles (n = 2 or more)
(wt/wt)n
UM‡
2 × n
UM
Two fully active wild-type (wt) alleles
wt/wt
EM
1 + 1 = 2
High EM
One fully active + one partially active allele
wt/*x
EM
1 + 0.5 = 1.5
Medium EM
One fully active + one inactive allele
wt/*y
EM
1 + 0 = 1
Low EM
Two partially active alleles
*x/*x
EM or IM
0.5 + 0.5 = 1
Low EM
One partially active + one inactive allele
*x/*y
IM
0.5 + 0 = 0.5
IM
Two inactive alleles
*y/*y
PM
0 + 0 = zero
PM
*In the case of CYP2D6, various activity scores have been assigned as follows:
Activity score = 1.0 for each *1 (wt), *2, *35, and *41 [2988G].
Activity score = 0.75 for each *9, *29, *45, and *46.
Activity score = 0.5 for each *10, *17, and *41 [2988A].
Activity score = 0 for each *3, *4, *5, *6, *7, *8, *11, *12, *13, *14, *15, *19, *20, *21, *30, *36, *38, *40, *42, *68, *92, *100, and *101.
†Activity scores are classified as follows:
UM activity score = > 2.0 (e.g., [*1/*1]n where n is 2 or more gene duplications).
High EM activity score = 1.75 to 2.0 (e.g., *1/*1).
Medium EM activity score = 1.5 (e.g., *1/*17 or *9/*9).
Low EM activity score = 1.0 to 1.25 (e.g., *1/*4, *17/*17, or *9/*17).
IM activity score = 0.5 to 0.75 (e.g., *4/*9 or *4/*17).
PM activity score = 0 (e.g., *4/*4).
‡The phenotypes are ultrarapid metabolizer (UM), extensive metabolizer (EM), intermediate metabolizer (IM), and poor metabolizer (PM), based on the 
particular combination of alleles that are fully active (wt), partially active (*x), or inactive (*y).
SOURCES: Data adapted from Gaedigk et al. (2008) and Zineh et al. (2004).

214
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
in the case of victim drugs with a narrow therapeutic index, dosage 
must be increased in UMs to achieve a therapeutic effect and/or it 
must be decreased in PMs to prevent ADEs.
Genetic polymorphisms in xenobiotic-biotransforming 
enzymes have an impact on the incidence of certain environmen-
tal diseases. For example, ethnic differences in the incidence of 
polymorphisms in alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) and aldehyde 
dehydrogenase (ALDH) impact the incidence of alcoholism (Li, 
2000). Genetic polymorphisms in CYP2A6 impact the incidence of 
cigarette-smoking-induced lung cancer. Individuals lacking 
CYP2A6 are PMs of nicotine (so they tend to smoke less than 
CYP2A6 EMs) and are poor activators of tobacco-specific muta-
gens (so they form fewer DNA-reactive metabolites than do 
CYP2A6 EMs) (Kamataki et al., 2005).
Genetic polymorphisms can be the underlying cause of a 
disease. For example, the severe and mild hyperbilirubinemias 
associated with Crigler–Najjar syndrome and Gilbert syndrome, 
respectively, reflect a complete and partial loss of the UGT respon-
sible for conjugating bilirubin, namely, UGT1A1. The hyper-
bilirubinemic Gunn rat is the rodent equivalent of Crigler–Najjar 
syndrome. Genetic polymorphisms in CYP1B1 are associated with 
primary congenital glaucoma.
Genetic polymorphisms have been described in laboratory 
animals. For example, laboratory-bred rabbits have about 50:50 
chance of being a poor or rapid acetylator of certain drugs (such as 
isoniazid) because NAT2 is polymorphically expressed in rabbits. 
CYP1A2 is polymorphically expressed in dogs.
Point 24 Environmental factors can introduce as much varia-
tion in drug metabolism as can genetic factors, and this is especially 
true of drug–drug interactions. To take CYP3A4 as an example, 
PMs can be created pharmacologically with inhibitors (such as 
ketoconazole, erythromycin, and ritonavir), whereas UMs can be 
created pharmacologically with inducers (such as rifampin and the 
herbal agent St. John’s wort). While the impact of genetic poly-
morphisms on drug disposition and safety is often identified dur-
ing clinical trials, the impact of drug–drug interactions may not 
be identified until after the drug has been approved and is under 
postmarketing surveillance.
Drugs (and other xenobiotics) can be viewed from a victim and 
perpetrator perspective. A drug whose clearance is largely deter-
mined by a single route of elimination, such as metabolism by a 
single CYP enzyme, is considered a victim drug (also known as a 
sensitive or object drug). Such drugs have a high victim potential 
because a diminution or loss of that elimination pathway, either 
due to a genetic deficiency in the relevant CYP enzyme or due to its 
inhibition by another, concomitantly administered drug, will result 
in a large decrease in victim drug clearance and a correspondingly 
large increase in exposure (the magnitude of which will depend on 
fm, as indicated in Point 23). Perpetrators are those drugs (or other 
environmental factors) that inhibit or induce the enzyme that is oth-
erwise responsible for clearing a victim drug. In other words, perpe-
trators are drugs that cause drug–drug interactions. Perpetrators are 
also known as precipitants. Genetic polymorphisms that result in 
the partial or complete loss of enzymatic activity can also be viewed 
as perpetrators inasmuch they cause a decrease in the clearance of—
and an increase in exposure to—victim drugs. A combination of two 
perpetrators (such as two drugs that inhibit different enzymes or an 
inhibitory drug plus a genetic polymorphism) can have a dramatic 
effect on the disposition of a victim drug if they impair parallel 
pathways of clearance, a phenomenon called maximum exposure 
(Collins et al., 2006; Ogilvie and Parkinson, 2014). This is illus-
trated by voriconazole, whose metabolic clearance is determined 
by CYP2C19 and CYP3A4 (which represent two parallel pathways 
of clearance). Based on plasma AUC, CYP2C19 PMs ­(individuals 
lacking CYP2C19) are exposed to roughly twice as much vori-
conazole compared with CYP2C19 EMs. Loss of CYP3A4 (and 
only CYP3A4) by administering ritonavir to CYP2C19 EMs also 
causes about a doubling in systemic exposure to voriconazole. 
However, when ritonavir is administered to CYP2C19 PMs (such 
that both CYP2C19 and CYP3A4 are inactive), exposure to vori-
conazole increases more than 25-fold. This example illustrates how 
two drugs (ritonavir and voriconazole) can interact dramatically 
in some individuals (CYP2C19 PMs) but not others (CYP2C19 
EMs). Conversely, a perpetrator drug that inhibited only CYP2C19 
would cause such inhibition only in CYP2C19 EMs (the PMs 
­having no enzyme to inhibit). Many other examples of perpetrator–­
perpetrator–victim interactions (maximum exposure) are reviewed 
in Ogilvie and Parkinson (2014).
Terfenadine (Seldane), cisapride (Propulsid), astemizole 
(Hismanal), and cerivastatin (Baycol) are all victim drugs, so much 
so that they have all been withdrawn from the market (Fung et al., 
2001). The first three are all victim drugs because they are exten-
sively metabolized by CYP3A4. Inhibition of CYP3A4 by various 
antimycotic drugs, such as ketoconazole, and antibiotic drugs, such 
as erythromycin, decreases the clearance of terfenadine, cisapride, 
and astemizole and increases their plasma concentrations to lev-
els that, in some individuals, cause ventricular arrhythmias (QT 
prolongation) that can result in fatal heart attacks. Cerivastatin is 
extensively metabolized by CYP2C8. Its metabolism is inhibited by 
the glucuronide conjugates of gemfibrozil and clopidogrel (Ogilvie 
et al., 2006; Tornio et al., 2014). The coadministration of cerivastatin 
(Baycol) with either gemfibrozil (Lopid) or clopidogrel (Plavix) 
was associated with a high incidence of fatal, cerivastatin-induced 
rhabdomyolysis which resulted in the withdrawal of cerivastatin.
Mibefradil (Posicor) is the only drug withdrawn from the U.S. 
market largely because of its perpetrator potential. This calcium 
channel blocker not only causes extensive inhibition of CYP3A4 
but also causes prolonged inhibition of the enzyme by virtue of 
being a metabolism-dependent inhibitor of CYP3A4. By inactivat-
ing CYP3A4 in an irreversible manner—such that restoration of 
normal CYP3A4 activity requires the synthesis of new enzyme—
mibefradil inhibits CYP3A4 long after treatment with the drug is 
discontinued.
The in vitro technique of reaction phenotyping (also known 
as enzyme mapping) is the process of identifying which enzyme or 
enzymes are largely responsible for metabolizing a drug candidate 
(Williams et al., 2003a; Ogilvie et al., 2008; Zientek and Youdim, 
2015; Bohnert et al., 2016). Reaction phenotyping allows an assess-
ment of the victim potential of a drug candidate or other xenobiotic. 
Drug candidates can also be evaluated in vitro for their potential 
to inhibit or induce CYP enzymes (and selected UGT enzymes 
and transporters), which allows an assessment of their perpetrator 
potential (Tucker et al., 2001; Bjornsson et al., 2003; Huang et al., 
2008; EMA, 2012; FDA, 2017).
Herbal products can also interact with drugs. For example, St. 
John’s wort contains hyperforin, which is a potent PXR agonist 
and, as such, is an inducer of CYP3A4 (along with several other 
xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes) and P-gp. To prevent a loss of 
therapeutic efficacy, the use of St. John’s wort is not recommended 
for patients on antirejection drugs (such as cyclosporine and tacroli-
mus), anti-HIV drugs (such as indinavir and nevirapine), anticoagu-
lants (such as warfarin and phenprocoumon), or oral contraceptive 
steroids (Pal and Mitra, 2006). Food can affect drug disposition in a 
number of ways. It can affect absorption, which is why some drugs 
are taken with meals and others are taken between meals. Large 
quantities of cruciferous vegetables (e.g., broccoli and Brussels

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
215
sprouts) can induce hepatic CYP1A2 (Conney, 1982), whereas 
grapefruit juice can inhibit intestinal CYP3A4 (Paine et al., 2006) 
and large quantities of orange and apple juice can inhibit the intes-
tinal absorption of drugs by OATP2B1 and/or OATP1A2 (Dolton 
et al., 2012).
Point 25 Although drug–drug interactions can cause an 
increase in the incidence of adverse events or, in the case of induc-
tion, a loss of therapeutic efficacy, not all drug–drug interactions are 
undesirable. For example, some anti-HIV drugs, such as ritonavir, 
inhibit CYP3A4 and P-gp and thereby improve the pharmacoki-
netic profile of other anti-HIV drugs, such as saquinavir, lopinavir, 
and elitegravir. Cobicistat, an analog of ritonavir with no antiviral 
activity, is used with several anti-HIV drugs (atazanavir, darunavir, 
and tenofovir alafenamide) to enhance their systemic exposure by 
improving their oral absorption and decreasing their rate of elimi-
nation. Tumors often overexpress various transporters and GSTs, 
which limit the effectiveness of several anticancer drugs. Drugs that 
inhibit transporters and GST are being developed to enhance the 
efficacy of anticancer drugs.
Point 26 Although the amount of functional enzyme deter-
mines whether an individual is a PM, IM, EM, or UM, disease states 
and cofactor levels can impact the rate of xenobiotic metabolism. 
Not surprisingly, severe liver disease decreases the rate of metabo-
lism of a large number of drugs whose clearance is determined by 
hepatic metabolism, as can kidney disease, which decreases the 
hepatic expression of CYP2D6 (Rostami-Hodjegan et al., 1999). 
For certain xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes, particularly the con-
jugating enzymes, cofactor availability can impact the rate of xeno-
biotic biotransformation. The liver usually has sufficient NADPH to 
saturate reactions catalyzed by CYP, but it does not have sufficient 
levels of UDP-glucuronic acid (UDPGA) or 3′-phosphoadenosine-
5′-phosphosulfate (PAPS) to saturate the enzymes responsible for 
glucuronidating or sulfonating xenobiotics. Consequently, altera-
tions in the levels of these cofactors can impact the rate or extent 
of glucuronidation and sulfonation. For example, fasting lowers 
hepatic levels of these cofactors, and fasting decreases the extent 
to which acetaminophen is conjugated. Consequently, fasting 
increases the extent to which acetaminophen is metabolized to a 
toxic metabolite by CYP (including CYP2E1, which is induced 
by fasting), for which reason fasting is suspected of being one of 
the risk factors for acetaminophen hepatotoxicity (Whitcomb and 
Block, 1994).
Point 27 Stereochemical aspects can play an important role 
in the interaction between a xenobiotic and its biotransforming 
enzyme (from both a substrate and an inhibitor perspective), and 
xenobiotic-biotransforming enzymes can play a key role in convert-
ing one stereoisomer to another, a process known as mutarotation 
or inversion of configuration.
A xenobiotic that contains a chiral center can exist in two 
mirror-image forms called stereoisomers or enantiomers. The bio-
transformation of some chiral xenobiotics occurs stereoselectively, 
meaning that one enantiomer (stereoisomer) is biotransformed faster 
than its antipode. For example, the antiepileptic drug Mesantoin®, 
which is a racemic mixture of R- and S-mephenytoin, is biotrans-
formed stereoselectively in humans, such that the S-enantiomer is 
rapidly hydroxylated (by CYP2C19) and eliminated faster than 
the R-enantiomer. The ability of some chiral xenobiotics to inhibit 
xenobiotic-biotransforming enzymes can also occur stereoselec-
tively. For example, quinidine is a potent inhibitor of CYP2D6, 
whereas quinine, its antipode, has relatively little inhibitory effect 
on this enzyme. In some cases, achiral molecules (or achiral 
centers) are converted to a mixture of enantiomeric metabolites, 
and this conversion may proceed stereoselectively such that one 
enantiomer is formed preferentially over its antipode. Inversion of 
configuration is the process whereby one enantiomer is converted 
to its antipode via an achiral intermediate. This interconversion can 
occur nonenzymatically, as in the case of thalidomide, or it can be 
catalyzed by a xenobiotic-metabolizing enzyme, as in the case of 
lisofylline, or by an endobiotic-metabolizing enzyme, as in the case 
of simvastatin (Fig. 6-6).
In the case of thalidomide, inversion of configuration (as shown 
in Fig. 6-6) occurs spontaneously, although the process is facili-
tated by albumin (Eriksson et al., 1998). In the mid-to-late 1950s, 
mainly in Europe, thalidomide was prescribed to pregnant women 
in the first trimester to treat morning sickness. Unfortunately, while 
(R)-thalidomide is an effective sedative, the (S)-enantiomer is a 
teratogen that produces phocomelia (limb shortening) and other 
congenital defects in the offspring largely as a result of its abil-
ity to inhibit angiogenesis (vasculogenesis). The teratogenic effect 
of thalidomide cannot be circumvented by administering only the 
(R)-enantiomer because spontaneous or albumin-facilitated 
racemization quickly produces the teratogenic (S)-enantiomer. 
Thalidomide blocks the release of tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-
α) and it has been approved for the treatment of erythema nodosum 
leprosum (an acute inflammatory reaction associated with leproma-
tous leprosy), and is useful in the treatment of several other inflam-
matory conditions and immune-mediated diseases. Because of its 
ability to inhibit angiogenesis (the process that supplies tumors 
with new blood vessels), thalidomide is also under investigation 
as an anticancer drug. It is ironic that a drug with antivascular side 
effects was originally prescribed as a sedative and was subsequently 
approved for the treatment of a vascular disease (leprosy) with seda-
tion as a side effect (Franks et al., 2004). Thalidomide (Thalomid) 
plus dexamethasone is also approved for the treatment of multiple 
myeloma.
Ketones can be reduced by carbonyl reductases to a mixture 
of enantiomeric secondary alcohols, and this can occur with a high 
degree of stereoselectivity. For example, pentoxifylline is reduced 
by carbonyl reductases in blood and liver to a mixture of secondary 
alcohols with the major metabolite having an S-configuration, as 
shown in Fig. 6-6. Interestingly, the minor metabolite, a secondary 
alcohol with the R-configuration, has pharmacological properties 
distinct from those of its S-antipode and its ketone precursor pent-
oxifylline. This minor metabolite is known as lisofylline, which was 
once under clinical investigation as a possible treatment for various 
inflammatory diseases and type 1 diabetes. Through the action of 
carbonyl reductase, lisofylline is oxidized to pentoxifylline and then 
reduced to its antipode (i.e., R-alcohol → ketone → S-alcohol), 
the net result being an inversion of configuration (Lillibridge et al., 
1996a). The same type of interconversion explains why the admin-
istration of pure R-albuterol to human volunteers results in the for-
mation of S-albuterol, just as the administration of pure S-albuterol 
leads to the formation of R-albuterol (Boulton and Fawcett, 1997).
In the case of simvastatin (which contains a β-hydroxylactone), 
the interconversion of two secondary alcohols (β-hydroxylactone 
↔ α-hydroxy-lactone) involves hydrolysis of the lactone ring (by 
paraoxonase 3 [PON3] in humans) followed by formation of an 
acyl-CoA thioester with CoA, the first step in the β-oxidation of 
fatty acids, followed by dehydration to an achiral intermediate. 
Reversal of the steps by a combination of hydrolysis and lactoniza-
tion (condensation) restores the lactone ring with the hydroxyl group 
in the original β-configuration or in the opposing α-configuration. 
In humans, both the initial hydrolysis of the lactone ring and the 
final lactonization (condensation) reaction are catalyzed by PON3 
(Draganov and La Du, 2004). Conversion to an acyl-CoA thioes-
ter also plays a role in the chiral inversion of ketoprofen. In this

216
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
case, only the R-enantiomer is converted to an acyl-CoA thioester, 
which isomerizes and undergoes hydrolysis to the S-enantiomer. 
Although both R- and S-ketoprofen are converted to acyl glucuro-
nides, the former is hydrolyzed twice as quickly as the latter, which 
further contributes to the accumulation of the S-enantiomer (Regan 
et al., 2010).
Atropisomers are stereoisomers arising because of hindered 
rotation about a single bond. Polyhalogenated biphenyls (PCBs 
and PBBs) with two or more halogens in the ortho position (adja-
cent to the bond connecting the two phenyl rings) are atropisomers. 
Telenzepine is an example of a drug with atropisomers (Clayden 
et al., 2009).
Point 28 Mass spectrometry is widely used to characterize the 
structure of metabolites, and many instruments now come equipped 
with software to assist in this process, based on the fact that certain 
xenobiotic reactions are associated with discrete changes in mass 
(Holcapek et al., 2008). For example, the loss of 2 mass/charge (m/z) 
units signifies dehydrogenation, whereas the loss of 14 m/z units 
usually signifies demethylation (−CH2). Several reactions result 
in an increase in mass, including reduction (+2 m/z units = 2H), 
methylation (+14 m/z units = CH2), oxidation (+16 m/z units = O), 
hydration (+18 m/z units = H2O), acetylation (+42 m/z units = 
C2H2O), glucosidation (+162 m/z units = C6H10O5), sulfona-
tion (+80 m/z units = SO3), glucuronidation (+176 m/z units = 
C6H8O6), carbamoyl glucuronidation (+220 m/z units = C7H8O8), 
and conjugation with GSH (+305 m/z units = C10H15N3O6S), 
glycine (+57 m/z units = C2H3NO), taurine (+107 m/z units = 
C2H5NO2S), and glutamine (+107 m/z units = C5H7NO3) (Holcapek 
et al., 2008). Conjugation of acidic drugs with CoA (to form acyl-
CoA thioesters) increases mass by 749 m/z units, but these conju-
gates are not transported out of cells and, hence, are not detected in 
blood, bile, or urine.
Occasionally, routine changes in mass can arise from unex-
pected reactions. For example, ziprasidone is converted to two 
metabolites, each of which involves an increase of 16 m/z units, 
which normally indicates addition of oxygen (e.g., hydroxylation, 
sulfoxidation, N-oxygenation). One of the metabolites is indeed 
formed by addition of oxygen to ziprasidone (sulfoxidation), 
as shown in Fig. 6-7 (Beedham et al., 2003). However, the other 
metabolite is formed by a combination of reduction (+2 m/z units) 
and methylation (+14 m/z units). Therefore, nominal changes in 
mass can sometimes leave in doubt the biotransformation event that 
led to metabolite formation, which accounts for the popularity of 
accurate or high-resolution mass spectrometry, a technique that can 
NH
O
O
H
O
O
NH
O
O
H
O
O
NH
O
OH
O
O
S(+)-Thalidomide
R(+)-Thalidomide
Thalidomide
intermediate
Secondary alcohol (S-conﬁguration)
Secondary alcohol (R-conﬁguration)
Lisofylline
N
N
O
CH3
O
O
N
N
CH3
Pentoxifylline (ketone)
Carbonyl
reductase
Carbonyl
reductase
N
HO
H
O
N
N
N
O
CH3
CH3
N
H
OH
O
N
N
N
O
CH3
CH3
Simvastatin
β-hydroxy lactone
CoASH, ATP
α-hydroxy
ring opened
β-hydroxy
ring opened
“Simvastatin”
α-hydroxy lactone
hPON3
β-oxidation
+H2O
–H2O
–H2O
–H2O
–H2O
hPON3
+H2O
H2O
O H
O
HO
O
O
O H
O
HO
O
O
R
SCoA
O
OH
HO
R
SCoA
O
OH
HO
R
SCoA
O
OH
H
Figure 6-6.  Stereochemical aspects of xenobiotic biotransformation: inversion of configuration by nonenzymatic means (thalidomide), by carbonyl reductase 
(lisofylline), and by hydrolysis and condensation (lactonization) of a lactone ring (simvastatin).

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
217
distinguish, in the case of ziprasidone, for example, oxidation from 
a combination of reduction and methylation.
Mass spectrometry can typically provide information on which 
region of a molecule has undergone biotransformation, but in some 
cases it cannot distinguish between several closely related possibili-
ties. For example, based on mass spectrometry alone, it might be 
possible to ascertain that a certain phenyl group has been hydroxyl-
ated. However, analysis by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) may 
be required to ascertain whether the hydroxylation occurred at the 
ortho, meta, or para position.
Point 29 As mentioned in Point 19, xenobiotic-­
biotransforming enzymes are widely distributed throughout the 
body. The advent of high-throughput assays based on quantita-
tive real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction 
(QPCR) has facilitated comprehensive measurements of the lev-
els of mRNA encoding numerous xenobiotic-biotransforming 
enzymes, transporters, and xenosensors in a wide range of human 
tissues (Nishimura et al., 2003; Furukawa et al., 2004; Nishimura 
et al., 2004; Nishimura and Naito, 2005, 2006). These data are 
very informative as far as mRNA expression is concerned, 
but it can be difficult to draw conclusions about the activity of 
a given enzyme in a given tissue based on mRNA levels alone. 
For instance, based on mRNA levels in the human liver, the lev-
els of the major xenobiotic-biotransforming CYP enzymes fol-
low the rank order: CYP2E1 > 2A6 > 2C8 > 2C18 ≈ 1A2 ≈ 
4A11 ≈ 2C9 ≈ 3A4 (Nishimura et al., 2003). This contrasts 
substantially from the levels of CYP protein (as determined by 
LC–MS/MS), which follow the rank order: CYP2C9 > 3A4 ≈ 
2E1 ≈ 2A6 > 2C8 > 1A2 > 2D6 > 2B6 ≈ 2C19 > 3A5 ≈ 
3A43 ≈ 3A7 (Kawakami et al., 2011; Ohtsuki et al., 2012). In the 
case of CYP2E1, hepatic mRNA levels are more than 17 times 
higher than the levels of CYP3A4 mRNA, but CYP2E1 protein 
levels in microsomes are comparable to those of CYP3A4. This 
discrepancy is due to the fact that, under normal conditions, most 
of the mRNA encoding CYP2E1 is sequestered in the cytoplasm 
and is not available for translation (Gonzalez, 2007). The mRNA 
for FMO2 is present at very high levels in the human lung, but it is 
not translated into functional enzyme due to the presence of a trun-
cation ­mutation in Caucasians and Asians. However, about 33% of 
sub-Saharan Africans, 26% of African Americans, 7% of Puerto 
Ricans, and 2% of Mexicans have one normal allele and express 
a functional protein (Cashman and Zhang, 2006; Veeramah et al., 
2008). Human CYP2A7 and CYP4B1 are full-length genes that 
encode enzymes incapable of incorporating heme and are therefore 
nonfunctional.
Mass spectrophotometric techniques (LC–MS/MS) for the 
quantitative analysis of proteins have been applied to drug-metabo-
lizing enzymes and transporters (Kawakami et al., 2011; Sakamoto 
et al., 2011; Ohtsuki et al., 2012; Shrivas et al., 2013). They will 
undoubtedly play an important role in examining the tissue distribu-
tion and subcellular location of the large diversity of variant forms 
of drug-metabolizing enzymes and transporters that arise from 
alternative splicing of DNA transcripts and pre-mRNA, which can 
produce both functional variants and catalytically inactive proteins 
of unknown function (Annalora et al., 2017). Such diversification 
is not unique to drug-metabolizing enzymes and transporters, as 
evidenced by the observation that about 22,000 genes in the human 
genome produce a proteome with over 200,000 distinct proteins 
(Annalora et al., 2017).
HYDROLYSIS, REDUCTION, AND 
OXIDATION
Hydrolysis
Mammals contain a variety of enzymes that hydrolyze xenobiot-
ics containing such functional groups as a carboxylic acid ester 
(delapril and procaine), amide (procainamide), thioester (spi-
ronolactone), carbamate (irinotecan), phosphoric acid ester (para-
oxon), acid anhydride (diisopropylfluorophosphate [DFP]), lactone 
(lovastatin and simvastatin), and thiolactone (erdosteine), most 
of which are shown in Figs. 6-8 and 6-9. The major hydrolytic 
S
S-Methyldihydroziprasidone
(mass increases by 16 amu relative to ziprasidone)
HS
N
N
N
Cl
H
Dihydroziprasidone
S
N
N
N
Cl
N
O
O
H
Ziprasidone sulfoxide
(mass increases by 16 amu relative to ziprasidone)
S-Methylation
(TMT)
S-Oxidation
(CYP3A4)
Reduction
(Aldehyde oxidase)
S
N
N
N
Cl
N
O
H
Ziprasidone
N
N
N
Cl
N
O
H3C
H
H
N
O
H
Figure 6-7.  Conversion of ziprasidone to two different metabolites both involving a mass increase of 16 m/z (relative to ziprasidone).

218
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
enzymes are the carboxylesterases, cholinesterases, and paraox-
onases (for which lactonase is a more encompassing name), but 
they are by no means the only hydrolytic enzymes involved in 
xenobiotic biotransformation. The first two classes of hydrolytic 
enzymes, the carboxylesterases and cholinesterases, are known as 
serine esterases because their catalytic site contains a nucleophilic 
serine residue that participates in the hydrolysis of various xenobi-
otic and endobiotic substrates and the stoichiometric (one-to-one) 
binding of organophosphorus (OP) compounds and other choliner-
gic neurotoxins.
Approximately 100 human genes encode serine hydrolases 
that are classified as esterases, amidases, thioesterases, lipases, 
peptidases, or proteases (Evans and Cravatt, 2006; Ross and 
Crow, 2007; Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). The active-site ser-
ine residue of carboxylesterases, cholinesterases, and other ser-
ine hydrolases becomes phosphorylated (or phosphonylated) by 
OP compounds, such as those used as insecticides, herbicides, 
fungicides, nematicides, and plant growth regulators. Binding of 
OP compounds to carboxylesterases, cholinesterases, and other 
targets, some of which have been identified as receptors and 
enzymes involved in the hydrolysis of endobiotics (Casida and 
Quistad, 2005), plays a key role in limiting the binding of OP 
compounds to acetylcholinesterase (AChE). Phosphorylation of 
AChE, which hydrolyzes acetylcholine and thereby terminates 
its neurotransmitter activity, is the principal mechanism of OP 
toxicity in mammals, insects, and nematodes, with 70% to 90% 
inhibition usually proving lethal. Reversal of this phosphorylation 
event with pyridinium oximes such as pralidoxime (2-PAM) and 
obidoxime (toxogonin) is one of the strategies to treat OP poison-
ing (Casida and Quistad, 2005).
In the presence of an alcohol, carboxylesterases and cer-
tain other hydrolytic enzymes can catalyze the transesterifica-
tion of xenobiotics, which accounts for the conversion of cocaine 
(a methyl ester) to ethylcocaine (the corresponding ethyl ester) 
H3C
H3C
CH3
CH3
HF
+
(E) Acid anhydride (diisopropylﬂuorophosphate)
(C) Thioester (spironolactone)
hCE1
(A2) Carboxylic acid ester (procaine)
(D) Phosphoric acid ester (paraoxon)
(B) Amide (procainamide)
(A1) Carboxylic acid ester (delapril)
(F) Transesteriﬁcation (cocaine)
H2O
H3PO4
H2O
O
P
O
O
O
C2H5
C2H5
+
hCE1
ethanol
methanol
CH3CH2OH
CH3OH
ethyl ester
N
H3C
C
OCH3
O
C
methyl ester
(G) Lactone (spironolactone)
COOH
+
HO
NH2
N
H2O
H2O
hCE2
H2O
hPON1
H2O
H2O
N
H
C
O
OC2H5
CH
CH3
C
N
O
CH2COOH
(CH2)2 CH
CH3COOH
O
SCOCH3
O
O
+
C2H5OH
+
(H)  Phosphate prodrugs (fosamprenavir)
O
H
N
N
S
NH2
O
O
O
P
O
OH
OH
O
O
N
S
NH2
O
O
O
H
N
O
O
OH
+
Alkaline phosphatase
C
R
O
OH
C
O
O
N
NH2
COOH
+
H2N
N
NH2
NH2
N
C
O
N
H
NO2
OH
NO2
O
O
OH
P
O
O
O
C2H5
C2H5
F
P
O
O
O
CH
CH
H3C
H3C
CH3
CH3
OH
P
O
O
O
CH
CH
H2O
hPON3
O
SCOCH3
OH
COOH
O
SCOCH3
O
O
O
SH
O
O
N
H3C
C
OCH2CH3
O
C
O
O
Figure 6-8.  Examples of reactions catalyzed by carboxylesterases, cholinesterases, organophosphatases, and alkaline phosphatase. CES1 and CES2, human 
carboxylesterases 1 and 2; PON1 and PON3, human paraoxonase 1 and 3.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
219
(Fig. 6-8). The same transesterification occurs with clopidogrel, 
which is converted from a methyl to an ethyl ester (Tang et al., 
2006). Transesterification occurs when ethanol, not water, cleaves 
the catalytic transition state, that is, the esteratic bond between the 
active serine residue on the enzyme and the carbonyl group on the 
xenobiotic:
Enzyme O CO R
CH CH OH
Enzyme
OH
CH CH
O
CO
R
−−
−
+
→
+
−
−
−
3
2
3
2
–
In humans, the hydrolysis of xenobiotics (including many 
prodrugs) is largely catalyzed by microsomal carboxylesterases 
in liver (CES1 and CES2) and intestine (CES2), and by cholin-
esterases, paraoxonases, and albumin in blood (some of these 
enzymes are present in plasma; others are bound to erythrocytes 
in a species-dependent manner) (Li et al., 2005). Compared with 
many other mammalian species humans and monkeys are unusual 
because they lack a plasma carboxylesterase (Li et al., 2005; Oda 
et al., 2015). However, human erythrocytes contain esterase D, a 
carboxylesterase used as a genetic marker for retinoblastoma (Wu 
et al., 2009). In humans, enzymes other than those mentioned above 
can be involved in xenobiotic hydrolysis (Oda et al., 2015). These 
so-called orphan esterases include:
	 1.	 α/β hydrolase domain containing 10 (ABHD10), which 
hydrolyzes the acyl glucuronides of mycophenolic acid and 
probenecid;
	 2.	 Acylpeptide hydrolase (APEH), which hydrolyzes the acyl 
glucuronide of valproic acid;
	 3.	 Biphenyl hydrolase-like protein (BPHL or valacyclovirase), 
which hydrolyzes the valine ester prodrugs of acyclovir (vala-
cyclovir) and gangciclovir (valgangciclovir) as well as nucleo-
side drugs such as zidovudine, floxuridine, and gemcitabine;
	 4.	 Carboxymethylenebutenolidase homolog (CMBL), which 
hydrolyzes olmesartan, medoxomil, faropenen, and 
lenampicillin;
	 5.	 Sialic acid 9-O-acetylesterase (SIAE), which hydrolyzes 
alacepril;
	 6.	 Platelet-activating factor acetylhydrolase (PAFAH), which 
hydrolyzes aspirin;
	 7.	 Aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH), which hydrolyzes 
nitroglycerin.
Albumin, lipases, peptidases, proteases, and carbonic anhy-
drases have also been shown to have hydrolytic (esteratic) activ-
ity toward various xenobiotics. CYP can catalyze the cleavage of 
certain xenobiotics containing a carboxylic acid ester, phosphoric 
acid ester, or carbamate (see the section “Cytochrome P450” for 
examples).
In general, esters are hydrolyzed more rapidly than amides, 
which can impact the duration and site of action of drugs. For exam-
ple, procaine, a carboxylic acid ester, is rapidly hydrolyzed, which 
is why this drug is used mainly as a local anesthetic. In contrast, 
procainamide, the amide analog of procaine, is hydrolyzed much 
more slowly; hence, this drug reaches the systematic circulation, 
where it is useful in the treatment of cardiac arrhythmia. In general, 
enzymatic hydrolysis of amides occurs more slowly than esters, 
although electronic factors can influence the rate of hydrolysis. The 
presence of electron-withdrawing substituents weakens an amide 
bond, making it more susceptible to enzymatic hydrolysis.
The hydrolysis of xenobiotics by carboxylesterases and other 
hydrolytic enzymes is not always a detoxication process. Fig. 6-9 
shows some examples in which carboxylesterases convert xenobiot-
ics to toxic and tumorigenic metabolites.
In 1953, Aldridge classified hydrolytic enzymes on the basis 
of their interaction with OP compounds, classifying those that 
hydrolyze OP compounds as A-esterases, those that are inhibited 
Dimethylester of succinic acid
Carboxylesterase
Succinic acid
Nasal epithelium
Epithelial degeneration
Methanol
OCH3
CH3O
C
O
CH2CH2
C
O
H3C
C
O
O
H3C
CH3
C
O
C
O
OH
CH
CH2
O
CH
CH3
N
N
CH3]
[HO
CH2CH2
COOH
HOOC
2 × CH3OH
Carboxylesterase
Vinyl acetate
Covalent binding to
DNA and proteins
Acetaldehyde
Nasal tumors
1,3-Dimethyl-3-phenyl-1-nitrosourea
Methyldiazonium hydroxide
Covalent binding to DNA
Skin tumors
N
N
NO
CH3
CH3
C
O
N
OH
Carboxylesterase
Acetate
N-methyl-N-phenyl-
1-nitro-formic acid
Figure 6-9.  Activation of xenobiotics to toxic and tumorigenic metabolites 
by carboxylesterases.

220
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
by OP compounds as B-esterases, and those that do not interact 
with OP compounds as C-esterases (Aldridge, 1953). Although the 
terms are still used, the classification system of Aldridge can be 
somewhat confusing because it divides the paraoxonases into the 
A- and C-esterase classes: the human paraoxonase PON1 hydro-
lyzes OP compounds and so can be classified as an A-esterase, 
whereas PON2 and PON3 can be classified as C-esterases because 
they neither hydrolyze OP compounds nor, in most cases, are inhib-
ited by them. Furthermore, carboxylesterases and cholinesterases, 
two distinct classes of hydrolytic enzymes, are both B-esterases 
according to Aldridge because both are inhibited by OP compounds.
Carboxylesterases  Carboxylesterases 
are 
predominantly 
microsomal enzymes (about 60 kDa glycoproteins) that are pres-
ent in liver, intestine, kidney, and a wide variety of other tissues. 
As shown in Table 6-8, humans, monkeys, and dogs express two 
carboxylesterases (CES1 and CES2) in a tissue-specific manner, 
whereas rats and mice express 10 and 11 carboxylesterase (Ces) 
enzymes, respectively, and only rodents express a carboxylesterase 
(Ces1c) in plasma (Oda et al., 2015). Based on LC–MS/MS (pro-
teomic) analysis, the levels of CES1 in 16 samples of human liver 
microsomes (171 to 801 pmol/mg) were much greater than those 
of CES2 (16.3 to 57.2 pmol/mg) (Sato et al., 2012). Interindividual 
variation of both enzymes was low (less than fivefold) and the lev-
els of CES1 were negatively correlated with the levels of CES2. 
Both enzymes were also detected in human liver cytosol at roughly 
one-seventh the concentration in microsomes (Sato et al., 2012).
Human CES1 prefers to hydrolyze xenobiotics with a small alco-
hol leaving group (large acid–small alcohol), whereas CES2 prefers 
to hydrolyze xenobiotics with a large alcohol leaving group (small 
acid–large alcohol). This is illustrated in Fig. 6-8 for the hydrolysis 
of delapril by CES1 (which releases ethanol, a small alcohol) and the 
hydrolysis of procaine by CES2 (which releases 2-hydroxytriethyl-
amine, a large alcohol). In the case of cocaine (the structure of which 
is shown in Fig. 6-8), the methyl ester is hydrolyzed by CES1 (to 
release a small alcohol), whereas the benzoic ester is hydrolyzed by 
CES2 (to release a large alcohol). CES1 also catalyzes the transester-
ification of the methyl ester of cocaine, as shown in Fig. 6-8. CES1 
is more active than CES2 at catalyzing the hydrolysis of oseltamivir, 
benazepril, cilazepril, quinapril, temocapril, imidapril, meperidine, 
delapril, capecitabine, methylphenidate, and clopidogrel, whereas 
CES2 is more active than CES1 at hydrolyzing aspirin, flutamide, 
prasugrel, heroin, cocaine benzoyl ester, 6-­acetylmorphine, oxybu-
tynin, and the anticancer drug irinotecan (also known as CPT-11) 
(Satoh and Hosokawa, 2006; Shi et al., 2006; Tang et al., 2006; Oda 
et al., 2015). Individual pyrethroids such as trans-permethrin repre-
sent an example of xenobiotics that are hydrolyzed by both CES1 and 
CES2 (Ross and Crow, 2007).
In addition to hydrolyzing xenobiotics, carboxylesterases 
hydrolyze numerous endogenous compounds, such as long- and 
short-chain acyl-glycerols (both monoacylglycerols and diacylg-
lycerols), long-chain acyl-carnitine, long-chain acyl-CoA thioes-
ters (e.g., palmitoyl-CoA), retinyl ester, platelet-activating factor, 
and other esterified lipids. Carboxylesterases can also catalyze the 
synthesis of fatty acid ethyl esters, which represents a nonoxida-
tive pathway of ethanol metabolism in adipose and certain other 
tissues. In the case of platelet-activating factor, carboxylesterases 
catalyze both the deacetylation of PAF and its subsequent esteri-
fication with fatty acids to form phosphatidylcholine (Satoh and 
Hosokawa, 1998).
In addition to CES1 and/or CES2, human liver and intes-
tinal microsomes contain another serine hydrolase known as 
AADAC, which stands for arylacetamide deacetylase. This enzyme 
catalyzes the hydrolysis of phenacetin (a discontinued drug), 
2-acetylaminofluorene (2-AAF, a carcinogen), and flutamide (an 
antiandrogen drug) (Watanabe et al., 2010). AADAC deacety-
lates phenacetin and 2-aminofluorene (2-AF) to aromatic amines 
that can be N-hydroxylated by CYP and then conjugated to form 
reactive metabolites. Examples of this type of metabolic activa-
tion are given later in the sections “Azo- and Nitro-Reduction” 
and “Conjugation”). Due to risk of hepatotoxicity, the antifungal 
drug ketoconazole is no longer recommended for use as a CYP3A 
inhibitor in clinical studies designed to assess the role of CYP3A 
in the disposition of a drug. AADAC catalyzes the first step in the 
metabolic activation of ketoconazole (Fukami et al., 2016). In sub-
sequent steps, desacetylated ketoconazole is oxidized by FMO to an 
hepatotoxic nitrone and/or dialdehyde, as shown in Fig. 6-10 (Foti 
and Dalvie, 2016).
CES1 (the major liver form, which is also expressed in lung 
and other tissues) and CES2 (the major intestinal form, which is 
also expressed in liver, kidney, and brain) represent two of the six 
families of human carboxylesterases (Satoh and Hosokawa, 2006; 
Holmes et al., 2010; Merali et al., 2014). The other enzymes are 
CES3 (expressed in brain, liver, and colon), CES4A (previously 
called CES6 or CES8, which is expressed in brain, lung, and kid-
ney), CES5A (previously called CES7, which is expressed in brain, 
lung, and testis), and CES6 (which is expressed in brain cerebellum).
Table 6-8  
Tissue Distribution of Carboxylesterase (CES) Enzymes in Various Species
SPECIES (NUMBER OF 
FORMS)
TISSUE DISTRIBUTION OF CARBOXYLESTERASES (CES)
LIVER
SMALL INTESTINE
KIDNEY
LUNG
PLASMA
Human (n = 2)
CES1, CES2
CES2
CES2
CES1
‒
Cynomolgus monkey 
(n = 2)
CES1, CES2
CES1, CES2
CES1, CES2
?
‒
Dog (n = 2)
CES1, CES2
‒
CES1, CES2
CES1, CES2
‒
Rat (n = 10)
Ces1c, 1d, 1e, and 1f
Ces1e and 1f
Ces1e and 1f
Ces1d
Ces1c
Ces2a, 2c, 2e, & 2g
Ces2a, 2c, and 2h
Ces2g
Mouse (n = 11)
Ces1c, 1d, 1e, 1f, and 1g
Ces1d, 1e, 1f, and 1g
Ces1d, 1e, 1f, and 1g
Ces1d
Ces1c
Ces2a, 2c, and 2e
Ces2a, 2b, 2c, 2e, and 2g
Ces2c
SOURCE: Table adapted from Table 6-9 in Oda et al. (2015).

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
221
The human gene encoding CES1 (also known as CES1A1) is 
adjacent to a duplicated segment of CES1 called CES1P1. Despite 
a high degree of sequence homology, this pseudogene does not 
encode a functional carboxylesterase due to the presence of stop 
codon at exon 3. In some individuals, the nonfunctional CES1P1 
gene is replaced with hybrid gene composed partly of CES1P1 (the 
5′ end and exon 1) and mostly of CES1A1, which eliminates the 
premature stop codon at exon 3 and encodes a functional enzyme. 
This hybrid gene is variously called CES1P1 variant, CES1P1VAR 
or CES1A2, to distinguish it from the original copy of CES1, 
namely CES1A1 (Rasmussen et al., 2017). This variant form of 
CES1 (in addition to CES1A1) is expressed in 4.4% of Caucasians, 
5.1% of African Americans, and 31.3% of Japanese subjects (Oda 
et al., 2015). Two variants of CES1A1 have been described in which 
exon 1 of CES1A1 is replaced by exon 1 from CES1P1 (with or 
without its flanking sequences). These variants are called CES1A1b 
and CES1A1c to distinguish them from the “original” form desig-
nated CES1A1a (Rasmussen et al., 2017).
Genetic polymorphisms (single-nucleotide polymorphisms 
or SNPs) that affect carboxylesterase activity or expression levels 
underscore the importance of CES1 and CES2 in drug metabo-
lism (Merali et al., 2014). Genetic polymorphisms of CES1 
(rs71647871, rs71647872, and rs1219127770) affect the disposi-
tion of methylphenidate (Ritalin, a methyl ester) and the antiviral 
prodrug oseltamivir (an ethyl ester) (Zhu and Markowitz, 2009). 
Dabigatran etexilate, an anticoagulant with a narrow therapeu-
tic index, is a substrate for CES1. A genome-wide association 
study (GWAS) identified an allelic variant of CES1 (rs2244613) 
in roughly one-third of patients on long-term anticoagulation ther-
apy which was associated with lower exposure to dabigatran (the 
active metabolite formed by CES1) and a lower risk of bleeding 
(a consequence of excessive anticoagulation) (Pare et al., 2013). 
A phenotype for CES1 that might be classified as high EM has 
been described. It arises from a SNP (rs3785161) in the promoter 
region of CES1A2 (but not CES1A1) that increases the expression 
of CES1 and thereby increases the rate of hydrolysis of imidapril to 
its active metabolite imidaprilat, an angiotensin-converting enzyme 
(ACE) inhibitor, which increases its antihypertensive effect (Geshi 
et al., 2005). Genetic polymorphisms of CES2 (rs72547531 and 
rs72547532) affect the disposition of the anticancer drug irinotecan 
(CPT-11, a carbamate), which is converted by CES2 to the active 
metabolite SN-38, a topoisomerase inhibitor (Kubo et al., 2005). 
However, genetic polymorphisms of UGT1A have a greater impact 
on the disposition and toxicity of irinotecan, as detailed in the sec-
tion “Glucuronidation and Formation of Acyl-CoA Thioesters.”
Certain carboxylesterases also have a physiological func-
tion in anchoring other proteins to the endoplasmic reticulum. For 
example, the lysosomal enzyme β-glucuronidase is also present 
in the endoplasmic reticulum, where it is anchored in the lumen 
by egasyn, a microsomal carboxylesterase designated Ces1e in 
mouse and rat (Holmes et al., 2010). In rodents, egasyn binds to 
β-glucuronidase at its active-site serine residue, which effectively 
abolishes the carboxylesterase activity of egasyn, although there 
is no corresponding loss of β-glucuronidase activity. In humans, 
β-glucuronidase binds to egasyn but at a site distinct from its active 
site (Islam et al., 1999). Binding of OP compounds to egasyn causes 
AADAC
O
R
N-Deacetyl ketoconazole (DKTZ)
N-Hydroxy-DKTZ
DKTZ nitrone
(reactive)
H2O
HN
O
Aldehyde
Dialdehyde
(reactive)
O
R
N
O
OH
N
R
R
N
N
OH
OH
[O]
N
N
H
R
N
N
H
R
N
N+
O–
FMO1, FMO3
N
N
O
H
CI
R=
CI
O
O
N
N
Ketoconazole (KTZ)
Figure 6-10.  Role of arylacetamide deacetylase (AADAC) and flavin monooxygenase (FMO) in the activation of ketoconazole (KTZ) to hepatotoxic metabolites.

222
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
the release of β-glucuronidase into plasma, which serves as the 
basis for a test for OP exposure (Fujikawa et al., 2005). The reten-
tion of β-glucuronidase in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum 
is thought to be physiologically significant. Glucuronidation by 
microsomal UGTs is a major pathway in the clearance of many of 
the endogenous aglycones (such as bilirubin) and xenobiotics (such 
as drugs). However, hydrolysis of glucuronides by β-glucuronidase 
complexed with egasyn in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticu-
lum appears to be an important mechanism for recycling endog-
enous compounds, such as steroid hormones (Dwivedi et al., 1987). 
The acute-phase response protein, C-reactive protein, is similarly 
anchored in the endoplasmic reticulum by egasyn.
The mechanism of catalysis by carboxylesterases is analogous 
to the mechanism of catalysis by serine proteases. In the case of 
carboxylesterases, it involves charge relay among a catalytic triad 
comprising an acidic amino acid residue (glutamate [Glu335]), a 
basic residue (histidine [His448]), and a nucleophilic residue (ser-
ine [Ser203]) (Yan et al., 1994; Satoh and Hosokawa, 1998). (These 
amino acid residues, numbered for a rat carboxylesterase, differ 
slightly in other species, but the overall location and function of 
these residues are the same in all mammalian carboxylesterases.) 
The mechanism of catalysis of carboxylesterases is shown in 
Fig. 6-11, and is discussed in more detail in the section “Epoxide 
Hydrolases.” OP compounds bind to the nucleophilic OH group 
on the active-site serine residue to form a phosphorus–oxygen 
bond, which is not readily cleaved by water. Therefore, OP com-
pounds bind stoichiometrically to carboxylesterases and inhibit 
their enzymatic activity, for which reason they are also classified as 
B-esterases (Aldridge, 1953). Surprisingly, the stoichiometric bind-
ing of OP compounds to carboxylesterases and cholinesterases is 
an important determinant of OP toxicity, as outlined in the section 
“Cholinesterases (AChE and BChE).”
As mentioned previously in this section, a plasma carboxy-
lesterase, namely, Ces1c (previously known as Es1), is present in 
mouse plasma but not human or monkey plasma and accounts, at 
least in part, for the relative resistance of mice to the OP nerve agent 
soman. Duysen et al. (2011) demonstrated that plasma carboxyles-
terase knockout mice are considerably more susceptible to soman 
toxicity than wild-type mice.
Given the lack of plasma carboxylesterase in humans, the 
hydrolysis of xenobiotics in human blood is catalyzed by cholines-
terases and paraoxonases (with a significant contribution from albu-
min on a case-by-case basis), as described in the following sections.
Cholinesterases (AChE and BChE)  Humans have two cholin-
esterases, namely, acetylcholinesterase (AChE; gene name ACHE) 
and butyrylcholinesterase (BChE, also known as pseudocholines-
terase; gene name BCHE), which are related enzymes (about 54% 
identical). They are present in most tissues. The levels of BChE 
are higher than those of AChE except in brain and muscle, tissues 
where AChE terminates the action of the neurotransmitter acetyl-
choline. In human plasma, the levels of BChE are 100- to 1000-fold 
greater than those of AChE, although the latter enzyme is present in 
erythrocytes (Li et al., 2005). As the names imply, AChE and BChE 
have high activity toward acetylcholine and butyrylcholine, respec-
tively. AChE is highly selective for acetylcholine and plays little or 
no significant role in the hydrolysis of xenobiotics, whereas BChE 
hydrolyzes numerous drugs (and other xenobiotics) including 
aspirin, bambuterol, chlorpropaine, cocaine, flestolol, heroin, iri-
notecan, isosorbide diaspirinate, methylprednisolone acetate, miva-
curium, moxisylyte, n-octanoyl ghrelin, procaine, succinylcholine 
(suxamethonium), and tetracaine (Li et al., 2005). Eserine (physo-
stigmine) is an inhibitor of both enzymes, whereas BW284C51 is a 
selective inhibitor of AChE, and iso-OMPA, bambuterol, tolserine, 
and bis-norcymserine are selective inhibitors of BChE (Liederer 
and Borchardt, 2006; Masson and Lockridge, 2010). Drugs that 
selectively inhibit AChE, such as tacrine (Cognex®), gelantamine 
(Reminyl®), and donepezil (Aricept®), or inhibit both AChE and 
BChE, namely rivastigmine (Exelon®), have been approved for the 
treatment of Alzheimer disease, which is characterized by a loss 
of cholinergic neurons that project from the basal forebrain to the 
cortex and hippocampus (Wang et al., 2016b).
Both enzymes exist in six different forms with differing solubil-
ity: monomer (G1), dimer (G2), tetramer (G4), tailed tetramers (A4), 
double tetramers (A8), and triple tetramers (A12). G1, G2, and G4 
contain 1, 2, and 4 subunits, each with a catalytic site. These various 
forms can each exist in three states: soluble (hydrophilic), immo-
bilized (asymmetric), and amphiphilic globular (membrane-bound 
Acylated enzyme intermediate
O
C
O
O
R2
R1
O
H
O
O
N
N
H
O
C
R1
R1
O
O
O
N
N
H
H
O
R2
O
C
O
O
O
N
N
H
H
O
H
H2O
R2OH
R1COOH
Enzyme ready to
bind substrate
Nucleophilic attack by water
Enzyme–substrate complex
C
O
O
O
O
N
N
H
H+
Enzyme–substrate complex
C
O
O
HO
O
O
N
N
H
Alkylated enzyme intermediate
H2O
O
H
H
C
O
O
HO
O
O
N
N
H
Enzyme ready to
bind substrate
Nucleophilic attack by water
OH
HO
Epoxide hydrolase
Carboxylesterase
His448
Glu335
His448
Glu335
Ser203 
Ser203 
His448
Glu335
Ser203 
Asp226
His431
Glu376
and 404 
Asp226
His431
Glu376
and 404 
Asp226
His431
Glu376
and 404 
Figure 6-11.  Catalytic cycle of microsomal carboxylesterase (left) and 
microsomal epoxide hydrolase (right), both of which are α/β-hydrolase fold 
enzymes.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
223
through attachment to the phospholipid bilayer) (Nigg and Knaak, 
2000). All forms are expressed in muscle. In the case of AChE, the 
major form in brain is the tetramer G4 (anchored with a 20-kDa side 
chain containing fatty acids), but the major form in erythrocytes 
is the dimer G2 (anchored with a glycolipid-­phosphatidylinositol 
side chain). In the case of BChE, the major form in plasma is the 
tetramer G4 (a glycoprotein with Mr 342 kDa). In both AChE and 
BChE, the esteratic site (containing the same catalytic triad— 
­Ser-His-Glu—present in carboxylesterases [Fig. 6-11]) is adjacent 
to an anionic (negatively charged) site that interacts with the posi-
tively charged nitrogen on acetylcholine and butyrylcholine.
Genetic variants of AChE that eliminate its activity have not 
been described, which is not surprising given the key role that AChE 
plays in terminating neurotransmission by acetylcholine, although 
AChE knockout mice (AChE−/−) are born alive and, despite devel-
opmental abnormalities, survive up to 21 days (Xie et al., 2000). 
Based on measurements of erythrocyte AChE activity, familial 
reductions of 30% have been reported, and a reduction of 50% has 
been linked to paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (Nigg and 
Knaak, 2000).
More than 70 genetic variants of BChE have been described 
following the discovery of poor metabolizers (PMs) of succinylcho-
line (suxamethonium) and, later, mivacurium. Succinylcholine and 
mivacurium are muscle relaxants whose duration of action is deter-
mined by plasma BChE. Succinylcholine (1.5 to 2.0 mg/kg) is a 
rapidly acting muscle relaxant (the onset of paralysis takes 30 to 60 
seconds) with a short duration of action (8 to 15 minutes) making 
it well suited for intubating patients. In some individuals, succinyl-
choline causes prolonged (60 to 120 minutes) paralysis (muscular 
relaxation and apnea), which led to the discovery of two BChE 
genetic polymorphisms (now known as BCHE*A and BCHE*K) 
(Cerf et al., 2002). The so-called A variant of BChE (Asp70Gly) has 
markedly reduced enzymatic activity (less than 10% of the wild-
type enzyme) but is relatively rare; about 1 in 300 Caucasians are 
homozygous for the A variant. The K variant (Ala539Thr) is con-
siderably more common (with 1 in 63 individuals being homozy-
gous), but the K variant still retains approximately two-thirds of 
its enzymatic activity. Consequently, the A variant causes a greater 
impairment of succinylcholine (and mivacurium) metabolism than 
does the K variant (La Du, 1992; Lockridge, 1992; Levano et al., 
2008). Although the A variant has markedly diminished activity 
toward succinylcholine (due to about 100-fold increase in Km), it 
nevertheless has appreciable activity toward other substrates, such 
as acetylcholine and benzoylcholine. Wild-type BChE and the A 
variant are equally sensitive to the inhibitory effect of OP com-
pounds, but the allelic variant is relatively resistant to the inhibitory 
effect of dibucaine, a local anesthetic, which forms the basis of a 
diagnostic test for its presence (frequently called a test for atypi-
cal pseudocholinesterase). The percent inhibition of hydrolysis of 
benzoylcholine by dibucaine (with both the substrate and inhibitor 
at 10 μM) is called the dibucaine number; it is 80% or more with 
wild-type BChE and about 40% with the A variant in most but not 
all cases (Cerf et al., 2002). The discovery of the A variant of BChE 
(the so-called atypical pseudocholinesterase) is of historical inter-
est because it ushered in the new field of pharmacogenetics, a field 
pioneered by Dr Werner Kalow, after whom the K variant of BChE 
is named.
Carboxylesterases and cholinesterases in the blood and tissues 
play an important role in limiting the amount of cholinergic neu-
rotoxins that reach AChE in the brain, marked inhibition (70% to 
90%) of which is lethal to mammals, insects, and nematodes. The 
cholinergic neurotoxins that are bound covalently to—or are hydro-
lyzed by—these enzymes include OP nerve agents (such as soman 
and sarin), OP pesticides (such as parathion, malathion, and chlor-
pyros, which are converted to oxons by CYP), carbamate pesticides 
(such as aldicarb, carbaryl, carbofuran), the naturally occurring OP 
compound anatoxin-a(S) from blue-green algae, physostigmine 
(eserine) from the Calabar bean, huperzine A from the club moss 
Huperzia serrata, solandine from green potatoes, and cocaine from 
the Erythroxylum coca plant. The covalent interaction between OP 
compounds and brain AChE is analogous to their binding to the 
active-site serine residue in all serine esterases (B-esterases). As 
previously mentioned, certain OP compounds are hydrolyzed by 
A-esterases (the paraoxonase PON1) but bind stoichiometrically 
and, for the most part, irreversibly to B-esterases (carboxylester-
ases and cholinesterases). Surprisingly, stoichiometric binding of 
OP compounds to carboxylesterase and cholinesterase (and perhaps 
to numerous other enzymes and receptors that have structural fea-
tures common to serine esterases) plays an important role in limit-
ing the toxicity of OP compounds. Numerous studies have shown an 
inverse relationship between serine esterase activity and susceptibil-
ity to the toxic effect of OP compounds. Factors that decrease ser-
ine esterase activity potentiate the toxic effects of OP compounds, 
whereas factors that increase serine esterase activity have a protec-
tive effect. For example, the susceptibility of animals to the toxic-
ity of parathion, malathion, and diisopropylfluorophosphate (DFP) 
is inversely related to the level of plasma esterase activity (which 
reflects BChE activity and, in some species, carboxylesterase activ-
ity). Differences in the susceptibility of several mammalian species 
to OP toxicity can be abolished by pretreatment with selective ser-
ine esterase inhibitors such as cresylbenzodioxaphosphorin oxide, 
the active metabolite of tri-ortho-tolylphosphate (which is also 
known as tri-ortho-cresylphosphate [TOCP]). Knockout mice that 
lack plasma carboxylesterase (Ces1c, previously known as Es1) or 
AChE are more susceptible to the toxic effects of OP compounds, 
as are PON1 knockout mice in some but not all cases (discussed in 
the section “Paraoxonases (Lactonases)”) (Xie et al., 2000; Duysen 
et al., 2011). Somewhat surprisingly, BChE knockout mice are not 
more sensitive to OP toxicity than wild-type mice (Duysen et al., 
2007), but this may not reflect the situation in humans because 
mouse plasma contains a carboxylesterase, whereas humans do not 
(see Table 6-8 and the section “Carboxylesterases”). In humans, 
BChE plays an important role in preventing OP compounds from 
reaching AChE in the brain. Carboxylesterases, cholinesterases, and 
paraoxonases are not the only enzymes involved in the detoxication 
of OP pesticides. Certain OP compounds are detoxified by CYP, fla-
vin monooxygenases, and GSTs. However, paraoxonases, enzymes 
that catalyze the hydrolysis of certain OP compounds, appear to 
play a limited role in determining susceptibility to OP toxicity, as 
outlined in the following section.
Once bound to the active site of cholinesterase or carboxy-
lesterase, OP compounds can undergo dealkylation reactions that 
further retard their release from the active-site serine residue of 
these enzymes. This process is called “aging.” In many cases the 
phosphorylated or phosphonylated enzyme can be reactivated by 
displacement of the OP adduct with nucleophilic compounds such 
as fluoride, hydroxamates, and oximates. The pyridinium oximes 
pralidoxime (2-PAM) and obidoxime (toxogonin) are used thera-
peutically as antidotes to OP poisoning. More potent oximes, 
namely HI-6 (asoxime) and MMB-4 (ICD-039, methoxime), have 
been developed for the treatment of poisoning from OPs includ-
ing chemical warfare agents (Masson and Lockridge, 2010; Lundy 
et al., 2011; Kovalevsky et al., 2016).
Cocaine is hydrolyzed by CES1 and CES2 in the liver and 
intestine, and by BChE in plasma. Genetic polymorphisms that 
reduce BChE activity toward succinylcholine (such as the A variant

224
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
described earlier in this section) also reduce its activity toward 
cocaine (again by increasing Km), which exacerbates cocaine toxic-
ity (Masson and Lockridge, 2010). Despite its important role in 
cocaine toxicity, BChE hydrolyzes cocaine slowly. Masson and 
Lockridge (2010) reviewed efforts based on molecular dynamics 
simulation to improve the hydrolytic function of BChE through site-
directed mutagenesis. A BChE variant with four mutations hydro-
lyzes cocaine with a catalytic efficiency 1500- to 5000-fold greater 
than that of the wild-type enzyme, whereas a variant with five 
mutations is 6500 times more active. Cocaine hydrolase (CocH), a 
modified form of BChE with high activity toward cocaine, coupled 
with albumin or a modified Fc region of immunoglobulin G1 (IgG1) 
to prolong its plasma half-life, is under development for the treat-
ment of cocaine overdose and addition (Chen et al., 2016). Based 
on its ability to hydrolyze and inactivate ghrelin, a gastric peptide 
hormone acylated with a fatty acid that stimulates hyperphagia and 
adiposity (earning ghrelin the title of “hunger hormone”), CocH 
also has potential as an antiobesity drug (Zheng et al., 2016).
Paraoxonases (Lactonases)  Paraoxonases catalyze the hydro-
lysis of a broad range of organophosphates, organophosphinites, 
aromatic carboxylic acid esters (such as phenylacetate), cyclic car-
bonates, lactones, and oxidized phospholipids. They are calcium-
dependent enzymes containing a critical sulfhydryl (−SH) group; 
as such they are inhibited by EDTA, metal ions (Cu and Ba), and 
various mercurials such as phenylmercuric acetate (PMA), para-
chloromercuribenzoate (PCMB), and the PCMB hydrolysis prod-
uct, para-hydroxymercuribenzoate. (Note: Calcium must be added 
to measure paraoxonase activity in plasma prepared from EDTA-
anticoagulated blood.) Based on the observation that A-esterases 
are inhibited by PCMB but not OP compounds, Augustinsson 
(1966) postulated that, in the case of paraoxonases, OP compounds 
bind to a nucleophilic SH group on an active-site cysteine residue 
and form a phosphorus–sulfur bond, which is readily cleaved by 
water. A strong argument against this postulate is the fact that there 
is no loss of enzymatic activity when the only potential active-site 
cysteine residue in human paraoxonase (Cys283) is substituted with 
serine or alanine (Sorenson et al., 1995). However, substitution 
with serine or alanine renders paraoxonase resistant to inhibition 
by PCMB, placing Cys283 near but not in the active site of paraox-
onase. Paraoxonase requires Ca2+ for both stability and catalytic 
activity, which raises the possibility that the hydrolysis of OP com-
pounds by paraoxonase involves metal-catalyzed hydrolysis, analo-
gous to that proposed for calcium-dependent phospholipase A2 or 
zinc-dependent phosphotriesterase activity (Sorenson et al., 1995). 
A structurally modified but catalytically active form of recombi-
nant PON1 has been crystallized and shown by x-ray analysis to 
contain two calcium ions in a sixfold β-propeller protein similar 
to that found in squid diisopropylfluorophosphatase (DFPase), a 
paraoxonase-like enzyme (Otto et al., 2009).
Humans express three paraoxonases designated PON1, PON2, 
and PON3. PON1 is present in liver microsomes and plasma, where 
it is associated exclusively with high-density lipoprotein (HDL). 
PON2 is not present in plasma but it is expressed in the inner mito-
chondrial membrane of vascular cells and many tissues (Devarajan 
et al., 2011). PON3 is expressed in liver and kidney microsomes 
and plasma. Only PON1 has appreciable arylesterase activity and 
the ability to hydrolyze the toxic oxon metabolites of OP insecti-
cides such as parathion (paraoxon), diazinon (diazoxon), and chlor-
pyrifos (chlorpyrifos oxon) (Gupta and DuBois, 1998; Draganov 
and La Du, 2004). However, all three enzymes can catalyze the 
hydrolysis of various lactones, for which reason the name “lac-
tonase” is more encompassing. A lactone derived from arachidonic 
acid (5-hydroxy-cicosate traeomic acid-1,5-lactone) is one of the 
few substrates hydrolyzed by all three paraoxonases (Gupta et al., 
2009). Lactone hydrolysis of the statins lovastatin and simvastatin 
is catalyzed only by PON3. Reports of the same reaction being 
catalyzed by PON1 appear to be attributable to trace contamination 
with PON3 (Draganov and La Du, 2004). However, both PON1 and 
PON3 hydrolyze the lactone form of atorvastatin, which reverses 
the lactonization of atorvastatin, a reaction that involves forma-
tion of an acyl glucuronide of atorvastatin by UGT1A3 (Riedmaier 
et al., 2011). PON1 hydrolyzes thiolactones such as homocysteine 
thiolactone (an endobiotic substrate) and a thiolactone metabolite 
of clopidogrel (discussed later in the section “CYP2C19”), whereas 
PON3 hydrolyzes the lactone spironolactone (a diuretic drug) 
(Gupta et al., 2009). PON1 is the major plasma enzyme responsible 
for hydrolyzing the prodrug olmesartan medoxomil to its active 
metabolite (Ishizuka et al., 2012) and is one of the plasma enzymes 
responsible for hydrolyzing the structurally related prodrugs pru-
lifloxacin and ceftobiprole medocaril to their active metabolite 
(Eichenbaum et al., 2012).
PON2, located on the inner mitochondrial membrane, appears 
to play no significant role in xenobiotic biotransformation, although 
it can hydrolyze the lactone dihydrocoumarin. In the inner mito-
chondrial membrane, PON2 is bound to coenzyme Q10 and 
complexed with respiratory complex III where it protects the mito-
chondrion from oxidative damage from superoxide anion and its 
derivative reactive oxygen species (hydrogen peroxide, peroxyni-
trate, and hydroxy radicals) (Devarajan et al., 2011).
PON1 has two prominent polymorphisms in the coding region, 
namely, Q192R (Glu192Arg) and L55M (Leu55Met), and several poly-
morphisms in the promoter region. Polymorphisms in the promoter 
region and the L55M polymorphism in the coding region do not 
affect PON1 activity but they do affect expression levels (Gupta 
et al., 2009; Furlong et al., 2010). The commonest genetic poly-
morphism, Q192R, affects PON1 activity in a substrate-dependent 
­manner. The glutamine (Q192) and arginine (R192) allelozymes have 
the same hydrolytic activity toward para-nitrophenylacetate (a mea-
sure of arylesterase activity) and diazoxon (the oxon of diazinon) 
but R192 is more active toward paraoxon (the oxon of parathion), 
chlorpyrifos oxon, the prodrugs olmesartan medoxomil and pruli-
floxacin, and the lactone pilocarpine, whereas Q192 is more active 
toward soman, sarin, the thiolactone metabolite of clopidogrel 
(Bouman et al., 2011; discussed later in the section “CYP2C19”), 
and lipid peroxides, the significance of which is discussed later in 
this section (Gupta et al., 2009; Furlong et al., 2010; Eichenbaum 
et al., 2012; Ishizuka et al., 2012).
There is evidence to suggest that PON1 protects against ath-
erosclerosis by hydrolyzing specific derivatives of oxidized choles-
terol and/or phospholipids in atherosclerotic lesions and in oxidized 
low-density lipoprotein (LDL). Low-serum PON-1 activity is asso-
ciated with a higher risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD), which 
is partly dependent on the serum levels of high-density lipopro-
tein cholesterol (HDL-C), which binds PON-1 and is a recognized 
risk factor for CVD (Kunutsor et al., 2016). Mice lacking PON1 
(knockout mice or PON1 null mice) are predisposed to atherogen-
esis, whereas mice overexpressing PON1 are protected (Draganov 
and La Du, 2004; Gupta et al., 2009). Some studies show that indi-
viduals who are homozygous for the R192 allele are at increased risk 
of atherosclerosis and ischemic stroke compared with individuals 
who are homozygous for the Q192 allele, suggesting that the absence 
of the latter enzyme, the PON1 allelozyme with high activity toward 
lipid peroxides and offering more protection against LDL oxida-
tion, is a risk factor for CVD (Gupta et al., 2009; Dahabreh et al., 
2010). However, the association is controversial. A complicating 
factor is that the R192 allelozyme is expressed at higher levels than

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
225
the Q192 enzyme, which may partially offset its lower ability to 
hydrolyze lipid peroxides. Bayrak et al. (2012) proposed that, in 
terms of assessing the risk of atherosclerosis, an assessment of both 
plasma PON1 activity and genotype is more reliable than genotype 
alone. This seems appropriate in view of the finding that several 
environmental factors affect PON1 levels, which are upregulated by 
hypolipidemic drugs (fenofibrate and statins) and cardioprotective 
dietary components such as polyphenols (such as resveratrol), oleic 
acid, and olive oil, and downregulated by diabetes and a high-fat 
(proatherogenic) diet (Gupta et al., 2009).
It seems reasonable to assume that PON1 would play an impor-
tant role in determining the susceptibility of humans to OP toxicity 
based on three considerations: first, PON1 hydrolyzes OP com-
pounds (rather than simply bind them stoichiometrically like BChE). 
Second, the concentration of PON1/PON3 in human plasma is 10 
times greater than that of BChE (50 ng/mL vs.5 ng/mL) (Li et al., 
2005). Third, human plasma does not contain ­carboxylesterase 
(Table 6-8). PON1/PON3 may protect against OP toxicity in some 
but not all cases. PON1 knockout mice are no more susceptible than 
wild-type mice to the toxic effects of paraoxon (the active metabo-
lite of parathion), and administration of human PON1 (either the 
R192 or the Q192 allelozyme) to PON1 knockout mice does not confer 
protection against paraoxon. However, administration of either the 
R192 or Q192 human allelozymes to PON1 knockout mice does protect 
against diazoxon toxicity, and administration of the R192 allelozyme 
(but not the Q192 allelozyme) protects against chlorpyrifos oxon 
(Cole et al., 2010). The allelozyme-dependent pattern of protection 
corresponds with the rate of hydrolysis of these OP oxons by R192 
and Q192 (high and equal for diazoxon, high but greater with R192 
for chlorpyrifos oxon, and low but greater with R192 for paraoxon). 
Although the concentration of BChE in human plasma is only one-
tenth that of PON1/PON3 (about 50 nM vs. 500 nM), its apparent 
second-order rate constant with OP compounds is very high (107 to 
109 M−1 min−1) compared with the catalytic efficiency of PON1 (105 
M−1 min−1) (Masson and Lockridge, 2010).
Diisopropylfluorophosphatase (DFPase), a squid enzyme that 
catalyzes the release of fluoride from DFP (Fig. 6-9), is a hydrolytic 
enzyme related to the paraoxonases. It hydrolyzes the nerve gas 
agents sarin and soman (Liederer and Borchardt, 2006). Human 
paraoxonases do not hydrolyze DFP but are inhibited by this OP 
compound.
Prodrugs and Alkaline Phosphatase  Many prodrugs are 
designed to be hydrolyzed by hydrolytic enzymes (Liederer and 
Borchardt, 2006; Yang et al., 2011). Some prodrugs, such as pro-
pranolol ester, are hydrolyzed by both carboxylesterases and cholin-
esterases (both AChE and BChE), whereas others are preferentially 
or specifically hydrolyzed by carboxylesterases (capecitabine and 
irinotecan), BChE (bambuterol and methylprednisolone acetate), 
hPON1 (prulifloxacin and olmesartan medoxomil), or PON3 (lov-
astatin and simvastatin). On a case-by-case basis, specific enzymes 
other than those mentioned above can be involved in xenobiotic 
hydrolysis. For example, the valine ester prodrugs of acyclovir 
(valacyclovir) and gangciclovir (valgangciclovir) are hydrolyzed 
by valacyclovirase (gene code BPHL), a serine- and α/β-fold-
hydrolase that hydrolyzes other antiviral and anticancer nucleoside 
drugs such as zidovudine, floxuridine, and gemcitabine (Lai et al., 
2008). As a means of targeting the release of cytotoxic antican-
cer drugs toward cancer cells, amino acid or peptide conjugates 
of drugs such as doxorubicin have been designed for hydrolysis 
(activation) by various matrix metalloproteinases, which play a 
key role in tumor angiogenesis, invasion, and metastasis (Yang 
et al., 2011). Several anticancer drugs have been conjugated with 
peptides that are specifically cleaved by prostate-specific antigen 
(PSA) to target PSA-expressing prostate cells (Yang et al., 2011). 
Some prodrugs are hydrolyzed with a high degree of stereoselectiv-
ity. For example, in the case of prodrugs of ibuprofen and flurbi-
profen, the R-enantiomer is hydrolyzed about 50 times faster than 
the S-enantiomer. The acyl glucuronides of ibuprofen and other 
NSAIDs are also hydrolyzed stereoselectively (see the section 
“Glucuronidation and Formation of Acyl-CoA Thioesters”).
Some prodrugs, such as fosphenytoin (Cerebyx®) and fosam-
prenavir (Lexiva®), are designed to be hydrolyzed by alkaline phos-
phatase, high concentrations of which are present on the luminal 
surface of the enterocytes lining the wall of the small intestine. 
Hydrolysis of these prodrugs by alkaline phosphatase releases the 
active drug at the surface of the enterocytes, where it can be read-
ily absorbed. Soluble epoxide hydrolase (sEH) is a bifunctional 
enzyme; its C-terminus contains an epoxide hydrolase domain, 
whereas its N-terminus contains a phosphatase domain, as described 
in the section “Epoxide Hydrolases.” Although it may play a role 
in the hydrolysis of endogenous phosphates, such as polyisoprenyl 
phosphates and lysophosphatidic acids (Oguro and Imaoka, 2012), 
sEH is an intracellular enzyme and, as such, can play no significant 
role in the hydrolysis of phosphate/phosphonate prodrugs.
Peptidases  Peptidases are proteolytic enzymes that hydro-
lyze the amide (peptide) bond connecting adjacent amino acids 
in peptides and proteins (R1‒NH‒CO‒R2 + H2O → R1‒NH2 + 
R2‒COOH). Traditionally they have not been viewed as drug-
metabolizing enzymes but that has changed with the emerging field 
of therapeutic peptides and proteins.
On January 16, 2017, Botox made the cover of Time Magazine 
under the title: How Botox Became the Drug That’s Treating 
Everything—Depression, Heart Trouble, Migraines, Erectile 
Dysfunction, Back Pain, Sweaty Palms, Drooling and 793 Other 
Problems. Botox is a large therapeutic protein (about 1300 amino 
acids) derived from botulinum neurotoxin type A (BoNT/A), which 
ranks as one of the most toxic substances known and is the cause of 
botulism following infection with the bacterium Botulinum clostrid-
ium. The manufacturer of Botox, Allergan, holds over 800 ­patents 
on potential therapeutic applications for Botox. Today, Botox 
is probably the best known therapeutic protein, although insulin 
held this position in the past. Therapeutic proteins (9%), therapeu-
tic peptides (8%), and monoclonal antibodies (8%) collectively 
accounted for 25% of drugs approved by the FDA between 2009 
and 2011, compared with 34% for small molecule drugs (Albericio 
and Kruger, 2012). Therapeutic peptides/proteins are used or can 
potentially be used to treat infection, cancer, diabetes, cardiovascu-
lar diseases and, even with Botox alone, too many other conditions 
to list.
Proteolysis is one of the major factors limiting the usefulness 
of therapeutic peptides and proteins. Proteolysis in the intestine 
restricts oral bioavailability and proteolysis in the blood/tissues 
leads to the rapid systemic elimination of therapeutic peptides/
proteins and loss of therapeutic efficacy. Parenteral administration 
overcomes the former problem. Overcoming proteolysis in blood 
and tissues is more problematic. A larger number of proteolytic 
enzymes are expressed in blood, on cell surfaces, or in tissues, 
including serine proteases (n = 9), cysteine proteases (n = 3), 
aspartate proteases (n = 2), metalloproteinases (n = 2), aminopep-
tidases (n = 3), dipeptidyl- and/or tripeptidyl-peptidases (n = 4), 
and metallocarboxypeptidases (n = 6) (Vlieghe et al., 2010). The 
stability of therapeutic peptides can be enhanced by various ways, 
including incorporation of d-amino acids (to render them prote-
ase resistant), cyclization (to prevent hydrolysis by exopeptidases 
[the last four classes of proteases listed in the preceding sentence]), 
and incorporation of α-aminoxy amino acids, which greatly slow

226
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
proteolysis (Gentilucci et al., 2010; Chen et al., 2012a). Another 
strategy to overcome rapid elimination of therapeutic peptides by 
proteolysis is the use of modified peptides, which are known as 
peptidomimetics or quasi-peptides. When intracellular targeting is 
desirable, therapeutic peptides can be linked to one of a variety 
of cell-penetrating peptides, which are generally peptides contain-
ing multiple amino acids with cationic (basic) side chains (such as 
lysine and arginine) that can bind to phospholipid membranes and 
enter cells by endocytosis, much the same way as aminoglycosides 
permeate cell membranes (see the section “Introduction”) (Zheng 
et al., 2016; Guidotti et al., 2017).
β-Glucuronidase  β-Glucuronidase is present in liver lyso-
somes and microsomes (where it is bound to the lumen of the 
endoplasmic reticulum by egasyn [Ces1e], as mentioned in the 
section “Carboxylesterases”) and in gut microbiota. The enzyme 
hydrolyzes xenobiotic glucuronides (in which the glucuronide is 
in the β-configuration). When a drug is glucuronidated directly 
and excreted in bile, hydrolysis by β-glucuronidase in the gut can 
release the aglycone (the parent drug) and result in a second phase 
of drug absorption, a process called enterohepatic circulation. In 
the case of the anticancer drug irinotecan, which is hydrolyzed to 
SN-11 (the pharmacologically active and toxic metabolite) and 
then glucuronidated, hydrolysis of SN-11-glucuronide by micro-
biota β-glucuronidase is undesirable because it releases SN-11 
in the colon and causes dose-limiting diarrhea. To reduce the risk 
of such an adverse event, inhibitors of gut β-glucuronidase have 
been developed (Wallace et al., 2010; Roberts et al., 2013) which 
is described in more detail in the section “Glucuronidation and 
Formation of Acyl-CoA Thioesters.”
Epoxide Hydrolases  Epoxide hydrolases catalyze the trans-
addition of water to alkene epoxides and arene oxides (oxiranes), 
which can form during the CYP-dependent oxidation of aliphatic 
alkenes and aromatic hydrocarbons, respectively. As shown in 
Fig. 6-12, the products of this hydrolysis are vicinal diols with a 
trans-configuration (i.e., trans-1,2-dihydrodiols). There are two 
notable exceptions to this general rule. Epoxide hydrolase catalyzes 
the hydration of the epoxide leukotriene A4 (LTA4) to leukotriene 
B4 (LTB4) and the hydration of AZD1979, an investigational drug 
containing an oxetane moiety (a four-membered ring composed of 
three carbons and one oxygen atom) to a ring-opened diol, and in 
both cases the two hydroxyl groups appear on nonadjacent carbon 
atoms (Li et al., 2016; Toselli et al., 2017). Hydration of a generic 
oxetane by epoxide hydrolase is shown below:
R1
O + H2O
OH
OH
R2
R1
R2
Epoxide hydrolases play an important role in detoxifying elec-
trophilic epoxides that might otherwise bind to proteins and nucleic 
acids and cause cellular toxicity and genetic mutations. In the case 
of PAHs, however, microsomal epoxide hydrolase plays a critical 
role in forming diol epoxides, the ultimate carcinogenic metabo-
lites of benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P), 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene 
(DMBA), and many other PAHs (discussed later in this section).
There are four distinct forms of epoxide hydrolase in mam-
mals: microsomal epoxide hydrolase (mEH; gene name EPHX1), 
soluble epoxide hydrolase (sEH; gene name EPHX2), cholesterol-
5,6-epoxide hydrolase (ChEH; EC 3.3.2.11), and leukotriene A4 
hydrolase (LTA4 hydrolase; gene name LTA4H) (Fretland and 
Omiecinski, 2000; Morisseau and Hammock, 2005; Kodani and 
Hammock, 2015). Hepoxilin A3 hydrolase was thought to represent 
a fifth class of epoxide hydrolase but it was subsequently identified 
as being the same enzyme as sEH (Cronin et al., 2011). As their 
names imply, cholesterol-5,6-epoxide hydrolase (ChEH) and LTA4 
hydrolase hydrolyze endogenous epoxides specifically, and have 
virtually no capacity to detoxify xenobiotic oxides. LTA4 hydrolase 
is distinct from the other epoxide hydrolases because it is a bifunc-
tional zinc metalloenzyme that has both epoxide hydrolase and 
peptidase activity, and because the two hydroxyl groups introduced 
during the conversion of LTA4 to LTB4 are eight carbon atoms apart. 
sEH is a bifunctional enzyme; its C-terminus contains an epoxide 
hydrolase domain, whereas its N-terminus contains a phosphatase 
domain. The latter domain is structurally related to members of the 
haloacid dehalogenase (HAD) superfamily, which includes deha-
logenases, phosphonatases, phosphomutases, phosphatases, and 
ATPases. The phosphatase domain of sEH is thought to play a role 
in the hydrolysis of endogenous phosphates, such as polyisoprenyl 
phosphates (which regulate cholesterol levels) and lysophosphatidic 
acids (Imig and Hammock, 2009; Oguro and Imaoka, 2012).
mEH hydrolyzes a wide variety of xenobiotics with an alkene 
epoxide or arene oxide. sEH hydrolyzes some xenobiotic epoxides 
and oxides, such as trans-stilbene oxide, but it also plays an impor-
tant role in the hydrolysis of endogenous fatty acid epoxides, such 
as the epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs) that are formed by epoxi-
dation of arachidonic acid by CYP (particularly CYP2C8, CYP2C9, 
and CYP2J2) and the leukotoxins that are formed by the epoxi-
dation of linoleic acid by leukocytes (Fretland and Omiecinski, 
2000; Morisseau and Hammock, 2005; Imig and Hammock, 2009; 
Fleming, 2014). EETs are endothelin-derived hyperpolarizing fac-
tors (EDHFs) (i.e., vasodilators) that possess anti-inflammatory 
properties and protect tissues from ischemic injury. Hydrolysis of 
EETs by sEH terminates their vasodilatory and anti-inflammatory 
effects. Accordingly, sEH is a potential therapeutic target for the 
treatment of various cardiovascular diseases such as hypertension 
and atherosclerosis (Imig and Hammock, 2009; Wang et al., 2010c; 
Oguro and Imaoka, 2012; Fleming, 2014; Kodani and Hammock, 
2015; He et al., 2016). Several disubstituted ureas (including the 
anticancer drug sorafenib) have been identified as competitive 
inhibitors of sEH that are both potent (Ki values in the nanomolar 
range) and specific (they do not inhibit the phosphatase domain 
of sEH and they do not potently inhibit mEH). Despite promising 
efficacy in nonclinical species, a clinical trial of a sHE inhibitor 
H2O
Naphthalene 1,2-oxide
Naphthalene 1,2-dihydrodiol
Styrene 7,8-epoxide
+
H2O
+
O
H
H
Styrene 7,8-glycol
C
H
CH2OH
OH
Alkene epoxide
Arene oxide
C
CH2
O
H
OH
H
HO
H
Figure 6-12.  Examples of the hydration of an alkene epoxide (top) and an 
arene oxide (bottom) by epoxide hydrolase.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
227
(1-(1-acetyl-piperidin-4-yl)-3-adamantan-1-yl-urea) was termi-
nated for lack of efficacy in Phase 2 trials (He et al., 2014). In 
addition to their vasodilatory and anti-inflammatory effects, EETs 
promote endothelial cell proliferation and migration; hence, they 
are angiogenic (i.e., they stimulate blood vessel supply). A potential 
side effect of sEH inhibitors, therefore, may be potentiation of EET-
mediated angiogenesis resulting in accelerated tumorigenesis (Imig 
and Hammock, 2009; Wang et al., 2010c; Fleming, 2014).
Although the levels vary from one tissue to the next, mEH 
has been found in the microsomal fraction (and in some cases the 
plasma membrane) of virtually all tissues, including the liver, testis, 
ovary, lung, kidney, skin, intestine, colon, spleen, thymus, brain, 
and heart. sEH is also widely distributed in tissues; high levels of 
sEH are present in the cytosol (and in some cases the lysosomes) 
of liver, kidney, brain, and vasculature and lower levels are present 
in lung, spleen, and testis. In general, mEH prefers monosubsti-
tuted epoxides and disubstituted epoxides with a cis configuration, 
such as cis-stilbene oxide, whereas sEH prefers tetrasubstituted 
and trisubstituted epoxides and disubstituted epoxides with a gem 
configuration (both substituents on the same carbon atom) or the 
trans configuration, such as trans-stilbene oxide, as shown in 
Fig. 6-13. In rodents, both sEH and mEH are inducible enzymes; 
sEH is under the control of PPARα, so it is induced following treat-
ment of rats and mice with peroxisome proliferators, whereas mEH 
is under the control of Nrf2, so it is induced in response to oxidative 
stress or exposure to electrophiles and GSH depletors (see the sec-
tion “Quinone Reduction: NQO1 and NQO2”). Treatment of mice 
with the CAR agonist phenobarbital induces mEH about two- to 
threefold, whereas treatment with Nrf2 activators such as butylated 
hydroxytoluene (BHT), butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA), and eth-
oxyquin induces mEH by an order of magnitude or more. mEH is 
one of several proteins (so-called preneoplastic antigens) that are 
overexpressed in chemically induced foci and nodules that eventu-
ally develop into liver tumors.
Many epoxides and oxides are intermediary metabolites 
formed during the CYP-dependent oxidation of unsaturated ali-
phatic and aromatic xenobiotics. These electrophilic metabolites 
might otherwise bind to proteins and nucleic acids and cause cel-
lular toxicity and genetic mutations. In general, sEH and mEH are 
found in the same tissues and cell types that contain CYP enzymes. 
For example, the distribution of epoxide hydrolase parallels that 
of CYP enzymes in the liver, lung, and testis. In other words, both 
enzymes are located in the centrilobular region of the liver (zone 3), 
in Clara and type II cells in the lung, and in Leydig cells in the 
testis. The colocalization of epoxide hydrolase and CYP presum-
ably ensures the rapid detoxication of alkene epoxides and arene 
oxides generated during the oxidative metabolism of unsaturated 
xenobiotics.
Electrophilic epoxides and arene oxides are constantly pro-
duced during the CYP-dependent oxidation of unsaturated aliphatic 
and aromatic xenobiotics, and are potentially reactive to cellular 
macromolecules such as DNA and protein. Epoxide hydrolase 
can rapidly convert these potentially toxic metabolites to the cor-
responding dihydrodiols, which are less reactive and easier to 
excrete. Thus, epoxide hydrolases are widely considered as a group 
of detoxication enzymes. In some cases, however, further oxidation 
of a dihydrodiol can lead to the formation of diol epoxide deriva-
tives that are no longer substrates for epoxide hydrolase because the 
oxirane ring is protected by bulky substituents that sterically hin-
der interaction with the enzyme. This point proved to be extremely 
important in elucidating the mechanism by which PAHs cause 
tumors in laboratory animals (Conney, 1982). Tumorigenic PAHs, 
such as B[a]P, are converted by CYP (particularly by CYP1B1 and 
CYP1A1) to a variety of arene oxides that bind covalently to DNA, 
making them highly mutagenic to bacteria. One of the major arene 
oxides formed from B[a]P, namely, the 4,5-oxide, is highly mutagenic 
to bacteria but weakly mutagenic to mammalian cells. This discrep-
ancy reflects the rapid inactivation of B[a]P 4,5-oxide by epoxide 
hydrolase in mammalian cells. However, one of the arene oxides 
formed from B[a]P, namely, B[a]P 7,8-dihydrodiol-9,10-oxide, 
is not a substrate for epoxide hydrolase and is highly mutagenic to 
mammalian cells and considerably more potent than B[a]P as a lung 
tumorigen in mice.
B[a]P 7,8-dihydrodiol-9,10-oxide is known as a bay-region 
diol epoxide, and analogous bay-region diol epoxides are now 
recognized as tumorigenic metabolites of numerous PAHs. 
A feature common to all bay-region epoxides is their resistance 
to hydration by mEH, which results from steric hindrance from 
the nearby dihydrodiol group. As shown in Fig. 6-14, B[a]P 
7,8-­dihydrodiol-9,10-oxide is formed in three steps: B[a]P is con-
verted to the 7,8-oxide, which is converted to the 7,8-dihydrodiol, 
which is converted to the corresponding 9,10-epoxide (which can 
exist in four diastereomeric forms). The first and third steps are 
epoxidation reactions catalyzed by CYP (especially CYP1B1 and 
CYP1A1) or prostaglandin H synthase, but the second step is cata-
lyzed by mEH. Consequently, even though mEH plays a major role 
in detoxifying several B[a]P, such as the 4,5-oxide, it neverthe-
less plays a role in converting B[a]P to its ultimate tumorigenic 
metabolite B[a]P 7,8-dihydrodiol-9,10-oxide. Diol epoxides are 
also the carcinogenic metabolites of DMBA and many other PAHs 
(Shimada, 2006).
The importance of mEH in the conversion of PAHs to their 
ultimate carcinogenic metabolites, namely, diol epoxides, is illus-
trated by the observation that mEH knockout mice (mEH-null 
mice) are completely resistant to the tumorigenic effects of DMBA 
(Shimada, 2006). Genetic polymorphisms of human mEH also 
impact cigarette-smoking-induced cancer of the lung and upper 
aerodigestive tract (UADT) in a manner consistent with the pro-
tective effect conferred by a lack of mEH in DMBA-treated mice 
(Li et al., 2011b). More than 110 SNPs have been identified in 
the human EPHX1 gene, 2 of which have been studied in detail: 
one of them (Tyr113His) decreases mEH activity (by about 40%) 
and the other (His139Arg) increases mEH activity (by about 25%). 
Soluble (cytosolic)
epoxide hydrolase
Microsomal epoxide
hydrolase
1,2-diphenyl-1,2-ethanediol
trans-stilbene oxide
H2O
H2O
cis-stilbene oxide
C
C
OH H
H
OH
O
H
H
O
H
H
Figure 6-13.  Stereoselective hydration of stilbene oxide by microsomal and 
soluble epoxide hydrolase.

228
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
The low-activity mEH (observed in individuals who are homo-
zygous or heterozygous for the His133 allelozyme) protects from 
tobacco-induced cancer of the lung and UADT, whereas the high-
activity variant (observed in individuals who are homozygous or 
heterozygous for the Arg139 allelozyme) predisposes to these can-
cers (Li et al., 2011b). These findings do not translate to the risk 
of other cancers. Chen et al. (2015b) found that the low activity 
variant of mEH was associated with an increased risk of head and 
neck (odds ratio of ∼ 1.3), in contrast to the decreased risk of lung 
and UADT cancer, and found no association between head and neck 
cancer and the high activity variant of mEH.
Not all epoxides are highly reactive and toxic to the cells 
that produce them. Some drugs actually contain an epoxide, 
such as scopolamine, tiotropium, troleandomycin, carfilzomib, 
and oprozomib. Vitamin K epoxide is also a nontoxic epoxide, 
which is formed and consumed during the vitamin K–dependent 
γ-carboxylation of prothrombin and other clotting factors in the 
liver. Vitamin K epoxide is not hydrated by mEH but is reduced 
by vitamin K epoxide reductase. This enzyme is inhibited by war-
farin and related coumarin anticoagulants, which interrupts the 
synthesis of several clotting factors. The major metabolite of car-
bamazepine is an epoxide, which is so stable that carbamazepine 
10,11-epoxide is a major circulating metabolite in patients treated 
with this antiepileptic drug. (Carbamazepine is converted to a sec-
ond epoxide, which is less stable and more cytotoxic, as shown 
in the section “Cytochrome P450.”) Circulating levels of carbam-
azepine 10,11-epoxide are elevated in individuals expressing the 
low-activity variant of mEH (the His133 allelozyme) but, with one 
possible exception, this genetic polymorphism is not associated 
with an increase in the adverse effects of this or other anticonvulsant 
drugs (Daly, 1999). The exception is a case report of a man who had 
a defect in mEH expression and suffered acute and severe phenytoin 
toxicity (Morisseau and Hammock, 2005). Certain drugs such as 
valpromide (the amide analog of valproic acid) and progabide (a 
γ-aminobutyric acid [GABA] agonist) cause clinically significant 
inhibition of mEH and may impair epoxide hydrolase activity more 
OH
HO
OH
HO
O
O
Bay region
P450
Epoxide
hydrolase
P450
PHS
Benzo[a]pyrene
(+) Benzo[a]pyrene
7,8-oxide
Benzo[a]pyrene
4,5-oxide
Benzo[a]pyrene
4,5-dihydrodiol
(–) Benzo[a]pyrene
7,8-dihydrodiol
 
(+) Benzo[a]pyrene
7,8-dihydrodiol-9,10-epoxide
P450
O
Epoxide
hydrolase
OH
OH
       
OH
HO
O
O
Oxidation
o-Semiquinone
anion radical
Reduction
ortho-quinone
catechol
AKRs
Dimeric dihydrodiol
dehydrogenase
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Covalent
binding to
DNA
Mutation of the
12th codon of
the HRas oncogene
Lung and
skin tumors
Resistant to
hydration
by epoxide
hydrolase
O2
•–
O2
O2
•–
H2O
Figure 6-14.  Role of epoxide hydrolase in the inactivation of benzo[a]pyrene 4,5-oxide and in the conversion of benzo[a]pyrene to its tumorigenic bay-region 
diol epoxide. Also shown is the role of dimeric dihydrodiol dehydrogenase, and the aldo-keto reductase (AKR) superfamily, in the formation of reactive cat-
echol and ortho-quinone metabolites of benzo[a]pyrene.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
229
than genetic polymorphisms. These two drugs potentiate the neuro-
toxicity of carbamazepine by inhibiting mEH, leading to increased 
plasma levels of carbamazepine 10,11-epoxide and presumably its 
more toxic 2,3-epoxide (Kroetz et al., 1993). mEH can be inhibited 
in vitro by certain epoxides, such as 1,1,1-trichloropropene oxide 
and cyclohexene oxide, and stimulated by several alcohols, ketones, 
and imidazoles.
The microsomal and soluble forms of epoxide hydrolase show 
no evident sequence identity and, accordingly, are immunochemi-
cally distinct proteins (Beetham et al., 1995). Nevertheless, mEH 
and sEH catalyze reactions by the same mechanism, and simi-
lar amino acids are involved in catalysis, namely, a nucleophilic 
acid (Asp226 in mEH and Asp334 in sEH), a basic histidine (His431 
in mEH and His523 in sEH), an orienting acid (Glu404 in mEH and 
Asp495 in sEH), and polarizing tyrosine residues (Tyr299 and Tyr374 
in mEH and Tyr382 and Tyr465 in mEH) (Morisseau and Hammock, 
2005). The mechanism of catalysis by epoxide hydrolase is simi-
lar to that of carboxylesterase, in that the catalytic site comprises 
three amino acid residues that form a catalytic triad, as shown in 
Fig. 6-11. The attack of the nucleophile Asp226 on the carbon of 
the oxirane ring initiates enzymatic activity, leading to the forma-
tion of an α-hydroxyester-enzyme intermediate, with the negative 
charge developing on the oxygen atom stabilized by a putative oxy-
anion hole. The His431 residue (which is activated by Glu376 and 
Glu404) activates a water molecule by abstracting a proton (H+). The 
activated (nucleophilic) water then attacks the Cγ atom of Asp226, 
resulting in the hydrolysis of the ester bond in the acyl–enzyme 
intermediate, which restores the active enzyme and results in the 
formation of a vicinal diol with a trans-configuration (Armstrong, 
1999). The second step, namely, cleavage of the ester bond in the 
acyl–enzyme intermediate, resembles the cleavage of the ester or 
amide bond in substrates for serine esterases and proteases.
Although both epoxide hydrolase and carboxylesterase have 
a catalytic triad comprising a nucleophilic, basic, and acidic amino 
acid residue, there are striking differences in their catalytic machin-
ery, which account for the fact that carboxylesterases primarily 
hydrolyze esters and amides, whereas epoxide hydrolases primar-
ily hydrolyze epoxides and oxides. In the triad, both enzymes have 
histidine as the base and either glutamate or aspartate as the acid, 
but they differ in the type of amino acids for the nucleophile. Even 
during catalysis, there is a major difference. In carboxylesterases, 
the same carbonyl carbon atom of the substrate is attacked initially 
by the nucleophile Ser203 to form an α-hydroxyester-enzyme ester 
that is subsequently attacked by the activated water to release the 
alcohol product. In contrast, two different atoms in epoxide hydro-
lase are targets of nucleophilic attacks. First the less hindered car-
bon atom of the oxirane ring is attacked by the nucleophile Asp226 to 
form a covalently bound ester, and next this ester is hydrolyzed by 
an activated water molecule that attacks the Cγ atom of the Asp226 
residue, as illustrated in Fig. 6-11. Therefore, in carboxylesterase, 
the oxygen incorporated into the product is derived from the acti-
vated water molecule. In contrast, in epoxide hydrolase, the oxygen 
incorporated into the product is derived from the nucleophile Asp226 
(Fig. 6-11).
Carboxylesterases and epoxide hydrolases exhibit no pri-
mary sequence identity, but they share surprising similarities in the 
topology of the structure and sequential arrangement of the cata-
lytic triad. Both are members of the α/β-hydrolase fold enzymes, a 
superfamily of proteins that includes lipases, esterases, and haloal-
kane dehydrogenases (Beetham et al., 1995). Functionally, proteins 
in this superfamily all catalyze hydrolytic reactions; structurally, 
they all contain a similar core segment that is composed of eight 
β-sheets connected by α-helices. They all have a catalytic triad 
and the arrangement of the amino acid residues in the triad (i.e., 
the order of the nucleophile, the acid, and the base in the primary 
sequence) is the mirror image of the arrangement in other hydrolytic 
enzymes such as trypsin. All three active-site residues are located 
on loops that are the best conserved structural features in the fold, 
which likely provides catalysis with certain flexibility to hydrolyze 
numerous structurally distinct substrates.
Reduction
Certain metals (e.g., pentavalent arsenic) and xenobiotics con-
taining an aldehyde, ketone, alkene, disulfide, sulfoxide, quinone, 
N-oxide, hydroxamic acid, amidoxime, isoxazole, isothiazole, azo, 
or nitro group are often reduced in vivo, although it is sometimes 
difficult to ascertain whether the reaction proceeds enzymatically 
or nonenzymatically by interaction with reducing agents (such as 
the reduced forms of glutathione, FAD, FMN, and NAD[P]). Some 
of these functional groups can be either reduced or oxidized. For 
example, aldehydes (R–CHO) can be reduced to an alcohol (R–
CH2OH) or oxidized to a carboxylic acid (R–COOH), whereas 
sulfoxides (R1–SO–R2) can be reduced to a sulfide (R1–S–R2) or 
oxidized to a sulfone (R1–SO2–R2). Likewise, some enzymes, such 
as alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH), aldehyde oxidase (AO), and CYP, 
can catalyze both reductive and oxidative reactions depending on 
the substrate or conditions (e.g., aerobic vs. anaerobic). In the case 
of halogenated hydrocarbons, such as halothane, dehalogenation 
can proceed by an oxidative or reductive pathway, both of which 
are catalyzed by the same enzyme (namely, CYP). In some cases, 
such as azo-reduction, nitro-reduction, and the reduction of certain 
alkenes, the reaction is largely catalyzed by intestinal microbiota.
Azo- and Nitro-Reduction  Prontosil and chloramphenicol are 
examples of drugs that undergo azo- and nitro-reduction, respec-
tively, as shown in Fig. 6-15. Reduction of prontosil is of historical 
interest. Treatment of streptococcal and pneumococcal infections 
with prontosil marked the beginning of specific antibacterial che-
motherapy. Subsequently, it was discovered that the active drug was 
not prontosil but its metabolite sulfanilamide (para-aminobenzene 
sulfonamide), a product of azo-reduction. During azo-reduction, the 
nitrogen–nitrogen double bond is sequentially reduced and cleaved 
to produce two primary amines, a reaction requiring four reduc-
ing equivalents. RT Williams subsequently provided additional 
evidence that intestinal microbiota were involved in prontosil and 
neoprontosil azo-reduction with the finding that total sulfanilamide 
excretion was significantly reduced in rats pretreated with antibi-
otics (Gingell et al., 1971). Nitro-reduction requires six reducing 
equivalents, which are consumed in three sequential reactions, as 
shown in Fig. 6-15, for the conversion of nitrobenzene to aniline.
Azo- and nitro-reduction reactions are generally catalyzed by 
intestinal microbiota. However, under certain conditions, such as 
low oxygen tension, the reactions can be catalyzed by liver micro-
somal CYP and NAD(P)H-quinone oxidoreductase (NQO1, a cyto-
solic flavoprotein that is also known as DT-diaphorase) and, in the 
case of nitroaromatics, by cytosolic AO. The anaerobic environ-
ment of the lower gastrointestinal tract is well suited for azo- and 
nitro-reduction, which is why intestinal microbiota contribute sig-
nificantly to these reactions. The reduction of quinic acid to benzoic 
acid is another example of a reductive reaction catalyzed by gut 
microbiota, as shown in Fig. 6-4.
Nitro-reduction by intestinal microbiota is thought to play 
an important role in the toxicity of several nitroaromatic com-
pounds including 2,6-dinitrotoluene, which is hepatotumorigenic 
to male rats. The role of nitro-reduction in the metabolic activa-
tion of 2,6-dinitrotoluene is shown in Fig. 6-16 (Long and Rickert,

230
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
Azo-reduction
Nitro-reduction
C
CHCl2
O
NH
CH
CH
O2N
OH
CH2OH
C
CHCl2
O
NH
CH
CH
H2N
OH
CH2OH
Chloramphenicol
Arylamine metabolite
Prontosil
1,2,4-Triaminobenzene
Sulfanilamide
H2N
NH2
N
N
SO2NH2
H2N
NH2
NH2
H2N
SO2NH2
+
NO2
NO
NHOH
NH2
Nitrobenzene
Nitrosobenzene
Phenylhydroxylamine
Aniline
[2H]
[2H]
[2H]
[6H]
[4H]
Figure 6-15.  Examples of drugs that undergo azo reduction (prontosil) and nitro-reduction (chloramphenicol and nitrobenzene).
Liver
NHOH
NHOX
P450
X = COCH3
       SO3H
Acetylation
Sulfonation
– XO–
CH2OH
CH2OH
2-Amino-6-nitrobenzylalcohol
Covalent binding
to protein and DNA
CH2O-glucuronide
NO2
2,6-Dinitrobenzylalcohol glucuronide
CH2OH
NH2
β-Glucuronidase
Nitroreductase
Intestine
Liver
O2N
O2N
O2N
O2N
O2N
O2N
O2N
CH3
NO2
CH2OH
NO2
CH2O-glucuronide
NO2
2,6-Dinitrotoluene
2,6-Dinitrobenzylalcohol
P450
UGT
CH2OH
NH2
O2N
Figure 6-16.  Role of nitro reduction by intestinal microbiota in the activation of the rat liver tumorigen, 2,6-dinitrotoluene.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
231
1982; Mirsalis and Butterworth, 1982). The biotransformation of 
2,6-­dinitrotoluene begins in the liver, where it is oxidized by CYP 
and conjugated with glucuronic acid. This glucuronide is excreted 
in bile and undergoes biotransformation by intestinal microbiota. 
One or both of the nitro groups are reduced to amines by nitro-
reductase, and the glucuronide is hydrolyzed by β-glucuronidase. 
The reduced/deconjugated metabolites are absorbed and transported 
to the liver, where the newly formed amine group is N-hydroxylated 
by CYP and conjugated with acetate or sulfonate. These conjugates 
form good leaving groups, which renders the nitrogen highly sus-
ceptible to nucleophilic attack from proteins and DNA; this ostensi-
bly leads to mutations and the formation of liver tumors. Compared 
with females, male rats are more susceptible to hepatotumorigenic-
ity of 2,6-dinitrotoluene due to their higher rate of biliary excre-
tion of 2,6-dinitrobenzylalcohol glucuronide. The complexity of 
the metabolic scheme shown in Fig. 6-16 underscores an important 
principle that the activation of some chemical tumorigens to DNA-
reactive metabolites involves several different biotransforming 
enzymes and may take place in more than one tissue. Consequently, 
the ability of 2,6-dinitrotoluene to bind to DNA and cause muta-
tions is not revealed in most of the short-term assays for assessing 
the genotoxic potential of chemicals. These in vitro assays for geno-
toxicity do not make allowance for biotransformation by intestinal 
microbiota or, in some cases, the conjugating enzymes.
Nitro-reduction by intestinal microbiota plays an important 
role in the biotransformation of musk xylene (1-­tert-butyl-3,5-dim
ethyl-2,4,6-trinitrobenzene). Reduction of one or both of the nitro 
groups is required for musk xylene to induce (as well as mark-
edly inhibit) liver microsomal CYP (namely, CYP2B) in rodents 
(Lehman-McKeeman et al., 1999). Azo- and nitro-reduction cata-
lyzed by intestinal microbiota also play a role in the toxicity and 
disposition of several drugs. For instance, the teratogenicity (e.g., 
exencephaly, cleft palate, and limb reductions) observed with nitraz-
epam (approved in the United Kingdom and several other countries) 
appears to be due to this drug’s conversion to 7-­aminonitrazepam 
and 7-acetylaminonitrazepam in normal pregnant rats, but not in 
those pretreated with antibiotics to deplete intestinal microbiota 
(Takeno and Sakai, 1991; Klaassen and Cui, 2015; Enright et al., 
2016). Clonazepam and misonidazole also undergo nitro-reduction 
catalyzed by the intestinal microbiota (Klaassen and Cui, 2015; 
Jourova et al., 2016). In addition, metronidazole bears a black 
box warning for carcinogenicity in mice and rats, which may be 
in part due to nitro-reduction and further conversion of this drug 
to acetamide and N-(2-hydroxyethyl)-oxamic acid by the intesti-
nal microbiota (Koch and Goldman, 1979; Enright et al., 2016). 
Sulfasalazine is a poorly absorbed prodrug indicated for ulcerative 
colitis that links 5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA) with sulfapyri-
dine with an azo bond. In the colon, it undergoes azo-reduction by 
the microbiota to release both drugs, with the anti-inflammatory 
action of 5-ASA attributable to suppression of cytokines within 
the mucosa (Rachmilewitz et al., 1992; Klaassen and Cui, 2015). 
Other drugs that undergo azo-reduction by the intestinal micro-
biota include balsalazide and olsalazine (Klaassen and Cui, 2015; 
Jourova et al., 2016).
Azo-reduction by the intestinal microbiota is also implicated 
in the activation of azo dyes (Chung, 2013; Claus et al., 2016). 
More than 3000 azo dyes are used in various industries, notably 
in the production of processed foods and pharmaceuticals where 
small amounts of the dyes are directly ingested and can theoreti-
cally be acted upon by the intestinal microbiota. For instance, at 
least five azo dyes are used as food colorants, including Sunset 
Yellow (FD&C Yellow 6), Orange B, Allura Red (FD&C Red 40), 
Citrus Red No. 2, and tartrazine (FD&C Yellow 5). These dyes have 
no carcinogenic, mutagenic, or cytotoxic effects, but some studies 
provide evidence that azo-reductases from the intestinal microbiota 
can cleave the azo bond to form potentially carcinogenic aromatic 
amines (Claus et al., 2016).
Carbonyl Reduction: AKRs, SDRs, and Others  A variety of 
xenobiotics contain a carbonyl function (R–CHO and R1–CO–R2) 
that undergoes reduction in vivo. The reduction of aldehydes to pri-
mary alcohols and of ketones to secondary alcohols is generally cat-
alyzed in mammals by NAD(P)H-dependent reductases belonging 
to one of several superfamilies, the aldo–keto reductases (AKRs), 
the short-chain dehydrogenases/reductases (SDRs), the medium-
chain dehydrogenases/reductases (MDR), aldehyde dehydroge-
nases (ALDH), and NAD(P)H-quinone oxidoreductases (NQO), 
as shown in Table 6-9 (Jez and Penning, 2001; Oppermann et al., 
2001; Matsunaga et al., 2006; Malatkova et al., 2010; Skarydova 
and Wsol, 2012).
The 15 human AKRs are members of a superfamily of cyto-
solic, generally monomeric, enzymes that reduce both xenobiotic 
and endobiotic compounds, as their alternative names imply (Table 
6-9). Although AKRs can catalyze oxidations in vitro, it is likely 
that they function nearly exclusively as reductases in vivo (with the 
notable exception of oxidation of several trans-dihydrodiols of poly-
cyclic aromatic hydrocarbon oxiranes—covered below) (Penning, 
2015). The propensity for AKRs to catalyze reductions rather than 
oxidations is mainly due to their affinity for NADP(H) (10 to 120 
nM) versus NAD(H) (100 to 250 µM), which also ensures potent 
product inhibition for any NAD+-dependent oxidations that may 
occur (Penning, 2015).
Dimeric dihydrodiol dehydrogenase and various members of 
the AKR superfamily (particularly AKR1A1, AKR1C1, AKR1C2, 
AKR1C3, and AKR1C4), functioning as dihydrodiol dehydroge-
nases, can oxidize the trans-dihydrodiols of various polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbon oxiranes (formed by epoxide hydrolase) to 
the corresponding ortho-quinones, as shown previously in Fig. 
6-14 (Penning, 2014). The role of AKRs as oxidizing enzymes 
is discussed in the section on oxidative enzymes (see the section 
“Dimeric Dihydrodiol Dehydrogenase”). As mentioned earlier 
(see Point 9 in the “Principles of Xenobiotic Biotransformation”), 
AKR7A2 and AKR7A3 (also known as aflatoxin aldehyde B1 
reductases 1 and 2) are two of the many enzymes induced follow-
ing activation of Nrf2 by oxidative stress, exposure to electrophiles, 
or depletion of glutathione (Ahmed et al., 2011; Li et al., 2015). 
The dimeric AKR7As also rapidly reduce the ortho-quinones once 
formed (but cannot oxidize the trans-dihydrodiols), increasing the 
likelihood of redox cycling in cells where both sets of enzymes are 
expressed (Penning, 2014).
Various members of the AKR superfamily have been implicated 
in the reduction of carbonyl-containing xenobiotics as the tobacco-
specific nitrosamine NNK, acetohexamide, daunorubicin, naloxone, 
naltrexone, befunolol, ethacrynic acid, ketoprofen, ketotifen, halo-
peridol, loxoprofen, metyrapone, oxonortriptyline, and numerous 
aromatic and aliphatic aldehydes (Rosemond and Walsh, 2004). 
Putative AKR1A, AKR1B, AKR1C1–4, or AKR1D1-selective 
inhibitors, statil, flufenamic acid, phenolphthalein, and finasteride, 
respectively, can aid in the evaluation of which reductive enzyme(s) 
is(are) involved in the formation of specific metabolites. Many of 
the xenobiotics reduced by AKRs are also reduced by SDRs, and in 
most cases the relative contribution of individual carbonyl-reducing 
enzymes is not known. Genetic polymorphisms of human AKR1C3, 
AKR1C4, AKR7A2, and cytosolic carbonyl reductase (CBR1) have 
been associated with decreased metabolism of carbonyl-contain-
ing xenobiotics such as doxorubicin and daunorubicin in vitro

232
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
(Gonzalez-Covarrubias et al., 2007; Bains et al., 2010). Allelic vari-
ants of human cytosolic AKR1C2 with reduced enzymatic activity 
toward the androgen 5α-dihydrotestosterone (DHT) have also been 
identified (Takahashi et al., 2009).
Humans contain at least 80 SDR members, three of which, 
namely, cytosolic carbonyl reductases (CBR1 and CBR3) and 
a microsomal carbonyl reductase (HSD11B1), play a role in the 
reduction of a wide variety of carbonyl-containing xenobiotics 
(other species express more than two carbonyl reductases) (see 
SDR [2018]). Erythrocytes also contain carbonyl reductase, which 
contributes significantly to the reduction of haloperidol, as shown 
in Fig. 6-17. From the alternative names given in Table 6-9, it is 
apparent that both cytosolic and microsomal carbonyl reductases 
have been studied for their role in endobiotic metabolism, namely, 
the reduction of prostaglandin derivatives and 11β-hydroxysteroids, 
respectively (Kavanagh et al., 2008). There appear to be no reports 
of clinically significant drug–drug interactions involving the inhibi-
tion or induction of AKRs or SDRs (Rosemond and Walsh, 2004).
In certain cases, the reduction of aldehydes to alcohols can 
be catalyzed by alcohol dehydrogenase, as shown in Fig. 6-17, 
for the conversion of the sedative-hypnotic, chloral hydrate, to 
trichloroethanol. As shown in Table 6-9, alcohol dehydrogenases 
belong to the medium-chain dehydrogenases/reductases (MDRs). 
They typically convert alcohols to aldehydes, for which reason they 
are discussed later in the section on oxidative reactions (see sec-
tion “Alcohol Dehydrogenase”). In the case of chloral hydrate, the 
reverse reaction is favored by the presence of the trichloromethyl 
group, which is a strong electron-withdrawing group.
The SDR carbonyl reductases are monomeric, NADPH-
dependent enzymes present in erythrocytes and both the cytosolic 
and microsomal fractions of the liver, kidney, brain, and many other 
tissues. The major circulating metabolite of the antipsychotic drug 
Table 6-9  
Human Aldo-Keto Reductases (AKRs), Short-Chain Dehydrogenases/Reductases (SDRs), Medium-Chain 
Dehydrogenases/Reductases (MDRs), and Quinone Reductases (NQOs)
ENZYME SUPERFAMILY
EXAMPLE ENZYMES
ALTERNATIVE NAMES
SUBCELLULAR 
LOCALIZATION
Aldo-keto reductase 
(AKR), 15 enzymes
AKR1A1
Aldehyde reductase
Cytosol
AKR1B1
Aldose reductase
Cytosol
AKR1B10
Small intestine reductase (small intestine and liver)
Cytosol
AKR1B15
Putative aldo-keto reductase family 1 member B15
Membrane-associated
AKR1C1
20α-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, dihydrodiol  
dehydrogenase (DD1)
Cytosol
AKR1C2
3α-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, dihydrodiol  
dehydrogenase (DD2), bile acid binding protein
Cytosol
AKR1C3
3α-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, 
17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type V,  
dihydrodiol dehydrogenase (DD3)
Cytosol
AKR1C4
3α-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, chlordecone  
reductase, dihydrodiol dehydrogenase (DD4)
Cytosol
AKR1D1
Δ4-3-Ketosteroid-5β-reductase
Cytosol
AKR1E2
AKRDC1; AKR1CL2; LoopADR
Unknown
AKR6A3, 6A5, 6A9
Shaker-channel subunit Kvb1, Kvb2, Kvb3 
(KCNAB1-3)
Cytosol
AKR7A2
Aflatoxin B1 aldehyde reductase 2
Golgi
AKR7A3
Aflatoxin B1 aldehyde reductase 3
Cytosol
Short-chain 
dehydrogenase/
reductases (SDR),  
80 enzymes
Cytosolic carbonyl 
reductases (gene 
symbols CBR1 and 
CBR3)
Xenobiotic ketone reductase with pH 6.0 
­activity; prostaglandin 9-ketoreductase; human 
­placental NADP-linked 15-hydroprostaglandin 
­dehydrogenase, SDR21C1, and SDR21C2
Cytosol
Microsomal carbonyl 
reductase (gene 
­symbol HSD11B1)
11β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase; 11β-HSD1; 
11β-reductase, 11-oxidoreductase, SDR26C1
Microsomes
Medium-chain 
dehydrogenase/
reductases (MDR), 
7 ADH enzymes
ADH1A
Class I ADH; ADH1, α, β, γ; hADH1,2,3
Cytosol
ADH1B
Class I ADH; ADH2, β, γ; ADHII; hADH4
Cytosol
ADH1C
Class I ADH; ADH3, γ
Cytosol
ADH4
Class II ADH; π, hADH7
Cytosol
ADH5
Class III ADH; χ, ADH3
Cytosol
ADH6
Class V ADH
Cytosol
ADH7
Class IV ADH; μ (σ)
Cytosol
NQO, 2 enzymes
NQO1
DT diaphorase, menadione reductase
Cytosol
NQO2
N-Ribosyldihydronicotinamide dehydrogenase
Cytosol
Abbreviation: NQO, NADPH-quinone oxidoreductase.
Members of the aldo-keto reductase superfamily can be found at http://www.med.upenn.edu/akr/members.shtml. Information on human SDR membranes 
can be found at http://www.sdr-enzymes.org/resources.htm.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
233
haloperidol is a secondary alcohol formed by carbonyl reductases 
in the blood and liver, as shown in Fig. 6-17. Other xenobiotics 
that are reduced by carbonyl reductases include pentoxifylline (see 
Fig. 6-6), acetohexamide, daunorubicin, doxorubicin, loxopro-
fen, menadione, 4-nitroacetophenone, timiperone, and R-warfarin 
(Rosemond and Walsh, 2004). As shown in Fig. 6-6, the reduction 
of ketones to secondary alcohols by carbonyl reductases may pro-
ceed with a high degree of stereoselectivity, as in the case of pent-
oxifylline (Lillibridge et al., 1996a).
Liver cytosol contains at least two carbonyl reductases (CBR1 
and CBR3), and microsomes contain at least one other form of car-
bonyl reductase (HSD11B1), and these can differ in the degree to 
which they stereoselectively reduce ketones to secondary alcohols. 
For example, keto-reduction of pentoxifylline produces two enan-
tiomeric secondary alcohols: one with the R-configuration (which is 
known as lisofylline) and one with the S-configuration, as shown in 
Fig. 6-6. Reduction of pentoxifylline by cytosolic carbonyl reduc-
tases results in the stereospecific formation of the optical antipode 
of lisofylline, whereas the same reaction catalyzed by microsomal 
carbonyl reductase produces both lisofylline and its optical antipode 
in a ratio of about 1 to 5 (Lillibridge et al., 1996a).
The well-known microsomal carbonyl reductase is 
11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (gene symbol HSD11B1, aka 
SDR26C1) (Skarydova and Wsol, 2012). However, there are sev-
eral other microsomal carbonyl-reducing enzymes, such as the six 
human retinol dehydrogenases (e.g., RDHs) and the six human 
17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases. Although these enzymes have 
not been well-characterized for their ability to reduce carbonyl-
containing xenobiotics, there is indirect evidence from the ratio 
of enantiomers of metabolites that multiple microsomal enzymes 
may play a role in the metabolism of some xenobiotics such as 
7α-methyl-19-nortestotsterone (Skarydova and Wsol, 2012). There 
are at least two monomeric cytosolic carbonyl reductases (gene 
symbols CBR1 [aka SDR21C1] and CBR3 [aka SDR21C2]) that 
have broad and somewhat overlapping substrate specificities toward 
many endobiotics and xenobiotics such as menadione, isatin, NNK, 
daunorubicin, and doxorubicin (Malatkova et al., 2010). A human 
tetrameric mitochondrial carbonyl reductase, namely CBR4 (aka 
SDR45C1), has also been identified with activity toward 9,10-phen-
anthrenequinone and 1,4-benzoquinone, and therefore acts as a 
mitochondrial quinone reductase (Malatkova et al., 2010).
In rat liver cytosol, the reduction of quinones is primarily cata-
lyzed by NQO1 and NQO2 (see the section “Quinone Reduction: 
NQO1 and NQO2”), whereas in human liver cytosol, quinone 
reduction is catalyzed by both NQO and carbonyl reductases.
Disulfide Reduction  Some disulfides are reduced and cleaved to 
their sulfhydryl components, as shown in Fig. 6-18, for the alcohol 
deterrent disulfiram (Antabuse). As shown in Fig. 6-18, disulfide 
reduction by glutathione is a three-step process, the last of which is 
catalyzed by glutathione reductase. The first step can be catalyzed by 
glutathione transferase, or it can occur nonenzymatically. The disul-
fide, thioctic acid (α-lipoic acid), is a prescription drug in Germany 
and some other countries that is indicated mainly for diabetic poly-
neuropathy. It can be reduced in NADPH-dependent reactions cat-
alyzed by cytosolic glutathione reductase (GSR) and thioredoxin 
reductases (cytosolic TXNRD1, and mitochondrial TXNRD2), as 
well as by the NADH-dependent mitochondrial enzyme (Arner 
et al., 1996; Haramaki et al., 1997; Testa and Kramer, 2008).
Sulfoxide and N-Oxide Reduction  Thioredoxin-dependent 
enzymes in liver and kidney cytosol have been reported to reduce 
sulfoxides, which themselves may be formed by CYP or flavin 
monooxygenases (Anders et al., 1981). Recycling through these 
counteracting enzyme systems, a process known as retro-reduction 
or futile cycling, may prolong the half-life of certain xenobiotics 
(Hinrichs et al., 2011). As shown in Fig. 6-19, sulindac is a sulfox-
ide that undergoes reduction to a sulfide, which is excreted in bile 
and reabsorbed from the intestine (Ratnayake et al., 1981). This 
N
OH
Cl
F
C
(CH2)3
(CH2)3
O
Haloperidol
Carbonyl reductase
OH
CH
OH
Chloral hydrate
Alcohol dehydrogenase
Cl3C
Cl3C
Cl3C
CH2OH
Trichloroethanol
Reduced haloperidol
A
–H2O
N
OH
Cl
F
C
H
OH
C
O
H
B
Figure 6-17.  Reduction of xenobiotics by carbonyl reductase (A) and alcohol dehydrogenase (B).

234
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
enterohepatic cycling prolongs the duration of action of the drug 
such that this NSAID need only be taken twice daily. In the human 
liver, glutaredoxin and thioredoxin may also be involved in reduc-
ing the mixed disulfide formed between xenobiotics and glutathi-
one, as is the case in the formation of the pharmacologically active 
metabolite of prasugrel, an inhibitor of P2Y12, the platelet ADP-
binding receptor (Hagihara et al., 2011).
Sulfoxide reduction may also occur nonenzymatically at an 
appreciable rate, as in the case of the proton pump inhibitor rabe-
prazole (Miura et al., 2006). Diethyldithiocarbamate methyl ester, 
a metabolite of disulfiram, is oxidized to a sulfine, which is reduced 
to the parent methyl ester by glutathione. In the latter reaction, two 
molecules of glutathione (GSH) are oxidized with reduction of the 
sulfine oxygen to water (Madan et al., 1994) as shown below:
R R C
S
O
GSH
R R C
S
GSSG
H O
1
2
1
2
2
2
=
+
→
=
+
+
+
−
–
Just as sulfoxide reduction can reverse the effect of sulfoxida-
tion, so the reduction of N-oxides can reverse the N-oxygenation 
of amines, which is catalyzed by FMO and CYP enzymes. Under 
reduced oxygen tension, reduction of the N-oxides of imipramine, 
tiaramide, indicine, and N, N-dimethylaniline can be catalyzed 
by mitochondrial and/or microsomal enzymes in the presence 
of NADH or NADPH (Sugiura and Kato, 1977). The NADPH-
dependent reduction of N-oxides in liver microsomes appears to 
be catalyzed by CYP (Sugiura et al., 1976) although in some cases 
NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductase may play an important role.
As a class, N-oxides are not inherently toxic compounds. 
However, certain aromatic and aliphatic N-oxides have been 
exploited as bioreductive drugs (also known as DNA-affinic 
drugs) for the treatment of certain cancers and infectious diseases 
(Wardman et al., 1995). In these cases, N-oxides have been used 
as prodrugs that are converted to cytotoxic or DNA-binding drugs 
under hypoxic conditions. The fact that N-oxides of certain drugs 
are converted to toxic metabolites under hypoxic conditions is the 
basis for their selective toxicity to certain solid tumors (namely, 
those that are hypoxic and, hence, resistant to radiotherapy) and 
anaerobic bacteria. For example, tirapazamine (SR 4233) is a ben-
zotriazine di-N-oxide that is preferentially toxic to hypoxic cells, 
such as those present in solid tumors, apparently due to its rapid 
activation by one-electron reduction of the N-oxide to an oxidiz-
ing nitroxide radical, as shown in Fig. 6-19 (Walton et al., 1992). 
This reaction is catalyzed by CYP and NADPH-CYP reductase 
(Saunders et al., 2000). Two-electron reduction of the di-N-oxide, 
SR 4233, produces a mono-N-oxide, SR 4317, which undergoes a 
second N-oxide reduction to SR 4330. Like SR 4233, the antibacte-
rial drug quindoxin is a di-N-oxide whose cytotoxicity is dependent 
on reductive activation, which is favored by anaerobic condi-
tions. AQ4N is a di-N-oxide prodrug that is converted by N-oxide 
reduction to the potent topoisomerase II inhibitor 4QA (Nishida 
et al., 2010). The reductive reaction is catalyzed by CYP2S1 and 
CYP2W1, two hypoxia-inducible CYP enzymes expressed in many 
solid tumors. The induction of CYP2S1 and CYP2W1 in hypoxic 
tumor cells provides a basis for their application in the selective bio-
reductive activation of antineoplastic drugs (Nishida et al., 2010).
Bioreductive alkylating agents, which include such drugs as 
mitomycins, anthracyclins, and aziridinylbenzoquinones, represent 
another class of anticancer drugs that require activation by reduc-
tion. However, for this class of drugs, bioactivation also involves 
a two-electron reduction reaction, which is largely catalyzed by 
NQO, which is described in the next section.
Quinone Reduction: NQO1 and NQO2  Quinones can be 
reduced to hydroquinones by two closely related, cytosolic flavo-
proteins, namely, NQO1 and NQO2. The former enzyme, NAD(P)
H-quinone oxidoreductase-1, is also known as DT-diaphorase. The 
latter enzyme, NAD(P)H-quinone oxidoreductase-2, is also known 
as NRH-quinone oxidoreductase because it prefers the unusual 
electron donor dihydronicotinamide riboside (NMR) over NAD(P)
H. Although they are closely related enzymes (both contain two 
27-kDa subunits each with an FAD prosthetic group), NQO1 and 
NQO2 have different substrate specificities, and they can be distin-
guished on the basis of their differential inhibition by dicoumarol 
and quercetin (which are selective inhibitors of NQO1 and NQO2, 
respectively). NQO2 may have a physiological role in the metabo-
lism of vitamin K hydroquinone (Chen et al., 2000).
An example of the type of reaction catalyzed by NQO is 
shown in Fig. 6-20. Formation of the hydroquinone involves a 
two-electron reduction of the quinone with stoichiometric oxida-
tion of NAD[P]H without oxygen consumption. (The two-electron 
reduction of certain quinones can also be catalyzed by carbonyl 
reductase, especially in humans.) In contrast, NADPH-cytochrome 
P450 reductase, a microsomal flavoprotein, catalyzes the one-
electron reduction of quinones to semiquinone radicals that, in 
addition to being reactive metabolites themselves, cause oxidative 
stress by reacting with oxygen to form reactive oxygen species, 
which leads to nonstoichiometric oxidation of NADPH and oxygen 
Disulﬁram (Antabuse)
Diethyldithiocarbamate
N
C
C
S
S
H5C2
H5C2
S
N
S
C2H5
C2H5
C
S
XSSX
GSH
XSH
XSSG
XSH
GSH
GSSG
2GSH
NADP
2 ×
N
SH
H5C2
H5C2
NADPH
+ H+
+
A
B
Figure 6-18.  Biotransformation of disulfiram by disulfide reduction (A) 
and the general mechanism of glutathione-dependent disulfide reduction 
of xenobiotics (B). GSH, glutathione; GSSG, reduced glutathione; XSSX, 
xenobiotic disulfide. The last reaction in (B) is catalyzed by glutathione 
reductase.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
235
S
CH3
O
CH
CH3
CH2COOH
F
[O]
2H
H2O
Sulindac
Sulindac sulﬁde
N
N
N
NH2
O
O
N
N
N
NH2
O
N
N
N
NH2
2e–
Tirapazamine
(SR 4233)
Nitroxide
radical
Disproportionation
Toxicity to hypoxic cells, such
as those in solid tumors
Sulfoxide reduction
N-oxide reduction
SR 4317
SR 4330
2e–
1e–
Note:  The sulfoxide is a chiral center; hence, sulindac is a racemic mixture
S
CH3
CH
CH3
CH2COOH
F
Figure 6-19.  Examples of sulfoxide and N-oxide reduction. Note that tirapazamine (3-amino-1,2,4-benzotriazine-1,4-dioxide) is a representative of a class of 
agents that are activated by reduction, which may be clinically useful in the treatment of certain tumors.
CH3
O
O
CH3
OH
OH
O
OH
Menadione
Hydroquinone
H+, e–
O2
Semiquinone radical
Damage to proteins and DNA
Superoxide anion
Perhydroxyl radical
Hydrogen peroxide
Hydroxyl radical
Lipid peroxidation
DT-diaphorase
(NAD(P)H-quinone
oxidoreductase)
NADPH-cytochrome
P450 reductase
2H+, 2e–
HO2
H2O2
Reactive oxygen species (ROS)
O2•–
•
•
HO•
CH3
Figure 6-20.  Two-electron reduction of menadione to a hydroquinone, and production of reactive oxygen species during its one-electron reduction to a semi-
quinone radical.

236
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
consumption, as shown in Fig. 6-20. The two-electron reduction of 
quinones is a nontoxic reaction—one that is not associated with 
semiquinone formation and oxidative stress—provided the resul-
tant hydroquinone is sufficiently stable to undergo glucuronidation 
or sulfonation. However, there are quinone-containing xenobiotics 
that, despite undergoing two-electron reduction by NQO, produce 
semiquinone free radicals, oxidative stress, DNA damage, and 
cytotoxicity. Many of these xenobiotics are being developed as 
anticancer drugs because NQO1 is often overexpressed in tumor 
cells (Oh and Park, 2015). The impact of the null allele NQO1*2 
(discussed below in this section) on the sensitivity and resistance to 
antitumor quinones remains to be established (Siegel et al., 2012). 
The properties of the hydroquinone determine whether, during the 
metabolism of quinone-containing xenobiotics, NQO functions as 
a protective antioxidant or a pro-oxidant activator leading to the 
formation of reactive oxygen species and reactive semiquinone free 
radicals. The latter are thought to form not from the one-electron 
reduction of the quinone but from the two-electron reduction of 
the quinone (Q) to the hydroquinone (QH2), which then undergoes 
one-electron oxidation or perhaps disproportionation to form the 
reactive semiquinone (QH):
QH
Q
QH
2
2
+
↔
Drugs or drug candidates that are activated by NQO to anti-
cancer agents include the aziridinylbenzoquinone diaziquone, the 
anthraquinone mitoxantrone, the indolquinones mitomycin C and 
EO9 (an analog of mitomycin C that is more rapidly reduced by 
NQO1), and the anthracycline antibiotics daunorubicin and doxo-
rubicin (Gutierrez, 2000). These so-called bioreductive alkylating 
agents are reduced by NQO1 to generate semiquinone free radicals 
and other reactive intermediates that undergo nucleophilic addi-
tions with DNA, resulting in single-strand DNA breaks. The rea-
son such drugs are preferentially toxic to tumor cells is that tumor 
cells, especially those in solid tumors, are hypoxic, and hypoxia 
induces the synthesis of NQO1 (by a mechanism that involves the 
activator protein 1 [AP-1] and nuclear factor-κB [NF-κB] response 
elements in the 5′ -promoter region of the NQO1 gene). Therefore, 
tumor cells often express high levels of NQO1, which predisposes 
them to the toxic effects of quinone-reductive anticancer drugs 
like mitomycin C. Interestingly, mitomycin C also upregulates the 
expression of NQO1, which may enable this anticancer drug to 
stimulate its own metabolic activation in tumor cells (Yao et al., 
1997). Some cancer chemotherapeutic drugs, such as the N-oxide 
SR 4233 (tirapazamine), are inactivated, not activated, by NQO, as 
shown in Fig. 6-19.
NQO can activate certain nitroaromatic compounds (R–NO2) 
to the corresponding hydroxylamine (R–NHOH), which can be 
activated by acetylation or sulfonation (by pathways analogous to 
those shown in Fig. 6-16). Dinitropyrenes and the nitroaromatic 
compound CB 1954 are activated by NQO. The latter compound 
was under consideration as an anticancer agent. However, although 
it is activated by reduction by rat NQO, the nitroaromatic compound 
CB 1954 is not activated by human NQO.
Oxidative stress is an important component to the mechanism 
of toxicity of several xenobiotics that either contain a quinone or 
can be biotransformed to a quinone (Anders, 1985). The produc-
tion of superoxide anion radicals and oxidative stress are respon-
sible, at least in part, for the cardiotoxic effects of doxorubicin 
(adriamycin) and daunorubicin (daunomycin), the pulmonary tox-
icity of paraquat and nitrofurantoin, and the neurotoxic effects of 
6-hydroxydopamine. Oxidative stress also plays an important role 
in the destruction of pancreatic beta cells by alloxan and dialuric 
acid. Tissues low in superoxide dismutase activity, such as the heart, 
are especially susceptible to the oxidative stress associated with 
the redox cycling of quinones. This accounts, at least in part, for 
the cardiotoxic effects of adriamycin and related anticancer drugs, 
although other susceptibility factors have been proposed (Mordente 
et al., 2001).
As already mentioned in this section, it is now apparent 
that the structure of the hydroquinones produced by NQO deter-
mines whether the two-electron reduction of quinones results in 
xenobiotic detoxication or activation. Hydroquinones formed by 
two-electron reduction of unsubstituted or methyl-substituted 
1,4-­naphthoquinones (such as menadione) or the corresponding 
quinone epoxides are relatively stable to autoxidation, whereas 
the methoxyl, glutathionyl, and hydroxyl derivatives of these com-
pounds undergo autoxidation with production of semiquinones and 
reactive oxygen species. The ability of glutathionyl derivatives to 
undergo redox cycling indicates that conjugation with glutathione 
does not prevent quinones from serving as substrates for NQO. 
The glutathione conjugates of quinones can also be reduced to 
hydroquinones by carbonyl reductases, which actually have a bind-
ing site for glutathione. In human carbonyl reductase, this bind-
ing site is Cys227, which is involved in binding both substrate and 
glutathione (Tinguely and Wermuth, 1999). Although oxidative 
stress is an important mechanism by which quinones cause cellu-
lar damage (through the intermediacy of semiquinone radicals and 
the generation of reactive oxygen species), it should be noted that 
quinones are Michael acceptors, and cellular damage can occur 
through direct alkylation of critical cellular proteins and/or DNA 
(Bolton et al., 2000).
NQO1 is inducible up to 10-fold by two classes of induc-
ers, which have been categorized as bifunctional and monofunc-
tional inducers (Prochaska and Talalay, 1988). The bifunctional 
inducers include compounds like β-naphthoflavone, benzo[a]
pyrene, 3-methylcholanthrene, and 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-
p-dioxin (dioxin or TCDD), which are AhR (aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor) agonists that induce both oxidative enzymes (such as 
the CYP enzyme CYP1A1) and conjugating enzymes (such as 
glutathione transferase and UDP-glucuronosyltransferase). The 
monofunctional inducers are Nrf2 activators that tend to induce 
conjugating and other non-CYP enzymes (although in mice, mono-
functional inducers can induce CYP2C55 and CYP2U1, as well as 
aldehyde oxidase). The AhR agonists (the so-called bifunctional 
inducers) signal through XRE (the xenobiotic-response element), 
whereas Nrf2 activators (the so-called monofunctional inducers) 
signal through ARE (the antioxidant response element), which 
is also known as the EpRE (the electrophilic response element). 
(Response elements are short sequences of DNA, often located in 
the 5´-promoter region of a gene, that bind the transcription factors 
that control gene expression.) The monofunctional inducers can be 
subdivided into two chemical classes: those that activate Nrf2 by 
causing oxidative stress through redox cycling (e.g., the quinone, 
menadione, and the phenolic antioxidants tert-butylhydroquinone 
and 3,5-di-tert-butylcatechol), and those that activate Nrf2 by 
causing oxidative stress by depleting glutathione (e.g., fumarates, 
maleates, acrylates, isothiocyanates, and other Michael acceptors 
that react with glutathione). Experiments in wild-type and Nrf2 
knockout mice revealed that activation of AhR leads to activation 
of Nrf2, which contains an AhR-response element in its promoter 
region; hence, AhR agonists such as dioxin induce enzymes under 
the direct control of AhR (such as CYP1A1) as well as enzymes 
under the control of Nrf2 (such as NQO1 and the other enzymes 
mentioned above) (Yeager et al., 2009). Induction of Nrf2 via acti-
vation of AhR protects mice from the hepatotoxic effects of dioxin 
(Lu et al., 2011).

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
237
The bifunctional inducers are direct activators of AhR and 
indirect activators of Nrf2 due to the upregulation of Nrf2 by acti-
vated AhR. However, several bifunctional inducers also activate 
Nrf2 directly due to their ability to form electrophilic metabolites 
or to cause oxidative stress. The flavonoid β-naphthoflavone and 
the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon benzo[a]pyrene induce NQO1 
(and other enzymes) by both mechanisms; the parent compound 
activates AhR, whereas electrophilic and/or redox active metabo-
lites activate Nrf2. The situation with benzo[a]pyrene is quite 
intriguing. This polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon binds directly to 
AhR, which binds to XRE and induces the synthesis of CYP1A1 
and CYP1B1, which in turn convert benzo[a]pyrene to electrophilic 
metabolites (such as arene oxides and diol-epoxides) and redox 
active metabolites (such as catechols), as shown in Fig. 6-14. These 
electrophilic and redox active metabolites activate Nrf2 and induce 
various enzymes that protect against oxidative stress. However, 
the catechol metabolites of benzo[a]pyrene are further converted 
by AKRs and/or dimeric dihydrodiol dehydrogenase to ortho-
quinones (Fig. 6-14), and are thereby converted back into planar, 
hydrophobic compounds that are highly effective ligands for the 
AhR (Burczynski and Penning, 2000). This may be toxicologically 
important, because the AhR may translocate ortho-quinone metabo-
lites of benzo[a]pyrene into the nucleus, where they might damage 
DNA (Bolton et al., 2000).
Sulforaphane and various isothiocyanates are Nrf2 activa-
tors that are present in broccoli and are thought responsible for 
the anticarcinogenic effects of this cruciferous vegetable (Zhang 
et al., 1992). These Nrf2 activators induce glutathione transferase 
(GSTA1), microsomal epoxide hydrolase, aldo–keto reductase 
(AKR7A, also known as aflatoxin aldehyde reductase), NAD(P)
H-quinone oxidoreductase (NQO1, also known as DT-diaphorase), 
glutamate-cysteine ligase (GCL), as well as genes involved in apop-
tosis. One isothiocyanate in particular, phenethylisothiocyanate, has 
been found to activate Nrf2 and activate numerous genes in addition 
to those encoding xenobiotic-biotransforming enzymes and oxidant 
defense systems. Microarray studies carried out in wild-type and 
Nrf2 knockout mice treated with phenethylisothiocyanate showed 
that the most highly inducible genes include the very low density 
lipoprotein (VLDL) receptor, G-protein signaling modulator 2, 
early growth response 1, pancreatic lipase–related protein 2, histo-
compatibility 2 (K region), general transcription factor IIB, myo-
globin, potassium voltage–gated channel Q2, and SLC39A10 (Hu 
et al., 2006). As with other xenosensors, activation of Nrf2 results in 
a pleiotypic response in which a large number of genes are activated 
(or repressed) (Klaassen and Reisman, 2010; Wu et al., 2012). As 
mentioned in this section, hypoxia and the anticancer drug mitomy-
cin C are also inducers of NQO1, which has implications for cancer 
chemotherapy.
NQO1 and NQO2 are polymorphically expressed enzymes, 
and several lines of evidence suggest that NQO1 and/or NQO2 
plays a key role in protecting bone marrow from the hematotoxic 
effects of benzene or other environmental factors (Iskander and 
Jaiswal, 2005). In humans, a high percentage of individuals with 
myeloid and other types of leukemia are homo- or heterozygous 
for a null mutant allele of NQO1. This polymorphism, NQO1*2, 
is a SNP (C609T) that changes Pro187 to Ser187, which destabi-
lizes the protein and targets it for rapid degradation by the ubiquitin 
proteasomal pathway; this polymorphism is also associated with 
increased risk of colorectal and esophageal cancers (Ross, 2005; 
Chen et al., 2012b). Mice lacking NQO1 or NQO2 (knockout or 
null mice) have no developmental abnormalities but have increased 
granulocytes in the blood and myelogenous hyperplasia of the 
bone marrow (due to decreased apoptosis). Mice lacking NQO1 
are substantially more susceptible than wild-type mice to benzene-
induced hematotoxicity (Iskander and Jaiswal, 2005; Ross, 2005). 
The hematotoxicity of benzene is thought to involve its conversion 
to hydroquinone in the liver and its subsequent oxidation to benzo-
quinone by myeloperoxidase in the bone marrow (discussed later 
in the section “Peroxidase-Dependent Cooxidation”). NQO would 
be expected to play a role in detoxifying benzoquinone, and the loss 
of this protective mechanism may be the mechanism by which loss 
of NQO potentiates benzene hematotoxicity. However, loss of NQO 
also impairs apoptosis, which also represents a plausible explana-
tion for the association between loss of NQO and increased sus-
ceptibility to benzene hematotoxicity. This latter mechanism (i.e., 
impaired apoptosis) likely accounts for the observation that NQO1 
and NQO2 null mice are more susceptible than wild-type mice to 
skin carcinogenesis by benzo[a]pyrene and 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]
anthracene, an effect attributable to the diol-epoxides, not the 
quinone metabolites, of these polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 
(Iskander and Jaiswal, 2005).
Dihydropyrimidine Dehydrogenase  In 1993, 18 Japanese 
patients died as a result of an interaction between two oral medi-
cations: sorivudine—a new antiviral drug for herpes zoster—and 
tegafur—a prodrug that is converted in the liver to the anticancer 
agent 5-fluorouracil. The deaths occurred within 40 days of the 
Japanese government’s approval of sorivudine for clinical use. 
The mechanism of the lethal interaction between sorivudine and 
tegafur is illustrated in Fig. 6-21, and involves inhibition of dihy-
dropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD), an NADPH-requiring, 
homodimeric protein (Mr about 210 kDa) containing FMN/FAD 
and an iron–sulfur cluster in each subunit. The enzyme is located 
mainly in liver cytosol, where it catalyzes the reduction of 5-fluo-
rouracil and related pyrimidines. Sorivudine is converted in part by 
gut microbiota to (E)-5-(2-bromovinyl) uracil (BVU), which lacks 
antiviral activity but which is converted by DPD to a metabolite 
that binds covalently to the enzyme. The irreversible inactivation 
(aka suicidal inactivation) of DPD by sorivudine causes a marked 
inhibition of 5-fluorouracil metabolism, which increases blood 
levels of 5-fluorouracil to toxic and, in some cases, lethal levels 
(Ogura et al., 1998; Kanamitsu et al., 2000).
Several genetic polymorphisms that result in a partial or com-
plete loss of DPD activity, affecting about 8% of the population, 
have been described (van Kuilenburg et al., 2004; Robert et al., 
2005). Severe 5-fluorouracil toxicity has also been documented in 
individuals who are heterozygous for allelic variants of DPD, and 
5-fluorouracil lethality has been documented in rare individuals who 
are completely deficient in DPD (one individual in about 10,000)
(Caudle et al., 2013; Meulendijks et al., 2015). 5-Fluorouracil is 
one of the most frequently prescribed anticancer drugs, for which 
reason assessing an individual’s DPD genotype (by analyzing DNA 
for allelic variants) or phenotyping (by measuring DPD activity in 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells or PBMCs) is advocated prior 
to 5-fluorouracil or capecitabine (a 5-flurouracil prodrug) therapy 
so that the dosage of these anticancer drugs can be adjusted on an 
individual basis.
Dehalogenation  There are three major mechanisms for remov-
ing halogens (F, Cl, Br, and I) from aliphatic xenobiotics (Anders, 
1985). The first, known as reductive dehalogenation, involves 
replacement of a halogen with hydrogen, as shown below:
X
H
X
X
X
X
C
C
H
H
X
X
X
X
C
C
Pentahaloethane
Tetrahaloethane
–HX
+2H

238
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
In the second mechanism, known as oxidative dehalogenation, 
a halogen and hydrogen on the same carbon atom are replaced with 
oxygen. Depending on the structure of the haloalkane, oxidative 
dehalogenation leads to the formation of an acylhalide or aldehyde, 
as shown below:
X
H
X
X
X
X
C
C
C
C
X
X
X
X
O
Pentahaloethane
Tetrahaloacetylhalide
–HX
+[O]
H
H
X
X
X
X
C
C
C
C
X
X
X
H
O
Tetrahaloethane
Trihaloacetaldehyde
–HX
+[O]
A third mechanism of dehalogenation involves the elimination 
of two halogens on adjacent carbon atoms to form a carbon–carbon 
double bond, as shown below:
C
C
X
H
X
X
Pentahaloethane
Trihaloethylene
X
H
X
X
X
X
C
C
–2HX
+2H
A variation on this third mechanism is dehydrohalogenation, 
in which a halogen and hydrogen on adjacent carbon atoms are 
eliminated to form a carbon–carbon double bond.
Reductive and oxidative dehalogenations are both catalyzed by 
CYP. (The ability of CYP to catalyze both reductive and oxidative 
reactions is explained later in the section “Cytochrome P450”.) 
Dehalogenation reactions leading to double bond formation are 
catalyzed by CYP and glutathione transferase. These reactions play 
an important role in the biotransformation and metabolic activation 
of several halogenated alkanes, as the following examples illustrate.
The hepatotoxicity of carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) and several 
related halogenated alkanes is dependent on their biotransformation 
by reductive dehalogenation (Plaa, 2000). The first step in reductive 
dehalogenation is a one-electron reduction catalyzed by CYP, which 
produces a potentially toxic, carbon-centered radical and inorganic 
halide. In the case of CCl4, reductive dechlorination produces a tri-
chloromethyl radical (•CCl3), which initiates lipid peroxidation and 
produces a variety of other metabolites, as shown in Fig. 6-22.
Halothane can also be converted by reductive dehalogenation 
to a carbon-centered radical, as shown in Fig. 6-23. The mechanism 
is identical to that described for carbon tetrachloride, although in the 
case of halothane the radical is generated through loss of bromine, 
which is a better leaving group than chlorine. Fig. 6-23 also shows 
that halothane can undergo oxidative dehalogenation, which involves 
oxygen insertion at the C–H bond to generate an unstable halohydrin 
(CF3COHClBr) that decomposes to a reactive acylhalide (CF3COCl), 
which can bind to cellular proteins (particularly to amine groups) or 
further decompose to trifluoroacetic acid (CF3COOH).
Both the oxidative and reductive pathways of halothane metab-
olism generate reactive intermediates capable of binding to proteins 
and other cellular macromolecules. The relative importance of these 
two pathways to halothane-induced hepatotoxicity is species depen-
dent. In rats, halothane-induced hepatotoxicity is promoted by those 
conditions favoring the reductive dehalogenation of halothane, such 
HN
N
H
O
Br
O
HN
N
H
O
F
O
HN
N
H
O
O
HN
N
H
O
O
O
OH
HO
HN
N
O
Br
HOCH2 O
O
HN
N
O
F
O
Sorivudine
Tegafur
P450
in liver
Gut microbiota
5-Fluorouracil (5-FU)
H2N
F
HOOC
BVU
5-Fluorodihydrouracil
α-Fluoro-β-alanine
Dihydro-BVU
Dihydropyrimidine
dehydrogenase (DPD)
NADP+
NADP+ 
HBr
Br
DPD
NADPH
+ H+
NADPH
+ H+
Toxicity to bone marrow
and GI tract
May be fatal
Increase in 5-FU
levels when DPD
is inactivated
– NH3  – CO2
Inactivated DPD
HN
N
H
O
F
O
Figure 6-21.  Reduction of 5-fluorouracil by dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase and its inhibition (suicide inactivation) by sorivudine. Note that inhibition of 
dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase is the mechanism of fatal interactions between sorivudine and the 5-fluorouracil prodrug, tegafur.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
239
as moderate hypoxia (10% to 14% oxygen) plus treatment with the 
CYP inducers, phenobarbital, and pregnenolone-16α-carbonitrile. 
In contrast to the situation in rats, halothane-induced hepatotoxicity 
in guinea pigs is largely the result of oxidative dehalogenation of 
halothane (Lunam et al., 1989). In guinea pigs, halothane hepato-
toxicity is not enhanced by moderate hypoxia and is diminished 
by the use of deuterated halothane, which impedes the oxidative 
dehalogenation of halothane because the CYP-dependent insertion 
of oxygen into a carbon–deuterium bond is energetically less favor-
able (and therefore slower) than inserting oxygen into a carbon–
hydrogen bond.
Halothane hepatitis in humans is a rare but severe form of 
liver necrosis associated with repeated exposure to this volatile 
anesthetic. In humans, as in guinea pigs, halothane hepatotoxicity 
results from the oxidative dehalogenation of halothane, as shown in 
Fig. 6-23. Serum samples from patients suffering from halothane 
hepatitis contain antibodies directed against neoantigens formed by 
the trifluoroacetylation of proteins. These antibodies have been used 
to identify which specific proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum are 
targets for trifluoroacetylation during the oxidative dehalogenation 
of halothane (Pohl et al., 1989).
The concept that halothane is activated by CYP to trifluo-
roacetylhalide, which binds covalently to proteins and elicits an 
immune response, has been extended to other volatile anesthetics, 
such as enflurane, methoxyflurane, and isoflurane. In other words, 
these halogenated aliphatic hydrocarbons, such as halothane, may 
be converted to acylhalides that form immunogens by binding 
covalently to proteins. In addition to accounting for rare instances 
of enflurane hepatitis, this mechanism of hepatotoxicity can also 
account for reports of a cross-sensitization between enflurane and 
halothane, in which enflurane causes liver damage in patients previ-
ously exposed to halothane.
One of the metabolites generated from the reductive deha-
logenation of halothane is 2-chloro-1,1-difluoroethylene (Fig. 
6-23). The formation of this metabolite involves the loss of two 
halogens from adjacent carbon atoms with formation of a car-
bon–carbon double bond. This type of dehalogenation reaction can 
also be catalyzed by glutathione transferases. Glutathione initiates 
the reaction with a nucleophilic attack either on the electrophilic 
carbon to which the halogen is attached (mechanism A) or on the 
halide itself (mechanism B), as shown in Fig. 6-24, for the deha-
logenation of 1,2-dihaloethane to ethylene. The insecticide DDT is 
detoxified by dehydrochlorination to DDE by a lyase (i.e., DDT-
dehydrochlorinase), as shown in Fig. 6-25. The activity of this 
glutathione-dependent reaction correlates well with resistance to 
DDT in houseflies.
Dehydroxylation: mARC, Cytochrome b5, b5 Reductase, 
and Aldehyde Oxidase  Mitochondrial amidoxime-reducing 
complex (mARC) is a molybdenum-containing enzyme that, in the 
presence of NADH, cytochrome b5 and NADH-cytochrome b5 reduc-
tase, can catalyze the N-dehydroxylation of various amidoximes 
and related N-hydroxy compounds, as shown in Fig. 6-26 (Have-
meyer et al., 2010). Reactions catalyzed by mARC/cytochrome b5/
NADH-cytochrome b5 reductase include the N-dehydroxylation of 
amidoximes formed during the activation of the antiparasitic pro-
drug pafuramidine (DB-289), the N-dehydroxylation of N-hydroxy-
sulfonamides, and the N-dehydroxylation of N-hydroxy-valdecoxib 
to its active principal, a COX-2 inhibitor (Saulter et al., 2005; Have-
meyer et al., 2010). The mARC complex can also N-dehydroxylate 
the aryl hydroxylamine metabolites of carcinogenic arylamines 
such as 4-aminobiphenyl and PhIP; N-hydroxy metabolites that 
are formed by CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP1B1, lactoperoxidase, and 
myeloperoxidase (see the sections “Cytochrome P450” and “Per-
oxidase-Dependent Cooxidation”) (Kurian et al., 2006). Because 
these carcinogenic aryl hydroxylamines can be further activated by 
glucuronidation, sulfonation, or acetylation in various tissues (see 
the sections “Glucuronidation,” “Sulfonation,” and “Acetylation”), 
reduction by mARC/cytochrome b5/NADH-cytochrome b5 reduc-
tase represents a competing detoxication pathway. Gut microbiota 
can also catalyze dehydroxylation reactions as shown in Fig. 6-4 for 
quinic acid. Gut microbiota can also reduce N- and S-oxides formed 
by FMO and/or CYP, as described for trimethylamine N-oxide in the 
section “Flavin Monooxygenases.”
Aldehyde Oxidase—Reduction Reactions  Aldehyde oxidase 
is a cytosolic molybdoenzyme that catalyzes the oxidation of some 
xenobiotics and the reduction of others. The types of oxidative and 
reductive reactions catalyzed by aldehyde oxidase are shown in 
Fig. 6-27. In contrast to the large number of drugs that are known 
to be (or suspected of being) oxidized by aldehyde oxidase in vivo, 
only a few drugs are known to be (or suspected of being) reduced 
by aldehyde oxidase in vivo, including nitrofurazone, zonisamide, 
and ziprasidone. The reductive metabolism of ziprasidone by alde-
hyde oxidase is shown in Fig. 6-7. The features of aldehyde oxidase 
and the oxidative reactions it catalyzes are discussed later in the 
section “Aldehyde Oxidase.”
CCl4
•CCl3
e–
e–
Cl–
Cl–
O
CCl3
•O
RH
R•
CCl2
CHCl3
HOCCl3
HCl
H2O
2HCl
O
C
Cl
Cl
CO2
2HCl
H2O
2GSH
GSSG
+ H2O
Reductive dehalogenation
O2
CO
Carbon monoxide
HOO
CCl3
Lipid peroxidation
Carbon dioxide
Phosgene
P450
[O]
••
Figure 6-22.  Reductive dehalogenation of carbon tetrachloride to a tri-
chloromethyl free radical that initiates lipid peroxidation. RH, unsaturated 
lipid; R•, lipid dienyl radical; GSH, reduced glutathione; GSSG, oxidized 
glutathione.

240
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
F
C
F
C
F
Br
Cl
H
F
C
F
C
F
H
Cl
H
e–
e–
Cl–
–OH
F–
Br–
F
C
F
C
F
Cl
H
H+, e–
F
C
F
C
F
Br
Cl
O
H
HBr
F
C
F
F
F
C
F
C
F
OH
O
Oxidative
dehalogenation
P450
[O]
2-chloro-1,1,1-tri-
ﬂuoroethane
2-chloro-1,1-di-
ﬂuoroethylene
Triﬂuoroacetic
acid
Triﬂuoroacetylchloride
Carbon-centered
radical
Lipid peroxidation
Binding to protein
Liver damage
in rats
Immune hepatitis
in humans
Binding to protein
(Neoantigen [hapten] formation)
Reductive
dehalogenation
C
C
Cl
H
F
F
•
C
Cl
O
Figure 6-23.  Activation of halothane by reductive and oxidative dehalogenation and their role in liver toxicity in rats and humans.
X
CH2
CH2
X
CH2
CH2
X
GS
CH2
CH2
GSSR
RS–
+
X–
X–
A
GS
X
CH2
CH2
X
CH2
CH2
GS
X
GS
X–
GSSR
X–
RS–
+
B
Figure 6-24.  Glutathione-dependent dehalogenation of 1,2-dihaloethane to ethylene. (A) Nucleophilic attack on carbon and (B) nucleophilic attack on halide.
HCl
DDT
DDE
Cl
Cl
C
H
CCl3
Cl
Cl
C
CCl2
Figure 6-25.  Dehydrochlorination of the pesticide DDT to DDE, a glutathione-dependent reaction.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
241
Oxidation
Alcohol, Aldehyde, and Ketone Oxidation–Reduction 
Systems  Alcohols, aldehydes, and ketones are oxidized by a 
number of enzymes, including alcohol dehydrogenases, aldehyde 
dehydrogenases, AKR1A1, AKR1C1–1C4 (which have dihydro-
diol dehydrogenase activity toward trans-dihydrodiols of various 
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon oxiranes), the molybdenum-
containing enzymes (namely aldehyde oxidase and xanthine 
dehydrogenase/oxidase), and CYP. For example, simple alcohols 
(such as methanol and ethanol) are oxidized to aldehydes (namely, 
formaldehyde and acetaldehyde) by alcohol dehydrogenase. 
These aldehydes are further oxidized to carboxylic acids (formic 
acid and acetic acid) by aldehyde dehydrogenase, as shown in 
Fig. 6-28. Many of the aforementioned enzymes can also catalyze 
the reduction of xenobiotics, as discussed in the previous section 
“Reduction.”
Alcohol Dehydrogenase  Alcohol dehydrogenases (ADHs) 
belong to the medium-chain dehydrogenases/reductases (MDRs), 
as shown in Table 6-9. ADHs are zinc-containing, cytosolic 
enzymes present in several tissues including liver (which has the 
N
OH
mARC (mitochondrial amidoxime-reducing component)
Cytochrome b5
NADH-cytochrome b5 reductase
NADH
N
OH
N
H
Benzamidine
Benzamidoxime
N-hydroxylated amidines
(amidoximes)
N
OH
NH2
NH
NH2
Debrisoquine
N-hydroxydebrisoquine
N-hydroxylated guanidines
N
NH2
N
NH
NH2
Guanabenz
Guanoxabenz
N-hydroxylated
amidinohydrazones
NH2
H
N
N
Cl
Cl
N
OH
NH2
H
N
NH
N
Cl
Cl
Cytosine
N 4-hydroxycytosine
N-hydroxylated amines
(hydroxylamines)
N
H
O
N
N
H
H
OH
N
H
O
N
N
H
Benzenesulfonamide
N-hydroxybenzenesulfonamide
N-hydroxylated sulfonamides
(sulfhydroxamic acids)
O
O
S
N
OH
H
O
O
S
N
H
H
Figure 6-26.  Dehydroxylation reactions catalyzed by the molybdoenzyme mitochondrial amidoxime-reducing component (mARC), cytochrome b5, and NADH-
cytochrome b5 reductase. Note that aldehyde oxidase can also catalyze dehydroxylation reactions as shown in Fig. 6-27.

242
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
highest levels), kidney, lung, and gastric mucosa (Agarwal, 1992; 
Ramchandani, 2004). These enzymes oxidize several types of alco-
hols including hydroxysteroids, retinol, ethanol, lipid peroxidation 
products, and other simple and complex (e.g., ring-containing) alco-
hols. Human ADHs are dimeric proteins consisting of two about 
40-kDa subunits designated α, β, γ, π, χ, σ (previously known as 
µ), or ADH6 (the latter having no subunit designation). As shown 
in Table 6-9, there are seven human ADHs, and these are catego-
rized into five classes (I to V) based on patterns of tissue-specific 
expression, catalytic properties, and amino acid sequence. Class 
I comprises three hepatically expressed genes: ADH1A, ADH1B, 
and ADH1C, which were formerly known as ADH1, ADH2, and 
ADH3, respectively. The class I isozymes consist of homo- and 
hetero-dimeric forms of the three subunits (e.g., αα, αβ, ββ, βγ, 
and γγ). Class II contains ADH4, which is composed of two pi sub-
units (ππ). Class III contains ADH5, which is composed of two chi 
subunits (χχ). Class IV contains ADH7, which is composed of two 
sigma subunits (σσ). Class V contains ADH6 (for which there is no 
subunit designation) (Brennan et al., 2004; Ramchandani, 2004). 
Therefore, there are over 20 human ADH isozymes and these dif-
fer in their substrate specificity and catalytic efficiency toward 
ethanol (Ramchandani, 2004). The human ADH genes have similar 
sequences (i.e., 60% to 70% identical coding regions), and all have 
nine exons and eight introns with the exception of ADH6, which 
lacks the last exon (Han et al., 2005). In addition, several hundred 
genetic variants have been described across the human ADH cluster 
which lies on chromosome 4q (Li et al., 2008). Alcohols can be 
oxidized to aldehydes by non-ADH enzymes in microsomes and 
peroxisomes, although these are quantitatively less important than 
ADH for ethanol oxidation (Lieber, 2004). The microsomal ethanol 
oxidizing system (formerly known as MEOS) is the CYP enzyme, 
CYP2E1. The corresponding peroxisomal enzyme is catalase. The 
O
O
O
Oxidation
Reduction
O
N
OH
O
N
H
O
N
R
OH
R
NH
NO2
Azaheterocyclic
aromatic compounds
Hydroxamic acids
Amides
Isothiazoles
Imino thiols
Imino alcohols
Isoxazoles
+
Alicyclic imines
R
O
H
R
O
OH
Aldehydes
Carboxylic acids
O
Lactams
Lactams
N
H
N
H
N
NH
N
N
N
N
N
N
OH
H
N
N
N
Hydroxylamines
Nitroaromatics
S
N
R
SH
R
NH
Figure 6-27.  Examples of oxidation and reduction catalyzed by aldehyde oxidase.
R
CH2OH
R
C
ADH
O
H
NAD+ + H2O
NAD+
NADH + H+
NADH + H+
R
C
O
OH
ALDH
Figure 6-28.  Oxidation of alcohols to aldehydes and carboxylic acids by alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) and aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH).

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
243
oxidation of ethanol to acetaldehyde by these three enzyme sys-
tems is shown in Fig. 6-29.
Class I (ADH1A, ADH1B, ADH1C)  The class I ADH isozymes 
(ADH1A or α-ADH, ADH1B or β-ADH, and ADH1C or γ-ADH) 
are responsible for the oxidation of ethanol and other small, ali-
phatic alcohols, and they are strongly inhibited by pyrazole and its 
4-alkyl derivatives (e.g., 4-methylpyrazole). High levels of class I 
ADH isozymes are expressed in liver and adrenals, with lower lev-
els in kidney, lung, blood vessels (in the case of ADH1B), gastric 
mucosa (in the case of ADH1C), and other tissues, but not brain. It 
is noteworthy that the liver expresses a very large amount of ADHs 
(approximately 3% of all soluble protein) and also expresses the 
widest variety of isozymes (Ramchandani, 2004).
The class I ADH isozymes differ in their capacity to oxidize 
ethanol. Polymorphisms have been well described for the class 
I ADH isozymes. Even the allelozymes, which differ in a single 
amino acid, differ markedly in their affinity (Km) and/or capac-
ity (Vmax) for oxidizing ethanol to acetaldehyde. There are at least 
three allelic variants of ADH1B (i.e., *1, *2, and *3), with a single 
amino acid change at position 48. The homodimer, β2 β2 and het-
erodimers containing at least one β2 subunit (i.e., the ADH1B*2 
allelozymes) are especially active in oxidizing ethanol at physi-
ological pH. ADH1B*2 (formerly known as ADH2*2) is known 
as atypical ADH, and is responsible for the unusually rapid conver-
sion of ethanol to acetaldehyde in up to 90% of the Pacific Rim 
Asian population (e.g., Japanese, Chinese, Korean), whereas only 
about 10% of Caucasians express this allele. The ADH1B*3 is rel-
atively common in individuals of African descent. The latter two 
alleles have greater activity toward ethanol than the ADH1B1*1 
allele (Kimura and Higuchi, 2011). These population differences in 
ADH1B allelozyme expression contribute to ethnic differences in 
alcohol consumption and toxicity, as discussed in the next section 
“Aldehyde Dehydrogenase.”
Unlike the allelic variants of ADH1B, the allelic variants of 
ADH1C do not differ markedly in their ability to oxidize ethanol. 
However, as in the case of the ADH1B allelozymes, the expres-
sion of the ADH1C allelozymes also varies from one ethnic group 
to the next. The two allelozymes of ADH1C, namely, ADH1C*1 
(γ1-ADH) and ADH1C*2 (γ2-ADH), are respectively expressed 
~50:50 in Caucasians, but 90:10 in Pacific Rim Asians, with the *2 
allele having somewhat higher activity toward ethanol than the *1 
allele (Li, 2000; Kimura and Higuchi, 2011). An additional SNP 
in ADH1C has been found in up to 20% of some Native American 
populations (Ramchandani, 2004).
Class II (ADH4)  The class II enzyme ADH4 (π-ADH) is mainly 
expressed in liver (and to some extent in other gastrointestinal tis-
sues), where it preferentially oxidizes larger alcohols (Ramchandani, 
2004). ADH4 differs from the ADH1 isozymes in that it is less 
sensitive to pyrazole inhibition, but may play some role in ethanol 
oxidation, especially at high concentrations (Lockley et al., 2005; 
CH3CH
OH
OH
CH3C
CH3CH2OH
H2O2
H2O
NAD+
NADH + H+
2H2O
Ethanol
Acetaldehyde
NADH + H+
Acetic acid
CH3C
O
OH
O
H
NADP+ + H2O
NADPH + H+
+ O2
H2O
+ NAD+
ADH
CYP2E1
Endoplasmic reticulum
Cytosol
Peroxisomes
CATALASE
Mitochondria
ALDH2
ALDH1B1
Figure 6-29.  Oxidation of alcohol to acetaldehyde by alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH), cytochrome P450 (CYP2E1), and catalase. Note that the oxidation of 
alcohol to acetic acid involves multiple organelles.

244
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
Edenberg, 2007; Kimura and Higuchi, 2011). Some studies support 
a role for polymorphisms of ADH4 in the susceptibility to alcohol-
ism (Kimura and Higuchi, 2011).
Class III (ADH5)  The class III enzyme ADH5 (a homodimer of 
the χ-subunit) preferentially oxidizes long-chain alcohols (pen-
tanol and larger), omega-hydroxy-fatty acids, and other alcohols 
(such as cinnamyl alcohol). Like ADH4, ADH5 is less sensitive 
to pyrazole inhibition than ADH1 enzymes. However, in contrast 
to ADH4, which is largely confined to the liver, ADH5 is ubiq-
uitous, being present in virtually all tissues (including brain), 
where it catalyzes the rate-limiting step in detoxifying formalde-
hyde through oxidation of S-hydroxymethylglutathione (which 
is formed spontaneously from formaldehyde and glutathione) to 
S-formylglutathione. In fact, ADH5 and the glutathione-dependent 
formaldehyde dehydrogenase (also referred to in literature as FDH, 
ADH3, or S-nitrosoglutathione reductase [GSNOR]) are identical 
enzymes (Koivusalo et al., 1989; Edenberg, 2007; Just et al., 2011). 
This enzyme appears to be the ancestral form of ADH from which 
all other vertebrate ADHs have evolved, and so far functional poly-
morphisms have not been identified in ADH5 (Just et al., 2011).
Class IV (ADH7)  The class IV enzyme ADH7 (σ-ADH; also 
referred to as the µ subunit) is a low-affinity (high Km), high-­capacity 
(high Vmax) enzyme, and is the most active of the medium-chain 
ADHs in oxidizing retinol (a member of the vitamin A family). It 
is the major ADH expressed in human stomach and other areas of 
the upper aero-digestive tract (e.g., stomach, esophagus, pharynx, 
gingiva, mouth, and tongue), as well as the eyes (Han et al., 2005). 
In contrast to the other ADHs, ADH7 is not expressed in the adult 
human liver (Ramchandani, 2004). Among the human ADH forms, 
ADH7 has the highest activity toward ethanol (Han et al., 2005). 
Inasmuch as ADH7 is expressed in the upper gastrointestinal tract, 
where chronic alcohol consumption leads to cancer development, 
there is considerable interest in the role of ADH7 in the preabsorp-
tive conversion of ethanol to acetaldehyde (a suspected upper gas-
trointestinal tract carcinogen or co-carcinogen) and in its role in the 
metabolism of retinol (a vitamin required for epithelial cell growth 
and differentiation), which might be inhibited by alcohol consump-
tion (Seitz and Oneta, 1998). The role for a protective effect of 
high-activity polymorphisms against alcoholism remains to be 
fully elucidated, with some studies showing a positive association 
(Han et al., 2005), and others no association (Duell et al., 2012). 
However, the A92G SNP (rs1573496; C → G) in ADH7 has been 
found to confer a reduced risk of squamous cell carcinoma of the 
head and neck in Caucasians (Wei et al., 2010).
Compared with hepatic ADH, gastric ADH has a lower affinity 
(higher Km) but higher capacity (larger Vmax) for oxidizing ethanol; 
the former being dominated by the class I ADH isozymes, the latter 
by the class IV enzyme ADH7. Although ethanol is largely biotrans-
formed by hepatic ADH1, gastric ADH7 nevertheless can limit the 
systemic bioavailability of alcohol. This first-pass elimination of 
alcohol by gastric ADH7 can be significant depending on the man-
ner in which the alcohol is consumed; large doses over a short time 
produce high ethanol concentrations in the stomach, which compen-
sate for the low affinity (high Km) of gastric ADH7. Young women 
have lower gastric ADH7 activity than do men, and gastric ADH7 
activity tends to be lower in alcoholics (Frezza et al., 1990). Some 
alcoholic women have no detectable gastric ADH7, and blood levels 
of ethanol after oral consumption of alcohol are the same as those 
that are obtained after intravenous administration. Gastric ADH7 
activity decreases during fasting, which is one reason alcohol is 
more intoxicating when consumed on an empty stomach. Several 
commonly used drugs (e.g., cimetidine, ranitidine, and aspirin) are 
noncompetitive inhibitors of gastric ADH7. Under certain circum-
stances these drugs increase the systemic availability of alcohol, 
although the effect is too small to have serious medical, social, or 
legal consequences (Levitt, 1993). About 30% of Asians appear to 
be genetically deficient in ADH7, the main gastric ADH. In addition 
to biotransforming ethanol and retinol, ADH7 also detoxifies the 
dietary carcinogen nitrobenzaldehyde. It has been suggested that 
a lack of ADH7 in some Japanese subjects may impair their abil-
ity to detoxify nitrobenzaldehyde and may possibly be linked to 
the high rate of gastric cancer observed in the Japanese population 
(Seitz and Oneta, 1998).
Class V (ADH6)  The mRNA for class V ADH (namely ADH6, 
for which there is no subunit designation) (Brennan et al., 2004; 
Ramchandani, 2004) has been found in fetal and adult liver 
(Edenberg, 2007). However, the protein has not yet been isolated 
from human tissue so little is known about its in vivo function. 
ADH6 has been expressed in vitro and metabolizes ethanol with 
a Km of approximately 28 mM and has higher affinity for benzyl 
alcohol (Km 0.12 mM) and propanol (Km 3.2 mM) (Zhi et al., 2000).
Aldehyde Dehydrogenase  Aldehyde dehydrogenases (ALDHs) 
oxidize four major types of aldehydes: (1) saturated alkanals (e.g., 
formaldehyde and acetaldehyde), (2) unsaturated alkenals (e.g., 
acrolein), (3) aromatic aldehydes (e.g., benzaldehyde), and (4) 
dicarbonyls (e.g., glyoxal and malondialdehyde) to their corre-
sponding carboxylic acids, generally with NAD+ as the cofactor. 
However, it should be noted that ALDH1L1 prefers NADP+ over 
NAD+, and ALDH3B1 can use either cofactor in a substrate-depen-
dent manner. In addition, ALDH6A1 requires acetyl- or propio-
nyl-CoA (Marchitti et al., 2007, 2008). Most of the enzymes also 
have esterase activity (Yoshida et al., 1998; Marchitti et al., 2008). 
Several ALDH enzymes are involved in the oxidation of xenobiotic 
aldehydes, such as those formed from ethanol, allyl alcohol, carbon 
tetrachloride, cyclophosphamide, and ifosfamide (Marchitti et al., 
2007). Formaldehyde dehydrogenase, which specifically oxidizes 
formaldehyde that is complexed with glutathione, is not a member 
of the ALDH family but is a class III ADH (ADH5) (Koivusalo 
et al., 1989; Edenberg, 2007; Just et al., 2011). At least 19 ALDH 
genes have been identified in humans, and a correspondingly large 
number of ALDH genes appear to be present in other mammalian 
species (Sládek, 2003; Vasiliou et al., 2004; Marchitti et al., 2007; 
Marchitti et al., 2008). The name, tissue distribution, subcellular 
location, and major substrate for the human ALDHs are summa-
rized in Table 6-10. The ALDHs differ in their primary amino acid 
sequences. They may also differ in the quaternary structure. For 
example, ALDH3A1 is a dimer of two 85-kDa subunits, whereas 
ALDH1A1 and ALDH2 are homotetramers of 54-kDa subunits 
(Goedde and Agarwal, 1992; Marchitti et al., 2008).
As shown in Fig. 6-29, ALDH2 is a mitochondrial enzyme 
that, by virtue of its high affinity, is primarily responsible for oxi-
dizing simple aldehydes, such as acetaldehyde (Km for acetaldehyde 
<1 μM), and by acting as a nitrate reductase, ALDH2 is the princi-
pal enzyme necessary for the activation of nitroglycerin (Marchitti 
et al., 2008). In fact, the genetic polymorphism ALDH2*2 is associ-
ated with decreased nitroglycerin efficacy in certain Chinese popu-
lations (Marchitti et al., 2008). Several genetic polymorphisms in 
human ALDH2 have been described, including the well-described 
ALDH2*2 point mutation (Glu487 → Lys487) which results in a loss 
of activity due to a greatly diminished affinity for NAD+ (Marchitti 
et al., 2008). The mutant ALDH2*2 allele is dominant, such that het-
erotetrameric ALDH2 proteins that contain even a single ALDH2*2 
subunit are inactive (Marchitti et al., 2008). A high percentage (40% 
to 50%) of individuals of Asian descent are deficient in ALDH2

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
245
Table 6-10  
Properties of the Human Aldehyde Dehydrogenases (ALDHs)
ALDH
ALTERNATIVE 
NAMES
FORM
TISSUE
SUBCELLULAR 
LOCALIZATION
MAJOR SUBSTRATE
1A1
ALDH1, ALDH11, 
RALDH1
Homotetramer
Liver, kidney, lung, stomach, 
testis, lens, retina, CNS, etc. 
Cytosol
Retinal
1A2
RALDH2
Homotetramer
Intestine, testis, lung, liver, 
kidney, retina, CNS, etc.
Cytosol
Retinal, nitroglycerin
1A3
ALDH6, RALDH3
Homodimer
Prostate, salivary gland, 
­stomach, kidney, breast,  
CNS, etc.
Cytosol
Retinal, aliphatic aldehydes
1B1
ALDH5
Homotetramer
Muscle, liver, kidney, lung, 
­testis, muscle, heart, CNS, etc.
Mitochondria
Acetaldehyde, aliphatic 
aldehydes
1L1
FDH
Homotetramer
Liver, kidney, pancreas, lung, 
prostate, heart, muscle, testis, 
ovary, CNS, etc.
Cytosol, 
mitochondria
10-Formyltetrahydrofolate, 
propanal, and acetaldehyde
1L2
mtFDH
Homotetramer
Spleen, cervix, uterus, corpus 
collusum
Mitochondria
10-Formyltetrahydrofolate
2
ALDM, ALDHI
Homotetramer
Liver, kidney, lung, heart, 
­stomach, muscle, CNS, etc.
Mitochondria
Acetaldehyde
3A1
ALDH3
Homodimer
Cornea, esophagus, trachea, 
stomach, lung, bladder, etc.
Cytosol, nucleus
Aromatic and medium-chain 
aliphatic aldehydes
3A2
ALDH10, FALDH
Homodimer
Adrenal gland, kidney, liver, 
lung, intestine, pancreas, 
­stomach, heart, muscle,  
CNS, etc.
Microsomes, 
peroxisomes
Fatty and aromatic 
­aldehydes
3B1
ALDH4, ALDH7
Unknown
Kidney, lung, liver, cerebral 
astrocytes, testis, macrophages, 
pancreas, spleen
Cytosol 
(membrane-
bound in some 
tissues)
Medium- and long-chain 
aliphatic and aromatic 
­aldehydes
3B2
ALDH8
Unknown
Parotid, adrenal gland, prostate, 
lung, kidney, liver, CNS
Microsomes
Unknown*
4A1
ALDH4, P5CDH
Homodimer
Liver, muscle, kidney, CNS
Mitochondria
Glutamate γ-semialdehyde, 
short- and medium-chain 
aliphatic aldehydes
5A1
SSDH, SSADH
Homotetramer
Liver, kidney, muscle, heart, 
CNS
Mitochondria
Succinate semialdehyde
6A1
MMSDH
Homotetramer
Kidney, liver, heart, muscle, 
CNS
Mitochondria
Malonate semialdehyde
7A1
ATQ1, EPD
Homotetramer
Cochlea, eye, ovary, heart, 
kidney, liver, CNS, etc.
Cytosol, nucleus, 
mitochondria
α-Aminoadipic 
­semialdehyde
8A1
ALDH12
Unknown
Liver, kidney, CNS, breast, 
testis, prostate, etc.
Cytosol
9-cis-Retinal
9A1
ALDH4, ALDH7, 
ALDH9, γABHD
Homotetramer
Liver, kidney, muscle, CNS
Cytosol
γ-Aminobutyraldehyde
16A1
MGC10204
Unknown
CNS, uterus, placenta, bone 
marrow, heart, kidney, lung
Cytosol
Unknown
18A1
GSAS, Δ1-P5CS†
Unknown
Pancreas, ovary, testis, kidney, 
heart, colon, muscle, CNS, etc.
Mitochondria
Glutamic γ-semialdehyde
Abbreviations: γABHD, 4-aminobutyraldehyde; FALDH, fatty aldehyde dehydrogenase; MMSDH, methylmalonate semialdehyde dehydrogenase; SSDH, 
succinic dehydrogenase.
SOURCE: Data adapted from Marchitti et al. (2007, 2008, 2010), Sládek (2003), Strickland et al. (2011), and Vasiliou et al. (2004).
*ALDH3B2 contains an in-frame stop codon, suggesting the possibility that it is a pseudogene, although transcripts have been found in various tissues.
† Δ1-Pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthase, P5CS.

246
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
activity due to the presence of the ALDH2*2 allele. This same pop-
ulation also has a high incidence of the atypical form of ADH1B 
(i.e., ADH1B*2), which means that they rapidly convert ethanol 
to acetaldehyde but only slowly convert acetaldehyde to acetic 
acid. (They also have a relatively high prevalence of a deficiency of 
ADH7 activity, which impairs gastric metabolism of ethanol.) As a 
result, many Asian subjects experience a flushing syndrome after 
consuming alcohol due to a rapid buildup of acetaldehyde, which 
triggers the dilation of facial blood vessels through the release of 
catecholamines. Some Native American populations also experi-
ence a flushing syndrome after consuming alcohol, possibly because 
they express ADH1B*2 (Ramchandani, 2004) or a different allelic 
variant of ALDH2 and/or because acetaldehyde oxidation in blood 
erythrocytes is impaired in these individuals, possibly due to the 
expression of a variant form of ALDH1A1. The functional genetic 
variants of ADH that rapidly convert ethanol to ­acetaldehyde (i.e., 
ADH1B*2) and the genetic variants of ALDH that slowly detoxify 
acetaldehyde (i.e., ALDH2*2) both protect against heavy drink-
ing and alcoholism. Inhibition of ALDH by disulfiram (Antabuse) 
causes an accumulation of acetaldehyde in alcoholics. The nauseat-
ing effect of acetaldehyde serves to deter continued ethanol con-
sumption (Goedde and Agarwal, 1992). However, it is important 
to note that a predisposition toward alcoholism is not simply deter-
mined by factors that affect the pharmacokinetics of ethanol and 
its metabolites. Studies in humans and rodents implicate 5-HT1B, 
5-HT2A, 5-HT3A, and 5-HT3B receptors, dopamine-related genes, 
GABA receptors, cholinergic muscarinic receptor 2, the endoge-
nous opioid system, tryptophan hydroxylase, and neuropeptide Y 
as candidate targets of genetic susceptibility in the pharmacody-
namic actions of ethanol (Li, 2000; Kimura and Higuchi, 2011). 
Monoamine oxidase may also be a risk factor for alcoholism, as 
discussed later (see the section “Amine Oxidases”).
Genetic deficiencies in other ALDHs impair the metabo-
lism of other aldehydes, which is the underlying basis of cer-
tain diseases. For example polymorphisms in certain ALDH 
genes may alter the risk for, or cause, the following: spina bifida 
(ALDH1A2); Sjögren–Larsson syndrome (ALDH3A2); paranoid 
schizophrenia (ALDH3B1); type II hyperprolinemia (ALDH4A1); 
γ-hydroxybutyric aciduria (ALDH5A1); methylmalonic aciduria 
(ALDH6A1); pyroxidine-dependent seizures (ALDH7A1); nonal-
coholic steatohepatitis or NASH (ALDH9A1); and hyperammone-
mia and/or hypoprolinemia (ALDH18A1) (Marchitti et al., 2008).
The toxicological consequences of an inherited (i.e., genetic) 
or acquired (e.g., drug-induced) deficiency of ALDH illustrate 
that aldehydes are more cytotoxic than the corresponding alcohol. 
This is especially true of allyl alcohol (CH2=CHCH2OH), which 
is converted by ADH to the highly hepatotoxic aldehyde acrolein 
(CH2=CHCHO) (Marchitti et al., 2007, 2008).
The oxidation of ethanol by ADH and ALDH leads to the for-
mation of acetic acid, which is rapidly oxidized to carbon dioxide 
and water. However, in certain cases, alcohols are converted to toxic 
carboxylic acids, as in the case of methanol and ethylene glycol, 
which are converted via aldehyde intermediates to formic acid and 
oxalic acid, respectively. Formic and oxalic acids are considerably 
more toxic than acetic acid. For this reason, methanol and ethylene 
glycol poisoning are commonly treated with ethanol, which com-
petitively inhibits the oxidation of methanol and ethylene glycol by 
ADH and ALDH. The potent inhibitor of ADH, 4-methylpyrazole 
(fomepizole) (Lockley et al., 2005), is also used to treat methanol 
and ethylene glycol poisoning.
The reduction of aldehydes and ketones to primary and sec-
ondary alcohols by carbonyl reductases has already been discussed 
(see the section “Carbonyl Reduction: AKRs, SDRs, and Others”). 
In contrast to ADH and ALDH, carbonyl reductases typically use 
NADPH as the source of reducing equivalents. Aldehydes, espe-
cially aromatic aldehydes, can also be oxidized by aldehyde oxidase 
and xanthine oxidoreductase, which are discussed in the section 
“Molybdenum Hydroxylases (Molybdoenzymes).”
Dimeric Dihydrodiol Dehydrogenase  As mentioned in the 
section “Carbonyl Reduction: AKRs, SDRs, and Others,” several 
members of the aldo–keto reductase (AKR) superfamily (particularly 
AKR1A1, 1C1, 1C2, 1C3, and 1C4) are dihydrodiol dehydrogenases 
that oxidize the trans-dihydrodiols of various polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons to the corresponding ortho-quinones, as shown in 
Fig. 6-14 (Penning, 1997; Burczynski and Penning, 2000). There 
is also a dihydrodiol dehydrogenase (gene symbol DHDH; com-
pletely unrelated to AKRs or SDRs) that encodes a dimeric enzyme 
that oxidizes trans-dihydrodiols of aromatic hydrocarbons to the 
corresponding catechols in a NADP+-dependent manner (Carbone 
et al., 2008). The overall reaction catalyzed by dimeric dihydrodiol 
dehydrogenase is a two-electron oxidation of one of the hydroxyl 
groups of a trans-dihydrodiol to an intermediate ketol, which rap-
idly enolizes to the catechol (Carbone et al., 2008). It also activates 
naphthalene trans-dihydrodiol to 1,2-­dihydroxynaphthalene, which 
rapidly auto-oxidizes to 1,2-naphthoquinone, a cytotoxic ortho-
quinone that may be responsible for naphthalene-induced cataracts 
(Carbone et al., 2008). Dimeric dihydrodiol dehydrogenase is not 
active toward hydroxysteroids, but it does oxidize several endog-
enous sugars, including d-glucose and d-xylose, and may therefore 
play a role in the metabolism of dietary sugars with subsequent 
generation of NADPH. Dimeric dihydrodiol dehydrogenase can 
also catalyze reductions in the presence of NADPH, such as the 
carbonyl reduction of methylglyoxal and 3-deoxyglucusone, nitro-
benzaldehydes, and camphoroquine (Carbone et al., 2008). Dimeric 
dihydrodiol dehydrogenase can be inhibited by l-ascorbic and iso-
ascorbic acids and also by 4-hydroxyphenylketones and 2,6-dihy-
droxyanthraquinone, and is inactivated by magnesium chloride and 
some phosphate salts (Carbone et al., 2008). This enzyme was first 
characterized in rabbit liver, where it oxidizes benzene dihydro-
diol to the genotoxic and immunotoxic catechol. It has also been 
isolated from pig, dog, and cynomolgus monkey (Macaca fascicu-
laris). The purified enzyme is composed of identical subunits with 
molecular weights of 32 to 36 kDa, and amino acid sequence in 
humans indicates that each subunit is composed of 335 amino acids 
(Carbone et al., 2008). Dimeric dihydrodiol dehydrogenase is ubiq-
uitously expressed in dogs and pigs, but only in the kidney of mon-
key, lens and intestine of rabbit, and apparently only the intestine of 
humans (Carbone et al., 2008).
It should be noted that polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 
can be oxidized by CYP to an arene oxide, an electrophilic and 
potentially toxic metabolite that is detoxified by its conversion to 
a trans-dihydrodiol by epoxide hydrolase. By oxidizing the trans-
dihydrodiol to an ortho-quinone, AKR1A1, 1C1-1C4 can generate 
yet another potentially toxic metabolite. The roles of these AKRs 
(which can act as monomeric dihydrodiol dehydrogenases) in the 
metabolism of PAHs are well known but the activity of dimeric 
dihydrodiol dehydrogenase toward the trans-dihydrodiols of PAHs 
has not yet been reported (Carbone et al., 2008). In terms of their 
ability to cause oxidative stress and cellular toxicity, ortho-­quinones 
can be considered equivalent to para-quinones, which were 
discussed earlier in the section “Quinone Reduction: NQO1 
and NQO2.”
Molybdenum Hydroxylases (Molybdoenzymes)  There are 
five human molybdenum-containing enzymes (molybdoenzymes), 
namely aldehyde oxidase (AO; gene symbol AOX1), xanthine

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
247
oxidoreductase (XOR; also known as xanthine oxidase or xan-
thine dehydrogenase, gene symbol XDH), sulfite oxidase (gene 
symbol SUOX), and the more recently discovered “mitochondrial 
amidoxime reducing component” (mARC-1 and -2; gene symbols 
MARC1 and MARC2) (Havemeyer et al., 2011; Neve et al., 2015). 
Aldehyde oxidase and xanthine oxidoreductase are the two major 
molybdoenzymes that participate in the biotransformation of xeno-
biotics. The human mitochondrial amidoxime-reducing component 
(composed of mARC 1 and 2) is involved in the activation of ami-
doxime prodrugs and detoxication of some N-hydroxylated xenobi-
otics, as described in the section “Dehydroxylation.” Sulfite oxidase 
will not be described in detail here except that, as its name implies, 
the enzyme oxidizes sulfite, an irritating air pollutant, to sulfate, 
which is relatively innocuous, and is also required to metabolize the 
sulfur-containing amino acids cysteine and methionine in foods.
Genetic polymorphisms can affect all molybdoenzymes or 
individual enzymes. Homozygosity for nonfunctional forms of 
some of the genes involved in the synthesis of the active molyb-
denum cofactor (MoCo), namely MOCS1, MOCS2, MOCOS, or 
GPHN, result in a complete lack of activity of all molybdoenzymes, 
and is clinically indistinguishable from isolated sulfite oxidase defi-
ciency (Reiss and Hahnewald, 2010), a rare condition that gives rise 
to progressive neurological damage and death in early childhood 
(Reiss and Johnson, 2003; Feng et al., 2007). Isolated xanthine oxi-
doreductase deficiency results in the classical type I xanthinuria 
which can lead to xanthine stones (calculi) because of the inabil-
ity to oxidize xanthine and hypoxanthine to uric acid, but it is not 
life-threatening (Reiss and Hahnewald, 2010). Although no isolated 
forms of AO deficiency have been described, type II xanthinuria 
results from a combined deficiency of xanthine oxidoreductase and 
aldehyde oxidase as evidenced by both the inability to oxidize xan-
thine and hypoxanthine as well as allopurinol to oxypurinol. Certain 
polymorphisms in aldehyde oxidase do appear to cause a decrease 
or complete loss of activity toward certain substrates, as discussed 
in the section “Aldehyde Oxidase” (Hartmann et al., 2012). Not 
surprisingly, given its recent discovery, isolated mARC deficiency 
has not yet been described.
Xanthine oxidoreductase and aldehyde oxidase comprise the 
human members of the “xanthine oxidase family” of molybdoen-
zymes. Both enzymes are only active as homodimers, each with 
about 145-kDa monomer consisting of an N-terminal region that 
binds two nonidentical iron–sulfur clusters of the [2Fe-2S]-type, 
followed by an FAD-binding region and C-terminal domains that 
bind the molybdenum center (Wahl et al., 2010). In xanthine oxi-
doreductase, however, an additional NAD+ binding site is present. 
In xanthine oxidoreductase and aldehyde oxidase, the molybdenum 
is ligated to an oxo ligand, a hydroxyl group, two dithiolene sul-
furs, and a sulfido group (as shown in the upper left panel of Fig. 
6-31). The molybdenum-sulfur bond is inserted through a post-
translational reaction catalyzed by MoCo sulfurase (gene symbol 
MOCOS) which substitutes one of the oxo groups of the molyb-
denum cofactor with a sulfo double bond and is essential for the 
activity of these enzymes (Garattini et al., 2008). In contrast, in 
sulfite oxidase (the only fully accepted human member of the “sul-
fite oxidase family” of molybdoenzymes), the molybdenum is coor-
dinated by the two sulfurs on the pterin, two oxo ligands, and a 
protein-derived cysteinyl sulfur (Wahl et al., 2010). Sulfite oxidase 
does not require posttranslational sulfuration of the molybdenum 
cofactor to become active. The two 35-kDa human mARC enzymes 
may represent a separate family of molybdoenzymes in that they do 
not contain an FAD domain and may bind molybdenum in a manner 
different than either the xanthine oxidase or sulfite oxidase families. 
However, there is some evidence to suggest that the mARCs are in 
fact members of the human sulfite oxidase family of molybdoen-
zymes (Havemeyer et al., 2011). In addition, the mARCs share sig-
nificant sequence similarity with the C-terminal domain of MOCOS 
and appear to require cytochrome b5, cytochrome b5 reductase, and 
NADH for catalytic activity (Wahl et al., 2010). Furthermore, while 
xanthine oxidoreductase, aldehyde oxidase, and sulfite oxidase are 
localized in the cytosol, the two mARC proteins appear to be local-
ized to the outer mitochondrial membrane (Havemeyer et al., 2011).
The catalytic cycle for xanthine oxidoreductase and alde-
hyde oxidase involves an interaction between the molybdenum 
center with a reducing substrate, which results in the reduction of 
the molybdenum cofactor, after which reducing equivalents are 
transferred intramolecularly to the flavin cofactors (which act as 
electron sinks), with reoxidation occurring via the flavin moiety by 
molecular oxygen (in the case of aldehyde oxidase and the xanthine 
oxidase form of xanthine oxidoreductase) or NAD+ (in the case 
of the xanthine dehydrogenase form of xanthine oxidoreductase). 
Electrons are transferred from the molybdenum cofactor to the fla-
vin cofactor through the intermediacy of the iron–sulfur centers. 
During substrate oxidation, aldehyde oxidase and xanthine oxido-
reductase are reduced and then reoxidized by molecular oxygen; 
hence, they function as true oxidases. The oxygen incorporated into 
the xenobiotic is derived from water rather than oxygen, which dis-
tinguishes these oxidases from oxygenases. The main functional 
difference between aldehyde oxidase and xanthine oxidoreductase 
is the ability of the latter to use both NAD+ (in its XD form) and 
molecular oxygen (in its XO form), as the final acceptors of the 
reducing equivalents (Garattini and Terao, 2011). Reduction of 
oxygen by the XO form of xanthine oxidoreductase leads to the 
formation of hydrogen peroxide or superoxide anion (in a substrate-
dependent manner) as follows:
RH
H O
O
ROH
H O
+
+
+
→
2
2
2
2
RH
H O
O
ROH
O
H
+
+
+
+
→
−
+
2
2
2
2
2
2
Additional details of the catalytic cycle are described in the 
next section “Xanthine Oxidoreductase.” Xanthine oxidoreductase 
and aldehyde oxidase catalyze the oxidation of carbon atoms with 
a low electron density such as the electron-deficient sp2-hybridized 
carbon atom, double-bonded to nitrogen in aromatic azaheterocy-
cles (R1–CH=N–R2) or oxygen in various aldehydes (R1–CH=O). 
In aromatic azaheterocycles (such as purines, pyrimidines, pteri-
dines, quinolines, iminium ions, and diazanaphthalenes), oxidation 
by aldehyde oxidase (and in most cases by xanthine oxidoreduc-
tase) occurs at the carbon with the lowest electron density, which 
is typically the α-carbon (next to the nitrogen), but in some cases 
the γ-carbon (two carbons removed) (Strolin-Benedetti, 2011). This 
contrasts with oxidation by CYP, which generally catalyzes the oxi-
dation of carbon atoms with a high electron density. For this reason, 
xenobiotics that are good substrates for molybdoenzymes (nucleo-
philic oxidizing enzymes) tend to be poor substrates for CYP (an 
electrophilic oxidizing enzyme), and vice versa (Pryde et al., 2010). 
Aldehyde oxidase and, to a lesser extent, xanthine oxidoreductase 
hydroxylate the carbonyl carbon in certain aldehydes and convert 
them to carboxylic acids (R–CHO → R–COOH). Both molybdo-
enzymes hydroxylate the α-carbon in aromatic azaheterocycles 
(R1–CH=N–R2) to form α-hydroxyimines (R1–COH=N–R2) that 
rapidly tautomerizes to the corresponding lactam (R1–CO–NH–R2) 
(α-aminoketone). Certain aromatic aldehydes, such as tamoxifen 
aldehyde and benzaldehyde, are good substrates for aldehyde oxi-
dase and xanthine oxidoreductase, whereas aliphatic aldehydes tend 
to be poor substrates. Consequently, aldehyde oxidase and xanthine

248
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
oxidoreductase contribute negligibly to the metabolism of acetalde-
hyde under normal conditions. Some reactions catalyzed by alde-
hyde oxidase and xanthine oxidoreductase are shown in Fig. 6-30. 
It should be noted that although aldehyde oxidase and xanthine 
oxidoreductase tend to oxidize similar substrates, there are some 
differences in substrate specificity (e.g., vanillin is rapidly oxidized 
by aldehyde oxidase, but there is little contribution of xanthine oxi-
doreductase) (Strolin-Benedetti, 2011). An interesting difference 
between xanthine oxidoreductase and aldehyde oxidase is their regi-
oselective oxidation of the purine prodrug 6-deoxyacyclovir, which 
is oxidized by xanthine oxidoreductase in the six-membered ring to 
form the active drug acyclovir (discussed below) but is oxidized by 
aldehyde oxidase in the five-membered ring to form the pharmaco-
logically inactive metabolite 6-deoxy-8-hydroxy-acyclovir (Testa 
and Krämer, 2008, 2010). In the case of nonaromatic azahetero-
cycles, the preferred substrate is the protonated form (–CH=NH+–) 
because this form lowers the electron density at the α-carbon. For 
this same reason, N-alkylation of aromatic azaheterocycles to form 
a quaternary (positively charged) nitrogen next to the α-carbon 
improves oxidation by aldehyde oxidase (more so than by xanthine 
oxidoreductase), as in the case of N-methylnicotinamide. Under 
certain conditions, both enzymes can also catalyze the reduction of 
xenobiotics (Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). Examples of reductive 
reactions catalyzed by aldehyde oxidase are shown in Fig. 6-27.
O
N
N
N
NH
HN
O
O
O
N
H
N
HN
N
O
HN
N
N
O
HN
N
O
N
N
H2N
N
N
HOCH2 O
HN
N
H2N
N
N
HOCH2 O
HN
N
O
O
O
O
Hypoxanthine
Xanthine
Uric acid
Allopurinol
Alloxanthine
Phthalazine
Phthalazinone
6-Deoxyacyclovir
Acyclovir
C2H5
O
CH2
CHO
C2H5
O
CH2
COOH
Tamoxifen aldehyde
Tamoxifen acid
Vanillic acid
O
H
OH
O
CH3
O
OH
OH
O
CH3
Vanillin
N
H
N
H
N
H
N
H
N
H
N
H
N
H
H
N
Figure 6-30.  Examples of reactions catalyzed by the molybdoenzymes, xanthine oxidoreductase, and aldehyde oxidase.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
249
Xanthine Oxidoreductase  Xanthine dehydrogenase (XD) and 
xanthine oxidase (XO) are two forms of the same cytosolic enzyme 
(xanthine oxidoreductase or XOR, gene symbol XDH) that differ 
in the electron acceptor used in the final step of catalysis. In the 
case of XD, the final electron acceptor is NAD+ (dehydrogenase 
activity), whereas in the case of XO the final electron acceptor is 
oxygen (oxidase activity). Although both xanthine oxidoreductase 
and aldehyde oxidase are expressed in many tissues, the highest 
xanthine oxidoreductase expression in humans is found in the 
proximal intestine, liver, and lactating mammary glands (Strolin-
Benedetti, 2011). XD is converted reversibly to XO by oxidation 
of sulfhydryl groups or irreversibly by proteolytic cleavage (Testa 
and Krämer, 2008, 2010). In humans, xanthine oxidoreductase is 
encoded by a single gene (i.e., XDH). Under normal physiologic 
conditions, XD is the predominant form of the enzyme found in 
vivo. However, during tissue processing, the dehydrogenase form 
tends to be converted to the oxidase form; hence, most in vitro stud-
ies are conducted with XO or a combination of XO and XD. The 
induction (upregulation) of XD and/or the conversion of XD to XO 
in vivo is thought to play an important role in ischemia-reperfusion 
injury, lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-mediated tissue injury, and alco-
hol-induced hepatotoxicity (Pacher et al., 2006). During ischemia, 
XO levels increase because hypoxia induces xanthine oxidoreduc-
tase gene transcription, and because XD is converted to XO. During 
reperfusion, XO contributes to oxidative stress and lipid peroxi-
dation because the oxidase activity of XO involves the reduction 
of molecular oxygen, which can lead to the formation of reactive 
oxygen species of the type shown in Fig. 6-20. Similarly, treatment 
with LPS, a bacterial endotoxin that triggers an acute inflamma-
tory response, increases XO activity both by inducing xanthine 
oxidoreductase transcription and by converting XD to XO. The 
associated increase in oxidative stress has been implicated in LPS-
induced cytotoxicity. Ethanol facilitates the conversion of XD to 
XO, and the conversion of ethanol to acetaldehyde provides a sub-
strate and, hence, a source of electrons for the reduction of oxygen. 
Hereafter, the two forms of the enzyme will be referred to as xan-
thine oxidoreductase.
Typical reactions catalyzed by xanthine oxidoreductase are 
shown in Fig. 6-30. Xanthine oxidoreductase contributes signifi-
cantly to the first-pass elimination of several purine derivatives (e.g., 
6-mercaptopurine and 2,6-dithiopurine), and limits the therapeutic 
effects of these cancer chemotherapeutic drugs. In contrast, certain 
prodrugs are activated by xanthine oxidoreductase. For example, 
the antiviral prodrugs 6-deoxyacyclovir and 2′-fluoroarabino-dide-
oxypurine, which are relatively well absorbed after oral dosing, are 
oxidized by xanthine oxidoreductase to their respective active forms 
acyclovir and 2′-fluoroarabino-dideoxyinosine, which are otherwise 
poorly absorbed (see Fig. 6-30). Furthermore, xanthine oxidore-
ductase has been implicated in the bioactivation of mitomycin C 
and related antineoplastic drugs, although this bioactivation reac-
tion is thought to be largely catalyzed by NQO1 (DT-diaphorase), 
as discussed previously in the section “Quinone Reduction: NQO1 
and NQO2.” Other xenobiotic substrates of xanthine oxidoreductase 
include 6-thioxanthine, methotrexate, and the benzylic aldehyde 
metabolite of tolbutamide (Chladek et al., 1997; Testa and Krämer, 
2008, 2010; Kudo et al., 2010).
Xanthine oxidoreductase catalyzes an important physiologi-
cal reaction, namely, the sequential oxidation of hypoxanthine to 
xanthine and uric acid, as shown in Fig. 6-30 (Rajagopalan, 1980). 
By competing with hypoxanthine and xanthine for oxidation by 
xanthine oxidoreductase, allopurinol inhibits the formation of uric 
acid, making allopurinol a useful drug in the treatment of gout (a 
complication of hyperuricemia). Allopurinol can also be used to 
evaluate the contribution of xanthine oxidoreductase to xenobiotic 
biotransformation in vivo. Allopurinol is often added to fluids used 
to perfuse human livers intended for transplantation or research 
purposes. Cytosol prepared from such human livers lacks xanthine 
oxidoreductase activity but still retains aldehyde oxidase activity 
(Barr et al., 2014). Like allopurinol, hydroxylated coumarin deriva-
tives, such as umbelliferone (7-hydroxycoumarin) and esculetin 
(7,8-dihydroxycoumarin), are potent inhibitors of xanthine oxido-
reductase. Allopurinol and other xanthine oxidoreductase inhibitors 
are being evaluated for the treatment of various types of ischemia 
reperfusion and vascular injury that appear to be mediated, at least 
in part, by xanthine oxidoreductase (Pacher et al., 2006).
Monomethylated xanthines are preferentially oxidized to the 
corresponding uric acid derivatives by xanthine oxidoreductase. In 
contrast, dimethylated and trimethylated xanthines, such as the-
ophylline (1,3-dimethylxanthine) and caffeine (1,3,7-trimethyl-
xanthine), are oxidized to the corresponding uric acid derivatives 
primarily by CYP. Through two sequential N-demethylation reac-
tions, CYP converts caffeine to 1-methylxanthine, which is con-
verted by xanthine oxidoreductase to 1-methyluric acid. The urinary 
ratio of 1-methylxanthine to 1-methyluric acid provides an in vivo 
marker of xanthine oxidoreductase activity.
The mechanism of catalysis by molybdoenzymes depicted 
in Fig. 6-31 is based on studies of xanthine oxidoreductase by 
Okamoto et al. (2004), Amano et al. (2007), and Alfaro and Jones 
(2008). The molybdopterin active center of the enzyme consists of 
molybdenum (Mo) bound to the following groups: pterin cofac-
tor, thioxo (=S), oxo (=O), and hydroxyl (–OH). For simplicity, 
this cofactor will be written as S=Mo–OH. The hydroxyl group 
(S=Mo–OH) is activated by a nearby glutamic acid residue in the 
enzyme to S=Mo–O−, which initiates a concerted nucleophilic 
attack on the substrate at the electron-deficient carbon atom dou-
ble-bonded to the nitrogen (H–CR1=N–R2) with hydride transfer 
from the α-carbon to the thioxo group to form the intermediate 
(HS–Mo–O–CR1=N–R2). The oxygen bound to the α-carbon in the 
substrate (e.g., xanthine) is replaced by oxygen from water to com-
plete formation of product (e.g., uric acid). The resting enzyme is 
restored by the removal of two reducing equivalents, which may be 
transferred to NAD+ (in the case of XD) or oxygen (in the case of 
XO), as shown in Fig. 6-31. In the XO mode, xanthine oxidoreduc-
tase (and aldehyde oxidase, which exists only in the XO mode) can 
transfer both reducing equivalents to a single molecule of oxygen 
to produce hydrogen peroxide or it can transfer the two electrons to 
two molecules of oxygen to produce superoxide anion. In addition 
to the concerted mechanism described above, a stepwise mecha-
nism involving a tetrahedral intermediate is also possible (Alfaro 
and Jones, 2008).
Aldehyde Oxidase  The term aldehyde oxidase is something of a 
misnomer, in that this enzyme does not solely act on aldehyde-con-
taining substrates (see Table 6-11). Aldehyde oxidase is the second 
of two molybdoenzymes that play an important role in xenobiotic 
biotransformation; the other being xanthine oxidoreductase (dis-
cussed in the preceding section). While xanthine oxidoreductase 
exists in two forms, a dehydrogenase form (XD) that relays elec-
trons to NAD+ and an oxidase form (XO) that relays electrons to 
molecular oxygen, aldehyde oxidase exists only in the oxidase 
form because it lacks an NAD+ binding site (Garattini and Terao, 
2011). Another significant difference between these two molybdo-
enzymes is that high levels of xanthine oxidoreductase appear to 
be widely distributed throughout the body, whereas high levels of 
aldehyde oxidase (or at least its mRNA) are found in the liver and 
adrenal gland, with somewhat less expression in the small and large

250
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
intestine, ovary, prostate, proximal, distal, and collecting tubules of 
the kidney, the epithelia of trachea and bronchium, and the alveolar 
cells of the lung, with only detectable levels of transcript in the 
endocrine tissues, esophagus, pancreas, brain, and few other tissues, 
at least in humans (Pryde et al., 2010; Garattini and Terao, 2011). 
The human AOX1 gene is complex with 35 exons, and exists as an 
active homodimer. There is also considerable interindividual vari-
ability in the activity of aldehyde oxidase in humans, which may be 
due to genetic (as discussed further below) as well as environmental 
factors such as age, disease state (e.g., cancer and inflammatory 
conditions leading to altered levels of various cytokines), smoking, 
heavy ethanol consumption, and drug use (Pryde et al., 2010; Fu 
et al., 2013). Apart from these differences, many of the features 
of xanthine oxidoreductase apply to aldehyde oxidase, includ-
ing subcellular location (cytosol), enzyme structure and cofactor 
composition, typical mechanism of catalysis, preference for oxi-
dizing sp2-hybridized carbon atoms adjacent to the nitrogen atoms 
in nitrogen heterocycles, and its preference for oxidizing aromatic 
 
 
 
2e–, 2H+
NAD+ (XD)
O2 (XO)
S
S
MoVI
O
S
HO
C
O
Glu
O–
C
O
Glu
O
H
C
O
Glu
O
H
–O
HN
H
N
O
O
H
N
N
H
HN
H
N
O
O
H
N
N
H
Uric acid
O
H2O
Xanthine
HN
H
N
O
O
H
N
N
C
O
Glu
O
H
S
S
MoIV
O
SH
HO
S
S
MoVI
O
S
O
S
S
MoIV
O
SH
Figure 6-31.  Catalytic cycle of the molybdoenzyme xanthine oxidoreductase. Xanthine oxidoreductase is a molybdoenzyme with xanthine dehydrogenase (XD) 
and xanthine oxidase (XO) activities. During the final step of the catalytic cycle, the enzyme is reoxidized by transferring electrons to NAD+ (in the case of 
XD) or oxygen (in the case of XO). The same mechanism of catalysis likely applies to aldehyde oxidase, although there is no dehydrogenase form of this 
molybdoenzyme.
Table 6-11  
Substrates Associated with Oxidation by Aldehyde Oxidase
SUBSTRATE GROUPS
EXAMPLE SUBSTRATES
Aldehydes
Acetaldehyde, benzaldehyde, citalopram aldehyde, phenylacetaldehyde, pyridoxal, retinal, tamoxifen aldehyde, 
tolbutamide aldehyde, vanillin
Aromatic 
azaheterocycles
Phthalazines, cinchona alkaloids, quinazolines, carbazeran, chloroquinazolinone, famciclovir, 
6-mercaptopurine, N-methyl-nicotinamide, N-methyl-phthalazinium, phenanthridine, 3-descladinosyl-
11,12-dideoxy-6-O-methyl-3-oxo-12,11-(oxycarbonyl-(1-(1R-([1,8]naphthyridin-4-yl)-ethyl)azetidin-3-yl)
imino)erythromycin A, 2,4-diaminopteridine, N-{trans-4-[2-(6-cyano-3,4-dihydroisoquinolin-2(1H)-yl)
ethyl]cyclohexyl}quinoline-4-carboxamide (SB-277011), methotrexate, 6-thioxanthine, zebularine, 
5-fluoro-pyrimidinone, 5-ethinylpyrimidinone, caffeine, 6-deoxyacyclovir, 8-hydroxy-6-deoxyacyclovir, 
allopurinol, pyrazinamide, N-[(20-dimethylamino) ethyl]acridine-4-carboxamide (DACA), 2-[4-(7-chloro-2-
quinoxalinyloxyphenoxy]-propionic acid (XK-469), dibenzo[b,f]-1,4-oxazepine, briminodine, 3-tert-butyl-7-
(5-methylisoxazol-3-yl)-2-(1-methyl-1H-1,2,4-triazol-5-ylmethoxy)-pyrazolo[1,5-d][1,2,4]triazine (MRK-016), 
6-(2,4-difluoro-phenoxy)-2-((R)-2-hydroxy-1-methyl-ethylamino)-8-((S)-2-hydroxy-propyl)-8H-pyrido[2,3-d]
pyrimidin-7-one (RO1), zaleplon
Iminium ions
Nicotine iminium ion, N-methyl-nicotinamide iminium ion, iminium ion of 3-methyl-5-[(2S)-1-methyl-2-
pyrrolidinyl]isoxazole (ABT-418), prolintane iminium ion, azapetine iminium ion
SOURCES: Data from Pryde et al. (2010) and Hartmann et al. (2012).

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
251
aldehydes over aliphatic aldehydes. Other aldehyde oxidase sub-
strate types include nitro- or nitroso-containing compounds as well 
as aldehyde or iminium ion intermediates formed by CYP, alcohol 
dehydrogenases, or MAOs (Pryde et al., 2010). Furthermore, alde-
hyde oxidase also transfers electrons to molecular oxygen, which 
can generate reactive oxygen species (e.g., superoxide anion which 
dismutates to hydrogen peroxide) and lead to oxidative stress and 
lipid peroxidation (Garattini and Terao, 2011). However, in con-
trast to xanthine oxidoreductase, the physiological functions of 
aldehyde oxidase remain largely unknown, although endogenous 
compounds such as indole-3-acetate, retinaldehyde, retinoic acid, 
nicotinamide, and pyridoxal are substrates for aldehyde oxidase 
(Garattini and Terao, 2011).
In vitro human aldehyde oxidase activity varies significantly 
in human liver cytosols from one individual donor to another, and 
appears to be substrate-dependent (e.g., 90-fold differences in 
carbazeran oxidation vs. 19-fold for phthalazine oxidation across 
20 donors) (Fu et al., 2013). Many single-nucleotide polymor-
phisms in the human AOX1 gene have been described in the NCBI 
dbSNP database (NCBI, 2018). In a population of 180 Italian indi-
viduals, relatively frequent nonsense, synonymous, or missense 
SNPs in aldehyde oxidase have been described, with a total of 51 
SNPs identified, with 10 individuals being homozygous for a SNP 
(Hartmann et al., 2012). Two of the SNPs resulted in a fast metabo-
lizer phenotype (FMs; N1135S, frequency = 2.9%, and H1297R, 
frequency = 5.3%) and one in a poor metabolizer phenotype (PMs, 
i.e., R921H, frequency = 0.3%). In addition, a relatively frequent 
nonsense mutation in exon 5 (Y126stop, frequency = 0.026) was 
identified that results in a very short and nonfunctional 126–amino 
acid protein, but no subjects were homozygous for this loss-of-
function mutation. An important point about these polymorphisms 
described so far is that the effects appear to be somewhat substrate-
dependent based on the functional characterization of purified, het-
erologously expressed variants described above with the aldehyde 
oxidase substrates benzaldehyde, phthalazine, phenathridine, and 
chloroquinazolinone (Hartmann et al., 2012). Somewhat equivo-
cal evidence for the clinical relevance of AOX1 SNPs has been 
published. The selective topoisomerase II β inhibitor and former 
drug candidate 2-(4-((7-chloro-2-quinoxalinyl)oxy)phenoxy)propa-
noic acid (XK469) is metabolized mainly by aldehyde oxidase and 
showed high intersubject variability in drug clearance during Phase 
1 clinical trials (Ramirez et al., 2014). Although the authors found 
associations between certain aldehyde oxidase SNPs and decreased 
clearance of XK469, they concluded that the variability in clearance 
could not be explained by these SNPs. However, the University of 
Washington Metabolism and Transport Drug Interaction Database 
indicates that two SNPs (AOX1 IVS27-152A/IVS27-152G and 
IVS27-152G/IVS27-152G) are associated with significant reduc-
tions in the clearance of XK469 (–29% and –40%, respectively) 
(University of Washington DIDB, 2018). It is likely that genotype 
is only one of several factors that play a role in the relatively high 
variability in aldehyde oxidase activity.
Substrates for aldehyde oxidase do not appear to correlate with 
any specific area of “chemical space” based on physicochemical 
properties, which have a wide variety of lipophilicity, polar sur-
face area, polarity, and structure, in contrast to P450 substrates, 
for which there is a high correlation between higher log P and 
P450-mediated metabolism as measured by microsomal stability 
in the presence of NADPH (see Table 6-11 for example substrates) 
(Pryde et al., 2010). Therefore, although it has been assumed that, 
in general, xenobiotics that are good substrates for aldehyde oxi-
dase are poor substrates for CYP, and vice versa (Rettie and Fisher, 
1999), there is some overlap, and structural motifs alone may be a 
better predictor of aldehyde oxidase substrates (Pryde et al., 2010). 
Naphthalene (with no nitrogen atoms) is oxidized by CYP, but 
not by aldehyde oxidase, whereas the opposite is true of pteridine 
(1,3,5,8-­tetraazanaphthalene), which contains four nitrogen atoms. 
The intermediate structure quinazolone (1,3-diazanaphthalene) is 
a substrate for both enzymes. This complementarity in substrate 
specificity reflects the opposing preference of the two enzymes 
for oxidizing carbon atoms; CYP prefers to oxidize carbon atoms 
with high electron density, whereas aldehyde oxidase (and xan-
thine oxidoreductase) prefers to oxidize carbon atoms with low 
electron density. Because of their opposing mechanisms of action 
(electrophilic for CYP and nucleophilic for aldehyde oxidase), the 
common practice in drug development of adding a fluorine atom 
to block a site of oxidation by CYP (to improve metabolic stabil-
ity) can potentially increase the rate of metabolism by aldehyde 
oxidase. In nearly all cases, oxidation of aromatic heterocycles by 
aldehyde oxidase occurs at the α-carbon but occasionally, depend-
ing on ring structure, the γ-carbon (or even the β-carbon) has the 
lowest electron density and is the site of oxidation. Examples of 
γ-carbon (or β-carbon) oxidation by aldehyde oxidase include 
N-methylnicotinamide, quinolone, cinnoline, and DACA (N-[(2′-
dimethylamino)ethyl]acridine-4-carboxamide) (Schofield et al., 
2000; Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). In terms of its role in drug 
metabolism, it is reasonable to conclude that human aldehyde 
oxidase does play—and will continue to play—a significant role 
in the oxidation of a wide range of structurally diverse nitrogen 
heterocyclic substrates (Pryde et al., 2010).
As shown in Figs. 6-27 and 6-30, aldehyde oxidase can oxidize 
a number of substituted pyrroles, pyridines, pyrimidines, purines, 
pteridines, and iminium ions (see Table 6-11 for additional exam-
ples) by the mechanism described for xanthine oxidoreductase in 
the previous section (Alfaro and Jones, 2008). Aldehyde oxidase 
can oxidize aldehydes to their corresponding carboxylic acids, but 
the enzyme shows a marked preference for aromatic aldehydes 
(e.g., benzaldehyde and tamoxifen aldehyde). Consequently, alde-
hyde oxidase contributes negligibly to the oxidation of aliphatic 
aldehydes, such as acetaldehyde. Rodrigues (1994) found that, in 
a bank of human liver samples, aldehyde oxidase activity toward 
N1-methylnicotinamide varied more than 40-fold, whereas activ-
ity toward 6-methylpurine varied less than threefold. Although 
this suggests human liver cytosol contains two or more forms of 
aldehyde oxidase, subsequent Southern blot analysis has provided 
evidence for only a single copy of the aldehyde oxidase gene in 
humans (Terao et al., 1998), although genomic analysis of chro-
mosome 2q has revealed the presence of two nearby pseudogenes 
(Garattini and Terao, 2011). Species differences in the number of 
functional AOX genes are discussed further below.
The substrate specificity of aldehyde oxidase differs among 
mammalian species, often leading to erroneous conclusions about 
the potential metabolic stability of certain drugs in humans, as 
detailed below. Aldehyde oxidase activity among animal species 
can vary depending on the particular substrate, but in general it is 
high in monkeys and humans, low in rats, and essentially absent 
in dogs (because the latter only express AOX3L1 and AOX4) 
(Garattini and Terao, 2011). These differences have been ascribed 
to the size of the active site (Pryde et al., 2010). However, large dif-
ferences in activity have also been found among individual strains 
of rats and mice (e.g., high activity in Sea:SD rats and low in WKA/
Sea rats; large differences between Sprague–Dawley and Wistar as 
well as between C129/C57 and CB57B1/6J mice) (Pryde et al., 
2010). Gender differences between rats and mice due to hormonal 
regulation further complicate attempts to extrapolate stability of 
aldehyde oxidase substrates from toxicologically relevant species

252
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
to humans (e.g., two- to fourfold higher activity in male mice than 
in female) (Pryde et al., 2010). Finally, whereas humans encode 
only a single functional aldehyde oxidase (namely AOX1; the oth-
ers being transcribed pseudogenes, i.e., AOX3P and 3L1P), mice 
and rats possess four functional AOX genes (namely, AOX1, AOX3, 
AOX4, and AOX3L1) (Garattini and Terao, 2011). Rhesus monkeys 
possess two functional AOs (AOX3 and AOX3L1). In the mouse 
and monkey, AOX3L1 is expressed only in nasal mucosa (Garattini 
and Terao, 2011). A further complication is the observation of spe-
cies differences in the relative roles of aldehyde oxidase and xan-
thine oxidoreductase in xenobiotic biotransformation. For example, 
the 6-oxidation of antiviral deoxyguanine prodrugs is catalyzed 
exclusively in rats by xanthine oxidoreductase, but by aldehyde 
oxidase in humans (Rettie and Fisher, 1999). Similarly, only human 
aldehyde oxidase catalyzes the oxidation of 6-deoxypenciclovir to 
­penciclovir (Strolin-Benedetti, 2011).
Aldehyde oxidase in the human liver has proved to be rather 
unstable, which complicates an in vitro assessment of species dif-
ferences in aldehyde oxidase activity in frozen stocks of human 
liver cytosol (Rodrigues, 1994; Rettie and Fisher, 1999; Garattini 
and Terao, 2011). In addition, few human cell lines express func-
tional aldehyde oxidase (e.g., HepG2 cells express the AOX1 tran-
script, but lack the functional enzyme) (Garattini and Terao, 2011). 
Fresh or cryopreserved human hepatocytes are therefore most likely 
to have relevant levels of aldehyde oxidase activity.
Aldehyde oxidase is the second of two enzymes involved in 
the formation of cotinine, a major metabolite of nicotine excreted 
in the urine of cigarette smokers. The initial step in this reaction is 
the formation of a double bond (C=N) in the pyrrole ring, which 
produces nicotine ∆1′,5′ -iminium ion. Like nicotine, several other 
drugs are oxidized either sequentially or concomitantly by CYP 
and aldehyde oxidase, including quinidine, azapetine, cyclophos-
phamide, carbazeran, and prolintane. Other drugs that are oxidized 
by aldehyde oxidase include bromonidine, citalopram, proprion-
aldehyde, O6-benzylguanine, 6-mercaptopurine, metyrapone, qui-
nine, pyrazinamide, methotrexate, vanillin, isovanillin, zaleplon, 
and famciclovir (an antiviral prodrug that is converted by aldehyde 
oxidase to penciclovir) (for additional examples, see Table 6-11). 
Several pyrimidine derivatives are oxidized by aldehyde oxidase, 
including 5-ethyl-2(1H)-pyrimidone, which is converted by alde-
hyde oxidase to 5-ethinyluracil. Like sorivudine, 5-ethinyluracil is 
a metabolism-dependent (suicide) inactivator of dihydropyrimidine 
dehydrogenase (see Fig. 6-21).
Raloxifene is an extraordinarily potent inhibitor of human 
aldehyde oxidase (Ki values as low as 0.9 nM), whereas it is at least 
three orders of magnitude less potent in other species (Obach, 2004; 
Pryde et al., 2010). Perphenazine and menadione are also potent 
inhibitors of aldehyde oxidase (IC50 about 0.03 and about 0.2 μM) 
and are often used together with allopurinol to discriminate between 
aldehyde oxidase–catalyzed and xanthine oxidoreductase–cata-
lyzed reactions. The ability of proadifen to inhibit aldehyde oxidase 
is noteworthy because this methadone analog, commonly known 
as SKF 525A, is widely used as a CYP inhibitor. Hydralazine is 
an irreversible (time-dependent) inhibitor of aldehyde oxidase. 
Nitroso-imidacloprid has been characterized as a mechanism-based 
inhibitor of rabbit aldehyde oxidase with a Ki value of 1.3 mM and 
kinact of 0.35 min−1 (Dick et al., 2007). Several other inhibitors of 
aldehyde oxidase have also been described, but raloxifene is prob-
ably the most useful for in vitro studies to evaluate the contribution 
of aldehyde oxidase to the metabolism of a substrate (Pryde et al., 
2010). For instance, if a substrate that undergoes oxidative metabo-
lism is found (1) to have higher in vitro turnover in human hepa-
tocytes than in human liver microsomes, (2) is oxidized in human 
liver S9 or cytosol in the absence of NADPH, and (3) contains a 
structure amenable to oxidation by aldehyde oxidase, then raloxi-
fene can be used to confirm involvement of aldehyde oxidase in the 
metabolism of the substrate (Pryde et al., 2010).
Under certain conditions, aldehyde oxidase and xanthine oxi-
doreductase can also catalyze the reduction of xenobiotics, including 
azo-reduction (e.g., 4-dimethylaminoazobenzene), nitro-reduction 
(e.g., 1-nitropyrene, imidacloprid and other nitroguanidines, and 
nitromethylenes), N-oxide reduction (e.g., S-(-)-nicotine-1′-N-
oxide, imipramine N-oxide, and cyclobenzaprine N-oxide), nitro-
samine reduction (e.g., N-nitrosodiphenylamine), hydroxamic 
acid reduction (e.g., N-hydroxy-2-acetylaminofluorene), sulfoxide 
reduction (e.g., sulindac; see Fig. 6-19, fenthion sulfoxide), quinone 
reduction (e.g., diethylstilbestrol quinone), epoxide reduction (e.g., 
benzo[a]pyrene 4,5-oxide), and heterocycle reduction (e.g., ziprasi-
done and zonisamide) (Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010; Pryde et al., 
2010). Oximes (C=NOH) can also be reduced by aldehyde oxidase 
to the corresponding ketimines (C=NH), which may react nonenzy-
matically with water to produce the corresponding ketone or alde-
hyde (C=O) and ammonia (Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). The 
reduction of ziprasidone by aldehyde oxidase is shown in Fig. 6-7, 
and examples of other reductive reactions catalyzed by aldehyde 
oxidase are shown in Fig. 6-27. Xenobiotic reduction by aldehyde 
oxidase in vitro requires anaerobic conditions or the presence of a 
reducing substrate, such as N1-methylnicotinamide, 2-hydroxypy-
rimidine, or benzaldehyde. These “co-substrates” reduce the 
enzyme, which in turn catalyzes azo-reduction, nitro-reduction, etc. 
by relaying electrons to xenobiotics (rather than molecular oxygen). 
These unusual requirements make it difficult to assess the degree to 
which aldehyde oxidase functions as a reductive enzyme in vivo.
Amine Oxidases  Human amine oxidases can be divided into 
two classes: (1) the familiar FAD-containing mitochondrial mono-
amine oxidases, MAO-A and MAO-B (gene symbols MAOA and 
MAOB), and polyamine oxidase (gene symbol PAOX) and sperm-
ine oxidase (gene symbol SMOX); and (2) the copper-containing 
amine oxidases (CuAOs) that contain a tightly bound CuII and a 
quinone residue (typically 2,4,5-trihydroxyphenylalanine quinone 
[TPQ]) as the redox cofactor (Largeron, 2011). The latter class 
of human amine oxidases belongs to the larger class of so-called 
quinoproteins class, which are present in plants, animals, fungi, 
yeast, and bacteria. In humans the CuAOs include (1) the intracel-
lular lysyl oxidase (gene symbol LOX), (2) diamine oxidase (also 
known as AOC1 [from “amine-oxidase, copper-containing] and 
DAO [gene symbol ABP1, from “amiloride binding protein”]), and 
(3) the two known so-called semicarbazide-sensitive copper-con-
taining amine oxidases (or SSAOs), which are located in plasma 
and the plasma membranes of various tissues (gene symbols AOC2 
for the retina-specific amine oxidase, and AOC3 for the gene encod-
ing what is probably the originally identified SSAO, which is the 
same as vascular adhesion protein-1 (VAP-1)) (Largeron, 2011).
Class I amine oxidases differ markedly from class II amine 
oxidases in their substrate specificity, but there is some overlap. For 
instance, dopamine and tyramine are good substrates for MAOs, 
SSAOs, and DAO, whereas benzylamine is a good substrate for 
both MAOs and the CuAOs (Largeron, 2011). Features of some of 
these enzymes are discussed in the following section, with exam-
ples of reactions catalyzed by MAO, DAO, and PAO, as shown in 
Fig. 6-32.
Class I Amine Oxidases: MAO-A and MAO-B, PAO, and 
SMOX  Monoamine oxidase (MAO; gene symbols MAOA and 
MAOB), spermine oxidase (gene symbol SMOX), and polyamine 
oxidase (PAO; gene symbol PAOX) are involved in the oxidative 
deamination of primary, secondary, and tertiary amines (Benedetti, 
2001; Agostinelli et al., 2004; Edmondson et al., 2004). Substrates

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
253
for these enzymes include several naturally occurring amines, such 
as the monoamine serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine), and mono-
acetylated derivatives of the polyamines spermine and spermidine. 
A number of xenobiotics are substrates for these enzymes, par-
ticularly MAOs. Oxidative deamination of a primary amine pro-
duces ammonia and an aldehyde, whereas oxidative deamination 
O
CH2
CH
OH
CH2
NH
CH
CH3
CH3
O
CH2
CH
OH
CH2
NH
CH
CH3
CH3
OH
O
CH2
CH
OH
CH2
NH2
O
CH2
CH
OH
CHO
CYP2C19
Propranolol
CYP2D6
4-Hydroxypropranolol
O2 + H2O
NH3 + H2O2
MAO-A
N-Desisopropylpropranolol
Oxidation
Reduction
Carboxylic acid
Glycol
CH2
CH2
NH
NH2
CH2
CH
N
NH2
CHO
COOH
CH2
CH2
N
NH
Phenelzine
Phenylethylidene
hydrazine
Benzaldehyde
Benzoic
acid
Phenylethyldiazene
MAO
Covalent binding
and irreversible
inactivation of MAO
C5H11
C4H8
NHCH2
C
O
NH2
CH2
C
O
NH2
H2N
CHO
CONH2
CONH2
CONH2
COOH
CH2OH
PAO
DAO
MAO
Oxamic
acid
2-Hydroxy
acetamide
C5H11NH2
O2 +
H2O
H2O2
C4H9CHO
Glycinamide
Milacemide
or
H2N
CH2NH2
C4H8
H2N
CHO
O2 + H2O
NH3 + H2O2
Figure 6-32.  Examples of reactions catalyzed by selected amine oxidases. Note that phenelzine is a metabolism-dependent (mechanism-based) inhibitor of 
MAO-A and MAO-B.

254
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
of a secondary amine produces a primary amine and an aldehyde. 
(The products of the former reaction—i.e., an aldehyde and ammo-
nia—are those produced during the reductive biotransformation of 
certain oximes by aldehyde oxidase, as described in the preceding 
section “Aldehyde Oxidase”.) The aldehydes formed by MAO are 
usually oxidized further by other enzymes to the corresponding car-
boxylic acids, although in some cases they are reduced to alcohols.
Monoamine oxidase is located throughout the brain, and is 
present at high levels in the liver, kidney, intestine, heart, blood 
platelets, and blood vessels (but absent from erythrocytes) in the 
outer membrane of mitochondria, although some activity has been 
found in other cellular compartments, possibly because human 
liver microsomes prepared from frozen tissue are contaminated 
with the outer mitochondrial membrane (Pearce et al., 1996a; Testa 
and Krämer, 2008, 2010). Although MAOs are expressed in most 
tissues, there are some that express predominantly one form over 
the other. For example, MAO-A is the predominant form in human 
placenta, whereas MAO-B is the predominant form in human plate-
lets, lymphocytes, and chromaffin cells (Strolin Benedetti et al., 
2007). MAO substrates include milacemide (Fig. 6-32), a dealkyl-
ated metabolite of propranolol (Fig. 6-32), primaquine, haloperidol, 
citalopram, sertraline, doxylamine, MPTP, β-phenylethylamine, 
tyramine, catecholamines (e.g., dopamine, norepinephrine, and epi-
nephrine), tryptophan derivatives (tryptamine and serotonin), and 
tryptophan analogs known as triptans, which include the antimi-
graine drugs almotriptan, sumatriptan, zolmitriptan, and rizatriptan 
(Strolin Benedetti et al., 2007; Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). In 
the case of the triptans, when a nitrogen exists in either a pyrrolidine 
or a piperidine ring, MAOs are not involved in their metabolism. 
Also, as a general rule, the introduction of a methyl group in the 
α-position relative to the nitrogen atom in what would otherwise be 
an MAO substrate renders it resistant to oxidative deamination by 
MAO (Strolin Benedetti et al., 2007).
MAO-A preferentially oxidizes serotonin (5-hydroxytrypta-
mine), norepinephrine, and the dealkylated metabolite of proprano-
lol, and is preferentially inhibited by clorgyline, whereas MAO-B 
preferentially oxidizes β-phenylethylamine, benzylamine, and cita-
lopram, and is preferentially inhibited by l-deprenyl (selegiline) 
(Strolin Benedetti et al., 2007). Species differences in the substrate 
specificity of MAO have been documented. For example, dopamine 
is oxidized by MAO-B in humans, but by MAO-A in rats, and by 
both enzymes in several other mammalian species. The distribution 
of MAO in the brain shows little species variation, with the highest 
concentration of MAO-A in the locus coeruleus, and the highest 
concentration of MAO-B in the raphe nuclei. MAO-A is expressed 
predominantly in catecholaminergic neurons, whereas MAO-B is 
expressed largely in serotonergic and histaminergic neurons and 
glial cells. The distribution of MAO throughout the brain does not 
always parallel that of its substrates. For example, serotonin is pref-
erentially oxidized by MAO-A, but MAO-A is not found in sero-
tonergic neurons.
The mechanism of catalysis by monoamine oxidase is illus-
trated below:
RCH NH
FAD
RCH=NH
FADH
2
2
2
+
→
+
RCH=NH
H O
RCHO
NH
+
→
+
2
3
FADH
O
FAD
H O
2
2
2
2
+
→
+
The substrate is oxidized by the enzyme, which itself is 
reduced (FAD → FADH2). The oxygen incorporated into the sub-
strate is derived from water, not molecular oxygen; hence, the 
enzyme functions as a true oxidase. The catalytic cycle is com-
pleted by reoxidation of the reduced enzyme (FADH2 → FAD) 
by oxygen, which generates hydrogen peroxide (which may be a 
cause of oxidative stress). The initial step in the catalytic cycle is 
abstraction of hydrogen from the α-carbon adjacent to the nitrogen 
atom, hence the oxidative deamination of xenobiotics by MAO is 
generally blocked by substitution of the α-carbon. For example, 
amphetamine and other phenylethylamine derivatives carrying a 
methyl group on the α-carbon atom are not oxidized well by MAO. 
(Amphetamines can undergo oxidative deamination, but the reac-
tion is catalyzed by CYP.) The abstraction of hydrogen from the 
α-carbon adjacent to the nitrogen atom can occur stereospecifically; 
therefore, only one enantiomer of an α-substituted compound may 
be oxidized by MAO. For example, while MAO-B catalyzes the 
oxidative deamination of both R- and S-β-phenylethylamine, only 
the R-enantiomer is a substrate for MAO-A. The oxidative deami-
nation of the dealkylated metabolite of propranolol is catalyzed 
stereoselectively by MAO-A, although in this case the preferred 
substrate is the S-enantiomer (which has the same absolute con-
figuration as the R-enantiomer of β-phenylethylamine) (Benedetti 
and Dostert, 1994).
Clorgyline and l-deprenyl (selegiline) are metabolism-­
dependent inhibitors (i.e., mechanism-based or suicide inactivators) 
of MAO-A and MAO-B, respectively. Both enzymes are irrevers-
ibly inhibited by phenelzine, a hydrazine that can be oxidized either 
by abstraction of hydrogen from the α-carbon atom, which leads to 
oxidative deamination with formation of benzaldehyde and benzoic 
acid, or by abstraction of hydrogen from the terminal nitrogen atom, 
which leads to formation of phenylethyldiazene and covalent modi-
fication of the enzyme, as shown in Fig. 6-32.
Monoamine oxidase has received considerable attention for its 
role in the activation of MPTP (1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,5,6-tetrahy-
dropyridine) to a neurotoxin that causes symptoms characteristic of 
Parkinson disease in humans and monkeys but not rodents (Gerlach 
et al., 1991). In 1983, Parkinsonism was observed in young individ-
uals who, in attempting to synthesize and use a narcotic drug related 
to meperidine (Demerol®), instead synthesized and self-administered 
MPTP, which causes selective destruction of dopaminergic neu-
rons in the substantia nigra. MPTP crosses the blood–brain barrier, 
where it is oxidized by MAO in the astrocytes (a type of glial cell) 
to 1-methyl-4-phenyl-2,3-dihydropyridine (MPDP+), which in turn 
autoxidizes to the neurotoxic metabolite, 1-methyl-4-phenylpyri-
dine MPP+, as shown in Fig. 6-33. Because it is transported by the 
dopamine transporter, MPP+ concentrates in dopaminergic neurons, 
where it impairs mitochondrial respiration. The neurotoxic effects of 
MPTP can be blocked with pargyline (an inhibitor of both MAO-A 
and MAO-B), by l-deprenyl (a selective inhibitor of MAO-B) 
but not by clorgyline (a selective inhibitor of MAO-A). This sug-
gests that the activation of MPTP to its neurotoxic metabolite is 
catalyzed predominantly by MAO-B. This interpretation is consis-
tent with the finding that MAO-B knockout mice (i.e., transgenic 
mice that lack MAO-B) do not sustain damage to the dopaminergic 
terminals of nigrostriatal neurons after MPTP treatment (Shih et al., 
1999; Quinn et al., 2007).
Genetic and environmental factors both appear to play impor-
tant roles in the etiology of Parkinson disease. Apart from MPTP, 
Parkinsongenic neurotoxins to which humans are exposed have not 
been identified unequivocally; hence, the environmental factors that 
cause Parkinson disease remain to be identified. It is interesting that 
the bipyridyl herbicide, paraquat, is similar in structure to the toxic 
metabolite of MPTP, as shown in Fig. 6-33. Some epidemiological 
studies have shown a positive correlation between herbicide expo-
sure and the incidence of Parkinsonism in some but not all rural

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
255
communities. Haloperidol can also be converted to a potentially 
neurotoxic pyridinium metabolite (Subramanyam et al., 1991).
MAO-B may be among the genetic factors that affect suscep-
tibility to Parkinson disease. MAO-B activity in the human brain 
increases with aging, perhaps due to a proliferation of glial cells. It 
has been proposed that increased oxidation of dopamine by MAO-B 
in the elderly may lead to a loss of dopaminergic neurons in the 
substantia nigra, which underlies Parkinson disease. Such damage 
may be caused by the oxidative stress associated with the oxidative 
deamination of dopamine by MAO-B. In support of this proposal, 
patients with Parkinson disease have elevated MAO-B activity in 
the substantia nigra, and the MAO-B inhibitors l-deprenyl (selegi-
line), lazabemide, and rasagiline provide some symptomatic relief 
and can delay the progression of symptoms and need for levodopa 
(Sano et al., 1997; Lohle and Reichmann, 2011). Furthermore, there 
are allelic variants of MAO-B, some of which (such as alleles 1, A, 
B4, and G) appear to be associated with an increased risk of devel-
oping Parkinson disease, especially in women (Shih et al., 1999; 
Kang et al., 2006). No such association has been found between 
Parkinson disease and MAO-A gene polymorphisms (Williams-
Gray et al., 2009). Cigarette smoking, which carries a number 
of health risks, nevertheless provides some protection against 
Parkinson disease (Gorell et al., 1999; Gu et al., 2010). Although 
the mechanism of protection remains to be determined, it is inter-
esting to note that cigarette smokers are known to have decreased 
levels of MAO-B (and MAO-A) (Shih et al., 1999), the degree of 
which is proportional to cigarette usage (i.e., it is dose related) 
(Whitfield et al., 2000).
MAO-A knockout mice have elevated brain levels of serotonin 
and a distinct behavioral syndrome, including enhanced aggression 
in adult males. The enhanced aggressive behavior exhibited by 
MAO-A knockout mice is consistent with the abnormal aggressive 
behavior in individuals who lack MAO-A activity due to a point 
mutation in the MAO-A gene (Shih et al., 1999). Other polymor-
phisms in the MAO-A gene appear to be risk factors for alcohol-
ism among Euro-Americans and Han Chinese (Shih et al., 1999). 
MAO-B may also be a factor in alcoholism inasmuch as alcohol-
ics (especially male Type 2 alcoholics) tend to have lower MAO 
activity in platelets, which only contain MAO-B. However, MAO-B 
activity is not lower in alcoholics when cigarette smoking status is 
taken into account, which suggests that MAO-B activity tends to be 
lower in alcoholics because smoking and alcohol dependence are 
strongly associated with each other (Whitfield et al., 2000).
Although not present in mitochondria, the polyamine oxidase, 
PAOX (approved name: “polyamine oxidase [exo-N4-amino]”), 
and SMOX (approved name: “spermine oxidase”) resemble 
MAO in their cofactor requirement and basic mechanism of 
action. These enzymes use oxygen as an electron acceptor, which 
results in the production of hydrogen peroxide. However, sperm-
ine and spermidine are first acetylated by spermidine/spermine 
N1-acetyltransferases (gene symbols SAT1 and SAT2), and sub-
sequently oxidized by PAOX, which produces not only hydrogen 
peroxide but also 3-acetamidopropanal (Hakkinen et al., 2010). 
SMOX has very different substrate specificity, preferring nonacety-
lated polyamines (but not spermidine). The polyamines, spermine, 
spermidine, and the diamine precursor putrescine (discussed below) 
are ubiquitous in mammalian cells. The intracellular levels of these 
amines are strictly controlled by several enzymes (including PAOX 
and SMOX) as well as various transporters (Hakkinen et al., 2010). 
Dysregulation of polyamine metabolism is associated with cancer 
and other diseases. Because of differences in polyamine regula-
tion in various parasites, several xenobiotic polyamine synthesis 
inhibitors or substrates have been investigated as antiparasitic, che-
mopreventive, or chemotherapeutic drugs, including N-alkylated 
polyamine analogs such as diethylnorspermine, as well as some 
N-benzyl-substituted polyamines (Hakkinen et al., 2010).
The MAO inhibitor pargyline also inhibits PAOX. The anti-
convulsant milacemide is one of the few xenobiotic substrates for 
PAOX (the structure of which is unrelated to polyamines), although 
it is also a substrate for MAO (Fig. 6-32) (Strolin Benedetti et al., 
1992). By converting milacemide to glycine (via glycinamide), 
MAO plays an important role in the anticonvulsant therapy with 
milacemide (Benedetti and Dostert, 1994).
Class II Amine Oxidases (CuAOs): SSAOs, DAO, and LO  The 
term semicarbazide-sensitive amine oxidase (SSAO) is confusing 
because the term has been previously used to refer only to amine 
oxidases that are active only toward primary amines, although this 
has not been proved, and several publications that mention SSAOs 
N
CH3
N
CH3
+
+
MAO B
N
CH3
MPTP
MPDP+
MPP+
Blood–brain
barrier
Inhibition of dopamine
uptake and destruction of
dopaminergic neurones
N
CH3
CH3
Pulmonary toxicity due
to oxidative stress
Paraquat
MPTP
+
+
N
Figure 6-33.  Activation of 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,5,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) to the neurotoxic metabolite, 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridine (MPP+), by mono-
amine oxidase B. The toxic pyridinium metabolite, MPP+, is structurally similar to the herbicide paraquat MPDP+, 1-methyl-4-phenyl-2,3-dihydropyridine.

256
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
actually describe DAO. There are at least three types of SSAOs 
(Largeron, 2011). The first (which probably includes the original 
SSAO) has the recommended name PrAOs, for “primary amine 
oxidases,” and includes gene symbols AOC2 and AOC3, the latter 
of which is probably the originally identified SSAO. The second 
semicarbazide-sensitive amine oxidase is diamine oxidase (DAO) 
represented by AOC1; gene symbol ABP1, for “amiloride-binding 
protein”). A third type of SSAO is lysyl oxidase (LOX) (Largeron, 
2011). All of these enzymes are copper-containing amine oxidases. 
In general, the SSAOs (i.e., PrAOs, for “primary amine oxidases”) 
do oxidize primary monoamines and have little or no activity 
toward diamines. DAO (ABP1) oxidizes both diamines such as his-
tamine and some primary amines. Neither DAO nor SSAOs have 
activity toward secondary and tertiary amines (Largeron, 2011). 
These primary amine oxidases can be either soluble or membrane 
associated and are expressed in the liver, lung, lymph nodes, small 
intestine, and blood plasma (Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). The 
PrAO/SSAO known as AOC3 is a 180-kDa dimeric endothelial 
transmembrane glycoprotein that mediates leukocyte extravasa-
tion, for which reason it is widely known as the “vascular adhesion 
protein 1” (Kaitaniemi et al., 2009).
SSAOs/PrAOs catalyze fundamentally the same reaction cata-
lyzed by monoamine oxidase (Kaitaniemi et al., 2009):
RCH NH
H O
O
RCHO
H O
NH
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
+
+
→
+
+
The endogenous roles of the copper-containing amine oxidases 
(CuAOs) include regulating the levels of endogenous and exog-
enous primary monoamines and polyamines (e.g., methylamine, 
putrescine, and cadaverine, as well as specific lysine residues of 
extracellular matrix proteins in the case of LOX) by catalyzing their 
oxidative deamination, which produces an aldehyde, hydrogen per-
oxide, and ammonia (Yraola et al., 2009; Largeron, 2011). Because 
all of the latter chemicals are potentially cytotoxic, these metabolic 
pathways can activate endo- and xenobiotics. The activity of plasma 
CuAOs is generally increased in various disease states, including 
Alzheimer disease, congestive heart failure, cirrhosis, type 1 and 2 
diabetes, atherosclerosis, and other inflammatory conditions, which 
leads to the overproduction of toxic species, especially aldehydes 
and hydrogen peroxide, and may further contribute to the disease 
process (Largeron, 2011).
Although CuAOs do not play a large role in xenobiotic oxida-
tion, there is some evidence for the involvement of SSAOs in the 
oxidative deamination of a few xenobiotics, including allylamine, pri-
maquine, mescaline, amlodipine, and amifostine (Testa and Krämer, 
2008, 2010; Largeron, 2011). The calcium channel blocker amlodip-
ine is first oxidized (mainly by CYP3A4) to dehydroamlodipine, with 
subsequent deamination to an aldehyde (consistent with the action of 
an SSAO) and finally oxidation to the corresponding carboxylic acid 
by an ALDH and/or aldehyde oxidase (Largeron, 2011). Amifostine 
is a thiophosphate prodrug used as a cytoprotective adjuvant used in 
cancer chemo- and radiotherapy; it is rapidly converted to 2-[3-ami-
nopropylamino] ethanethiol by alkaline phosphatase followed by 
oxidative deamination catalyzed by one or more CuAOs to an alde-
hyde that spontaneously decomposes to acrolein and cysteamine 
(Largeron, 2011). Benzylamine (and several analogs) may be used 
in vitro as a substrate for SSAOs (Yraola et al., 2009). MAO-B can 
also catalyze the deamination of benzylamine, but MAO-B acts by 
removal of the pro-R H-atom, whereas SSAOs act by removal of the 
pro-S H-atom (Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). There also appear to 
be some substrate selectivity between the individual SSAOs in that 
the preferred in vitro substrates of AOC2 (highly expressed in the 
retina) include 2-phenylethylamine, tryptamine, and tyramine, rather 
than the benzylamines and methylamine, which appear to be the pre-
ferred substrates for AOC3 (Kaitaniemi et al., 2009).
Diamine oxidase (DAO) is a cytosolic, copper-containing, pyri-
doxal phosphate-dependent enzyme that is highly expressed in the 
lung, liver, kidney, intestine, and placenta, among other tissues, for 
which two crystal structures have been described (McGrath et al., 
2010). It is located in the extracellular space (secreted form) or in the 
endoplasmic reticulum (Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). Its preferred 
substrates include histamine and simple alkyl diamines with a four- or 
five-carbon chain length such as putrescine (1,4-diaminobutane) and 
cadaverine (1,5-diaminopentane) (McGrath et al., 2010). Diamines 
with carbon chains longer than nine are not substrates for DAO, 
although they can be oxidized by MAO. DAO or a similar enzyme 
is present in cardiovascular tissue and appears to be responsible for 
the cardiotoxic effects of allylamine, which is converted by oxidative 
deamination to acrolein. Although histamine is a substrate for DAO 
(which catalyzes oxidative deamination of the primary amine to imid-
azole acetaldehyde by the secreted diamine oxidase) (McGrath et al., 
2010), there is little DAO in brain (nor is there a receptor-mediated 
uptake system for histamine, in contrast to other neurotransmitters). 
For this reason, the major pathway of histamine metabolism in the 
brain is by methylation (see the section “Methylation”).
Aromatization  The conversion of MPTP to MPP+ (Fig. 6-33) is 
an example of a xenobiotic whose oxidation involves the introduc-
tion of multiple double bonds to achieve some semblance of aroma-
ticity (in this case, formation of a pyridinium ion). Aromatization 
of xenobiotics is an unusual reaction, but some examples have 
been documented. A mitochondrial enzyme in the guinea pig and 
rabbit liver can oxidize several cyclohexane derivatives to the cor-
responding aromatic hydrocarbon, as shown in Fig. 6-34, for the 
aromatization of cyclohexane carboxylic acid (hexahydrobenzoic 
acid) to benzoic acid. Mitochondria from rat liver are less active, 
and those from cat, mouse, dog, monkey, and human are inactive 
(Mitoma et al., 1958). The reaction requires magnesium, coenzyme 
COOH
C
O
SCoA
C
O
SCoA
CoA
ATP
Cyclohexane
carboxylic acid
Benzoic acid
COOH
Figure 6-34.  Aromatization of cyclohexane carboxylic acid, a reaction catalyzed by rabbit and guinea pig liver mitochondria.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
257
A, oxygen, and ATP. The first step is the formation of hexahydro-
benzoyl-CoA, which is then dehydrogenated to the aromatic prod-
uct. Glycine stimulates the reaction, probably by removing benzoic 
acid through conjugation to form hippuric acid. The conversion of 
androgens to estrogens involves aromatization of the A-ring of the 
steroid nucleus. This reaction is catalyzed by CYP19A1, one of 
the CYP enzymes involved in steroidogenesis. The major substrate 
of CYP19A1 is androstenedione, which is converted to estrone 
by three successive oxidation steps (Kuhl and Wiegratz, 2007). 
Gut microbiota can catalyze aromatization reactions, as shown in 
Fig. 6-4, for the conversion of quinic acid to benzoic acid.
Evidence for the apparent aromatization of a few xenobiot-
ics by other CYP enzymes has also been described. For instance, 
19-nortestosterone derivatives can be converted to aromatic metab-
olites, namely, ethinylestradiol (from norethisterone and norethyn-
odrel) and 7α-methylethinylestradiol (from tibolone) (Kuhl and 
Wiegratz, 2007). Formation of these A-ring aromatized steroids 
occurs in the liver, which does not express the steroidogenic enzyme 
CYP19A1 (aromatase). In addition, indoline (and some derivatives) 
is aromatized to indole in human liver microsomes, and mainly 
by recombinant human CYP3A4 (as well as CYP1A2, CYP2B6, 
CYP2C19, CYP2D6, and CYP2E1) by a dehydrogenation path-
way (Sun et al., 2007). The aromatization mechanism involves two 
one-electron oxidations, which is different from that catalyzed by 
CYP19A1, which catalyzes two sequential carbon oxidations fol-
lowed by cleavage of a carbon–carbon bond (Sun et al., 2007). The 
indoline-containing diuretic, indapamide, is also dehydrogenated 
to the aromatic indole by CYP3A4 (Sun et al., 2009). This type of 
dehydrogenation can lead to P450 inactivation, as exemplified by 
the mechanism-based inhibition of CYP3A4 by the 3-alkylindole-
containing TNF-α inhibitor, SPD-304, which forms an electrophilic 
3-methylenindolenine (Sun and Yost, 2008).
Peroxidase-Dependent Cooxidation  The oxidative biotrans-
formation of xenobiotics generally requires the reduced pyridine 
nucleotide cofactors NADPH and NADH, although oxidation by 
AO and MAO is a notable exception. Another exception is xenobi-
otic biotransformation by peroxidases, which are heme-containing 
enzymes that couple the reduction of hydrogen peroxide (or a lipid 
hydroperoxide) to the one-electron oxidation of other substrates 
(O’Brien, 2000; Tafazoli and O’Brien, 2005). Several different 
peroxidases catalyze the biotransformation of xenobiotics (in addi-
tion to performing important physiological functions), and these 
enzymes occur in a variety of tissues and cell types. Peroxidases 
do not play an important role in the first-pass metabolism or clear-
ance of drugs as most other xenobiotics because their contribution 
is usually negligible compared with CYP and other oxidative 
enzymes. However, peroxidases do play an important role in xeno-
biotic toxicity, especially the activation of drugs associated with 
idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity, blood dyscrasias (e.g., agranulocyto-
sis, neutropenia, aplastic anemia, and thrombocytopenia), and skin 
rashes, and the activation of xenobiotics (including the activation 
of proximate carcinogens to ultimate carcinogens) in skin, blad-
der, bone marrow, and various other extrahepatic tissues. As shown 
in Fig. 6-5, peroxidases form reactive intermediates by converting 
nitrogen- and sulfur-containing xenobiotics to heteroatom-centered 
radicals (Tang and Lu, 2010; Walsh and Miwa, 2011).
In humans, the family of peroxidases includes myeloper-
oxidase (gene symbol MPO), eosinophil peroxidase (EPO; gene 
symbol EPX), lactoperoxidase (gene symbol LPO), thyroid per-
oxidase (gene symbol TPO), catalase, two forms of prostaglandin 
H synthase (also known as PHS1 and PHS2 or cyclooxygenase-1 
[COX-1] and COX-2; gene symbols PTGS1 and PTGS2), as well 
as the selenium-containing glutathione peroxidases (gene symbol 
GPX1-8). Some basic features of these peroxidases are summarized 
in Table 6-12. These peroxidases all have physiological functions: 
MPO, EPO, and LPO are lysosomal enzymes present in neutro-
phils, eosinophils, and secretory cells of exocrine glands, respec-
tively. During infection, MPO and EPO are released into phagocytic 
vacuoles (granules) and into the plasma, whereas LPO is released 
into saliva and tears, where they kill microorganisms and thereby 
provide protection against infectious agents such as bacteria and 
parasites. (Peroxidases are also present in milk: LPO is the pre-
dominant peroxidase in cow’s milk, whereas MPO is the predomi-
nant peroxidase in human milk.) The hydrogen peroxide required 
by MPO and EPO is produced by a membrane-bound NADPH 
oxidase that is activated by the presence of infectious agents. 
Unlike MPO, EPO, and LPO, which are soluble enzymes, TPO 
is a membrane-bound peroxidase located on the apical membrane 
of thyroid follicular cells; it catalyzes the iodination of tyrosine 
residues and the oxidative coupling of di-iodinated and monoio-
dinated tyrosine residues in thyroglobulin to form T3- and thyrox-
ine (T4)-bound thyroglobulin, from which thyroid hormones are 
released. An NAD(P)H-oxidase known as p138 TOX (gene symbol 
DUOX2), which is also localized on the apical plasma membrane, 
produces the hydrogen peroxide required by TPO to synthesize 
thyroid hormones. PHS1 and PHS2 are the peroxidase component 
of COX-1 and COX-2; they are enzymes that convert arachidonic 
acid (and closely related fatty acids) to a variety of eicosanoids 
­(prostaglandins, leukotrienes, thromboxane, and prostacyclin). 
In contrast to the other peroxidases, PHS1 and PHS2 do not require 
a source of hydrogen peroxide (although they can use it); hence, 
Table 6-12  
Characteristics of Some Human Peroxidases
PEROXIDASES
CELLULAR LOCATION
SUBCELLULAR LOCATION
HOMOLOGY WITH MPO
Myeloperoxidase (MPO)
Neutrophils, leukocytes
Lysosomes (human milk)
100%
Eosinophil peroxidase (EPO)
Eosinophils
Lysosomes
70%
Lactoperoxidase (LPO)
Mammary duct epithelial cells
Saliva, tears (bovine milk)
61%
Thyroid peroxidase (TPO)
Thyroid follicular cells
Microsomes, Golgi
47%
Prostaglandin-H synthase
PHS1 (COX1)*
Numerous extrahepatic tissues
Microsomes
PHS2 (COX2)*
Inflammatory cells
Microsomes
*There are two forms of prostaglandin H synthase, PHS1 and PHS2; they are the peroxidase component of the bifunctional enzymes known as COX1 and 
COX2 (gene symbols PTGS1 and PTGS2), respectively.
SOURCE: Data adapted from O’Brien (2000).

258
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
their activity is not dependent on an H2O2-generating NAD(P)
H-oxidase. Catalase is also a peroxidase. This peroxisomal enzyme 
catalyzes the disproportionation of hydrogen peroxide to water and 
oxygen (2H2O2 → 2H2O + O2). At low concentrations of hydro-
gen peroxide, catalase can catalyze the oxidation of ethanol (see 
Fig. 6-29) and various other small molecules. GPXs are a family of 
selenium-containing enzymes that also detoxify hydrogen peroxide 
(and lipid hydroperoxides) by reducing it to water, which is associ-
ated with the formation of oxidized GSH as follows:
2
2
2
GSH
HOOH
GS-SG
H O
+
→
+
In mammalian peroxidases (in contrast to plant peroxidases), 
the heme prosthetic group is covalently attached to the enzyme. 
Iron is bound to four pyrrole nitrogen atoms with the nitrogen on 
the imidazole ring of histidine serving as the usual fifth ligand. The 
sixth coordination position is vacant so that peroxidases can interact 
with hydrogen peroxide (or other hydroperoxides), just as the sixth 
coordinate position of hemoglobin and myoglobin (both of which 
have low peroxidase activity) is available to bind molecular oxygen 
(Tafazoli and O’Brien, 2005). The oxidation of a xenobiotic (X → 
XO or 2XH → 2X• + H2O) by peroxidase involves the conversion 
of hydrogen peroxide to water or the conversion of a hydroperox-
ide to the corresponding alcohol (ROOH → ROH), during which 
the peroxidase (FeIII) is converted to spectrophotometrically distinct 
states known as compound I and compound II, shown as follows for 
the conversion of a xenobiotic phenol (XOH) to the corresponding 
phenoxyl radical (XO•) (Tafazoli and O’Brien, 2005):
Peroxidase
ROOH
CompoundI
ROH
+
→
+
CompoundI
XOH
CompoundII
XO
H
+
→
+
+
+
•
CompoundII
XOH
Peroxidase
XO
H O
+
→
+
+
•
2
In this example, the hydroperoxide is converted to the corre-
sponding alcohol (ROOH → ROH), and the peroxyl oxygen atom 
is reduced to water (H2O) by the one-electron oxidation of two 
molecules of xenobiotic (XOH) to produce two xenobiotic radicals 
(XO•). In some cases, the oxygen from the hydroperoxide is incor-
porated into the xenobiotic itself (XH → XOH). Examples of each 
reaction are given later in this section. The conversion of ROOH 
to ROH involves the release of an oxygen atom that coordinates 
with the heme iron (initially in the ferric or FeIII state). This iron-
bound oxygen formally contains only six (instead of eight) valence 
electrons, making it a powerful oxidizing species. One electron is 
removed from the iron to produce FeIV=O, and a second electron is 
removed from the tetrapyrrole ring to produce a π-porphyrin cation 
radical (Por•+), which corresponds to compound I (FeIV=O–Por•+). 
The transfer of an electron from a xenobiotic (XOH → XO• + H+) to 
the porphyrin cation radical produces compound II (FeIV=O–Por). 
In some cases, such as PHS, the electron donated to the initial 
Fe=O complex comes directly or indirectly from an amino acid 
rather than the tetrapyrrole ring, and this accounts in part for some 
of the differences among the various peroxidases (such as the abil-
ity of TPO to catalyze the iodination of tyrosine residues and the 
subsequent formation of thyroid hormones).
Although peroxidases are renowned for catalyzing one-elec-
tron oxidation reactions, they can catalyze the two-electron oxida-
tion of iodide (I−) to hypoiodous acid (HOI) and iodine which, in 
the case of TPO, is important for the synthesis of thyroid hormones:
PeroxidasecompoundI(O)
I
H
HOI
+
+
→
−
+
PeroxidasecompoundI(O)
I
H
I iodine
OH
+
×
+
→
+
−
+
−
2
2(
)
MPO, EPO, and LPO can all oxidize the pseudohalide thiocya-
nate (SCN−) faster than iodide, which in turn is oxidized faster than 
bromide, which is oxidized much faster than chloride (Bafort et al., 
2014). In fact, MPO is the only peroxidase with appreciable ability 
to oxidize chloride to hypochlorous acid (HOCl). There is an inverse 
relationship between the rate of conversion of halides to hypohalous 
acids and their physiological plasma concentrations: chloride = 100 
to 140 mM, bromide = 20 to 100 μM, and iodide = 0.1 to 0.5 μM. 
Consequently, the relatively low rate of chloride oxidation is offset by 
the high levels of chloride such that about half (20% to 70%) of the 
hydrogen peroxide produced by activated neutrophils is converted to 
HOCl, which reacts with GSH, proteins, thiols, amines, unsaturated 
fatty acids, and cholesterol, all of which disrupt cell membranes and 
lead to cell lysis and death (of both infectious organisms and host 
cells). Formation of HOCl by MPO is important not only from a phys-
iological perspective but also from a drug metabolism and toxicity 
perspective, as discussed later in this section. The preferred (pseudo) 
halide substrate for MPO is thiocyanate, which is present in plasma 
at concentrations ranging from 20 to 120 μM—which is sufficiently 
high that oxidation of thiocyanate consumes the other half of the 
hydrogen peroxide produced by activated neutrophils. While MPO 
oxidizes chloride to HOCl, which is cytotoxic, it oxidizes thiocya-
nate to thiocyanogen (SCN2), which rapidly hydrolyzes to hypothio-
cyanic acid (HOSCN). HOSCN is much less reactive and cytotoxic 
than HOCl, such that the oxidation of thiocyanate by peroxidases is 
a mechanism to remove hydrogen peroxide without forming HOCl. 
This represents an important mechanism of hydrogen peroxide detox-
ication in saliva, which contains low levels of catalase but high levels 
(1 to 5 mM) of thiocyanate, and in the stomach, where the levels of 
thiocyanate in parietal cells are three times greater than plasma levels, 
which allows gastric peroxidase to inactivate hydrogen peroxide that 
otherwise stimulates gastric acid secretion by stimulating histamine 
release from mast cells. Inactivation of gastric peroxidase by aspirin, 
dexamethasone, indomethacin, or methimazole can result in gastric 
ulceration due to impaired detoxication of hydrogen peroxide and 
impaired synthesis of cytoprotective prostaglandins (O’Brien, 2000).
MPO and EPO can be distinguished by (1) their cellular dis-
tribution (neutrophils/leukocytes vs. eosinophils); (2) their ability 
to oxidize halides (MPO is better than EPO at converting chloride 
to HOCl, whereas EPO is better than MPO at converting bromide 
to hypobromous acid); and (3) their sensitivity to inhibitors (MPO 
is more sensitive to the inhibitory effect of cyanide over azide, 
whereas the opposite is true of EPO).
As noted earlier in this section, peroxidases convert chloride 
to HOCl, which is cytotoxic, and they convert thiocyanate to thio-
cyanogen (SCN2), which rapidly hydrolyzes to hypothiocyanic acid 
(HOSCN), which is much less reactive and cytotoxic than HOCl. 
However, EPO can oxidize thiocyanate to a mixture of cyanate 
(OCN‒) and hypothiocyanous acid (HOSCN). Cyanate is a minor 
product but it can react with lysine residues, which results in the 
formation of carbamylated proteins (Protein‒NH2 + OCN‒ + H+) 
→ Protein‒NH‒CO‒NH2). EPO-mediated carbamylation of pro-
teins occurs during allergen-induced asthma and can modulate the 
immune response and trigger a cascade of inflammatory signals 
associated with asthma (Wang et al., 2016b).
The level of EPO (or a related peroxidase) in uterine epithelial 
cells is regulated by estrogen; uterine peroxidase activity is induc-
ible several hundred-fold by estrogenic steroids, including the 
synthetic estrogens diethylstilbestrol and tamoxifen. The level of 
TPO in thyroid follicular cells is regulated by TSH. The enzyme is 
inactivated by a variety of ethylenethiourea drugs, such as propyl-
thiouracil and methimazole (which is used as an antithyroid drug 
in patients with Graves disease), as well as a number of naturally

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
259
occurring flavonoid/resorcinol compounds that also have antithy-
roid effects. By inactivating TPO and impairing thyroid hormone 
synthesis, these chemicals trigger a large and prolonged increase 
in TSH that in rodents (but apparently not in humans) can result in 
thyroid follicular cell tumor formation.
MPO is an abundant enzyme in granulocytes, where it accounts 
for 5% of the dry weight. It can be used as a diagnostic marker 
to differentiate myeloid leukemia from lymphoid leukemia. MPO 
is one of the peroxidases implicated in the formation of reactive 
metabolites of drugs that cause idiosyncratic agranulocytosis (or 
other blood dyscrasias), including clozapine, aminopyrine, vesna-
rinone, propylthiouracil, dapsone, remoxipride, sulfonamides, pro-
cainamide, amodiaquine, and ticlopidine (Liu and Uetrecht, 2000; 
O’Brien, 2000; Tafazoli and O’Brien, 2005; Testa and Krämer, 
2008, 2010). The nitro-reduced metabolite of tolcapone can be 
converted to a reactive ortho-quinoneimine by MPO and poten-
tially lead to hepatotoxicity (Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). Many 
of these drugs are aromatic amines, and both MPO and PHS have 
also been implicated in the activation of several carcinogenic aro-
matic amines, such as benzidine, methylaminoazobenzene, and 
aminofluorene. Furthermore, inactivating polymorphisms in MPO 
(such as MPO-463A) appear to afford protection against both the 
activation of aromatic amines and PAH in tobacco smoke and the 
tumor-promoting effects of hydrogen peroxide formed by tobacco 
smoke–activated neutrophils (O’Brien, 2000).
In the presence of hydrogen peroxide and chloride (which are 
converted to HOCl by MPO), activated neutrophils and monocytes 
(including Kupffer cells) oxidize the aforementioned drugs to reac-
tive intermediates (such as nitrogen-centered radicals, hydroxyl-
amines, N-chloramines, and, in the case of aromatic amines with 
a hydroxyl group in the para-position, quinoneimines or the cor-
responding semiquinoneimine radicals). In the case of ticlopidine, 
MPO converts the thiophene ring of this antiplatelet drug to a thio-
phene-S-chloride, a reactive metabolite that rearranges to 2-chlo-
roticlopidine (minor) and dehydro-ticlopidine (major), or reacts 
with GSH, as shown in Fig. 6-35. When catalyzed by activated 
N
S
Cl
N
S
R
Cl
N
S
R
Cl
N
S
R
GS
N
S
R
H2O2 + H+ + Cl–
H2O + OH–
Ticlopidine
Ticlopidine S-chloride
2-Chloroticlopidine
Glutathione adduct
Dehydro-ticlopidine
Cl–
HCl
GS–
Cl–
Cl–
–H+
–H+
–H+
Reactive intermediate
that may be responsible
for ticlopidine-induced
agranulocytosis
HOCl
Myeloperoxidase
+
Figure 6-35.  Activation of ticlopidine to a reactive thiophene S-chloride by myeloperoxidase.

260
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
neutrophils, ticlopidine oxidation is inhibited by low concentrations 
of azide and catalase. When catalyzed by purified myeloperoxidase, 
ticlopidine oxidation requires hydrogen peroxide and chloride, 
although all components of this purified system can be replaced 
with HOCl. It is not known whether drugs that cause agranulocyto-
sis are activated in the bone marrow by neutrophils or their precur-
sors that contain myeloperoxidase, or are activated in neutrophils 
in the general circulation. In the latter case, agranulocytosis would 
presumably involve an immune response triggered by neoantigens 
formed in neutrophils by the covalent modification of cellular com-
ponent by one or more of the reactive metabolites formed by MPO. 
MPO is also present in Kupffer cells, which release the enzyme 
in the liver upon activation by hydrogen peroxide. It is possible 
to increase the toxicity of hydralazine (which is associated with 
the development of hepatitis and centrilobular necrosis) toward 
cultured hepatocytes by the inclusion of a hydrogen peroxide–gen-
erating system (Tafazoli and O’Brien, 2008).
MPO has also been implicated in the formation of pro-oxidant 
phenoxyl radicals of etoposide, a topoisomerase inhibitor that can 
cause myelogenous leukemia, and both MPO and PHS have been 
implicated in the formation of phenoxyl radicals of benzene, an 
industrial solvent that causes bone marrow suppression and leuke-
mia. MPO and PHS cannot oxidize benzene itself. Liver CYP con-
verts benzene to phenol, which in turn is oxidized to hydroquinone, 
which can be converted to DNA-reactive metabolites by MPO in 
bone marrow leukocytes and by PHS in bone marrow. The myelo-
suppressive effect of benzene can be blocked by the PHS inhibitor 
indomethacin, which suggests an important role for PHS-dependent 
activation in the myelotoxicity of benzene. The formation of phenol 
and hydroquinone in the liver is also important for myelosuppres-
sion by benzene. However, such bone marrow suppression cannot be 
achieved simply by administering phenol or hydroquinone to mice, 
although it can be achieved by coadministering hydroquinone with 
phenol. Phenol stimulates the MPO- and PHS-dependent activation 
of hydroquinone. Therefore, bone marrow suppression by benzene 
involves the CYP-dependent oxidation of benzene to phenol and 
hydroquinone in the liver, followed by the phenol-enhanced, MPO- 
and PHS-catalyzed peroxidative oxidation of hydroquinone to reac-
tive intermediates that bind to protein and DNA in the bone marrow 
(Fig. 6-36). It is noteworthy that the CYP enzyme responsible for 
hydroxylating benzene has been identified as CYP2E1 (see the sec-
tion “Cytochrome P450”). Although CYP2E1 was first identified 
in the liver, this same enzyme has been identified in bone marrow 
where it can presumably convert benzene to phenol and possibly 
hydroquinone. The importance of CYP2E1 in the metabolic activa-
tion of benzene was confirmed by the demonstration that CYP2E1 
knockout mice are relatively resistant to the myelosuppressive 
effects of benzene (Gonzalez, 2003; Gonzalez and Yu, 2006). MPO 
has also been shown to convert phenol to diols. Benzene-diols are 
good substrates of EPO, LPO, and MPO and their oxidation by per-
oxidases leads to oxidative stress (Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010).
Prostaglandin H synthase (formally known as prostaglan-
din-endoperoxide synthase 1 and 2, and also widely known as 
cyclooxygenase 1 and 2; gene symbols PTGS1 and PTGS2 and col-
lectively referred to below as “PHS”) is one of the most extensively 
studied peroxidases involved in xenobiotic biotransformation. As 
shown in Fig. 6-37, PHS is a dual-function enzyme composed 
of a cyclooxygenase, which converts arachidonic acid to PGG2, a 
15-hydroperoxide-endoperoxide (which involves the addition of 
two molecules of oxygen to each molecule of arachidonic acid), and 
a peroxidase that converts the 15-hydroperoxide to the correspond-
ing 15-alcohol PGH2, which can be accompanied by the oxidation 
of xenobiotics (a “cosubstrate”) and formation of reactive oxygen 
species (Ramkissoon and Wells, 2011). PHS1 is localized in the 
endoplasmic reticulum and nuclear envelope and is constitutively 
expressed in a wide variety of tissues that synthesize and release 
eicosanoids (prostaglandins, leukotrienes, thromboxane, and pros-
tacyclin), which generally bind to G-coupled cell surface receptors 
and regulate cellular function, largely in a paracrine (local) fashion 
(Ramkissoon and Wells, 2011). In contrast, PHS2 is expressed in 
cells that respond to inflammatory cytokines, mitogens, tumor pro-
moters, and AhR agonists (i.e., agents such as TNF-α, LPS, phorbol 
esters, TPA, and dioxin) such as the macula densa of the kidney, 
the vas deferens, and certain regions of the brain (Ramkissoon and 
Wells, 2011). PGH2 produces prostaglandins that activate recep-
tors on the nuclear membrane, and high levels of the enzyme are 
expressed in colorectal and other tumors, which appear to be impor-
tant for tumor promotion and angiogenesis (the process of stimulat-
ing the blood vessel supply). Both enzymes play an important role 
in the activation of xenobiotics to toxic or tumorigenic metabolites, 
OH
OH
OH
Benzene
Phenol
Hydroquinone
Stimulation
OH
OH
Hydroquinone
O•
OH
H+, e–
Phenoxyl radical
PHS
myeloperoxidase
Binding to protein
and DNA leading
to bone marrow
suppression
Bone marrow
Liver
P450
[O]
P450
[O]
Figure 6-36.  Role of cytochrome P450 and peroxidases in the activation of benzene to myelotoxic metabolites.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
261
particularly in extrahepatic tissues that contain low levels of CYP. 
PHS2 (COX-2) also plays an important role in the subsequent 
response of tissues to cell damage and tumor initiation, and is a 
possible target for the treatment or prevention of certain types of 
cancer. Increasing evidence suggests that inhibition of COX-2 by 
NSAIDs may be part of the mechanism whereby these drugs protect 
against colon and other gastrointestinal cancers (Dubé et al., 2007; 
Wu et al., 2010). PHS has been evaluated for its contribution to 
the metabolism of phenytoin and other antiepileptic drugs B[a]P, 
thalidomide, methamphetamine, and 3,4-methylenedioxymetham-
phetamine (Ramkissoon and Wells, 2011).
In certain cases, the oxidation of xenobiotics by peroxidases 
involves direct transfer of the peroxide oxygen to the xenobiotic, as 
shown in Fig. 6-37 for the conversion of substrate X to product XO. 
An example of this type of reaction is the PHS-catalyzed epoxi-
dation of B[a]P 7,8-dihydrodiol to the corresponding 9,10-epox-
ide (see Fig. 6-14). Although PHS can catalyze the final step (i.e., 
9,10-epoxidation) in the formation of this tumorigenic metabolite 
of B[a]P, it cannot catalyze the initial step (i.e., 7,8-epoxidation), 
which is catalyzed by CYP. Several lines of evidence suggest that 
both PHS1 and PHS2 play an important role in PAH-induced skin 
carcinogenesis. First, both PHS1 knockout and PHS2 knockout 
mice are resistant to PAH-induced skin cancer. (It is noteworthy 
that PHS1 knockout mice appear normal despite having only 1% 
of the prostaglandin levels of wild-type mice, whereas only 60% 
of PHS2 knockout mice survive until weaning, and the 40% that 
survive past weaning usually die within a year of kidney disease.) 
Both resveratrol (an inhibitor of PHS1 and CYP1A1) and SC-58125 
(an inhibitor of PHS2) block PAH-induced skin cancer in mice.
PHS can also catalyze the 8,9-epoxidation of aflatoxin 
B1, which is one of the most potent hepatotumorigens known. 
Epoxidation by CYP is thought to be primarily responsible for the 
hepatotumorigenic effects of aflatoxin B1. However, aflatoxin B1 
also causes neoplasia of rat renal papilla. This tissue has very low 
levels of CYP, but contains relatively high levels of PHS, which is 
suspected, therefore, of mediating the nephrotumorigenic effects of 
aflatoxin (Fig. 6-38).
The direct transfer of the peroxide oxygen from a hydroper-
oxide to a xenobiotic is neither the only mechanism of xenobiotic 
oxidation by peroxidases nor the most common. Xenobiotics that 
Arachidonic acid
O2 + O2
OOH
O
O
COOH
X or 2XH 
PGG2
Cyclooxygenase
Peroxidase
PGH2
Prostaglandins
(PGD2, PGE2, PGF2α)
Thromboxane A2
Prostacyclin
COOH
XO or 2X• + H2O
 
Prostaglandin H Synthase (PHS)
OH
O
O
COOH
Figure 6-37.  Cooxidation of xenobiotics (X) during the conversion of ara-
chidonic acid to PGH2 by prostaglandin H synthase.
O
O
O
OCH3
O
O
Aﬂatoxin B1
Cytochrome P450
Peroxidase or peroxyl radical
Aﬂatoxin B1 8,9-epoxide
O
O
O
OCH3
O
O
H
H
O
Inactivation
by conjugation
with glutathione
DNA binding.
Liver tumors and
renal papilla neoplasia
Figure 6-38.  Activation of aflatoxin B1 by cytochrome P450, leading to 
liver tumor formation, and by peroxidases, leading to renal papilla neoplasia.

262
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
can serve as electron donors, such as amines and phenols, can be 
oxidized to free radicals during the reduction of a hydroperoxide. 
In this case, the hydroperoxide is still converted to the correspond-
ing alcohol, but the peroxide oxygen is reduced to water instead 
of being incorporated into the xenobiotic. For each molecule of 
hydroperoxide reduced (which is a two-electron process), two 
molecules of xenobiotic can be oxidized (each by a one-electron 
process). Important classes of compounds that undergo one-elec-
tron oxidation reactions by peroxidase include aromatic amines, 
phenols, hydroquinones, and polycyclic hydrocarbons. Many of 
the metabolites produced are reactive electrophiles. For example, 
PAHs, phenols, and hydroquinones are oxidized to electrophilic 
quinones. Acetaminophen is similarly converted to a quinonei-
mine, namely, N-acetyl-benzoquinoneimine, a cytotoxic electro-
phile that binds to cellular proteins, as shown in Fig. 6-39. The 
formation of this toxic metabolite by CYP causes centrilobular 
necrosis of the liver. However, acetaminophen can also damage the 
kidney medulla, which contains low levels of CYP but relatively 
high levels of PHS; hence, PHS may play a significant role in 
the nephrotoxicity of acetaminophen. The two-electron oxidation 
of acetaminophen to N-acetyl-benzoquinoneimine by PHS likely 
involves the formation of a one-electron oxidation product, namely, 
N-acetyl-benzosemiquinoneimine radical. Formation of this semi-
quinoneimine radical by PHS likely contributes to the nephrotoxic-
ity of acetaminophen and related compounds, such as phenacetin 
and 4-aminophenol. Metabolites of the NSAID diclofenac (namely, 
4′-hydroxydiclofenac and 5-hydroxydiclofenac) can also be con-
verted to benzoquinoneimines by peroxidases (Testa and Krämer, 
2008, 2010).
Like the kidney medulla, urinary bladder epithelium also con-
tains low levels of CYP but relatively high levels of PHS. Just as 
PHS in kidney medulla can ostensibly activate aflatoxin and acet-
aminophen to nephrotoxic metabolites, PHS in urinary bladder 
epithelium can potentially activate certain aromatic amines, such 
as benzidine, 4-aminobiphenyl, and 2-aminonaphthalene, to DNA-
reactive metabolites that cause bladder cancer in certain species, 
O
N
SO3
–
H
C
O
CH3
N
H
C
O
CH3
N
H
C
O
CH3
O
N
H
C
O
CH3
N
C
O
CH3
PAP
PAPS
UDP-GA
UDP
Acetaminophen
sulfate
Acetaminophen
(APAP)
Acetaminophen
glucuronide
Phenolsulfo-
transferase
UDP-glucuronosyl-
transferase
N-Acetyl-benzosemiquinoneimine
free radical
N-Acetyl-p-benzoquinoneimine
(NAPQI)
Glutathione
conjugate
Binding to hepatic proteins leading
to centrilobular necrosis
Glutathione
conjugation
(GSH)
NADPH2, O2
NADP, 2H2O
Cytochrome P450
(CYP2E1, 1A2, and 3A4)
ROOH
ROH
+
H2O
OH
PHS
O
C6H8O6
–
SG
O
H+, e–
H+, e–
Binding to renal proteins with
damage to kidney medulla
Phenoxyl radical
•
OH
N
H
C
O
CH3
OH
•N
C
O
CH3
Figure 6-39.  Activation of acetaminophen by cytochrome P450, leading to hepatotoxicity, and by prostaglandin H synthase (PHS), leading to nephrotoxicity. 
Conjugation with sulfonate, glucuronic acid, or glutathione represents detoxication reactions.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
263
including humans and dogs. PHS can convert aromatic amines to 
reactive radicals, which can undergo nitrogen–nitrogen or nitro-
gen–carbon coupling reactions, or they can undergo a second 
one-electron oxidation to reactive diimines. Binding of these reac-
tive metabolites to DNA is presumed to be one of the underlying 
mechanisms by which several aromatic amines cause bladder can-
cer in humans and dogs. In some cases the one-electron oxidation 
of an amine leads to N-dealkylation. For example, PHS catalyzes 
the N-demethylation of aminopyrine, although in vivo this reac-
tion is mainly catalyzed by CYP. In contrast to CYP, PHS does not 
appear to catalyze the N-hydroxylation of carcinogenic aromatic 
amines (an important step in their metabolic activation), although 
MPO and LPO have been shown to catalyze this reaction. In liver, 
activation of aromatic amines by N-hydroxylation is catalyzed pre-
dominantly by CYP1A2, whereas this same reaction in the bladder 
epithelium appears to be catalyzed by another enzyme, possibly a 
CYP enzyme other than CYP1A2, such as CYP2A13, CYP4B1, or 
CYP2S1 (Nakajima et al., 2006), or a peroxidase other than PHS.
Many of the aromatic amines known or suspected of caus-
ing bladder cancer in humans have been shown to cause bladder 
tumors in dogs. In rats, however, aromatic amines cause liver 
tumors by a process that is thought to involve N-hydroxylation by 
CYP, followed by conjugation with acetate or sulfonate, as shown in 
Fig. 6-16. This species difference has complicated an assessment of 
the role of PHS in aromatic amine–induced bladder cancer, because 
such experiments must be carried out in dogs. However, another 
class of compounds, the 5-nitrofurans, such as N-[4-(5-nitro-2-
furyl)-2-thiazole]formamide (FANFT) and its deformylated ana-
log 2-amino-4-(5-nitro-2-furyl)thiazole (ANFT), are substrates for 
PHS and are potent bladder tumorigens in rats. The tumorigenic-
ity of FANFT is thought to involve deformylation to ANFT, which 
is oxidized to DNA-reactive metabolites by PHS. The ability of 
FANFT to cause bladder tumors in rats is blocked by the COX 
inhibitor, aspirin, which suggests that PHS plays an important role 
in the metabolic activation and tumorigenicity of this nitrofuran. 
Unexpectedly, combined treatment of rats with FANFT and aspirin 
causes forestomach tumors, which are not observed when either 
compound is administered alone.
Increased expression of PHS2 (COX-2) has been documented 
in a number of tumors, including human colorectal, gastric, esopha-
geal, pulmonary, and pancreatic carcinomas (Gupta and DuBois, 
1998; Molina et al., 1999; Dubé et al., 2007; Wu et al., 2010). 
Aspirin and other NSAIDs block the formation of colon cancer in 
experimental animals, and there is epidemiological evidence that 
long-term use of certain NSAIDs (aspirin and sulindac), but not 
acetaminophen (which does not inhibit COX-2), decreases the inci-
dence of colorectal polyps and cancer in humans, and also decreases 
the number of deaths from esophageal, gastric, and rectal cancers. 
The incidence of intestinal neoplasms in ApcΔ716 knockout mice is 
dramatically suppressed by crossing these transgenic animals with 
PHS2 (COX-2) knockout mice (Oshima et al., 1996). From these 
few examples it is apparent that PHS2 may play at least two dis-
tinct roles in tumor formation; it may convert certain xenobiotics to 
DNA-reactive metabolites (and thereby initiate tumor formation), 
and it may promote subsequent tumor growth, perhaps through for-
mation of growth-promoting eicosanoids, such as PGE2, which can 
activate EGFR, ERKs, etc. (Wu et al., 2010).
Many phenolic compounds can serve as reducing substrates for 
PHS peroxidase. The phenoxyl radicals produced by one-electron 
oxidation reactions can undergo a variety of reactions, including 
binding to critical nucleophiles such as protein and DNA, reduction 
by antioxidants such as GSH, and self-coupling. The reactions of 
phenoxyl radicals are analogous to those of the nitrogen-centered 
free radicals produced during the one-electron oxidation of aro-
matic amines by PHS.
It was previously mentioned in this section that phenol can 
enhance the peroxidative metabolism of hydroquinone, which is 
an important component to benzene myelotoxicity. An analogous 
interaction has been described between the phenolic antioxidants, 
BHT, and BHA. In mice, the pulmonary toxicity of BHT, which is 
a relatively poor substrate for PHS, is enhanced by BHA, which is 
a relatively good substrate for PHS. The mechanism by which BHA 
enhances the pulmonary toxicity of BHT involves the peroxidase-
dependent conversion of BHA to a phenoxyl radical that interacts 
with BHT, converting it to a phenoxyl radical (by one-electron oxi-
dation) or a quinone methide (by two-electron oxidation), as shown 
in Fig. 6-40. Formation of the toxic quinone methide of BHT can 
also be catalyzed by CYP, which is largely responsible for activat-
ing BHT in the absence of BHA. A similar outcome occurs with 
quercetin, which is oxidized to a quinonemethide in the presence of 
peroxidases (Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010).
Several reducing substrates, such as phenylbutazone, retinoic 
acid, 3-methylindole, sulfite, and bisulfite, are oxidized by PHS to 
carbon- or sulfur-centered free radicals that can trap oxygen to form 
a peroxyl radical, as shown in Fig. 6-41 for phenylbutazone. The 
peroxyl radical can oxidize xenobiotics in a peroxidative manner. 
For example, the peroxyl radical of phenylbutazone can convert 
B[a]P 7,8-dihydrodiol to the corresponding 9,10-epoxide.
PHS is unique among peroxidases because it can both gener-
ate hydroperoxides and catalyze peroxidase-dependent reactions, 
as shown in Fig. 6-37. Xenobiotic biotransformation by PHS is 
controlled by the availability of arachidonic acid. The biotrans-
formation of xenobiotics by other peroxidases is controlled by the 
availability of hydroperoxide substrates. Hydrogen peroxide is a 
normal product of cellular respiration, and lipid peroxides can form 
during lipid peroxidation. The level of these peroxides and their 
availability for peroxidase reactions depend on the efficiency of 
hydroperoxide scavenging by GPX and catalase.
Flavin Monooxygenases  The liver, kidney, intestine, brain, and 
lung (among other tissues) contain one or more FAD-containing 
monooxygenases (FMO) that oxidize soft nucleophilic nitrogen, 
sulfur, selenium, phosphorus, and rarely—iodine, carbon, and 
boron—atoms of xenobiotics (Ziegler, 1993; Lawton et al., 1994; 
Cashman, 1995, 1999; Rettie and Fisher, 1999; Cashman and 
Zhang, 2006; Cashman, 2008; Mitchell, 2008; Testa and Krämer, 
2008, 2010). Among these types of substrates, the best ones tend 
to be those with lone pairs of electrons available to form a polar, 
coordinate covalent (dative) bond (e.g., hydroxylamines and piperi-
dines) (Cashman, 2008; Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). The mam-
malian FMO gene family comprises five enzymes (designated 
FMO1 to FMO5) that contain 532 to 558 amino acid residues each 
and are 48% to 60% identical in amino acid sequence within a spe-
cies, whereas orthologous forms are 82% to 86% identical across 
species (Hines et al., 2002). The human enzymes range in appar-
ent molecular weight from 52 to 64 kDa (Testa and Krämer, 2008, 
2010). Six human FMO pseudogenes have also been described, 
including one that shares 71% sequence identity with FMO3, 
namely, FMO6, for which nine distinct transcripts were identified 
in the liver, but not the kidney. All of these variant FMO6 tran-
scripts arise by alternative splicing and lead to truncated, and there-
fore nonfunctional, enzymes. Each FMO enzyme contains a highly 
conserved glycine-rich region (residues 4 to 32) that binds 1 mol 
of FAD (noncovalently) near the active site, which is adjacent to a 
second highly conserved glycine-rich region (residues 186 to 213) 
that binds NADPH (or NADH). Other structural motifs have been 
reviewed in detail by Ziegler (2002).

264
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
Like CYP, the FMOs are microsomal enzymes that require O2 
and NADPH (or NADH in some cases) (Lai et al., 2011), and many 
of the reactions catalyzed by FMO also can be catalyzed by CYP. 
However, while CYP catalyzes two sequential one-electron oxida-
tions, FMO catalyzes a single two-electron oxidation (Cashman, 
2008). In contrast to CYP enzymes, FMOs are not readily induced 
or inhibited in humans, such that metabolism of a drug by FMO 
tends to decrease its victim potential (i.e., its potential to be the 
object of drug–drug interactions) (Cashman, 2008; Phillips and 
Shephard, 2017). However, basal expression levels appear to vary as 
much as 20-fold between individuals, with the differences appear-
ing to be caused by mutations in the promoter regions of at least 
FMO1 and FMO3 (Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). Consequently, 
the disposition of a drug primarily metabolized by FMO would 
likely show considerable interindividual variation and, for reasons 
outlined later in this section, infants and young children would 
likely be PMs.
Several in vitro techniques have been developed to distin-
guish reactions catalyzed by FMO from those catalyzed by CYP. 
In general, and in contrast to CYP, FMO is heat labile and can be 
inactivated in the absence of NADPH by warming microsomes 
to 50°C for one minute (Ogilvie et al., 2008). However, even the 
often-used procedure of preincubating human liver microsomes at 
37°C prior to addition of NADPH can cause significant inactiva-
tion of FMO, possibly leading to an underestimation of the role 
of FMO in the metabolism of xenobiotics (Cashman, 2008). By 
comparison, CYP can be inactivated with nonionic detergent, such 
as 1% Emulgen 911, which has a minimal effect on FMO activity. 
The pH optimum for FMO-catalyzed reactions (pH 8 to 10) tends 
to be higher than that for most (but not all) CYP reactions (pH 7 
to 8). Based on the latter approach, a higher rate of formation of 
N-oxides from tertiary amines in microsomal incubations at pH 10 
relative to pH 7.4 provides strong evidence for the role of FMO 
in N-oxide formation (Cashman, 2008). Antibodies raised against 
purified CYP enzymes can be used not only to establish the role of 
CYP in a microsomal reaction but also to identify which particular 
CYP enzyme catalyzes the reaction. In contrast, antibodies raised 
against purified FMO do not inhibit the enzyme. The use of chemi-
cal inhibitors to ascertain the relative contribution of FMO and CYP 
to microsomal reactions is often complicated by a lack of specific-
ity. For example, both cimetidine and SKF 525A, which are well-
recognized CYP inhibitors, are substrates for FMO. Conversely, 
the FMO inhibitor methimazole is known to cause direct inhibi-
tion of CYP2B6 and CYP2C9, and irreversible inhibition (MDI) 
of CYP3A4 (Parkinson et al., 2011). Excellent FMO substrates, 
such as the strong nucleophile mercaptoimidazole, can potentially 
be used as competitive inhibitors of FMO-mediated N-oxidation of 
tertiary amines (Cashman, 2008). Zwitterions, multivalent cations 
such as cadaverine (a diamine), are generally not FMO substrates 
(Krueger et al., 2006). The situation is further complicated by the 
observation that the various forms of FMO differ in their thermal 
stability and sensitivity to detergents and other chemical modulators 
(examples of which are described later in this section).
FMO catalyzes the oxidation of nucleophilic tertiary amines 
to N-oxides, secondary amines to hydroxylamines and nitrones, and 
primary amines to hydroxylamines and oximes. Amphetamine, ben-
zydamine, chlorpromazine, clozapine, guanethidine, imipramine, 
methamphetamine, olanzapine, and tamoxifen are examples of nitro-
gen-containing drugs that are N-oxygenated by FMO (and by CYP 
in most cases). Only sp3-hybridized electron-rich (nucleophilic) 
OCH3
OH
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
× 2
Prostaglandin H synthase
OCH3
O•
2H+, 2e–
× 2
BHA
CH3
OH
CH3 CH3
CH3
BHT
Phenoxyl radical
Quinone methide
Phenoxyl radical
Cytochrome P450
NADPH, H+, O2
NADP+, H2O
CH3
CH3
CH3 CH3
CH3
CH3
CH2
O
CH3
O•
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3 CH3
CH3
Figure 6-40.  Metabolite interaction between the phenolic antioxidants, butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT), and butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA). Note that activa-
tion of BHT to a toxic quinone methide can be catalyzed by cytochrome P450 or, in the presence of BHA, by prostaglandin H synthase (PHS).

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
265
nitrogen atoms—those with pKa(B) values 5 to 10—are substrates 
for N-oxygenation by FMO, hence the preference of FMO for ter-
tiary and cyclic amines. Therefore, in general, FMO N-oxygenates 
tertiary aliphatic amines and aliphatic cyclic amines (CYP can also), 
but FMO does not usually N-oxygenate aromatic amines (pyridines 
and anilines such as clozapine) (Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). 
Heteroaromatics (with an sp2-hybridized nitrogen) and amides 
(which have low basicity [low pKa(B)]) are not N-oxygenated by 
FMO but they may be N-oxygenated by CYP. Thus, CYP can 
N-oxygenate both tertiary/cyclic amines and pyridines. In the case 
of anilines (arylamines), however, CYP (as will peroxidases, but 
rarely FMO) will N-hydroxylate them (Testa and Krämer, 2008, 
2010). As shown in Fig. 6-42, the N-oxygenation of primary and 
secondary aliphatic amines by FMO is more complex. For instance, 
the aliphatic secondary amine methamphetamine (R−NH−CH3) is 
N-oxygenated by FMO3 first to a hydroxylamine (R−NOH−CH3) 
and then to a dihydroxylated intermediate (R−N+(OH)2−CH3) that 
loses water to form a nitrone (R−N+O−CH3). The resulting nitrone 
can spontaneously hydrolyze to a ketone (phenylacetone in this 
case), such that this overall reaction represents an alternative deam-
ination pathway (Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). In the case of 
the aliphatic primary amine, amphetamine (R−CH2−NH2), FMO 
again catalyzes two sequential N-hydroxylation reactions but in this 
case the N-dihydroxylated metabolite R−CH2−N(OH)2 loses water 
to form an oxime (R−CH=NOH). Primary aliphatic amines tend 
to be poor substrates for CYP; in fact, primary alkylamines, such 
as the N-demethylated metabolite of fluoxetine, are metabolically 
stable and potent inhibitors of CYP (discussed later in the section 
“Inhibition of Cytochrome P450”).
FMO also oxygenates several sulfur-containing xenobiot-
ics (such as thiols, thioethers, thiones, and thiocarbamates) and 
phosphines to S- and P-oxides, respectively. Cimetidine and sulin-
dac sulfide are examples of sulfur-containing drugs that are con-
verted to sulfoxides by FMO. As in the case of N-oxygenation, 
S-oxygenation requires a soft nucleophilic heteroatom, such as that 
found in thioethers. Both FMO and CYP can convert thioethers to 
sulfoxides (R1−S−R2 → R1−SO−R2) but only CYP can convert 
sulfoxides to sulfones (R1−SO−R2 → R1−SO2−R2). Electron-
withdrawing groups next to the sulfur (as in the case of sulfoxides 
and many heteroaromatics) decrease the nucleophilicity of the sul-
fur atom and decrease or abolish its oxygenation by FMO, whereas 
electronic-donating groups have the opposite effect, which is why 
thioamides are excellent substrates for S-oxygenation by FMO. Fig. 
6-19 shows how sulindac, a sulfoxide, is reduced to sulindac sul-
fide, only to be oxidized by FMO back to the parent drug in what 
is often called a futile cycle as discussed further below in this sec-
tion and earlier in the section “Sulfoxide and N-Oxide Reduction.” 
Hydrazines, iodides, selenides, and boron-containing compounds 
N
N
C4H9
–O
O
N
N
C4H9
O
O
O
C4H9
N
N
O
O
O
Peroxyl
radical
Carbon-centered
radical
Phenylbutazone
(anionic form of
the enol tautomer)
O2
PHS
–e–
RH
X
XO
O
C4H9
N
N
O
O
HOO
C4H9
N
N
O
O
R•
Xenobiotic cooxidation
•
•
•
Figure 6-41.  Oxidation of phenylbutazone by prostaglandin H synthase (PHS) to a carbon-centered radical and peroxyl radical. Note that the peroxyl radical 
can oxidize xenobiotics (X) in a peroxidative manner.

266
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
are also substrates for FMO. Examples of FMO-catalyzed reactions 
are shown in Fig. 6-43A and B.
In general it is safe to assume that biotransformation reactions 
involving C-oxidation of a xenobiotic by NADPH-fortified liver 
microsomes can be ascribed to CYP, but there are a few cases where 
the reaction is catalyzed by FMO (Fan et al., 2016). For example, 
FMO1 catalyzes the oxidative defluorination of 4-fluoro-N-methyl-
aniline to 4-hydroxy-N-methylaniline (i.e., 4-N-methylaminophenol) 
through the intermediacy of a reactive quinoneimine, as shown in 
Fig. 6-43A (Driscoll et al., 2010; Fan et al., 2016). In the case of 
4-fluoro-N-methylaniline, this oxidative defluorination reaction is 
facilitated by delocalization of the lone pair of electrons on the ani-
line nitrogen. A second example of C-oxidation by FMO involves 
the ability of the reactive C(4a)-hydroperoxyflavin to function as 
an “enzymatic peroxide” to catalyze a Baeyer–Villiger oxidation, 
which involves the insertion of an oxygen atom into a carbon–­
carbon bond next to a carbonyl group (e.g., aldehyde or ketone) 
to form an ester (e.g., oxidation of salicylaldehyde by pig FMO1) 
(Lai et al., 2011). However, this reaction has not been described in 
humans with the notable exception of FMO5 (and only FMO5), 
which mediates the Baeyer–Villiger lactonization of ER-879819, 
the ketone metabolite of the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitor 
E7016 (Lai et al., 2011) and another 4-piperidone-containing com-
pound, namely MRX-1 (Fan et al., 2016). By inserting oxygen next 
to a carbonyl group FMO forms a lactone that can be hydrolyzed to 
a ring-open carboxylic acid and alcohol.
In general, the metabolites produced by FMO are the prod-
ucts of a chemical reaction between a xenobiotic and a peracid 
H
N
CH3
CYP
N-Demethylation
Methamphetamine
Hydroxylamine
Ketone (phenylacetone)
FMO
OH
CH3
CH3
OH
OH
CH3
CH3
CH3
–H2O
H2O
Nitrone
Yes
Deamination
No
Oxime
CH3
N
OH
–H2O, –H+
CH3
H
OH
OH
Hydroxylamine
FMO
FMO
Amphetamine
FMO
OH
CH3
NH2
NH
CH3
O
CH3
CH3
+
N
O –
N
+
N
CH3
N
+
Figure 6-42.  Oxidation of methamphetamine (a secondary amine) and amphetamine (a primary amine) by flavin monooxygenase (FMO). After an initial 
N-hydroxylation of both compounds by FMO, methamphetamine is further converted to a nitrone that undergoes deamination whereas amphetamine is con-
verted to an oxime that does not undergo deamination.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
267
or peroxide, which is consistent with the mechanism of catalysis 
of FMO (discussed later in this section). The reactions catalyzed 
by FMO are generally detoxication reactions, although there are 
exceptions to this rule, which are described later in this section. 
Inasmuch as FMO attacks nucleophilic heteroatoms, it might be 
assumed that substrates for FMO could be predicted from their 
pKa(B) values (i.e., from a measure of their basicity). Although 
there is some truth to this—for example, xenobiotics containing an 
sp3-hybridized nitrogen atom with a pKa(B) of 5 to 10 are generally 
good substrates for FMO—predictions of substrate specificity based 
on pKa(B) values alone are not very reliable presumably because 
steric effects influence access of substrates to the FMO active site, 
which is consistent with the reported lack of rabbit FMO2 activity 
toward imipramine and chlorpromazine (Rettie and Fisher, 1999; 
Krueger et al., 2006).
The mechanism of catalysis by FMO is depicted in Fig. 6-44. 
After the FAD moiety is reduced to FADH2 by NADPH, the oxidized 
cofactor, NADP+, remains bound to the enzyme. FADH2 then binds 
N
CH3
N
N
N
CH3
N
O
N
O
Nicotine
Trimethylamine
Trimethylamine-N-oxide
Nicotine-1′N-oxide
Tertiary amines  (e.g., Nicotine, Trimethylamine, Chlorpromazine, Fluphenazine, Cocaine)
Oxidative deﬂuorination  (e.g., 4-Fluoro-N-methylaniline)
NH
F
FMO
H3C
H3C
H3C
CH3
CH3
H3C
N
F
HO
4-Fluoro-N-methylaniline
NH
OH
4-Hydroxy-N-methylaniline
Hydrazines  (e.g., Acetylhydrazine, Isoniazid, Dimethylhydrazine, Procarbazine, Benzylhydrazine)
NH2
NH
C
CH3
O
NH
N
C
CH3
O
C
CH3
O
C
+
CH3
O
NHOH
NH
C
CH3
O
[O]
–H2O
–N2
Acetylhydrazine
A
N-hydroxy-
acetylhydrazine
Covalent binding
Reactive intermediates
Diazene
–HF
N
O
+2H+, 2e–
••
•
FMO
FMO
FMO
Figure 6-43.  Examples of reactions catalyzed by flavin monooxygenases (FMO). (A) Nitrogen-containing xenobiotics.

268
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
oxygen to produce a peroxide (i.e., the C(4a)-hydroperoxyflavin of 
FAD). The FAD hydroperoxide is relatively stable, probably because 
the active site of FMO comprises non-nucleophilic, lipophilic 
amino acid residues, and this is thought to be the enzyme’s resting 
state (i.e., the FAD hydroperoxide is the form in which FMO exists 
prior to substrate binding). During the oxygenation of xenobiotics 
(depicted as X → XO in Fig. 6-44), the nucleophilic heteroatom (N 
or S) attacks the terminal oxygen of the C(4a)-hydroperoxyflavin 
resulting in oxygen transfer to the xenobiotic (to form an N-oxide 
or sulfoxide) and formation of C(4a)-hydroxyflavin. From the latter 
Thiols  (e.g., Cysteamine)
Cysteamine
(thiol)
Cystamine
(disulﬁde)
Sulﬁde  (e.g., Cimetidine, Aldicarb, Phorate)
N
N
H
CH2
CH3
S
CH2CH2NHCNHCH3
NCN
N
N
H
CH2
CH3
S
CH2CH2NHCNHCH3
NCN
O
Cimetidine
Cimetidine S-oxide
Thioamides  (e.g., Thiobenzamide, Thioacetamide, Methimazole, Propylthiouracil)
Phosphines  (e.g., Diphenylmethylphosphine)
Diphenylmethylphosphine
Diphenylmethylphosphine oxide
P
CH3
P
CH3
O
Thiobenzamide
Thiobenzamide S-oxide
S
NH2
O–
FMO
Thiobenzamide S,S-dioxide
Iminosulﬁnic acid
Oxathiirane
intermediate
Covalent
binding
NH2
O
S
Benzamide
O
NH
NH
R
CN
Benzonitrile
[S]
RNH2
[H2SO2]
[H2SO2]
H2O
[H2SO2]
H2N
H2N
H2N
H2N
H2N
SH
FMO
S
OH
Sulfenic acid
+
S
S
SH
Non-enzymatic
SO2
NH2
SO2H
NH
+S
NH2
NH2
B
FMO
FMO
(B) Sulfur- and phosphorus-containing xenobiotics.
Figure 6-43.  (Continued)

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
269
step, it is understandable why the metabolites produced by FMO 
are generally the products of a chemical reaction between a xenobi-
otic and a peroxide or peracid. The final step in the catalytic cycle 
involves dehydration of C(4a)-hydroxyflavin (which restores FAD 
to the ground state) and release of NADP+. This final step is impor-
tant because it is rate-limiting, and it occurs after substrate oxygen-
ation. Consequently, this step determines the upper limit of the rate 
of substrate oxidation. Therefore, all good substrates for FMO are 
converted to products at roughly the same maximum rate (i.e., Vmax 
is determined by the final step in the catalytic cycle).
Binding of NADP+ to FMO during catalysis is important 
because it prevents the reduction of oxygen to H2O2. In the absence 
of bound NADP+, FMO functions as an NADPH oxidase that con-
sumes NADPH and oxygen to produce H2O2. In the presence of 
substrate, NADPH and oxygen, recombinant human FMO1, FMO2, 
and FMO3 release 30% to 50% of the oxygen consumed as H2O2 
(Siddens et al., 2014). Functional FMO2 (FMO2*1) is expressed in 
the lung of individuals of African (up to 49%) and Hispanic (2% to 
7%) decent but is not expressed in Caucasians or Asians due to a 
mutation that introduces a premature stop codon and results in the 
synthesis of a truncated and inactive enzyme, namely FMO2*2 (dis-
cussed later in this section). A SNP in the wild-type (active) form 
of FMO2*1 resulting in a single amino acid substitution, namely 
Ser195 → Leu195, increases H2O2 production by an order of magni-
tude (Siddens et al., 2014). Whether hydrogen peroxide produced 
by FMO, especially by the FMO2*1 variant S195L expressed in 
the lung of certain ethnic groups, has toxicological consequences 
is not known.
The oxygenation of substrates by FMO does not lead to inacti-
vation of the enzyme, even though some of the products are strong 
electrophiles capable of binding covalently to critical and non-
critical nucleophiles such as protein and GSH, respectively. The 
products of the oxygenation reactions catalyzed by FMO and/or 
the oxygenation of the same substrates by CYP can inactivate CYP. 
For example, the FMO-dependent S-oxygenation of spironolactone 
thiol (which is formed by the deacetylation of spironolactone by 
carboxylesterases, as shown in Fig. 6-8) leads to the formation of 
an electrophilic sulfenic acid (R−SH → R−SOH) that can undergo 
redox cycling, or be further converted to the reactive sulfinic acid 
(R−SO2H) or sulfanyl radical (HS•) that inactivates CYP and binds 
covalently to other proteins (Decker et al., 1991; Krueger et al., 
2006; Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010).
In humans, FMO plays a role in the biotransformation of 
several drugs (e.g., albendazole, amphetamine, benzydamine, 
chlorpheniramine, cimetidine, clindamycin, clozapine, codeine, 
dasatinib, deprenyl, ethionamide, fenbendazole, guanethidine, ito-
pride, methimazole, olanzapine, olopatadine, pargyline, ranitidine, 
sulindac sulfide, tamoxifen, tazarotene, thiacetazone, thiorida-
zine, tozasertib, vandetanib, voriconazole, xanomeline, zimeldine, 
hydrazines such as procarbazine, and various dimethylaminoalkyl 
phenothiazine derivatives such as chlorpromazine and imipramine) 
and other xenobiotics (e.g., aldicarb, cocaine, diallyl disulfide, N,N-
dimethylaniline, disulfoton, fenthion, methyl-p-tolyl sulfide, meth-
amphetamine, nicotine, phorate, thioacetamide, thiobenzamide, 
and tyramine), and in the activation of 3,3′-iminodipropionitrile to 
the neurotoxic N-hydroxy-3,3′-iminodipropionitrile (Ballard et al., 
2007; Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010; Wang and Tompkins, 2008; 
Francois et al., 2009; Weil et al., 2010; Strolin-Benedetti, 2011). 
As discussed later in this section, FMO also plays a role in the 
metabolism of some endogenous substrates such as trimethylamine 
(TMA), cysteamine, cysteine conjugates, methionine, and lipoic 
acid (6,8-dithiooctanoic acid).
The major FMO in human liver microsomes, FMO3, is pre-
dominantly if not solely responsible for converting (S)-nicotine 
to (S)-nicotine N-1′-oxide (which is one of the reactions shown in 
Fig. 6-43A). The reaction proceeds stereospecifically; only the 
trans isomer is produced by FMO3, and this is the only isomer of 
(S)-nicotine N-1′-oxide excreted in the urine of cigarette smokers or 
individuals wearing a nicotine patch (Cashman and Zhang, 2006). 
Therefore, the urinary excretion of trans-(S)-nicotine N-1′-oxide 
can be used as an in vivo probe/index of FMO3 activity in humans. 
However, common polymorphisms in FMO1 (e.g., FMO1*6) have 
been shown to be associated with nicotine dependence in European 
patients (Hinrichs et al., 2011). Furthermore, recombinant human 
FMO1 catalyzes the N-oxidation of (S)-nicotine approximately 
fourfold more efficiently than recombinant human FMO3, and 
does so nonstereospecifically (i.e., 55:45 cis:trans ratio of (S)-
nicotine N-1′-oxide, similar to the situation with pig, rat, and rabbit 
FMO1), whereas FMO3 forms predominantly the trans-(S)-nicotine 
N-1′-oxide (as described above) (Hinrichs et al., 2011). FMO1 is 
extrahepatic, with high expression levels in the kidney, and some 
expression in the intestine and brain. If FMO1 contributes signifi-
cantly to the metabolism of nicotine in the brains of smokers, it is 
possible that the N-oxide formed by FMO1 could be reduced back 
to nicotine in the brain by AO, a process known as retro-reduction 
or futile cycling (Hinrichs et al., 2011).
FMO3 is also the principal enzyme involved in the 
S-oxygenation of cimetidine, an H2-antagonist that was once widely 
used in the treatment of gastric ulcers and other acid-related disor-
ders (this reaction is shown in Fig. 6-43B). Cimetidine is stereose-
lectively sulfoxidated by FMO3 to an 84:16 mixture of (+) and (−) 
enantiomers, which closely matches the 75:25 enantiomeric compo-
sition of cimetidine S-oxide in human urine. Therefore, the urinary 
excretion of cimetidine S-oxide, like that of (S)-nicotine N-1′-oxide, 
is an in vivo indicator of FMO3 activity in humans.
Sulindac is a sulfoxide that exists in two stereochemical forms 
(as do most sulfoxides), and a racemic mixture of R- and S-sulindac 
is used therapeutically as an NSAID. As shown in Fig. 6-19, the 
sulfoxide group in sulindac is reduced to the corresponding sulfide 
(which is achiral), which is then oxidized back to sulindac by retro-
reduction (futile cycling), as discussed in the section “Sulfoxide 
and N-Oxide Reduction.” In the human liver, the sulfoxidation 
FMO
FAD
FMO
FADH2
NADP+
FMO
FADHOOH
NADP+
FMO
FADHOH
NADP+
X
O2
NADPH
+H+
NADP+
H2O
XO
Figure 6-44.  Catalytic cycle of flavin monooxygenase (FMO). X and XO 
are the xenobiotic substrate and oxygenated product, respectively. The 
C(4a)-hydroperoxyflavin and C(4a)-hydroxyflavin of FAD are depicted as 
FADHOOH and FADHOH, respectively.

270
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
of sulindac sulfide is catalyzed by FMO3 with little or no contribu-
tion from CYP. At relatively low substrate concentrations (30 μM), 
FMO3 converts sulindac sulfide to R- and S-sulindac in an 87:13 
ratio (Hamman et al., 2000). Consequently, although sulindac is 
administered as a racemic mixture (i.e., a 1:1 mixture of R- and 
S-enantiomers), the reduction of this drug to the corresponding 
sulfide and its preferential sulfoxidation by FMO3 to R-sulindac 
results in stereoselective enrichment of R-sulindac in plasma 
and urine.
This retro-reduction of sulfide S-oxides or amine N-oxides 
formed by FMO (or CYP) back to the parent may occur more 
often than is currently recognized, but it can be observed in vitro 
when the levels of an N- or S-oxide metabolite increase rapidly 
at first but then quickly reach a plateau as a balance between oxi-
dation and reduction is reached (Cashman, 2008). There are at 
least seven systems that can catalyze the retro-reduction of FMO 
metabolites: (1) AO, (2) quinone reductase, (3) hemoglobin itself 
or other heme-containing proteins such as CYP (which may or may 
not be enzymatically catalyzed), (4) xanthine oxidoreductase, (5) 
NADPH–cytochrome P450 reductase, (6) the mARC with NADH 
cytochrome b5/cytochrome b5, and (7) gut microbiota (Cashman, 
2008; Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). For instance, amitripty-
line N-oxide, imipramine N-oxide, cyclobenzaprine N-oxide, and 
brucine N-oxide are reduced back to the parent tertiary amine by 
quinone reductase, heme, and/or gut microbiota (Cashman, 2008; 
Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). Nicotine N-oxide is retro-reduced 
to nicotine by AO (Cashman, 2008). Recombinant human CYP1A1, 
CYP2A6, CYP2D6, and CYP3A4 can also retro-reduce tamoxifen 
N-oxide to the tertiary amine (Cashman, 2008). The retro-reduction 
of TMA N-oxide to TMA by gut microbiota is discussed later in this 
section (Cashman, 2008; Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010).
In the case of sulindac sulfide, stereoselective sulfoxidation 
occurs not only with human FMO3 (the major drug-metabolizing 
FMO in the human liver) but also with porcine FMO1 (the major 
form expressed in pig liver) and rabbit FMO2 (the major form 
expressed in rabbit lung) (Hamman et al., 2000). However, this 
conformity is the exception, rather than the rule. For example, 
in contrast to the stereoselective oxygenation of (S)-nicotine and 
cimetidine by human FMO3 (see above), FMO1 (which is the major 
FMO expressed in pig, rat, and rabbit liver) converts (S)-nicotine to 
a 1:1 mixture of cis- and trans-(S)-nicotine N-1′-oxide, and simi-
larly converts cimetidine to a 1:1 mixture of (+) and (−) cimetidine 
S-oxide, respectively. Therefore, statements concerning the role of 
FMO in the disposition of xenobiotics in humans may not apply to 
other species, or vice versa.
Several sulfur-containing xenobiotics are oxygenated by FMO 
to electrophilic reactive intermediates. Such xenobiotics include 
various thiols, thioamides, 2-mercaptoimidazoles, thiocarbamates, 
and thiocarbamides. The electrophilic metabolites of these xenobi-
otics do not inactivate FMO, but they can covalently modify and 
inactivate neighboring proteins, including CYP. Some of these same 
xenobiotics are substrates for CYP, and their oxygenation to elec-
trophilic metabolites leads to inactivation of CYP, a process known 
variously as metabolism-dependent inhibition, mechanism-based 
inhibition, and suicide inactivation. 2-Mercaptoimidazoles undergo 
sequential S-oxygenation reactions by FMO, first to sulfenic acids 
and then to sulfinic acids (R-SH → R-SOH → R-SO2H). These elec-
trophilic metabolites, such as the sulfenic acid metabolite ­produced 
from spironolactone thiol (see above), bind to critical nucleophiles 
(such as proteins) or interact with GSH to form disulfides. The thio-
carbamate functionality present in numerous agricultural chemicals 
is converted by FMO to S-oxides (sulfoxides), which can be fur-
ther oxygenated to sulfones. These reactions involve S-oxygenation 
adjacent to a ketone, which produces strong electrophilic acylating 
agents, which may be responsible for the toxicity of many thiocar-
bamate herbicides and fungicides. The hepatotoxicity of thiobenza-
mide is dependent on S-oxidation by FMO and/or CYP. As shown in 
Fig. 6-43B, the S-oxidation of thiobenzamide produces an S-oxide, 
which can rearrange to an oxathiirane (a three-membered ring of 
carbon, sulfur, and oxygen) on photolysis or thermolysis. However, 
such oxathiiranes are readily reduced back to the S-oxide. In vivo, 
the S,S-dioxide is more likely to form, which readily tautomerizes 
to iminosulfinic acid, binds covalently to protein (which leads to 
hepatocellular necrosis), or rearranges to benzamide, a reaction 
known as oxidative group transfer. In general, thiols with a negative 
charge on the S atom (e.g., dithioacids) tend to be good substrates 
of FMOs, whereas less nucleophilic S atoms tend to be oxidized by 
CYP (Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010).
Endogenous FMO substrates include cysteamine, which is 
oxidized to the disulfide, cystamine, and TMA, which is converted 
to TMA N-oxide (Fig. 6-43). By converting cysteamine to cysta-
mine, FMO may serve to produce a low-molecular weight-disulfide 
exchange agent, which may participate in the formation of disulfide 
bridges during peptide synthesis or the renaturation of proteins. By 
converting TMA to TMA N-oxide, FMO3 (but neither FMO1 nor 
FMO5) converts a malodorous and volatile dietary product derived 
from the reduction of dietary TMA N-oxide by gut microbiota (e.g., 
from choline, lecithin, carnitine, and especially fish, which contain 
large amounts of TMA N-oxide) to an inoffensive metabolite. TMA 
smells of rotting fish (because bacteria in dead fish rapidly con-
vert the high levels of TMA N-oxide to TMA), and people who are 
genetically deficient in FMO3 suffer from trimethylaminuria or fish 
odor syndrome, which is caused by the excretion of TMA in urine, 
sweat, and breath (Ayesh and Smith, 1992; Phillips and Shephard, 
2008). Although the lack of functional FMO3 (and hence trimethyl-
aminuria) occurs only rarely (e.g., about 1% of British Caucasians), 
it is now known to be caused by one of at least 30 mutations that 
decrease or abolish FMO3 activity (Cashman et al., 2000; Cashman 
and Zhang, 2006; Phillips and Shephard, 2008). As might be 
expected, trimethylaminuria is associated with an impairment of 
nicotine N-oxidation and other pathways of drug biotransformation 
that are primarily catalyzed by FMO3 (Rettie and Fisher, 1999). For 
instance, benzydamine N-oxygenation and oxidation of sulindac 
sulfide has been correlated with FMO3 genotype in trimethylamin-
urics (Cashman and Zhang, 2006; Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010; 
Francois et al., 2009). Some polymorphisms decrease while oth-
ers increase the activity of FMO3 toward certain substrates, while 
others affect the promoter region and alter the amount of enzyme 
expressed (Phillips and Shephard, 2008).
Humans and other mammals express five different flavin 
monooxygenases (FMO1, FMO2, FMO3, FMO4, and FMO5) in a 
species- and tissue-specific manner, as shown in Table 6-13, based 
on mRNA levels, which may not reflect protein levels (Cashman, 
1995; Cashman and Zhang, 2006; Zhang and Cashman, 2006). The 
major hepatic FMOs expressed in humans are FMO3 and FMO5, 
whereas FMO1 is the major FMO expressed in the rat, rabbit, and 
pig liver. In humans FMO1 is expressed in the fetal liver and is 
very rapidly downregulated after birth (although not in kidney) 
while hepatic FMO3 is gradually upregulated over months to 
years, in contrast to other mammals (Shephard et al., 2007; Phillips 
and Shephard, 2008; Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). This delay 
between the hepatic silencing of FMO1 and expression of FMO3 
means that most infants probably have very little drug-metabolizing 
FMO present in the liver for several months (Shimizu et al., 2011). 
In addition, given the fact that apparently only FMO3 catalyzes the 
N-oxidation of TMA produced from gut microbiota, this begs the

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
271
question of why all infants do not have fish odor syndrome. In a 
cohort of six patients with genetically confirmed trimethylaminuria, 
the average age of presentation was 6 (±3.6) years (Chalmers et al., 
2006). As a genetic deficiency of FMO3, trimethylaminuria is obvi-
ously present from birth. However, the phenotype only becomes 
apparent when an affected child is weaned, and foods with high 
amounts of choline (e.g., eggs and liver) or TMA N-oxide (e.g., 
seafood) are introduced (Chalmers et al., 2006). Diagnostic delay 
also presumably leads to the higher than expected average age of 
presentation. Transient trimethylaminuria can however occur in 
neonates and infants if their diet sporadically contains higher than 
usual levels of choline (Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010).
An epidemiological link between circulating levels of TMA 
N-oxide and the risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD) has raised 
the possibility that TMA N-oxide is proatherogenic (Fennema et al., 
2016; Velasquez et al., 2016; Cho and Caudill, 2017). However, the 
circulating levels of TMA N-oxide are influenced by diet, kidney 
function, the composition of intestinal microbiota, and the activity 
of FMO3; hence, it is not known whether TMA N-oxide is a cause 
or simply a biomarker for CVD. Following up on the interesting 
link between FMO3/TMA N-oxide and CVD, Miao et al. (2015) 
discovered that selective loss of hepatic insulin receptors (in liver 
insulin receptor knockout or LIRKO mice) results in more than 
1000-fold increase in FMO3 mRNA levels and a large increase in 
FMO3 protein. With livers unresponsive to insulin, LIRKO mice 
are glucose intolerant and have elevated hepatic levels of several 
gluconeogenic enzymes, all of which are reversed by antisense 
oligonucleotide knockdown of FMO3. Knockdown of FMO3 in 
LIRKO mice results in a decrease in Foxo1 levels, a key regulator 
of gluconeogenic enzymes. Knockdown of FMO3 also attenuates 
atherosclerosis in LDL knockout mice (Shih et al., 2015). These 
results suggest that, by regulating Foxo1 signaling, FMO3 plays a 
role in the development of insulin resistance and atherosclerosis in 
mice (Schugar and Brown, 2015). However, it is not clear why the 
marked gender difference in FMO3 levels in sexually mature mice, 
where FMO3 is a female-predominant enzyme, has no impact on 
glucose tolerance or CVD in mice. Furthermore, in humans who 
are homozygous for a genetic polymorphism (Glu158→Lys158) that 
reduces FMO3 activity, which would be expected to protect against 
atherogenesis, the risk of chronic CVD was unchanged in men and 
increased (not decreased) in women (odds ratio 1.7) (Bushueva 
et al., 2015). FMO5 knockout mice do not exhibit the age-dependent 
increases in glucose and insulin levels characteristic of wild-type 
mice; that is, FMO5 knockout mice remain glucose tolerant and 
insulin sensitive as they age and even when fed a high-fat diet 
(Scott et al., 2017). FMO5 is expressed in the small intestine and 
the resistance of FMO5 knockout mice to age-dependent and diet-
induced weight gain, obesity, and glucose intolerance resembles 
that observed in germ-free mice (mice lacking intestinal microbi-
ota), leading Scott et al. (2017) to propose that FMO5 plays a role 
in sensing or responding to gut microbiota.
Previously, FMO3 has been considered to be the dominant 
FMO in the human liver, and although FMO5 expression is higher, 
it has activity toward fewer xenobiotic substrates, and likely plays 
only a minor role in xenobiotic metabolism, with the exception of 
E7016, the poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitor noted above 
(Cashman and Zhang, 2006; Lai et al., 2011). FMO5 is also the most 
highly expressed FMO in the small intestine, in terms of mRNA. 
In humans, high levels of FMO1 are expressed in the kidney, and 
low levels of FMO2 are expressed in the lungs of Caucasians and 
Asians.
Lung microsomes from most mammals, particularly rabbit, 
mouse, monkey, and other nonhuman primates, contain high levels 
of functional FMO2, and of the FMO transcripts detected in the 
human lung, the FMO2 transcript is found at the highest levels by 
far (Zhang and Cashman, 2006). The uncharacteristically low level 
of active FMO2 in human lung is caused by a mutation (a C → T 
transition at codon 472 in exon 9 [rs6661174]) in the major human 
Table 6-13  
Putative Tissue Levels of Flavin Monooxygenase (FMO) Enzymes Present in Animals and Humans
FMO1
FMO2
FMO3
FMO4
FMO5
Liver
Mouse
Low
None
High
Unknown
Low
Rat
High
Unknown
Low
Unknown
Low
Rabbit
High
None
Low
Unknown
Low
Human*
Trace
Low
Very high
High
Very high
Kidney
Mouse
High
Unknown
High
Unknown
Low
Rat
High
Unknown
High
High
Low
Rabbit
Low
Low
Trace
High
Low
Human*
High
High
Low
Medium
Medium
Lung
Mouse
Unknown
High
Trace
None
Low
Rat
Unknown
Unknown
Unknown
None
Low
Rabbit
Unknown
Very high
Unknown
None
None
Human*
Low
Variable†
Medium
Low
Medium
Small intestine
Human*
Low
Low
Trace
Trace
High
*Human tissue levels are based on FMO mRNA levels.
† FMO2 mRNA levels in human lung are high, but this mRNA is not translated into functional enzyme due to the presence of a truncation mutation in 
Caucasians and Asians. Approximately 33% of sub-Saharan Africans, 26% of African Americans, 7% of Puerto Ricans, and 2% of Mexicans have one 
normal allele and express a functional protein (Veeramah et al., 2008).
SOURCES: Data adapted from Cashman and Zhang (2006) and Zhang and Cashman (2006).

272
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
FMO2*2A allele found in essentially all Caucasian and Asian popu-
lations, which results in a premature stop codon and the synthesis 
of a nonfunctional, truncated protein (one lacking the last 64 amino 
acid residues from the C-terminus) (Dolphin et al., 1998; Veeramah 
et al., 2008; Francois et al., 2009). In contrast, 26% of African 
Americans, 7% of Puerto Ricans, and 2% of Mexicans have one 
normal allele and express a functional protein (Cashman and Zhang, 
2006). In sub-Saharan Africa, approximately 33% of individuals 
possess at least one functional FMO2*1 allele, and in some subpop-
ulations the incidence approaches 50% (Veeramah et al., 2008). In 
pulmonary microsomes from individuals who express one or more 
functional FMO2 alleles, the protein level is equal to or greater than 
that of CYP enzymes. Functional FMO2 has high activity toward 
thioureas and thioamides, which implies that individuals who 
express a functional FMO2 may be more susceptible to the toxic 
effects of sulfenic or sulfinic acids formed from S-oxygenation of 
phenylthiourea, α-naphthylthiourea, and ethylenethiourea, whereas 
Caucasians and Asians may be more susceptible to thioether-con-
taining organophosphate pesticides such as phorate and disulfoton, 
for which the parent compounds are more toxic than products of the 
FMO2-catalyzed reaction (Cashman and Zhang, 2006; Veeramah 
et al., 2008). FMO2 has also been shown to catalyze S-oxygenation 
of the second-line antitubercular drugs ethionamide and thiacet-
azone, leading to the formation of reactive metabolites such as the 
sulfenic and sulfinic acids, carbodiimide derivatives, and S-oxides 
(Francois et al., 2009). Because these second-line antitubercular 
drugs are prodrugs that must be converted by the mycobacteria 
in FMO-like reactions to the reactive products, it is possible that 
administration to individuals with at least one FMO2*1 allele could 
decrease their efficacy and increase pulmonary toxicity. Finally, as 
noted earlier in this section, an allelic variant of FMO2*1 functions 
as an efficient NADPH oxidase and produces H2O2 at much higher 
rates than the wild-type enzyme. The toxicological consequences 
of this genetic polymorphism, which would be expected to increase 
oxidative stress in the lung, are not known.
FMO4 is expressed at low levels in the brain of several mam-
malian species, where it might terminate the action of several cen-
trally active drugs and other xenobiotics. It is unstable, however, 
which makes its characterization somewhat difficult (Cashman and 
Zhang, 2006).
The various forms of FMO are distinct gene products with dif-
ferent physical properties and substrate specificities. For example, 
FMO2 N-oxygenates n-octylamine, whereas such long aliphatic pri-
mary amines are not substrates for FMO1, although they stimulate 
its activity toward other substrates (in some cases causing a change 
in stereospecificity). Conversely, short-chain tertiary amines, such 
as chlorpromazine, orphenadrine, and imipramine, are substrates 
for FMO1 but not FMO2. FMO2 exhibits no activity toward 
phenothiazine derivatives with only a three-carbon side chain or 
1,3-diphenylthiourea (Krueger et al., 2006). FMO3 is highly selec-
tive in the N-oxygenation of TMA, whereas FMO5 is selective for 
the N-oxygenation of short-chain aliphatic primary amines such 
as N-octylamine, but has little activity toward other typical FMO 
substrates, with the exception of E7016, the poly(ADP-ribose) 
polymerase inhibitor noted previously (Krueger et al., 2006; Lai 
et al., 2011). The substrate specificity of FMO4 also is somewhat 
restricted. Certain substrates are oxygenated stereospecifically by 
one FMO enzyme but not another. For example, FMO2 and FMO3 
convert (S)-nicotine exclusively to trans-(S)-nicotine N-1′-oxide, 
whereas the N-oxides of (S)-nicotine produced by FMO1 are a 1:1 
mixture of cis and trans isomers. FMO2 is heat stable under condi-
tions that completely inactivate FMO1, and FMO2 is resistant to 
anionic detergents that inactivate FMO1. Low concentrations of bile 
acids, such as cholate, stimulate FMO activity in rat and mouse liver 
microsomes but inhibit FMO activity in the rabbit and pig liver.
The FMO enzymes expressed in liver microsomes are not under 
the same regulatory control as CYP enzymes. In rats, the expression 
of FMO1 is suppressed rather than induced by treatment with phe-
nobarbital or 3-methylcholanthrene (although some studies point to a 
modest [about threefold] induction of rat FMO1 by 3-methylcholan-
threne). Indole-3-carbinol, which induces the same CYP enzymes as 
3-methylcholanthrene, causes a marked decrease in FMO activity in 
the rat liver and intestine. A similar decrease in FMO3 activity occurs 
in human volunteers following the consumption of large amounts 
of Brussels sprouts, which contain high levels of indole-3-carbinol 
and related indoles. The decrease in FMO3 activity may result from 
direct inhibition of FMO3 by indole-3-carbinol and its derivatives 
rather than from an actual decrease in enzyme levels (Cashman, 
1999). Increased levels of nitric oxide (NO), as occurs during acute 
inflammation (e.g., sepsis or endotoxemia), which activates nitric 
oxide synthase-2 (NOS-2), can inhibit FMO (as well as CYP) 
(Mitchell, 2008). However, AhR agonists, such as dioxin, PCB 77 
(3,3′,4,4′-tetrachlorobiphenyl), and PCB 126 (3,3′,4,4′,5-pentachlo-
robiphenyl), induce FMO2 and FMO3 mRNA levels in male mice by 
30- and 80-fold, respectively, with much smaller increases in FMO 
activity or protein levels (Tijet et al., 2006; Petriello et al., 2016).
The levels of FMO3 and, to a lesser extent, the levels of FMO1 
in mouse liver microsomes are sexually differentiated (female > 
male) due to suppression of expression by testosterone. The oppo-
site is true of FMO1 levels in rat liver microsomes, the expression 
of which is positively regulated by testosterone and negatively 
regulated by estradiol. In pregnant rabbits, lung FMO2 is positively 
regulated by progesterone and/or corticosteroids.
Species differences in the relative expression of FMO and 
CYP appear to determine differences in the toxicity of the pyrroli-
zidine alkaloids, senecionine, retrorsine, and monocrotaline. These 
compounds are detoxified by FMO, which catalyzes the formation 
of tertiary amine N-oxides, but are activated by CYP, which oxi-
dizes these alkaloids to pyrroles that generate toxic electrophiles 
through the loss of substituents on the pyrrolizidine nucleus (details 
of which appear in the section “Cytochrome P450”). Rats have a 
high pyrrole-forming CYP activity and a low N-oxide-forming 
FMO activity, whereas the opposite is true of guinea pigs. This 
likely explains why pyrrolizidine alkaloids are highly toxic to rats 
but not to guinea pigs. Many of the reactions catalyzed by FMO 
are also catalyzed by CYP, but differences in the oxidation of pyr-
rolizidine alkaloids by FMO and CYP illustrate that this is not 
always the case. Species differences in the levels of FMO can also 
complicate the findings of preclinical toxicology and metabolism 
studies because most toxicologically useful small animal species 
express FMO1 as the dominant hepatic FMO in contrast to human, 
in which FMO3 is the dominant form (Cashman, 2008). However, 
one animal model that may be more similar to the human hepatic 
expression of FMO is the female mouse, which has relatively high 
levels of FMO3 and FMO5 (Cashman, 2008).
Cytochrome P450
General Features, Reactions, and Catalytic Cycle  Of all the 
xenobiotic-biotransforming enzymes, the CYP enzyme system 
ranks first in terms of catalytic versatility and the sheer number of 
xenobiotics it detoxifies or activates to reactive intermediates. The 
highest levels of CYP enzymes involved in xenobiotic biotrans-
formation are found in liver endoplasmic reticulum (microsomes), 
but CYP enzymes are present in virtually all tissues. Some of the 
so-called microsomal CYP enzymes are also located on the inner 
membrane of mitochondria, the importance of which is discussed

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
273
in the section “CYP2E1.” CYP enzymes play a very important role 
in determining the intensity and duration of action of drugs, and 
they also play a key role in the detoxication of xenobiotics. CYP 
enzymes in the liver and extrahepatic tissues play important roles 
in the activation of xenobiotics to toxic and/or tumorigenic metabo-
lites. The catalytic versatility of CYP enzymes is apparent from 
Table 6-5, which shows some of the many chemical groups that can 
be metabolized by CYP.
Microsomal and mitochondrial CYP enzymes play key roles 
in the biosynthesis or catabolism of steroid hormones, bile acids, 
fat-soluble vitamins such as vitamins A and D, fatty acids, and eico-
sanoids such as prostaglandins, thromboxane, prostacyclin, and leu-
kotrienes, which underscores the catalytic versatility of CYP.
The human CYP superfamily contains 55 functional genes and 
60 pseudogenes (Zhou et al., 2009a; Nelson, 2009a; Guengerich 
et al., 2010). Many sources place the number of functional genes at 
57; however, the two additional genes, namely, CYP2A7 (originally 
named IIA4) and CYP4B1, encode enzymes incapable of incorpo-
rating heme, rendering them catalytically inactive (note, however, 
that functional CYP4B1 is expressed in other mammalian species) 
(Yamano et al., 1990; Ding et al., 1995; Baer and Rettie, 2006). As 
shown in Table 6-14, the 55 human CYP enzymes can be broadly 
categorized on the basis of their role in (1) xenobiotic biotrans-
formation, (2) fatty acid/eicosanoid hydroxylation/epoxidation, 
(3) steroidogenesis, (4) bile acid synthesis, vitamin D activation/
inactivation, (5) retinoic acid metabolism, and (6) unknown func-
tion (a diminishing group of so-called orphan enzymes). In several 
cases, there is no clear functional distinction in terms of endobiotic 
and xenobiotic metabolism because, as noted in Table 6-14, there 
are many examples of CYP enzymes playing an important role in 
the metabolism of both an endobiotic and a drug or other xenobi-
otic. CYP2J2 and, in animals, CYP4B1 are examples of enzymes 
that ride the xenobiotic–endobiotic fence. In terms of endobiotic 
metabolism, CYP enzymes play a role in both catabolism and 
anabolism (several different CYP enzymes play a role in steroid 
hormone and bile acid synthesis). For example, CYP enzymes both 
activate vitamin D3 to 1α,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25-(OH)2-D3) 
(CYP2R1, CYP2J2, CYP3A4, CYP27A1, and CYP27B1) and inac-
tivate the active metabolite (CYP24A1 and CYP3A4). Arachidonic 
acid is epoxidated by CYP2C8, CYP2C9, and especially CYP2J2 
to vasodilatory epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs) but is converted 
by ω-hydroxylation to the vasoconstrictor 20-hydroxyeicosatet-
raenoic acid (20-HETE) by various CYP4A and CYP4F enzymes. 
The major xenobiotic-biotransforming CYP enzymes in human 
liver microsomes belong to families 1, 2, and 3, which are shown 
in Table 6-15 along with their homologs in the nonclinical species 
widely used in drug safety testing.
All CYP enzymes are heme-containing proteins. In some 
cases, such as many members of the CYP4 family, the heme moi-
ety is covalently attached to the protein but in most other cases it 
is attached noncovalently (Ortiz de Montellano, 2008). The heme 
iron in CYP is usually in the ferric (FeIII) state. When reduced to 
the ferrous (FeII) state, CYP can bind ligands such as O2 and car-
bon monoxide (CO). The complex between ferrous CYP and CO 
absorbs light maximally at 450 nm, from which CYP derives its 
name (Pigment 450). The absorbance maximum of the CO com-
plex differs slightly among different CYP enzymes and ranges from 
447 to 452 nm. All other hemoproteins that bind CO absorb light 
maximally at about 420 nm. The unusual absorbance maximum 
of CYP is due to an unusual fifth ligand to the heme (a cysteine 
Table 6-14  
Classification of the 55 Functional Human CYP Enzymes
XENOBIOTICS
FATTY ACIDS/
EICOSANOIDS
STEROIDOGENIC
BILE ACIDS
VITAMIN D
RETINOIC 
ACID
UNKNOWN
CYP1A1
CYP2F1
CYP2U1
CYP11A1
CYP7A1
CYP2R1
CYP26A1
CYP4A22
CYP1A2
CYP2J2*,†
CYP4A11
CYP11B1
CYP7B1
CYP24A1
CYP26B1
CYP4X1
CYP1B1
CYP2S1
CYP4F2‡,§
CYP11B2
CYP8B1
CYP26C1**
CYP20A1
CYP2A6
CYP2W1
CYP4F3§
CYP17A1
CYP27A1†
CYP27B1
CYP27C1
CYP2A13
CYP3A4†,††
CYP4F8
CYP19A1
CYP39A1
CYP2B6
CYP3A5
CYP4F11
CYP21A2
CYP46A1
CYP2C8*
CYP3A7
CYP4F12§
CYP51A1‡‡
CYP2C9
CYP3A43
CYP4F22
CYP2C18
CYP4V2
CYP2C19
CYP4Z1
CYP2D6
CYP5A1§§
CYP2E1
CYP8A1***
*Also involved in fatty acid and eicosanoid metabolism.
†Also involved in vitamin D metabolism.
‡Also involved in vitamin E and vitamin K metabolism.
§Also involved in xenobiotic metabolism.
**Also involved in retinoic acid metabolism.
††Also involved in bile acid synthesis.
‡‡Also involved in cholesterol biosynthesis.
§§Thromboxane A synthase (TBXAS1).
***Prostaglandin I2 (prostacyclin) synthase (PTGIS).
Note: CYP2A7 and CYP4B1 are full length genes that probably encode inactive enzymes due to lack of heme incorporation.

274
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
thiolate). The amino acid sequence around the cysteine residue that 
forms the thiolate bond with the heme moiety is highly conserved 
in all CYP enzymes. When this thiolate bond is disrupted, CYP is 
converted to a catalytically inactive form called cytochrome P420. 
By competing with oxygen, CO inhibits CYP. The inhibitory effect 
of CO can be reversed by irradiation with light at 450 nm, which 
photodissociates the CYP–CO complex. These properties of CYP 
are of historical importance (Omura, 2011). The observation that 
treatment of rats with certain chemicals, such as 3-methylcholan-
threne, causes a shift in the peak absorbance of CYP (from 450 to 
448 nm) provided some of the earliest evidence for the existence 
of multiple forms of CYP in liver microsomes. The conversion of 
CYP to cytochrome P420 by detergents and phospholipases helped 
to establish the hemoprotein nature of CYP. The inhibition of CYP 
by CO and the reversal of this inhibition by photodissociation of the 
CYP–CO complex established CYP as the microsomal and mito-
chondrial enzyme involved in drug biotransformation and steroid 
biosynthesis (Omura, 2011).
The basic reaction catalyzed by CYP enzymes is monooxy-
genation in which one atom of oxygen from O2 is incorporated into 
a substrate, designated RH, and the other is reduced to water with 
reducing equivalents derived from NADPH, as follows:
Substrate(RH)
O
NADPH
H
Product(ROH)
H O
NADP
+
+
+
→
+
+
+
+
2
2
Although CYP functions as a monooxygenase, the products 
are not limited to alcohols and phenols due to rearrangement reac-
tions (Guengerich and Shimada, 1991; Guengerich, 2001a, 2007; 
Isin and Guengerich, 2007). During catalysis, CYP binds directly to 
the substrate and molecular oxygen, but it does not interact directly 
with NADPH or NADH. The mechanism by which CYP receives 
electrons from NAD(P)H depends on the subcellular localization 
of CYP. In the endoplasmic reticulum, which is where most of the 
CYP enzymes involved in xenobiotic biotransformation are local-
ized, electrons are relayed from NADPH to CYP via a flavoprotein 
called NADPH–cytochrome P450 reductase or POR (also known 
as an oxidoreductase; gene symbol POR). Within this flavoprotein, 
electrons are transferred from NADPH to CYP via FMN and FAD. 
In mitochondria, which house many of the CYP enzymes involved in 
steroid hormone biosynthesis and vitamin D metabolism, electrons 
are transferred from NAD(P)H to CYP via two proteins: an iron–
sulfur protein called ferredoxin (gene symbol FDX1) and an FMN-
containing flavoprotein called ferredoxin reductase (gene symbol 
FDXR). These proteins are also known as adrenodoxin and adreno-
doxin reductase. In bacteria such as Pseudomonas putida, which 
express P450cam (CYP101A1), electron flow is similar to that in 
mitochondria (NADH → flavoprotein → putidaredoxin → P450).
There are some notable exceptions to the general rule that CYP 
requires a second enzyme (i.e., a flavoprotein) for catalytic activity. 
One exception applies to two CYP enzymes involved in the conver-
sion of arachidonic acid to eicosanoids, namely, thromboxane A 
synthase (CYP5A1; gene symbol TBXAS1) and prostaglandin I2 
synthase, which is also known as prostacyclin synthase (CYP8A1; 
gene symbol PTGIS). These two CYP enzymes convert the endo-
peroxide, PGH2, to thromboxane (TXA2) and prostacyclin (PGl2) in 
platelets and the endothelial lining of blood vessels, respectively. 
In both cases, CYP functions as an isomerase and catalyzes a rear-
rangement of the oxygen atoms introduced into arachidonic acid by 
cyclooxygenase (see Fig. 6-37). The plant CYP, allene oxide syn-
thase (CYP74A1), and certain invertebrate CYP enzymes also cata-
lyze the rearrangement of oxidized chemicals (Guengerich, 2001a).
The second exception is represented by CYP102 (P450BM3) 
from the bacterium Bacillus megaterium, which produces a CYP 
enzyme linked directly to a flavoprotein to form a single, self-­
sufficient fusion protein. Some bacterial CYP enzymes are thermo-
philic (such as CYP119, CYP174A1, and CYP231A2), which has 
attracted attention for their potential industrial applications (Nishida 
and Ortiz de Montellano, 2005). The thermophilic P450 enzyme 
from Sulfolobus acidocaldarius, namely, CYP119, was used to 
confirm (and settle a long-standing debate) that the final step in the 
Table 6-15  
Homologs of the Major Xenobiotic-Metabolizing CYP Enzymes in Liver Microsomes from Humans and Nonclinical 
Species
Subfamily
Human
Monkey
Dog
Rat
Mouse
CYP1A
1A2 (1A1, IB1)
1A2 (1A1, IB1)
1A2 (1A1, IB1)
1A2 (1A1, IB1)
1A2 (1A1, IB1)
CYP2A
2A6, 2A13
2A23, 2A24
2A13, 2A25
2A1, 2A2, 2A3
2A4, 2A5, 2A12, 2A22
CYP2B
2B6
2B6, 2B17
2B11
2B1, 2B2, 2B3
2B9, 2B10
CYP2C
2C8, 2C9, 
2C18, 2C19
2C20, 2C43, 
2C76
2C21, 2C41
2C6, 2C7, 2C11, 2C12, 
2C13, 2C22, 2C23, 2C24, 
2C46, 2C77, 2C79, 2C80, 
2C81
2C29, 2C37, 2C38, 2C39, 
2C40, 2C44, 2C50, 2C54, 
2C55, 2C65, 2C66, 2C67, 
2C68, 2C69, 2C70 
CYP2D
2D6
2D17, 2D19, 
2D29, 2D30
2D15
2D1, 2D2, 2D3, 2D4, 
2D5, 2D18
2D9, 2D10, 2D11, 2D12, 
2D13, 2D22, 2D26, 2D34, 
2D40
CYP2E
2E1
2E1
2E1
2E1
2E1
CYP2J
2J2
2J2
2J2
2J3, 2J4, 2J10, 2J13, 2J16
2J5, 2J6, 2J7, 2J8, 2J9, 2J11, 
2J12, 2J13
CYP3A
3A4, 3A5, 3A7, 
3A43
3A8
3A12, 3A26
3A1/23, 3A2, 3A9, 3A18, 
3A23, 3A62, 3A73
3A11, 3A13, 3A16, 3A25, 
3A41, 3A44, 3A57, 3A59
Note: CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 are extrahepatic enzymes, although CYP1A1 is an AhR-inducible hepatic enzyme.
SOURCE: Data adapted from Baillie and Rettie (2011) and Nelson (2009b).

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
275
catalytic cycle of CYP is formation of compound I (por•+FeIV=O), 
as in the case of peroxidases, which is discussed later in this section 
(Rittle and Green, 2010). Most mammalian CYP enzymes are not 
synthesized as a single enzyme containing both the hemoprotein 
and flavoprotein moieties, but this arrangement is found in nitric 
oxide (NO) synthases. In addition to its atypical structure, the 
P450 enzyme expressed in B. megaterium, CYP102, is unusual for 
another reason: it is inducible by phenobarbital, which provided 
insight into the mechanism of CYP induction.
Phospholipids and cytochrome b5 also play an important role 
in CYP reactions (McLaughlin et al., 2010). CYP and POR are 
embedded in the phospholipid bilayer of the endoplasmic reticu-
lum, which facilitates their interaction. With the notable excep-
tion of CYP2W1 (discussed later in this section), CYP and POR 
face the cytoplasmic side of the endoplasmic reticulum. When the 
C-terminal region that anchors POR in the membrane is cleaved 
with trypsin, the truncated flavoprotein can no longer support CYP 
reactions, although it is still capable of reducing cytochrome c and 
other soluble electron acceptors. The ability of phospholipids to 
facilitate the interaction between POR and CYP does not appear 
to depend on the nature of the polar head group (serine, choline, 
inositol, and ethanolamine), although certain CYP enzymes (those 
in the CYP3A subfamily) have a requirement for phospholipids 
containing unsaturated fatty acids. In vitro experiments established 
that cytochrome b5 can stimulate various CYP reactions by either 
increasing Vmax or decreasing Km, which was initially interpreted 
as evidence that cytochrome b5 can donate the second of two elec-
trons required by CYP. However, the same stimulation occurs with 
heme-depleted cytochrome b5 (Yamazaki et al., 1996, 2001). The 
stimulatory effect of cytochrome b5 is now attributed to its effect 
on CYP conformation/oligomerization and/or its ability to facili-
tate the interaction between CYP and POR. Experiments in condi-
tional knockout mice establish that cytochrome b5 has an important 
stimulatory effect on CYP in vivo (McLaughlin et al., 2010). Liver 
microsomes contain numerous forms of CYP but contain a single 
form of POR and cytochrome b5 (CYB5A).
For each molecule of POR in rat liver microsomes, there 
are 5 to 10 molecules of cytochrome b5 and 10 to 20 molecules 
of CYP. In human liver microsomes the ratio of CYP to POR is 
slightly lower (closer to 5:1). POR will reduce electron acceptors 
other than CYP, which enables this enzyme to be quantified based 
on its ability to reduce cytochrome c (which is why POR is often 
called NADPH–cytochrome c reductase). POR can transfer elec-
trons much faster than CYP can use them, which more than likely 
accounts for the low ratio of POR to CYP in liver microsomes. Low 
levels of POR may also be a safeguard to protect cells from the 
often deleterious one-electron reduction reactions catalyzed by this 
flavoprotein (see Fig. 6-20). POR also supports heme oxygenase, a 
Nrf2-inducible enzyme, the significance of which is discussed in 
the section “CYP2E1.”
While microsomal cytochrome b5 is encoded by CYB5A, 
CYB5B encodes the cytochrome b5 found in the outer mitochon-
drial membrane where it supports the molybdoenzyme mARC in 
the dehydroxylation of certain amidoximes and related compounds 
(see the section “Dehydroxylation: mARC, Cytochrome b5, b5 
Reductase, and Aldehyde Oxidase” and Fig. 6-26).
The catalytic cycle of CYP involves eight steps (A → H), 
as shown in Fig. 6-45, for the oxidation of a substrate (RH) to its 
hydroxylated metabolite (ROH) (Dawson, 1988; Guengerich, 2007; 
Rittle and Green, 2010; Johnston et al., 2011; Hrycay and Bandiera, 
2012). In this scheme, iron is shown bound to its fifth ligand, a 
heme thiolate provided by a highly conserved cysteine (Cys) resi-
due. The first steps of the cycle (A → G) involve the activation of 
oxygen to compound I, and the final steps involve substrate oxida-
tion by compound I (G → H) followed by release of the metabo-
lite (ROH) to restore the enzyme to its resting (ferric) state (H → 
A). Following the binding of substrate (RH) to CYP (A → B), the 
heme iron is reduced from the ferric (FeIII) to the ferrous (FeII) state 
by the introduction of a single electron from POR (B → C). In 
many cases the reduction of CYP is facilitated by substrate binding 
because binding of the substrate in the vicinity of the heme moiety 
converts the heme ferric iron from a low-spin to a high-spin state, 
although some enzymes, such as CYP1A2 and CYP2E1, are natu-
rally in the high-spin state and can be reduced in the absence of 
substrate. It is at stage C, when the iron is in the ferrous state, that 
CYP can bind oxygen and CO. It is at this stage of the cycle that, 
under reduced oxygen tension, CYP can reduce certain substrates 
(see “Other reactions” at the bottom of the catalytic cycle shown in 
Fig. 6-45). In the third step (C → D) oxygen binds to the ferrous iron, 
which transfers an electron to oxygen to form ferrisuperoxo anion 
(i.e., ferric-bound superoxide anion), designated Cys
Fe O
III
−
−
2. 
At this stage, the cycle can be interrupted (uncoupled) to release 
superoxide anion and restore the enzyme to its resting (ferric) state 
(see “Other reactions” in Fig. 6-45). In the fourth step (D → E), a 
second electron is introduced from POR, which is delocalized over 
the thiolate bond to form the supernucleophilic ferriperoxo interme-
diate 
−
−
−
Cys
Fe O
III
2. Uncoupling of the cycle at this stage releases 
hydrogen peroxide and restores the enzyme to its resting (ferric) 
state (see “Other reactions” in Fig. 6-45). In the fifth step (E → F), 
addition of a proton (H+) converts the supernucleophilic ferriper-
oxo intermediate to its corresponding hydroperoxide, the ferrihy-
droperoxy intermediate −Cys−FeIIIOOH. In the sixth step (F → G), 
addition of a second proton followed by release of water converts 
the ferrihydroperoxy intermediate to compound I, an ironIV-oxo 
porphyrin radical cation species (an oxidizing species previously 
described in the section “Peroxidase-Dependent Cooxidation”). 
The formation of compound I (por•+FeIV=O) by protonation of the 
ferrihydroperoxy intermediate involves the heterolytic cleavage of 
oxygen with the two-electron oxygen atom going to water, a reac-
tion facilitated by the strong electron-donating effects of the heme 
thiolate anion. Heterolytic (two-electron) cleavage of oxygen to 
produce compound I places the iron in the perferryl (FeV) oxidation 
state, which is a considerably stronger oxidant than that formed by 
homolytic cleavage of oxygen, which produces the less reactive Por 
FeIV–OH with iron in oxidation state IV. (Note: It is somewhat con-
fusing that compound I is written as por•+FeIV=O because, without 
taking the porphyrin ring into account, the formula gives the errone-
ous impression that the iron is in the FeIV [ferryl] state, whereas it is 
actually in the FeV [perferryl] state.) In the seventh step (G → H), 
the highly electrophilic oxygen from compound I is transferred to 
the substrate (RH) to produce metabolite (ROH). In the final step 
(H → A), the metabolite is released, which restores the enzyme to 
its initial resting (ferric) state.
Compound I is the electrophilic oxo species responsible for the 
vast majority of CYP-catalyzed reactions (Hrycay and Bandiera, 
2012). It can be formed as described above with NADPH and oxy-
gen, or it can be formed by oxygen transfer from various organic 
hydroperoxides and peracids (X–OOH, such as cumene hydroper-
oxide, tert-butylhydroperoxide, and meta-chloroperbenzoic acid) in 
a one-step reaction called the “peroxide shunt,” as shown in “Other 
reactions” in Fig. 6-45. Formation of CYP compound I from peroxy 
compounds (P450 + X–OOH → P450 compound I + X-OH) is 
identical to the formation of compound I in peroxidases (see the 
section “Peroxidase-Dependent Cooxidation”). However, by virtue 
of its unusual fifth ligand (the heme thiolate from cysteine) and, 
perhaps more importantly, its active site topology, CYP can catalyze 
a far greater array of oxidative reactions (or catalyze them much

276
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
faster) than those typically seen with peroxidases (even chloroper-
oxidase, which is unusual among peroxidases for containing a Cys 
thiolate as the fifth ligand to the heme like that in CYP). CYP reac-
tions supported by organic peroxides and peracids are not affected 
by CO, an inhibitor of reactions supported by NADPH and O2.
Although P450 compound I generated by the peroxide shunt is 
as catalytically versatile as that generated by NADPH and O2, differ-
ences in the ratio of metabolites formed from a single substrate, dif-
ferences in the relative rates of oxidation of two or more substrates, 
and differences in kinetic isotope effects (the influence of deute-
rium substitution at the site of oxidation) have led to the “multiple 
oxidants” hypothesis. The concept is supported by the finding that 
site-directed mutagenesis of a highly conserved threonine residue 
in bacterial and mammalian CYP enzymes can differentially affect 
reaction rates. For example, site-directed mutagenesis (Thr268Ala) 
of the bacterial enzyme CYP102A1 (P450BM3) increases the 
rate of sulfoxidation relative to N-demethylation of a single sub-
strate, namely, dimethyl-(4-methylsulfanylphenyl)amine, whereas 
another mutation (Phe87Ala) has the opposite effect. Although 
the concept that CYP forms two or more oxidizing species is well 
accepted, the basis for the multiplicity is a source of considerable 
debate (Chandrasena et al., 2004; Jin et al., 2004; Newcomb and 
Chandrasena, 2005; Sheng et al., 2009; Hrycay and Bandiera, 
2012). The two major competing theories are the two-state and the 
two-oxidant hypotheses, both of which have supporting evidence. 
The two-state hypothesis posits that compound I is the only oxidiz-
ing species but it exists in two states, a low-spin state (that favors 
N-demethylation) and a high-spin state (that favors sulfoxidation) 
Other reactions
One-electron reduction
Superoxide anion production
C  (Cys—FeII RH)
D  (Cys—FeIIIO2
– RH)
E  (–Cys—FeIIIO2
– RH) + 2H+
B  (Cys—FeIII RH) + H2O2
B  (Cys—FeIII RH) + H2O2
F  (–Cys—FeIIIOOH RH) + H+
B  (Cys—FeIII RH) + XOOH
G
Hydrogen peroxide shunt
Peroxide shunt to form
Compound I
Hydrogen peroxide production
(Por•+FeIV
O RH) + XOH
A  (Cys—FeIII + RH–)
•
B  (Cys—FeIII RH) + O2
–•
Cys—FeIII
ROH
Cys—FeII
RH
FeIV
RH
O
S
–Cys—FeIIIOOH
RH
–Cys—FeIIIO2
–
RH
Cys—FeIIIO2
–
RH
A
Substrate (RH)
O2
(Inhibited by CO)
Product (ROH)
H2O
H2O
H2O
H+
H+
e–
e–
POR
H
G
F
E
D
C
Cys—FeIII
RH
B
RH
Por•+FeIV
O
POR
•+
Compound I
Cys—FeIII
H2O
Figure 6-45.  Catalytic cycle of cytochrome P450. Cytochrome P450 is represented as Cys-FeIII, where Cys represents the fifth ligand (a cysteine thiolate) to 
the ferric heme iron. RH and ROH represent the substrate and product (hydroxylated metabolite), respectively. The intermediates in the catalytic cycle are as 
follows: A, ferric resting state; B, substrate bound; C, ferrous intermediate; D, ferrisuperoxo anion intermediate; E, ferriperoxo intermediate with an electron 
delocalized over the Cys thiolate bond; F, ferrihydroperoxy intermediate (with a negative charge on the Cys thiolate bond); G, compound I, an ironIV-oxo 
porphyrin cation, which is responsible for most substrate oxidation reactions; H, enzyme in its resting state prior to the release of product formed by hydrogen 
abstraction followed by oxygen rebound (see text for details). FeII, FeIII, FeIV, and FeV refer to iron in the ferrous, ferric, ferryl, and perferryl state, respec-
tively. It should be noted that although it is written as por•+FeIV=O, compound I is in the highly oxidized perferryl (FeV) state when the oxidation state of 
the porphyrin ring is also taken into account.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
277
(Newcomb and Chandrasena, 2005; Hrycay and Bandiera, 2012). 
The two-oxidant hypothesis posits that compound I is the major 
electrophilic oxidizing species but that its precursor, the ferri-
hydroperoxo intermediate (−Cys−FeIIIOOH), can function as a 
relatively strong nucleophilic but weak electrophilic oxidizing 
species (Chandrasena et al., 2004; Jin et al., 2004; Sheng et al., 
2009). This is supported by the observation that hydrogen peroxide 
(which does not form compound I but instead forms the preced-
ing ferrihydroperoxo intermediate or its equivalent, namely, ferric 
iron–bound hydrogen peroxide) can support certain reactions that 
are not supported by organic hydroperoxides and peracids. The two 
mechanisms of generating multiple oxidizing species are not mutu-
ally exclusive and both may be needed to explain all the catalytic 
properties of CYP enzymes. There are also competing theories 
concerning the mechanism of substrate oxidation by P450 com-
pound I (Hrycay and Bandiera, 2012). Hereafter, the mechanism of 
carbon hydroxylation is discussed in terms of just one possibility, 
namely, hydrogen atom transfer (HAT) from the site of substrate 
hydroxylation by compound I to form a carbon radical followed by 
oxygen rebound in a nonconcerted, stepwise manner even though 
experiments with so-called ultrarapid radical clocks support a non-
radical mechanism (Newcomb and Chandrasena, 2005; Hrycay 
and Bandiera, 2012). In reactions involving heteroatoms (N and S) 
the initial step involves (among other possibilities) single electron 
transfer (SET) leading to S- and N-oxygenation or HAT leading to 
S- and N-dealkylation, as discussed later in this section (Li et al., 
2009a; Roberts and Jones, 2010).
CYP catalyzes several types of oxidation reactions, including 
the following:
	 1.	 Hydroxylation of an aliphatic or aromatic carbon
	 2.	 Epoxidation of a double bond
	 3.	 Heteroatom (S-, N-, and I-) oxygenation and N-hydroxylation
	 4.	 Heteroatom (O-, S-, and N-) dealkylation
	 5.	 Oxidative group transfer
	 6.	 Cleavage of esters and carbamates
	 7.	 Dehydrogenation
In the first three cases, oxygen from P450 compound I is incor-
porated into the substrate, which otherwise remains intact. In the 
fourth case, oxygenation of the substrate is followed by a rearrange-
ment reaction leading to cleavage of an amine (N-dealkylation) or 
an ether (O- and S-dealkylation). Oxygen from P450 compound I 
is incorporated into the alkyl-leaving group, producing an aldehyde 
or ketone. In the fifth case, oxygenation of the substrate is followed 
by a rearrangement reaction leading to loss of a heteroatom (oxida-
tive group transfer). The sixth case, the cleavage of esters and car-
bamates, resembles heteroatom dealkylation in that the functional 
group is cleaved with incorporation of oxygen from P450 compound 
I into the leaving group, producing an aldehyde. In the seventh case, 
two hydrogens are abstracted from the substrate with the formation 
of a double bond (C=C, C=O, or C=N), with the reduction of oxy-
gen from P450 compound I to water. It should be noted that this long 
list of reactions does not encompass all the reactions catalyzed by 
CYP (Guengerich, 2001a, 2007). CYP can catalyze reductive reac-
tions (such as azo-reduction, nitro-reduction, N-oxide reduction, 
sulfoxide reduction, and reductive dehalogenation), ring expansion 
or ring formation, dearylation, dearomatization, isomerization (such 
as the conversion of PGH2 to thromboxane and prostacyclin), and 
oxidative dehalogenation (as described previously for FMO; see 
Fig. 6-43). During the synthesis of steroid hormones, CYP cata-
lyzes the cleavage of carbon–carbon bonds, which occurs during the 
conversion of cholesterol to pregnenolone by cholesterol side-chain 
cleavage enzyme (CYP11A1, which is also known as P450scc) and 
the aromatization of a substituted cyclohexane, which occurs during 
the conversion of androgens to estrogens by aromatase (CYP19A1, 
also known as CYP19 and P450arom). CYP-dependent cleavage of 
carbon–carbon bonds in xenobiotics is rare but it does occur. For 
example, Takahashi et al. (2017) reported that a minor pathway of 
metabolism of the investigational drug GDC-0425 involves CYP-
dependent oxidative decyanation—replacement of a nitrile group 
(R–CN) with a hydroxyl group (R–OH) with release of the nitrile 
group as cyanide.
Examples of aliphatic and aromatic hydroxylation reactions 
catalyzed by CYP are shown in Figs. 6-46 and 6-47, respectively. 
The hydroxylation of aromatic hydrocarbons may proceed via an 
oxirane intermediate (i.e., an arene oxide) that isomerizes to the 
corresponding phenol. Alternatively, aromatic hydroxylation can 
proceed by a mechanism known as direct insertion. The ortho- 
and para-hydroxylation of chlorobenzene proceeds via 2,3- and 
3,4-epoxidation, whereas meta-hydroxylation proceeds by direct 
insertion, as shown in Fig. 6-48. When aromatic hydroxylation 
involves direct insertion, hydrogen abstraction (i.e., cleavage of the 
C–H bond) is the rate-limiting step, so that substitution of hydro-
gen with deuterium or tritium considerably slows the hydroxylation 
reaction. This isotope effect is less marked when aromatic hydrox-
ylation proceeds via an arene oxide intermediate. Arene oxides are 
electrophilic and, therefore, potentially toxic metabolites that are 
detoxified by such enzymes as epoxide hydrolase (see Figs. 6-12 
to 6-14) and GST (see the section “Glutathione Conjugation”). 
Depending on the ring substituents, the rearrangement of arene 
oxides to the corresponding phenol can lead to an intramolecular 
migration of a substituent (such as hydrogen or a halogen) from 
one carbon to the next. This intramolecular migration occurs at the 
site of oxidation and is known as the NIH shift, so named for its 
discovery at the National Institutes of Health.
Aliphatic hydroxylation involves insertion of oxygen into a 
C–H bond. The initial step involves HAT to form a carbon radical 
followed by oxygen rebound, shown as follows:
Hydrogen
atom transfer
(HAT)
C
H
P450
Compound I
Substrate
O
Por•+FeIV
C
OH
Hydroxylated
metabolite
P450
resting
state
Por FeIII
C
Carbon
radical
Protonated
Compound II
OH
Por FeIV
•
Oxygen
rebound
In the case of simple, straight-chain hydrocarbons, such as 
n-hexane, aliphatic hydroxylation occurs at both the terminal 
methyl groups and the internal methylene groups. In the case of 
fatty acids (both saturated and unsaturated) and their derivatives 
(i.e., retinoic acid and eicosanoids such as prostaglandins and leu-
kotrienes), aliphatic hydroxylation occurs at the ω-carbon (terminal 
methyl group) and the ω-1 carbon (penultimate carbon), as shown 
for lauric acid in Fig. 6-46. For thermodynamic reasons, most CYP 
enzymes preferentially catalyze the ω-1 hydroxylation of fatty 
acids and their derivatives, but one group of CYP enzymes (those 
encoded by the CYP4 gene family) preferentially catalyzes the less 
energetically favorable ω-hydroxylation of fatty acids, which can 
be further oxidized to dicarboxylic acids and undergo chain short-
ening by β-oxidation (Baer and Rettie, 2006; Johnston et al., 2011, 
2015; Edson and Rettie, 2013).

278
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
O
N
Cl
OH
CYP2E1
O
N
Cl
OH
HO
Chlorzoxazone
6-Hydroxychlorzoxazone
O
O
O
O
HO
Coumarin
7-Hydroxycoumarin
N
H
N
O
O
CH3
HO
(S)-Mephenytoin
4′-Hydroxy-(S)-mephenytoin
CYP2A6
CYP2C19
N
H
N
O
O
CH3
H5C2
H5C2
Figure 6-47.  Examples of reactions catalyzed by cytochrome P450: hydroxylation of aromatic carbon.
S
NH
O
O
C
NH
O
HOCH2
CYP2C9
Tolbutamide
Hydroxymethyltolbutamide
COOH
COOH
OH
HO
COOH
11-Hydroxylauric acid
12-Hydroxylauric acid
Lauric acid
OH
O
OH
CYP3A4
Testosterone
6β-Hydroxytestosterone
CYP4A
ω-1 hydroxylation
ω-hydroxylation
CH3
S
NH
O
O
C
NH
O
OH
O
Figure 6-46.  Examples of reactions catalyzed by cytochrome P450: hydroxylation of aliphatic carbon.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
279
Like CYP, the molybdoenzymes AO and XO can also cata-
lyze the carbon oxidation of xenobiotics as outlined in the section 
“Molybdenum Hydroxylases (Molybdoenzymes).” As an electro-
philic oxidizing enzyme, CYP generally prefers to catalyze the oxi-
dation of carbon atoms with a high electron density, whereas the 
nucleophilic oxidizing enzymes AO and XO preferentially catalyze 
the oxidation of carbon atoms with a low electron density (such as 
the sp2 carbon atom double bonded to a nitrogen atom in various 
nitrogen heterocycles). For this reason, xenobiotics that are good 
substrates for CYP enzymes tend to be poor substrates for AO, and 
vice versa (Pryde et al., 2010).
Xenobiotics containing a carbon–carbon double bond (i.e., 
alkenes) can be epoxidated (i.e., converted to an oxirane) in an 
analogous manner to the oxidation of aromatic compounds to 
arene oxides. Just as arene oxides can isomerize to phenols, so 
aliphatic epoxides can isomerize to the corresponding ene-ol, the 
Cl
Cl
H
H
O
Cl
H
H
O
Cl
OH
Cl
OH
Cl
OH
Direct insertion
Chlorobenzene
2,3-oxide
3,4-oxide
ortho-hydroxylation
meta-hydroxylation
para-hydroxylation
Carbamazepine
Carbamazepine-10,11-epoxide
(stable epoxide)
O
O
O
O
H
H
O
Coumarin
Coumarin-3,4-epoxide
ortho-Hydroxyphenylacetaldehyde
N
Cl
C
S
S
COOH
CON(CH3)2
CYP1A1
Cl
H
H
O
N
R
Verlukast
Verlukast epoxide
C
O
NH2
N
C
O
NH2
N
C
O
NH2
N
O
H
H
CH2CHO
OH
+   CO2
O
H
H
+
Carbamazepine-2,3-epoxide
(unstable arene oxide)
Figure 6-48.  Examples of reactions catalyzed by cytochrome P450: epoxidation.

280
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
formation of which may involve an intramolecular migration (NIH 
shift) of a substituent at the site of oxidation (examples of intra-
molecular shifts accompanying epoxidation are given in the sec-
tion “Activation of Xenobiotics by Cytochrome P450”). Like arene 
oxides, aliphatic epoxides are also potentially toxic metabolites that 
are inactivated by other xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes such as 
epoxide hydrolase and GST. Alkynes can be epoxidated by CYP to 
ketocarbenes (which can be further oxidized to carboxylic acids). 
The conversion of an alkyne to a ketocarbene via epoxidation or 
other possible oxidation intermediates is shown in the following 
scheme:
[O]
Alkyne
Ketocarbene
C
C
R1
R2
C
C
R1
R2
O
C
C
O
R2
R1
• •
C
C
R1
R2
O–
+
C
C
R1
R2
O
Oxidation of some aliphatic alkenes and alkynes produces 
metabolites that are sufficiently reactive to bind covalently to the 
heme moiety of CYP, a process known as suicide inactivation or 
metabolism-dependent inhibition (discussed later in the section 
“Inhibition of Cytochrome P450”). As previously discussed in 
the section “Epoxide Hydrolases,” not all epoxides are highly 
reactive electrophiles. Although the 3,4-epoxidation of couma-
rin produces a hepatotoxic metabolite, the 10,11-epoxidation of 
carbamazepine produces a stable, relatively nontoxic metabolite 
(Fig. 6-48). Epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs) are endogenous 
epoxides with vasodilatory, anti-inflammatory, and angiogenic 
properties (Imig and Hammock, 2009; Wang et al., 2010c). They 
are formed by CYP2C8, CYP2C9, and CYP2J2 (discussed later 
in this section) and inactivated by sEH (see the section “Epoxide 
Hydrolases”).
In the presence of NADPH and O2, liver microsomes catalyze 
the oxygenation of several sulfur-containing xenobiotics, includ-
ing chlorpromazine, cimetidine, lansoprazole, pantoprazole, and 
omeprazole. Sulfur-containing xenobiotics can potentially undergo 
two consecutive sulfoxidation reactions: one that converts the sul-
fide (S) to the sulfoxide (SO), which occurs during the sulfoxida-
tion of chlorpromazine and cimetidine, and one that converts the 
sulfoxide (SO) to the sulfone (SO2), which occurs during the sulf-
oxidation of omeprazole and lansoprazole, as shown in Fig. 6-49. 
Albendazole is converted first to a sulfoxide and then to a sulfone. 
Both CYP and FMO can sulfoxidate sulfides to sulfoxides (S → 
SO) but only CYP can covert sulfoxides to sulfones (SO → SO2) 
(see the section “Flavin Monooxygenases”) (Testa and Krämer, 
2008, 2010). Accordingly, the sulfoxidation of the proton pump 
inhibitors omeprazole, lansoprazole, and pantoprazole to sulfones 
is catalyzed by CYP (CYP3A4) and not by FMO. Examples of 
sulfoxidation reactions catalyzed by FMO and/or CYP are shown 
in Figs. 6-43B and 6-49. In the presence of NADPH and O2, 
liver microsomes catalyze the oxygenation of several nitrogen-
containing xenobiotics, including chlorpromazine, doxylamine, 
oflaxacin, morphine, nicotine, MPTP, methapyrilene, methaqua-
lone, metronidazole, pargyline, pyridine, senecionine, strychnine, 
TMA, trimipramine, and verapamil, all of which are converted to 
stable N-oxides. While S-oxygenation might be catalyzed by both 
CYP and FMO, N-oxygenation is more likely to be catalyzed by 
just one of these enzymes. FMO prefers to N-oxygenate aliphatic 
amines (particularly tertiary and cyclic amines) with a highly 
nucleophilic/basic nitrogen atom (pKa(B) 5 to 10) but, in contrast 
to CYP, FMO cannot N-oxygenate aromatic amines, for which 
reason the N-oxygenation of pyridines and (iso)quinolones is usu-
ally catalyzed only by CYP, as is the case for pyridine-containing 
xenobiotics such as the tobacco-specific nitrosamine NNK and the 
antihistamine temelastine, and the isoquinoline-containing muscle 
relaxant 6,7-dimethoxy-4-(4′-chlorobenzyl)isoquinoline. Methods 
to distinguish the role of CYP versus FMO in microsomal N- 
and S-oxygenation reactions are described in the section “Flavin 
Monooxygenases.”
Although direct oxygen transfer is possible (Li et al., 2009a), 
the initial step in heteroatom oxygenation by CYP could involve 
SET from the heteroatom (N, S, or I) to P450 compound I, shown 
as follows for sulfoxidation:
P450
Compound I
Substrate
S
O
Por•+FeIV
••
Sulfur radical
cation
Compound II
O
Por FeIV
S
•+
Oxygen
rebound
Single
electron
transfer
(SET)
Sulfoxidated
metabolite
P450 resting
state
Por FeIII
S
O
SET from N, O, or S to P450 compound I may also be the ini-
tial step in heteroatom dealkylation, but in this case abstraction of 
the electron from the heteroatom is quickly followed by abstraction 
of a proton (H+) from the α-carbon atom (the carbon atom attached 
to the heteroatom) to form a carbon radical. Oxygen rebound leads 
to hydroxylation of the α-carbon, which then rearranges to form the 
corresponding aldehyde or ketone with cleavage of the α-carbon 
from the heteroatom, as shown in the following scheme for the 
N-dealkylation of an N-alkylamine:
CH
H
P450 Compound I
Substrate
Single electron
transfer (SET)
N
R
Carbon radical
Nitrogen radical cation
O
Por•+FeIV
Compound II
OH
Por FeIV
Protonated Compound II
Oxygen
rebound
• •
CH
OH
N
R
• •
CH
O
N
R
• •
CH
H
N
R
Proton
abstraction
•+
CH
N
R
••
•
O
Por FeIV
Rearrangement
Amine
Aldehyde
Por FeIII
Por FeIII
P450 resting state 
Alternatively, it seems more likely that the initial step in het-
eroatom dealkylation may be HAT from the α-carbon atom to com-
pound I to produce a carbon radical that undergoes oxygen rebound

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
281
and rearrangement as shown in the following scheme (Li et al., 
2009a; Roberts and Jones, 2010):
Hydrogen atom
transfer (HAT)
P450 Compound I
Substrate
CH
H
N
R
O
Por•+FeIV
• •
P450 resting state
Amine
Aldehyde
Por FeIII
CH
O
NH
R
• •
Oxygen
rebound
Carbon radical
Protonated
Compound II
OH
Por FeIV
CH
N
R
••
•
Rearrangement
Por FeIII
••
CH
OH
N
R
In general, CYP catalyzes the N-dealkylation, not the 
N-oxygenation, of amines. N-Oxygenation by CYP can occur if the 
nitrogen is next to an electron-donating group (making the nitro-
gen electron rich) or if α-protons are either absent (e.g., aromatic 
amines) or inaccessible (e.g., quinidine). In the case of aromatic 
amines (anilines; aryl-NH2), N-oxidation by CYP usually results 
in the formation of hydroxylamines (aryl-NHOH). Some hydrox-
ylamines are further oxidized to the corresponding nitroso metabo-
lite, as observed with sulfamethoxazole (aryl-NH2 → aryl-NOH 
→ aryl-NO). Primary aromatic amides (aryl-CONH2) are not 
substrates for N-oxidation, but secondary aromatic amides (aryl-
NHCOR) are often N-hydroxylated by CYP (often by CYP1A2) 
to produce N-hydroxyamides (also known as hydroxamic acids). 
N-Hydroxylamines and hydroxyamides are of toxicological inter-
est because under acidic conditions they can dissociate to form 
reactive nitrenium ions. Phenacetin, an aromatic amide (aryl-
NH−CO−CH3), causes kidney toxicity because it is converted by 
N-hydroxylation to a hydroxamic acid (aryl-NOH−CO−CH3) that 
in the low pH of urine undergoes acid-catalyzed conversion to a 
N
CH3
OCH3
CH3
H
N
N
CH3O
S
O
S
O
S
O
O
Sulfone
Omeprazole
Lansoprazole
Sulfoxidation
CYP3A4
O
4-(Methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)butan-1-one (NNK)
(A tobacco-speciﬁc nitrosamine)
NNK N-oxide
6,7-Dimethoxy-4-(4′-chlorobenzyl)isoquinoline 
(muscle relaxant)
N-Oxygenation
S-Oxygenation
N
(CH2)3
C
O
ON
H3C
N
CH3O
CH3O
N
CH2
Cl
CH3O
CH3O
N
CH2
Cl
Note:  The sulfoxide in omeprazole and
 
 lansoprazole is a chiral center.
 
 Each drug is a racemic mixutre.
H
N
N
CH3
OCH2CF3
N
N
(CH2)3
C
O
ON
H3C
N
O
Figure 6-49.  Examples of reactions catalyzed by cytochrome P450: heteroatom oxygenation.

282
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
reactive nitrenium ion (aryl-NOH−CO−CH3 + H+ → aryl-N+−
CO−CH3 + H2O) (Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). N-Hydroxylation 
of aromatic amines with subsequent O-acetylation or O-sulfonation 
is a mechanism by which tumorigenic aromatic amines, such as 
2-AAF and 4-aminobiphenyl, are converted to electrophilic reactive 
intermediates that bind covalently to DNA (discussed later in the 
sections “Glucuronidation and Formation of Acyl-CoA Thioesters” 
and “Acetylation”).
Numerous xenobiotics are N-, O-, or S-dealkylated by CYP 
(but not by FMO), and some examples of these heteroatom deal-
kylation reactions are shown in Fig. 6-50. The dealkylation of 
xenobiotics containing an N-, O-, or S-methyl group results in the 
formation of formaldehyde, which can easily be measured by a sim-
ple colorimetric assay to monitor the demethylation of substrates 
in vitro. The expiration of 13C- or 14C-labeled carbon dioxide fol-
lowing the demethylation of drugs containing a 13C- or 14C-labeled 
methyl group has been used to probe CYP activity in vivo (Watkins, 
1994). The activity of the human CYP enzymes involved in the 
N-demethylation of aminopyrine, erythromycin, and caffeine can 
be assessed by this technique. Although caffeine has three N-methyl 
groups, all of which can be removed by CYP, the major pathway in 
humans involves N3-demethylation of caffeine to paraxanthine (see 
Fig. 6-50). Fig. 6-50 also presents an example of a xenobiotic (octa-
methylcyclotetrasiloxane, a component of cosmetics and deodor-
ants) that undergoes silicone demethylation by CYP (Varaprath 
et al., 1999).
While the metabolism of N-methyl amines by CYP generally 
results in N-demethylation, with the hydroxylation of the methyl 
group leading to the release of formaldehyde, the metabolism of 
N-methyl amides and carbamates by CYP can result in the for-
mation of a stable methyl-hydroxylated metabolite, one that does 
not release formaldehyde (which would otherwise complete an 
N-demethylation reaction) possibly because of the hydroxymethyl 
metabolite formation of a six-membered configuration that is stabi-
lized by hydrogen bonding, illustrated as follows:
C
O
R
N
CH3
C
O
R
N
CH2OH
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
R
N
CH2
O
H
C
O
C
O
R
NH
HCHO
Zolpidem and camazepam are amide- and carbamate-containing 
drugs, respectively, that undergo such N-methyl-hydroxylation 
reactions.
Seto and Guengerich have shown that the N-demethylation 
and N-deethylation of N-ethyl-N-methylaniline not only proceed at 
different rates (with N-demethylation proceeding up to 20 times 
faster than N-deethylation) but also proceed by different mecha-
nisms (Seto and Guengerich, 1993; Guengerich, 2001b). The initial 
step in the N-deethylation reaction involves HAT from the α-carbon 
atom (i.e., the carbon atom attached to the nitrogen), whereas the 
initial step in the N-demethylation reaction involves a much faster 
reaction, namely, a SET from the nitrogen atom, which is trans-
ferred to P450 compound I. Although the N-demethylation of N,N-
substituted amines proceeds by the relatively rapid process of SET, 
N
O
O
H5C2
O
N
O
O
HO
CH3CHO
7-Ethoxyresoruﬁn
Resoruﬁn
O
CH3
N
H3C
OH
N
H3C
HCHO
Dextromethorphan
Dextrorphan
N
N
N
N
H
S
CH3
N
N
N
N
H
SH
[O]
HCHO
6-Methylmercaptopurine
6-Mercaptopurine
HCHO
CYP2C19
CYP3A4
Diazepam
Nordiazepam
N
N
Cl
H3C
O
N
H
N
Cl
O
O-Dealkylation
S-Dealkylation
N-Dealkylation
Theophylline
N
N
N
N
H3C
O
CH3
CH3
O
HN
N
N
N
O
CH3
CH3
O
N
N
H
N
N
H3C
O
CH3
O
N
N
H
N
N
H3C
O
CH3
O
HCHO
N1-demethylation
(CYP2E1)
N3-demethylation
(CYP1A2)
N7-demethylation
(CYP2E1)
Theobromine
Paraxanthine
Caffeine
CYP1A2
CYP2D6
Si
O
O
Si
O
Si
O
Si
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
Si
O
O
Si
O
Si
O
Si
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
Octamethylcyclotetrasiloxane (D4)
Si-Dealkylation
HCHO
Figure 6-50.  Examples of reactions catalyzed by cytochrome P450: heteroatom dealkylation.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
283
the N-demethylation of N,N-substituted amides, where the adjacent 
carbonyl causes electrons to be withdrawn from the nitrogen atom, 
proceeds by the relatively slow process of HAT, for which reason 
the latter reactions, in contrast to the former, show a large intrinsic 
isotope effect when the hydrogen atoms are replaced with deute-
rium (because it requires more energy to break a C–D bond than 
a C–H bond).
In addition to N-dealkylation, some primary amines can also 
undergo oxidative deamination by CYP, which is an example of 
oxidative group transfer. The mechanism of oxidative deamination 
is similar to that of N-dealkylation: the α-carbon adjacent to the 
primary amine is hydroxylated, which produces an unstable inter-
mediate that rearranges to eliminate ammonia with the formation of 
an aldehyde or ketone. The conversion of amphetamine to phenyl-
acetone is an example of CYP-catalyzed oxidative deamination, as 
shown in Fig. 6-51. However, primary aliphatic amines tend to be 
poor substrates for CYP; in fact, primary alkylamines, such as the 
N-demethylated metabolite of fluoxetine, are metabolically stable 
and potent inhibitors of CYP inhibitors (discussed later in the sec-
tion “Inhibition of Cytochrome P450”). Oxidative deamination is 
also catalyzed by MAO and FMO (Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). 
In the example given above, however, the substrate, amphetamine, 
contains an α-methyl group that renders it a poor substrate for MAO 
(as described in the section “Amine Oxidases”).
In addition to oxidative deamination, CYP catalyzes two other 
types of oxidative group transfer, namely, oxidative desulfuration 
and oxidative dehalogenation. In all cases the heteroatom (N, S, or 
halogen) is replaced with oxygen. As shown in Fig. 6-52, oxidative 
desulfuration converts parathion, which has little insecticidal activ-
ity, to paraoxon, which is a potent insecticide. The same reaction 
converts thiopental to pentobarbital. Diethyldithiocarbamate methyl 
ester, a metabolite of disulfiram, also undergoes oxidative desulfura-
tion. The initial reaction involves S-oxidation by CYP or FMO to a 
sulfine (R1R2C=S → R1R2C=S+−O−). In the presence of GSH and 
GST, this sulfine either is converted back to the parent compound 
(R1R2C=S+−O− + 2GSH → R1R2C=S + H2O) or undergoes desul-
furation (R1R2C=S + 2GSH → R1R2C=O + GSSG + H2S) (Madan 
et al., 1994). CYP catalyzes both reductive and oxidative dehalogena-
tion reactions (Guengerich, 1991). During oxidative dehalogenation, 
a halogen and hydrogen from the same carbon atom are replaced with 
oxygen (R1R2CHX → R1R2CO) to produce an aldehyde or acylhalide, 
as shown in Fig. 6-23, for the conversion of halothane (CF3CHClBr) 
to trifluoroacetylchloride (CF3COCl). Oxidative dehalogenation 
does not involve a direct attack on the carbon–halogen bond, but it 
involves the formation of an unstable halohydrin by oxidation of the 
carbon atom bearing the halogen substituent. The carbon–halogen 
bond is broken during the rearrangement of the unstable halohydrin. 
When the carbon atom contains a single halogen, the resulting prod-
uct is an aldehyde, which can be further oxidized to a carboxylic acid 
or reduced to a primary alcohol. When the carbon atom contains two 
halogens, the dihalohydrin intermediate rearranges to an acylhalide, 
which can be converted to the corresponding carboxylic acid (see 
Fig. 6-23). Aldehydes and, in particular, acylhalides are reactive 
compounds that can bind covalently to protein and other critical cel-
lular molecules. The immune hepatitis caused by repeated exposure 
of humans to halothane and related volatile anesthetics is dependent 
on oxidative dehalogenation by CYP, with neoantigens produced by 
the trifluoroacetylation of proteins, as shown in Fig. 6-23. Another 
example of oxidative dehalogenation by CYP is provided by studies 
of dasatinib metabolism by Li and colleagues who, in order to pre-
vent the formation of a reactive quinoneimine metabolite that bound 
to GSH, used fluoro and chloro substitutions in an attempt to block 
para-hydroxylation of the substituted aniline in dasatinib, which is a 
metabolism-dependent inhibitor of CYP3A4 (Li et al., 2009b). The 
halogen substitutions did not block the formation of GSH adducts of 
the para-hydroxylated metabolite. The mechanism of oxidative deha-
logenation of the substituted aniline in dasatinib (followed by glu-
tathionylation) was presumed to arise from an epoxide intermediate 
Oxidative desulfuration
Oxidative deamination
CH2
C
CH3
O
CH2
CH
CH3
NH2
+ NH3
Amphetamine
Phenylacetone
[O]
Parathion
Paraoxon
[O]
[S]
[O]
[S]
Thiopental
Pentobarbital
HN
N
H
O
O
S
C2H5
CH3
C3H7
CH
HN
N
H
O
O
O
C2H5
CH3
C3H7
CH
NO2
P
OC2H5
S
C2H5O
NO2
P
OC2H5
O
C2H5O
Figure 6-51.  Examples of reactions catalyzed by cytochrome P450: oxidative group transfer.

284
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
Desloratadine
NO2
O
OH
P
S
OC2H5
C2H5O
C2H5O
OC2H5
C2H5O
NO2
OH
NO2
O
P
S
O–
O–
+
OC2H5
C2H5O
NO2
O
P
S
OC2H5
C2H5O
OH
P
S
OC2H5
C2H5O
OH
P
O
OC2H5
C2H5O
P450
[O]
Parathion
oxidative
desulfuration
Diethylphosphorothiolate
Diethylphosphate
4-Nitrophenol
Paraoxon
N
COOH
C
O
CH3
H3C
C2H5O
OC2H5
N
C
O
C
O
CH3
H3C
P450
CH3CHO
CH3CHO
CO2
+
P450 (CYP3A4)
Loratadine
+ H+
OH–
O
S
P
OH
N
Cl
N
H
C2H5
N
Cl
N
C
O
O
Figure 6-52.  Examples of reactions catalyzed by cytochrome P450 that resemble hydrolytic reactions: cleavage of a thiophosphate (parathion), a carboxylic 
acid ester (2,6-dimethyl-4-phenyl-3,5-pyridinecarboxylic acid diethyl ester), and a carbamate (loratadine).

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
285
that underwent dehalogenation during its conjugation with GSH. 
Another example of oxidative defluorination is shown in Fig. 6-43 
for the oxidative defluorination of 4-fluoro-N-methylaniline by FMO 
(Driscoll et al., 2010; Fan et al., 2016).
CYP can catalyze the reductive dehalogenation of halogenated 
alkanes (see Figs. 6-22 and 6-23) and the reduction of certain azo- 
and nitro-containing xenobiotics, although these latter reactions are 
largely catalyzed by gut microbiota (see Figs. 6-15 and 6-16). The 
ability of CYP to reduce xenobiotics can be understood from the 
catalytic cycle shown in Fig. 6-45. Binding of a substrate to CYP is 
followed by a one-electron reduction by POR. Under aerobic condi-
tions, reduction of the heme iron to the ferrous state permits binding 
of oxygen. Anaerobic conditions, in contrast, interrupt the cycle at 
this point, which allows CYP to reduce those substrates capable of 
accepting an electron. Therefore, CYP can catalyze reduction reac-
tions, such as azo-reduction, nitro-reduction, N-oxide reduction, 
sulfoxide reduction, and reductive dehalogenation, particularly under 
conditions of low oxygen tension. In effect, the substrate rather than 
molecular oxygen accepts electrons and is reduced. In fact, oxygen 
acts as an inhibitor of these reactions because it competes with the 
substrate for the reducing equivalents. The toxicity of many haloge-
nated alkanes is dependent on their biotransformation by reductive 
dehalogenation. The first step in reductive dehalogenation is a one-
electron reduction catalyzed by CYP, which produces a potentially 
toxic, carbon-centered radical and inorganic halide. The conversion of 
CCl4 to a trichloromethyl radical and other toxic metabolites is shown 
in Fig. 6-22. The activation of the prodrug AQ4N by N-oxide reduc-
tion to form 4QA, a potent topoisomerase II inhibitor, by the hypoxia-
inducible enzymes CYP2S1 and CYP2W1 represents a potentially 
new cancer chemotherapy, as discussed later in the section.
The oxidative desulfuration of parathion (see Fig. 6-51) 
involves the production of an intermediate that rearranges to para-
oxon (as shown in Fig. 6-52). This same intermediate can decom-
pose to 4-nitrophenol and diethylphosphorothioic acid, which 
are the same products formed by the hydrolysis of parathion 
(Fig. 6-52). In addition to facilitating the hydrolysis of phosphoric 
acid esters, CYP also catalyzes the cleavage of certain carboxylic 
acid esters and carbamates, as shown in Fig. 6-52. Carboxylic acid 
esters typically are cleaved by carboxylesterases and cholinester-
ases (see the section “Hydrolysis”), which results in the formation 
of an acid and an alcohol (R1COOCH2R2 + H2O → R1COOH + 
R2CH2OH). In contrast, CYP converts carboxylic acid esters to an 
acid plus aldehyde (R1COOCH2R2 + [O] → R1COOH + R2CHO), 
as shown in Fig. 6-52. The deacylation of loratadine, a carbamate, 
is the major route of biotransformation of this nonsedating antihis-
tamine. The reaction is catalyzed predominantly by CYP (namely, 
CYP3A4 with a minor contribution from CYP2D6), with little con-
tribution from carboxylesterases (Yumibe et al., 1996).
CYP can also catalyze the dehydrogenation of a number of 
compounds, including acetaminophen, nifedipine, and related 
dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers, sparteine, nico-
tine, and ­testosterone, as shown in Fig. 6-53. Dehydrogenation 
OH
N
C
O
CH3
H
N
C
O
CH3
H3C
H3C
H3C
H3C
CYP2E1
CYP1A2
CYP3A4
CYP3A4
CYP2D6
N-Acetylbenzo-p-quinoneimine (NAPQI)
Acetaminophen
Nifedipine
N
H
OCH3
H3C
CH3
C
O
H3CO
NO2
C
O
N
OCH3
H3C
CH3
C
O
H3CO
NO2
C
O
Dehydronifedipine
Sparteine
2-Dehydrosparteine
5-Dehydrosparteine
N
CH3
H
N
N
CH3
O
CYP2A6
Aldehyde
oxidase
Cotinine
(S)-Nicotine
(S)-Nicotine ∆1′,5′-iminium ion
N
N
N
N
N
N
O
OH
O
HO
O
O
O
OH
O
OH
HO
O
O
O
H3C
O
O
HO
O
HO
O
Digitoxoside
Digitoxoside
Digitoxigenin
Digitoxigenin bisdigitoxoside (dt2)
9′-Dehydro-dt2
15′-Dehydro-dt3
Digitoxosyl
cleavage
Digitoxosyl
cleavage
Digitoxigenin monodigitoxoside (dt1)
OH
O
–H2O
[O]
CYP2B1
[O] H2O
CYP3A4
CYP2B1
6-Dehydrotestosterone
Androstenedione
gem-diol
Epi-testosterone
Testosterone
Digitoxin(dt3)
COOH
COOH
COSCoA
Valproic acid
4-Ene valproic acid
2,4-Diene valproic acid
(CoA thioester)
Digitoxoside
Digitoxigenin
CYP2C9
β-oxidation
OH
OH
O
O
O
H
N
+
N
CH3
H
N
OH
HO
O
O
Figure 6-53.  Examples of reactions catalyzed by cytochrome P450: dehydrogenation.

286
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
by CYP converts acetaminophen to its hepatotoxic metabolite 
N-acetylbenzo-p-quinoneimine (NAPQI), as shown in Fig. 6-39. 
The formation of a double bond during the conversion of digi-
toxin (dt3) to 15′-dehydro-dt3 leads to cleavage of the termi-
nal sugar residue to produce digitoxigenin bisdigitoxoside (dt2) 
(Fig. 6-53), which can similarly be converted to 9′-dehydro-dt2, 
which undergoes digitoxosyl cleavage to digitoxigenin monodigi-
toxoside (dt1). In contrast to digitoxin, the latter metabolite is an 
excellent substrate for glucuronidation. In rats, the CYP enzymes 
responsible for converting digitoxin to dt1 (namely, the CYP3A 
enzymes) and the UGT responsible for glucuronidating dt1 are 
inducible by dexamethasone, PCN, and spironolactone, all of which 
protect rats from the toxic effects of digitoxin. The dehydrogenation 
of nicotine produces nicotine ∆1′,5′-iminium ion, which is oxidized 
by cytosolic AO to cotinine, a major metabolite of nicotine excreted 
in the urine of cigarette smokers (see Fig. 6-53). Although nico-
tine can be N-oxygenated by FMO, dehydrogenation by CYP2A6 
is responsible for 80% of the clearance of nicotine from cigarette 
smoking (Hukkanen et al., 2005).
Testosterone is dehydrogenated by CYP to two metabolites: 
6-dehydrotestosterone, which involves formation of a carbon–car-
bon double bond, and androstenedione, which involves formation 
of a carbon–oxygen double bond, as shown in Fig. 6-53. The con-
version of testosterone to androstenedione is one of several cases 
where CYP converts a primary or secondary alcohol to an aldehyde 
or ketone, respectively. The reaction can proceed by formation of a 
gem-diol (two hydroxyl groups on the same carbon atom), with sub-
sequent dehydration to a keto group, as shown in Fig. 6-29, for the 
conversion of ethanol to acetaldehyde. However, gem-diols are not 
obligatory intermediates in the oxidation of alcohols by CYP, and in 
fact the conversion of testosterone to androstenedione by CYP2B1 
(the major phenobarbital-inducible CYP enzyme in rats) does 
not involve the intermediacy of a gem-diol but proceeds by direct 
dehydrogenation (Fig. 6-53). In contrast, a gem-diol is involved 
in the formation of androstenedione from epi-testosterone (which 
is identical to testosterone except the hydroxyl group at C17 is in 
the α-configuration, not the β-configuration) (Wood et al., 1988). 
The fact that formation of androstenedione from epi-testosterone 
involves formation of a gem-diol, whereas its formation from tes-
tosterone does not, makes it difficult to generalize the mechanism 
by which CYP converts alcohols to aldehydes and ketones.
Cytochrome P450 Nomenclature  Liver microsomes from all 
mammalian species contain numerous CYP enzymes (Table 6-15), 
each with the potential to catalyze the various types of reactions 
shown in Figs. 6-46 to 6-53. In other words, all of the CYP enzymes 
expressed in liver microsomes have the potential to catalyze xeno-
biotic hydroxylation, epoxidation, dealkylation, oxygenation, 
dehydrogenation, and so forth. The broad and often overlapping 
substrate specificity of liver microsomal CYP enzymes precludes 
the possibility of naming these enzymes for the reactions they 
catalyze, which are now categorized into families and subfamilies 
and named individually on the basis of their amino acid sequence. 
As shown in Tables 6-14 and 6-15, the CYP enzymes involved in 
xenobiotic biotransformation belong mainly to the CYP1, CYP2, 
and CYP3 gene families, although on a case-by-case basis CYP 
enzymes in other gene families play a key role in xenobiotic bio-
transformation. The CYP enzymes involved in endobiotic metab-
olism generally have the same name in all mammalian species. 
Some of the xenobiotic-biotransforming CYP enzymes have the 
same name in all mammalian species, whereas others are named 
in a species-specific manner. For example, all mammalian species 
contain two CYP enzymes belonging to the CYP1A subfamily, and 
in all cases these are known as CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 because 
the function and regulation of these enzymes are highly conserved 
among mammalian species. The same is true of CYP1B1, CYP2E1, 
CYP2R1, CYP2S1, CYP2U1, and CYP2W1, all of which are 
highly conserved homologs that can be given the same name across 
mammalian species. In most other cases, functional or evolution-
ary relationships are not immediately apparent; hence, the CYP 
enzymes are named in a species-specific manner, and the names are 
assigned in chronological order regardless of the species of origin. 
For example, human liver microsomes express CYP2D6, but this 
is the only functional member of the CYP2D subfamily found in 
the human liver. CYP2D7 and CYP2D8 are human pseudogenes. 
The other members of this subfamily (i.e., CYP2D1 to CYP2D5 
and CYP2D9 onward) are the names given to CYP2D enzymes in 
other species.
Genetic Variation and Drug Interactions  Without exception, 
the levels and activity of each CYP enzyme have been shown to 
vary from one individual to the next, due to extrinsic (e.g., envi-
ronmental) and/or intrinsic (e.g., genetic) factors. Decreased CYP 
enzymatic activity can result from (1) a genetic mutation that either 
blocks the synthesis of a CYP enzyme or leads to the synthesis of 
a catalytically compromised, inactive, or unstable enzyme, which 
gives rise to the PM and IM genotypes; (2) exposure to an environ-
mental factor (such as an infectious disease or an inflammatory pro-
cess) that suppresses CYP enzyme expression; or (3) exposure to 
a xenobiotic that inhibits or inactivates a preexisting CYP enzyme. 
By inhibiting CYP, one drug can impair the biotransformation of 
another, which may lead to an exaggerated pharmacological or 
toxicological response to the second drug. In this regard, inhibition 
of CYP by a drug (and suppression of CYP by infection, vaccina-
tion, or inflammation) essentially mimics the effects of a genetic 
deficiency in CYP enzyme expression (i.e., these environmental 
factors mimic the IM or PM genotype depending on the degree to 
which they decrease CYP activity). Genetic deficiencies in CYP 
expression, CYP inhibition, and, to a lesser extent, CYP suppres-
sion all contribute significantly to interindividual variability in drug 
metabolism and toxicity, and inhibition of CYP activity is a major 
cause of drug–drug interactions. Examples of the impact of these 
genetic and environmental factors on drug metabolism and toxicity 
are given later in this section in the overviews of individual CYP 
enzymes and in the section “Inhibition of Cytochrome P450.”
Increased CYP enzymatic activity can result from (1) gene 
duplication leading to overexpression of a CYP enzyme, which 
gives rise to the UM genotype; (2) gene mutations in the coding 
or promoter region that increase expression, activity, or stability of 
CYP; (3) exposure to drugs and other xenobiotics that induce the 
synthesis or retard the degradation of CYP; or (4) exposure to drugs 
and other xenobiotics that stimulate the activity of a preexisting 
enzyme (a process known as homotropic or heterotropic activation 
depending on whether the drug stimulates its own metabolism or 
the metabolism of other drugs, respectively). Activation of CYP 
has been documented in vitro and in some in situ situations, such as 
the pronounced (up to 25-fold) activation of R-warfarin 10-hydrox-
ylation by quinidine in rabbit liver microsomes and perfused rab-
bit liver (Chen et al., 2004a). However, in general, activation does 
not appear to be a major cause of drug–drug interactions. Although 
duplication of functional CYP2D6 genes has been documented (and 
shown to be relevant to drug metabolism and safety [see the section 
“CYP2D6”]), induction of CYP by xenobiotics is the most com-
mon mechanism by which CYP enzyme activity is increased to a 
pharmacologically relevant extent. By inducing CYP, one drug can 
stimulate the metabolism of a second drug and thereby decrease or 
ameliorate its therapeutic effect. Enzyme induction is a particular 
concern when it compromises the therapeutic effectiveness of drugs

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
287
that have a narrow therapeutic index and are being used to treat a 
life-threatening illness, such as anti-HIV drugs, antirejection drugs 
(such as cyclosporine and tacrolimus), and oral anticoagulants (such 
as warfarin), or when it is used with drugs that exhibit a quantal (all-
or-nothing) dose–response relationship, such as oral contraceptive 
steroids (which either block or do not block ovulation and thereby 
provide or do not provide protection against pregnancy).
The environmental factors known to affect CYP levels include 
medications (e.g., prescription drugs and herbal remedies), foods 
(e.g., cruciferous vegetables and charcoal-broiled beef), social hab-
its (e.g., alcohol consumption and cigarette smoking), and disease 
status (diabetes, infection, inflammation, vaccination, liver and kid-
ney disease, and both hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism). When 
environmental factors influence CYP enzyme levels, considerable 
variation may be observed during repeated measures of xenobiotic 
biotransformation (e.g., drug metabolism) in the same individual. 
Such variation is not observed when alterations in CYP activity are 
determined genetically.
Due to their broad substrate specificity, it is possible that two 
or more CYP enzymes can contribute to the metabolism of a single 
compound. Three human CYP enzymes, CYP1A2, CYP2E1, and 
CYP3A4, can convert the commonly used analgesic acetaminophen 
to its hepatotoxic metabolite NAPQI (Figs. 6-38 and 6-53). It is 
also possible for a single CYP enzyme to catalyze two or more 
metabolic pathways for the same drug. For example, CYP2D6 
catalyzes both the O-demethylation and 5-hydroxylation (aromatic 
ring hydroxylation) of methoxyphenamine, and CYP3A4 catalyzes 
the 3-hydroxylation and N-oxygenation of quinidine, the 1′- and 
4-hydroxylation of midazolam, the tert-butyl-hydroxylation and 
N-dealkylation of terfenadine, and several pathways of testoster-
one oxidation, including 1β-, 2β-, 6β-, and 15β-hydroxylation and 
dehydrogenation to 6-dehydrotestosterone (Figs. 6-46 and 6-53).
The pharmacological or toxic effects of certain drugs are 
exaggerated in a significant percentage of the population due to a 
heritable deficiency in a CYP enzyme (Meyer, 1994; Tucker, 1994; 
Zhou, 2009b). The observation that individuals who are geneti-
cally deficient in a particular CYP enzyme are PMs of one or more 
drugs illustrates a very important principle, namely, that the rate 
of elimination of drugs can be largely determined by a single CYP 
enzyme. This observation seems to contradict the fact that CYP 
enzymes have broad and overlapping substrate specificities. The 
resolution to this apparent paradox lies in the fact that although 
more than one human CYP enzyme can catalyze the biotransfor-
mation of a xenobiotic, they may do so with markedly different 
affinities. Consequently, xenobiotic biotransformation in vivo, 
where only low substrate concentrations are usually achieved, is 
often determined by the CYP enzyme with the highest affinity (low-
est apparent Km) for the xenobiotic. For example, the 5-hydroxyl-
ation of lansoprazole, which represents the key route of elimination 
of this proton pump inhibitor, is catalyzed by both CYP2C19 and 
CYP3A4. However, these reactions are catalyzed by CYP3A4 with 
such low affinity that the 5-hydroxylation (and hence the clearance) 
of lansoprazole in vivo is largely determined by CYP2C19 (Pearce 
et al., 1996b). When several CYP enzymes catalyze the same reac-
tion, their relative contribution to xenobiotic biotransformation is 
determined by the kinetic parameter Vmax/Km, which is a measure of 
in vitro intrinsic metabolic clearance at low substrate concentrations 
(less than 10% of Km).
A drug whose clearance is largely determined by a single 
CYP enzyme (or any single route of elimination) is said to have 
high victim or object potential, meaning its rate of clearance will 
be decreased by genetic polymorphisms and inhibitory drugs that 
result in a loss of that particular CYP activity and increased by drugs 
and other xenobiotics that induce that particular CYP enzyme. For 
example, a drug that is largely cleared by CYP2D6 will be slowly 
metabolized in CYP2D6 PMs and rapidly metabolized in CYP2D6 
UMs, whereas a drug whose clearance is largely determined by 
CYP3A4 will be slowly metabolized in the presence of ketocon-
azole (and other CYP3A4 inhibitors) and rapidly metabolized in 
the presence of rifampin or St. John’s wort (and other CYP3A4 
inducers). The extent to which genetic polymorphisms and CYP 
inhibitors/inducers impact the disposition of a drug (or any other 
xenobiotic) is determined by fm, the fraction of clearance attribut-
able to the affected enzyme. This principle applies to all xenobiotic-
biotransforming enzymes and is explained in detail in Point 24 in 
the section “Principles of Xenobiotic Biotransformation.” Point 24 
also covers the principle of drug–drug interactions in terms of per-
petrator–victim interactions (in which the disposition of one drug, 
the victim, is impacted by a single perpetrator such as an inhibi-
tory drug or a genetic polymorphism) and perpetrator–perpetra-
tor–victim interactions, otherwise known as “maximum exposure,” 
which involves the dramatic (synergistic) impact of two perpetra-
tors blocking two parallel pathways of clearance of the victim drug 
(Collins et al., 2006; Ogilvie and Parkinson, 2014).
Accordingly, for drugs under development, considerable 
attention is paid to identifying which CYP enzyme or enzymes 
are involved in eliminating the drug, a process known as reaction 
phenotyping or enzyme mapping. Four in vitro approaches have 
been developed for reaction phenotyping (Williams et al., 2003a; 
Ogilvie et al., 2008; Zientek and Youdim, 2015; Bohnert et al., 
2016). Each has its advantages and disadvantages, and a combi-
nation of approaches is usually required to identify which human 
CYP enzyme is responsible for metabolizing a xenobiotic. The four 
approaches to reaction phenotyping are as follows:
	 1.	 Correlation analysis, which involves measuring the rate of 
xenobiotic metabolism by several samples of human liver 
microsomes and correlating reaction rates with the variation in 
the level or activity of the individual CYP enzymes in the same 
microsomal samples. This approach is successful because the 
levels of the CYP enzymes in human liver microsomes vary 
enormously from sample to sample as shown in Table 6-16.
	 2.	 Chemical inhibition, which involves an evaluation of the 
effects of known CYP enzyme inhibitors on the metabolism 
of a xenobiotic by human liver microsomes. Chemical inhibi-
tors of CYP, which are discussed later, must be used cautiously 
because most of them can inhibit more than one CYP enzyme. 
Some chemical inhibitors are metabolism-dependent inhibitors 
that require biotransformation to a metabolite that inactivates 
or noncompetitively inhibits CYP.
	 3.	 Antibody inhibition, which involves an evaluation of the effects 
of inhibitory antibodies against selected CYP enzymes on the 
biotransformation of a xenobiotic by human liver microsomes. 
Due to the ability of antibodies to inhibit selectively and non-
competitively, this method alone can potentially establish 
which human CYP enzyme is responsible for biotransforming 
a xenobiotic.
	 4.	 Biotransformation by purified or recombinant (cDNA-
expressed) human CYP enzymes, which can establish whether 
a particular CYP enzyme can or cannot biotransform a xeno-
biotic, but it does not address whether that CYP enzyme, con-
tributes substantially to reactions catalyzed by human liver 
microsomes. The information obtained with purified or recom-
binant human CYP enzymes can be improved by taking into 
account large differences in the extent to which the individual 
CYP enzymes are expressed in human liver microsomes.

288
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
The specific content of the major xenobiotic-biotransforming 
enzymes in human liver microsomes has been determined 
by mass spectrometry and the values are summarized in 
Table 6-16. The extrapolation of metabolic rates obtained 
with recombinant enzymes to those expected to occur in liver 
microsomes can be based on specific content, relative activ-
ity factors (RAF), or a combination of both called intersys-
tem extrapolation factor (ISEF) (Proctor et al., 2004; Ogilvie 
et al., 2008).
Some CYP enzymes, such as CYP1A1 and CYP1B1, are 
expressed at such low levels in human liver microsomes that they 
do not contribute significantly to the hepatic biotransformation of 
xenobiotics that are excellent substrates for these enzymes. Other 
CYP enzymes are expressed in some but not all livers, as discussed 
later under each individual enzyme subheading. It should be empha-
sized that reaction phenotyping in vitro is not always carried out 
with pharmacologically or toxicologically relevant substrate con-
centrations. As a result, the CYP enzyme that appears responsible 
for biotransforming the drug in vitro may not be the CYP enzyme 
responsible for biotransforming the drug in vivo (Ogilvie et al., 
2008). This may be particularly true of CYP3A4, which metabo-
lizes several drugs with high capacity but low affinity.
Reaction phenotyping (often in conjunction with clinical 
observation) has been used to characterize the substrate specific-
ity of many of the CYP enzymes expressed in human liver micro-
somes, as discussed later under each individual enzyme subheading. 
Examples of reactions catalyzed by individual human CYP enzymes 
are shown in Figs. 6-46 to 6-53, and lists of substrates, inhibitors, 
and inducers for each CYP enzyme are given in Table 6-17. The 
examples listed in Table 6-17 are largely based on examples cited 
by the FDA which has provided, where possible, the following 
lists to guide the conduct of in vitro and in vivo pharmacokinetic 
drug–drug interaction studies: (1) preferred and acceptable CYP 
substrates and chemical inhibitors for reaction phenotyping in vitro; 
(2) sensitive index substrates (formerly called probe substrates) to 
monitor CYP activity in vivo (a sensitive substrate is one whose 
clearance is largely [>80%] determined by a single CYP enzyme 
such that loss of that CYP enzyme causes a fivefold or higher 
increase in systemic exposure); (3) drugs that are strong, moder-
ate, or weak inhibitors of CYP enzymes in vivo; (4) preferred and 
acceptable inhibitors and inducers for use as positive controls for 
CYP inhibition and induction studies in vitro; and (5) drugs that are 
effective inducers of CYP enzymes in vivo (FDA, 2017). Similar 
and more complete lists of CYP substrates, inhibitors, and induc-
ers can be found at the University of Washington Drug Interaction 
Database (University of Washington DIDB, 2018).
The global features of the major xenobiotic-biotransforming 
human CYP enzymes are as follows:
	 1.	 Two CYP enzymes, namely, CYP2D6 and CYP3A4, metab-
olize the majority of orally effective drugs, but they often 
metabolize different drugs and they do not metabolize all 
drugs; consequently, there are many drugs whose clearance 
is largely determined by CYP enzymes other than CYP2D6 
or CYP3A4. Interindividual variation in CYP2D6, which is 
largely confined to the liver, is largely determined by genetic 
factors, whereas interindividual variation in CYP3A4, which is 
Table 6-16  
Specific Content of Individual Cytochrome P450 (CYP) Enzymes in Human Liver Microsomes (HLM)
INDIVIDUAL HLM (n = 17)†
ENZYME
POOLED HLM*
MEAN
RANGE (MINIMUM–MAXIMUM)
FOLD VARIATION 
(MAXIMUM/MINIMUM)
CYP1A2
17.7
25.1
3.26–65.5
20.1
CYP2A6
49.2
56.2
5.45–168
30.8
CYP2B6
6.86
6.72
4.05–14.9
3.7
CYP2C8
29.3
30.0
5.66–83.5
14.8
CYP2C9
80.2
76.3
40.2–115
2.9
CYP2C19
3.64
5.31
2.08–22.2
10.7
CYP2D6
11.5
17.2
6.16–36.4
5.9
CYP2E1
51.3
66.1
36.3–147
4.0
CYP3A4
64.0
60.4
6.22–270
43.4
CYP3A5
3.54
3.86
2.48–17.1
6.9
CYP3A7
ND
2.40
BLQ–9.39
NA
CYP3A43
1.30
4.10
BLQ–6.42
NA
CYP4A11
ND
21.8
9.29–46.5
5.0
CYP4F2‡
ND
14.3
1.3–27.1 
21
CYP4F3B‡
ND
11.3
6.4–20.9
3.3
P450 OR
ND
71.6
41.7–99.0
2.4
Abbreviations: ND, not determined; BLQ, below limit of quantitation; NA, not applicable; P450 OR, NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductase.
* Data from Kawakami et al. (2011).
† Unless noted otherwise, data from Ohtsuki et al. (2012).
‡ Data from Michaels and Wang (2014).

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
289
CYP1A2
CYP2A6
CYP2B6
CYP2C8
CYP2C9
CYP2C19
CYP2E1
SUB-
STRATES
Alosetron*
Caffeine*,‡,§
Duloxetine*
7-Ethoxyresorufin‡
Melatonin*
Phenacetin†
Pirfenidone*
Ramelteon*
Selegiline*
Tacrine*,‡
Tasimelteon*
Tizanidine*,**
Theophylline§,**
Coumarin†
Nicotine†
Efavirenz
Tegafur
Bupropion*,†
Efavirenz*,†,§
Propofol‡
(S)-Mephenytoin‡ 
Cyclophosphamide
Ketamine
Meperidine
Nevirapine
Ifosfamide
Pethidine
Methadone
Amodiaquine‡
Cerivastatin
Dasabuvir*
GSK1278863*
Montelukast
Paclitaxel†,**
Rosiglitazone‡,§
Repaglinide*,§
Celecoxib*
Diclofenac†
Fluoxetine‡
Flurbiprofen‡
Meloxicam
Peroxicam
Phenytoin**
Tolbutamide†,§
(S)-Warfarin†,§,**
Clobazam*
Diazepam
Esomeprazole
Fluoxetine‡
Gliclazide
(R)-Hexobarbital
(S)-Mephenytoin*,†,**
(R)-Mephobarbital
Lansoprazole*,§
Moclobemide
Omeprazole*,‡,§
Pantoprazole§
Proguanil
Tilidine*
Aniline‡
Acetaminophen
Chlorzoxazone†
Lauric acid‡
4-Nitrophenol‡
INHIBI-
TORS
Acyclovir††
Allopurinol††
Caffeine††
Cimetidine††
Ciprofloxacin§§
Clinafloxacin§§
Daidzein††
Disulfiram††
Echinacea††
Enoxacin§§
Famotidine††
Fluvoxamine§,§§
Furafylline†
Methoxsalen‡‡
Mexilitene‡‡
α-Naphthoflavone‡
Norfloxacin††
Oltipraz§§
Oral contraceptives‡‡
Propafenone††
Propranolol††
Phenylpropanolamine‡‡
Methoxsalen†
Pilocarpine‡
Selegiline
Tranylcypromine†
Tryptamine‡
Boceprevir††
Clopidogrel‡,††
Clorgyline
3-Isopropenyl-3-methyl 
diamantane‡
2-Isopropenyl-2-
methyladamantane‡
Pargyline
Phencyclidine‡
Phenelzine
Phenylethylpiperidine
Prasugrel††
Rolapitant††
Selegiline
Sertraline‡
Tenofovir††
Thio-TEPA‡
Ticlopidine‡,††
Voriconazole††
Clopidogrel 
glucuronide§§
Deferasirox‡‡
Fluvoxamine††
Gemfibrozil 
glucuronide‡,§,§§
Ketoconazole††
Montelukast†
Pioglitazone‡
Quercetin†
Rosiglitazone‡
Rosuvastatin
Teriflunomide‡‡
Trimethoprim‡,††
Amiodarone§,‡‡
Ataciguat‡‡
Azapropazone‡‡
Benzbromarone‡‡
Bucolome‡‡
Capecitabine††
Cotrimoxazole††
Etravirine††
Fluconazole‡,§,‡‡
Fluoxetine‡
Fluvastatin††
Fluvoxamine‡,††
Metronidazole††
Miconazole‡‡
Oxandrolone‡‡
Phenylbutazone‡‡
Sulfaphenazole†
Sulfinpyrazone††
Tienilic acid
Tigecycline††
Voriconazole††
Zafirlukast††
Allicin††
Armodafinil††
Carbamazepine††
Cimetidine††
Esomeprazole‡‡
Efavirenz‡‡
Etravirine††
Felbamate††
Fluconazole§§
Fluoxetine‡‡
Fluvoxamine§,§§
Human growth hormone 
(rhGH)††
Ketoconazole††
Moclobemide§,‡‡
Nootkatone‡
Omeprazole§,‡‡
Oral contraceptives††
Ticlopidine‡,§§
Voriconazolee
Clomethiazole‡
Diallyldisulfide‡
Diethyldithiocarbamate‡
Disulfiram§
Isoniazid‡‡
Table 6-17  
Examples of Clinically Relevant Substrates, Inhibitors, and Inducers of the Major Human Liver Microsomal P450 Enzymes Involved in Xenobiotic 
Biotransformation
(continued)
Downloaded by [ Weill Cornell Medical College Library 82.154.40.205] at [05/19/19]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

290
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
CYP1A2
CYP2A6
CYP2B6
CYP2C8
CYP2C9
CYP2C19
CYP2E1
Rofecoxib§§
Terbinafine††
Thiabendazole‡‡
Ticlopidine††
Vemurafenib‡‡
Verapamil††
Zafirlukast§§
Zileuton‡‡
INDUCERS
Cigarette smoking†††
Lansoprazole‡
Omeprazole†,†††
3-Methylcholanthrene†
Montelukast
Moricizine†††
β-Naphthoflavone†
Phenobarbital†††
Phenytoin***
Rifampin†††
Ritonivir†††
TCDD
Teriflunomide†††
Dexamethasone†
Pyrazole‡
Carbamazepine‡‡‡
Efavirenz***
Nevirapine†††
Phenobarbital†
Phenytoin‡
Rifampin***
Ritonavir†††
St. John’s wort***
Carbamazepine†††
Oral contraceptives†††
Phenobarbital‡
Rifampin†,§,***
Aprepitant†††
Bosentan†††
Carbamazepine***
Enzalutamide†††
Phenobarbital†††
Rifampin***
Ritonavir†††
St. John’s wort†††
Artemisinin†††
Carbamazepine***
Efavirenz***
Enzalutamide†††
Ginkgo***
Phenobarbital
Rifampin†,§,***
St. John’s wort***
Cigarette smoking***
Ethanol§
Isoniazid
CYP2D6
CYP3A4
SUBSTRATES
Table 6-17  
(Continued)
Atomoxetine*,§
Amitriptyline
Aripiprazole
Brofaromine
(±)-Bufuralol†
(S)-Chlorpheniramine
Chlorpromazine
Clomipramine
Codeine
Debrisoquine‡
Desipramine*,§
Dextromethorphan*,†,§
Dolasetron
Doxepin
Duloxetine
Eliglustat*
Encainide*
Methylphenidate
Metoprolol*
Mexiletine
Morphine
Nebivolol*
Nicergoline*
Nortriptyline
Ondansetron
Paroxetine
Perhexilene
Perphenazine*
Pimozide**
Propafenone
(+)-Propranolol
Risperidone*
Sparteine
Tamoxifen
Alfentanil*,**
Alfuzosin
Alisporivir*
Almorexant
Alprazolam
Amlodipine
Amprenavir
Aplaviroc*
Aprepitant*
Artemether
Astemiziole**
Atazanavir
Atorvastatin
Avanafil*
Azithromycin
Barnidipine
Bexarotene
Cyclosporine**
Danoprevir*
Darifenacin*
Darunavir*
Dasatinib*
Depsipeptide
Dexamethasone
Dextromethorphan‡
Diergotamine**
α-Dihydroergocriptine
Dihydroergotamine**
Disopyramide
Docetaxel
Domperidone
Dronedarone*
Dutasteride
Ebastine
Etoricoxib
Felodipine*,§
Fentanyl**
Fluticasone*
Gallopamil
Gefitinib
Gepirone
Gestodene
Granisetron
Grazoprevir*
Halofantrine
Ibrutinib*
Imatinib
Indinavir*
Isavuconazole*
Isradipine
Itraconazole
Methylprednisolone
Mexazolam
Midazolam*,†,§
Midostaurin*
Mifepristone
Mosapride
Naloxegol*
Neratinib*
Nicardipine
Nifedipine‡
Nimoldipine
Nisoldipine*
Nitrendipine
Norethindrone
Oxatomide
Oxybutynin
Paritaprevir*
Saquinavir*
Sildenafil*,§
Sibutramine
Simeprevir*
Simvastatin*,§
Sirolimus*,**
Sunitinib
Tacrolimus**
Tadalafil
Telithromycin
Terfenadine‡,**
Testosterone†
Tiagabine
Ticagrelor*
Tilidine*
Tipranavir*
Tirilazad
Downloaded by [ Weill Cornell Medical College Library 82.154.40.205] at [05/19/19]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
291
INHIBITORS
Amiodarone††
Buproprion§§
Celecoxib††
Chlorpheniramine
Cimetidine††
Cinacalet‡‡
Clobazam††
Clomipramine
Dacomitinib§§
Desvenlafaxine††
Diltiazem††
Diphenhydramine††
Duloxetine‡‡
Echinacea††
Ecstasy§§
Escitalopram††
Febuxostat††
Fluoxetine§,§§
Gefitinib††
Haloperidol
Hydralazine††
Hydroxychloroquine††
Imatinib††
Methadone††
Mibefradil
Oral contraceptives††
Paroxetine§,§§
Pazopanib††
Propafenone††
Quinidine†,§,§§
Ranitidine††
Ritonavir††
Sertraline††
Telithromycin††
Terbinafine‡‡
Verapamil††
Vemurafenib††
Alprazolam††
Amiodarone††
Amlodipine††
Amprenavir‡‡
Aprepitant‡‡
Atazanavir§,‡‡
Atorvastatin††
Azamulin‡
Bicalutamide††
Bosentan
Boceprevir§§
Cilostazol††
Cimetidine††
Ciprofloxacin‡‡
Clarithromycin§,§§
Cobicistat§§
Conivaptan§§
Crizotinib‡‡
Cyclosporine††
Darunavir‡‡
Diltiazem‡‡
Erythromycin‡‡
Felbamate
Fluconazole‡‡
Fluoxetine††
Fluvoxamine††
Fosamprenavir‡‡
Gestodene
Ginkgo††
Goldenseal††
Grapefruit Juice‡‡,§§
Idelalisib§§
Imatinib‡‡
Indinavir§,§§
Isoniazid††
Itraconazole†,§,§§
Ketoconazole†,§,§§
Lapatinib††
Lopinavir§§
Mibefradil§§
Nefazodone§,§§
Nelfinavir§,§§
Nilotinib††
Oral contraceptives††
Pazopanib††
Posaconazole§§
Ranitidine††
Ranolazine††
Ritonavir§,‡‡,§§
Roxithromycin
Saquinavir§,§§
St. John’s wort
Telaprevir§§
Telithromycin§,§§
Ticagrelor††
Tipranavir††
Troleandomycin‡
Verapamil‡,‡‡
Voriconazole§§
Zileuton††
(continued)
Fentanyl
(S)-Fluoxetine*
Haloperidol (reduced)
Ibogaine*
Imipramine
Loperamide
(R)-Metoprolol*
Thioridazine**
Timolol
Tolperisone*
Tolterodine*
Tramadol
Traxoprodil*
(R)-Venlafaxine*
Vernakalant*
Bortezomib
Bosutinib*
Brecanavir
Brotizolam
Budesonide*
Buspirone*,§
Capravirine
Carbamazepine
Casopitant*
Cibenzoline
Cilastazol
Cisapride**
Clarithromycin
Clindamycin
Clopidogrel
Cobimetinib*
Conivaptan*
Eletriptan*,§
Elvitegravir*
Eplerenone*
Ergotamine**
Erlotinib
Erythromycin‡
Eplerenone
Ethosuximide
Etoperidone
Everolimus*
Ethinyl estradiol
Ivabradine*
Ivacaftor*
Karenitecin
Ketamine
Laquinimod
Levomethadyl
Lomitapide*
Lonafarnib
Loperamide
Lopinavir*
Lovastatin*,§
Lumefantrine
Lurasidone*
Maraviroc*
Medroxyprogesterone
Perospirone
Pimozide**
Pranidipine
Praziquantel
Quetiapine*
Quinidine**
Quinine
Reboxetine
Ridaforolimus*
Rifabutin
Ritonavir
Rosuvastatin
Ruboxistaurin
Salmeterol
Tofisopam
Tolvaptan*
Triazolam‡
Trimetrexate
Ulipristal*
Vardenafil*
Vicriviroc*
Vinblastine
Vincristine
Vinorelbine
Voclosporin*
Ziprasidone
Zonisamide
Downloaded by [ Weill Cornell Medical College Library 82.154.40.205] at [05/19/19]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

292
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
CYP2D6
CYP3A4
INDUCERS
Carbamazepine***
Corticosteroids 
(pregnancy)***
Phenobarbital***
Rifampin***
Amprenavir†††
Aprepitant†††
Armodafinil†††
Avasimibe‡‡‡
Bosentan***
Carbamazepine§,‡‡‡
Clobazam
Echinacea†††
Clotrimazole
Cyproterone acetate
Dabrafenib†††
Dexamethasone‡
Echinacea†††
Efavirenz***
Enzalutamide‡‡‡
Etravirine***
Etoposide
Genistein†††
Guggulsterone
Hyperforin
Lersivirine†††
Lopinavir†††
Lovastatin
Modafinil***
Mifepristone
Mitotane‡‡‡
Nafcillin***
Nelfinavir
Nifedipine
Omeprazole
Paclitaxel‡
PCBs
Phenobarbital‡
Phenytoin‡,‡‡‡
Pioglitazone†††
Prednisone†††
Rifabutin
Rifampin†,§,‡‡‡
Rifapentine‡
Ritonavir
Rufinamide†††
Semagacestat†††
St. John’s wort‡‡‡
Simvastatin
Spironolactone
Sulfinpyrazole
Talviraline†††
Telotristat ethyl†††
Thioridazine†††
Topotecan
Troglitazone‡
Troleandomycin
Vemurafenib†††
* Classified by the FDA as a “Sensitive substrate” (i.e., drugs whose plasma AUC values have been shown to increase by more than or equal to fivefold when co-administered with a known CYP inhibitor).
† FDA-preferred in vitro substrate, inhibitor or inducer.
‡ FDA-acceptable in vitro substrate, inhibitor or inducer.
§ FDA-provided examples of in vivo substrates, inhibitors, or inducers for oral administration. Substrates in this category have plasma AUCs that are increased by at least twofold (fivefold for CYP3A4 substrates) 
when co-administered with inhibitors of the enzyme. Inhibitors in this category increase the AUC of substrates for that enzyme by at least twofold (fivefold for CYP3A4). Inducers in this category decrease the 
plasma AUC of substrates for that enzyme by at least 30%.
** Classified by the FDA as a “Substrate with narrow therapeutic range” (i.e., drugs whose exposure response indicates that increases in their exposure levels by concomitant use of CYP inhibitors may lead to seri-
ous safety concerns such as Torsades de Pointes).
†† Classified by the FDA as a “Weak inhibitor” (i.e., caused a greater than or equal to 1.25-fold but less than twofold increase in plasma AUC or 20% to 50% decrease in the clearance of sensitive CYP substrates 
when the inhibitor was given at the highest approved dose and the shortest dosing interval in clinical evaluations).
‡‡ Classified by the FDA as a “Moderate inhibitor” (i.e., caused a greater than or equal to twofold but less than fivefold increase in plasma AUC or 50% to 80% decrease in the clearance of sensitive CYP sub-
strates when the inhibitor was given at the highest approved dose and the shortest dosing interval in clinical evaluations).
§§ Classified by the FDA as a “Strong inhibitor” (i.e., caused a greater than or equal to fivefold increase in plasma AUC or greater than or equal to 80% decrease in the clearance of CYP substrates in clinical 
evaluations).
*** Classified by the FDA as a “Moderate inducer” (i.e., caused a greater than or equal to 50% to 80% decrease in AUC of CYP substrates in clinical evaluations).
††† Classified by the FDA as a “Weak inducer” (i.e., caused a greater than or equal to 20% to 50% decrease in AUC of CYP substrates in clinical evaluations).
‡‡‡ Classified by the FDA as a “Strong inducer” (i.e., caused a greater than or equal to 80% decrease in AUC of CYP substrates in clinical evaluations).
Note: All FDA classifications are based on information available as of February 21, 2012 at the following URL: http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/DevelopmentResources/DrugInteractions-
Labeling/ucm093664.htm.
Table 6-17  
(Continued)
Downloaded by [ Weill Cornell Medical College Library 82.154.40.205] at [05/19/19]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
293
expressed in liver and small intestine, is largely determined by 
environmental factors (such as inhibitory and inducing drugs).
	 2.	 The induction of CYP3A4 is often associated with induction 
of CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, and CYP2C19. 
CYP1A2 and CYP2E1 are also inducible enzymes, but they 
are induced by different mechanisms and xenobiotics. CYP 
induction is invariably associated with the upregulation of 
other xenobiotic-biotransforming enzymes, as discussed later 
in the section “Induction of Cytochrome P450: Xenosensors.” 
CYP2D6 is considered a noninducible enzyme despite in vitro 
and clinical data to the contrary (Spina et al., 1996; Madan 
et al., 2003; Farooq et al., 2016), as discussed later in the sec-
tion “CYP2D6.”
	 3.	 Genetic polymorphisms have been identified for all of the 
human CYP enzymes involved in drug metabolism. Zhou 
et al. (2009a) estimated that each human CYP gene contains 
an average of about 15 nonsynonymous SNPs, many of which 
are associated with altered drug metabolism or susceptibility 
to disease (a selection of which will be discussed later under 
each individual enzyme subheading). The incidence of CYP 
polymorphisms varies greatly among different ethnic groups. 
In the case of CYP2D6, genetic polymorphisms are common 
among Caucasian populations and impact the metabolism, 
safety, and efficacy of many drugs, as summarized in Point 23 
in the section “Principles of Xenobiotic Biotransformation.” 
Based on CYP2D6 genotype, individuals can be categorized 
as PMs, IMs, EMs, and UMs (and the EMs can be subdivided 
into low, medium, and high EMs), as shown in Table 6-7. 
There is a vast literature describing SNPs and other genetic 
polymorphisms affecting the human CYP enzymes involved 
in xenobiotic biotransformation, too large—and often too 
confusing—to be summarized here (reviewed by Zhou et al. 
[2009a]). Information on CYP genetic polymorphisms can be 
found at PharmVar, 2018. Genetic polymorphisms in the cod-
ing region can increase or decrease CYP activity, sometimes 
in a substrate-dependent manner, making generalizations diffi-
cult. They can also alter the stability of CYP enzymes without 
altering their enzymatic activity. Genetic polymorphisms in the 
promoter region can impair transcription (and thereby decrease 
CYP levels) or increase CYP levels by increasing its consti-
tutive expression or inducibility by activated xenosensors. In 
many cases neither the impact of a particular SNP is known, 
nor it is known in many cases whether the SNP is in linkage 
disequilibrium with another genetic polymorphism. Studies 
on a genetic polymorphism in CYP2C8—the *3 allele—illus-
trate the complexity of this field of research. The *3 allele of 
CYP2C8 is in partial linkage disequilibrium with the *2 allele 
of CYP2C9 (i.e., individuals with one allelic variant will likely 
have the second too). Furthermore, based on in vitro studies 
CYP2C*3 was considered a loss-of-function allele, but in vivo 
studies with three different CYP2C8 substrates established that 
the CYP2C8*3 allele is a gain-of-function allele. These find-
ings sound a word of caution about interpreting the impact of 
genetic polymorphisms on drug disposition, adverse effects, 
efficacy, and disease processes. That said, there are many cases 
of CYP genetic polymorphisms having a reproducible, clini-
cally relevant impact on drug disposition, examples of which 
are given below under each individual enzyme subheading.
There are also many reports of CYP polymorphisms predis-
posing individuals to diseases or conferring protection against 
them. This literature is often confusing. For example, in the case of 
CYP2J2 (which converts arachidonic acid to EETs that are thought 
to be cardioprotective), a genetic polymorphism in the promoter 
region that causes a decrease in CYP2J2 expression was examined 
in four separate studies for its effects on coronary artery disease 
(Zordoky and El-Kadi, 2010). The CYP2J2 polymorphism was 
associated with an increased risk of coronary artery disease in one 
study (in Germans) and a decreased risk in another study (in African 
Americans) and had no discernible effect in two other studies (in 
Swedes and a Caucasian population). Four other studies on the 
impact of the same genetic polymorphism of CYP2J2 (i.e., lower 
expression) on hypertension gave similar results: the first showed 
increased risk (in Russians), second showed decreased risk (in 
Caucasians [but only in males]), and third and fourth showed no 
association. Given the incongruity of these studies, the impact of 
genetic polymorphisms on disease generally will not be discussed 
below with a few notable exceptions, such as the impact of CYP1A 
and CYP2A6 polymorphisms on cigarette-smoking-induced cancer 
of the lung and upper aerodigestive tract and selected other cases.
The salient features of each of the major xenobiotic-bio-
transforming CYP enzymes, with emphasis on the CYP enzymes 
in human liver microsomes, are summarized in the following 
subsections.
CYP1A1, CYP1A2, and CYP1B1  All mammalian species exam-
ined possess three members of the CYP1 family, namely, CYP1A1, 
CYP1A2, and CYP1B1. They have attracted considerable atten-
tion because they are highly inducible by AhR agonists such as 
dioxin and PAHs and because they play a major role in the acti-
vation/detoxication of carcinogenic/mutagenic compounds such 
as PAHs, aflatoxin B1, various aromatic amines/amides, and PhIP 
and 2-amino-3-methylimidazol[4,5f]quinoline (IQ), two repre-
sentatives of the many heterocyclic amines (products of amino acid 
pyrolysis) known as cooked food mutagens. A possible d’Artagnan 
to these three musketeers is CYP2S1, which resembles CYP1A1 
and CYP1B1 in being an AhR-inducible, extrahepatic enzyme 
capable of metabolizing PAHs, but it will be discussed later in 
the section “CYP2R1, CYP2S1, CYP2U1, and CYP2W1.” High 
levels of CYP1A2 are expressed in the liver (see Table 6-16) but 
not in extrahepatic tissues. In contrast, the liver contains low or 
undetectable levels of CYP1A1 and CYP1B1, but these enzymes 
are expressed in a great number of extrahepatic tissues (Shimada, 
2006). Only CYP1A2 contributes significantly to the in vivo clear-
ance of drugs (Zhou et al., 2010b).
The ability of CYP1 enzymes to activate a wide variety of 
compounds to mutagenic metabolites underscores the widespread 
practice of using liver microsomes from Aroclor 1254–induced rats 
in the Ames bacterial mutagenicity assay (because these micro-
somes have high levels of CYP1A1 and CYP1A2, among many 
other induced CYP enzymes). This and many other in vitro studies, 
including heterologous expression of CYP1 enzymes in mamma-
lian cells, have established that CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 are adept 
at oxidizing PAHs such as B[a]P and DMBA to DNA-reactive 
diol epoxides, as illustrated in Fig. 6-14. (A second pathway of 
DMBA activation is shown later in the section “Sulfonation.”) 
Similar in vitro studies have clearly established that CYP1A2 is 
highly effective in catalyzing the initial step (N-hydroxylation) 
in the activation of numerous carcinogenic aromatic amines 
(4-aminobiphenyl, 2-aminonaphthalene, 2-AF), aromatic amides 
(2-acetylaminofluorine), and heterocyclic amines (PhIP, IQ, etc.) 
to mutagenic metabolites (these activation pathways will be dis-
cussed in the sections “Glucuronidation and Formation of Acyl-
CoA Thioesters” for 2-aminonaphthalene, “Sulfonation” for 
2-AAF, and “Acetylation” for 2-aminofluorence and 2-AAF). In 
the case of PAHs, it was noted that these carcinogens are also AhR

294
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
agonists; hence, it was long assumed that PAHs can induce CYP1 
enzymes and thereby induce their own activation to carcinogenic 
metabolites. Consequently, it came as a huge surprise when experi-
ments with knockout mice indicated that these in vitro findings did 
not translate in a predictable manner to the in vivo situation (Nebert 
and Dalton, 2006; Shimada, 2006; Ma and Lu, 2007; Nebert 
et al., 2013). Compared with their wild-type littermates, CYP1A1, 
CYP1A2, and CYP1B1 knockout mice would be expected to be 
less susceptible and possibly resistant to the tumorigenic effects 
of PAHs such as B[a]P and DMBA, and to aromatic amines such 
as 4-aminobiphenyl and cooked food mutagens. However, con-
trary to expectation, deletion of CYP1A1 potentiated the toxicity 
of oral B[a]P, which caused increased spleen and thymus weight, 
leukocytopenia, extreme hypercellularity in the bone marrow, 
and death within 30 days in CYP1A1 knockout mice but not in 
wild-type mice. CYP1A1 knockout mice also had higher levels 
of B[a]P-DNA adducts in extrahepatic tissues. However, both 
wild-type mice and CYP1A1 knockout mice were susceptible to 
B[a]P toxicity when the PAH was administered by intraperitoneal 
injection instead of the oral route of administration. These find-
ings strongly suggest that induction of CYP1A1 in the intestine 
and liver and metabolism of PAHs in these presystemic organs 
provide protection against orally administered PAHs (Nebert and 
Dalton, 2006; Shimada, 2006; Ma and Lu, 2007; Nebert et al., 
2013).
Contrary to expectation, deletion of CYP1A2 similarly poten-
tiates the toxicity and liver tumorigenicity of aromatic/heterocyclic 
amines. Deletion of CYP1A2 (CYP1A2 null mice) increased the 
toxicity of 4-aminobiphenyl (methemoglobinemia), adduct forma-
tion in the liver and bladder (two targets of arylamine carcinoge-
nicity in rodents), and the incidence of hepatocellular tumors and 
preneoplastic foci. Deletion of CYP1A2 likewise increased adduct 
and tumor formation by the cooked food mutagens (heterocyclic 
amines) known as PhIP and IQ. These results strongly suggest that 
the role of CYP1A2 in aromatic/heterocyclic amine/amide metabo-
lism is protective, and that enzymes other than CYP1A2 (such as 
peroxidases, extrahepatic CYP enzymes, and/or UGTs) play an 
important role in their activation (or, alternatively, it is the parent 
compound that causes tumor formation) (Nebert and Dalton, 2006; 
Shimada, 2006; Ma and Lu, 2007).
In contrast to the unexpected results observed with CYP1A1 
and CYP1A2 knockout mice, gene deletion of CYP1B1 does in 
fact have the anticipated protective effect against PAH tumorigenic-
ity. CYP1B1 mice are completely protected against DMBA tumor 
formation (Nebert and Dalton, 2006; Shimada, 2006; Ma and Lu, 
2007). Similar protection against DMBA and/or B[a]P has been 
achieved with CYP1B1 inhibitors such as 1-ethinylpyrene (an irre-
versible inhibitor of both CYP1B1 and CYP1A1) and the specific 
(or more selective) CYP1B1 inhibitor 1,4-phenylenebis(methylene)-
selonocyanate (p-XSC). These results suggest CYP1B1 plays a 
key role in activating PAHs to diol epoxides that cause skin and 
mammary tumors in experimental animals. Of particular interest 
is the finding that, although both CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 convert 
PAHs to DNA-reactive diol epoxides, the latter enzyme does so 
with higher affinity (Nebert and Dalton, 2006; Shimada, 2006; Ma 
and Lu, 2007).
The studies in knockout mice establish that induction of 
CYP1A1 protects against oral PAH toxicity (through first-pass 
[presystemic] elimination) but does not protect against parenter-
ally administered PAH toxicity. In humans, the most prevalent 
exposure to parenterally administered PAHs is through cigarette 
smoking. Not surprisingly, therefore, a large number of studies 
have examined the impact of genetic polymorphisms in CYP1A1 
and, to a lesser extent, in CYP1B1 on the incidence of lung and 
upper aerodigestive tract cancers in cigarette smokers and, in 
some cases, nonsmokers (Chen et al., 2010, 2011b; Zhan et al., 
2011). Allelic variants that increase CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 have 
been investigated for their potential to predispose to environmental 
tobacco smoke (ETS)–induced lung, upper aerodigestive tract, and 
other cancers. In the case of CYP1A1, the focus has been on two 
mutually linked polymorphisms, namely, *2A and *2B; the for-
mer is a point mutation in the 3′-flanking region and is commonly 
called the MspI polymorphism. By itself MspI has no effect on 
CYP1A1 activity or expression. However, MspI (*2A) is linked to 
*2B, a point mutation in exon 7 that leads to an Ile462Val substitu-
tion, which is near the heme-binding site. The latter polymorphism 
is associated with increased activity or inducibility of CYP1A1 
(Crofts et al., 1994). In the case of CYP1B1, the focus of atten-
tion has been on the *3 allele caused by a Leu432Val substitution 
that increases CYP1B1 activity (Li et al., 2000). Studies of the 
impact of these gain-of-function polymorphisms of CYP1A1 and 
CYP1B1 on the incidence of lung and other cancers are numerous 
and the outcomes varied. Within a study, an association between 
gain-of-function alleles and cancer incidence is often found in a 
subgroup based on ethnicity or gender, and in some studies the 
association (increased risk) is observed in both smokers and non-
smokers. In the case of CYP1A1, two meta-analysis studies, one 
based on 18,397 subjects (Zhan et al., 2011) and the other based 
on 30,368 subjects (Chen et al., 2011b), concluded that the over-
all risk of cigarette-smoking lung cancer posed by the gain-of-
function polymorphism in CYP1A1 was low (odds ratio ~1.2) but 
that slightly higher risks could be discerned in subgroups based 
on ethnicity. In the case of CYP1B1, a meta-analysis based on 
6501 subjects similarly concluded that the overall risk of cigarette-
smoking lung cancer posed by the gain-of-function polymorphism 
in CYP1B1 was low (odds ratio 1.46) but variable among different 
ethnic groups (Chen et al., 2010). The authors concluded that the 
gain-of-function polymorphism in CYP1B1, which had a larger 
odds ratio than that of CYP1A1, was a low-penetrant risk for 
developing lung cancer.
The early studies of CYP1A1 induction were based on mea-
surement of aryl hydrocarbon hydroxylase (AHH) activity, which 
took advantage of the conversion of B[a]P to the fluorescent metab-
olite 3-hydroxy-B[a]P (Conney, 1982). This assay was supplanted 
when it was discovered that CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 catalyze 7-eth-
oxyresorufin O-dealkylation (EROD) to form the highly fluores-
cent metabolite resorufin, which is one of the reactions shown in 
Fig. 6-50 (Burke and Mayer, 1974). These studies are of histori-
cal interest because they provided some of the earliest evidence 
for the existence of multiple forms of CYP, one of which (namely, 
CYP1A1) was highly inducible by 3-methylcholanthrene. Why was 
3-methylcholanthrene studied for its effects on AHH activity? It 
was studied because of the observation reported in 1952 that treat-
ing rats with a low dose of one carcinogen, namely, 3-methylcho-
lanthrene, could delay or entirely prevent liver tumor formation 
by a second carcinogen, namely, 3′-methyl-4-dimethylaminoazo-
benzene (Ma and Lu, 2007). Therefore, the more recent studies in 
knockout mice reinforced (arguably rediscovered) the protective 
effect of CYP1 induction (Nebert et al., 2013). The possibility that 
CYP1A induction is associated with adverse effects stemmed in 
part from the discovery that dioxin (or TCDD), an industrial and 
environmental chemical that is highly toxic to certain species, is an 
extraordinarily potent inducer of CYP1A enzymes in rodents, and 
that strain differences in dioxin toxicity in mice correlate with CYP 
inducibility (Poland and Glover, 1974). As outlined in the section 
“Induction of Cytochrome P450: Xenosensors,” dioxin is the most

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
295
potent AhR agonist known, and it is this xenosensor, not the induc-
tion of CYP1A enzymes per se, that mediates the toxicity of dioxin, 
which is abrogated in AhR knockout mice. However, the impact of 
CYP1 gene deletion on the teratogenic effects of dioxin is interest-
ing. Gene deletion of CYP1A1 or CYP1B1 has no effect on dioxin 
teratogenicity. However, gene deletion of CYP1A2 in dams predis-
poses to dioxin teratogenicity by exposing the embryos to higher 
levels of dioxin. The loss of CYP1A2 does not result in decreased 
metabolism of dioxin, which is essentially metabolically stable, 
but increased exposure to dioxin is likely due to loss of hepatic 
binding of dioxin to CYP1A2 (Dragin et al., 2006). In addition to 
metabolizing PAHs, CYP1B1 also catalyzes the 4-hydroxylation of 
17β-estradiol, which produces a catechol that can potentially oxi-
dize to a toxic ortho-quinone. Methylation of 4-hydroxyestradiol 
acts as a detoxication pathway in some tissues, as discussed in the 
section “Methylation.”
CYP1 enzymes are regulated by AhR and its DNA-binding 
partner ARNT, which is discussed later in the section “Induction 
of Cytochrome P450: Xenosensors.” Numerous endogenous com-
pounds are AhR activators and substrates for CYP1 enzymes, indi-
cating CYP1A enzymes play an important role in the disposition of 
endogenous compounds. Some of the most potent endogenous AhR 
activators identified to date (with binding affinities comparable to 
3-MC and BNF) are various tryptophan derivatives such as kyn-
urenine, kynurenic acid, FICZ (6-formylindolo[3,2-b]carbazole), 
ITE (2-(1’H-indole-3’-carbonyl)-thiazole-4-carboxylic acid methyl 
ester), and condensation products formed from indole-3-carbinol 
(I3C), such as DIM (3,3’-diindoylmethane, a dimer of I3C) and ICZ 
(indolo[3,2-b]carbazole, another of dimer of I3C) (Rannug et al., 
1987; Bjeldanes et al., 1991; Heath-Pagliuso et al., 1998; Bergander 
et al., 2004; Henry et al., 2006; Chiaro et al., 2007; DiNatale et al., 
2010; Opitz et al., 2011; Wincent et al., 2012). I3C is one of many 
dietary constituents that activate AhR and induce CYP1 enzymes. 
The role of intestinal CYP1A1 in preventing systemic exposure to 
phytochemicals was demonstrated in genetically modified mice 
with a selective loss of ARNT (the DNA-binding partner of AhR) 
from the intestine, which selectively blocks CYP1A1 expression in 
the intestine (Ito et al., 2007). In these mice, CYP1A1 was markedly 
induced in the liver and all extrahepatic tissues (including brain), a 
finding attributed to systemic exposure to dietary phytochemicals 
like I3C in the diet.
FICZ is a photoproduct of tryptophan; although it is a potent 
AhR activator it also is rapidly metabolized by CYP1 enzymes 
(Bergander et al., 2004; Wincent et al., 2012). In the eye and skin, 
FICZ is an auto-inducer; it activates AhR, induces CYP1A1 and 
CYP1B1, and thereby induces the metabolism of FIZC and other 
photoproducts of tryptophan. Like FICZ, another tryptophan prod-
uct, namely melatonin, can potentially induce its own metabolism 
because melatonin is an AhR activator and a substrate for CYP1A1, 
CYP1A2, and CYP1B1 (Ma et al., 2005; Hu et al., 2007). CYP1B1 
is expressed in the eye, and genetic polymorphisms that decrease 
CYP1B1 function are associated with primary congenital glaucoma, 
possibly due to impaired metabolism of FICZ and other photoprod-
ucts of tryptophan. CYP1B1 knockout mice also have structural eye 
defects, which suggest that CYP1B1 has an important physiological 
role in eye development.
In addition to being under the transcriptional control of 
AhR, the expression of human CYP1B1 is controlled posttran-
scriptionally by the microRNA known as miR-27b, a small non-
coding RNA that blocks the synthesis of CYP1B1 by binding 
to near-perfect matching sequences in the 3′ untranslated region 
of CYP1B1. The level of miR-27b is decreased and the level of 
CYP1B1 is correspondingly increased (overexpressed) in breast 
cancerous cells (and other cancerous tissues) (Tsuchiya et al., 
2006). The overexpression of CYP1B1 in malignant cells (cou-
pled with its ability to activate xenobiotics to reactive metabo-
lites) is being exploited to activate a prodrug to a cytotoxic 
metabolite as a possible cancer treatment. A related approach 
is the development of CYP1B1 DNA vaccine, which has been 
shown in clinical trials to kill CYP1B1-expressing cancer cells 
(Maecker et al., 2003).
Of the three CYP1 enzymes, only CYP1A2 contributes 
significantly to the in vivo clearance of drugs (Gunes and Dahl, 
2008; Zhou et al., 2010b). Drugs and other xenobiotics that are 
substrates, inhibitors, or inducers of human CYP1A2 are shown in 
Table 6-17. CYP1A2 catalyzes the O-dealkylation of phenacetin 
and the 4-hydroxylation of acetanilide, both of which produce acet-
aminophen, which can be converted by CYP1A2 and other CYP 
enzymes to NAPQI, a toxic quinoneimine (Fig. 6-39). As shown 
in Fig. 6-50, CYP1A2 catalyzes the N3-demethylation of caffeine 
to paraxanthine. By quantifying rates of formation of paraxanthine 
in blood, urine, or saliva or by quantifying the exhalation of iso-
topically labeled CO2 from 13C- or 14C-labeled caffeine, the N3-
demethylation of caffeine can be used as an in vivo probe or index 
of CYP1A2 activity, which varies enormously from one individual 
to the next.
As in the case of CYP1A1 and CYP1B1, the function and 
regulation of CYP1A2 are reasonably conserved across mamma-
lian species, but there are some notable differences. For example, 
furafylline is a metabolism-dependent inhibitor of human but not 
rodent CYP1A2 (Racha et al., 1998) and omeprazole and other pro-
ton pump inhibitors are inducers of human but not rodent CYP1A2 
(Diaz et al., 1990).
Although the levels of CYP1A2 vary enormously from one 
individual to the next, genetic defects in CYP1A2 (i.e., CYP1A2 
PMs) are extremely rare. Several clinical studies have reported gen-
der differences in CYP1A2, with most—but not all—studies report-
ing slightly higher CYP1A2 in males compared with females (with 
wide variation in both genders). Rasmussen et al. (2002) reported 
that, based on a clinical study of caffeine metabolism in 378 indi-
viduals, males have higher CYP1A2 activity than females. In 2014 
the FDA recommended that, due to their lower activity of CYP1A2, 
women should be administered half the dose administered to men 
for zolpidem (Intermezzo) and zolpidem-containing drugs such as 
Ambien, Edluar, and Zolpimist (FDA, 2018). Although oral contra-
ceptive treatment reduces CYP1A2 activity, the gender difference 
in CYP1A2 was still significant even when women on oral contra-
ceptive steroids were excluded from the analysis (Rasmussen et al., 
2002). Rasmussen et al. (2002) also demonstrated a strong correla-
tion in CYP1A2 activity between identical (monozygous) twins and 
concluded that, despite the large number of environmental factors 
that can potentially influence CYP1A2 expression (such as ciga-
rette smoking and treatment with proton pump inhibitors, which 
induce CYP1A2, and oral contraceptive therapy, which suppresses 
CYP1A2), genetic factors account for 70% to 75% of the observed 
variation in CYP1A2 activity. Some but not all studies suggest an 
association between genetic polymorphisms that impair CYP1A2 
function and elevated levels of clozapine. Decreased levels of clo-
zapine are observed in cigarette smokers (Gunes and Dahl, 2008). 
In conjunction with caffeine consumption, a genetic polymorphism 
that decreases CYP1A2 expression and impairs caffeine metabo-
lism is associated with a small increase in the risk of hypertension 
and nonfatal myocardial infarction (Zordoky and El-Kadi, 2010).
CYP2A6, CYP2A7, and CYP2A13  Enzymes belonging to the 
CYP2A gene family show marked species differences in catalytic 
function. For example, two of the three CYP2A enzymes expressed

296
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
in the rat liver, namely, CYP2A1 and CYP2A2, primarily cata-
lyze the 7α- and 15α-hydroxylation of testosterone, respectively. 
In contrast, the CYP2A enzyme expressed in the human liver, 
namely, CYP2A6, catalyzes the 7-hydroxylation of coumarin, as 
shown in Fig. 6-47. Just as rat CYP2A1 and CYP2A2 have little 
or no capacity to 7-hydroxylate coumarin, human CYP2A6 has lit-
tle or no capacity to hydroxylate testosterone. Mouse liver micro-
somes contain four CYP2A enzymes, one of which catalyzes the 
7α-hydroxylation of testosterone (CYP2A12), one of which cata-
lyzes the 15α-hydroxylation of testosterone (CYP2A4), and one 
of which catalyzes the 7-hydroxylation of coumarin (CYP2A5). 
Functionally, CYP2A5 can be converted to CYP2A4 by a single 
amino acid substitution (Phe209Leu). In other words, this single 
amino substitution converts CYP2A5 from a coumarin 7-hydrox-
ylating enzyme to a testosterone 15α-hydroxylating enzyme 
(Lindberg and Negishi, 1989). Differences in CYP2A function 
have important implications for the adverse effects of coumarin, 
which is hepatotoxic to rats but not humans. While coumarin is 
detoxified in humans by conversion to 7-hydroxycoumarin, which 
is subsequently conjugated with glucuronic acid and excreted, a 
major pathway of coumarin biotransformation in rats involves for-
mation of the hepatotoxic metabolite, coumarin 3,4-epoxide, as 
shown in Fig. 6-48. In addition to catalyzing the 7-hydroxylation of 
coumarin, CYP2A6 converts 1,3-butadiene to butadiene monoxide 
and nicotine to nicotine ∆1′,5′-iminium ion, which is further oxidized 
by AO to cotinine, as shown in Fig. 6-53.
Humans possess two functional CYP2A genes, namely, 
CYP2A6 and 2A13, and one nonfunctional CYP2A gene, namely, 
CYP2A7. CYP2A7 (originally named IIA4) is a full-length gene 
that encodes an enzyme incapable of incorporating heme, render-
ing it catalytically inactive (Yamano et al., 1990; Ding et al., 1995). 
CYP2A6 is expressed in the liver but few extrahepatic tissues (with 
the notable exception of mammary gland), whereas CYP2A13 is 
expressed mainly in the lung (bronchus and trachea) and bladder, 
with lower levels in reproductive organs such as the testis, ovary, 
uterus, and mammary gland. Hepatic CYP2A6 plays a major role 
in the metabolism of coumarin and nicotine, and plays a role in the 
metabolism of tegafur, fadrozole, methoxyflurane, and valproic acid. 
8-Methoxypsoralen, a structural analog of coumarin, is a potent, 
metabolism-dependent inhibitor of CYP2A6 (and CYP2A13), 
whereas the aromatase inhibitor letrozole is a potent competitive 
inhibitor (Jeong et al., 2009). The MAO-B inhibitor selegiline is 
also a metabolism-dependent inhibitor of CYP2A6 (and CYP2B6). 
Selegiline is approved for the treatment of Parkinson disease, but 
it is also used for smoking cessation due, in part, to its ability to 
inhibit the CYP2A6-dependent metabolism of nicotine (Siu and 
Tyndale, 2008). Other inhibitors of CYP2A6 are listed in Table 
6-17. CYP2A13 does not appear to contribute to drug clearance, 
but it may play an important role in the activation of xenobiotics 
to toxic and carcinogenic metabolites in lung and bladder. Both 
CYP2A6 and CYP2A13 activate nitrosamines to DNA-reactive 
(mutagenic) metabolites, especially those nitrosamines with bulky 
alkyl substituents such as NNK, N′-nitrosonorcotinine, and related 
nitrosamines found in tobacco smoke. (CYP2E1 also activates 
nitrosamines, but it preferentially activates nitrosamines with small 
alkyl substituents such as N-nitrosodimethylamine.)
The identification of three Japanese individuals who were 
PMs of SM-12502, an antiplatelet drug whose clearance is largely 
determined by CYP2A6, led to the identification of a genetic 
polymorphism that, in homozygous individuals, leads to the 
complete loss of CYP2A6 (CYP2A6*4/*4). The incidence of the 
CYP2A6 PM genotype is high in Asians (up to 15%) and rela-
tively low in Caucasians (0% to 4.2%) and Africans and African 
Americans (0.9% to 1.9%) (Liu et al., 2011). Individuals who are 
genetically deficient in CYP2A6 have a considerably lower risk 
of cigarette-smoking-induced lung cancer, presumably because 
these individuals have a reduced capacity for activating tobacco-
smoke nitrosamines to carcinogenic metabolites (Kamataki et al., 
2005). In support of this interpretation, the CYP2A inhibitor 
8-methoxypsoralen protects mice from NNK-induced lung adeno-
mas. CYP2A6 PMs are not only PMs of nitrosamines but also PMs 
of nicotine. Therefore, decreased cigarette consumption may also 
contribute to the lowered risk of lung cancer in CYP2A6 PMs. 
CYP2A6 is detectable in human lung, but the levels are consider-
ably less than those of CYP2A13, which can activate the same 
carcinogens as CYP2A6. Therefore, it is not immediately obvious 
why a genetic deficiency in CYP2A6 protects against lung cancer. 
A similar situation occurs with CYP2D6, inasmuch as individu-
als lacking this hepatic enzyme (i.e., CYP2D6 PMs) also have a 
slightly decreased risk of cigarette-smoking-induced lung cancer 
(Rostami-Hodjegan et al., 1998).
It seems somewhat paradoxical but just as CYP2A6 PMs 
have a decreased risk of lung cancer, so they have an increased 
risk of nasopharyngeal cancer, which is rare in Caucasians (Western 
countries) but endemic in Southern China and Southeast Asia. It 
has been postulated that, in the absence of CYP2A6, higher lev-
els of nitrosamines and other carcinogens reach the nasal epithe-
lium where they can be activated to carcinogenic metabolites by 
CYP2E1 and CYP2A13, both of which are expressed in nasal epi-
thelium (Tiwawech et al., 2006).
Like CYP2A6, CYP2A13 can activate several carcinogens 
including many of the nitrosamines (e.g., NNK) and aromatic 
amines (e.g., 4-aminobiphenyl) that are present in cigarette smoke, 
and the mycotoxin aflatoxin B1. CYP2A13 is suspected of playing 
a role in the activation of carcinogens in tobacco smoke because it 
is localized in the two sites where cigarette smoking causes cancer, 
namely, the lung, bronchus, and bladder (Nakajima et al., 2006).
In view of high prevalence of the CYP2A6 PM genotype in 
Chinese populations, it is noteworthy that the estimated 300 mil-
lion cigarette smokers in China consume approximately one-third 
of the world’s cigarettes. Although CYP2A6 PMs smoke fewer 
cigarettes than CYP2A6 EMs, the protective effect of this loss-of-
function polymorphism does not prevent an estimated 1 million 
smokers dying annually from tobacco-related diseases each year 
in China, a number that is predicted to rise to 2.2 million by 2020 
(Liu et al., 2011).
Of the 45 known CYP2A6 allelic variants, 6 are inac-
tive (CYP2A6*3, CYP2A6*4, CYP2A6*12, CYP2A6*20, 
CYP2A6*27, and CYP2A6*34) and 1 variant (CYP2A6*9) is 
expressed at low levels due to a mutation in the TATA box. Many of 
the other allelic variants of CYP2A6 have up to 60% lower activity 
than CYP2A6*1, the wild-type enzyme (Hosono et al., 2017).
CYP2B6  CYP2B6 is expressed in the human liver and, to a lesser 
extent, in the kidney, intestine, and lung. It plays a significant role in 
the metabolism of the antidepressant bupropion, the antiretroviral 
drugs efavirenz and nevirapine, the anesthetics propofol and keta-
mine, the antineoplastic drugs cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide, and 
tamoxifen, the antimalarial artemisinin, the synthetic opioids meth-
adone and pethidine (Demerol), the anti-Parkinsonian selegiline, 
and the endocrine disrupter methoxychlor (Wang and Tompkins, 
2008; Hedrich et al., 2016). The activation of cyclophosphamide by 
CYP2B6 (and CYP3A4) is shown in Fig. 6-56. CYP2B6 also cata-
lyzes the N-demethylation of S-mephenytoin but not the 4′-hydrox-
ylation, which is catalyzed by CYP2C19. Some but not all of these 
substrates can be used in vitro or in vivo to assess CYP2B6 activ-
ity, as shown in Table 6-17. Several drugs (including many MAO

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
297
inhibitors) have been shown to inhibit CYP2B6 (Table 6-17), and 
many of them do so in a metabolism-dependent manner, such as 
clopidogrel, clorgyline, pargyline, phenelzine, selegiline, ticlopi-
dine, and thio-TEPA, many of which inactivate other CYP enzymes 
(Sridar et al., 2012; Nirogi et al., 2015). 2-Phenyl-2-(1-piperidinyl) 
propane (PPP) is a potentially selective inactivator of CYP2B6 for 
in vitro studies (Walsky et al., 2006; Walsky and Obach, 2007). 
Several organothiophosphate pesticides are also metabolism-
dependent inhibitors of CYP2B6, including chlorpyrifos, chlor-
pyrifos-methyl, diazinon, parathion-methyl, and aziophos-methyl 
(D’Agostino et al., 2015).
CYP2B6 is an inducible enzyme (Fahmi et al., 2016); it is 
generally coinduced with CYP3A4 and several CYP2C enzymes 
by xenobiotics that activate CAR and/or PXR, such as rifampin, 
efavirenz, ritonavir, clotrimazole, nevirapine, the enzyme-inducing 
antiepileptic drugs (EIAEDs) phenobarbital, phenytoin, carbamaze-
pine, and felbamate, and the herbal preparation of St. John’s wort, 
which is discussed later (see the section “Induction of Cytochrome 
P450: Xenosensors”).
There is considerable interindividual variation in CYP2B6 
activity, partly due to environmental factors (such as treatment with 
enzyme inducers) and partly due to genetic factors. Several SNPs 
that, to varying degrees, impair CYP2B6 expression and/or activity 
have been identified. The CYP2B6*6 allele (Gln172His, Lys262Arg) 
is common in Asians (15% to 40%), Caucasians (20% to 30%), and 
African Americans (over 50%), which is associated with a marked 
decrease in CYP2B6 activity. One functional consequence of the 
CYP2B6*6 polymorphism is impaired clearance of efavirenz, an 
antiretroviral drug, leading to increased plasma levels and adverse 
effects (Wang and Tompkins, 2008; Mukonzo et al., 2014; Mukonzo 
et al., 2016). CYP2B6*6 is also associated with impaired cyclo-
phosphamide metabolism and S-mephenytoin N-demethylation. 
Another loss-of-function allele, namely, CYP2B6*5 (Arg487Cys), 
is common in Caucasians (14% to 25%) and curiously results in 
a decrease in CYP2B6 expression and activity but only in females 
(Wang and Tompkins, 2008).
CYP2C Enzymes  Humans express four CYP2C enzymes, namely, 
CYP2C8, CYP2C9, 2C18, and 2C19, the genes for which are clus-
tered in about 390-kb segment of chromosome 10q23.3. With the 
exception of CYP2C18, these CYP2C enzymes play a significant 
role in drug metabolism, and their inhibition or induction is the 
basis of a number of clinically important drug interactions. In the 
case of CYP2C9 and 2C19, genetic polymorphisms give rise to a 
relatively common IM or even PM phenotype, which also impacts 
the metabolism and safety or efficacy of certain drugs. As a gen-
eral rule, CYP2C8 metabolizes large, acidic drugs, including sev-
eral glucuronide conjugates, whereas CYP2C9 metabolizes (or is 
inhibited by) smaller acid- or sulfonamide-containing drugs, and 
CYP2C19 metabolizes neutral or weakly basic drugs often with a 
high degree of stereoselectivity (i.e., it preferentially metabolizes 
one enantiomer over the other). All four enzymes appear to be 
inducible by CAR/PXR agonists such as phenobarbital, rifampin, 
and St. John’s wort (hyperforin); hence, they tend to be coin-
duced together with CYP2B6 and CYP3A4. Substrates, inhibitors, 
and inducers of CYP2C8, CYP2C9, and CYP2C19 are listed in 
Table 6-17.
CYP2C8, CYP2C9, and CYP2C19 are abundant enzymes in 
the human liver (see Table 6-16) but low levels of CYP2C8 and 
CYP2C9 are also expressed in a wide range of tissue and in vas-
cular endothelium where, together with CYP2J2, they epoxidate 
arachidonic acid to vasoactive EETs (see the sections “CYP2J2” 
and “Epoxide Hydrolases”) (Chen and Goldstein, 2009; Zordoky 
and El-Kadi, 2010). CYP2C8 and CYP2C9 can also hydroxylate 
all-trans-retinoic acid and 9-cis- and 13-cis-retinoic acid (Marill 
et al., 2000, 2002).
CYP2C8 and CYP2C9 show a marked preference for metabo-
lizing large and small acidic drugs, respectively, and these substrates 
are ionized (negatively charged) at physiological pH and highly 
bound to albumin in plasma. In many cases substrates for CYP2C8, 
which metabolizes large acidic drugs, are also substrates for one or 
more of the organic anion-transporting polypeptides (OATPs) in 
the intestine and liver. Accordingly, drug interactions with CYP2C8 
may also involve drug interactions at the level of OATP, especially 
if transporter-mediated uptake into the liver becomes a rate-limiting 
step in clearance.
As shown in Table 6-15, rats and mice express a large number 
of CYP2C enzymes (13 and 15, respectively). The expression of 
CYP2C11 in adult male but not adult female rats (together with 
male-predominant expression of CYP3A2, which also has a broad 
substrate specificity) is a key factor underlying many gender differ-
ences in xenobiotic and steroid metabolism in mature rats (Waxman 
and Holloway, 2009).
CYP2C8  CYP2C8 has been implicated in the metabolism of over 
100 drugs including the thiazolidinediones rosiglitazone, piogl-
itazone, and troglitazone (withdrawn), amiodarone, amodiaquine, 
carbamazepine, cerivastatin (withdrawn), chloroquine, cilostazol, 
dasabuvir, enzalutamide, R-ibuprofen, imatinib, loperamide, lovas-
tatin, montelukast, morphine, paclitaxel (Taxol®), repaglinide, rosu-
vastatin, simvastatin, tazarotene (a retinoid derivative), torsemide, 
verapamil, and zopiclone (Lai et al., 2009; Backman et al., 2016). 
However, with the exception of the antidiabetic drug, repaglinide, 
all of the above drugs are metabolized to a significant extent by 
enzymes other than CYP2C8, and in the case of repaglinide its dis-
position is influenced by the transporter OATP1B1. Repaglinide is 
classified by the FDA as a sensitive CYP2C8 substrate with the 
qualification that it is only suitable as an in vivo probe or index sub-
strate for drug–drug interaction studies if the investigational drug 
being evaluated as a CYP2C8 inhibitor does not inhibit OATP1B1. 
In the presence of the CYP2C8 inhibitor gemfibrozil, exposure 
to repaglinide (based on plasma AUC) increases about eightfold, 
which is greater than the increase observed with other CYP2C8 
substrates with the exception of dasabuvir (ABT-333) and dapro-
dustat (GSK1278863A), whose respective plasma AUC values 
increase 11.3- and 18.6-fold following inhibition of CYP2C8 by 
gemfibrozil (Backman et al., 2016).
Substrates for CYP2C8 tend to be large and acidic as evidenced 
by the observation that CYP2C8 metabolizes several glucuronides 
(Nishihara et al., 2012). For example, while 17β-estradiol and 
diclofenac are metabolized by CYP2C9, the glucuronide metabo-
lites of these compounds (namely, estradiol-17β-glucuronide and 
diclofenac acyl glucuronide) are metabolized by CYP2C8 (at the 
same site as that metabolized by CYP2C9, which is distal to the 
glucuronide moiety).
Cerivastatin (Baycol), a cholesterol-lowering drug, was with-
drawn from the U.S., European, and Japanese markets in 2001 after 
postmarketing surveillance revealed a high incidence of rhabdomy-
olysis, a muscle disorder potentially caused by all statins, and 99 
fatalities, most of which were judged to be probably or possibly the 
result of treatment with cerivastatin. Of the 99 fatalities, 36 cases 
involved coadministration of cerivastatin with gemfibrozil and 18 
cases involved coadministration with clopidogrel (EMA, 2002). At 
the time of its worldwide market withdrawal, the mechanism by 
which gemfibrozil and clopidogrel increase systemic exposure to 
cerivastatin and increase its risk of causing rhabdomyolysis was 
not known, although inhibition of hepatic uptake (OATP) trans-
porters and/or inhibition of CYP2C8 and possibly CYP3A4, the

298
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
major and minor enzymes involved in cerivastatin metabolism, were 
suspected. The mechanism of interaction is unusual and involves 
metabolism-dependent (irreversible) inhibition of CYP2C8 by the 
acyl glucuronides of gemfibrozil and clopidogrel, which represent 
rare cases of CYP inhibition by a Phase 2 conjugate of drugs that 
otherwise have little inhibitory potential (Ogilvie et al., 2006; Baer 
et al., 2009; Tornio et al., 2014; Itkonen et al., 2016; Kim et al., 
2016). During the benzylic hydroxylation of gemfibrozil glucuro-
nide, CYP2C8 forms a benzylic radical (as shown previously in 
the scheme for the mechanism of carbon hydroxylation [this sec-
tion]) that evades oxygen rebound and alkylates the heme moiety 
(at the α-meso position), which inactivates the enzyme (Baer et al., 
2009). Clopidogrel (the parent drug) is a metabolism-dependent 
(irreversible) inhibitor of CYP2B6 due to formation of a reactive 
S-oxide or thiophene epoxide that alkylates the heme moiety and, 
to a lesser extent, the apoprotein (at Cys475) (Zhang et al., 2011a). 
Heme alkylation by a reactive S-oxide or thiophene epoxide is also 
thought to be the mechanism by which clopidogrel glucuronide 
inactivates CYP2C8 (Tornio et al., 2014). In contrast to gemfibrozil 
(a carboxylic acid–containing drug), clopidogrel is an ester that is 
hydrolyzed by CES1 to a carboxylic acid before converted to an 
acyl glucuronide. The metabolism of clopidogrel is discussed fur-
ther in the section “CYP2C19.”
The ability of CYP2C8 to metabolize the glucuronide conju-
gates of certain drugs held the answer to a long-standing mystery: 
What enzyme converts desloratadine, a nonsedating long-lasting 
antihistamine, to 3-hydroxydesloratadine, a human-predominant 
metabolite that is not formed in certain individuals. In the general 
population such poor metabolizers occur with a frequency of 6% 
but such PMs are most frequent in African American (17%) com-
pared with Caucasian (2%), Native American (8%), Hispanic (2%), 
and Jordanian (3%) populations. Kazmi and colleagues established 
that the 3-hydroxylation of desloratadine is catalyzed by CYP2C8 
but prior N-glucuronidation of desloratadine by UGT2B10 is an 
obligatory first step, as shown in Fig. 6-54 (Kazmi et al., 2015a, 
2015b). The metabolite formed by CYP2C8, namely 3-hydroxydes-
loratadine N-glucuronide, is not a circulating metabolite because 
the N-glucuronide moiety is unstable and undergoes rapid hydro-
lysis (deconjugation) to release 3-hydroxydesloratadine. Genetic 
polymorphisms leading to loss of CYP2C8 or UGT2B10 activity 
could give rise to the PM phenotype because both enzymes are 
indispensable to 3-hydroxydesloratadine formation. A splice site 
mutation that prevents synthesis of functional UGT2B10 occurs 
with high frequency in individuals of African origin (45%), with 
moderate frequency in Asians (8%), and rarely in Caucasians 
(<1%), which resembles the frequency of the desloratadine PM 
phenotype (Fowler et al., 2015). Likewise, CYP2C8*2 (c.805A > 
T, p.Cys266Phe) is a low-activity allelic variant of CYP2C8 that is 
common in certain African populations but rare in Caucasian and 
Asian populations (Backman et al., 2016).
A large number of genetic polymorphisms have been identi-
fied in the CYP2C8 gene, one of which is particularly notewor-
thy, namely, the *3 allele, which is common in Caucasians (about 
12%) but rare in Asians, Africans, and African Americans (Daily 
and Aquilante, 2009). CYP2C8*3 is a double mutation (Arg139Lys 
and Lys399Arg). It is of particular interest for two reasons. First, the 
*3 allele of CYP2C8 is in partial linkage disequilibrium with the 
*2 allele of CYP2C9, meaning individuals often carry both allelic 
variants, which complicates the clinical assessment of either one 
of these genetic polymorphisms on drug metabolism or disease 
processes. Second, CYP2C8*3 is of particular interest because of 
the disconnect between in vitro and in vivo findings. In vitro stud-
ies identified the CYP2C8*3 as a loss-of-function allelic variant. 
However, clinical studies established that *3 is a gain-of-function 
allelozyme that is associated with increased clearance of repa-
glinide, rosiglitazone, and pioglitazone, but not paclitaxel (Daily 
and Aquilante, 2009). Both the linkage between the *3 allele 
for CYP2C8 and the *2 allele for CYP2C9 and the discrepancy 
between in vitro and in vivo findings on CYP2C8*3 sound a word 
of caution about interpreting the impact of genetic polymorphisms 
on drug disposition, adverse effects, efficacy, and disease processes.
CYP2C8 is one of several CYP enzymes including CYP2B6, 
CYP2C9, CYP2C19, and CYP3A4 that are all inducible by activa-
tors of the xenosensors PXR and CAR. As discussed in “Induction 
of Cytochrome P450: Xenosensors,” there is a growing body of 
in vitro evidence that CYP2C8 along with CYP3A4 and CYP1A1 
but not the other aforementioned CYP enzymes are inducible by 
activators of human PPARα, the xenosensor linked with induction 
Figure 6-54.  Role of CYP2C8 and UGT2B10 in the conversion of desloratadine to the human-predominant metabolite 3-hydroxydesloratadine. CYP2C8 cata-
lyzes the 3-hydroxylation of desloratadine only after desloratadine is N-glucuronidated by UGT2B10. Following hydroxylation, the N-glucuronide moiety of 
3-hydroxydesloratadine-N-glucuronide hydrolyzes rapidly to release 3-hydroxydesloratadine, the major circulating metabolite of desloratadine in humans.
Desloratadine
Desloratadine
N-glucuronide
3-Hydroxydesloratadine
N-glucuronide
3-Hydroxydesloratadine
UGT2B10
CYP2C8
UDPGA
H2O
Glucuronic acid
Desloratadine
N
CI
N
H
A
B
A: Site of 3-hydroxylation
B: Likely site of N-glucuronidation
H2O
Glucuronic acid
UDP

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
299
of CYP4A enzymes in rodents (Seree et al., 2004; Prueksaritanont 
et al., 2005; Klein et al., 2012; Thomas et al., 2013, 2015; Makia 
and Goldstein, 2016). Whether fibrates and other drugs that activate 
PPARα cause clinically relevant induction of CYP2C8 (or CYP1A1 
and CYP3A4) is not known.
CYP2C9  CYP2C9 plays a role in the metabolism of over 100 
drugs including NSAIDs (e.g., diclofenac, celecoxib, ibuprofen, 
flurbiprofen, meloxicam, naproxen, piroxicam, mefenamic acid, 
and suprofen), oral hypoglycemics (e.g., glyburide, glipizide, 
glimepiride, tolbutamide), oral anticoagulants (e.g., S-warfarin, 
S-acenocoumarol, and phenprocoumon), diuretics and uricosu-
rics (e.g., sulfinpyrazone sulfide, torsemide, and tienilic acid [tic-
rynafen]), angiotensin II blockers (e.g., candesartan, irbesartan, 
and losartan), anticonvulsants (e.g., phenytoin), and many others 
(Zhou et al., 2009b). It also metabolizes ∆9-tetrahydrocannabinol. 
Substrates and inhibitors of CYP2C9 tend to be carboxylic acid-, 
tetrazole-, or sulfonamide-containing compounds, but there are 
exceptions to this general rule. In fact, the most potent CYP2C9 
inhibitors known, namely, benzbromarone and 2-methyl-3-(3′,5′-
diiodo-4′-hydroxybenzoyl)benzofuran, are neither acid- nor sul-
fonamide-containing compounds but they resemble these agents in 
that they are phenolic anions (negatively charged) at physiological 
pH (Rettie and Jones, 2005).
CYP2C9 is a polymorphically expressed enzyme. Of the more 
than 30 variants identified, 2 particular loss-of-function alleles, the *2 
and *3 variants, are recognized for their clinically significant impact 
on drug disposition and safety (Zhou, 2009b; Van Booven et al., 
2010; Niinuma et al., 2014). CYP2C9*2 (Arg144Cys) is prevalent in 
Caucasians (10% to 15%) but not in Asians or African Americans, as 
is the case with the *3 allele of CYP2C8. These two alleles (on dif-
ferent enzymes) are in partial linkage disequilibrium as noted above 
in the preceding section. CYP2C9*3 (Ile359Leu) is widespread across 
all ethnic groups, being highest in Caucasians (5% to 16%) followed 
by African Americans (about 10%) and Asians (1% to 5%) (Van 
Booven et al., 2010). CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3 have moderately 
and markedly decreased catalytic activity, respectively. Individuals 
who are homozygous for the *3 allele are considered CYP2C9 PMs. 
They are PMs of S-warfarin, tolbutamide, and phenytoin. These 
three drugs have a low therapeutic index, and their dose must be 
reduced in CYP2C9 PMs to prevent adverse drug events. Dosage 
adjustment is also required when these drugs are combined with a 
CYP2C9 inhibitor or inducer, examples of which are given in Table 
6-17. In the case of the anticoagulant warfarin, CYP2C9 genotype 
is one of three important genetic factors that affect dosing require-
ments, the second being the therapeutic target of warfarin vitamin K 
epoxide reductase complex 1 (VKORC1) (McDonald et al., 2009; 
Lurie et al., 2010). A third genetic factor is a genetic polymorphism 
in CYP4F2 (Val433Met) that impairs the metabolism of vitamin K1. 
Individuals with this CYP4F2 polymorphism require a higher war-
farin dose to compete with the increased levels of the vitamin K1 in 
the liver (McDonald et al., 2009; Lurie et al., 2010).
Tienilic acid, suprofen, and silybin are all metabolism-depen-
dent inhibitors of CYP2C9. Tienilic acid is of interest because it 
was withdrawn from the market due to its hepatotoxicity (see Table 
6-6). CYP2C9 converts tienilic acid to an electrophilic thiophene 
sulfoxide that can react either with water to give 5-hydroxytie-
nilic acid or with a nucleophilic amino acid in CYP2C9 to form 
a covalent adduct, which inactivates the enzyme (Lecoeur et al., 
1994). Antibodies directed against the adduct between CYP2C9 
and tienilic acid are thought to be responsible for the immunoal-
lergic hepatitis that develops in about 1 out of every 10,000 patients 
treated with this uricosuric diuretic drug. As shown in Table 6-6, 
these autoantibodies against CYP2C9 are known as anti-LKM2 
because they are directed against liver and kidney microsomes. The 
subscript number 2 distinguishes these antibodies against CYP2C9 
from those against CYP2D6, which are known as anti-LKM1. It 
should be noted that tienilic acid can also be activated to a reactive 
acyl glucuronide, as outlined in the section “Glucuronidation and 
Formation of Acyl-CoA Thioesters.”
CYP2C18  In contrast to the other three CYP2C enzymes expressed 
in the human liver, CYP2C18 plays little or no role in drug metabo-
lism. CYP2C18 is the most abundant CYP2C enzyme in the skin 
and lung, and it is also expressed in the brain, uterus, mammary 
gland, kidney, and duodenum. CYP2C18 is more than an order of 
magnitude more active than either CYP2C9 or CYP2C19 at catalyz-
ing the para-hydroxylation of phenytoin to HPPH, and CYP2C18 
can further hydroxylate HPPH to a catechol (Kinobe et al., 2005). 
Autoxidation of this catechol to an ortho-quinone is thought to be 
responsible, at least in part, for rare incidences of hypersensitiv-
ity reactions to phenytoin. Therefore, although hepatic CYP2C9 
and CYP2C19 are largely responsible for determining the systemic 
clearance of phenytoin, it is possible that CYP2C18 is responsible 
for activating phenytoin by the catechol/quinone pathway in the 
skin, the tissue where the first signs of hypersensitivity to phenytoin 
are observed.
CYP2C19  CYP2C19 is a polymorphically expressed enzyme that 
metabolizes several drugs with a high degree of stereospecificity 
such that, in the case of drugs administered as a racemic mixture, 
it metabolizes one enantiomer faster than the other, as in the case 
of mephenytoin (Mesantoin®), which is of historical interest with 
respect to CYP2C19. A genetic polymorphism for the metabo-
lism of S-mephenytoin was first described in 1984 (Wilkinson 
et al., 1989). The deficiency affects the 4′-hydroxylation (aromatic 
ring hydroxylation) of this anticonvulsant drug (see Fig. 6-47). 
The other major pathway of S-mephenytoin metabolism, namely, 
N-demethylation to S-nirvanol, is not affected. (This pathway was 
subsequently shown to be catalyzed by CYP2B6.) Consequently, 
PMs excrete little or no 4′-hydroxymephenytoin in their urine, but 
they do excrete increased amounts of the N-demethylated metabo-
lite, S-nirvanol (S-phenylethylhydantoin). The enzyme responsible 
for this genetic polymorphism is CYP2C19, and it is highly stere-
oselective for the S-enantiomer of mephenytoin (de Morais et al., 
1994). In contrast to the S-enantiomer, the R-enantiomer is not 
converted to 4′-hydroxymephenytoin, but it is N-demethylated to 
R-nirvanol (R-phenylethylhydantoin). Individuals who are geneti-
cally deficient in CYP2C19 are at increased risk of adverse events 
from Mesantoin® (a racemic mixture of the S- and R-enantiomers of 
mephenytoin). An exaggerated central response has been observed 
in CYP2C19 PMs administered Mesantoin® at doses that were 
without effect in CYP2C19 EMs.
CYP2C19 plays an important role in the metabolism of the 
proton pump inhibitors omeprazole, lansoprazole, pantoprazole, 
and rabeprazole, representative structures of which are shown in 
Fig. 6-49. The sulfoxide group in proton pump inhibitors is a chi-
ral center, and CYP2C19 preferentially metabolizes one enantio-
mer over the other: it preferentially hydroxylates the R-enantiomer 
in the case of omeprazole, and it preferentially hydroxylates the 
S-enantiomer in the case of lansoprazole. These reactions are 
equivalent inasmuch as these two proton pump inhibitors are 
hydroxylated on opposite ends of the molecule (on the pyridine 
ring in the case of omeprazole and on the benzimidazole ring in 
the case of lansoprazole), meaning the sulfoxide in each case binds 
to the active site of CYP2C19 in the same orientation (Kim et al., 
2003). CYP2C19 PMs are poor metabolizers of omeprazole and 
lansoprazole. However, CYP2C19 PMs are not at increased risk for 
ADEs but actually derive greater therapeutic benefit (better control

300
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
of GERD) from standard doses of proton pump inhibitors (Furuta 
et al., 2005). Esomeprazole, the S-enantiomer of omeprazole, was 
approved for the treatment of GERD and related gastric acid dis-
orders. Compared with the R-enantiomer, esomeprazole is not rap-
idly metabolized by CYP2C19, and its improved pharmacokinetic 
behavior provides CYP2C19 EMs with the same therapeutic benefit 
as CYP2C19 PMs administered omeprazole. This is due in part to 
the ability of esomeprazole to function as a metabolism-dependent 
inhibitor of CYP2C19 and inhibit its own metabolism in CYP2C19 
EMs (Ogilvie et al., 2011). Other substrates, inhibitors, and induc-
ers of CYP2C19 are listed in Table 6-17.
Two genetic polymorphisms, the *2 and *3 alleles (and their 
variants *2A, *2B, and *2C, and *3A and *3B), are responsible for 
the majority of CYP2C9 PMs (Zhou et al., 2009a). Both the *2 and 
*3 are null alleles; hence, individuals homozygous for either allele 
(*2/*2 and *3/*3) and heterozygotes (*2/*3) are devoid of func-
tional CYP2C19. The incidence of the CYP2C19 PM genotype var-
ies considerably from one ethnic group to the next: it ranges from 
13% to 23% in Japanese, Chinese, Korean, Vietnamese, and Indian 
populations, but the incidence is considerably lower in Africans 
and African Americans (3% to 5%), and in Caucasians (1% to 7% 
depending on geographical location) (Zhou et al., 2009a). A high 
incidence of CYP2C19 PMs is found in Australian aboriginals 
(about 26%) and in South Pacific Polynesian populations (about 
14%). In the Polynesian island of Vanuatu, 79% of the population 
has been identified as CYP2C19 PMs. When administered standard 
drug doses, CYP2C19 PMs have elevated plasma levels of proton 
pump inhibitors (omeprazole, lansoprazole, pantoprazole, and, to a 
lesser extent, rabeprazole), diazepam, escitalopram, sertraline, and 
voriconazole, not to mention the S-enantiomer of mephenytoin in 
individuals administered Mesantoin, which was the original obser-
vation that led to the discovery of the CYP2C19 PM genotype. No 
CYP2C19 UM individuals with functional CYP2C19 gene duplica-
tions have been identified; however, CYP2C19*17 (Ile331Val) has 
been identified as a gain-of-function allele with allele frequencies 
of about 20% in Caucasians and Africans but only about 2% in 
Asian populations (Li-Wan-Po et al., 2010). Based on the magni-
tude of the increase in clearance of drugs such as escitalopram, 
CYP2C19 activity in individuals who are homozygous for this gain-
of-function allele (*17/*17) can be considered high-activity EMs 
rather than UMs (Li-Wan-Po et al., 2010). CYP2C19 is regulated 
by CAR/PXR; hence, its activity in IMs and EMs can be increased 
by enzyme-inducing drugs (see Table 6-17).
CYP2C19 has attracted considerable attention for its role in 
converting the antiplatelet drug clopidogrel to its pharmacologically 
active metabolite. This activation process is shown in Fig. 6-55. 
It is unusual for several reasons. First, the therapeutically active 
component is a reactive metabolite that binds covalently to the 
ADP-binding receptor (P2Y12) on platelets. Second, the oxidative 
pathway leading to formation of this active metabolite is in compe-
tition with two hydrolytic pathways, one that hydrolyzes clopido-
grel, which is catalyzed by CES1 (a carboxylesterase), and another 
that hydrolyzes the first oxidative metabolite (a thiolactone), which 
is catalyzed by PON1 (a paraoxonase). Third, the active metabolite 
formed by CYP and the inactive metabolite formed from the inter-
mediary thiolactone by PON1 are isomers, as shown in Fig. 6-55 
(Dansette et al., 2012). Fourth, clopidogrel provides an example of 
Type F toxicity (Aronson and Ferner, 2003) whereby PMs (indi-
viduals who fail to produce the active metabolite) derive diminished 
therapeutic benefit and, in the case of clopidogrel, are at increased 
risk of thrombosis and coronary artery disease, whereas high-activ-
ity EMs that produce too much of the active metabolite (and hence 
too much platelet inhibition) are at increased risk from bleeding and 
hemorrhage. Much of the pharmacogenomic data strongly implicate 
CYP2C19 as the most important enzyme for clopidogrel activa-
tion, based on poor response to clopidogrel in carriers of the loss-
of-function CYP2C19 alleles (i.e., the *2 and *3 alleles), and also 
increased bleeding in carriers of the gain-of-function CYP2C19*17 
allele (Sibbing et al., 2010; Scott et al., 2011). A dominant role 
for PON1 in clopidogrel activation has been proposed (Bouman 
et al., 2011). This rather compelling (but controversial) proposal 
was explained when Dansette et al. (2012) showed that the ring-
opened thiol produced by PON1 (with the double bond in the α/β 
position relative to the thiol) is an inactive isomer of the true active 
metabolite produced by CYP2C19 (with the double bond in the β/γ 
position relative to the thiol), as shown in Fig. 6-55.
Because of its tendency to cause gastric bleeding as an adverse 
event, clopidogrel was often prescribed together with a proton 
pump inhibitor (to raise gastric pH and lessen the severity of gastric 
bleeding). It was established that omeprazole and its S-enantiomer 
esomeprazole, but not pantoprazole or lansoprazole, compromise 
the antiplatelet effect of clopidogrel. It was subsequently estab-
lished that omeprazole (and its S-enantiomer esomeprazole), but 
not pantoprazole or lansoprazole, is a metabolism-dependent inhibi-
tor of CYP2C19 (Ogilvie et al., 2011). This drug–drug interaction 
and the pharmacogenomic data strongly implicate CYP2C19 as the 
major enzyme responsible for converting clopidogrel to its pharma-
cologically active metabolite.
CYP2D6  In the late 1950s, clinical trials in the United States estab-
lished that sparteine was as potent as oxytocin for inducing labor 
at term. However, the duration and intensity of action of sparteine 
were dramatically increased in about 7% of all patients tested. The 
exaggerated response to sparteine included prolonged (tetanic) 
uterine contraction and abnormally rapid labor. In some cases, 
sparteine caused the death of the unborn baby. The drug was not 
recommended for clinical use because these adverse effects were 
unpredictable and occurred at doses that were well tolerated by 
other patients. The antihypertensive drug debrisoquine was subse-
quently found to cause a marked and prolonged hypotension in 5% 
to 10% of patients, and a genetic polymorphism for the metabo-
lism of debrisoquine and sparteine was discovered during 1977 to 
1979. PMs lack CYP2D6, which catalyzes the 4-hydroxylation of 
debrisoquine and the dehydrogenation (∆2- and ∆5-oxidation) of 
sparteine (see Fig. 6-53).
Genetic polymorphisms of CYP2D6 have been so extensively 
studied that it is possible not only to categorize individuals into 
four phenotypes, namely, PMs, IMs, EMs, and Ums, but also to 
subdivide the EMs into three categories, namely, High-Activity 
EM, Medium-Activity EM, and Low-Activity EM, as summarized 
in Table 6-7. More than 100 allelic variants of CYP2D6 have been 
identified (Zhou et al., 2009a; PharmVar, 2018). Many of the allelic 
variants that result in a partial or complete loss of CYP2D6 activity 
are listed in the legend to Table 6-7. The incidence of the CYP2D6 
PM genotype varies considerably from one ethnic group to the next: 
it is 5% to 7% in Caucasians, 2% to 4% in Africans and African 
Americans, and 1% to 2% in Asian (Thai, Chinese, and Japanese) 
populations. Similarly, the incidence of the CYP2D6 gene duplica-
tion, which gives rise to the CYP2D6 UM genotype, varies among 
ethnic groups: it is up to 29% in Ethiopians, 20% in Saudi Arabians, 
5% to 10% in Southern European Caucasians, but only 1% to 2% 
in Northern European Caucasians, 5% to 10% in Turkish subjects, 
and 2% or less in African, African American, and Asian subjects.
CYP2D6 plays a major role in drug metabolism, second only 
to CYP3A4 in terms of the sheer number of drugs it metabolizes 
(Zhou, 2009a, 2009b; Zhou et al., 2009a). CYP2D6 metabolizes 
13% of drugs (n = 860) and 6% of natural products/endobiotics

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
301
(n = 331 compounds) (Rendic and Guengerich, 2015). CYP2D6 
prefers to metabolize lipophilic amines, which is the fundamen-
tal structure of most cardiovascular and CNS drugs. Accordingly, 
CYP2D6 metabolizes various tricyclic antidepressants, nontricyclic 
antidepressants, SSRIs, neuroleptics, β-blockers, antiarrhymthics, 
antiemetics, opioids, and antihistamines, examples of which are 
given in Table 6-17. CYP2D6 plays an important role in tamoxifen 
metabolism (discussed later in this section). CYP2D6 also metabo-
lizes several drugs of abuse including methamphetamine (“meth” 
or “ice”), methylenedioxymethamphetamine (NMDA or “ecstasy”), 
N-ethyl-3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDE or “eve”), and 
3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDA or “the love drug”). Drugs 
of abuse containing a methylenedioxy (benzodioxole) moiety are 
also metabolism-dependent inhibitors of CYPD6 (Van et al., 2006). 
CYP2D6 also metabolizes the neurotoxin MPTP (see Fig. 6-33 and 
the section “Amine Oxidases”). Individuals lacking CYP2D6 have 
an exaggerated response to some but not all the drugs mentioned 
above or shown in Table 6-17. Large increases (more than fivefold) 
in systemic exposure are observed in CYP2D6 PMs with atomox-
etine, desipramine, dextromethorphan, metoprolol, perphenazine, 
and risperidone, some of which are useful in vivo probe/index sub-
strates of CYP2D6 activity. Drugs whose clearance is impaired in 
CYP2D6 PMs are cleared faster in UMs.
Whether the impact of CYP2D6 polymorphisms on the phar-
macokinetics of a drug translate into changes in pharmacodynamic 
response depends on the nature of the polymorphism (ranging from 
PM to UMs), the magnitude of the PK response (which is deter-
mined by fmCYP2D6, the fractional contribution of CYP2D6 to drug 
Figure 6-55.  Biotransformation of clopidogrel to inactive metabolites by carboxylesterase (CES1) and paraoxonase (PON1) and its active, antiplatelet metabo-
lite by cytochrome P450 (especially CYP2C19).
CYP
Clopidogrel
N
Cl
O
OCH3
S
Inactive
N
Cl
HOOC
S
H2O
CES1
2-Oxo-clopidogrel
(a thiolactone)
N
R
S
O
Inactive
H2O
PON1
CYP
H2O
Active
4b-cis thiol isomer
N
R
HS
HOOC
GSH
4b-endo thiol isomer
N
R
HS
HOOC
Sulfenic acid
intermediate
Clopidogrel’s antiplatelet activity results from covalent binding of one of the 4b-cis thiol
diastereomers to a cysteine residue in P2Y12, the platelet ADP-binding receptor
N
R
S
OH
HOOC

302
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
clearance [see Point 24 in the section “Principles of Xenobiotic 
Biotransformation”]), and the pharmacological and toxicological 
properties of the metabolites. For example, the metabolites pro-
duced by CYP2D6 from the antiarrhythmic drug encainide are more 
potent than those of the parent drug; hence, QT prolongation is more 
apparent in CYP2D6 EMs than PMs. On the hand, propafenone is 
a more potent β-blocker than its metabolites; hence, PMs experi-
ence prolonged hypotension from a standard dose of propafenone. 
CYP2D6 status affects the pharmacokinetics of most β-blockers, 
but many of them have active metabolites such that changes in phar-
macokinetics have little or no effect on their overall pharmacologi-
cal activity (Tucker, 1994; Turner et al., 2001; Ingelman-Sundberg, 
2005; Zhou, 2009b). CYP2D6 PMs are at increased risk from the 
hepatotoxic and other adverse effects (sedation, extrapyramidal, and 
psychomotor symptoms) of perhexiline, for which reason perhexi-
line joined sparteine and debrisoquine in being denied regulatory 
approval by the U.S. FDA.
The analgesic codeine (which is O-demethylated to mor-
phine) and the anticancer drug tamoxifen (which is hydroxylated 
and N-demethylated to endoxifen) are converted to pharmacologi-
cally active metabolites by CYP2D6. Consequently, CYP2D6 PMs 
derive less therapeutic benefit than CYP2D6 EMs. In contrast, in 
the case of codeine, CYP2D6 UMs are at increased risk from mor-
phine toxicity. The death of an elderly man administered a recom-
mended dose of codeine and the death of baby who was breastfed 
by a woman on codeine have been attributed to the CYP2D6 UM 
genotype that causes rapid conversion of codeine to morphine 
(which causes respiratory suppression) (Gasche et al., 2004; Koren 
et al., 2006). CYP2D6 converts the breast cancer drug tamoxifen 
to endoxifen (which is 30- to 100-fold more potent than tamoxi-
fen in suppressing estrogen-dependent cell proliferation); hence, 
CYP2D6 PMs are at increased risk for breast cancer recurrence 
following tamoxifen adjuvant therapy (Goetz et al., 2005; Schroth 
et al., 2009). The effects of codeine in CYP2D6 UMs (who form 
too much active metabolite) and tamoxifen in PMs (who form too 
little active metabolite) represent examples of Type A and Type F 
toxicity, respectively (Aronson and Ferner, 2003).
The propensity for CYP2D6 to metabolize so many cardiovas-
cular and CNS drugs (and other lipophilic amines) can be attributed 
in large part to the binding of the amine function to anionic resi-
dues (Glu216 and Asp301) in the enzyme’s substrate-binding site. 
Substrate oxidation usually occurs 5 to 7.5 Å from the basic nitro-
gen atom. Other substrate binding orientations are possible, which 
is why CYP2D6 can N-dealkylate drugs, even drugs that contain a 
single amine function (i.e., drugs that appear to bind upside down in 
the active site) (Bonn et al., 2008; Unwalla et al., 2010).
Quinidine is a potent inhibitor of CYP2D6 because it interacts 
favorably with the anionic sites on CYP2D6 but it cannot be oxi-
dized at a site 5 to 7.5 Å from its basic nitrogen atoms. Quinidine, 
paroxetine, and fluoxetine (and especially norfluoxetine, its 
N-demethylated metabolite) are strong CYP2D6 inhibitors in vivo, 
and a PM phenotype can be induced pharmacologically with these 
particular inhibitors. Quinine, the levorotatory diastereomer of 
quinidine, is not a potent inhibitor of CYP2D6, and neither drug is a 
potent inhibitor of the CYP2D enzymes expressed in rats. Compared 
with other SSRIs, fluoxetine causes surprisingly prolonged inhibi-
tion of CYP2D6; this is attributable in part to the long half-life 
of norfluoxetine (a primary amine), which also inhibits CYP2D6 
(Liston et al., 2002). Paroxetine has a relatively short plasma half-
life (16 to 24 hours) but causes prolonged inhibition of CYP2D6 
because it contains a methylenedioxy (benzodioxole) moiety that 
causes irreversible inhibition (MDI) of CYP2D6 (Venkatakrishnan 
and Obach, 2005). Because of the low dose of paroxetine (20 mg), 
maximum inactivation of CYP2D6 activity is not achieved with-
out 7 to 10 days of paroxetine treatment. Bupropion, a commonly 
used in vitro probe or index of CYP2B6 activity, causes clinically 
relevant inhibition of CYP2D6 even though it is a relatively weak 
inhibitor of the enzyme in vitro (in human liver microsomes) (Reese 
et al., 2008). Bupropion represents one of a handful of examples of 
system-dependent inhibition (Parkinson et al., 2010) (see the sec-
tion “Inhibition of Cytochrome P450”). The ability of bupropion 
to inhibit CYP2D6 in vivo is attributable in large part to its reduc-
tion to inhibitory metabolites (erythrohydrobupropion and threohy-
drobupropion). Accordingly, the in vivo inhibition of CYP2D6 by 
bupropion is better predicted in human hepatocytes than in human 
liver microsomes (Parkinson et al., 2010).
The prominent determinants of CYP2D6 activity in vivo 
are genetic polymorphisms and treatment with inhibitory drugs. 
CYP2D6 is considered a noninducible enzyme despite in vitro and 
clinical data to the contrary (Spina et al., 1996; Madan et al., 2003; 
Farooq et al., 2016). For example, phenobarbital decreases systemic 
exposure to desipramine, a CYP2D6 probe/index drug, by 40% in 
CYP2D6 EMs but not in CYP2D6 PMs, suggesting induction of 
CYP2D6 is the mechanism by which phenobarbital increases desip-
ramine clearance (Spina et al., 1996). Rifampin increases the oral 
clearance of the CYP2D6 substrates sparteine, dextromethorphan, 
and debrisoquine approximately twofold, whereas carbamazepine 
causes a similar increase in the oral clearance of risperidone (Farooq 
et al., 2016). CYP2D6 levels increase during pregnancy (Sit et al., 
2010) and this effect has been attributed to induction of CYP2D6 by 
corticosteroids, which rise during gestation (Farooq et al., 2016). In 
contrast, renal impairment is associated with a decrease in CYP2D6 
levels (Rostami-Hodjegan et al., 1999). Although these data estab-
lish that CYP2D6 can be induced (and repressed) to a clinically sig-
nificant extent, it should be emphasized that genetic polymorphisms 
and duplication of the CYP2D6 gene, giving rise to PMs and UMs, 
respectively, are the major contributor to interindividual differences 
in CYP2D6 activity.
Compared with hepatic levels, low levels of CYP2D6 are pres-
ent in several tissues including the brain, kidney, lung, intestine, 
breast, and placenta (Zhou, 2009a, 2009b). The metabolism of CNS 
drugs by CYP2D6 in the brain has attracted considerable interest, 
as has its ability to convert m- and p-tyramine to dopamine and to 
catalyze the 21-hydroxylation of certain steroid hormones such as 
progesterone.
Individuals lacking CYP2D6 have an unusually low incidence 
of some chemically induced neoplastic diseases (Idle, 1991). For 
example, CYP2D6 PMs appear to be relatively resistant to lung can-
cer, whereas CYP2D6 UMs appear to be at increased risk, although 
the effects are modest (Rostami-Hodjegan et al., 1998; Agundez 
et al., 2001). It has been hypothesized that CYP2D6 may play a role 
in the metabolic activation of chemical carcinogens, such as those 
present in the environment, in the diet, and/or in cigarette smoke. 
According to this hypothesis, CYP2D6 PMs have a low incidence of 
cancer because they fail to activate chemical carcinogens, whereas 
CYP2D6 UMs have an increased risk because they rapidly and/or 
extensively activate procarcinogens. However, CYP2D6 plays little 
or no role in the activation of known chemical carcinogens to DNA-
reactive or mutagenic metabolites, with the notable exception of 
the tobacco-smoke-specific nitrosamine, NNK, which is also acti-
vated by numerous other CYP enzymes (see the section “CYP2A6, 
CYP2A7, and CYP2A13”).
CYP2E1  As shown in Fig. 6-29, CYP2E1 was first identified as 
the microsomal ethanol oxidizing system (MEOS) (Lieber, 1999). 
It is now recognized as a key enzyme involved in the activation 
of acetaminophen (Tylenol) to its reactive metabolite NAPQI (see

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
303
Fig. 6-39), a leading cause of drug-induced liver injury (Kaplowitz, 
2005). CYP2E1 also biotransforms a large number of volatile halo-
genated alkanes (chloroform, carbon tetrachloride, vinyl chloride, 
and many more), halogenated anesthetics (halothane, enflurane, 
and others), small aromatic and nitrogen aromatic compounds 
(benzene, styrene, toluene, pyridine, pyrazole, and others), alkanes 
(ethane–hexane), alcohols (ethanol–pentanol), the colon carcino-
gen azoxymethane, and numerous mutagenic/carcinogenic nitrosa-
mines (Pohl and Scinicariello, 2011). In many cases CYP2E1 
converts the aforementioned xenobiotics to reactive (toxic/
mutagenic/carcinogenic) metabolites, as shown in Table 6-18 and 
as illustrated for carbon tetrachloride in Fig. 6-22, halothane in 
Fig. 6-23, benzene in Fig. 6-36, and N-nitrosamine, urethane (ethyl 
carbamate), trichloroethylene, and tetrachloroethylene in Fig. 6-56 
(Guengerich, 1991). CYP2E1 activates acetylhydrazine, a metabo-
lite formed following the N-acetylation of isoniazid, to a hepatotoxic 
metabolite. The severity of isoniazid hepatotoxicity is influenced 
by genetic polymorphisms that decrease N-acetyltransferases 
(NAT) and increase CYP2E1 activity, as discussed in the section 
“Acetylation.”
Figure 6-56.  Additional mechanisms of cytochrome P450–dependent activation of xenobiotics to reactive (electrophilic) metabolites.
Nitrosamines
Ethyl carbamate
(urethane)
Halogenated alkenes
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids
Nitrogen mustards
CH2
CH
O
C
O
NH2
H2C
CH
O
O
C
O
NH2
O
CH3
CH2
O
C
O
NH2
Ethyl carbamate
Vinyl carbamate
Vinyl carbamate epoxide
Cl
H
Cl
C
C
Cl
Trichloroethylene
Dichloroacetyl chloride
(Activation)
Chloral
(Detoxication)
Trichloroacetyl chloride
Epoxide
Epoxide
Tetrachloroethylene
rearrangement
rearrangement
C
Cl
H
C
Cl
O
Cl
C
Cl
Cl
C
Cl
O
H
C
Cl
Cl
C
Cl
O
Cl
CYP2E1
CYP2E1
CYP2E1
CYP2E1
CYP3A4
CYP2B6
CYP3A4
CYP2E1
N
N
O
O
H
HCHO
N2, OH–
R
H2C
N
N
O
R
CH3
O
Cl
Cl
Cl
C
C
Cl
Cl
H
Cl
C
C
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
C
C
Cl
N-Nitrosoamine
(e.g., N-Nitrosodimethylamine, R     CH3)
N
Senecionine
H+
O
P
N
H
N
Cl
O
HO
Cl
N
Cl
O
P
–O
Cl
Cl
Cl–
Cyclophosphamide
Acrolein
Phosphoramide mustard
Aziridinium species
N
O
C
R1
R2
CH2
H2C
CHCHO
CH2OCR2
R1CO–
O
R
R+
N
N
OH
C
O
O
••
••
N
O
C
R1
R2
CH2
O
C
O
O
••
••
••
O
O
+
+
+
N
CH2OCR2
R1CO–
O
O
O
P
N
H
N
Cl
O
Cl
••
H2N
N
O
P
–O
H2N

304
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
Studies in CYP2E1 knockout mice have established an impor-
tant role for CYP2E1 in the in vivo activation of some of the afore-
mentioned xenobiotics. Compared with wild-type mice, CYP2E1 
knockout mice are protected (partially or completely) from the 
hepatotumorigenic effects of urethane (ethyl carbamate), the pre-
neoplastic changes induced in the colon by azoxymethane, the 
myelotoxicity of benzene, and the hepatotoxicity of acetaminophen 
(Gonzalez, 2003, 2007; Ghanayem, 2007). CYP2E1 is one of three 
enzymes that catalyze the conversion of acetaminophen to NAPQI, 
the others being CYP1A2 and CYP3A4. Double knockout mice, in 
which both CYP2E1 and CYP1A2 are deleted, are even more resis-
tant to acetaminophen hepatotoxicity than CYP2E1 knockout mice 
(Gonzalez, 2007). These findings in mice are thought to translate 
to the situation in humans. It is interesting to note, however, that 
human CYP2E1 knockin mice (transgenic mice harboring human 
CYP2E1 in place of the mouse enzyme, also known as CYP2E1-
humanized mice) are more resistant to acetaminophen hepatotoxic-
ity than wild-type mice, suggesting mouse CYP2E1 may be more 
active than human CYP2E1 in converting acetaminophen to NAPQI 
(Cheung and Gonzalez, 2008). The role of CYP2E1 in acetamino-
phen hepatotoxicity is discussed later in this section.
The only orally administered drug (as opposed to volatile 
anesthetics) that is primarily metabolized by CYP2E1 is chlor-
zoxazone, an FDA-approved muscle relaxant (Paraflex®). The 
Table 6-18 
Examples of Xenobiotics Activated by Human P450
CYP1A2
CYP2E1
 Acetaminophen
 Acetaminophen
 2-Acetylaminofluorene
 Acrylonitrile
 4-Aminobiphenyl
 Benzene
 2-Aminofluorene
 Carbon tetrachloride
 2-Naphthylamine
 Chloroform
 NNK
 Dichloromethane
 Amino acid pyrolysis products
 1,2-Dichloropropane
 (DiMeQx, MelQ, MelQx, Glu P-2, IQ, 
PhlP, Trp P-1, Trp P-2)
 Ethylene dibromide
 Ethylene dichloride
 Tacrine
 Ethyl carbamate
CYP2A6 and 2A13
 Halothane
 NNK and bulky nitrosamines
 N-Nitrosodimethylamine
 N-Nitrosodiethylamine
 Styrene
 Aflatoxin B1
 Trichloroethylene
CYP2B6
 Vinyl chloride
 6-Aminochrysene
CYP3A4
 Cyclophosphamide
 Acetaminophen
 Ifosfamide
 Aflatoxin B1 and G1
CYP2C8, 9, 18, 19
 6-Aminochrysene
 Tienilic acid
 Benzo[a]pyrene 7,8-dihydrodiol
 Phenytoin
 Cyclophosphamide
 Valproic acid
 Ifosfamide
CYP2D6
 1-Nitropyrene
 NNK
 Sterigmatocystin
CYP2F1
 Senecionine
 3-Methylindole
 Tris(2,3-dibromopropyl)phosphate
 Acetaminophen
CYP4B1 (in animals but not humans)*
 Valproic acid
 Ipomeanol
CYP1A1 and 1B1
 3-Methylindole
Benzo[a]pyrene and other polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbons
 2-Aminofluorene
Abbreviation: NNK, 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone, a tobacco-specific nitrosamine.
* Due to lack of heme incorporation human CYP4B1 is probably inactive.
SOURCE: Data adapted from Guengerich and Shimada (1991).

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
305
urinary excretion of 6-hydroxychlorzoxazone and the plasma ratio 
of 6-hydroxychlorzoxazone to chlorzoxazone have been used as 
in vivo probes of CYP2E1. In human liver microsomes, CYP2E1 
activity can be conveniently measured by the 6-hydroxylation of 
chlorzoxazone and the hydroxylation of 4-nitrophenol (Table 6-17). 
The 6-hydroxylation of chlorzoxazone can also be catalyzed by 
CYP1A1, but this enzyme is rarely expressed in the human liver 
and only low levels are present in extrahepatic tissues. CYP2E1 is 
one of the CYP enzymes that require cytochrome b5, which lowers 
the Km for certain substrates (Levin et al., 1986).
The function and regulation of CYP2E1 are relatively well 
conserved across mammalian species. CYP2E1 is expressed con-
stitutively in the liver and several extrahepatic tissues, such as the 
kidney, pancreas, brain, lung, intestine, nasal epithelium, bone 
marrow, and lymphocytes. The levels of CYP2E1 in human liver 
microsomes do not show the high degree of interindividual variation 
characteristic of other enzymes, as shown in Table 6-16. Numerous 
genetic polymorphisms in the CYP2E1 gene have been identified 
but none impact function and/or expression in a manner that gives 
rise to a PM or UM phenotype (Pohl and Scinicariello, 2011). In 
humans and most other mammalian species, CYP2E1 is moderately 
inducible (less than fivefold) by ethanol, isoniazid, pyrazole, ace-
tone, and other ketone bodies (which form during uncontrolled dia-
betes). In contrast to the induction of most other CYP enzymes, the 
induction of CYP2E1 often involves increased translation of preex-
isting mRNA and/or protein stabilization rather than transcriptional 
activation of the CYP2E1 gene; hence, induction of CYP2E1 often 
occurs in the absence of an increase in mRNA levels (Gonzalez, 
2007). An exception to this general rule is the induction of CYP2E1 
by diabetes, which involves transcriptional activation and a marked 
increase in CYP2E1 mRNA. CYP2E1 can be inhibited by 4-meth-
ylpyrazole (fomepizole), which also inhibits ADH (class I ADH), 
and by disulfiram (Antabuse), which also inhibits ALDH (ADH2). 
Disulfiram is one of many sulfur-containing agents that competi-
tively or irreversibly inhibit CYP2E1, such as chlormethiazole, 
diallylsulfide, diethyldithiocarbamate, and phenethylisothiocyanate 
(Pohl and Scinicariello, 2011; Stresser et al., 2016).
Alcohol can potentiate the hepatotoxicity of acetaminophen. 
Several mechanisms have been proposed, including increased acti-
vation of acetaminophen due to the induction of CYP2E1, increased 
oxidative stress (reactive oxygen species production), and decreased 
inactivation of NAPQI and reactive oxygen species due to a lower-
ing of GSH levels. Likewise fasting potentiates acetaminophen hep-
atotoxicity, presumably by inducing CYP2E1 (which is inducible 
by ketone bodies) and lowering UDPGA levels, which impairs the 
direct conjugation of acetaminophen and directs more drug toward 
the formation of NAPQI (Whitcomb and Block, 1994).
CYP2E1 is receiving considerable attention for several rea-
sons that impact our understanding of its role in acetaminophen 
hepatotoxicity and alcoholic fatty liver disease (AFLD) and non-
alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) (Abdelmegeed et al., 2015). 
First, during its catalytic cycle CYP2E1 is prone to uncoupling (see 
Fig. 6-45), such that, during the metabolism of ethanol (alcohol) 
and acetaminophen, roughly 50% of its catalytic cycles result in 
the production of superoxide anion and related reactive oxygen 
species instead of metabolite formation (Gonzalez, 2005; Lu and 
Cederbaum, 2008). Second, in the rat liver, approximately 40% of 
CYP2E1 is phosphorylated and localized to the inner membrane of 
mitochondria (Knockaert et al., 2011a, 2011b). Like all microsomal 
enzymes, CYP2E1 has a canonical N-terminal signal recognition 
peptide (SRP) that targets its translation to the rough endoplasmic 
reticulum (in ribosomes bound to the endoplasmic reticulum), but 
the process is relatively inefficient such that about half of CYP2E1 
is transcribed membrane-free ribosomes. CYP2E1 contains a mito-
chondrial targeting signal (two positively charged amino acids, 
Lys24 and Lys25) and a serine residue (Ser129) that, when phosphory-
lated by cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA), complexes with 
heat-shock proteins (Hsp70 and Hsp90) and is translocated to the 
inner membrane of mitochondria (Knockaert et al., 2011b). Cell 
culture experiments in which CYP2E1 is expressed only in mito-
chondria or in both mitochondria and microsomes established that 
mitochondrial CYP2E1 is catalytically active (it is presumably sup-
ported by ferredoxin/ferredoxin reductase, the electron transporters 
that support endobiotic biotransformation by mitochondrial CYP 
enzymes) and is sufficient to cause oxidative stress, GSH deple-
tion, and cell toxicity in response to acetaminophen or alcohol 
(Knockaert et al., 2011a). A variety of evidence points to mitochon-
drial toxicity by NAPQI and reactive oxygen species as the key 
event in acetaminophen hepatotoxicity (Jaeschke et al., 2012). For 
example, studies with radioactive acetaminophen (4′-hydroxyacet-
anilide) and its nonhepatotoxic meta isomer 3′-hydroxyacetanilide 
show comparable levels of overall covalent binding to mouse liver 
proteins but covalent binding of acetaminophen is predominantly 
in mitochondria, whereas binding of the nonhepatotoxic regioiso-
mer is in the cytoplasm (Jaeschke et al., 2012). The mitochondrial 
localization of CYP2E1 and its ability to form NAPQI and reac-
tive oxygen species in the mitochondrion appear to be important 
determinants of acetaminophen hepatotoxicity. It is of interest that 
several CYP enzymes in addition to CYP2E1 have been located 
inside mitochondria (Knockaert et al., 2011a, 2011b).
There is growing evidence that the potentially deleterious 
reactive oxygen species produced by microsomal CYP2E1 and 
other CYP enzymes (notably CYP1A2; the other high-spin enzyme 
that, like CYP2E1, can produce reactive oxygen species even in 
the absence of substrate) is actively inhibited during the process 
known as ER stress, which is triggered by the accumulation of 
unfolded proteins (the ER plays a key role in protein folding and 
posttranslational modification of proteins prior to their exit to the 
Golgi and other destinations) , which occurs in response to isch-
emia/reperfusion injury and exposure to certain xenobiotics such as 
tunicamycin (an N-glycosylation inhibitor) and thapsigargin (an ER 
calcium ATPase inhibitor) (Rasheva and Domingos, 2009; Tabas 
and Ron, 2011). Extensive ER stress (i.e., a prolonged unfolded 
protein response [UPR], which is mediated by PERK, ATF6, and 
IRE1) results in the activation of caspases and Bcl-2, which leads to 
apoptotic cell death. However, mild ER stress activates Nrf2 and the 
antiapoptotic factor BI-1. Both activation of Nrf2 (through its phos-
phorylation by PERK, one of the three main ER stress responders) 
and BI-1 protect the endoplasmic reticulum from further damage 
by inhibiting the production of reactive oxygen species by CYP2E1 
(and presumably other CYP enzymes such as CYP1A2) by two 
distinct mechanisms (Lee et al., 2007; Kim et al., 2009). In the case 
of Nrf2, this transcription factor causes a marked (about 10-fold) 
induction of heme oxygenase (among other antioxidant defense 
enzymes), which inhibits CYP activity by competing for electrons 
from POR (which serves both enzymes) (Reed et al., 2011). Heme 
oxygenase can also inactivate certain CYP enzymes by convert-
ing their heme moiety to biliverdin (Kutty et al., 1988). BI-1 also 
inhibits CYP but does so by complexing with POR (the two pro-
teins coimmunoprecipitate), which inhibits reactive oxygen species 
production by CYP2E1 (Kim et al., 2009). From these studies, it is 
emerging that CYP2E1 and possibly CYP1A2, the two high-spin 
CYP enzymes, produce reactive oxygen species and contribute to 
oxidative stress, processes that are augmented by xenobiotics such 
as acetaminophen and alcohol and processes that are particularly 
damaging during ER stress.

306
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
CYP2F1  CYP2F1 is a human enzyme; its homologs in mouse and 
rat are CYP2F2 and CYP2F4, respectively. These enzymes are 
expressed in the respiratory tract (lung and nasal mucosa), although 
CYP2F1 is expressed in human lung at much lower levels than 
CYP2F2 is expressed in mice. In mice CYP2F2 plays an impor-
tant role in activating various pulmonary/nasal toxicants including 
3-methylindole, naphthalene, 1-nitronaphthalene, styrene, ben-
zene, B[a]P, dichloroethylene, and trichloroethylene. For example, 
CYP2F2 knockout mice are resistant to the toxic effects of naphtha-
lene on the lung and nasal olfactory mucosa (Li et al., 2011a) and 
they are similarly resistant to the toxic effects of styrene on lung 
Clara cells and terminal bronchial cells (Cruzan et al., 2012, 2013). 
Studies on the metabolic activation of 3-methylindole (a constituent 
in tobacco smoke) are interesting for illustrating how two respiratory 
enzymes CYP2F2 and CYP2A5 (the homologs of human CYP2F1 
and CYP2A13) can make the same initial reactive metabolites with 
different subsequent fates (Zhou et al., 2012). Both CYP2F2 and 
CYP2A convert 3-methylindole to a carbon radical and epoxide, 
but these are further converted by CYP2A5 to stable metabolites: 
the carbon radical is converted to indole-3-­carbinol by oxygen 
rebound and the epoxide is converted to an amide (3-methyloxin-
dole) by rearrangement. In contrast, CYP2F2 converts these inter-
mediates to reactive metabolites: the carbon radical is converted 
by dehydrogenation to a Michael acceptor, 3-methyleneindolenine, 
whereas the epoxide is either released or converted to iminium ions, 
all of which react with GSH. In animals, 3-methylindole can also 
be activated by another pulmonary enzyme, namely, CYP4B1, an 
enzyme that is functionally inactive in humans due to lack of heme 
incorporation (see the section “CYP4 Enzymes”).
CYP2G1  CYP2G1 is not expressed in humans but it is expressed in 
the olfactory mucosa of rodents and other animals. Numerous xeno-
biotics cause nasal cytotoxicity and cancer in rodents (Jeffrey et al., 
2006). Along with other CYP enzymes that are highly expressed 
in olfactory mucosa, such as CYP2A5 and CYP2F2 in mice and 
CYP2A3 and CYP2F4 in rats, CYP2G1 is a potential contributor 
to the formation of reactive metabolites in this target of xenobiotic 
toxicity in rodents.
CYP2J2  CYP2J2 is of interest for a number of reasons. First, it is 
expressed in vascular epithelium and high levels are found in the 
heart and many other tissues. CYP2J2 is the most abundant CYP 
expressed in heart and left ventricular levels are about 1.5-fold 
higher in women than in men (Michaud et al., 2010). Based on 
mRNA levels (which may not reflect protein levels), the expres-
sion of CYP2J2 is highest in small intestine followed by heart, 
skeletal muscle, kidney, salivary gland, lung, and liver. Second, 
CYP2J2 metabolizes many of the same drugs that are substrates 
for CYP3A4 (although not always to the same metabolites) and 
it is inhibited by many of the same drugs that inhibit CYP3A4 
(Lee et al., 2010a, 2012). Various derivatives of terfenadine and 
other compounds have been identified as selective competitive or 
metabolism-dependent inhibitors of CYP2J2 (Lafite et al., 2006, 
2007; Karkhanis et al., 2016; Phuc et al., 2017). However, given 
the relatively low levels of intestinal and hepatic CYP2J2 compared 
with CYP3A4, Lee et al. (2010a) concluded that the contribution 
of CYP2J2 to presystemic clearance of drugs is probably low com-
pared with that of CYP3A4. Furthermore, in contrast to CYP3A4, 
CYP2J2 is not inducible by CAR/PXR agonists (Xu et al., 2013).
The third notable aspect is that CYP2J2 is the major enzyme in 
vascular endothelial cells responsible for the epoxidation of arachi-
donic acid to four EETs (5,6-, 8,9-, 11,12-, and 14,15-epoxyeicosa-
trienoic acid) with a minor contribution from CYP2C8 and CYP2C9 
(Liu et al., 2006a; Spiecker and Liao, 2006; Deng et al., 2012; Xu 
et al., 2013; Karkhanis et al., 2017). EETs are endothelin-derived 
hyperpolarizing factors (EDHFs) (i.e., vasodilators) that possess 
anti-inflammatory properties and protect tissues from ischemic 
injury. Hydrolysis of EETs by sEH terminates their vasodilatory and 
anti-inflammatory effects (see the section “Epoxide Hydrolases”) 
(Fretland and Omiecinski, 2000; Morisseau and Hammock, 2005; 
Imig and Hammock, 2009; Fleming, 2014; Kodani and Hammock, 
2015; He et al., 2016). The acute vascular inflammatory response 
to endotoxin in transgenic mice can be attenuated either by overex-
pressing CYP2J2 (or CYP2C8) or by deleting sEH (sEH knockout 
mice) (Deng et al., 2012).
The fourth and final notable aspect is that CYP2J2 is overex-
pressed in many human cancers and cancer-derived cell lines (Chen 
et al., 2011a; Xu et al., 2011). In human-derived tumor cell lines, 
overexpression of CYP2J2 (or direct application of EETs) stimu-
lates cell proliferation and inhibits apoptosis, whereas the opposite 
effects are achieved by inhibiting CYP2J2 with terfenadine-like 
inhibitors or silencing CYP2J2 expression with antisense oligonu-
cleotides (Chen et al., 2009, 2011a; Xu et al., 2011). Inhibitors of 
CYP2J2 are under consideration as anticancer drugs, but by block-
ing EET formation in vascular endothelial cells they may poten-
tially predispose to hypertension and coronary artery disease (Chen 
et al., 2011a; Xu et al., 2011, 2013; Karkhanis et al., 2017), whereas 
inhibitors of sEH are under consideration as cardioprotective drugs, 
but by inhibiting the hydrolysis of EETs in cancer cells they may 
potentially predispose to tumor development and metastatic tumori-
genesis (Imig and Hammock, 2009; Wang et al., 2010c; Xu et al., 
2013; Karkhanis et al., 2017).
In addition to its role in arachidonic acid metabolism, CYP2J2 
can also catalyze the 25-hydroxylation of vitamin D1, D2, and D3, 
the first of two steps in the formation of the active metabolite 1α,25-
dihydroxyvitamin D (Aiba et al., 2006).
CYP2R1, CYP2S1, CYP2U1, and CYP2W1  CYP2R1, CYP2S1, 
CYP2U1, and CYP2W1 are four of the eight members of the CYP1 
and CYP2 families that are so well conserved from an evolutionary 
perspective that they have been given the same names across all 
mammalian species (the other members are CYP1A1, CYP1A2, 
CYP1B1, and CYP2E1). These enzymes have been conserved dur-
ing evolution presumably because they perform an important but 
in some cases a poorly defined physiological function. The hepatic 
enzyme CYP2R1 was identified as a vitamin D 25-hydroxylating 
enzyme in 2004, but other CYP enzymes in human liver micro-
somes (CYP27A1, CYP2J2, and CYP3A4) have been impli-
cated in catalyzing this first step in the activation of vitamin D to 
1α,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (Cheng et al., 2004; Schuster, 2011). 
However, based on an analysis of genetic determinants of vitamin 
D deficiency, two groups established that genetic polymorphism 
of CYP2R1 is associated with circulating 25-­hydroxyvitamin D, 
which provides strong evidence that CYP2R1is the main enzyme 
responsible for the critical first step in vitamin D activation 
(Ahn et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2010b).
CYP2U1 is highly expressed in the brain and thymus and to 
a lesser extent in the kidney, lung, and heart (Devos et al., 2010). 
CYP2U1 metabolizes arachidonic acid, docosahexaenoic acid 
(DHA), and other long-chain fatty acids. CYP2U1 catalyzes the 
ω-1 and ω-hydroxylation of arachidonic acid 19- and 20-HETE. 
The latter metabolite, 20-HETE, is a powerful vasoconstrictor in the 
kidney and brain, which suggests CYP2U1 may play a role in the 
regulation of blood flow in these tissues. However, several CYP4A 
and CYP4F enzymes can also catalyze the ω-1 and ω-hydroxylation 
of arachidonic acid to 19- and 20-HETE. Genetic polymorphisms 
in CYP2U1 have been identified but they do not appear to alter its 
function or expression (Devos et al., 2010).

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
307
CYP2S1 and CYP2W1 are intriguing enzymes because they 
are expressed in certain tumors and because they have unusual cata-
lytic properties. CYP2S1 is expressed in several extrahepatic tissues 
such as the lung, trachea, stomach, small intestine, colon, spleen, 
bladder, and skin (Saarikoski et al., 2005). It is also expressed in 
psoriatic skin, ovarian cancer, and colorectal tumors where its 
presence is associated with poor prognosis (Kumarakulasingham 
et al., 2005). CYP2W1 is expressed in a large number of tumors 
including colorectal and adrenal tumors, but it does not appear to 
be expressed to a significant extent in normal (i.e., noncancerous) 
hepatic or extrahepatic tissues (Karlgren et al., 2006). Both enzymes 
are induced by hypoxia, which may account for their upregulation 
in tumors. CYP2S1 is also inducible by AhR agonists and joins 
CYP1A1, CYP1A2, and CYP1B1 as a dioxin-inducible enzyme 
(Saarikoski et al., 2005). There is some evidence to suggest that, at 
least in certain cell lines, CYP2W1 is also inducible by AhR ligands 
(Tan et al., 2011).
There is considerable controversy surrounding the catalytic 
function of CYP2S1, but this controversy has been resolved (at 
least in part) by understanding the importance of oxygen tension 
in the function of CYP2S1. Under aerobic conditions, CYP2S1 can 
catalyze the oxidative metabolism of several carcinogens (PAHs 
and their diol epoxides, aflatoxin B1, naphthalene, and styrene) but 
only if these reactions are supported by lipid peroxides or hydrogen 
peroxide (by the peroxide shunt) and not if the enzyme is supported 
by NADPH and O2 together with POR (Wu et al., 2006; Bui and 
Hankinson, 2009; Bui et al., 2009). However, under anaerobic con-
ditions, CYP2S1 can efficiently use POR and NADPH to catalyze 
reductive reactions, as can CYP2W1 (discussed later in this sec-
tion) (Nishida et al., 2010). These reactions are inhibited by oxygen. 
The ability of CYP2S1-expressing cells to catalyze the oxidative 
metabolism of carcinogens is suspect of being due to the presence 
of intracellular lipid peroxides and hydrogen peroxide that support 
the peroxide shunt (Bui and Hankinson, 2009; Bui et al., 2009).
CYP2W1 catalyzes the oxidative metabolism of a wide variety 
of PAHs and their diol epoxides, aflatoxin B1, and indoline to cyto-
toxic/mutagenic metabolites (Wu et al., 2006; Gomez et al., 2010). 
CYP2W1 also hydroxylates and epoxidates a variety of lysopho-
phospholipids and catalyzes the 4-hydroxylation of all-trans reti-
noic acid and all-trans retinol (Xiao and Guengerich, 2012; Zhao 
et al., 2016). It is unusual, however, for being one of the few CYP 
enzymes to undergo glycosylation, which places CYP2W1 on the 
luminal side of the endoplasmic reticulum, which is the wrong 
side for an interaction with POR, which faces the cytoplasmic 
side (Gomez et al., 2010). Nevertheless, CYP2W1 expressed in 
cells is functional, either because it uses lipid peroxides/hydro-
gen peroxide (as does CYP2S1) or because it can use electron 
donors other than POR. As a result of its luminal orientation in the 
endoplasmic reticulum (where it becomes glycosylated), approxi-
mately 8% of CYP2W1 is expressed on the plasma membrane 
(Gomez et al., 2010).
Because of their presence and upregulation in hypoxic tumors, 
CYP2S1 and especially CYP2W1 have been targeted for their 
potential to activate anticancer drugs (Travica et al., 2013; Choong 
et al., 2015; Chung et al., 2016). AQ4N is a prodrug (a di-N-oxide) 
that undergoes N-oxide reduction to 4QA, a potent topoisomerase II 
inhibitor. The reaction is catalyzed by both CYP2S1 and CYP2W1 
under anaerobic conditions. The reductive activation by CYP2S1 
and CYP2W1 requires POR but the reaction is inhibited by oxygen.
Phortress (a prodrug) is representative of a new class of anti-
cancer drugs that are derivatives of 2-(4-amino-3-methylphenyl)-
5-fluorobenzothiazole, better known as 5F-203. Phortress is in 
clinical trials as an anticancer drug. It is an AhR agonist that induces 
CYP1A1 and induces its own activation to one or more cytotoxic 
metabolites (Brantley et al., 2004). Like CYP1A1, CYP2W1 
also activates 5F-203 (the active metabolite of Phortress) and the 
related fluorinated benzothiazole GW-610 to cytotoxic metabolites, 
whereas CYP2S1 converts 5F-203 and GW-610 to inactive metabo-
lites (Tan et al., 2011). 5F-203 and GW-610 are AhR agonists that 
induce CYP1A1, CYP2S1, and, in certain cell lines, CYP2W1 (Tan 
et al., 2011). CYP2W1 is inducible by imatinib and can activate 
duocarmycin to cytotoxic metabolites suggesting that a combina-
tion of these two anticancer drugs might be a promising approach 
to treat colorectal cancer (Choong et al., 2015).
CYP3A Enzymes  In terms of the number of drugs it metabo-
lizes, CYP3A4 is the most important CYP enzyme (Rendic and 
Guengerich, 2015). Numerous drugs, herbals, and food constitu-
ents inhibit or induce CYP3A4, making the enzyme the center 
of many drug interactions. The high levels in the liver and small 
intestine (where it works in conjunction with efflux transporters 
including P-gp, BCRP, and MRP2) allow CYP3A4 to play a key 
role in the presystemic elimination of drugs and other xenobiotics. 
CYP3A5 is a polymorphically expressed enzyme expressed in the 
liver, small intestine, and kidney. It is unusual because, in several 
ethnic groups, the CYP3A5*3 allele that gives rise to a PM geno-
type is more prevalent than the wild-type genotype (the *1 allele), 
such that the majority of Caucasians, Asians, and Mexicans are 
CYP3A5 PMs. CYP3A5 plays a significant role in the disposition 
of tacrolimus but few other drugs. CYP3A7 is expressed in the fetal 
liver. It is also expressed in the adult liver and the levels increase 
with age (Ohtsuki et al., 2012). CYP3A43 is the major CYP3A 
enzyme in the brain where it plays an important role in the disposi-
tion of a select few drugs.
The function and regulation of the CYP3A enzymes are fairly 
well conserved among mammalian species, with some notable excep-
tions. For example, rifampin is an inducer of the CYP3A enzymes 
in humans and rabbits but not rats or mice, whereas the opposite is 
true of PCN. In adult rats, the levels of CYP3A2 in males are much 
greater (more than 10-fold) than in females (Waxman and Holloway, 
2009). In humans, men do not have higher levels of CYP3A4 than 
women; in fact, there is evidence to suggest that the reverse is 
true—that women have slightly higher levels of CYP3A4 than men, 
although it should be noted that CYP3A4 levels vary widely in both 
men and women (Parkinson et al., 2004; Soldin et al., 2011).
CYP3A4  CYP3A4 is abundantly expressed in the liver and small 
intestine, where it biotransforms an extraordinary array of xenobiot-
ics and endobiotics (such as steroid hormones, sterols, and vitamin 
D), including drugs from numerous therapeutic classes as shown 
in Table 6-17. CYP3A4 metabolizes 27% of drugs (n = 860) and 
15% of natural products/endobiotics (n = 331 compounds) (Rendic 
and Guengerich, 2015). A large number of clinically significant 
drug–drug, drug–herbal, and drug–food interactions involve the 
inhibition or induction of hepatic and/or intestinal CYP3A4. Three 
victim drugs whose clearance is mainly determined by CYP3A4, 
namely, terfenadine (Seldane), cisapride (Propulsid), and astemi-
zole (Hismanal), have been withdrawn from the market because of 
their potential to cause ventricular arrhythmias (and on rare occa-
sions heart attacks) when their metabolism by CYP3A4 was inhib-
ited by drugs such as ketoconazole and erythromycin (Huang et al., 
2008; Zhang et al., 2009). One perpetrator drug, namely, mibefradil 
(Posicor), has been withdrawn from the market because of its abil-
ity to cause marked and prolonged inhibition of CYP3A4 by vir-
tue of its ability to cause irreversible inhibition (MDI) of CYP3A4 
(which persists after the inhibitory drug is withdrawn and until new 
enzyme is synthesized) (Foti et al., 2011).

308
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
Intestinal CYP3A4 contributes significantly to the presys-
temic elimination of drugs because drugs in the small intestine are 
recycled by efflux transporters such as P-gp, BCRP, and MRP2 
on the luminal surface of enterocytes, which delays absorption 
and increases the opportunity for xenobiotic biotransformation by 
CYP3A4 (Benet, 2009; Galetin et al., 2010). Cobicistat is a struc-
tural analog of ritonavir. Despite being devoid of antiviral activity, 
cobicistat shares ritonavir’s ability to inhibit CYP3A4 and P-gp and 
accordingly is approved as a pharmacokinetic booster for combina-
tion with various antiviral drugs to increase and prolong their sys-
temic exposure (Deeks, 2014; Marzolini et al., 2016). Like ritonavir, 
cobicistat causes particularly large increases in systemic exposure 
to drugs whose intestinal absorption is normally restricted by P-gp 
efflux and metabolism by intestinal CYP3A4 and whose systemic 
clearance is determined largely by hepatic metabolism by CYP3A4. 
For example, ritonavir can increase systemic exposure to atazanavir 
and saquinavir more than 25-fold (University of Washington DIDB, 
2018). CYP3cide is a metabolism-dependent inhibitor that inacti-
vates CYP3A4 but not CYP3A5; it is used in vitro to distinguish the 
relative contribution of CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 to the metabolism 
of drugs by human liver microsomes, which is discussed in the next 
section “CYP3A5” (Tseng et al., 2014).
Furanocoumarins in grapefruit juice inhibit intestinal but not 
hepatic CYP3A4 and yet grapefruit juice increases systemic expo-
sure to felodipine and other drugs that undergo first-pass metabo-
lism by CYP3A4 (Paine et al., 2006). The impact of the CYP3A4 
inhibitor ketoconazole on the disposition of the CYP3A4 substrate 
midazolam depends on whether midazolam is given orally or 
intravenously. When midazolam is given intravenously, such that 
its clearance is dependent only on hepatic metabolism, ketocon-
azole causes a three- to fivefold increase in the plasma AUC of 
midazolam. However, when midazolam is given orally, ketocon-
azole causes a 10- to 15-fold increase in plasma AUC, the differ-
ence reflecting the significant role of intestinal metabolism to the 
presystemic clearance of midazolam. In rats, administration of the 
general CYP inhibitor 1-aminobenzotriazole (ABT) by the intrave-
nous route (which inhibits only hepatic CYP enzymes) and the oral 
route (which inhibits both intestinal and hepatic CYP enzymes) can 
be used to assess the relative role of the intestine and liver to the 
first-pass metabolism of a drug or other xenobiotic (Strelevitz et al., 
2006; Boily et al., 2015).
The induction of CYP3A4 is mediated by CAR and PXR, 
agonists for which include several antibiotics, such as rifampin 
and rifabutin, several EIAEDs, such as phenobarbital, phenytoin, 
carbamazepine, and felbamate, and the herbal St. John’s wort 
(active inducer hyperforin), as shown in Table 6-17. The induction 
of intestinal and hepatic CYP3A4 (and conjugating enzymes, as 
outlined in the sections “Glucuronidation and Formation of Acyl-
CoA Thioesters” and “Sulfonation”) by these drugs can result in 
a loss of therapeutic efficacy of oral contraceptive steroids, anti-
HIV, and anti-organ rejection drugs. It is an important mechanism 
of drug–drug and drug–herbal interactions (Huang et al., 2008). 
Prolonged induction of CYP3A4 also adversely impacts the 
metabolism of vitamin D, as discussed in the section “Induction 
of Cytochrome P450: Xenosensors.” As mentioned earlier in the 
section “CYP2C8,” there is in vitro evidence that CYP3A4 along 
with CYP2C8 and CYP1A1 are inducible by activators of human 
PPARα, the xenosensor linked with induction of CYP4A enzymes 
in rodents (Seree et al., 2004; Prueksaritanont et al., 2005; Klein 
et al., 2012; Thomas et al., 2013, 2015; Makia and Goldstein, 2016). 
Whether fibrates and other drugs that activate PPARα cause clini-
cally relevant induction of CYP3A4 (or CYP1A1 and CYP2C8) is 
not known.
CYP3A4 metabolizes more drugs than any other xenobiotic-
biotransforming enzyme, which is apparent from the large list of 
CYP3A4 substrates listed in Table 6-17. Like CYP2C8, CYP3A4 
can metabolize large substrates, such as paclitaxel (Taxol®), which 
is a substrate for both enzymes. The active site of CYP3A4 is suffi-
ciently large to bind two drugs simultaneously (Ekroos and Sjögren, 
2006), and individual drugs tend to bind to discrete regions, which 
has several consequences. First, the binding of two substrates to 
CYP3A4 allows for homotropic activation (where a substrate 
stimulates its own metabolism, as in the case of testosterone and 
diazepam) and heterotropic activation (where one compound, such 
as α-naphthoflavone, stimulates the metabolism of another). These 
effects give rise to non-Michaelis–Menten or atypical enzyme 
kinetics, which is characteristic of the metabolism of several drugs 
by CYP3A4 (Atkins, 2005). The binding of one ligand (substrate, 
inhibitor, or activator) to CYP3A4 can cause conformational 
changes that increase the size of the active site by 80% or more, 
which allows additional ligands to bind, possibly in a stacked or 
side-by-side configuration (Ekroos and Sjögren, 2006). Second, 
substrates can bind to relatively discrete sites within the active 
site. Testosterone and midazolam appear to bind to distinct sites 
(called the steroid and benzodiazepine binding site, respectively); 
consequently, these two prototypical substrates only weakly inhibit 
each other’s metabolism by CYP3A4 (Schrag and Wienkers, 2001; 
Galetin et al., 2003). As a result of these different substrate-binding 
sites or orientations, it is possible for a drug to inhibit CYP3A4 
in a substrate-dependent manner (Schrag and Wienkers, 2001; 
Galetin et al., 2003). However, inhibitors that coordinate directly 
with the heme moiety of CYP3A4 will inhibit the metabolism of 
all CYP3A4 substrates, as will most metabolism-dependent inhibi-
tors of CYP3A4 (see the section “Inhibition of Cytochrome P450”). 
Although the active site of CYP3A4 is sufficiently large to bind 
substrates in apparently discrete sites and to bind two molecules 
simultaneously, it nevertheless often catalyzes reactions with a high 
degree of regioselectivity and stereoselectivity. In the case of tes-
tosterone, for example, CYP3A4 catalyzes hydroxylation at sev-
eral sites on the β-face of the molecule (e.g., 1β-, 2β-, 6β-, and 
15β-hydroxylation) but none on the α-face.
More than 40 SNPs have been identified in the CYP3A4 gene, 
some of which contribute to the large interindividual variation 
in CYP3A4 activity (Staatz et al., 2010). An individual with low 
CYP3A4 activity was found to be heterozygous for a null allele 
(CYP3A4*20) and was characterized as a genetically determined 
IM (Westlind-Johnsson et al., 2006). The *20 variant was the first 
null allele identified for CYP3A4. A genetic polymorphism in 
intron 6 (CYP3A4*22; rs35599367, C > T) affects the expression 
and, hence, the activity of CYP3A4 such that individuals who are 
homozygous for the *1 allele (CC carriers) have 1.7 times more 
CYP3A4 activity than heterozygotes (*1/*22 or CT) and 2.5 times 
more CYP3A4 activity than individuals homozygous for the *22 
allele (TT carriers) (Wang et al., 2011a). Compared with *1/*1 
(wild-type) carriers, individuals carrying one or two of the loss-of-
function *22 alleles require lower doses (40% to 80% less) of ator-
vastatin, simvastatin, and lovastatin for optimal lipid control (Wang 
et al., 2011a). The same genetic polymorphism impacts the dispo-
sition of cyclosporine and tacrolimus (Elens et al., 2011a, 2011b). 
In individuals who lack CYP3A5 (the majority of Caucasians, for 
example), carriers of the *22/*22 (TT) genotype (low CYP3A4) 
and *1/*22 (TC) genotype (intermediate CYP3A4) have dose-
adjusted concentrations of cyclosporine that are, respectively, 1.5- 
and 2.2-fold greater than in carriers of the *1/*1 (CC) genotype 
(high CYP3A4); in the case of tacrolimus they are 1.6- and 4.1-fold 
greater (Elens et al., 2011b).

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
309
The most widely studied CYP3A4 allelic variant (392A>G) is 
designated CYP3A4*1B. This allelic variant encodes a functional 
CYP3A4 enzyme that is expressed to the same extent (or perhaps to 
a slightly greater extent) than the wild-type enzyme (CYP3A4*1). 
The prevalence of the *1B allele varies from one ethnic group to 
the next as follows: 2% to 9.6% in Caucasians, 35% to 67% in 
Africans, 9.3% to 11% in Hispanics, and 0% in Asians. This poly-
morphism is linked to the *1 genetic polymorphism in CYP3A5 
such that CYP3A5 EMs tend to express the CYP3A4*1B variant, 
as discussed in the next section.
CYP3A4*1G (rs2242480, 20239G>A) is the most preva-
lent allelic variant of CYP3A4 in Asian populations (up to about 
35%), but the functional consequences of this genetic polymor-
phism appear to be substrate dependent. Clinical pharmacokinetic 
studies in genotyped Chinese subjects have shown that, compared 
with wild-type (*1/*1) individuals, individuals who are heterozy-
gous or homozygous for the *1G allele (i.e., *1/*1G or *1G/*1G) 
have increased activity toward atorvastatin, cyclosporine, diltiazem, 
tacrolimus, and methadone but decreased activity toward fentanyl 
with little or no change in activity toward midazolam, cortisol, or 
ticagrelor (Qiu et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2010; Miura et al., 2011; 
Uesugi et al., 2013; He et al., 2014; Chan et al., 2016; Zhou et al., 
2016; Liu et al., 2017b).
CYP3A5  CYP3A5 is a polymorphically expressed enzyme whose 
role in drug metabolism is a matter of considerable debate. The rel-
ative role of CYP3A4 versus CYP3A5 in the disposition of drugs is 
not easy to ascertain from in vitro or in vivo studies. In general, both 
enzymes are inducible by the same drugs, both enzymes metabolize 
the same drugs, and both are inhibited by the same drugs, although 
the two enzymes may differ in the affinity with which they bind to 
substrates and inhibitors. For example, when evaluated as inhibitors 
of recombinant human CYP3A enzymes, 14 out of 14 compounds 
inhibited CYP3A4 more potently than they inhibited CYP3A5 
by a factor of 3.9- to 142-fold (Ekins et al., 2003). CYP3cide is a 
selective irreversible inhibitor of CYP3A4 (discussed later in this 
section) (Tseng et al., 2014). A large number of drugs are metabo-
lized in vitro by both CYP3A4 and CYP3A5. Some drugs appear 
to be metabolized by CYP3A4 but not CYP3A5; however, all of the 
drugs known to be metabolized by CYP3A5 are also metabolized 
by CYP3A4. Accordingly, there is no in vitro or in vivo probe drug 
or index substrate to selectively measure CYP3A5 activity.
Assessing the relative contribution of CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 
to the metabolism of drugs is complicated by several factors. For 
example, studies with human liver microsomes are complicated by 
conflicting reports on the relative levels of CYP3A5 and CYP3A4; 
some reports indicate that the levels of CYP3A5 in human liver 
microsomes are uniformly low (Patki et al., 2003; Westlind-
Johnsson et al., 2003), whereas others indicate that, in some liver 
samples, the levels of CYP3A5 can approach those of CYP3A4 
(Lin et al., 2002). Analysis of the specific content of CYP enzymes 
by mass spectrometry indicates that, on average, CYP3A4 levels 
are considerably higher (>10 times) than the levels of CYP3A5, as 
shown in Table 6-16, but in individual livers the levels of CYP3A5 
can approach those of CYP3A4 (Ohtsuki et al., 2012). There are 
also conflicting reports on the relative rate of drug and steroid 
metabolism by recombinant CYP3A5 and CYP3A4. Early stud-
ies with recombinant enzymes generally showed that CYP3A4 is 
considerably more active than CYP3A5 in the metabolism of a 
wide range of substrates. However, these studies were criticized 
later by Huang et al. (2004) on the basis that few of them were 
conducted with recombinant enzymes in the presence of both POR 
and cytochrome b5. Under such conditions, the catalytic activity of 
CYP3A5 can rival or even surpass that of CYP3A4. Of the eight 
substrates examined by Huang et al. (2004), midazolam represented 
the extreme case: in the presence of both POR and cytochrome b5, 
recombinant CYP3A5 was three times more active than CYP3A4 
at catalyzing the 1′-hydroxylation of midazolam, based on estimates 
of in vitro intrinsic metabolic clearance (i.e., Vmax/Km). However, 
when this same group evaluated the metabolism of the same eight 
substrates in two pools (n = 10) of human liver microsomes each 
with the same levels of CYP3A4 but with markedly different lev-
els of CYP3A5 (to mimic the CYP3A5 genetic polymorphism), 
it was found that CYP3A5 contributed nothing to the metabolism 
of testosterone, carbamazepine, lidocaine, terfenadine, dextro-
methorphan, or itraconazole, but contributed 27%, 26%, and 35% 
to the metabolism of midazolam, erythromycin, and flunitrazepam, 
respectively.
The selective CYP3A4 inhibitor CYP3cide was used with 
human liver microsomes from individuals expressing CYP3A4 
but not CYP3A5 (i.e., livers from CYP3A5*3/*3 PMs) and indi-
viduals expressing both CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 (i.e., livers from 
CYP3A5*1/*1 EMs) to assess the relative contribution of these two 
CYP3A enzymes to the metabolic clearance of 32 drugs (Tseng 
et al., 2014). CYP3A5 contributed less than 25% to the metabolic 
clearance of 19 of 32 drugs (with less than 10% contribution to 
11 of them). However, CYP3A5 contributed 25% to 50% to the 
metabolic clearance of 11 drugs, including midazolam (49%), and 
contributed considerably more than 50% to the metabolic clear-
ance of two drugs, namely vincristine (75%) and atazanavir (82%) 
(Tseng et al., 2014). Based on these findings CYP3A5 EMs would 
be expected, for example, to have twice the oral clearance (CL/F) 
of midazolam compared with CYP3A5 PMs; however, the results of 
11 clinical studies show a range of CL/F values ranging from –18% 
to +33% (Tseng et al., 2014).
Huang et al. (2004) demonstrated that, under certain in vitro 
conditions, the catalytic activity of CYP3A5 can surpass that of 
CYP3A4 in a substrate-dependent manner, and they further pre-
dicted that CYP3A5 contributes to the in vivo metabolism of mid-
azolam, a drug whose disposition is known to be highly dependent 
on CYP3A-catalyzed metabolism in the liver and small intestine. 
However, two clinical studies have shown that CYP3A5 genotype 
has no influence on the disposition of midazolam in vivo (Goh 
et al., 2002; Shih and Huang, 2002). Williams et al. (2003b) have 
reviewed possible reasons for the discrepancy between the in vitro 
prediction of the contribution of CYP3A5 to drug metabolism and 
the in vivo observation.
The relative role of CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 in the metabo-
lism of the calcineurin inhibitors cyclosporine and tacrolimus has 
been studied in vitro (Staatz et al., 2010). These two anti-organ 
rejection drugs have a narrow therapeutic index and factors that 
affect their disposition are of great clinical interest. Studies with 
recombinant CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 and studies with human liver 
microsomes that contain both CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 or that con-
tain only CYP3A4 suggest that the metabolism of cyclosporine is 
predominantly catalyzed by CYP3A4, whereas the metabolism 
of tacrolimus is predominantly catalyzed by CYP3A5 when this 
enzyme is present in human liver microsomes. Estimates of in vitro 
intrinsic metabolic clearance suggest that CYP3A4 contributes 
2.3-fold more to the metabolism of cyclosporine than CYP3A5, 
whereas CYP3A5 contributes 2.0-fold more to the metabolism of 
tacrolimus than CYP3A4. Although these in vitro studies suggest 
a role for CYP3A5 in the metabolism of tacrolimus and, to a lesser 
extent, cyclosporine, it should be remembered that identical studies 
by Huang et al. (2004) predicted a role for CYP3A5 in the metabo-
lism of midazolam, a prediction that subsequent clinical studies 
proved to be false.

310
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
In the case of CYP3A5, 11 SNPs have been identified, one of 
which (the *3 allele) causes a complete loss of CYP3A5 expression 
and, hence, a complete loss of CYP3A5 activity (Staatz et al., 2010). 
Individuals who are homozygous for the *3 allele can be classi-
fied as CYP3A5 PMs; they are genetically deficient in CYP3A5. 
Individuals with at least one wild-type allele (*1/*1 or *1/*3) are 
considered CYP3A5 EMs.
The *3 allele that gives rise to the CYP3A5 PM genotype is 
unusual in that it is more prevalent than the wild-type allele (*1), 
at least in most populations. The prevalence of the wild-type allele 
(CYP3A5*1) varies from one ethnic group to the next as follows: 
5% to 15% in Caucasians, 55% to 73% in Africans, about 25% in 
Mexicans, and 15% to 35% in Asians. In Caucasians, Mexicans, 
and Asians, most individuals are CYP3A5 PMs, which creates an 
atypical situation with respect to drug metabolism, one that con-
trasts sharply with genetic polymorphisms in other CYP enzymes 
where, to take CYP2D6 as an example, most Caucasians are EMs 
and only a minority (about 7%) are PMs. In the case of a drug that 
is largely cleared by CYP2D6, for example, the dose that confers 
therapeutic benefit to the largest number of people is a relatively 
high dose because most individuals are EMs. In the small number 
of individuals who are PMs (such as the 7% of Caucasians who 
lack CYP2D6), this dose may be too high; it may cause extended 
pharmacological effects (as seen with debrisoquine and sparteine) 
or adverse side effects (as seen with perhexiline). However, in the 
case of a drug that is primarily cleared by CYP3A5, the dose that 
confers therapeutic benefit to the largest number of people (in most 
ethnic populations) is a relatively low dose because most individu-
als are PMs. In the small number of individuals who are EMs (such 
as the 5% to 15% of Caucasians who are CYP3A5 EMs), this dose 
may be too low; it may fail to confer a therapeutic benefit, which is 
a major concern for an anti-organ rejection drug such as tacrolimus.
Several studies have shown linkage disequilibrium between the 
CYP3A4*1B allelic variant and the CYP3A5*1 wild-type allele, as 
evidenced by the observation that 67% of Caucasians and 100% 
of Africans expressing the CYP3A4*1B variant allele also express 
the CYP3A5*1 wild-type allele (Staatz et al., 2010). There is also 
evidence of linkage disequilibrium between the P-gp 3435C > T 
variant allele and the CYP3A5*3 variant allele. Such linkages 
underscore the need for caution in attributing an effect to one allelic 
variant when in fact the effect may be caused by another allele in 
close linkage.
Numerous studies have been conducted to assess the impact of 
genetic polymorphisms of CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 (as well as P-gp) 
on the pharmacokinetics of cyclosporine and tacrolimus. These 
studies were extensively reviewed by Staatz et al. (2010), and their 
findings can be summarized as follows:
	 1.	 The CYP3A4*1B allele has no effect on the disposition of 
cyclosporine.
	 2.	 The CYP3A4*1B allele increases the metabolism of tacro-
limus, but this association likely reflects its linkage with 
CYP3A5*1 (the EM genotype).
	 3.	 The CYP3A5*3 allele has no consistent effect on the disposi-
tion of cyclosporine; some studies suggest the lack of func-
tional CYP3A5 actually increases the rate of metabolism of 
cyclosporine, but others show no effect or a slight decrease.
	 4.	 The CYP3A5*3 allele impairs the metabolism of tacrolimus. 
The dose-adjusted trough level of tacrolimus in CYP3A5 
PMs (*3/*3) is roughly twice that in CYP3A5 EMs (*1/*1 
and *1/*3). Accordingly, to achieve the same blood levels, the 
dose of tacrolimus administered to CYP3A5 EMs is twice that 
administered to CYP3A5 PMs.
Overall, the results establish that the disposition of tacroli-
mus, but not cyclosporine, is affected by genetic polymorphisms 
of CYP3A5. Individuals with one or two copies of the wild-type *1 
allele (EMs) metabolize tacrolimus twice as quickly as individuals 
with two copies of the *3 allele (PMs). In contrast, genetic poly-
morphisms of CYP3A4 (such as the loss-of-function *22 allele) 
impact the disposition of both cyclosporine and tacrolimus, as out-
lined in the section “CYP3A4.”
CYP3A7  CYP3A7 is expressed in the fetal liver where it may play 
a role in the activation of drugs and other xenobiotics to teratogenic 
metabolites (Li et al., 1997; Pang et al., 2012). This is a concern 
because the laboratory animals used in drug safety testing (rats, 
mice, dogs, and monkeys) do not express a fetal CYP3A enzyme, 
raising the possibility that teratogenic metabolites formed by 
CYP3A7 may go undetected during reproductive toxicity testing 
in animals. In the fetus CYP3A7 is also expressed in extrahepatic 
tissue such as intestine, endometrial, placenta, adrenal gland, pros-
tate, and lung in the fetus.
CYP3A7 is also expressed in most adult human livers and 
the levels increase with age (Ohtsuki et al., 2012). CYP3A7 shows 
high activity toward endobiotics such as dehydroepiandrosterone 
(DHEA), estrone, and retinoic acid but low activity toward the 
majority of drugs metabolized by CYP3A4 (Williams et al., 2002; 
Pang et al., 2012). The 16α-hydroxylation of DHEA is catalyzed by 
CYP3A7 but not by CYP3A4. A null allelic variant (CYP3A7*3, 
caused by a thymidine insertion [4011insT] that prematurely 
terminates translation) has been identified in a Korean subject 
(Lee et al., 2010b).
CYP3A43  CYPA43 is expressed in the human liver but higher lev-
els are found in the brain, testis, and ovary (Westlind et al., 2001). It 
is upregulated in prostate, breast, and ovarian carcinomas. There are 
reports of an association between the loss-of-function CYP3A43*3 
polymorphism (Pro340Ala) and the risk of prostate cancer and the 
grade and size of benign prostatic hyperplasia but there is no asso-
ciation with breast cancer risk (Justenhoven et al., 2010). A genetic 
polymorphism (an intronic SNP) in CYP3A43 (rs472660) accounts 
for the long recognized ethnic difference in the metabolism of olan-
zapine, an antipsychotic drug associated with a high rate of dis-
continuation due to lack of efficacy or the prevalence of adverse 
effects. Although the functional consequences of the SNP remain to 
be determined, 67% of African Americans carry the A variant and 
have higher rates of olanzapine clearance than Caucasians, only 
14% of whom carry the A variant. Among the AA carriers 89% are 
African Americans (compared with 11% of Caucasians), whereas 
95% of GG carriers are Caucasians compared with only 5% of 
African Americans (Justenhoven et al., 2010).
The expression CYP3A43 in brain impacts the metabolism of 
the antianxiety drug alprazolam (Agarwal et al., 2008). In the liver, 
CYP3A4 mainly converts alprazolam to the pharmacologically 
inactive metabolite 4-hydroxy-alprazolam, whereas in the brain 
CYP3A43 converts alprazolam to both 4-hydroxy-alprazolam and 
the pharmacologically active metabolite α-hydroxy-alprazolam.
CYP4 Enzymes  Humans express 11 members of the CYP4 fam-
ily, namely, CYP4A11, CYP4A22, CYP4F2, CYP4F3, CYP4F8, 
CYP4F11, CYP4F12, CYP4F22, CYP4V2, CYP4X1, and 
CYP4Z1. CYP4B1 is often considered a 12th member, but the 
human CYP4B1 gene, in contrast to that in other mammalian spe-
cies, encodes a protein that does not incorporate heme; hence, 
human CYP4B1 is catalytically inactive (Baer and Rettie, 2006; 
Edson and Rettie, 2013; Johnson et al., 2015). For the most part, 
the CYP4 enzymes can be divided into two groups: a large group 
that is known to metabolize fatty acids and/or eicosanoids and

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
311
a small group (CYP4A22 and CYP4X1) with no known func-
tion (so-called orphan enzymes), as shown in Table 6-14. The 
first group (CYP4A11, CYP4F2, CYP4F3, CYP4F8, CYP4F12, 
CYP4F22, CYP4V2, and CYP4Z1) is part of a larger group of fatty 
acid–metabolizing and eicosanoid-metabolizing enzymes, which 
includes CYP2C8, CYP2C9, and CYP2J2. However, these lat-
ter enzymes are fatty acid/eicosanoid epoxygenases; they oxidize 
arachidonic acid to four regioisomers of EETs, which are vaso-
dilators. In contrast, the CYP4 enzymes hydroxylate the terminal 
methyl group (ω-hydroxylation) of fatty acids and eicosanoids. In 
the case of arachidonic acid, ω-hydroxylation by CYP4 enzymes 
produces 20-HETE, which is a vasoconstrictor. Hydroxylation of 
the terminal methyl group (ω-hydroxylation) by CYP4 enzymes 
is thermodynamically unfavorable compared with hydroxyla-
tion of a methylene group (e.g., ω-1 hydroxylation), which some 
CYP4 enzymes also catalyze (Baer and Rettie, 2006; Kalsotra 
and Strobel, 2006; Johnston et al., 2011; Edson and Rettie, 2013). 
Following ω-hydroxylation, the terminal hydroxymethyl group can 
be further oxidized to convert the original fatty acid/eicosanoid to a 
dicarboxylic acid. These dicarboxylic acids are then catabolized by 
fatty acid β-oxidation (chain shortening) and eliminated. Hepatic 
CYP4A enzymes are upregulated in humans and mice with nonal-
coholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and CYP4A14 knockout mice 
are protected against NAFLD induced by a high-fat diet or a diet 
deficient in methionine and choline (Zhang et al., 2017).
Unlike other CYP families, the majority of CYP4 enzymes 
have a covalently attached heme moiety in which the heme forms 
an ester bond with a conserved glutamic acid residue (Ortiz de 
Montellano, 2008). However, CYP4F8 and CYP4F12 are excep-
tions (and CYP4X1 probably also lacks a covalent heme because it 
lacks the critical glutamate residue). It is noteworthy that CYP4F8 
and CYP4F12 preferentially hydroxylate fatty acids in the ω-1 
or ω-2 position, which are more energetically favorable than 
ω-hydroxylation but which do not lead to the formation of dicar-
boxylic acids (Stark et al., 2005). It has been postulated that the 
purpose of the covalently bound heme in CYP4 ω-hydroxylases is 
to help restrict the orientation of the fatty acid in the active site to 
direct hydroxylation toward the ω-position (Ortiz de Montellano, 
2008; Johnston et al., 2011).
Several CYP4 enzymes have been shown to metabolize drugs 
and other xenobiotics, but in nearly all cases the drugs that are 
metabolized by the CYP4 enzymes are also metabolized more 
extensively by CYP1, CYP2, or CYP3 family members. A nota-
ble exception is the antiparasitic prodrug pafuramidine (DB-289), 
which is O-demethylated in human liver microsomes by CYP4F2 
and CYP4F3 with negligible contribution from CYP enzymes in 
the 1, 2, or 3 family (Wang et al., 2006). O-Demethylation converts 
pafuramidine (DB-289) to an amidoxime, which undergoes dehy-
droxylation by mARC/cytochrome b5/NADH-cytochrome b5 reduc-
tase as shown for other amidoximes in Fig. 6-26. Other examples of 
CYP4-mediated drug metabolism include the CYP4F12-dependent 
hydroxylation of ebastine and terfenadine (Cauffiez et al., 2004), 
and the CYP4F2-dependent ω-hydroxylation of fingolimod 
(FTY720, Gilenya), an FDA-approved immunosuppressive drug 
for the treatment of multiple sclerosis (Zollinger et al., 2011).
Another notable exception is CYP4B1, which is expressed in 
a wide range of extrahepatic tissues and which activates several 
protoxicants including the pneumotoxins ipomeanol and 3-methyl-
indole, the bladder carcinogen 2-AF, as well as aromatic amines in 
animals (Baer and Rettie, 2006; Parkinson et al., 2012). However, 
CYP4B1 appears to be inactive in humans due to a mutation that 
interferes with heme incorporation; the mutation is located in the 
meander region and encodes for a serine residue at amino acid 427. 
This amino acid is an evolutionarily conserved proline in other spe-
cies where CYP4B1 is known to be active including cow, mouse, 
rat, rabbit, and dog. Introducing a Pro427Ser mutation into rabbit 
CYP4B1 interferes with heme incorporation, and reverting Ser427 
to the conserved proline in the human CYP4B1 gene yields a func-
tional enzyme that incorporates heme (Zheng et al., 1998). The 
Pro427Ser mutation likely explains why attempts to express human 
CYP4B1 in a recombinant system have yielded inactive enzyme 
lacking heme.
CYP4F2 has been implicated in the clearance of both vitamins 
K and E (Parker et al., 2004; Sontag and Parker, 2007; McDonald 
et al., 2009). Both of these compounds have phytyl-derived, long 
alkyl chains attached to a polar moiety (which makes them roughly 
structurally analogous to fatty acids). Urinary metabolites of vita-
mins K and E that lack the phytyl chain likely arise from CYP4F2-
catalyzed ω-hydroxylation followed by further oxidation to the 
carboxylic acid with subsequent chain shortening by β-oxidation. 
A genetic polymorphism in CYP4F2 (Val433Met) that impairs the 
metabolism of vitamin K1 is clinically relevant because individuals 
with this loss-of-function allelic variant require a higher warfarin 
dose to compete with the increased levels of the vitamin K1 in the 
liver (McDonald et al., 2009; Lurie et al., 2010).
Genetic defects in CYP4V2 and CYP4F22 have been linked to 
diseases with symptoms possibly caused by disruption of fatty acid 
homeostasis and/or disruption of eicosanoid signaling. Mutations in 
CYP4V2 are linked to Bietti crystalline corneoretinal dystrophy (Li 
et al., 2004; Lockhart et al., 2014; Ng et al., 2016), a late-onset eye 
disease characterized by night blindness and eventually blindness 
caused by crystalline deposits in the retinal epithelium and cornea. 
Mutations in CYP4F22 are associated with autosomal recessive 
congenital ichthyosis (Lefevre et al., 2006), which is character-
ized by large dark scales on the skin without exfoliative dermati-
tis. CYP4F22 is likely involved in the metabolism of hepoxilins or 
trioxilins, signaling molecules that are part of the arachidonic acid 
cascade (Kelly et al., 2011).
Endogenous Biomarkers of Cytochrome P450  The ability 
of many CYP enzymes (and other drug-metabolizing enzymes) 
to biotransform endogenous substrates (in addition to xenobiot-
ics) opens the possibility that their activity in vivo can be moni-
tored with biomarkers (i.e., metabolites of endogenous compounds 
formed by a specific CYP or other drug-metabolizing enzyme). 
In principle, biomarkers could be used, for example, to assess the 
impact of a new investigational drug, herbal medication, or any 
other xenobiotic to which humans are exposed on one or more 
enzymes involved in xenobiotic biotransformation. In the case of 
investigational drugs, this assessment could be conducted early in 
the clinical phase of drug development to assess the potential of a 
new drug candidate to cause clinically relevant inhibition or induc-
tion of CYP enzymes. A large number (>20) of metabolites formed 
from androgens, estrogens, corticosteroids, cholesterol, and vita-
min D3 are potential biomarkers of CYP3A activity (Tracy et al., 
2016). Changes in the ratio of plasma 6β-hydroxycholesterol/
cholesterol and urinary 6β-hydroxycortisol/cortisol were used (in 
addition to changes in the plasma pharmacokinetics of midazolam) 
to assess the CYP3A-inducing potential of PF-06282999, an inves-
tigational drug that inhibits myeloperoxidase (Dong et al., 2017). 
Metabolomic studies identified an endogenous urinary biomarker 
for CYP2D6 (Tay-Sontheimer et al., 2014). This biomarker, des-
ignated M1 (m/z 444.3102), the structure of which is unknown, is 
undetectable in urine from CYP2D6 PMs. In CYP2D6 EMs, the 
levels of M1 excreted in urine decrease by almost an order of mag-
nitude following treatment with the CYP2D6 inhibitor fluoxetine. 
These examples illustrate the potential for biomarkers to provide

312
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
valuable information on interindividual differences in the activity 
of xenobiotic-biotransforming enzymes and the potential for drugs 
and other xenobiotics to cause clinically relevant inhibition or 
induction of these enzymes.
Activation of Xenobiotics by Cytochrome P450  Biotrans­
formation by CYP does not always lead to detoxication, and 
several examples have been given previously where the toxic-
ity or tumorigenicity of a chemical depends on its activation by 
CYP. The role of individual human CYP enzymes in the activa-
tion of selected procarcinogens and protoxicants is summarized in 
Table 6-18 (Guengerich, 1991). A variety of CYP-dependent 
reactions are involved in the activation of the chemicals listed in 
Table 6-18. The conversion of PAHs to tumor-forming metabolites 
involves the formation of bay-region diol epoxides, as shown in 
Fig. 6-14, for the conversion of B[a]P to B[a]P 7,8-dihydrodiol-
9,10-epoxide. Epoxidation generates hepatotoxic metabolites of 
chlorobenzene and coumarin (Fig. 6-48), and generates a hepatotu-
morigenic metabolite of aflatoxin B1 (Fig. 6-38).
The initial step in the conversion of aromatic amines and 
amides to tumor-forming metabolites involves N-hydroxylation, 
as shown for 2-amino-6-nitrobenzylalcohol (Fig. 6-16), 2-AF, and 
2-AAF (Fig. 6-67). The aromatic amide phenacetin, a discontin-
ued drug, undergoes N-hydroxylation by CYP (and peroxidases) to 
form a hydroxamic acid. Under acidic conditions (such as in urine), 
the hydroxamic acid can lose water to form reactive nitrenium ion, 
which is thought to contribute to the renal toxicity of phenacetin 
(Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). In the case of acetaminophen, 
activation to hepatotoxic metabolite involves dehydrogenation to 
NAPQI, as shown in Fig. 6-39. A similar reaction converts BHT to 
a toxic quinone methide, as shown in Fig. 6-40. The myelotoxic-
ity of benzene depends on its conversion to phenol and hydroqui-
none (Fig. 6-36). The toxicity of several OP insecticides involves 
oxidative group transfer to the corresponding organophosphate, as 
shown for the conversion of parathion to paraoxon in Figs. 6-51 
and 6-52. The hepatotoxicity of carbon tetrachloride involves reduc-
tive dechlorination to a trichloromethyl free radical, which binds 
to protein and initiates lipid peroxidation, as shown in Fig. 6-22. 
The hepatotoxicity and nephrotoxicity of chloroform involve oxi-
dative dechlorination to phosgene (Fig. 6-22). Both oxidative and 
reductive dehalogenation play a role in the activation of halothane, 
although hepatotoxicity in rats is more dependent on reductive 
dehalogenation, whereas the immune hepatitis in humans is largely 
a consequence of oxidative dehalogenation, which leads to the for-
mation of neoantigens (Pohl et al., 1989). Formation of neoantigens 
(by covalent binding to CYP2C9) is also the mechanism by which 
the uricosuric diuretic drug, tienilic acid, causes immune hepatitis 
(Lecoeur et al., 1994).
Some of the chemicals listed in Table 6-18 are activated to 
toxic or tumorigenic metabolites by mechanisms not mentioned 
previously. For example, N-nitrosodimethylamine, which is repre-
sentative of a large class of tumorigenic nitrosamines, is activated 
to an alkylating electrophile by N-demethylation, as shown in Fig. 
6-56. The activation of ethyl carbamate (urethane) involves two 
sequential reactions catalyzed by CYP (CYP2E1): dehydrogena-
tion to vinyl carbamate followed by epoxidation, as shown in Fig. 
6-56. CYP2E1 is one of several CYP enzymes that can catalyze the 
epoxidation of tetrachloroethylene. The rearrangement of this epox-
ide to a carbonyl is accompanied by migration of chlorine, which 
produces the highly reactive metabolite, trichloroacetyl chloride, 
as shown in Fig. 6-56. The toxic pyrrolizidine alkaloids, such as 
senecionine, are cyclic arylamines that are dehydrogenated by CYP 
(CYP3A4) to the corresponding pyrroles. Pyrroles themselves are 
nucleophiles, but electrophiles are generated through the loss of 
substituents on the pyrrolizidine nucleus, as shown in Fig. 6-56. 
Cyclophosphamide and ifosfamide are examples of chemicals 
designed to be activated to toxic electrophiles for the treatment of 
malignant tumors and other proliferative diseases. These drugs are 
nitrogen mustards, which have a tendency to undergo intramolecular 
nucleophilic displacement to form an electrophilic aziridinium spe-
cies. In the case of cyclophosphamide and ifosfamide, the nitrogen 
mustard is stabilized by the presence of a phosphoryl oxygen, which 
delocalizes the lone pair of nitrogen electrons required for intramo-
lecular nucleophilic displacement. For this reason, formation of an 
electrophilic aziridinium species requires hydroxylation by CYP, 
as shown in Fig. 6-56, for cyclophosphamide. Hydroxylation of the 
carbon atom next to the ring nitrogen leads spontaneously to ring 
opening and elimination of acrolein. In the resultant phosphoramide 
mustard, delocalization of the lone pair of nitrogen electrons to the 
phosphoryl oxygen is now disfavored by the presence of the lone 
pair of electrons on the oxygen anion; hence, the phosphoramide 
undergoes an intramolecular nucleophilic elimination to generate 
an electrophilic aziridinium species. This reaction is catalyzed by 
CYP2B6 and CYP3A4. Activation of cyclophosphamide by CYP 
enzymes in the skin would generate a cytotoxic metabolite at the 
base of hair follicles, which may be the reason why hair loss is one 
of the side effects of cyclophosphamide treatment.
Many of the chemicals listed in Table 6-18 are also detoxified 
by CYP by biotransformation to less toxic metabolites. In some 
cases, the same CYP enzyme catalyzes both activation and detoxi-
cation reactions. For example, CYP3A4 activates aflatoxin B1 to 
the hepatotoxic and tumorigenic 8,9-epoxide, but it also detoxifies 
aflatoxin B1 by 3-hydroxylation to aflatoxin Q1. Similarly, CYP3A4 
activates senecionine by converting this pyrrolizidine alkaloid to the 
corresponding pyrrole, but it also detoxifies senecionine through 
formation of an N-oxide (a reaction mainly catalyzed by FMO3). 
Epoxidation of trichloroethylene by CYP2E1 is both an activation 
and a detoxication pathway, as shown in Fig. 6-56. Rearrangement 
of trichloroethylene epoxide can be accompanied by migration of 
chlorine, which produces chloral (trichloroacetaldehyde), or hydro-
gen, which produces dichloroacetylchloride. Chloral is much less 
toxic than dichloroacetylchloride; hence, migration of the chlorine 
during epoxide rearrangement is a detoxication reaction, whereas 
migration of the hydrogen is an activation reaction. These few 
examples serve to underscore the complexity of factors that deter-
mine the balance between xenobiotic activation and detoxication.
Structural alerts (functional groups) for the bioactivation of 
xenobiotics to reactive metabolites by CYP include the following: 
acetylenes, activated aromatics, 3-alkly indoles, anilines, cyclopro-
pylamines, formamides, furans, hydrazines, polyaromatics, pyr-
roles, nitro aromatics, sulfonylureas, thiazolidinones, thioamides, 
thiophenes, and thioureas (Walsh and Miwa, 2011). As outlined 
more fully in Point 12 (see the section “Principles of Xenobiotic 
Biotransformation”), the prominence of cytochrome P450 in con-
verting xenobiotics to reactive and potentially harmful metabolites 
is illustrated by the widespread use of liver microsomes in the in 
vitro safety evaluation of drug candidates. Liver microsomes are 
used in (1) the Ames bacterial mutagenicity assay, (2) an assess-
ment of the formation of reactive metabolites that bind covalently 
to protein or GSH (or a related nucleophile such as N-acetylcysteine 
[NAC]), and (3) an assessment of a drug candidate’s potential to 
cause irreversible inhibition of the major drug-metabolizing CYP 
enzymes. The latter application is the topic of the next section.
Inhibition of Cytochrome P450  Inhibition of CYP is a major 
cause of drug–drug interactions (and occasionally the withdrawal 
of regulatory approval), as illustrated by the examples cited earlier 
(terfenadine, cisapride, astemizole, cerivastatin, and mibefradil) in

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
313
the sections “CYP3A4” and “CYP2C8” (Ogilvie et al., 2008). The 
magnitude of the drug–drug interaction depends on the degree of 
CYP inhibition by the perpetrator drug and the fractional metabo-
lism (fm) of the victim drug by the affected enzyme. This principle 
is explained in Point 23 in the section “Principles of Xenobiotic 
Biotransformation.” In summary, complete inhibition of a CYP 
enzyme that contributed 50% to the clearance of Drug A (fm = 
0.5) and 90% to the clearance of Drug B (fm = 0.9) would cause 
a twofold increase in systemic exposure (plasma AUC) to Drug 
A, and a 10-fold increase in exposure to Drug B. The concept of 
“maximum exposure,” where two perpetrators inhibit two parallel 
pathways of clearance and cause dramatic increases in systemic 
exposure to the victim drug, has been explained in Point 24 in the 
section “Principles of Xenobiotic Biotransformation.” Maximum 
exposure often occurs when a genetic polymorphism affects one 
pathway of clearance and a perpetrator drug inhibits a second, 
parallel pathway of clearance, as illustrated in Point 24 for the 
weak effect (about twofold) of the CYP3A4 inhibitor ritonavir on 
voriconazole exposure in CYP2C19 EMs (individuals in whom 
CYP3A4 plays a minor role in voriconazole metabolism) and the 
dramatic (26-fold) increase in voriconazole AUC in CYP2C19 
PMs (individuals who lack CYP2C19 and in whom CYP3A4 plays 
the major role in voriconazole clearance) (Collins et al., 2006; 
Ogilvie and Parkinson, 2014). A single drug can inhibit multiple 
CYP enzymes and thereby inhibit two or more parallel pathways 
of drug clearance. An exceptional case is the interaction between 
fluvoxamine and ramelteon. The three major enzymes involved in 
the clearance of ramelteon are CYP1A2, CYP2C19, and CYP3A4, 
all of which are inhibited by fluvoxamine. The product label 
for ramelteon (Rozerem, Takeda Pharmaceuticals, Osaka, Japan) 
describes a drug–drug interaction study in which fluvoxamine 
caused a 190-fold increase in the plasma AUC of ramelteon, which 
is the largest drug interaction reported. Interestingly, the magni-
tude of the interaction surpasses that predicted from in vitro studies 
(Obach and Ryder, 2010).
Inhibitory drug interactions generally fall into two categories, 
namely reversible or irreversible. Reversible (direct) inhibitors can 
be competitive, noncompetitive, or uncompetitive (or mixed) inhibi-
tors. Irreversible inhibitors are metabolism-dependent inhibitors 
(MDIs), which can be completely irreversible or quasi-irreversible 
(reversible under certain conditions). Direct inhibition can be sub-
divided into two types. The first involves competition between two 
drugs that are metabolized by the same CYP enzyme. The second 
type of direct inhibition is when the inhibitor is not a substrate for 
the affected CYP enzyme. The inhibition of dextromethorphan bio-
transformation by quinidine is a good example of this type of drug 
interaction. Dextromethorphan is O-demethylated by CYP2D6, 
and the clearance of dextromethorphan is impaired in individuals 
lacking this polymorphically expressed enzyme. The clearance of 
dextromethorphan is similarly impaired when this antitussive drug 
is taken with quinidine, a potent inhibitor of CYP2D6. However, 
quinidine is not biotransformed by CYP2D6, even though it binds 
to this enzyme with high affinity (Ki ~100 nM). Quinidine is actu-
ally biotransformed by CYP3A4, and is a weak competitive inhibi-
tor of this enzyme (Ki >100 μM), although its effects are highly 
dependent on the CYP3A4 substrate employed.
As the name implies, MDI occurs when CYP converts a xeno-
biotic to a metabolite that is a more potent inhibitor than the parent 
compound. In some cases, the metabolite, once formed, func-
tions as a potent, reversible inhibitor, as occurs when fluoxetine is 
N-demethylated to norfluoxetine. The contribution of norfluoxetine 
to the inhibitory effects of fluoxetine illustrates a common find-
ing that drug metabolites often function as reversible inhibitors of 
CYP and thereby contribute significantly to drug–drug interactions 
(Isoherranen et al., 2009; Yeung et al., 2011; Callegari et al., 2013; 
Yu and Tweedie, 2013; Yu et al., 2015). In other cases, however, the 
metabolite functions as an irreversible inhibitor (which occurs when 
the metabolite alkylates the heme or apoprotein moiety of CYP) 
or a quasi-irreversible inhibitor (which occurs when the metabo-
lite coordinates tightly but not covalently with the ferrous heme to 
form what is known as a metabolite-inhibitory complex [MIC]). 
Metabolism-dependent inhibitors that cause irreversible inactiva-
tion of CYP include 8-methoxypsoralen (CYP2A6), clopidogrel 
(CYP2B6), tienilic acid (CYP2C9), and ticlopidine (CYP2C19), all 
of which contain a furan or thiophene that is activated by CYP to 
a reactive metabolite that inactivates the enzyme (suicide inactiva-
tion). Metabolism-dependent inhibitors that form metabolite inhibi-
tory complexes and cause quasi-irreversible inhibition include the 
CYP3A4 inhibitor troleandomycin, which contains a tertiary amine 
(R–N(CH3)2) that is converted by several successive oxidative reac-
tions to a putative nitroso metabolite (R–N=O) that coordinately 
binds to the ferrous heme iron. This interaction resembles the bind-
ing of CO to the ferrous heme iron, and indeed compounds that 
form inhibitory metabolite complexes with CYP can be detected 
spectrophotometrically based on an absorbance peak at around 455 
nm (which is similar to the peak at about 450 nm when CO binds to 
CYP). The chemical structures commonly associated with MDI of 
CYP are shown in Table 6-19.
In some cases, MDI involves metabolism by enzymes other 
than the affected CYP enzyme, which can give rise to system-depen-
dent inhibition in in vitro studies (whereby the results obtained in 
human liver microsomes or recombinant enzymes do not predict 
as well as studies performed with human hepatocytes) (Parkinson 
et al., 2010). For example, the inhibition of CYP2C8 by gemfibrozil 
and clopidogrel requires the formation of an acyl glucuronide by 
UGT, after which gemfibrozil glucuronide and clopidogrel gluc-
uronide function as MDIs of CYP2C8 (Ogilvie et al., 2006; Tornio 
et al., 2014). The reduction of bupropion to erythrohydrobupropion 
and threohydrobupropion is largely responsible for its ability to 
cause clinically relevant inhibition of CYP2D6 (Reese et al., 2008). 
Likewise, the oxidation of decernotinib (VX-509) by aldehyde oxi-
dase produces a metabolite (M3) that, in contrast to the parent drug, 
is an MDI of CYP3A4 (Zetterberg et al., 2016). Experiments with 
human liver microsomes and recombinant CYP enzymes underpre-
dict the inhibition of CYP2C8 by gemfibrozil and clopidogrel, the 
inhibition of CYP2D6 by bupropion, and the inhibition of CYP3A4 
by decernotinib, whereas hepatocytes do not because they support 
the necessary glucuronidation, reduction, and oxidation pathways, 
respectively. Conversely, experiments with human liver micro-
somes and recombinant CYP enzymes overpredict the inhibition 
of CYP3A4 by ezetimibe. In the clinic (and in hepatocytes) rapid 
glucuronidation of ezetimibe protects CYP3A4 from MDI by ezeti-
mibe (Parkinson et al., 2010). Other issues that can arise during the 
in vitro evaluation of drug candidates as MDIs of CYP enzymes 
are described elsewhere (Parkinson et al., 2011). An extensive 
database on drug–drug interactions is available at the University of 
Washington Metabolism and Transport Drug Interaction Database 
(University of Washington DIDB, 2018).
There are cases where inhibition of CYP has proved advanta-
geous, as in the case of certain combinations of anti-HIV drugs. For 
example, by inhibiting CYP3A4, the HIV protease inhibitor rito-
navir and the structurally related drug cobicistat (which lacks anti-
viral activity) improve the pharmacokinetic profile of saquinavir, 
lopinavir, and several other antiviral drugs that are otherwise cleared 
so rapidly by CYP3A4 that blood levels easily fall below therapeuti-
cally effective concentrations (Deeks, 2014; Marzolini et al., 2016).

314
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
Induction of Cytochrome P450: Xenosensors  The induc-
tion (upregulation) of xenobiotic-biotransforming enzymes and 
transporters is a receptor-mediated, adaptive process that augments 
xenobiotic elimination during periods of high xenobiotic exposure. 
It is not a toxicological or pathological response, but enzyme induc-
tion is often associated with liver enlargement (due to both hepato-
cellular hypertrophy and hyperplasia), and it may be associated with 
toxicological and pharmacological consequences, especially for the 
safety evaluation of drug candidates in laboratory animals and for 
clinical practice in humans. In animals and humans, enzyme induc-
tion may be associated with pharmacokinetic tolerance, whereby 
the xenobiotic induces its own elimination. Carbamazepine is one 
of many EIAEDs that induced its own metabolism. Because of 
autoinduction it is often necessary to increase the dose of carba-
mazepine at a rate of 200 mg every 1 to 2 weeks to achieve the 
desired antiseizure threshold. During safety testing in animals, 
autoinduction may require increasing dosages of the drug candi-
date to achieve the same degree of systemic exposure over time. 
In rodents, lifetime exposure to enzyme inducers may be associ-
ated with liver or thyroid tumor formation, as discussed later in 
this section. In humans, enzyme induction may also be associated 
with pharmacokinetic tolerance (autoinduction). Long-term treat-
ment of humans with enzyme inducers can cause osteomalacia due 
to increased inactivation of 1,25-(OH)2-D3, the active metabolite 
Table 6-19  
Structures Associated with Metabolism-Dependent Inhibition of Cytochrome P450 (CYP) Enzymes
CHEMICAL GROUPS (EXAMPLES)
STRUCTURES
Terminal (ω) and ω-1 acetylenes (gestodene)
R
R
Furans and thiophenes (8-methoxypsoralen and tienilic acid)
S
O
Epoxides (R-bergamottin-6′,7′-epoxide)
O
R
R1
Dichloro- and trichloro-ethylenes (1,2,-dichloroethylene and trichloroethylene)
Cl
H
Cl
Cl
Cl
H
Cl
H
Cl
H
Cl
H
Secondary amines (fluoxetine)
N
R
H
R1
Benzodioxoles (paroxetine)
O
O
Isothiocyanates (phenethyl isothiocyanate)
C
N
S
R
Thioamides (methimazole)
H3C
S
NH
R
S
Dithiocarbamates (disulfiram)
N
H
R
S
SH
Conjugated structures (rhapontigenin)
R
R
Terminal alkenes (tiamulin)
R
CH2
4-Alkyl-1,4-dihydropyridines (3,5-diethoxycarbonyl-1, 
4-dihydro-2,6-dimethyl-4-ethylpyridine [DDEP]),
NH
R
R
R
R
H
Alkyl
2-Alkyl-1H-imidazoles (furafylline)
NH
N
R1
R2
R3
SOURCES: Data from Fontana et al. (2005) and Testa and Kramer (2008, 2010).

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
315
of vitamin D (discussed later in this section), but it is not associ-
ated with liver or thyroid tumor formation. However, in humans, 
enzyme induction by one drug (the perpetrator) can augment the 
clearance of a concomitantly administered drug (the victim), which 
is a cause of drug–drug interactions.
As an underlying cause of serious adverse events, enzyme 
induction is generally less important than enzyme inhibition 
because the latter can cause a rapid and profound increase in the 
blood concentration of a victim drug, which can cause an exagger-
ated pharmacological or toxicological effect. In contrast, enzyme 
induction lowers blood concentration, which usually does not cause 
an exaggerated pharmacological or toxicological response to the 
drug. However, enzyme induction may be associated with a loss 
of therapeutic effectiveness, which is a particular concern when it 
compromises the therapeutic effectiveness of drugs that have a nar-
row therapeutic index and are being used to treat a life-threatening 
illness, such as anti-HIV drugs, anti-organ rejection drugs (such 
as cyclosporine and tacrolimus), and oral anticoagulants (such as 
warfarin), or when it is used with drugs that exhibit a quantal (all-
or-nothing) dose–response relationship, such as oral contraceptive 
steroids (which either block or do not block ovulation and thereby 
provide or do not provide protection against pregnancy).
CYP induction does not necessarily enhance the biotransfor-
mation of the inducer, in which case the induction is said to be 
gratuitous. Consequently, lack of autoinduction cannot be taken as 
evidence that a xenobiotic does not cause enzyme induction. For 
example, in humans, omeprazole induces CYP1A2, even though the 
disposition of this acid-suppressing drug is largely determined by 
CYP2C19 and, to a lesser extent, CYP3A4. Some of the most effec-
tive inducers of CYP are polyhalogenated aromatic hydrocarbons 
(PHAHs), such as polychlorinated derivatives of dibenzo-p-dioxin 
(PCDDs), dibenzofurans (PCDFs), azobenzenes and azoxyben-
zenes, biphenyl (PCBs), and naphthalene. In general, highly chlo-
rinated compounds are resistant to biotransformation and cause a 
prolonged induction of CYP and other enzymes. Some inducers 
are potent direct-acting or metabolism-dependent inhibitors such 
that they mask the activity of one or more of the enzymes they 
induce. Such dual-acting xenobiotics include macrolide antibiot-
ics (e.g., erythromycin and troleandomycin), methylenedioxy-
containing compounds (e.g., tadalafil [Cialis®], safrole, isosafrole), 
and imidazole antimycotics (e.g., clotrimazole, ketoconazole, and 
miconazole). In the case of dual-acting drugs (such as the induction/
inhibition of CYP3A4 by ritonavir and several other HIV protease 
inhibitors, and the induction/inhibition of CYP2E1 by isoniazid), 
the initial effect—and often the effect observed during the period 
of drug treatment—is CYP inhibition, with induction becoming 
evident after prolonged drug treatment or following drug cessa-
tion. However, when ritonavir induces CYP3A4, for example, it 
also induces several other CYP enzymes, as well as conjugating 
enzymes and transporters that are regulated by CAR/PXR. Like 
ritonavir, cobicistat inhibits CYP3A4 and P-gp and is approved 
for use as a pharmacokinetic booster for combination with various 
antiviral drugs to increase and prolong their systemic exposure. In 
contrast to ritonavir, cobicistat is not an enzyme inducer (Deeks, 
2014; Marzolini et al., 2016). Some dual-acting xenobiotics, such 
as allylisopropylacetamide, cause certain types of porphyria (a dis-
order of heme synthesis) because they induce CYP enzymes and 
destroy the CYP heme moiety, which greatly increases the demand 
for heme synthesis (discussed later in this section).
In general, CYP induction is mediated by four ligand-activated 
receptors, namely, AhR, CAR, PXR, and PPARα, as summarized 
in Table 6-20 (Tirona and Kim, 2005). These so-called xenosen-
sors resemble other nuclear receptors, such as steroid and thyroid 
hormone receptors, which has consequences for receptor interac-
tions (cross-talk among xenosensors and cross-talk between xeno-
sensors and other nuclear receptors), the role that some xenosensors 
play in responding to endobiotics and regulating their metabolism 
(e.g., bilirubin, bile acids, fatty acids, and 1,25-(OH)2-D3), and 
the role that some nuclear receptors (such as farnesoid X recep-
tor [FXR], VDR, small heterodimer partner-1 [SHP], NF-κB) play 
in inducing or suppressing the expression of xenobiotic-biotrans-
forming enzymes and transporters, as discussed later in this sec-
tion. Details of the nomenclature system of this superfamily of 
DNA-binding transcriptional factors have been reviewed (Germain 
et al., 2006). Xenosensors have a ligand-binding domain (LBD) and 
a highly conserved cysteine-rich DNA-binding domain (DBD). In 
general, CYP induction involves the following steps (with steps 2 
and 3 reversed in the case of AhR): (1) binding of ligand (xenobi-
otic) to the receptor, which triggers conformational changes that 
promote its dissociation from accessory proteins (such as corepres-
sors, chaperones, and cytoplasm retention proteins) and promote its 
association with coactivators; (2) dimerization of the ligand-bound 
receptor with a partner protein to form a DNA-binding heterodi-
mer (which is analogous to the two halves of a clothespin coming 
together to form a functional unit); (3) translocation of the func-
tional receptor heterodimer from the cytoplasm to the nucleus; (4) 
binding of the functional receptor heterodimer to discrete regions 
of DNA (response elements) that are typically located in the 5′-pro-
moter region of the gene (which is analogous to a clothespin being 
fastened to a clothes line); (5) recruitment of other transcription 
factors and coactivators (such as histone and RNA methyltransfer-
ases, histone and chromatin deacetylases, and histone remodeling 
helicases) and RNA polymerase to form a transcription complex; 
and (6) gene transcription, which leads to increased levels of CYP 
mRNA and protein (as well as other xenobiotic-biotransforming 
enzymes and transporters). As is the case with all nuclear recep-
tors, the details of the process of activating a xenosensor to its tran-
scriptionally active form are complex and multifaceted. Over 200 
coactivators/coregulators of nuclear receptor function have been 
identified (Lonard and O’Malley, 2006), some of which are known 
to play a critical but undefined role in xenosensor activation.
As shown in Table 6-20, the major ligand-activated recep-
tors mediating CYP induction are (1) AhR, which partners with 
aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) to induce 
CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP1B1, and CYP2S1; (2) CAR (aka the con-
stitutively active receptor), which partners with RXRα (the reti-
noid X receptor, which binds 9-cis-retinoic acid) to induce several 
members of the CYP2A, CYP2B, CYP2C, and CYP3A subfami-
lies; (3) PXR (aka SXR, the steroid X receptor) that, like CAR, 
partners with RXRα and induces several members of the CYP2A, 
CYP2B, CYP2C, and CYP3A subfamilies; and (4) PPARα, which 
partners with RXRα and induces CYP4A enzymes in rodents and 
CYP1A1, CYP2C8, and CYP3A4 in humans. The response ele-
ments (aka consensus sequences) to which xenosensors bind are 
generally a pair of hexanucleotide sequences in a direct repeat 
(DR), inverted repeated (IR), or everted repeat (ER) orientations, 
separated by a zero-to-eight nucleotide spacer. As shown in Tables 
6-20 and 6-21, activation of a xenosensor leads to the induction of 
multiple enzymes, which is called a pleiotypic response. However, 
in terms of fold induction, CYP enzymes tend to be the most induc-
ible and, consequently, the most studied enzymes (although activa-
tion of PPARα has a more pronounced effect on the expression of 
peroxisomal enzymes involved in fatty acid oxidation). Like induc-
tion of CYP enzymes, induction of conjugating and other non-CYP 
enzymes is an important mechanism of drug–drug and drug–endo-
biotic interactions. For example, induction of various conjugating

316
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
enzymes (both SULT and UGT enzymes) plays a key role in the 
metabolism of oral contraceptive steroids in humans, which is 
associated with a loss of therapeutic effect. In rodents induction 
of conjugating enzymes is responsible for increased metabolism 
of thyroid hormone, which is associated with thyroid follicular cell 
hyperplasia and tumor formation.
As shown in Table 6-20, AhR, CAR, PXR, and PPARα are 
not the only receptors that regulate CYP expression in response 
to xenobiotics (or certain endobiotics). Nuclear factor erythroid 2–
related factor 2 (Nrf2) plays a key role in regulating the induction 
of several enzymes in response to electrophilic metabolites, oxida-
tive stress, or GSH depletion, as discussed previously (see Point 
Table 6-20  
Receptors Mediating the Induction (or Suppression) of Cytochrome P450 Enzymes and Other Xenobiotic-
Biotransforming Enzymes and Transporters
NUCLEAR 
RECEPTOR
RESPONSE 
ELEMENT(S)
RECEPTOR ACTIVATORS
REGULATED GENES*
AhR
XRE
PAHs, TCDD (other PHAHs), β-naphthoflavone, indigoids, 
tryptophan metabolites, omeprazole, lansoprazole, 
­laquinimod, roquinimex
CYP1A1, 1A2, 1B1, 2S1, UGT1A1, 
UGT1A6, AKR1A1, AKR1C1–4
CAR
DR-3
Phenobarbital, phenytoin, carbamazepine, CITCO (human), 
TCPOBOP (mouse), clotrimazole, Yin Zhi Wuang (many 
PXR agonists are also CAR agonists, and vice versa)
CYP2A6, 2B6, 2C8, 2C9, 2C19, 3A4, 
UGT1A1, SULT1A1, AKR1D1, ALAS, 
MRP2, MRP3, MRP4
DR-4
ER-6
PXR
DR-3
Amprenavir, avasimibe, bosentan, bile acids, ­carbamazepine, 
clindamycin, clotrimazole, cortisol, ­cyproterone acetate, ­ 
dicloxacillin, efavirenz, etoposide, dexamethasone, 
­griseofulvin, guggulsterone, ­hyperforin (SJW), indinavir, 
­lovastatin, ­mifepristone, nafcillin, ­nelfinavir, nifedipine, 
omeprazole, ­paclitaxel, PCBs, ­phenobarbital, phthalate 
­monoesters, 5β-pregnane-3,20-dione, rifabutin, rifampin,  
­ritonavir, saquinavir, simvastatin, spironolactone, 
­sulfinpyrazole, TAO, tetracycline, ­topotecan, transnanoclor, 
troglitazone, verapamil, vitamin E, vitamin K2
CYP2A6, 2B6, 2C8, 2C9, 2C19, 
2D6, 3A4, 3A7, 4F12, 7A1↓, CES2, 
SULT2A1, UGT1A1, 1A3, 1A4, 1A6, 
GSTA1, AKR1D1, PAPSS2, ALAS, 
MDR1, MRP2, AhR
DR-4
ER-6
ER-8
PPARα
DR-1
Fibrates, WY-14643, perfluorodecanoic acid
CYP4A, UGT1A9, UGT2B4 in rodents
CYP1A1, 2C8, and 3A4 in humans
Nrf2
ARE
β-Naphthoflavone, oltipraz, phenolic antioxidants (e.g., BHA 
and BHT), phenylisothiocyanate, acetaminophen, and various 
glutathione depletors (diethyl maleate, phorone)
NQO1, mEH, AKR7A, UGTs, GSTA1, 
γ-GCL, MRP1
GR
GRE
Glucocorticoids (e.g., dexamethasone)
CYP2C9, 2B6, 2D6, 3A4, 3A5, CAR, PXR
FXR
IR-1
Bile acids, GW4064, AGN29, AGN31
BSEP, I-BABP, MDR3, UGT2B4, 
SULT2A1, OATP8, OSTα/β, PPARα, 
SHP
LXRα
DR-4
GW3965, T0901317, paxiline, F3methylAA,† 
­acetylpodocarpic dimer (APD)
LRH1, SHP, CYP7A, LXRα, 
CYP3A4↓↓, 2B6↓
VDR
DR-3
1α,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3, lithocholate
CYP2B6, 2C9, 3A4, SULT2A1
ER-6
IR-0
HNF-1α
Not named‡
OATP-C, OATP8, CYP7A1, UGT1A6, 
1A8, 1A9, 1A10, HNF4α, PXR, kidney 
specific expression of OAT1, OAT3, 
URAT1
HNF-4α
DR
CYP2A6, 2B6, 2C9, 2D6, 3A4, DD4, 
MDR1, PXR, CAR, FXR, PPARα, 
HNF1α
LRH-1
DR-4
CYP7A, ASBT
SHP
None
Targets of PPARα↓, AhR↓, PXR↓, CAR↓, 
LRH-1↓, HNF4α↓, LXRα↓, GR↓
* A downward arrow indicates downregulation (suppression). All others are upregulated (induced).
† [3-Chloro-4-(3-(7-propyl-3-trifluoromethyl-6-(4,5)-isoxazolyl)propylthio)-phenylacetic acid].
‡ The HNF-1α consensus sequence is GTTTAATNATTAAC.
SOURCES: Data from Jin et al. (2012), Penning and Drury (2007), and Tirona and Kim (2005).

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
317
Table 6-21  
Examples of Agonists and Antagonists for the Receptors That Mediate Enzyme Induction (AhR, CAR, and PXR) and 
PXR/CAR Target Genes in Humans and Mice
AGONISTS
ANTAGONISTS
AhR
O
O
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl 
TCDD
N
N
N
N
CH3
CH3
NH
C
O
 
CH-223191
N
NH
N
S
H3C
O
H3C
CH3
O
H3C
O
 
Omeprazole
N
NH
N
S
H3C
O
H3C
CH3
O
H3C
 
Omeprazole sulfide
CAR
Agonists
Human
Mouse
Inverse agonists
Human
Mouse
Chlorpromazine
No
Yes
Chlorpromazine
Yes
No
Meclizine
No
Yes
Meclizine
Yes
No
Clotrimazole
No
Yes
CITCO
Yes
No
TCPOBOP
No
Yes
Indirect Activators
Phenobarbital
Yes
Yes
Phenytoin
Yes
Yes
PXR
Agonists
Human
Mouse
Antagonists
Human
Mouse
Artemisinin
Yes
No
Ketoconazole
Yes
Unknown
Clotrimazole
Yes
No
Trabectedin (ET-743)
Yes
Unknown
Hyperforin
Yes
Yes
Nicardipine
Yes
No
Nifedipine
Yes
No
Phenobarbital
Yes
Yes
PCN
Weak
Yes
Rifampin
Yes
No
TCPOBOP
Yes
Unknown
Xenosensor
HUMAN PXR/CAR TARGET GENES*
MOUSE PXR/CAR TARGET GENES*
PXR and CAR
CYP2A6
CYP2B6
CYP2C9
CYP2C19
CYP3A4
UGT1A1
MDR1
MRP2
CYP2B10
CYP3A11
ALDH1
AKR1B7
UGT1A1
UGT1A9
GSTA1/2
SULT1E1
SULT2A1
SULT2A2
MDR1a
MRP2
MRP3
PXR only
CYP3A7
CYP4F12
CYP7A1↓
AKR1C1/2
CES2
UGT1A3
UGT1A6
GSTA1
CES6
UGT2B5
GST(α,π,μ)
MDR1b
OATP1A4
CAR only
MRP3
MRP4
CYP1A1
CYP1A2
CYP2A4
CYP2C29
CYP2C37
EST1
UGT1A6
UGT2B1
MRP1
MRP4
Abbreviations: CITCO: 6-(4-chloropheny)imidazo[2,1-b][1,3]thiazole-5-carbaldehyde O-(3,4-dichlorobenzyl)oxime; PCN, pregnenolone-16α-
carbonitrile; TCDD, 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin; TCPOBOP: 1,4-bis[2-(3,5-dichloropyridyloxy)]benzene.
* Data from Tolson and Wang (2010).

318
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
9 in the section “Principles of Xenobiotic Biotransformation” and 
sections “Epoxide Hydrolases” and “Quinone Reduction: NQO1 
and NQO2”). The enzymes regulated by Nrf2 include several con-
jugating but few CYP enzymes (notable exceptions are CYP2C55 
and CYP2U1 in mice), whereas those regulated by AhR, CAR, 
PXR, and PPARα include both conjugating and CYP enzymes. In 
mice, activation of AhR leads to activation of Nrf2; accordingly, 
the enzymes induced by the AhR agonist dioxin are the result of 
increased transcription of two classes of genes, namely those con-
trolled by AhR and those controlled by Nrf2 (Yeager et al., 2009). 
A role for HNF-1α in the kidney-specific expression of drug trans-
porters, OAT1, OAT3, and URAT1, has been documented (Jin et al., 
2012). Some of the other receptors listed in Table 6-20 are discussed 
later in this section. CYP induction can also involve mechanisms 
other than receptor-mediated transcriptional activation. Increased 
translation of mRNA is the mechanism by which several xenobi-
otics increase the levels of CYP2E1, and increased translational 
efficiency and protein stabilization play important roles in the 
induction of several CYP enzymes including CYP1A2, CYP2E1, 
and CYP3A enzymes (Gonzalez, 2007).
It might be assumed that xenobiotics can be divided into four 
categories of inducers represented by the xenosensors AhR, CAR, 
PXR, and PPARα. This is largely true of rats where 3-methylcho-
lanthrene, phenobarbital, PCN, and clofibric acid are prototypical 
inducers of CYP1A, CYP2B, CYP3A, and CYP4A by virtue of 
their ability to activate AhR, CAR, PXR, and PPARα, respec-
tively. In fact, rats have five classes of inducible CYP enzymes 
with the fifth class represented by CYP2E1, which is inducible 
by the prototypical inducer isoniazid. However, the situation in 
other species (including rats) on a xenobiotic-by-xenobiotic basis 
is not so straightforward because (1) CAR and PXR have similar 
but not identical LBDs such that ligands that activate one recep-
tor activate the other and vice versa (although they can do so with 
markedly different affinities) and (2) CAR and PXR have similar 
but not identical DBDs such that, once activated, CAR and PXR 
bind to some of the same response elements and induce the same 
enzymes. It was once thought that CYP2B induction was mediated 
only by CAR, and that CYP3A induction was mediated only by 
PXR. However, the PXR agonist dexamethasone can maximally 
induce both CYP2B10 and CYP3A11 in wild-type and CAR knock-
out mice, indicating that PXR can maximally induce both CYP2B 
and CYP3A enzymes in mice. Similarly, the CAR activator phe-
nobarbital can maximally induce CYP2B10 and induce CYP3A11 
(albeit submaximally) in wild-type and PXR knockout mice, indi-
cating that CAR can also induce both CYP2B and CYP3A enzymes 
(Kodama and Negishi, 2006). The same is true of humans: PXR 
can maximally induce both CYP2B6 and CYP3A4, whereas CAR 
can maximally induce CYP2B6 and induce CYP3A4 submaxi-
mally due to its relatively weaker binding and functional activa-
tion of the CYP3A4 ER6 (Faucette et al., 2006). Furthermore, there 
are species and strain differences in the LBDs, DBDs, and DNA-
response elements that give rise to species and strain differences in 
enzyme induction, and even interindividual differences in humans. 
Some species differences in enzyme induction reflect differences 
in the catalytic activity of CYP enzymes. For example, although 
7-methoxyresorufin and 7-ethoxyresorufin are useful substrates 
to study CYP1A enzyme induction in all mammalian species, 
7-pentoxyresorufin is useful for studying CYP2B only in mouse and 
rat (not hamster, dog, monkey, or humans). However, many species, 
strain, and individual differences in enzyme induction reflect differ-
ences in xenosensor function, as discussed below (this section). The 
following descriptions of the individual xenosensors focus largely 
on the mouse and human receptors; studies of the latter have been 
driven by the desire to investigate drug–drug interactions, whereas 
studies of the former have been facilitated by the ability to create 
transgenic mice in which a particular xenosensor has been deleted 
(so-called knockout or null mice) or replaced with the human recep-
tor (so-called humanized mice).
Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor  AhR and ARNT are cytosolic and 
nuclear transcription factors, respectively, that are expressed in 
most tissues and many cell lines. The binding of an agonist such 
as dioxin (the structure of which is shown in Table 6-21) to AhR 
initiates a number of changes (such as dissociation from heat-shock 
protein [hsp90] and other chaperones, dissociation from proteins 
that retain the unbound receptor in the cytoplasm, and phosphoryla-
tion by tyrosine kinase) that culminate in (1) the translocation of 
AhR to the nucleus, (2) the dimerization of AhR with ARNT (which 
is somewhat misnamed as the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear 
translocator because it is a nuclear, not a cytoplasmic protein that 
complexes with AhR after it translocates to the nucleus), (3) the 
binding of AhR–ARNT to DNA-response elements known as XRE, 
and (4) the increased transcription of CYP1A1 and numerous other 
genes listed in Table 6-20. While members of the nuclear receptor 
superfamily (such as CAR, PXR, and PPARα) are “zinc finger” 
proteins, AhR and ARNT are “bHLH-PAS” proteins, so-named 
because they belong to the per-arnt-sim (PAS) class of receptors 
and they have a basic helix–loop–helix (bHLH) domain near their 
N-terminus, which is involved in protein–protein interactions.
Dioxin is a high-affinity ligand for AhR (KD values tend to be 
in the nanomolar-to-submicromolar range), and AhR mediates the 
toxicity of dioxin and related PHAHs (such as various chlorinated 
or brominated dibenzodioxins, dibenzofurans, and biphenyls), 
which is characterized by a wasting syndrome (progressive weight 
loss or cachexia resulting in death), immunosuppression (thymic 
atrophy), tumor promotion, fetal abnormalities (cleft palate and 
other teratogenic disorders), and, in some species, liver enlarge-
ment and a skin condition called chloracne. Dioxin binds to AhR 
and induces CYP1A1 in all mammalian species, but it causes lethal 
cachexia in some species (such as guinea pig, where the LD50 is 
about 1 μg/kg) but not others (such as hamsters, where the LD50 
exceeds 1000 μg/kg). This greater than 1000-fold species differ-
ence in dioxin toxicity with only marginal differences in CYP1A1 
induction raised the possibility that AhR does not mediate the tox-
icity of dioxin, but several lines of evidence established that AhR 
does in fact mediate many, perhaps all, of the toxic effects of dioxin 
and related compounds. First, naturally occurring strain differences 
in the responsiveness of mice (such as so-called responsive C57 
and nonresponsive DBA mice) and rats (such as responsive Long–
Evans and nonresponsive Han/Wistar rats) to dioxin toxicity are 
associated with polymorphisms in AhR (Pohjanvirta et al., 1999). 
Second, AhR knockout mice, mice harboring a modified form of 
AhR that cannot be translocated to the nucleus, and mice harbor-
ing a hypomorphic (reduced expression) form of ARNT are all 
resistant to dioxin-induced toxicity, whereas transgenic mice that 
express a constitutively active form of AhR (CA-AhR mice) spon-
taneously display numerous signs of dioxin toxicity (even though 
the CYP1A1 levels in the liver of CA-AhR mice are elevated to a 
lesser extent than those in dioxin-treated wild-type mice) (Bunger 
et al., 2003, 2008; Brunnberg et al., 2006, 2011). Third, the AhR 
antagonist CH-223191 (see Table 6-21) blocks the enzyme-induc-
ing effects and various toxic effects of dioxin (Kim et al., 2006). 
Although AhR mediates both CYP1A1 induction and dioxin toxic-
ity, it is noteworthy that the dose of dioxin required to cause 50% 
lethality to various strains of rats and mice (LD50) is at least two 
orders of magnitude greater than the dose required to achieve 50% 
of maximum CYP1A1 induction (ED50) (Watson et al., 2014). For

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
319
example, the ED50 for induction of CYP1A1 mRNA by dioxin is 
0.04 and 0.01 μg dioxin/kg body weight in Long–Evans and Han/
Wistar rats, whereas LD50 after 28 days is 17.7 and greater than 
9600 μg dioxin/kg body weight, respectively. These findings not 
only indicate that acute toxicity requires much higher doses of 
dioxin than those required to induce CYP1A1, but also indicate 
that dioxin is equally effective at inducing CYP1A1 in both strains 
of rats despite a marked difference (more than 100-fold) in dioxin 
toxicity. It remains to be determined why prolonged and sustained 
activation of AhR by dioxin and dioxin-like compounds (DLCs) 
causes an irreversible cachexia that leads to death after a latency 
period that varies from one species to the next (and even one strain 
to the next) but that cannot be shortened by administering “superle-
thal” doses of dioxin. Another enduring mystery is why numerous 
other AhR agonists, including many endogenous compounds, acti-
vate AhR but do not cause the toxic effects characteristic of dioxin 
and dioxin-like compounds (DLCs).
AhR agonists include PHAHs (such as dioxin), PAHs 
(such as 3-methylcholanthrene and B[a]P), flavonoids (such as 
β-naphthoflavone), and various acid-catalyzed condensation prod-
ucts or UV-induced derivatives of naturally occurring indoles (such 
as indole-3-carbinol and tryptophan). Some of the most potent 
endogenous AhR activators identified to date (with binding affinities 
comparable to 3-MC and BNF) are various tryptophan derivatives 
such as kynurenine, kynurenic acid, FICZ (6-formylindolo[3,2-b]
carbazole), ITE (2-(1’H-indole-3’-carbonyl)-thiazole-4-carboxylic 
acid methyl ester) and condensation products formed from indole-
3-carbinol (I3C), such as DIM (3,3′-diindoylmethane, a dimer of 
I3C) and ICZ (indolo[3,2-b]carbazole, another of dimer of I3C) 
(Rannug et al., 1987; Bjeldanes et al., 1991; Heath-Pagliuso 
et al., 1998; Bergander et al., 2004; Henry et al., 2006; Chiaro 
et al., 2007; DiNatale et al., 2010; Opitz et al., 2011; Wincent et al., 
2012). I3C is one of many dietary constituents that activate AhR 
and induce CYP1 enzymes. The role of intestinal CYP1A1 in pre-
venting systemic exposure to phytochemicals was demonstrated in 
genetically modified mice with a selective loss of ARNT (the DNA-
binding partner of AhR) from the intestine, which selectively blocks 
CYP1A1 expression in the intestine (Ito et al., 2007). In these mice, 
CYP1A1 was markedly induced in the liver and all extrahepatic tis-
sues (including brain), a finding attributed to systemic exposure to 
dietary phytochemicals such as I3C in the diet.
FICZ is a photoproduct of tryptophan; although it is a potent 
AhR activator it also is rapidly metabolized by CYP1 enzymes 
(Bergander et al., 2004; Wincent et al., 2012). In the eye and skin, 
FICZ is an auto-inducer; it activates AhR, induces CYP1A1 and 
CYP1B1, and thereby induces the metabolism of FIZC and other 
photoproducts of tryptophan. Like FICZ, another tryptophan prod-
uct, namely melatonin, can potentially induce its own metabolism 
because melatonin is an AhR activator and a substrate for CYP1A1, 
CYP1A2, and CYP1B1 (Ma et al., 2005; Hu et al., 2007).
In general, AhR agonists induce CYP1A1 and other enzymes 
across all mammalian and many nonmammalian species. A notable 
exception is a class of benzimidazole-containing compounds that 
includes the proton pump inhibitors omeprazole and lansoprazole. 
These drugs are not typical AhR agonists because they induce 
CYP1A enzymes in humans but not in rats or mice, which is one 
of the few species differences in AhR activation by xenobiotics 
(Diaz et al., 1990). In addition to agonists and antagonists there is 
a third class of AhR ligands known as selective AhR modulators 
(SAhRMs) as exemplified by SGA360. In contrast to AhR agonists 
that induce both XRE-driven transcriptional activity and repression 
of acute-phase gene expression, SAhRMs are only capable of medi-
ating repression of acute-phase genes (Murray et al., 2010). The 
SAhRM-mediated suppression of cytokine-mediated acute-phase 
genes is a non-XRE-driven, cytoplasmic event. This process illus-
trates an emerging role of AhR in the regulation of inflammatory 
process and liver homeostasis. AhR influences T-cell differentiation 
and influences the balance of TH1 and TH2 cells, as was established 
through the use of an AhR agonist M50367 that preferentially pro-
motes the production of TH1 over TH2 cells. Exposure of mice to 
M50367 leads to a decrease in IgE synthesis and peritoneal eosino-
philia in allergic experimental models (Negishi et al., 2005).
Several compounds can disrupt AhR signaling at a variety of 
levels. CH-223191 (Table 6-21), GNF351, and α-naphthoflavone 
are receptor antagonists that bind to the LBD of AhR without acti-
vating the receptor (Kim et al., 2006; Smith et al., 2011). CH-223191 
blocks CYP1 enzyme induction by dioxin and dioxin-related com-
pounds (DLCs) and protects mice against the acute toxicity of 
dioxin (Kim et al., 2006), but it has no effect (or a marginal effect) 
on AhR activation by 3-methylcholanthrene, β-naphthoflavone, and 
other non-DLCs (Zhou et al., 2010b). Although CH-223191 does 
not antagonize CYP1A1 induction by non-DLCs (i.e., the XRE 
properties of AhR) it does antagonize their ability to stimulate the 
differentiation of regulatory T cells (i.e., the SAhRM properties of 
AhR) (Mezrich et al., 2010; Rouse et al., 2013). In contrast, GNF351 
antagonizes both the XRE- and SAhRM-mediated effects of AhR 
(Smith et al., 2011). Omeprazole sulfide (which forms by reduction 
of the sulfoxide group in omeprazole [see Table 6-21]) antagonizes 
CYP1A1 induction by stabilizing AhR in an inactive conformation 
(Gerbal-Chaloin et al., 2006). In cell-based systems, the ability of 
omeprazole to induce CYP1A1 is compromised by formation of 
omeprazole sulfide unless the cells express CYP3A4, which can 
sulfoxidate omeprazole sulfide back to omeprazole. After AhR is 
activated, its translocation to the nucleus is blocked by 3′-methoxy-
4-nitroflavone, its binding to XRE is blocked by salicylamide, and 
its ability to recruit transcription factors and initiate gene transcrip-
tion is blocked by resveratrol (an antioxidant in red wine) (Gerbal-
Chaloin et al., 2006). The presence of exogenous (and perhaps 
endogenous) AhR antagonists is one of the many factors that are 
known or suspected of causing clinically observed interindividual 
differences in CYP1A induction. These factors have been reviewed 
by Ma and Lu (2003), who have documented that differences in 
the magnitude of CYP1A induction in humans can be attributed 
to (1) genetic polymorphisms in AhR, ARNT, or XRE; (2) altered 
levels or function of accessory proteins (some of which are associ-
ated with inflammation and other disease states that activate NF-κB, 
as discussed later in this section); (3) gender differences in basal 
CYP1A2 activity (which tends to be lower in females compared 
with males); and (4) variation in the intracellular concentration of 
the inducing drug, as exemplified by variation in the metabolism of 
omeprazole. The clearance of omeprazole is largely determined by 
its rate of metabolism by the polymorphically expressed enzyme 
CYP2C19. Based on measurements of caffeine metabolism, a daily 
dose of 40 mg omeprazole causes CYP1A2 induction in CYP2C19 
PMs but not in CYP2C19 EMs, which require higher doses (120 
mg) to achieve CYP1A2 induction. In a clinical setting, the for-
mation of omeprazole sulfide (an AhR antagonist) does not pre-
vent CYP1A induction by omeprazole (an agonist) partly because 
reduction to the sulfide occurs slowly and partly because the sulfide 
can be converted back to the sulfoxide (parent drug) by CYP3A4. 
However, it is possible that the formation of rabeprazole sulfide, 
which occurs rapidly and extensively (by nonenzymatic means), 
explains why rabeprazole is one of the proton pump inhibitors that 
does not induce CYP1A.
Although strain differences in CYP1A inducibility have been 
linked to genetic polymorphisms in the mouse and rat AhR gene,

320
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
species differences have been attributed either to the unusual inter-
action of AhR with benzimidazole-containing compounds such as 
omeprazole and lansoprazole or to species differences in the loca-
tion of XRE. For example, rat UGT1A6 and UGT1A7 are highly 
inducible (more than 20-fold) enzymes because these conjugating 
genes are under the control of XRE in rats but in few other species.
Increased expression of AhR is correlated with tumor inva-
siveness of cigarette-smoke-associated urothelial carcinoma cells 
in vitro, presumably due to enhanced expression of MMP-1 and 
MMP-9, matrix metalloproteinases involved in tumor invasion 
(Ishida et al., 2010). The involvement of AhR signaling in tumor 
invasiveness is further supported by a positive correlation between 
nuclear localization of the receptor and histopathological charac-
teristics of the neoplasm and long-term survival of urothelial car-
cinoma patients.
AhR and ARNT are evolutionarily conserved across inverte-
brate and vertebrate species, suggesting they have important physio-
logical functions (Guyot et al., 2013). Deletion of the gene encoding 
AhR affects the development of mice and rats, but it affects them 
in different ways (Harrill et al., 2013). AhR knockout mice have 
alterations in serum analytes indicative of compromised hepatic 
function, patent ductus venosus of the liver, and persistent hyaloid 
arteries in the eye. In contrast, AhR knockout rats display pathologi-
cal alterations to the urinary tract, such as bilateral renal dilation 
(hydronephrosis), secondary medullary tubular and uroepithelial 
degenerative changes, and bilateral ureter dilation (hydroureter). 
These results suggest AhR plays significant roles in tissue devel-
opment and homeostasis but does so in a species-dependent man-
ner. This may account for some of the species differences in dioxin 
toxicity. ARNT is also known as hypoxia-inducible factor-1β 
(HIF-1β). In addition to partnering with AhR, ARNT complexes 
with HIF-1α to form the nuclear receptor known as hypoxia-induc-
ible factor-1 (HNF-1), which regulates gene expression in response 
to hypoxia. In contrast to the situation with AhR, deletion of the 
gene encoding ARNT is 100% lethal, suggesting ARNT has a criti-
cal physiological function. It should be noted that deletion of the 
AhR gene is also lethal to about half of newborn mice but the other 
half survive despite the closure of the fetal liver ductus venosus, 
which leads to defective development of adult liver vasculature, 
which likely contributes to their low liver and body weight com-
pared with wild-type mice.
With growing appreciation for AhR’s important but incom-
pletely understood physiological functions, particularly its immu-
nomodulatory effects, and with the identification of numerous 
endogenous AhR agonists, such as the numerous tryptophan deriva-
tives that potently activate AhR, attention has turned to the possibil-
ity that AhR is a potential pharmacological target for the treatment 
of certain diseases including cancer, multiple sclerosis, inflamma-
tory skin disorders, Crohn disease, and colitis (Quintana and Sherr, 
2013; Wheeler et al., 2017). When administered orally or paren-
terally, the tryptophan product ITE (2-(1’H-indole-3’-carbonyl)-
thiazole-4-carboxylic acid methyl ester), which is an endogenous 
AhR agonist, protects mice from experimental autoimmune enceph-
alomyelitis (EAE), a murine model of multiple sclerosis, by induc-
ing immunological tolerance by direct effects on dendritic cells in 
the CNS and peripheral T cells (Quintana et al., 2010). Circulating 
levels of endogenous AhR agonists are decreased in patients with 
relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (Rothhammer et al., 2017). 
Laquinimod, a drug under development for the treatment of multiple 
sclerosis, arrests EAE (i.e., multiple sclerosis) in mice by activating 
AhR, as indicated by a loss of therapeutic activity in AhR knockout 
mice (Berg et al., 2016; Kaye et al., 2016). Laquinimod (Nervanta) 
is structurally similar to roquinimex (Linomide), which also 
activates AhR and was once under development for the treatment 
of multiple sclerosis. Clinical studies with roquinimex were halted 
because of concerns over serious cardiovascular events including 
myocardial infarction, pleuritis, and pericarditis (Tan et al., 2000) 
and, likewise, clinical studies with high doses of laquinimod were 
halted for the same reason (Teva, 2016). Whether cardiotoxicity 
limits the usefulness of all drugs that activate AhR remains to be 
seen. Laquinimod, roquinimex, tasquinimod (an investigational 
drug for the treatment of prostate cancer), and IMA-08401 are all 
nonplanar compounds that can be converted by N-dealkylation or 
amide hydrolysis to coplanar metabolites that potentially play a key 
role in their ability to activate AhR (Mahiout et al., 2017).
Constitutive Androstane Receptor and Pregnane X Receptor  
CAR and PXR are members of the nuclear receptor family 1 (NR1I2 
and NR1I3, respectively). In contrast to AhR, which is expressed in 
most tissues and numerous cell lines, CAR and PXR are expressed 
in relatively few organs—liver, small intestine, and colon—and in 
few cell lines. Both CAR and PXR are cytoplasmic nuclear recep-
tors; both are activated by some of the same compounds, and both 
dimerize with RXRα to form DNA-binding proteins that recog-
nize some of the same response elements, as shown in Tables 6-20 
and 6-21. Consequently, there is considerable cross-talk between 
these two xenosensors, and it can sometimes be difficult to ascer-
tain whether induction is mediated by CAR, PXR, or both recep-
tors. Both humans and mice have drug-metabolizing enzymes 
and transporters that are regulated by CAR only, PXR only, and 
both xenosensors, but the enzymes/transporters are inducible in 
a species-dependent manner, as shown for humans and mice in 
Table 6-21 (Tolson and Wang, 2010).
As shown in Table 6-20, three factors combine to make CAR 
and PXR the most important human xenosensors in terms of 
drug–drug interactions. First, CAR and PXR regulate several CYP 
enzymes (e.g., CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, 
and CYP3A4), conjugating enzymes (several UGTs and SULTs), 
and transporters (such as P-gp, MRP2, and MRP4). Second, a large 
number of xenobiotics (drugs and the herbal preparations, St. John’s 
wort, and Yin Zhi Huang) and certain endobiotics (such as bilirubin, 
bile acids, and 1,25-(OH)2-D3) activate CAR and/or PXR. Third, 
some of the genes regulated by CAR and PXR encode proteins 
with broad substrate specificities, such as CYP3A4 and P-gp, such 
that the induction mediated by CAR and PXR impacts the disposi-
tion of a large number of xenobiotics and certain endobiotics (see 
Table 6-17). In terms of drug–drug interactions, human xenosensors 
can be rank-ordered (from most important to least) as follows: CAR/
PXR > AhR > “CYP2E1” > PPARα. PPARα is ranked last because 
its activation in humans, in contrast to its activation in rodents, does 
not lead to induction of CYP4 enzymes (a family of enzymes that 
plays a limited role in drug metabolism compared with CYP1, CYP2, 
and CYP3 enzymes), and although activation of human PPARα in 
vitro leads to induction of CYP1A1, CYP2C8, and CYP3A4, this 
effect has not be demonstrated in a clinical setting (see the section 
“Peroxisome Proliferator–Activated Receptor Alpha”). CYP2E1 is 
an inducible enzyme in humans by mechanisms that do not appear 
to involve any of the xenosensors listed in Table 6-20, such as induc-
tion by activators of the WNT/β-catenin pathway (Gerbal-Chaloin 
et al., 2014), but relatively few drugs are inducers of—or substrates 
for—CYP2E1. AhR is less important than CAR/PXR because there 
are relatively few drugs that activate AhR and because the major 
hepatic enzyme regulated by AhR, namely, CYP1A2, plays a more 
limited role in drug metabolism than the hepatic and intestinal CYP 
enzymes regulated by CAR/PXR, namely, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, 
CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP3A4, and other enzymes and 
transporters (see Tables 6-20 and 6-21).

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
321
The activation of PXR follows the canonical steps outlined 
earlier in this section, beginning with (1) ligand binding to LBD, (2) 
dissociation of PXR from cytoplasmic retention protein and core-
pressors (such as nuclear receptor corepressor [NCOR] and silenc-
ing mediator for retinoid and thyroid hormone receptors [SMRT]), 
(3) association with coactivators (such as SRC1, GRIP-1, PGC-1, 
C/EBPα, and RAC3), (4) dimerization with RXRα, (5) transloca-
tion to the nucleus, and (6) binding to a set of core gene promoter 
elements within xenobiotic-responsive enhancer modules that typi-
cally contain DR-3 or ER-6 motifs, which culminates in transcrip-
tional activation of multiple genes, as shown in Tables 6-20 and 
6-21 (Chang and Waxman, 2006; Stanley et al., 2006; Gao and Xie, 
2010; Tolson and Wang, 2010; Omiecinski et al., 2011a). Sequence 
variation in the LBD of PXR accounts for certain species differences 
in CYP3A induction. For example, PCN is a prototypical inducer 
of CYP3A in rats and mice, but not humans, whereas the opposite 
is true of rifampin. Transgenic mice with human PXR in place of 
mouse PXR (PXR-humanized mice) lose the ability to respond to 
PCN and gain the ability to respond to rifampin. Rifampin can also 
bind and activate rat PXR once the opening to the LBD is slightly 
widened (by changing a phenylalanine to a leucine residue). As 
shown in Table 6-21, rifampin, artemisinin, clotrimazole, nicardip-
ine, and nifedipine are agonists for human PXR but not mouse PXR, 
which exemplifies why enzyme induction studies in rodents often 
fail to predict enzyme induction in humans. Some agonists bind to 
human PXR with relatively high affinity (with KD values in the [sub]
micromolar range), including rifampin and hyperforin, the inducing 
agent in St. John’s wort. In general, activation of CAR/PXR shows 
little or no stereospecificity, although the C-cyclopropylalkylamide 
known as S20 is a rare exception: (−)-C20 preferentially activates 
mouse PXR, whereas (+)-C20 preferentially activates human PXR. 
This difference further underscores the lack of predictability of 
rodent data to the human situation.
Tang and colleagues have reviewed the factors that give rise 
to differences in the magnitude of enzyme induction by PXR/
CAR agonists in humans (Tang et al., 2005); such differences can 
be attributed to (1) genetic polymorphisms or splicing variation in 
PXR or CAR and/or polymorphism in their DNA-response ele-
ments; (2) altered levels or function of accessory proteins (some of 
which are associated with inflammation and other disease states that 
activate NF-κB, as discussed later in this section); (3) gender differ-
ences in basal CYP3A4 activity (which tends to be lower in males 
compared with that in females); and (4) variation in the intracellular 
concentration of the inducing drug, as exemplified by variation in 
the metabolism of propafenone and celecoxib. The COX-2 inhibi-
tor celecoxib is a PXR agonist whose in vivo clearance is largely 
determined by CYP2C9. At recommended clinical doses, celecoxib 
induces CYP3A4 in CYP2C9 PMs but not in CYP2C9 EMs due to 
the higher levels of celecoxib in the PMs (Rodrigues et al., 2006).
The activation of CAR is considerably more complex than that 
of PXR (Chang and Waxman, 2006; Kodama and Negishi, 2006; 
Stanley et al., 2006; Mutoh et al., 2009; Tolson and Wang, 2010; 
Omiecinski et al., 2011b; Osabe and Negishi, 2011; Kobayashi et al., 
2015; Negishi, 2017). CAR is constitutively active, meaning that, 
in the absence of an exogenous ligand, it can complex with RXRα, 
translocate to the nucleus, bind to DNA-response elements (known 
as PBREM [for phenobarbital response elements] and containing 
DR4 and DR5 elements), and activate gene transcription, which 
is what generally happens when CAR is expressed in cell lines in 
vitro. In the in vivo situation (and in primary cultures of hepato-
cytes), CAR is prevented from being transcriptionally active by its 
retention in the cytoplasm by cytoplasmic CAR retention protein 
(CCRP), also known as DNAJC7, and chaperones such as hsp90, 
and possibly by its binding to an endogenous reverse agonist such 
as androstanol (5α-androstan-3α-ol) and androstenol (5α-androst-
16-en-3α-ol), the androstanes for which CAR is named (reverse 
agonists are discussed later in this section). The retention of CAR 
in the cytoplasm is achieved by its phosphorylation (at threonine 38 
in human CAR and threonine 48 in mouse CAR) by protein kinase 
C (PKC) (Mutoh et al., 2009). Once phosphorylated, CAR com-
plexes with P-ERK1/2, the phosphorylated (active) form of extra-
cellular-signal-regulated kinase (also known as mitogen-activated 
protein kinase p42/p44), which binds to the so-called xenochemical 
response signal (XRS), a peptide sequence (313LGLLAEL319) near 
the C-terminus of the CAR receptor (Osabe and Negishi, 2011). 
Similar XRSs are present in RXR, VDR, peroxisome prolifera-
tor–activated receptors (PPARs), and estrogen receptor. Binding of 
P-ERK1/2 to XRS prevents the hydrolysis of the phosphate group 
at threonine 38 (human CAR) or threonine 48 (mouse CAR). The 
activation of CAR by xenobiotics involves the dephosphorylation 
of the threonine residue by protein phosphatase 2A, as evidenced 
by the observation that the protein phosphatase 2A inhibitor oka-
daic acid blocks CAR translocation in mouse hepatocytes (Mutoh 
et al., 2009). Treatment with CAR activators also initiates ubiq-
uitination of CCRP and thereby promotes its degradation, which 
releases CAR from its cytosolic complex, followed by translocation 
of CAR to the nucleus (Kobayashi et al., 2015).
A factor that long complicated our understanding of the 
mechanism of CAR activation by xenobiotics was the realization 
that CAR activators can be divided into direct activators, which 
bind directly to the LBD of CAR, and indirect activators, which 
do not bind to CAR. CITCO and TCPOBOP are direct activators 
of human CAR and mouse CAR, respectively, and they are selec-
tive CAR activators, meaning they do not activate PXR. In humans 
and mice, phenobarbital (along with other EIAEDs) is the canoni-
cal indirect activator of CAR. The direct binding of CITCO and 
TCPOBOP to CAR triggers its dephosphorylation by protein phos-
phatase 2A, leading to the translocation of CAR to the nucleus. 
Phenobarbital treatment also leads to dephosphorylation (and hence 
activation) of CAR but it does so by inhibiting a membrane-bound 
receptor, namely epidermal growth factor (EGF) (Meyer and Jirtle, 
2013; Mutoh et al., 2013). Inhibition of EGF leads to the loss of 
phosphorylated RACK1 (receptor for activated C kinase 1). Once 
dephosphorylated, RACK1 can complex with and activate protein 
phosphatase 2A, which then dephosphorylates (and hence activates) 
CAR. Because CAR is constitutively active but retained in the cyto-
plasm, ligands can function as agonists, reverse agonists, or antag-
onists. Agonists activate CAR by displacing endogenous reverse 
agonists (e.g., androstanes) (Chang and Waxman, 2006; Kodama 
and Negishi, 2006; Stanley et al., 2006; Mutoh et al., 2009; Tolson 
and Wang, 2010; Omiecinski et al., 2011b; Osabe and Negishi, 
2011) or by promoting the dissociation of corepressors (such as 
P-ERK1/2 and NCOR) and the recruitment of coactivators (such as 
SRC-1, SP1, ASC-2, and PBP). Reverse agonists have the opposite 
effect: they promote the dissociation of coactivators and the recruit-
ment of corepressors, and they may also decrease the transcriptional 
activity of CAR. Antagonists bind to the same LBD as agonists and 
reverse agonists; they neither activate nor deactivate CAR, but they 
block the binding of other ligands. Examples of agonists, reverse 
agonists, or antagonists of CAR are shown in Table 6-21.
Xenobiotics can function as CAR agonists or antagonists in a 
species-specific manner. For example, chlorpromazine and mecli-
zine are agonists for mouse CAR, but they are inverse agonists for 
human CAR. TCPOBOP and CITCO are potent direct activators 
of CAR, but they function as CAR agonists in a species-specific 
manner: TCPOBOP is a potent agonist for mouse CAR, whereas

322
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
CITCO is a potent agonist for human CAR (Table 6-21). These 
selective CAR agonists must be used in a species-specific manner, 
as underscored by the fact that the mouse CAR agonist TCPOBOP 
is not an agonist for human CAR but it is an agonist for human 
PXR. Phenobarbital is an indirect activator of mouse and human 
CAR, but it is also an activator of human PXR (but not mouse or rat 
PXR). In contrast, another enzyme-inducing antiepileptic drug phe-
nytoin does not activate human PXR and, like CITCO, is a selective 
activator of human CAR. There are also species differences in the 
genes regulated specifically by CAR, specifically by PXR, and by 
both xenosensors, as shown for mouse and human in Table 6-21. 
These species differences in CAR, such as those described earlier 
in this section for PXR, illustrate why, during the safety evaluation 
of drug candidates, enzyme induction studies in rodents are often of 
limited value in predicting enzyme induction in humans.
Alternative splicing of CAR mRNA gives rise to CAR2 and 
CAR3, which are not constitutively active but are ligand-activated 
forms of the receptor. CAR2 and CAR3 contain four and five amino 
acid inserts, respectively, within the LBD of the receptor. The 
inserts interfere with the ligand-binding pocket affinity of CAR2 
but not CAR3. As a result, the ubiquitous plasticizer and envi-
ronmental pollutant di(2ethylhexyl)phthalate (DEHP) is a highly 
potent and selective CAR2 activator. Alternative splicing of CAR 
mRNA leads to the expression of tissue-specific variants, which can 
increase CAR’s functional diversity and broaden the human recep-
tor’s repertoire of responses to xenobiotics (DeKeyser et al., 2009, 
2011). The splice variants detected for human CAR are not present 
in rats or mice, which further underscores why rodents may not be 
adequate to assess CAR-mediated events in humans.
Certain cofactors/enzymes are required for activation of CAR 
to its transcriptionally active form. For example, the coactivator 
PBP/MED1 (PPAR-binding protein/TRAP220/DRIP205/media-
tor subunit 1) is required for CAR activation (as well as PPARα 
activation) (Pyper et al., 2010), as is AMP-activated protein kinase 
(AMPK) (Rencurel et al., 2006). The ability of phenobarbital to 
induce CYP2B10 and CYP3A11 is abolished in transgenic mice 
lacking CAR, PBP/MED1, or the α-subunit of AMPK. Activation 
of CAR by direct ligands is dependent on p38 mitogen–activated 
protein kinase (MAPK) and the low levels of MAPK in various 
cell lines compared with primary hepatocytes contributes to the 
relatively low degree of CYP2B induction in, for example, HepG2 
cells (Saito et al., 2013). Phenobarbital activates the upstream 
kinase LKB1, which in turn phosphorylates and activates AMPK, 
which phosphorylates transcriptional coactivators such as p300 (a 
nuclear phosphoprotein with histone acetylase activity), TORC2 
(transducer of regulated cAMP response element–binding pro-
tein [CREB]), and peroxisome proliferator–activated receptor γ 
coactivator-1α (PGC-1α) (Blattler et al., 2007; Shindo et al., 2007).
The role of AMPK in CAR activation and CYP2B induction 
is not clear. Metformin, a drug used to lower fasting blood glu-
cose levels in patients with noninsulin-dependent (type 2) diabetes, 
is an activator of AMPK. Metformin has been reported to be both 
an inducer of CYP2B6 (Rencurel et al., 2006) and a suppressor of 
CYP2B6 induction in human hepatocytes (Yang et al., 2014). In 
the latter study, metformin suppressed the induction of CYP2B6 in 
human hepatocytes by both direct-acting and indirect-acting CAR 
activators (CITCO and phenobarbital, respectively) which was 
associated with AMPK-dependent phosphorylation of CAR at Thr-
38, leading to its inactivation. Another activator of AMPK, namely, 
5-amino-4-carboxamide-1-β-ribofuranoside (AICAR), does not 
induce CYP2B in rat hepatocytes (Kanno et al., 2010) and metfor-
min does not induce CYP2B in vivo in mice or rats (Shindo et al., 
2007). Furthermore, metformin does not cause clinically significant 
CYP2B6 or CYP3A4 induction in humans (Blattler et al., 2007). 
Despite the initial finding that metformin was an activator of CAR, 
the weight of evidence suggests metformin actually suppresses 
CYP2B induction by activating AMPK and keeping CAR in the 
phosphorylated (inactive) state.
AMPK is sensitive to energy charge; consequently, it is acti-
vated by an increase in the ratio of AMP to ATP, which occurs, 
for example, during fasting. AMPK, PGC-1α, and CAR are all 
activated by fasting, which is associated with the induction of 
CYP2B10 and other CAR-regulated enzymes and transporters in 
mice (Ding et al., 2006). Like metformin, phenobarbital also low-
ers glucose levels in patients with type 2 diabetes and improves 
glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity in mice (Rencurel et al., 
2006; Dong et al., 2009). This glucose-lowering effect involves, at 
least in part, the binding of activated CAR to forkhead box protein 
O1 (FOXO1), a transcription factor that binds to insulin-response 
sequences (IRS) in the promoter region of gluconeogenic genes 
such as phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase-1 (PEPCK1) and 
glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase). Inactivation of FOXO1 by CAR 
leads to the suppression of PEPCK1 and G6Pase, which in turn 
leads to decreased gluconeogenesis (i.e., decreased glucose synthe-
sis) (Kodama and Negishi, 2006; Rencurel et al., 2006). Consistent 
with this mechanism of action, phenobarbital decreases glucose 
levels in wild-type mice but not in CAR knockout mice. PXR ago-
nists can also suppress gluconeogenesis either by the binding of 
activated PXR to FOXO1, which impairs the ability of FOXO1 to 
activate IRS-regulated gluconeogenic enzymes such as PEPCK1 
and G6Pase, or by the binding of activated PXR to phosphorylated 
CREB that prevents CREB-dependent transcription of G6Pase 
(Kodama et al., 2004; Gao and Xie, 2010). In addition to suppress-
ing gluconeogenic enzymes (PEPCK1 and G6Pase), CAR activa-
tors also induce hexokinase and glucose metabolism by the pentose 
phosphate pathway, which supports drug metabolism by generating 
the NADPH required by CYP, FMO, and certain other xenobiotic-
biotransforming enzymes (Kodama et al., 2004; Rencurel et al., 
2006; Dong et al., 2009).
The interaction between CAR and transcription factor FOXO1 
has opposing effects on each other’s transcriptional activity: CAR 
is a corepressor of FOXO1, whereas FOXO1 is a coactivator of 
CAR. Activation of FOXO1 by diabetes increases CYP2B and 
CYP3A expression in rats and mice, and this effect is reversed by 
insulin treatment (which stimulates the phosphorylation of FOXO1 
and thereby decreases its activity). By inactivating FOXO1 (which 
removes a coactivator for CAR), insulin blunts the induction of 
CYP2B enzymes by phenobarbital and represses the gluconeogenic 
pathway (Kodama and Negishi, 2006; Moreau et al., 2008). The 
interactions between CAR and FOXO1 have also been described 
for PXR and FOXO1 (Kodama et al., 2004; Gao and Xie, 2010).
In addition to playing a role in glucose homeostasis (by sup-
pressing gluconeogenic enzymes), CAR also plays a role in lipid 
homeostasis (largely by suppressing lipogenic enzymes). Multiple 
mechanisms have been identified that contribute to the suppression 
of lipogenesis by CAR activators (Gao and Xie, 2010). CAR acti-
vation and its associated activation of AMPK lead to the induction 
of Insig-1, a microsomal protein that, together with Insig-2, plays a 
key role in the control of hepatic triglyceride and cholesterol synthe-
sis (Roth et al., 2008). Induction of Insig-1 results in repression of 
sterol regulatory element–binding protein-1 (SREBP-1), which in 
turn results in the downregulation of lipogenic enzymes and, hence, 
a decrease in hepatic triglyceride and, to a lesser extent, cholesterol 
levels. In addition to Insig-1 induction, the mechanism of SREBP-1 
repression may also occur by an indirect mechanism that involves 
induction of CAR-regulated SULT2B enzyme(s) that sulfonate and

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
323
inactivate the oxysterols that function as agonists for the liver X 
receptor-α (LXRα), which is an inducer of SREBP-1. This indi-
rect pathway may play a significant role in suppressing SREBP-1 
expression based on the observation that the ability of CAR activa-
tors to suppress triglyceride/cholesterol synthesis is substantially 
impaired in SULT1B1b knockout mice (Dong et al., 2009). In addi-
tion to suppressing lipogenesis, CAR activators also induce fatty 
acid β-oxidation. The mechanism is distinct from the induction 
of fatty acid β-oxidation by PPARα agonists, which are the main 
regulators of lipid catabolism (discussed in the next section). CAR 
activators promote fatty acid β-oxidation by repressing the expres-
sion of acetyl-coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) carboxylase (both ACC1 
and ACC2; gene symbols ACACA and ACACB), which results in 
a decrease in the levels of malonyl-CoA, the initial intermediate in 
lipogenesis and an allosteric inhibitor of the carnitine-dependent 
transport of fatty acids into mitochondria for β-oxidation (Dong 
et al., 2009). From the foregoing it can be appreciated that there is 
growing interest in CAR as a potential therapeutic target in type 2 
diabetes and fatty liver disease.
Just as activation of CAR suppresses lipogenesis so excess 
lipid in the liver suppresses CAR activity. Obesity, steatosis (fatty 
liver), and high-fat diets all suppress CAR activation and CYP2B 
induction (Blouin et al., 1993; Gao and Xie, 2010). The effects are 
mediated, at least in part, by suppression of CAR (and PXR) by the 
key lipogenic factors SREBP-1 and LXRα presumably by compe-
tition for nuclear receptor coactivators. Although CAR and PXR 
have the same effect on gluconeogenesis (both of them suppress 
glucose synthesis), these xenosensors have opposing effects on lipid 
homeostasis: activation of CAR leads to repression of lipogenesis, 
whereas activation of PXR leads to the promotion of lipogenesis 
(Gao and Xie, 2010). Transgenic mice expressing a constitutively 
activated PXR develop hepatomegaly with marked steatosis, as do 
PXR-humanized mice treated with rifampin, albeit to a lesser extent 
(Zhou et al., 2006b). PXR activation causes fatty liver by inducing 
CD36 (a transporter of free fatty acids), PPARγ (a lipogenic peroxi-
some proliferation activation receptor discussed in the next section), 
and several accessory lipogenic enzymes including stearoyl-CoA 
desaturase-1 (SDC-1) and long-chain fatty acid elongase and by 
suppressing enzymes involved in β-oxidation (Zhou et al., 2006b). 
Both PXR and CAR agonists induce thyroid hormone-responsive 
spot 14 (gene symbol THRSP), the expression of which correlates 
with lipogenesis, which is consistent with the aforementioned role 
of PXR in lipogenesis and which suggests that the role of CAR 
in lipid homeostasis may be complex because paradoxically CAR 
appears to induce both lipid synthesis and catabolism. In the clini-
cal setting, a number of PXR agonists (rifampin, nifedipine, and 
carbamazepine) and a number of CAR activators (phenobarbital, 
phenytoin, and valproic acid) have been shown to alter lipid homeo-
stasis and/or cause steatosis (fatty liver) (Zhou et al., 2006b).
CAR and PXR are activated by certain endobiotics, and the 
enzymes regulated by these xenosensors play important roles in 
terminating the hormonal activity of 1,25-(OH)2-D3 and attenu-
ating the toxicity of high levels of bilirubin and bile acids. The 
active form of vitamin D, namely, 1,25-(OH)2-D3, binds to VDR to 
induce the synthesis of calbindin-D9K, a calcium-binding protein 
that facilitates the uptake of calcium from the intestinal lumen to 
blood. VDR also induces CYP enzymes that further hydroxylate 
and thereby inactivate 1,25-(OH)2-D3, which establishes a negative 
feedback loop. Two VDR-inducible CYP enzymes have been shown 
to inactivate 1,25-(OH)2-D3 by hydroxylating the active hormone 
in the 24-position and, to a lesser extent, the 23-position. The first 
is CYP24A1, which is expressed mainly in the kidney, and which 
catalyzes the 24R-hydroxylation of 1,25-(OH)2-D3. The second is 
CYP3A4, which is expressed mainly in the intestine and liver, and 
which catalyzes the 24S-hydroxylation of 1,25-(OH)2-D3. The ste-
reochemical differences in the 24-hydroxylation reaction helped to 
establish that CYP3A4 is the principal inactivator of 1,25-(OH)2-D3 
in the intestine, with little or no contribution from CYP24A1. These 
findings are important for two reasons. First, the ability of VDR to 
mimic PXR/CAR and induce CYP3A4 is an example of the cross-
talk that can occur between a xenosensor and other nuclear recep-
tors. Second, the key role played by CYP3A4 in the inactivation of 
1,25-(OH)2-D3 in the intestine provides an explanation for the clini-
cal observation that long-term treatment of patients with rifampin, 
phenobarbital, phenytoin, or carbamazepine can lead to osteoma-
lacia, a bone disorder that is symptomatic of vitamin D deficiency. 
These PXR/CAR agonists are thought to cause osteomalacia by 
inducing CYP3A4 in the intestine, which accelerates the inactiva-
tion of 1,25-(OH)2-D3 and thereby impairs calcium absorption (Xu 
et al., 2006; Zhou et al., 2006a).
CAR plays an important role in detoxifying high levels of 
bilirubin, as might occur in patients with hemolytic anemia. Like 
phenobarbital, bilirubin is an indirect activator of CAR. When acti-
vated, CAR induces UGT1A1 and several SULTs, the major hepatic 
enzymes responsible for conjugating bilirubin, as well as transport-
ers of bilirubin/bilirubin conjugates (MRP2 and MRP4). When 
hemolytic anemia is induced by treating mice with phenylhydrazine, 
bilirubin levels rise to a greater extent in CAR knockout mice com-
pared with wild-type mice, which demonstrates the important role 
CAR plays in responding to high levels of bilirubin. Phenobarbital 
was once used to treat neonatal jaundice, and the Chinese herbal 
Yin Zhi Huang is still used for this purpose. Phenobarbital and 
scoparone (6,7-dimethylesculetin), the active ingredient in Yin Zhi 
Huang, are CAR activators that, like bilirubin, induce the major 
bilirubin-conjugating enzyme UGT1A1 and related transporters 
(Chang and Waxman, 2006; Kodama and Negishi, 2006). In con-
trast, CAR appears to play a role in acetaminophen hepatotoxicity 
presumably by allowing acetaminophen to induce its own activation 
to a toxic quinoneimine. CAR knockout mice are relatively resistant 
to acetaminophen hepatotoxicity compared with both wild-type and 
CAR-humanized mice, which suggests early treatment with a CAR 
antagonist might be a useful adjunct treatment for acetaminophen 
overdose.
CAR, PXR, and the VDR appear to act as backup receptors 
to prevent bile acid accumulation and toxicity when the princi-
pal bile acid sensor, FXR, is overloaded. In the mouse ileum and 
colon, bile acid activation of FXR and, to a lesser extent, VDR 
and PXR, promotes bile acid detoxication by three mechanisms: 
(1) metabolism by AKR1B7 and CYP3A11; (2) intracellular bind-
ing to ileal bile acid–binding protein (IBABP); and (3) secretion 
by the organic solute transporter OSTα/β (Ballatori et al., 2009b; 
Degirolamo et al., 2011; Schmitt et al., 2011). FXR induces the 
expression of AKR1B7 in murine small intestine, colon, and liver 
by binding directly to a response element in the AKR1B7 promoter 
and this AKR metabolizes 3-keto bile acids to the corresponding 
3β-hydroxy bile acids, which are less toxic than their 3α-hydroxy 
isomers. High concentrations of bile acids activate FXR, which sup-
presses the expression of CYP7A1, the cholesterol 7α-hydroxylase 
that catalyzes the rate-limiting step in bile acid synthesis, and which 
induces the expression of bile acid conjugating enzymes, namely 
UGT2B4 and SULT2A1, and bile acid transporters, such as the bile 
salt export pump (BSEP). When hepatocytes contain low concentra-
tions of bile acids, FXR is inactive and the expression of CYP7A1 
is stimulated by liver receptor homolog-1 (LRH-1), a constitutively 
active nuclear receptor. When hepatocytes contain high concentra-
tions of bile acids, FXR is activated, and it inactivates LRH-1 by

324
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
inducing the synthesis of small heterodimer partner-1 (SHP), so 
named because it lacks a DNA-binding domain (hence its small 
size) and because it forms heterodimers with LRH-1 and numer-
ous other nuclear receptors including AhR, CAR, PXR, LXRα, 
HNF4α, and the glucocorticoid receptor (GR). Because it lacks a 
DBD, SHP inactivates all of these receptors; in the case of LRH-1, 
this results in a loss of CYP7A1 expression and a decrease in bile 
acid synthesis, which represents a negative feedback loop. FXR 
knockout mice are more sensitive than wild-type mice to bile acid 
toxicity, and treatment with the FXR ligand GW4064 further pro-
tects wild-type mice against experimentally induced extrahepatic 
and intrahepatic cholestasis. Cholic acid is both an FXR and PXR 
agonist; it suppresses CYP7A1 expression by activating first FXR 
and then PXR. In contrast to the situation in wild-type or single 
receptor knockout mice, 1% dietary cholic acid is lethal to FXR/
PXR double knockout mice. PXR and CAR play a similar role in 
attenuating the toxicity of lithocholic acid, which is both a PXR 
agonist and a substrate for many of the enzymes regulated by PXR, 
including CYP3A, SULT, and transporters involved in the hepatic 
uptake and efflux of lithocholic acid. In PXR/CAR double knockout 
mice, lithocholic acid causes lethal hepatotoxicity at doses that are 
well tolerated by wild-type mice. The mouse PXR agonist PCN 
can markedly suppress CYP7A1 expression and bile acid synthe-
sis in mice, and the human PXR agonist rifampin can markedly 
suppress CYP7A1 expression in human hepatocytes. The ability of 
PXR/CAR to function as a backup system for FXR may be com-
promised by the expression of SHP, which represses the activity 
of these xenosensors. This complex interplay is one of the likely 
reasons why there are some conflicting results from studies of 
the role of PXR/CAR in bile acid detoxication. The overall role 
of FXR is to provide protection against the toxic and tumorigenic 
effects of bile acids in the liver and colon; consequently, agonists 
of this receptor are being considered as potential colon cancer che-
motherapeutic drugs (Degirolamo et al., 2011). Obeticholic acid 
(Ocaliva), a bile acid analog (6α-ethyl-chenodeoxycholic acid) and 
potent activator of FXR, received FDA approval in 2016 for the 
treatment of primary biliary cholangitis. Obeticholic acid lowers 
bile acids in the liver by inducing BSEP (to transport bile acids into 
bile) and OSTα/β (to transport bile acids into blood), and by sup-
pressing CYP7A1, the enzyme that catalyzes the rate-limiting step 
in bile acid synthesis (Zhang et al., 2017). Activation of FXR by 
obeticholic acid in human hepatocytes is associated with suppres-
sion of various CYP enzymes and drug transporters but treatment 
with the clinical dose of obeticholic acid is associated only with 
slight suppression of CYP1A2 (based on a about 50% increase in 
systemic exposure to caffeine), which could be relevant to CYP1A2 
substrates with a narrow therapeutic index, such as theophylline 
(Edwards et al., 2017). Conversely, enzyme inducers that activate 
PXR/CAR can decrease the activity of FXR and thereby suppress 
the expression of BSEP and OSTα/β, leading to concern that pro-
longed treatment with PXR/CAR agonists could be a cause of drug-
induced cholestasis, which can also result from direct inhibition of 
BSEP (Garzel et al., 2014).
As the preceding examples in this section illustrate, there is 
a complex interplay between many of the nuclear receptors listed 
in Table 6-20. Some nuclear receptors, such as the hepatic nuclear 
factors HNF-1α and HNF-4α, and the coactivator PBP/MED1 
(PPAR-binding protein/TRAP220/DRIP205/mediator subunit 1), 
play a critical permissive role in gene regulation by CAR, PXR, 
and other receptors, whereas others, such as SHP, play a widespread 
role in suppressing nuclear receptor activity. HNF-1α is instru-
mental for the expression of high levels of CYP2E1 mRNA in the 
liver, although it is not the only factor because disruption of the 
WNT/β-catenin pathway in mice greatly reduces CYP2E1 mRNA 
levels in the liver in the absence of changes in HNF-1α expression 
(Gonzalez, 2007). Conversely, activation of the WNT/β-catenin 
pathway causes a pronounced induction of CYP2E1 (Gerbal-
Chaloin et al., 2014). Interestingly, the cross-talk between tran-
scription factors, particularly between HNF-4α, CAR, and PXR, is 
markedly increased in tissues from patients with severe viral hepati-
tis with pronounced inflammation and fibrosis (Congiu et al., 2009).
The glucocorticoid receptor (GR) plays an important role in 
inducing the synthesis of CAR and PXR (and individual xenobiotic-
biotransforming enzymes such as CYP2C9). The role of GR in regu-
lating the synthesis of xenosensors and the interplay among nuclear 
receptors are instrumental to the mechanism by which infections 
and inflammatory diseases suppress the expression and blunt the 
induction of xenobiotic-biotransforming enzymes and, conversely, 
the mechanism by which PXR agonists cause immunosuppression.
The expression and induction of xenobiotic-biotransforming 
enzymes by AhR, CAR, PXR, and PPARα are all suppressed by 
infection (viral, bacterial, and parasitic), vaccination, inflammation, 
and treatment with endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide or LPS) or proin-
flammatory cytokines such as interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and IL-6. The 
suppression involves (1) an increase in proinflammatory cytokines, 
(2) a decrease in the levels of PXR and CAR due to a decrease in GR 
activity, and (3) a decrease in the activity of GR, PXR, CAR, AhR, 
PPARα, and several other nuclear receptors including the androgen, 
estrogen, and mineralocorticoid receptors (De Bosscher et al., 2006; 
Pascual and Glass, 2006; Zhou et al., 2006b). The decrease in recep-
tor activity is caused by NF-κB, which is activated during infec-
tion and inflammatory disease, and which induces the synthesis of 
COX-2, TNF-α, ICAM-1, and several interleukins. NF-κB binds 
to the DBD of RXRα and thereby decreases the transcriptional 
activity of all nuclear receptors that form heterodimers with RXRα 
(such as PXR, CAR, PPARα, and GR). It also decreases the tran-
scriptional activity of AhR even though AhR forms heterodimers 
with ARNT, not RXRα. By lowering the levels and/or inhibiting 
the activity of the major xenosensors and numerous other nuclear 
factors, NF-κB mediates the widespread suppression of xenobiotic-
biotransforming enzymes associated with infection and inflamma-
tory disease. However, the converse is also true inasmuch as certain 
nuclear receptors, when activated, can complex NF-κB and thereby 
repress the expression of NF-κB-regulated genes (COX-2, TNF-α, 
ICAM-1, and interleukins). This is the basis, at least in part, for the 
immunosuppressive effect of corticosteroids, which activate GR, 
and the immunosuppressive effect of PXR ligands such as rifampin 
and mifepristone (RU-486). PXR plays a role in suppressing NF-κB 
activity in the small intestine. PXR knockout mice show signs of 
inflammation of the small intestine, and certain genetic polymor-
phisms and splicing variants of PXR are associated with inflamma-
tory bowel disease. Similarly, during periods of inflammation, the 
levels of mRNA encoding PXR and CYP3A4 are decreased in the 
intestine, and are decreased in children with active Crohn disease 
(a type of inflammatory bowel disease) (Shakhnovich et al., 2016). 
Common environmental AhR agonists can suppress the response 
to bacterial LPS through downregulation of IL-6. This suppression 
occurs at the level of IL-6 gene transcription and may be regulated 
by NF-κB (Jensen et al., 2003). AhR can also attenuate cytokine-
mediated induction of acute-phase response genes in the liver in a 
XRE-independent manner. This function of the receptor suggests its 
role in maintaining liver homeostasis during inflammation. The role 
of PXR in regulating NF-κB activity, responding to high levels of 
bile acids, and terminating the actions of 1,25-(OH)2-D3, the role of 
CAR in responding to high level of bilirubin, and the role of CAR 
and PXR in glucose and lipid (energy) metabolism all illustrate that

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
325
these so-called xenosensors do not simply respond to xenobiotics 
but play key roles in endobiotic homeostasis.
PXR is expressed in a variety of tumors, which has been linked 
to drug resistance, cell proliferation, apoptosis, and cancer progno-
sis. The possibility of using a PXR antagonist to downregulate drug-
metabolizing enzymes and transporters under the control of PXR in 
order to sensitize tumor cells to anticancer drugs has been proposed 
(Mani et al., 2013; Qiao et al., 2013; Pondugula et al., 2016).
Peroxisome 
Proliferator–Activated 
Receptor 
Alpha  An 
increase in the size and number of rat hepatic peroxisomes was 
first observed in response to the hypolipidemic drug clofibrate. 
Peroxisome proliferation is accompanied by hepatomegaly, and 
induction of fatty acid oxidation in peroxisomes, mitochondria, 
and microsomes. With long-term administration of hypolipidemic 
drugs, peroxisome proliferation is accompanied by hepatocarci-
nogenicity. Induction of microsomal fatty acid oxidation is due to 
the induction of CYP4A enzymes that play a limited role in xeno-
biotic biotransformation but that convert fatty acids to dicarbox-
ylic acids by ω-hydroxylation (see the section “CYP4 Enzymes”). 
Numerous xenobiotic “peroxisome proliferators” have been 
identified including hypolipidemic fibrate drugs (e.g., clofibrate, 
fenofibrate, ciprofibrate, bezafibrate, nafenopin, and methylcofena-
pate), various NSAIDs, aspirin, leukotriene receptor antagonists 
(MK-0571 and RG 7512), organic solvents (trichloroacetic acid), 
phthalate ester plasticizers, herbicides (haloxyfab, lactyofen, and 
2,4-­dichlorophenoxyacetic acid [2,4-D]), perfluorodecanoic acid, 
nicotinic acid, cinnamyl anthranilate, and the potent and widely 
used experimental peroxisome proliferator–activated receptor 
α (PPARα) agonist Wy-14643 (Lake, 2009). Peroxisome prolif-
eration by some of these xenobiotics occurs stereoselectively. The 
receptor that mediates peroxisome proliferation by these xenobiot-
ics is PPARα. PPARα (NR1C1) is one of a family of three nuclear 
receptors; the other members are PPARβ/δ (NR1C2) and PPARγ 
(NR1C3). All three are type II nuclear receptors that reside in the 
nucleus (in contrast to AhR, CAR, and PXR, which reside in the 
cytoplasm) (Pyper et al., 2010).
The distinction between xenobiotic- and endobiotic-sensing 
functions is particularly blurred in the case of PPARα, which is 
activated by the aforementioned xenobiotics and by several endog-
enous fatty acids (e.g., notably the acyl-CoA and enoyl-CoA deriva-
tives of long-chain fatty acid), dicarboxylic acids (such as those 
formed by CYP4-dependent ω-hydroxylation of long-chain fatty 
acids and arachidonic acid [HETEs]), LTB4, products formed by 
fatty acid synthase (such as 1-palmityl-2-oleolyl-sn-glycerol-
3-phosphocholine [16:0/18:1-GPC]), and DHEA sulfate. From this 
list of endogenous ligands it is apparent that fatty acids (generally 
in the form of acyl-CoA thioesters) can activate PPARα and induce 
their own metabolism. All three receptors play an important role in 
lipid (energy) metabolism. In general, PPARα and PPARβ/δ are 
regulators of fatty acid catabolism (catabolic energy metabolism) 
that are highly expressed in the liver, heart, kidney, brown adipose 
tissue, muscle, and the small and large intestines (Issemann and 
Green, 1990; Braissant et al., 1996; Bookout et al., 2006). PPARγ, 
which is expressed in at least three forms (e.g., PPARγ1, PPARγ2, 
and PPARγ3), regulates lipid synthesis and is abundant in white and 
brown adipose tissues (Tontonoz et al., 1994; Fajas et al., 1998). 
The pattern of tissue expression of PPARα is similar in rodents and 
humans (Bookout et al., 2006). PPARα exerts a dominant role in 
regulating fatty acid catabolism and ketone body synthesis in the 
liver. PPARβ/δ also participates in the regulation of fatty acid oxi-
dation, but its effects are more prominent in muscle and heart; how-
ever, PPARβ/δ also regulates certain lipid-metabolizing enzymes 
in the liver (Sanderson et al., 2009). PPARα functions as the major 
xenobiotic and lipid sensor to regulate fatty acid catabolism, hepatic 
steatosis, lipoprotein synthesis, inflammation, and hepatocarcino-
genesis; hence, this xenosensor is the major focus of discussion 
here.
Activation of PPARα follows the canonical steps outlined ear-
lier in this section. Binding of ligands to the LBD of PPARα results 
in (1) dissociation of corepressors (such as NCOR and SMRT), (2) 
dimerization with RXRα, (3) association with coactivators (p300, 
SRC/p160 family members, PBP/MED1, PGC-1α, and many oth-
ers), and (4) binding of activated PPARα to response elements 
(PPREs) that usually reside in the promoter (5′-region) of target 
genes. The PPRE is a direct repeat (DR1) composed of two copies 
of the consensus hexamer sequence AGG(A)TCA separated by a 
single base pair. PPARα activity is increased by phosphorylation 
of serine residues 12 and 21. Insulin stimulates the phosphorylation 
and, hence, the transcriptional activity of PPARα. The expression of 
PPARα is increased by fasting/starvation to provide energy through 
the oxidation of fatty acids released from adipose tissue. During 
starvation, PPARα is essential for the upregulation of the genes 
necessary for fatty acid oxidation, although PPARβ/δ can also 
upregulate some of the same enzymes independently of PPARα 
(Sanderson et al., 2009). The β-oxidation of fatty acids produces 
acetyl-CoA that either enters the mitochondrial tricarboxylic acid 
cycle or undergoes condensation reactions to form ketone bodies 
that are released into blood for energy (ATP) production in extrahe-
patic tissues. PPARα is also regulated by stress, growth hormone, 
leptin, and glucocorticoids. Direct binding of glucose to PPARα 
may be an important mechanism of stimulating fatty acid oxidation 
during uncontrolled diabetes (Pyper et al., 2010).
Once activated, PPARα induces the expression of key 
enzymes involved in the oxidation of fatty acids in peroxisomes, 
mitochondria, and endoplasmic reticulum (the three major organ-
elles involved in lipid catabolism). Oxidation of fatty acids in per-
oxisomes and mitochondria involves β-oxidation, whereas their 
oxidation in microsomes involves ω- and ω-1 hydroxylation by 
CYP (especially CYP4 enzymes). Peroxisomal β-oxidation tar-
gets very long straight-chain fatty acids, 2-methyl branched fatty 
acids, prostanoids, and dicarboxylic acids. The latter are formed by 
the ω-hydroxylation of fatty acids by CYP4 enzymes. Compared 
with their precursors (monocarboxylic acids), dicarboxylic acids 
are highly toxic; hence, the coordinate induction of microsomal 
ω-hydroxylation and peroxisomal β-oxidation is an important func-
tion of PPARα. There are two peroxisomal β-oxidation systems: 
the first system targets long-chain fatty acids and is inducible by 
PPARα, with the initial step being catalyzed by the highly induc-
ible enzyme peroxisomal acyl-coenzyme A oxidase 1 (ACOX1). 
The second system is a noninducible system that targets 2-methyl-
branched fatty acids (with the initial step catalyzed by ACOX2). 
Peroxisomal β-oxidation of long-chain fatty acids (C20+) produces 
chain-shortened fatty acids (approximately C10) that are trans-
ported to mitochondria for further β-oxidation. The three enzymes 
involved in peroxisomal β-oxidation of long-chain fatty acids, 
namely, ACOX1, the bifunctional enzyme L-PBE/MFP1 (enoyl-
CoA hydratase/3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase), and PTL 
(3-ketoacyl-CoA thiolase), are all inducible by PPARα. PPARα 
also induces mitochondrial carnitine palmitoyl transferase-1, which 
facilitates the entry of fatty acyl carnitine into mitochondria, and 
long-chain acyl-CoA synthetases, which initiate β-oxidation of 
fatty acids.
Fatty liver is the most common liver disease. It encompasses 
steatosis and steatohepatitis, diseases that can progress to cirrhosis 
and hepatocellular carcinoma. Fatty liver disease is divided into alco-
holic fatty liver disease (due to excessive alcohol consumption) and

326
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (due to obesity, which may occur with 
or without insulin resistance). During fasting PPARα knockout mice 
develop steatosis, hyperlipidemia, hypoketonemia, hypoglycemia, 
and hypothermia because they are unable to induce the peroxisomal, 
mitochondrial, and microsomal enzymes required to metabolize lip-
ids released from adipose tissue. PPARα knockout mice also develop 
severe steatohepatitis if fed a choline- and methionine-deficient diet. 
Ethanol-fed PPARα knockout mice develop marked hepatomegaly, 
steatohepatitis, hepatocellular proliferation, and cell death. In wild-
type mice and humans, ethanol impairs PPARα function, which is 
thought to contribute to the mechanism by which alcohol causes 
alcoholic fatty liver disease (Pyper et al., 2010).
In addition to playing a key role in protecting the liver against 
fatty liver disease, PPARα plays an important role in reducing 
inflammation. The proinflammatory eicosanoid LTB4 is an activator 
of PPARα and induces its own metabolism by β- and ω-oxidation. 
PPARα ligands significantly reduce the levels of other proinflam-
matory cytokines/enzymes including interleukin-1 (IL-1), tumor 
necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), COX-2, and inducible nitric oxide syn-
thase (NOS-2) by inhibiting NF-κB and by decreasing phosphoryla-
tion of the c-Jun subunit of AP-1 (Pyper et al., 2010).
Paradoxically, in addition to inducing peroxisomal, mitochon-
drial, and microsomal enzymes involved in fatty acid catabolism, 
PPARα can upregulate the expression of hepatic lipogenic genes by 
activating SREBP-1 and liver X receptor α (LXRα) (Browning and 
Horton, 2004; Hebbachi et al., 2008). The situation is analogous to 
CAR that also upregulates lipid synthesis and catabolism (see the 
preceding section). The upregulation of lipogenic genes by PPARα 
is possibly a fail-safe mechanism to save fatty acids by incorporat-
ing them into triglycerides during starvation.
Species differences in PPARα and peroxisome proliferation 
are a complex issue. Activation of human PPARα in humans and 
other primates (and guinea pigs) is generally considered to cause 
little or no induction of microsomal CYP4A enzymes (Lake, 2009). 
There is in vitro evidence that CYP1A1, CYP2C8, and CYP3A4 
are inducible by activators of human PPARα, the xenosensor 
(Seree et al., 2004; Prueksaritanont et al., 2005; Klein et al., 2012; 
Thomas et al., 2013, 2015; Makia and Goldstein, 2016). Whether 
fibrates and other drugs that activate PPARα cause clinically rel-
evant induction of CYP3A4 (or CYP1A1 and CYP2C8) is not 
known. In rodents, CYP induction by fibrates is not exclusively 
mediated by PPARα. For example, the ability of clofibric acid to 
induce CYP2B enzymes in rats is due to activation of CAR, not 
PPARα (Ibrahim et al., 2014).
Activation of human PPARα in humans and other primates 
(and guinea pigs) generally causes minimal peroxisome prolifera-
tion, although peroxisome proliferation does occur in rhesus and 
cynomolgus monkeys treated with supertherapeutic doses of cip-
rofibrate (Lake, 2009). The lack of hepatomegaly and peroxisome 
proliferation in humans administered PPARα agonists is attributed 
to dose and the levels of hepatic PPARα, which are about an order 
of magnitude lower in humans compared with those in rodents. 
PPARα-humanized mice (i.e., mice harboring human PPARα 
instead of the mouse receptor) are resistant to peroxisome prolif-
eration but the overexpression of human PPARα in mice restores 
peroxisome proliferation, the pleiotropic induction response, and 
cell proliferation (Pyper et al., 2010). These findings are pertinent 
to the risk of hepatocellular carcinogenesis posed by fibrate drugs 
and other PPARα agonists, which is discussed in the next section.
Enzyme Induction and Chemical Carcinogenesis  In humans, 
induction of CYP2E1 and the associated increased activation of 
acetaminophen to N-acetylbenzo-p-quinoneimine (NAPQI) is one 
of the mechanisms by which alcohol consumption and fasting 
potentiate acetaminophen hepatotoxicity (other contributing mech-
anisms include the impaired conjugation of acetaminophen due to 
lowered levels of UDPGA and PAPS, and the impaired detoxication 
of NAPQI due to lowered levels of GSH). By analogy, induction 
of CYP enzymes would be expected to increase the activation of 
procarcinogens to DNA-reactive metabolites, leading to increased 
tumor formation. However, contrary to expectation, treatment of 
rodents with a CYP inducer prior to treatment with a known proxi-
mate carcinogen (tumor initiators such as aflatoxin, various nitros-
amines, or PAHs) is generally associated with a decrease, not an 
increase, in tumor incidence (Parkinson and Hurwitz, 1991; Nebert 
and Dalton, 2006; Shimada, 2006; Ma and Lu, 2007; Nebert et al., 
2013). The route of exposure to the carcinogen can affect the 
impact of enzyme induction; it protects against orally administered 
drugs but may increase the tumorigenicity of carcinogens applied 
directly to their site of action (Nebert et al., 2004). Although treat-
ment of rats and mice with a CYP inducer before treatment with 
an initiator (a genotoxic carcinogen) generally decreases tumor 
incidence, treatment with a CYP inducer after the initiator (such as 
diethylnitrosamine) generally increases tumor incidence because 
CYP inducers generally function as tumor promoters in rodents.
Phenobarbital is representative of a large number of com-
pounds that appear to promote liver tumor formation in mice and, 
to a lesser extent, in rats by a nongenotoxic mechanism, including 
phenytoin, carbamazepine, chlordecone, butylated hydroxytolu-
ene, DDT, dieldrin, hexachlorocyclohexane, certain polychlori-
nated and polybrominated biphenyls, loratadine, doxylamine, 
lansoprazole, musk xylene, and fenbuconazole (Williams and 
Iatropoulos, 2002; Juberg et al., 2006; Elcombe et al., 2014; Lake 
et al., 2015). Although the exact mechanism of tumor formation 
remains unknown, it is critically dependent on CAR activation, 
as evidenced by the finding that phenobarbital and related com-
pounds do not function as tumor promoters in CAR knockout 
mice (Gonzalez and Yu, 2006). Replicative DNA synthesis and 
possibly inhibition of apoptosis are mechanistically important. 
Phenobarbital does not function as a tumor promoter in Syrian 
hamsters (even following treatment with a genotoxic agent such 
as DMN, DEN, or methylazoxymethanol acetate). Phenobarbital 
is a CYP2B inducer in hamsters but it does not induce replicative 
DNA synthesis and does not inhibit apoptosis in hamster hepa-
tocytes (either spontaneous or transforming growth factor-β1 
[TGF-β1]–induced apoptosis) (Lake, 2009). In mice and rats 
phenobarbital and related compounds only cause liver tumors 
at doses that cause liver enlargement due to an increase in cell 
number (hepatocellular hyperplasia) and cell size (hepatocel-
lular hypertrophy). The liver changes induced by phenobarbi-
tal, including an increase in DNA synthesis within 24 hours, a 
wave of mitotic activity after 1 to 3 days, enzyme induction (e.g., 
CYP2B enzymes), and a progressive increase in liver weight, all 
exhibit nonlinear dose–response relationships, suggesting that 
there is a threshold dose below which no activation of CAR and 
no liver tumor promotion occur.
Although induction of CYP2B enzymes (and other xeno-
biotic-biotransforming enzymes and transporters) is a common 
feature of phenobarbital and related tumor-promoting chemi-
cals, the two events do not appear to be mechanistically linked 
(Williams and Iatropoulos, 2002). Activation of CAR is critical 
to liver tumor development in mice, although upregulation of 
xenobiotic-biotransforming enzymes is less important than other 
xenosensor-dependent events, such as, in the cases of the indi-
rect (phenobarbital) or direct mouse CAR-activator (TCPOBOP), 
altered DNA methylation of numerous genes, upregulation of 
GADD45B (an antiapoptotic factor) and Mdm2 (a negative

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
327
regulator of the tumor suppressor p53), and the downregulation 
of gap junctional proteins (connexin 32), which diminishes cell–
cell communication (Omiecinski et al., 2011b). Connexin 32 null 
mice are resistant to the tumor-promoting effects of phenobarbital, 
although it remains to be determined whether connexin 32 is a 
CAR-regulated signal molecule (Kobayashi et al., 2015). Although 
phenobarbital and other CAR activators induce CYP2B6 in human 
hepatocytes (both in vitro and in vivo), they neither cause replica-
tive DNA synthesis nor inhibit spontaneous or TGF-β1-induced 
apoptosis (Lake, 2009).
Prolonged treatment of rodents with clofibrate, fenofibrate, 
ciprofibrate, bezafibrate, nafenopin, methylcofenapate, Wy-14643, 
DEHP, DEHA, cinnamyl anthranilate, or trichloroethylene is 
associated with hepatic peroxisome proliferation and liver tumor 
(adenoma and/or carcinoma) formation (Lake, 2009). PPARα 
plays a critical role in tumor formation by peroxisome prolifera-
tors as evidenced by the finding that Wy-14643 does not function 
as a tumor promoter in PPARα knockout mice (Gonzalez and Yu, 
2006). Furthermore, there is an excellent agreement between the 
potency with which agonists activate PPARα and the potency (in 
terms of latency period and tumor incidence) with which they pro-
mote liver tumor formation in rodents (which in turn is correlated 
with their ability to induce the proliferation of peroxisomes, induce 
peroxisomal enzymes involved in the β-oxidation of fatty acids, 
and induce microsomal CYP4A enzymes). Like CAR agonists, 
PPARα agonists are considered nongenotoxic tumorigens because 
they are not mutagenic and they are not known to be converted 
to mutagenic metabolites. Another similarity with CAR agonists is 
that, in rodents, PPARα agonists cause replicative DNA synthesis 
in association with hepatomegaly (due to early hyperplastic and 
hypertrophic growth of hepatocytes) and they inhibit apoptosis. 
Just as it is sensitive to the enzyme-inducing/endoplasmic reticulum 
proliferative effects but not the tumor-promoting effects of CAR 
agonists, so the Syrian hamster is sensitive to the enzyme-inducing/
peroxisome proliferating effects of PPARα agonists, but is resis-
tant to their tumor-promoting effects (Lake, 2009). PPARα agonists 
cause replicative DNA synthesis and inhibit apoptosis in rat and 
mouse hepatocytes, but not in hepatocytes from hamsters, guinea 
pigs, monkeys, and humans (Lake, 2009). Treatment of mice with 
Wy-14643 represses the expression of let-7C microRNA, which 
results in increased expression (derepression) of c-myc oncogene 
expression (Shah et al., 2007). Interestingly, suppression of let-7C 
miRNA does not occur in PPARα-humanized mice treated with 
Wy-14643 (Yang et al., 2008).
Although PPARα agonists are not genotoxic, the dramatic 
(more than 20-fold) induction of peroxisomal ACOX1 by Wy-14643 
and other peroxisome proliferators (dramatic when compared with 
the modest [two- to fivefold] induction of peroxisomal catalase) 
leads to increased production of hydrogen peroxide, which can 
cause oxidative stress and DNA damage that possibly play a role in 
some of the downstream events leading to tumor promotion (Pyper 
et al., 2010). Oxidative DNA damage is evident from the fact that 
treatment of rodents with PPARα agonists leads to the induction 
of long-patch base excision DNA repair, the principal pathway for 
removing oxidized DNA bases (Rusyn et al., 2004).
Activation of PPARα is required but apparently not sufficient 
to lead to liver tumor formation. Other key events include increased 
oxidant production (such as increased peroxisomal H2O2 produc-
tion), increased cell proliferation (which fixes mutations), and 
suppression of apoptosis (which prevents the removal of geneti-
cally damaged cells and permits clonal expansion) (Klaunig et al., 
2003; Lai, 2004; Bosgra et al., 2005). Kupffer cells appear to play 
an important role in liver tumor formation by releasing mitogenic 
cytokines and possibly by contributing to oxidative stress by releas-
ing superoxide anion, although it is not clear how PPARα agonists 
trigger these events. Inhibition of gap junctional intercellular com-
munication plays an important role in liver tumor formation by 
PPARα agonists, just as it does in the promotion of liver tumors by 
phenobarbital-type inducers.
Epidemiological studies designed to assess the human cancer 
risk posed by PPARα agonists have produced inconclusive results. 
Clofibrate has been reported to cause a statistically significant 
increase in cancer mortality rate during a 5- to 8-year treatment 
period. However, there was no significant increase in cancer rate in a 
follow-up study, which included a posttreatment period (Lai, 2004). 
Three compelling lines of evidence suggest that PPARα agonists 
will not cause liver tumors in humans. First, PPARα agonists do not 
cause peroxisome proliferation and microsomal CYP4A induction 
in human hepatocytes in vitro or in primates in vivo at therapeutic 
doses. Second, PPARα agonists do not cause replicative DNA syn-
thesis or inhibit apoptosis in human hepatocytes (or in hepatocytes 
from hamsters and guinea pigs, two species that are resistant to the 
hepatocarcinogenic effects of PPARα agonists). Third, treatment 
of PPARα-humanized mice (transgenic mice with human PPARα 
in place of mouse PPARα) with Wy-14643 or fenofibrate neither 
results in the hepatocellular proliferation characteristic of wild type 
nor results in the repression of let-7C miRNA and the upregulation 
of the c-myc oncogene (Gonzalez and Yu, 2006; Yang et al., 2008; 
Lake, 2009; Pyper et al., 2010).
The mechanism of thyroid tumor formation is better under-
stood. In rodents, CAR activators (as well as PXR and PPARα 
agonists) induce UGT and SULT enzymes and transporters that 
accelerate the conjugation and elimination of thyroid hormones, 
which triggers a compensatory increase in thyroid stimulating hor-
mone (TSH). T4 is a substrate for UGT1A enzymes, whereas T3 is 
a substrate for UGT2B2 and an as yet unidentified UGT enzyme 
(van Raaij et al., 1993; Visser et al., 1993; Richardson and Klaassen, 
2010). Induction of T3 glucuronidation, rather than induction of 
T4 glucuronidation, is strongly associated with a compensatory 
increase in TSH and thyroid follicular hyperplasia. The PXR ago-
nist PCN induces T3 glucuronidation in both Sprague–Dawley rats 
and UGT2B2-deficient Fischer 344 rats, which establishes that at 
least two PCN-inducible UGTs are involved in T3 glucuronidation 
(Richardson and Klaassen, 2010).
Sustained stimulation of the thyroid gland by TSH leads to 
the development of thyroid follicular tumors, the development 
of which can be blocked by administering T4, which blocks the 
release of TSH and thereby abrogates the hormonal stimulation 
of the thyroid gland. It is not clear why sustained stimulation of 
the thyroid gland by TSH results in tumor formation in rodents, 
but such tumors develop in other rodent organs following pro-
longed hormonal stimulation: LH causes Leydig cell tumors, gas-
trin causes stomach tumors, and corticosteroids cause pancreatic 
tumors. In addition, just as proliferation of the hepatic endoplas-
mic reticulum and peroxisomes by phenobarbital and Wy-14643 
is associated with liver tumor formation, so the proliferation of 
hepatic lysosomes by Ponceau S and the proliferation of mitochon-
dria by methapyrilene are also associated with liver tumor forma-
tion (Grasso et al., 1991).
Epidemiological studies of epileptic patients treated for more 
than 35 years with phenobarbital or phenytoin have established 
that chronic liver microsomal enzyme induction in humans does 
not increase the incidence of thyroid tumor formation (Singh et al., 
2005). Prolonged elevation of TSH in humans does not lead to 
tumor formation but causes goiter, a reversible enlargement of the 
thyroid gland associated with iodide deficiency and treatment with

328
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
drugs that block thyroid hormone synthesis. In humans and mon-
keys, circulating T4 is largely bound to thyroxine-binding globulin 
(TBG). This high-affinity binding protein is not present in rodents, 
for which reason T4 is rapidly conjugated and excreted in bile in 
rodents. Accordingly, the plasma half-life of T4 in rats (12 to 24 
hours) is considerably shorter than in humans (5 to 9 days). Similar 
differences are observed for T3. To compensate for the increased 
turnover of thyroid hormones, the rat pituitary secretes more TSH. 
While the baseline plasma TSH concentration in humans is about 
2.2 μU/mL, TSH concentrations in rats range from 55.5 to 65 μU/
mL in males and 36.5 to 41 μU/mL in females (Hill et al., 1989). It 
is estimated that rats require a 10-fold higher rate of T4 production 
(on a per kilogram body weight basis) than do humans to maintain 
physiological T4 and T3 concentrations. These differences in plasma 
half-life, protein binding, thyroid hormone metabolism, and TSH 
secretion between rats and humans are thought to be reasons for the 
greater sensitivity of rats to developing hyperplastic and/or neoplas-
tic nodules in response to chronic TSH stimulation (Capen, 1997).
Enzyme Induction and Porphyria  Due to the increased demand 
for heme, persistent induction of CYP can lead to porphyria, a dis-
order characterized by excessive accumulation of intermediates 
in the heme biosynthetic pathway. In 1956, widespread consump-
tion of wheat contaminated with the fungicide hexachlorobenzene 
caused an epidemic of porphyria cutanea tarda in Turkey. Another 
outbreak occurred in 1964 among workers at a factory in the United 
States manufacturing 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid (the 
active ingredient in several herbicides and in the defoliant, Agent 
Orange). The outbreak of porphyria cutanea tarda was caused not 
by the herbicide itself but by a contaminant, namely, dioxin. Drugs 
that cause P450 induction have not been shown to cause porphyria 
cutanea tarda under normal circumstances, but phenobarbital, phe-
nytoin, and alcohol are recognized as precipitating factors because 
they cause episodes of porphyria in individuals with an inherited 
deficiency in the heme-biosynthetic enzyme, uroporphyrinogen 
decarboxylase. Studies conducted in mice suggest that the use of 
flurane-based anesthetics, such as enflurane and isoflurane, which 
affect heme metabolism, should be avoided in porphyria patients 
(Sampayo et al., 2009). Due to the increased demand for heme, 
induction of CYP enzymes in vivo or in vitro (in hepatocytes) is 
associated with induction of δ-aminolevulinic acid synthase (ALA 
synthase), the enzyme that catalyzes the first and rate-limiting step 
in heme synthesis.
Enzyme Suppression  The suppression (downregulation) of drug-
metabolizing enzymes and transporters is an adaptive process that 
reduces xenobiotic elimination during periods of inflammation, 
infection, and postvaccination or in response to certain therapeu-
tic proteins. The phenomenon may be associated with pharmaco-
logical and toxicological consequences, especially in the case of 
drugs with a narrow therapeutic index, and it can be a manifes-
tation of a drug–disease interaction. Suppression of xenobiotic-
biotransforming enzymes, a consequence of influenza infection, 
resulted in severe toxicity of theophylline, a CYP1A2 substrate 
with a narrow therapeutic index. A number of children infected 
with the influenza virus and receiving theophylline, a prophylactic 
asthma treatment, experienced convulsions, and cardiac conduc-
tion anomalies associated with elevated plasma levels of the drug 
(which increased up to fivefold in association with a prolonga-
tion of plasma half-life from 4 to up to 20 hours) (Kraemer et al., 
1982). Suppression of xenobiotic-biotransforming enzymes, as a 
result of vaccination or treatment with certain therapeutic protein, 
may cause drug–drug interactions involving a small drug molecule 
as victim and the biological drug as perpetrator. Blood trough 
levels of tacrolimus, a narrow therapeutic index immunosuppres-
sant and a substrate of CYP3A4/5, increased by 63% in patients 
treated with basiliximab, a chimeric monoclonal antibody to the 
interleukin-2 (IL-2) receptor (Sifontis et al., 2002). Similar effects 
of basiliximab on the calcineurin inhibitor cyclosporine A were 
observed in children following kidney transplantation. Within the 
first 10 days following transplantation, substantially less cyclo-
sporine was required in the basiliximab treatment group than in 
controls, but it resulted in higher trough concentrations and was 
associated with liver and kidney toxicity (Strehlau et al., 2000). 
The proposed mechanism of these interactions is an IL-2-mediated 
suppression of CYP3A4. This mechanism is in agreement with 
CYP suppression initiated by proinflammatory cytokines, such as 
IL-1β, IL-6, interferon-γ (INF-γ), or TNF-α, released in response 
to infection or inflammation. These proinflammatory cytokines, in 
turn, modulate expression and activity of transcription factors and 
specific nuclear receptors determining the levels of CYP mRNA 
(Morgan, 2009). In the liver proinflammatory cytokines can induce 
NOS-2 and the increased production of NO can directly inhibit 
CYP enzymes. Accordingly infection and inflammation can both 
suppress and inhibit CYP enzymes (Morgan et al., 2008; Zhou and 
Mascelli, 2011). Therapeutic proteins that are cytokines or cytokine 
modulators deserve special scrutiny during the drug development 
process because they can suppress CYP enzymes without stimu-
lating the release of endogenous cytokines. All the major drug-
metabolizing CYP enzymes, including the noninducible CYP2D6, 
are subject of suppression by cytokines (IL-1, IL-2, IL-6, IL-10, 
IFN-α, IFNα-2b, IFN-β, and TNF-α) or cytokine modulators (toci-
lizumab, basiliximab, and muromonab-CD3) (Huang et al., 2010). 
By reversing the disease process—such as lessening the inflam-
mation associated with rheumatoid arthritis—some biologics, for 
example, tocilizumab (a humanized monoclonal antibody against 
the interleukin-6 receptor), can reverse the suppression of drug-
metabolizing enzymes and restore their activity to normal levels 
(Morgan, 2009; Schmitt et al., 2011).
CONJUGATION
Conjugation reactions include glucuronidation, sulfonation (often 
called sulfation), acetylation, methylation, conjugation with glu-
tathione (GSH; mercapturic acid synthesis), and conjugation with 
coenzyme A (CoA) followed by conjugation with amino acids 
such as glycine, taurine, and glutamine. The cofactors (or cosub-
strates) for these reactions, which are shown in Fig. 6-57, react 
with functional groups that are either present on the xenobiotic 
or introduced/exposed during oxidation, reduction, or hydrolysis. 
With the exception of methylation and acetylation, conjugation 
reactions result in a large increase in xenobiotic hydrophilicity and 
total polar surface area (TPSA), so they greatly promote the excre-
tion of foreign chemicals (see Table 6-3 and discussion in the sec-
tion “Introduction’). Because of their high water solubility, most 
xenobiotic conjugates cannot readily diffuse across the plasma 
membrane; hence, their exit from hepatocytes, for example, gener-
ally involves transport across the canalicular membrane into bile 
(for elimination in feces) or the sinusoidal membrane into blood 
(for elimination in urine) (see the section “Introduction” and Point 
6 in the section “Principles of Xenobiotic Biotransformation”). 
Glucuronidation, sulfonation, acetylation, and methylation involve 
reactions with activated or “high-energy” cofactors, whereas con-
jugation with amino acids or GSH involves reactions with activated 
xenobiotics. Most conjugation enzymes are located in the cytosol; 
a notable exception is the UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs), 
which are microsomal enzymes (Table 6-4).

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
329
Figure 6-57.  Structures of cofactors for conjugation reactions. The functional group that reacts with or is transferred to the xenobiotic is shown in red.
HO
Uridine-5′-diphospho-α-D-glucuronic acid (UDPGA)
3′-Phosphoadenosine-5′-phosphosulfate (PAPS)
S
CH3
(CH2)2
CH
–OOC
H2N
S-Adenosylmethionine (SAM)
Glutathione conjugation
Amino acid conjugation
CH
COO–
NH2
CH2
CH2
C
O
NH
CH
N
O
H
N
H
OH
Coenzyme A
C
O
NH
CH2
CH2
COO–
SH
CH
COO–
CH2
H2N
COO–
CH2
CH2
SO3
–
CH2
CH2
C
O
NH2
Glycine
Taurine
Glutamine
Glucuronidation
Sulfonation (sulfation)
Methylation
γ-glutamic acid
cysteine
glycine
Glutathione
HN
N
O
OH
OH
O
O
O
P
P
O
O–
O
O
O–
O
CH2
CH2
O
COO–
OH
OH
N
O
O
OH
P
O
O
O–
O
N
N
N
PO3
=
H2N
S
O
O
–O
Acetyl-coenzyme A
Acetylation
CH2
N
O
O
OH
P
O
O
O–
O
N
N
N
PO3
=
H2N
CH2
N
O
OH
OH
O
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
H2N
O
P
O
O–
CH2
C
CH3
CH3
CH
C
O
NH
CH2
CH2
C
O
NH
CH2
CH2
S
OH
C
O
CH3
+
O
O
O
P
O
O–
NH2
O
P
O
O–
Formation of acyl-CoA thioesters
D
O
OH
PO3
=
H2N
H2N
HS

330
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
Glucuronidation and Formation of Acyl-CoA 
Thioesters
Glucuronidation is a major pathway of xenobiotic biotransforma-
tion in mammalian species except for members of the cat family 
(lions, lynxes, civets, and domestic cats) (Tukey and Strassburg, 
2000; Court, 2013). It requires primarily the cofactor UDP-
glucuronic acid (UDPGA), but can also use UDP-glucose, UDP-
xylose, and UDP-galactose. The reaction is catalyzed by UGTs, 
which are located predominantly in the endoplasmic reticulum 
of the liver and other tissues, such as the kidney, gastrointestinal 
tract, lungs, prostate, mammary glands, skin, brain, spleen, and 
nasal mucosa (Fig. 6-58). Examples of xenobiotics that are gluc-
uronidated are shown in Fig. 6-59. The site of glucuronidation is 
generally an electron-rich (nucleophilic) O, N, or S heteroatom. 
Glucuronidation reactions mediated by UGTs are SN2 substitu-
tion reactions where the nucleophilic heteroatom of the substrate 
attacks the C1 atom of UDPGA, which results in a xenobiotic 
glucuronide in the β-configuration (Yin et al., 1994). Therefore, 
substrates for glucuronidation are typically small lipophilic com-
pounds that contain functional groups such as aliphatic alcohols 
and phenols (which form O-glucuronide acetals), carboxylic acids 
(which form acyl glucuronides), primary and secondary aromatic 
and aliphatic amines (which form N-glucuronides), and free sulfhy-
dryl groups (which form S-glucuronides). In humans and monkeys 
(but in few other species), numerous tertiary amines (including 
tripelennamine, cyclobenzaprine, and imipramine) are substrates 
for N-glucuronidation, which leads to the formation of positively 
charged quaternary ammonium glucuronides, some of which 
may be carcinogenic (see below in this section) (Hawes, 1998). 
Certain xenobiotics, such as phenylbutazone, sulfinpyrazone, suxi-
buzone, ethchlorvynol, ∆6-tetrahydrocannabinol, and feprazone, 
contain carbon atoms that are sufficiently nucleophilic to form 
C-glucuronides. Coumarin and certain other carbonyl-containing 
compounds are glucuronidated to form arylenol-glucuronides.
In addition to the typical conjugation reactions above, UGTs 
can form unusual conjugates: (1) bisglucuronides (e.g., biliru-
bin and morphine), where two different functional groups on 
the same molecule are glucuronidated; (2) diglucuronides (e.g., 
5α-dihydroxytestosterone; DHT), where two glucuronides are 
attached in tandem to a single site; (3) N-carbamoyl glucuronides 
(e.g., sertraline and varenicline), where carbonate incorporated in 
the glucuronide; and (4) glycosidation with UDP-sugars other than 
UDPGA (e.g., glucosidation of barbiturates). Two examples are 
shown in Fig. 6-60. These reactions will be covered in greater detail 
later in this section. In addition to numerous xenobiotics, substrates 
for glucuronidation include several endogenous compounds, such 
as bilirubin, steroid hormones, and thyroid hormones. Table 6-22 
provides examples of marker substrates for the major human UGTs. 
Several review articles provide extensive descriptions of UGT sub-
strates, Km and Vmax values, and specificity of substrates and inhibi-
tors for individual UGT enzymes (Radominska-Pandya et al., 1999; 
Tukey and Strassburg, 2000; Kiang et al., 2005; Miners et al., 2010; 
Rowland et al., 2013; Oda et al., 2015).
The cofactor for glucuronidation, UDPGA, is synthesized 
from glucose-1-phosphate, and the linkage between glucuronic acid 
and UDP has an α-configuration, as shown in Fig. 6-58. This con-
figuration protects the cofactor from hydrolysis by β-glucuronidase. 
Figure 6-58.  Synthesis of UDP-glucuronic acid and inversion of configuration (α → β) during glucuronidation of a phenolic xenobiotic (designated RO−).
α-D-UDP-glucose
UDP-glucose
dehydrogenase
UTP
PPi
Phosphorylation
UDP-glucose
pyrophosphorylase
CYTOPLASM
LUMEN
UDP
O
COO–
O
UDP
HO
HO
OH
–OR
UDP-glucuronosyl
transferase
UDP-α-D-glucuronic acid (UDPGA)
β-glucuronide
2NADH, 2H+
2NAD+
H2O
α-D-glucose-1-phosphate
Transport across the endoplasmic reticulum
O
COO–
O
HO
HO
OH
R

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
331
However, glucuronides of xenobiotics have a β-configuration. This 
inversion of configuration occurs because glucuronides are formed 
by nucleophilic attack by an electron-rich atom (usually O, N, or S) 
on UDPGA, and this attack occurs on the opposite side of the 
linkage between glucuronic acid and UDP, as shown in Fig. 6-58. 
In contrast to the UDPGA cofactor, xenobiotics conjugated with 
glucuronic acid are substrates for β-glucuronidase. Although pres-
ent in the lysosomes of some mammalian tissues, considerable 
Figure 6-59.  Examples of xenobiotics and endogenous substrates that are glucuronidated. The arrow indicates the site of glucuronidation, with the UGT 
enzyme if selective.
O-Glucuronides (acetals)
Other Examples
Acyl-glucuronides
O-Glucuronides (esters)
N-Glucuronides
S-Glucuronides
C-Glucuronides
Benoxaprofen
Bilirubin
Diclofenac
Diﬂunisal
Amitryptyline
Benzidine
Ciclopiroxolamine
Cyclobenzaprine
N
N
R
O
O
Phenylbutazone       
R = C4H9 
Sulﬁnpyrazone
R = (CH2)2SOC6H5
Acetaminophen
Codeine
Dextrorphan
Diethystilbestrol
Estrone
Hexobarbital
Methylphenylcarbinol
Naloxone
4-Nitrophenol
Phenolphthalein
Progesterone
Propranolol
Temazepam
Testosterone
Thyroxine
Trichloroethanol
Cyproheptadine
N-Hydroxyarylamines
Imipramine
Lamotrigine
Etodolac
Gemﬁbrozil
Ketoprofen
Lopanoic acid
Other Examples
Naproxen
Suprofen
Valproic acid
Zomepirac
Meprobamate
Sulfadimethoxine
Sulfathiazole
Sulﬁsoxazole
Tripelennamine
Other Examples
UGT2B7
UGT2B7
UGT2B15
UGT1A9
UGT1A6
UGT1A3
UGT1A1
NH2
Aniline
Triﬂuoperazine
O
OH
O
Tolmetin
Morphine
Cl
H
N
N
O
OH
C2H5
S-Oxazepam
Propofol
CH3
H3C
H3C
CH3
CH3 OH
OH
1-Naphthol
26,26,26,27,27,27,-hexaﬂuoro-
1α,23,25-trihydroxyvitamin D3
HO
OH
CF3
CF3
OH
OH
SN-38
17β-Estradiol
OH
HO
OH
H
N
H
HO
O
UGT1A1
Other Examples:  Suxibuzone 
Ethchlorvynol
∆6-THC
UGT1A9
N
C
C2H5
C2H5
SH
S
Diethyldithiocarbamate
SH
Thiophenol
Other Examples:    
Disulﬁram
Methimazole 
O
O
O
OH
HO
N
N
UGT1A4
H3C
CF3
N
N
N
S
CH3

332
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
Figure 6-60.  Examples of unusual glucuronide conjugates.
HCO3
–
UDPGA
UDP
Monoglucuronidation
Major: UGT2B17, 2B15
Minor: UGT1A8, 1A4
Diglucuronidation
UGT1A8
Cl
Cl
N
CH3
H
Sertraline
Sertraline N-carbamoyl glucuronide
C
O
O
O
COOH
HO
OH
OH
N
CH3
5α-Dihydrotestosterone diglucuronide
O
O
COOH
HO
O
OH
O
COOH
HO
OH
OH
O
H
OH
5α-Dihydrotestosterone
Cl
Cl
O
H
UGT
TISSUE
SPECIFIC CONTENT IN 
HUMAN MICROSOMES*
SELECTIVE SUBSTRATES (BOLD), OTHER SUBSTRATES, AND 
SELECTIVE INHIBITORS (ITALICS)
1A1
Liver, small intestine, 
colon
Liver: 45 pmol/mg
Bilirubin, 17β-estradiol (3-glucuronidation), etoposide, ezetimibe, 
acetaminophen, belinostat, R-carvedilol, efavirenz, ethinyl estradiol, 
ezetimibe, levothyroxine, raloxifene, SN-38 (active metabolite of  
irinotecan), telmisartan, tranilast. Atazanavir, erlotinib
Intestine: 23 pmol/mg
1A3
Liver, small intestine, 
colon
Liver: 32 pmol/mg
Hexafluoro-1α,23(s),25-trihydroxyvitamin D3, vitamin D3,  
R-lorazepam, beviramat, bile acids (chenodeoxycholic acid,  
lithocholic acid, hyodeoxycholic acid), 17β-estradiol, ezetimibe,  
ibuprofen, fenoprofen, ketoprofen, ketotifen, naproxen,  
norbuprenorphine, telmisartan, valproic acid, zolosartan
Intestine: 1.9 pmol/mg
1A4
Liver, small intestine, 
colon
Liver: 55 pmol/mg
Trifluoperazine, 1′-hydroxymidazolam, afloqualone, amitriptyline, 
benzidine, clozapine, S-cotinine, cyclobenzaprine, diphenhydramine, 
imipramine, ketoconazole, ketotifen, lamotrigine, levomedetomidine, 
midazolam, S-nicotine, olanzapine, tamoxifen. Hecogenin
Intestine: 1.6 pmol/mg
1A5
Liver
Liver: 0.1 pmol/mg
Unknown
Intestine: Not determined
1A6
Liver, small intestine, 
colon, stomach
Liver: 43 pmol/mg
1-Naphthol, serotonin, deferiprone, acetaminophen, deferiprone, 
diclofenac, 4-methylumbelliferone, ibuprofen, methotrexate, 
4-­nitrophenol, SN-38 (active metabolite of irinotecan)
Intestine: 2.3 pmol/mg
Kidney: 14 pmol/mg
1A7
Esophagus, stomach, 
lung
Liver: <0.2 pmol/mg
4-Hydroxybiphenyl, 4-hydroxyestrone, hydroxybenzo[a]pyrene, 
mycophenolic acid, octylgallate, SN-38 (active metabolite of 
irinotecan)
Intestine: 8.4 pmol/mg
1A8
Colon, small 
intestine, kidney
Liver: <0.2 pmol/mg
Anthraquinone, ciprofibric acid, clofibric acid, diflunisal, catechol 
estrogens, entacapone, furosemide, 8-hydroxyquinoline, mycophenolic 
acid, niflumic acid, raloxifene, troglitazone, valproic acid
Intestine: 6.1 pmol/mg
1A9
Liver, colon, kidney
Liver: 32 pmol/mg
Propofol, mycophenolic acid, phenylbutazone, sulfinpyrazone, 
­acetaminophen, bumetanide, diclofenac, diflunisal, edaravone, 
­entacapone, fenofibrate, fenoprofen, furosemide, ibuprofen, 
­indomethacin, ketoprofen, mycophenolic acid, naproxen,  
R-oxazepam, propofol, salicylic acid, scopoletin, sorafenib. Thyroid 
hormones. Niflumic acid
Intestine: 6.6 pmol/mg
Kidney: 171 pmol/mg
Table 6-22  
Major Human UDP-Glucuronosyltransferase Enzymes

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
333
β-glucuronidase activity is present in the intestinal microbiota. The 
intestinal enzyme can release the aglycone, which can be reabsorbed 
and thereby enter a cycle called enterohepatic circulation, which 
delays the elimination of xenobiotics. In general, N-glucuronides 
are hydrolyzed relatively slowly by β-glucuronidase (with some 
N-glucuronides being resistant to hydrolysis by β-glucuronidase) 
but some N-glucuronides undergo hydrolysis in acidic conditions 
(hence, some N-glucuronides are hydrolyzed in urine, which can 
give the impression that the parent compound was eliminated in 
urine unchanged). In contrast, acyl glucuronides are stable under 
acidic conditions; unless the samples are acidified (to pH ~5), 
acyl glucuronides in plasma and other biological matrices can 
isomerize or hydrolyze to a significant extent. The instability of 
N-glucuronides under acidic conditions has implications for the 
tumorigenicity of N-glucuronides of compounds such as benzidine 
(discussed later in this section).
Glucuronide conjugates of xenobiotics and endogenous com-
pounds are polar (typically anionic) with a pKa(A) of 3 to 3.5, 
water-soluble metabolites that are eliminated from the body in 
urine or bile. Whether glucuronides are excreted from the body in 
bile (following their canalicular transport by MRP2) or urine (fol-
lowing their sinusoidal transport into blood by MRP3) depends, 
in part, on the size of the aglycone (i.e., the parent compound or 
its unconjugated metabolite). In rat, glucuronides are preferentially 
excreted in urine if the molecular weight of the aglycone is less 
than 250, whereas glucuronides of larger molecules (aglycones with 
molecular weight greater than 350) are preferentially excreted in 
bile. Molecular weight cutoffs for the preferred route of excretion 
vary among mammalian species. Yang et al. (2009) conducted a 
statistical analysis of the molecular weight cutoff for biliary excre-
tion of anionic, cationic, zwitterionic, and neutral compounds and 
concluded that, for anionic compounds, the molecular weight cutoff 
was approximately 400 and 475 Da in rats and humans, respec-
tively. The carboxylic acid moiety of glucuronic acid (pKa(A) 
3–3.5), which is ionized at physiological pH, promotes excretion 
because (1) it increases the aqueous solubility and TPSA of the 
xenobiotic and (2) it is recognized by the biliary and renal organic 
anion transport systems, which enable glucuronides to be actively 
UGT
TISSUE
SPECIFIC CONTENT IN 
HUMAN MICROSOMES*
SELECTIVE SUBSTRATES (BOLD), OTHER SUBSTRATES, AND 
SELECTIVE INHIBITORS (ITALICS)
1A10
Stomach, small 
intestine, colon
Liver: <0.1 pmol/mg
Dopamine, furosemide, mycophenolic acid, 1-naphthol, raloxifene, 
troglitazone
Intestine: 4.7 pmol/mg
2A1
Olfactory
Not determined
Ibuprofen, valproic acid
2A2
Unknown
Not determined
Unknown
2A3
Liver, small intestine, 
colon, adipose tissue
Not determined
Bile acids
2B4
Liver, small intestine
Not determined
Androsterone, bile acids such as hyodeoxycholic acid, codeine, 
carvedilol, estriol
2B7
Kidney, small 
intestine, colon
Liver: 98 pmol/mg
Zidovudine (AZT), morphine (6-glucuronidation†), 
­carbamazepine, benoxaprofen, bile acids (hyocholic acid, 
hyodeoxycholic acid), buprenorphine, S-carvedilol, clofibric acid, 
codeine, diclofenac, denopamine, epirubicin, efavirenz, flurbiprofen, 
gemfibrozil, hydroxyprogesterone (6α- and 21-), ibuprofen, 
ketoprofen, naproxen, naloxone, R-oxazepam, RO5263397, 
tiaprofenic, valproic acid, zomepirac. Fluconazole
Intestine: 16 pmol/mg
Kidney: 95 pmol/mg
2B10
Liver, ileum, prostate
Liver: 20 pmol/mg
S-Nicotine, cotinine, levomedetomidine, amitriptyline, 
­clomipramine, desloratadine, diphenhydramine, imipramine, 
­trimipramine. S-Nicotine, desloratadine 
Intestine: <0.1 pmol/mg
2B11
Mammary, prostate, 
others
Not determined
2-Aminophenol, 3α-androgens and pregnanes, 4-hydroxybiphenyl, 
4-nitrophenol, 1-naphthol, estriol and hydroxylated estrogens
2B15
Liver, small intestine, 
prostate
Liver: 52 pmol/mg
S-Oxazepam, S-lorazepam, androgens, diclofenac, entacapone, 
estriol, flavonoids, 4-hydroxytamoxifen, sipoglitazar, SN-38 (active 
metabolite of irinotecan), tolcapone, vorinostat
Intestine: <0.1 pmol/mg
2B17
Liver, prostate
Liver: 18 pmol/mg
Androgens, eugenol, galangin, ibuprofen, MK-7246, scopoletin, 
­vorinostat.
Intestine: 112 pmol/mg
2B28
Liver, mammary
Not determined
17β-Estradiol, testosterone
*Specific content of UGT enzymes (pmol/mg protein) was determined in up to 126 samples of microsomes prepared from human liver, intestine, or micro-
somes by LC-MS/MS (Oda et al., 2015).
†UGT2B7 also catalyzes the 3-glucuronidation of morphine, but this reaction is also catalyzed by other UGTs.
Note: Bold text represents selective substrates (or reactions) for hepatic UGTs. These compounds may be glucuronidated in extrahepatic tissues by other 
UGT enzymes. Italic text represents selective inhibitors.
SOURCES: Data from Fisher et al. (2000), Williams et al. (2004), Kiang et al. (2005), Miners et al. (2006), Court et al. (2008), Miners et al. (2010), 
­Kaivosaari et al. (2011), Ohtsuki et al. (2012), and Oda et al. (2015).
Table 6-22  
(Continued)

334
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
secreted into urine and bile. Furthermore, as anions, glucuronides 
generally bind extensively to albumin, which, in addition to their 
large TPSA, confines glucuronides to plasma (although some gluc-
uronides are actively taken up by the liver, as described below).
As discussed above, glucuronide metabolites are often sub-
strates of transmembrane transporters that mediate the vectoral 
transport of conjugates into systemic circulation or into bile for 
fecal excretion or enterohepatic circulation. These transport pro-
teins efflux the glucuronide either across the canalicular membrane 
for biliary excretion or across the sinusoidal membrane into the 
blood for excretion in urine. Transport of glucuronides across the 
sinusoidal membrane into the blood is mediated largely by MRP3 
and, to a lesser extent, by MRP1 and MRP4. The transport of gluc-
uronides across the canalicular membrane into bile is largely medi-
ated by MRP2 and, to a lesser extent, by BCRP. Glucuronides can 
also be taken up by hepatocytes through the action of OATP1B1 and 
OATP1B3 on the sinusoidal membrane (Giacomini and Sugiyama, 
2006; Giacomini et al., 2010).
Bilirubin monoglucuronide and diglucuronide, certain steroid 
conjugates (such as estradiol-17β-glucuronide), and certain bile 
acids are also substrates for MRP2 and MRP3, although bile acids 
are mainly effluxed into bile by the bile salt export pump (BSEP). 
The important role of MRP2 in transporting conjugated bilirubin 
into bile is evident from the observation that rats deficient in MRP2 
(such as TR–/GY and EHBR rats) have high plasma levels of mono-
conjugated and diconjugated bilirubin. In humans, a deficiency of 
MRP2 also leads to conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, and this inher-
ited disease is called Dubin–Johnson syndrome. When MRP2 func-
tion is impaired (due to a genetic deficiency or due to drug-induced 
cholestasis or bile duct ligation), MRP3 levels increase. In this way, 
when the biliary efflux of xenobiotics and endobiotics by MRP2 is 
impaired, their efflux into blood is increased (as if the back door 
is opened wider when the front door is closed). The upregulation 
of MRP3 in response to a loss of MRP2 augments the basolateral 
efflux of drug, steroid and bilirubin conjugates, and certain bile 
acids during cholestasis. MRP2 can be highly effective at trans-
porting glucuronides and anionic compounds into bile as evidenced 
by bile-to-blood concentration ratios greater than 1 (and commonly 
between 10 and 1000) (Brauer, 1959). However, the elimination of 
drug conjugates in bile may not result in the elimination of the drug 
in feces because the conjugates may be hydrolyzed in the gut by 
bacterial β-glucuronidase and the parent drug may be reabsorbed 
or eliminated in feces. For orally administered drugs, the former 
process (biliary excretion of conjugates, hydrolysis in the gut, and 
reabsorption of the parent drug) gives rise to the phenomenon of 
enterohepatic circulation, whereas the latter process (biliary excre-
tion of conjugates, hydrolysis in the gut, and elimination of the par-
ent drug in feces) can give the impression of incomplete intestinal 
absorption.
The mammalian UGT gene superfamily contains four fami-
lies, UGT1, UGT2, UGT3, and UGT8. The major UGTs involved 
in xenobiotic conjugation are 9 members of the UGT1 family 
and 10 members of the UGT2 family (3 and 7 in the UGT2A and 
UGT2B subfamilies, respectively). Families 1 and 2 preferentially 
utilize UDPGA as the cofactor, but may use other UDP-sugars 
such as UDP-glucose and UDP-xylose (Mackenzie et al., 2005). 
UGT3A1 and UGT3A2 were identified in the human genome, and 
are about 30% similar to UGT1 and UGT2 sequences but prefer 
N-acetylglucosamine as a cofactor (Mackenzie et al., 2005; Meech 
and Mackenzie, 2010). UGT8A1 utilizes UDP-galactose and is 
involved in the synthesis of membrane components, which is 
beyond the scope of this chapter. The total number of functional 
human UGT enzymes is 22.
The major xenobiotic-metabolizing human UGT enzymes are 
products of either a single UGT1A gene locus (see Fig. 6-61) or 
multiple individual UGT2 genes (with the exception of UGT2A1 
and 2A2, see below). The human UGT1A locus encodes 13 poten-
tial UGT enzymes (namely, UGT1A1, 1A2, 1A3, 1A4, 1A5, 1A6, 
1A7, 1A8, 1A9, 1A10, 1A11, 1A12, and 1A13), 9 of which are 
expressed in vivo; the 4 transcripts that are not expressed are 
UGT1A2, 1A11, 1A12, and 1A13, which are pseudogenes because 
they lack an open reading frame (Mackenzie et al., 2005). Each 
of the UGT1A enzymes is encoded by five exons, four of which 
(exons 2 to 5) are the same and encode the cofactor-binding site. 
Because of the cassette nature of the UGT1A locus, the individual 
UGT1A enzymes differ in only the first exon, which encodes the 
substrate-binding site. Because they share four out of five exons, all 
the UGT1A enzymes share extensive amino acid sequence identity. 
Figure 6-61.  Structure of the human UGT1 locus that encodes multiple forms of UDP-glucuronosyltransferase. Note that these microsomal enzymes face the 
lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum.
Variable region (multiple exons 1)
UGT
Exon
position
Pseudogene
UGT 1A10
UGT 1A9
UGT 1A8
UGT 1A7
UGT 1A6
UGT 1A5
UGT 1A4
UGT 1A3
UGT 1A1
A12P
A11P
A13P
A2P
A8
A9
A7
A6
A5
A4
A3
A1
1
1
2
2
3
3
3
4
4
4
5
5
5
6
6
7
7
8
8
9
10
10
11
11
12
13
A10
Pseudogene
Pseudogene
Alternate splicing of exon 1 with exons 2–5 (constant)
Constant region (exons 2-5)

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
335
The UGT2 genes expressed in humans are UGT2A1, 2A2, 2A3, 
2B4, 2B7, 2B10, 2B11, 2B15, 2B17, and 2B28. Human UGT2B24 
to UGT2B27 and UGT2B29 are pseudogenes. The UGT2 genes 
are made up of six exons each, which are not shared between sub-
family members, with the exception of UGT2A1 and UGT2A2, 
and these two genes are more than 70% similar (Mackenzie et al., 
2005). UGT2A1 and UGT2A2 share five exons with a variable 
first exon, similar to the UGT1A enzymes. The human UGT3 
family contains two members UGT3A1 and UGT3A2. UGT3A1 
mRNA is expressed in the liver and, to a lesser extent, in the kid-
ney, stomach, duodenum, colon, and testes. UGT3A2 mRNA is 
expressed at high levels in kidney and testes. UGT3A1 utilizes 
N-acetylglucosamine as a sugar donor and is implicated in the 
formation of N-acetylglucosamide conjugates of various steroidal 
substrates, such as steroid hormones and bile acids (Meech and 
Mackenzie, 2010).
The C-terminus of all UGTs contains a membrane-spanning 
domain that anchors the enzyme in the endoplasmic reticulum. 
The enzyme faces the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum, which 
places UGTs on the opposite side of the endoplasmic reticu-
lum from CYP. As outlined in the section “Introduction” and in 
Table 6-3, biotransformation of xenobiotics by CYP generally 
results in a modest increase in TPSA and hydrophilicity; hence, 
metabolites formed by CYP enzymes can generally diffuse through 
the lipid bilayer of the endoplasmic reticulum to access UGTs on 
the luminal side of the membrane. The luminal orientation of UGT 
poses a problem because UDPGA is a water-soluble cofactor syn-
thesized in the cytoplasm. One or more transporters are suspected of 
shuttling UDPGA from the cytoplasm to the lumen of the endoplas-
mic reticulum, and they may also shuttle UDP (the by-product of 
glucuronidation) back into the cytoplasm for synthesis of UDPGA, 
as shown in Fig. 6-58 (Rowland et al., 2013).
Historically, studies on the ontogeny and inducibility of vari-
ous UGT enzyme activities in rats contributed considerably to our 
understanding of the multiplicity of UGT enzymes. These studies 
predated widespread gene sequencing and genomic analysis and 
they were reviewed in previous versions of this chapter. Today we 
know that the genes encoding the xenobiotic-metabolizing UGT 
enzymes in rats are organized like those in humans: multiple 
UGT1A enzymes are encoded in cassette fashion by a single gene 
locus and multiple UGT2B enzymes are encoded by numerous 
individual genes. Three historical findings in rats are worth noting. 
First, in contrast to the situation in humans, some of the rat UGT 
enzymes are highly inducible. For example, AhR ligands such as 
dioxin and 3-methylcholanthrene cause more than a 10-fold induc-
tion of UGT1A6 and UGT1A7 in rats but not in humans because 
the human UGT genes lack the XRE activated by AhR. Second, 
activators of rat PXR, such as dexamethasone and PCN, cause 
more than a 10-fold induction of a UGT enzyme that conjugates 
digitoxigenin monodigitioxoside (dt1), a metabolite of digitoxin 
(dt3) formed by CYP3A (see Fig. 6-53). The specific rat UGT1A 
enzyme responsible for glucuronidating dt1 has not been identified. 
Third, all UGT1A enzymes are deficient in Gunn rats. In this hyper-
bilirubinemic rat, a mutation at codon 415 introduces a premature 
stop signal, so that all forms of UGT encoded by the UGT1 locus 
are truncated and functionally inactive. The UGTs known to be 
encoded by the rat UGT1 locus include the 3-methylcholanthrene-
inducible enzyme that conjugates planar molecules such as 1-naph-
thol (UGT1A6 and UGT1A7), the phenobarbital- and clofibric 
acid–inducible enzyme that conjugates bilirubin (UGT1A1), and 
the PCN-inducible enzyme that conjugates dt1. While Gunn rats are 
genetically defective in all UGT1A enzymes, Wistar-LA rats are 
selectively defective in UGT2B2, which allowed this enzyme to be 
identified as the principal enzyme responsible for glucuronidating 
androsterone and triiodothyronine (T3) in rats (Burchell, 1999).
The tissue distribution and substrate/inhibitor specificity of the 
human UGT1 and UGT2 enzymes are summarized in Table 6-22 
(Rowland et al., 2013; Oda et al., 2015; Yang et al., 2017). With the 
exception of UGT1A5, 1A7, 1A8, 1A10, 2A1 and possibly 2A2, 
all of the UGT1 and UGT2 members are expressed in human liver 
microsomes, with mean specific contents ranging from 18 pmol/mg 
protein (UGT2B17) to 98 pmol/mg protein (UGT2B7), as shown in 
Table 6-22. Of the hepatically expressed UGT enzymes, UGT1A1, 
1A3, 1A4, 1A6, 1A9, 2B7, 2B10, 2B15 and 2B17 are considered to 
be the UGT enzymes most important for hepatic drug metabolism 
(Miners et al., 2006, 2010; Kaivosaari et al., 2011). UGT1A7, 1A8, 
1A10, and 2A1 also play a role in drug metabolism, and these four 
UGT enzymes are expressed in the stomach and/or small intestine 
but not the liver, as shown in Table 6-22, which has implications for 
the common practice of using human liver microsomes to inves-
tigate the role of glucuronidation in drug metabolism. Numerous 
UGT1 and UGT2 enzymes are expressed throughout the gastroin-
testinal tract (stomach and/or small intestine), where they contribute 
significantly to the first-pass (presystemic) elimination of numerous 
xenobiotics. The major UGT enzymes expressed in human kidney 
are UGT1A6, 1A9, and 2B7; they are expressed in human kidney 
microsomes at levels that are comparable to or greater than those 
in human liver microsomes, as shown in Table 6-22. Other UGTs 
expressed in human kidney include UGT1A5, 1A7, 2B4, and 2B17 
(with low or undetectable levels of mRNA encoding UGT1A1, 
1A3, 1A4, 1A8, 1A10, 2B10, 2B11, 2B15, and 2B28). UGT2A1 
is primarily expressed in nasal epithelia, whereas UGT2A3 is a 
polymorphic enzyme expressed in the liver, gastrointestinal tract, 
and kidneys (Jedlitschky et al., 1999; Court et al., 2008). Several 
UGT2B enzymes, notably UGT2B15 and UGT2B17, are expressed 
in steroid-sensitive tissues, such as prostate and mammary gland, 
where they glucuronidate various steroid hormones.
Various epigenetic/transcriptional factors have been identi-
fied that explain, at least in part, the tissue distribution of UGT 
enzymes including the hepatic nuclear factors HNF-1α, HNF-4α, 
and HNF-3α (FOXA1), caudal homeodomain-containing 2 (Cdx2), 
and the degree of methylation of CpG-rich regions in the promoter 
regions of individual UGTs (Rowland et al., 2013; Oda et al., 2015; 
Yang et al., 2017). For example, HNF-1α, which is predominantly 
expressed in the liver and kidney, promotes the expression of sev-
eral UGTs in these two organs including UGT1A1, 1A3, 1A4, 1A6, 
1A9, 2B7, and 2B17. An HNF-4α-binding site in the UGT1A9 pro-
moter region that is important for its expression in the liver and 
kidney is absent from UGT1A7, 1A8, and 1A10, which are not 
expressed in the liver. Cdx2, which is expressed in small intestine 
and colon but not liver or stomach, promotes the expression of 
UGT1A8, 1A10, and 2B7 in the intestine (but not UGT1A7, which 
is not regulated by Cdx2 and which is expressed mainly in stom-
ach and esophagus). HNF-3α (FOXA1) promotes the expression of 
UGT2B15 and UGT2B17 in prostate. A CpG-rich sequence in the 
promoter region of UGT1A1 is hypermethylated in the kidney but 
hypomethylated in the liver, which coincides with the high expres-
sion of UGT1A1 in the liver but not kidney. Conversely, CpG-rich 
regions in UGT1A8 and UGT1A10 are hypermethylated in the liver 
but hypomethylated in the small intestine, which coincides with 
high expression of UGT1A8 and UGT1A10 in the intestine but not 
liver (Rowland et al., 2013; Oda et al., 2015; Yang et al., 2017). 
The regulation of UGT expression by xenosensors and bile acids is 
discussed later in this section.
Probe drugs (index substrates) and selective inhibitors 
have been identified for most but not all of the human UGTs, as

336
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
summarized in Table 6-22. Some drugs are glucuronidated by all 
of the UGTs involved in drug conjugation, albeit at different rates. 
For example, all UGTs form acyl glucuronides of several NSAIDs 
including diclofenac, ibuprofen, and indomethacin, and all UGTs 
with the exception of UGT2B15 form acyl glucuronides of flurbi-
profen and ketoprofen (Iwamura et al., 2017). Some UGTs gluc-
uronidate drugs stereoselectively. For example, R- and S-carvedilol 
are preferentially glucuronidated by UGT1A1 and UGT2B7, 
respectively; R- and S-lorazepam are preferentially glucuroni-
dated by UGT1A3 and UGT2B15, respectively, whereas R- and 
S-oxazepam are preferentially glucuronidated by both UGT1A9 and 
2B7 and 2B15, respectively. Some drugs are converted to more than 
one glucuronide. For example, the glucuronidation of morphine by 
UGT2B7 involves conjugation of the phenolic 3-hydroxyl and the 
alcoholic 6-hydroxyl group in a 7:1 ratio. The 6-O-glucuronide is 
600 times more potent an analgesic than the parent drug, whereas 
the 3-O-glucuronide is devoid of analgesic activity. UGT2B7 is 
present in the brain, where it might facilitate the analgesic effect 
of morphine through formation of the 6-O-glucuronide, which pre-
sumably does not readily cross the blood–brain barrier and may be 
retained in the brain longer than morphine (Tukey and Strassburg, 
2000). Only UGT2B7 catalyzes the 6-glucuronidation of morphine, 
whereas several UGTs including UGT1A1, 1A3, 1A6, 1A8, 1A9, 
1A10, as well as 2B7 can catalyze the 3-glucuronidation (Stone 
et al., 2003). Some UGTs conjugate the same drugs but with 
markedly different affinities. For example, in general, UGT1A4 
catalyzes quaternary N-glucuronide formation with low affin-
ity, whereas UGT2B10 does so with high affinity. Consequently, 
CYP2B10 is primarily responsible for the N-glucuronidation of 
various tricyclic antidepressants (e.g., amitriptyline, clomipramine, 
imipramine, and trimipramine) at low, pharmacologically relevant 
substrate concentrations (Zhou et al., 2010a; Kaivosaari et al., 2011; 
Oda et al., 2015).
Despite their broad and overlapping substrate specificities, 
some generalities can be made regarding the types of substrates 
conjugated by certain UGT enzymes. For instance, UGT1A4 and 
UGT2B10 are largely responsible for glucuronidating tertiary 
amines (Kaivosaari et al., 2011). For UGT1A1 and UGT1A4, the 
site of glucuronidation is always adjacent to a hydrophobic region of 
the substrate, with another hydrophobic region 6 to 8 Å from the site 
of glucuronidation (Smith et al., 2004). UGT1A9 is similar, except 
that the distal hydrophobic region also contains a hydrogen-bond 
acceptor (Smith et al., 2004). UGT1A6 prefers to glucuronidate less 
bulky phenolic substrates. Specifically, rat UGT1A6 enzyme has 
restricted selectivity toward planar phenols with a molecular thick-
ness less than 4 Å and a total length of more than 6.3 Å (Smith et al., 
2004). In a series of 24 para-substituted phenols, a methyl or ether 
in any position increased the rate of glucuronidation in the human 
liver (in vitro) compared with phenol itself (Temellini et al., 1991). 
A hydrogen bond acceptor 10 Å from the nucleophile is common 
to UGT2B4 substrates (Sorich et al., 2004). The C-glucuronidation 
of the enolic form of phenylbutazone is catalyzed specifically by 
UGT1A9 (Nishimura and Naito, 2006). Additionally, Sorich et al. 
(2008) reviewed a number of pharmacophores and their importance 
as determinants in enzyme-specific glucuronidation with in silico 
modeling.
Kaivosaari et al. (2011) reviewed N-glucuronidation of drugs 
and xenobiotics. Historically, UGT1A4 was considered the major 
UGT enzyme responsible for the formation of N-glucuronides 
of primary, secondary, and tertiary amines, but it is now known 
that several UGT enzymes including UGT1A3, 1A9, 2B4, 2B7, 
and 2B10 can also form N-glucuronides (Zhou et al., 2010a; 
Kaivosaari et al., 2011). UGT1A4 and UGT2B10 are considered 
low- and high-affinity enzymes specific for N-glucuronidation in 
the liver, especially for tertiary amines, which are converted to 
positively charged quaternary ammonium glucuronides. In vitro, 
many tertiary amine substrates, such as imipramine and amitrip-
tyline, exhibit biphasic kinetics with UGTB10 as the high-affinity, 
low-capacity component and UGT1A4 as the low-affinity, high-
capacity component (Zhou et al., 2010a). Many in vitro studies 
that previously identified other UGT enzymes as key enzymes 
involved in N-glucuronidation may have overlooked the role of 
UGT2B10 because they employed substrate concentrations sev-
eral times higher than those observed in vivo. N-Glucuronidation 
can be divided into four categories based on the structure of the 
aglycone: (1) primary amines and hydroxylamines, (2) amides and 
sulfonamides, (3) tertiary amines, and (4) aromatic N-heterocycles. 
In the case of primary amines, hydroxylamines, amides, and sulfon-
amides, UGT1A4 is the primary N-glucuronidating enzyme, with 
other enzymes such as UGT1A1, 1A3, 1A9, 1A10, and 2B7 playing 
a secondary role. In the case of tertiary amines and N-heterocycles, 
UGT2B10 and UGT1A4 are the primary high- and low-affinity 
enzymes, respectively, whereas several other enzymes have the 
potential to form N-glucuronides with these substrates, namely, 
UGT1A1, 1A3, and 2B7 (Kaivosaari et al., 2011).
Kaivosaari et al. (2011) also summarized species differences 
in N-glucuronide formation based on the structure of the aglycone. 
Most species are capable of N-glucuronidating primary amines and 
hydroxylamines, although rats preferentially acetylate these com-
pounds. Primary amine N-glucuronides are generally labile under 
acidic conditions and can undergo hydrolysis in urine (discussed 
in more detail later in this section). There are marked species dif-
ferences in the N-glucuronidation of tertiary amines. Formation of 
quaternary N-glucuronides is observed in humans and higher pri-
mates but is generally not observed in rats, mice, guinea pigs, and 
dogs, presumably due to the negligible contribution of UGT1A4 
(a pseudogene in rodents). N-Glucuronidation of N-heterocycles is 
variable between species. For instance, the pyridine derivative nico-
tine is N-glucuronidated in humans, rhesus monkeys, cynomolgus 
monkeys, and guinea pigs (in descending order based on rate), but 
this reaction is undetectable in dogs, rats, mice, and rabbit. In most 
cases, heterocyclic amines form N-glucuronides in humans and cer-
tain higher primates but are highly variable among all other species, 
particularly rats and dogs, two species that are commonly used to 
conduct safety toxicology studies for new drug candidates.
N-Carbamoyl glucuronidation has been reported for relatively 
few primary amines, or the demethylated metabolites of second-
ary and tertiary amines, and includes drugs such as sertraline 
(Fig. 6-60), carvedilol, varenicline, mofegiline, garenoxacin, 
tocainide, and sibutramine (Gipple et al., 1982; Tremaine et al., 
1989; Beconi et al., 2003; Hayakawa et al., 2003; Link et al., 2006; 
Obach et al., 2006). Marked species difference have been found 
in the formation of N-carbamoyl glucuronides, and humans have 
only been found to produce these conjugates from even fewer drugs, 
including sertraline, varenicline, and mofegiline. To form this type 
of conjugate in vitro, the incubation must be performed under a CO2 
atmosphere, in a carbonate buffer. Although not directly demon-
strated, it has been hypothesized that a transient carbamic acid inter-
mediate is formed by the interaction of the amine with the dissolved 
CO2, followed by glucuronidation (Obach et al., 2005). Because the 
intermediate is not stable, the hypothesis that UGT also catalyzes 
the formation of the carbamic acid cannot be disproved. However, in 
the case of sertraline and varenicline, it is predominantly UGT2B7 
that forms the N-carbamoyl glucuronide, which also conjugates 
various carboxylic acids (Obach, et al., 2005, 2006). Given that the 
in vitro formation of N-carbamoyl glucuronides occurs only under

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
337
special incubation conditions that are not typically employed, it is 
possible that many other primary and secondary amines or their oxi-
dative metabolites can be converted to such conjugates but have not 
been detected because of the unusual incubation conditions required 
to support the formation of N-carbamoyl glucuronides.
As mentioned above and as shown in Fig. 6-60, UGTs can 
form unusual conjugates including bisglucuronides, diglucuro-
nides, N-carbamoyl glucuronides, N-glucosides, and other glyco-
side conjugates. Bisglucuronides (i.e., a glucuronide in which two 
separate functional groups on the aglycone are glucuronidated) 
are more common than diglucuronides, and include the bisgluc-
uronides of bilirubin, morphine, octylgallate, diosmetin, phenol-
phthalein, and hydroxylated PAHs (such as hydroxylated chrysene 
and B[a]P) (Murai et al., 2006). A diglucuronide is a glucuronide 
in which a single functional group on the aglycone is conjugated 
twice resulting in two glucuronosyl groups in tandem (Murai 
et al., 2006). Diglucuronides of the xenobiotics nalmefene and 
4-hydroxybiphenyl and of the endogenous steroids androsterone, 
DHT, 17β-estradiol, estriol, estrone, and testosterone have previ-
ously been detected in dogs. Rat liver microsomes do not form 
diglucuronides of these steroids, whereas monkey liver microsomes 
form detectable levels of the DHT, testosterone, and 17 β-estradiol 
diglucuronides, with human liver microsomes forming only the 
diglucuronide of DHT (see Fig. 6-60) (Murai et al., 2005). In all 
cases, it is the 2-hydroxyl group of the first glucuronide moiety that 
is subject to additional glucuronidation. In the case of DHT, only 
human UGT1A8 (an intestinal UGT) has been found to produce 
the diglucuronide from DHT itself, although UGT1A4, 2B15, and 
2B17 can produce the monoglucuronide, and UGT1A1 and 1A9 
can produce the diglucuronide when the monoglucuronide is the 
substrate (Murai et al., 2006). Human intestinal microsomes form 
the diglucuronide more efficiently than human liver microsomes, 
reflecting the fact that UGT1A8, an extrahepatic UGT, is the pre-
dominant enzyme involved in the diglucuronidation of DHT.
Although human UGTs typically are highly selective in the use 
of UDPGA as a sugar donor, they can accommodate the use of other 
sugar donors such as UDP-glucose, UDP-galactose, and UDP-
xylose in an aglycone-dependent manner, as mentioned previously 
(Tang and Ma, 2005). For instance, recombinant human UGT1A1 
can utilize UDPGA, UDP-xylose, or UDP-glucose to form glyco-
sides, but only with bilirubin (Tang and Ma, 2005). Recombinant 
human UGT2B7 can glycosidate Compound A [(+)-(5S,6R,7R)-
2-isopropylamino-7-[4-methoxy-2-((2R)-3-methoxy-2-
methylpropyl)-5-(3,4-methylenedioxyphenyl)cyclopenteno[1,2-b]
pyridine 6-carboxylic acid], an endothelin ETA receptor antagonist, 
with UDPGA, UDP-glucose, and UDP-galactose, but can glyco-
sidate diclofenac with only UDPGA (Tang and Ma, 2005). In the 
case of AS-3201, an aldose reductase inhibitor, it was found that 
UGT2B4, 2B7, and especially 2B15 all preferentially utilize UDP-
glucose over UDPGA (Toide et al., 2004). Several other compounds 
have been found to be glucosidated in mammals, including 5-ami-
nosalicylic acid, bromfenac, pranoprofen, pantothenic acid, hyode-
oxycholic acid, mycophenolic acid, sulfadimidine, sulfamerazine, 
sulfamethoxazole, and various barbiturates (e.g., phenobarbital and 
amobarbital) (Tang and Carro-Ciampi, 1980; Nakano et al., 1986; 
Arima, 1990; Kirkman et al., 1998; Toide et al., 2004; Picard et al., 
2005). In the case of the carboxyl-containing amine, bromfenac, the 
aglycone was observed in rat bile after base hydrolysis, and it was 
concluded that it was formed by hydrolysis of an acyl glucuronide 
(Kirkman et al., 1998). In later studies to characterize the stabil-
ity of the putative acyl glucuronide, an N-glucoside was detected 
(Kirkman et al., 1998). 5-Aminosalicylic acid is structurally similar 
to bromfenac in that both NSAIDs contain a primary amine near the 
carboxyl group, and both are converted to N-glucosides (Kirkman 
et al., 1998). In the human metabolism of barbiturates, N-glucosides 
are the major metabolites found in urine, and glucuronides have 
not been detected. Accordingly, it was theorized that enzymes other 
than UGTs may be involved in the conjugation of barbiturates in 
humans (Toide et al., 2004). This theory is interesting because liver 
homogenates from cats, which lack UGT activity, can N-glucosidate 
amobarbital (however, it should be noted that glucose conjugates 
can sometimes form nonenzymatically) (Carro-Ciampi et al., 1985). 
However, Toide et al. (2004) demonstrated that the N-glucosidation 
of amobarbital in human liver microsomes correlates highly with 
the N-glucosidation of AS-3201, but not its N-glucuronidation, 
indicating that UGT2B15 is probably the predominant human UGT 
responsible for the glucosidation of amobarbital.
In general, in vivo hepatic clearance is often estimated from 
kinetic parameters (Km and Vmax) determined in vitro with human 
hepatocytes, liver microsomes, or S9 fraction. The process is com-
monly used for in vitro–in vivo extrapolation (IVIVE). However, 
for drugs that are primarily eliminated by glucuronidation, these 
in vitro studies conducted with liver microsomes and, to a lesser 
extent, hepatocytes consistently underpredict UGT-mediated clear-
ance in vivo (Miners et al., 2010). There are several intrinsic factors 
that influence the clearance of glucuronidated compounds in vitro, 
such as (1) the permeability of the microsomal membranes to allow 
access of both the aglycone substrate and cofactor UDPGA, (2) the 
influence of long-chain unsaturated fatty acids released in micro-
somal incubations, and (3) the homodimerization and heterodimer-
ization of UGT proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane. 
Additionally, the kinetic properties of UGTs vary in vitro with 
changes in the incubation conditions (extrinsic factors), such as the 
concentration of cofactor, membrane composition, partitioning into 
microsomes, type of buffer, ionic strength, pH, organic solvents 
(used for the addition of substrates), β-glucuronidase activity, and 
the stability of the glucuronide in the incubation buffer (Miners 
et al., 2010). Many of these extrinsic factors are minimized with 
appropriate experimental conditions. For instance, cofactor avail-
ability is overcome with saturating concentrations of UDPGA, 
typically 2 to 5 mM. However, Fujiwara et al. (2008) reported that 
UDP, the by-product of glucuronidation reactions, is a competitive 
inhibitor that blocks binding of UDGPA. Therefore, for in vitro 
experiments, the concentrations of cofactor must be maintained at 
very high levels (up to 20 mM UDPGA) to overcome competitive 
inhibition of the UDPGA binding site by free UDP produced during 
the incubation, especially for high-turnover UGT substrates such 
as 1-naphthol. Other common in vitro conditions for microsomal 
assays include the addition of the pore-forming peptide alamethicin 
or zwitterionic detergent CHAPS (described below), the addition of 
saccharic acid-1,4-lactone to inhibit β-glucuronidase, and the acidi-
fication (pH 5 to 6.8) of the organic solvent used to stop reactions 
when acyl glucuronide formation is expected (Miners et al., 2010).
In vitro intrinsic metabolic clearance (CLint) values (measured 
as Vmax/Km) for zidovudine (AZT) glucuronidation in human liver 
microsomes were shown to vary sixfold depending on incubation 
conditions, but even under conditions that produced the greatest 
CLint, the in vivo clearance rate was underpredicted by three- to 
fourfold (Miners et al., 2006). This in vitro underprediction of the 
in vivo rate of clearance of drugs that are glucuronidated is typical 
when human liver microsomes are used to assess CLint, and is likely 
due to a number of factors including the presence or absence of 
albumin, the effects of long-chain unsaturated fatty acids, correction 
for membrane partitioning, atypical in vitro kinetics, active uptake 
into hepatocytes, and significant extrahepatic expression of various 
UGTs (Miners et al., 2010). The prediction of the in vivo clearance

338
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
of drugs that are glucuronidated by hepatocytes is generally more 
accurate than predictions made with microsomes, but underpre-
diction is still the common outcome. Zidovudine is an exception 
to this rule because its in vivo clearance is accurately predicted 
from in vitro studies with hepatocytes (Miners et al., 2006). The 
use of either microsomes or recombinant UGT2B7 also underpre-
dicts the in vivo magnitude of the inhibitory interaction between 
fluconazole and zidovudine by 5- to 10-fold (Miners et al., 2006). 
However, when 2% bovine serum albumin (BSA) is added to either 
test system, there is a decrease in the Ki value of 85% which results 
in a much improved prediction of the in vivo interaction (Miners 
et al., 2006). The effect of BSA is due to the sequestration of inhibi-
tory fatty acids released from membranes during the incubation. 
The BSA or “albumin” effect is also observed with fatty-acid-free 
human serum albumin (HSA-FAF) added to incubations. The Km 
values of reactions catalyzed by UGT1A9 and UGT2B7 are mark-
edly influenced by the presence of free fatty acids released from 
microsomal membranes (notably arachidonic, linoleic, and oleic 
acids) and albumin serves as a fatty acid scavenger. Similarly, the 
addition of intestinal fatty acid–binding protein (IFABP) to micro-
somal incubations decreased the Km values for zidovudine glucuron-
idation, a UGT2B7 substrate (Rowland et al., 2009). Unsaturated 
long-chain fatty acids are potent competitive inhibitors of some, but 
not all, UGT enzymes and can lead to overestimation of Km values 
and, therefore, underprediction of CLint. Furthermore, the effect of 
fatty acids varies depending on the membrane composition of the 
enzyme source (recombinant vs. microsomes vs. hepatocytes) inas-
much as kinetic constants for a specific reaction may vary based 
on the test system. Unlike UGT1A9 and UGT2B7, fatty acids have 
little to no effect on reactions catalyzed by UGT1A1, 1A4, and 1A6 
(Miners et al., 2010).
The glucuronidation of xenobiotics by liver microsomes in 
vitro displays a property known as latency inasmuch as it can be 
stimulated by detergents (e.g., CHAPS and Brij-58) and the pore-
forming peptide alamethicin, which disrupt the lipid bilayer of the 
endoplasmic reticulum and allow UGTs free access to UDPGA. 
High concentrations of detergent, especially nonionic detergents 
such as Brij, can inhibit certain UGTs, presumably by disrupting 
their interaction with phospholipids, which are important for cata-
lytic activity (Fisher et al., 2000). Treatment of microsomes with 
detergents also virtually eliminates CYP activity; hence, detergents 
cannot be used to study the possible coupling of oxidation reac-
tions catalyzed by CYP with conjugation reactions catalyzed by 
UGT. This is not a limitation of alamethicin which does not inhibit 
CYP. Furthermore, in contrast to certain detergents, alamethicin 
increases Vmax without affecting Km. From a review of the literature, 
Miners et al. (2006) reported that alamethicin and nonionic deter-
gents such as Brij-58 generally result in the highest UGT activity 
and that alamethicin is the preferred activator because the effects 
of detergents are not reproducible between substrates. However, 
in incubations designed strictly to measure UGT activity (and not 
both UGT and CYP activity), the zwitterionic detergent, CHAPS, 
can activate certain UGT activities to a comparable or even greater 
extent than alamethicin.
The kinetic properties of UGTs are possibly influenced by the 
formation of homodimers and heterodimers among UGT enzymes 
and by the formation of heterodimers with other microsomal 
enzymes such as various CYP enzymes, POR, or epoxide hydro-
lase (Ishii et al., 2010). For instance, it has been demonstrated that 
the ratio of morphine-3-glucuronide to morphine-6-glucuronide 
formed by UGT2B7 is altered by the presence of CYP3A4. The 
Km of UGT2B7-catalyzed formation of morphine-3-glucuronide 
was increased 9.8-fold (0.38 to 3.7 μM) when coexpressed with 
CYP3A4 (Takeda et al., 2005; Ishii et al., 2010). Fremont et al. 
(2005) reported that UGT1A1, 1A6, and 2B7 coimmunoprecipi-
tated with CYP3A4 in solubilized human liver microsomes. If 
there are functional consequences to the associations between dif-
ferent UGT enzymes and/or the association between UGT and CYP 
enzymes, then such associations would have implications for stud-
ies with recombinant UGT enzymes, which are invariably expressed 
individually.
Advances in mass spectrometry have enabled the quantifi-
cation of UGT proteins in samples of human liver, intestinal and 
kidney microsomes, recombinant UGT enzymes, and cultured 
hepatocytes (see Table 6-22), which permits extrapolation of rates 
of glucuronidation from these in vitro systems to the in vivo situ-
ation as is done with CYP enzymes (through the application of 
relative activity factors [RAF] or intersystem extrapolation factors 
[ISEF]) (Harbourt et al., 2012; Ohtsuki et al., 2012; Fallon et al., 
2013; Achour et al., 2014; Sato et al., 2014). The role of hetero-
meric or homomeric expression of UGTs in vivo is largely unde-
fined. Several publications have investigated the coexpression of 
UGT enzymes in vitro with cell lines overexpressing various UGTs 
with mixed results: enhancement of some activities and impairment 
of others (Ishii et al., 2010). Finally, posttranslational modifications 
to UGTs that occur in vivo in humans (e.g., phosphorylation and 
N-glycosylation) may not occur in the cell expression system chosen 
to produce the recombinant UGTs (i.e., bacterial systems), which 
can impact activity in a substrate-dependent manner (Miners et al., 
2006). All of these findings suggest that the use of recombinant 
human UGT enzymes may not provide accurate indications of the 
extent to which a given UGT can glucuronidate a given substrate.
Glucuronidation can be impaired by cofactor availability, poly-
morphisms, drug–drug interactions, or the effects of endogenous 
or dietary compounds, any of which can result in toxicities due 
to decreased elimination of certain compounds (e.g., bilirubin). 
Cofactor availability can limit the rate of glucuronidation of drugs 
that are administered in high doses and are conjugated extensively, 
such as aspirin and acetaminophen. In experimental animals, the 
glucuronidation of xenobiotics can be impaired in vivo by factors 
that reduce or deplete UDPGA levels, such as diethyl ether, borneol, 
and galactosamine. The lowering of UDPGA levels by fasting, such 
as might occur during a severe toothache or oral cancer, is thought 
to predispose individuals to the hepatotoxic effects of acetamino-
phen, although even then hepatotoxicity only occurs with higher-
than-recommended doses of this analgesic (Whitcomb and Block, 
1994; Rumack, 2004).
Drug–drug interactions that are at least partly due to inhibi-
tion of UGTs have been reported; however, the drug–drug interac-
tions caused by UGT inhibition rarely cause increases in the plasma 
AUC of the victim drug more than twofold (Williams et al., 2004). 
Valproic acid, which inhibits the clearance of lamotrigine, loraz-
epam, and ziduvodine), and probenecid, which inhibits the clear-
ance of acetaminophen, clofibrate, lorazepam, and ziduvodine, are 
the two drugs most commonly associated with clinically relevant 
inhibition of UGT activity (Rowland et al., 2013). Particular atten-
tion is paid to investigational drugs that inhibit UGT1A1, the major 
bilirubin-conjugating enzyme. Administration of the protease inhib-
itors atazanavir and indinavir to HIV patients can lead to revers-
ible hyperbilirubinemia due to inhibition of UGT1A1 (Zhang et al., 
2005). The potential for atazanavir to cause hyperbilirubinemia is 
increased in individuals with genetic polymorphisms that decrease 
the activity of UGT1A1, namely UGT1A1*28 and UGT1A1*37 
(discussed later in this section), and already have elevated levels of

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
339
bilirubin (Gammal et al., 2016). Clinically relevant drug–drug inter-
actions due to induction of UGT enzymes have also been observed. 
Rifampin coadministration increases mycophenolic acid clearance 
by 30%, and increases the AUC of its acyl glucuronide (formed 
by UGT2B7) and its 7-O-glucuronide (formed by various UGT1 
enzymes) by more than 100% and 20%, respectively (Naesens 
et al., 2006). Similarly, rifampin coadministration in humans causes 
a decrease in the systemic AUC of some UGT substrates, includ-
ing raltagravir (UGT1A1; decreases AUC by 40%) and zidovudine 
(UGT2B7; decreases AUC 30% to 50%) (Gallicano et al., 1999; 
Wenning et al., 2009). Coadministration of other drugs, such as the 
enzyme-inducing antiepileptics (e.g., phenobarbital), and certain 
physiological conditions (e.g., increased levels of estrogens during 
pregnancy) can cause an increase of hepatic UGT enzymes and, 
therefore, the clearance of some UGT substrates. The CAR ago-
nists phenobarbital and the Chinese herbal Yin Zhi Huang (active 
ingredient scoparone [6,7-dimethylesculetin]) have been used for 
the treatment of neonatal jaundice due to their ability to induce the 
UGT1A1-dependent glucuronidation of bilirubin (a treatment no 
longer practiced with phenobarbital). In general, the magnitude of 
drug–drug interactions due to UGT enzyme induction is less than 
those reported for CYP-mediated induction. Although inhibition 
and induction of UGT enzymes are associated with modest changes 
(usually less than twofold) in the clearance of drugs that undergo 
glucuronidation, certain genetic polymorphisms have a profound 
impact (more than 100-fold) on systemic exposure to certain inves-
tigational drugs that are substrates for UGT2B10 or UGT2B17, as 
discussed later in this section.
Human UGT1A6 glucuronidates acetaminophen. This reaction 
is enhanced by cigarette smoking and dietary cabbage and Brussels 
sprouts, which suggests that human UGT1A6 is inducible by PAHs 
and derivatives of indole 3-carbinol, but not to the extent observed 
in rats (Bock et al., 1994). Ligands for AhR, such as those pres-
ent in cigarette smoke, induce CYP1A2, which would be expected 
to enhance the hepatotoxicity of acetaminophen. Increased acet-
aminophen glucuronidation may explain why cigarette smoking 
does not enhance the hepatotoxicity of acetaminophen. Conversely, 
decreased glucuronidation may explain why some individuals with 
Gilbert syndrome are predisposed to the hepatotoxic effects of acet-
aminophen (de Morais et al., 1992). Low rates of glucuronidation 
predispose newborns to jaundice and to the toxic effects of chlor-
amphenicol; the latter was once used prophylactically to prevent 
opportunistic infections in newborns until it was found to cause 
severe cyanosis and even death (gray baby syndrome).
Some glucuronide conjugates have been found to act as sub-
strates for further biotransformation by oxidation or even by fur-
ther conjugation. For instance, in male WAG/Rij rats, estradiol 
17β-glucuronide can be sulfonated by one or more sulfotransferases 
(SULTs) to estradiol 3-sulfate-17 β-glucuronide (Sun et al., 2006). 
In addition, the acyl glucuronide of 4-hydroxydiclofenac can be 
formed either by a combination of 4′-hydroxylation followed by 
acyl glucuronidation or by a combination of acyl glucuronidation 
followed by 4′-hydroxylation. In the former case, the 4′-hydroxyl-
ation of diclofenac is catalyzed by CYP2C9, whereas in the latter 
case the 4′-hydroxylation of diclofenac acyl glucuronide is cata-
lyzed by CYP2C8 (Kumar et al., 2002). Glucuronidation converts 
several other CYP2C9 substrates into CYP2C8 substrates or inhibi-
tors. For instance, CYP2C8 catalyzes the oxidation of several gluc-
uronides, the aglycones of which are CYP2C9 substrates, including 
estradiol 17β-glucuronide and the acyl glucuronides of naproxen, 
the PPARα/agonist MRL-C, gemfibrozil (Delaforge et al., 2005; 
Kochansky et al., 2005; Ogilvie et al., 2006). Desloratadine 
undergoes 3-hydroxylation by CYP2C8 (to form 3-hydroxydeslo-
aratdine, a human-predominant metabolite) but only after deslo-
ratadine is N-glucuronidated by UGT2B10, as shown in Fig. 6-54 
(see the section “CYP2C8”). Despite its instability, desloratadine 
N-glucuronide is an obligatory intermediate in the conversion of 
desloratadine to 3-hydroxydesloratadine by CYP2C8 (Kazmi et al., 
2015a, 2015b).In the case of gemfibrozil and clopidogrel (fol-
lowing ester hydrolysis to its acidic metabolite), glucuronidation 
produces metabolites, namely acyl glucuronides, that cause irre-
versible (metabolism-dependent) inhibition of CYP2C8, which is 
the mechanism by which gemfibrozil and clopidogrel increase sys-
temic exposure to cerivastatin leading to increased myotoxicity of 
this statin (see the section “CYP2C8”) (Ogilvie et al., 2006; Tornio 
et al., 2014). Similar to its inhibition of CYP2C8, gemfibrozil and 
its glucuronide are inhibitors (and substrates) of the organic anion 
transporter OATP1B1 on the sinusoidal membrane of hepatocytes. 
Inhibition of OATP1B1 by gemfibrozil and gemfibrozil glucuronide 
accounts, at least in part, for the pharmacokinetic drug–drug inter-
action between gemfibrozil and several statin drugs whose systemic 
clearance is predominately through OATP-mediated hepatic uptake, 
namely, pravastatin and rosuvastatin (Tornio et al., 2008). Although 
inactivation of CYP2C8 by gemfibrozil glucuronide and clopidogrel 
glucuronide are the only known examples of CYP inactivation by 
the glucuronide metabolites of clinically used drugs, Kazmi et al. 
(2010) identified a carbamoyl-glucuronide of an investigational 
drug that caused irreversible (metabolism-dependent) inhibition of 
CYP2C8 in vitro, the clinical significance of which is unknown.
Glucuronidation is important for the conversion of atorvastatin 
acid to its pharmacologically inactive lactone form at physiological 
pH; however, the formation of atorvastatin lactone is also associated 
with dose-limiting toxicities (Riedmaier et al., 2011). Atorvastatin 
(Lipitor) is administered as a free acid but is found in systemic 
circulation at levels similar to its pharmacologically inactive lac-
tone based on plasma AUC. The major cause of adverse events 
associated with atorvastatin therapy is myopathy (skeletal muscle 
toxicity) which, in severe cases, can result in rhabdomyolysis and 
fatal kidney failure. In vitro studies with the acid and lactone forms 
of atorvastatin in primary skeletal muscle cells established that the 
lactone form is 14 times more potent than the acid form at inducing 
cell death. Both atorvastatin acid and lactone can undergo oxidative 
metabolism by CYP3A4 and CYP3A5 to form ortho- and para-
hydroxylated metabolites. Atorvastatin acid also undergoes gluc-
uronidation to form atorvastatin acyl glucuronide. The conversion 
of atorvastatin acid to its pharmacologically inactive lactone occurs 
nonenzymatically at low pH (e.g., intestine) or enzymatically at 
physiological pH (7.4); the latter is dependent on formation of the 
acyl glucuronide (Riedmaier et al., 2011). The glucuronide moiety 
is a good leaving group and is lost during the lactonization reaction. 
Based on in vitro and in vivo studies, Riedmaier et al. (2010) identi-
fied UGT1A3 as the enzyme largely responsible for the lactoniza-
tion of atorvastatin and further demonstrated that the paraoxonases 
PON1 and PON3 are responsible for the hydrolysis of atorvastatin 
lactone back to the acid form. Taken together, UGT1A3, PON1, and 
PON3 are important determinants of the atorvastatin acid–lactone 
ratio in vivo and, hence, the potential for atorvastatin myopathy and 
rhabdomyolysis.
Kumar et al. (2002) demonstrated that failure to take into 
account the formation of the acyl glucuronide of 4′-hydroxydiclof-
enac leads to an underestimation of hepatic clearance of diclof-
enac. It may also be that oxidation of glucuronide metabolites 
can lead to toxicity. A case report described the formation of an 
IgM antibody that bound erythrocytes, but only in the presence of

340
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
the 4-hydroxydiclofenac acyl glucuronide in a patient who devel-
oped hemolysis (hemolytic anemia) during diclofenac treatment 
(Shipkova et al., 2003). A determination of the absolute amount of 
diclofenac acyl glucuronide formed in vivo relative to the amount 
of 4-hydroxydiclofenac formed in vivo would be confounded by the 
rapid hydrolysis of the glucuronide to the aglycone, and it would 
therefore be likely that detection of 4-hydroxydiclofenac acyl gluc-
uronide would be attributed to oxidative metabolism occurring 
prior to conjugation. Two reports suggest that direct glucuronida-
tion with subsequent oxidation (by a combination of UGT2B7 and 
CYP2C8 in humans) may be the major determinants of diclofenac 
clearance in humans (possibly as high as 75%) and monkeys (more 
than 90%) (Kumar et al., 2002; Prueksaritanont et al., 2006), as 
opposed to earlier in vivo data that suggested oxidative metabolism 
by CYP2C9 alone is the major determinant of clearance (Stierlin 
and Faigle, 1979; Stierlin et al., 1979). In support of this interpreta-
tion, there are no clinical reports that implicate pharmacokinetic 
interactions between diclofenac and potent CYP2C9 inhibitors or 
inducers (Prueksaritanont et al., 2006). Taken together, these obser-
vations suggest that the CYP-mediated oxidation of glucuronide 
metabolites has implications not only for the prediction of in vivo 
drug–drug interactions from in vitro data (i.e., gemfibrozil and 
clopidogrel) but also for the prediction of in vivo clearance (i.e., 
diclofenac), and possibly also toxicity, as in the case of immune-
mediated toxicity of diclofenac.
In humans, Crigler–Najjar syndrome (types I and II) and 
Gilbert disease are congenital defects in bilirubin conjugation. 
The diseases have historically been differentiated largely on the 
basis of the severity of symptoms and total plasma concentra-
tions of bilirubin (e.g., Crigler–Najjar type I: 310 to 855 μM, 
Crigler–Najjar type II: 100 to 430 μM, and Gilbert disease: 20 to 
100 μM). The major bilirubin-conjugating enzyme in humans is 
UGT1A1. Genetic polymorphisms in exons 2 to 5 (which affect all 
enzymes encoded by the UGT1A locus), in exon 1 (which affect 
only UGT1A1), in the promoter regions, and in introns 1 and 3 
have been identified in patients with Crigler–Najjar syndrome or 
Gilbert disease. More than 60 genetic polymorphisms are associ-
ated with these diseases. A current list of all UGT polymorphisms 
and phenotypes (when known) can be found at https://www.phar-
macogenomics.pha.ulaval.ca/ugt-alleles-nomenclature/. Some 
polymorphisms cause the introduction of a premature stop codon 
in one of the UGT1A common exons 2 to 5 (which causes a loss of 
all UGT1A enzymes, analogous to the Gunn rat) and are associated 
with type I Crigler–Najjar syndrome, a severe form of the disease 
characterized by a complete loss of bilirubin-conjugating activity 
and marked hyperbilirubinemia. Type I Crigler–Najjar syndrome 
is also associated with various frameshifts and deletions in exons 
1 to 5, and in at least three cases with changes in introns 1 and 3 
that affect splice donor or acceptor sites. Other polymorphisms are 
associated with the less severe type II Crigler–Najjar syndrome 
(i.e., UGT1A1*7–9, 12, 26, 30, 33-38, 42, 48, 51, 52, 59, and 64). 
Individuals with Gilbert disease have an occasionally transient, 
and generally mild, hyperbilirubinemia that is often caused by the 
addition of one “TA” segment in the TATA promoter region (i.e., 
UGT1A1*28: A(TA)6TAA → A(TA)7TAA). There is some overlap 
between Crigler–Najjar type II and Gilbert disease, not only in 
terms of the plasma concentrations of bilirubin but also in the type 
of polymorphism that underlies the disease. In addition to the *28 
allele, the *6, *27, *29, *60, and *62 alleles are associated with 
Gilbert disease, and some of these polymorphisms affect coding 
regions of the UGT1A1 gene. In addition, the UGT1A1*37 allele 
produces a A(TA)8TAA promoter defect that results in Crigler–
Najjar type II disease. A Korean individual heterozygous for three 
UGT1A1 alleles associated with Gilbert disease (i.e., likely *6, 
*28, and *60) was found to have total bilirubin concentrations 
as high as 193 μM (Seo et al., 2007), which is a concentration 
typically associated with Crigler–Najjar type II disease. Crigler–
Najjar type II and Gilbert diseases (in contrast to Crigler–Najjar 
type I disease) typically respond to some extent to phenobarbi-
tal treatment, which stimulates bilirubin conjugation by inducing 
UGT1A1. Type I Crigler–Najjar syndrome is also associated with 
impaired glucuronidation of propofol, ethinylestradiol, and various 
phenolic substrates for UGT1A enzymes.
Genetic variants that impair UGT1A1 activity, notably the 
*6, *28, and *37 allelic variants, are clinically important due to 
their impact on the toxicity of the topoisomerase I inhibitor iri-
notecan, which is used primarily to treat colorectal cancer. The 
disposition of irinotecan is complex. Irinotecan (a prodrug) is 
administered intravenously with hydrolysis to the active metabo-
lite, SN-38, occurring mainly by tissue carboxylesterases, namely, 
CES2, and hydrolytic enzymes in plasma. The active metabolite 
SN-38 is subsequently glucuronidated in the liver primarily by 
UGT1A1 after which the glucuronide conjugate is excreted into 
bile. Other UGT enzymes that contribute to glucuronidation, at 
least in part, include hepatic UGT1A6 and UGT1A9 and intesti-
nal UGT1A7 and UGT1A10 (Nagar and Blanchard, 2006; Wallace 
et al., 2010). The UGT1A1*28 variant has now been referenced in 
the Camptosar® prescribing information, which notes that patients 
with reduced UGT1A1 activity have a higher exposure to SN-38 
(which is 50 to 100 times more toxic than the glucuronide), and 
that the dose of irinotecan should be adjusted downward accord-
ingly (Nagar and Blanchard, 2006). The toxicity of SN-38 primarily 
manifests as severe diarrhea and myelosuppression (in the form of 
leucopenia, severe thrombocytopenia, severe anemia, or grade 3 to 
4 neutropenia) (Nagar and Blanchard, 2006). Several studies have 
demonstrated grade 3 to 4 neutropenia and/or grade 3 to 4 diar-
rhea upon irinotecan administration in patients with at least one 
UGT1A1*28 or UGT1A*27 allele, and one study implicated high-
activity variants of UGT1A7 and UGT1A9 with diarrhea (Nagar 
and Blanchard, 2006).
Inhibition of bacterial β-glucuronidase is a potential phar-
macological approach to overcome the severe diarrhea associ-
ated with irinotecan (CPT-11) chemotherapy (Wallace et al., 
2010). Hydrolysis of SN-38-O-glucuronide (SN-38G) by bac-
terial β-glucuronidase in the gastrointestinal tract releases the 
pharmacologically active SN-38 into the intestinal lumen where 
it can be reabsorbed and cause dose-limiting diarrhea. The 
β-glucuronidase enzyme responsible for hydrolysis of SN-38G 
in the gut is found in the symbiotic microbiota. Wallace et al. 
(2010) identified four compounds that potently (Ki values in 
the nanomolar range) and specifically inhibit Escherichia coli 
β-glucuronidase, but not human β-glucuronidase activity, by tar-
geting a 17-residue loop in the bacterial enzyme that is not present 
in mammalian forms (Wallace et al., 2010). Inhibition of E. coli–
specific β-glucuronidase protected mice from the GI toxicity of 
irinotecan (Wallace et al., 2010). Taken together, these results 
suggest that β-glucuronidase may be a potential pharmacological 
target to limit pharmacokinetic or toxicological concerns associ-
ated with hydrolysis of glucuronides in the gastrointestinal tract, 
which may lead to reabsorption of, and prolonged exposure to, 
the aglycone.
Genetic polymorphisms have been identified in UGT2B4, 
2B7, 2B10, 2B15, 2B17, and 2B28. Until recently, these were 
thought to have a modest impact on systemic exposure to drugs 
(Rowland et al., 2013; Mazerska et al., 2016). However, that view 
changed with reports of dramatic changes (more than 25-fold

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
341
increase) in systemic exposure to two investigational drugs that 
were associated with genetic polymorphisms in either UGT2B10 
or UGT2B17. A genetic polymorphism in UGT2B10 (caused by a 
splice site mutation that prevents synthesis of functional enzyme) 
was identified as the cause of a 136-fold increase in systemic 
exposure to RO5263397, a drug candidate under investigation 
for the treatment of schizophrenia, in an individual enrolled in a 
clinical trial (Fowler et al., 2015). Further clinical studies identi-
fied two additional PMs, all of African descent and all with the 
same splice variant of UGT2B10. Interestingly, in vitro reaction 
phenotyping studies with a panel of recombinant human UGT 
enzymes pointed to UGT1A4 as the enzyme primarily responsible 
for the N-glucuronidation of RO5263397, but this study did not 
include UGT2B10, which was subsequently identified as a high-
affinity enzyme capable of catalyzing the N-glucuronidation of 
RO5263397 (Fowler et al., 2015). The UGT2B10 splice variant 
(rs2942857 variant C allele) was found in Africans with a fre-
quency of 45%, compared with 7% in Native Americans, 8% 
in Asians, and 0% in Caucasians. As discussed in the section 
“CYP2C8,” this variant is a likely cause of (or at least a contribu-
tor to) the PM phenotype for desloratadine 3-hydoxylation, a reac-
tion that requires N-glucuronidation of desloratadine by UGT2B10 
(see Fig. 6-54) and is impaired mainly in individuals of African 
descent, although genetic polymorphisms that impair CYP2C8 
could give rise to the same PM phenotype.
The second example of a genetic polymorphism of UGT 
greatly impacting systemic exposure to an investigational drug 
involves MK-7246, a carboxylic acid–containing compound under 
development for the treatment of respiratory diseases based on its 
ability to antagonize the chemoattractant receptor on T helper type 
2 cells (a CRTH2 antagonist). Clearance of MK-7246 is mainly 
due to acyl glucuronidation by UGT2B17. In individuals with no 
UGT2B17 activity (UGT2B17*2/*2 carriers), the plasma AUC and 
Cmax of MK-7246 was 25- and 82-fold greater than in individu-
als harboring the wild-type enzyme (UGT2B17*/*1) (Wang et al., 
2012). UGT2B17 (as well as UGT2B15) also plays an important 
role in the glucuronidation of dihydrotestosterone, testosterone, 
and androsterone, which terminates androgen signaling in pros-
tate and other androgen target cells. Genetic polymorphisms that 
decrease UGT2B17 activity or expression, like the *2 allele, have 
attracted attention for their impact on circulating androgen levels, 
such as sports doping and some instances of an increased risk of 
prostate cancer, among others (Guillemette et al., 2010; Gauthier-
Landry et al., 2015).
Oxazepam is glucuronidated by UGT2B15, which preferen-
tially glucuronidates S-oxazepam over its R-enantiomer. Ten percent 
of the population appear to be poor glucuronidators of S-oxazepam, 
and one study has implicated the low-activity UGT2B15*2 allele 
as a possible determinant of such variation (Nagar and Remmel, 
2006). Such polymorphisms also appear to be the underlying cause 
of alterations in hyodeoxycholate glucuronidation in gastric mucosa 
(Tukey and Strassburg, 2000).
In some cases, glucuronidation represents an important event 
in the toxicity of xenobiotics. For example, the aromatic amines 
that cause bladder cancer (such as benzidine, 2-aminonaphtha-
lene, and 4-aminobiphenyl) undergo N-hydroxylation in the 
liver (aryl-NH2 → aryl-NHOH) followed by N-glucuronidation 
(not O-glucuronidation) of the resultant hydroxylamine. Direct 
N-glucuronidation (prior to N-hydroxylation) also occurs, and 
is a competing pathway of hepatic metabolism. In the case of 
4-aminobiphenyl, the competing pathways of ring hydroxylation 
and O-esterification (i.e., O-glucuronidation, O-sulfonation, or 
O-acetylation) are detoxication pathways, whereas N-esterification 
catalyzed by UGTs, SULTs, or NATs represent activating pathways 
(see the section “Acetylation”) (Cohen et al., 2006). Benzidine and 
2-aminonaphthalene are particularly tumorigenic. The risk of blad-
der cancer may increase by up to 100-fold in workers exposed to 
these substances in the course of their occupation in various manu-
facturing processes (Al-Zoughool et al., 2006). The N-glucuronides 
of such carcinogens, which accumulate in the urine of the bladder, 
are unstable in acidic pH and thus are hydrolyzed to the correspond-
ing unstable, tumorigenic hydroxylamines, as shown in Fig. 6-62. 
Under acidic conditions, hydroxylamines can produce highly elec-
trophilic aromatic nitrenium ions (aryl-NHOH + H+ → aryl-N+ + 
H2O) that can bind to DNA and other macromolecules, or they can 
be converted to reactive acetoxy metabolites directly in the blad-
der epithelium by NAT-mediated O-acetylation (aryl-NH–O–CO–
CH3), which also leads to the formation of aromatic nitrenium ions 
(Al-Zoughool et al., 2006). Because N-glucuronidation of aromatic 
amines can also occur directly without prior oxidation, this reac-
tion competes with oxidation, and therefore a decrease in UGT 
activity in the liver would favor N-hydroxylation, with subsequent 
O-acetylation by NAT and spontaneous formation of aromatic nitre-
nium ions in the liver, rather than the bladder. In contrast, decreased 
acetylation with normal UGT activity would lead to a greater accu-
mulation of N-glucuronides (of the parent aromatic amine and its 
hydroxylamine) in the bladder with increased bladder tumor forma-
tion. Concordant with this scenario, benzidine induces predomi-
nantly liver tumors in rats (fast acetylators) but bladder cancer in 
dogs (poor acetylators) (Al-Zoughool et al., 2006). In humans, there 
are sex differences in aromatic amine carcinogenicity. Irrespective 
of ethnicity or race, men are 2.5 to 5 times more likely to develop 
bladder cancer than women in general. In particular male smok-
ers, hairdressers, and dye and textile workers who are exposed to 
aromatic amines have several times increased risk relative to their 
female counterparts. Male mice, which N-glucuronidate 4-amino-
biphenyl faster than females, were found during the treatment with 
this carcinogen to have a 2.2-fold higher rate of DNA-adduct for-
mation, and increased rates of bladder tumor formation relative to 
females, and female mice were found to have tumors only in the liver 
(Al-Zoughool et al., 2006). In mice, coadministration of 4-aminobi-
phenyl with hecogenin, which in humans has been found to inhibit 
hepatic UGT1A4 (Uchaipichat et al., 2006), was found to increase 
DNA-adduct formation in a statistically significant manner in the 
livers of male mice, and to slightly decrease adduct formation in the 
bladders of both male and female mice (Al-Zoughool et al., 2006). 
The available literature regarding sex differences in human UGT 
activity is conflicting. Glucuronidation of temazepam, oxazepam, 
propranolol, and salicylic acid was 20% to 60% higher in men than 
in women (Al-Zoughool et al., 2006), whereas 4-methyumbellifer-
one glucuronidation in cryopreserved human hepatocytes was found 
to be an average of 40% higher in female samples (n = 33) than in 
male samples (n = 31). The carcinogenicity of aromatic amines is 
multifactorial, and involves not only hepatic N-glucuronidation but 
also hepatic oxidation, hepatic and bladder acetylation, and possibly 
peroxidation of N-hydroxy-N-acetyl aromatic amines in the blad-
der (Al-Zoughool et al., 2006). Therefore, sex differences in UGT 
activity alone may not fully explain the sex differences observed 
in the carcinogenicity of aromatic amines. A similar mechanism 
may be involved in colon tumor formation by aromatic amines, 
although in this case hydrolysis of the N-glucuronide is probably 
catalyzed by β-glucuronidase in intestinal microbiota. Aromatic 
amides (such as phenacetin) can also be N-hydroxylated by CYP 
(and peroxidases) to form hydroxamic acids: aryl-N(OH)–COCH3. 
Under acidic conditions (such as in urine), these can lose water to 
form reactive nitrenium ions that are thought to contribute to the

342
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
renal toxicity of phenacetin. The N–OH group can also be con-
jugated, which introduces a good leaving group. This represents 
a second pathway to nitrenium ion formation (Testa and Krämer, 
2008, 2010).
Steroid hormones glucuronidated on the D-ring (but not the 
A-ring) cause cholestasis. For instance, 17β-estradiol-glucuronide 
causes cholestasis in rats by inhibition of MRP2 and BSEP, which 
are transporters located on the apical membrane of hepatocytes 
and are important for biliary efflux of endobiotics and xenobiot-
ics, and formation of bile (Huang et al., 2000; Stieger et al., 2000). 
Induction of UGT activity has been implicated as a nongenotoxic 
mechanism of thyroid tumor formation in rodents (McClain, 1989; 
Curran and DeGroot, 1991). Inducers of UGTs cause a decrease 
in plasma thyroid hormone levels, which triggers a compensatory 
increase in thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH). During sustained 
exposure to the enzyme-inducing agent, prolonged stimulation 
of the thyroid gland by TSH (more than 6 months) results in the 
development of thyroid follicular cell neoplasia. Glucuronidation 
followed by biliary excretion is a major pathway of thyroxine (T4) 
biotransformation in rodents, whereas deiodination is the major 
pathway (up to 85%) of T4 metabolism in humans. In contrast to 
the situation in rodents, prolonged stimulation of the thyroid gland 
by TSH in humans will result in malignant tumors only in excep-
tional circumstances and possibly only in conjunction with some 
thyroid abnormality. Therefore, chemicals that cause thyroid tumors 
in rats or mice by inducing UGT activity are unlikely to cause such 
tumors in humans. In support of this conclusion, extensive epide-
miological data in epileptic patients suggest that phenobarbital and 
other anticonvulsants do not function as thyroid (or liver) tumor 
promoters in humans (Parkinson et al., 2006; Elcombe et al., 2014; 
Lake et al., 2015).
Earlier in this chapter the metabolic activation of drugs to 
reactive metabolites was discussed on the basis of structural class 
(acidic vs. neutral/basic) and is illustrated in Fig. 6-63. In par-
ticular, acidic drugs (e.g., NSAIDs) can undergo conjugation by 
UGTs to form acyl glucuronides and/or conjugation with amino 
acids through the formation of acyl-CoA thioesters catalyzed by 
mitochondrial acyl-CoA ligases (see the section “Amino Acid 
Conjugation”). Both conjugation pathways potentially lead to 
formation of chemically reactive metabolites that have the intrin-
sic ability to covalently modify proteins by glycation (acyl gluc-
uronides) and/or transacylation (acyl glucuronides and acyl-CoA 
Figure 6-62.  Role of glucuronidation in the activation of xenobiotics to toxic metabolites.
2-Aminonaphthalene
(2-Naphthylamine)
N-hydroxylation (CYP1A2)
N-Hydroxy-2-naphthylamine
N-glucuronidation
Acidic pH of urine
β-Glucuronidase in intestine
N-Hydroxy-2-naphthylamine
(e.g., diclofenac and
related NSAIDs)
Acyl-glucuronidation
O
COOH
O
OH
OH
C
O
R
HO
O
COOH
OH
OCOR
OH
HO
Acylglucuronide
Protein
Glycation
Transacylation
glucuronic acid
Acyl
migration
Nucleophilic
displacement
Ring opening
Protein
C
R
O
Acylated protein
Toxicity/Immune
hepatitis
Protein
Protein
Protein
Imine formation
Glycated protein containing a
rearranged acyl glucuronide
H2O
Glucuronic
acid
NH2
N
H
OH
N
glucuronide
OH
OH
COOH
OCOR
HO
HC
OH
O
Activation of DNA-reactive
metabolites that cause bladder
or colon tumors
The 2-O-β-, 3-O-β-, and 4-O-β- 
isomers also form and undergo ring
opening and protein binding
Lys
OH
COOH
OCOR
HO
CH
OH
NH
H2N
H2O
Lys
Amadori
rearrangement
NH
Lys
OH
COOH
OCOR
HO
CH2
O
R
COOH

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
343
Figure 6-63.  Conversion of carboxylic acid–containing xenobiotics to acyl-CoA thioesters and their subsequent biotransformation by chain shortening by β-oxidation, conjugation with amino acid, and transacylation 
with glutathione and protein.
Aliphatic acid
Acyl CoA thioester
Glycine conjugate
CH2
C
O
CH2
CH2
FAD
FADH2
R
OH
CH2
C
O
CH2
CH2
R
SG
CH2
C
O
CH2
CH2
R
S
CoA
CH2
C
O
CH2
CH2
R
NH
CH2
C
O
OH
Taurine conjugate
Conjugation with glutamine or
carnitine may also occur
CH2
C
O
CH2
CH2
R
NH
CH2
CH2
SO3
–
CH2
C
O
CH2
R
C
O
S
CoA
SH
CoA
SH
CoA
SH
CoA
Acyl-glucuronide
Amino acid
conjugation
Glutathione
transacylation
Glutathione conjugate
S-Acyl-GSH thioester
(also formed via acyl-glucuronide)
CH2
C
O
CH2
CH2
R
Nuc
Pr
Transacylated
drug–protein adduct
(also formed via acyl-glucuronide)
Protein
transacylation
β-Oxidation
CH3COOH
Acyl CoA synthetase
Acetyl CoA
ATP
AMP + PPi
NAD+
H+ + NADH
Enoyl CoA
L-Hydroxyacyl CoA
α,β-unsaturated acid
Ketoacyl CoA
CH2
R
C
O
S
CoA
H3C
+
C
O
S
CoA
Acyl CoA shortened
by two carbon atoms
Acetyl CoA
C
C
O
H
C
CH2
R
S
CoA
H
H2O
H2O
GSH
SH
CoA
Nucleophile
(–SH, –OH, –NH)
GSH
Hydration
Thiolysis
C
C
O
H
C
CH2
R
OH
H
C
O
CH2
R
S
CoA
C
H
H
C
H
OH
Downloaded by [ Weill Cornell Medical College Library 82.154.40.205] at [05/19/19]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

344
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
thioesters) (Iwamura et al., 2017; Van Vleet et al., 2017). Reactive 
acyl glucuronides glycate amine group of lysine residues through 
Schiff base formation (in which case the glucuronide moiety cova-
lently modifies the protein) and they can also transacylate proteins 
by nucleophilic displacement reactions (in which case the gluc-
uronic acid moiety serves as the leaving group and is not cova-
lently bound to the protein), as shown in Fig. 6-63 (Regan et al., 
2010). Similarly, acyl-CoA thioesters can transacylate proteins at 
nucleophilic sites (such as lysine, serine, cysteine, and tyrosine 
residues), in which case the thio-CoA moiety is the leaving group 
(Grillo, 2011). An important difference between acyl glucuronides 
and acyl-CoA thioesters is that only the former are transported 
into bile where they can damage cholangiocytes and other bile 
duct cells (discussed later in this section). Several drugs, includ-
ing the NSAIDs benoxaprofen, bromfenac, diclofenac, diflunisal, 
etodolac, fenoprofen, flurbiprofen, indoprofen, ketoprofen, ketoro-
lac, loxoprofen, sulindac, suprofen (very similar to the diuretic, 
tienilic acid), tiaprofenic acid, tolmetin, and zomepirac, contain a 
carboxylic acid moiety that can be glucuronidated to form a reac-
tive acyl glucuronide that can form covalent adducts with proteins. 
Acyl glucuronides vary widely in their reactivity, from the highly 
reactive zomepirac and tolmetin acyl glucuronides to the less reac-
tive acyl glucuronides of ibuprofen and salicylic acid (Shipkova 
et al., 2003). A relationship between the reactivity of acyl gluc-
uronides and the substitution near the carboxylic acid has been 
found. In general, α-unsubstituted acetic acid derivatives such as 
zomepirac, tolmetin, and diclofenac exhibit the highest degree of 
covalent binding, whereas mono-α-substituted acetic acids such as 
fenoprofen show intermediate levels, and fully substituted α-acetic 
acids such as furosemide, ketoprofen, ibuprofen, and suprofen 
exhibit lower levels of covalent binding (Bolze et al., 2002). The 
chemical reactivity of acyl glucuronides (as measured by glycation 
of albumin or a trapping agent such as the dipeptide phenylalanine 
lysine) is highly correlated with its rate of isomerization whereby 
the xenobiotic sequentially migrates from the initial 1-O-β posi-
tion to the 2-, 3-, and 4-positions (which can be in either the α- or 
β-configuration) (Wang et al., 2004). It is only after the xenobiotic 
migrates from the 1-position that the glucuronide moiety can tran-
siently open to its hemiacetal form and form a Schiff base with 
lysine residues. When incubated in protein-free phosphate buffer 
at pH 7.4, those acyl glucuronides with a half-life of less than 30 
minutes (with the loss of the 1-O-β isomer occurring by a combina-
tion of isomerization and hydrolysis) include the acyl glucuronides 
of the particularly hepatotoxic NSAIDs zomepirac and tolmetin. 
Isomerization is slowed by the addition of one or two substituents 
on the α-carbon (next to the carboxylic acid moiety), which cor-
relates with their reduced toxicity. However, a direct correlation 
between the ability of acyl glucuronides to give rise to covalent 
adducts with proteins such as albumin and their ability to cause 
drug-related toxicity has not been firmly established, and other 
mechanisms may come into play. For instance, diclofenac is still 
a widely used drug in spite of the fact that its acyl glucuronide is 
very reactive, whereas zomepirac, which is less reactive than these 
other drugs, was withdrawn from the market in 1983 (Chen et al., 
2006; Regan et al., 2010).
Neoantigens formed by binding of acyl glucuronides to pro-
tein might be the cause of rare cases of NSAID-induced immune 
hepatitis. Covalent adducts with proteins in the liver, kidneys, 
colon, small intestine, skeletal muscle, and bladder were detected 
in rats administered diflunisal, and in the liver, lungs, and spleen 
of rats administered diclofenac (Shipkova et al., 2003). Covalent 
binding of acyl glucuronides to proteins can be selective, with 
diclofenac acyl glucuronide forming adducts with dipeptidyl 
peptidase in the rat liver, and with aminopeptidase N and sucrase-
isomaltase in rat intestine (Shipkova et al., 2003). Human and rat 
liver UGTs are themselves targets of adducts formed by ketopro-
fen acyl glucuronide, which may cause nonspecific irreversible 
inhibition (Shipkova et al., 2003). Both acyl glucuronides and 
acyl-CoA thioesters can transacylate proteins either directly or 
after their conversion to GSH adducts. Based on in vitro trapping 
studies with N-acetylcysteine (NAC) as the nucleophile, the reac-
tivity of acyl-CoA thioesters is dependent on the substitution of 
the α-carbon and β-carbon of the xenobiotic (Grillo, 2011). The 
addition of methyl groups to the α-carbon and/or oxygen to the 
β-carbon decreases the reactivity of acyl-CoA thioesters just as it 
decreases the reactivity of acyl glucuronides. In terms of binding to 
NAC (an indicator of transacylation reactivity), acyl-CoA thioes-
ters and their corresponding acyl-GSH thioesters can be orders of 
magnitude more reactive than acyl glucuronides, for which reason 
the formation of acyl-CoA thioesters may contribute to the hepa-
totoxicity of NSAIDs and other carboxylic acid–containing drugs 
(Grillo, 2011).
Knights et al. (2007) reviewed the ability of acyl-CoA conju-
gates of acidic drugs to cause mitochondrial toxicity by interruption 
of the mitochondrial β-oxidation of fatty acids, which is dependent 
on their conversion to fatty acyl-CoA thioesters. Xenobiotic-CoA 
conjugates that are resistant to hydrolysis and are not conjugated 
with amino acids (e.g., valproic acid) can sequester the pool of 
mitochondrial CoA and disrupt fatty acid β-oxidation, which are 
key events in the hepatotoxicity of valproic acid. Valproic acid is 
metabolized in mitochondria (major pathway) and microsomes 
(where it is dehydrogenated to 4-ene-valporic acid by CYP2C9 
[Fig. 6-53]). In mitochondria, valproic acid is converted to an acyl-
CoA thioester that in turn is converted to metabolites that resemble 
intermediates in the β-oxidation of fatty acids, as shown in Fig. 
6-63. Valproic acid is present in mitochondria primarily in the form 
of its acyl-CoA thioester, which is too polar to diffuse out of the 
mitochondrion. Taken together, these studies suggest that the con-
version of carboxylic acid–containing drugs to acyl-CoA thioesters 
can play an important role in cell toxicity by causing mitochondrial 
damage (by depleting CoA and disrupting fatty acid β-oxidation) or 
by binding covalently to proteins (either directly or following con-
version to acyl-GSH thioesters) (Knights et al., 2007; Grillo, 2011).
The intrinsic reactivity of acyl glucuronides and acyl-CoA 
thioesters is not the only factor that contributes to the toxicity of 
carboxylic acid–containing drugs and metabolites. Extrinsic fac-
tors also influence the potential for toxicity, such as dose/exposure, 
disposition of the parent drug and its metabolites, hydrolysis of 
acyl glucuronides in the gut (or even in plasma), and reexposure to 
the aglycone via enterohepatic circulation, transport mechanisms 
for the efflux of acyl glucuronides from liver into bile or blood, 
and, perhaps most importantly, targets of these reactive species. 
Dose or daily body burden is a concern for many acidic drugs (e.g., 
NSAIDs) because hundreds of milligrams—or even gram quanti-
ties—are consumed daily. The reactivity of these metabolites can 
be assessed with relatively simple in vitro techniques as described 
above. Intrinsic reactivity can be predicted, to some extent, with 
structural alerts; the substitution pattern of the α-carbon is particu-
larly informative. Transport proteins also play a crucial role in the 
disposition of acidic drugs and their acyl glucuronides. MRP2 and 
MRP3 play critical roles in the efflux of acyl glucuronides into bile 
and blood, respectively. Shifts in the vectoral transport of these acyl 
glucuronides may dictate whether toxicity is limited to the cells in 
which they are formed or whether these reactive metabolites enter 
bile where they can cause damage to biliary endothelial cells or 
enter the systemic circulation where they can cause damage to other

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
345
tissues or blood. Just as efflux transporters are crucial for trans-
porting these anionic compounds into blood, uptake transporters 
(OATPs) are involved in tissue-mediated uptake of acyl glucuro-
nides as well as active renal elimination. Expression patterns of 
certain transporters may predispose or preclude certain cell types 
to toxicities caused by acyl glucuronides. It should be noted that 
unlike acyl glucuronides, acyl-CoA thioester metabolites are not 
transporter substrates and do not leave the cell in which they are 
formed. This suggests that toxicities caused by acylation of pro-
teins by acyl-CoA thioester metabolites are restricted to the cell 
where the metabolite is formed (e.g., formed in the hepatocyte and 
causes hepatotoxicity). In the case of acyl glucuronides and acyl-
CoA thioesters, the identity of the protein adducted may determine 
whether or not these acidic drugs are toxic.
Sulfonation
Many of the xenobiotics and endogenous substrates that undergo 
O-glucuronidation also undergo O-sulfonation, as illustrated in 
Fig. 6-39, for acetaminophen (Mulder, 1981; Paulson et al., 1986). 
Sulfonation generally produces a highly water-soluble sulfuric 
acid ester (see Table 6-3). The reaction is catalyzed by sulfotrans-
ferases (SULTs), a large multigene family of enzymes that are 
widely distributed throughout the body (Chen et al., 2015a). In 
mammals, there are two major classes of SULTs: (1) membrane-
bound SULTs in the Golgi apparatus and (2) soluble SULTs in the 
cytoplasm (Gamage et al., 2006). The membrane-bound SULTs 
are responsible for the sulfonation of various glycosaminogly-
cans, proteins, and peptides. At least five different Golgi-resident 
N-acetylglucosamine 6-O-sulfotransferases have been identified 
in humans (Grunwell and Bertozzi, 2002). Brachymorphic mice, 
which have a global defect in SULT activity due to an impairment 
in the synthesis of PAPS, the cofactor for sulfonation (see below 
in this section), are undersized because of their defective sulfona-
tion of glycosaminoglycans and proteoglycans, such as heparin and 
chondroitin, which are important components of cartilage. These 
particular sulfonation reactions are catalyzed by membrane-bound 
SULTs, which play no known role in xenobiotic sulfonation (Wang 
and James, 2006). This section focuses on the cytosolic SULTs, 
which are known for the sulfonation of various drugs, mutagens, 
flavonoids, and other xenobiotics, as well as endogenous substrates 
such as bile acids, thyroid hormones, catecholamine neurotransmit-
ters, and steroids.
The 
cofactor 
for 
the 
sulfonation 
reaction 
is 
3′-phosphoadenosine-5′-phosphosulfate (PAPS), the structure of 
which is shown in Fig. 6-57. The sulfonation of aliphatic alcohols 
and phenols, R-OH, proceeds as follows:
OH
R
S
O
P
O
O–
O
O
O–
O
phospho-
adenosine
+
S
O
O–
O
O
O–
P
O
O–
O
R
phospho-
adenosine
+
+
H+
Sulfonation involves the transfer of sulfonate, not sulfate (i.e., 
SO3
−, not SO4
−) from PAPS to the xenobiotic. The reaction cata-
lyzed by a SULT enzyme involves simultaneous binding of PAPS 
and substrate (S), and can be depicted as follows:
Enzyme
PAPS
S
Enzyme-PAPS-S
Enzyme-PAP
S-sulfonate
+
+
→
→
+
[
]
[
]
Sulfonation of the substrate involves the conversion of PAPS 
to PAP. Dissociation of PAP from the SULT enzyme is relatively 
slow and generally determines the overall rate of sulfonation (i.e., 
dissociation of PAP is the rate-limiting step in the catalytic cycle). 
In addition to PAPS, several sulfonated compounds, such as 4-nitro-
phenyl sulfate, can support the sulfonation of substrates by con-
verting PAP to PAPS in the active site of SULT, which effectively 
bypasses the rate-limiting step in sulfonation. For this reason, sul-
fonation reactions supported by both PAPS and 4-nitrophenyl sul-
fate are an order of magnitude faster than those supported by PAPS 
alone (Duffel and Jakoby, 1981).
PAPS is synthesized from inorganic sulfate (SO4
2−) and ATP in 
a two-step reaction. The first reaction is catalyzed by ATP sulfury-
lase, which converts ATP and SO4
2− to adenosine-5′-phosphosulfate 
(APS) and pyrophosphate. The second reaction is catalyzed by APS 
kinase, which transfers a phosphate group from ATP to the 3′-posi-
tion of APS. These two enzymes are domains on a single enzyme 
called PAPS synthetase or PAPSS. Mammals express two forms 
of PAPS synthetase, PAPSS1 and PAPSS2 (Coughtrie, 2016). 
Mutations in PAPSS2 are linked to rare musculoskeletal and endo-
crine disorders in humans (Coughtrie, 2016). The major source of 
sulfate required for the synthesis of PAPS is derived from cysteine 
through a complex oxidation sequence. Because the concentration 
of free cysteine is limited, the cellular concentrations of PAPS (4 
to 80 μM) are considerably lower than those of UDPGA (200 to 
350 μM) and GSH (5 to 10 mM). This topic has been thoroughly 
reviewed, and is outside the scope of this chapter (Klaassen and 
Boles, 1997). The relatively low concentration of PAPS limits 
the capacity for xenobiotic sulfonation. In general, sulfonation is 
a high-affinity but low-capacity pathway of xenobiotic conjuga-
tion, whereas glucuronidation is a low-affinity but high-capacity 
pathway. Acetaminophen is one of the several xenobiotics that are 
substrates for both SULTs and UGTs (see Fig. 6-39). The rela-
tive amount of sulfonate and glucuronide conjugates of acetamino-
phen is dependent on dose. At low doses, acetaminophen sulfonate 
is the main conjugate formed due to the high affinity of SULTs. 
As the dose of acetaminophen increases, the proportion of acet-
aminophen conjugated with sulfonate or glucuronic acid decreases 
and increases, respectively. In some cases, even the absolute 
amount of xenobiotic conjugated with sulfonate can decrease at 
high doses due to substrate inhibition of SULT, which can occur 
by two mechanisms. First, at high concentrations, substrates can 
bind to the Enzyme-PAP complex (rather than the Enzyme-PAPS 
complex) and form a dead-end complex. Second, two substrates 
can bind simultaneously to SULT either with both substrates in 
the large substrate-binding (active) site or with one substrate 
in the active site and another in an allosteric binding site (Chen 
et al., 2015a). Binding of two different substrates to a single SULT 
can alter the regiospecificity of sulfonation. For example, in the 
absence of other chemicals, SULT2A1 catalyzes the sulfonation 
of 17α-ethinylestradiol in the 3-position, but in the presence of 
high concentrations of celecoxib this switches to sulfonation in the 
17-position (Cui et al., 2004).
Table 6-23 lists some examples of xenobiotics and endogenous 
compounds that are sulfonated without prior biotransformation by 
oxidative enzymes. An even greater number of xenobiotics are 
sulfonated after a hydroxyl group is exposed or introduced during 
hydrolytic or oxidative biotransformation. Phenols and aliphatic 
alcohols (which are often the products of oxidative or hydrolytic 
biotransformation) are converted to O-sulfonates, and these rep-
resent the largest groups of substrates for SULTs. However, in 
some cases, SULTs can form N-sulfonates, otherwise known as 
sulfamates. For example, aniline and 2-aminonaphthalene, two

346
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
aromatic amines, can undergo sulfonation to the correspond-
ing sulfamates, which involves ­formation of a nitrogen-sulfur 
bond (R–NH2 + PAPS → R–NH–SO3H + PAP). The primary 
amines in cisapride and DPC423 (an inhibitor of coagulation fac-
tor Xa) can also be directly N-sulfonated to sulfamates. N-Oxides 
and hydroxylamines can also be O-sulfonated by SULTs. The 
N-oxide group in minoxidil can be sulfonated to form a phar-
macologically active metabolite, and in this case the sulfonate 
group is attached to the oxygen atom, not the nitrogen atom 
( R R R
N
O
PAPS
R R R
N
O
SO
PAP
1
2
3
1
2
3
3
−
−
−
−
−
+
→
+
+
−
+
−
). 
Table 6-23  
Properties of the Human Cytosolic Sulfotransferases (SULTs)
HUMAN SULT
POLYMORPHIC?*
TISSUE DISTRIBUTION
MAJOR SUBSTRATES†,‡
SULT1A1
Yes***
Liver, platelets, placenta, adrenal 
gland, endometrium, colon, small  
intestine, leukocytes, brain
4-Nitrophenol, acetaminophen, apomorphine, 4-cresol, 
dopamine, epinephrine, 17β-estradiol (and other ­phenolic 
steroids), 4-ethylphenol, genistein, N-hydroxy-PhIP, 
minoxidil, morphine, naloxone, 2-naphthol (and other 
phenols), 2-nitropropane, numerous aromatic amines, 
hydroxylamines, hydroxamic acids, and benzylic alcohols, 
T2, T3, troglitazone 
*1–*4
SULT1A2
Yes
Liver, kidney, brain, gastrointestinal 
tract, leukocytes, bladder tumors
4-Nitrophenol, N-hydroxy-2-acetylaminofluorene, 
­minoxidil, morphine, naloxone, 2-naphthol, various 
­aromatic hydroxylamines and hydroxamic acids
*1–*6
SULT1A3
Yes
Small intestine and colon, liver, 
­platelets, placenta, brain, leukocytes, 
fetal liver
Dopamine, albuterol, dobutamine, 
1-­hydroxymethylpyrene, minoxidil, morphine, 
4-­nitrophenol, norepinephrine, salbutamol, vanillin 
*1–*4
SULT1A4
Liver, pancreas, colon, brain
Likely similar to SULT1A3
SULT1B1
Gastrointestinal tract, liver, 
­leukocytes, skeletal muscle
Benzylic alcohols, dopamine, 4-nitrophenol, T2, T3,  
r-T3, T4
SULT1C2
Yes
Kidney, gastrointestinal tract, thyroid 
gland, heart, fetal lung and kidney
Aromatic hydroxylamines, N-hydroxy-2- 
­acetylaminofluorene, 4-nitrophenol, thyroid hormones
*1–*5
SULT1C3
Appendix, lymph nodes, thymus, 
­adrenal gland, fetal liver
Unknown
SULT1C4
Kidney, ovary, spinal cord, fetal 
­kidney and lung
Bisphenol-A, diethylstilbestrol, estrone, 
1-­hydroxymethylpyrene, N-hydroxy-2- 
­acetylaminofluorene, 4-nitrophenol, nonylphenol, 
4-­octylphenol
SULT1D1
Not characterized
SULT1E1
Liver, small intestine, endometrium, 
heart, adrenal gland, mammary 
­epithelial cells, and fetal liver, lung, 
and kidney
17β-Estradiol, dehydroepiandrosterone, ­diethylstilbestrol, 
equilenin, estrone, ethinyl estradiol, 2- and 
4-­hydroxyestrone, 2- and 4-hydroxyestradiol,  
4-­hydroxylonazolac, 1-naphthol, naringenin, 
­pregnenolone, raloxifene, tamoxifen, thyroid hormones
SULT2A1
Yes
Liver, adrenal gland, ovaries, 
prostate, small intestine, kidney, brain
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), afitoxifene, bile 
acids, budesonide, buprenorphine, estradiol (and other 
hydroxysteroids), hycanthone, 1-hydroxymethylpyrene, 
6-hydroxymethylbenzo[a]pyrene, 4-hydroxytamoxifen, 
pregnenolone, raloxifene, testosterone (and other  
androgens)
*1–*3
SULT2B1
Tongue, placenta, liver, prostate, 
­trachea, skin, skeletal muscle, spleen, 
thymus, kidney, ovary, adrenal gland, 
gastrointestinal tract
Cholesterol, dehydroepiandrosterone, pregnenolone and 
other oxysterols and hydroxysteroids
SULT4A1
Brain
Estrone, 2-naphthol, 2-naphthylamine, 4-nitrophenol, T3, 
T4
SULT6B1
Testis, kidney
Unknown
*Data from Lindsay et al. (2008).
†Substrates in bold are reported to be selective probe substrates for the SULT listed. Data from Coughtrie and Fisher (2003), Blanchard et al. (2004), 
Bradley and Benner (2005), Gamage et al. (2006), Wang and James (2006), Lindsay et al. (2008), Riches et al. (2009), and Salman et al. (2009).
‡T4 is thyroxine. T2 and T3 are di- and tri-iodothyronine. r-T3 is reverse tri-iodothyronine.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
347
Similarly, the N-hydroxy group in N-hydroxy-2-aminonaphthalene 
and hydroxy-2-acetylaminofluorene (NOH-AAF) can be ­sulfonated, 
as shown for NOH-AAF in Fig. 6-64. In all cases, the conjugation 
reaction involves nucleophilic attack of oxygen or nitrogen on the 
electrophilic sulfur atom in PAPS with cleavage of the phospho-
sulfate bond.
Sulfonation and glucuronidation are often viewed as equal 
solutions to the problem of biotransforming xenobiotics and their 
phase 1 metabolites to water-soluble conjugates that can be readily 
eliminated from the body. However, in terms of forming reactive and 
potentially toxic/carcinogenic metabolites, sulfonation and gluc-
uronidation differ in several aspects. As discussed in the previous 
section “Glucuronidation,” formation of reactive metabolites that 
undergo glucuronidation is a concern with carboxylic acid–contain-
ing xenobiotics, which can be converted to potentially reactive acyl 
glucuronides, but it is not a concern with aliphatic alcohols and 
phenols that undergo O-glucuronidation. Acidic drugs are not con-
jugated by SULTs; hence, the conversion of carboxylic acid–con-
taining xenobiotics to potentially reactive acyl sulfonates is not a 
concern. However, in contrast to O-glucuronidation, O-sulfonation 
can produce reactive and potentially toxic/carcinogenic metabo-
lites. This is because addition of a sulfonate moiety to the oxygen 
atom of an alcohol, phenol, or N-hydroxylamine produces a sulfate 
group that, being a good leaving group, can dissociate to form a 
Figure 6-64.  Role of sulfonation in the generation of tumorigenic metabolites (nitrenium or carbonium ions) of 2-acetylaminofluorene, safrole, and 
7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene (DMBA).
N
C
O
CH3
OH
N
N
C
O
CH3
C
O
CH3
C
O
CH3
OSO3
–
2-Acetylaminoﬂuorene (2-AAF)
N-Hydroxylation (P450)
PAPS
PAP
N-Hydroxy-2-AAF
Nitrenium ion
Carbonium ion
Safrole
1′-Hydroxylation (P450)
O
O
CH
CH
H2C
OSO3
–
OSO3
–
O
O
CH
CH
H2C
O
O
CH
CH
CH2
OH
1′-Hydroxysafrole
1′-Sulfoxysafrole
Carbonium ion
Carbonium ion
DNA binding and
tumor formation
7-12-Dimethylbenz[a]anthracene (DMBA)
7-Methyl-hydroxylation (P450)
CH3
CH2
OH
CH3
CH2
CH3
CH2
PAPS
PAP
PAPS
PAP
SO4
2–
+
+N
+
+
SULT
SULT
SULT
SO4
2–
SO4
2–

348
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
carbon- or nitrogen-centered anion (i.e., a carbonium or nitrenium 
ion), as shown below:
R
OH(alcoholorphenol)
R
O
SO
R
carbonium ion
O
SO
su
−
−
−
−
→
→
+
−
+
−
−
3
3
(
)
(
lfate)
R
NH
OH(hydroxylamine)
R
NH
O
SO
R
NH
nitrenium ion
O
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
→
→
+
−
+
−
3
(
)
SO
sulfate
3
−(
)
Examples of xenobiotics that are converted to reactive 
metabolites by pathways that involve O-sulfonation are shown in 
Fig. 6-64. O-Sulfonation plays an important role in the activation 
of aromatic amines, such as the hepatocarcinogen 2-acetylamino-
fluorene (2-AAF), methyl-substituted PAHs, such as the lung and 
skin carcinogen dimethylbenzanthracene (DMBA), and safrole, a 
hepatotumorigen. Activation of 2-AAF involves CYP-dependent 
N-hydroxylated to a hydroxylamine (NOH-AAF) followed by 
O-sulfonation to a conjugate that can lose the sulfate moiety to form 
a reactive nitrenium ion (which can rearrange to form a carbonium 
ion), as shown in the first panel of Fig. 6-64. The same reactions 
(i.e., N-hydroxylation followed by O-sulfonation) are the final steps 
in the metabolic activation of the hepatotumorigen 2,6-dinitrotolu-
ene, as shown in Fig. 6-16. To exert its tumorigenic effect in rodents, 
safrole must be hydroxylated by CYP to 1′-hydroxysafrole, which 
is then sulfonated to the electrophilic and tumor-initiating metabo-
lite 1′-sulfooxysafrole, as shown in the middle panel of Fig. 6-64. 
1′-Hydroxysafrole is a more reactive and a more potent hepatotu-
morigen than safrole due to its ability to form a reactive carbonium 
ion. Two lines of evidence support a major role for sulfonation in 
the hepatotumorigenic effect of 1′-hydroxysafrole. First, the hepato-
tumorigenic effect of 1′-hydroxysafrole can be inhibited by treating 
mice with the SULT inhibitor pentachlorophenol (discussed later in 
this section). Second, the hepatotumorigenic effect of 1′-hydroxysaf-
role is markedly reduced in brachymorphic mice, which have a 
diminished capacity to sulfonate xenobiotics because of a genetic 
defect in PAPS synthesis (Boberg et al., 1983). A similar pathway, 
namely, benzylic hydroxylation followed by O-sulfonation, con-
verts DMBA to a sulfate conjugate that can lose sulfate to form a 
reactive carbonium ion, as shown in the third panel in Fig. 6-64. 
The sulfonate conjugates of benzylic and allylic alcohols, aro-
matic hydroxylamines, and hydroxamic acids (including those in 
cooked meat) are short-lived electrophiles capable of reacting with 
nucleophilic substances including proteins and DNA (Wang and 
James, 2006). In addition to 1′-hydroxysafrole, the benzylic alco-
hol of DMBA, and NOH-AAF, sulfonation has been implicated in 
converting 1-hydroxymethylpyrene (1-HMP), and the cooked food 
mutagen N-hydroxy-2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo(4,5-b)
pyridine (N-OH-PhIP) to electrophilic nitrenium or carbocation 
intermediates linked to mutagenesis or tumorigenesis (Wang and 
James, 2006). In rats, gender differences in the tumorigenesis of 
various aromatic amines, arylhydroxamic acids, and the benzylic 
alcohols of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons have been linked to 
gender differences in the expression of multiple SULT enzymes 
(discussed later in this section) (Coughtrie, 2016).
Benzylic hydroxylation and subsequent O-sulfonation are key 
steps in the metabolic activation of safrole and DMBA, as shown 
in Fig. 6-64. These same pathways are also responsible for acti-
vating nevirapine to a reactive metabolite in skin, which is the 
underlying cause of skin rashes (red blotches, itchy lumps, and/or 
speckles) in about one in five people starting nevirapine treatment, 
which qualifies as a serious (life-threatening) idiosyncratic reac-
tion in approximately 0.3% of patients on this antiretroviral drug. 
Covalent binding to protein and rash can be induced by nevirapine 
in the human and rat skin, but not in the mouse skin, which does 
not sulfonate the benzyl alcohol metabolite of nevirapine. In the 
human and rat skin, covalent binding and rash caused by nevirapine 
or its benzyl alcohol metabolite can be blocked by local application 
of 1-phenyl-1-hexanol, a SULT inhibitor (Uetrecht and Naisbitt, 
2013). These studies underscore the importance of SULTs in extra-
hepatic tissues in the formation of reactive metabolites.
Although carboxylic acids can be conjugated with gluc-
uronic acid, they cannot be conjugated with sulfonate. However, 
a number of carboxylic acids, such as benzoic acid, naphthoic 
acid, naphthylacetic acid, salicylic acid, and naproxen, are inhibi-
tors of SULTs (Rao and Duffel, 1991). Pentachlorophenol and 
2,6-dichloro-4-nitrophenol are potent SULT inhibitors because 
they bind to the enzyme but cannot initiate a nucleophilic attack on 
PAPS due to the presence of electron-withdrawing substituents in 
the ortho- and para-positions on the aromatic ring. In addition to 
these direct inhibitors, salicylamide and 1-phenyl-1-hexanol, both 
of which are SULT substrates that undergo rapid sulfonation, are 
used in vitro and in animals to cause generalized inhibition of SULT 
activity by depleting PAPS, which was exploited, for example, in 
studies of the role of SULT in an idiosyncratic reaction to nevirapine 
(namely skin rash), as discussed earlier in this section. Inhibition of 
SULTs can occur with exposure to drugs such as mefenamic acid, 
salicylic acid, clomiphene, danazol, environmental chemicals, such 
as hydroxylated PCBs, hydroxylated PAHs, pentachlorophenol, 
triclosan, and bisphenol A, and dietary constituents, such as cat-
echins, colorants, phytoestrogens, and flavonoids. Adverse effects 
on human health can potentially result from SULT inhibition, such 
as the thyroid hormone disruption, that occurs with exposure to 
hydroxylated PCBs (Wang and James, 2006). In contrast, given 
that some sulfonate conjugates are chemically reactive (discussed 
earlier in this section), inhibition of their formation may be protec-
tive. There are a few reports of drug–drug interactions due to SULT 
inhibition. It has been reported that the sulfonation rates of both 
acetaminophen and salicylamide are decreased when these drugs 
are administered together, and dapsone and lamivudine have been 
found to decrease acetaminophen sulfonation (Wang and James, 
2006). Coadministration of acetaminophen with ethinyl estradiol 
increases its AUC by up to 54% and decreases the AUC of ethinyl 
estradiol sulfate by about 40%, indicating that acetaminophen may 
directly inhibit one or more SULTs (Rogers et al., 1987). Drug–
drug interactions involving induction of SULT are detailed later in 
this section.
Sulfonate conjugates of xenobiotics are excreted mainly in 
urine. Those excreted in bile may be hydrolyzed by aryl sulfa-
tases present in gut microbiota, which contributes to the entero-
hepatic circulation of certain xenobiotics. Sulfatases are also 
present in the endoplasmic reticulum and lysosomes, where they 
primarily hydrolyze sulfonates of endogenous compounds, pre-
sumably in a manner analogous to that described for microsomal 
β-glucuronidase (Dwivedi et al., 1987) (see comments on egasyn 
in the section “Carboxylesterases”). Like glucuronide conjugates, 
some sulfonate conjugates are substrates for further biotransforma-
tion. For instance, the 7- and 4-sulfates of daidzein and genistein 
can be sulfonated by SULT1E1 to disulfates (Nakano et al., 2004). 
Other examples include the oxidation of sulfonate conjugates of 
testosterone and estrogens. Dehydroepiandrosterone-3-sulfate is 
16α-hydroxylated by CYP3A7, the major CYP enzyme expressed 
in the human fetal liver (Ingelman-Sundberg et al., 1975; Kitada 
et al., 1987; Ohmori et al., 1998). CYP2C12, which is expressed 
in female but not male rats, catalyzes the oxidation of a steroid di-
sulfate (namely, 5α-androstane-3α,17β-diol-3,17-disulfate) (Ryan 
et al., 1984). Sulfonation facilitates the deiodination of T4 and

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
349
triiodothyronine (T3) and can determine the rate of elimination of 
thyroid hormones in some species. Efavirenz sulfate is conjugated 
with GSH in rodents but not primates and accounts for the rodent-
specific nephrotoxicity of this antiretroviral drug, as described in 
the section “Glutathione Conjugation.”
Multiple SULTs have been identified in all mammalian spe-
cies examined and they are arranged into gene families that share at 
least 45% amino acid sequence identity, which are subdivided into 
subfamilies that are at least 60% identical (Blanchard et al., 2004; 
Gamage et al., 2006). The SULTs expressed in mammals belong 
to six families (SULT1 to SULT6). Humans express SULT only in 
families 1, 2, 4, and 6. SULT3 is expressed only in mice and rab-
bits, whereas SULT5 is expressed only in mice (Chen et al., 2015a). 
SULT1 and SULT2 are the only gene families subdivided into mul-
tiple subfamilies: five in the case of SULT1 (SULT1A to SULT1E), 
and two in the case of SULT2 (SULT2A and SULT2B). As shown 
in Table 6-23, humans express 14 SULTs, namely, SULT1A1, 1A2, 
1A3, 1A4, 1B1, 1C2, 1C3, 1C4, 1D1, 1E1, 2A1, 2B1, 4A1, and 
6B1. Human SULT4A1 is expressed in the brain and SULT6B1 is 
expressed in the testis and kidney. Their role in xenobiotic sulfona-
tion is largely unknown, as is their presumptive physiological func-
tion. Sulfonation of xenobiotics is catalyzed by various members 
of the SULT1 and SULT2 families. SULT1 enzymes catalyze the 
sulfonation of phenols, isoflavones, the procarcinogen NOH-AAF, 
endogenous compounds such as 17β-estradiol (including its gluc-
uronide conjugate; see the section “Glucuronidation and Formation 
of Acyl-CoA Thioesters”), and other steroids, thyroid hormones, 
endogenous catecholamines, and eicosanoids. The SULT2 enzymes 
catalyze the sulfonation of the 3β-hydroxy groups of steroids (in 
contrast to UGTs, which glucuronidate the 3α-hydroxy groups of 
steroids), bile acids, benzylic alcohols of PAHs, and other primary 
and secondary alcohols.
SULTs are expressed in a wide range of tissues. Based on quan-
titative immunoblotting techniques, Riches et al. (2009) quantified 
five of the major SULT enzymes involved in xenobiotic sulfonation 
(SULT1A1, 1B1, 1E1, 2A1, and 1A3) in cytosol from the human 
liver, small intestine, kidney, and lung. In human liver cytosol, the 
rank order of protein expression was as follows: SULT1A1 (53%) 
> 2A1 (27%) > 1B1 (14%) > 1E1 (6%) > 1A3 (0%). The kid-
ney was similar to the liver inasmuch as SULT1A1 was the major 
enzyme expressed (40%), followed by SULT1B1 (31%) > 1A3 
(28%) > 2A1 (1%) > 1E1 (0%). In the small intestine, SULT1B1 
and SULT1A3 were most highly expressed enzymes (36% and 31%, 
respectively), followed by SULT1A1 (19%) > 1E1 (8%) > 2A1 
(6%). Lastly, SULT1E1 protein was most highly expressed in lung 
(40%), followed by SULT1A1 (20%) > 1A3 (19%) > 1B1 (12%) 
> 2A1 (9%). In humans, SULTs are predominantly expressed in 
extrahepatic tissues. Based on microarray analysis of 79 human tis-
sues, mRNA encoding most SULT enzymes was detected in the 
liver but in no case did the liver have the highest levels of an indi-
vidual SULT mRNA (Chen et al., 2015a). Further details on the 
tissue expression of SULTs are summarized in Table 6-23.
Our current understanding of the multiplicity of SULTs is 
based on genome sequencing, as is the case with all other classes of 
xenobiotic biotransforming enzymes. Two prior classifications that 
provided insight into the multiplicity of SULTs are briefly described 
here for historical reasons. In human liver cytosol, SULT activity 
toward phenolic compounds, the so-called phenol sulfotransferase 
or PST, was found to exist in two forms that could be distinguished 
by their thermal stability; hence, they were known as TS-PST 
(thermally stable) and TL-PST (thermally labile) (Weinshilboum, 
1992a; Weinshilboum et al., 1997). It is now known that TS-PST 
largely reflects the activity of SULT1A1 and SULT1A2, whereas 
TL-PST largely reflects the activity of SULT1A3 and SULT1A4 
(Gamage et al., 2006).
Historically, the SULT enzymes were previously catego-
rized into five classes based on their catalytic activity. These five 
functional classes were as follows: arylsulfotransferase, which 
sulfonates numerous phenolic xenobiotics; alcohol SULT, which 
sulfonates primary and secondary alcohols including nonaromatic 
hydroxysteroids (for which reason these enzymes are also known as 
hydroxysteroid SULTs); estrogen SULT, which sulfonates estrone 
and other aromatic hydroxysteroids; tyrosine ester SULT, which 
sulfonates tyrosine methyl ester and 2-cyanoethyl-N-hydroxythio-
acetamide; and bile salt SULT, which sulfonates conjugated and 
unconjugated bile acids. The arylsulfotransferase and estrogen 
SULT are composed largely of SULT1 enzymes, which catalyze the 
sulfonation of phenolic xenobiotics, catechols, and aromatic (phe-
nolic) steroids. The alcohol SULT and bile salt SULT are composed 
largely of SULT2 enzymes, which catalyze the sulfonation of a vari-
ety of primary and secondary alcohols, bile acids, and hydroxyster-
oids (such as DHEA).
Genetic polymorphisms have been described for human 
SULTs. They can affect SULT function and/or expression in a tis-
sue-specific manner. For example, an allelic variant of SULT1A1 
known as SULT1A1*2 (Arg213 → His213) is associated with 
decreased expression in platelets but not the liver, and decreased 
thermal stability (Glatt and Meinl, 2004a). This particular genetic 
polymorphism is common in both Caucasians and Nigerians (with 
an allele frequency of 31% and 37%, respectively), and is correlated 
with interindividual variation in the sulfonation of acetaminophen. 
SULT1A1 catalyzes the sulfonation of the 4-hydroxymetabolite 
of tamoxifen, a metabolite identified as a potent inducer of apop-
tosis in certain breast cancer cell lines. Contrary to expectation, 
the lower activity SULT1A1*2 allele did not improve the efficacy 
of tamoxifen in breast cancer patients by decreasing clearance of 
4-hydroxytamoxifen. It was the wild-type (*1) allele that, para-
doxically, was correlated with improved outcomes with tamoxi-
fen therapy (Nowell and Falany, 2006). Human SULT1B1, like 
the corresponding enzyme in other species, catalyzes the sulfona-
tion of thyroid hormones, 2-naphthol, and dopamine. SULT1B1 
levels in human liver cytosol vary widely, possibly due to poly-
morphisms (e.g., Glu186 → Gly186 and Glu204 → Asp204) (Glatt and 
Meinl, 2004a). Polymorphisms with consequences for the bioacti-
vation of xenobiotics have been reported. For instance, the human 
SULT1A*Arg (*1) allelozyme expressed in S. typhimurium is 
12- to 350-fold more active in the sulfonation of 2-acetylamino-
4-hydroxyaminotoluene, 2-nitropropoane, 2,4-dinitrobenzylalco-
hol, (–)-1-(α-hydroxyethyl) pyrene, and 1-hydroxymethlpyrene 
to mutagens than are cells expressing SULT1A1*His (Gamage 
et al., 2006). Enantioselective sulfonation of promutagens has been 
reported, as in the case of 1-(α-hydroxyethyl) pyrene, for which 
SULT2A1 exhibits a 15-fold preference for the (+)-enantiomer, 
and SULT1E1 exhibits a 160-fold preference for the (–)-­enantiomer 
(Gamage et al., 2006).
Human SULT1E1 has been identified as a high-affinity estro-
gen SULT. SULT1A1 also catalyzes the sulfonation of estrogens, 
such as 17β-estradiol, but it does so with a much lower affinity 
than does SULT1E1. The sulfonation of ethinyl estradiol in human 
hepatocytes is inducible by rifampin (Li et al., 1999). In addition 
to the human liver, SULT1E1 is expressed in the placenta, breast, 
brain, testes, adrenal glands, and uterine tissue. SULT1E1 has been 
studied in SULT1E1-deficient mice, and it has been shown that 
these mice had spontaneous fetal loss caused by placental throm-
bosis, which was reversible by administration of antiestrogens 
(Gamage et al., 2006).

350
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
SULT2A1 is the human alcohol SULT long known as 
DHEA-ST (for its ability to sulfonate dehydroepiandosterone 
[DHEA]). In addition to DHEA, substrates for SULT2A1 include 
steroid hormones, bile acids, and cholesterol. Furthermore, 
SULT2A1 converts several procarcinogens to electrophilic metabo-
lites, including hydroxymethyl PAHs, NOH-AAF, and 1-hydoxysaf-
role, as shown in Fig. 6-64. The thermal stability of SULT2A1 is 
intermediate between that of the four phenol SULTs (SULT1A1/2 
and SULT1A3/4), and the enzyme is resistant to the inhibitory 
effects of 2,6-dichloro-4-nitrophenol. In humans, SULT2A1 selec-
tively catalyzes the N-sulfonation of quinolone drugs, such as cip-
rofloxacin, moxifloxacin, garenoxacin, and other amine drugs such 
as desipramine and metoclopramide (Senggunprai et al., 2009). 
SULT2A1 is not expressed in blood platelets, but the activity of 
this enzyme has been measured in human liver cytosol. It is also 
expressed in adrenal cortex, brain, and intestine (Blanchard et al., 
2004). SULT2A1 is bimodally distributed, possibly due to a genetic 
polymorphism that apparently lies outside of the coding region, and 
perhaps outside of the SULT2A1 gene itself, with a high-activity 
group composed of about 25% of the population (Glatt and Meinl, 
2004a). Several SULT2A1 SNPs have been identified, but the 
underlying basis for the high-activity group remains to be deter-
mined as these polymorphisms appear to be too rare to explain the 
bimodal distribution.
Human SULT2B1 is also a DHEA sulfotransferase. It is 
expressed in the placenta, prostate, and trachea. The SULT2B1 gene 
can be transcribed from one of the two exons, both of which contain 
coding sequences; hence, two forms of SULT2B1 (known as 2B1_
v1 and 2B1_v2) with different N-terminal amino acid sequences 
can be transcribed by alternate splicing of precursor mRNA. This 
situation is analogous to the alternative splicing of multiple exons 
1 in the UGT1 gene family (see Fig. 6-61). SULT2B1_v1 catalyzes 
the sulfonation of pregnenolone, and SULT2B1_v2 can catalyze 
the sulfonation of both pregnenolone and cholesterol (Blanchard 
et al., 2004).
Extrapolation of animal data with regard to biotransformation 
by SULTs is confounded by the number of SULTs, the expression 
pattern of SULTs, and pronounced gender differences in rodents 
(Gamage et al., 2006; Coughtrie, 2016). For instance, expression of 
SULTs in humans is largely extrahepatic, whereas SULT expression 
in rodents is predominantly hepatic. Based on microarray analysis 
of 79 human tissues, mRNA encoding most SULT enzymes was 
detected in the liver but in no case did the liver have the highest lev-
els of an individual SULT mRNA (Chen et al., 2015a). Additionally, 
humans express four members of the SULT1A subfamily (1A1 to 
1A4), whereas rodents express only one. In contrast, rats express 
four members of the SULT2A subfamily, whereas humans have 
only a single SULT2A gene (SULT2A1). Equivalents of mouse 
SULT3A1 and SULT5A1 are not expressed in humans (Gamage 
et al., 2006). There are also significant differences between other 
mammalian species. For instance, SULT activity is generally low 
in pigs but high in cats. The high SULT activity in cats offsets their 
low capacity to conjugate xenobiotics with glucuronic acid.
In rats, SULT activity varies considerably with sex and age. In 
mature rats, expression of various SULTs in the liver is greater in 
males than females: approximately twofold in the case of SULT1A1 
and 10-fold in the case of SULT1C1. SULT1E1 is undetectable in 
the female rat liver and qualifies as a male-specific SULT in adult 
rats (Coughtrie, 2016). In contrast, various SULT2 enzymes are 
expressed to a greater extent in mature female rats and mice com-
pared with their male counterparts (Coughtrie, 2016). Sex differ-
ences in the developmental expression of individual SULTs are 
the result of a complex interplay between gonadal, thyroidal, and 
pituitary hormones (particularly growth hormone), which similarly 
determine sex differences in CYP enzyme expression. However, 
compared with CYP enzymes, the SULTs are refractory or only 
marginally responsive to the enzyme-inducing effects of AhR and 
CAR activators such as 3-methylcholanthrene and phenobarbital, 
respectively, although one or more individual SULT2 enzymes are 
inducible by PXR agonists such as PCN. Likewise, SULT1A1, 2A1, 
or 2E1 expressed in Caco-2 cells are refractory to various PAHs, and 
3-methylcholanthrene has no effect on SULT1A1 and SULT1A3 
mRNA levels in primary human hepatocytes (Gamage et al., 2006). 
From rodent studies, it is generally held that AhR agonists have sup-
pressive effects on SULT regulation. 2-AAF, dioxin, 3-methylcho-
lanthrene, and β-naphthoflavone markedly suppress SULT1A1 and 
SULT12A activities and mRNA levels in rat livers (Gamage et al., 
2006). In contrast, there is evidence that the rat liver hydroxyster-
oid SULTs (SULT2s) may be inducible by tamoxifen and estrogens 
(Gamage et al., 2006). For mouse SULT2A2, a functional nuclear 
response element responsive for CAR has been reported (Gamage 
et al., 2006). Human SULT2A1 has been reported to be regulated 
by FXR, PXR, VDR, and PPARα, whereas SULT1A1, 2A1, and 
2A9 genes in mice are regulated by CAR (Tirona and Kim, 2005; 
Gamage et al., 2006). There are conflicting data regarding the 
influence of CAR ligands on SULT1A1 and SULT1A3. One study 
reports an 11-fold increase in SULT1A1 mRNA in primary human 
hepatocytes by the CAR ligand, CITCO, whereas another study 
could not reproduce these results for either SULT1A1 or SULT1A3 
(Gamage et al., 2006). The glucocorticoid dexamethasone has been 
reported to induce both murine and human SULT2A1 through PXR 
and GR activation (Gamage et al., 2006). Human SULT2A1 mRNA 
and protein have also been reported to be induced by rifampin, vita-
min D3, phenobarbital, TCPOBOP, and the PPARα-agonist ciprofi-
brate (Runge-Morris and Kocarek, 2005). Recent reviews reinforce 
the complexity of the role of xenosensors (including FXR and LXR) 
in the induction and suppression of SULT enzymes, which often 
occurs in a species-, gender- and tissue-specific manner (Kodama 
and Negishi, 2013; Runge-Morris et al., 2013).
Induction of SULTs by rifampin may be clinically relevant. 
Rifampin (600 mg q.d.) has been reported to cause up to a 190% 
increase in the clearance of ethinyl estradiol (35 μg q.d.) (Barditch-
Crovo et al., 1999). The interaction between ethinyl estradiol–con-
taining oral contraceptives and antibiotics such as rifampin is often 
attributed to the induction of CYP3A4, which is the major CYP 
involved in the oxidative metabolism of ethinyl estradiol (e.g., 
Ortho-Evra® prescribing information). Several lines of evidence 
suggest that induction of CYP3A4 is not the predominant mecha-
nism by which rifampin increases the clearance of ethinyl estradiol. 
First, Li et al. (1999) reported that treatment of primary cultures of 
human hepatocytes with rifampin (33.3 nM) caused up to a 3.3-
fold increase in ethinyl estradiol 3-O-sulfate formation. Second, 
SULTs 1A1, 1A2, 1A3, 1E1, and 2A1 catalyze the 3-O-sulfonation 
of ethinyl estradiol with Km values ranging from 6.7 to 4500 nM, 
nearer the pharmacologically relevant concentrations (Schrag et al., 
2004). Finally, it is known that ethinyl estradiol is predominantly 
excreted in bile and urine as the 3-sulfate and, to a lesser extent, the 
3-glucuronide (Li et al., 1999), which suggests that 3-sulfonation is 
the major pathway of ethinyl estradiol metabolism. Taken together, 
these data suggest that induction of SULTs can be clinically relevant 
at least for low-dose drugs that can be sulfonated with high affinity.
Some drugs must be converted to a sulfonate conjugate to exert 
their desired effect, including triamterene, cicletanine, and minoxi-
dil (Wang and James, 2006). Sulfonation (as well as glucuronida-
tion) converts morphine to more potent analgesics than the parent, 
with morphine-6-sulfate being 30 times more potent, and with 
morphine-6-glucuronide being 45 to 800 times more potent than 
morphine itself in rats (Wang and James, 2006). Similarly, several

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
351
sulfonated steroids such as pregnenolone sulfate and DHEA sulfate 
interact directly with neurotransmitter receptors. It has been found 
that pregnenolone sulfate and DHEA sulfate enhance memory 
in mice. Prevention of hydrolysis of these sulfates by the steroid 
sulfatase inhibitor (para-O-sulfamoyl)-N-tetradecanoyl tyramine 
increases the memory enhancement caused by DHEA sulfate in 
rats, which suggests there is an important role of these sulfates in 
the central nervous system (Wang and James, 2006). Other exam-
ples of pharmacologically active sulfonated drugs and endogenous 
compounds have been reported (Chen et al., 2015a).
Methylation
Methylation is a common but generally minor pathway of xeno-
biotic biotransformation. It differs from most other conjugation 
reactions by causing only modest changes in log P and TPSA, as 
shown in Table 6-3, which can decrease, rather than increase, the 
aqueous solubility of xenobiotics. One exception to this rule is the 
N-methylation of pyridine-containing xenobiotics, such as nico-
tine, which produces quaternary ammonium ions that are water-sol-
uble and readily excreted. Another exception is the S-methylation 
of thioethers to form positively charged sulfonium ions, a reaction 
catalyzed by thioether methyltransferase (TEMT), which has only 
been identified in mice (Weinshilboum et al., 1999). Methylation 
masks functional groups (–OH, –SH, and –NH2) that might other-
wise be metabolized by other conjugating enzymes, which raises the 
question: Why did methylation evolve as a pathway of xenobiotic 
biotransformation? In the preceding section “Sulfonation,” con-
jugation of certain alcohols and phenols with sulfonic acid was 
identified as a mechanism of activation of certain xenobiotics 
(e.g., those shown in Fig. 6-64). In contrast, methylation is not a 
mechanism of xenobiotic activation with the possible exception of 
arsenic (discussed later in the section). Furthermore, in the case of 
catechols, which are redox active and can nonenzymatically gener-
ate reactive oxygen species, methylation represents an important 
pathway of detoxication.
The cofactor for methylation is S-adenosylmethionine (SAM), 
the structure of which is shown in Fig. 6-57. The methyl group 
bound to the sulfonium ion in SAM has the characteristics of a 
carbonium ion and is transferred to xenobiotics and endogenous 
substrates by nucleophilic attack from an electron-rich heteroatom 
(O, N, or S). Consequently, the functional groups involved in meth-
ylation reactions are phenols, catechols, aliphatic and aromatic 
amines, N-heterocyclics, and sulfhydryl-containing compounds. 
The conversion of benzo[a]pyrene (B[a]P) to 6-methylbenzo[a]
pyrene is a rare example of C-methylation. Another reaction that 
appears to involve C-methylation, the conversion of cocaine to 
ethylcocaine, is actually a transesterification reaction catalyzed by 
CES1, as shown in Fig. 6-9. Metals can also be methylated. Both 
inorganic mercury and arsenic can be dimethylated, and inorganic 
selenium can be trimethylated. The selenium atom in ebselen is 
methylated following the ring opening of this anti-inflammatory 
drug. Some examples of xenobiotics and endogenous substrates that 
undergo O-, N-, or S-methylation are shown in Fig. 6-65. During 
Figure 6-65.  Examples of compounds that undergo O-, N-, or S-methylation.
CH2
NH2
CH2CH2NH2
OH
HO
CH
COO–
CH3
CH2
NH2
OH
CH
COO–
Levodopa
CH3O
3-O-Methyldopa
O-Methylation
N-Methylation
N
N
CH2CH2NH2
HN
N
Histamine
N-Methylhistamine
N +
N
CH3
CH3
N
N
CH3
Nicotine
N-Methylnicotinium ion
S-Methylation
N
N
N
N
H
S
N
N
N
N
H
SH
SAM
SAM
SAM
SAM
CH3
6-Mercaptopurine
6-Methylmercaptopurine

352
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
these methylation reactions, SAM is converted to S-adenosyl-
l-homocysteine (SAH). This section will cover the following 
methyltransferases: arsenic (III) methyltransferase (AS3MT), cat-
echol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), glycine N-methyltransferase 
(GNMT), histamine N-methyltransferase (HNMT), indolethylamine 
N-methyltransferase (INMT), nicotinamide N-methyltransferase 
(NNMT), phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase (PNMT), 
phenol O-methyltransferase (POMT) (thiol methyltransferase 
[TMT]), TEMT, and thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT). Other 
methyltransferases that have been implicated as drug-metabolizing 
enzymes include guanidinoacetate N-methyltransferase (GAMT) 
and phosphatidylethanolamine N-methyltransferase (PEMT) 
(Nishimura and Naito, 2006).
The O-methylation of phenols and catechols is catalyzed by 
two different enzymes known as COMT and the enzyme histori-
cally termed POMT (Weinshilboum, 1989, 1992b). POMT is a 
microsomal enzyme that methylates phenols but not catechols, 
and COMT is both a cytosolic and microsomal enzyme with the 
converse substrate specificity, that is, an absolute requirement for 
catechol substrates (Weinshilboum, 2006). COMT plays a greater 
role in the biotransformation of catechols than POMT plays in 
the biotransformation of phenols. It should be noted that there is 
strong evidence to suggest that the membrane-bound POMT is the 
same enzyme as TMT (Weinshilboum, 2006). COMT was origi-
nally described as a cytosolic, Mg2+-requiring, monomeric enzyme 
(Mr 25,000). However, in rats and humans, the enzyme is encoded 
by the COMT gene (on chromosome 22 in humans) with two dif-
ferent promoters and transcription initiation sites. Transcription at 
one site produces a cytosolic form of COMT, whereas transcription 
from the other site produces a membrane-bound form by adding 
50 hydrophobic amino acids to the N-terminus of the microsomal 
COMT, which targets this form to the endoplasmic reticulum 
(Weinshilboum et al., 1999; Weinshilboum, 2006). The microsomal 
COMT is expressed at high levels in the brain and lymphocytes 
(Weinshilboum, 2006). The cytosolic form of COMT is present in 
virtually all tissues, including erythrocytes, but the highest concen-
trations are found in the liver and kidney. The membrane-bound 
form is more highly expressed in brain.
Substrates for COMT include several catecholamine neu-
rotransmitters, such as epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopa-
mine; and catechol drugs, such as the anti-Parkinson disease agent 
levodopa (l-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine) and the antihyperten-
sive drug methyldopa (α-methyl-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine). 
Catechol estrogens, which are formed by 2- or 4-hydroxylation of 
the steroid A-ring, are substrates for COMT, as are drugs that are 
converted to catechols by two consecutive hydroxylation reactions 
(as in the case of phenobarbital, duloxetine, and diclofenac), by ring 
opening of a phenyl methylenedioxy (benzodioxole) group (as in 
the case of stiripentol and 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine), 
or by hydrolysis of vicinal esters (as in the case of ibopamine). 
Formation of catechol estrogens, particularly 4-hydroxyestradiol, 
has been suggested to play an important role in estrogen-induced 
tumor formation in hamster kidney, rat pituitary, and mouse uterus 
(Zhu and Liehr, 1993) (see the section “CYP1B1”). These tissues 
contain high levels of epinephrine or dopamine, which inhibit the 
O-methylation of 4-hydroxyestradiol by COMT. Nontarget tissues 
do not contain high levels of catecholamines, which suggests that 
4-hydroxyestradiol induces tumor formation in those tissues that 
fail to methylate and detoxify this catechol estrogen. These obser-
vations in animals are especially intriguing in view of subsequent 
epidemiological evidence demonstrating that low COMT activity 
appears to increase the risk of breast cancer, with odds ratios rang-
ing from 1.7 to 3.0 (Weinshilboum, 2006).
In the 1970s, when COMT levels in erythrocytes (predomi-
nantly the cytosolic form) were measured in human subjects, it was 
apparent that there was a subpopulation that displayed low levels of 
this enzyme. Segregation analysis indicated that erythrocyte COMT 
activity was an autosomal codominant trait, and that erythrocyte 
levels correlated with relative COMT levels in liver and lympho-
cyte cytosol (Weinshilboum, 2006). It was subsequently found that 
COMT is encoded by a single gene with alleles for a low-activity 
form (COMTL) and high-activity form (COMTH) (Weinshilboum, 
1989, 1992b, 2006; Weinshilboum et al., 1999). This polymorphism 
results from a single G → A transition in exon 4 that results in the 
substitution Val108Met in cytosolic COMT and Val158Met in micro-
somal COMT (Weinshilboum et al., 1999; Weinshilboum, 2006). 
The presence of methionine at position 108 in the cytosolic enzyme 
not only decreases the catalytic activity of COMT but also decreases 
the thermal stability of the enzyme, which has long been used to dif-
ferentiate COMTL (thermolabile) from COMTH (thermostable). In 
Caucasians, these allelic variants are expressed with roughly equal 
frequency, so that 25% to 30% of the population is homozygous for 
Met/Met, the low activity COMT, 20% to 25% is homozygous for 
Val/Val, the high activity COMT, and 50% is heterozygous (Met/
Val) and has intermediate COMT activity. The Val/Val form of 
COMT is three- to fourfold more active than the Met/Met form of 
COMT. COMT activity is generally higher in Asians and African 
Americans due to a higher frequency of COMTH (the Val allele) 
(about 75% for Asians and African Americans compared with about 
50% for Caucasians) (McLeod et al., 1994). Subsequent resequenc-
ing of the COMT gene has revealed numerous SNPs, with at least 
eight that occur with a frequency of more than 10% in Caucasians, 
and 11 such SNPs in African Americans. Several of these SNPs are 
found in the intronic regions. A list of COMT alleles can be found 
at http://alfred.med.yale.edu/alfred/index.asp.
The genetically determined levels of COMT in erythrocytes 
correlate with individual differences in the proportion of levodopa 
converted to 3-O-methyldopa and the proportion of methyldopa 
converted to its 3-O-methyl metabolite. O-Methylation is normally a 
minor pathway of levodopa biotransformation, but 3-O-methyldopa 
is the major metabolite when levodopa is administered with a dopa 
decarboxylase inhibitor, such as carbidopa or benserazide, which 
is a common clinical practice. High COMT activity, resulting in 
extensive O-methylation of levodopa to 3-O-methyldopa, has been 
associated with poor therapeutic management of Parkinson disease 
and an increased incidence of drug-induced toxicity (dyskinesia). 
A large number of epidemiological studies have been performed 
to examine the effects of the COMT Val108/158Met polymorphism, 
and there is no evidence that the genetic polymorphism in COMT 
represents a risk modifier for the development of Parkinson disease 
(Weinshilboum et al., 1999). Talcopone, entacapone, and opicapone 
are drugs that inhibit COMT and are used (together with inhibi-
tors of dopa decarboxylase) to slow the metabolism and lower the 
dose of levodopa in Parkinson patients (Muller, 2015). All three 
COMT inhibitors are nitrocatechols (catechols with an adjacent 
nitro group).
Egan et al. (2001) reported that COMT genotype is related 
in an allele-dosage manner to cognitive performance, with Met/
Met individuals (COMTL phenotype) demonstrating increased 
executive cognition, as measured by the Wisconsin Card Sorting 
Test. The impact of the low-activity COMT allele was attributed 
to decreased dopamine catabolism in the prefrontal cortex, which 
results in enhanced neuronal function. Conversely, those individuals 
who are homozygous for Val108 (COMTH phenotype) appear to have 
decreased executive cognition, and may be at a slightly increased 
risk of developing schizophrenia (Egan et al., 2001). Modafinil, a

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
353
drug approved for the treatment of narcolepsy and other sleep disor-
ders, allows better executive function performance and better vigi-
lance throughout sleep deprivation in individuals with high COMT 
activity (the Val/Val allelic variant). Due to their higher brain levels 
of dopamine, individuals with low COMT activity (the Met/Met 
allelic variant) respond to lower doses of modafinil than individu-
als with intermediate (Val/Met) or high (Val/Val) COMT activity 
(Dauvilliers et al., 2015).
Several N-methyltransferases have been described in humans 
and other mammals, including PNMT, which catalyzes the 
N-methylation of the neurotransmitter norepinephrine to form 
epinephrine; HNMT, which specifically methylates the imidazole 
ring of histamine and closely related compounds (Fig. 6-65); and 
NNMT, which methylates compounds containing a pyridine ring, 
such as nicotinamide, or an indole ring, such as tryptophan and 
serotonin (Weinshilboum, 1989, 1992b; Weinshilboum et al., 1999). 
PNMT is a cytosolic enzyme expressed at high levels in adrenal 
medullary chromafin cells, and in neurons of the medulla oblon-
gata, hypothalamus, as well as in sensory nuclei of the vagus nerve 
and the retina, and is not thought to play a significant role in the 
biotransformation of xenobiotics (Ji et al., 2005; Testa and Krämer, 
2008, 2010).
HNMT is a cytosolic enzyme (Mr 33,000) that is highly 
expressed in kidney, liver, colon, prostate, ovary, and spinal cord 
cells (Horton et al., 2005). Its activity (which can be measured in 
erythrocytes) varies sixfold among individuals due to a genetic 
polymorphism (C → T) that results in a point mutation, namely, 
Thr115Ile. The latter allele (Ile115) is quite common in Caucasians 
and Han Chinese (10% frequency) and encodes a variant of HNMT 
with decreased catalytic activity and thermal stability. HNMT 
may influence efficacy of some drugs by a mechanism that is not 
yet fully understood. For instance, individuals who are heterozy-
gous for the Ile115 allele have been found to exhibit significantly 
decreased methylprednisolone-induced cortisol suppression relative 
to (Thr115)-homozygous individuals (Hon et al., 2006). Several other 
polymorphisms in the noncoding region of the HNMT gene have 
also been identified. HNMT can be inhibited by several antihis-
tamines, quinacrine, amodiaquine, metoprine, and tacrine (Horton 
et al., 2005).
NNMT is a monomeric, cytosolic enzyme (Mr ~30,000) that 
appears to be a member of a family of methyltransferases that 
includes PNMT and TEMT (the thioether S-methyltransferase pres-
ent in mouse lung). It catalyzes the N-methylation of nicotinamide 
and structurally related pyridine compounds (including pyridine 
itself) to form positively charged pyridinium ions. Nicotinic acid 
(niacin), a commonly used lipid-lowering agent, is converted to 
nicotinamide in vivo, which is then methylated by NNMT (or it 
is incorporated into nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide [NAD]). In 
contrast to many other methyltransferases, NNMT is not expressed 
in erythrocytes.
NNMT activity in the human liver, like HNMT activity in 
erythrocytes, varies considerably from one individual to the next, 
and has a trimodal distribution dependent on variations in mRNA 
and protein levels, and up to 25% of the general population has 
high NNMT levels (Souto et al., 2005; Williams et al., 2005). It 
is not known to what extent genetic polymorphisms account for 
this variation. However, 10 SNPs in the untranslated regions of 
the gene have been detected in a Spanish population (Souto et al., 
2005). A genome-wide scan for genes associated with plasma 
homocysteine levels determined that there was a statistically signifi-
cant association with the NNMT gene, and, moreover, that 1 SNP 
(dbSNP ID#: rs694539) has a greater statistically significant asso-
ciation with homocysteine levels (P = .017) (Souto et al., 2005). 
Homocysteine plasma levels are an independent intermediate 
risk marker for osteoporotic fractures, congestive heart failure, 
venous thrombosis, myocardial infarction, stroke, and Alzheimer 
disease (Souto et al., 2005). In humans, the only source of homo-
cysteine is from the demethylation of methionine in a multistep 
pathway that involves SAM-dependent methyltransferases to form 
S-adenosylhomocysteine, the immediate precursor to homocyste-
ine. Taken together, these data suggest that high methyltransferase 
activity could contribute to hyperhomocysteinemia. Of the many 
SAM-dependent methyltransferase genes examined for an asso-
ciation with homocysteine levels, only NNMT (which is highly 
expressed in the liver) was found to show a significant association 
(Souto et al., 2005). NNMT is reported to be expressed in the brain 
and has been implicated as a component of the etiology of idio-
pathic Parkinson disease because it can convert 4-phenylpyridine to 
MPP+, which is known to cause Parkinson disease symptoms due 
to its toxic effect on neuronal mitochondria (see the section “Amine 
Oxidases” and Fig. 6-33) (Williams et al., 2005).
There are numerous other human N-methyltransferases (as 
well as O-, S-, and C-methyltransferases) that appear to play rela-
tively specific roles in the methylation of endogenous compounds, 
and most have not been well characterized with regard to their 
capability to methylate xenobiotics (there are at least 39 SAM-
dependent methyltransferases in humans) (Souto et al., 2005). For 
instance, INMT catalyzes the N-methylation of tryptamine and 
structurally related compounds (Thompson et al., 1999). Other 
such enzymes that were initially thought to play a role only in the 
N-methylation of endogenous compounds were later found to play 
a role, albeit a minor one, in the N-methylation of one or more 
xenobiotics. Amine N-methyltransferase (AMNT, also called aryl-
amine N-methyltransferase or nicotine N-methyltransferase), which 
is highly expressed in the human thyroid and is also found in the 
adrenal gland and lung, exhibits some activity toward tryptamine 
and has been also found to preferentially methylate the pyridine 
nitrogen of R-nicotine, which gives rise to nicotine isomethonium 
ions (Hukkanen et al., 2005). GNMT is thought to play an impor-
tant role in the regulation of methyl group metabolism in the liver 
and pancreas through regulation of the ratio between S-adenosyl-
l-methionine and SAH. Rat data show that the tetrameric form of 
the GNMT has catalytic activity, and the dimeric form binds PAHs. 
There is also evidence that the dimeric form of human GNMT 
sequesters B[a]P, and thereby decreases its cytotoxic effects (Chen 
et al., 2004b; Lee et al., 2006).
The system that is used to classify human N-methyltransferases 
may not be appropriate for other species. In guinea pigs, for exam-
ple, both nicotine and histamine are methylated by a common 
N-methyltransferase. Guinea pigs have an unusually high capacity 
to methylate histamine and xenobiotics. The major route of nico-
tine biotransformation in the guinea pig is methylation, although 
R-nicotine is preferentially methylated over its S-enantiomer 
(Cundy et al., 1985). Guinea pigs also methylate the imidazole ring 
of cimetidine.
S-Methylation is an important pathway in the biotransforma-
tion of sulfhydryl-containing xenobiotics, such as the antihyperten-
sive drug captopril, the antirheumatic agent d-penicillamine, the 
antineoplastic and immunosuppressive drugs 6-mercaptopurine, 
6-thioguanine, and azathioprine, metabolites of the alcohol deter-
rent disulfiram, and the deacetylated metabolite of the antidiuretic, 
spironolactone. In humans, S-methylation is catalyzed by at least 
two enzymes TPMT and TMT (which may be the same enzyme 
as POMT).
TPMT is a cytoplasmic enzyme that preferentially methyl-
ates aromatic and heterocyclic compounds such as the thiopurine

354
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
drugs 6-mercaptopurine, 6-thioguanine, and azathioprine. TMT is a 
microsomal enzyme that preferentially methylates aliphatic sulfhy-
dryl compounds such as captopril, d-penicillamine, and disulfiram 
derivatives. It has also been found to methylate the heterocyclic 
thiol-containing leaving groups of some cephalosporins (Wood 
et al., 2002), the thiazolidinedione drug, MK-0767, a dual α/γ PPAR 
agonist (Karanam et al., 2004), dithiothreitol (Weinshilboum, 2006), 
and some thiofuran flavoring agents (Lake et al., 2003). Although a 
gene that encodes TMT has not yet been definitively identified, there 
is strong evidence to suggest that the membrane-bound POMT is the 
same enzyme as TMT, which means that TMT could also catalyze 
the O-methylation of phenols (Weinshilboum, 2006).
Both TMT and TPMT are present in erythrocytes at levels that 
reflect the expression of TPMT and TMT in liver and other tis-
sues. Although TPMT and TMT are independently regulated, their 
expression in erythrocytes is largely determined by genetic factors. 
TPMT is encoded by a single gene with alleles for a low-activity 
form (TPMTL) and for a high-activity form (TPMTH). The allele 
frequencies of TPMTL and TPMTH are 0.06 and 0.94, respectively, 
which produces a trimodal distribution of TPMT activity with low, 
intermediate, and high activity expressed in 0.3%, 11.1%, and 
88.6% of Caucasians, respectively. At least 28 separate genetic 
polymorphisms have been identified and most are associated with 
low TPMT activity, with the *2, *3A, *3B, and *3C alleles account-
ing for 80% to 95% of the TPMTL phenotype (Weinshilboum, 2006; 
Ujiie et al., 2008; Wang et al., 2010a; Asadov et al., 2017; Liu et al., 
2017a; Tamm et al., 2017). In Caucasians, the allele that is most 
commonly associated with the TPMTL phenotype is TPMT*3A 
(5%), which contains two nonsynonymous SNPs: Ala154Thr and 
Tyr240Cys (Wood et al., 2006). These amino acid changes (and 
those in the TPMT*3B and TPMT*3C variants) lead to aggrega-
tion and rapid degradation of expressed TPMT by a ubiquitin/pro-
teasome-dependent mechanism (Wang et al., 2005). Another variant 
TPMT*4 results in alternative TPMT mRNA splicing and reduced 
enzyme expression, leading to low TPMT activity in individuals 
carrying this allele (Wang et al., 2010a).
Thiopurine drugs such as 6-mercaptopurine and its prodrug 
azathioprine are widely used in the treatment of cancer, such as acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia, inflammatory disorders, such as inflamma-
tory bowel disease, and autoimmune diseases, such as rheumatoid 
arthritis, systemic lupus erythromatosus, autoimmune hepatitis, and 
generalized eczematous disorders. Patients with low TPMT activity 
are at increased risk of thiopruine toxicity, which includes myelo-
suppression (bone marrow toxicity), gastrointestinal disturbances 
(nausea and vomiting), hepatotoxicity, and pancreatitis, which 
can lead to discontinuation of treatment with 6-merceptopurine or 
azathioprine in up to one-third of patients (Weinshilboum, 1989, 
1992b; Liu et al., 2015b; Abaji and Krajinovic, 2017; Asadov et al., 
2017). The thiopurine drugs metabolized by TPMT have a rela-
tively narrow therapeutic index. They are metabolized by xanthine 
oxidoreductase (in addition to TPMT), but because xanthine oxi-
doreductase is not present in hematopoietic tissues, TPMT activity 
in these tissues is more important in the avoidance of life-threat-
ening myelosuppression at standard doses (Weinshilboum, 2006). 
Phenotyping for the TPMT genetic polymorphism represents one of 
the first examples in which testing for a genetic variant has entered 
standard clinical practice (Weinshilboum et al., 1999; Liu et al., 
2015b; Abaji and Krajinovic, 2017; Asadov et al., 2017). The clini-
cal relevance of TPMT polymorphisms is reflected by the inclu-
sion of TPMT as a “valid biomarker” for pharmacogenomics, along 
with CYP2D6 polymorphisms, in the FDA’s 2005 “Guidance for 
Pharmacogenomic Data Submission.” TPMT can be inhibited by 
benzoic acid derivatives, which also complicates therapy with drugs 
that are metabolized by TPMT. Patients with inflammatory bowel 
disorders such as Crohn disease are often treated with thiopurine 
drugs, which are metabolized by TPMT, and with sulfasalazine or 
olsalazine, which are potent TPMT inhibitors. The combination of 
these drugs can lead to thiopurine-induced myelosuppression.
A genetic polymorphism for TMT also has been described, 
but its pharmacological and toxicological significance remains to 
be determined. The molecular basis for the polymorphism has not 
been determined, but studies have shown that 98% of the fivefold 
individual variation in erythrocyte TMT activity is due to inher-
itance, with an allele for high TMT activity having a frequency 
of 12%. TMT is relatively specific for aliphatic sulfhydryl com-
pounds such as 2-mercatoethanol, captopril, d-penicillamine, and 
N-acetylcysteine. It also rapidly methylates a dihydro metabolite 
of ziprasidone that is formed by aldehyde oxidase, as shown in 
Fig. 6-7 (Obach et al., 2005). TMT is present at high levels in the 
colonic mucosa and is also expressed in liver microsomes and 
erythrocyte membranes. It is not inhibited by benzoic acid deriva-
tives, but it is inhibited by the CYP inhibitor proadifen (aka SKF-
525A) (Weinshilboum et al., 1999).
As shown in Fig. 6-55, clopidogrel is a prodrug that is con-
verted to its active metabolite, a ring-opened thiol, by sequential 
CYP- and GSH-dependent steps. The active metabolite, H4, is one 
of four diastereomers formed during this process. Due to stereo-
preferential metabolism by CYP enzymes, clopidogrel is converted 
to H3, an inactive metabolite, to a greater extent (about threefold) 
than H4 but the circulating levels of H3 and H4 are roughly the 
same. This is because microsomal TMT preferentially methylates 
H3 over H4 by almost 100-fold (Liu et al., 2015a).
Some of the hydrogen sulfide produced by anaerobic bacteria 
in the intestinal tract is converted by S-methyltransferases to meth-
ane thiol and then to dimethylsulfide. Another source of substrates 
for S-methyltransferases are the thioethers of GSH conjugates. GSH 
conjugates are hydrolyzed to cysteine conjugates, which can either 
be acetylated to form mercapturic acids or cleaved by cysteine-con-
jugate β-lyase (CCBL1). This β-lyase pathway converts the cyste-
ine conjugate to pyruvate, ammonia, and a sulfhydryl-containing 
xenobiotic, which is a potential substrate for S-methylation.
Methylation can also lead to increased toxicity. AS3MT is a 
methyltransferase (previously called Cyt19) that methylates inor-
ganic arsenic to form methylarsonic and dimethylarsonic acids, 
which are more cytotoxic and genotoxic than arsenate and arse-
nite (Wood et al., 2006). As many as 27 polymorphisms have been 
identified in this gene, with two rare alleles that cause markedly 
decreased activity and immunoreactive protein levels, and one 
frequent allele (i.e., about 10% in both African Americans and 
Caucasians) that causes increased activity and immunoreactive 
protein levels (Wood et al., 2006). Up to 1% of African Americans 
and Caucasians would be expected to be homozygous for the allele 
that encodes the high-activity AS3MT, and this may potentially 
lead to increased arsenic toxicity in such individuals. Contrary to 
expectation, AS3MT knockout mice are more susceptible, not less 
susceptible, than wild-type mice to the toxicity of arsenite (such 
as urinary bladder hyperplasia) (Antonelli et al., 2014). It is pos-
sible that methylation of inorganic arsenic by AS3MT represents a 
detoxication process in mice and an activation process in humans.
Acetylation
N-Acetylation is a major route of biotransformation for xenobiotics 
containing an aromatic amine (phenyl-NH2) or a hydrazine group 
(R–NH–NH2), which are converted to aromatic amides (phenyl-
NH–COCH3) and hydrazides (R–NH–NH–COCH3), respectively

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
355
(Evans, 1992). N-Acetylation of aromatic amines and hydra-
zines occurs on nitrogen atoms with a low pKa(B), usually less 
than 5. Xenobiotics containing primary aliphatic amines, most of 
which have pKa(B) values greater than 8, are rarely substrates for 
N-acetylation. Notable exceptions are the antibacterial agent trova-
floxacin, the primary metabolite of the β-adrenoreceptor blocker 
propranolol, and cysteine conjugates, which are formed from GSH 
conjugates and converted to mercapturic acids by N-acetylation 
in the kidney (see the section “Glutathione Conjugation”) (Testa 
and Krämer, 2008, 2010). N-acetylation of aliphatic amines low-
ers their pKa(B) value from above 8 to below 6, which lowers their 
ion-partitioning into lysosomes and reduces their volume of distri-
bution, as described in the section “Introduction.” In a few cases, 
the N-acetylation of aliphatic acidic amines (such as the amine in 
a sulfonamide, which is present as an anion, not a cation) has also 
been documented, an example of which is N-acetylation of the 
anticonvulsant drug zonisamide (Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). 
Like methylation, N-acetylation has a negligible effect on log P and 
TPSA, as shown in Table 6-3; hence, N-acetylation has a negligible 
effect on aqueous solubility and does little to promote the renal and 
biliary excretion of xenobiotics.
The N-acetylation of xenobiotics is catalyzed by 
N-acetyltransferases (NATs) and requires the cofactor acetyl coen-
zyme A (acetyl-CoA), the structure of which is shown in Fig. 6-57. 
The reaction occurs in two sequential steps according to a ping-
pong Bi–Bi mechanism (Hein, 1988). In the first step, the acetyl 
group from acetyl-CoA is transferred to a cysteine residue in the 
NAT active site with release of CoA (E–SH + CoA–SCOCH3 → 
E–S–COCH3 + CoA–SH). In the second step, the acetyl group is 
transferred from the acylated enzyme to the amino group of the sub-
strate with regeneration of the enzyme. For “strongly” basic amines 
(pKa(B) >8), the rate of N-acetylation is determined by the first step 
(acetylation of the enzyme), whereas the rate of N-acetylation of 
“weakly” basic amines (pKa(B) <6) is determined by the second 
step (transfer of the acetyl group from the acylated enzyme to the 
acceptor amine). In certain cases (discussed later in this section), 
NATs can catalyze the O-acetylation of hydroxylamines.
NATs are cytosolic enzymes found in the liver and many other 
tissues of most mammalian species, with the notable exception of 
the dog, fox, and musk shrew (Suncus marinus) which are unable 
to acetylate xenobiotics (a notable exception being the ability of 
dogs to N-acetylate cyanamide, which contains an acidic amine 
group) (Nakura et al., 1995; Trepanier et al., 1997; Sim et al., 
2008; Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). In contrast to other xeno-
biotic-biotransforming enzymes, the number of NATs known to 
play a role in xenobiotic metabolism is limited (Vatsis et al., 1995; 
Boukouvala and Fakis, 2005). Rabbits and hamsters express only 
two NAT enzymes, known as NAT1 and NAT2, whereas mice and 
rats express three enzymes, namely, NAT1, NAT2, and NAT3. The 
two xenobiotic-acetylating human enzymes are NAT1 and NAT2, 
which are encoded by two highly polymorphic genes located on 
chromosome 8. Other human NAT genes are NAT6, NAT8 to 
NAT10, NAT14, and NAT16, located on other chromosomes. The 
activities and expression pattern of these enzymes have not yet been 
definitively characterized, although some of these genes have been 
associated with atopic dermatitis or psoriasis (NAT9) and nasopha-
ryngeal cancer (NAT6) (Helms et al., 2003; Bowcock and Cookson, 
2004; Duh et al., 2004; Yamada and Ymamoto, 2005; Morar et al., 
2006). Individual NATs and their allelic variants were named in 
the order of their description in the literature, which makes for a 
somewhat confusing nomenclature system (Vatsis et al., 1995). For 
example, in humans, the “wild-type” NAT1 and NAT2 alleles are 
designated NAT1*4 and NAT2*4 (Hein, 2006; McDonagh et al., 
2014). Information on allelic variants of NATs is available at http://
nat.mbg.duth.gr/.
In each species examined, NAT1 and NAT2 are closely related 
proteins (79% to 95% identical in amino acid sequence) with an 
active-site cysteine residue (Cys68) in the N-terminal region (Grant 
et al., 1992; Vatsis et al., 1995). In addition to the active-site cyste-
ine residue, the presence of a histidine residue (His107) and an aspar-
tate residue (Asp122) are required for activity, forming a catalytic 
triad necessary for the transfer of an acetyl group from acetyl-CoA 
to the substrate (Sandy et al., 2005; Sim et al., 2008). Human NAT1 
and NAT2 genes are composed of intronless open reading frames of 
870 bp on the same chromosome with a NAT pseudogene (NATP1) 
between them, and encode proteins of 290 amino acids that share 
87% homology in the coding region (Boukouvala and Fakis, 2005; 
Hein, 2006).
Despite their proximity on the same chromosome, NAT1 and 
NAT2 are independently regulated proteins. For instance, human 
NAT1 protein and/or mRNA have been detected in every tissue 
examined (e.g., liver, gastrointestinal tract, leukocytes, erythro-
cytes, bladder, uroepithelial cells, mammary, lung, placenta, kid-
ney, pineal gland, skeletal muscle, heart, brain, and pancreas) and 
are present from the blastocyst stage, whereas NAT2 is mainly 
expressed in the liver, small intestine, and codon. However, most 
(but not all) of the tissues that express NAT1 also express low levels 
of NAT2 mRNA (Debiec-Rychter et al., 1999).
NAT1 and NAT2 have different but overlapping substrate 
specificities, although no substrate is exclusively N-acetylated by 
one enzyme or the other. Substrates preferentially N-acetylated by 
human NAT1 include 4-aminobenzoic acid (PABA), 4-aminosali-
cylic acid, sulfamethoxazole, and sulfanilamide, whereas substrates 
preferentially N-acetylated by human NAT2 include isoniazid, 
hydralazine, procainamide, dapsone, aminoglutethimide, and sul-
famethazine. Some investigators have used PABA as a selective 
probe/index substrate for wild-type NAT1, and either sulfameth-
azine or sulfadiazine as selective probe/index substrate for wild-
type NAT2 (Winter and Unadkat, 2005). Some xenobiotics, such 
as the carcinogenic aromatic amine, 2-aminofluorene (2-AF), are 
N-acetylated equally well by NAT1 and NAT2. The calcium-sen-
sitizing agent levosimendan, developed for the treatment of con-
gestive heart failure, has a pharmacologically active N-acetylated 
metabolite produced by NAT2 (Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). 
Other drugs that are substrates for either NAT1 or NAT2 include 
acebutolol, amantadine, amonafide, amrinone, benzocaine, declo-
pramide, metamizole, and phenelzine (Gonzalez and Tukey, 2006; 
Sirot et al., 2006; Sim et al., 2008).
Several drugs are N-acetylated following their biotransforma-
tion by hydrolysis, reduction, or oxidation. For example, caffeine 
is N3-demethylated by CYP1A2 to paraxanthine (Fig. 6-50), which 
is then N-demethylated to 1-methylxanthine and N-acetylated to 
5-acetylamino-6-formylamino-3-methyluracil (AFMU) by NAT2. 
The ratio of AFMU to 1-methylxanthine can be used to determine 
acetylator phenotype (Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). Other drugs 
converted to metabolites that are N-acetylated by NAT2 include 
sulfasalazine, nitrazepam, and clonazepam. Examples of drugs that 
are N-acetylated by NAT1 and NAT2 are shown in Fig. 6-66. It 
should be noted, however, that there are species differences in the 
substrate specificity of NATs. For example, PABA is preferentially 
N-acetylated by NAT1 in humans and rabbits but by NAT2 in mice 
and hamsters.
Genetic polymorphisms for N-acetylation have been docu-
mented in humans, hamsters, rabbits, and mice (Evans, 1992; Vatsis 
et al., 1995; Hirvonen, 1999; Hein et al., 2000; Sim et al., 2008). 
The impact of genetic polymorphisms of human NATs on drug

356
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
toxicity and environmental carcinogenesis, such as the incidence 
of cancer associated with cigarette smoking and the consumption 
of cooked meat, has attracted considerable attention. However, 
the literature is replete with contradictory findings (McDonagh 
et al., 2014). A further complication is that some genetic poly-
morphisms affect the N-acetylation of compounds in a substrate-
dependent manner (McDonagh et al., 2014). NAT1 and NAT2 used 
to be referred to as monomorphic and polymorphic NATs because 
only the latter enzyme was thought to be genetically polymorphic. 
However, at least 28 allelic variants have now been documented for 
the human NAT1 gene, compared with 88 for NAT2 (McDonagh 
et al., 2014). In general, NAT1 allelic variants are less prevalent 
than NAT2 allelic variants; hence, there is less genetically deter-
mined variation in the metabolism of “NAT1 substrates.”
A series of clinical observations in the 1950s established the 
existence of slow and fast acetylators of the antitubercular drug 
isoniazid, which is now known to be primarily acetylated by NAT2. 
In general, about 50% of patients treated with isoniazid have 
adverse events such as peripheral neuropathy and hepatotoxicity. 
These adverse effects are more pronounced in NAT2 slow acetyl-
ators, although some early reports suggested fast acetylators were 
at increased risk of isoniazid-induced liver injury (discussed later in 
this section). NAT2 slow acetylators also exhibit a higher incidence 
of adverse events with clonazepam, hydralazine, procainamide, and 
sulfonamides, such as sulfamethoxazole and sulfasalazine (Sirot 
et al., 2006; McDonagh et al., 2014). The incidence of the NAT2 slow 
acetylator phenotype is high in Middle Eastern populations (e.g., 
about 92% in Egyptians), intermediate in Caucasian and African 
populations (e.g., about 50% to 59% in Caucasian Americans, 
Australians, and Europeans; about 41% in African Americans; 
about 50% to 60% in Africans), and low in Asian populations (e.g., 
~=about 20% in Chinese; about 8% to 10% in Japanese) (Sirot 
et al., 2006). Many studies have demonstrated the typical bimodal 
distribution of fast and slow acetylators with drugs such as isonia-
zid, but other drugs, such as caffeine and sulfamethazine, exhibit 
slow, intermediate, and fast acetylator phenotypes (Hein, 2006). 
Parkin et al. (1997) also demonstrated that isoniazid elimination is 
trimodal, and that phenotype and genotype were concordant.
The NAT2 slow acetylator phenotype is caused by various sin-
gle nucleotide polymorphisms in the NAT2 gene that decrease NAT2 
activity, decrease enzyme stability, or target the enzyme for protea-
somal degradation. At least 88 allelic variants of human NAT2 have 
been documented. The wild-type enzyme is NAT2*4. Allelic variants 
that do NOT appear to affect NAT2 activity are *11A, *12A–C, *13, 
and *18. Common allelic variants associated with the NAT2 poor 
acetylator phenotype include *5 (rs1801280), *6 (rs1799930), *7 
(rs1799931), and *14 (rs1801279) (McDonagh et al., 2014). NAT2*5 
is a point mutation T341C (which causes the amino acid substitution 
Ile114Thr) that decreases Vmax for N-acetylation without altering the 
Km for substrate binding or the stability of NAT2. The NAT2*5 
allele is the most common cause of the slow acetylator phenotype in 
Caucasians (e.g., frequency of about 50% in the United Kingdom) 
but is rarely observed in Koreans (i.e., less than 5%) (Hein, 2006). 
There are 10 known NAT2*5 alleles, designated NAT2*5A through 
NAT*5J. The alleles containing only the Ile114Thr substitution are 
NAT2*5A (which also contains a silent C481T nucleotide change) and 
NAT2*5D. The others contain this and at least one other nucleotide 
and/or amino acid substitution, and NAT2*5B confers the “slow-
est acetylator” phenotype (Patin et al., 2006). The NAT2*7 allele is 
more prevalent in Asians than Caucasians or Africans (Hein, 2006), 
and involves either a point mutation G857A (i.e., NAT2*7A) or both 
this change and C282T (i.e., NAT2*7B). Both of these changes cause 
the amino acid substitution Gly286Glu, which decreases the stabil-
ity, rather than the activity, of NAT2. NAT2*6 (more common in 
southern India) and NAT2*14 (present mainly in Africa and Spain) 
also result in one or more amino acid changes that lead to decreased 
NAT2 activity, whereas the amino acid change in NAT2*12 (pres-
ent mainly in Africa and Spain) does not decrease activity (Hein, 
2006). Within the slow NAT2 acetylator phenotype there is consid-
erable variation in rates of xenobiotic N-acetylation. This is partly 
because different mutations in the NAT2 gene have different effects 
on NAT2 activity and/or enzyme stability, heterozygotes retain mod-
erate NAT2 activity, and the N-acetylation of “NAT2-substrates” by 
NAT1 becomes significant in slow NAT2 acetylators.
The slowest acetylator haplotype, namely NAT2*5B, which 
has the strongest association with bladder cancer, appears to have 
been positively selected during the last 6500 years in western and 
central Eurasians, which suggests that slow acetylation conferred an 
evolutionary advantage within this population (Patin et al., 2006). 
Moreover, because most of the NAT2 polymorphisms that lead to 
slow acetylation are present at high frequencies in various popu-
lations, it would seem that varied rates of acetylation may be an 
important human adaptation to environmental variables. Because 
acetylation can be very important in the determination of the inter-
action between human populations and many xenobiotics in their 
particular environment (e.g., through different diets and lifestyles), 
it is not surprising that they are recent targets for natural selection. 
Today, slow acetylation can be a disadvantage inasmuch as it pre-
disposes to the toxicity of several drugs.
At least 28 allelic variants have now been documented for the 
human NAT1 gene, although these variants are less prevalent than 
Figure 6-66.  Examples of substrates for the human N-acetyltransferases, 
NAT1, and the highly polymorphic NAT2.
Preferred NAT1 substrates
Preferred NAT2 substrates
COOH
NH2
NH2
NH2
NH2
COOH
NH2
4-Aminobenzoic acid
OH
4-Aminosalicylic acid
NH
N
O
Sulfamethoxazole
N
C
O
NH
NH2
Isoniazid
N
N
CH3
CH3
CH3
SO2
NH2
NH
SO2
SO2
Sulfamethazine
Dapsone

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
357
the NAT2 allelic variants; hence, there is less genetically determined 
variation in the metabolism of “NAT1 substrates.” Nevertheless, 
there is evidence that phenotypic differences in the N-acetylation of 
4-aminosalicylic acid are distributed bimodally, consistent with the 
existence of low- and high-activity forms of NAT1. Furthermore, 
an extremely slow acetylator of 4-aminosalicylic acid has been 
identified with mutations in both NAT1 alleles: one that decreases 
NAT1 activity and stability and one that encodes a truncated and 
catalytically inactive form of the enzyme. Two NAT1 variants, 
NAT1*10 and NAT1*11, are gain-of-function polymorphisms that 
lead to increased efficiency of protein translation (Wang et al., 
2011b). Individuals homozygous for NAT1*10 or heterozygous 
for NAT1*11 are classified as fast acetylators, whereas those rare 
individuals who are homozygous for NAT1*11 have been classi-
fied as ultrafast acetylators (Wang et al., 2011b). Both NAT*10 and 
NAT*11 alleles are risk modifiers of sulfamethoxazole-induced 
hypersensitivity in HIV/AIDS patients, such that individuals who 
are NAT1 fast acetylators but are also NAT2 slow acetylators are 
protected against this type of hypersensitivity (Wang et al., 2011b). 
It has also been demonstrated that NAT1*16 but not NAT1*10 or 
NAT1*11 causes a 50% decrease in NAT1 activity and NAT1 pro-
tein levels in COS-1 cell cytosol (Soucek et al., 2004). Cascorbi 
et al. (2001) found that individuals who express NAT1*10 and 
NAT2*4 (i.e., intermediate NAT1 activity and normal NAT2 activ-
ity) were at a significantly lower risk of bladder cancer, especially 
when exposed to environmental carcinogens (Cascorbi et al., 2001). 
It is therefore likely that the interplay between NAT1 and NAT2 
phenotypes is relevant to susceptibility to certain carcinogens.
Genetic polymorphisms in NAT2 have a number of phar-
macological and toxicological consequences for drugs that are 
N-acetylated by this enzyme. The pharmacological effects of the 
antihypertensive drug hydralazine are more pronounced in slow 
NAT2 acetylators. Slow NAT2 acetylators are predisposed to 
several drug toxicities, including nerve damage (peripheral neu-
ropathy) from isoniazid and dapsone, systemic lupus erythema-
tosus from hydralazine and procainamide, and the toxic effects 
of coadministration of the anticonvulsant phenytoin with isonia-
zid. Slow NAT2 acetylators who are also deficient in glucose-
6-phosphate dehydrogenase are particularly prone to hemolysis 
from certain sulfonamides. HIV-infected individuals of the slow 
acetylator phenotype suffer more often from adverse drug events 
(ADEs) and, among patients with Stevens–Johnson syndrome, the 
overwhelming majority are slow acetylators. Fast NAT2 acetyl-
ators are predisposed to the myelotoxic effects of amonafide 
because N-acetylation retards the clearance of this antineoplas-
tic drug, which is thought to be due to inhibition of CYP1A2 by 
N-acetylamonofide (McDonagh et al., 2014).
Early epidemiological studies suggested that rapid NAT2 
acetylators were at increased risk for the development of isoniazid-
induced liver toxicity; however, the current consensus is that slow 
NAT2 acetylation is a risk modifier for isoniazid-induced hepato-
toxicity while rapid acetylators are protected from toxicity (Metushi 
et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2016a). Following its acetylation by NAT2, 
isoniazid can be hydrolyzed to isonicotinic acid and acetylhydrazine 
(CH3CO–NHNH2). The latter metabolite can be N-hydroxylated by 
FMO or CYP to a reactive intermediate, as shown in Fig. 6-43. 
The generation of a reactive metabolite from acetylhydrazine would 
seem to provide a mechanistic basis for enhanced isoniazid hepa-
totoxicity in fast acetylators. However, acetylhydrazine can be fur-
ther acetylated to diacetlyhydrazine (CH3CO–NHNH–COCH3), and 
this detoxication reaction is also catalyzed by NAT2. Therefore, 
acetylhydrazine is both produced and detoxified by NAT2; hence, 
slow acetylation, not fast acetylation, becomes the risk modifier for 
isoniazid-induced hepatotoxicity, just as it is for isoniazid-induced 
peripheral neuropathy. Isoniazid can also be directly hydrolyzed to 
yield isonicotinic acid and hydrazine (H2N–NH2). Hydrazine (also 
a toxic substance used as rocket propellant) has been proposed to 
be the hepatotoxic metabolite of isoniazid as slow acetylators have 
significantly higher plasma concentrations of hydrazine relative to 
rapid acetylators (Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010; Metushi et al., 
2011). Rifampin and alcohol have been reported to enhance the 
hepatotoxicity of isoniazid. These drug interactions support a grow-
ing body of evidence that isoniazid itself is converted to one or 
more reactive metabolites that result in covalent binding to protein 
(hapten formation), which in severe cases of isoniazid-induced liver 
injury trigger an immune response. In support of this interpretation, 
isoniazid hepatotoxicity is more severe in NAT2 slow acetylator 
who also carry the high-activity CYP2E1 c1/c1 genotype (Metushi 
et al., 2011). Furthermore, circulating antibodies against isoniazid-
adducted proteins (antidrug antibodies) and CYP enzymes (antibod-
ies against CYP2E1, 3A4, and 2C9) have been found in patients 
with severe isoniazid-induced liver injury (Metushi et al., 2014). 
Isoniazid is an antitubercular drug, and its inactivation by NAT2 is 
interesting from the perspective that several organisms, including 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, express a NAT2-like enzyme, which 
has implications for isoniazid resistance in tuberculosis.
Aromatic amines can be both activated and deactivated by 
NATs (Kato and Yamazoe, 1994; Hirvonen, 1999; Hein et al., 
2000). The NATs detoxify aromatic amines by converting them to 
the corresponding amides because aromatic amides are less likely 
than aromatic amines to be activated to DNA-reactive metabo-
lites by CYP, peroxidases such as PHS, and UGTs (see the sec-
tion “Glucuronidation and Formation of Acyl-CoA Thioesters”). 
However, NATs can activate aromatic amines if they are first 
N-hydroxylated by CYP because NATs can also function as 
O-acetyltransferases and convert hydroxylamines to acetoxy esters 
(aryl-NHOH → aryl-NH–O–COCH3). As shown in Fig. 6-16, the 
acetoxy esters of hydroxylamines, like the corresponding sulfonate 
esters (Fig. 6-64), can break down to form highly reactive nitre-
nium and carbonium ions that bind to DNA. NATs catalyze the 
O-acetylation of N-hydroxyaromatic amines by two distinct mecha-
nisms. The first reaction, which is exemplified by the conversion of 
N-hydroxyaminofluorene to N-acetoxyaminofluorene, requires ace-
tyl-CoA and proceeds by the same mechanism previously described 
for N-acetylation. The second reaction is exemplified by the conver-
sion of 2-acetylaminofluorene (2-AAF) to N-acetoxyaminofluorene, 
which does not require acetyl-CoA but involves an intramolecular 
transfer of the N-acetyl group from nitrogen to oxygen. These reac-
tions are shown in Fig. 6-67.
Genetic polymorphisms in NAT2 have been reported to influ-
ence susceptibility to aromatic amine–induced bladder and colon 
cancer (see the section “Glucuronidation and Formation of Acyl-
CoA Thioesters”) (Evans, 1992; Kadlubar, 1994; Hirvonen, 1999; 
Hein et al., 2000; Sim et al., 2008; Ma et al., 2016). Bladder can-
cer is thought to be caused by bicyclic aromatic amines (benzi-
dine, 2-aminonaphthalene, and 4-aminobiphenyl), whereas colon 
cancer is thought to be caused by heterocyclic aromatic amines, 
such as the products of amino acid pyrolysis (e.g., 2-amino-
6-methylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine or PhIP, and others listed in Table 
6-18). Epidemiological studies suggest that slow NAT2 acetylators 
are more likely than fast NAT2 acetylators to develop bladder can-
cer from cigarette smoking and from occupational exposure to bicy-
clic aromatic amines. The possibility that slow NAT2 acetylators are 
at increased risk for aromatic amine–induced cancer is supported by 
the finding that dogs, which are poor acetylators, are highly prone to 
aromatic amine–induced bladder cancer. By comparison, fast NAT2

358
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
acetylators appear to be at increased risk for colon cancer from het-
erocyclic aromatic amines.
The influence of acetylator phenotype on susceptibility to 
aromatic amine–induced cancer can be rationalized on the ability 
of NATs to activate and detoxify aromatic amines and by differ-
ences in the substrate specificity and tissues distribution of NAT1 
and NAT2 (recall that NAT1 is expressed in virtually all tissues, 
whereas NAT2 is expressed mainly in the liver and gastrointestinal 
tract). Both NAT1 and NAT2 catalyze the O-acetylation (activation) 
of N-hydroxy bicyclic aromatic amines, whereas the O-acetylation 
of N-hydroxy heterocyclic aromatic amines is preferentially cata-
lyzed by NAT2. Bicyclic aromatic amines can also be N-acetylated 
(detoxified) by NAT1 and NAT2, but heterocyclic aromatic amines 
are poor substrates for both enzymes. Therefore, the fast acetylator 
phenotype protects against aromatic amine–induced bladder can-
cer because NAT2 (as well as NAT1) catalyzes the N-acetylation 
(detoxication) of bicyclic aromatic amines in the liver. In slow acet-
ylators, a greater proportion of the bicyclic aromatic amines are acti-
vated through N-hydroxylation by CYP1A2. These N-hydroxylated 
aromatic amines can be activated by O-acetylation, which can be 
catalyzed in the bladder itself by NAT1. A high level of NAT1 in 
the bladder is a risk modifier for aromatic amine–induced bladder 
cancer. In addition, the fast acetylator phenotype potentiates the 
colon cancer–inducing effects of heterocyclic aromatic amines. 
These aromatic amines are poor substrates for NAT1 and NAT2, 
so that high levels of NAT2 in the liver do little to prevent their 
N-hydroxylation by CYP1A2. The N-hydroxylated metabolites of 
heterocyclic aromatic amines can be activated by O-acetylation, 
which can be catalyzed in the colon itself by NAT2. The presence 
of NAT2 (and NAT1) in the colons of fast acetylators probably 
explains why this phenotype is a risk modifier for the development 
of colon cancer.
Whether fast acetylators are protected from or predisposed 
to the cancer-causing effects of aromatic amines depends on the 
nature of the aromatic amine (bicyclic vs. heterocyclic) and on other 
important risk modifiers. Both the activation of aromatic amines by 
N-glucuronidation and the activation of N-hydroxy aromatic amines 
(hydroxylamines) by sulfonation are suspected of playing an impor-
tant role in the incidence of bladder and colon cancer. These and 
other risk modifiers may explain why some epidemiological studies, 
Figure 6-67.  Role of N-acetyltransferase in the O-acetylation of N-hydroxy-2-aminofluorene (N-hydroxy-2-AF) and the intramolecular rearrangement of 
N-hydroxy-2-acetylaminofluorene (N-hydroxy-2-AAF).
N-Hydroxy-2AF
2AAF
N-Acetyltransferase
(Acetyl-CoA)
N-Hydroxylation
N-Acetoxy-2AF
Reactive nitrenium ion
N-Hydroxy-2AAF
N-Acetyltransferase
(N       O transfer)
CoA
S
COCH3
CoA
SH
N
OH
H
N
H
C
CH3
O
N
OH
C
CH3
CH3
O
O
C
N
O
H
CH3COO–

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
359
contrary to expectation, have shown that slow NAT2 acetylators 
are at increased risk for aromatic amine–induced bladder cancer, 
as was demonstrated for benzidine manufacturers in China (Hayes 
et al., 1993).
The N-acetylation of aromatic amines (a detoxication reaction) 
and the O-acetylation of N-hydroxy aromatic amines (an activation 
reaction) can be reversed by a microsomal enzyme called arylacet-
amide deacetylase (gene symbol AADAC) (Probst et al., 1994). 
This enzyme is similar to but distinct from the microsomal carbo-
xylesterases that hydrolyze esters and amides, as described in the 
section “Carboxylesterases.” AADAC can potentially alter the over-
all balance between detoxication and activation of aromatic amines.
Overall, it would appear that low NAT2 activity increases 
the risk of bladder, breast, liver, and lung cancers, and decreases 
the risk of colon cancer, whereas low NAT1 activity increases the 
risk of bladder and colon cancers and decreases the risk of lung 
cancer (Hirvonen, 1999). The individual risks associated with par-
ticular NAT1 and/or NAT2 acetylator genotypes are small, but they 
increase when considered in conjunction with other susceptibility 
genes and/or exposure to carcinogenic aromatic and heterocyclic 
amines. Because of the relatively high frequency of allelic variants 
of NAT1 and NAT2, the attributable risk of cancer in the population 
may be high (Hein et al., 2000).
Amino Acid Conjugation
There are two principal pathways by which xenobiotics are conju-
gated with amino acids, as illustrated in Fig. 6-68. The first involves 
conjugation of xenobiotics containing a carboxylic acid group with 
the amino group of amino acids such as glycine, glutamine, and 
taurine (see Fig. 6-57). This pathway involves activation of the 
xenobiotic by conjugation with coenzyme A (A), which produces 
a xenobiotic-CoA thioester that reacts with the amino group of an 
amino acid to form an amide linkage. The second pathway involves 
conjugation of xenobiotics containing an aromatic hydroxylamine 
(N-hydroxy aromatic amine) with the carboxylic acid group of such 
amino acids as serine and proline. This pathway involves activation 
of an amino acid by aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase, which reacts with 
an aromatic hydroxylamine to form a reactive N-ester (Kato and 
Yamazoe, 1994).
The conjugation of benzoic acid with glycine to form hip-
puric acid (see Fig. 6-4) was discovered in 1842, making it the 
first biotransformation reaction discovered (Knights et al., 2007; 
Badenhorst et al., 2014). The first step in this conjugation reac-
tion involves activation of benzoic acid to an acyl-CoA thioester. 
This reaction requires ATP and is catalyzed by acyl-CoA synthe-
tase (ATP-dependent acid:CoA ligase [AMP forming]). The second 
step is catalyzed by acyl-CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferase, which 
transfers the acyl moiety of the xenobiotic to the amino group of the 
acceptor amino acid. The reaction proceeds by a ping-pong Bi–Bi 
mechanism, and involves transfer of the xenobiotic to a cysteine 
residue in the enzyme with release of CoA, followed by transfer of 
the xenobiotic to the acceptor amino acid with regeneration of the 
enzyme. The second step in amino acid conjugation is analogous 
to amide formation during the acetylation of aromatic amines by 
NAT. Substrates for amino acid conjugation are restricted to certain 
aliphatic, aromatic, heteroaromatic, cinnamic, and arylacetic acids.
The ability of xenobiotics to undergo amino acid conjugation 
depends on steric hindrance around the carboxylic acid group, and 
by substituents on the aromatic ring or aliphatic side chain. In rats, 
ferrets, and monkeys, the major pathway of phenylacetic acid bio-
transformation is amino acid conjugation. However, due to steric 
hindrance, diphenylacetic acid cannot be conjugated with an amino 
acid, so the major pathway of diphenylacetic acid biotransformation 
in these three species is acyl glucuronidation. Bile acids are endog-
enous substrates for glycine and taurine conjugation. However, the 
activation of bile acids to an acyl-CoA thioester is catalyzed by a 
microsomal enzyme, cholyl-CoA synthetase, and conjugation with 
glycine or taurine is catalyzed by the cytosolic enzyme, bile acid-
CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferase (BACAT; gene symbol BAAT) 
(Falany et al., 1994; Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). BACAT is 
expressed at high levels in the liver, kidney, gallbladder, and intestine, 
with lower levels in the adrenal gland, muscle, lung, and brain, which 
suggests that it may have substrates other than bile acids (O’Byrne 
et al., 2003). In vitro studies show that BACAT can form glycine 
conjugates of long-chain fatty acids, and also possesses thioesterase 
activity toward the same substrates (O’Byrne et al., 2003). In con-
trast to bile acids, the conjugation of xenobiotics with CoA occurs 
mainly in mitochondria, which appear to contain multiple acyl-CoA 
ligases. There are three acid-thiol ligases that are involved in the 
formation of a xenobiotic acyl-CoA intermediate, namely, the short-, 
medium-, and long-chain acyl-CoA ligase (Testa and Krämer, 2008, 
2010). These enzymes are also involved in endogenous fatty acid 
activation. Of particular importance to amino acid conjugation is the 
medium-chain [butyrate]-CoA ligase present in the mitochondrial 
matrix, which converts medium-chain fatty acids (C4-C12) to CoA 
thioesters to initiate β-oxidation (Knights et al., 2007). In humans, 
two distinct forms of medium-chain fatty acid CoA ligases have 
been characterized, HXM-A (48 kDa) and HXM-B (49 kDa), each 
of which has overlapping substrate specificities. Common substrates 
of HXM-A and HXM-B include benzoate, propionate, hexanoate, 
octanoate, valproate, and salicylate (Knights et al., 2007). The for-
mation of xenobiotic acyl-CoA conjugates is interesting because of 
their potential to cause mitochondrial toxicity by inhibiting fatty-
acid β-oxidation due to a combination of CoA sequestration and 
direct inhibition of acyl-CoA ligases (Knights et al., 2007; Testa 
and Krämer, 2008, 2010). Some xenobiotic acyl-CoA conjugates 
can also act as reactive electrophiles and form protein adducts 
with immunogenic potential (see the section “Glucuronidation and 
Formation of Acyl-CoA Thioesters”). The second step in the conju-
gation of xenobiotics with amino acids is catalyzed by cytosolic and/
or mitochondrial forms of N-acyltransferase, expressed primarily in 
the liver and kidney (Knights et al., 2007). Amino acid conjugation 
is apparently catalyzed by separate N-acyltransferases specific for 
each amino acid (Gopaul et al., 2003). Glycine-N-acyltransferase 
and glutamine-N-phenylacetyltransferase have been isolated from 
human hepatic mitochondria (Gopaul et al., 2003).
There are several examples of xenobiotics that undergo amino 
acid conjugation as a major metabolic pathway, such as the hypo-
lipidemic drug nicotinic acid (niacin) that is conjugated with gly-
cine to form nicotinuric acid (Iwaki et al., 1996; Testa and Krämer, 
2008, 2010). In humans, over 90% of a dose of acetylsalicylic acid 
(aspirin) is hydrolyzed to salicylic acid, of which 75% is excreted in 
urine as the glycine conjugate, salicyluric acid (Knights et al., 2007; 
Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). While benzoic acids and small ana-
logs generally are conjugated with glycine, larger substrates such 
as 4-phenylbutanoic acid are generally conjugated with glutamine. 
4-Phenylbutanoic acid is a drug used in the treatment of hyperam-
monemia caused by genetic errors in urea synthesis. Conjugation 
of 4-phenylbutanoic acid with glutamine contributes to nitrogen 
elimination under conditions of impaired urea synthesis (Kasumov 
et al., 2004; Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). Taurine (along with 
glycine) plays an important role in the conjugation of bile acids. 
The herbicide 4-chloro-2-methylphenoxyacetic acid (MCPA) forms 
both taurine and glycine conjugates in dogs, but only trace glycine 
conjugates in rats (Lappin et al., 2002; Testa and Krämer, 2008,

360
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
2010). The PPARα agonist MRL-II exhibits dose-dependent for-
mation of acyl glucuronides and taurine conjugates, major biliary 
metabolites in dogs, with lower doses favoring the formation of the 
taurine conjugate (Kim et al., 2004; Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). 
While few reports of xenobiotic taurine conjugates in humans exist, 
taurine conjugation of the NSAID ibuprofen is a minor metabolite 
eliminated in urine almost solely as the S-enantiomer (Shirley et al., 
1994; Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010).
An important difference between the amino acid conjugates of 
xenobiotics and bile acids is their route of elimination: bile acids 
are secreted into bile, whereas amino acid conjugates of xenobiot-
ics are eliminated primarily in urine. The addition of an endog-
enous amino acid to xenobiotics may facilitate this elimination by 
increasing their ability to interact with the tubular organic anion 
transport system in the kidney. The precursor to amino acid conju-
gation, namely, the xenobiotic acyl-CoA thioester, is not transported 
out of the cell and is not detected in the bile, plasma, or urine, 
but it can be detected in tissue samples and in vitro test systems. 
The formation of xenobiotic acyl-CoA thioesters in adipose tissue 
(and their further metabolism to more complex lipid conjugates) 
Figure 6-68.  Conjugation of xenobiotics with amino acids.
Amino acid conjugation of
carboxylic acids
Amino acid conjugation
of hydroxylamines
C
O
NH2
CH2
COO–
C
O
CH
NH2
CH2OH
C
O
S
CoA
C
O
O–
Benzoic acid
Acyl-CoA synthetase
ATP
AMP
+
PPi
AMP
+
PPi
Benzoyl-CoA
Acyl-CoA: amino acid
N-acyltransferase
(glycine)
Hippuric acid
N
N
O
H
O
N
N
OH
H
O
N
N
H
+
O
N-Hydroxy-4-aminoquinoline-1-oxide
ATP
Seryl-tRNA synthetase
Reactive nitrenium ion
CH3COO–
CH
NH2
CH2OH
OOC
OH–
NH2CH2COO–
SH
CoA
(serine)
(Acetyl CoA)
CoA
S
COCH3

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
361
can be a relatively long-lived repository for certain acidic drugs. 
Consequently, in mass balance studies (i.e., in studies of the dis-
position of a radiolabeled drug) the formation of acyl-CoA thioes-
ters and their lipid derivatives in adipose tissue can contribute to 
incomplete recovery of radioactivity in the case of acidic drugs and 
drugs that are extensively metabolized to one or more carboxylic 
acid–containing metabolites.
In addition to glycine, glutamine, and taurine, acceptor amino 
acids for xenobiotic conjugation include ornithine, arginine, histi-
dine, serine, aspartic acid, and several dipeptides, such as glycylgly-
cine, glycyltaurine, and glycylvaline. The acceptor amino acid used 
for conjugation is both species- and xenobiotic-dependent. For ben-
zoic, heterocyclic, and cinnamic acids, the acceptor amino acid is 
glycine, except in birds and reptiles, which use ornithine. Arylacetic 
acids are also conjugated with glycine except in primates, which use 
glutamine. In mammals, taurine is generally an alternative accep-
tor to glycine. Taurine conjugation is well developed in nonmam-
malian species and carnivores. While most species conjugate bile 
acids with both glycine and taurine, cats and dogs conjugate bile 
acids only with taurine.
Amino acid conjugation of carboxylic acid–containing xeno-
biotics is an alternative to glucuronidation. Conjugation of carbox-
ylic acid–containing xenobiotics with amino acids has long been 
considered a predominantly detoxication reaction. However, as out-
lined in the section “Glucuronidation and Formation of Acyl-CoA 
Thioesters,” there is growing evidence that the toxicity of certain 
NSAIDs is due in part to the formation of reactive acyl-CoA thioes-
ters (the precursors to amino acid conjugates), which represents an 
alternative activation pathway to the formation of reactive acyl 
glucuronides, as illustrated in Fig. 6-63. Amino acid conjugation of 
ibuprofen, ketoprofen, and related profens (2-substituted propionic 
acid NSAIDs) is significant for two reasons: it limits the formation 
of potentially toxic acyl glucuronides and it leads to chiral inversion 
(the interconversion of R- and S-enantiomers) (Shirley et al., 1994). 
The latter reaction requires conversion of the profen to its acyl-
CoA thioester, which undergoes chiral inversion by 2-arylpropio-
nyl-CoA epimerase (this involves the intermediacy of a symmetric, 
conjugated enolate anion). Chiral inversion may explain why the 
R- and S-enantiomers of several profen NSAIDs have comparable 
anti-inflammatory effects in vivo, even though the S-enantiomers 
are considerably more potent than their antipodes as in vitro inhibi-
tors of cyclooxygenase (the target of NSAID therapy). There is 
also evidence that the acyl-CoA thioesters of the R-enantiomers are 
pharmacologically active and contribute to the therapeutic effect by 
inhibiting COX-2 (Neupert et al., 1997; Levoin et al., 2004; Testa 
and Krämer, 2008, 2010). In general, amino acid conjugation is 
a high-affinity–low-capacity reaction, whereas glucuronidation is 
a high-capacity–low-affinity reaction. At low substrate concentra-
tions, amino acid conjugation can be the predominant reaction.
Amino acid conjugation of N-hydroxy aromatic amines 
(hydroxylamines) is an activation reaction because it produces 
N-esters that can degrade to form electrophilic nitrenium and car-
bonium ions (Anders, 1985; Kato and Yamazoe, 1994). Conjugation 
of hydroxylamines with amino acids is catalyzed by cytosolic 
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases and requires ATP (Fig. 6-68). 
Hydroxylamines activated by aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases include 
N-hydroxy-4-aminoquinoline 1-oxide, which is conjugated with 
serine, and N-hydroxy-Trp-P-2, which is conjugated with proline. 
(N-Hydroxy-Trp-P-2 is the N-hydroxylated metabolite of Trp-P-
2, a pyrolysis product of tryptophan [see Table 6-18].) It is now 
apparent that the hydroxylamines formed by the CYP-dependent 
N-hydroxylation of aromatic amines can potentially be activated 
by numerous reactions, including N-glucuronidation by UGTs 
(Fig. 6-62), O-acetylation by NAT (Fig. 6-16), O-sulfonation by 
SULT (Fig. 6-64), and conjugation with amino acids by seryl- or 
prolyl-tRNA synthetase (Fig. 6-68).
Various amino acid conjugates of valproic acid, including glu-
tamine, glutamate, and glycine conjugates, have been detected in 
urine, plasma, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of patients adminis-
tered this antiepileptic drug (Gopaul et al., 2003). CSF concentra-
tions of the glutamine and glutamate conjugates of valproic acid 
were five and nine times higher than in plasma, which suggests that 
these conjugation reactions in the brain decrease levels of the excit-
atory neurotransmitter glutamic acid and decrease the incidence of 
seizure (Gopaul et al., 2003). Taken together, these data suggest that 
amino acid conjugation in the brain may play a role in the mecha-
nism of action of valproic acid.
Glutathione Conjugation
The preceding section described the conjugation of xenobiotics 
with certain amino acids, including some simple dipeptides, such 
as glycyltaurine. This section describes the conjugation of xeno-
biotics with the tripeptide glutathione (GSH) in a reaction also 
known as glutathionylation, which is fundamentally different from 
other conjugation reactions. While glucuronidation, sulfonation, 
and all of the other previously described conjugation reactions 
involve conjugation of nucleophilic xenobiotics or their nucleo-
philic metabolites, GSH conjugation occurs with electrophilic 
xenobiotics or their electrophilic metabolites. GSH is composed 
of glycine, cysteine, and glutamic acid; the latter being linked to 
cysteine via the γ-carboxyl group, not the usual α-carboxyl group, 
as shown in Fig. 6-57. Glutathione transferase (GST) activity was 
first discovered as the enzyme-catalyzed conjugation of GSH with 
halogenated compounds such as chloronitrobenzenes and bromo-
sulfophthalein (Mannervik et al., 2005; Higgins and Hayes, 2011). 
The activity was initially designated GSH S-aryltransferase, and 
GST activities toward other substrates such as alkyl halides and 
epoxides were called S-alkyl and S-epoxide transferases. The 
original names were later replaced with letter designations once 
the overlapping substrate specificity was described, and it was 
recognized that GSTs do not simply conjugate xenobiotics with 
GSH but also catalyze reactions such as hydroperoxide reduction 
(an example of which is shown in Fig. 6-22 as part of the metabo-
lism of carbon tetrachloride), dehydrohalogenation (as shown in 
Fig. 6-24 [general mechanisms] and Fig. 6-25 [dechlorination of 
DDT]), thiolysis (the general mechanism for disulfide cleavage 
is shown in Fig. 6-18), disulfide interchange, and isomerization 
(Mannervik et al., 2005; Higgins and Hayes, 2011). Although the 
abbreviation “GST” has survived to describe the enzyme fam-
ily, the term “glutathione S-transferase” is technically incorrect 
because the glutathionyl group (GS-) is transferred rather than a 
single sulfur atom (Mannervik et al., 2005); hence, the correct term 
is glutathione transferase. GSTs function endogenously as part of a 
defense mechanism against reactive oxygen species; GSTs reduce 
the formation of hydroperoxides of fatty acids, phospholipids, and 
cholesterol and protect against the redox cycling of many quinone-
containing compounds by conjugating them with GSH (Hayes 
et al., 2005; Testa and Krämer, 2010). GSTs also play a role in other 
endogenous functions such as the degradation of aromatic amino 
acids, steroid hormone synthesis, eicosanoid synthesis (leukotri-
enes are GSH conjugates), and modulation of signaling pathways 
(Hayes et al., 2005; Higgins and Hayes, 2011; Oakley, 2011)
Substrates for glutathionylation include an enormous array 
of electrophilic xenobiotics, or xenobiotics that can be biotrans-
formed to electrophiles. GSH conjugates are thioethers that form

362
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
by nucleophilic attack of GSH thiolate anion (GS–) with an elec-
trophilic carbon or heteroatom (O, N, and S) in the xenobiotic or 
its metabolite. Michael acceptors are also conjugated with GSH 
(discussed later in this section). The sulfhydryl group in GSH has a 
pKa(A) value of ~9.0; hence, at physiological pH, only about 1% of 
GSH is present in the thiolate anion (GS–) form. A primary function 
of GSTs is to lower the pKa(A) of GSH by more than two orders 
of magnitude (to pKa(A) 6 to 7), such that most (more than 50%) 
of the GSH bound to GST is in the reactive anionic form, which is 
stabilized by hydrogen bonding with a tyrosine, serine, or cysteine 
residue in the active site (Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). GSH, 
cysteine, N-acetylcysteine (NAC), and various analogs (esters and 
amides) are used in vitro to trap electrophilic metabolites formed by 
CYP in liver microsomes. In this system, which lacks the cytosolic 
GSTs, only about 1% of GSH is present in the thiolate anion (GS−), 
compared with 6% of cysteine and up to 16% for certain cysteine 
esters, which is why chemicals other than GSH are widely used to 
trap electrophilic metabolites formed by CYP in vitro (Reed, 1985). 
Cysteine has sixfold greater ionization than GSH at physiological 
pH; however, the concentration of GSH in liver is about 50 times 
greater than that of cysteine, and its ionization is greatly increased 
by binding to GSTs.
The synthesis of GSH involves formation of the peptide bond 
between cysteine and glutamic acid, followed by peptide bond for-
mation with glycine. The first and overall rate-limiting reaction is 
catalyzed by γ-glutamylcysteine synthetase (γ-GCL), the second 
by GSH synthetase. At each step, ATP is hydrolyzed to ADP and 
inorganic phosphate (Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). Due to the 
sheer multiplicity of GSTs, they cannot be collectively inhibited or 
induced; therefore, the importance of glutathionylation in xenobi-
otic toxicity in vivo is often assessed by altering levels of GSH. This 
can be achieved by (1) inhibiting GSH synthesis, (2) depleting GSH, 
or (3) increasing GSH levels through Nrf2 activation. Inhibition 
of GSH synthesis can be achieved with buthionine-S-sulfoximine 
(BSO), which inhibits γ-GCL, the enzyme that catalyzes the first 
reaction in GSH synthesis (Ballatori et al., 2009a). Michael accep-
tors such as diethyl maleate (DEA) and phorone are commonly 
used in vivo to deplete GSH levels in experimental animals. Other 
chemicals, such as 2-cyclohexen-1-one and 2-cyclohepten-1-one, 
selectively decrease cerebral GSH levels in comparison with BSO 
treatment (Masukawa et al., 1989; Yoneyama et al., 2008). Lastly 
several chemicals can activate Nrf2, which induces γ-GCL, the rate-
limiting step in GSH synthesis. Nrf2 activators include butylated 
hydroxytoluene (BHT), butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA), ethoxy-
quin, and low doses of acetaminophen (Higgins and Hayes, 2011).
The conjugation of xenobiotics with GSH is catalyzed by 
GSTs in cytosol, microsomes, and mitochondria (Hayes et al., 
2005; Higgins and Hayes, 2011; Oakley, 2011). Most GSTs were 
originally found in the soluble cell fraction, and they are referred to 
as cytosolic or soluble GSTs, even though they may also be found 
in the nucleus or peroxisomes (Mannervik et al., 2005; Higgins and 
Hayes, 2011; Oakley, 2011). The only mitochondrial GST found 
to date has traditionally been referred to as Kappa GST (detailed 
later in this section), and although it dimerizes (as do the cytosolic 
GSTs), Kappa GST has a structure that is distinct from the cytosolic 
GSTs and is also present in peroxisomes, which suggests that it is 
involved in fatty acid β-oxidation (Hayes et al., 2005; Mannervik 
et al., 2005; Morel and Aninat, 2011). The microsomal GSTs or 
MAPEGs, which stands for membrane-associated proteins in eico-
sanoid and glutathione metabolism, are an independent group of 
GSTs expressed in microsomes and mitochondria. It should also be 
noted that some GSTs have nonenzymatic functions such as binding 
of zeaxanthin in the retina and c-Jun N-terminal kinase 1 by GST 
P1-1, and were initially designated by other names (Mannervik 
et al., 2005). There are also other proteins that are homologous to 
some GSTs but are not yet known to serve as detoxication enzymes, 
such as the chloride intracellular channels (CLIC) (Mannervik 
et al., 2005; Littler et al., 2010). Proteins that were characterized 
and named were subsequently identified as GSTs, as was the case 
with GSH-dependent hematopoietic prostaglandin D synthase 
(HPGDS), now determined to be GST S1-1 due to similarities with 
the Sigma class GSTs expressed in nonmammalian organisms. The 
GSTs are present in most tissues, with high concentrations in the 
liver, intestine, kidney, testis, adrenal, and lung.
Substrates for GST share three common features: they are 
hydrophobic, they contain an electrophilic atom, and they react 
nonenzymatically with GSH at some measurable rate. The mecha-
nism by which GST increases the rate of GSH conjugation involves 
deprotonation of GSH to GS– by an active-site tyrosine or serine, 
which functions as a general base catalyst (Atkins et al., 1993; Dirr 
et al., 1994). In the case of the Omega class GSTs, the active site 
contains a cysteine residue (Mukherjee et al., 2006; Board, 2011). 
The concentration of GSH in the liver is extremely high (5 to 10 
mM) relative to plasma (0.5 to 10 μM); hence, the nonenzymatic 
conjugation of certain xenobiotics with GSH can be significant 
(Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). However, some xenobiotics are 
conjugated with GSH stereoselectively, indicating that the reaction 
is largely catalyzed by GST. Like GSH, the GSTs are themselves 
abundant cellular components, accounting for up to 10% of the 
total cellular protein. These enzymes bind, store, and/or transport a 
number of compounds that are not substrates for GSH conjugation. 
The cytoplasmic protein formerly known as ligandin, which binds 
heme, bilirubin, steroids, azo-dyes, polycyclic aromatic hydrocar-
bons (PAHs), and thyroid hormones, is an Alpha class GST (Oakley, 
2011).
As shown in Fig. 6-69, substrates for GSH conjugation can be 
divided into two groups: those that are sufficiently electrophilic to 
be conjugated directly and those that must first be biotransformed to 
an electrophilic metabolite prior to conjugation. The second group 
of substrates for GSH conjugation includes reactive intermediates 
(often formed by CYP) such as oxiranes (arene oxides and alkene 
epoxides), nitrenium ions, carbonium ions, and free radicals. The 
conjugation reactions themselves can be divided into two types: 
displacement reactions, in which GSH displaces an electron-with-
drawing group, and addition reactions, in which GSH is added to an 
activated double bond or strained ring system. Table 6-24 provides 
examples of typical substrates for each of the characterized GSTs.
The displacement of an electron-withdrawing group by GSH 
typically occurs when the substrate contains halide, sulfate, sulfo-
nate, phosphate, or a nitro group (i.e., good leaving groups) attached 
to an allylic or benzylic carbon atom. Displacement of an electron-
withdrawing group from aromatic xenobiotics is decreased by the 
presence of other substituents that donate electrons to the aromatic 
ring (–NH2, –OH, –OR, and –R). Conversely, such displacement 
reactions are increased by the presence of other electron-withdraw-
ing groups (–F, –Cl, –Br, –I, –NO2, –CN, –CHO, and –COOR). 
This explains why 1,2-dichloro-4-nitrobenzene and 1-chloro-2,4-di-
nitrobenzene, each of which contains three electron-withdrawing 
groups, are commonly used as substrates for measuring GST activ-
ity in vitro, and one or more members of all three GST families can 
catalyze this conjugation reaction (Hayes et al., 2005; Higgins and 
Hayes, 2011). GST can catalyze the O-demethylation of dimethyl-
vinphos and other methylated organophosphorus compounds. The 
reaction is analogous to the interaction between methyliodide and 
GSH, which produces methylglutathione and iodide ion (GS– + 
CH3I → GS–CH3 + I–). In this case, iodide is the leaving group. In

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
363
the case of dimethylvinphos, the entire organophosphate molecule 
(minus the methyl group) functions as the leaving group.
The addition of GSH to a carbon–carbon double bond is 
also facilitated by the presence of a nearby electron-withdrawing 
group; hence, substrates for this reaction typically contain a double 
bond attached to –CN, –CHO, –COOR, or –COR (i.e., they are 
Michael acceptors). The double bond in diethyl maleate (DEA) is 
attached to two electron-withdrawing groups and readily undergoes 
a Michael addition reaction with GSH, as shown in Fig. 6-69. The 
loop diuretic, ethacrynic acid, contains an α/β-unsaturated ketone 
that readily reacts with GSH and other sulfhydryls by Michael addi-
tion. The conversion of acetaminophen to a GSH conjugate involves 
addition of GSH to an activated double bond, which is formed 
during the CYP-dependent dehydrogenation of acetaminophen to 
NAPQI, as shown in Fig. 6-39.
An interesting feature of GSH conjugation is the potential for 
nonenzymatic GSH conjugation in xenobiotic metabolism. The 
mechanism for this nonenzymatic activity is based on electrophi-
licity or nucleophilicity of potential reactants (Testa and Krämer, 
2008, 2010). Electrophiles and nucleophiles are scaled according 
to their hardness or softness, and this determines whether a non-
enzymatic or GST-catalyzed enzymatic reaction will be favored. 
Hard electrophilic sites are highly localized positive charges that 
maintain a high charge density during the approach of a nucleo-
philic reactant (i.e., they are not readily polarized). In contrast, soft 
electrophilic sites have a low charge density (i.e., a delocalized 
charge) and are easily polarized by an approaching nucleophilic 
reactant (Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). Because GSH acts as a 
soft nucleophile, it will react spontaneously with soft electrophiles, 
such as in the case of 1-4(nitrophenoxy)propane-2,3-oxide, which 
is a poor GST substrate, but reacts spontaneously with GSH (Testa 
and Krämer, 2008, 2010). Hard electrophiles are unlikely to react 
spontaneously with GSH and require the catalytic facilitation of 
GSTs (Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010).
Arene oxides and alkene epoxides, which are often formed by 
CYP-dependent oxidation of aromatic hydrocarbons and alkenes, 
are examples of strained ring systems that open during the addition 
of GSH (Fig. 6-69). In many cases, conjugation of arene oxides 
with GSH proceeds stereoselectively, as shown in Fig. 6-70 for the 
1,2-oxides of naphthalene. The GSH conjugates of arene oxides 
Figure 6-69.  Examples of glutathione conjugation of xenobiotics with an electrophilic carbon. GS− represents the anionic form of glutathione.
Direct conjugation by displacement of an electron-withdrawing group
Cl
GS–
GS–
Cl–
NO2
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
NO2
SG
SG
1,2-Dichloro-4-nitrobenzene
N
O
NO2
N
O
4-Nitroquinoline 1-oxide
Direct conjugation by addition of glutathione
Diethyl maleate (DEA)
β-Propiolactone
Conjugation of a strained
ring system (oxirane)
formed metabolically
Chlorobenzene
P450
O
H
H
H
H
SG
OH
3,4-Oxide
GS
CH
CH
C
O
OC2H5
OC2H5
O
C
CH2
C
O
OH
CH2
GS
O
CH2
CH2
C
O
O
CH2
OC2H5
O
C
CH
C
OC2H5
GS–, H+
GS–, H+
NO2
–
GS–, H+

364
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
may undergo rearrangement reactions, which restore aromaticity 
and possibly lead to migration of the conjugate to the adjacent car-
bon atom (through formation of an episulfonium ion), as shown in 
Fig. 6-70. Conjugation of quinones and quinoneimines with GSH 
also restores aromaticity, as shown in Fig. 6-39 for NAPQI, the 
reactive metabolite of acetaminophen. Compared with glucuronida-
tion and sulfonation, conjugation with GSH is a minor pathway of 
acetaminophen biotransformation, even though the liver contains 
high levels of both GSH and GSTs. The relatively low rate of GSH 
conjugation reflects the slow rate of formation of NAPQI, which is 
catalyzed by CYP enzymes (Fig. 6-39).
GSH can also conjugate xenobiotics with an electrophilic 
heteroatom (O, N, and S) as shown in Fig. 6-71. In each of the 
examples shown in Fig. 6-71, the initial conjugate formed between 
GSH and the heteroatom is cleaved by a second molecule of GSH 
to form oxidized GSH, which is also known as glutathione disulfide 
(GSSG). The initial reactions shown in Fig. 6-71 are catalyzed by 
GST, whereas the second reaction (which leads to GSSG formation) 
generally occurs nonenzymatically. Analogous reactions leading to 
the reduction and cleavage of disulfides have been described previ-
ously (see Fig. 6-18). Some of the reactions shown in Fig. 6-71, 
such as the reduction of hydroperoxides to alcohols, can also be 
catalyzed by glutathione peroxidase (GPX), which is a selenium-
dependent enzyme. For their role in the reduction of hydroperox-
ides, the GSTs are sometimes called nonselenium-requiring GPXs. 
For instance, one or more members of the mammalian cytosolic, 
microsomal, and mitochondrial GSTs exhibit GPX activity toward 
cumene hydroperoxide (Hayes et al., 2005). Cleavage of the nitrate 
esters of nitroglycerin releases nitrite, which can be converted to 
the potent vasodilator, nitric oxide (NO). The ability of sulfhydryl-
generating chemicals to partially prevent or reverse tolerance to 
nitroglycerin suggests that GSH-dependent denitration may play 
Table 6-24  
Human Glutathione Transferase Enzymes
GST FAMILY
CLASS
GENE
EXAMPLE 
ENZYMES
EXAMPLE SUBSTRATES
Cytosolic
Alpha
GSTA1
GST A1-1
Δ5-ADD, BCDE, BPDE, busulfan, chlorambucil, DBADE, 
DBPDE, BPhDE, N-acetoxy-PhIP
GSTA2
GST A2-2
CuOOH, DBPDE, 7-chloro-4-nitrobenz-2-oxa-1,3-diazole
GSTA3
GST A3-3
Δ5-ADD, Δ5-pregnene-3,20-dione, DBPDE
GSTA4
GST A4-4
COMC-6, EA, 4-hydroxynonenal, 4-hydroxydecenal
GSTA5
GST A5-5
Unknown
Mu
GSTM1
GST M1-1
trans-4-Phenyl-3-buten-2-one, BPDE, CDE, DBADE, trans-
stilbene oxide, styrene-7,8-oxide
GSTM2
GST M2-2
COMC-6, 1,2-dichloro-4-nitrobenzene, aminochrome, dopa  
O-quinone, PGH2→PGE2
GSTM3
GST M3-3
BCNU, PGH2→PGE2
GSTM4
GST M4-4
CDNB
GSTM5
GST M5-5
CDNB
Pi
GSTP1
GST P1-1
Acrolein, base propenals, BPDE, CDE, chlorambucil, COMC-6, 
EA, thio-TEPA
Sigma
HPGDS
GST S1-1*
PGH2→PGD2
Theta
GSTT1
GST T1-1
BCNU, butadiene epoxide, CH2Cl2, EPNP, ethylene oxide
GSTT2
GST T2-2
CuOOH, menaphthyl sulfonate
Zeta
GSTZ1
GST Z1-1
Dichloroacetate, fluoroacetate, 2-chloropropionate, 
maleylacetoacetate
Omega
GSTO1
GST O1-1
Monomethylarsonic acid, dehydroascorbic acid
GSTO2
GST O2-2
Monomethylarsonic acid, dehydroascorbic acid
Mitochondrial
Kappa
GSTK1
GSTK1-1
CDNB, CuOOH, (S)-15-hydroperoxy-5,8,11,13-eicosatetraenoic 
acid
Microsomal 
(MAPEGs)
Clan 1
MGST2
MGST2
CDNB, LTA4→LTC4, (S)-5-hydroperoxy-8,11,14-cis-6-trans-
eicosatetraenoic acid
MGST3
MGST3
CDNB, LTA4→LTC4,(S)-5-hydroperoxy-8,11,14-cis-6-trans-
eicosatetraenoic acid
LTC4S
LTC4S
LTA4→LTC4
Clan 2
PTGEs
PGES1
PGH2→PGE2
MGST1
MGST1
CDNB, CuOOH, hexachlorobuta-1,3-diene
Clan 3
ALOX5AP
FLAP
Arachidonic acid binding (nonenzymatic)
Abbreviations: Δ5-ADD, Δ5-androstene-3,17-dione; BCDE, benzo[g]chrysene diol epoxide; BCNU, 1,3-bis(2-chloroethyl)-1-nitrosourea; BPDE, 
benzo[a]pyrene diol epoxide; BPhDE, benzo[c]phenanthrene diol epoxide; CDE, chrysene-1,2-diol 3,4-epoxide; CDNB, 1-chloro-2,4-dinitroben-
zene; COMC-6, crotonyloxymethyl-2-cyclohexenone; CuOOH, cumene hydroperoxide; DBADE, dibenz[a,h]anthracene diol epoxide; DBPDE, 
dibenzo[a,l]pyrene diol epoxide; EA, ethacrynic acid; EPNP, 1,2-epoxy-3-(p-nitrophenoxy)propane; N-acetoxy-PhIP, N -acetoxy-2-amino-1-methyl-6-
phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine.
*GST S1-1 is also the glutathione-dependent prostaglandin D2 synthase.
SOURCES: Data from Hayes et al. (2005), Mannervik et al. (2005), and Higgins and Hayes (2011).

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
365
a role in nitroglycerin-induced vasodilation, although ALDH2 is 
recognized as the principal enzyme responsible for activating nitro-
glycerin as discussed in the section “Aldehyde Dehydrogenase” 
(Marchitti et al., 2008).
Cytosolic or mitochondrial GSTs catalyze two important 
isomerization reactions, namely, the conversion of the endoperox-
ide, PGH2, to the prostaglandins PGD2 and PGE2 and the conversion 
of Δ5 steroids to Δ4 steroids, such as the formation of androstenedi-
one from androst-5-ene-3,17-dione. Another physiological function 
of GST is the synthesis of leukotriene C4, which is catalyzed by 
the microsomal GSTs, namely, MGST2, MGST3, and LTC4S (see 
Table 6-24).
GSH conjugates formed in the liver can be effluxed into bile 
by MRP2 on the canalicular membrane, or they can be transported 
into blood by various transporters on the sinusoidal membrane 
such as MRP1, MRP3, MRP4, MRP5, and MRP6 (Giacomini and 
Sugiyama, 2006; Ballatori et al., 2009a; Klaassen and Aleksunes, 
2010). MRP7 and MRP8 have also been implicated in the trans-
port of GSH conjugates (Ballatori et al., 2009a). GSH itself is often 
cotransported with other xenobiotics or xenobiotic metabolites, 
namely, by MRP2 into bile, and by MRP1, MRP4, and MRP5 into 
blood (Ballatori et al., 2009a). This cotransport is exemplified by 
drugs such as vincristine, etoposide, and vinblastine, each of which 
stimulates MRP-mediated GSH transport (Ballatori et al., 2009a). 
BCRP is also involved in GSH transport (Brechbuhl et al., 2010). 
Furthermore, GST and MRP overexpression can act synergistically 
to confer multiple-drug resistance in many cancers, and can affect 
the efficacy of chemotherapeutic drugs such as chlorambucil, etopo-
side, ethacrynic acid, vincristine, and doxorubicin (Sau et al., 2010).
GSH conjugates can be converted to mercapturic acids 
(N-acetylcysteine conjugates) in the kidney and excreted in urine. 
As shown in Fig. 6-72, the conversion of GSH conjugates to mer-
capturic acids involves the sequential cleavage of glutamic acid 
and glycine from the GSH moiety, followed by N-acetylation of the 
resulting cysteine conjugate. The first two steps in mercapturic acid 
synthesis are catalyzed outside the cell by two membrane-bound 
enzymes on the luminal surface of the proximal tubule of the kid-
ney (and the bile ducts of the liver), namely γ-glutamyltransferase 
(GGT; aka γ-glutamyltranspeptidase), which cleaves the glutamic 
acid residue, and alanyl aminopeptidase (ANPEP), which cleaves 
the glycine residue. After hydrolysis, the xenobiotic, now con-
jugated only to cysteine, is transported into the proximal tubule, 
where it is N-acetylated to a mercapturic acid by cytosolic NAT 
or deconjugated by mitochondrial β-lyase, as shown in Fig. 6-72. 
Mercapturic acids are transported back across the luminal surface 
of the proximal tubules for elimination in urine. Unconjugated 
GSH is also hydrolyzed by GGT and ANPEP to prevent loss of 
circulating GSH in urine. The process is remarkably efficient, 
as evidenced by the observation that treatment of rats with L-γ-
glutamyl-(O-carboxy)-phenyl-hydrazine, an irreversible inhibitor 
of GGT, resulted in a 3000-fold increase in the urinary excretion of 
GSH (Griffith and Meister, 1979). Sequential hydrolysis by GGT 
and ANPEP is involved in leukotriene metabolism. Leukotriene C4, 
a GSH conjugate, is hydrolyzed by GGT to leukotriene D4, a cys-
teinylglycine conjugate, which in turn is hydrolyzed by ANPEP to 
leukotriene E4, a cysteine conjugate.
Hydrolysis of GSH conjugates at the luminal membrane of 
proximal tubules followed by active uptake of the resulting cys-
teine conjugates into the proximal cells of the kidney plays a key 
role in the nephrotoxicity of certain xenobiotics. Nephrotoxicity is 
the dose-limiting toxicity of the anticancer drug cisplatin, which is 
conjugated with GSH. After hydrolysis by GGT and ANPEP in the 
lumen of the proximal tubule, the cysteine conjugate of cisplatin 
is actively transported into the proximal tubular cells, where it is 
converted by β-lyase to a highly reactive thiol that is toxic to kidney 
cells (Zhang and Hanigan, 2003). Cisplatin nephrotoxicity is not 
observed in GGT knockout mice or in mice treated with the GGT 
inhibitor acivicin (Hanigan et al., 1994, 2001). The antiretroviral 
drug efavirenz is nephrotoxic to rats and mice but not monkeys 
or humans. A sulfate conjugate of efavirenz is conjugated with 
GSH by a rodent-specific GST. Hydrolysis of the GSH conjugate 
by GGT and ANPEP followed by active transport of the cysteine 
Figure 6-70.  Stereoselective conjugation of naphthalene 1,2-oxide and rearrangement of 2-naphthyl to 1-naphthyl conjugates.
O
O
Naphthalene
Naphthalene 1,2-oxide
SG
OH
Conjugation at C1
does not occur
γ-glutamic acid + glycine + OH–
Glutathione conjugates
H
H
S
cysteine
S
+ cysteine
epi-Sulfonium ion
P450
H+
SG
OH
SG
OH

366
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
conjugate into the proximal cells of the kidney efficiently delivers 
high concentrations of efavirenz sulfate to the kidney, which results 
in nephrotoxicity in rodents but not primates (Mutlib et al., 1999, 
2000). A similar mechanism (i.e., hydrolysis of GSH conjugates 
by membrane-bound GGT and ANPEP followed by active trans-
port of the cysteine conjugate) accounts for the nephrotoxicity of 
a number of halogenated compounds, such as trichloroethene and 
hexachloro-1,3-butadiene, and other xenobiotics, as discussed later 
in this section (Dekant, 2001).
Cytosolic GSTs are dimers, typically composed of identical 
subunits (Mr 23–29 kDa), although some forms are heterodimers. 
Each subunit contains 199 to 244 amino acids and one catalytic 
site. The general structural features of cytosolic GSTs include an 
N-terminal thioredoxin-like domain (with βαβαβαβα topology) 
and a C-terminal domain consisting of α-helices (Oakley, 2011). 
Mitochondrial GSTs are also dimeric with 226 amino acids per sub-
unit. The microsomal GSTs vary in their ability to form complex 
aggregates across the three groups of human MAPEGs. Numerous 
GST subunits have been cloned and sequenced, which forms the 
basis of a nomenclature system, as shown in Table 6-24 (Hayes et al., 
2005; Mannervik et al., 1992; Hayes and Pulford, 1995; Whalen 
and Boyer, 1998; Higgins and Hayes, 2011). Each cytosolic and 
mitochondrial enzyme is assigned a two-digit number to designate 
its subunit composition. For example, the homodimers of subunits 1 
and 2 are designated 1-1 and 2-2, respectively, whereas the heterodi-
mer is designated 1-2. The soluble GSTs were initially arranged 
into four classes designated A, M, P, and T (which refer to Alpha, 
Mu, Pi, and Theta). Four additional classes were subsequently 
identified, namely, K (Kappa; the mitochondrial form), S (Sigma), 
Z (Zeta), and O (Omega) (Hayes and Pulford, 1995; Whalen and 
Boyer, 1998; Strange et al., 2000; Hayes et al., 2005; Higgins and 
Hayes, 2011; Oakley, 2011). None of these eight gene classes cor-
responds to the microsomal GSTs (MAPEGs), which appear to 
have evolved independently. By definition, the subunits in the dif-
ferent classes share less than 50% amino acid sequence identity. 
Generally, the subunits within a class are about 70% identical, but 
can share up to 90% sequence identity, and can form heterodimers, 
whereas the subunits in different classes are generally only about 
30% identical. On the basis of structural similarity as well as the 
residues in the GSH-binding site that are involved in thiolate anion 
formation, the cytosolic GSTs can be divided into two groups: the 
more recently evolved Alpha, Mu, Pi, and Sigma classes that use 
Figure 6-71.  Examples of glutathione conjugation of electrophilic heteroatoms.
CH2
O
NO2
NO2
–
CH2
O
O
NO2
CH2
NO2
CH2
O
SG
CH2
O
O
NO2
CH2
NO2
CH2
OH
CH2
O
O
NO2
CH2
NO2
Trinitroglycerin
Nitrite
GSSG
Oxidized glutathione
Oxidized glutathione
NO
Nitric oxide
Dinitroglycerin
GSOH
PGF2α
Glutathionesulfenic acid
H2O
15-Hydroperoxy-PGF2α
GSSG
Oxidized glutathione
GSSG
Oxidized glutathione
GSSG
NH
C
C
O
O
N(CH3)2
N(CH3)2
NH
N
N
C
C
O
O
N(CH3)2
N(CH3)2
Diamine
R
R
S
SCN
Cyanide
SG
RSH
Alkylthiocyanate
GS–
COOH
OOH
HO
HO
NH
N
C
C
O
O
N(CH3)2
N(CH3)2
GS
GS–, H+
GS–, H+
GS–, H+
GS–, H+
GS–, H+
GS–, H+
GS–
CN–
COOH
OH
HO
HO

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
367
a tyrosine residue near the N-terminus to activate GSH, and the 
older Theta, Omega, and Zeta classes that use either an N-terminal 
proximate serine or cysteine residue to activate GSH (Higgins and 
Hayes, 2011). Members of the Alpha and Mu classes can also form 
heterodimers with each other (Hayes et al., 2005). Affinity label-
ing studies with rat Alpha GSTs demonstrated the presence of a 
high-affinity, nonsubstrate binding site within the cleft between the 
two subunits of the dimer. Presumably, the cleft in heterodimers 
would be different from that in homodimers, which suggests the 
possibility that there is an evolutionary reason that the formation of 
heterodimers between Alpha and Mu subunits has been conserved 
(Hayes et al., 2005).
Several GSTs (as well as GGT) are overexpressed in vari-
ous cancers, such as Alpha, Mu, Theta, Pi, and microsomal GSTs, 
which can confer resistance against many chemotherapeutic drugs 
(Hollman et al., 2016). For example, GST Alpha overexpression 
has been correlated with resistance to alkylating drugs (Sau et al., 
2010). GST Mu overexpression is associated with chlorambucil 
resistance and a poor prognosis in childhood acute lymphoblas-
tic leukemia (Sau et al., 2010). The microsomal GSTs have been 
shown to confer resistance to chlorambucil, melphalan, cisplatin, 
and doxorubicin treatment (Sau et al., 2010). GSTP1-1 overexpres-
sion, the most highly expressed GST in various cancers, is often 
associated with a poor prognosis and chemotherapeutic resistance 
Figure 6-72.  Glutathione conjugation and mercapturic acid biosynthesis.
Substrate (RX)
Glutathione transferase
HS
R
S
CH2
CH
NH
NH
CH2
COO–
COO–
NH2
R
S
CH2
γ-Glutamyltransferase (GGT1)
H2O
glutamic acid
glycine
Alanyl aminopeptidase (ANPEP)
Cysteine conjugate
CoA
Acetyl-CoA
N-Acetyltransferase
CH
COO–
NH
C
O
CH3
Mercapturic acid
Excretion in urine
R
SH
CH3COCOO–
NH3
Methylation
Glucuronidation
Beta lyase
HX
H2O
γ-glutamic acid
glycine
(pyruvate)
C
O
CH2
O
C
R
S
CH2
CH
NH2
NH
CH2
COO–
O
C
R
S
CH2
CH
NH2
COO–
CH2
CH
cysteine

368
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
in ovarian, non-small-cell lung, breast, and colorectal cancers (Sau 
et al., 2010; Tew and Townsend, 2011). Two strategies have been 
adopted in the development of cancer therapies that specifically 
target cells that overexpress GSTs, namely (1) inhibition of GSTs 
and (2) activation of prodrugs by GSTs (or GGT) to form reac-
tive metabolites (Ramsay and Dilda, 2014). Ezatiostat (Telintra or 
TLK199), which is currently in clinical trials for the treatment of 
myelodysplastic syndrome, is a GSH-peptidomimetic prodrug that 
is activated by cellular esterases to the selective GSTP1-1 inhibi-
tor TLK117 (Sau et al., 2010; Tew and Townsend, 2011; Ramsay 
and Dilda, 2014). Although not commonly used due to its diuretic 
effects, ethacrynic acid inhibition of GSTs sensitizes cancer cells 
to chemotherapeutics (Sau et al., 2010). A synthetic GSH analog 
specifically inhibits GSTA1-1, whereas the 7-nitro-2,1,3-benzoxa-
diazole derivative NBDHEX is an inhibitor of GSTP1-1 that is not 
effluxed by transporters (Sau et al., 2010). Several other drugs have 
been shown to inhibit GSTs, such as drugs that act as NO donors 
(PABA/NO and oxathiazolylum-5-olate derivatives) and bombesin-
sulfonamide derivatives (Sau et al., 2010). Canfosfamide (Telcyta 
or TLK286) is a GST-activated nitrogen mustard. This modified 
GSH analog is metabolized by GSTP1-1, which results in the 
release of two electrophilic fragments, GSH vinyl sulfone and 
tetrakis(chloroethyl)phosphorodiamidate, that induce apoptosis 
(Townsend and Tew, 2003; Rosen et al., 2004; Gonzalez and Tukey, 
2006; Tew and Townsend, 2011). Clinical development of canfos-
famide, for treatment of ovarian cancer, was halted by the FDA in 
2007. Other drugs have also been developed to take advantage of 
activation by GSTs, such as brostallicin and ethacraplatin, which 
are derivatives of 2-crotonyloxymethyl-2-cycloalkenone (Sau et al., 
2010). Like GST, GGT is also overexpressed in various cancer 
cells. Arsenic-based prodrugs (GSAO and darinaparsin) have been 
developed, which are activated by GGT (Ramsay and Dilda, 2014).
As is the case with many of the other xenobiotic-metabolizing 
enzymes, all of the GST enzymes are polymorphic and this likely 
contributes to interindividual differences in drug response or toxic-
ity (Hollman et al., 2016). For example, the null phenotypes for 
GST Mu and GST Theta, GSTM1*0 and GSTT1*0, respectively, 
contribute to the drug-associated toxicities of several xenobiotics, 
such as carbamazepine, valproic acid, and troglitazone (Saruwatari 
et al., 2010; Ikeda, 2011). Therefore, individuals who are polymor-
phic for these enzymes (and also potentially for other GST allelic 
variants) are at an increased risk of toxicity by xenobiotics that are 
selectively biotransformed by specific GSTs. A large number of 
associations between genetic variants of GSTs (A1, M1, M3, M4, 
M5, O1, O2, P1, T1, and Z1) and multiple types of cancer, inflam-
matory diseases, immunological disorders, neurological disorders, 
age-related or metabolic disorders, and reproductive disorders have 
been described (Hollman et al., 2016).
The alpha GSTs are the major GSTs in the liver and kid-
ney. They have basic isoelectric points. Rats express four GSTA 
genes, GSTA1–A4, whereas humans express five GSTA genes, 
GSTA1–A5. GST1*A and GST1*B are common variants of human 
GSTA1 (Hayes et al., 2005). GSTA1*A expression is higher than 
GSTA1*B, and individuals with the latter loss-of-function variant 
have improved rates of breast cancer survival, presumably due to 
increased efficacy of chemotherapeutic drugs (Ekhart et al., 2009). 
In contrast, GSTA2 variants *A to *D do not show much differ-
ence in enzymatic activity, whereas GSTA2*E is a loss-of-func-
tion variant (McIlwain et al., 2006). Rats express at least seven 
functional Mu subunits, designated GSTM1 through GSTM7. 
Humans express five subunits belonging to the Mu class of GSTs, 
designated GSTM1 through GSTM5. Human GSTM1, 3, and 4 are 
known to be polymorphic. In the case of GSTM1, the *A and *B 
allelic variants differ by a single amino acid; *A is a “basic vari-
ant” with lysine at residue 173, whereas *B is an “acidic variant” 
with asparagine at the corresponding site. There is also a GSTM1 
deletion (*0) and a duplication (*1 × 2) (Hayes et al., 2005). The 
incidence of the GSTM1 deletion is high in Pacific Islander and 
Malaysian populations (i.e., 62% to 100%), intermediate in sev-
eral other populations (i.e., 35% to 62% in those of European 
descent; 32% to 53% in those of Asian descent; 40% to 53% in 
those of Hispanic descent), and low in those of African descent 
(i.e., 23% to 41%) (Geisler and Olshan, 2001; Piacentini et al., 
2011). GSTM1*0 has only a modest effect on the incidence of the 
lung, head, and neck cancers consistent with its high prevalence in 
various populations. The GSTM1*0 polymorphism has been linked 
to an increased susceptibility to certain inflammatory diseases 
(e.g., asthma) (Hayes et al., 2005). At least two allelic variants of 
GSTM3 and GSTM4 have also been identified. Members of the 
Mu class of GSTs have neutral isoelectric points. Human GSTM2 
and GSTM3 are expressed in muscle and brain, respectively. The 
GSTM1*0 polymorphism is a risk factor for carbamazepine and 
valproic acid hepatotoxicity, whereas the double null phenotype of 
GSTM1*0 and GSTT1*0 is a risk factor for troglitazone hepato-
toxicity (Ikeda, 2011; Saruwatari et al., 2010).
Humans and rats express one subunit belonging to the Pi class 
of GSTs, GSTP1, whereas mice have been found to express two Pi 
subunits, GSTP1 and GSTP2 (provisional). The human Pi enzyme 
is polymorphic, with at least four allelic variants reported (Hayes 
et al., 2005). The subunit encoded by GSTP1*B is seven times more 
active than that encoded by GSTP1*A in conjugating diol epox-
ides of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) (Strange et al., 
2000). GSTP polymorphisms are known to influence susceptibility 
to carcinogens (including some pesticides), affect the response to 
chemotherapy used in the treatment of metastatic colon cancer and 
multiple myeloma, and modify the risk of acute myeloid leukemia 
which results from the successful treatment of Hodgkin disease, 
non-Hodgkin lymphoma, breast cancer, and ovarian cancer (Hayes 
et al., 2005; Liu et al., 2006b). GSTP polymorphisms that result in 
decreased activity have been implicated in an increased suscepti-
bility to certain inflammatory diseases (e.g., asthma) (Hayes et al., 
2005). In some cancers, such as prostate, breast, liver and blood 
cancers, GSTP1 is silenced by hypermethylation of a CpG-rich pro-
moter region, which has been linked to the promotion of neoplastic 
transformation, such that low GSTP1 expression is a biomarker 
for multistep cancer development (Schnekenburger et al., 2014). 
Members of the Pi class of GSTs have acidic isoelectric points. 
They are expressed in the placenta, lung, gut, and other extrahe-
patic tissues. In rats, GSTP1 is one of several proteins (so-called 
preneoplastic antigens) that are overexpressed in chemical-induced 
tumors.
The Sigma class of GSTs is widely distributed in nature, and 
is present in many species including humans, mice, rats, chickens, 
insects, flatworms, and mollusks (Flanagan and Smythe, 2011). 
Sigma GSTs, also known as hematopoietic prostaglandin D syn-
thases (HPGDS), are involved in the synthesis of prostaglandin 
in mammals, and catalyze the conversion of the cyclooxygenase 
product PGH2 to PGD2. Sigma subunits are also capable of con-
jugating GSH to a variety of aryl halide substrates and organic 
isothiocyanates and also have GPX activity toward cumene hydro-
peroxide (Flanagan and Smythe, 2011). The human Sigma class 
GST (HPGDS) is different from other cytosolic GSTs in that it is 
activated by divalent metal ions, such as Mg2+ and Ca2+, binding at 
the center of the dimer interface formed by a group of six conserved 
Asp residues (Inoue et al., 2003; Flanagan and Smythe, 2011). Rats 
and humans appear to express a single Sigma GST (GSTS1, also

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
369
known as the GSH-dependent HPGDS). The tissue distribution 
of Sigma GST occurs in a species-specific manner. In mammals, 
high levels of Sigma GST are present in the spleen, bone marrow, 
placenta, lung, adipose, oviduct, and both dermal and epidermal 
layers of skin (Flanagan and Smythe, 2011). In rats, Sigma GST is 
highly expressed in bone marrow and spleen, whereas in humans it 
is highly expressed in the adipose tissue, placenta, lung, and fetal 
liver (Flanagan and Smythe, 2011). Immunohistochemical studies 
of Sigma GST (i.e., HPGDS) in rat, mouse, and human have shown 
that expression of the enzyme is limited to select cell types, namely, 
antigen-presenting cells, resident tissue and infiltrating mast cells, 
and T-helper (Th)-2 cells (Flanagan and Smythe, 2011). Sigma GST 
can play multiple roles in the immune response because the PGD2 
produced by Sigma GST (i.e., by HPGDS) can exert both proinflam-
matory and anti-inflammatory effects (Flanagan and Smythe, 2011). 
To block PGD2 production associated with allergic inflammation, 
drugs have been or are currently being developed as Sigma GST 
(HPGDS) inhibitors, such as tranilast (N-(3,4-dimethoxycinnamoyl)
anthranilic acid), which is an inhibitor of both HPGDS and LPGDS 
(lipocalin prostaglandin D synthase) (Flanagan and Smythe, 2011).
Humans express two subunits belonging to the Theta class of 
GSTs (GSTT1 and GSTT2), whereas rats and mice each express 
four subunits (GSTT1–4). GST Theta catalyzes the conjugation of 
mono and dihaloalkanes with GSH, in contrast to α-haloalkanoates 
and α, α-dihaloalkanoates which tend to be substrates of GST Zeta 
(Josephy, 2010). Due to the small active site of GST Theta, small 
xenobiotics are typical substrates of this enzyme, such as dichloro-
methane (Josephy, 2010). Additionally, analogous to the reaction 
shown in Fig. 6-24, GSTT1 is involved in the bioactivation of eth-
ylene dibromide (an insecticide and gasoline additive) to an elec-
trophilic sulfonium ion that can form adducts with macromolecules 
(Josephy, 2010). A GSTT1 deletion has been identified (GSTT1*0), 
which has a modest effect on the incidence of lung, head, and neck 
cancers, and has also been implicated in an increased susceptibility 
to certain inflammatory diseases (e.g., asthma) (Hayes et al., 2005) 
and coronary heart disease, especially in cigarette smokers (Song 
et al., 2017). The incidence of the GSTT1*0 is present in several 
populations, at a low to intermediate frequency (10% to 43%) in 
those of European and Mediterranean descent and a slightly higher 
frequency (20% to 45%) in those of African descent (Piacentini 
et al., 2011). The GSTT1 null allele, in conjunction with GST Mu 
deficiency, predisposes to troglitazone hepatotoxicity (Ikeda, 2011). 
Human GSTT2-2 conjugates ethacrynic acid with GSH and cata-
lyzes the GSH-dependent reduction of cumene hydroperoxide, as 
well as the GSH-dependent sulfatase activity of 1-menaphthyl sul-
fate (Higgins and Hayes, 2011).
Zeta class GSTs are found in many species, such as plants, 
fungi, and mammals. Within mammals, there is also a wide tissue 
distribution of the protein with high levels predominantly in the 
liver and kidney (Board and Anders, 2011). A single Zeta subunit 
is expressed in rats, mice, and humans (GSTZ1), which dimerizes 
to form the functional enzyme GSTZ1-1. GSTZ1-1 is the same 
enzyme as maleylacetoacetate isomerase (MAAI), the enzyme 
that catalyzes the isomerization of maleylacetoacetate to fumary-
lacetoacetate, the penultimate step in tyrosine and phenylalanine 
catabolism (Board and Anders, 2011). GSTZ1-1 also catalyzes the 
GSH-dependent biotransformation of dichloroacetate (DCA) to 
glyoxylate (CHCl2–COOH → CHO–COOH) (Board and Anders, 
2011). Although GSH is required for the biotransformation of DCA 
to glyoxylate, it is not consumed as the GSTZ1-1-catalyzed nucleo-
philic attack of GSH on DCA yields S-(α-chlorocarboxymethyl)
glutathione (GS–CHClCOOH), which in turn undergoes deha-
logenation and facile hydrolysis to produce glyoxylate and GSH 
(Board and Anders, 2011). In all species examined, DCA inhibits 
its own metabolism by irreversibly inhibiting GSTZ1-1 through 
covalent modification of Cys16 by S-(α-chlorocarboxymethyl) 
glutathione (Board and Anders, 2011; James et al., 2017). DCA has 
several potential therapeutic applications (such as the treatment of 
inherited mitochondrial disorders that result in lactic acidosis, pul-
monary hypertension and, by restoring aerobic glycolysis, several 
solid tumors) based on its ability to inhibit pyruvate dehydroge-
nase kinase. However, treatment with DCA is complicated by its 
auto-inhibition, which results in increased exposure to DCA with 
repeat dosing. While monohaloalkanes and dihaloalkanes tend to be 
substrates for GST Theta, a number of α-haloalkanoates and α,α-
dihaloalkanoates have been identified as substrates for GSTZ1-1 
(Board and Anders, 2011). At least four polymorphic variants of 
GSTZ1-1 have been identified in humans, with the haplotypes des-
ignated as GSTZ1A (Lys32, Arg42, Thr82), GSTZ1B (Lys32, Gly42, 
Thr82), GSTZ1C (Glu32, Gly42, Thr82), and GSTZ1D (Glu32, Gly42, 
Met82) (Board and Anders, 2011). GSTZ1C shows the highest allele 
frequency and has been designated the wild-type enzyme. GSTZ1A 
shows the highest rate of conversion of DCA to glyoxylate and 
is resistant to inactivation by DCA (Board and Anders, 2011). 
Genetically determined differences in DCA turnover may be signifi-
cant if DCA is utilized in cancer therapy (Michelakis et al., 2010; 
Board and Anders, 2011). GSTZ1 knockout mice have increased 
levels of GSTA1, A2, M1, M5, P1, P2, and NQO1 in the liver, and 
undergo rapid weight loss, leucopenia, and death when provided 2% 
phenylalanine in drinking water (recall that GSTZ1-1 is the same 
enzyme as MAAI, the enzyme that catalyzes the isomerization of 
maleylacetoacetate to fumarylacetoacetate, the penultimate step in 
tyrosine and phenylalanine catabolism) (Board and Anders, 2011).
The Omega class of GST was initially identified through bio-
informatics analysis of the expressed sequence tag (EST) database. 
Omega GSTs are present in many species including plants, yeast, 
nematodes, insects, and mammals (Board, 2011). Two Omega 
subunits have been identified in mice, rats, and humans (GSTO1 
and GSTO2). GSTO1 and GSTO2 are also highly expressed in the 
mouse liver, heart, and kidney with wide distribution in other tissues 
(Board, 2011). The GSTOs differ from the other cytosolic GSTs in 
that they do not display the typical activity toward substrates such as 
1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene, dichloromethane, cumene hydroperox-
ide, or ethacrynic acid, but have some characteristics of glutaredox-
ins (GLRXs) (Board, 2011; Mukherjee et al., 2006). Interestingly, 
a mutation in GSTO1 (Cys32Ala) significantly improves its GSH-
conjugating activity with 1-chloro-2,4-­dinitrobenzene (Board, 
2011). Human GSTO1 shows thioltransferase activity and can 
catalyze the reduction of S-phenacylglutathione (a metabolite of 
tear gas), dehydroascorbate, and methylated arsenic species (Board, 
2011). In fact, GSTO2 was originally identified in rats as dehy-
droascorbate reductase. The major component in tear gas 2-chloro-
acetophenone is converted to a GSH conjugate (phenyl-CO–CH2Cl 
+ GSH → phenyl-CO–CH2–SG + HCl) that is further metabo-
lized by GSTO1 to acetophenone (phenyl-CO–CH2–SG + GSH → 
­phenyl-CO–CH3 + GSSG) (Board, 2011). Inasmuch as the reaction 
with S-phenacylglutathione is highly specific to GSTO1, a novel 
substrate was developed, namely, S-(4-nitrophenacyl)glutathione, 
that can be used in spectrophotometric assays to determine GSTO1 
activity (Board, 2011). GSTO2 also exhibits thioltransferase activ-
ity and can catalyze the reduction of monomethylarsenate and 
dehydroascorbate, but not S-phenacylglutathiones (Board, 2011). 
Sulfonylurea cytokine-release inhibitory drugs (CRIDs) can bind 
to GSTO1 and inhibit IL-1β activation, suggesting GSTO1 involve-
ment in a proinflammatory response (Board, 2011). GSTO1 can 
catalyze the glutathionylation and deglutathionylation of proteins.

370
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
This reversible, posttranslational modification of proteins may 
explain the requirement for functional GSTO1 in LPS-stimulated 
inflammatory signaling through the TLR4 receptor. The observation 
that ML175, a selective GSTO1 inhibitor, can block LPS-stimulated 
inflammatory signaling suggests that GSTO1 inhibitors represent a 
potential new class of anti-inflammatory drugs for the treatment of 
toxic shock and other inflammatory disorders (Board and Menon, 
2016). Other chemicals have been shown to inhibit GSTO1 activ-
ity, such as tocopherol succinate, phenylsulfonate, omeprazole, and 
rifampicin (Bachovchin et al., 2009; Board, 2011). As Omega GSTs 
can reduce monomethylarsenic acid, they have been suggested to 
play a key role in arsenic biotransformation through the arsenic 
methylation pathway (Board, 2011). However, several studies have 
not supported a major role for GSTOs in overall arsenic biotrans-
formation (Board, 2011). While most GSTs have a tyrosine or 
serine at the active site, GSTOs have a cysteine and an additional 
19 amino acids at the N-terminus (Mukherjee et al., 2006; Board, 
2011). Many polymorphisms have been detected in both GSTO1 
and GSTO2, with five and four polymorphisms that result in amino 
acid changes, respectively (Mukherjee et al., 2006; Board, 2011). 
GSTO genes have also been associated with several neurological 
diseases, suggesting that variation of these GSTs may modify dis-
ease susceptibility or age of onset through a common pathological 
mechanism (Board, 2011).
The Kappa class of GSTs is an ancient protein family and 
represents a separate evolutionary pathway that has significant 
differences in function, localization, and structure than other sol-
uble GSTs (Morel and Aninat, 2011). Harris et al. (1991) initially 
discovered and isolated GST Kappa from rat liver mitochondrial 
matrix. The Kappa subunit is a soluble, dimeric protein with a 36% 
sequence identity to GST Theta, and localized to both the mitochon-
dria and peroxisomes (Morel and Aninat, 2011). A single Kappa 
subunit is expressed in mouse, rat, and humans, with the gene desig-
nated as GSTK1 in each species. The three-dimensional structure of 
the Kappa subunit is more similar to bacterial GSH-dependent and 
disulfide-bond-forming oxidoreductase (DsbA) than to the cyto-
solic GSTs. The Kappa subunit contains a thioredoxin-like domain 
but with a DsbA-like α-helical domain inserted between the α2 
helix and the β3 strand (Oakley, 2011). GSTK1 is ubiquitously 
expressed in humans with the kidney, liver, adrenal gland, and adi-
pose tissue expressing the most abundant levels (Morel and Aninat, 
2011). Differential expression of GSTK1 has been seen between 
fetal and adult liver and brain tissues, indicating possible ontogenic 
regulation of GST Kappa (Morel and Aninat, 2011). In rodents it 
is present at high levels in the liver and stomach; moderate levels 
in the kidney, heart, and lung; and subsequent decreasing levels in 
the duodenum, jejunum, and ileum (Thomson et al., 2004; Knight 
et al., 2007; Morel and Aninat, 2011). GSTK1 expression in the 
heart shows marked gender differences, with females expressing 
twice as much Kappa subunit than males (Knight et al., 2007; Morel 
and Aninat, 2011).
Two human single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of 
GSTK1 have been identified in the 5′-flanking region of the GSTK1 
gene located −1308 and −1032 bp from the transcription start site 
(Shield et al., 2010; Morel and Aninat, 2011). The −1308 SNP cor-
responds to a G to T transition, whereas the −1032 SNP corresponds 
to an alteration in a CpG methylation site (Shield et al., 2010; Morel 
and Aninat, 2011). The T allele variant (−1308 SNP) occurs with 
a 20% frequency in Asian populations (Morel and Aninat, 2011). 
The −1032 SNP has been demonstrated to cause a 38% decrease 
in GSTK1 promoter activity in HEK293 and HepG2 cells (Shield 
et al., 2010; Morel and Aninat, 2011). GSTK1 expression has been 
correlated with obesity; hence, GST Kappa may represent a new 
target for xenobiotics in the treatment of insulin resistance and 
related metabolic disorders (Morel and Aninat, 2011).
The microsomal GSTs are distinct from the soluble enzymes 
and have been referred to as the membrane-associated proteins in 
eicosanoid and glutathione metabolism (MAPEG) (Higgins and 
Hayes, 2011). Six human microsomal GSTs divided into three 
clans have been identified (see Table 6-24), which differ in their 
ability to form aggregates. For instance, MGST1 exists as a tri-
mer, as does the other clan 2 MAPEG, namely, PGES1, whereas 
the clan 1 MAPEGs, LTC4S, and MGST2, as well as the clan 
3 MAPEG 5-lipoxygenase-activating protein (FLAP), can func-
tion as monomers, dimers, trimers, or more complex aggregates 
(Hayes et al., 2005; Martinez Molina et al., 2008; Higgins and 
Hayes, 2011). MGST1 conjugates xenobiotics with GSH and prob-
ably functions solely as a detoxication enzyme. It is a highly abun-
dant microsomal protein (1% of total ER protein) in the human 
liver and the outer mitochondrial membrane (5% of outer mito-
chondrial membrane protein) in the rat liver (Morgenstern et al., 
2011). MGST1 plays a role in the biotransformation of certain 
lipophilic reactive electrophiles and the reduction of membrane-
embedded hydroperoxides with substrates that include halogenated 
hydrocarbons and phospholipid hydroperoxides (Morgenstern 
et al., 2011). The denitration of glyceryl trinitrate is another role for 
MGST1 (Morgenstern et al., 2011). While no specific substrates for 
MGST1 have been found, this MAPEG can be selectively activated 
with N-ethylmaleimide to determine its contribution toward over-
all GST activity (Morgenstern et al., 2011). Furthermore, MGST1 
is the only GST that can utilize N-acetyl-l-cysteine as a cofactor 
instead of GSH (Morgenstern et al., 2011). MGST1 is involved in 
the formation of the mitochondrial permeability transition (MPT), 
suggesting a role for MGST1 in mitochondria-mediated cell death 
(Aniya and Imaizumi, 2011). It is also upregulated in many tumor 
types, overexpressed in many stem cells and stem-cell-like tumor 
cells, where it may be playing a protective role for these cells 
(Morgenstern et al., 2011). Other MAPEGs, such as MGST2 and 
MGST3, contribute to detoxication and synthesis of leukotriene C4 
(Hayes et al., 2005). FLAP does not have catalytic activity, but binds 
arachidonic acid and is essential for leukotriene synthesis. LTC4S 
and PGES1 do not appear to be involved in xenobiotic metabolism 
(Hayes et al., 2005). Many SNPs have been identified in MGST1 
and FLAP as well as diallelic variants in MGST3 in certain popula-
tions, but the biological significance has not yet been determined 
(Hayes et al., 2005).
The conjugation of certain xenobiotics with GSH is cata-
lyzed by most classes of GST. For example, members of the Alpha, 
Kappa, Mu, and Pi classes of human cytosolic GSTs, as well 
as several of the MAPEG GSTs, all catalyze the conjugation of 
1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene. Other reactions are fairly specific for 
one class of enzymes (Hayes and Pulford, 1995). For example, the 
Alpha GSTs preferentially isomerize Δ5 steroids to Δ4 steroids and 
reduce linoleate and cumene hydroperoxide to their correspond-
ing alcohols. The Mu GSTs preferentially conjugate certain arene 
oxides and alkene epoxides, such as styrene-7,8-epoxide. The Pi 
GSTs preferentially conjugate ethacrynic acid. Additional examples 
are shown in Table 6-24. However, individual members within a 
class of GSTs can differ markedly in their substrate specificity. In 
mice, for example, the Alpha GSTs composed of GSTA3 subunits 
can rapidly conjugate aflatoxin B1 8,9-epoxide, whereas those com-
posed of GSTA1 subunits are virtually incapable of catalyzing this 
reaction (Eaton and Gallagher, 1994).
In rodents, individual members of the Alpha and Mu 
classes of GSTs are inducible (generally two- to threefold) by 
3-­methylcholanthrene, phenobarbital, corticosteroids, oltipraz, and

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
371
various antioxidants (such as ethoxyquin and BHA). Several GST 
substrates (i.e., Michael acceptors) are GST inducers, as are certain 
nonsubstrates, such as hydrogen peroxide and other reactive oxygen 
species, all of which activate Nrf2 (Rushmore et al., 1991; Daniel, 
1993; Nguyen et al., 1994; Hayes and Pulford, 1995; Hayes et al., 
2005; Higgins and Hayes, 2011). Induction is usually associated 
with increased levels of mRNA due to transcriptional activation of 
the gene encoding a subunit of GST. Not all subunits are induced to 
the same extent (Higgins and Hayes, 2011).
The enhancer regions of the genes encoding some of the 
rodent GSTs (such as rat GSTA2-2) have been shown to contain 
a xenobiotic-responsive element (XRE), a putative phenobarbital-
responsive element, a glucocorticoid-responsive element (GRE), 
and an antioxidant-responsive element (ARE, which is also known 
as the electrophile-responsive element [see Point 9 in the section 
“Principles of Xenobiotic Biotransformation”]). Accordingly, in 
rodents, certain GST subunits are regulated by both AhR and Nrf2 
activators (i.e., by both monofunctional and bifunctional agents), as 
described previously for DT-diaphorase (see the sections “Quinone 
Reduction: NQO1 and NQO2” and “Induction of Cytochrome P450: 
Xenosensors”). Induction of GSTs by the Nrf2 activator sulfora-
phane is thought to be responsible, at least in part, for the anticancer 
effects of broccoli (Zhang et al., 1992; Higgins and Hayes, 2011). 
GSTA4 is induced in mice administered α-angeliclactone, butylated 
hydroxyanisole (BHA), ethoxyquin, indole-3-carbinol, limettin, and 
oltipraz (Hayes et al., 2005; Higgins and Hayes, 2011). In addition 
to inducing one or more GSTs, activation of Nrf2 by oxidative stress 
or exposure to electrophiles induces γ-GCL, which increases GSH 
levels in response to an initial decrease in GSH levels (see Point 9 in 
the section “Principles of Xenobiotic Biotransformation”).
Factors that regulate the expression of GSTs in rodents may 
have similar effects in humans, but some differences have been 
noted. For example, the 5′ promoter region of Alpha GST in humans 
(GSTA1) lacks the ARE and XRE consensus sequences through 
which the corresponding rat enzyme is induced. However, such 
sequences appear to be present in the promoter region of human 
GSTM4 and GSTP1 genes (Hayes and Pulford, 1995; Whalen 
and Boyer, 1998; Higgins and Hayes, 2011). (A functional ARE 
is also present in the promoter region of human DT-diaphorase 
[NQO1].) Therefore, certain subunits of GSTs are inducible by 
a variety of mechanisms in rats, and other subunits appear to be 
inducible by similar mechanisms in humans. Species differences 
in GST regulation may also stem from differences in xenobiotic 
biotransformation, especially differences in the formation of elec-
trophiles, Michael acceptors, and/or the production of oxidative 
stress. For example, coumarin is thought be an inducer of GSTP1 
in rats because it is converted in the rat liver to reactive metabolites, 
namely, coumarin 3,4-epoxide and ortho-hydroxyphenylacetalde-
hyde (see Fig. 6-48). In contrast, the major route of coumarin bio-
transformation in humans is by 7-hydroxylation, which would not 
be expected to be associated with GST induction.
Conjugation with GSH represents an important detoxication 
reaction because electrophiles are potentially toxic species that can 
bind to critical nucleophiles, such as proteins and nucleic acids, 
and cause cellular damage and genetic mutations. All the enzymes 
involved in xenobiotic biotransformation have the potential to gen-
erate reactive intermediates, most of which are detoxified to some 
extent by conjugation with GSH. GSH is also a cofactor for GPXs, 
which play an important role in protecting cells against lipid and 
hemoglobin peroxidation. Resistance to toxic compounds is often 
associated with an overexpression of GST. Examples include the 
resistance of insects to DDT (see Fig. 6-25), of corn to atrazine, and 
of cancer cells to chemotherapeutic drugs.
GST is the major determinant of certain species differences in 
chemical-induced toxicity. For example, low doses of aflatoxin B1 
cause liver toxicity and tumor formation in rats but not mice, even 
though rats and mice convert aflatoxin B1 to the highly reactive 
8,9-epoxide at similar rates (this reaction is shown in Fig. 6-38). 
This species difference arises because mice express high levels 
of an Alpha class GST (GSTA3) enabling them to conjugate afla-
toxin B1 8,9-epoxide with GSH up to 50 times faster than rats (or 
humans, which are also considered a susceptible species) (Eaton 
and Gallagher, 1994). Mice become sensitive to the adverse effects 
of aflatoxin B1 following treatment with chemicals that decrease 
GSH levels, such as diethyl maleate (DEA) (which depletes GSH) 
or buthionine-S-sulfoximine (BSO) (which inhibits GSH synthe-
sis). Conversely, treatment of rats with inducers of certain GSTs, 
such as ethoxyquin, BHA, oltipraz, and phenobarbital, protects 
them from the hepatotoxic/tumorigenic action of aflatoxin B1 
(Hayes et al., 1994)
The conjugation of aflatoxin B1 8,9-epoxide with GSH pro-
vides an interesting example of the stereospecificity with which 
certain GSH conjugation reactions can occur. CYP converts afla-
toxin B1 to a mixture of exo- and endo-8,9-epoxides (only a generic 
8,9-epoxide is shown in Fig. 6-38, meaning the figure does not 
indicate whether the oxygen atom is above or below the plane of 
the ring system). Both enantiomeric epoxides are formed by liver 
microsomes from mice, rats, and humans, but only the exo-­epoxide 
binds extensively to DNA (where it binds to the N7 position of 
guanine). One or more mouse Alpha GSTs rapidly conjugate the 
exo-epoxide, which accounts for the resistance of this species to 
aflatoxin-induced hepatotoxicity and tumorigenicity (as described 
above). Rat and human GSTAs do not rapidly conjugate either 
the exo- or the endo-epoxide (with the exception of the inducible 
rat GST, which is not constitutively expressed in rats to any great 
extent). However, human GSTM1-1 can conjugate aflatoxin B1 
8,9-epoxide, but it preferentially conjugates the relatively innocu-
ous endo-isomer (Wang et al., 2000).
Species differences in the detoxication of aflatoxin B1 
8,9-epoxide suggest that individual differences in GST may deter-
mine susceptibility to the toxic effects of certain chemicals. In sup-
port of this interpretation, a genetic polymorphism for GSTM1 has 
been identified, and individuals who are homozygous for the null 
allele (i.e., those with low GST activity due to complete deletion 
of the GSTM1 gene) appear to be at a moderately increased risk 
for cigarette-smoking-induced lung cancer, head and neck cancer, 
and possibly bladder cancer (Hayes and Pulford, 1995; Whalen and 
Boyer, 1998; Strange et al., 2000; Hayes et al., 2005). Depending 
on the ethnic group, 22% to 100% of the population is homozygous 
for the GSTM1 null genotype, which results in a complete lack 
of GSTM1 activity in all tissues. However, there is evidence that 
GSTM1 confers significant protection from breast cancer in indi-
viduals homozygous for a functional GSTM1 allele (Hayes et al., 
2005). GSTT1 activity is absent from 11% to 58% of the population 
(depending on ethnicity) due to deletion of the GSTT1 gene, which 
appears to increase susceptibility to development of astrocytoma, 
meningioma, and myelodysplasia. When examined for their indi-
vidual effect, these null genotypes generally have a small effect on 
disease susceptibility, with an odds ratio of 2 or less. However, the 
odds ratio can increase dramatically when these null GST geno-
types are examined in conjunction with other genotypes or with 
environmental factors (such as exposure to carcinogens). For exam-
ple, when the GSTM1 null genotype is combined with cigarette 
smoking and a particular CYP1A1 allele, the odds ratio can increase 
to 8.9 (in one study) or 21.9 (in another study). Polymorphisms 
that result in amino acid substitutions have been reported for most

372
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
human GST genes, some of which alter GST function. Some of 
these polymorphisms may also be risk modifiers for certain diseases 
in an analogous manner to the GSTM1 and GSTT1 null genotypes.
In some cases, conjugation with GSH enhances the toxic-
ity of a xenobiotic (Monks et al., 1990; Dekant and Vamvakas, 
1993; Testa and Krämer, 2008, 2010). Five mechanisms of GSH-
dependent activation of xenobiotics have been identified, with the 
first four shown in Fig. 6-73. These mechanisms are (1) forma-
tion of GSH conjugates of haloalkanes, organic thiocyanates, and 
nitrosoguanides that release a toxic metabolite; (2) formation of 
GSH conjugates of vicinal dihaloalkanes that are inherently toxic 
because they can form electrophilic sulfur mustards; (3) formation 
of GSH conjugates of halogenated alkenes that are degraded to 
toxic metabolites by β-lyase in the kidney; (4) formation of GSH 
conjugates of quinones, quinoneimines, and isothiocyanates that are 
degraded to toxic metabolites by GGT1 and ANPEP in the kidney; 
and (5) cyclic GSH conjugation that leads to GSH depletion.
The first mechanism is illustrated by dichloromethane, which 
is conjugated with GSH to form the highly unstable S-chloromethyl-
glutathione, which then breaks down to formaldehyde. Both 
formaldehyde and the GSH conjugate are reactive metabolites, and 
either or both may be responsible for dichloromethane-induced 
tumorigenesis in sensitive species. The rate of conjugation of 
dichloromethane with GSH is considerably faster in mice, which 
are susceptible to dichloromethane-induced tumorigenesis, than 
in rats or hamsters, which are resistant species. Other examples 
include the 1,1,3,3,3-pentafluoro-2-(fluromethoxy)prop-1-ene 
breakdown product of the general anesthetic sevoflurane. This 
breakdown product and its derivatives are conjugated to GSH, bio-
transformed to cysteine conjugates and mercapturic acids, which 
are then converted through β-lyase cleavage and thiol rearrange-
ment to the highly reactive thioacyl fluoride (Testa and Krämer, 
2008, 2010). This highly reactive metabolite can form adducts with 
proteins and may explain its associated nephrotoxicity (Testa and 
Krämer, 2008, 2010).
The second mechanism accounts for the toxicity of dichlo-
roethane and dibromoethane. These vicinal dihaloalkanes are con-
verted to GSH conjugates that can rearrange to form mutagenic and 
nephrotoxic episulfonium ions (sulfur half-mustards) (Fig. 6-73). 
Dichloroethane and dibromoethane can also be oxidized by CYP 
Figure 6-73.  Role of glutathione conjugation in the activation of xenobiotics to toxic metabolites.
Cl
C
Cl
H
H
Br
CH2
CH2
Br
CH2
CH2
Cl
CH2
CH2
SG
HO
CH2
SG
Br
Dichloromethane
GSH
HCHO
Formaldehyde
Dibromoethane
SG
Episulfonium ion
Hexachlorobutadiene
Glutathione conjugate
Glutamic acid
Glycine
Cysteine conjugate
N-Acetyltransferase
Beta lyase
Pyruvate
Covalent binding to
macromolecules,
toxicity
Br
P450
Br
O
O
Br
SG
OH
OH
Glutamate
Glycine
Br
SCy s
OH
OH
Br
O
O
SCys
REDOX
CYCLING
H2C
S +
G
GS–
Cl–
Cl
Cl
Cl
C
Cl
S
NH3, Cl–
Br
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
SG
Cl
Cl
S
NH
COO–
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
COCH3
Mercapturic acid
OH–
Cl–
GS–
GS–, H+
Cl–
GS–
Br–

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
373
to chloroacetaldehyde and bromoacetaldehyde (by reactions analo-
gous to those shown in Fig. 6-56). Either pathway can potentially 
account for the toxic and tumorigenic effects of these dihaloal-
kanes. However, the toxicity and DNA binding of dihaloalkanes 
are increased by factors that decrease their oxidation by CYP and 
increase their conjugation with GSH.
The third mechanism accounts for the nephrotoxicity of sev-
eral halogenated alkenes. Several halogenated alkenes, such as 
hexachlorobutadiene, cause damage to the kidney tubules in rats, 
which leads to carcinoma of the proximal tubules. These nephro-
toxic halogenated alkenes are conjugated with GSH and transported 
to the kidney for processing to mercapturic acids. The cysteine 
conjugates, which form by removal of glutamic acid and glycine, 
are substrates for N-acetyltransferase (NAT), which completes the 
synthesis of mercapturic acids, and cysteine-conjugate β-lyase 
(CCBL1), which removes pyruvate and ammonia from the cysteine 
conjugate to produce thionylacyl halides, thiiranes, thiolactones, 
and thioketenes. The early damage to renal mitochondria caused by 
halogenated alkenes is probably because CCBL1 is a mitochondrial 
enzyme.
The fourth mechanism accounts for the nephrotoxicity of 
bromobenzene, which causes damage to the proximal tubules in 
rats. Bromobenzene is oxidized by CYP in the liver to bromohy-
droquinone, which is conjugated with GSH and transported to the 
kidney (Fig. 6-73). The GSH conjugate is converted to the cysteine 
derivative by GGT1 and membrane ANPEP. Substitution of bro-
mohydroquinones with cysteine lowers their redox potential and 
thereby facilitates their oxidation to toxic quinones. The cysteine 
conjugates of bromohydroquinone are thought to undergo redox 
cycling and cause kidney damage through the generation of reactive 
oxygen species. 4-Aminophenol is thought to cause kidney damage 
by a similar mechanism, except a benzoquinoneimine is involved in 
conjugation with GSH and subsequent damage to proximal tubules 
of the kidney. Treatment of rats with the GSH depletor, buthionine-
S-sulfoximine (BSO), protects them against the nephrotoxic effects 
of 4-aminophenol, which implicates GSH conjugation in the activa-
tion of this compound.
The fifth mechanism occurs with moderately toxic allyl-, 
­benzyl-, and phenethylisothiocyantes as well as sulforaphane 
formed from plant glucosinolates. These compounds are reversibly 
conjugated with GSH to form thiocarbamates which spontaneously 
degrade to their isothiocyanates upon export from the cell, which 
releases GSH. The isothiocyanate is then taken up by the cells again 
and the cycle can repeat until intracellular GSH is depleted. Once 
GSH levels are low, the compounds will tend to thiocarbamylate 
proteins, which can lead to cell death (Hayes et al., 2005).
Thiosulfate Sulfurtransferase (Rhodanese)
Cyanide forms naturally in leucocytes and neural cells, and also 
as a result of vitamin B12 metabolism, and is also encountered as 
a xenobiotic in plants containing cyanogenic glycosides, such as 
cassava, tobacco smoke, and pyrolysis of nitrile polymers or plas-
tic (Billaut-Laden et al., 2006a; Libiad et al., 2015). Thiosulfate 
sulfurtransferase (TST) is a mitochondrial enzyme encoded by the 
TST gene that converts cyanide to the far less toxic metabolite, 
thiocyanate. The reaction involves transfer of sulfur from thiosul-
fate (or another sulfur donor) as follows:
CN
S O
SCN
SO
Cyanide
Thiosulfate
Thiocyanate
Sulfit
−
−
−
−
+
→

+
2
3
2
3
2
e
The sulfite produced by this reaction can be converted to 
sulfate by the molybdoenzyme, sulfite oxidase (see the section 
“Molybdenum Hydroxylases (Molybdoenzymes)”). Taking advan-
tage of the TST reaction, thiosulfate has been used as an antidote 
against cyanide poisoning (Libiad et al., 2015). Cyanide can also be 
“detoxified” by binding to methemoglobin (the oxidized or ferric 
form of hemoglobin). 4-Dimethylaminophenol is used to induce 
methemoglobinemia as an antidote to cyanide poisoning because 
methemoglobin competes with cytochrome oxidase for the cyanide 
ion. However, 4-dimethylaminophenol is nephrotoxic to rats, pre-
sumably by a mechanism similar to that described above for the 
structural analog 4-aminophenol (see the preceding section and the 
section “Glutathione Conjugation”). TST also catalyzes the trans-
fer of sulfane sulfur from glutathione persulfide (GSSH) to sulfite 
to form thiosulfate as part of the mitochondrial sulfide oxidation 
pathway (Libiad et al., 2015). The disulfide glutathione persulfide 
is formed by the transfer of sulfur from hydrogen sulfide to gluta-
thione by sulfide quinone oxidoreductase (SQR).
In humans, TST is expressed at high levels in the liver, kid-
ney, and particularly the colon where it plays a major role in the 
detoxication of hydrogen sulfide (which can reach concentrations 
of more than 3 mM) produced by anaerobic bacteria (Billaut-Laden 
et al., 2006a; Libiad et al., 2015). TST is also widely distributed in 
the central nervous system and may also play a role in the import 
of 5S rRNA into mitochondria (Smirnov et al., 2010). Several fac-
tors have been shown to induce TST, including resveratrol, α-lipoic 
acid, fungal (Phellinus linteus) polysaccharide extracts, and long-
term low-dose irradiation, implicating TST in protection against 
persistent oxidative stress (Nakajima, 2015). Six allelic variants of 
TST have been identified, namely, TST*1B to TST*1F and TST*2, 
with the latter showing significantly reduced intrinsic metabolic 
clearance for thiocyanate formation (Billaut-Laden et al., 2006a). 
TST polymorphisms that decrease cyanide and hydrogen sulfide 
detoxication may ultimately become important in understanding 
certain diseases, such as ulcerative colitis and ALS. For instance, 
hydrogen sulfide release has been found to be three to four times 
higher in patients with ulcerative colitis when compared with 
healthy subjects, and is positively correlated with disease severity 
(Billaut-Laden et al., 2006a). Furthermore, it has been postulated 
that individuals with ALS display a disorder in cyanide metabolism 
because of the higher blood and urine levels of cyanide (Billaut-
Laden et al., 2006a). Mimori et al. (1984) significantly decreased 
TST activity in cervical and thoracic spinal cords of patients with 
ALS compared with healthy subjects. Finally, TST has also been 
proposed as a target for the treatment of obesity and type 2 diabetes 
based on the observed inverse relationship between TST expression 
in adipose tissue and diabetes in rodents (Morton et al., 2016).
3-Mercaptopyruvate Sulfurtransferase
An additional pathway of cyanide detoxication involves the enzyme 
3-mercaptopyruvate sulfurtransferase (encoded by the gene MPST) 
that converts cyanide to thiocyanate by the transfer of sulfur from 
3-mercaptopyruvate as follows:
CN
-Mercaptopyruvate
Thiocyanate
Pyruvate.
−+
→
+
3
The 3-mercaptopyruvate in this reaction is produced during 
cysteine metabolism by cysteine aminotransferase (Billaut-Laden 
et al., 2006b; Nagahara et al., 2015). MPST is both a cytosolic and 
mitochondrial enzyme and is expressed at high levels in the kidney, 
liver, heart, and erythrocytes (Billaut-Laden et al., 2006b).
Three allelic variants of MPST have been identified, namely, 
MPST*1B, MPST*1C, and MPST*2, with the latter showing little-
to-no activity because it is a nonsense allele (Billaut-Laden et al., 
2006b). While TST and MPST are related enzymes due to their

374
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
shared amino acid sequence identity and function in cyanide detoxi-
fication, MPST enzymatic activity has been shown to be induced 
specifically by diallyl disulfide, suggesting a separate mechanism 
of regulation for each enzyme (Nakajima, 2015).
Unusual Conjugation Reactions
In rare cases, xenobiotics can be biotransformed to unusual con-
jugates which can contribute to xenobiotic clearance. As shown 
in Fig. 6-74, the immunosuppressive drug 6-mercaptopurine (as 
well as its precursor azathioprine) is converted to 6-thioinosine 
monophosphate (TIMP) by hypoxanthine guanine phophoribosyl-
transferase (HGPRT) with phophoribosyl pyrophosphate (PRPP) 
as the phophoribosyl donor (Wielinga et al., 2002; Gearry et al., 
2010; Hofmann et al., 2012). Similarly, to 6-mercaptopurine, 
6-thiopurine can also be converted to a thionucleotide mono-
phosphate (TNMP) (Wielinga et al., 2002). While the 6-thiogua-
nine nucleotides are responsible for immunosuppressant activity, 
6-methylmercaptopurine nucleotides have been associated with 
hepatotoxicity at high doses (Gearry et al., 2010).
Another example of an unusual conjugate is that of the immu-
nosuppressant macrolide everolimus, which forms a phosphocho-
line conjugate as a major metabolite (ATG181) in both animals and 
humans (Zollinger et al., 2008). While phosphocholine esters of 
endogenous lipids, such as sphingomyelins or phosphatidylcholines, 
are common, phosphocholine conjugates of xenobiotics are rare. The 
addition of activated phosphocholine is catalyzed by the enzymes 
cholinephosphotransferase found in the Golgi apparatus as well as 
choline/ethanolaminephosphotransferase found in the endoplasmic 
reticulum and nuclear envelope; however, it is not known whether 
these enzymes also catalyze the phosphocholine conjugation of 
everolimus (Zollinger et al., 2008). Hepatitis C inhibitors contain-
ing a bicycle[1.1.1]pentane moiety are also conjugated with phos-
phocholine (Zhuo et al., 2016), whereas pimasertib, an inhibitor of 
MEK1/2 (the mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathway), 
is conjugated with phosphoethanolamine (Scheible et al., 2017).
Figure 6-74.  Examples of unusual conjugation reactions.
6-Mercaptopurine
Everolimus
Imatinib
Imatinib-ADP+
ATG181
5-Phosphoribosyl 1-pyrophosphate (PRPP)
6-Thioinosine monophosphate (TIMP)
+
N
N
N
HN
SH
O
N
+
P
O
OH
+ Phosphocholine
PPi
N
N
N
N
SH
O
O
P
O
–O
O–
OH
OH
O
O
P
O
O–
O–
P
O
O–
O
O
P
O
–O
O–
OH
OH
+ NADPH
N
N
N
N
HN
N
H
O
N
O
HO
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
HO
N
O
OH
O
O
N
N
N+
N
HN
N
H
O
N
O
O
O
P
O
O
P
O
O–
O
O
P
O
O–
O–
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
HO
N
O
OH
O
OH
OH
N
N
N
N
NH2
O
OH
O–

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
375
The hydroxyl group or a nitrogen atom in azoheterocyclic 
xenobiotics can be conjugated with ADP-ribose, the ADP moiety 
of which can be hydrolyzed by phosphatases to convert the ADP-
ribose conjugate to a ribose conjugate (Fan et al., 2016). The ADP-
ribosyltransferases (ART) responsible for the ADP-ribosylation 
of xenobiotics is known variously as NAD+ hydrolase, NAD-
glycohydrolase, nucleosidase, or NADase (EC 3.2.2.5), which use 
various nicotiminade cofactors including NAD, NADP, and/or NMN. 
Examples of substrates that undergo ADP-ribosylation are rifampin, 
imatinib, otenabant, continine, nicotinic acid, 4-ipomeanol, and nitro-
samines such as 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone 
(NNK) and 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanol (NNAL). 
Different forms of ART are thought to be responsible for ADP-
ribosylation of xenobiotics in liver cytosol and endoplasmic reticulum 
(Fan et al., 2016). ADP-ribosylation is highly species specific and 
is mainly observed in rodents (i.e., imatinib, ipomeanol, and NNK/
NNAL) but not in dogs, monkeys, or humans (Fan et al., 2016).
While single amino-acid conjugation is a well characterized 
metabolic pathway for xenobiotic metabolism (see the section 
“Amino Acid Conjugation”), xenobiotic conjugation to a peptide 
moiety other than glutathione is rare. The metabolism of lucanthone 
is an example of this unusual peptide conjugation. In human liver 
microsomes and in incubations with fungi, lucanthone undergoes 
desethylation or 4-methyl hydroxylation to yield desethyl lucan-
thone and hycanthone, respectively, and these products can be 
further metabolized (Mitchell et al., 2014). Lucanthone can also 
undergo sulfoxidation to yield lucanthone sulfoxide, the major 
urinary metabolite excreted by monkey. Lucanthone sulfoxide is 
conjugated with a peptide moiety, named miracil X, which was 
shown to be a unique human urinary metabolite (Mitchell et al., 
2014). There are several other examples of peptide conjugation to 
xenobiotics, namely 3-phenoxybenzoic acid conjugation to dipep-
tide glycylvaline, quinaldic acid conjugates with glycylglycine 
and glycyltaurine, polyglutamyl conjugates of methotrexate and 
aminopterin, CCNU ((2-chloroethyl)-3-cyclohexyl-1-nitrosourea) 
peptide conjugate, DDA (4,4′-dichlorodiphenylacetic acid) peptide 
conjugate, and polypeptide conjugates of phenothiazine (Mitchell 
et al., 2014). However, the enzymatic pathways involved and the 
significance of these conjugates are not well established.
Succinylation has been shown to be a posttranslational modifi-
cation of proteins (typically at lysine residues); however, succinyl-
ation of xenobiotics is rare (Zhang et al., 2011b). The only reported 
case of this conjugation reaction is that of mephedrone, which is 
succinylated in humans. In studies with human volunteers dosed 
with mephedrone, a novel mephedrone succinate conjugate was 
detected in urine, and proposed to form from the conjugation of 
succinic acid to nor-mephedrone (Pozo et al., 2015). Succinylation 
of xenobiotics is typically used as a prodrug strategy to produce 
drugs with favorable properties; however, succinylation as a mecha-
nism of xenobiotic clearance is highly unusual (Pozo et al., 2015).
Another unusual conjugate is that of investigational antican-
cer agent β-lapachone, which forms a glucosylsulfate conjugate in 
mammals (Savage et al., 2008). Glucosidation and sulfonation of 
xenobiotics can readily occur (see the sections “Glucuronidation 
and Formation of Acyl-CoA Thioesters” and “Sulfonation”) by 
UGT and SULT enzymes. However, typically these Phase 2 reac-
tions are independent of each other and are not sequential to each 
other at the same metabolic site. In the case of β-lapachone, reduc-
tion by NOQ to a hydroquinone is followed by glucosidation, which 
in turn is followed by sulfonation of the glucose moiety (suspected 
to occur at glucose C6) forming the unusual glucosylsulfate con-
jugate (Savage et al., 2008). Glucosylsulfate conjugates have 
previously been observed in cotton plants treated with the insec-
ticide profenofos and 2,4-dicholorphenoxyacetic acid; in sugar 
beets treated with phenmedipham, and in crustaceans exposed to 
1-hydroxypyrene (Savage et al., 2008).
Lastly, the mechanism of xenobiotic conjugation to urea has 
been an area of some debate in the literature. These unusual con-
jugates have largely been considered as artifacts formed in urine 
through a nonenzymatic chemical reaction; however, there are 
reports of xenobiotic-urea metabolites found in bile and feces. An 
example of this is that of rosaramicin, where its urea metabolite 
20-bisureidorosaramicin was found in dog bile and feces, as well 
as human feces, suggesting an enzymatic process in the formation 
of this metabolite (Mitchell, 2014). Xenobiotics that form urea 
conjugates include aminopyrine, formaldehyde, oxazepam, carox-
azone, laropiprant, torcetrapib, isoproturon, and andrographolide 
(Mitchell, 2014). The significance of these conjugates and their 
mechanism of formation (chemical vs. metabolic) remain unclear.
Phosphorylation
Some drugs are intentionally designed to be phosphorylated by intra-
cellular enzymes. For example, the anti-HIV drug zidovudine (AZT) 
is converted to a triphosphate nucleoside by enzymes in the salvage 
pathway (nucleoside kinase, nucleoside monophosphate kinase 
[NMK], and nucleoside diphosphate kinase [NDK]). A rare exam-
ple of a non-nucleoside mimetic that undergoes phosphorylation is 
AZ2381, a tankyrase inhibitor, which is phosphorylated at its primary 
alcohol moiety by red blood cells from mice and, to a lesser extent, 
rat, dog, and human (Gu et al., 2017). However, phosphorylation 
of xenobiotics is the exception rather than the rule. All conjugation 
reactions ultimately require ATP, either to activate the xenobiotic for 
conjugation with GSH or amino acids or to synthesize high-energy 
cofactors such as UDPGA and PAPS. The process is inefficient in 
that several ATP molecules (or their equivalent) are used to synthe-
size each cofactor molecule. The question arises: why is ATP not 
used directly by conjugating enzymes? In other words, why are xeno-
biotics rarely phosphorylated directly (with the exception of nucleo-
side mimetics like zidovudine and the tankyrase inhinitor AZ2381), 
which would require less ATP and would achieve the goal of con-
verting xenobiotics to water-soluble conjugates? It is difficult to be 
certain why this does not occur, but four reasons suggest themselves. 
First, if xenobiotics could be phosphorylated, high intracellular levels 
of a xenobiotic might consume so much ATP as to jeopardize cell 
viability, whereas UDPGA and PAPS can be depleted without kill-
ing cells. Second, phosphorylation of endogenous substrates, such as 
glucose, is a mechanism for trapping endogenous substrates inside a 
cell. This works because the plasma membrane of all cells is a bar-
rier to the passage of polar compounds by virtue of its hydropho-
bic properties (lipid bilayer) and its general lack of transporters that 
efflux phosphorylated compounds out of the cell. The same is true 
for the phosphorylated metabolites of zidovudine and related anti-
viral drugs; they are retained inside the cell that forms them. A lipid 
bilayer is also a physical barrier to other water-soluble conjugates, 
such as glucuronides and sulfonates, but these are transported out of 
the cell by various transporters. Third, phosphorylation of both small 
molecules (such as inositol) and proteins (such as membrane-bound 
receptors and various transcription factors) plays an important role in 
intracellular and intranuclear signaling. It is possible that some xeno-
biotics, if they were phosphorylated, might interfere with these regu-
latory systems and thereby disrupt cellular homeostasis. Fourth, even 
if xenobiotics were phosphorylated in the liver and excreted in bile, 
they would be rapidly hydrolyzed by high levels of alkaline phos-
phatase lining the surface of enterocytes in the small intestine, which 
would promote reabsorption of the xenobiotic (by the very process 
exploited in the design of phosphorylated prodrugs such as fosampre-
navir). Whatever the reason, there appears to be strong evolutionary 
pressure against the conjugation of xenobiotics with phosphoric acid.

376
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The editor and authors recognize the contributions of previous 
authors of this chapter: Ted R. Norton (1st edition), Robert A. Neal 
(2nd edition), I. Glenn Sipes and A. Jay Gandolfi (3rd and 4th edi-
tions), and Maciej Czerwinski (8th edition).
REFERENCES
Abaji R, Krajinovic M. Thiopurine S-methyltransferase polymorphisms in 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia, inflammatory bowel disease and autoim-
mune disorders: influence on treatment response. Pharmgenomics Pers 
Med. 2017;10:143–156.
Abdelmegeed MA, Ha SK, Choi Y, Akbar M, Song BJ. Role of CYP2E1 in 
mitochondrial dysfunction and hepatic tissue injury in alcoholic and non-
alcoholic diseases. Curr Mol Pharmacol. 2015;10:207–225.
Achour B, Russell MR, Barber J, Rostami-Hodjegan A. Simultaneous 
quantification of the abundance of several cytochrome P450 and uridine 
5′-diphospho-glucuronosyltransferase enzymes in human liver micro-
somes using multiplexed targeted proteomics. Drug Metab Dispos. 
2014;42:500–510.
Adamson RH, Bridges JW, Evans ME, Williams RT. Species differences 
in the aromatization of quinic acid in vivo and the role of gut bacteria. 
Biochem J. 1970;116:437–443.
Agarwal DP. Pharmacogenetics of alcohol dehydrogenase. In: Kalow W, 
ed. Pharmacogenetics of Drug Metabolism. New York: Pergamon; 1992.
Agarwal V, Kommaddi RP, Valli K, et al. Drug metabolism in human 
brain: high levels of cytochrome P4503A43 in brain and metabolism 
of anti-anxiety drug alprazolam to its active metabolite. PLoS One. 
2008;3:e2337.
Agostinelli E, Arancia G, Vedova LD, et al. The biological functions of 
polyamine oxidation products by amine oxidases: perspectives of clinical 
applications. Amino Acids. 2004;27:347–358.
Agundez JA, Gallardo L, Ledesma MC, et al. Functionally active duplica-
tions of the CYP2D6 gene are more prevalent among larynx and lung 
cancer patients. Oncology. 2001;61:59–63.
Ahmed MM, Wang T, Luo Y, et al. Aldo-keto reductase-7A protects liver 
cells and tissues from acetaminophen-induced oxidative stress and hepa-
totoxicity. Hepatology. 2011;54:1322–1332.
Ahn J, Yu K, Stolzenberg-Solomon R, et al. Genome-wide association study 
of circulating vitamin D levels. Hum Mol Genet. 2010;19:2739–2745.
Aiba I, Yamasaki T, Shinki T, et al. Characterization of rat and human CYP2J 
enzymes as vitamin D 25-hydroxylases. Steroids. 2006;71:849–856.
Al-Zoughool M, Succop P, Desai P, et al. Effect of N-glucuronidation on 
urinary bladder genotoxicity of 4-aminobiphenyl in male and female 
mice. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 2006;22:153–159.
Albericio F, Kruger HG. Therapeutic peptides. Future Med Chem. 
2012;4:1527–1531.
Aldridge WN. Serum esterases. I. Two types of esterase (A and B) hydro-
lysing p-nitrophenyl acetate, propionate and butyrate, and a method for 
their determination. Biochem J. 1953;53:110–117.
Alfaro JF, Jones JP. Studies on the mechanism of aldehyde oxidase and 
xanthine oxidase. J Org Chem. 2008;73:9469–9472.
Alfirevic A, Pirmohamed M. Drug-induced hypersensitivity reactions 
and pharmacogenomics: past, present and future. Pharmacogenomics. 
2010;11:497–499.
Amano T, Ochi N, Sato H, Sakaki S. Oxidation reaction by xanthine 
oxidase: theoretical study of reaction mechanism. J Am Chem Soc. 
2007;129:8131–8138.
Anders MW. Bioactivation of Foreign Compounds. New York: Academic 
Press; 1985.
Anders MW, Ratnayake JH, Hanna PE, Fuchs JA. Thioredoxin-dependent sulf-
oxide reduction by rat renal cytosol. Drug Metab Dispos. 1981;9:307–310.
Aniya Y, Imaizumi N. Mitochondrial glutathione transferases involving a 
new function for membrane permeability transition pore regulation. Drug 
Metab Rev. 2011;43:292–299.
Annalora AJ, Marcus CB, Iversen PL. Alternative splicing in the cyto-
chrome P450 superfamily expands protein diversity to augment gene 
function and redirect human drug metabolism. Drug Metab Dispos. 
2017;45:375–389.
Antonelli R, Shao K, Thomas DJ, et al. AS3MT, GSTO, and PNP poly-
morphisms: impact on arsenic methylation and implications for disease 
susceptibility. Environ Res. 2014;132:156–167.
Arima N. Acyl glucuronidation and glucosidation of pranoprofen, a 
2-­arylpropionic acid derivative, in mouse liver and kidney homogenates. 
J Pharmacobiodyn. 1990;13:724–732.
Armstrong RN. Kinetic and chemical mechanism of epoxide hydrolase. 
Drug Metab Rev. 1999;31:71–86.
Arner ES, Nordberg J, Holmgren A. Efficient reduction of lipoamide and 
lipoic acid by mammalian thioredoxin reductase. Biochem Biophys Res 
Commun. 1996;225:268–274.
Aronson JK, Ferner RE. Joining the DoTS: new approach to classifying 
adverse drug reactions. BMJ. 2003;327:1222–1225.
Asadov C, Aliyeva G, Mustafayeva K. Thiopurine S-methyltransferase as a 
pharmacogenetic biomarker: significance of testing and review of major 
methods. Cardiovasc Hematol Agents Med Chem. 2017;15(1):23–30.
Atkins WM. Non-Michaelis-Menten kinetics in cytochrome P450-catalyzed 
reactions. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 2005;45:291–310.
Atkins WM, Wang RW, Bird AW, Newton DJ, Lu AY. The catalytic 
mechanism of glutathione S-transferase (GST). Spectroscopic deter-
mination of the pKa of Tyr-9 in rat alpha 1-1 GST. J Biol Chem. 
1993;268:19188–19191.
Augustinsson KB. The nature of an “anionic” site in butyrylcholinester-
ase compared with that of a similar site in acetylcholinesterase. Biochim 
Biophys Acta. 1966;128:351–362.
Ayesh R, Smith RL. Genetic polymorphism of trimethylamine N-oxidation. 
In: Kalow W, ed. Pharmacogenetics of Drug Metabolism. New York: 
Pergamon; 1992.
Bachovchin DA, Brown SJ, Rosen H, Cravatt BF. Identification of selective 
inhibitors of uncharacterized enzymes by high-throughput screening with 
fluorescent activity-based probes. Nat Biotechnol. 2009;27:387–394.
Backman JT, Filppula AM, Niemi M, Neuvonen PJ. Role of cytochrome 
P450 2C8 in drug metabolism and interactions. Pharmacol Rev. 
2016;68:168–241.
Badenhorst CP, Erasmus E, van der Sluis R, et al. A new perspective on the 
importance of glycine conjugation in the metabolism of aromatic acids. 
Drug Metab Rev. 2014;46:343–361.
Baer BR, DeLisle RK, Allen A. Benzylic oxidation of gemfibrozil-1-O-beta-
glucuronide by P450 2C8 leads to heme alkylation and irreversible inhi-
bition. Chem Res Toxicol. 2009;22:1298–1309.
Baer B, Rettie A. CYP4B1: an enigmatic P450 at the interface between xeno-
biotic and endobiotic metabolism. Drug Metab Rev. 2006;38:451–476.
Bafort F, Parisi O, Perraudin JP, Jijakli MH. Mode of action of lactoper-
oxidase as related to its antimicrobial activity: a review. Enzyme Res. 
2014;2014:517164.
Baillie TA, Rettie AE. Role of biotransformation in drug-induced toxicity: 
influence of intra- and inter-species differences in drug metabolism. Drug 
Metab Pharmacokinet. 2011;26:15–29.
Bains OS, Grigliatti TA, Reid RE, Riggs KW. Naturally occurring variants 
of human aldo-keto reductases with reduced in vitro metabolism of dau-
norubicin and doxorubicin. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2010;335:533–545.
Ballard JE, Prueksaritanont T, Tang C. Hepatic metabolism of MK-0457, 
a potent aurora kinase inhibitor: interspecies comparison and role of 
human cytochrome P450 and flavin-containing monooxygenase. Drug 
Metab Dispos. 2007;35:1447–1451.
Ballatori N, Krance SM, Marchan R, Hammond CL. Plasma membrane glu-
tathione transporters and their roles in cell physiology and pathophysiol-
ogy. Mol Aspects Med. 2009a;30:13–28.
Ballatori N, Li N, Fang F, et al. OST alpha-OST beta: a key membrane 
transporter of bile acids and conjugated steroids. Front Biosci (Landmark 
Ed). 2009b;14:2829–2844.
Barditch-Crovo P, Trapnell CB, Ette E, et al. The effects of rifampin and 
rifabutin on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of a combina-
tion oral contraceptive. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 1999;65:428–438.
Barr JT, Choughule KV, Nepal S, et al. Why do most human liver cyto-
sol preparations lack xanthine oxidase activity? Drug Metab Dispos. 
2014;42:695–699.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
377
Bauman JN, Kelly JM, Tripathy S, et al. Can in vitro metabolism-­dependent 
covalent binding data distinguish hepatotoxic from nonhepatotoxic 
drugs? An analysis using human hepatocytes and liver S-9 fraction. Chem 
Res Toxicol. 2009;22:332–340.
Bayrak A, Bayrak T, Tokgozoglu SL, et al. Serum PON-1 activity but 
not Q192R polymorphism is related to the extent of atherosclerosis. J 
Atheroscler Thromb. 2012;19:376–384.
Beasley DE, Koltz AM, Lambert JE, et al. The evolution of stomach 
acidity and its relevance to the human microbiome. PLoS One. 2015; 
10:e0134116.
Beconi MG, Mao A, Liu DQ, et al. Metabolism and pharmacokinetics 
of a dipeptidyl peptidase IV inhibitor in rats, dogs, and monkeys with 
selective carbamoyl glucuronidation of the primary amine in dogs. Drug 
Metab Dispos. 2003;31:1269–1277.
Beedham C, Miceli JJ, Obach RS. Ziprasidone metabolism, alde-
hyde oxidase, and clinical implications. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 
2003;23:229–232.
Beetham JK, Grant D, Arand M, et al. Gene evolution of epoxide hydrolases 
and recommended nomenclature. DNA Cell Biol. 1995;14:61–71.
Benedetti MS. Biotransformation of xenobiotics by amine oxidases. Fund 
Clin Pharmacol. 2001;15:75–84.
Benedetti MS, Dostert P. Contribution of amine oxidases to the metabolism 
of xenobiotics. Drug Metab Rev. 1994;26:507–535.
Benet LZ. The drug transporter-metabolism alliance: uncovering and defin-
ing the interplay. Mol Pharm. 2009;6:1631–1643.
Berg J, Mahmoudjanlou Y, Duscha A, et al. The immunomodulatory effect 
of laquinimod in CNS autoimmunity is mediated by the aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor. J Neuroimmunol. 2016;298:9–15.
Bergander L, Wincent E, Rannug A, et al. Metabolic fate of the Ah 
receptor ligand 6-formylindolo[3,2-b]carbazole. Chem Biol Interact. 
2004;149:151–164.
Billaut-Laden I, Allorge D, Crunelle-Thibaut A, et al. Evidence for a func-
tional genetic polymorphism of the human thiosulfate sulfurtransferase 
(Rhodanese), a cyanide and H2S detoxification enzyme. Toxicology. 
2006a;225:1–11.
Billaut-Laden I, Rat E, Allorge D, et al. Evidence for a functional genetic 
polymorphism of the human mercaptopyruvate sulfurtransferase (MPST), 
a cyanide detoxification enzyme. Toxicol Lett. 2006b;165:101–111.
Bjeldanes LF, Kim JY, Grose KR, et al. Aromatic hydrocarbon responsive-
ness-receptor agonists generated from indole-3-carbinol in vitro and in 
vivo: comparisons with 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A. 1991;88:9543–9547.
Bjornsson TD, Callaghan JT, Einolf HJ, et al. The conduct of in vitro and 
in vivo drug–drug interaction studies: a Pharmaceutical Research and 
Manufacturers of America (PhRMA) perspective. Drug Metab Dispos. 
2003; 31:815–832.
Blanchard RL, Freimuth RR, Buck J, et al. A proposed nomencla-
ture system for the cytosolic sulfotransferase (SULT) superfamily. 
Pharmacogenetics. 2004;14:199–211.
Blattler SM, Rencurel F, Kaufmann MR, Meyer UA. In the regulation 
of cytochrome P450 genes, phenobarbital targets LKB1 for necessary 
activation of AMP-activated protein kinase. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2007;104:1045–1050.
Blouin RA, Bandyopadhyay AM, Chaudhary I, et al. Cytochrome P450 2B 
enzyme (CYP2B) induction defect following phenobarbital treatment in 
the fa/fa Zucker rat: molecular characterization. Arch Biochem Biophys. 
1993; 303:313–320.
Board PG. The omega-class glutathione transferases: structure, function, 
and genetics. Drug Metab Rev. 2011; 43:226–235.
Board PG, Anders MW. Glutathione transferase zeta: discovery, polymor-
phic variants, catalysis, inactivation, and properties of Gstz1–/– mice. 
Drug Metab Rev. 2011;43:215–225.
Board PG, Menon D. Structure, function and disease relevance of Omega-
class glutathione transferases. Arch Toxicol. 2016;90:1049–1067.
Boberg EW, Miller EC, Miller JA, Poland A, Liem A. Strong evidence 
from studies with brachymorphic mice and pentachlorophenol that 
1′-­sulfooxysafrole is the major ultimate electrophilic and carcino-
genic metabolite of 1′-hydroxysafrole in mouse liver. Cancer Res. 
1983;43:5163–5173.
Bock KW, Schrenk D, Forster A, et al. The influence of environmental and 
genetic factors on CYP2D6, CYP1A2 and UDP-glucuronosyltransferases 
in man using sparteine, caffeine, and paracetamol as probes. 
Pharmacogenetics. 1994;4:209–218.
Bohnert T, Patel A, Templeton I, et al. Evaluation of a new molecular entity 
as a victim of metabolic drug-drug interactions—an industry perspective. 
Drug Metab Dispos. 2016;44:1399–1423.
Boily MO, Chauret N, Laterreur J, et al. In vitro and in vivo mechanis-
tic studies toward understanding the role of 1-aminobenzotriazole in rat 
drug–drug interactions. Drug Metab Dispos. 2015;43:1960–1965.
Bolton JL, Trush MA, Penning TM, Dryhurst G, Monks TJ. Role of qui-
nones in toxicology. Chem Res Toxicol. 2000;13:135–160.
Bolze S, Bromet N, Gay-Feutry C, et al. Development of an in vitro screen-
ing model for the biosynthesis of acyl glucuronide metabolites and the 
assessment of their reactivity toward human serum albumin. Drug Metab 
Dispos. 2002;30:404–413.
Bonn B, Masimirembwa CM, Aristei Y, Zamora I. The molecular basis of 
CYP2D6-mediated N-dealkylation: balance between metabolic clearance 
routes and enzyme inhibition. Drug Metab Dispos. 2008;36:2199–2210.
Bookout AL, Jeong Y, Downes M, et al. Anatomical profiling of nuclear 
receptor expression reveals a hierarchical transcriptional network. Cell. 
2006;126:789–799.
Borst P, Zelcer N, van de Wetering K. MRP2 and 3 in health and disease. 
Cancer Lett. 2006; 234:51–61.
Bosgra S, Mennes W, Seinen W. Proceedings in uncovering the mecha-
nism behind peroxisome proliferator-induced hepatocarcinogenesis. 
Toxicology. 2005;206:309–323.
Boukouvala S, Fakis G. Arylamine N-acetyltransferases: what we learn 
from genes and genomes. Drug Metab Rev. 2005;37:511–564.
Boulton DW, Fawcett JP. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of 
single oral doses of albuterol and its enantiomers in humans. Clin 
Pharmacol Ther. 1997;62:138–144.
Bouman HJ, Schomig E, van Werkum JW, et al. Paraoxonase-1 is a major 
determinant of clopidogrel efficacy. Nat Med. 2011;17:110–116.
Bowcock AM, Cookson WO. The genetics of psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis 
and atopic dermatitis. Hum Mol Genet. 2004;13(suppl 1):R43–R55.
Bradley ME, Benner SA. Phylogenomic approaches to common problems 
encountered in the analysis of low copy repeats: the sulfotransferase 1A 
gene family example. BMC Evol Biol. 2005;5:22.
Braissant O, Foufelle F, Scotto C, Dauca M, Wahli W. Differential expres-
sion of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs): tissue distri-
bution of PPAR-alpha, -beta, and -gamma in the adult rat. Endocrinology. 
1996;137:354–366.
Brantley E, Trapani V, Alley MC, et al. Fluorinated 2-(4-amino-3-­
methylphenyl)benzothiazoles induce CYP1A1 expression, become 
metabolized, and bind to macromolecules in sensitive human cancer 
cells. Drug Metab Dispos. 2004;32:1392–1401.
Brauer RW. Mechanisms of bile secretion. J Am Med Assoc. 
1959;169:1462–1466.
Brechbuhl HM, Gould N, Kachadourian R, et al. Glutathione transport is 
a unique function of the ATP-binding cassette protein ABCG2. J Biol 
Chem. 2010; 285:16582–16587.
Brennan P, Lewis S, Hashibe M, et al. Pooled analysis of alcohol dehy-
drogenase genotypes and head and neck cancer: a HuGE review. Am J 
Epidemiol. 2004;159:1–16.
Browning JD, Horton JD. Molecular mediators of hepatic steatosis and liver 
injury. J Clin Invest. 2004;114:147–152.
Brunnberg S, Andersson P, Lindstam M, et al. The constitutively active Ah 
receptor (CA-Ahr) mouse as a potential model for dioxin exposure—
effects in vital organs. Toxicology. 2006;224:191–201.
Brunnberg S, Andersson P, Poellinger L, Hanberg A. The constitutively 
active Ah receptor (CA-AhR) mouse as a model for dioxin exposure—
effects in reproductive organs. Chemosphere. 2011;85:1701–1706.
Bui PH, Hankinson O. Functional characterization of human cytochrome 
P450 2S1 using a synthetic gene-expressed protein in Escherichia coli. 
Mol Pharmacol. 2009;76:1031–1043.
Bui PH, Hsu EL, Hankinson O. Fatty acid hydroperoxides support 
cytochrome P450 2S1-mediated bioactivation of benzo[a]pyrene-7, 
8-­dihydrodiol. Mol Pharmacol. 2009;76:1044–1052.

378
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
Bunger MK, Glover E, Moran SM, et al. Abnormal liver development and 
resistance to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin toxicity in mice car-
rying a mutation in the DNA-binding domain of the aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor. Toxicol Sci. 2008;106:83–92.
Bunger MK, Moran SM, Glover E, et al. Resistance to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlo-
rodibenzo-p-dioxin toxicity and abnormal liver development in mice 
carrying a mutation in the nuclear localization sequence of the aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor. J Biol Chem. 2003;278:17767–17774.
Burchell B. Transformation reactions: glucuronidation. In: Woolf TF, ed. 
Handbook of Drug Metabolism. New York: Marcel Dekker; 1999.
Burczynski ME, Penning TM. Genotoxic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon 
ortho-quinones generated by aldo-keto reductases induce CYP1A1 via 
nuclear translocation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor. Cancer Res. 2000; 
60:908–915.
Burke MD, Mayer RT. Ethoxyresorufin: direct fluorimetric assay of 
a microsomal O-dealkylation which is preferentially inducible by 
3-­methylcholanthrene. Drug Metab Dispos. 1974;2:583–588.
Bushueva OY, Bulgakova IV, Ivanov VP, Polonikov AV. Association of fla-
vin monooxygenase gene E158K polymorphism with chronic heart dis-
ease risk. Bull Exp Biol Med. 2015;159:776–778.
Callegari E, Kalgutkar AS, Leung L, et al. Drug metabolites as cytochrome 
p450 inhibitors: a retrospective analysis and proposed algorithm for eval-
uation of the pharmacokinetic interaction potential of metabolites in drug 
discovery and development. Drug Metab Dispos. 2013;41:2047–2055.
Capen CC. Mechanistic data and risk assessment of selected toxic end 
points of the thyroid gland. Toxicol Pathol. 1997;25:39–48.
Carbone V, Hara A, El-Kabbani O. Structural and functional fea-
tures of dimeric dihydrodiol dehydrogenase. Cell Mol Life Sci. 
2008;65:1464–1474.
Carro-Ciampi G, Jurima M, Kadar D, Tang BK, Kalow W. N-Glucosidation 
of amobarbital in the cat. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 1985;63:1263–1266.
Cascorbi I, Roots I, Brockmoller J. Association of NAT1 and NAT2 poly-
morphisms to urinary bladder cancer: significantly reduced risk in sub-
jects with NAT1*10. Cancer Res. 2001;61:5051–5056.
Cashman JR. Role of flavin-containing monooxygenase in drug develop-
ment. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol. 2008;4:1507–1521.
Cashman JR. Structural and catalytic properties of the mammalian flavin-
containing monooxygenase. Chem Res Toxicol. 1995;8:166–181.
Cashman JR. In vitro metabolism: FMO and related oxygenations. In: Woolf 
TE, ed. Handbook of Drug Metabolism. New York: Marcel Dekker; 1999.
Cashman JR, Akerman BR, Forrest SM, Treacy EP. Population-specific 
polymorphisms of the human FMO3 gene: significance for detoxication. 
Drug Metab Dispos. 2000;28:169–173.
Cashman JR, Zhang J. Human flavin-containing monooxygenases. Annu 
Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 2006;46:65–100.
Casida JE, Quistad GB. Serine hydrolase targets of organophosphorus toxi-
cants. Chem Biol Interact. 2005;157–158:277–283.
Catterson ML, Preskorn SH. Pharmacokinetics of selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors: clinical relevance. Pharmacol Toxicol. 1996; 78: 
203–208.
Caudle KE, Thorn CF, Klein TE, et al. Clinical Pharmacogenetics 
Implementation Consortium guidelines for dihydropyrimidine dehydro-
genase genotype and fluoropyrimidine dosing. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 
2013;94:640–645.
Cauffiez C, Klinzig F, Rat E, et al. Human CYP4F12 genetic polymor-
phism: identification and functional characterization of seven variant 
allozymes. Biochem Pharmacol. 2004;68:2417–2425.
Cerf C, Mesguish M, Gabriel I, Amselem S, Duvaldestin P. Screening 
patients with prolonged neuromuscular blockade after succinylcholine 
and mivacurium. Anesth Analg. 2002;94:461–466, table of contents.
Chalasani N, Bjornsson E. Risk factors for idiosyncratic drug-induced liver 
injury. Gastroenterology. 2010;138:2246–2259.
Chalmers RA, Bain MD, Michelakakis H, Zschocke J, Iles RA. Diagnosis 
and management of trimethylaminuria (FMO3 deficiency) in children. J 
Inherit Metab Dis. 2006;29:162–172.
Chan SW, Xiao Y, Hu M, et al. Associations of the CYP3A5*3 and 
CYP3A4*1G polymorphisms with the pharmacokinetics of oral mid-
azolam and the urinary 6beta-hydroxycortisol/cortisol ratio as mark-
ers of CYP3A activity in healthy male Chinese. J Clin Pharm Ther. 
2016;41:552–558.
Chandrasena RE, Vatsis KP, Coon MJ, Hollenberg PF, Newcomb M. 
Hydroxylation by the hydroperoxy-iron species in cytochrome P450 
enzymes. J Am Chem Soc. 2004;126:115–126.
Chang TK, Waxman DJ. Synthetic drugs and natural products as modula-
tors of constitutive androstane receptor (CAR) and pregnane X receptor 
(PXR). Drug Metab Rev. 2006;38:51–73.
Chen J, Mannargudi BM, Xu L, Uetrecht J. Demonstration of the metabolic 
pathway responsible for nevirapine-induced skin rash. Chem Res Toxicol. 
2008;21:1862–1870.
Chen B, Qiu LX, Li Y, et al. The CYP1B1 Leu432Val polymorphism con-
tributes to lung cancer risk: evidence from 6501 subjects. Lung Cancer. 
2010;70:247–252.
Chen BH, Wang CC, Hou YH, Mao YC, Yang YS. Mechanism of sulfotrans-
ferase pharmacogenetics in altered xenobiotic metabolism. Expert Opin 
Drug Metab Toxicol. 2015a;11:1053–1071.
Chen C, Hanson E, Watson JW, Lee JS. P-glycoprotein limits the brain 
penetration of nonsedating but not sedating H1-antagonists. Drug Metab 
Dispos. 2003;31:312–318.
Chen C, Li G, Liao W, et al. Selective inhibitors of CYP2J2 related to terf-
enadine exhibit strong activity against human cancers in vitro and in vivo. 
J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2009;329:908–918.
Chen C, Wei X, Rao X, et al. Cytochrome P450 2J2 is highly expressed 
in hematologic malignant diseases and promotes tumor cell growth. J 
Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2011a;336:344–355.
Chen F, Ma B, Yang ZC, Lin G, Yang D. Extraordinary metabolic sta-
bility of peptides containing alpha-aminoxy acids. Amino Acids. 
2012a;43:499–503.
Chen H, Ge L, Sui Q, Lin M. Systematic review and meta-analysis of the 
relationship between EPHX1 polymorphisms and the risk of head and 
neck cancer. PLoS One. 2015b;10:e0123347.
Chen J, Lin Y, Zhang R, Huang ZJ, Pan XG. Contribution of NAD(P)H 
quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) Pro187Ser polymorphism and risks 
of colorectal adenoma and cancer for Caucasians: a meta-analysis. Arch 
Med Res. 2012b;43(1):58–66.
Chen Q, Doss GA, Tung EC, et al. Evidence for the bioactivation of 
zomepirac and tolmetin by an oxidative pathway: identification of glu-
tathione adducts in vitro in human liver microsomes and in vivo in rats. 
Drug Metab Dispos. 2006;34:145–151.
Chen Q, Tan E, Strauss JR, et al. Effect of quinidine on the 10-hydrox-
ylation of R-warfarin: species differences and clearance projection. J 
Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2004a;311:307–314.
Chen S-Y, Lin JR, Darbha R, et al. Glycine N-methyltransferase tumor sus-
ceptibility gene in the benzo(a)pyrene-detoxification pathway. Cancer 
Res. 2004b;64:3617–3623.
Chen S, Wu K, Knox R. Structure-function studies of DT-diaphorase 
(NQO1) and NRH:quinone oxidoreductase (NQO2). Free Radic Biol 
Med. 2000;29:276–284.
Chen X, Xue L, Hou S, et al. Long-acting cocaine hydrolase for addiction 
therapy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016;113:422–427.
Chen Y, Goldstein JA. The transcriptional regulation of the human CYP2C 
genes. Curr Drug Metab. 2009;10:567–578.
Chen Z, Li Z, Niu X, et al. The effect of CYP1A1 polymorphisms on the 
risk of lung cancer: a global meta-analysis based on 71 case-control stud-
ies. Mutagenesis. 2011b;26:437–446.
Cheng JB, Levine MA, Bell NH, Mangelsdorf DJ, Russell DW. Genetic evi-
dence that the human CYP2R1 enzyme is a key vitamin D 25-hydroxy-
lase. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004;101:7711–7715.
Cheung C, Gonzalez FJ. Humanized mouse lines and their application for 
prediction of human drug metabolism and toxicological risk assessment. 
J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2008;327:288–299.
Chiaro CR, Patel RD, Marcus CB, Perdew GH. Evidence for an aryl hydro-
carbon receptor-mediated cytochrome p450 autoregulatory pathway. Mol 
Pharmacol. 2007;72:1369–1379.
Chladek J, Martinkova J, Sispera L. An in vitro study on methotrexate 
hydroxylation in rat and human liver. Physiol Res. 1997;46:371–379.
Cho CE, Caudill MA. Trimethylamine-N-oxide: friend, foe, or simply 
caught in the cross-fire? Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2017;28:121–130.
Choong E, Guo J, Persson A, et al. Developmental regulation and induction 
of cytochrome P450 2W1, an enzyme expressed in colon tumors. PLoS 
One. 2015;10:e0122820.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
379
Chung FF, Mai CW, Ng PY, Leong CO. Cytochrome P450 2W1 (CYP2W1) 
in colorectal cancers. Curr Cancer Drug Target. 2016;16:71–78.
Chung KT. The etiology of bladder cancer and its prevention. J Cancer Sci 
Ther. 2013;5:346–361.
Ciraulo DA, Shader RI, Greenblatt DJ. Clinical pharmacology and therapeu-
tics of antidepressants. In: Ciraulo DA, Shader RI, eds. Pharmacotherapy 
of Depression. Totowa, NJ: Springer Science+Business Media; 2011:33–
124:chap 2.
Claus SP, Guillou H, Ellero-Simatos S. The gut microbiota: a major player 
in the toxicity of environmental pollutants? NPJ Biofilms Microbiomes. 
2016;2:16003.
Clayden J, Moran WJ, Edwards PJ, LaPlante SR. The challenge of atropisom-
erism in drug discovery. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2009;48:6398–6401.
Cohen S, Boobis A, Meek M, Preston R, McGregor D. 4-Aminobiphenyl 
and DNA reactivity: case study within the context of the 2006 IPCS 
Human Relevance Framework for Analysis of a Cancer Mode of Action 
for Humans. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2006;36:803–819.
Cole TB, Jansen K, Park S, et al. The toxicity of mixtures of specific 
organophosphate compounds is modulated by paraoxonase 1 status. Adv 
Exp Med Bio. 2010;660:47–60.
Collins C, Levy R, Ragueneau-Majlessi I, Hachad H. Prediction of maxi-
mum exposure in poor metabolizers following inhibition of nonpolymor-
phic pathways. Curr Drug Metab. 2006;7:295–299.
Congiu M, Mashford ML, Slavin JL, Desmond PV. Coordinate regulation 
of metabolic enzymes and transporters by nuclear transcription factors in 
human liver disease. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2009;24:1038–1044.
Conney AH. Induction of microsomal enzymes by foreign chemicals 
and carcinogenesis by polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Cancer Res. 
1982;42:4875–4917.
Coughtrie MW. Function and organization of the human cytosolic sulfo-
transferase (SULT) family. Chem Biol Interact. 2016;259:2–7.
Coughtrie MW, Fisher MB. The role of sulfotransferases (SULTs) and 
UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) in human drug clearance and 
bioactivation. In: Obach RS, Lee JS, Fisher MB, eds. Drug Metabolizing 
Enzymes. New York: Marcel Dekker; 2003.
Court MH. Feline drug metabolism and disposition: pharmacokinetic evi-
dence for species differences and molecular mechanisms. Vet Clin North 
Am Small Anim Pract. 2013;43:1039–1054.
Court MH, Hazarika S, Krishnaswamy S, Finel M, Williams JA. Novel 
polymorphic human UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 2A3: cloning, func-
tional characterization of enzyme variants, comparative tissue expres-
sion, and gene induction. Mol Pharmacol. 2008;74:744–754.
Crofts F, Taioli E, Trachman J, et al. Functional significance of different 
human CYP1A1 genotypes. Carcinogenesis. 1994;15:2961–2963.
Cronin A, Decker M, Arand M. Mammalian soluble epoxide hydrolase is 
identical to liver hepoxilin hydrolase. J Lipid Res. 2011;52:712–719.
Cruzan G, Bus J, Hotchkiss J, et al. CYP2F2-generated metabolites, not 
styrene oxide, are a key event mediating the mode of action of styrene-
induced mouse lung tumors. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2012;62:214–220.
Cruzan G, Bus J, Hotchkiss J, et al. Studies of styrene, styrene oxide and 
4-hydroxystyrene toxicity in CYP2F2 knockout and CYP2F1 human-
ized mice support lack of human relevance for mouse lung tumors. Regul 
Toxicol Pharmacol. 2013;66:24–29.
Cui D, Booth-Genthe CL, Carlini E, Carr B, Schrag ML. Heterotropic 
modulation of sulfotransferase 2A1 activity by celecoxib: product 
ratio switching of ethynylestradiol sulfation. Drug Metab Dispos. 
2004;32:1260–1264.
Cundy KC, Sato M, Crooks PA. Stereospecific in vivo N-methylation of 
nicotine in the guinea pig. Drug Metab Dispos. 1985;13:175–185.
Curran PG, DeGroot LJ. The effect of hepatic enzyme-inducing drugs on 
thyroid hormones and the thyroid gland. Endocr Rev. 1991;12:135–150.
D’Agostino J, Zhang H, Kenaan C, Hollenberg PF. Mechanism-based 
inactivation of human cytochrome P450 2B6 by chlorpyrifos. Chem Res 
Toxicol. 2015;28:1484–1495.
Dahabreh IJ, Kitsios GD, Kent DM, Trikalinos TA. Paraoxonase 1 polymor-
phisms and ischemic stroke risk: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Genet Med. 2010;12:606–615.
Daily EB, Aquilante CL. Cytochrome P450 2C8 pharmacogenetics: a 
review of clinical studies. Pharmacogenomics. 2009;10:1489–1510.
Daly AK. Pharmacogenetics. In: Woolf TF, ed. Handbook of Drug 
Metabolism. New York: Marcel Dekker; 1999.
Daniel V. Glutathione S-trasferases: gene struture and regulation of expres-
sion. Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol. 1993;28:173–207.
Dansette PM, Rosi J, Bertho G, Mansuy D. Cytochromes P450 catalyze 
both steps of the major pathway of clopidogrel bioactivation, whereas 
paraoxonase catalyzes the formation of a minor thiol metabolite isomer. 
Chem Res Toxicol. 2012;25:348–356.
Dauvilliers Y, Tafti M, Landolt HP.Catechol-O-methyltransferase, dopa-
mine, and sleep-wake regulation. Sleep Med Rev. 2015;22:47–53.
Davies NM, Skjodt NM. Choosing the right nonsteroidal anti-inflam-
matory drug for the right patient: a pharmacokinetic approach. Clin 
Pharmacokinet. 2000;38:377–392.
Dawson JH. Probing structure-function relations in heme-containing oxy-
genases and peroxidases. Science. 1988;240:433–439.
De Bosscher K, Vanden Berghe W, Haegeman G. Cross-talk between nuclear 
receptors and nuclear factor kappaB. Oncogene. 2006;25:6868–6886.
De Bruyn T, Stieger B, Augustijns PF, Annaert PP. Clearance prediction 
of HIV protease inhibitors in man: role of hepatic uptake. J Pharm Sci. 
2016; 105:854–863.
de Morais SM, Wilkinson GR, Blaisdell J, et al. The major genetic defect 
responsible for the polymorphism of S-mephenytoin metabolism in 
humans. J Biol Chem. 1994;269:15419–15422.
de Morais SM, Uetrecht JP, Wells PG. Decreased glucuronidation and 
increased bioactivation of acetaminophen in Gilbert’s syndrome. 
Gastroenterology. 1992;102:577–586.
Debiec-Rychter M, Land SJ, King CM. Histological localization of acetyl-
transferases in human tissue. Cancer Lett. 1999;143:99–102.
Decker CJ, Cashman JR, Sugiyama K, Maltby D, Correia MA. Formation 
of glutathionyl-spironolactone disulfide by rat liver cytochromes P450 or 
hog liver flavin-containing monooxygenases: a functional probe of two-
electron oxidations of the thiosteroid? Chem Res Toxicol. 1991;4:669–677.
Deeks ED. Cobicistat: a review of its use as a pharmacokinetic enhancer 
of atazanavir and darunavir in patients with HIV-1 infection. Drugs. 
2014;74:195–206.
Degirolamo C, Modica S, Palasciano G, Moschetta A. Bile acids and colon 
cancer: solving the puzzle with nuclear receptors. Trends Mol Med. 
2011;17:564–572.
Dekant W. Chemical-induced nephrotoxicity mediated by glutathione 
S-conjugate formation. Toxicol Lett. 2001;124:21–36.
Dekant W, Vamvakas S. Glutathione-dependent bioactivation of xenobiot-
ics. Xenobiotica. 1993;23:873–887.
DeKeyser JG, Laurenzana EM, Peterson EC, Chen T, Omiecinski CJ. 
Selective phthalate activation of naturally occurring human constitutive 
androstane receptor splice variants and the pregnane X receptor. Toxicol 
Sci. 2011;120:381–391.
DeKeyser JG, Stagliano MC, Auerbach SS, et al. Di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate 
is a highly potent agonist for the human constitutive androstane receptor 
splice variant CAR2. Mol Pharmacol. 2009;75:1005–1013.
Delaforge M, Pruvost A, Perrin L, Andre F. Cytochrome P450-mediated 
oxidation of glucuronide derivatives: example of estradiol-17{beta}-
glucuronide oxidation to 2-hydroxy-estradiol-17{beta}-glucuronide by 
CYP 2C8. Drug Metab Dispos. 2005;33:466–473.
Deng LH, Zeng YL, Feng P, et al. Clinical characteristics of critical patients 
with pandemic influenza A (H1N1) virus infection in Chengdu, China. J 
Zhejiang Univ Sci B. 2012;13:49–55.
Devarajan A, Bourquard N, Hama S, et al. Paraoxonase 2 deficiency alters 
mitochondrial function and exacerbates the development of atherosclero-
sis. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2011;14:341–351.
Devos A, Lino Cardenas CL, Glowacki F, et al. Genetic polymorphism 
of CYP2U1, a cytochrome P450 involved in fatty acids hydroxylation. 
Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids. 2010;83:105–110.
Diaz D, Fabre I, Daujat M, et al.Omeprazole is an aryl hydrocarbon-
like inducer of human hepatic cytochrome P450. Gastroenterology. 
1990;99:737–747.
Dick RA, Kanne DB, Casida JE. Nitroso-imidacloprid irreversibly inhibits 
rabbit aldehyde oxidase. Chem Res Toxicol. 2007;20:1942–1946.
DiNatale BC, Murray IA, Schroeder JC, et al. Kynurenic acid is a potent 
endogenous aryl hydrocarbon receptor ligand that synergistically induces

380
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
interleukin-6 in the presence of inflammatory signaling. Toxicol Sci. 
2010;115:89–97.
Ding S, Lake BG, Friedberg T, Wolf CR. Expression and alternative splicing 
of the cytochrome P-450 CYP2A7. Biochem J. 1995;306(pt 1):161–166.
Ding X, Lichti K, Kim I, Gonzalez FJ, Staudinger JL. Regulation of con-
stitutive androstane receptor and its target genes by fasting, cAMP, 
hepatocyte nuclear factor alpha, and the coactivator peroxisome pro-
liferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1alpha. J Biol Chem. 
2006;281:26540–26551.
Dirr H, Reinemer P, Huber R. X-Ray crystal structures of cytosolic glutathi-
one S-transferases. Eur J Biochem. 1994;220:645–661.
Dolphin CT, Beckett DJ, Janmohamed A, et al. The flavin-containing mono-
oxygenase 2 gene (FMO2) of humans, but not of other primates, encodes 
a truncated, nonfunctional protein. J Biol Chem. 1998;273:30599–30607.
Dolton MJ, Roufogalis BD, McLachlan AJ. Fruit juices as perpetrators of 
drug interactions: the role of organic anion-transporting polypeptides. 
Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2012;92:622–630.
Dong B, Saha PK, Huang W, et al. Activation of nuclear receptor CAR 
ameliorates diabetes and fatty liver disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2009;106:18831–18836.
Dong JQ, Gosset JR, Fahmi OA, et al. Examination of the human cyto-
chrome P4503A4 induction potential of PF-06282999, an irreversible 
myeloperoxidase inactivator: integration of preclinical, in silico, and bio-
marker methodologies in the prediction of the clinical outcome. Drug 
Metab Dispos. 2017;45:501–511.
Draganov DI, La Du  BN. Pharmacogenetics of paraoxonases: a brief 
review. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 2004;369:78–88.
Dragin N, Dalton TP, Miller ML, Shertzer HG, Nebert DW. For dioxin-
induced birth defects, mouse or human CYP1A2 in maternal liver pro-
tects whereas mouse CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 are inconsequential. J Biol 
Chem. 2006;281:18591–18600.
Driscoll JP, Aliagas I, Harris JJ, et al. Formation of a quinoneimine inter-
mediate of 4-fluoro-N-methylaniline by FMO1: carbon oxidation plus 
defluorination. Chem Res Toxicol. 2010;23:861–863.
Dubé C, Rostom A, Lewin G, et al. The use of aspirin for primary pre-
vention of colorectal cancer: a systematic review prepared for the U.S. 
Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2007;146:365–375.
Duell EJ, Sala N, Travier N, et al. Genetic variation in alcohol dehydroge-
nase (ADH1A, ADH1B, ADH1C, ADH7) and aldehyde dehydrogenase 
(ALDH2), alcohol consumption, and gastric cancer risk in the European 
Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC) cohort. 
Carcinogenesis. 2012;33(2):361–367.
Duffel MW, Jakoby WB. On the mechanism of aryl sulfotransferase. J Biol 
Chem. 1981;256:11123–11127.
Duh FM, Fivash M, Moody M, et al. Characterization of a new SNP 
c767A/T (Arg222Trp) in the candidate TSG FUS2 on human chromo-
some 3p21.3: prevalence in Asian populations and analysis of association 
with nasopharyngeal cancer. Mol Cell Probes. 2004;18:39–44.
Duysen EG, Koentgen F, Williams GR, et al. Production of ES1 plasma 
carboxylesterase knockout mice for toxicity studies. Chem Res Toxicol. 
2011;24:1891–1898.
Duysen EG, Li B, Darvesh S, Lockridge O. Sensitivity of butyrylcholin-
esterase knockout mice to (– –)-huperzine A and donepezil suggests 
humans with butyrylcholinesterase deficiency may not tolerate these 
Alzheimer’s disease drugs and indicates butyrylcholinesterase function 
in neurotransmission. Toxicology. 2007;233:60–69.
Dwivedi C, Downie AA, Webb TE. Net glucuronidation in different 
rat strains: importance of microsomal beta-glucuronidase. FASEB J. 
1987;1:303–307.
Eaton DL, Gallagher EP. Mechanisms of aflatoxin carcinogenesis. Annu 
Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 1994;34:135–172.
Edenberg HJ. The genetics of alcohol metabolism: role of alcohol dehy-
drogenase and aldehyde dehydrogenase variants. Alcohol Res Health. 
2007;30:5–13.
Edmondson DE, Mattevi A, Binda C, Li M, Hubalek F. Structure 
and mechanism of monoamine oxidase. Curr Med Chem. 2004;11: 
1983–1993.
Edson KZ, Rettie AE. CYP4 enzymes as potential drug targets: focus on 
enzyme multiplicity, inducers and inhibitors, and therapeutic modulation 
of 20-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (20-HETE) synthase and fatty 
acid omega-hydroxylase activities. Curr Top Med Chem. 2013;13: 
1429–1440.
Edwards J, Eliot L, Parkinson A, Karan S, MacConell L. Assessment of 
pharmacokinetic interactions between obeticholic acid and caffeine, 
midazolam, warfarin, dextromethorphan, omeprazole, rosuvastatin, and 
digoxin in healthy subjects. Adv Ther. 2017;34(9):2120–2138.
Egan MF, Goldberg TE, Kolachana BS, et al. Effect of COMT Val108/158 
Met genotype on frontal lobe function and risk for schizophrenia. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001;98:6917–6922.
Eichenbaum G, Skibbe J, Parkinson A, et al. Use of enzyme inhibitors to 
evaluate the conversion pathways of ester and amide prodrugs: a case 
study example with the prodrug ceftobiprole medocaril. J Pharm Sci. 
2012;101:1242–1252.
Ekhart C, Rodenhuis S, Smits PH, Beijnen JH, Huitema AD. An overview 
of the relations between polymorphisms in drug metabolising enzymes 
and drug transporters and survival after cancer drug treatment. Cancer 
Treat Rev. 2009;35:18–31.
Ekins S, Stresser DM, Williams JA. In vitro and pharmacophore insights 
into CYP3A enzymes. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2003;24:161–166.
Ekroos M, Sjögren T. Structural basis for ligand promiscuity in cytochrome 
P450 3A4. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006;103:13682–13687.
Elcombe CR, Peffer RC, Wolf DC, et al. Mode of action and human rel-
evance analysis for nuclear receptor-mediated liver toxicity: a case study 
with phenobarbital as a model constitutive androstane receptor (CAR) 
activator. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2014;44:64–82.
Elens L, Bouamar R, Hesselink DA, et al. A new functional CYP3A4 intron 
6 polymorphism significantly affects tacrolimus pharmacokinetics in kid-
ney transplant recipients. Clin Chem. 2011a;57:1574–1583.
Elens L, van Schaik RH, Panin N, et al. Effect of a new functional CYP3A4 
polymorphism on calcineurin inhibitors’ dose requirements and trough 
blood levels in stable renal transplant patients. Pharmacogenomics. 
2011b;12:1383–1396.
EMA. Available at: http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_
library/Referrals_document/Cerivastatin_36/WC500011752.pdf. 2002.
EMA. Guideline on the Investigation of Drug Interactions (Final). London: 
European Medicines Agency; 2012.
Enright EF, Gahan CG, Joyce SA, Griffin BT. The impact of the gut 
microbiota on drug metabolism and clinical outcome. Yale J Biol Med. 
2016;89:375–382.
Eriksson T, Björkman S, Roth B, Fyge A, Höglun P. Enantiomers of tha-
lidomide: blood distribution and the influence of serum albumin on chiral 
inversion and hydrolysis. Chirality. 1998;10:223–228.
Ertl P, Rohde B, Selzer P. Fast calculation of molecular polar surface area 
as a sum of fragment-based contributions and its application to the pre-
diction of drug transport properties. J Med Chem. 2000;43:3714–3717.
Evans DAP. N-acetyltransferase. In: Kalow W, ed. Pharmacogenetics of 
Drug Metabolism. New York: Pergamon; 1992.
Evans DC, O’Connor D, Lake BG, Evers R, Allen C, Hargreaves R. 
Eletriptan metabolism by human hepatic CYP450 enzymes and transport 
by human P-glycoprotein. Drug Metab Dispos. 2003; 31:861–869.
Evans MJ, Cravatt BF. Mechanism-based profiling of enzyme families. 
Chem Rev. 2006;106:3279–3301.
Fahmi OA, Shebley M, Palamanda J, et al. Evaluation of CYP2B6 induction 
and prediction of clinical drug–drug interactions: considerations from 
the IQ Consortium Induction Working Group—an industry perspective. 
Drug Metab Dispos. 2016;44:1720–1730.
Fajas L, Fruchart JC, Auwerx J. PPARgamma3 mRNA: a distinct 
PPARgamma mRNA subtype transcribed from an independent promoter. 
FEBS Lett. 1998;438:55–60.
Falany CN, Johnson MR, Barnes S, Diasio RB. Glycine and taurine conju-
gation of bile acids by a single enzyme. Molecular cloning and expres-
sion of human liver bile acid CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferase. J Biol 
Chem. 1994;269:19375–19379.
Fallon JK, Neubert H, Goosen TC, Smith PC. Targeted precise quantifica-
tion of 12 human recombinant uridine-diphosphate glucuronosyl trans-
ferase 1A and 2B isoforms using nano-ultra-high-performance liquid 
chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry with selected reaction moni-
toring. Drug Metab Dispos. 2013;41: 2076–2080.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
381
Fan PW, Zhang D, Halladay JS, Driscoll JP, Khojasteh SC. Going beyond 
common drug metabolizing enzymes: case studies of biotransformation 
involving aldehyde oxidase, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, cathepsin 
B, flavin-containing monooxygenase, and ADP-ribosyltransferase. Drug 
Metab Dispos. 2016;44: 1253–1261.
Farooq M, Kelly EJ, Unadkat JD. CYP2D6 is inducible by endogenous and 
exogenous corticosteroids. Drug Metab Dispos. 2016;44: 750–757.
Faucette SR, Sueyoshi T, Smith CM, et al. Differential regulation of hepatic 
CYP2B6 and CYP3A4 genes by constitutive androstane receptor but not 
pregnane X receptor. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2006;317:1200–1209.
FDA. Guidance for Industry. In vitro Metabolism- and Transporter-
Mediated Drug-Drug Interaction Studies. Silver Spring, MD: FDA; 
2017.
FDA. Available at: https://www.fda.gov/downloads/drugs/guidancecompli-
anceregulatoryinformation/guidances/ucm581965.pdf.
Feng C, Tollin G, Enemark JH. Sulfite oxidizing enzymes. Biochim Biophys 
Acta. 2007;1774:527–539.
Fennema D, Phillips IR, Shephard EA. Trimethylamine and trimethylamine 
N-oxide, a flavin-containing monooxygenase 3 (FMO3)-mediated host-
microbiome metabolic axis implicated in health and disease. Drug Metab 
Dispos. 2016;44:1839–1850.
Fisher MB, Campanale K, Ackermann BL, Vandenbrande M, Wrighton 
SA. In vitro glucuronidation using human liver microsomes and the 
pore-forming peptide alamethicin. Drug Metab Dispos. 2000;28: 
560–566.
Flanagan JU, Smythe ML. Sigma-class glutathione transferases. Drug 
Metab Rev. 2011;43:194–214.
Fleming I. The pharmacology of the cytochrome P450 epoxygenase/solu-
ble epoxide hydrolase axis in the vasculature and cardiovascular disease. 
Pharmacol Rev. 2014;66:1106–1140.
Fontana E, Dansette PM, Poli SM. Cytochrome p450 enzymes mecha-
nism based inhibitors: common sub-structures and reactivity. Curr Drug 
Metab. 2005;6:413–454.
Foti RS, Dalvie DK. Cytochrome P450 and non-cytochrome P450 oxidative 
metabolism: contributions to the pharmacokinetics, safety, and efficacy 
of xenobiotics. Drug Metab Dispos. 2016;44:1229–1245.
Foti R, Rock DA, Pearson JT, Wahlstrom JL, Wienkers LC. Mechanism-
based inactivation of cytochrome P450 3A4 by mibefradil through heme 
destruction. Drug Metab Dispos. 2011;39:1188–1195.
Fowler S, Kletzl H, Finel M, et al. A UGT2B10 splicing polymorphism 
common in African populations may greatly increase drug exposure. J 
Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2015;352:358–367.
Francois AA, Nishida CR, de Montellano PR, Phillips IR, Shephard EA. 
Human flavin-containing monooxygenase 2.1 catalyzes oxygenation 
of the antitubercular drugs thiacetazone and ethionamide. Drug Metab 
Dispos. 2009;37:178–186.
Franks ME, Macpherson GR, Figg WD. Thalidomide. Lancet. 2004;363: 
1802–1811.
Fremont JJ, Wang RW, King CD. Coimmunoprecipitation of UDP-
glucuronosyltransferase isoforms and cytochrome P450 3A4. Mol 
Pharmacol. 2005;67:260–262.
Fretland AJ, Omiecinski CJ. Epoxide hydrolases: biochemistry and molecu-
lar biology. Chem Biol Interact. 2000;129:41–59.
Frezza M, di Padova C, Pazzato G, et al. High blood alcohol levels in 
women. The role of decreased gastric alcohol dehydrogenase activity and 
first-pass metabolism. N Engl J Med. 1990;322:95–99.
Fu C, Di L, Han X, et al. Aldehyde oxidase 1 (AOX1) in human liver cyto-
sols: quantitative characterization of AOX1 expression level and activity 
relationship. Drug Metab Dispos. 2013;41:1797–1804.
Fujikawa Y, Satoh T, Suganuma A, et al. Extremely sensitive biomarker 
of acute organophosphorus insecticide exposure. Hum Exp Toxicol. 
2005;24:333–336.
Fujiwara R, Nakajima M, Yamanaka H, Katoh M, Yokoi T. Product inhi-
bition of UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) enzymes by UDP obfus-
cates the inhibitory effects of UGT substrates. Drug Metab Dispos. 
2008;36:361–367.
Fukami T, Iida A, Konishi K, Nakajima M. Human arylacetamide deacety-
lase hydrolyzes ketoconazole to trigger hepatocellular toxicity. Biochem 
Pharmacol. 2016;116:153–161.
Fung M, Thornton A, Mybeck A, et al. Evaluation of the characteristics of 
safety withdrawal of prescription drugs from worldwide pharmaceutical 
markets 1960 to 1999. Drug Inf J. 2001;35:293–317.
Furlong CE, Suzuki SM, Stevens RC,et al. Human PON1, a biomarker of 
risk of disease and exposure. Chem Biol Interact. 2010;187:355–361.
Furukawa M, Nishimura M, Ogino D, et al. Cytochrome p450 gene expres-
sion levels in peripheral blood mononuclear cells in comparison with the 
liver. Cancer Sci. 2004;95:520–529.
Furuta T, Shirai N, Sugimoto M, et al. Influence of CYP2C19 pharmaco-
genetic polymorphism on proton pump inhibitor-based therapies. Drug 
Metab Pharmacokinet. 2005;20:153–167.
Gaedigk A, Simon SD, Pearce RE, et al. The CYP2D6 activity score: trans-
lating genotype information into a qualitative measure of phenotype. Clin 
Pharmacol Ther. 2008;83:234–242.
Galetin A, Clarke SE, Houston JB. Multisite kinetic analysis of interactions 
between prototypical CYP3A4 subgroup substrates: midazolam, testos-
terone, and nifedipine. Drug Metab Dispos. 2003;31:1108–1116.
Galetin A, Gertz M, Houston JB. Contribution of intestinal cytochrome 
p450-mediated metabolism to drug-drug inhibition and induction inter-
actions. Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2010;25:28–47.
Gallicano KD, Sahai J, Shukla VK, et al. Induction of zidovudine glucuron-
idation and amination pathways by rifampicin in HIV-infected patients. 
Br J Clin Pharmacol. 1999;48:168–179.
Gamage N, Barnett A, Hempel N, et al. Human sulfotransferases and their 
role in chemical metabolism. Toxicol Sci. 2006;90:5–22.
Gammal RS, Court MH, Haidar CE, et al. Clinical Pharmacogenetics 
Implementation Consortium (CPIC) guideline for UGT1A1 and atazana-
vir prescribing. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2016;99:363–369.
Gao J, Xie W. Pregnane X receptor and constitutive androstane receptor at 
the crossroads of drug metabolism and energy metabolism. Drug Metab 
Dispos. 2010;38:2091–2095.
Garattini E, Fratelli M, Terao M. Mammalian aldehyde oxidases: genetics, 
evolution and biochemistry. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2008;65:1019–1048.
Garattini E, Terao M. Increasing recognition of the importance of alde-
hyde oxidase in drug development and discovery. Drug Metab Rev. 
2011;43:374–386.
Garzel B, Yang H, Zhang L, et al. The role of bile salt export pump gene 
repression in drug-induced cholestatic liver toxicity. Drug Metab Dispos. 
2014;42:318–322.
Gasche Y, Daali Y, Fathi M, et al. Codeine intoxication associated with 
ultrarapid CYP2D6 metabolism. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:2827–2831.
Gauthier-Landry L, Belanger A, Barbier O. Multiple roles for UDP-
glucuronosyltransferase (UGT)2B15 and UGT2B17 enzymes in andro-
gen metabolism and prostate cancer evolution. J Steroid Biochem Mol 
Biol. 2015;145:187–192.
Gearry RB, Day AS, Barclay ML, Leong RW, Sparrow MP. Azathioprine 
and allopurinol: a two-edged interaction. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 
2010;25:653–655.
Geisler SA, Olshan AF. GSTM1, GSTT1, and the risk of squamous cell 
carcinoma of the head and neck: a mini-HuGE review. Am J Epidemiol. 
2001;154:95–105.
Gentilucci L, De Marco R, Cerisoli L. Chemical modifications designed 
to improve peptide stability: incorporation of non-natural amino 
acids, pseudo-peptide bonds, and cyclization. Curr Pharm Des. 
2010;16:3185–3203.
Gerbal-Chaloin S, Dume AS, Briolotti P, et al. The WNT/beta-catenin 
pathway is a transcriptional regulator of CYP2E1, CYP1A2, and aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor gene expression in primary human hepatocytes. 
Mol Pharmacol. 2014;86:624–634.
Gerbal-Chaloin S, Pichard-Garcia L, Fabre JM, et al. Role of CYP3A4 in 
the regulation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor by omeprazole sulphide. 
Cell Signal. 2006;18:740–750.
Gerlach M, Riederer P, Przuntek H, Youdim MB. MPTP mechanisms of 
neurotoxicity and their implications for Parkinson’s disease. Eur J 
Pharmacol. 1991;208:273–286.
Germain P, Staels B, Dacquet C, Spedding M, Laudet V. Overview of 
nomenclature of nuclear receptors. Pharmacol Rev. 2006;58:685–704.
Geshi E, Kimura T, Yoshimura M, et al. A single nucleotide polymor-
phism in the carboxylesterase gene is associated with the responsiveness

382
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
to imidapril medication and the promoter activity. Hypertens Res. 
2005;28:719–725.
Ghanayem BI. Inhibition of urethane-induced carcinogenicity in cyp2e1–/– 
in comparison to cyp2e1+/+ mice. Toxicol Sci. 2007;95:331–339.
Giacomini KM, Huang SM, Tweedie DJ, et al. Membrane transporters in 
drug development. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2010;9:215–236.
Giacomini KM, Sugiyama Y. Membrane transporters and drug response. In: 
Goodman LS, Gilman A, Brunton LL, et al., eds. Goodman & Gilman’s The 
Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2006.
Gingell R, Bridges JW, Williams RT. The role of the gut flora in the metabo-
lism of prontosil and neoprontosil in the rat. Xenobiotica. 1971;1:143–156.
Gipple KJ, Chan KT, Elvin AT, Lalka D, Axelson JE. Species differences 
in the urinary excretion of the novel primary amine conjugate: tocainide 
carbamoyl O-beta-d-glucuronide. J Pharm Sci. 1982;71:1011–1014.
Glatt H, Meinl W. Pharmacogenetics of soluble sulfotransferases (SULTs). 
Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 2004a;369:55–68.
Glatt H, Meinl W. Use of genetically manipulated Salmonella typhimurium 
strains to evaluate the role of sulfotransferases and acetyltransferases in 
nitrofen mutagenicity. Carcinogenesis. 2004b;25:779–786.
Goedde HW, Agarwal DP. Pharmacogenetics of aldehyde dehydrogenase. 
In: Kalow W, ed.. Pharmacogenetics of Drug Metabolism. New York: 
Pergamon; 1992.
Goetz MP, Rae JM, Suman VJ, et al. Pharmacogenetics of tamoxifen bio-
transformation is associated with clinical outcomes of efficacy and hot 
flashes. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:9312–9318.
Goh BC, Lee SC, Wang LZ, et al. Explaining interindividual variability of 
docetaxel pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics in Asians through 
phenotyping and genotyping strategies. J Clin Oncol. 2002;20:3683–3690.
Goldring CE, Kitteringham NR, Elsby R, et al. Activation of hepatic Nrf2 in 
vivo by acetaminophen in CD-1 mice. Hepatology. 2004;39:1267–1276.
Gomez A, Nekvindova J, Travica S, et al. Colorectal cancer-specific cyto-
chrome P450 2W1: intracellular localization, glycosylation, and catalytic 
activity. Mol Pharmacol. 2010;78:1004–1011.
Gonzalez FJ. Role of cytochromes P450 in chemical toxicity and oxidative 
stress: studies with CYP2E1. Mutat Res. 2005;569:101–110.
Gonzalez FJ. The 2006 Bernard B. Brodie Award lecture. Cyp2e1. Drug 
Metab Dispos. 2007;35:1–8.
Gonzalez FJ, Tukey RH. Drug metabolism. In: Goodman LS, Gilman A, 
Brunton LL, et al. eds. Goodman & Gilman’s The Pharmacological 
Basis of Therapeutics. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2006.
Gonzalez FJ. Role of gene knockout and transgenic mice in the study of 
xenobiotic metabolism. Drug Metab Rev. 2003;35:319–335.
Gonzalez FJ, Yu A-M. Cytochrome P450 and xenobiotic receptor human-
ized mice. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 2006;46:41–64.
Gonzalez-Covarrubias V, Ghosh D, Lakhman SS, Pendyala L, Blanco JG. A 
functional genetic polymorphism on human carbonyl reductase 1 (CBR1 
V88I) impacts on catalytic activity and NADPH binding affinity. Drug 
Metab Dispos. 2007;35:973–980.
Gopaul VS, Tang W, Farrell K, Abbott FS. Amino acid conjugates: metabo-
lites of 2-propylpentanoic acid (valproic acid) in epileptic patients. Drug 
Metab Dispos. 2003;31:114–121.
Gorell JM, Rybicki BA, Johnson CC, Peterson EL. Smoking and Parkinson’s 
disease: a dose–response relationship. Neurology. 1999;52:115–119.
Grant DM, Blum M, Meyer UA. Polymorphisms of N-acetyltransferase 
genes. Xenobiotica. 1992;22:1073–1081.
Grasso P, Sharratt M, Cohen AJ. Role of persistent, non-genotoxic tissue 
damage in rodent cancer and relevance to humans. Annu Rev Pharmacol 
Toxicol. 1991;31:253–287.
Griffith OW, Meister A. Translocation of intracellular glutathione to mem-
brane-bound gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase as a discrete step in the 
gamma-glutamyl cycle: glutathionuria after inhibition of transpeptidase. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1979;76:268–272.
Grillo MP. Drug-S-acyl-glutathione thioesters: synthesis, bioanalytical 
properties, chemical reactivity, biological formation and degradation. 
Curr Drug Metab. 2011;12:229–244.
Grompe M, Strom S. Mice with human livers. Gastroenterology. 
2013;145:1209–1214.
Grose KR, Bjeldanes LF. Oligomerization of indole-3-carbinol in aqueous 
acid. Chem Res Toxicol. 1992;5:188–193.
Grunwell JR, Bertozzi CR. Carbohydrate sulfotransferases of the GalNAc/
Gal/GlcNAc6ST family. Biochemistry. 2002;41:13117–13126.
Gu Z, Feng X, Dong X, Chan P. Smoking, genes encoding dopamine path-
way and risk for Parkinson’s disease. Neurosci Lett. 2010;482:31–34.
Gu C, Wen S, Doig P, Gangl E, Zheng X, Wang Y, Johannes JW. Mouse 
red blood cell-mediated rare xenobiotic phosphorylation of a drug mol-
ecule not intended to be a kinase substrate. Drug Metab Dispos. 2017;45: 
1345–1353.
Guengerich FP. Reactions and significance of cytochrome P-450 enzymes. 
J Biol Chem. 1991;266:10019–10022.
Guengerich FP. Uncommon P450-catalyzed reactions. Curr Drug Metab. 
2001a;2:93–115.
Guengerich FP. Common and uncommon cytochrome P450 reactions related 
to metabolism and chemical toxicity. Chem Res Toxicol. 2001b;14:611–650.
Guengerich FP. Mechanisms of cytochrome P450 substrate oxidation: mini 
review. J Biochem Mol Toxicol. 2007;21:163–168.
Guengerich FP, Shimada T. Oxidation of toxic and carcinogenic chemicals by 
human cytochrome P-450 enzymes. Chem Res Toxicol. 1991;4:391–407.
Guengerich FP, Tang Z, Salamanca-Pinzon SG, Cheng Q. Characterizing 
proteins of unknown function: orphan cytochrome p450 enzymes as a 
paradigm. Mol Interv. 2010;10:153–163.
Guidotti G, Brambilla L, Rossi D. Cell-penetrating peptides: from basic 
research to clinics. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2017;38:406–424.
Guillemette C, Levesque E, Harvey M, Bellemare J, Menard V. UGT genomic 
diversity: beyond gene duplication. Drug Metab Rev. 2010;42:24–44.
Gunes A, Dahl ML. Variation in CYP1A2 activity and its clinical impli-
cations: influence of environmental factors and genetic polymorphisms. 
Pharmacogenomics. 2008;9:625–637.
Gupta N, Gill K, Singh S. Paraoxonases: structure, gene polymorphism & 
role in coronary artery disease. Indian J Med Res. 2009;130:361–368.
Gupta RA, DuBois RN. Aspirin, NSAIDs, and colon cancer prevention: 
mechanisms? Gastroenterology. 1998;114:1095–1098.
Gutierrez PL. The role of NAD(P)H oxidoreductase (DT-Diaphorase) in 
the bioactivation of quinone-containing antitumor agents: a review. Free 
Radic Biol Med. 2000;29:263–275.
Guyot E, Chevallier A, Barouki R, Coumoul X. The AhR twist: ligand-
dependent AhR signaling and pharmaco-toxicological implications. 
Drug Discov Today. 2013;18:479–486.
Hagihara K, Kazui M, Kurihara A, Kubota K, Ikeda T. Glutaredoxin and 
thioredoxin can be involved in producing the pharmacologically active 
metabolite of a thienopyridine antiplatelet agent, prasugrel. Drug Metab 
Dispos. 2011;39:208–214.
Hakkinen MR, Hyvonen MT, Auriola S, et al. Metabolism of N-alkylated 
spermine analogues by polyamine and spermine oxidases. Amino Acids. 
2010;38:369–381.
Hamman M, Haehner-Daniels B, Wrighton S, Rettie A, Hall S. 
Stereoselective sulfoxidation of sulindac sulfide by flavin-containing 
monooxygenases. Biochem Pharmacol. 2000;60:7–17.
Han Y, Oota H, Osier MV, et al. Considerable haplotype diversity within 
the 23kb encompassing the ADH7 gene. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 
2005;29:2091–2100.
Hanigan MH, Gallagher BC, Taylor PT Jr, Large MK. Inhibition of gamma-
glutamyl transpeptidase activity by acivicin in vivo protects the kidney 
from cisplatin-induced toxicity. Cancer Res. 1994;54:5925–5929.
Hanigan MH, Lykissa ED, Townsend DM, et al. Gamma-glutamyl trans-
peptidase-deficient mice are resistant to the nephrotoxic effects of cispla-
tin. Am J Pathol. 2001;159:1889–1894.
Haramaki N, Han D, Handelman GJ, Tritschler HJ, Packer L. Cytosolic and 
mitochondrial systems for NADH- and NADPH-dependent reduction of 
alpha-lipoic acid. Free Radic Biol Med. 1997;22:535–542.
Harbourt DE, Fallon JK, Ito S, et al. Quantification of human uridine-
diphosphate glucuronosyl transferase 1A isoforms in liver, intestine, and 
kidney using nanobore liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrom-
etry. Anal Chem. 2012;84:98–105.
Harrill JA, Hukkanen RR, Lawson M, et al. Knockout of the aryl hydrocar-
bon receptor results in distinct hepatic and renal phenotypes in rats and 
mice. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2013;272:503–518.
Harris JM, Meyer DJ, Coles B, Ketterer B. A novel glutathione trans-
ferase (13-13) isolated from the matrix of rat liver mitochondria

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
383
having structural similarity to class theta enzymes. Biochem J. 1991;278 
(pt 1):137–141.
Hartmann T, Terao M, Garattini E, et al. The impact of single nucleo-
tide polymorphisms on human aldehyde oxidase. Drug Metab Dispos. 
2012;40(5):856–864.
Havemeyer A, Grunewald S, Wahl B, et al. Reduction of N-hydroxy-
sulfonamides, including N-hydroxy-valdecoxib, by the molybdenum-
containing enzyme mARC. Drug Metab Dispos. 2010;38:1917–1921.
Havemeyer A, Lang J, Clement B. The fourth mammalian molybde-
num enzyme mARC: current state of research. Drug Metab Rev. 
2011;43:524–539.
Hawes EM. N+-glucuronidation, a common pathway in human metabo-
lism of drugs with a tertiary amine group. Drug Metab Dispos. 
1998;26:830–837.
Hayakawa H, Fukushima Y, Kato H, et al. Metabolism and disposition of 
novel des-fluoro quinolone garenoxacin in experimental animals and an 
interspecies scaling of pharmacokinetic parameters. Drug Metab Dispos. 
2003;31:1409–1418.
Hayes JD, Flanagan JU, Jowsey IR. Glutathione transferases. Annu Rev 
Pharmacol Toxicol. 2005;45:51–88.
Hayes JD, Nguyen T, Judah DJ, Petersson DG, Neal GE. Cloning of cDNAs 
from fetal rat liver encoding glutathione S-transferase Yc polypeptides. 
The Yc2 subunit is expressed in adult rat liver resistant to the hepatocar-
cinogen aflatoxin B1. J Biol Chem. 1994;269:20707–20717.
Hayes JD, Pulford DJ. The glutathione S-transferase supergene fam-
ily: regulation of GST and the contribution of the isoenzymes to can-
cer chemoprotection and drug resistance. Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol. 
1995;30:445–600.
Hayes RB, Bi W, Rothman N, et al. N-acetylation phenotype and genotype 
and risk of bladder cancer in benzidine-exposed workers. Carcinogenesis. 
1993;14:675–678.
He BX, Shi L, Qiu J, Zeng XH, Zhao SJ. The effect of CYP3A4*1G allele 
on the pharmacokinetics of atorvastatin in Chinese Han patients with 
coronary heart disease. J Clin Pharmacol. 2014;54:462–467.
He J, Wang C, Zhu Y, Ai D. Soluble epoxide hydrolase: a potential target for 
metabolic diseases. J Diabetes. 2016;8:305–313.
Heath-Pagliuso S, Rogers WJ, Tullis K, et al. Activation of the Ah 
receptor by tryptophan and tryptophan metabolites. Biochemistry. 
1998;37:11508–11515.
Hebbachi AM, Knight BL, Wiggins D, Patel DD, Gibbons GF. Peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor alpha deficiency abolishes the response 
of lipogenic gene expression to re-feeding: restoration of the nor-
mal response by activation of liver X receptor alpha. J Biol Chem. 
2008;283:4866–4876.
Hedrich WD, Hassan HE, Wang H. Insights into CYP2B6-mediated drug–
drug interactions. Acta Pharm Sin B. 2016;6:413–425.
Hein DW. Acetylator genotype and arylamine-induced carcinogenesis. 
Biochim Biophys Acta. 1988;948:37–66.
Hein DW. N-acetyltransferase 2 genetic polymorphism: effects of car-
cinogen and haplotype on urinary bladder cancer risk. Oncogene. 
2006;25:1649–1658.
Hein DW, Doll MA, Fretland AJ, et al. Molecular genetics and epide-
miology of the NAT1 and NAT2 acetylation polymorphisms. Cancer 
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2000;9:29–42.
Helms C, Cao L, Krueger JG, et al. A putative RUNX1 binding site variant 
between SLC9A3R1 and NAT9 is associated with susceptibility to pso-
riasis. Nat Genet. 2003;35:349–356.
Henry EC, Bemis JC, Henry O, Kende AS, Gasiewicz TA. A potential 
endogenous ligand for the aryl hydrocarbon receptor has potent agonist 
activity in vitro and in vivo. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2006;450:67–77.
Higgins LG, Hayes JD. Mechanisms of induction of cytosolic and micro-
somal glutathione transferase (GST) genes by xenobiotics and pro-
inflammatory agents. Drug Metab Rev. 2011;43:92–137.
Hill RN, Erdreich LS, Paynter OE, et al. Thyroid follicular cell carcinogen-
esis. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1989;12:629–697.
Hines RN, Hopp KA, Franco J, Saeian K, Begun FP. Alternative process-
ing of the human FMO6 gene renders transcripts incapable of encod-
ing a functional flavin-containing monooxygenase. Mol Pharmacol. 
2002;62:320–325.
Hinrichs AL, Murphy SE, Wang JC, et al. Common polymorphisms 
in FMO1 are associated with nicotine dependence. Pharmacogenet 
Genomics. 2011;21:397–402.
Hirvonen A. Polymorphic NAT’s and cancer predisposition. In: Ryder W, ed. 
Metabolic Polymorphisms and Susceptibility to Cancer (IARC). Lyon: 
IARC Scientific Publications; 1999.
Hofmann U, Heinkele G, Angelberger S, et al. Simultaneous quantification 
of eleven thiopurine nucleotides by liquid chromatography-tandem mass 
spectrometry. Anal Chem. 2012;84(3):1294–1301.
Holcapek M, Kolarova L, Nobilis M. High-performance liquid chroma-
tography-tandem mass spectrometry in the identification and determi-
nation of phase I and phase II drug metabolites. Anal Bioanal Chem. 
2008;391:59–78.
Hollman AL, Tchounwou PB, Huang HC. The association between gene–
environment interactions and diseases involving the human GST super-
family with SNP variants. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2016;13:379.
Holmes RS, Wright MW, Laulederkind SJ, et al. Recommended nomencla-
ture for five mammalian carboxylesterase gene families: human, mouse, 
and rat genes and proteins. Mamm Genome. 2010;21:427–441.
Hon YY, Jusko WJ, Spratlin VE, Jann MW. Altered methylprednisolone phar-
macodynamics in healthy subjects with histamine N-methyltransferase 
C314T genetic polymorphism. J Clin Pharmacol. 2006;46:408–417.
Horton JR, Sawada K, Nishibori M, Cheng X. Structural basis for inhi-
bition of histamine N-methyltransferase by diverse drugs. J Mol Biol. 
2005;353:334–344.
Hosono H, Kumondai M, Maekawa M, et al. Functional characterization of 
34 CYP2A6 allelic variants by assessment of nicotine C-oxidation and cou-
marin 7-hydroxylation activities. Drug Metab Dispos. 2017;45:279–285.
Hrycay EG, Bandiera SM. The monooxygenase, peroxidase, and per-
oxygenase properties of cytochrome P450. Arch Biochem Biophys. 
2012;522:71–89.
Hu R, Xu C, Shen G, et al. Identification of Nrf2-regulated genes induced 
by chemopreventive isothiocyanate PEITC by oligonucleotide microar-
ray. Life Sciences. 2006;79:1944–1955.
Hu W, Sorrentino C, Denison MS, Kolaja K, Fielden MR. Induction of 
cyp1a1 is a nonspecific biomarker of aryl hydrocarbon receptor activa-
tion: results of large scale screening of pharmaceuticals and toxicants in 
vivo and in vitro. Mol Pharmacol. 2007;71:1475–1486.
Huang L, Smit JW, Meijer DK, Vore M. Mrp2 is essential for estradiol-
17beta(beta-D-glucuronide)-induced cholestasis in rats. Hepatology. 
2000;32:66–72.
Huang SM, Strong JM, Zhang L, et al. New era in drug interaction evalua-
tion: US Food and Drug Administration update on CYP enzymes, trans-
porters, and the guidance process. J Clin Pharmacol. 2008;48: 662–670.
Huang SM, Zhao H, Lee JI, et al. Therapeutic protein–drug interac-
tions and implications for drug development. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 
2010;87(4):497–503.
Huang W, Lin YS, McConn DJ II, et al. Evidence of significant contribu-
tion from CYP3A5 to hepatic drug metabolism. Drug Metab Dispos. 
2004;32:1434–1445.
Hukkanen J, Jacob P III, Benowitz NL. Metabolism and disposition kinetics 
of nicotine. Pharmacol Rev. 2005;57:79–115.
Hyland R, Roe EG, Jones BC, Smith DA. Identification of the cytochrome 
P450 enzymes involved in the N-demethylation of sildenafil. Br J Clin 
Pharmacol. 2001;51:239–248.
Ibrahim ZS, Ahmed MM, El-Shazly SA, Ishizuka M, Fujita S. Clofibric 
acid induces hepatic CYP 2B1/2 via constitutive androstane receptor 
not via peroxisome proliferator activated receptor alpha in rat. Biosci 
Biotechnol Biochem. 2014;78:1550–1559.
Idle JR. Is environmental carcinogenesis modulated by host polymorphism? 
Mutat Res. 1991;247:259–266.
Ikeda T. Drug-induced idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity: prevention strategy 
developed after the troglitazone case. Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 
2011;26:60–70.
Imig JD, Hammock BD. Soluble epoxide hydrolase as a therapeutic target 
for cardiovascular diseases. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2009;8:794–805.
Ingelman-Sundberg M, Rane A, Gustafsson JA. Properties of hydroxylase 
systems in the human fetal liver active on free and sulfoconjugated ste-
roids. Biochemistry. 1975;14:429–437.

384
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
Ingelman-Sundberg M. Genetic polymorphisms of cytochrome P450 2D6 
(CYP2D6): clinical consequences, evolutionary aspects and functional 
diversity. Pharmacogenomics J. 2005;5:6–13.
Inoue T, Irikura D, Okazaki N, et al. Mechanism of metal activation 
of human hematopoietic prostaglandin D synthase. Nat Struct Biol. 
2003;10:291–296.
Ishida M, Mikami S, Kikuchi E, et al. Activation of the aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor pathway enhances cancer cell invasion by upregulating the 
MMP expression and is associated with poor prognosis in upper urinary 
tract urothelial cancer. Carcinogenesis. 2010;31:287–295.
Ishii Y, Takeda S, Yamada H. Modulation of UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 
activity by protein-protein association. Drug Metab Rev. 2010;42:145–158.
Ishizuka T, Fujimori I, Nishida A, et al. Paraoxonase 1 as a major bioacti-
vating hydrolase for olmesartan medoxomil in human blood circulation: 
molecular identification and contribution to plasma metabolism. Drug 
Metab Dispos. 2012;40:374–380.
Isin EM, Guengerich FP. Complex reactions catalyzed by cytochrome P450 
enzymes. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007;1770:314–329.
Iskander K, Jaiswal AK. Quinone oxidoreductases in protection against 
myelogenous hyperplasia and benzene toxicity. Chemico-Biological 
Interactions. 2005;153–154:147–157.
Islam MR, Waheed A, Shah GN, Tomatsu S, Sly WS. Human egasyn binds 
beta-glucuronidase but neither the esterase active site of egasyn nor the 
C terminus of beta-glucuronidase is involved in their interaction. Arch 
Biochem Biophys. 1999;372:53–61.
Isoherranen N, Hachad H, Yeung CK, Levy RH. Qualitative analysis of the 
role of metabolites in inhibitory drug–drug interactions: literature evalu-
ation based on the metabolism and transport drug interaction database. 
Chem Res Toxicol. 2009;22:294–298.
Issemann I, Green S. Activation of a member of the steroid hormone recep-
tor superfamily by peroxisome proliferators. Nature. 1990;347:645–650.
Itkonen MK, Tornio A, Neuvonen M, et al. Clopidogrel markedly increases 
plasma Concentrations of CYP2C8 Substrate Pioglitazone. Drug Metab 
Dispos. 2016;44:1364–1371.
Ito S, Chen C, Satoh J, Yim S, Gonzalez FJ. Dietary phytochemicals 
regulate whole-body CYP1A1 expression through an arylhydrocarbon 
receptor nuclear translocator-dependent system in gut. J Clin Invest. 
2007;117:1940–1950.
Iwaki M, Ogiso T, Hayashi H, Tanino T, Benet LZ. Acute dose-depen-
dent disposition studies of nicotinic acid in rats. Drug Metab Dispos. 
1996;24:773–779.
Iwamura A, Nakajima M, Oda S, Yokoi T. Toxicological potential of acyl gluc-
uronides and its assessment. Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2017;32:2–11.
Iwata H, Fujita K, Kushida H, et al. High catalytic activity of human cyto-
chrome P450 co-expressed with human NADPH-cytochrome P450 
reductase in Escherichia coli. Biochem Pharmacol. 1998;55:1315–1325.
Jack DB. Handbook of Clinical Pharmacokinetic Data. Houndmils, UK: 
Macmillan; 1992:chap 2 (pharmacokinetic tables).
Jaeschke H, Williams CD, Ramachandran A, Bajt ML. Acetaminophen 
hepatotoxicity and repair: the role of sterile inflammation and innate 
immunity. Liver Int. 2012;32:8–20.
James MO, Jahn SC, Zhong G, et al. Therapeutic applications of dichloro-
acetate and the role of glutathione transferase zeta-1. Pharmacol Ther. 
2017;170:166–180.
Jedlitschky G, Cassidy AJ, Sales M, Pratt N, Burchell B. Cloning and char-
acterization of a novel human olfactory UDP-glucuronosyltransferase. 
Biochem J. 1999;340(pt 3):837–843.
Jeffrey AM, Iatropoulos MJ, Williams GM. Nasal cytotoxic and carcino-
genic activities of systemically distributed organic chemicals. Toxicol 
Pathol. 2006;34:827–852.
Jensen BA, Leeman RJ, Schlezinger JJ, Sherr DH. Aryl hydrocarbon recep-
tor (AhR) agonists suppress interleukin-6 expression by bone marrow 
stromal cells: an immunotoxicology study. Environ Health. 2003;2:16.
Jeong S, Woo MM, Flockhart DA, Desta Z. Inhibition of drug metabolizing 
cytochrome P450s by the aromatase inhibitor drug letrozole and its major 
oxidative metabolite 4,4′-methanol-bisbenzonitrile in vitro. Cancer 
Chemother Pharmacol. 2009;64:867–875.
Jez JM, Penning TM. The aldo-keto reductase (AKR) superfamily: an 
update. Chem Biol Interact. 2001;130–132:499–525.
Ji Y, Salavaggione OE, Wang L, et al. Human phenylethanolamine 
N-methyltransferase pharmacogenomics: gene re-sequencing and func-
tional genomics. J Neurochem. 2005;95:1766–1776.
Jin L, Kikuchi R, Saji T, Kusuhara H, Sugiyama Y. Regulation of tissue-
specific expression of renal organic anion transporters by hepatocyte 
nuclear factor 1 alpha/beta and DNA methylation. J Pharmacol Exp 
Ther. 2012;340:648–655.
Jin S, Bryson TA, Dawson JH. Hydroperoxoferric heme intermediate as a 
second electrophilic oxidant in cytochrome P450-catalyzed reactions. J 
Biol Inorg Chem. 2004;9:644–653.
Johnson AL, Edson KZ, Totah RA, Rettie AE. Cytochrome P450 
omega-hydroxylases in inflammation and cancer. Adv Pharmacol. 
2015;74:223–262.
Johnston JB, Ouellet H, Podust LM, Ortiz de Montellano PR. Structural 
control of cytochrome P450-catalyzed ω-hydroxylation. Arch Biochem 
Biophys. 2011;507:86–94.
Josephy PD. Genetic variations in human glutathione transferase enzymes: 
significance for pharmacology and toxicology. Hum Genomics 
Proteomics. 2010;2010:876940.
Jourova L, Anzenbacher P, Anzenbacherova E. Human gut microbiota plays 
a role in the metabolism of drugs. Biomed Pap Med Fac Univ Palacky 
Olomouc Czech Repub. 2016;160:317–326.
Juberg DR, Mudra DR, Hazelton GA, Parkinson A. The effect of fenbuco-
nazole on cell proliferation and enzyme induction in the liver of female 
CD1 mice. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2006;214:178–187.
Just W, Zeller J, Riegert C, Speit G. Genetic polymorphisms in the form-
aldehyde dehydrogenase gene and their biological significance. Toxicol 
Lett. 2011;207:121–127.
Justenhoven C, Winter S, Hamann U, et al. The frameshift polymorphism 
CYP3A43_74_delA is associated with poor differentiation of breast 
tumors. Cancer. 2010;116:5358–5364.
Kadlubar FF. Biochemical individuality and its implications for drug and 
carcinogen metabolism: recent insights from acetyltransferase and cyto-
chrome P4501A2 phenotyping and genotyping in humans. Drug Metab 
Rev. 1994;26:37–46.
Kaitaniemi S, Elovaara H, Gron K, et al. The unique substrate specificity 
of human AOC2, a semicarbazide-sensitive amine oxidase. Cell Mol Life 
Sci. 2009;66:2743–2757.
Kaivosaari S, Finel M, Koskinen M. N-glucuronidation of drugs and 
other xenobiotics by human and animal UDP-glucuronosyltransferases. 
Xenobiotica. 2011;41:652–669.
Kalsotra A, Strobel HW. Cytochrome P450 4F subfamily: at the cross-
roads of eicosanoid and drug metabolism. Pharmacol Ther. 2006;112: 
589–611.
Kamataki T, Fujieda M, Kiyotani K, Iwano S, Kunitoh H. Genetic polymor-
phism of CYP2A6 as one of the potential determinants of tobacco-related 
cancer risk. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005;338:306–310.
Kanamitsu SI, Ito K, Okuda H, et al. Prediction of in vivo drug–drug inter-
actions based on mechanism-based inhibition from in vitro data: inhibi-
tion of 5-fluorouracil metabolism by (E)-5-(2-bromovinyl) uracil. Drug 
Metab Dispos. 2000;28:467–474.
Kang SJ, Scott WK, Li YJ, et al. Family-based case-control study of 
MAOA and MAOB polymorphisms in Parkinson disease. Mov Disord. 
2006;21:2175–2180.
Kanno Y, Inoue Y, Inouye Y. 5-Aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-beta-
ribofuranoside (AICAR) prevents nuclear translocation of constitutive 
androstane receptor by AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) indepen-
dent manner. J Toxicol Sci. 2010;35:571–576.
Kaplowitz N. Idiosyncratic drug hepatotoxicity. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 
2005;4:489–499.
Karanam BV, Hop CE, Liu DQ, et al. In vitro metabolism of MK-0767 
[(+/–)-5-[(2,4-dioxothiazolidin-5-yl)methyl]-2-methoxy-N-[[(4-tri-
fluoromet hyl) phenyl]methyl]benzamide], a peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptor alpha/gamma agonist. I. Role of cytochrome P450, 
methyltransferases, flavin monooxygenases, and esterases. Drug Metab 
Dispos. 2004;32:1015–1022.
Karkhanis A, Hong Y, Chan ECY. Inhibition and inactivation of human 
CYP2J2: implications in cardiac pathophysiology and opportunities in 
cancer therapy. Biochem Pharmacol. 2017;135:12–21.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
385
Karkhanis A, Lam HY, Venkatesan G, et al. Multiple modes of inhibition 
of human cytochrome P450 2J2 by dronedarone, amiodarone and their 
active metabolites. Biochem Pharmacol. 2016;107:67–80.
Karlgren M, Gomez A, Stark K, et al. Tumor-specific expression of the 
novel cytochrome P450 enzyme, CYP2W1. Biochem Biophys Res 
Commun. 2006;341:451–458.
Kasumov T, Brunengraber LL, Comte B, et al. New secondary metabolites of 
phenylbutyrate in humans and rats. Drug Metab Dispos. 2004;32:10–19.
Kato R, Yamazoe Y. Metabolic activation of N-hydroxylated metabolites of 
carcinogenic and mutagenic arylamines and arylamides by esterification. 
Drug Metab Rev. 1994;26:413–429.
Kavanagh KL, Jornvall H, Persson B, Oppermann U. Medium- and short-
chain dehydrogenase/reductase gene and protein families : the SDR 
superfamily: functional and structural diversity within a family of meta-
bolic and regulatory enzymes. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2008;65:3895–3906.
Kawakami H, Ohtsuki S, Kamiie J, et al. Simultaneous absolute quantifi-
cation of 11 cytochrome P450 isoforms in human liver microsomes by 
liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry with in silico target 
peptide selection. J Pharm Sci. 2011;100:341–352.
Kaye J, Piryatinsky V, Birnberg T, et al. Laquinimod arrests experimental 
autoimmune encephalomyelitis by activating the aryl hydrocarbon recep-
tor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016;113:E6145–E6152.
Kazmi F, Barbara JE, Yerino P, Parkinson A. A long-standing mystery solved: 
the formation of 3-hydroxydesloratadine is catalyzed by CYP2C8 but prior 
glucuronidation of desloratadine by UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 2B10 
is an obligatory requirement. Drug Metab Dispos. 2015a;43:523–533.
Kazmi F, Smith B, Hvenegaard MG, et al. Identification of a novel car-
bamoyl glucuronide as a metabolism-dependent inhibitor of CYP2C8. 
Drug Metab Rev. 2010;42:A105.
Kazmi F, Yerino P, Barbara JE, Parkinson A. Further characterization of 
the metabolism of desloratadine and its cytochrome P450 and UDP-
glucuronosyltransferase inhibition potential: identification of deslorata-
dine as a relatively selective UGT2B10 inhibitor. Drug Metab Dispos. 
2015b;43:1294–1302.
Kelly EJ, Nakano M, Rohatgi P, Yarov-Yarovoy V, Rettie AE. Finding 
homes for orphan cytochrome P450s: CYP4V2 and CYP4F22 in disease 
states. Mol Interv. 2011;11:124–132.
Kiang TK, Ensom MH, Chang TK. UDP-glucuronosyltransferases and clin-
ical drug–drug interactions. Pharmacol Ther. 2005;106:97–132.
Kim HR, Lee GH, Cho EY, et al. Bax inhibitor 1 regulates ER-stress-
induced ROS accumulation through the regulation of cytochrome P450 
2E1. J Cell Sci. 2009;122:1126–1133.
Kim K-A, Kim M-J, Park J-Y, et al. Stereoselective metabolism of lanso-
prazole by human liver cytochrome P450 enzymes., Drug Metab Dispos. 
2003;31:1227–1234.
Kim MS, Shen Z, Kochansky C, et al. Differences in the metabolism and 
pharmacokinetics of two structurally similar PPAR agonists in dogs: 
involvement of taurine conjugation. Xenobiotica. 2004;34:665–674.
Kim SH, Henry EC, Kim DK, et al. Novel compound 2-methyl-2H-pyr-
azole-3-carboxylic acid (2-methyl-4-O-tolylazo-phenyl)-amide (CH-
223191) prevents 2,3,7,8-TCDD-induced toxicity by antagonizing the 
aryl hydrocarbon receptor. Mol Pharmacol. 2006;69:1871–1878.
Kim SJ, Yoshikado T, Ieiri I, et al. Clarification of the mechanism of 
clopidogrel-mediated drug–drug interaction in a clinical cassette small-
dose study and its prediction based on in vitro information. Drug Metab 
Dispos. 2016;44:1622–1632.
Kimura M, Higuchi S. Genetics of alcohol dependence. Psychiatry Clin 
Neurosci. 2011;65: 213–225.
Kinobe RT, Parkinson OT, Mitchell DJ, Gillam EMJ. P450 2C18 cata-
lyzes the metabolic bioactivation of phenytoin. Chem Res Toxicol. 
2005;18:1868–1875.
Kirby BJ, Unadkat JD. Impact of ignoring extraction ratio when predict-
ing drug–drug interactions, fraction metabolized, and intestinal first-pass 
contribution. Drug Metab Dispos. 2010;38:1926–1933.
Kirkman SK, Zhang M-Y, Horwatt PM, Scatina J. Isolation and identi-
fication of bromfenac glucoside from rat bile., Drug Metab Dispos. 
1998;26:720–723.
Kitada M, Kamataki T, Itahashi K, Rikihisa T, Kanakubo Y. P-450 HFLa, 
a form of cytochrome P-450 purified from human fetal livers, is the 16 
alpha-hydroxylase of dehydroepiandrosterone 3-sulfate. J Biol Chem. 
1987;262:13534–13537.
Klaassen CD, Aleksunes LM. Xenobiotic, bile acid, and cholesterol trans-
porters: function and regulation. Pharmacol Rev. 2010;62:1–96.
Klaassen CD, Boles JW. Sulfation and sulfotransferases 5: the importance 
of 3′-phosphoadenosine 5′-phosphosulfate (PAPS) in the regulation of 
sulfation. FASEB J. 1997;11:404–418.
Klaassen CD, Cui JY. Review: mechanisms of how the intestinal micro-
biota alters the effects of drugs and bile acids. Drug Metab Dispos. 
2015;43:1505–1521.
Klaassen CD, Reisman SA. Nrf2 the rescue: effects of the antioxidative/elec-
trophilic response on the liver. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2010;244:57–65.
Klaunig JE, Babich MA, Baetcke KP, et al. PPARalpha agonist-induced 
rodent tumors: modes of action and human relevance. Crit Rev Toxicol. 
2003;33:655–780.
Klein K, Thomas M, Winter S, et al. PPARA: a novel genetic determinant of 
CYP3A4 in vitro and in vivo. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2012;91:1044–1052.
Knight TR, Choudhuri S, Klaassen CD. Constitutive mRNA expression of 
various glutathione S-transferase isoforms in different tissues of mice. 
Toxicol Sci. 2007;100:513–524.
Knights KM, Sykes MJ, Miners JO. Amino acid conjugation: contribution 
to the metabolism and toxicity of xenobiotic carboxylic acids. Expert 
Opin Drug Metab Toxicol. 2007;3:159–168.
Knockaert L, Descatoire V, Vadrot N, Fromenty B, Robin MA. Mitochondrial 
CYP2E1 is sufficient to mediate oxidative stress and cytotoxicity induced 
by ethanol and acetaminophen. Toxicol In Vitro. 2011a;25:475–484.
Knockaert L, Fromenty B, Robin MA. Mechanisms of mitochondrial tar-
geting of cytochrome P450 2E1: physiopathological role in liver injury 
and obesity. FEBS J. 2011b;278:4252–4260.
Kobayashi K, Hashimoto M, Honkakoski P, Negishi M. Regulation of gene 
expression by CAR: an update. Arch Toxicol. 2015;89:1045–1055.
Koch RL, Goldman P. The anaerobic metabolism of metronidazole 
forms N-(2-hydroxyethyl)-oxamic acid. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 
1979;208:406–410.
Kochansky CJ, Xia Y-Q, Wang S, et al. Species differences in the elimina-
tion of a peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor agonist highlighted 
by oxidative metabolism of its acyl glucuronide. Drug Metab Dispos. 
2005;33:1894–1904.
Kodama S, Koike C, Negishi M, Yamamoto Y. Nuclear receptors CAR 
and PXR cross talk with FOXO1 to regulate genes that encode drug-
metabolizing and gluconeogenic enzymes. Mol Cell Biol. 2004;24: 
7931–7940.
Kodama S, Negishi M. Phenobarbital confers its diverse effects by activat-
ing the orphan nuclear receptor car. Drug Metab Rev. 2006;38:75–87.
Kodama S, Negishi M. Sulfotransferase genes: regulation by nuclear recep-
tors in response to xeno/endo-biotics. Drug Metab Rev. 2013;45:441–449.
Kodani SD, Hammock BD. The 2014 Bernard B. Brodie award lecture-
epoxide hydrolases: drug metabolism to therapeutics for chronic pain. 
Drug Metab Dispos. 2015;43:788–802.
Koivusalo M, Baumann M, Uotila L. Evidence for the identity of glutathi-
one-dependent formaldehyde dehydrogenase and class III alcohol dehy-
drogenase. FEBS Lett. 1989;257:105–109.
Koren G, Cairns J, Chitayat D, Gaedigk A, Leeder SJ. Pharmacogenetics 
of morphine poisoning in a breastfed neonate of a codeine-prescribed 
mother. Lancet. 2006;368:704.
Kovalevsky A, Blumenthal DK, Cheng X, Taylor P, Radic Z. Limitations 
in current acetylcholinesterase structure-based design of oxime antidotes 
for organophosphate poisoning. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2016;1378:41–49.
Kraemer MJ, Furukawa CT, Koup JR, et al. Altered theophylline clearance 
during an influenza B outbreak. Pediatrics. 1982;69:476–480.
Kroetz DL, Loiseau P, Guyot M, Levy RH. In vivo and in vitro correla-
tion of microsomal epoxide hydrolase inhibition by progabide. Clin 
Pharmacol Ther. 1993;54:485–497.
Krueger S, VanDyke J, Williams D, Hines R. The role of flavin-containing 
monooxygenase (FMO) in the metabolism of tamoxifen and other ter-
tiary amines. Drug Metab Rev. 2006;38:139–147.
Kubo T, Kim SR, Sai K, et al. Functional characterization of three naturally 
occurring single nucleotide polymorphisms in the CES2 gene encoding 
carboxylesterase 2 (HCE-2). Drug Metab Dispos. 2005;33:1482–1487.

386
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
Kudo M, Sasaki T, Ishikawa M, Hirasawa N, Hiratsuka M. Kinetics of 
6-thioxanthine metabolism by allelic variants of xanthine oxidase. Drug 
Metab Pharmacokinet. 2010;25:361–366.
Kuhl H, Wiegratz I. Can 19-nortestosterone derivatives be aromatized in 
the liver of adult humans? Are there clinical implications? Climacteric. 
2007;10:344–353.
Kuipers F, Bloks VW, Groen AK. Beyond intestinal soap—bile acids in 
metabolic control. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2014;10:488–498.
Kumar S, Samuel K, Subramanian R, et al. Extrapolation of diclofenac 
clearance from in vitro microsomal metabolism data: role of acyl gluc-
uronidation and sequential oxidative metabolism of the acyl glucuronide. 
J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2002;303:969–978.
Kumarakulasingham M, Rooney PH, Dundas SR, et al. Cytochrome p450 
profile of colorectal cancer: identification of markers of prognosis. Clin 
Cancer Res. 2005;11:3758–3765.
Kunutsor SK, Bakker SJ, James RW, Dullaart RP. Serum paraoxonase-1 
activity and risk of incident cardiovascular disease: The PREVEND study 
and meta-analysis of prospective population studies. Atherosclerosis. 
2016;245:143–154.
Kurian JR, Chin NA, Longlais BJ, Hayes KL, Trepanier LA. Reductive 
detoxification of arylhydroxylamine carcinogens by human NADH 
cytochrome b5 reductase and cytochrome b5. Chem Res Toxicol. 
2006;19:1366–1373.
Kutty RK, Daniel RF, Ryan DE, Levin W, Maines MD. Rat liver cyto-
chrome P-450b, P-420b, and P-420c are degraded to biliverdin by heme 
oxygenase. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1988;260:638–644.
La Du  B. Human serum paraoxonase/arylesterase. In: Kalow W, ed. 
Pharmacogenetics of Drug Metabolism. New York: Pergamon; 1992.
Lafite P, Dijols S, Buisson D, et al. Design and synthesis of selective, high-
affinity inhibitors of human cytochrome P450 2J2. Bioorg Med Chem 
Lett. 2006;16:2777–2780.
Lafite P, Dijols S, Zeldin DC, Dansette PM, Mansuy D. Selective, com-
petitive and mechanism-based inhibitors of human cytochrome P450 2J2. 
Arch Biochem Biophys. 2007;464: 155–168.
Lai DY. Rodent carcinogenicity of peroxisome proliferators and issues on 
human relevance. J Environ Sci Health C Environ Carcinog Ecotoxicol 
Rev. 2004;22:37–55.
Lai L, Xu Z, Zhou J, Lee KD, Amidon GL. Molecular basis of prodrug acti-
vation by human valacyclovirase, an alpha-amino acid ester hydrolase. J 
Biol Chem. 2008;283:9318–9327.
Lai WG, Farah N, Moniz GA, Wong YN. A Baeyer-Villiger oxidation spe-
cifically catalyzed by human flavin-containing monooxygenase 5′. Drug 
Metab Dispos. 2011;39:61–70.
Lai XS, Yang LP, Li XT, et al. Human CYP2C8: structure, substrate speci-
ficity, inhibitor selectivity, inducers and polymorphisms. Curr Drug 
Metab. 2009;10:1009–1047.
Lake BG. Species differences in the hepatic effects of inducers of CYP2B 
and CYP4A subfamily forms: relationship to rodent liver tumour forma-
tion. Xenobiotica. 2009;39:582–596.
Lake BG, Price RJ, Osimitz TG. Mode of action analysis for pesticide-induced 
rodent liver tumours involving activation of the constitutive androstane 
receptor: relevance to human cancer risk. Pest Manag Sci. 2015;71:829–834.
Lake BG, Price RJ, Walters DG, et al. Studies on the metabolism of the 
thiofurans furfuryl mercaptan and 2-methyl-3-furanthiol in rat liver. Food 
Chem Toxicol. 2003;41:1761–1770.
Lammert C, Bjornsson E, Niklasson A, Chalasani N. Oral medications with 
significant hepatic metabolism at higher risk for hepatic adverse events. 
Hepatology. 2010;51:615–620.
Lammert C, Einarsson S, Saha C, et al. Relationship between daily dose of 
oral medications and idiosyncratic drug-induced liver injury: search for 
signals. Hepatology. 2008;47:2003–2009.
Lappin GJ, Hardwick TD, Stow R, Pigott GH, Van Ravenzwaay B. 
Absorption, metabolism and excretion of 4-chloro-2-methylphenoxyace-
tic acid (MCPA) in rat and dog. Xenobiotica. 2002;32:153–163.
Largeron M. Amine oxidases of the quinoproteins family: their implication 
in the metabolic oxidation of xenobiotics. Ann Pharm Fr. 2011;69:53–61.
Lasser KE, Allen PD, Woolhandler SJ, et al. Timing of new black box 
warnings and withdrawals for prescription medications. JAMA. 
2002;287:2215–2220.
Lawton MP, Cashman JR, Cresteil T, et al. A nomenclature for the mamma-
lian flavin-containing monooxygenase gene family based on amino acid 
sequence identities. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1994;308:254–257.
Lazarou J, Pomeranz BH, Corey PN. Incidence of adverse drug reactions 
in hospitalized patients: a meta-analysis of prospective studies. JAMA. 
1998;279:1200–1205.
Lecoeur S, Bonierbale E, Challine D, et al. Specificity of in vitro cova-
lent binding of tienilic acid metabolites to human liver microsomes in 
relationship to the type of hepatotoxicity: comparison with two directly 
hepatotoxic drugs. Chem Res Toxicol. 1994;7:434–442.
Lee CA, Jones JP III, Katayama J, et al. Identifying a selective substrate and 
inhibitor pair for the evaluation of CYP2J2 activity. Drug Metab Dispos. 
2012;40:943–951.
Lee CA, Neul D, Clouser-Roche A, et al. Identification of novel substrates 
for human cytochrome P450 2J2. Drug Metab Dispos. 2010a;38:347–356.
Lee CM, Chen SY, Lee YC, Huang CY, Chen YM. Benzo[a]pyrene and gly-
cine N-methyltransferse interactions: gene expression profiles of the liver 
detoxification pathway. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2006;214:126–135.
Lee GH, Kim HK, Chae SW, et al. Bax inhibitor-1 regulates endoplasmic 
reticulum stress-associated reactive oxygen species and heme oxygen-
ase-1 expression. J Biol Chem. 2007;282:21618–21628.
Lee JM, Johnson JA. An important role of Nrf2-ARE pathway in the cel-
lular defense mechanism. J Biochem Mol Biol. 2004;37:139–143.
Lee SS, Jung HJ, Park JS, et al. Identification of a null allele of cytochrome 
P450 3A7: CYP3A7 polymorphism in a Korean population. Mol Biol 
Rep. 2010b;37:213–217.
Lefevre C, Bouadjar B, Ferrand V, et al. Mutations in a new cytochrome P450 
gene in lamellar ichthyosis type 3. Hum Mol Genet. 2006;15:767–776.
Lehman-McKeeman LD, Caudill D, Vassallo JD, et al. Effects of musk 
xylene and musk ketone on rat hepatic cytochrome P450 enzymes. 
Toxicology Letters. 1999;111:105–115.
Levano S, Keller D, Schobinger E, Urwyler A, Girard T. Rapid and accu-
rate detection of atypical and Kalow variants in the butyrylcholinesterase 
gene using denaturing high performance liquid chromatography. Anesth 
Analg. 2008;106:147–151, table of contents.
Levin W, Thomas PE, Oldfield N, Ryan DE. N-demethylation of 
N-nitrosodimethylamine catalyzed by purified rat hepatic microsomal 
cytochrome P-450: isozyme specificity and role of cytochrome b5′. Arch 
Biochem Biophys. 1986;248:158–165.
Levitt MD. Review article: lack of clinical significance of the interaction 
between H2-receptor antagonists and ethanol. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 
1993;7:131–138.
Levoin N, Blondeau C, Guillaume C, et al. Elucidation of the mechanism of 
inhibition of cyclooxygenases by acyl-coenzyme A and acylglucuronic 
conjugates of ketoprofen. Biochem Pharmacol. 2004;68:1957–1969.
Li A, Jiao X, Munier FL, et al. Bietti crystalline corneoretinal dystrophy 
is caused by mutations in the novel gene CYP4V2. Am J Hum Genet. 
2004;74:817–826.
Li AP, Hartman NR, Lu C, Collins JM, Strong JM. Effects of cytochrome 
P450 inducers on 17a ethinyloestradiol (EE2) conjugation by primary 
human hepatocytes. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 1999;48:733–742.
Li B, Sedlacek M, Manoharan I, et al. Butyrylcholinesterase, paraoxonase, 
and albumin esterase, but not carboxylesterase, are present in human 
plasma. Biochem Pharmacol. 2005;70:1673–1684.
Li C, Wu W, Cho KB, Shaik S. Oxidation of tertiary amines by cytochrome 
p450-kinetic isotope effect as a spin-state reactivity probe. Chemistry. 
2009a;15:8492–8503.
Li D, Ma S, Ellis EM. Nrf2-mediated adaptive response to methyl glyoxal 
in HepG2 cells involves the induction of AKR7A2. Chem Biol Interact. 
2015;234:366–371.
Li DN, Seidel A, Pritchard MP, Wolf CR, Friedberg T. Polymorphisms in P450 
CYP1B1 affect the conversion of estradiol to the potentially carcinogenic 
metabolite 4-hydroxyestradiol. Pharmacogenetics. 2000;10:343–353.
Li H, Gu S, Cai X, et al. Ethnic related selection for an ADH Class I variant 
within East Asia. PLoS One. 2008;3:e1881.
Li L, Wei Y, Van Winkle L, et al. Generation and characterization of a 
Cyp2f2-null mouse and studies on the role of CYP2F2 in naphthalene-
induced toxicity in the lung and nasal olfactory mucosa. J Pharmacol 
Exp Ther. 2011a;339:62–71.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
387
Li TK. Pharmacogenetics of responses to alcohol and genes that influence 
alcohol drinking. J Stud Alcohol. 2000;61:5–12.
Li X, He Y, Ruiz CH, et al. Characterization of dasatinib and its structural 
analogs as CYP3A4 mechanism-based inactivators and the proposed bio-
activation pathways. Drug Metab Dispos. 2009b;37:1242–1250.
Li X, Hu Z, Qu X,et al. Putative EPHX1 enzyme activity is related with risk 
of lung and upper aerodigestive tract cancers: a comprehensive meta-
analysis. PLoS One. 2011b;6:e14749.
Li XQ, Hayes MA, Gronberg G, et al. Discovery of a novel microsomal 
epoxide hydrolase-catalyzed hydration of a spiro oxetane. Drug Metab 
Dispos. 2016;44:1341–1348.
Li Y, Yokoi T, Katsuki M, et al. In vivo activation of aflatoxin B1 in 
C57BL/6N mice carrying a human fetus-specific CYP3A7 gene. Cancer 
Res. 1997;57:641–645.
Libiad M, Sriraman A, Banerjee R. Polymorphic variants of human rhoda-
nese exhibit differences in thermal stability and sulfur transfer kinetics. J 
Biol Chem. 2015;290:23579–23588.
Lieber CS. Microsomal ethanol-oxidizing system (MEOS): the first 30 
years (1968–1998)—a review. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 1999;23:991–1007.
Lieber CS. The discovery of the microsomal ethanol oxidizing system. 
Drug Metab Rev. 2004;36:511–529.
Liederer BM, Borchardt RT. Enzymes involved in the bioconversion of 
ester-based prodrugs. J Pharm Sci. 2006;95:1177–1195.
Lillibridge J, Kalhorn T, Slattery J. Metabolism of lisofylline and pent-
oxifylline in human liver microsomes and cytosol. Drug Metab Dispos. 
1996a;24:1174–1179.
Lin YS, Dowling ALS, Quigley SD, et al. Co-regulation of CYP3A4 and 
CYP3A5 and contribution to hepatic and intestinal midazolam metabo-
lism. Mol Pharmacol. 2002;62:162–172.
Lindberg RLP, Negishi M. Alteration of mouse cytochrome P450coh sub-
strate specificity by mutation of a single amino-acid residue. Nature. 
1989;339:632–634.
Lindsay J, Wang LL, Li Y, Zhou SF. Structure, function and polymor-
phism of human cytosolic sulfotransferases. Curr Drug Metab. 2008;9: 
99–105.
Link M, Hakala KS, Wsol V, Kostiainen R, Ketola RA. Metabolite profile of 
sibutramine in human urine: a liquid chromatography-electrospray ion-
ization mass spectrometric study. J Mass Spectrom. 2006;41:1171–1178.
Liston HL, DeVane CL, Boulton DW, et al. Differential time course of 
cytochrome P450 2D6 enzyme inhibition by fluoxetine, sertraline, and 
paroxetine in healthy volunteers. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2002;22: 
169–173.
Littler DR, Brown LJ, Breit SN, Perrakis A, Curmi PM. Structure of human 
CLIC3 at 2 A resolution. Proteins. 2010;78:1594–1600.
Liu C, Chen Z, Zhong K, et al. Human liver cytochrome P450 enzymes and 
microsomal thiol methyltransferase are involved in the stereoselective 
formation and methylation of the pharmacologically active metabolite of 
clopidogrel. Drug Metab Dispos. 2015a;43:1632–1641.
Liu C, Yang W, Pei D, et al. Genomewide approach validates thiopurine 
methyltransferase activity is a monogenic pharmacogenomic trait. Clin 
Pharmacol Ther. 2017a;101:373–381.
Liu K-H, Kim M-G, Lee D-J, et al. Characterization of ebastine, hydroxye-
bastine, and carebastine metabolism by human liver microsomes and 
expressed cytochrome P450 enzymes: major roles for CYP2J2 and 
CYP3A. Drug Metab Dispos. 2006a;34:1793–1797.
Liu S, Shi X, Tian X, et al. Effect of CYP3A4 *1G and CYP3A5 *3 poly-
morphisms on pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of ticagrelor in 
healthy Chinese subjects. Front Pharmacol. 2017b;8:176.
Liu T, David SP, Tyndale RF, et al. Associations of CYP2A6 genotype with 
smoking behaviors in southern China. Addiction. 2011;106:985–994.
Liu YP, Xu HQ, Li M, et al. Association between thiopurine 
S-methyltransferase polymorphisms and azathioprine-induced adverse 
drug reactions in patients with autoimmune diseases: a meta-analysis. 
PLoS One. 2015b;10:e0144234.
Liu Y-J, Huang P-L, Chang Y-F, et al. GSTP1 genetic polymorphism is 
associated with a higher risk of DNA damage in pesticide-exposed fruit 
growers. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2006b;15:659–666.
Liu ZC, Uetrecht JP. Metabolism of ticlopidine by activated neutrophils: 
implications for ticlopidine-induced agranulocytosis. Drug Metab 
Dispos. 2000;28:726–730.
Li-Wan-Po A, Girard T, Farndon P, Cooley C, Lithgow J. Pharmacogenetics 
of CYP2C19: functional and clinical implications of a new variant 
CYP2C19*17. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2010;69:222–230.
Lockhart CM, Nakano M, Rettie AE, Kelly EJ. Generation and characteriza-
tion of a murine model of Bietti crystalline dystrophy. Invest Ophthalmol 
Vis Sci. 2014;55:5572–5581.
Lockley DJ, Howes D, Williams FM. Cutaneous metabolism of glycol 
ethers. Arch Toxicol. 2005;79:160–168.
Lockridge O. Genetic variants of human serum butyrylcholinesterase influ-
ence the metabolism of the muscle relaxant succinylcholine. In: Kalow W, 
ed. Pharmacogenetics of Drug Metabolism. New York: Pergamon; 1992.
Lohle M, Reichmann H. Controversies in neurology: why monoamine 
oxidase B inhibitors could be a good choice for the initial treatment of 
Parkinson’s disease. BMC Neurol. 2011;11:112.
Lonard DM, O’Malley BW. The expanding cosmos of nuclear receptor 
coactivators. Cell. 2006;125:411–414.
Long RM, Rickert DE. Metabolism and excretion of 2,6-dinitro [14C]
toluene in vivo and in isolated perfused rat livers. Drug Metab Dispos. 
1982;10:455–458.
Lu H, Cui W, Klaassen CD. Nrf2 protects against 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorod-
ibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD)-induced oxidative injury and steatohepatitis. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2011;256:122–135.
Lu Y, Cederbaum AI. CYP2E1 and oxidative liver injury by alcohol. Free 
Radic Biol Med. 2008;44:723–738.
Lunam CA, Hall PM, Cousins MJ. The pathology of halothane hepatotoxic-
ity in a guinea-pig model: a comparison with human halothane hepatitis. 
Br J Exp Pathol. 1989;70:533–541.
Lundy PM, Hamilton MG, Sawyer TW, Mikler J. Comparative protective 
effects of HI-6 and MMB-4 against organophosphorous nerve agent poi-
soning. Toxicology. 2011;285:90–96.
Lurie Y, Loebstein R, Kurnik D, Almog S, Halkin H. Warfarin and vita-
min K intake in the era of pharmacogenetics. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 
2010;70:164–170.
Ma C, Gu L, Yang M, et al. rs1495741 as a tag single nucleotide polymor-
phism of N-acetyltransferase 2 acetylator phenotype associates bladder 
cancer risk and interacts with smoking: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Medicine (Baltimore). 2016;95:e4417.
Ma Q, Lu AY. Origins of individual variability in P4501A induction. Chem 
Res Toxicol. 2003;16: 249–260.
Ma Q, Lu AY. CYP1A induction and human risk assessment: an evolving tale 
of in vitro and in vivo studies. Drug Metab Dispos. 2007;35:1009–1016.
Ma X, Idle JR, Krausz KW, Gonzalez FJ. Metabolism of melatonin by 
human cytochromes p450. Drug Metab Dispos. 2005;33:489–494.
Mackenzie PI, Walter BK, Burchell B, et al. Nomenclature update for 
the mammalian UDP glycosyltransferase (UGT) gene superfamily. 
Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2005;15:677–685.
Madan A, Graham RA, Carroll KM, et al. Effects of prototypical micro-
somal enzyme inducers on cytochrome P450 expression in cultured 
human hepatocytes. Drug Metab Dispos. 2003;31:421–431.
Madan A, Williams TD, Faiman MD. Glutathione- and glutathione-S-trans-
ferase-dependent oxidative desulfuration of the thione xenobiotic dieth-
yldithiocarbamate methyl ester. Mol Pharmacol. 1994;46:1217–1225.
Maecker B, Sherr DH, Vonderheide RH, et al. The shared tumor-associated 
antigen cytochrome P450 1B1 is recognized by specific cytotoxic T cells. 
Blood. 2003;102:3287–3294.
Mahiout S, Linden J, Esteban J, et al. Toxicological characterisation of 
two novel selective aryl hydrocarbon receptor modulators in Sprague–
Dawley rats. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2017;326:54–65.
Makia NL, Goldstein JA. CYP2C8 is a novel target of peroxisome pro-
liferator-activated receptor alpha in human liver. Mol Pharmacol. 
2016;89:154–164.
Malatkova P, Maser E, Wsol V. Human carbonyl reductases. Curr Drug 
Metab. 2010;11:639–658.
Mani S, Dou W, Redinbo MR. PXR antagonists and implication in drug 
metabolism. Drug Metab Rev. 2013;45:60–72.
Mannervik B, Awasthi YC, Board PG, et al. Nomenclature for human gluta-
thione transferases. Biochem J. 1992;282:305–306.
Mannervik B, Board PG, Hayes JD, Listowsky I, Pearson WR. 
Nomenclature for mammalian soluble glutathione transferases. Methods 
Enzymol. 2005;401:1–8.

388
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
Marchitti SA, Brocker C, Stagos D, Vasiliou V. Non-P450 aldehyde oxi-
dizing enzymes: the aldehyde dehydrogenase superfamily. Expert Opin 
Drug Metab Toxicol. 2008;4:697–720.
Marchitti SA, Deitrich RA, Vasiliou V. Neurotoxicity and metabolism of 
the catecholamine-derived 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetaldehyde and 3, 
4-­dihydroxyphenylglycolaldehyde: the role of aldehyde dehydrogenase. 
Pharmacol Rev. 2007;59: 125–150.
Marchitti SA, Orlicky DJ, Brocker C, Vasiliou V. Aldehyde dehydrogenase 
3B1 (ALDH3B1): immunohistochemical tissue distribution and cellular-
specific localization in normal and cancerous human tissues. J Histochem 
Cytochem. 2010;58:765–783.
Marill J, Capron CC, Idres N, Chabot GG. Human cytochrome P450s 
involved in the metabolism of 9-cis- and 13-cis-retinoic acids. Biochem 
Pharmacol. 2002;63:933–943.
Marill J, Cresteil T, Lanotte M, Chabot GG. Identification of human cyto-
chrome P450s involved in the formation of all-trans-retinoic acid princi-
pal metabolites. Mol Pharmacol. 2000;58:1341–1348.
Martinez Molina D, Eshaghi S, Nordlund P. Catalysis within the lipid 
bilayer-structure and mechanism of the MAPEG family of integral mem-
brane proteins. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2008;18:442–449.
Marzolini C, Gibbons S, Khoo S, Back D. Cobicistat versus ritonavir 
boosting and differences in the drug–drug interaction profiles with co-­
medications. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2016;71:1755–1758.
Masson P, Lockridge O. Butyrylcholinesterase for protection from organo-
phosphorus poisons: catalytic complexities and hysteretic behavior. Arch 
Biochem Biophys. 2010;494:107–120.
Masukawa T, Sai M, Tochino Y. Methods for depleting brain glutathione. 
Life Sci. 1989;44:417–424.
Matsunaga T, Shintani S, Hara A. Multiplicity of mammalian reductases 
for xenobiotic carbonyl compounds. Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 
2006;21:1–18.
Mazerska Z, Mroz A, Pawlowska M, Augustin E. The role of glucuronida-
tion in drug resistance. Pharmacol Ther. 2016;159:35–55.
McClain RM. The significance of hepatic microsomal enzyme induction 
and altered thyroid function in rats: implications for thyroid gland neo-
plasia. Toxicol Pathol. 1989;17:294–306.
McCormack M, Alfirevic A, Bourgeois S, et al. HLA-A*3101 and carbam-
azepine-induced hypersensitivity reactions in Europeans. N Engl J Med. 
2011;364:1134–1143.
McDonagh EM, Boukouvala S, Aklillu E, et al. PharmGKB summary: 
very important pharmacogene information for N-acetyltransferase 2. 
Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2014;24:409–425.
McDonald MG, Rieder MJ, Nakano M, Hsia CK, Rettie AE. CYP4F2 is a 
vitamin K1 oxidase: an explanation for altered warfarin dose in carriers 
of the V433M variant. Mol Pharmacol. 2009;75:1337–1346.
McGrath AP, Hilmer KM, Collyer CA, Dooley DM, Guss JM. A new crys-
tal form of human diamine oxidase. Acta Crystallogr Sect F Struct Biol 
Cryst Commun. 2010;66:137–142.
McIlwain CC, Townsend DM, Tew KD. Glutathione S-transferase polymor-
phisms: cancer incidence and therapy. Oncogene. 2006;25:1639–1648.
McLaughlin LA, Ronseaux S, Finn RD, Henderson CJ, Wolf CR. Deletion 
of microsomal cytochrome b5 profoundly affects hepatic and extrahe-
patic drug metabolism. Mol Pharmacol. 2010;78:269–278.
McLeod HL, Fang L, Luo X, Scott EP, Evans WE. Ethnic differences in 
erythrocyte catechol-O-methyltransferase activity in black and white 
Americans. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1994;270:26–29.
Meech R, Mackenzie PI. UGT3A: novel UDP-glycosyltransferases of the 
UGT superfamily. Drug Metab Rev. 2010;42:45–54.
Merali Z, Ross S, Pare G. The pharmacogenetics of carboxylesterases: 
CES1 and CES2 genetic variants and their clinical effect. Drug Metabol 
Drug Interact. 2014;29:143–151.
Metushi IG, Cai P, Zhu X, Nakagawa T, Uetrecht JP. A fresh look at the 
mechanism of isoniazid-induced hepatotoxicity. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 
2011;89: 911–914.
Metushi IG, Sanders C, Lee WM, Uetrecht J; Group Acute Liver Study.  
Detection of anti-isoniazid and anti-cytochrome P450 antibodies in 
patients with isoniazid-induced liver failure. Hepatology. 2014;59: 
1084–1093.
Metushi I, Uetrecht J, Phillips E. Mechanism of isoniazid-induced hepato-
toxicity: then and now. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2016;81:1030–1036.
Meulendijks D, Henricks LM, Sonke GS, et al. Clinical relevance of 
DPYD variants c.1679T>G, c.1236G>A/HapB3, and c.1601G>A 
as predictors of severe fluoropyrimidine-associated toxicity: a system-
atic review and meta-analysis of individual patient data. Lancet Oncol. 
2015;16:1639–1650.
Meyer SA, Jirtle RL. Old dance with a new partner: EGF receptor as 
the phenobarbital receptor mediating Cyp2B expression. Sci Signal. 
2013;6:pe16.
Meyer UA. The molecular basis of genetic polymorphisms of drug metabo-
lism. J Pharm Pharmacol. 1994;46:409–415.
Mezrich JD, Fechner JH, Zhang X, et al. An interaction between kynuren-
ine and the aryl hydrocarbon receptor can generate regulatory T cells. J 
Immunol. 2010;185:3190–3198.
Miao J, Ling AV, Manthena PV, et al. Flavin-containing monooxygenase 3 
as a potential player in diabetes-associated atherosclerosis. Nat Commun. 
2015;6:6498.
Michaels S, Wang MZ. The revised human liver cytochrome P450 “Pie”: 
absolute protein quantification of CYP4F and CYP3A enzymes using tar-
geted quantitative proteomics. Drug Metab Dispos. 2014;42:1241–1251.
Michaud V, Frappier M, Dumas MC, Turgeon J. Metabolic activity and 
mRNA levels of human cardiac CYP450s involved in drug metabolism. 
PLoS One. 2010;5:e15666.
Michelakis ED, Sutendra G, Dromparis P, et al. Metabolic modulation of 
glioblastoma with dichloroacetate. Sci Transl Med. 2010;2:31ra34.
Mimori Y, Nakamura S, Kameyama M. Regional and subcellular distribu-
tion of cyanide metabolizing enzymes in the central nervous system. J 
Neurochem. 1984;43:540–545.
Miners JO, Knights KM, Houston JB, Mackenzie PI. In vitro–in vivo cor-
relation for drugs and other compounds eliminated by glucuronidation in 
humans: pitfalls and promises. Biochem Pharmacol. 2006;71:1531–1539.
Miners JO, Mackenzie PI, Knights KM. The prediction of drug-glucuron-
idation parameters in humans: UDP-glucuronosyltransferase enzyme-
selective substrate and inhibitor probes for reaction phenotyping and in 
vitro–in vivo extrapolation of drug clearance and drug–drug interaction 
potential. Drug Metab Rev. 2010;42:196–208.
Mirsalis JC, Butterworth BE. Induction of unscheduled DNA synthe-
sis in rat hepatocytes following in vivo treatment with dinitrotoluene. 
Carcinogenesis. 1982;3:241–245.
Mitchell SC. Flavin mono-oxygenase (FMO)—the ‘other’ oxidase. Curr 
Drug Metab. 2008;9:280–284.
Mitchell SC. Xenobiotic-urea conjugates: chemical or biological? 
Xenobiotica. 2014;44:1055–1066.
Mitchell S, Steventon G, Waring R. Drug peptide conjugates in human 
urine? Xenobiotica. 2014;44:89–93.
Mitoma C, Posner HS, Leonard F. Aromatization of hexahydroben-
zoic acid by mammalian liver mitochondria. Biochim Biophys Acta. 
1958;27:156–160.
Miura M, Satoh S, Kagaya H, et al. Impact of the CYP3A4*1G poly-
morphism and its combination with CYP3A5 genotypes on tacrolimus 
pharmacokinetics in renal transplant patients. Pharmacogenomics. 
2011;12:977–984.
Miura M, Satoh S, Tada H, Habuchi T, Suzuki T. Stereoselective metabo-
lism of rabeprazole-thioether to rabeprazole by human liver microsomes. 
Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2006;62:113–117.
Molina MA, Sitja-Arnau M, Lemoine MG, Frazier ML, Sinicrope FA. 
Increased cyclooxygenase-2 expression in human pancreatic carcinomas 
and cell lines: growth inhibition by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. 
Cancer Res. 1999;59:4356–4362.
Monks TJ, Anders MW, Dekant W, et al. Glutathione conjugate mediated 
toxicities. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1990;106:1–19.
Moore RA, Derry S, Wiffen PJ, Straube S. Effects of food on pharmaco-
kinetics of immediate release oral formulations of aspirin, dipyrone, 
paracetamol and NSAIDs—a systematic review. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 
2015;80:381–388.
Moore TJ, Cohen MR, Furberg CD. Serious adverse drug events reported 
to the Food and Drug Administration, 1998–2005. Arch Intern Med. 
2007;167:1752–1759.
Morar N, Bowcock AM, Harper JI, Cookson WO, Moffatt MF. Investigation 
of the chromosome 17q25 PSORS2 locus in atopic dermatitis. J Invest 
Dermatol. 2006;126:603–606.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
389
Mordente A, Meucci E, Martorana GE, Giardina B, Minotti G. Human 
heart cytosolic reductases and anthracycline cardiotoxicity. IUBMB Life. 
2001;52:83–88.
Moreau A, Vilarem MJ, Maurel P, Pascussi JM. Xenoreceptors CAR and 
PXR activation and consequences on lipid metabolism, glucose homeo-
stasis, and inflammatory response. Mol Pharm. 2008;5:35–41.
Morel F, Aninat C. The glutathione transferase kappa family. Drug Metab 
Rev. 2011;43:281–291.
Morgan ET. Impact of infectious and inflammatory disease on cytochrome 
P450-mediated drug metabolism and pharmacokinetics. Clin Pharmacol 
Ther. 2009;85:434–438.
Morgan ET, Goralski KB, Piquette-Miller M, et al. Regulation of drug-
metabolizing enzymes and transporters in infection, inflammation, and 
cancer. Drug Metab Dispos. 2008;36:205–216.
Morgenstern R, Zhang J, Johansson K. Microsomal glutathione transferase 
1: mechanism and functional roles. Drug Metab Rev. 2011;43: 300–306.
Morisseau C, Hammock BD. Epoxide hydrolases: mechanisms, inhibi-
tor designs, and biological roles. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 
2005;45:311–333.
Morton NM, Beltram J, Carter RN, et al. Genetic identification of thio-
sulfate sulfurtransferase as an adipocyte-expressed antidiabetic target in 
mice selected for leanness. Nat Med. 2016;22:771–779.
Mukherjee B, Salavaggione OE, Pelleymounter LL, et al. Glutathione 
S-transferase omega 1 and omega 2 pharmacogenomics. Drug Metab 
Dispos. 2006;34:1237–1246.
Mukonzo JK, Bisaso RK, Ogwal-Okeng J, et al. CYP2B6 genotype-based 
efavirenz dose recommendations during rifampicin-based antituberculo-
sis cotreatment for a sub-Saharan Africa population. Pharmacogenomics. 
2016;17: 603–613.
Mukonzo JK, Nanzigu S, Waako P, et al. CYP2B6 genotype, but not rifam-
picin-based anti-TB cotreatments, explains variability in long-term efavi-
renz plasma exposure. Pharmacogenomics. 2014;15:1423–1435.
Mulder GJ. Sulfation of Drugs and Related Compounds. Boca Raton, FL: 
CRC; 1981.
Muller T. Catechol-O-methyltransferase inhibitors in Parkinson’s disease. 
Drugs. 2015;75:157–174.
Murai T, Iwabuchi H, Ikeda T. Repeated glucuronidation at one hydroxyl 
group leads to structurally novel diglucuronides of steroid sex hormones. 
Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2005;20:282–293.
Murai T, Samata N, Iwabuchi H, Ikeda T. Human UDP-glucuronosyl­
transferase, UGT1A8, glucuronidates dihydrotestosterone to a mono-
glucuronide and further to a structurally novel diglucuronide. Drug 
Metab Dispos. 2006;34:1102–1108.
Murray IA, Krishnegowda G, DiNatale BC, et al. Development of a selec-
tive modulator of aryl hydrocarbon (Ah) receptor activity that exhibits 
anti-inflammatory properties. Chem Res Toxicol. 2010;23:955–966.
Mutlib AE, Chen H, Nemeth G, Gan LS, Christ DD. Liquid chromatogra-
phy/mass spectrometry and high-field nuclear magnetic resonance char-
acterization of novel mixed diconjugates of the non-nucleoside human 
immunodeficiency virus-1 reverse transcriptase inhibitor, efavirenz. 
Drug Metab Dispos. 1999;27:1045–1056.
Mutlib AE, Gerson RJ, Meunier PC, et al. The species-dependent metabo-
lism of efavirenz produces a nephrotoxic glutathione conjugate in rats. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2000;169:102–113.
Mutoh S, Osabe M, Inoue K, et al. Dephosphorylation of threonine 38 is 
required for nuclear translocation and activation of human xenobiotic 
receptor CAR (NR1I3). J Biol Chem. 2009;284:34785–34792.
Mutoh S, Sobhany M, Moore R, et al. Phenobarbital indirectly activates the 
constitutive active androstane receptor (CAR) by inhibition of epidermal 
growth factor receptor signaling. Sci Signal. 2013;6:ra31.
Naesens M, Kuypers DR, Streit F, et al. Rifampin induces alterations in 
mycophenolic acid glucuronidation and elimination: implications 
for drug exposure in renal allograft recipients. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 
2006;80:509–521.
Nagahara N, Nagano M, Ito T, Suzuki H. Redox regulation of mam-
malian 
3-mercaptopyruvate 
sulfurtransferase. 
Methods 
Enzymol. 
2015;554:229–254.
Nagar S, Remmel RP. Uridine diphosphoglucuronosyltransferase pharma-
cogenetics and cancer. Oncogene. 2006;25:1659–1672.
Nagar S, Blanchard R. Pharmacogenetics of uridine diphosphoglucuronos-
yltransferase (UGT) 1A family members and its role in patient response 
to irinotecan. Drug Metab Rev. 2006;38:393–409.
Nakajima M, Itoh M, Sakai H, et al. CYP2A13 expressed in human 
bladder metabolically activates 4-aminobiphenyl. Int J Cancer. 
2006;119:2520–2526.
Nakajima T. Roles of sulfur metabolism and rhodanese in detoxification and 
anti-oxidative stress functions in the liver: responses to radiation expo-
sure. Med Sci Monit. 2015;21:1721–1725.
Nakano H, Ogura K, Takahashi E, et al. Regioselective monosulfation and 
disulfation of the phytoestrogens daidzein and genistein by human liver 
sulfotransferases. Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2004;19:216–226.
Nakano K, Ohashi M, Harigaya S. The beta-glucosidation and beta-gluc-
uronidation of pantothenic acid compared with p-nitrophenol in dog liver 
microsome. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo). 1986;34:3949–3952.
Nakayama S, Atsumi R, Takakusa H, et al. A zone classification system for 
risk assessment of idiosyncratic drug toxicity using daily dose and cova-
lent binding. Drug Metab Dispos. 2009;37:1970–1977.
Nakura H, Itoh S, Kusano H, et al. Evidence for the lack of hepatic 
N-acetyltransferase in suncus (Suncus murinus). Biochem Pharmacol. 
1995;50:1165–1170.
NCBI. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/SNP. 2018.
Nebert DW, Shi Z, Galvez-Peralta M, Uno S, Dragin N. Oral benzo[a]
pyrene: understanding pharmacokinetics, detoxication, and conse-
quences—Cyp1 knockout mouse lines as a paradigm. Mol Pharmacol. 
2013;84:304–313.
Nebert DW, Dalton TP. The role of cytochrome P450 enzymes in endog-
enous signalling pathways and environmental carcinogenesis. Nat Rev 
Cancer. 2006;6:947–960.
Nebert DW, Dalton TP, Okey AB, Gonzalez FJ. Role of aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor-mediated induction of the CYP1 enzymes in environmental tox-
icity and cancer. J Biol Chem. 2004;279:23847–23850.
Negishi M. Phenobarbital meets phosphorylation of nuclear receptors. 
Drug Metab Dispos. 2017;45:532–539.
Negishi T, Kato Y, Ooneda O, et al. Effects of aryl hydrocarbon recep-
tor signaling on the modulation of TH1/TH2 balance. J Immunol. 
2005;175:7348–7356.
Nelson DR. Available at: http://drnelson.uthsc.edu/CytochromeP450.html. 
2009a.
Nelson DR. The cytochrome p450 homepage. Hum Genomics. 
2009b;4:59–65.
Neupert W, Brugger R, Euchenhofer C, Brune K, Geisslinger G. Effects 
of ibuprofen enantiomers and its coenzyme A thioesters on human pros-
taglandin endoperoxide synthases. Br J Pharmacol. 1997;122:487–492.
Neve EP, Kofeler H, Hendriks DF, et al. Expression and function of mARC: 
roles in lipogenesis and metabolic activation of ximelagatran. PLoS One. 
2015;10:e0138487.
Newcomb M, Chandrasena RE. Highly reactive electrophilic oxi-
dants in cytochrome P450 catalysis. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 
2005;338:394–403.
Newton DW, Kluza RB. pKa values of medicinal compounds in pharmacy 
practice. Drug Intell Clin Pharm. 1978;12:546–554.
Ng DS, Lai TY, Ng TK, Pang CP. Genetics of Bietti crystalline dystrophy. 
Asia Pac J Ophthalmol (Phila). 2016;5:245–252.
Nguyen T, Rushmore TH, Pickett CB. Transcriptional regulation of 
a rat liver glutathione S-transferase Ya subunit gene. Analysis of 
the antioxidant response element and its activation by the phor-
bol 
ester 
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate. 
J 
Biol 
Chem. 
1994;269:13656–13662.
Nigg HN, Knaak JB. Blood cholinesterases as human biomarkers of 
organophosphorus pesticide exposure. Rev Environ Contam Toxicol. 
2000;163:29–111.
Niinuma Y, Saito T, Takahashi M, et al. Functional characterization of 32 
CYP2C9 allelic variants. Pharmacogenomics J. 2014;14:107–114.
Nirogi R, Palacharla RC, Mohammed AR, et al. Evaluation of metabolism 
dependent inhibition of CYP2B6 mediated bupropion hydroxylation in 
human liver microsomes by monoamine oxidase inhibitors and predic-
tion of potential as perpetrators of drug interaction. Chem Biol Interact. 
2015;230:9–20.

390
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
Nishida CR, Lee M, de Montellano PR. Efficient hypoxic activation of 
the anticancer agent AQ4N by CYP2S1 and CYP2W1. Mol Pharmacol. 
2010;78:497–502.
Nishida CR, Ortiz de Montellano PR. Thermophilic cytochrome P450 
enzymes. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005;338:437–445.
Nishihara M, Sudo M, Kawaguchi N, et al. An unusual metabolic pathway of 
sipoglitazar, a novel antidiabetic agent: cytochrome P450-catalyzed oxida-
tion of sipoglitazar acyl glucuronide. Drug Metab Dispos. 2012;40:249–258.
Nishimura M, Naito S. Tissue-specific mRNA expression profiles of human 
ATP-binding cassette and solute carrier transporter superfamilies. Drug 
Metab Pharmacokinet. 2005;20:452–477.
Nishimura M, Naito S. Tissue-specific mRNA expression profiles of human 
phase I metabolizing enzymes except for cytochrome P450 and phase II 
metabolizing enzymes. Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2006;21:357–374.
Nishimura M, Naito S, Yokoi T. Tissue-specific mRNA expression profiles 
of human nuclear receptor subfamilies. Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 
2004;19:135–149.
Nishimura M, Yaguti H, Yoshitsugu H, Naito S, Satoh T. Tissue distribution 
of mRNA expression of human cytochrome P450 isoforms assessed by 
high-sensitivity real-time reverse transcription PCR. Yakugaku Zasshi. 
2003;123:369–375.
Nowell S, Falany CN. Pharmacogenetics of human cytosolic sulfotransfer-
ases. Oncogene. 2006;25:1673–1678.
O’Brien PJ. Peroxidases. Chem Biol Interact. 2000;129:113–139.
O’Byrne J, Hunt MC, Rai DK, Saeki M, Alexson SE. The human bile acid-
CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferase functions in the conjugation of fatty 
acids to glycine. J Biol Chem. 2003;278: 34237–34244.
Oakley A. Glutathione transferases: a structural perspective. Drug Metab 
Rev. 2011;43:138–151.
Obach RS. Potent inhibition of human liver aldehyde oxidase by raloxifene. 
Drug Metab Dispos. 2004;32:89–97.
Obach RS, Cox LM, Tremaine LM. Sertraline is metabolized by mul-
tiple cytochrome P450 enzymes, monoamine oxidases, and gluc-
uronyl transferases in human: an in vitro study. Drug Metab Dispos. 
2005;33:262–270.
Obach RS, Kalgutkar AS, Soglia JR, Zhao SX. Can in vitro metabolism-
dependent covalent binding data in liver microsomes distinguish 
hepatotoxic from nonhepatotoxic drugs? An analysis of 18 drugs with 
consideration of intrinsic clearance and daily dose. Chem Res Toxicol. 
2008;21:1814–1822.
Obach RS, Reed-Hagen AE, Krueger SS, et al. Metabolism and disposition 
of varenicline, a selective alpha4beta2 acetylcholine receptor partial ago-
nist, in vivo and in vitro. Drug Metab Dispos. 2006;34:121–130.
Obach RS, Ryder TF. Metabolism of ramelteon in human liver microsomes 
and correlation with the effect of fluvoxamine on ramelteon pharmacoki-
netics. Drug Metab Dispos. 2010;38:1381–1391.
Obach RS, Walker GS, Brodney MA. Biosynthesis of fluorinated analogs 
of drugs using human cytochrome P450 enzymes followed by deoxy-
fluorination and quantitative nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy 
to improve metabolic stability. Drug Metab Dispos. 2016;44:634–646.
Oda S, Fukami T, Yokoi T, Nakajima M. A comprehensive review of UDP-
glucuronosyltransferase and esterases for drug development. Drug Metab 
Pharmacokinet. 2015;30:30–51.
Ogilvie BW, Parkinson A. Drugs as victims and perpetrators and the 
pharmacokinetic concept of maximum exposure. In: Lee P, Aizawa W, 
Gan L, Prakash C, Zhong D, eds. Handbook of Metabolic Pathways of 
Xenobiotics. Chichester, England: Wiley; 2014.
Ogilvie BW, Usuki E, Yerino P, Parkinson A. In vitro approaches for ­studying 
the inhibition of drug-metabolizing enzymes and identifying the drug-
metabolizing enzymes responsible for the metabolism of drugs (reaction 
phenotyping) with emphasis on cytochrome P450. In: Rodrigues AD, ed. 
Drug–Drug Interactions. New York: Informa Healthcare USA; 2008.
Ogilvie BW, Yerino P, Kazmi F, et al. The proton pump inhibitor, omepra-
zole, but not lansoprazole or pantoprazole, is a metabolism-dependent 
inhibitor of CYP2C19: implications for coadministration with clopido-
grel. Drug Metab Dispos. 2011;39(11):2020–2033.
Ogilvie BW, Zhang D, Li W, et al. Glucuronidation converts gemfibrozil to 
a potent, metabolism-dependent inhibitor of CYP2C8: implications for 
drug–drug interactions. Drug Metab Dispos. 2006;34:191–197.
Ogura K, Nishiyama T, Takubo H, et al. Suicidal inactivation of human 
dihydropyrimidine 
dehydrogenase 
by 
(E)-5-(2-bromovinyl)uracil 
derived from the antiviral, sorivudine. Cancer Lett. 1998;122:107–113.
Oguro A, Imaoka S. Lysophosphatidic acids are new substrates for 
the phosphatase domain of soluble epoxide hydrolase. J Lipid Res. 
2012;53(3):505–512.
Oh ET, Park HJ. Implications of NQO1 in cancer therapy. BMB Rep. 
2015;48:609–617.
Ohmori S, Fujiki N, Nakasa H, et al. Steroid hydroxylation by human fetal 
CYP3A7 and human NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductase coexpressed 
in insect cells using baculovirus. Res Commun Mol Pathol Pharmacol. 
1998;100:15–28.
Ohtsuki S, Schaefer O, Kawakami H, et al. Simultaneous absolute pro-
tein quantification of transporters, cytochromes P450, and UDP-
glucuronosyltransferases as a novel approach for the characterization 
of individual human liver: comparison with mRNA levels and activities. 
Drug Metab Dispos. 2012;40:83–92.
Okamoto K, Matsumoto K, Hille R, et al. The crystal structure of xanthine 
oxidoreductase during catalysis: implications for reaction mechanism 
and enzyme inhibition. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004;101:7931–7936.
Omiecinski CJ, Coslo DM, Chen T, Laurenzana EM, Peffer RC. Multi-
species analyses of direct activators of the constitutive androstane recep-
tor. Toxicol Sci. 2011a;123:550–562.
Omiecinski CJ, Vanden Heuvel JP, Perdew GH, Peters JM. Xenobiotic 
metabolism, disposition, and regulation by receptors: from bio-
chemical phenomenon to predictors of major toxicities. Toxicol Sci. 
2011b;120(suppl 1):S49–S75.
Omura T. Recollection of the early years of the research on cytochrome 
P450. Proc Jpn Acad Ser B Phys Biol Sci. 2011;87:617–640.
Opitz CA, Litzenburger UM, Sahm F, et al. An endogenous tumour-
promoting ligand of the human aryl hydrocarbon receptor. Nature. 
2011;478:197–203.
Oppermann UC, Filling C, Jörnvall H. Forms and functions of human SDR 
enzymes. Chem Biol Interact. 2001;130-132:699–705.
Ortiz de Montellano PR. Mechanism and role of covalent heme binding 
in the CYP4 family of P450 enzymes and the mammalian peroxidases. 
Drug Metab Rev. 2008;40:405–426.
Osabe M, Negishi M. Active ERK1/2 protein interacts with the phosphory-
lated nuclear constitutive active/androstane receptor (CAR; NR1I3), 
repressing dephosphorylation and sequestering CAR in the cytoplasm. J 
Biol Chem. 2011;286:35763–35769.
Oshima M, Dinchuk JE, Kargman SL, et al. Suppression of intestinal pol-
yposis in Apc[Delta]716 knockout mice by inhibition of cyclooxygenase 
2 (COX-2). Cell. 1996;87:803–809.
Otto TC, Harsch CK, Yeung DT, et al. Dramatic differences in organophos-
phorus hydrolase activity between human and chimeric recombinant mam-
malian paraoxonase-1 enzymes. Biochemistry. 2009;48:10416–10422.
Pacher P, Nivorozhkin A, Szabo C. Therapeutic effects of xanthine oxidase 
inhibitors: renaissance half a century after the discovery of allopurinol. 
Pharmacol Rev. 2006;58:87–114.
Paine MF, Widmer WW, Hart HL, et al. A furanocoumarin-free grapefruit 
juice establishes furanocoumarins as the mediators of the grapefruit 
juice–felodipine interaction. Am J Clin Nutr. 2006;83:1097–1105.
Pal D, Mitra AK. MDR- and CYP3A4-mediated drug–herbal interactions. 
Life Sci. 2006;78:2131–2145.
Palm K, Stenberg P, Luthman K, Artursson P. Polar molecular surface prop-
erties predict the intestinal absorption of drugs in humans. Pharm Res. 
1997;14:568–571.
Pang XY, Cheng J, Kim JH, et al. Expression and regulation of human fetal-
specific CYP3A7 in mice. Endocrinology. 2012;153:1453–1463.
Pare G, Eriksson N, Lehr T, et al. Genetic determinants of dabigatran 
plasma levels and their relation to bleeding. Circulation. 2013;127: 
1404–1412.
Park BK, Boobis A, Clarke S, et al. Managing the challenge of chemi-
cally reactive metabolites in drug development. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 
2011;10:292–306.
Park JE, Kim KB, Bae SK, Moon BS, Liu KH, Shin JG. Contribution 
of cytochrome P450 3A4 and 3A5 to the metabolism of atorvastatin. 
Xenobiotica. 2008;38:1240–1251.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
391
Parker RS, Sontag TJ, Swanson JE, McCormick CC. Discovery, charac-
terization, and significance of the cytochrome P450 omega-hydroxylase 
pathway of vitamin E catabolism. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2004;1031:13–21.
Parkin DP, Vandenplas S, Botha FJ, et al. Trimodality of isoniazid elimina-
tion: phenotype and genotype in patients with tuberculosis. Am J Respir 
Crit Care Med. 1997;155:1717–1722.
Parkinson A, Hurwitz A. Omeprazole and the induction of human cyto-
chrome P-450: a response to concerns about potential adverse effects. 
Gastroenterology. 1991;100:1157–1164.
Parkinson A, Kazmi F, Buckley DB, et al. System-dependent outcomes 
during the evaluation of drug candidates as inhibitors of cytochrome 
P450 (CYP) and uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 
enzymes: human hepatocytes versus liver microsomes versus recombi-
nant enzymes. Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2010;25:16–27.
Parkinson A, Kazmi F, Buckley DB, et al. An evaluation of the dilution 
method for identifying metabolism-dependent inhibitors of cytochrome 
p450 enzymes. Drug Metab Dispos. 2011;39:1370–1387.
Parkinson A, Leonard N, Draper A, Ogilvie BW. On the mechanism of 
hepatocarcinogenesis of benzodiazepines: evidence that diazepam and 
oxazepam are CYP2B inducers in rats, and both CYP2B and CYP4A 
inducers in mice. Drug Metab Rev. 2006;38:235–259.
Parkinson A, Mudra DR, Johnson C, Dwyer A, Carroll KM. The effects of 
gender, age, ethnicity, and liver cirrhosis on cytochrome P450 enzyme 
activity in human liver microsomes and inducibility in cultured human 
hepatocytes. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2004;199:193–209.
Parkinson OT, Kelly EJ, Bezabih E, Whittington D, Rettie AE. Bioactivation 
of 4-Ipomeanol by a CYP4B enzyme in bovine lung and inhibition by 
HET0016. J Vet Pharmacol Ther. 2012;35:402–405.
Pascual G, Glass CK. Nuclear receptors versus inflammation: mechanisms 
of transrepression. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2006;17:321–327.
Patin E, Barreiro LB, Sabeti PC, et al. Deciphering the ancient and complex 
evolutionary history of human arylamine N-acetyltransferase genes. Am 
J Hum Genet. 2006;78:423–436.
Patki KC, von Moltke LL, Greenblatt DJ. In vitro metabolism of midazolam, 
triazolam, nifedipine, and testosterone by human liver microsomes and 
recombinant cytochromes P450: role of CYP3A4 and CYP3A5. Drug 
Metab Dispos. 2003;31:938–944.
Paulson GD, Caldwell J, Hutson DH, Menn JJ. Xenobiotic Conjugation 
Chemistry. Washington, DC: American Chemical Society; 1986.
Pearce RE, McIntyre CJ, Madan A, et al. Effects of freezing, thawing, 
and storing human liver microsomes on cytochrome P450 activity. Arch 
Biochem Biophys. 1996a;331:145–169.
Pearce RE, Rodrigues AD, Goldstein JA, Parkinson A. Identification of the 
human P450 enzymes involved in lansoprazole metabolism. J Pharmacol 
Exp Ther. 1996b;277:805–816.
Penning T. Molecular endocrinology of hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases. 
Endocr Rev. 1997;18:281–305.
Penning TM. Human aldo-keto reductases and the metabolic activation of 
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Chem Res Toxicol. 2014;27:1901–1917.
Penning TM. The aldo-keto reductases (AKRs): overview. Chem Biol 
Interact. 2015;234:236–246.
Penning TM, Drury JE. Human aldo-keto reductases: function, gene regu-
lation, and single nucleotide polymorphisms. Arch Biochem Biophys. 
2007;464:241–250.
Petriello MC, Hoffman JB, Sunkara M, et al. Dioxin-like pollutants increase 
hepatic flavin containing monooxygenase (FMO3) expression to pro-
mote synthesis of the pro-atherogenic nutrient biomarker trimethylamine 
N-oxide from dietary precursors. J Nutr Biochem. 2016;33:145–153.
PharmVar. Available at: https://www.pharmvar.org/. 2018.
Phillips IR, Shephard EA. Flavin-containing monooxygenases: mutations, 
disease and drug response. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2008;29:294–301.
Phillips IR, Shephard EA. Drug metabolism by flavin-containing mono-
oxygenases of human and mouse. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol. 
2017;13:167–181.
Phuc NM, Wu Z, O Y, et al. LKY-047: first selective inhibitor of cytochrome 
P450 2J2. Drug Metab Dispos. 2017;45:765–769.
Piacentini S, Polimanti R, Porreca F, et al. GSTT1 and GSTM1 gene 
polymorphisms in European and African populations. Mol Biol Rep. 
2011;38:1225–1230.
Picard N, Ratanasavanh D, Premaud A, Le Meur Y, Marquet P. Identification 
of the UDP-glucuronosyl transferase isoforms involved in mycophenolic 
acid phase II metabolism. Drug Metab Dispos. 2005;33:139–146.
Plaa GL. Chlorinated methanes and liver injury: highlights of the past 50 
years. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 2000;40:43–65.
Pohjanvirta R, Viluksela M, Tuomisto JT, et al. Physicochemical differences 
in the AH receptors of the most TCDD-susceptible and the most TCDD-
resistant rat strains. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1999;155:82–95.
Pohl HR, Scinicariello F. The impact of CYP2E1 genetic variabil-
ity on risk assessment of VOC mixtures. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 
2011;59:364–374.
Pohl LR, Kenna JG, Satoh H, Christ D, Martin JL. Neoantigens associated 
with halothane hepatitis. Drug Metab Rev. 1989;20:203–217.
Poland A, Glover E. Comparison of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, a 
potent inducer of aryl hydrocarbon hydroxylase, with 3-­methylcholanthrene. 
Mol Pharmacol. 1974;10:349–359.
Pondugula SR, Pavek P, Mani S. Pregnane X receptor and cancer: context-
specificity is key. Nucl Receptor Res. 2016;3. pii: 101198.
Pozo OJ, Ibanez M, Sancho JV, et al. Mass spectrometric evaluation of 
mephedrone in vivo human metabolism: identification of phase I and 
phase II metabolites, including a novel succinyl conjugate. Drug Metab 
Dispos. 2015;43:248–257.
Price DA, Blagg J, Jones L, Greene N, Wager T. Physicochemical drug 
properties associated with in vivo toxicological outcomes: a review. 
Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol. 2009;5:921–931.
Probst MR, Beer M, Beer D, et al. Human liver arylacetamide deacetylase. 
Molecular cloning of a novel esterase involved in the metabolic activa-
tion of arylamine carcinogens with high sequence similarity to hormone-
sensitive lipase. J Biol Chem. 1994;269:21650–21656.
Prochaska HJ, Talalay P. Regulatory mechanisms of monofunctional and 
bifunctional anticarcinogenic enzyme inducers in murine liver. Cancer 
Res. 1988;48:4776–4782.
Proctor NJ, Tucker GT, Rostami-Hodjegan A. Predicting drug clearance 
from recombinantly expressed CYPs: intersystem extrapolation factors. 
Xenobiotica. 2004;34:151–178.
Prueksaritanont T, Li C, Tang C, et al. Rifampin induces the in vitro oxida-
tive metabolism, but not the in vivo clearance of diclofenac in rhesus 
monkeys. Drug Metab Dispos. 2006;34(11):1806–1810.
Prueksaritanont T, Richards KM, Qiu Y, et al. Comparative effects of 
fibrates on drug metabolizing enzymes in human hepatocytes. Pharm 
Res. 2005;22:71–78.
Pryde DC, Dalvie D, Hu Q, et al. Aldehyde oxidase: an enzyme of emerging 
importance in drug discovery. J Med Chem. 2010;53:8441–8460.
Pyper SR, Viswakarma N, Yu S, Reddy JK. PPARalpha: energy combustion, 
hypolipidemia, inflammation and cancer. Nucl Recept Signal. 2010;8:e002.
Qiao E, Ji M, Wu J, et al. Expression of the PXR gene in various types of 
cancer and drug resistance. Oncol Lett. 2013;5:1093–1100.
Qiu XY, Jiao Z, Zhang M, et al. Association of MDR1, CYP3A4*18B, and 
CYP3A5*3 polymorphisms with cyclosporine pharmacokinetics in Chinese 
renal transplant recipients. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2008;64:1069–1084.
Quinn LP, Perren MJ, Brackenborough KT, et al. A beam-walking apparatus 
to assess behavioural impairments in MPTP-treated mice: pharmacologi-
cal validation with R-(–)-deprenyl. J Neurosci Methods. 2007;164:43–49.
Quintana FJ, Murugaiyan G, Farez MF, et al. An endogenous aryl hydro-
carbon receptor ligand acts on dendritic cells and T cells to suppress 
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2010;107:20768–20773.
Quintana FJ, Sherr DH. Aryl hydrocarbon receptor control of adaptive 
immunity. Pharmacol Rev. 2013;65:1148–1161.
Racha JK, Rettie AE, Kunze KL. Mechanism-based inactivation of human 
cytochrome P450 1A2 by furafylline: detection of a 1:1 adduct to protein 
and evidence for the formation of a novel imidazomethide intermediate. 
Biochemistry. 1998;37:7407–7419.
Rachmilewitz D, Karmeli F, Schwartz LW, Simon PL. Effect of amino-
phenols (5-ASA and 4-ASA) on colonic interleukin-1 generation. Gut. 
1992;33:929–932.
Radominska-Pandya A, Czernik PJ, Little JM, Battaglia E, Mackenzie PI. 
Structural and functional studies of UDP-glucuronosyltransferases. Drug 
Metab Rev. 1999;31:817–899.

392
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
Raeissi SD, Hidalgo IJ, Segura-Aguilar J, Artursson P. Interplay between 
CYP3A-mediated metabolism and polarized efflux of terfenadine and its 
metabolites in intestinal epithelial Caco-2 (TC7) cell monolayers. Pharm 
Res. 1999;16:625–632.
Rajagopalan KV. Xanthine oxidase and aldehyde oxidase. In Jakoby WB, 
ed. Enzymatic Basis of Detoxication. New York: Academic Press; 1980.
Ramchandani VA. Genetic aspects of alcohol metabolism. In: Watson RR, 
Preedy VR, eds. Nutrition and Alcohol: Linking Nutrient Interactions 
and Dietary Intake. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2004.
Ramirez J, Kim TW, Liu W, et al. A pharmacogenetic study of aldehyde 
oxidase I in patients treated with XK469. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 
2014;24:129–132.
Ramkissoon A, Wells PG. Human prostaglandin H synthase (hPHS)-1 and 
hPHS-2 in amphetamine analog bioactivation, DNA oxidation, and cyto-
toxicity. Toxicol Sci. 2011;120:154–162.
Ramsay EE, Dilda PJ. Glutathione S-conjugates as prodrugs to target drug-
resistant tumors. Front Pharmacol. 2014;5: 181.
Rannug A, Rannug U, Rosenkranz HS, et al. Certain photooxidized 
derivatives of tryptophan bind with very high affinity to the Ah recep-
tor and are likely to be endogenous signal substances. J Biol Chem. 
1987;262:15422–15427.
Rao SI, Duffel MW. Inhibition of aryl sulfotransferase by carboxylic acids. 
Drug Metab Dispos. 1991;19:543–545.
Rasheva VI, Domingos PM. Cellular responses to endoplasmic reticulum 
stress and apoptosis. Apoptosis. 2009;14:996–1007.
Rasmussen BB, Brix TH, Kyvik KO, Brosen K. The interindividual dif-
ferences in the 3-demthylation of caffeine alias CYP1A2 is deter-
mined by both genetic and environmental factors. Pharmacogenetics. 
2002;12:473–478.
Rasmussen HB, Madsen MB, Hansen PR; Indices Consortium. 
Nomenclature for alleles of the human carboxylesterase 1 gene. 
Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2017;27:78–80.
Ratnayake JH, Hanna PE, Anders MW, Duggan DE. Sulfoxide reduction. In 
vitro reduction of sulindac by rat hepatic cytosolic enzymes. Drug Metab 
Dispos. 1981;9:85–87.
Reed DJ. Cellular defense mechanisms against reactive metabolites. In: 
Anders MW, ed. Bioactivation of Foreign Compounds. Orlando, FL: 
Academic Press; 1985.
Reed JR, Cawley GF, Backes WL. Inhibition of cytochrome P450 
1A2-mediated metabolism and production of reactive oxygen species by 
heme oxygenase-1 in rat liver microsomes. Drug Metab Lett. 2011;5:6–16.
Reese MJ, Wurm RM, Muir KT, et al. An in vitro mechanistic study to elu-
cidate the desipramine/bupropion clinical drug–drug interaction. Drug 
Metab Dispos. 2008;36:1198–1201.
Regan SL, Maggs JL, Hammond TG, et al. Acyl glucuronides: the good, the 
bad and the ugly. Biopharm Drug Dispos. 2010;31:367–395.
Reiss J, Hahnewald R. Molybdenum cofactor deficiency: mutations in 
GPHN, MOCS1, and MOCS2. Hum Mutat. 2010;32:10–18.
Reiss J, Johnson JL. Mutations in the molybdenum cofactor biosynthetic 
genes MOCS1, MOCS2, and GEPH. Human Muta. 2003;21:569–576.
Relling MV, Giacomini KM. Pharmacogenetics. In: Goodman LS, Gilman 
A, Brunton LL, Lazo JS, Parker KL, eds. Goodman & Gilman’s The 
Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2006.
Rencurel F, Foretz M, Kaufmann MR, et al. Stimulation of AMP-activated 
protein kinase is essential for the induction of drug metabolizing 
enzymes by phenobarbital in human and mouse liver. Mol Pharmacol. 
2006;70:1925–1934.
Rendic S, Guengerich FP. Survey of human oxidoreductases and cyto-
chrome P450 enzymes involved in the metabolism of xenobiotic and 
natural chemicals. Chem Res Toxicol. 2015;28:38–42.
Rettie AE, Fisher MB. Transformation enzymes: oxidative; non-P450. 
In: Woolf TF, ed. Handbook of Drug Metabolism. New York: Marcel 
Dekker; 1999.
Rettie AE, Jones JP. Clinical and toxicological relevance of CYP2C9: drug–
drug interactions and pharmacogenetics. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 
2005;45:477–494.
Richardson TA, Klaassen CD. Role of UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 
(UGT) 2B2 in metabolism of triiodothyronine: effect of microsomal 
enzyme inducers in Sprague Dawley and UGT2B2-deficient Fischer 344 
rats. Toxicol Sci. 2010;116:413–421.
Riches Z, Stanley EL, Bloomer JC, Coughtrie MW. Quantitative evaluation 
of the expression and activity of five major sulfotransferases (SULTs) 
in human tissues: the SULT “pie.” Drug Metab Dispos. 2009;37: 
2255–2261.
Riedmaier S, Klein K, Hofmann U, et al. UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 
(UGT) polymorphisms affect atorvastatin lactonization in vitro and in 
vivo. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2010;87:65–73.
Riedmaier S, Klein K, Winter S, et al. Paraoxonase (PON1 and PON3) 
polymorphisms: impact on liver expression and atorvastatin-lactone 
hydrolysis. Front Pharmacol. 2011;2:41.
Rittle J, Green MT. Cytochrome P450 compound I: capture, characteriza-
tion, and C–H bond activation kinetics. Science. 2010;330:933–937.
Robert J, Le Morvan V, Smith D, Pourquier P, Bonnet J. Predicting drug 
response and toxicity based on gene polymorphisms. Crit Rev Oncol 
Hematol. 2005;54:171–196.
Roberts AB, Wallace BD, Venkatesh MK, Mani S, Redinbo MR. Molecular 
insights into microbial beta-glucuronidase inhibition to abrogate CPT-11 
toxicity. Mol Pharmacol. 2013;84:208–217.
Roberts KM, Jones JP. Anilinic N-oxides support cytochrome P450-
mediated N-dealkylation through hydrogen-atom transfer. Chemistry. 
2010;16:8096–8107.
Rodrigues AD, Yang Z, Chen C, et al. Is celecoxib an inducer of cytochrome 
P450 3A4 in subjects carrying the CYP2C9*3 allele? Clin Pharmacol 
Ther. 2006;80:298–301; author reply 01-02.
Rodrigues AD. Comparison of levels of aldehyde oxidase with cyto-
chrome P450 activities in human liver in vitro. Biochem Pharmacol. 
1994;48:197–200.
Rogers SM, Back DJ, Stevenson PJ, Grimmer SF, Orme ML. Paracetamol 
interaction with oral contraceptive steroids: increased plasma concentra-
tions of ethinyloestradiol. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 1987;23:721–725.
Rosemond MJ, Walsh J. Human carbonyl reduction pathways and a strategy 
for their study in vitro. Drug Metab Rev. 2004;36:335–361.
Rosen LS, Laxa B, Boulos L, et al. Phase 1 study of TLK286 (Telcyta) 
administered weekly in advanced malignancies. Clin Cancer Res. 
2004;10:3689–3698.
Ross D. Functions and distribution of NQO1 in human bone marrow: 
potential clues to benzene toxicity. Chem Biol Interact. 2005;153-154: 
137–146.
Ross MK, Crow JA. Human carboxylesterases and their role in xenobiotic 
and endobiotic metabolism. J Biochem Mol Toxicol. 2007;21:187–196.
Rostami-Hodjegan A, Kroemer HK, Tucker GT. In-vivo indices of enzyme 
activity: the effect of renal impairment on the assessment of CYP2D6 
activity. Pharmacogenetics. 1999;9:277–286.
Rostami-Hodjegan A, Lennard MS, Woods HF, Tucker GT. Meta-analysis 
of studies of the CYP2D6 polymorphism in relation to lung cancer and 
Parkinson’s disease. Pharmacogenetics. 1998;8:227–238.
Roth A, Looser R, Kaufmann M, et al. Regulatory cross-talk between drug 
metabolism and lipid homeostasis: constitutive androstane receptor 
and pregnane X receptor increase Insig-1 expression. Mol Pharmacol. 
2008;73:1282–1289.
Roth AD, Lee MY. Idiosyncratic drug-induced liver injury (IDILI): potential 
mechanisms and predictive assays. Biomed Res Int. 2017;2017:9176937.
Roth RA, Maiuri AR, Ganey PE. Idiosyncratic drug-induced liver injury: 
is drug-cytokine interaction the linchpin? J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 
2017;360:461–470.
Rothhammer V, Borucki DM, Garcia Sanchez MI, et al. Dynamic regu-
lation of serum aryl hydrocarbon receptor agonists in MS. Neurol 
Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm. 2017;4:e359.
Rouse M, Singh NP, Nagarkatti PS, Nagarkatti M. Indoles mitigate the 
development of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis by induc-
tion of reciprocal differentiation of regulatory T cells and Th17 cells. Br 
J Pharmacol. 2013;169:1305–1321.
Rowland A, Knights KM, Mackenzie PI, Miners JO. Characterization of the 
binding of drugs to human intestinal fatty acid binding protein (IFABP): 
potential role of IFABP as an alternative to albumin for in vitro–in 
vivo extrapolation of drug kinetic parameters. Drug Metab Dispos. 
2009;37:1395–1403.
Rowland A, Miners JO, Mackenzie PI. The UDP-glucuronosyltransferases: 
their role in drug metabolism and detoxification. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 
2013;45:1121–1132.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
393
Ruell JA, Tsinman KL, Avdeef A. PAMPA—a drug absorption in vitro 
model. 5. Unstirred water layer in iso-pH mapping assays and pKa(flux)–
optimized design (pOD-PAMPA). Eur J Pharm Sci. 2003;20:393–402.
Rumack BH. Acetaminophen misconceptions. Hepatology. 2004;40:10–15.
Runge-Morris M, Kocarek TA. Regulation of sulfotransferases by xenobi-
otic receptors. Curr Drug Metab. 2005;6: 299–307.
Runge-Morris M, Kocarek TA, Falany CN. Regulation of the cytosolic sul-
fotransferases by nuclear receptors. Drug Metab Rev. 2013;45:15–33.
Rushmore TH, Morton MR, Pickett CB. The antioxidant responsive ele-
ment. Activation by oxidative stress and identification of the DNA 
consensus sequence required for functional activity. J Biol Chem. 
1991;266:11632–11639.
Rusyn I, Asakura S, Pachkowski B, et al. Expression of base excision DNA 
repair genes is a sensitive biomarker for in vivo detection of chemical-
induced chronic oxidative stress: identification of the molecular source 
of radicals responsible for DNA damage by peroxisome proliferators. 
Cancer Res. 2004;64:1050–1057.
Ryan DE, Dixon R, Evans RH, et al. Rat hepatic cytochrome P-450 iso-
zyme specificity for the metabolism of the steroid sulfate, 5 alpha-
androstane-3 alpha, 17 beta-diol-3,17-disulfate. Arch Biochem Biophys. 
1984;233:636–642.
Saarikoski ST, Rivera SP, Hankinson O, Husgafvel-Pursiainen K. CYP2S1: 
a short review. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2005;207:62–69.
Saito K, Moore R, Negishi M. p38 Mitogen-activated protein kinase regu-
lates nuclear receptor CAR that activates the CYP2B6 gene. Drug Metab 
Dispos. 2013;41:1170–1173.
Sakamoto A, Matsumaru T, Ishiguro N, et al. Reliability and robustness of 
simultaneous absolute quantification of drug transporters, cytochrome P450 
enzymes, and UDP-glucuronosyltransferases in human liver tissue by mul-
tiplexed MRM/selected reaction monitoring mode tandem mass spectrom-
etry with nano-liquid chromatography. J Pharm Sci. 2011;100:4037–4043.
Salman ED, Kadlubar SA, Falany CN. Expression and localization of 
cytosolic sulfotransferase (SULT) 1A1 and SULT1A3 in normal human 
brain. Drug Metab Dispos. 2009;37:706–709.
Sampayo R, Lavandera JV, Batlle A, Buzaleh AM. Sevoflurane: its action 
on heme metabolism and Phase I drug metabolizing system. Cell Mol 
Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 2009;55:140–146.
Sanchez-Covarrubias L, Slosky LM, Thompson BJ, Davis TP, Ronaldson 
PT. Transporters at CNS barrier sites: obstacles or opportunities for drug 
delivery? Curr Pharm Des. 2014;20:1422–1449.
Sanderson LM, Degenhardt T, Koppen A, et al. Peroxisome proliferator-acti-
vated receptor beta/delta (PPARbeta/delta) but not PPARalpha serves as a 
plasma free fatty acid sensor in liver. Mol Cell Biol. 2009;29:6257–6267.
Sandy J, Mushtaq A, Holton SJ, et al. Investigation of the catalytic triad 
of arylamine N-acetyltransferases: essential residues required for acetyl 
transfer to arylamines. Biochem J. 2005;390:115–123.
Sano M, Ernesto C, Thomas RG, et al. A controlled trial of selegiline, alpha-
tocopherol, or both as treatment for Alzheimer’s disease. N Engl J Med. 
1997;336:1216–1222.
Saruwatari J, Ishitsu T, Nakagawa K. Update on the genetic polymor-
phisms of drug-metabolizing enzymes in antiepileptic drug therapy. 
Pharmaceuticals. 2010;3:2709–2732.
Sato Y, Miyashita A, Iwatsubo T, Usui T. Simultaneous absolute protein 
quantification of carboxylesterases 1 and 2 in human liver tissue fractions 
using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Drug Metab 
Dispos. 2012;40:1389–1396.
Sato Y, Nagata M, Tetsuka K, et al. Optimized methods for targeted peptide-
based quantification of human uridine 5´-diphosphate-glucuronosyltrans-
ferases in biological specimens using liquid chromatography-tandem 
mass spectrometry. Drug Metab Dispos. 2014;42:885–889.
Satoh T, Hosokawa M. The mammalian carboxylesterases: from molecules 
to functions. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxico. 1998;38:257–288.
Satoh T, Hosokawa M. Structure, function and regulation of carboxylester-
ases. Chem Biol Interact. 2006;162:195–211.
Sau A, Pellizzari Tregno F, Valentino F, Federici G, Caccuri AM. Glutathione 
transferases and development of new principles to overcome drug resis-
tance. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2010;500:116–122.
Saulter JY, Kurian JR, Trepanier LA, et al. Unusual dehydroxylation of 
antimicrobial amidoxime prodrugs by cytochrome b5 and NADH cyto-
chrome b5 reductase. Drug Metab Dispos. 2005;33:1886–1893.
Saunders MP, Patterson AV, Harris AL, Stratford IJ. NADPH:cytochrome 
c (P450) reductase activates tirapazamine (SR4233) to restore hypoxic 
and oxic cytotoxicity in an aerobic resistant derivative of the A549 lung 
cancer cell line. Br J Cancer. 2000;82:651–656.
Savage RE, Tyler AN, Miao XS, Chan TC. Identification of a novel glu-
cosylsulfate conjugate as a metabolite of 3,4-dihydro-2,2-dimethyl-
2H-naphtho[1,2-b]pyran-5,6-dione (ARQ 501, beta-lapachone) in 
mammals. Drug Metab Dispos. 2008;36:753–758.
Scheible H, Kraetzer F, Marx A, Johne A, Wimmer E. Metabolism of the 
MEK1/2 inhibitor pimasertib involves a novel conjugation with phos-
phoethanolamine in patients with solid tumors. Drug Metab Dispos. 
2017;45:174–182.
Schmitt C, Kuhn B, Zhang X, Kivitz AJ, Grange S. Disease-drug–drug 
interaction involving tocilizumab and simvastatin in patients with rheu-
matoid arthritis. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2011;89:735–740.
Schnekenburger M, Karius T, Diederich M. Regulation of epigenetic traits 
of the glutathione S-transferase P1 gene: from detoxification toward can-
cer prevention and diagnosis. Front Pharmacol. 2014;5:170.
Schofield PC, Robertson IG, Paxton JW. Inter-species variation in the 
metabolism and inhibition of N-[(2′-dimethylamino)ethyl]acridine-
4-carboxamide (DACA) by aldehyde oxidase. Biochem Pharmacol. 
2000;59:161–165.
Schrag ML, Cui D, Rushmore TH, et al. Sulfotransferase 1E1 is a low KM 
isoform mediating the 3-O-sulfation of ethinyl estradiol. Drug Metab 
Dispos. 2004;32:1299–1303.
Schrag ML, Wienkers LC. Covalent alteration of the CYP3A4 active site: 
evidence for multiple substrate binding domains. Arch Biochem Biophys. 
2001;391:49–55.
Schroth W, Goetz MP, Hamann U, et al. Association between CYP2D6 
polymorphisms and outcomes among women with early stage breast 
cancer treated with tamoxifen. JAMA. 2009;302:1429–1436.
Schugar RC, Brown JM. Emerging roles of flavin monooxygenase 3 
in cholesterol metabolism and atherosclerosis. Curr Opin Lipidol. 
2015;26:426–431.
Schuster I. Cytochromes P450 are essential players in the vitamin D signal-
ing system. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011;1814:186–199.
Scott F, Gonzalez Malagon SG, O’Brien BA, et al. Identification of fla-
vin-containing monooxygenase 5 (FMO5) as a regulator of glucose 
homeostasis and a potential sensor of gut bacteria. Drug Metab Dispos. 
2017;45(9):982–989.
Scott SA, Sangkuhl K, Gardner EE, et al. Clinical Pharmacogenetics 
Implementation Consortium guidelines for cytochrome P450-2C19 
(CYP2C19) genotype and clopidogrel therapy. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 
2011;90:328–332.
SDR. Available at: http://www.sdr-enzymes.org. 2018.
Seitz J, Oneta C. Gastrointestinal alchohol dehydrogenase. Nutr Rev. 
1998;56:52–60.
Senggunprai L, Yoshinari K, Yamazoe Y. Selective role of sulfotransfer-
ase 2A1 (SULT2A1) in the N-sulfoconjugation of quinolone drugs in 
humans. Drug Metab Dispos. 2009;37:1711–1717.
Seo YS, Keum B, Park S, et al. Gilbert’s syndrome phenotypically 
expressed as Crigler–Najjar syndrome type II. Scand J Gastroenterol. 
2007;42:540–541.
Seree E, Villard PH, Pascussi JM, et al. Evidence for a new human 
CYP1A1 regulation pathway involving PPAR-alpha and 2 PPRE sites. 
Gastroenterology. 2004;127:1436–1445.
Seto Y, Guengerich FP. Partitioning between N-dealkylation and 
N-oxygenation in the oxidation of N,N-dialkylarylamines catalyzed by 
cytochrome P450 2B1. J Biol Chem. 1993;268:9986–9997.
Shah YM, Morimura K, Yang Q, et al. Peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptor alpha regulates a microRNA-mediated signaling cascade 
responsible for hepatocellular proliferation. Mol Cell Biol. 2007;27: 
4238–4247.
Shakhnovich V, Vyhlidal C, Friesen C, et al. Decreased pregnane X receptor 
expression in children with active Crohn’s disease. Drug Metab Dispos. 
2016;44:1066–1069.
Shayiq RM, Roberts DW, Rothstein K, et al. Repeat exposure to incremen-
tal doses of acetaminophen provides protection against acetaminophen-
induced lethality in mice: an explanation for high acetaminophen dosage 
in humans without hepatic injury. Hepatology. 1999;29:451–463.

394
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
Sheng X, Zhang H, Hollenberg PF, Newcomb M. Kinetic isotope effects 
in hydroxylation reactions effected by cytochrome P450 compounds I 
implicate multiple electrophilic oxidants for P450-catalyzed oxidations. 
Biochemistry. 2009;48:1620–1627.
Shephard EA, Chandan P, Stevanovic-Walker M, Edwards M, Phillips IR. 
Alternative promoters and repetitive DNA elements define the species-
dependent tissue-specific expression of the FMO1 genes of human and 
mouse. Biochem J. 2007;406:491–499.
Shi D, Yang J, Yang D, et al. Anti-influenza prodrug oseltamivir is acti-
vated by carboxylesterase human carboxylesterase 1, and the activation 
is inhibited by antiplatelet agent clopidogrel. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 
2006;319:1477–1484.
Shield AJ, Murray TP, Cappello JY, Coggan M, Board PG. Polymorphisms 
in the human glutathione transferase Kappa (GSTK1) promoter alter 
gene expression. Genomics. 2010;95:299–305.
Shih DM, Wang Z, Lee R, et al. Flavin containing monooxygenase 3 exerts 
broad effects on glucose and lipid metabolism and atherosclerosis. J 
Lipid Res. 2015;56:22–37.
Shih J, Chen K, Tidd M. Monamine oxidase: from genes to behavior. 
Annual Rev Neurosci. 1999;22:197–217.
Shih P-S, Huang J-D. Pharmacokinetics of midazolam and 1′-hydroxymi-
dazolam in Chinese with different CYP3A5 genotypes. Drug Metab 
Dispos. 2002;30:1491–1496.
Shimada T. Xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes involved in activation and 
detoxification of carcinogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Drug 
Metab Pharmacokinet. 2006;21:257–276.
Shimizu M, Denton T, Kozono M, et al. Developmental variations in meta-
bolic capacity of flavin-containing mono-oxygenase 3 in childhood. Br J 
Clin Pharmacol. 2011;71:585–591.
Shindo S, Numazawa S, Yoshida T. A physiological role of AMP-activated 
protein kinase in phenobarbital-mediated constitutive androstane recep-
tor activation and CYP2B induction. Biochem J. 2007;401:735–741.
Shipkova M, Armstrong VW, Oellerich M, Wieland E. Acyl glucuronide 
drug metabolites: toxicological and analytical implications. Ther Drug 
Monit. 2003;25:1–16.
Shirasaka Y, Suzuki K, Nakanishi T, Tamai I. Intestinal absorption of HMG-
CoA reductase inhibitor pravastatin mediated by organic anion transport-
ing polypeptide. Pharm Res. 2010;27:2141–2149.
Shirasaka Y, Suzuki K, Shichiri M, Nakanishi T, Tamai I. Intestinal absorp-
tion of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor pitavastatin mediated by organic 
anion transporting polypeptide and P-glycoprotein/multidrug resistance 1. 
Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2011;26:171–179.
Shirley MA, Guan X, Kaiser DG, Halstead GW, Baillie TA. Taurine con-
jugation of ibuprofen in humans and in rat liver in vitro. Relationship to 
metabolic chiral inversion. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1994;269:1166–1175.
Shitara Y, Maeda K, Ikejiri K, et al. Clinical significance of organic anion 
transporting polypeptides (OATPs) in drug disposition: their roles in 
hepatic clearance and intestinal absorption. Biopharm Drug Dispos. 
2013;34:45–78.
Shrivas K, Mindaye ST, Getie-Kebtie M, Alterman MA. Mass spectrome-
try-based proteomic analysis of human liver cytochrome(s) P450. Toxicol 
Appl Pharmacol. 2013;267:125–136.
Sibbing D, Koch W, Gebhard D, et al. Cytochrome 2C19*17 allelic vari-
ant, platelet aggregation, bleeding events, and stent thrombosis in 
clopidogrel-treated patients with coronary stent placement. Circulation. 
2010;121:512–518.
Siddens LK, Krueger SK, Henderson MC, Williams DE. Mammalian fla-
vin-containing monooxygenase (FMO) as a source of hydrogen perox-
ide. Biochem Pharmacol. 2014;89:141–147.
Siegel D, Yan C, Ross D. NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) 
in the sensitivity and resistance to antitumor quinones. Biochemical 
Pharmacology. 2012;83(8):1033–1040.
Sifontis NM, Benedetti E, Vasquez EM. Clinically significant drug interac-
tion between basiliximab and tacrolimus in renal transplant recipients. 
Transplant Proc. 2002;34:1730–1732.
Sim E, Walters K, Boukouvala S. Arylamine N-acetyltransferases: from 
structure to function. Drug Metab Rev. 2008;40:479–510.
Singh G, Driever PH, Sander JW. Cancer risk in people with epilepsy: the 
role of antiepileptic drugs. Brain. 2005;128:7–17.
Singh J, Petter RC, Baillie TA, Whitty A. The resurgence of covalent drugs. 
Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2011;10:307–317.
Sirot EJ, van der Velden JW, Rentsch K, Eap CB, Baumann P. Therapeutic 
drug monitoring and pharmacogenetic tests as tools in pharmacovigi-
lance. Drug Saf. 2006;29:735–768.
Sit D, Perel JM, Luther JF, et al. Disposition of chiral and racemic fluox-
etine and norfluoxetine across childbearing. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 
2010;30:381–386.
Siu EC, Tyndale RF. Selegiline is a mechanism-based inactivator of CYP2A6 
inhibiting nicotine metabolism in humans and mice. J Pharmacol Exp 
Ther. 2008;324:992–999.
Skarydova L, Wsol V. Human microsomal carbonyl reducing enzymes in 
the metabolism of xenobiotics: well-known and promising members of 
the SDR superfamily. Drug Metab Rev. 2012;44(2):173–191.
Sládek NE. Human aldehyde dehydrogenases: potential pathological, 
pharmacological, and toxicological impact. J Biochem Mol Toxicol. 
2003;17:7–23.
Slitt AL, Cherrington NJ, Maher JM, Klaassen CD. Induction of mul-
tidrug resistance protein 3 in rat liver is associated with altered vecto-
rial excretion of acetaminophen metabolites. Drug Metab Dispos. 
2003;31:1176–1186.
Smirnov A, Comte C, Mager-Heckel AM, et al. Mitochondrial enzyme rho-
danese is essential for 5 S ribosomal RNA import into human mitochon-
dria. J Biol Chem. 2010;285:30792–30803.
Smith DA, Dalvie D. Why do metabolites circulate? Xenobiotica. 
2012;42:107–126.
Smith KJ, Murray IA, Tanos R, et al. Identification of a high-affinity 
ligand that exhibits complete aryl hydrocarbon receptor antagonism. J 
Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2011;338:318–327.
Smith PA, Sorich MJ, Low LS, McKinnon RA, Miners JO. Towards inte-
grated ADME prediction: past, present and future directions for model-
ling metabolism by UDP-glucuronosyltransferases. J Mol Graph Model. 
2004;22:507–517.
Soldin OP, Chung SH, Mattison DR. Sex differences in drug disposition. J 
Biomed Biotechnol. 2011;2011:187103.
Song Y, Shan Z, Luo C, et al. Glutathione S-transferase T1 (GSTT1) null 
polymorphism, smoking, and their interaction in coronary heart disease: 
a comprehensive meta-analysis. Heart Lung Circ. 2017;26:362–370.
Sontag TJ, Parker RS. Influence of major structural features of tocopherols 
and tocotrienols on their omega-oxidation by tocopherol-omega-hydrox-
ylase. J Lipid Res. 2007;48:1090–1098.
Sorenson RC, Primo-Parmo SL, Kuo C, et al. Reconsideration of the cata-
lytic center and mechanism of mammalian paraoxonase/arylesterase. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995;92:7187–7191.
Sorich MJ, Miners JO, McKinnon RA, Smith PA. Multiple pharmacophores 
for the investigation of human UDP-glucuronosyltransferase isoform 
substrate selectivity. Mol Pharmacol. 2004;65:301–308.
Sorich MJ, Smith PA, Miners JO, Mackenzie PI, McKinnon RA. Recent 
advances in the in silico modelling of UDP glucuronosyltransferase sub-
strates. Curr Drug Metab. 2008;9:60–69.
Soucek P, Skjelbred CF, Svendsen M, et al. Single-track sequencing for 
genotyping of multiple SNPs in the N-acetyltransferase 1 (NAT1) gene. 
BMC Biotechnol. 2004;4:28.
Souto JC, Blanco-Vaca F, Soria JM, et al. A genomewide exploration sug-
gests a new candidate gene at chromosome 11q23 as the major determi-
nant of plasma homocysteine levels: results from the GAIT project. Am J 
Hum Genet. 2005;76:925–933.
Spiecker M, Liao JK. Cytochrome P450 epoxygenase CYP2J2 and the risk 
of coronary artery disease. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2006;16:204–208.
Spina E, Avenoso A, Campo GM, Caputi AP, Perucca E. Phenobarbital 
induces the 2-hydroxylation of desipramine. Ther Drug Monit. 
1996;18:60–64.
Sridar C, Kenaan C, Hollenberg PF. Inhibition of bupropion metabolism 
by selegiline: mechanism-based inactivation of human CYP2B6 and 
characterization of glutathione and peptide adducts. Drug Metab Dispos. 
2012;40:2256–2266.
Staatz CE, Goodman LK, Tett SE. Effect of CYP3A and ABCB1 single nucle-
otide polymorphisms on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of 
calcineurin inhibitors: Part I. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2010;49:141–175.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
395
Stanley LA, Horsburgh BC, Ross J, Scheer N, Wolf CR. PXR and CAR: 
nuclear receptors which play a pivotal role in drug disposition and chemi-
cal toxicity. Drug Metab Rev. 2006;38:515–597.
Stark K, Wongsud B, Burman R, Oliw EH. Oxygenation of polyunsatu-
rated long chain fatty acids by recombinant CYP4F8 and CYP4F12 and 
catalytic importance of Tyr-125 and Gly-328 of CYP4F8. Arch Biochem 
Biophys. 2005;441:174–181.
Stieger B, Fattinger K, Madon J, Kullak-Ublick GA, Meier PJ. Drug- and 
estrogen-induced cholestasis through inhibition of the hepatocellular bile 
salt export pump (Bsep) of rat liver. Gastroenterology. 2000;118:422–430.
Stierlin H, Faigle JW. Biotransformation of diclofenac sodium (Voltaren) 
in animals and in man. II. Quantitative determination of the unchanged 
drug and principal phenolic metabolites, in urine and bile. Xenobiotica. 
1979;9:611–621.
Stierlin H, Faigle JW, Sallmann A, et al. Biotransformation of diclofenac 
sodium (Voltaren) in animals and in man. I. Isolation and identification 
of principal metabolites. Xenobiotica. 1979;9:601–610.
Stone AN, Mackenzie PI, Galetin A, Houston JB, Miners JO. Isoform selec-
tivity and kinetics of morphine 3- and 6-glucuronidation by human UDP-
glucuronosyltransferases: evidence for atypical glucuronidation kinetics 
by UGT2B7. Drug Metab Dispos. 2003;31:1086–1089.
Strange RC, Jones PW, Fryer AA. Glutathione S-transferase: genetics and 
role in toxicology. Toxicology Lett. 2000;112-113:357–363.
Strehlau J, Pape L, Offner G, Nashan B, Ehrich JH. Interleukin-2 receptor 
antibody-induced alterations of ciclosporin dose requirements in paediat-
ric transplant recipients. Lancet. 2000;356:1327–1328.
Strelevitz TJ, Foti RS, Fisher MB. In vivo use of the P450 inactivator 
1-aminobenzotriazole in the rat: varied dosing route to elucidate gut and 
liver contributions to first-pass and systemic clearance. J Pharm Sci. 
2006;95:1334–1341.
Stresser DM, Perloff ES, Mason AK, et al. Selective time- and NADPH-
dependent inhibition of human CYP2E1 by clomethiazole. Drug Metab 
Dispos. 2016;44:1424–1430.
Strickland KC, Krupenko NI, Dubard ME, et al. Enzymatic properties of 
ALDH1L2, a mitochondrial 10-formyltetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase. 
Chem Biol Interact. 2011;191:129–136.
Strolin-Benedetti M. FAD-dependent enzymes involved in the metabolic 
oxidation of xenobiotics. Ann Pharm Fr. 2011;69: 45–52.
Strolin Benedetti M, Allievi C, Cocchiara G, Pevarello P, Dostert P. 
Involvement of FAD-dependent polyamine oxidase in the metabolism of 
milacemide in the rat. Xenobiotica. 1992;22:191–197.
Strolin Benedetti M, Tipton KF, Whomsley R. Amine oxidases and mono-
oxygenases in the in vivo metabolism of xenobiotic amines in humans: 
has the involvement of amine oxidases been neglected? Fundam Clin 
Pharmacol. 2007;21:467–480.
Subramanyam B, Woolf T, Castagnoli N Jr. Studies on the in vitro con-
version of haloperidol to a potentially neurotoxic pyridinium metabolite. 
Chem Res Toxicol. 1991;4:123–128.
Sugiura M, Iwasaki K, Kato R. Reduction of tertiary amine N-oxides by 
liver microsomal cytochrome P-450. Mol Pharmacol. 1976;12:322–334.
Sugiura M, Kato R. Reduction of tertiary amine N-oxides by rat liver mito-
chondria. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1977;200:25–32.
Sun H, Ehlhardt WJ, Kulanthaivel P, et al. Dehydrogenation of indoline by 
cytochrome P450 enzymes: a novel “aromatase” process. J Pharmacol 
Exp Ther. 2007;322:843–851.
Sun H, Yost GS. Metabolic activation of a novel 3-substituted indole-
containing TNF-alpha inhibitor: dehydrogenation and inactivation of 
CYP3A4. Chem Res Toxicol. 2008;21:374–385.
Sun H, Moore C, Dansette PM, et al. Dehydrogenation of the indoline-con-
taining drug 4-chloro-N-(2-methyl-1-indolinyl)-3-sulfamoylbenzamide 
(indapamide) by CYP3A4: correlation with in silico predictions. Drug 
Metab Dispos. 2009;37:672–684.
Sun H, Liu L, Pang KS. Increased estrogen sulfation of estradiol 17beta-
d-glucuronide in metastatic tumor rat livers. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 
2006;319:818–831.
Tabas I, Ron D. Integrating the mechanisms of apoptosis induced by endo-
plasmic reticulum stress. Nat Cell Biol. 2011;13:184–190.
Tafazoli S, O’Brien PJ. Accelerated cytotoxic mechanism screening of 
hydralazine using an in vitro hepatocyte inflammatory cell peroxidase 
model. Chem Res Toxicol. 2008;21:904–910.
Tafazoli S, O’Brien PJ. Peroxidases: a role in the metabolism and side 
effects of drugs. Drug Discov Today. 2005;10:617–625.
Takahashi RH, Grigliatti TA, Reid RE, Riggs KW. The effect of allelic 
variation in aldo-keto reductase 1C2 on the in vitro metabolism of dihy-
drotestosterone. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2009;329:1032–1039.
Takahashi RH, Halladay JS, Siu M, et al. Novel mechanism of decyanation of 
GDC-0425 by cytochrome P450. Drug Metab Dispos. 2017;45:430–440.
Takeda S, Ishii Y, Iwanaga M, et al. Modulation of UDP-
glucuronosyltransferase function by cytochrome P450: evidence for 
the alteration of UGT2B7-catalyzed glucuronidation of morphine by 
CYP3A4. Mol Pharmacol. 2005;67:665–672.
Takeno S, Sakai T. Involvement of the intestinal microflora in nitrazepam-
induced teratogenicity in rats and its relationship to nitroreduction. 
Teratology. 1991;44:209–214.
Tamm R, Magi R, Tremmel R, et al. Polymorphic variation in TPMT 
is the principal determinant of TPMT phenotype: a meta-analysis 
of three genome-wide association studies. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 
2017;101:684–695.
Tan BS, Tiong KH, Muruhadas A, et al. CYP2S1 and CYP2W1 medi-
ate 2-(3,4-dimethoxyphenyl)-5-fluorobenzothiazole (GW-610, NSC 
721648) sensitivity in breast and colorectal cancer cells. Mol Cancer 
Ther. 2011;10:1982–1992.
Tan IL, Lycklama a Nijeholt GJ, Polman CH, Ader HJ, Barkhof F. Linomide 
in the treatment of multiple sclerosis: MRI results from prematurely ter-
minated phase-III trials. Mult Scler. 2000;6:99–104.
Tang BK, Carro-Ciampi G. A method for the study of N-glucosidation in 
vitro–amobarbital-N-glucoside formation in incubations with human 
liver. Biochem Pharmacol. 1980;29:2085–2088.
Tang C, Lin JH, Lu AY. Metabolism-based drug–drug interactions: what 
determines individual variability in cytochrome P450 induction? Drug 
Metab Dispos. 2005;33:603–613.
Tang C, Ma B. Glycosidation of an endothelin ETA receptor antagonist and 
diclofenac in human liver microsomes: aglycone-dependent UDP-sugar 
selectivity. Drug Metab Dispos. 2005;33:1796–1802.
Tang M, Mukundan M, Yang J, et al. Antiplatelet agents aspirin and clopi-
dogrel are hydrolyzed by distinct carboxylesterases, and clopidogrel is 
transesterificated in the presence of ethyl alcohol. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 
2006;319:1467–1476.
Tang W, Lu AY. Metabolic bioactivation and drug-related adverse effects: 
current status and future directions from a pharmaceutical research per-
spective. Drug Metab Rev. 2010;42:225–249.
Tay-Sontheimer J, Shireman LM, Beyer RP, et al. Detection of an endog-
enous urinary biomarker associated with CYP2D6 activity using global 
metabolomics. Pharmacogenomics. 2014;15:1947–1962.
Temellini A, Franchi M, Giuliani L, Pacifici GM. Human liver sulphotrans-
ferase and UDP-glucuronosyltransferase: structure-activity relationship 
for phenolic substrates. Xenobiotica. 1991;21:171–177.
Terao M, Kurosaki M, Demontis S, Zanotta S, Garattini E. Isolation and 
characterization of the human aldehyde oxidase gene: conservation of 
intron/exon boundaries with the xanthine oxidoreductase gene indicates 
a common origin. Biochem J. 1998;332:383–393.
Testa B, Krämer SD. The Biochemistry of Drug Metabolism: Principles, 
Redox Reactions, Hydrolyses. Weinheim, Germany: Wiley-VCH; 2008.
Testa B, Krämer SD. The Biochemistry of Drug Metabolism: Conjugations, 
Consequences of Metabolism, Influencing Factors. Zurich, Switzerland: 
Wiley-VCH; 2010.
Teva. Available at: http://www.tevapharm.com/news/teva_and_active_ 
biotech_announce_discontinuation_of_higher_doses_of_laquinimod_
in_two_multiple_sclerosis_trials_01_16.aspx. 2016.
Tew KD, Townsend DM. Regulatory functions of glutathione S-transferase 
P1-1 unrelated to detoxification. Drug Metab Rev. 2011;43:179–193.
Thomas JA. “Black Box” warning labels and drug withdrawals. Toxicol 
Appl Pharmacol. 2002;183:81–82.
Thomas M, Burk O, Klumpp B, et al. Direct transcriptional regulation 
of human hepatic cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) by peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARalpha). Mol Pharmacol. 
2013;83:709–718.
Thomas M, Winter S, Klumpp B, et al. Peroxisome proliferator-activated 
receptor alpha, PPARalpha, directly regulates transcription of cyto-
chrome P450 CYP2C8. Front Pharmacol. 2015;6:261.

396
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
Thompson MA, Moon E, Kim UJ, et al. Human indolethylamine 
N-methyltransferase: cDNA cloning and expression, gene cloning, and 
chromosomal localization. Genomics. 1999;61:285–297.
Thomson RE, Bigley AL, Foster JR, et al. Tissue-specific expression and 
subcellular distribution of murine glutathione S-transferase class kappa. 
J Histochem Cytochem. 2004;52: 653–662.
Tijet N, Boutros PC, Moffat ID, et al. Aryl hydrocarbon receptor regulates 
distinct dioxin-dependent and dioxin-independent gene batteries. Mol 
Pharmacol. 2006;69:140–153.
Tinguely JN, Wermuth B. Identification of the reactive cysteine residue 
(Cys227) in human carbonyl reductase. Eur J Biochem. 1999;260:9–14.
Tirona RG, Kim RB. Nuclear receptors and drug disposition gene regula-
tion. J Pharm Sci. 2005;94:1169–1186.
Tiwawech D, Srivatanakul P, Karalak A, Ishida T. Cytochrome P450 
2A6 polymorphism in nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Cancer Lett. 
2006;241:135–141.
Toide K, Terauchi Y, Fujii T, Yamazaki H, Kamataki T. Uridine diphosphate 
sugar-selective conjugation of an aldose reductase inhibitor (AS-3201) 
by UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 2B subfamily in human liver micro-
somes. Biochem Pharmacol. 2004;67:1269–1278.
Tolson AH, Wang H. Regulation of drug-metabolizing enzymes by xenobi-
otic receptors: PXR and CAR. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2010;62:1238–1249.
Tontonoz P, Hu E, Spiegelman BM. Stimulation of adipogenesis in fibro-
blasts by PPAR gamma 2, a lipid-activated transcription factor. Cell. 
1994;79:1147–1156.
Tornio A, Filppula AM, Kailari O, et al. Glucuronidation converts clopido-
grel to a strong time-dependent inhibitor of CYP2C8: a phase II metab-
olite as a perpetrator of drug–drug interactions. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 
2014;96:498–507.
Tornio A, Niemi M, Neuvonen M, et al. The effect of gemfibrozil on repa-
glinide pharmacokinetics persists for at least 12 h after the dose: evidence 
for mechanism-based inhibition of CYP2C8 in vivo. Clin Pharmacol 
Ther. 2008;84:403–411.
Toselli F, Fredenwall M, Svensson P, et al. Oxetane substrates of human 
microsomal epoxide hydrolas. Drug Metab Dispos. 2017;45:966–973.
Townsend DM, Tew KD. The role of glutathione-S-transferase in anti-can-
cer drug resistance. Oncogene. 2003;22:7369–7375.
Tracy TS, Chaudhry AS, Prasad B, et al. Interindividual variability in 
cytochrome P450-mediated drug metabolism. Drug Metab Dispos. 
2016;44:343–351.
Travica S, Pors K, Loadman PM, et al. Colon cancer-specific cytochrome 
P450 2W1 converts duocarmycin analogues into potent tumor cytotoxins. 
Clin Cancer Res. 2013;19:2952–2961.
Tremaine LM, Stroh JG, Ronfeld RA. Characterization of a carbamic acid 
ester glucuronide of the secondary amine sertraline. Drug Metab Dispos. 
1989;17:58–63.
Trepanier LA, Ray K, Winand NJ, Spielberg SP, Cribb AE. Cytosolic aryl-
amine N-acetyltransferase (NAT) deficiency in the dog and other canids 
due to an absence of NAT genes. Biochem Pharmacol. 1997;54:73–80.
Tseng E, Walsky RL, Luzietti RA Jr, et al. Relative contributions of cyto-
chrome CYP3A4 versus CYP3A5 for CYP3A-cleared drugs assessed 
in vitro using a CYP3A4-selective inactivator (CYP3cide). Drug Metab 
Dispos. 2014;42:1163–1173.
Tsuchiya Y, Nakajima M, Takagi S, Taniya T, Yokoi T. MicroRNA regu-
lates the expression of human cytochrome P450 1B1. Cancer Res. 
2006;66:9090–9098.
Tucker GT. Clinical implications of genetic polymorphism in drug metabo-
lism. J Pharm Pharmocol. 1994;46:417–424.
Tucker GT, Houston JB, Huang SM. Optimizing drug development: strate-
gies to assess drug metabolism/transporter interaction potential—toward 
a consensus. Pharm Res. 2001;18:1071–1080.
Tukey 
RH, 
Strassburg 
C. 
Human 
UDP-glucuronosyltransferases: 
metabolism, expression, and disease. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 
2000;40:581–616.
Turner ST, Schwartz GL, Chapman AB, Hall WD, Boerwinkle E. 
Antihypertensive pharmacogenetics: getting the right drug into the right 
patient. J Hypertens. 2001;19:1–11.
Uchaipichat V, Mackenzie PI, Elliot DJ, Miners JO. Selectivity of substrate 
(trifluoperazine) and inhibitor (amitriptyline, androsterone, canrenoic 
acid, hecogenin, phenylbutazone, quinidine, quinine, and sulfinpyr-
azone) “probes” for human UDP-glucuronosyl transferases. Drug Metab 
Dispos. 2006;34:449–456.
Uesugi M, Hosokawa M, Shinke H, et al. Influence of cytochrome P450 
(CYP) 3A4*1G polymorphism on the pharmacokinetics of tacrolimus, 
probability of acute cellular rejection, and mRNA expression level of 
CYP3A5 rather than CYP3A4 in living-donor liver transplant patients. 
Biol Pharm Bull. 2013;36:1814–1821.
Uetrecht J. Prediction of a new drug’s potential to cause idiosyncratic reac-
tions. Curr Opin Drug Discov Devel. 2001;4:55–59.
Uetrecht J, Naisbitt DJ. Idiosyncratic adverse drug reactions: current con-
cepts. Pharmacol Rev. 2013;65:779–808.
Ujiie S, Sasaki T, Mizugaki M, Ishikawa M, Hiratsuka M. Functional char-
acterization of 23 allelic variants of thiopurine S-methyltransferase gene 
(TPMT*2–*24). Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2008;18:887–893.
University of Washington DIDB. UW Metabolism and Transport Drug 
Interaction Database. Available at: https://www.druginteractioninfo.org/. 
2018.
Unwalla RJ, Cross JB, Salaniwal S, et al. Using a homology model of 
cytochrome P450 2D6 to predict substrate site of metabolism. J Comput 
Aided Mol Des. 2010;24:237–256.
Van Booven D, Marsh S, McLeod H, et al. Cytochrome P450 2C9-CYP2C9. 
Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2010;20:277–281.
van Kuilenburg A, Meinsma R, van Gennip A. Pyrimidine degradation 
defects and severe 5-fluorouracil toxicity. Nucleosides Nucleotides 
Nucleic Acids. 2004;23:1371–1375.
Van LM, Heydari A, Yang J, et al. The impact of experimental design 
on assessing mechanism-based inactivation of CYP2D6 by MDMA 
(Ecstasy). J Psychopharmacol. 2006;20:834–841.
van Raaij JA, Kaptein E, Visser TJ, van den Berg KJ. Increased glucuroni-
dation of thyroid hormone in hexachlorobenzene-treated rats. Biochem 
Pharmacol. 1993;45:627–631.
Van Vleet TR, Liu H, Lee A, Blomme EAG. Acyl glucuronide metabolites: 
implications for drug safety assessment. Toxicol Lett. 2017;272:1–7.
Varaprath S, Salyers KL, Plotzke KP, Nanavati S. Identification of metabo-
lites of octamethylcyclotetrasiloxane (D(4)) in rat urine. Drug Metab 
Dispos. 1999;27:1267–1273.
Varma MV, Rotter CJ, Chupka J, et al. pH-sensitive interaction of HMG-
CoA reductase inhibitors (statins) with organic anion transporting poly-
peptide 2B1. Mol Pharm. 2011;8:1303–1313.
Vasiliou V, Pappa A, Estey T. Role of human aldehyde dehydroge-
nases in endobiotic and xenobiotic metabolism. Drug Metab Rev. 
2004;36:279–299.
Vatsis KP, Weber WW, Bell DA, et al. Nomenclature for N-acetyltransferases. 
Pharmacogenetics. 1995;5:1–17.
Veeramah KR, Thomas MG, Weale ME, et al. The potentially deleteri-
ous functional variant flavin-containing monooxygenase 2*1 is at high 
frequency throughout sub-Saharan Africa. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 
2008;18:877–886.
Velasquez MT, Ramezani A, Manal A, Raj DS. Trimethylamine N-Oxide: 
the good, the bad and the unknown. Toxins (Basel). 2016;8(11):pii: E326.
Venkatakrishnan K, Obach RS. In vitro–in vivo extrapolation of CYP2D6 
inactivation by paroxetine: prediction of nonstationary pharma-
cokinetics and drug interaction magnitude. Drug Metab Dispos. 
2005;33:845–852.
Vijay N, Morris ME. Role of monocarboxylate transporters in drug delivery 
to the brain. Curr Pharm Des. 2014;20:1487–1498.
Visser TJ, Kaptein E, van Toor H, et al. Glucuronidation of thyroid hormone 
in rat liver: effects of in vivo treatment with microsomal enzyme induc-
ers and in vitro assay conditions. Endocrinology. 1993;133:2177–2186.
Vlieghe P, Lisowski V, Martinez J, Khrestchatisky M. Synthetic therapeutic 
peptides: science and market. Drug Discov Today. 2010;15:40–56.
Wahl B, Reichmann D, Niks D, et al. Biochemical and spectroscopic charac-
terization of the human mitochondrial amidoxime reducing components 
hmARC-1 and hmARC-2 suggests the existence of a new molybdenum 
enzyme family in eukaryotes. J Biol Chem. 2010;285:37847–37859.
Walgren JL, Mitchell MD, Thompson DC. Role of metabolism in 
drug-induced idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2005;35: 
325–361.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
397
Wallace BD, Wang H, Lane KT, et al. Alleviating cancer drug toxicity by 
inhibiting a bacterial enzyme. Science. 2010;330:831–835.
Walsh JS, Miwa GT. Bioactivation of drugs: risk and drug design. Annu Rev 
Pharmacol Toxicol. 2011;51:145–167.
Walsky RL, Astuccio AV, Obach RS. Evaluation of 227 drugs for in vitro inhi-
bition of cytochrome P450 2B6. J Clin Pharmacol. 2006;46:1426–1438.
Walsky RL, Obach RS. A comparison of 2-phenyl-2-(1-piperidinyl)propane 
(ppp), 1,1′,1″-phosphinothioylidynetrisaziridine (thioTEPA), clopido-
grel, and ticlopidine as selective inactivators of human cytochrome P450 
2B6. Drug Metab Dispos. 2007;35:2053–2059.
Walton MI, Wolf CR, Workman P. The role of cytochrome P450 and 
cytochrome P450 reductase in the reductive bioactivation of the novel 
benzotriazine di-N-oxide hypoxic cytotoxin 3-amino-1,2,4-­benzotriazine-
1,4-dioxide (SR 4233, WIN 59075) by mouse liver. Biochem Pharmacol. 
1992;44:251–259.
Wang C, Bammler TK, Guo Y, Kelly EJ, Eaton DL. Mu-Class GSTs are 
responsible for aflatoxin B1-8,9-epoxide-conjugating activity in the 
nonhuman primate Macaca fascicularis liver. Toxicol Sci. 2000;56: 
26–36.
Wang D, Guo Y, Wrighton SA, Cooke GE, Sadee W. Intronic polymorphism 
in CYP3A4 affects hepatic expression and response to statin drugs. 
Pharmacogenomics J. 2011a;11: 274–286.
Wang D, Para MF, Koletar SL, Sadee W. Human N-acetyltransferase 1 
*10 and *11 alleles increase protein expression through distinct mecha-
nisms and associate with sulfamethoxazole-induced hypersensitivity. 
Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2011b;21:652–664.
Wang H, Tompkins LM. CYP2B6: new insights into a historically over-
looked cytochrome P450 isozyme. Curr Drug Metab. 2008;9:598–610.
Wang J, Davis M, Li F, et al. A novel approach for predicting acyl glucuro-
nide reactivity via Schiff base formation: development of rapidly formed 
peptide adducts for LC/MS/MS measurements. Chem Res Toxicol. 
2004;17:1206–1216.
Wang L, Nguyen TV, McLaughlin RW, et al. Human thiopurine 
S-methyltransferase pharmacogenetics: variant allozyme misfolding and 
aggresome formation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005;102:9394–9399.
Wang L, Pelleymounter L, Weinshilboum R, et al. Very important phar-
macogene summary: thiopurine S-methyltransferase. Pharmacogenet 
Genomics. 2010a;20:401–405.
Wang LQ, James MO. Inhibition of sulfotransferases by xenobiotics. Curr 
Drug Metab. 2006;7:83–104.
Wang MZ, Saulter JY, Usuki E, et al. CYP4F enzymes are the major 
enzymes in human liver microsomes that catalyze the O-demethylation 
of the antiparasitic prodrug DB289 [2,5-bis(4-amidinophenyl)furan-bis-
O-methylamidoxime]. Drug Metab Dispos. 2006;34:1985–1994.
Wang P, Pradhan K, Zhong XB, Ma X. Isoniazid metabolism and hepato-
toxicity. Acta Pharm Sin B. 2016a;6:384–392.
Wang Q, Kurita H, Carreira V, et al. Ah receptor activation by dioxin dis-
rupts activin, BMP, and WNT signals during the early differentiation 
of mouse embryonic stem cells and inhibits cardiomyocyte functions. 
Toxicol Sci. 2016b;149:346–357.
Wang TJ, Zhang F, Richards JB, et al. Common genetic determinants of 
vitamin D insufficiency: a genome-wide association study. Lancet. 
2010b;376:180–188.
Wang YH, Trucksis M, McElwee JJ, et al. UGT2B17 genetic polymorphisms 
dramatically affect the pharmacokinetics of MK-7246 in healthy subjects 
in a first-in-human study. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2012;92:96–102.
Wang YX, Ulu A, Zhang LN, Hammock B. Soluble epoxide hydrolase in 
atherosclerosis. Curr Atheroscler Rep. 2010c;12:174–183.
Wardman P, Dennis MF, Everett SA, et al. Radicals from one-electron 
reduction of nitro compounds, aromatic N-oxides and quinones: the 
kinetic basis for hypoxia-selective, bioreductive drugs. Biochem Soc 
Symp. 1995;61:171–194.
Watanabe A, Fukami T, Takahashi S, et al. Arylacetamide deacetylase is a 
determinant enzyme for the difference in hydrolase activities of phenac-
etin and acetaminophen. Drug Metab Dispos. 2010;38:1532–1537.
Watkins PB. Noninvasive tests of CYP3A enzymes. Pharmacogenetics. 
1994;4:171.
Watson JD, Prokopec SD, Smith AB, et al. TCDD dysregulation of 13 AHR-
target genes in rat liver. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2014;274:445–454.
Waxman DJ, Holloway MG. Sex differences in the expression of hepatic 
drug metabolizing enzymes. Mol Pharmacol. 2009;76:215–228.
Wei S, Liu Z, Zhao H, et al. A single nucleotide polymorphism in the alco-
hol dehydrogenase 7 gene (alanine to glycine substitution at amino acid 
92) is associated with the risk of squamous cell carcinoma of the head 
and neck. Cancer. 2010;116:2984–2992.
Weil A, Martin P, Smith R, et al. Pharmacokinetics of vandetanib in subjects 
with renal or hepatic impairment. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2010;49:607–618.
Weinshilboum R. Methyltransferase pharmacogenetics. Pharmacol Ther. 
1989;43:77–90.
Weinshilboum R. Sulfotransferase pharmacogenetics. In: Kalow W, ed. 
Pharmacogenetics of Drug Metabolism. New York: Pergamon; 1992a.
Weinshilboum RM. Pharmacogenomics: catechol O-methyltransferase to 
thiopurine S-methyltransferase. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2006;26:539–561.
Weinshilboum R, Otterness D, Szumlanski C. Methylation pharmaco-
genetics: catechol O-methyltransferase, thiopurine methyltransferase, 
and histamine N-methyltransferase. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 
1999;39:19–52.
Weinshilboum RM. Methylation pharmacogenetics: thiopurine methyl-
transferase as a model system. Xenobiotica. 1992b;22:1055–1071.
Weinshilboum RM, Otterness DM, Aksoy IA, et al. Sulfation and sulfo-
transferases 1: sulfotransferase molecular biology: cDNAs and genes. 
FASEB J. 1997;11:3–14.
Wen B, Coe KJ, Rademacher P, et al. Comparison of in vitro bioactiva-
tion of flutamide and its cyano analogue: evidence for reductive activa-
tion by human NADPH:cytochrome P450 reductase. Chem Res Toxicol. 
2008;21:2393–2406.
Wenning LA, Hanley WD, Brainard DM, et al. Effect of rifampin, a potent 
inducer of drug-metabolizing enzymes, on the pharmacokinetics of ralte-
gravir. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2009;53:2852–2856.
Westlind-Johnsson A, Hermann R, Huennemeyer A, et al. Identification and 
characterization of CYP3A4*20, a novel rare CYP3A4 allele without 
functional activity. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2006;79:339–349.
Westlind-Johnsson A, Malmebo S, Johansson A, et al. Comparative analy-
sis of CYP3A expression in human liver suggests only a minor role for 
CYP3A5 in drug metabolism. Drug Metab Dispos. 2003;31:755–761.
Westlind A, Malmebo S, Johansson I, et al. Cloning and tissue distribution 
of a novel human cytochrome p450 of the CYP3A subfamily, CYP3A43. 
Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001;281:1349–1355.
Whalen R, Boyer TD. Human glutathione S-transferases. Semin Liver Dis. 
1998;18:345–358.
Wheeler MA, Rothhammer V, Quintana FJ. Control of immune-medi-
ated pathology via the aryl hydrocarbon receptor. J Biol Chem. 2017; 
292:12383–12389.
Whitcomb D, Block G. Association of acetominophen hepatoxicity with 
fasting and ethanol use. JAMA. 1994;272:1845–1850.
Whitfield JB, Pang D, Bucholz KK, et al. Monoamine oxidase: associations 
with alcohol dependence, smoking and other measures of psychopathol-
ogy. Psychol Med. 2000;30:443–454.
Wielinga PR, Reid G, Challa EE, et al. Thiopurine metabolism and identi-
fication of the thiopurine metabolites transported by MRP4 and MRP5 
overexpressed in human embryonic kidney cells. Mol Pharmacol. 
2002;62:1321–1331.
Wilkinson GR, Guengerich FP, Branch RA. Genetic polymorphism of 
S-mephenytoin hydroxylation. Pharmacol Ther. 1989;43:53–76.
Williams AC, Cartwright LS, Ramsden DB. Parkinson’s disease: the 
first common neurological disease due to auto-intoxication? QJM. 
2005;98:215–226.
Williams GM, Iatropoulos MJ. Alteration of liver cell function and prolif-
eration: differentiation between adaptation and toxicity. Toxicol Pathol. 
2002;30:41–53.
Williams JA, Cook J, Hurst SI. A significant drug-metabolizing role for 
CYP3A5? Drug Metab Dispos. 2003b;31:1526–1530.
Williams JA, Hurst SI, Bauman J, et al. Reaction phenotyping in drug discov-
ery: moving forward with confidence? Curr Drug Metab. 2003a;4:527–534.
Williams JA, Hyland R, Jones BC, et al. Drug–drug interactions for UDP-
glucuronosyltransferase substrates: a pharmacokinetic explanation for 
typically observed low exposure (AUCI/AUC) ratios. Drug Metabolism 
Dispos. 2004;32:1201–1208.

398
Disposition of toxicants
unit II
Williams JA, Ring BJ, Cantrell VE, et al. Comparative metabolic capa-
bilities of CYP3A4, CYP3A5, and CYP3A7. Drug Metab Dispos. 
2002;30:883–891.
Williams RT. Detoxication Mechanisms: The Metabolism and Detoxication 
of Drugs, Toxic Substances, and Other Organic Compounds. New York: 
Wiley; 1959.
Williams-Gray C, Goris A, Foltynie T, et al. No evidence for associa-
tion between an MAOA functional polymorphism and susceptibility to 
Parkinson’s disease. J Neurol. 2009;256:132–133.
Wincent E, Bengtsson J, Mohammadi Bardbori A, et al. Inhibition of cyto-
chrome P4501-dependent clearance of the endogenous agonist FICZ as 
a mechanism for activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A. 2012;109:4479–4484.
Winter HR, Unadkat JD. Identification of cytochrome P450 and arylamine 
N-acetyltransferase isoforms involved in sulfadiazine metabolism. Drug 
Metab Dispos. 2005;33:969–976.
Wood AW, Swinney DC, Thomas PE, et al. Mechanism of androstenedione 
formation from testosterone and epitestosterone catalyzed by purified 
cytochrome P-450b. J Biol Chem. 1988;263:17322–17332.
Wood TC, Johnson KL, Naylor S, Weinshilboum RM. Cefazolin admin-
istration and 2-methyl-1,3,4-thiadiazole-5-thiol in human tissue: pos-
sible relationship to hypoprothrombinemia. Drug Metab Dispos. 
2002;30:1123–1128.
Wood TC, Salavagionne OE, Mukherjee B, et al. Human arsenic methyl-
transferase (AS3MT) pharmacogenetics: gene resequencing and func-
tional genomics studies. J Biol Chem. 2006;281:7364–7373.
Wu D, Li Y, Song G, et al. Crystal structure of human esterase D: a potential 
genetic marker of retinoblastoma. FASEB J. 2009;23:1441–1446.
Wu KC, Cui JY, Klaassen CD. Effect of graded Nrf2 activation on phase-I 
and -II drug metabolizing enzymes and transporters in mouse liver. PLoS 
One. 2012;7:e39006.
Wu WK, Sung JJ, Lee CW, Yu J, Cho CH. Cyclooxygenase-2 in tumorigen-
esis of gastrointestinal cancers: an update on the molecular mechanisms. 
Cancer Lett. 2010;295:7–16.
Wu Z-L, Sohl CD, Shimada T, Guengerich FP. Recombinant enzymes over-
expressed in bacteria show broad catalytic specificity of human cyto-
chrome P450 2W1 and limited activity of human cytochrome P450 2S1. 
Mol Pharmacol. 2006;69:2007–2014.
Xiao Y, Guengerich FP. Metabolomic analysis and identification of a role 
for the orphan human cytochrome P450 2W1 in selective oxidation of 
lysophospholipids. J Lipid Res. 2012;53:1610–1617.
Xie W, Stribley JA, Chatonnet A, et al. Postnatal developmental delay and 
supersensitivity to organophosphate in gene-targeted mice lacking ace-
tylcholinesterase. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2000;293:896–902.
Xu M, Ju W, Hao H, Wang G, Li P. Cytochrome P450 2J2: distribution, 
function, regulation, genetic polymorphisms and clinical significance. 
Drug Metab Rev. 2013;45:311–352.
Xu X, Zhang XA, Wang DW. The roles of CYP450 epoxygenases and 
metabolites, epoxyeicosatrienoic acids, in cardiovascular and malignant 
diseases. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2011;63:597–609.
Xu Y, Hashizume T, Shuhart MC, et al. Intestinal and hepatic CYP3A4 cata-
lyze hydroxylation of 1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3): implications for 
drug-induced osteomalacia. Mol Pharmacol. 2006;69:56–65.
Yamada R, Ymamoto K. Recent findings on genes associated with inflam-
matory disease. Mutat Res. 2005;573:136–151.
Yamano S, Tatsuno J, Gonzalez FJ. The CYP2A3 gene product catalyzes 
coumarin 7-hydroxylation in human liver microsomes. Biochemistry. 
1990;29:1322–1329.
Yamazaki H, Johnson WW, Ueng YF, Shimada T, Guengerich FP. Lack of 
electron transfer from cytochrome b5 in stimulation of catalytic activities 
of cytochrome P450 3A4. Characterization of a reconstituted cytochrome 
P450 3A4/NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductase system and studies with 
apo-cytochrome b5. J Biol Chem. 1996;271:27438–27444.
Yamazaki H, Shimada T, Martin MV, Guengerich FP. Stimulation of cyto-
chrome P450 reactions by apo-cytochrome b5: evidence against transfer 
of heme from cytochrome P450 3A4 to apo-cytochrome b5 or heme oxy-
genase. J Biol Chem. 2001;276:30885–30891.
Yan B, Yang D, Brady M, Parkinson A. Rat kidney carboxylesterase. 
Cloning, sequencing, cellular localization, and relationship to rat liver 
hydrolase. J Biol Chem. 1994;269:29688–29696.
Yang H, Garzel B, Heyward S, et al. Metformin represses drug-induced 
expression of CYP2B6 by modulating the constitutive androstane recep-
tor signaling. Mol Pharmacol. 2014;85:249–260.
Yang N, Sun R, Liao X, Aa J, Wang G. UDP-glucuronosyltransferases 
(UGTs) and their related metabolic cross-talk with internal homeostasis: 
a systematic review of UGT isoforms for precision medicine. Pharmacol 
Res. 2017;121:169–183.
Yang Q, Nagano T, Shah Y, et al. The PPAR alpha-humanized mouse: a 
model to investigate species differences in liver toxicity mediated by 
PPAR alpha. Toxicol Sci. 2008;101: 132–139.
Yang X, Gandhi YA, Duignan DB, Morris ME. Prediction of biliary excre-
tion in rats and humans using molecular weight and quantitative struc-
ture–pharmacokinetic relationships. AAPS J. 2009;11:511–525.
Yang Y-H, Aloysius H, Inoyama D, Chen Y, Ju L-Q. Enzyme-mediated 
hydrolytic activation of prodrugs. Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica B. 
2011;1:143–159.
Yao KS, Hageboutros A, Ford P, O’Dwyer PJ. Involvement of activator pro-
tein-1 and nuclear factor-kappa B transcription factors in the control of 
the DT-diaphorase expression induced by mitomycin C treatment. Mol 
Pharmacol. 1997;51:422–430.
Yeager RL, Reisman SA, Aleksunes LM, Klaassen CD. Introducing the 
“TCDD-inducible AhR-Nrf2 gene battery.” Toxicol Sci. 2009;111:238–246.
Yeung CK, Fujioka Y, Hachad H, Levy RH, Isoherranen N. Are circulat-
ing metabolites important in drug–drug interactions? Quantitative anal-
ysis of risk prediction and inhibitory potency. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 
2011;89:105–113.
Yin H, Bennett G, Jones JP. Mechanistic studies of uridine diphosphate 
glucuronosyltransferase. Chem Biol Interact. 1994;90:47–58.
Yoneyama M, Nishiyama N, Shuto M, et al. In vivo depletion of endog-
enous glutathione facilitates trimethyltin-induced neuronal damage in 
the dentate gyrus of mice by enhancing oxidative stress. Neurochem Int. 
2008;52:761–769.
Yoshida A, Rzhetsky A, Hsu L, Chang C. Human aldehyde dehydrogenase 
gene family. Eur J Biochem. 1998;251:549–557.
Yraola F, Zorzano A, Albericio F, Royo M. Structure–activity relationships 
of SSAO/VAP-1 arylalkylamine-based substrates. Chem Med Chem. 
2009;4:495–503.
Yu H, Balani SK, Chen W, et al. Contribution of metabolites to P450 inhibi-
tion-based drug–drug interactions: scholarship from the drug metabolism 
leadership group of the innovation and quality consortium metabolite 
group. Drug Metab Dispos. 2015;43:620–630.
Yu H, Tweedie D. A perspective on the contribution of metabolites to drug–
drug interaction potential: the need to consider both circulating levels and 
inhibition potency. Drug Metab Dispos. 2013;41:536–540.
Yumibe N, Huie K, Chen KJ, et al. Identification of human liver cytochrome 
P450 enzymes that metabolize the nonsedating antihistamine loratadine. 
Formation of descarboethoxyloratadine by CYP3A4 and CYP2D6. 
Biochem Pharmacol. 1996;51:165–172.
Zamek-Gliszczynski MJ, Hoffmaster KA, Nezasa K, Tallman MN, Brouwer 
KL. Integration of hepatic drug transporters and phase II metabolizing 
enzymes: mechanisms of hepatic excretion of sulfate, glucuronide, and 
glutathione metabolites. Eur J Pharm Sci. 2006;27:447–486.
Zetterberg C, Maltais F, Laitinen L, et al. VX-509 (decernotinib)-­mediated 
CYP3A time-dependent inhibition: an aldehyde oxidase metabolite as 
a perpetrator of drug–drug interactions. Drug Metab Dispos. 2016;44: 
1286–1295.
Zhan P, Wang Q, Qian Q, Wei SZ, Yu LK. CYP1A1 MspI and exon7 gene 
polymorphisms and lung cancer risk: an updated meta-analysis and 
review. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2011;30:99.
Zhang D, Chando TJ, Everett DW, et al. In vitro inhibition of UDP glucuro-
nosyltransferases by atazanavir and other HIV protease inhibitors and the 
relationship of this property to in vivo bilirubin glucuronidation. Drug 
Metab Dispos. 2005;33:1729–1739.
Zhang DG, Zhang C, Wang JX, et al. Obeticholic acid protects against car-
bon tetrachloride-induced acute liver injury and inflammation. Toxicol 
Appl Pharmacol. 2017;314:39–47.
Zhang H, Amunugama H, Ney S, Cooper N, Hollenberg PF. Mechanism-
based inactivation of human cytochrome P450 2B6 by clopidogrel: 
involvement of both covalent modification of cysteinyl residue 475 and 
loss of heme. Mol Pharmacol. 2011a;80:839–847.

Biotransformation of Xenobiotics
Chapter 6
399
Zhang J, Cashman JR. Quantitative analysis of FMO gene mRNA levels in 
human tissues. Drug Metab Dispos. 2006;34:19–26.
Zhang L, Hanigan MH. Role of cysteine S-conjugate beta-lyase in the 
metabolism of cisplatin. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2003;306:988–994.
Zhang L, Zhang YD, Zhao P, Huang SM. Predicting drug–drug interactions: 
an FDA perspective. AAPS J. 2009;11:300–306.
Zhang W, Chang YZ, Kan QC, et al. CYP3A4*1G genetic polymorphism 
influences CYP3A activity and response to fentanyl in Chinese gyneco-
logic patients. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2010;66:61–66.
Zhang Y, Talalay P, Cho C, Posner GH. A major inducer of anticarcinogenic 
protective enzymes from broccoli: isolation and elucidation of structure. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992;89:2399–2403.
Zhang Z, Tan M, Xie Z, et al. Identification of lysine succinylation as a new 
post-translational modification. Nat Chem Biol. 2011b;7:58–63.
Zhao Y, Wan D, Yang J, Hammock BD, Ortiz de Montellano PR. Catalytic 
activities of tumor-specific human cytochrome P450 CYP2W1 toward 
endogenous substrates. Drug Metab Dispos. 2016;44:771–780.
Zheng X, Deng J, Zhang T, et al. Potential anti-obesity effects of a long-
acting cocaine hydrolase. Chem Biol Interact. 2016;259:99–103.
Zheng YM, Fisher MB, Yokotani N, Fujii-Kuriyama Y, Rettie AE. 
Identification of a meander region proline residue critical for heme bind-
ing to cytochrome P450: implications for the catalytic function of human 
CYP4B1. Biochemistry. 1998;37:12847–12851.
Zhi X, Chan EM, Edenberg HJ. Tissue-specific regulatory elements in the 
human alcohol dehydrogenase 6 gene. DNA Cell Biol. 2000;19:487–497.
Zhou C, Assem M, Tay JC, et al. Steroid and xenobiotic receptor and vita-
min D receptor crosstalk mediates CYP24 expression and drug-induced 
osteomalacia. J Clin Invest. 2006a;116:1703–1712.
Zhou D, Guo J, Linnenbach AJ, Booth-Genthe CL, Grimm SW. Role of 
human UGT2B10 in N-glucuronidation of tricyclic antidepressants, ami-
triptyline, imipramine, clomipramine, and trimipramine. Drug Metab 
Dispos. 2010a;38:863–870.
Zhou H, Mascelli MA. Mechanisms of monoclonal antibody–drug interac-
tions. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 2011;51:359–372.
Zhou J, Zhai Y, Mu Y, et al. A novel pregnane X receptor-mediated and ste-
rol regulatory element-binding protein-independent lipogenic pathway. J 
Biol Chem. 2006b;281:15013–15020.
Zhou LY, Zuo XC, Chen K, et al. Significant impacts of CYP3A4*1G and 
CYP3A5*3 genetic polymorphisms on the pharmacokinetics of diltia-
zem and its main metabolites in Chinese adult kidney transplant patients. 
J Clin Pharm Ther. 2016;41:341–347.
Zhou SF. Polymorphism of human cytochrome P450 2D6 and its clinical 
significance: part I. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2009a;48:689–723.
Zhou SF. Polymorphism of human cytochrome P450 2D6 and its clinical 
significance: part II. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2009b;48:761–804.
Zhou SF, Liu JP, Chowbay B. Polymorphism of human cytochrome P450 
enzymes and its clinical impact. Drug Metab Rev. 2009a;41:89–295.
Zhou SF, Wang B, Yang LP, Liu JP. Structure, function, regulation and poly-
morphism and the clinical significance of human cytochrome P450 1A2. 
Drug Metab Rev. 2010b;42:268–354.
Zhou SF, Zhou ZW, Yang LP, Cai JP. Substrates, inducers, inhibitors and 
structure-activity relationships of human cytochrome P450 2C9 and impli-
cations in drug development. Curr Med Chem. 2009b;16:3480–3675.
Zhou X, D’Agostino J, Li L, et al. Respective roles of CYP2A5 and CYP2F2 
in the bioactivation of 3-methylindole in mouse olfactory mucosa and 
lung: studies using Cyp2a5-null and Cyp2f2-null mouse models. Drug 
Metab Dispos. 2012;40:642–647.
Zhu BT, Liehr JG. Inhibition of the catechol-O-methyltransferase-catalyzed 
O-methylation of 2- and 4-hydroxyestradiol by catecholamines: impli-
cations for the mechanism of estrogen-induced carcinogenesis. Arch 
Biochem Biophys. 1993;304:248–256.
Zhu HJ, Markowitz JS. Activation of the antiviral prodrug oseltamivir is 
impaired by two newly identified carboxylesterase 1 variants. Drug 
Metab Dispos. 2009;37:264–267.
Zhuo X, Cantone JL, Wang Y, et al. Phosphocholine conjugation: an unex-
pected in vivo conjugation pathway associated with hepatitis C ns5b 
inhibitors featuring a bicyclo[1.1.1]pentane. Drug Metab Dispos. 2016, 
Mar 9. pii: dmd.115.069062. [Epub ahead of print].
Ziegler DM. An overview of the mechanism, substrate specificities, and 
structure of FMOs. Drug Metab Rev. 2002;34: 503–511.
Ziegler DM. Recent studies on the structure and function of multisub-
strate flavin-containing monooxygenases. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 
1993;33:179–199.
Zientek MA, Youdim K. Reaction phenotyping: advances in the experimen-
tal strategies used to characterize the contribution of drug-metabolizing 
enzymes. Drug Metab Dispos. 2015;43:163–181.
Zineh I, Beitelshees AL, Gaedigk A, et al.Pharmacokinetics and CYP2D6 
genotypes do not predict metoprolol adverse events or efficacy in hyper-
tension. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2004;76:536–544.
Zollinger M, Gschwind HP, Jin Y, et al. Absorption and disposition of the 
sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor modulator fingolimod (FTY720) in 
healthy volunteers: a case of xenobiotic biotransformation following 
endogenous metabolic pathways. Drug Metab Dispos. 2011;39:199–207.
Zollinger M, Sayer C, Dannecker R, et al. The macrolide everolimus forms 
an unusual metabolite in animals and humans: identification of a phos-
phocholine ester. Drug Metab Dispos. 2008;36:1457–1460.
Zordoky BN, El-Kadi AO. Effect of cytochrome P450 polymorphism on 
arachidonic acid metabolism and their impact on cardiovascular diseases. 
Pharmacol Ther. 2010;125:446–463.

This page intentionally left blank