# 9 Genetic Toxicology
# Casarett & Doull's Toxicology, 9th Edition
# Pages: 516-565
# Unit: Unit III Non-Organ-Directed Toxicity

9
chapter
Genetic Toxicology
Joanna Klapacz and B. Bhaskar Gollapudi
GENETIC TOXICOLOGY DEFINITION
Genetic toxicology is the study of genetic damage to the hereditary 
material that results in genetic alterations. Included in this broad 
definition are chemical and physical agents that cause mutagenic-
ity, or transmissible genetic alterations, and genotoxicity. In con-
trast to mutagenicity, genotoxicity covers a broader spectrum of 
endpoints, including DNA damage such as DNA strand breaks and 
DNA adduct biomarkers (both pro-mutagenic and non-mutagenic), 
unscheduled DNA synthesis (UDS), and sister chromatid exchanges 
(SCEs); these are all measures of genotoxicity, as opposed to muta-
genicity because they are not themselves transmissible from cell 
to cell or generation to generation. Genotoxicity also encompasses 
the mechanisms by which DNA damage occurs and the cellular 
responses to that damage. All of these effects can be assessed 
directly by measuring the interaction of agents with DNA or more 
indirectly through the assessment of DNA repair or the produc-
tion of gene mutations or chromosome alterations. Standardized 
assay outcomes that detect mutations in populations of cells and/or 
organisms have been applied to systematic hazard classifications of 
chemicals under the United Nations Globally Harmonized System 
of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals (GHS). Under GHS, 
the chemical hazards associated with germ cell mutagenicity are 
assigned to one of two hazard categories: (1) substances known 
to induce heritable mutations (subcategory 1A) or regarded as if 
they induce heritable mutations (subcategory 1B) in the germ cells 
of humans; and (2) substances which cause concern that they may 
induce heritable mutations in the germ cells of humans (UN, 2015).
It is worth mentioning that in the last decades, there has been 
an increased emphasis on the role of epigenetic changes that con-
trol gene expression through DNA methylation and histone modi-
fications in the production of altered phenotypes (Watson and 
Goodman, 2002; LeBaron et al., 2010; Dearfield et al., 2017). 
Although these epigenetic changes can be transmitted between gen-
erations, these are also fluid and adaptive, are not mutations by defi-
nition as they do not involve changes in DNA sequence, and have 
Genetic Toxicology Definition
History of Genetic Toxicology
Health Impact of Genetic 
Alterations
Somatic Cells
Germ Cells
Cancer and Genetic Risk 
Assessments
Cancer Risk Assessment
Genetic Risk Assessment
Formation of DNA Damage 
and DNA Damage Response 
Pathways
DNA Damage
Background DNA Damage
Ionizing Radiation
Ultraviolet Light
Chemical Agents
DNA Repair and Tolerance 
Pathways
Base Excision Repair (BER)
Nucleotide Excision Repair (NER)
Double-Strand Break Repair
Fanconi Anemia (FA) Pathway
Mismatch Repair (MMR)
Direct Repair (DR)
Translesion Synthesis (TLS)
DNA Damage Response (DDR)
Mechanisms of Induction of 
Genetic Alterations
Formation of Gene Mutations
Somatic Cells
Germ Cells
Formation of Chromosomal 
Alterations
Somatic Cells
Germ Cells
Assays for Detecting Genetic 
Alterations
Introduction to Assay Design
Structural Alerts and In Silico 
Assays
DNA Damage and Repair Assays
Gene Mutations in Prokaryotes
Genetic Alterations in 
Nonmammalian Eukaryotes
Gene Mutations and Chromosome 
Aberrations
Mitotic Recombination
Gene Mutations in Mammalian  
Cells
Gene Mutations In Vivo
Transgenic Assays
Mammalian Cytogenetic Assays
Chromosome Aberrations
Micronuclei
Sister Chromatid Exchanges (SCE)
Aneuploidy
Germ Cell Mutagenesis
Gene Mutations
Chromosomal Alterations
Dominant Lethal Mutations
Development of Testing Strategies
Human Population Monitoring
New Approaches for Genetic 
Toxicology
Advances in Cytogenetics
Molecular Analysis of Mutations 
and Gene Expression
Conclusions
Acknowledgments
References

498
Non-Organ-Directed toxicity
unit III
not been observed to lead to amended point-of-departure values for 
risk assessment (Hamilton, 2011; Alyea et al., 2014).
In this chapter, we will discuss the history of the development 
of the field of genetic toxicology, the cellular pathways that counter-
act DNA damage on a daily basis, the use of genetic toxicology data 
in cancer and genetic risk assessments, the mechanisms underlying 
genetic toxicology assays, the assays that can be used for detecting 
genotoxic endpoints, the use of the same assays for better under-
standing mechanisms of mutagenesis, and new methods for the 
assessment of genetic alterations. This field of toxicology is evolving 
rapidly, and a review of its past and present state will set the stage to 
allow for a consideration of what are likely next major landmarks.
HISTORY OF GENETIC TOXICOLOGY
The field of genetic toxicology can be considered to have its roots in 
the pioneering work of H.J. Muller (1927), who showed that x-rays 
could induce mutations in the fruit fly, Drosophila. In his studies, 
he showed not only that radiation exposure could increase the over-
all frequencies of mutations but also that the types of mutations 
induced were exactly the same in effect, or phenotype, as those 
observed in the absence of radiation exposure. Thus, the induced 
mutagenic responses should be assessed in relation to background 
mutations. As a conclusion to this study of radiation-induced muta-
tions, Muller predicted the utility of mutagenesis studies not only 
for the study of mutations themselves but also for gene mapping 
approaches.
Karl Sax (1938) built upon Muller’s original studies of radi-
ation-induced mutations by showing that x-rays could also induce 
structural alterations to chromosomes in Tradescantia pollen grains. 
Sax and his colleagues, notably in the absence of knowledge of 
DNA structure and chromosomal organization, showed that at 
least two critical lesions in a nuclear target are required for the 
production of an exchange within (intrachromosome) or between 
(interchromosome) chromosomes. We know now that the lesions 
identified by Sax are DNA double-strand breaks, base damages, or 
multiply damaged sites that are clusters of damages within one or 
two helical turns of DNA (reviewed by Ward, 1988). In addition, 
Sax and colleagues (Sax, 1939; Sax and Luippold, 1952) showed 
that the yield of chromosome aberrations was reduced if the total 
dose of x-rays was delivered over extended periods of time or split 
into two fractions separated by several hours. These observations 
led to the concept of restitution of radiation-induced damage, which 
was later recognized as involving specific DNA repair processes 
(see below).
Consideration of the genetic effects of exogenous agents on 
cells was expanded to include chemicals in 1946, when Charlotte 
Auerbach and colleagues reported that mustard gas could induce 
mutations in Drosophila and that these mutations were phenotypi-
cally similar to those induced by x-rays (Auerbach and Robson, 
1946). Thus, the field of chemical mutagenesis was initiated to run 
in parallel with studies of radiation mutagenesis. These original 
studies of Auerbach (actually conducted in 1941) are placed in a 
historical and biological perspective by the delightful review of 
Geoffrey Beale (1993).
Although the scientific value of the analysis of mutations in 
Drosophila was clear, there was an impression that the extrapola-
tion to predict similar effects in human populations was too wide 
a step. Thus, a research effort of great magnitude was initiated to 
attempt to assess radiation-induced mutations in mice. This effort 
resulted in the publication by William Russell (1951) of data on 
x-ray–induced mutations using a mouse-specific-locus mutation 
assay. These data clearly showed that the type of results obtained 
with Drosophila could be replicated in a mammalian system. The 
mouse tester strain developed for the specific-locus assay has reces-
sive mutations at seven loci coding for visible mutations, such as 
coat color, eye color, and ear shape. This homozygous recessive 
tester strain can be used for identifying recessive mutations induced 
in wild type genes at the same loci in mice treated with radiation 
or chemical mutagens. It was noteworthy that the mutation rate for 
x-ray–induced mutations in germ cells was similar in mouse and 
Drosophila. Subsequent studies by Liane Russell and colleagues 
showed that chemicals could induce mutations at the same seven 
loci (Russell et al., 1981).
Over the next 20 years, genetic toxicologists investigated the 
induction of mutations and chromosomal alterations in somatic and 
germ cells, largely following exposures to radiation, but increas-
ingly using chemical mutagens as well. The ability to grow cells 
in vitro, either as primary cultures or as transformed cell lines, 
enhanced these quantitative studies. The in vitro culture of human 
lymphocytes, stimulated to re-enter the cell cycle by phytohemag-
glutinin, greatly expanded the information on the assessment of 
chromosomal alterations in human cells (Hsu, 1979). It also became 
feasible to use cytogenetic alterations in human lymphocytes as a 
biodosimeter for assessing human exposures to ionizing radiations 
(Bender and Gooch, 1962).
Two events during the 1970s served to expand the utility of 
mutagenicity data into the realm of risk assessment. The Millers 
and their colleagues (Miller and Miller, 1977) showed that chemi-
cal carcinogens could react to form stable, covalent derivatives with 
DNA, RNA, and proteins both in vitro and in vivo. In addition, they 
reported that these derivatives could require the biotransformation of 
the parent chemical to form reactive metabolites. This metabolism 
is required for some chemicals to become mutagens and carcino-
gens. Metabolic capability is endogenous in vivo, but most in vitro 
cell lines do not express this capacity. To overcome this for in vitro 
mutagenicity studies, Heinrich Malling and colleagues developed 
an exogenous metabolizing system based on a rodent liver homog-
enate (S9) (Malling and Frantz, 1973; Malling, 2004). Although this 
exogenous metabolism system has had utility, it does have draw-
backs related to species and tissue specificity and loss of cellular 
compartmentalization. The development of transgenic cell lines 
containing P450 genes has overcome this drawback to some extent 
(Sawada and Kamataki, 1998; Crespi and Miller, 1999).
The second development in the 1970s that changed the field 
of genetic toxicology was the development by Bruce Ames (Ames 
et al., 1975) of a simple, inexpensive mutation assay with the bac-
terium Salmonella typhimurium. This assay can be used to detect 
chemically induced reverse mutations in several histidine mutant 
strains and can include the exogenous metabolizing S9 system 
described above. The Ames assay, as it is generally called, has 
been expanded and modified to enhance its performance as dis-
cussed below (under section “Gene Mutations in Prokaryotes”). The 
assay has been used extensively, especially for hazard identifica-
tion, as part of the cancer risk assessment process. This use was 
based on the assumption that carcinogens were mutagens and that 
cancer required mutation induction. This latter dogma proved to 
be somewhat inhibitory to the field of genetic toxicology because 
it provided a framework that was too rigid. Nonetheless, over the 
decade of the mid-1970s to mid-1980s somewhere on the order of 
200 short-term genotoxicity and mutagenicity assays were devel-
oped for screening potentially carcinogenic chemicals. The screens 
included mutation induction, chromosomal damage, DNA damage, 
DNA repair, and cell killing or other genotoxic activities.
Several international collaborative studies were organized to 
establish the sensitivity and specificity of a select group of assays

499
Genetic Toxicology
Chapter 9
as well as to assess interlaboratory variation (IPCS, 1988). Most 
assays were able to detect carcinogens or noncarcinogens with an 
efficiency of about 70% as compared with the outcome of two-year 
cancer bioassays (Preston, 1999a). The concordance between stan-
dard battery of in vitro genotoxicity assays and cancer bioassays 
was addressed to some extent by Tennant et al. (1987), who com-
pared the effectiveness of four individual and well-characterized 
short-term assays to identify carcinogens. Again, this battery pre-
dicted about 70% of known carcinogens with the concordance of 
each individual assay was approximately 60%. The authors con-
cluded that no battery of tests improved substantially on the overall 
performance of the Salmonella assay. Subsequently, the lack of a 
tight correlation between carcinogenicity and mutagenicity (and the 
converse, non-carcinogenicity and non-mutagenicity) was found to 
be due to the fact that some chemicals were not directly mutagenic, 
but instead induced changes necessary for tumor development indi-
rectly by, for example, clonally expanding preexisting mutant cells 
(i.e., tumor promotion), inflammation, or through the production 
of reactive oxygen species. Such chemicals are referred to as non-
genotoxic to contrast them with genotoxic mechanism of action. 
In the context of the mechanism of their mutagenicity, it is prefer-
able to distinguish between DNA-reactivity and its correlate non-
DNA-reactivity. Emphasis has recently been placed on identifying 
mechanisms whereby not directly mutagenic chemicals can be 
involved in tumor production. Those identified include cytotoxicity 
with regenerative cell proliferation, mitogenicity, receptor-mediated 
processes, changes in methylation status, immunosuppression, and 
alterations in cell–cell communication.
In the last two decades, the field of genetic toxicology has 
moved away from the short-term assay approach for assessing car-
cinogenicity to a much more mechanistic approach, fueled by the 
advances in molecular biology, analytical techniques, and statisti-
cal methodologies. In addition, genetic toxicology as a field has 
made significant advances from a primarily qualitative assessment 
of hazard without consideration of the dose to a quantitative exami-
nation of the dose–response to facilitate risk assessment (Gollapudi 
et al., 2013; Johnson et al., 2014; Gollapudi, 2017). The ability 
to manipulate and characterize DNA, RNA, and proteins and to 
understand basic cellular processes and how they can be perturbed 
has advanced enormously over this period. Knowing how to take 
advantage of these technical developments is paramount. This 
chapter addresses these changes in approach to genetic toxicology: 
the assays for qualitative and quantitative assessment of cellular 
changes induced by chemical and physical agents, the underlying 
molecular mechanisms for these changes, and how such informa-
tion can be incorporated into cancer and genetic risk assessments.
HEALTH IMPACT OF GENETIC 
ALTERATIONS
Mutations are permanent, transmissible alterations in DNA 
sequences that result in changes to the amount or structure of genetic 
material in the cell. Both small (i.e., one or few base-pair changes 
of a single gene) and large scale (i.e., changes affecting multiple 
genes) DNA alterations can lead to mutations. Mutagenicity refers 
to induction of mutations and the substances that induce mutations 
are referred to as mutagens. Clastogenicity refers to the process of 
inducing chromosomal breaks, and clastogens are the substances 
that induce chromosomal breakage. Clastogenicity can lead to chro-
mosomal deletions and rearrangements and these events can lead to 
mutations provided that they are not lethal to the cell harboring 
them. Substances that induce numerical changes in chromosome 
complement of a cell through loss or gain of whole chromosome(s) 
are referred to as aneugen and these substances induce aneugenic-
ity through changes in the ploidy (i.e., aneuploidy) of the normal 
chromosome complement of the cell. The importance of mutations 
and chromosomal alterations for human health is evident from 
their roles in genetic disorders, including birth defects and cancer. 
Mutations in both germ cells and somatic cells need to be con-
sidered when an overall risk resulting from mutations is assessed. 
However, mutations are also the underlying mechanism of variabil-
ity and adaptation, the basis for evolution.
Somatic Cells
Somatic mutations arise in the genomes of all normal dividing 
and transformed cells as a result of endogenous and exogenous 
processes and stressors (Greenman et al., 2007). An associa-
tion between mutation and cancer has long been evident, such as 
through the correlation between the mutagenicity and carcino-
genicity of chemicals, especially in biological systems that have 
the requisite metabolic activation capabilities. Moreover, human 
chromosome instability syndromes and DNA repair deficiencies 
are associated with increased cancer risk (Friedberg, 1985). Recent 
evidence shows that an average cancer genome contains about 
103 to 104 point mutations, 10 to 102 small insertions or deletions, and 
1 to 10 large-scale chromosome rearrangements (including copy- 
number alterations) (Zhang and Pellman, 2015). Most somatic 
mutations are likely to be “passengers” that do not contribute to 
oncogenesis (Greenman et al., 2007). Overall, approximately 
13,000 unique mutations from 5000 genes and ~340,000 tumors 
have been catalogued with the new next-generation sequencing 
(NGS) techniques (Bell, 2010). However, cancers are specifically 
driven by the accumulation of “driver” mutations in a subset of 
consensus “cancer genes” that confer growth advantage to cells; 
more than 410 mutated genes implicated in cancer development 
have been identified (Futreal et al., 2004; Greenman et al., 2007; 
Stratton et al., 2009; Bell, 2010; Pleasance et al., 2010). “Cancer 
genes” exhibit attributes that confer advantages with the capacity to 
generate their own mitogenic signals, the evasion of apoptosis, the 
resistance of exogenous growth-inhibitory signals, reprogramming 
of energy metabolism, evading immune destruction, cellular prolif-
eration without limits, and acquisition of angiogenic, invasive and 
metastatic properties (Hanahan and Weinberg, 2000; Hanahan and 
Weinberg, 2011); these are classified into 12 signaling pathways 
that regulate three core cellular processes: cell fate, cell survival, 
and genome maintenance (Vogelstein et al., 2013). In turn, these 
characteristics and dysregulated pathways allow cancer pathogen-
esis through genomic instability and mutability that drive tumor 
progression, and elevated inflammatory responses that are tumor-
promoting (Hanahan and Weinberg, 2011).
The advances in the NGS technologies have enabled the com-
prehensive characterization of somatic mutations in large number 
of tumor samples, allowing for new insight and revealing unantici-
pated complexities in the patterns of somatic alterations in cancers 
(Watson et al., 2013). These advances challenge the previously held 
belief of a linear process driven by serially acquired new mutations, 
including base pair substitutions, small insertions and deletions of 
bases, chromosomal rearrangements, and gains and losses in gene 
copy number (Vogelstein and Kinzler, 1993). In a study of 210 
diverse human cancers, more than 1000 somatic base pair mutations 
have been identified along with the evidence for “driver” mutations 
in approximately 120 genes that contribute to the development of 
the studied cancers (Greenman et al., 2007). New NGS evidence 
suggests that most point mutations (including small insertion or

500
Non-Organ-Directed toxicity
unit III
deletion events) in cancer genomes are passengers that do not con-
tribute to cancer development, and their patterns reflect the underly-
ing mutational processes (Zhang and Pellman, 2015).
New NGS data show that cancer genomes have histopatho-
logically distinct cancer subtypes of the same organ site and often 
have divergent underlying genomic alterations (Watson et al., 
2013). The recent landmark, large-scale cancer genomics analysis, 
applied to almost five million somatic mutations identified in 7042 
cancer samples, has provided insight into the global signatures of 
mutational processes in human cancer (Alexandrov et al., 2013). 
Each of the cancer types had at least two active mutational signa-
tures, while some cancers, including liver and uterus, had up to six 
distinct mutational signatures; mutational signatures include sub-
stitutions, indels, dinucleotide substitutions, kataegis, and strand 
bias. The analysis revealed 27 distinct mutational signatures; 22 of 
these mutational signatures were validated and etiology was pro-
posed for 11 of the 22 validated mutational signatures. Two major 
mutational signatures were associated with age of patient at cancer 
diagnosis and exhibited clear features of C-to-T transitions at CpG 
sites; these major somatic mutations were hypothesized to reflect 
mutations due to normal cellular processes such as deamination of 
5-methylcytosine of CpG sites and DNA replication errors. These 
background mutations were proposed to account for the majority of 
somatic mutations prior to neoplastic development (Alexandrov 
et al., 2013). Two mutational processes were associated with the 
activity of endogenous APOBEC family of deaminases; these 
exhibit predominantly C-to-T and C-to-G mutations at TpC sites 
and have been observed in 17% of all examined cancer samples. 
Distinct mutational signatures were associated with BRCA1/2 
mutations in breast and pancreatic cancers; DNA mismatch repair 
defects in colorectal cancers; hypermutation of the immuno-
globulin genes in chronic lymphocytic leukemia; and recurring 
polymerase ε mutations in uterine and colorectal cancers among 
others. Mutational signatures were also confirmed for ultraviolet 
light exposure as to C-to-T transitions at CpC or TpC sites, and for 
“tobacco smoking signature” as C-to-A transversions.
Cancer cytogenetics have revealed chromosomal alterations, 
including deletions, translocations, inversions, and amplifications, 
and these changes have been implicated in many human ­leukemias 
and lymphomas as well as in some solid tumors (Rabbitts, 1994; 
Zhang et al., 2010). Also, somatic mutations in the noncoding gene 
promoter regions have been recognized as genetic alterations in 
multiple cancer types (Piraino and Furney, 2016). Cancer genomes 
often harbor multiple large-scale chromosomal alterations includ-
ing extensive or whole-chromosome aneuploidy, telomere-bound 
copy-number alterations, chromosomal rearrangements, and com-
plex karyotypes within the same region of chromosomes (Zhang 
and Pellman, 2015). Compared with the analysis of point muta-
tions, the analysis of chromosomal alterations is very preliminary, 
but suggests that chromosomal breakage occurs frequently at 
centromeres and is enriched either in early-replicating, gene-rich 
regions or late-replicating, gene-poor regions, possibly reflecting 
different underlying mechanisms (Zhang and Pellman, 2015). On 
the phenotypic level, the large-scale copy-number alterations and 
chromosomal rearrangements can cause varying changes in fitness 
and are tumor type–dependent. Some aneuploidies are recurrent in 
certain tumor types and almost certainly under positive selection 
(Gordon et al., 2012).
Initial evidence that mutation plays a role in cancer has come 
from molecular studies of acquired somatic mutations in oncogenes, 
or positive growth regulators, and inactivation of tumor-suppressor 
genes. Oncogenes are genes that stimulate the transformation of 
normal cells into cancer cells (Bishop, 1991). They originate when 
genes called proto-oncogenes, involved in normal cellular growth 
and development, are genetically altered. Normal regulation of cel-
lular proliferation requires a balance between factors that promote 
growth and those that restrict it. Mutational alteration of proto-
oncogenes can lead to overexpression of their growth-stimulating 
activity, whereas mutations that inactivate tumor-suppressor genes, 
which normally restrain cellular proliferation, free cells from their 
inhibitory influence (Hanahan and Weinberg, 2000, 2011).
The action of oncogenes is genetically dominant in that a 
single active oncogene is expressed, even though its normal allele 
is present in the same cell. Proto-oncogenes can be converted into 
active oncogenes by point mutations or chromosomal alterations. 
Base pair substitutions in ras proto-oncogenes are found in many 
human tumors (Bishop, 1991; Barrett, 1993; Croce, 2008). Among 
chromosomal alterations that activate proto-oncogenes, transloca-
tions are especially prevalent (Rabbitts, 1994, Croce, 2008; Zhang 
et al., 2010). For example, Burkitt lymphoma involves a transloca-
tion between the long arm of chromosome 8, which is the site of the 
c-MYC oncogene, and chromosome 14 (about 90% of cases), 22, 
or 2. A translocation can activate a proto-oncogene by moving it to 
a new chromosomal location, typically the site of a T-cell recep-
tor or immunoglobulin gene, where its expression is enhanced. A 
similar translocation-based mechanism also applies to various other 
hematopoietic cancers. Alternatively, the translocation may join 
two genes, resulting in a protein fusion that contributes to cancer 
development. Fusions have been implicated in other hematopoietic 
cancers and some solid tumors (Rabbitts, 1994; Croce, 2008; Zhang 
et al., 2010). Like translocations, other chromosomal alterations can 
activate proto-oncogenes, and genetic amplification of oncogenes 
can magnify their expression (Bishop, 1991; Croce, 2008).
Mutational inactivation or deletion of tumor-suppressor genes 
has been implicated in many cancers. Unlike oncogenes, the cancer-
causing alleles that arise from tumor-suppressor genes are typically 
recessive in that they are not expressed when they are heterozy-
gous (Evans and Prosser, 1992). However, several genetic mecha-
nisms, including mutation, deletion, chromosome loss, and mitotic 
recombination, can cause loss of heterozygosity (LOH), in which 
the normal allele is inactivated or eliminated creating a locus with 
no normal gene function. LOH leads to the expression of the reces-
sive cancer gene in a formerly heterozygous cell (Cavenee et al., 
1983; Turner et al., 2003; Reliene et al., 2007). The inactivation of 
tumor-suppressor genes has been associated with various cancers, 
including those of the eye, kidney, colon, brain, breast, lung, and 
bladder (Fearon and Vogelstein, 1990; Marshall, 1991). Mutations 
in a tumor-suppressor gene called P53, located on chromosome 17, 
occur in many different human cancers, and molecular charac-
terization of P53 mutations has linked specific human cancers to 
mutagen exposures (Harris, 1993; Aguilar et al., 1994; Royds and 
Iacopetta, 2006).
In the simplest model for the action of tumor-suppressor 
genes, two events are considered to be required for the development 
of retinoblastoma, a tumor of the eye, because both normal alleles 
must be inactivated or lost (Knudson, 1997). In sporadic forms of 
the cancer without family history of disease, the two genetic events 
occur independently, but in familial cases, such as familial retino-
blastoma, the first mutation is inherited, leaving the need for only a 
single additional event for expression. The strong predisposition to 
cancer in the inherited disease stems from the high likelihood that 
a LOH will occur by mutation, recombination, or aneuploidy in at 
least one or a few cells in the development of the affected organ. 
The simple model involving two events and a single pair of alleles 
cannot explain all observations concerning tumor-suppressor genes 
because many cancers involve more than one tumor-suppressor

501
Genetic Toxicology
Chapter 9
gene. For example, the childhood kidney tumor called Wilms tumor 
can be caused by damage in at least three different genes (Marshall, 
1991), and colorectal carcinomas are often found to have lost not 
only the wild-type P53 tumor-suppressor gene but also other tumor-
suppressor genes (Fearon and Vogelstein, 1990; Stoler et al., 1999). 
Moreover, a single mutation in a tumor-suppressor gene, even 
though not fully expressed, may contribute to carcinogenesis. For 
example, a single P53 mutation in a developing colorectal tumor 
may confer a growth advantage that contributes to the development 
of the disease (Venkatachalam et al., 1998). Subsequent LOH will 
increase the growth advantage as the tumor progresses from benign 
to malignant (Fearon and Vogelstein, 1990). In this regard (mutation 
and selection), carcinogenesis has been likened to an evolutionary 
process, with genomic instability providing the substrate and with 
growth advantage as the selection pressure (Gatenby and Vincent, 
2003; Fischer et al., 2004).
Many cancers involve both activation of oncogenes and inac-
tivation of tumor-suppressor genes (Fearon and Vogelstein, 1990; 
Bishop, 1991; Croce, 2008). The observation of multiple genetic 
changes supports the view that cancer results from an accumula-
tion of genetic alterations and that carcinogenesis is a multistep 
process (Kinzler and Vogelstein, 1996; Hahn et al., 1999; Stoler 
et al., 1999; Croce, 2008). At least three stages have been defined 
in carcinogenesis: initiation, promotion, and progression (Barrett, 
1993). Initiation involves the induction of a genetic alteration, such 
as the mutational activation of a ras proto-oncogene either spon-
taneously or by a mutagen. It is an irreversible step that starts the 
process toward cancer. Promotion involves cellular proliferation 
in an initiated cell population. Promotion can lead to the develop-
ment of benign tumors such as papillomas. Agents called promot-
ers stimulate this process. While some mutagens can also act as 
tumor promoters, most promoters are not mutagens. Promotion is a 
reversible process and generally requires the continuous exposure to 
the promoter. Progression involves the accumulation of additional 
irreversible genetic changes and it is marked by increasing genetic 
instability and malignancy. More recent studies are beginning to 
change this view, leading to the concept of acquired capabilities 
(Hanahan and Weinberg, 2000). In their Hallmarks of Cancer, 
Hanahan and Weinberg (2000) describe a set of six acquired char-
acteristics that are essential for the formation of all tumors irrespec-
tive of tumor type and species. These characteristics are broadly 
described as follows: self-sufficiency in growth signals, insensitiv-
ity to antigrowth signals, evading apoptosis, limitless replicative 
potential, sustained angiogenesis, and tissue invasion and metasta-
sis. It seems probable that there is no specific order for obtaining 
these characteristics. Hanahan and Weinberg have revisited their 
hallmarks concept, and, based on progress in the field over the past 
decade, they have added two emerging hallmarks of potential gener-
ality to their existing six (Hanahan and Weinberg, 2011). These are 
reprogramming of energy metabolism and evading immune destruc-
tion. In addition, they describe genome instability and inflammation 
as general features that underlie their now eight hallmarks (Hanahan 
and Weinberg, 2011).
Genomic instability is a feature of all cancers, with the great 
majority having a large number of chromosomal and gene muta-
tions and aneuploidies. Gene mutations, chromosome aberrations, 
and aneuploidy are all implicated in the development of cancer. 
Mutagens and clastogens contribute to carcinogenesis as initiators. 
Their role does not have to be restricted to initiation, however, in 
that mutagens, clastogens, and aneugens may also contribute to 
the multiple genetic alterations that characterize progression or the 
development of acquired capabilities. Other agents that contrib-
ute to carcinogenesis, such as promoters, need not be mutagens. 
However, the role of mutations is critical, and analyzing mutations 
and mutagenic effects is essential for understanding and predicting 
chemical carcinogenesis. Currently, there is a debate on the fraction 
of cancers arising from random mutations during normal cell divi-
sion versus those mutations contributed by environmental and life-
style factors, with some authors proposing that nearly two-thirds of 
cancer-causing mutations occur spontaneously during cell prolifera-
tion (Tomasetti and Vogelstein, 2017).
Germ Cells
The relevance of gene mutations to health is evident from the many 
disorders that are inherited as simple Mendelian characteristics 
(Mohrenweiser, 1991). About 1.3% of newborns suffer from auto-
somal dominant (1%), autosomal recessive (0.25%), or sex-linked 
(0.05%) genetic diseases (Sankaranarayanan, 1998; Elespuru 
and Sankaranarayanan, 2007; National Research Council [NRC], 
2007a, 2007b). Molecular analysis of the mutations responsible for 
Mendelian diseases has revealed that almost half of these mutations 
are base pair substitutions; of the remainder, most are small dele-
tions (Sankaranarayanan, 1998; Elespuru and Sankaranarayanan, 
2007). In contrast to somatic mutations, common structural vari-
ants in the germ cells have been determined with NGS methods to 
be deletions, tandem duplications, transpositions, inversions, and 
insertions that affect only a small region of the genome and are 
nonoverlapping (Zhang and Pellman, 2015).
Many genetic disorders (such as cystic fibrosis, phenylketon-
uria, Tay-Sachs disease) are caused by the expression of recessive 
mutations. These mutations are mainly inherited from previous gen-
erations and are expressed when an individual inherits the mutant 
gene from both parents. New mutations make a larger contribu-
tion to the incidence of dominant diseases than to that of reces-
sive diseases because only a single dominant mutation is required 
for expression. Thus, new dominant mutations are expressed in 
the first generation. If a dominant disorder is severe, its transmis-
sion between generations is unlikely because of reduced fitness. 
For dominants with a mild effect, reduced penetrance, or a late age 
of onset, the contribution from previous generations is undoubt-
edly larger than it is for mutations with severe early expression. 
Estimating the proportion of all Mendelian genetic diseases that 
can be ascribed to new mutations is not straightforward; a rough 
estimate is 20% (Shelby, 1994).
Besides causing diseases that exhibit Mendelian inheritance, 
gene mutations undoubtedly contribute to human disease through 
the genetic component of disorders with a complex etiology 
(Sankaranarayanan et al., 1999; Sankaranarayanan, 2006). Some 
3% (United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic 
Radiation [UNSCEAR], 2001) or 5% to 6% (Sankaranarayanan, 
1998) of infants are affected by congenital abnormalities; if one 
includes multifactorial disorders that often have a late onset, such 
as heart disease, hypertension, and diabetes, the proportion of the 
population affected increases to more than 60% (Sankaranarayanan, 
1998, 2006; UNSCEAR, 2001). Such frequencies are necessarily 
approximate because of differences among surveys in the report-
ing and classification of disorders. A higher prevalence would 
be found if less severe disorders were included in the tabulation. 
Nevertheless, such estimates provide a sense of the large impact of 
genetic disease.
Sensitive cytogenetic methods have led to the discovery of 
minor variations in chromosome structure that have no apparent 
effect. On the contrary, other relatively minor structural chro-
mosome aberrations cause fetal death or serious abnormalities. 
Aneuploidy (gain or loss of one or more chromosomes) also

502
Non-Organ-Directed toxicity
unit III
contributes to fetal deaths and causes disorders such as Down syn-
drome. About four infants per 1000 live births have syndromes 
associated with chromosomal abnormalities, including transloca-
tions and aneuploidy. The majority of these syndromes (about 85%) 
result from trisomies (Griffin, 1996; Nagaishi et al., 2004; NRC, 
2007a, 2007b). Most of the adverse effects of chromosomal abnor-
malities occur prenatally. It has been estimated that 5% of all recog-
nized pregnancies involve chromosomal abnormalities, as do about 
6% of infant deaths and 30% of all spontaneous embryonic and 
fetal deaths (Mohrenweiser, 1991; Nagaishi et al., 2004). Among 
the abnormalities that have been observed, aneuploidy is the most 
common, followed by polyploidy. Structural aberrations constitute 
about 5% of the total. Unlike gene mutations, many of which are 
inherited from the previous generation, about 85% of the chromo-
somal anomalies observed in newborns arise de novo in the germ 
cells of the parents (Mohrenweiser, 1991). The frequency of aneu-
ploidy assessed directly in human sperm is 3% to 4%; about 0.4% 
are sex chromosome aneuploidies (Martin et al., 1991, 1996). The 
frequency of aneuploidy in human oocytes is about 18% (Martin 
et al., 1991).
As the field of oncology incorporates NGS approaches into 
tumor and germline analyses, comparisons of tumor to the germ-
line genomes may identify variants associated with susceptibil-
ity to cancer as well as other hereditary diseases (Stadler et al., 
2014). These new advances in NGS, together with identification of 
genetic sequence variants associated with common diseases, have 
the potential to shift the paradigm of personalized medicine, provid-
ing estimates of personal disease risk and the germline genetic risk 
assessment to more precisely guide medical management (Abul-
Husn et al., 2014). For example, meta-analysis of somatic and 
germline DNA sequence biomarker variants of esophageal cancer 
has identified a number of germline polymorphism markers in TP53 
and nucleotide excitation DNA repair pathways associated with 
survival and recurrence following treatment of esophageal cancer 
(Findlay et al., 2015).
CANCER AND GENETIC RISK 
ASSESSMENTS
Cancer Risk Assessment
Genotoxicity and mutagenicity testing is a prerequisite to the assess-
ment of carcinogenic and hereditary risks associated with chemi-
cal exposures (Moolenaar, 1994; EPA, 1996, 2005; ECHA, 2016; 
Eastmond, 2017). Harmonized strategies for mutagenicity testing for 
chemical risk assessment have been developed (Ashby et al., 1996; 
Cimino, 2006; Eastmond et al., 2009; MacGregor et al., 2015a). 
Chemicals are screened in a battery of mutagenicity and genotoxic-
ity assays to identify carcinogenic agents with a mutagenic mode of 
action (MOA). Mutagenic carcinogens share common characteris-
tics and typically produce positive gene mutation and chromosomal 
alteration in multiple in vitro and in vivo test systems (EPA, 2005). 
Mutagenic carcinogens are also active at multi-organ level, in dif-
ferent species, as well as at low-dose exposures across multiple 
doses (Tennant and Spalding, 1996). An adverse outcome pathway 
for mutagenic liver carcinogens was recently proposed involving a 
number of essential key events (KEs) (Becker et al., 2017; Moore 
et al., 2018). The sequence of KEs leading to cancer is initiated 
with a formation of pro-mutagenic DNA adduct/lesion. Following 
insufficient or misrepair of the adduct, a KE of an early mutation in 
critical gene(s) is expected that is to be followed by a KE of cellular 
proliferation and clonal expansion leading to an adverse outcome of 
hepatocellular carcinoma. However, it is important to remember that 
a substance that has induced tumors in animal bioassays is not nec-
essarily acting via a mutagenic MOA (Dearfield and Moore, 2005). 
Moreover, accumulated evidence has demonstrated that somatic 
mutations are brought about by the combination of genetic effects 
and cellular proliferation either by (1) increasing genetic damage 
so there are more errors produced during DNA replication; or (2) 
increasing the rate of DNA replication that increases the likelihood 
that spontaneous errors in DNA become fixed in daughter cells 
(Ames and Gold, 1990; Cohen and Ellwein, 1991; Cohen et  al., 
1991; Cohen and Arnold 2011; Tomasetti and Vogelstein, 2015; 
Tomasetti et al., 2017). Thus, for carcinogen risk assessment, it is 
important to understand impacts not just on genotoxicity, but also 
on cellular proliferation rates, and to distinguish substances that are 
DNA-reactive from substances that act by mechanisms increasing 
cellular proliferation. For substances that are not DNA-reactive, 
mechanisms that can increase cell proliferation include receptor-
mediated responses (e.g., enzyme induction CAR, PXR, AhR) and 
non-receptor mediated MOA (e.g., cytotoxicity leading to regen-
eration) (Becker et al., 2017). These MOAs can also be organized 
into adverse outcome pathway frameworks that provide a basis for 
research, regulatory toxicology testing and risk assessment, among 
other applications such as in eventual regulatory decision-making.
When assessing carcinogenic risks to humans, evaluation 
of complex genotoxicity databases should involve a weight-of-
evidence approach in which studies are critically evaluated based 
on their quality, reproducibility and consistency, significance of 
genetic alternations, phylogenic relevance to humans, type (in vivo 
vs. in vitro), and relevance of the route of chemical administra-
tion (Eastmond, 2017). Using these guidelines, the most weight is 
allocated to high-quality in vivo studies of gene and chromosome 
mutations in humans and mammals exposed via a physiologi-
cally relevant oral, dermal, or inhalation routes (Eastmond, 2017). 
Following evaluation and assessment of the chemical dataset, the 
weight-of-evidence approach is used to reach conclusions about 
chemical’s genotoxicity potential.
The formalized process for conducting a cancer risk assess-
ment has many variations based on national requirements and regu-
lations. Historically in the United States, the default has been linear 
extrapolation from the rodent bioassay tumor data to exposure 
levels consistent with human environmental or occupational expo-
sures (NRC, 1983, 1994; EPA, 1986). The assessment of risk has 
required the application of a series of default approaches for extrap-
olation, for example, from laboratory animals to humans, from high 
to low exposures, from intermittent to chronic lifetime exposures, 
and from route to route of exposure. Subsequently, approaches 
based on mechanistic data were published in Guidelines for 
Carcinogen Risk Assessment to inform the risk assessment process, 
particularly for dose–response assessment and risk characterization 
at low environmental exposures (EPA, 2005). These United States 
Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) cancer risk assessment 
guidelines provide a framework that utilizes MOA approach as the 
tool to organize the set of key events (KEs) required for a chemical 
to produce a tumor (Sonich-Mullin et al., 2001; EPA, 2005; Preston 
and Williams, 2005). The EPA guidelines invoke a linear extrapola-
tion and dose–response models in case of mutagenic MOA and as a 
default in case of an absence of sufficient MOA information. MOA 
is a biologically plausible series of chemical-specific key events 
starting with exposure and proceeding through the interaction of 
an agent with a cell, subsequent physiological, tissue, or organ 
changes, and resulting in an adverse effect or outcome (Sonich-
Mullin et al., 2001; Dellarco and Fenner-Crisp, 2012). Furthermore, 
this approach is more consistent with frameworks developed around 
a MOA/human relevance concepts (MOA framework) by the

503
Genetic Toxicology
Chapter 9
World Health Organization/International Programme on Chemical 
Safety (IPCS) (Boobis et al., 2006; Meek et al., 2014a, 2014b) and 
International Life Sciences Institute (ILSI) (Meek et al., 2003).
The IPCS MOA framework has been now widely adopted 
around the world into regulatory guidance (European Food Safety 
Authority, European Chemicals Agency, U.S. EPA, Joint FAO/
WHO Meeting on Pesticide Residues), and hazard characterization/
risk assessment, although variability in its use and conclusions has 
led to different interpretations of the sufficiency of evidence in sup-
port of hypothesized and alternative MOAs (Dourson et al., 2013; 
Becker et al., 2017). The MOA framework is an analytical approach 
where different lines of evidence are organized, linked, and inte-
grated at different levels of biological organization into a more effi-
cient, hypothesis-driven approach to safety evaluation that informs 
a human health risk assessments of chemical exposures (Dellarco 
and Fenner-Crisp, 2012; Meek et al., 2014a; Becker et al., 2017). 
The MOA framework has been extended to enable the evaluation 
for species concordance of effects in the context of environmental 
levels of exposure (Meek et al., 2014b).
The MOA framework continuously evolves to increase 
transparency and defensibility of decisions as well as system-
atic analysis of a weight-of-evidence supporting of all postulated 
chemical MOAs (Becker et al., 2017). The qualitative analysis in 
support of a MOA includes the scoping of potential MOAs and 
consideration of qualitative comparative weight-of-evidence of 
the supporting data. The latest addition to the framework involves 
quantitative weight-of-evidence confidence scoring based on the 
evolved Bradford Hill considerations (Meek et al., 2014a, 2014b; 
Becker et al., 2015, 2017); this latest methodology includes evalu-
ation of the positive, negative, or contradictory studies as well as 
strength of such evidence/counter-evidence that facilitates iden-
tification of the best supported MOA. The evolved Bradford Hill 
considerations for causality evaluate (1) biological concordance; (2) 
essentiality of key events; (3) dose–response concordance, temporal 
concordance, and incidence concordance of empirical observation; 
(4) consistency among different biological contexts; and (5) analogy 
(consistency across structurally significant chemicals) to promote 
better common understanding, consistency in use as well as confi-
dence in particular MOA (Meek et al., 2014b). Lines of evidence 
are evaluated and integrated to elucidate whether a substance acts 
to induce cancer primarily via DNA reactivity or whether it acts by 
mechanisms that increase cell proliferation (e.g., receptor-mediated 
or cytotoxicity leading to regeneration). Once an animal MOA and 
its KEs are established, qualitative and quantitative comparisons 
between experimental animals and humans are made to determine 
whether the MOA is likely operative in humans and, if so, whether 
it can result in a more refined hazard and dose–response assessment 
(Dellarco and Fenner-Crisp, 2012; Meek et al., 2014a, 2014b).
Genetic Risk Assessment
Historically, genetic risk assessment has been interpreted in a quali-
tative, dichotomous “yes” or “no” manner without analysis of dose-
response relationships. It has been recognized that these qualitative 
outcomes of in vitro genotoxicity tests do not adequately predict the 
outcomes of rodent carcinogenicity bioassays or in vivo genotoxic-
ity assays. The traditional “parallelogram approach” has involved 
estimation of the frequency of genetic alterations in human germ 
cells by using rodent germ cell and somatic cell data (Brewen and 
Preston, 1974; Sobels, 1982; Brusick, 1994; Preston et al., 1995; 
UNSCEAR, 2001; Eastmond, 2012, 2017).
New in vitro and in vivo data have demonstrated the existence 
of nonlinear/bilinear dose responses for genotoxic effects, defined 
as a dose–response curve with a slope not significantly different 
from zero gradient below the estimated threshold or Break Point 
Dose (BPD); within the BPD region, no significant difference in 
mutant frequency between the spontaneous background of control 
and the low-dose exposure region following treatment with DNA-
reactive agents (Klapacz et al., 2016; White and Johnson, 2016; 
Wills et al., 2016). Recent international multi-sector efforts have 
been undertaken to improve human health risk assessment for 
DNA-reactive chemicals utilizing a quantitative dose–response 
relationships from in vitro and in vivo genetic toxicology data sets 
to support risk characterization and risk management (Gollapudi 
et al., 2013; Johnson et al., 2014; MacGregor et al., 2015a, 2015b; 
White and Johnson, 2016).
Under the general framework for risk assessment with DNA-
reactive chemicals, the identification of key elements and factors 
should take place such as: (1) hazard assessment; (2) assessment of 
exposure to genotoxicants; (3) methods for dose and effect assess-
ment; (4) risk characterization strategies for genotoxic environmen-
tal chemicals; and (5) monitoring of environmental genotoxicant 
levels (Lewtas et al., 1994; Favor et al., 1995). Under this framework 
presented in Fig. 9-1, the risk assessment can be applicable to most 
situations; furthermore, the risk characterization measures require 
implementation by the regulatory agencies as well as monitoring of 
environmental exposure situations by risk managers (NAS, 1983; 
Lewtas et al., 1994; Favor et al., 1995; MacGregor et al., 2015a).
This framework focuses on minimization of the genotoxic risk 
and protecting against the risk of developing diseases (MacGregor 
et al., 2015a). A number of quantitative approaches for analyzing 
dose–response curves for genotoxic effects and deriving point-of-
departure (PoD) metrics have been evaluated that are based on the 
research data; these PoD metrics are: the no-observed-genotoxic-
effect-level (NOGEL) or the highest dose tested for which there 
is no significant increase in genotoxic effect compared to control; 
the threshold effect level (BPD or Td) or the dose at which the 
slope changes from zero (horizontal) to positive, with its standard 
error forming the confidence bounds (90% CI); the benchmark 
dose (BMD10) or the dose that produces 10% increase over the fit-
ted background; BMD1SD (the change in response corresponding to 
one standard deviation) or 10% excess risk for individuals below 
and above the 2nd and 98th percentiles, respectively; and slope-
transition-dose (STD) or the lowest dose for which the lower bound 
of the 95% confidence interval of the slope exceeds zero (Gollapudi 
et al., 2013; Johnson et al., 2014).
The PoD descriptors were determined for a number of chemi-
cals, including the data-rich, prototypical SN1 and SN2-type alkylat-
ing agents (Gocke and Muller, 2009; Gollapudi et al., 2013; Cao 
et al., 2014; Johnson et al., 2014; Ji et al., 2016). NOGEL, BMDL10, 
and BMDL1SD PoD metrics can be readily calculated from most 
gene mutation and chromosomal damage studies and the BMDL10 
values were often lower than the other PoDs (Johnson et al., 2014; 
MacGregor et al., 2015a). Analysis of obtained PoD values showed 
that these different approaches are complementary with respect 
to their advantages and limitations; have values within the same 
order of magnitude; and demonstrate more variability for the in 
vivo assays. The BMDL10 is considered a satisfactory PoD matrix 
for the analysis of genotoxic effects, as it typically yields a good 
fit to the data, generally provides the most conservative value, is 
flexible, and can be readily applied to a wide range of datasets. 
It should be noted that many DNA-reactive chemicals have been 
demonstrated to exhibit nonlinear/bilinear dose responses for 
genotoxic effects, such as formaldehyde, vinyl acetate, and pro-
pylene oxide (Swenberg et al., 1983; Albertini and Sweeney, 2007; 
Albertini, 2013).

504
Non-Organ-Directed toxicity
unit III
Once the genotoxic PoD values are obtained from in vivo test 
systems or target tissues with relevance to human health, appro-
priate extrapolation method(s) and uncertainty/assessment/safety 
factors need to be applied for the risk assessment. The choice of 
appropriate methods and assessment factors depends on knowledge 
of the mechanisms behind the dose–response relationships, the 
critical MOA information for DNA-reactive agents, and the entire 
weigh-of-evidence of the toxicological dataset (MacGregor et al., 
2015b). The mechanistic information used by authoritative bodies 
in their risk assessment has included: critical involvement of non-
DNA targets; contribution of DNA repair mechanisms; exceeded 
detoxification capacity; disruption of enzymes involved in DNA 
synthesis or replication; chemical reactivity or properties unlikely to 
occur in vivo; inadequate uptake or toxicokinetics limiting distribu-
tion to target; mutational spectrum in tumor genes similar to those in 
untreated animals; structural similarities to similar threshold-acting 
chemicals; secondary or indirect origin of the observed damage; and 
species and tumor-specific non-genotoxic MOA (MacGregor et al., 
2015b). Parameters and safety factors that need to be evaluated in 
order to minimize the uncertainty in the assessment include: (a) spe-
cies differences and allometric scaling; (b) differences in absorption, 
distribution, metabolism, and pharmacokinetics; (c) differences in 
duration of exposure; (d) severity of toxicity endpoint; (e) variabil-
ity among individuals; and (f) uncertainty in PoD (MacGregor et al., 
2015b). When data that permit assessment of these parameters/ 
factors are not available, default adjustment factors of up to 10,000-
fold can be applied to extrapolate to the acceptable human exposure 
levels. Knowledge of exposure, metabolism, and pharmacokinetics 
can help refine this extrapolation and reduce the assessment factor 
values by replacement with the experimentally determined param-
eters. Knowledge of a particular DNA adduct formed, its stability, 
its pro-mutagenic potential, its miscoding properties, the efficiency 
and fidelity of DNA repair in a particular tissue or cell type, and the 
replication rates of tissue or cell types can be used as a surrogate 
marker of a biologically effective dose (MacGregor et al., 2015b).
Overall, the derived genotoxic PoD values can be combined 
with appropriate assessment factors for the purpose of conduct-
ing the quantitative risk assessment for DNA-reactive agents. This 
approach will facilitate the derivation of reference doses below 
which there are no additional significant risk to human health as 
well as margin of exposure values useful for evaluating human 
health risk and regulatory decision making.
FORMATION OF DNA DAMAGE AND DNA 
DAMAGE RESPONSE PATHWAYS
DNA Damage
Preservation of genome integrity is central to cellular survival and 
successful propagation of hereditary material, yet all organisms 
sustain a certain number of background mutations as a result of 
limited DNA chemical stability, numerous stressors, cellular pro-
cesses, and interactions with the environment (Lindahl, 1993). 
Endogenous and exogenous chemicals produce a wide array of 
DNA lesions such as covalent DNA base adducts, cross-links 
between DNA bases or between DNA bases and proteins, ­and 
single- and double-strand breaks. DNA replication, transcription, 
or erroneous incorporation of ribonucleotides into DNA can also be 
a source of spontaneous mutation and genome instability (Echols 
and Goodman, 1991; Datta and Jinks-Robertson, 1995; McElhinny 
et  al., 2010). Ubiquitously present ultraviolet radiation, ionizing 
radiation, and exogenous hydrocarbons also present threats to 
genomic stability (Fig. 9-2).
In order to maintain the genome integrity and to assure accu-
rate duplication of genomic information by DNA and RNA poly-
merases, this damage must be faithfully repaired and/or addressed 
by posttranslational activation of cell cycle networks and tran-
scriptional networks for apoptosis/cell death (Guerard et al., 2015; 
Thomas et al., 2015; Klapacz et al., 2016). The understanding of the 
cellular mechanisms acting within the background mutation regions 
of the genotoxic dose–response curve can facilitate better risk char-
acterization from exposures to DNA-reactive chemicals, the deter-
mination of points of departure (PoDs) metrics for genotoxic effects 
that minimize genotoxic risk and protect against disease develop-
ment (Gollapudi et al., 2013; Johnson et al., 2014; MacGregor et al., 
2015a, 2015b; Klapacz et al., 2016). The aim of this section is to 
introduce the topic of DNA damage because such damage is the 
molecular initiating event for the formation of genetic alterations 
Laboratory and field
observations of
adverse health effects
and exposures to
particular agents
Information of
extrapolation
methods:
Field measurements,
estimated exposures,
characterization of
populations
EXPOSURE ASSESSMENT
•   What exposures are
currently experienced
or anticipated under
different conditions?
DOSE−RESPONSE
ASSESSMENT
•   What is the
relationship between
dose and incidence in
humans?
RISK
CHARACTERIZATION
•   What is the
estimated
incidence of the
adverse effect in
a given
population?
Development of
management options
Evaluation of public
health, economic,
social, and political
consequences of
management and
regulatory options
Decisions and actions
HAZARD INDENTIFICATION
RISK ASSESSMENT
RISK
MANAGEMENT
RESEARCH
•   Does the agent cause
the adverse effect?
•   High to low dose
•   Animal to human
Figure 9-1.  Elements of risk assessment and risk management processes of the quantitative risk assessment framework for DNA-reactive agents. (Reproduced 
with permission from MacGregor et al., 2015a.)

505
Genetic Toxicology
Chapter 9
and genotoxicity in general. For an expressed mutation, several key 
events must occur downstream from the initial DNA adduct forma-
tion, including insufficient adduct repair, DNA replication, and cell 
division (Pottenger and Gollapudi, 2010). Much greater detail can 
be found in recent reviews that are referenced within this section.
Background DNA Damage  Genomes sustain a continuous 
damage load due to numerous stressors, cellular metabolism, 
and limited chemical stability of DNA (Lindahl, 1993, 2000). 
The electrophilic by-products of endogenous metabolism include 
reactive oxygen species formed as by-products of cellular oxygen 
consumption (such as superoxide O2
•, hydroxyl free radicals ·OH, 
and hydrogen peroxide), nitric oxide and its metabolites causing 
nitrosative stress and pro-inflammatory responses, lipid peroxida-
tion by-products, aldehydes, and alkylators. Endogenous processes 
produce oxidized and alkylated bases, single- and double-strand 
breaks, interstrand cross-links, hydrolytic and enzymatic deamina-
tion of cytosine and 5-methylcytosine leading to uracil and thy-
mine, respectively. In the absence of any significant exogenous 
exposures, the steady-state background DNA damage load was 
estimated at ≥50,000 lesions per cell (Swenberg et al., 2011). 
The spontaneous daily damage load includes ~30,000 noninstruc-
tional and pro-mutagenic abasic sites resulting from spontaneous 
purine losses or enzymatic adduct/base cleavage, alkylated (N7-
methyl-dG) and oxidized (8-oxo-dG) bases, formaldehyde adducts, 
acrolein-dG adducts, and various etheno-purines (Lindahl, 1993; 
Swenberg et al., 2011). This significant and ubiquitous background 
of pro-mutagenic DNA background damage is similar to that 
caused by exogenous DNA-reactive agents and is likely causative 
for the normal range of background mutations (Swenberg et al., 
2011; Sharma et al., 2014).
The process of DNA replication itself is error-prone as one in 
about 106 replicated bases can be mis-inserted by replicative poly-
merases, or the polymerase can slip at repetitive sequences resulting 
in as small insertion–deletion loops (IDLs). However, the frequency 
of mis-inserted bases in replication is not the sole determinant of 
the spontaneous mutation frequency. Living cells reduce the rate of 
polymerase error appreciably through error recognition and repair 
processes (Johnson, 2010). A high-fidelity polymerase may make 
one error in a million bases while copying roughly 300 base pairs 
per second, but polymerase proofreading and mismatch correction 
then lower the error rate as much as 1000-fold (Johnson, 2010). The 
evolutionarily conserved mismatch repair pathway further corrects 
base pair mismatches as well as IDLs that escape the proofreading 
activity of DNA polymerases (Modrich and Lahue, 1996; Schofield 
and Hsieh, 2003); mismatch repair contributes about 1000-fold to 
the overall DNA replication fidelity (Jaworski et al., 1995; Jiricny, 
2006). The result is a low spontaneous mutation rate of the DNA 
replication process. A recent study based on the sequencing of 19 
Escherichia coli genomes in a 40,000-generation experiment esti-
mated the rate of spontaneous base pair substitutions to be 8.9 × 
10−11 per base pair per generation (Wielgoss et al., 2011). Finally, 
high levels of transcription in all organisms stimulate a wide vari-
ety of mutation types that reflect multiple molecular mechanisms 
(Jinks-Robertson and Bhagwat, 2014).
Ionizing Radiation  Electromagnetic waves that carry enough 
energy to ionize or remove electrons from an atom are defined as 
ionizing radiation (IR). Major exposure sources of general popula-
tions to IR include background waves, nuclear medicine, occupa-
tional exposure, industrial and consumer sources (NCRP, 2008). 
X-rays, γ-rays, neutrons, and α and β particles are types of IR that 
can produce radiochemical DNA damage either by direct or indirect 
mechanisms causing single- and double-strand breaks, abasic sites 
and a broad range of oxidative base damages from indirect creation 
of free radicals (Goodhead, 1994; Wallace, 1994; Ward, 1994; Cadet 
et al., 2011). The signature of IR exposure is the induction of DNA 
clustered damaged sites, defined as two or more lesions within one 
to two helical turns of DNA (Eccles et al., 2011). Clustered dam-
age can either be associated with double-strand breaks, oxidized 
base lesions or abasic sites or with single-strand breaks, oxidized 
base lesions, abasic sites. These multiple lesions can be formed in 
DNA from the same radiation energy deposition event (Blaisdell 
et al., 2001). The relative proportions of these different classes of 
DNA damage vary with type of radiation. For example, single-
strand breaks and base damages predominate with x-rays, for 
Mismatches
(DNA replication,
Alkylating agents)
Small Base Lesions
(Deamination,
RNOS, X-rays
Alkylating agents)
Abasic Sites
(Spontaneous
depurination,
Enzymatic
excision,
Alkylating
agents)
Strand Breaks
(X-rays, RNOS,
Alkylating
agents)
Photoproducts
(UV)
Cross-Links
(Bi/Multi-
functional
alkylating
agents,
Mitomycins,
Cisplatin)
Bulky Adducts
(DNA-protein
cross-links,
Hydrocarbons,
Alkylating
agents)
Phosphotriester
Adducts
(Alkylating
agents)
me
Intercalators
(Acridines,
Polycyclic
aromatics)
DR
DNA Damage Tolerance
DNA Damage Response
DNA Damage Repair
Fork Reversal
Recombination Past Lesion
Translesion Synthesis
Mismatch Repair
Base Excision Repair
Single-Strand Break Repair
Homologous Recombination
Nonhomologous End Joining
Fanconi Anemia Pathway
Nucleotide Excision Repair
Direct Repair
NER
FA
T T
DSBR
SSBR
BER
U
MMR
Gme:T
Ame
Gme
G=O
T:C
Figure 9-2.  Cellular mechanisms of DNA repair and damage tolerance to spontaneous and induced DNA damage.

506
Non-Organ-Directed toxicity
unit III
which ionization density is sparse, whereas increased frequencies 
of single- and double-strand breaks occur as a result of exposure to 
α particles for which ionization is dense. The 7,8-dihydro-8-oxo-
2′-deoxyguanosine (8-oxo-dG) base damage is considered as a bio-
marker for IR exposure and radiosensitivity (Erhola et al., 1997; 
Roszkowski and Olinski, 2012). Other base lesions such as thymine 
glycols, hypoxanthine, 1,N6-ethenoadenine, or 3,N4-ethenocytosine 
were also quantified following IR exposure (Le et al., 1998; Olipitz 
et al., 2012). It has been demonstrated that the modified histone 
γ-H2AX can be used as a sensitive biomarker of IR exposure fol-
lowing formation of DNA double-strand breaks (Nakamura et al., 
2006; Mah et al., 2010; Shee et al., 2013). The alkaline comet assay 
is also routinely used to measure DNA strand break damage fol-
lowing patient exposure to IR (Alapetite et al., 1999; Dusinska and 
Collins, 2008; Borrego-Soto et al., 2015).
Low-dose ionizing radiation is known to induce radioadap-
tive responses in vitro as well as in mice in vivo. The importance 
of dose-rate as the critical determinant of a genotoxic and adverse 
outcome has been demonstrated and presumably reflects saturation 
of the DNA repair and damage response capabilities at high-dose 
exposures leading to adverse outcomes including mutation. No 
accumulation of DNA damage such as base lesions and micro-
nuclei, sequence rearrangements, and gene expression of several 
radiation-sensitive genes following low-dose subacute exposure to 
10.5 cGy γ-radiation was seen in mice (Olipitz et al., 2012). This 
IR dose corresponds to approximately 400-fold increase over back-
ground dose, inducing formation of additional ~400 base lesions 
per cell. Meanwhile, when the same total amount of radiation was 
delivered in one acute dose, DNA double-strand breaks and DNA 
stress responses were detected.
Ultraviolet Light  Ultraviolet (UV) light is a type of electro-
magnetic nonionizing radiation with the wavelength range shorter 
than that of the violet end of the visible spectrum, but longer than 
that of x-rays. Our bodies use UV light to make vitamin D, but 
DNA is certainly one of its key ubiquitous targets; high UV expo-
sure causes skin burns and can even lead to cancer. UV radiation 
induces two of the most predominant and cytotoxic DNA lesions, 
cyclobutane-pyrimidine dimers (CPDs) and 6-4 photoproducts 
(6-4PPs) as well as their Dewar valence isomers. These lesions 
and biological responses to these lesions in various organisms have 
been well characterized and are described below (Friedberg et al., 
1995). Organisms have developed a number of repair and toler-
ance mechanisms to counteract UV-induced DNA damage (Sinha 
and Häder, 2002). Photoreactivation with the help of the enzyme 
photolyase is one of the most important and frequently occurring 
repair mechanisms in a variety of microorganisms. Excision repair 
plays an important role in eukaryotic DNA repair of UV-induced 
damage. In addition, mechanisms such as mutagenic repair, dimer 
translesion bypass, homologous recombination repair, cell-cycle 
checkpoints, apoptosis, and certain alternative repair pathways are 
also operative in various organisms to counteract consequences of 
UV exposures.
Chemical Agents  The major classes of DNA-reactive chemicals 
include polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, arylamines and nitro-
aryl hydrocarbons, aflatoxins, small alkylators, oxidating, reducing 
and deaminating chemicals, halogenated hydrocarbons, DNA-DNA 
and DNA-protein cross-linkers, strand breakers, and DNA interca-
lators; these are presented in Figure 9-2. Chemicals can produce 
DNA alterations either directly by DNA-reactive mechanisms of 
adduct formation or indirectly by intercalation of polycyclic, aro-
matic, and planar chemicals between the base pairs (Heflich, 1991). 
The conversion of DNA adducts or other structural modifications 
into gene and chromosomal mutations by errors of DNA replication 
on the damaged template, or occasionally by errors of DNA repair, 
can lead to cells being initiated along the key events pathway to the 
adverse outcome of cancer.
Many electrophilic chemicals react with nucleophilic sites 
within DNA, forming covalent addition products called biomarker 
DNA adducts, or some other DNA structural modifications. The 
DNA bases involved and the positions on DNA bases can be spe-
cific for a given chemical; base pairing can protect certain base 
positions from the adduction. Such specificity of DNA damage can 
result in a spectrum of mutations that is chemical-specific (Dogliotti 
et al., 1998; Jarabek et al., 2009). Some alkylated bases can mispair, 
causing mutations when DNA is replicated, other adducts are cyto-
toxic, while others can be both mutagenic and cytotoxic; impor-
tantly the most common alkylating adduct at N7 position of dG is 
not mutagenic. Ubiquitous alkyl adducts at the N3 and N7 positions 
of purines destabilize the N-glycosidic bond between the base and 
sugar backbone making these modified bases more susceptible to 
depurination into abasic sites (Wyatt and Pittman, 2006; Swenberg 
et al., 2011). Abasic sites are noninstructional and pro-mutagenic 
as the insertion of incorrect bases across from the abasic sites can 
cause mutations (Laval et al., 1990). The most abundant alkyl 
adduct produced by alkylating agents is at the N7 position of gua-
nine, a site that has the highest negative electrostatic potential in 
DNA (Pullman and Pullman, 1981; Beranek, 1990). However, N7 
C1-C3 alkyl guanine adducts are not considered to be cytotoxic 
or mutagenic as they do not block DNA replication and are well 
tolerated in the cells (Boiteux and Laval, 1983; Larson et al., 1985; 
Boysen et al., 2009; Philippin et al., 2014).
Bulky DNA adducts that distort DNA double helix, such as cis-
platin, metabolites of benzo(a)pyrene, or N-2-acetylaminofluorene, 
are recognized and repaired by excision repair in a similar way 
to UV damages (Gillet and Scharer, 2006). These bulky adducts 
impede progress of DNA and RNA polymerases, causing repli-
cation fork collapse or stalled transcription, respectively. If unre-
paired, these lesions can be bypassed during DNA replication in 
an error-prone or error-free manner by translesion synthesis (TLS).
Indirect intercalators such as acridine compounds (9-amino-
acridine, ethidium bromide, etc.) and other planar molecules such 
as daunomycin, doxorubicin, and thalidomide in repetitive DNA 
sequences have been associated with the induction of frameshift 
mutations in which one or two base pairs have been gained or lost 
(Ferguson and Denny, 1990; Hoffmann et al., 2003).
DNA Repair and Tolerance Pathways
The thousands of the steady-state background DNA lesions are readily 
repaired in cells by an integrated network of DNA repair pathways 
that includes direct repair (DR), base excision repair (BER), nucleotide 
excision repair (NER), mismatch repair (MMR), nonhomologous end- 
joining of double-strand breaks (NHEJ), homologous repair pathway 
(HR), and Fanconi Anemia (FA) pathway; these are presented in 
Figure 9-2. Among these repair activities, base excision repair is con-
sidered one of the most active, handling thousands of abasic sites, 
alkylated, oxidized and deaminated bases, single-strand breaks and 
nicks per day. These pathways also have overlapping repair substrates; 
for example, the most predominant abasic sites are also processed by 
homologous recombination between two similar or identical DNA 
sequences, nucleotide excision repair, or translesion synthesis that 
allows the DNA replication past unrepaired DNA lesions (Boiteux 
and Guillet 2004; Covo et al., 2004; Adar et al., 2009). The basic 
principles underlying DNA repair processes involve damage rec-
ognition, followed by either direct reversal of the damage (sealing

507
Genetic Toxicology
Chapter 9
of strand breaks or removal of alkyl adducts from DNA bases) or 
excision of damage that involves sequential steps of repair DNA syn-
thesis, and ligation of strands. DNA repair is usually error-free, but 
there may be rare events where the misrepair will result in genotoxic 
outcomes (Wiktor-Brown et al., 2008; Sukup-Jackson et al., 2014; 
Klapacz et al., 2016). DNA repair influences the genotoxic outcome, 
the dose–response of mutation and chromosome damage following 
exposure to DNA-reactive agents at all exposure levels (Kirsch-
Volders et al., 2000; Parry et al., 2000; Guerard et al., 2015; Thomas 
et al., 2015).
In contrast, if the sustained damage is extensive, the cell can 
undergo apoptosis (programmed cell death), effectively avoiding it 
becoming a mutant cell (Evan and Littlewood, 1998). If the damage 
is less severe, it can be repaired by a range of processes that are a 
part of generalized and complex cellular response networks; these 
processes can return the damaged DNA to its undamaged state by 
error-free post-replication damage avoidance pathway utilizing HR, 
or to an improved, but still altered, state involving the Radiation 
Sensitivity Proteins RAD6 and RAD18 protein complex respon-
sible for Proliferating Cell Nuclear Antigen (PCNA) modification 
and activation of translesion synthesis (TLS) (Hoege et al., 2002; 
McIntyre et al., 2006). During TLS, a family of prokaryotic and 
eukaryotic TLS polymerases, such as the human Y-family polymer-
ases eta, iota, kappa, and Rev1, can bypass lesions that otherwise 
would block replication by the normal processive DNA polymer-
ases (Rattray and Strathern, 2003; Prakash et al., 2005). These con-
served polymerases have the ability to bypass specific DNA lesions 
or groups of lesions. The result of the lesion bypass can be an inser-
tion of incorrect dNTP or a correct one depending on the induced 
lesion and the particular bypass polymerase.
This chapter presents a brief outline of the major classes of DNA 
repair and tolerance pathways (Fig. 9-3); much greater detail can be 
found in the reviews provided for each section and general reviews 
by Van Houten and Albertini (1995), Friedberg (2000), Krokan et al. 
(2000), Wood et al. (2005), Bansbach and Cortez (2011), Chatterjee 
and Siede (2013), and Coleman and Huang (2016).
Base Excision Repair (BER)  The base excision repair (BER) 
pathway is one of the most active DNA repair pathways in cells 
operating at all cell cycle stages. BER repairs non-bulky oxida-
tive, deaminated, and alkylated modifications to bases or the sugar 
phosphate backbone as well as abasic sites both in the nucleus and 
mitochondria (Chatterjee and Walker, 2017). BER involves five key 
enzymatic steps (Fig. 9-3A) to remove the initial DNA lesion and 
restore the original sequence, starting with (i) lesion recognition and 
excision of damaged base or inappropriate base by N-glycosylase; 
(ii) incision of the phosphodiester backbone at the resulting aba-
sic site by apurinic/apyrimidinic (AP) endonuclease; (iii) termini 
clean-up to permit repair synthesis and/or nick ligation; (iv) gap-
filling to replace the excised nucleotide by DNA polymerase; and 
(v) sealing of the final nick by DNA ligase enzymes.
BER is initiated by a class of lesion-specific enzymes called 
DNA glycosylases that recognize and cleave the damaged base to an 
abasic site (Lindahl, 1976; Demple and Harrison, 1994; Seeberg et 
al., 1995; Wood, 1996; McCullough et al., 1999; Sung and Demple, 
2006); at least 11 different DNA glycosylases have been identified. 
Glycosylases are known to share overlapping substrates; for exam-
ple, 8-oxoguanine glycosylase (OGG1), nei endonuclease VIII-like 
NEIL1, and NEIL3 glycosylases can all process 8-oxo-dG. DNA 
glycosylases initiate BER by either short-patch (one nucleotide) or 
long-patch (often 6 to 13 nucleotides) BER. The abasic sites formed 
by DNA glycosylases are recognized and processed by AP endo-
nucleases, such as APE1 or Apn1 to create incision of the phos-
phodiester backbone (Wood et al., 2001). DNA synthesis to fill the 
repair patch is completed by DNA polymerases, such as Pol β for 
short-patch repair, and processive Pol δ or Pol ε polymerases for 
long-patch repair. Two additional strand incision repair pathways 
that feed into long-patch BER have been characterized: nucleotide 
incision repair (NIR) where AP endonuclease directly incises 5′ 
to oxidized and alkylated pyrimidines (Ischenko and Saparbaev, 
2002); and ribonucleotide excision repair (RER) initiated by the 
RNase H2 complex that incises the strand 5′ to the misincorporated 
ribonucleotide (Sparks et al., 2012). Finally, repair of direct or indi-
rect single stranded DNA breaks is undertaken by the single-strand 
break repair (SSBR) pathway that feeds into BER. SSBR is divided 
into four different processes beginning with detection of a break, 
followed by DNA end processing, gap-filling, and finally ligation 
of the backbone (Fan and Wilson 2005). The importance of the BER 
pathway is highlighted by the fact that deficiencies in the core BER 
enzymes are incompatible with life and result in embryonic lethal-
ity and cell death (Xanthoudakis et al., 1996; Tebbs et al., 1999; 
Fung and Demple, 2005). Defects in BER enzymes lead to reduced 
Double-Strand Break
Collapsed Replication Fork
Resection
Strand Invasion &
Synthesis
Resolution & Repair
Ligation
Synthesis
Excision
Ligation
Synthesis
Excision
Mismatch Recognition
Base Damage Recognition
Interstrand Cross-link
Daughter Strand Gap
(C) Homologous Recombination-Directed Repair
(B) Mismatch Repair
(A) Excision Repair
Figure 9-3.  Schematics of basic steps of key DNA repair pathways. (A) Excision repair; (B) mismatch repair; (C) homologous recombination-directed DNA 
repair.

508
Non-Organ-Directed toxicity
unit III
cell survival, elevated mutation rates, DNA-damaging agent hyper-
sensitivities, and altered cellular responsiveness to relevant chemo-
therapeutics, such as alkylators (e.g., temozolomide), nucleoside 
analogs (e.g., 5-fluorouracil), and ionizing radiation (Kim and 
Wilson, 2012).
Nucleotide Excision Repair (NER)  The nucleotide excision 
repair (NER) pathway is a highly conserved pathway that recog-
nizes and removes bulky DNA lesions that distort DNA double 
helix and impede progress of DNA and RNA polymerases, caus-
ing replication fork collapse or stalled transcription, respectively 
(Lommel et al., 1995; Gillet and Scharer, 2006; Jiang and Sancar, 
2006). Substrates for NER include UV-induced lesions; cispla-
tin and hydrocarbon base adducts; chemicals in tobacco smoke, 
aflatoxin B1, endogenous lipid peroxidation products; and ROS-
induced base modifications (cyclopurines). NER uses about 30 
proteins to remove the damage-containing 25 to 30 base pairs long 
oligonucleotide from DNA (Reardon and Sancar, 2005; Reed, 
2011). The basic four steps of NER involve: (i) damage recognition 
and incision on both sides of the lesion, (ii) excision, (iii) repair 
synthesis, and (iv) ligation of the nicks (Fig. 9-3A). If unrepaired, 
these lesions can be bypassed in an error-prone manner by TLS 
polymerases. The characterization of these steps has been facili-
tated by the use of rodent mutant cell lines and cells from indi-
viduals with syndromes characterized by the UV-hypersensitivity, 
neurodevelopmental abnormalities, and skin cancers (Broughton 
et al., 2001). The defects in NER pathway are genetically linked to 
a group of autosomal recessive human diseases such as xeroderma 
pigmentosum (XP), Cockayne syndrome (CS), and photosensitive 
form of trichothiodystrophy. The cardinal feature of such patients is 
an extremely high incidence of UV-related cancers.
NER consists of a general pathway termed global genomic 
repair (GGR) that removes lesions from the entire genome and a spe-
cialized pathway referred to as transcription-coupled repair (TCR). 
These pathways differ in the mechanism of damage recognition, but 
share the same mechanism for removal and repair of the damage. 
In GGR, the xeroderma pigmentosum group C-complementing, or 
XPC complex, is the initial damage recognition factor that recog-
nizes the damage-induced structural change in DNA, binds to the 
strand opposite the adduct, mediates the recruitment of transcrip-
tion factor II human (TFIIH) complex, and initiates excision repair 
(Maillard et al., 2007; Min and Pavletich, 2007; Scharer, 2007). In 
TCR, stalled RNA polymerase II (RNAP) serves as the damage rec-
ognition step (Mellon and Hanawalt, 1989). In both pathways, TFIIH 
complex, containing XP type B and D, XPB (3′-5′) and XPD (5′-3′) 
helicases respectively, promotes the opening of DNA duplex around 
the adduct (Coin et al., 2007; Sugasawa et al., 2009; Mathieu et al., 
2010). XPF-ERCC1 (for XP type F and excision repair cross com-
plementation group 1) and XP type G (XPG) endonucleases are then 
responsible for dual incision 5′ and 3′ to the DNA damage, respec-
tively (Evans et al., 1997). After the dual incision event and removal 
of the damage-containing oligonucleotide fragment, DNA Pols δ, ε, 
or κ carry out gap-filling synthesis in cooperation with replication 
factor C (RFC) and proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) (Tang 
and Chu, 2002; Mocquet et al., 2008; Ogi et al., 2010). Finally, the 
nick is sealed in by ligase I or III complexes (Aboussekhra et al., 
1995; Araújo et al., 2000; Moser et al., 2007; Mocquet et al., 2008).
Double-Strand Break Repair  Cell survival and genome integ-
rity are seriously compromised by the presence of broken chro-
mosomes. Despite these consequences, double-strand breaks are 
exploited by cells to control a number of biological processes such 
as initiation of V(D)J recombination during antibody diversification, 
recombination of genetic material during meiosis, and decatenation 
of DNA molecules by topoisomerase II (Helleday et al., 2007). 
When double-strand breaks occur, the ends of the DNA are mostly 
not directly ligatable. To cope with the damage, all organisms have 
evolved several double-strand break repair mechanisms, of which 
NHEJ and HR are the most prominent (Shinohara and Ogawa, 
1995; Critchlow and Jackson, 1998; Haber, 2000; Sonoda et al., 
2006; Mladenov and Iliakis, 2011). Alternative error-prone double-
strand break repair pathways, namely alternative end joining (alt-
EJ) and single-strand annealing (SSA), have been recognized to 
compete for repair with classical HR (Fig. 9-3C) (Decottignies, 
2013; Ceccaldi et al., 2015). These pathways are largely similar 
across a broad range of species from yeast to humans, although 
the most frequently utilized one differ among species. Unrepaired 
double-strand breaks activate DNA damage repair (DDR) networks 
that allow either recognition of the break, activation of cellular 
checkpoints and DNA repair, or induction of apoptosis (Misteli and 
Soutoglou, 2009). Chromatin plays a crucial role in the regulation 
of DDR and double-strand break repair (Lemaître and Soutoglou, 
2014) with phosphorylated histone H2AX (γH2AX) serving as an 
early response following double-strand break formation (Rogakou 
et al., 1998, 1999). Formed γH2AX/MCD1 complex then either 
recruits p53 binding protein 1 (53BP1) to direct repair toward 
NHEJ, or BRCA1 to direct repair toward HR. MRN complex and 
ATM participate in both HR and NHEJ (Paull and Gellert, 1998, 
2000). Recent evidence also suggests that small non-protein-­coding 
RNAs are generated at the sites of DNA damage and control DDR 
network responses (d’Adda di Fagagna, 2014).
Homologous Recombination (HR)  Eukaryotes undergo homol-
ogous recombination (HR) between similar or identical DNA 
sequences as part of their normal activities both in germ cells 
(meiotic recombination) and somatic cells (mitotic recombination) 
(Zheng et al., 2011). In eukaryotes, the process has been charac-
terized most extensively for yeast, and these processes have been 
largely conserved in higher eukaryotes (Johnson et al., 1999; Krejci 
et al., 2003; West, 2003; Cahill et al., 2006). HR is the principal 
mode of double-strand break repair in the S and G2 phases of the 
cell cycle and is facilitated by the proximity of a sister chromatid 
with essentially the identical sequence as the broken chromosome 
(Fig. 9-3C). HR has been proposed to be initiated by the recognition 
of double-strand break by the Mre11-Rad50-Nbs1 (MRN) complex 
that acts as a break sensor and recruits ataxia-telangiectasia mutated 
(ATM) kinase to the site of damage (Stracker and Petrini, 2011). 
The initiating step involves the processing of the DNA ends imme-
diately adjacent to the double-strand break and the production of a 
3′-single-stranded tail by exonucleases or helicase activity. This is 
followed by the location of regions of homology, strand invasion 
with D-loop formation, and branch migration whereby the single-
stranded tail invades an undamaged homologous DNA molecule 
and Holliday junction DNA complex is formed; Holliday junction 
is cross-shaped structure that forms when two double-stranded 
DNA molecules become separated into four strands in order to 
exchange segments of genetic information. DNA synthesis and 
the resolution of the Holliday junction by its cleavage produce two 
DNA molecules (with or without a structural crossover). Additional 
models have also been proposed (Haber, 2000; Jasin and Rothstein, 
2013). A detailed description of the specific enzymes known to 
be involved can be found in Shinohara and Ogawa (1995), Cahill 
et al. (2006), Helleday et al. (2007), Hiom (2010), and Jasin and 
Rothstein (2013).
Nonhomologous End-Joining (NHEJ)  Classical nonhomolo-
gous end-joining (NHEJ) pathway joins two broken DNA ends in 
close spatial proximity to each other by direct re-ligation (Lieber

509
Genetic Toxicology
Chapter 9
et al., 2003). NHEJ does not require extensive sequence homology 
or genetic recombination and the repair is influenced by regions 
of microhomology of to 14 base pairs. NHEJ is the major double- 
strand break repair pathway in higher eukaryotes (Burma et al, 
2006). NHEJ can occur throughout cell cycle, but it predominates 
in the G0/G1 and G2 phases (Lieber, 2010). NHEJ is also an inte-
gral part of the V(D)J recombination, generating the vast antibody 
diversity and T-cell receptor proteins, while ensuring genomic sta-
bility (Malu et al., 2012).
NHEJ entails three main steps: recognition of the two-ended 
strand breaks; processing to remove non-ligatable termini; and join-
ing of the two ends. To initiate NHEJ, the Ku70/Ku80 heterodimer 
binds directly to the two broken ends, and recruits the DNA-
dependent protein kinase DNA-PKcs to facilitate the alignment of 
the broken ends (Mimori et al., 1986; Cary et al., 1997; Ramsden 
and Gellert, 1998). DNA-PKcs activates DNA endonucleases that 
trim the 3′ and 5′ single-stranded overhangs at the DNA ends to 
reveal complementary nucleotide stretches (Ma et al., 2002; Neal 
and Meek, 2011). This processing often results in nucleotide loss. 
In instances where short nucleotide gaps remain after microhomol-
ogy-mediated annealing, DNA Pols µ and λ fill in the small gap 
segments (Mahajan et al., 2002; Fan and Wu, 2004). Finally, ligase 
IV complex stimulates end joining to complete the repair process 
(Ahnesorg et al., 2006).
Fanconi Anemia (FA) Pathway  Fanconi anemia (FA) DNA 
excision repair pathway is involved in the repair of interstrand 
cross-links (ICLs) produced by cross-linking chemicals such as 
cisplatin, diepoxybutane, and mitomycin C (Coleman and Huang, 
2016). ICLs can interfere with cellular processes requiring separa-
tion of the two DNA strands, such as DNA replication and tran-
scription. Unrepaired ICLs can lead to mutations, chromosome 
breakage, and mitotic catastrophe. In addition to recognition and 
repair of ICLs, the complex FA pathway orchestrates cooperation 
of other DNA repair processes to complete ICLs repair process, 
such as HR, NER, and TLS. Individuals with FA protein defects 
exhibit hypersensitivity to cross-linking agents, developmental 
defects, bone marrow failure, and cancer predisposition.
Mismatch Repair (MMR)  The principal function of mismatch 
repair (MMR) system is the maintenance of genome integrity by 
correcting base pair mismatches and IDLs that escape the proof-
reading activity of DNA polymerases, and mismatches that occur 
after HR events (Modrich and Lahue, 1996; Jiricny, 1998; Schofield 
and Hsieh, 2003; Jun et al., 2006). MMR also responds to certain 
forms of DNA damage caused by alkylating agents, cisplatin, ROS, 
and UV radiation where it targets base pair mismatches following 
base mis-incorporation opposite DNA lesion (Earley and Crouse, 
1998; Colussi et al., 2002; Mazurek et al., 2002; Stojic et al., 2004). 
In this role of DNA damage surveillance, MMR proteins activate 
cell cycle checkpoints and apoptosis through interaction with sig-
naling kinases such as ATM (or ataxia-telangiectasia mutated), 
ATR (or ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3 related), and checkpoint 
kinases CHK1, and CHK2 (Wang and Qin, 2003; Stojic et al., 2004; 
Yoshioka et al., 2006; Liu et al., 2010). Individuals with defective 
MMR exhibit mutator phenotype (or increase in the mutation rate); 
microsatellite (or repetitive DNA sequence motifs) instability at 
mono-, di-, and trinucleotide repeats resulting in length changes 
of these motifs; and predisposition to hereditary Lynch cancer syn-
drome, also known as hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer 
(HNPCC), at an early age (Ionov et al., 1993; Shibata et al., 1994; 
Kolodner, 1995; Lynch and Lynch, 2000).
The principal steps of prokaryotic and eukaryotic MMR are 
damage recognition and binding to the mismatch, stabilizing of 
the binding by the addition of other proteins, cutting the DNA at 
a distance from the mismatch, excision past the mismatch, resyn-
thesis, and ligation (Fig. 9-3B). Organisms differ in their strategies 
to discriminate the parental template strand from the newly synthe-
sized daughter strand. These mechanisms are understood in Gram-
negative bacteria such as E. coli that utilize the DNA methylation 
at the N6 position of adenine in 5′-GATC-3′ sequences to direct the 
MMR-dependent strand excision to the newly synthesized, unmeth-
ylated DNA strand (Putnam, 2016). In higher eukaryotes the strand 
discrimination mechanisms are not completely understood; how-
ever, MMR is associated with eukaryotic replication machinery, 
suggesting that this interaction facilitates strand discrimination 
(Modrich, 1997; Mastrocola and Heinen, 2010; Pluciennik et al., 
2010). Data implicate PCNA (the “clamp”) together with replica-
tion factor C (RFC) complex (“clamp loader”) in early steps of 
eukaryotic MMR, as well as in gap repair synthesis. Following mis-
match recognition, the mutS homolog (MSH) heterodimers convert 
to ATP-dependent sliding clamps and recruit mutL homolog (MLH) 
heterodimers that together coordinate daughter strand excision. 
MutLα complex is a latent endonuclease activated by MutSα, RFC, 
and PCNA in a mismatch- and ATP-dependent manner (Kadyrov 
et al., 2006). DNA daughter segment flanked by two-strand breaks 
is then removed by exonuclease 1 and finally replaced by the pro-
cessive DNA synthesis machinery (Kadyrov et al., 2006).
Direct Repair (DR)  The error-free direct repair (DR) mecha-
nism is defined as the elimination of DNA and RNA damage using 
chemical reversion that does not require a nucleotide template, 
breaking of the phosphodiester backbone, or DNA synthesis (Nay 
and O’Connor, 2013). There are two distinct DR mechanisms in 
the majority of organisms: photoreactivation of UV-induced pyrim-
idine dimers by photolyases, and the removal of the alkyl groups 
from DNA and RNA by methyltransferases and dioxygenases.
Photolyases   have been identified in various organisms, but 
were lost early in the mammalian evolution and are not present 
in humans (Gerkema et al., 2013). DNA photolyases repair the 
UV-A- and UV-B-induced major pyrimidine dimers in DNA and 
RNA (Kim and Sancar, 1993). Photolyases bind to DNA contain-
ing a pyrimidine dimer in a light-independent reaction and absorb 
a photon to initiate the splitting of the dimer into two pyrimidines 
(Rupert et al., 1958; Rupert, 1961; Sancar, 1994).
Methylguanine DNA Methyltransferase (MGMT)  O6-Alkyl-
guanines are major cytotoxic and pro-mutagenic adducts produced 
by a variety of endogenous and exogenous alkylating chemicals 
(Loechler et al., 1984; Goldmacher et al., 1986; Beranek, 1990). If 
the cells enter S phase prior to O6-methylguanine (O6-MeG) repair, 
processive DNA polymerases commonly mispair O6-MeG with 
dT resulting in O6-MeG:T mismatch and fixation of a G:C-to-A:T 
transition mutation in the second round of replication (Fig. 9-4) 
(Ito et al., 1994). The ubiquitous methylguanine DNA methyltrans-
ferases (MGMT) remove alkyl from O6 position of dG. The human 
MGMT protein is constitutively expressed, housekeeping gene that 
is expressed in all tissues (Pieper, 1997). In all organisms, the alkyl 
group (such as methyl, ethyl, propyl, butyl, benzyl, and 2-chloro-
ethyl) is transferred via a one-step reaction to the repair protein by 
covalent binding to a highly conserved, active site cysteine directly 
restoring the DNA base and inactivating the protein (Tano et al., 
1990; Grombacher et al., 1996; Margison et al., 2003; Parkinson 
et al., 2008). This is referred to as a “suicide mechanism” where 
the protein is inactivated and targeted for elimination by protea-
some (Srivenugopal et al., 1996). A clear link between the levels 
of MGMT repair protein and the existence of thresholds for HPRT 
gene mutation induction was demonstrated in human-derived

510
Non-Organ-Directed toxicity
unit III
AHH-1 cells (Thomas et al., 2013). When levels of MGMT are not 
adequate or depleted, the MMR pathway serves as a backup repair 
pathway by eliminating cells with O6-MeG bases and preventing 
mutation (Fig. 9-4) (Duckett et al., 1996; Kaina et al., 1997; Cejka 
et al., 2004). O6-alkylguanine adducts can also be repaired by NER 
pathway (Taira et al., 2013). Biochemical studies have revealed that 
O6-MeG can be bypassed by TLS polymerases Pol η, Pol κ, and 
Pol ξ (Ito et al., 1994).
Alkbh Fe(II)/α-Ketoglutarate-Dependent Dioxygenases  Direct 
repair of N3-cytosine and N1-adenine alkyl adducts in DNA and 
RNA has been associated with the action of alkylation protein B 
(AlkB) family of dioxygenases (Kataoka et al., 1983; Delaney 
et al., 2005; Frick et al., 2007). The AlkB enzyme was first dis-
covered in E. coli and a number of its homologues (ALKBH) have 
been identified in humans (Aravind and Koonin, 2001; Kurowski 
et al., 2003). DNA adducts that are repaired by these enzymes inter-
fere with base-pairing, block DNA replication and transcription, 
and trigger cell cycle checkpoints and apoptosis (Kataoka et al., 
1983; Kurowski et al., 2003; Westbye et al., 2008). Dealkylation 
reaction catalyzed by AlkB and ALKBH occurs via transformation 
of α-ketoglutarate into succinate and restoration of the undam-
aged base (Trewick et al., 2002; Lee et al., 2005); removal of 
methyl adducts releases formaldehyde, removal of ethyl adducts 
releases acetaldehyde, whereas removal of etheno adducts releases 
glyoxal (Trewick et al., 2002; Delaney and Essigmann, 2004). 
E. coli AlkB mutants and Alkbh2- and Alkbh3-deficient mouse 
embryonic fibroblasts exhibit increased sensitivity to SN2-type 
alkylating chemicals and increased mutant frequency (Delaney and 
Essigmann, 2004; Ringvoll et al., 2006; Nieminuszczy et al., 2009).
Translesion Synthesis (TLS)  Translesion synthesis (TLS) is 
carried out by 11 highly conserved and specialized DNA polymer-
ases that are lesion- and species-specific (Prakash et al., 2005). 
TLS involves a temporary switch from the replicative, high-­fidelity 
polymerases to specialized, error-prone polymerases that help the 
cells bypass and tolerate the unrepaired damage (Moldovan et 
al., 2007). Common characteristics of TLS polymerases are large 
active sites that accommodate the damage, fewer contacts with 
DNA, low processivity, and lack of 3′–5′ exonuclease activity. 
For example, yeast and human homologues of TLS Pol η repli-
cate past TT dimers in an error-free manner; however, these incor-
rectly insert dG across from thymidine in 6-4 pyrimidine dimer 
photoproducts causing T-to-C mutations (Masutani et al., 2000; 
Johnson et al., 2001). XPV (xeroderma pigmentosum variant) 
patients have demonstrated congenital lack of this Pol η that leads 
to UV-hypersensitivity and predisposition to cutaneous malignan-
cies (Tung et al., 1996; Masutani et al., 1999; Kannouche et al., 
2004). Two TLS models have been proposed: the polymerase 
switch model to accommodate lesion bypass, and single-strand 
gap-filling model that typically falls outside of S phase of cell cycle 
(Chatterjee and Walker, 2017). After nucleotides are incorporated 
across from the damaged bases, the aberrant primer termini are 
typically extended by Pol ζ.
MMR-dependent,
direct activation
of various DDR
signaling networks
HR repair/survival
Sister Chromatid Exchanges
Chromosomal Aberration
Second round of DNA replication
ATR/ATM
Cell death
CDC25/JNK
CHK1/CHK2
Homologous Recombination
DSB
MMR
G
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
S
T
G
DNA replication
Direct repair by
MGMT
MGMT
C
G
C
G
C
Figure 9-4.  Interactions of DNA repair and damage response pathways in the processing and repair of O6-MeG adducts in DNA. MGMT repair protein directly 
repairs O6-MeG adducts. If unrepaired, O6-MeG preferably mispairs with T during DNA replication leading to G:C-to-A:T transitions. Alternatively, O6-MeG 
lesion induces apoptosis via the mismatch repair-dependent pathway. O6-MeG/mismatch repair-dependent DNA damage response includes multi-DNA damage 
response pathway, multi-time scale signaling network activation led by early ATM, H2AX, ATR-CHK1 kinases, and p53 phosphorylation, then followed by 
late phosphorylation of ATM-CHK2 and JNK kinase, as well as dramatic increases in p53 levels and p53 transcriptional target. Sister chromatid exchanges and 
chromosomal aberrations are induced by O6-MeG lesions via the mismatch repair-dependent pathway in the second cell cycle. The gaps and nicks present dur-
ing this phase can form double-strand breaks that are handled by homologous recombination. With loss of mismatch repair activity, cells become “methylation-
tolerant” accumulating mutations and escaping cell death in the presence of unrepaired O6-MeG. (Reproduced with permission from Klapacz et al., 2016.)

511
Genetic Toxicology
Chapter 9
DNA Damage Response (DDR)  DNA damage response (DDR) 
networks effectively remove thousands of background DNA 
load and maintain a very low level of spontaneous mutagenesis 
(Chatterjee and Siede, 2013). DNA repair enzymes and signaling 
networks are regulated by DDR kinases including ATM (ataxia-
telangiectasia mutated), ATR (ATM- and Rad3-Related), and 
DNA-PKcs (DNA-dependent protein kinases) at the sites of DNA 
damage via posttranslational protein modification cascades. These 
kinases sense the damage together with their mediator proteins, 
then pass the damage signal onto the transducer checkpoint kinases 
CHK1 and CHK2 (Bartek et al., 2001; Chen and Sanchez, 2004; 
Tanaka, 2010), followed by direct or indirect mediators of cell cycle 
progression such as p53, cell division cycle 25 CDC25A, B, or C 
phosphatases (Falck et al., 2001; Zhao et al., 2002; Sørensen et al., 
2003). Activation of the p53 checkpoint provides the cell with a 
more prolonged G1 cell cycle arrest (Bartek and Lukas, 2001). The 
p53 protein is phosphorylated directly by ATM and ATR as well 
as by CHK1 and CHK2 to stabilize and increase the level of cel-
lular p53 (Shiloh, 2003). As most mutations in DNA occur when a 
cell with unrepaired damage enters S phase of the cell cycle, DDR 
checkpoints arrest the progression of cell cycle to allow additional 
time for excision repair of the damage, or for DNA damage avoid-
ance, or for TLS. Should the checkpoints fail to prevent polymerase 
stalling, or if the damage is too extensive, cells can undergo apopto-
sis to eliminate heavily damaged or dysregulated cells.
As cells continually respond to endogenous DNA damage, the 
adaptive and homeostatic responses have been shown to also be 
utilized following exposures to DNA-reactive agents at all exposure 
doses (Noonan et al., 2012; Tentner et al., 2012; Li et al., 2014; 
Zhang et al., 2015). The fast-acting posttranslational networks, 
involving signaling ATM, ATR, p38, CHK2, and p53 cascades, are 
the main contributors to the avoidance of genotoxic outcomes at 
endogenous and at low exogenous DNA damage load of various 
classes (Zhang et al., 2014, 2015). However, the transcriptional 
up-regulation of genes occurred at higher concentrations of bilin-
ear dose–response curves with clear increases in micronuclei 
formation (Seidel et al., 2004; Zhang et al., 2014, 2015). ATM 
signaling kinase and p53 tumor suppressor are key players in 
DDR, but cells can utilize parallel DDR signaling pathways that 
are independent of ATM and p53 cascades, underscoring the com-
plexity and interconnectedness of biological responses to DNA 
damage (Hickman and Samson, 1999; Debiak et al., 2004; Noonan 
et al., 2012).
Taken together, the probability that DNA damage can be con-
verted into a genetic alteration is influenced by the dose–response 
relationships of various lesion classes, activated pathways, the com-
plex biological interactions between these pathways, the rate of the 
damage repair, and the fidelity and completeness of the repair. The 
mechanisms of induction of gene mutations and chromosome alter-
ations discussed in the following sections build upon the assessment 
of the probability and the mechanistic knowledge of repair versus 
mis-repair versus non-repair of the different DNA repair and DDR 
mechanisms.
MECHANISMS OF INDUCTION OF GENETIC 
ALTERATIONS
Formation of Gene Mutations
Somatic Cells  Mutations result in changes to the structure of a 
gene (Lodish et al., 2000). Gene mutations are considered to be 
small DNA sequence changes confined to a single gene such as 
point mutations, which involve alterations in a single base pair 
that affect the function of only one gene, and small deletions/addi-
tions in any DNA region. Larger genomic changes are considered 
below, under the section “Formation of Chromosomal Alterations.” 
Changes in a single base pair may produce one of three types of 
mutation: missense mutation, which results in a protein with one 
amino acid substituted for another; nonsense mutation, in which 
a stop codon replaces an amino acid codon, leading to premature 
termination of translation; and frameshift mutation, which causes a 
change in the reading frame by an addition or deletion of one or a 
few base pairs (not in multiples of three) in protein-coding regions, 
leading to pre-mature termination of the protein (Ripley; 1991; 
Lodish et al., 2000). Base substitutions can be further subdivided 
as transitions where the change is purine for purine or pyrimidine 
for pyrimidine, and transversions where the change is purine for 
pyrimidine and vice versa. Historically, nonsense mutations where 
the stop codon in the transcribed RNA is UAA are termed as ochre 
mutations, those with UAG codon are called amber mutations, and 
those with UGA are referred to as opal mutations. For the discus-
sion of the mechanism of induction of gene mutations and chromo-
somal alterations, it is necessary to distinguish substances by their 
general mode of action (MOA). Chemicals that can produce genetic 
alterations with similar effectiveness in all stages of the cell cycle 
are called radiomimetic because they act like radiation; the radio-
mimetic group includes bleomycin, streptonigrin, neocarzinostatin, 
and 8-ethoxycaffeine. Mutations caused by such chemicals tend to 
be deletions caused by DNA strand breaks ranging in size from a 
few bases to multilocus events (Thacker, 1992). As discussed pre-
viously, DNA strand breaks are rapidly repaired by multiple repair 
processes before DNA replication takes place. Therefore, mutations 
induced by ionizing radiation tend to be the result of errors of DNA 
repair (Preston, 1992). In contrast, chemicals that produce genetic 
alterations far more effectively in the S phase of the cell cycle are 
described as nonradiomimetic. The great majority of chemicals are 
nonradiomimetic.
Gene mutations can arise in the absence of specific exog-
enous exposures to radiation and chemicals. The great majority 
of spontaneous mutations arise from polymerase slippage, DNA 
biosynthetic errors, and replication errors of an altered template; 
spontaneous altered template can be a result of oxidative and alkyl-
ated damage, or the deamination of bases especially cytosine in 
DNA/5-methylcytosine at CpG sites resulting in uracil or thymine, 
respectively, eventually leading to G:C-to-A:T transitions after two 
rounds of DNA replication (Shinde et al., 2003; Jinks-Robertson 
and Bhagwat, 2014).
Gene mutations induced by a majority of chemicals and non-
ionizing radiations are base substitutions, frameshifts, and small 
deletions produced by errors of DNA replication on a damaged 
template. The relative mutation frequency of an adduct will be the 
outcome of kinetics between its repair and DNA replication, that 
is, in general terms, the more repair that takes place prior to rep-
lication, the lower the mutation frequency for a given amount of 
induced DNA damage. Furthermore, the nature of an unrepaired 
adduct dictates its miscoding properties expressed by DNA poly-
merases during the S phase (Jarabek et al., 2009). Not all DNA 
adducts are miscoding; small alkyl adducts frequently found at the 
N7 position of guanine are not mutagenic and do not block DNA 
replication progress (Beranek, 1990; Boysen et al., 2009; Swenberg 
et al., 2011; Philippin et al., 2014). Activation of S phase at a G1/S 
cell cycle checkpoints through signaling cascades involving kinases 
such as ATM, ATR, CHEK1, CHK2, and p53 is an important modu-
lator of these kinetics, as more repair can take place prior to the 
cell starting/re-starting DNA replication (Mercer, 1998; Giglia-
Mari et al., 2011). Finally, error-prone translesion synthesis past

512
Non-Organ-Directed toxicity
unit III
pro-mutagenic lesions can lead to mutations (Fix et al., 2008; 
Sale, 2013).
Germ Cells  Mutations in germ cells are changes to the DNA 
sequence of sperm or egg that can be inherited by the offspring 
(Yauk et al., 2015). The mechanism of production of gene muta-
tions in germ cells is basically the same as in somatic cells. 
It was estimated that a child inherits an average of one de novo 
mutation per 100×106 parental nucleotides (Roach et al., 2010; 
Conrad et  al., 2011). An important consideration for assessing 
gene mutations induced by chemicals in germ cells is the relation-
ship between exposure and the timing of DNA replication. In the 
mammalian spermatogonial stem cell, only a small fraction of the 
8-day or longer cell cycle is being occupied by the S phase; thus, 
the probability of DNA repair taking place prior to DNA replica-
tion is high. However, for considerations of the genetic risk, the 
spermatogonial stem cell is present throughout the reproductive 
lifetime of an individual; each time it divides, it produces a dif-
ferentiating spermatogonium and a stem cell that can accumulate 
genetic damage. Differentiating spermatogonia undergo a series of 
mitotic divisions before entering meiosis, followed by a series of 
morphological transformation to produce spermatozoa (Clermont, 
1972); the late spermatid/spermatozoa stages become DNA repair 
deficient (Marchetti and Wyrobek, 2005; Olsen et al., 2005). 
Postmeiotic germ cells are particularly sensitive to mutation induc-
tion by nonradiomimetic chemicals, especially following acute 
exposures (Russell, 2004). The fairly short duration of this stage 
(approximately 21 days in the mouse) means that their contribu-
tion to genetic risk following chronic exposures is quite small. The 
DNA damage incurred during late spermatid/spermatozoa stages 
can be repaired post-fertilization using the egg’s repair proteins 
(Marchetti et al., 2007). In contrast, oocyte is resistant to the induc-
tion of gene mutations by nonradiomimetic chemicals for which 
DNA repair is the mode of formation of mutations, and DNA repair 
occurs in oocytes as there is no further S phase until the zygote 
(Brewen and Preston, 1982).
The mechanistic aspects of the production of heritable gene 
mutations in male premeiotic germ cells has recently been consid-
ered for monofunctional alkylating chemicals and presented as an 
adverse outcome pathway (AOP) (Yauk et al., 2015). In general, 
AOPs describe a simplified series of key events (KEs) along the 
biological organization of organisms that lead to an adverse health 
or population effects (Villeneuve et al., 2014a, 2014b). An AOP 
links a molecular initiating event (MIE) to an adverse outcome 
(AO) through intermediate KEs. The tailored Bradford-Hill consid-
erations for key event relationships (KERs) and evidence evaluation 
of the essentiality of KEs to AO are systematically assessed under 
this framework. The AOP for alkylation of DNA in male premeiotic 
germ cells leading to heritable mutations is presented in Fig. 9-5. 
The MIE for this AOP has been designated as the alkylation of 
DNA in male premeiotic germ cells. This MIE is followed by the 
KE1: insufficient or incorrect DNA repair in male premeiotic germ 
cells, and KE2: increased mutations in male premeiotic germ cells. 
Mutations that do not impair spermatogenesis persist and eventually 
are present in mature sperm can be measured with in vivo trans-
genic rodent mutation (OECD TG 488, 2013) assay or mutations 
in simple tandem repeat DNA sequences (Yauk, 2004). Eventually, 
these series of KEs lead to an adverse outcome (AO) of increased 
heritable mutations in the offspring. Inherited mutations in the off-
spring can lead to embryonic or fetal death, or be transmitted to the 
offspring and cause phenotypic outcomes; thus, heritable mutation 
is an important regulatory endpoint used by the agencies around 
the world for risk assessment and regulatory purposes (Vinken, 
2013; Yauk et al., 2015). The overall AOP is generally accepted 
as dogma with strong essentiality of its KEs and KERs as well as 
strong biological plausibility without notable inconsistencies and 
uncertainties.
Formation of Chromosomal Alterations
Somatic Cells 
Structural Chromosome Aberrations  Large-scale changes 
in chromosome structure can affect the functioning of numer-
ous genes, resulting in major phenotypic consequences (Lodish 
et al., 2000). These chromosomal mutations, or abnormalities, can 
involve deletion or insertion of several contiguous genes, inversion 
of genes on a chromosome, or the exchange of large segments of 
DNA between nonhomologous chromosomes. Chromosome aber-
rations induced by ionizing radiations are generally formed by 
errors of DNA repair, whereas those produced by nonradiomimetic 
chemicals are generally formed by errors of DNA replication on a 
damaged DNA template.
Inherited
mutations
Offspring:
mutation in all
tissues, increasing
risk of disease
Mutations in
male premeiotic
germ cells
KER3
KER2
KER4
KER5
AO
KE2
KE1
KER1
MIE
Alkylation of
DNA
Exposure to
monofunctional
alkylating agents
Delivery to testes
Molecular
Initiating
Event
Cellular Response
Chemical
Structure &
Properties
Insufficient or
incorrect DNA
repair
(male premeiotic
germ cells)
Organism
Response
Figure 9-5.  Flow diagram of the alkylation of DNA in male premeiotic germ cells leading to heritable mutations AOP depicting the MIE, KEs, AO, and KERs. 
(Reproduced with permission from Yauk et al., 2015.)

513
Genetic Toxicology
Chapter 9
The DNA repair errors that lead to the formation of chromo-
some aberrations following ionizing radiation (and radiomimetic 
chemical) exposure arise from misligation of double-strand breaks 
or interaction of coincidentally repairing regions during excision 
repair of damaged bases. The overall kinetics and fidelity of DNA 
repair influence the sensitivity of cells to the induction of chromo-
somal aberrations produced by misrepair. The broad outcomes of 
misrepair are that incorrect rejoining of chromosomal pieces dur-
ing repair leads to chromosomal exchanges within (e.g., inversions 
and interstitial deletions) and between (e.g., dicentrics and recipro-
cal translocations) chromosomes. Failure to rejoin double-strand 
breaks or to complete the repair of other types of DNA damage 
leads to terminal deletions.
Acentric fragments arise from interstitial deletions, terminal 
deletions, and the formation of dicentric chromosomes and rings. The 
failure to incorporate an acentric fragment into a daughter nucleus at 
anaphase/telophase, or the failure of a whole chromosome to segre-
gate at anaphase to the cellular poles, can result in the formation of a 
membrane-bound micronucleus that resides in the cytoplasm.
Errors of DNA replication on a damaged template can lead to 
a variety of chromosomal alterations. The majority of these involve 
deletion or exchange of individual chromatids (chromatid-type aber-
rations). Thus, nonradiomimetic chemicals induce only chromatid-
type aberrations, whereas radiation and radiomimetic chemicals 
induce chromatid-type aberrations in the S and G2 phases of the cell 
cycle, but chromosome-type aberrations affecting both chromatids in 
G1. The reason for this latter observation is that the G1 (or G0) chro-
mosome behaves as a single DNA molecule and aberrations formed 
in it will be replicated in the S phase and will involve both chro-
matids. This distinction is important for considerations of outcome 
of the aberrations and the probability of an effect on cells because 
for chromatid-type aberrations, one chromatid remains intact and 
genetically unaltered, in contrast to chromosome-type aberrations in 
which both chromatids are damaged (Preston et al., 1995).
Numerical Chromosome Changes  Numerical changes (e.g., 
monosomies, trisomies, and ploidy changes) can arise from errors 
in chromosomal segregation. The complexity of the control and the 
mechanics of the mitotic process means that alteration of various cel-
lular components can result in failure to segregate the sister chroma-
tids to separate daughter cells or in failure to segregate a chromosome 
to either pole (Bickel and Orr-Weaver, 1996; Preston, 1996; Hunt, 
2006). The mechanisms underlying chromosomal loss are pertinent 
to those involved in the formation of micronuclei. Aneuploidy is a 
known cause of human disease and represents a major cause of infer-
tility, pregnancy failure, and serious genetic disorders in the offspring.
A limited set of chemicals has been demonstrated to cause 
aneuploidy through interaction with components of the structures 
that facilitate chromosome movement (Preston, 1996; Aardema 
et al., 1998). These include benomyl, griseofulvin, nocodazole, 
colchicine, colecemid, vinblastine, and paclitaxel. These chemicals 
affect tubulin polymerization or spindle microtubule stability. A 
group of small molecule drugs that are targeted to inhibit Aurora 
kinases, a family of serine/threonine kinases important for proper 
attachment of microtubules at spindle assembly during cell divi-
sion, have been shown to induce aneuploidy (Gollapudi et al., 2014; 
Bavetsias and Linardopoulos, 2015). To date, other mechanisms of 
aneuploidy induction by chemicals have not been firmly identified.
Germ Cells  The formation of chromosomal alterations in germ 
cells is basically the same as that for somatic cells, namely, via 
misrepair for ionizing radiations and radiomimetic chemicals for 
treatments in G1 and G2, and by errors of replication for all radia-
tions and chemicals for DNA damage present during the S phase.
The types of aberrations formed in germ cells are the same as 
those formed in somatic cells (e.g., deletions, inversions, transloca-
tions), although their appearance in diplotene/diakinesis of meiosis 
I, where analysis is frequently conducted, is rather different because 
of the homologous chromosome pairing that takes place in meiotic 
cells (Léonard, 1973). The specific segregation of chromosomes 
during meiosis influences the probability of recovery of an aber-
ration, particularly a reciprocal translocation, in the offspring of a 
treated parent (Preston et al., 1995).
An adverse outcome pathway (AOP) for chemical binding to 
tubulin in oocytes leading to aneuploid offspring has been developed 
and published (Marchetti et al., 2016). Colchicine, a prototypical 
chemical that binds to tubulin and causes microtubule depolymer-
ization has been used to develop the AOP. In this AOP specific to 
female germ cells exposed during the periovulation period, chemi-
cals that bind to tubulin (MIE) cause microtubule depolymerization 
(KE1) resulting in spindle disorganization (KE2) followed by altered 
chromosome alignment and segregation (KE3) and the generation 
of aneuploid oocytes (KE4), ultimately leading to an increased inci-
dence of aneuploidy syndromes in the offspring (AO). The available 
evidence suggests that the MIE and KEs are conserved across species 
and would be relevant for human oocytes. The development of AOPs 
related to mutagenicity in germ cells is expected to aid the identifica-
tion of potential hazards to germ cell genomic integrity and support 
regulatory efforts to protect population health (Marchetti et al., 2016).
ASSAYS FOR DETECTING GENETIC 
ALTERATIONS
Introduction to Assay Design
Genetic toxicology assays are used to identify germ cell mutagens, 
somatic cell mutagens, and potential carcinogens. These assays can 
detect diverse kinds of genetic alterations (e.g., gene mutations, 
chromosome aberrations, and aneuploidy) that are relevant to the 
production of adverse human health outcomes. Over the last three 
decades, hundreds of chemicals and complex mixtures have been 
evaluated for genotoxic effects. Genetic toxicology assays serve 
two interrelated but distinct purposes in the toxicologic evaluation 
of chemicals: (1) identifying mutagens for purposes of hazard iden-
tification and (2) characterizing dose–response relationships and 
mutagenic mechanisms, both of which contribute to an understand-
ing of genetic and carcinogenic risks.
A common experience when surveying the genetic toxicology 
literature is encountering a bewildering array of assays in viruses, 
bacteria, fungi, cultured mammalian cells, plants, insects, and mam-
mals. More than 200 assays for mutagens have been proposed, and 
useful information has been obtained from many of them. Although 
most genetic toxicology testing and evaluation relies on relatively 
few assays, data from relatively obscure assays can sometimes con-
tribute to a judgment about the genetic activity of a compound.
Table 9-1 lists key assays that have a prominent place in 
genetic toxicology. Table 9-2 is a more comprehensive list that 
provides literature citations to many of the assays that one might 
encounter in the genetic toxicology literature. Even this extensive 
table is not exhaustive, in that it emphasizes methods in applied 
genetic toxicology and not those assays whose use has been largely 
restricted to studies of mutational mechanisms. The commonly used 
assays rely on phenotypic effects as indicators of gene mutations 
or small deletions and on cytological methods for observing gross 
chromosomal damage. Detailed information on assay design, test-
ing data, controls, sample sizes, and other factors in effective testing 
is found in the references cited.

514
Non-Organ-Directed toxicity
unit III
Some assays for gene mutations detect forward mutations 
whereas others detect reversion. Forward mutations, such as those 
detected in the thymidine kinase (tk) gene in the widely used assay in 
mouse lymphoma cells (Clements, 2000; Wang et al., 2009; Schisler 
et al., 2013), are genetic alterations in a wild type gene that are 
detected by a change in phenotype caused by the alteration or loss of 
gene function. In contrast, reversion mutations are those that restore 
gene function in a mutant, such as the histidine revertants detected in 
the Ames assay in Salmonella (Ames et al., 1975; Mortelmans and 
Zeiger, 2000; Claxton et al., 2010). Thus, a back mutation or rever-
sion that restores gene function in a mutant brings about a return 
to the wild type phenotype. In principle, forward-mutation assays 
should respond to a broad spectrum of mutagens because any muta-
tion that interferes with gene expression should confer the detect-
able phenotype. A reversion assay might be expected to have a more 
restricted mutational response because only mutations that correct or 
compensate for the specific mutation in a particular mutant will be 
detected. In fact, some reversion assays respond to a broader spec-
trum of mutational changes than one might expect because mutations 
at a site other than that of the original mutation, either within the test 
gene or in a different gene (i.e., a suppressor mutation), can some-
times confer the selected phenotype. Both forward mutation assays 
and reversion assays are used extensively in genetic toxicology.
The simplest gene mutation assays rely on selection techniques 
to detect mutations. A selection technique is a means of imposing 
experimental conditions under which only cells or organisms that 
have undergone mutation can grow. For example, only cells that have 
a mutation in the tk gene can grow in medium containing the inhibitory 
chemical trifluorothymidine (Seifried et al., 2006; Wang et al., 2009; 
Schisler et al., 2013). Selection techniques greatly facilitate the identi-
fication of rare cells that have experienced mutation among the many 
cells that have not. Forward mutations (Clements, 2000; Vlasakova 
et al., 2005) and reversions (Josephy, 2000; Mortelmans and Riccio, 
2000; Mortelmans and Zeiger, 2000; Kamber et al., 2009) can both be 
detected by selection techniques in microorganisms and cultured mam-
malian cells. Due to their speed, low cost, and ease of detecting events 
that occur at low frequency (i.e., mutation), assays in microorganisms 
and cell cultures have figured prominently in genetic toxicology.
Studying mutagenesis in intact animals requires assays of 
more complex design than the simple selection methods used in 
Table 9-1  
Principal Assays in Genetic Toxicology
BATTERY
ASSAY TYPE
ASSAY DESCRIPTION
Current 
strategies for 
genotoxicity 
testing in vitro
Bacterial reverse mutation 
test (Ames test) for gene 
mutations
At least five amino-acid requiring strains of Salmonella typhimurium and 
Escherichia coli are used to detect point mutations (base-pair substitution, 
addition, or deletion of one or a few DNA base pairs) that restore the functional 
capability of the bacteria to synthesize an essential amino acid.
Chromosomal damage and 
aneuploidy in mammalian 
cell cultures
In vitro mammalian chromosomal aberration test in somatic cells. A micronucleus 
assay detecting both clastogenicity and aneugenicity.
Gene mutations in 
mammalian cell cultures
Forward mutation assay at tk locus of mouse lymphoma L5178Y cells or at the hprt 
locus of cell lines derived from Chinese hamster or human lymphoblastoid TK6 cells.
Current 
strategies for 
genotoxicity 
testing in vivo
An assay for the assessment 
of cytogenetic damage in 
rodent bone marrow cells
A micronucleus assay is preferred since it detects both clastogenicity and 
aneugenicity. A mammalian in vivo chromosome aberration test detects structural 
chromosome aberrations in rodent bone marrow cells.
Gene-mutation assays in 
rodent somatic cells
Transgenic lacI, lacZ, cII loci of Big Blue®, Muta™ Mouse, etc., detect mutations 
in vivo in any tissue of choice.
Genotoxicity assay for 
detection of DNA damage 
and repair
In vivo comet assay (single cell gel electrophoresis assay) recommended for 
follow-up testing of positive in vitro findings. Also useful as a tool for the 
evaluation of local genotoxicity, especially for organs/cell types which cannot 
easily be evaluated with other standard tests.
Other genetic 
toxicity assays
Assays for gene mutations
Gene-mutation assays in rodent somatic cells, e.g., Pig-a.
Saccharomyces cerevisiae Gene Mutation Assay (OECD guideline deleted).
Drosophila sex-linked recessive lethal assay (OECD guideline deleted).
Genotoxicity assays
Sister chromatid exchange assay detects reciprocal exchanges of DNA segments 
between two sister chromatids of a duplicating chromosome.
Unscheduled DNA synthesis test with mammalian liver cells detects DNA synthesis 
after excision repair of damaged DNA.
Mitotic recombination assay in Saccharomyces cerevisiae (OECD guideline deleted).
Mammalian germ cell assays
Mouse specific-locus tests.
Cytogenetic analysis and heritable translocation assays.
DNA damage and repair in rodent germ cells.
Mutation analysis in germ cells of transgenic rodents.
Mutation analysis in tandem-repeat loci in mice.
OECD guideline deletion means that no new testing shall be initiated using any deleted Test Guideline, but the results generated shall continue to be  
accepted in the regulatory settings and for weight-of-evidence assessments.

515
Genetic Toxicology
Chapter 9
ASSAYS
SELECTED LITERATURE CITATIONS
	I. 	Prediction of genotoxicity
A.  Interpretation of chemical structure
Structural alerts to genotoxicity
Ashby (1994), Ashby and Tennant (1991), Ashby and Paton (1993)
B.  In silico predictive models
Computational and structural programs: MCASE, 
TOPKAT, DEREK 
Snyder et al. (2004), Snyder and Smith (2005), Snyder (2009), 
Mahadevan et al. (2011)
Quantitative structure–activity relationship (QSAR) 
modeling 
Votano et al. (2004), Snyder and Smith (2005), Mahadevan et al. 
(2011)
	II. 	DNA damage and repair assays
A.  Direct detection of DNA damage:
Alkaline elution assays for DNA strand breakage in 
hepatocytes
Storer et al. (1996), Gealy et al. (2007)
Comet assay (single-cell gel electrophoresis) for DNA 
strand breakage
Fairbairn et al. (1995), Singh (2000), Tice et al. (2000), Collins 
(2004), Olive (2009)
CometChip
Weingeist et al. (2013), Ge et al. (2014)
Nonmammalian comets in ecotoxicology
Cotelle and Férard (1999), Lee and Steinert (2003), Jha (2004)
Assays for chemical adducts in DNA
Phillips et al. (2000), Farmer and Singh (2008), Himmelstein et al. 
(2009)
B.  DNA repair, recombination, and genotoxic stress responses as indicators of damage:
Differential killing of repair-deficient and wild type 
bacteria
Takigami et al. (2002)
Induction of the bacterial SOS system
Quillardet and Hofnung (1993), Yasunaga et al. (2004), Oda et al. 
(2009)
“Green Screen” for GADD45a gene induction in TK6 
human cells
Hastwell et al. (2009), Jagger et al. (2009), Hughes et al. (2012)
Unscheduled DNA synthesis (UDS) in isolated rat 
hepatocytes or rodents in vivo
Madle et al. (1994), McQueen and Williams (1987), Butterworth et al. 
(1987)
Induction of mitotic recombination
Zimmermann (1992), Hoffmann (1994), Vogel and Nivard (2000), 
Turner et al. (2003), Reliene et al. (2007)
	III.	Prokaryote gene-mutation assays
A.  Bacterial reverse mutation assays:
Salmonella/mammalian microsome assay (Ames test)
Ames et al. (1975), Kier et al. (1986), Maron and Ames (1983), 
Gatehouse et al. (1994), Mortelmans and Zeiger (2000), Seifried 
et al. (2006), Claxton et al. (2010)
E. coli WP2 tryptophan reversion assay
Gatehouse et al. (1994), Mortelmans and Riccio (2000)
Salmonella-specific base-pair substitution assay (Ames 
II assay)
Gee et al. (1994), Kamber et al. (2009)
E. coli lacZ-specific reversion assay
Cupples and Miller (1989), Cupples et al. (1990), Josephy (2000), 
Hoffmann et al. (2003)
B.  Bacterial forward mutation assays:
E. coli lacI assay
Calos and Miller (1981), Halliday and Glickman (1991)
Resistance to toxic metabolites or analogs in Salmonella
Jurado et al. (1994), Vlasakova et al. (2005)
	IV. 	Assays in nonmammalian eukaryotes:
A.  Fungal assays:
Forward mutations, reversion, and small deletions
Zimmermann et al. (1984), Crouse (2000)
Mitotic crossing over, gene conversion, and homology-
mediated deletions in yeast
Zimmermann et al. (1984), Zimmermann (1992), Howlett and 
Schiestl (2000), Daigaku et al. (2004), Freeman and Hoffmann 
(2007)
Genetic detection of mitotic and meiotic aneuploidy in 
yeast
Zimmermann et al. (1984), Aardema et al. (1998), Howlett and 
Schiestl (2000), Nunoshiba et al. (2007)
B.  Plant assays:
Gene mutations affecting chlorophyll in seedlings, the 
waxy locus in pollen, or Tradescantia stamen-hair color
Ma et al. (2005), Grant and Owens (2006)
Chromosome aberrations and micronuclei in mitotic and 
meiotic cells of corn, Tradescantia, and other plants
Ma et al. (2005), Grant and Owens (2006), Misík et al. (2011)
(continued )
Table 9-2  
Overview of Genetic Toxicology Assays

516
Non-Organ-Directed toxicity
unit III
ASSAYS
SELECTED LITERATURE CITATIONS
C.  Drosophila assays:
Sex-linked recessive lethal test in germ cells
Lee et al. (1983), Mason et al. (1987), Vogel et al. (1999)
Heritable translocation assays
Mason et al. (1987), Vogel et al. (1999)
Mitotic recombination and LOH in eyes or wings
Vogel et al. (1999), Vogel and Nivard (2000)
	V. 	Mammalian gene-mutation assays
A.  In vitro assays for forward mutations:
tk mutations in mouse lymphoma or human cells
Clements (2000), Seifried et al. (2006), Wang et al. (2009), Moore 
et al. (2011), Schisler et al. (2013)
hprt or xprt mutations in Chinese hamster or human cells
Li et al. (1988), DeMarini et al. (1989), Parry et al. (2005)
CD59 mutations in CHO-human hybrid AL cells
Zhou et al. (2006), Ross et al. (2007)
B.  In vivo assays for gene mutations in somatic cells:
Mouse spot test (somatic cell specific-locus test)
Styles and Penman (1985), Lambert et al. (2005)
hprt mutations (6-thioguanine-resistance) in rodent 
lymphocytes
Cariello and Skopek (1993), Casciano et al. (1999), Lambert et al., 
2005
Pig-a mutations (immunological detection of mutations 
blocking glycosylphosphatidylinositol synthesis)
Dobrovolsky et al. (2010), Miura et al. (2011), Dobo et al. (2011), 
Gollapudi et al. (2015)
C.  Transgenic assays:
Mutations in the bacterial lacI gene in Big Blue® mice 
and rats
Lambert et al. (2005), Singer et al. (2006)
Mutations in the bacterial lacZ gene in the Muta™ Mouse
Lambert et al. (2005), Singer et al. (2006)
Mutations in the phage cII gene in lacI or lacZ transgenic 
mice
Shane et al. (2000), Swiger (2001), Lambert et al. (2005)
Point mutations and deletions in the lacZ plasmid mouse
Lambert et al. (2005), Singer et al. (2006)
Point mutations and deletions in gpt delta mice and rats
Okada et al. (1999), Lambert et al. (2005), Nohmi (2016)
Forward mutations and reversions in ΦX174 transgenic 
mice
Valentine et al. (2010)
Inversions and deletions arising in pKZ1 mice by 
intrachromosomal recombination
Sykes et al. (2006)
	VI.	Mammalian cytogenetic assays
A.  Chromosome aberrations:
Metaphase analysis in cultured Chinese hamster or 
human cells
Ishidate et al. (1988), Kirkland et al. (1990), Galloway et al. 
(1994), Galloway (2000), Corvi et al. (2008), Galloway et al. 
(2011)
Metaphase analysis of rodent bone marrow or 
lymphocytes in vivo
Preston et al. (1981), Kirkland et al. (1990), Tice et al. (1994)
Chromosome painting and other FISH applications in 
vitro and in vivo
Tucker et al. (1993b, 2005), Paccierotti and Sgura (2008)
B.  Micronuclei:
Cytokinesis-block micronucleus assay in human 
lymphocytes
Fenech et al. (2003), Corvi et al. (2008), Fenech (2008), Fenech 
et al. (2011a, 2011b)
Micronucleus assay in mammalian cell lines
Kirsch-Volders et al. (2003), Corvi et al. (2008), Galloway et al. 
(2011)
In vivo micronucleus assay in rodent bone marrow or 
blood
Krishna and Hayashi (2000), Hayashi et al. (2007), Tweats et al. 
(2007), Dertinger et al. (2011)
 In vivo micronucleus assay in tissues other than marrow 
or blood
Hayashi et al. (2007), Coffing et al. (2011), Morita et al. (2011)
C.  Sister chromatid exchange:
SCE in human cells or Chinese hamster cells
Tucker et al. (1993a), Wilson and Thompson (2007)
SCE in rodent tissues, especially bone marrow
Tucker et al. (1993a)
D.  Aneuploidy in mitotic cells:
Hyperploidy detected by chromosome counting or FISH 
in cell cultures or bone marrow
Galloway and Ivett (1986), Natarajan (1993), Aardema et al. 
(1998), Paccierotti and Sgura (2008)
Micronucleus assay with centromere/kinetochore labeling 
in cell cultures
Lynch and Parry (1993), Natarajan (1993), Aardema et al. (1998), 
Fenech (2008), Paccierotti and Sgura (2008)
Table 9-2  
(Continued)
(continued )

517
Genetic Toxicology
Chapter 9
microorganisms and cultured cells. Genetic toxicology assays there-
fore range from inexpensive short-term tests (Zeiger, 2010) that can 
be performed in a few days to complicated assays for mutations in 
mammalian germ cells (Favor, 1999; Russell, 2004; Singer et al., 
2006). Even in multicellular organisms, there has been an empha-
sis on designing assays that detect mutations with great efficiency 
(Casciano et al., 1999; Vogel et al., 1999; Lambert et al., 2005; 
Dobrovolsky et al., 2010). Nevertheless, there remains a gradation 
in which an increase in relevance for human risk entails more elabo-
rate and costly tests (Table 9-2). The most expensive mammalian 
tests are typically reserved for chemicals of special importance in 
basic research or risk assessment, whereas the simpler assays can 
be applied more broadly.
Cytogenetic assays differ in design from typical gene mutation 
assays because of their reliance on cytological rather than genetic 
methods. The goal in cytogenetic methods is the unequivocal 
visual recognition of cells that have experienced genetic damage. 
The alterations measured include chromosome aberrations (Preston 
et al., 1981; Ishidate et al., 1988; Corvi et al., 2008), micronuclei 
(Hayashi et al., 2007; Corvi et al., 2008; Fenech et al., 2011a, 
2011b), sister chromatid exchanges (SCEs; Tucker et al., 1993a; 
Wilson and Thompson, 2007), and changes in chromosome num-
ber (Aardema et al., 1998; Paccierotti and Sgura, 2008). The latter 
include ploidy changes (e.g., polyploid cells) and aneuploidy, in 
which one or a few chromosomes have been gained (i.e., hyper-
ploidy) or lost (i.e., hypoploidy) relative to the normal chromosome 
number. Aneuploidy is of great interest because of its implications 
for human health, but assays for aneuploidy are not yet as refined 
or systematically applied as those for other classes of chromosomal 
alterations. The biological and toxicological significance of SCEs is 
largely unknown and as such tests for SCE induction are no longer 
included as part of genotoxicity assessment.
In all mutagenicity testing, one must be aware of possible 
sources of error. Factors to consider in the application of muta-
genicity assays are the choice of suitable organisms and growth 
conditions, appropriate monitoring of genotypes and phenotypes, 
ASSAYS
SELECTED LITERATURE CITATIONS
Altered parameters in flow-cytometric detection of 
micronuclei in CHO cells
Bryce et al. (2011)
Mouse bone marrow micronucleus assay with centromere 
labeling
Adler (1993), Aardema et al. (1998), Krishna and Hayashi (2000)
	VII. 	Germ cell mutagenesis
A.  Measurement of DNA damage
Molecular dosimetry based on mutagen adducts in 
reproductive cells
Russell and Shelby (1985), Olsen et al. (2010), Verhofsrad et al. 
(2011)
UDS in rodent germ cells
Bentley et al. (1994), Sotomayor and Sega (2000)
Alkaline elution assays for DNA strand breaks in rodent 
testes
Bentley et al. (1994)
Comet assay in sperm and gonadal tissue
Speit et al. (2009)
B.  Gene mutations
Mouse specific-locus test for gene mutations and 
deletions
Russell et al. (1981), Ehling (1991), Russell and Russell (1992), 
Favor (1999), Russell (2004), Singer et al. (2006)
Mouse electrophoretic specific-locus test
Lewis (1991)
Dominant mutations causing mouse skeletal defects or 
cataracts
Ehling (1991), Selby et al. (2004)
ESTR assay in mice
Yauk (2004), Dubrova (2005), Singer et al. (2006), Somers (2006)
Germ cell mutations in transgenic assays
Lambert et al. (2005), Singer et al. (2006)
C.  Chromosomal aberrations
Cytogenetic analysis of oocytes, spermatogonia, 
spermatocytes, or zygotes
Kirkland et al. (1990), Tease (1992), Russo (2000), Marchetti et al. 
(2001)
Direct detection in sperm by FISH
Marchetti et al. (2006, 2008)
Micronuclei in mouse spermatids
Russo (2000), Hayashi et al. (2007)
Mouse heritable translocation test
Russell and Shelby (1985), Singer et al. (2006)
D.  Dominant lethal mutations
Mouse or rat dominant lethal assay
Adler et al. (1994), Singer et al. (2006)
E.  Aneuploidy
Cytogenetic analysis for aneuploidy arising by 
nondisjunction
Allen et al. (1986), Adler (1993), Adler et al. (1994), Aardema et al. 
(1998), Russo (2000), Marchetti et al. (2001)
Sex chromosome loss test for nondisjunction or breakage
Russell and Shelby (1985)
Micronucleus assay in spermatids with centromere 
labeling
Aardema et al. (1998)
FISH with probes for specific chromosomes in sperm
Russo (2000), Marchetti et al. (2006, 2008)
Table 9-2  
(Continued)

518
Non-Organ-Directed toxicity
unit III
effective experimental design and treatment conditions, inclusion 
of proper positive and negative controls, and sound methods of data 
analysis. The articles cited in Table 9-2 discuss these aspects of 
genetic toxicology testing. In addition, the publication by Lorge 
et al. (2016) provides guidance on good cell culture practices in 
the conduct of genetic toxicology assays using mammalian cell 
cultures.
Many substances that are not themselves mutagenic or carci-
nogenic can be activated into mutagens and carcinogens by metabo-
lism (Guengerich, 2001; Malling, 2004). Such chemicals are called 
promutagens and procarcinogens. Since microorganisms and mam-
malian cell cultures lack many of the metabolic capabilities of intact 
mammals, provision must be made for metabolic activation in order 
to detect promutagens in many genetic assays. Incorporating an 
in vitro metabolic activation system derived from a mammalian 
tissue homogenate is the most common means of adding meta-
bolic activation to microbial or cell culture assays (Malling and 
Frantz, 1973; Ames et al., 1975; Clements, 2000; Malling, 2004; 
Cox et al., 2016). For example, the promutagens dimethylnitrosa-
mine and benzo[a]pyrene are not themselves mutagenic in bacte-
ria, but they are mutagenic in bacterial assays if the bacteria are 
treated with the promutagen in the presence of a homogenate from 
mammalian liver.
The most widely used metabolic activation system in micro-
bial and cell culture assays is a postmitochondrial supernatant from 
a rat liver homogenate, along with appropriate buffers and cofactors 
(Maron and Ames, 1983; Kirkland et al., 1990). The standard liver 
metabolic activation system is called an S9 mixture, designating 
a supernatant from centrifugation at 9000 g (Malling and Frantz, 
1973; Maron and Ames, 1983). The S9 subcellular fraction con-
tains microsomes and cytosol with microsomes containing enzymes 
necessary for Phase I metabolism (e.g., cytochrome P450s) and 
cytosol containing the enzymes involved in Phase II metabolism. 
Most of the short-term assays in Table 9-2 require exogenous meta-
bolic activation to detect promutagens. Exceptions are assays in 
intact mammals and a few simpler assays that have a high level of 
endogenous cytochrome P450 metabolism, such as the detection of 
UDS or DNA strand breakage in cultured hepatocytes (Madle et al., 
1994; Gealy et al., 2007).
Rat liver S9, usually prepared following induction with 
Aroclor-1254 (a mixture of polychlorinated biphenyls) or 
phenobarbital/β-naphthoflavone, provides a broad assemblage 
of metabolic reactions, but they are not necessarily the same as 
those of hepatic metabolism in an intact animal (Richardson et al., 
2016). Metabolic activation systems based on homogenates from 
mice, guinea pigs, hamsters, or monkeys and preparations from 
organs other than liver have found some use in mutagenicity test-
ing (Mortelmans and Zeiger, 2000). In some cases, these systems 
detect mutagenicity more efficiently than rat liver S9. However, 
like a homogenate from rat liver, these systems may differ from the 
species or organs of their origin. Therefore, alternative metabolic 
activation systems tend to be more useful if chosen for mechanistic 
reasons rather than simply testing another species or organ. Such 
systems include the use of intact hepatocytes (Madle et al., 1994; 
Storer et al., 1996; Gealy et al., 2007) to preserve the cellular com-
partmentalization of reactions; an in vitro system that can carry out 
the reduction reactions needed to detect the activity of substances 
whose mutagenicity requires reductive metabolism, such as some 
azo compounds (Mortelmans and Zeiger, 2000; Seifried et al., 
2006); and the use of mammalian cells or bacteria engineered to 
express foreign genes that encode enzymes of metabolic activation 
(Sawada and Kamataki, 1998; Crespi and Miller, 1999; Josephy, 
2000, 2002; Oda et al., 2009).
Besides metabolic activation, some chemicals are subject 
to photochemical activation. The genotoxicity of such chemi-
cals depends on the chemical being irradiated with ultraviolet or 
visible light. Many of the assays listed in Table 9-2, including 
gene-­mutation assays in bacteria and cultured mammalian cells, 
cytogenetic assays, and the comet assay, have been adapted so that 
they can measure photogenotoxic effects (Brendler-Schwaab et al., 
2004; Lynch et al., 2011).
Genes encoding enzymes of xenobiotic metabolism have 
been incorporated by recombinant DNA technology into micro-
organisms or cell cultures to expand their capacity for metabolic 
activation. The genes incorporated into bacteria may be derived 
from other bacteria or from humans (Josephy, 2002; Oda et al., 
2009). For example, bacterial genes that cause overexpression of 
N-acetyltransferase enhance the sensitivity of the bacteria to the 
mutagenicity of aromatic amines or nitroarenes (Josephy, 2002). 
The expression of human cytochrome P450 enzymes in Salmonella 
tester strains from the Ames assay (Josephy 2002; Yamazaki et al., 
2004), a Salmonella SOS-induction assay (Oda et al., 2009), or 
E. coli strains of the lacZ reversion assay (Josephy, 2000) permits 
the activation of promutagens like 2-aminoanthracene and 2-ami-
nofluorene without a S9 mixture. Mammalian cell lines have also 
been genetically engineered to express human Phase-I and Phase-II 
enzymes, including those catalyzing reactions of metabolic activa-
tion (Sawada and Kamataki, 1998; Chevereau et al., 2017). Many 
cell lines stably expressing a single form of P450 have been estab-
lished. Mutagenesis can be measured through such endpoints as 
HPRT mutations, cytogenetic alterations, and γH2AX, and the cells 
are well suited to analyzing the contribution of different enzymes to 
the activation of promutagens (Crespi and Miller, 1999; Chevereau 
et al., 2017).
Metabolic activation is so central to genetic toxicology that all 
mutagenicity testing programs must provide for it in the choice of 
assays and procedures. Despite their usefulness, in vitro metabolic 
activation systems, however well refined, cannot mimic mammalian 
metabolism perfectly. There are differences among tissues in reac-
tions that activate or inactivate foreign compounds, and organisms 
of the normal flora of the intestines can contribute to metabolism in 
intact mammals. Chemicals that induce enzyme systems or other-
wise alter the physiological state can also modify the metabolism 
of toxicants, and the balance between activation and detoxification 
reactions in vitro may differ from that found in vivo.
Structural Alerts and In Silico Assays
The first indication that a chemical is a mutagen often lies in 
chemical structure. Potential electrophilic sites in a molecule serve 
as an alert to possible mutagenicity and carcinogenicity because 
such sites confer reactivity with nucleophilic sites in DNA (Miller 
and Miller, 1981; Tennant and Ashby, 1991; Snyder et al., 2004; 
Votano et al., 2004; Snyder and Smith, 2005). In general, genotoxic 
carcinogens typically are either electrophiles or can be activated 
to electrophilic reactive intermediates (pro-electrophiles). These 
compounds form covalent adducts with most of the cellular mac-
romolecules such as DNA, RNA, or proteins at the nucleophilic 
centers with electron-rich heteroatoms S, O, or N (Plošnik et al., 
2016). The understanding of the mechanisms of action through 
which electrophiles react with biological nucleophiles is based 
on the classical chemical reactions (SN1, SN1, acylation, Schiff 
base formation, Michael addition, and SNAr) between electron-
rich and electron-deficient centers (Plošnik et al., 2016). Strong 
electrophiles (e.g., nitroso compounds, epoxides, α,β- unsatu-
rated aldehydes, N-sulphonyloxy-N-methyl-4- aminoazobenzene,

519
Genetic Toxicology
Chapter 9
N-sulphonyloxy-N-acetyl-2-aminofluorene, and N-hydroxy-2-
aminofluorene) are small, poorly polarized molecules, and their 
electron deficiency shows as positive electron charge. Soft electro­
philes (e.g., safrole, estragole, N-methylol-4-aminoazobenzene) are 
usually large, highly polarized molecules, and their electron defi-
ciency spreads all over the molecule (Plošnik et al., 2016).
Computer-based systems for predicting genotoxicity based 
on chemical structure properties are sometimes called in silico 
assays. These assays include computational and structural programs 
(Snyder and Smith, 2005; Snyder, 2009; Knudsen et al., 2011; 
Mahadevan et al., 2011) and the modeling of quantitative structure–
activity relationships or (Q)SARs (Votano et al., 2004; Snyder and 
Smith, 2005; Mahadevan et al., 2011). The electrophilic theory of 
genotoxic carcinogenicity has led to two main (Q)SAR approaches 
for modeling genotoxic chemicals: (a) to identify the electrophilic 
functional groups or substructures, that is, to develop SAR models 
based on structural alerts; and (b) to find molecular descriptors that 
can be quantitatively related to the activity of the chemicals, that is, 
to develop (Q)SARs (Serafimova et al., 2010).
Structural alerts in combination with critical interpretation are 
a valuable initial adjunct to mutagenicity testing within the inte-
grated approaches for testing and assessment of chemicals (Tennant 
and Ashby, 1991; Ashby and Paton, 1993). Although there is much 
skepticism that such approaches can replace biological testing, 
they hold promise of improving the efficiency of integrated testing 
strategies and reducing current levels of animal use (Guha, 2011; 
Dearfield et al., 2017; Wichard, 2017). The most commonly mod-
eled endpoint for genotoxicity has been the Ames mutagenicity 
assay. The accuracy of Ames mutagenicity prediction is typically 
around 70% to 75% (Serafimova et al., 2010). (Q)SAR predictions 
should be interpreted by an expert with knowledge of the endpoint, 
the strengths and limitations of the specific model applied, the 
applicability domain of the model, and the reliability of prediction 
for the chemical of interest (Serafimova et al., 2010). Moreover, 
computational approaches should not be based on stand-alone basis, 
but on a weight-of-evidence approach including information from 
all available sources such as read across and in vitro test methods 
(Serafimova et al., 2010).
DNA Damage and Repair Assays
Some assays measure DNA damage itself, rather than mutational 
consequences of DNA damage. These assays belong to the category 
of “indicator assays” and the effects measured in these assays may 
or may not lead to mutational consequence. Damage to DNA may 
be induced directly, through such indicators as chemical adducts 
or strand breaks in DNA, or indirectly, through the measure-
ment of biological repair processes. Adducts in DNA are detected 
by 
32P-postlabeling, high-performance liquid chromatography 
(HPLC), fluorescence-based methods, mass spectrometry, immu-
nological methods using antibodies against specific adducts, iso-
tope-labeled DNA binding, and electrochemical detection (Phillips 
et al., 2000; Farmer and Singh, 2008; Himmelstein et al., 2009). 
The 32P-postlabeling method is highly versatile, in that it is sensi-
tive and can be applied to diverse mutagens, but it may fall short of 
other methods for quantitative accuracy (Farmer and Singh, 2008). 
Through a combination of methods, many classes of adducts, 
including those of such environmentally widespread compounds 
as polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons, can be detected. The mea-
surement of adducts after human chemical exposures has proven 
useful in human monitoring, molecular dosimetry, and risk assess-
ment (Phillips et al., 2000; Farmer and Singh, 2008; Himmelstein 
et al., 2009). Adducts in somatic cells are relevant to carcinogenesis 
(Himmelstein et al., 2009), whereas those in reproductive cells per-
mit molecular dosimetry for germ cell mutagenesis (Olsen et al., 
2010; Verhofsrad et al., 2011; Yauk et al., 2015).
DNA strand breakage can be measured by alkaline elution 
(Storer et al., 1996; Gealy et al., 2007) and electrophoretic meth-
ods. Single-cell gel electrophoresis, also called the comet assay, is 
a widely used, rapid method of measuring DNA damage (Fairbairn 
et al., 1995; Singh, 2000; Tice et al., 2000; Collins, 2004; Olive, 
2009; Speit et al., 2015; Glei et al., 2016; Collins et al., 2017). 
In this assay, cells are incorporated into agarose on slides, lysed 
so as to liberate their DNA, and subjected to electrophoresis typi-
cally under alkaline conditions (pH >13) to allow detection of 
DNA double-strand breaks, single-strand breaks, alkali-labile sites, 
DNA-DNA/DNA-protein cross-linking, and incomplete excision 
repair sites (Fairbairn et al., 1995; Singh, 2000; Tice et al., 2000; 
Pu et al., 2015). The DNA is stained with a fluorescent dye for 
observation and image analysis. As broken DNA fragments in the 
tail migrate more quickly than larger pieces of DNA of the head, 
a blur of fragments (a “comet”) is observed when the DNA is 
extensively damaged. The extent of DNA damage can be estimated 
from the intensity of the comet tail relative to the total intensity 
(head plus tail) that reflects the amount of DNA breakage (Collins, 
2004; OECD TG 489, 2016). Variations in the procedure permit 
the preferential detection of double-strand breaks under neutral 
conditions (Fairbairn et al., 1995; Olive, 2009) or inclusion of 
digestion of lesion-specific DNA repair enzymes in the procedure 
allows the detection of various DNA base alterations, such as oxida-
tive base damage. (Pu et al., 2015; Glei et al., 2016; Collins et al., 
2017). Comet assay has also been modified to detect DNA meth-
ylation status (Townsend et al., 2017). Finally, the high-throughput 
“CometChip” technique, based on the traditional comet assay, 
simultaneously follows DNA damage load over time in different 
cell lines in response to various genotoxicants (Weingeist et al., 
2013; Ge et al., 2014). This method quantifies kinetics, differen-
tial sensitivity, and repair capacity within different genetic back-
grounds at the level of an individual cell. Although the comet assay 
has proven to be a sensitive indicator of DNA damage with broad 
applicability, it is prone to yield false positive/uninterpretable find-
ings under conditions of physiological and/or mechanical stress. It 
has been used most commonly with human lymphocytes (Fairbairn 
et al., 1995; Singh, 2000; Collins, 2004) and other mammalian cells 
(Tice et al., 2000), but it can be adapted to diverse species, including 
plants, worms, mollusks, fish, and amphibians (Cotelle and Férard, 
1999; Lee and Steinert, 2003; Jha, 2004). This adaptability makes 
it well suited to use in environmental genetic toxicology. The appli-
cability of the comet assay and other DNA damage assays to rodent 
testes (Bentley et al., 1994; Speit et al., 2009) makes these methods 
helpful in interpreting risks to germ cells.
The occurrence of DNA repair can serve as an easily measured 
indicator of DNA damage. Repair assays have been developed in 
microorganisms, cultured mammalian cells, and intact mammals 
(Table 9-2). Greater toxicity of a chemical in DNA-repair-deficient 
strains than in their repair-proficient counterparts (e.g., rec+ and 
rec− in Bacillus subtilis) can serve as an indicator of DNA dam-
age in bacteria (Takigami et al., 2002). Bacterial repair assays find 
occasional application, but are used less commonly today than his-
torically. The measurement of unscheduled DNA synthesis (UDS), 
which is a measure of excision repair, is a mammalian DNA repair 
assay indicating that DNA has been damaged (Madle et al., 1994). 
UDS has been used with cultured hepatocytes with endogenous 
cytochrome P450 enzyme activities as well as tissues of intact ani-
mals, including hepatocytes (Madle et al., 1994), and germinal tis-
sue (Bentley et al., 1994; Sotomayor and Sega, 2000). The absence

520
Non-Organ-Directed toxicity
unit III
of UDS, however, does not provide evidence that DNA has not been 
damaged because some classes of damage are not readily excised. 
Based upon their analysis, Kirkland and Speit (2008) questioned the 
value of in vivo rodent liver UDS assay as follow-up to the positive 
findings of in vitro genotoxicity assays. Their analyses were based 
on the relative performance of three in vivo assays (liver comet, 
transgenic mutation, and bone marrow micronucleus) in predicting 
rodent carcinogens.
Besides specific DNA repair processes, the induction of 
general responses to genotoxic stress has been used as an indica-
tor of genetic damage. The induction of DNA repair networks, 
known as the “SOS response,” allows bacteria to survive sudden 
increases in DNA damage as detected by phage induction, colo-
rimetry, or green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter induction after 
the activation of SOS gene promoters (Quillardet and Hofnung, 
1993; Yasunaga et al., 2004; Friedman et al., 2005; Michel, 2005; 
Oda et al., 2009). Another fluorescence-based screen, the growth 
arrest and DNA damage gene GADD45a-GFP assay, also called 
“Green Screen,” detects genotoxic stress in human lymphoblastoid 
TK6 cells (Hastwell et al., 2009; Hughes et al., 2012). The stress 
response is detected by the genetic GFP reporter construct following 
p53-dependent expression from GADD45a promoter of the trun-
cated GADD45a gene/GFP construct. The induction of fluorescence 
by mutagens, clastogens, and aneugens exhibits sensitivity toward 
genotoxicants comparable with other in vitro mammalian cell 
assays as well as a very high specificity (93%) (Birrell et al., 2009). 
The assay can be conducted with S9 metabolic activation and lends 
itself to automated detection by flow cytometry (Jagger et al., 2009).
Gene Mutations in Prokaryotes
The most common means of detecting mutations in microorganisms 
is selecting for reversion in strains that have a specific nutritional 
requirement differing from wild type members of the species; such 
strains are called auxotrophs. For example, the widely used assay 
developed by Bruce Ames and his colleagues is based on measur-
ing reversion in several histidine auxotrophs in Salmonella enterica 
serovar Typhimurium, commonly called S. typhimurium (Ames 
et al., 1975).
In the Ames assay one measures the frequency of histidine-
independent bacteria that arise in a histidine-requiring strain in the 
presence or absence of the chemical being tested. Auxotrophic bac-
teria are treated with the chemical of interest by one of several pro-
cedures (e.g., the standard plate-incorporation assay) and plated on 
medium that is deficient in histidine (Ames et al., 1975; Maron and 
Ames, 1983; Mortelmans and Zeiger, 2000). The assay is conducted 
using genetically different strains so that reversion by base pair sub-
stitutions and frameshift mutations in several DNA sequence con-
texts can be detected and distinguished. Since Salmonella does not 
metabolize promutagens in the same way as mammalian tissues, 
the assay is generally performed in the presence and absence of a 
rat liver S9 metabolic activation system. The Ames assay is com-
monly referred to as the Salmonella–Escherichia coli/mammalian-
microsome reverse mutation assay although the activation system 
used is S9 (microsomes + cytosol) (OECD TG 471, 1997). Based 
on the current version of the OECD Ames test guideline, at least 
five strains of bacteria should be used that include four strains of 
S. typhimurium that revert at GC base pairs (TA1535; TA1537 or 
TA97a or TA97; TA98; and TA100) and the fifth strain that reverts at 
AT base pair (either one of E. coli WP2 uvrA, or E. coli WP2 uvrA 
(pKM101), or S. typhimurium TA102).
The principal strains of the Ames test and their characteristics 
are summarized in Table 9-3. In addition to the histidine alleles that 
provide the target for measuring mutagenesis, the Ames tester strains 
contain other genes and plasmids that enhance the assay. Part I of the 
table gives genotypes, and Part II explains the rationale for including 
specific genetic characteristics in the strains. Part III summarizes the 
principal DNA target in each strain and the mechanisms of rever-
sion. Taken together, the Ames strains detect a broad array of muta-
tions, and they complement one another. For example, E. coli and S. 
typhimurium oxidative damage-sensitive strains TA102 and TA104, 
all detect the A:T-to-G:C base pair substitutions that are not detected 
by hisG46 strains (Mortelmans and Zeiger, 2000). TA102 also detects 
chemicals that cause DNA cross-links because it has an intact exci-
sion repair system whereas the other common tester strains do not.
The most common version of the Ames assay is the plate-
incorporation test (Ames et al., 1975; Maron and Ames, 1983; 
Mortelmans and Zeiger, 2000). In this procedure, the bacterial tester 
strain, the test compound (or solvent control), and the S9 metabolic 
activation system (or buffer for samples without S9) are added to 
2 mL of molten agar containing biotin and a trace of histidine to 
allow a few cell divisions, mixed, and immediately poured onto the 
surface of a petri dish selective for histidine-independent revertants. 
For general testing it is recommended that at least three plates per 
concentration and five concentrations be used with and without S9, 
along with appropriate concurrent positive and negative controls 
(Mortelmans and Zeiger, 2000). Variations on the standard plate-
incorporation assay confer advantages for some applications. These 
include a preincubation assay that facilitates the detection of unsta-
ble compounds and short-lived metabolites, a desiccator assay for 
testing volatile chemicals and gases, a microsuspension assay for 
working with small quantities of test materials, assays incorporating 
reductive metabolism rather than the conventional S9 system, and 
assays under hypoxic conditions (Mortelmans and Zeiger, 2000).
Although simplicity is a great merit of microbial assays, it can 
also be deceptive. Even assays that are simple in design and applica-
tion can be performed incorrectly. For example, in the Ames assay one 
may see very small colonies in the petri dishes at highly toxic concen-
trations (Maron and Ames, 1983; Kirkland et al., 1990; Mortelmans 
and Zeiger, 2000). Counting such colonies as revertants would be 
an error because they may actually be non-revertant survivors that 
grew on the low concentration of histidine in the plates. Were there 
millions of survivors, the amount of histidine would have been insuf-
ficient to allow any of them (except real revertants) to form colonies. 
This artifact is easily avoided by checking that there is a faint lawn 
of bacterial growth in the plates; one can also confirm that colonies 
are revertants by streaking them on medium without histidine to be 
sure that they grow in its absence. Such pitfalls exist in all mutagenic-
ity tests. Therefore, anyone performing mutagenicity tests must have 
detailed familiarity with the laboratory application and literature of 
the assay and be observant about the responsiveness of the assay in 
terms of laboratory historical negative and positive control values.
Although information from the Ames assay has become a 
standard in genetic toxicology testing, equivalent information can 
be obtained from other bacterial assays. Like the Ames assay, the 
WP2 tryptophan reversion assay in E. coli (Kirkland et al., 1990; 
Mortelmans and Riccio, 2000) incorporates genetic features that 
enhance assay sensitivity, can accommodate S9 metabolic acti-
vation, and performs well in many laboratories. Mutations are 
detected by selecting for reversion of a trpE allele from Trp− to 
Trp+. Its responsiveness to mutagens most closely resembles TA102 
among the Ames strains (Mortelmans and Riccio, 2000).
Bacterial reversion assays are commonly used for testing pur-
poses, but they also provide information on molecular mechanisms 
of mutagenesis. The broader understanding of mutational mecha-
nisms that comes from refined genetic assays and molecular analy-
sis of mutations can contribute to the interpretation of mutational 
hazards. The primary reversion mechanisms of the Ames strains,

521
Genetic Toxicology
Chapter 9
summarized in Table 9-3, were initially determined by genetic and 
biochemical means (Maron and Ames, 1983). An ingenious method 
called allele-specific colony hybridization greatly facilitated the 
molecular analysis of revertants in the Ames assay (Koch et al., 
1994), and many spontaneous and induced revertants have been 
cloned or amplified by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and 
sequenced (Levine et al., 1994; DeMarini, 2000).
Part III of Table 9-3 is by necessity a simplification with 
respect both to targets and mechanisms of reversion of the Ames 
strains. Some mutations that bring about reversion to histidine 
independence fall outside the primary target, and the full target has 
been found to be as much as 76 base pairs in hisD3052 (DeMarini 
et al., 1998). Other revertants can arise by suppressor mutations in 
other genes. It has been shown that hisG46, hisG428, hisC3076, 
III. MECHANISMS OF REVERSION DETECTED BY THE AMES TESTER STRAINS
STRAIN
PRIMARY TARGET*
MUTATIONS DETECTED
TA1535, TA100
GGG/CCC
Base-pair substitutions, principally those beginning at G:C base pairs 
(G:C→A:T; G:C→T:A; G:C→C:G). These strains also detect
A:T→C:G but not A:T→G:C.
TA1538, TA98
CGCGCGCG/GCGCGCGC
Frameshift mutations, especially −2 frameshifts (−GC or −CG), +1 
frameshifts, other small deletions, and some complex mutations.
TA1537
GGGGG/CCCCC
Frameshift mutations, mainly −1 (−G or −C; less frequently −T), but also 
some +CG frameshifts.
TA97
GGGGGG/CCCCCC
Frameshift mutations, combining the specificity of TA1537 at the primary 
target and with some characteristics of TA98.
TA102, TA104
TAA/ATT terminating ochre 
mutation
Base-pair substitutions, principally those beginning at A:T base pairs 
(A:T→G:C; A:T→T:A; A:T→C:G), but also G:C→T:A and G:C→A:T.
E. coli WP2 uvrA 
strains
TAA/ATT terminating ochre 
mutation 
Base-pair substitutions, principally those beginning at A:T base pairs.
*The sequences before and after the backslash represent the two complementary strands of DNA.
II. GENETIC CHARACTERISTICS OF THE AMES TESTER STRAINS
CHARACTERISTIC
RATIONALE FOR INCLUSION IN THE TESTER STRAIN
Rfa
Alters the lipopolysaccharide wall, enhancing permeability to mutagens.
ΔuvrB
Deletes the excision repair system, increasing sensitivity to many mutagens; retention of excision in 
TA102 permits the detection of DNA cross-linking agents.
mucAB
Enhances sensitivity to some mutagens whose activity depends on the SOS system.
Apr
Permits selection for the presence of pKM101 by ampicillin resistance.
hisO1242
Affects regulation of histidine genes, enhancing revertibility of hisD6610 in TA97.
His Δ (G)8476
Eliminates the chromosomal hisG gene, allowing detection of the reversion of hisG428 on pAQ1 
in TA102.
Tcr
Permits selection for the presence of pAQ1 in TA102 by tetracycline resistance.
Table 9-3  
The Ames Assay: Tester Strains and Their Characteristics
I. STANDARD TESTER STRAINS OF SALMONELLA TYPHIMURIUM AND ESCHERICHIA COLI
STRAIN
TARGET ALLELE
CHROMOSOMAL GENOTYPE
PLASMIDS
TA1535
hisG46
hisG46 rfa ΔuvrB
None
TA100
hisG46
hisG46 rfa ΔuvrB
pKM101 (mucAB Apr)
TA1538
hisD3052
hisD3052 rfa ΔuvrB
None
TA98
hisD3052
hisD3052 rfa ΔuvrB
pKM101 (mucAB Apr)
TA1537
hisC3076
hisC3076 rfa ΔuvrB
None
TA97
hisD6610
hisD6610 hisO1242 rf ΔuvrB
pKM101 (mucAB Apr)
TA102
hisG428
hisΔ (G)8476 rfa
pKM101 (mucAB Apr); pAQ1 (hisG428 Tcr)
TA104
hisG428
hisG428 rfa ΔuvrB
pKM101 (mucAB Apr)
E. coli WP2 uvrA
trpE
trpE uvrA
None
E. coli WP2 uvrA (pKM101)
trpE
trpE uvrA
pKM101 (mucAB Apr)

522
Non-Organ-Directed toxicity
unit III
hisD6610, and hisD3052 all revert by multiple mechanisms and 
that the spectrum of classes of revertants may vary depending on the 
mutagen, experimental conditions, and other elements of the geno-
type (Cebula and Koch, 1990; Prival and Cebula, 1992; DeMarini 
et al., 1998; Mortelmans and Zeiger, 2000).
The development of Salmonella strains that are highly specific 
with respect to mechanisms of reversion has made the identification 
of particular base pair substitutions more straightforward. These 
strains (TA7001–TA7006) each revert from his− to his+ by a single 
kind of mutation (e.g., G:C to T:A), and collectively they permit 
the specific detection of all six possible base pair substitutions (Gee 
et al., 1994; Mortelmans and Zeiger, 2000; Kamber et al., 2009). 
The assay, referred to as Ames II, is usually conducted using a fluc-
tuation test in 24-well plates, rather than the plate-incorporation or 
preincubation method. The ability to discern mutagens and non-
mutagens is comparable to the standard Ames assay with nearly 
84% agreement between the two tests (Kamber et al., 2009).
Specific reversion assays are also available in E. coli. One 
system, based on reversion of lacZ mutations in various E. coli 
strains, measures all six possible base pair substitutions (Cupples 
and Miller, 1989; Josephy, 2000) and five frameshift +G, −G, −
CG, +A, and −A mutations in several sequence contexts detected 
by growth on lactose medium (Cupples et al., 1990; Josephy, 2000; 
Hoffmann et al., 2003). The versatility of the lacZ assay has been 
expanded through the introduction of useful characteristics into the 
strains parallel to those incorporated into the Ames strains. Among 
the features added to the lacZ assay are DNA repair deficiencies, 
permeability alterations, plasmid-enhanced mutagenesis, and 
enzymes of mutagen metabolism (Josephy, 2000).
Bacterial forward mutation assays, such as selections for resis-
tance to arabinose or to purine or pyrimidine analogs in Salmonella 
(Jurado et al., 1994; Vlasakova et al., 2005), are also used in research 
and testing, although less extensively than reversion assays. A ver-
satile forward mutation assay that has contributed greatly to an 
understanding of mechanisms of mutagenesis is the lacI system in 
E. coli (Calos and Miller, 1981; Halliday and Glickman, 1991). 
Mutations in the lacI gene, which encodes the repressor of the lac-
tose operon, are easily identified by phenotype, cloned or amplified 
by PCR, and sequenced. The lacI gene is widely used as a target for 
mutagenesis both in E. coli and in transgenic mice, and thousands 
of lacI¯ mutants have been sequenced.
Genetic Alterations in Nonmammalian 
Eukaryotes
Gene Mutations and Chromosome Aberrations  Many early 
studies of mutagenesis used yeasts, mycelial fungi, plants, and 
insects as experimental organisms. Even though well-characterized 
genetic systems permit the analysis of a diverse array of genetic 
alterations in these organisms (Table 9-2), they have been largely 
supplanted in genetic toxicology by bacterial and mammalian sys-
tems. Exceptions are to be found where the assays in nonmamma-
lian eukaryotes permit the study of genetic endpoints that are not 
readily analyzed in mammals or where the organism has special 
attributes that fit a particular application.
The fruit fly, Drosophila, has long occupied a prominent 
place in genetic research. In fact, the first unequivocal evidence 
of chemical mutagenesis was obtained in Scotland in 1941 when 
Charlotte Auerbach and J.M. Robson demonstrated that mustard 
gas is mutagenic in Drosophila. Drosophila continues to be used in 
modern mutation research (Potter et al., 2000), but its role in genetic 
toxicology is now more limited. The Drosophila assay of great-
est historical importance is the sex-linked recessive lethal (SLRL) 
test. A strength of the SLRL test is that it permits the detection 
of recessive lethal mutations at 600 to 800 different loci on the X 
chromosome by screening for the presence or absence of wild type 
males in the offspring of specifically designed crosses (Mason et al., 
1987; Vogel et al., 1999). The genetic alterations include gene muta-
tions and small deletions. The spontaneous frequency of SLRL is 
about 0.2%, and a significant increase over this frequency in the lin-
eages derived from treated males indicates mutagenesis. Although 
it requires screening large numbers of fruit fly vials, the SLRL test 
yields information about mutagenesis in germ cells, which is lack-
ing in all microbial and cell culture systems. However, means of 
exposure, measurement of doses, metabolism, and gametogenesis 
in insects differ from those in mammalian toxicology, thereby intro-
ducing doubt about the relevance of Drosophila assays to human 
genetic risk. Drosophila assays are also available for studying the 
induction of chromosome abnormalities in germ cells, specifically 
heritable translocations and sex-chromosome loss (Zimmering, 
1982; Mason et al., 1987; Vogel et al., 1999).
Genetic and cytogenetic assays in plants (Ma et al., 2005; 
Grant and Owens, 2006; Misík et al., 2011) also occupy a more 
restricted niche in modern genetic toxicology than they did years 
ago. However, plant assays continue to find use in special applica-
tions, such as in situ monitoring for mutagens and exploration of the 
metabolism of promutagens by agricultural plants (Gentile et al., 
1986). In situ monitoring entails looking for evidence of muta-
genesis in organisms that are grown in the environment of inter-
est. Natural plant populations can also be examined for evidence 
of genetic damage, but doing so requires utmost precaution when 
characterizing the environments and defining appropriate control 
populations.
Mitotic Recombination  In addition to its role in DNA repair, 
recombination (or the rearrangement between two similar or identi-
cal DNA sequences) provides critical support for the tolerance of 
DNA damage (Li and Heyer, 2008). The RAD52 epistasis group 
genes are involved in homologous DNA recombination, and their 
primary structures are conserved from yeast to humans (Sonoda 
et al., 2001). Recombinogenic effects in yeast have long been used 
as a general indicator of genetic damage (Zimmermann et al., 
1984), and interest in the induction of recombination has increased 
as recombinational events between chromosomes have been impli-
cated in the etiology of cancer, including loss of heterozygosity 
(LOH) of one normal allele of tumor-suppressor genes such as 
p53 (Sengstag, 1994; Reliene et al., 2007). Widely used assays 
for recombinogens detect mitotic crossing over and mitotic gene 
conversion in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Zimmermann, 
1992), and hundreds of chemicals have been tested for recombino-
genic effects in straightforward yeast assays (Zimmermann et al., 
1984). In yeast strain D7, for example, mitotic crossing over involv-
ing the ade2 locus is detected on the basis of pink and red colony 
color, mitotic gene conversion at the trp5 locus by selection for 
growth without tryptophan, and gene mutations by reversion of the 
ilv1-92 allele (Zimmermann, 1992; Freeman and Hoffmann, 2007). 
Newer yeast assays have been constructed to discern whether 
LOH has occurred by mitotic recombination or chromosome loss 
(Daigaku et al., 2004; Nunoshiba et al., 2007). Strategies have also 
been devised to detect recombinogenic effects in human lympho-
cytes (Turner et al., 2003), other mammalian cells, mice, chickens, 
plants, and mycelial fungi (Hoffmann, 1994; Sonoda et al., 2001; 
Reliene et al., 2007). At least 350 chemicals have been evaluated 
in Drosophila somatic cell assays in which recombinogenic effects 
are detected by examining wings or eyes for regions in which 
recessive alleles are expressed in heterozygotes (Vogel et al., 1999; 
Vogel and Nivard, 2000).

523
Genetic Toxicology
Chapter 9
Gene Mutations in Mammalian Cells
Mutagenicity assays in cultured mammalian cells have some of the 
same advantages as microbial assays with respect to speed and cost, 
and they use similar approaches. The most widely used assays for 
gene mutations in mammalian cells detect forward mutations that 
confer resistance to a toxic chemical. For example, mutations in 
the gene encoding hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransfer-
ase (HPRT enzyme; HPRT gene) confer resistance to the purine 
analogue 6-thioguanine (Li et al., 1988; Parry et al., 2005), and 
thymidine kinase mutations (TK enzyme; tk gene) confer resistance 
to the pyrimidine analogue trifluorothymidine (Clive et al., 1987; 
Clements, 2000; Wang et al., 2009; Schisler et al., 2013). HPRT 
and tk mutations may, therefore, be detected by attempting to grow 
cells in the presence of purine analogues and pyrimidine analogues, 
respectively. For historical reasons, HPRT assays have most com-
monly been conducted in Chinese hamster cells or human cells, 
whereas TK assays have used mouse lymphoma cells or human 
cells. The mouse lymphoma assay, long used for detecting gene 
mutations, is now also used to detect other endpoints, includ-
ing recombination, deletion, and aneuploidy (Wang et al., 2009). 
Forward-mutation assays typically respond to diverse mechanisms 
of mutagenesis, but there are exceptions such as resistance to oua-
bain, which only occurs by a specific alteration (DeMarini et al., 
1989). Assays that do not detect various kinds of mutations are not 
useful for general mutagenicity testing. Genetic or molecular evi-
dence that an assay is responsive to diverse mechanisms of muta-
genesis is essential.
Instead of using selective media, flow cytometry can be used 
to detect gene mutations by immunological methods in mamma-
lian cell cultures and intact animals. An in vitro assay for CD59 
mutations is performed in CHO-human hybrid AL cells based on 
the complement/antibody-mediated cytotoxicity principle (Zhou 
et al., 2006). AL cells contain a single human chromosome 11 that 
expresses CD59 and other cell surface proteins along with the 
Chinese hamster chromosome complement of the Chinese hamster 
ovary (CHO) cells. Fluorescent anti-CD59 antibody is used to quan-
tify CD59 mutant cells by flow cytometry. Besides CD59 itself, 
mutations in other CD genes on chromosome 11 and in their gly-
cosylphosphatidylinositol anchor can be detected in other assays, 
including the in vivo Pig-a gene mutation assay described below 
(Ross et al., 2007; Krüger et al., 2016; Rees et al., 2017).
Gene Mutations In Vivo
In vivo assays involve treating intact animals and analyzing appro-
priate tissues for genetic effects. The choice of suitable doses, 
treatment procedures, controls, and sample sizes is critical in 
the conduct of in vivo tests. Mutations may be detected either in 
somatic cells or in germ cells. The latter are of special interest with 
respect to risk for future generations.
The mouse spot test is a traditional genetic assay for gene 
mutations in somatic cells (Styles and Penman, 1985; Lambert 
et al., 2005). Visible spots of altered phenotype in mice heterozy-
gous for coat-colored genes indicate mutations in the progenitor 
cells of the altered regions. Although straightforward in design, the 
spot test is less used today than other somatic cell assays or than its 
germ cell counterpart, the mouse specific-locus test.
Cells that are amenable to positive selection for mutants 
when collected from intact animals form the basis for efficient 
in vivo mutation-detection assays analogous to those in mam-
malian cell cultures. Lymphocytes with mutations in the HPRT 
gene are readily detected by selection for resistance to 6-thio-
guanine. The HPRT assay in mice, rats, and monkeys (Casciano 
et al., 1999) is of special interest because it permits comparisons 
to the measurement of HPRT mutations in humans in mutational 
monitoring (Cole and Skopek, 1994; Albertini and Hayes, 1997; 
Albertini, 2001).
The Pig-a mutation assay is a newer assay that has versions 
suitable for human monitoring and laboratory studies in several 
species (Gollapudi et al., 2015; Ji and LeBaron, 2017). The assay 
detects mutations that block the transmembrane anchor glyco-
sylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) synthesis (Dobrovolsky et al., 2010). 
Pig-a is a sex-linked, single copy gene whose gene product, the 
catalytic subunit of an N-acetyl glucosamine transferase, functions 
as an anchor for cell-surface proteins such as CD59, CD24, and 
CD55 to the exterior surface of the cytoplasmic membrane. The 
Pig-a mutation assay is based on the identification of mutant cells 
that have an altered repertoire of cell surface markers. Mutations in 
Pig-a can be detected in red blood cells from rats, mice, mon-
keys, and humans by means of fluorescent antibodies against GPI-
anchored cell-surface proteins, such as CD59. The Pig-a mutation 
assay was also applied to rat cauda epididymal spermatozoa (sperm) 
for germ cell mutagenicity evaluation (Ji and LeBaron, 2017). Using 
antibodies to more than one GPI-linked marker has been suggested 
as a means of making the assay specific to Pig-a rather than also 
detecting mutants for a particular cell-surface protein. Frequencies 
can be measured by clonal growth of Pig-a cells using proaerolysin 
(ProAER) selection or by flow cytometry (Dobrovolsky et al., 2010; 
Dobo et al., 2011; Miura et al., 2011; Ji and LeBaron, 2017). Since 
this assay is performed using red blood cell, one of the challenges 
has been to confirm the mutant phenotype is indeed due to alteration 
at the DNA level (genotype) since red blood cells in mammals do 
not have nuceli to sequence DNA. Attempts are currently underway 
to collect this information by attempting to sequence the gene tran-
script in reticulocytes and by studying the nucleated bone marrow 
progenitor cells.
Besides determining whether chemicals are mutagenic, muta-
tion assays provide information on mechanisms of mutagenesis that 
contributes to an understanding of mutational hazards. Base pair 
substitutions and large deletions, which may be indistinguishable 
on the basis of phenotype, can be differentiated through the use of 
probes for the target gene and Southern blotting, in that base sub-
stitutions are too subtle to be detectable on the blots, whereas gross 
structural alterations are visible (Cole and Skopek, 1994; Albertini 
and Hayes, 1997). Molecular analysis has been used to determine 
proportions of mutations ascribable to deletions and other structural 
alterations in several assays, including the specific-locus test for 
germ cell mutations in mice (Favor, 1999) and the human HPRT 
assay (Cole and Skopek, 1994). Gene mutations have been char-
acterized at the molecular level by DNA sequence analysis both in 
transgenic rodents (Lambert et al., 2005; Singer et al., 2006) and in 
endogenous mammalian genes (Cariello and Skopek, 1993). Many 
HPRT mutations from human cells in vitro and in vivo have been 
analyzed at the molecular level and classified with respect to base 
pair substitutions, frameshifts, small deletions, large deletions, and 
other alterations (Cole and Skopek, 1994).
Transgenic Assays  Transgenic animals are products of DNA 
technology in which the animal contains foreign DNA sequences 
that have been added to the genome. The foreign DNA is repre-
sented in all the somatic cells of the animal and is transmitted in 
the germ line to progeny. Mutagenicity assays in transgenic ani-
mals combine in vivo metabolic activation and pharmacodynamics 
with simple microbial detection systems, and they permit the analy-
sis of mutations induced in diverse mammalian tissues (Lambert 
et al., 2005; Sykes et al., 2006; Valentine et al., 2010; OECD TG 
488, 2013).

524
Non-Organ-Directed toxicity
unit III
The transgenic animals that have figured most heavily in 
genetic toxicology are rodents that carry lac genes from E. coli. 
The bacterial genes were introduced into mice or rats by injecting a 
vector carrying the genes into fertilized oocytes generating grown 
up transgenic animals containing multiple copies of chromosomally 
integrated plasmid or phage shuttle vectors. (Lambert et al., 2005; 
OECD TG 488, 2013). The Mammalian Transgenic Rodent (TGR) 
mutation assays are performed with strains commonly referred to 
by their commercial names: the Big Blue® mouse and Big Blue® rat, 
which use lacI as a target for mutagenesis, and the Muta™ Mouse, 
which uses the lacZ target gene (Lambert et al., 2005; OECD TG 
488, 2013). After mutagenic treatment of the transgenic animals, 
the lac genes are recovered from the animal, packaged in phage λ, 
and transferred to E. coli for mutational analysis. Mutant plaques 
are identified on the basis of phenotype, and mutant frequencies can 
be calculated for various tissues of the treated animals. The lambda 
cII locus of the transgene may be used as a second target gene in 
both the lacZ and lacI transgenic assays (Swiger et al., 1999; Shane 
et al., 2000; Swiger, 2001; Lambert et al., 2005). Its use offers tech-
nical advantages as a small, easily sequenced target in which muta-
tions are detected by positive selection, and it permits interesting 
comparisons both within and between assays.
The transgenic lacZ plasmid mouse uses a plasmid-based sys-
tem rather than a phage vector and has the advantage that dele-
tion mutants are more readily recovered than in the phage-based 
lac systems (Lambert et al., 2005; OECD TG 488, 2013). The gpt 
delta mouse and rat transgenic animals detect two kinds of genetic 
events in two targets: point mutations in gpt detected by resistance 
to 6-thioguanine and spi (or Sensitive to P2 Interference) deletions 
that permit growth on P2 lysogens (Okada et al., 1999; Lambert 
et al., 2005; Cao et al., 2014; OECD TG 488, 2013). The Spi¯ assay 
uniquely allows analyses of deletions and complex DNA rearrange-
ments induced by DNA double-strand breaks using a phage vec-
tor system (Nohmi, 2016; OECD TG 488, 2013). Other transgenic 
assays are under development and offer the prospect of expanding 
the versatility of such assays (Lambert et al., 2005). These include 
pKZ1 mice in which inversions and deletions arising in various tis-
sues by intrachromosomal recombination have been used to study 
effects of low doses of ionizing radiation (Sykes et al., 2006) and an 
assay that detects both forward mutations and reversion in mice that 
carry the genome of phage ΦX174 (Valentine et al., 2010).
Various mutagens, including alkylating chemicals, nitrosa-
mines, procarbazine, cyclophosphamide, and polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons have been studied in transgenic mouse assays, and 
mutant frequencies have been analyzed in such diverse tissues as 
liver, skin, spleen, kidney, bladder, small intestine, bone marrow, 
and testis (Lambert et al., 2005). Mutation frequencies in trans-
genes in testes have been compared to results in standard germ 
cell mutagenesis assays (Singer et al., 2006). Female germ cells 
are less amenable to study in transgenic assays because of the dif-
ficulty of collecting sufficient numbers of oocytes, but it has been 
suggested that granulosa cells from ovarian follicles may serve as a 
surrogate for the exposure of female germ cells to mutagens (Singer 
et al., 2006). Mutant frequencies have been compared to the for-
mation of adducts in various tissues and to the site specificity of 
carcinogenesis and DNA repair capacity (Lambert et al., 2005). An 
important issue that remains to be resolved is the extent to which 
transgenes resemble endogenous genes. Transgenes used in routine 
mutation assays are transcriptionally inactive and hence differ from 
transcriptionally endogenous genes in their accessibility to muta-
genesis as well as capability for repair. Although their mutational 
responses tend to be comparable (Lambert et al., 2005), some dif-
ferences have been noted (Burkhart and Malling, 1993; Lambert 
et al., 2005), and questions have been raised about the relevance of 
mutations that might be recovered from dying or dead animal tis-
sues (Burkhart and Malling, 1994). Several of the transgenic muta-
tion assays have been adequately characterized to the point that 
there is an OECD test guideline for the conduct of these assays in 
somatic and germ cells (OECD TG 488, 2013).
Mammalian Cytogenetic Assays
Chromosome Aberrations  Cytogenetic assays rely on the use 
of microscopy for the direct observation of the effects of interest. 
This approach differs sharply from the indirectness of traditional 
genetic assays in which one observes a phenotype and reaches 
conclusions about genes. It is only through the addition of DNA 
sequencing that genetic assays can approach the directness of cyto-
genetic assays.
In conventional cytogenetics, metaphase analysis is used to 
detect chromosomal anomalies, especially unstable chromosome 
and chromatid aberrations. A key factor in the design of cytoge-
netic assays is obtaining appropriate cell populations for treatment 
and analysis (Preston et al., 1981; Ishidate et al., 1988; Kirkland 
et al., 1990; Galloway et al., 1994). Cells with a stable, well-defined 
karyotype, short generation time, low chromosome number, and 
large chromosomes are ideal for cytogenetic analysis. For this rea-
son, Chinese hamster cells have been used widely in cytogenetic 
testing. Other cells are also suitable, and human cells, especially 
peripheral lymphocytes, have been used extensively. Cells should 
be treated during a sensitive period of the cell cycle (typically S), 
and aberrations should be analyzed at the first mitotic division 
after treatment so that the sensitivity of the assay is not reduced by 
unstable aberrations being lost during cell division. Examples of 
chromosome aberrations are shown in Fig. 9-6.
Cytogenetic assays require careful attention to growth condi-
tions, controls, dose levels, treatment conditions, and time inter-
vals between treatment and the sampling of cells for analysis 
A
B
C
D
Figure 9-6.  Chromosome aberrations induced by x-rays in Chinese hamster 
ovary (CHO) cells. (A) A chromatid deletion (‣). (B) A chromatid exchange 
called a triradial (‣). (C) A small interstitial deletion (‣) that resulted from 
chromosome breakage. (D) A metaphase with more than one aberration: a 
centric ring plus an acentric fragment (‣) and a dicentric chromosome plus 
an acentric fragment (→).

525
Genetic Toxicology
Chapter 9
(Preston et al., 1981; Ishidate et al., 1988; Kirkland et al., 1990; 
Galloway et al., 2011). Data collection is a critical part of cytoge-
netic analysis. It is essential that sufficient cells be analyzed because 
a negative result in a small sample is inconclusive. Results should 
be recorded for specific classes of aberrations, not just an overall 
index of aberrations per cell. The need for detailed data is all the 
more important because of nonuniformity in the classification of 
aberrations and disagreement on whether small achromatic (i.e., 
unstained) gaps in chromosomes are true chromosomal aberrations. 
Gaps should be quantified but not pooled with other aberrations.
In interpreting results on the induction of chromosome aber-
rations in cell cultures, one must be alert to the possibility of 
artifacts associated with extreme assay conditions because aber-
rations induced under such circumstances may not be a reflection 
of a chemical-specific genotoxicity (Scott et al., 1991; Galloway, 
2000; Galloway et al., 2011). Questionable positive results have 
been found at highly cytotoxic concentrations (Galloway et al., 
2011), high osmolality, and pH extremes (Scott et al., 1991). The 
possibility that metabolic activation systems may be genotoxic also 
warrants scrutiny (Scott et al., 1991). Although excessively high 
concentrations may lead to false positive responses, the failure to 
test to a sufficiently high dose level may undermine the utility of 
a test. Therefore, testing should be extended to a concentration at 
which there is some cytotoxicity, such as a reduction in a replicative 
index or the mitotic index (the proportion of cells in division cycle). 
If the chemical is nontoxic, testing concentrations should extend 
up to an arbitrary concentration limit (Galloway et al., 2011). By a 
consensus of cytogeneticists and genetic toxicologists, the limit of 
10 mM or 2 mg/mL, whichever is lower, has been recommended 
(Thybaud et al., 2017). However, the limit dose for the evaluation of 
human pharmaceuticals has been agreed to 1 mM (Galloway, 2017).
In vivo assays for chromosome aberrations involve treating 
intact animals and later collecting cells for cytogenetic analysis 
(Preston et al., 1981; Kirkland et al., 1990; Tice et al., 1994). The 
main advantage of in vivo assays is that they include mamma-
lian metabolism, DNA repair, and pharmacodynamics. The target 
is typically a tissue from which large numbers of dividing cells 
are easily prepared for analysis. Bone marrow from rats, mice, or 
Chinese hamsters is most commonly used. Peripheral lymphocytes 
are another suitable target when stimulated to divide with a mitogen 
such as phytohemagglutinin. Effective testing requires dosages and 
routes of administration that ensure adequate exposure of the target 
cells, proper intervals between treatment and collecting cells, and 
sufficient numbers of animals and cells analyzed (Preston et al., 
1981; Kirkland et al., 1990; Tice et al., 1994).
An important development in cytogenetic analysis is fluores-
cent in situ hybridization (FISH), in which a nucleic acid probe 
is hybridized to complementary sequences in chromosomal DNA 
(Tucker et al., 1993b, 2005; Paccierotti and Sgura, 2008). The probe 
is labeled with a fluorescent dye so that the chromosomal location 
to which it binds is visible by fluorescence microscopy, and the sig-
nal can be increased in strength by computer-enhanced processes. 
The use of whole-chromosome probes probed during metaphase 
or interphase nuclei is commonly called “chromosome painting” 
(Tucker et al., 1993b; Speicher and Carter, 2005; Paccierotti and 
Sgura, 2008). The level of sophistication has increased so much that 
all 24 different human chromosomes (22 autosomes, X and Y) can 
be individually detected (Macville et al., 1997), as can all mouse 
chromosomes (Liyanage et al., 1996).
Although FISH is not routinely used in genotoxicity testing, 
it is a valuable research tool for studying clastogens and is having 
a substantial impact in monitoring human populations for chromo-
somal damage. Fig. 9-7 shows chromosome painting and reciprocal 
translocations in human cancer cell. Regions of hybridization can 
be determined by the use of fluorescent antibodies that detect modi-
fied DNA bases incorporated during amplification or by incorpo-
rating fluorescent bases themselves during amplification. Another 
significant advantage of FISH methods is that the probes can be 
used with interphase cells/chromosomes making any tissue poten-
tially available for analysis (Trask et al., 1993; Speicher and Carter, 
2005; Vorsanova et al., 2010). Most recently, M-FISH (multicolor 
FISH) and M-BAND (multicolor banding) have been developed 
for defining chromosome abnormalities (Mackinnon and Chudoba, 
2011). Alterations in tumors can also be detected on a whole-
genome basis (Coleman et al., 1997; Veldman et al., 1997; Bridge 
and Cushman-Vokoun, 2011). The following example highlights the 
ability to construct breakpoint profiles of specific tumor types (Trost 
et al., 2006). One of the best known examples of a chromosomal 
breakpoint is the Philadelphia chromosome, a translocation abnor-
mality of chromosome 22 containing a part of chromosome 9 that 
is often found in chronic myelogenous leukemia and sometimes 
in acute lymphocytic leukemia. In translocations, the involvement 
of specific chromosome bands that contain oncogenes or tumor-
suppressor genes is also known.
Specifically, in chromosome 4 painted with a probe while the 
other chromosomes were counter-stained in a different color, one 
would see only the two homologues of chromosome 4 in the color 
of the probe in a normal cell. However, if there were a translocation 
or a dicentric chromosome and fragment involving chromosome 4, 
one would see three areas of fluorescence—one normal chromo-
some 4 and the two pieces involved in the chromosome rearrange-
ment. Aberrations are detected only in the painted portion of the 
genome, but this disadvantage can be offset by painting a few chro-
mosomes simultaneously with probes of different colors (Tucker 
et al., 1993b).
Micronuclei  Metaphase analysis is time consuming and requires 
considerable skill, so simpler cytogenetic assays have been devel-
oped, of which micronucleus assays have become especially 
important. Micronuclei are membrane-bound structures that con-
tain chromosomal fragments, or sometimes whole chromosomes, 
Figure 9-7.  Chromosome aberrations identified by FISH. Human breast can-
cer cell with aneuploidy for some chromosomes and with reciprocal translo-
cations (identified by color switches along a chromosome).

526
Non-Organ-Directed toxicity
unit III
that were not incorporated into a daughter nucleus at mitosis. 
Since micronuclei usually represent acentric chromosomal frag-
ments, these are most commonly used as simple indicators of 
chromosomal damage. However, the ability to detect micronuclei 
containing whole chromosomes has led to their use for detecting 
aneuploidy as well. Micronucleus assays may be conducted in pri-
mary cultures of human lymphocytes (Fenech et al., 2003; Corvi 
et al., 2008; Fenech, 2008; Fenech et al., 2011b), mammalian cell 
lines (Kirsch-Volders et al., 2003; Corvi et al., 2008), or mammals 
in vivo (Krishna and Hayashi, 2000; Hayashi et al., 2007; Dertinger 
et al., 2011).
Micronucleus assays in lymphocytes have been greatly 
improved by the cytokinesis-block technique in which cell division 
is inhibited with cytochalasin B, resulting in binucleate and mul-
tinucleate cells (Fenech et al., 2003, 2011b; Kirsch-Volders et al., 
2003; Fenech, 2008). In the cytokinesis-block assay in human lym-
phocytes, non-dividing (G0) cells are treated with ionizing radiation 
or a radiomimetic chemical and then stimulated to divide with the 
mitogen phytohemagglutinin. Alternatively, the lymphocytes may 
be exposed to the mitogen first, so that the subsequent mutagenic 
treatment with radiation or chemicals includes the S period of the 
cell cycle. Cytochalasin B is added to inhibit the actin filament net-
work formation and cytoplasmic division along with the test mate-
rial when treating the cells continuously for 1.5 to 2 cell cycles 
in the absence of S9. For short duration exposures (e.g., 2-4 h), 
cytochalasin B is added at the end of treatment and the cultures 
are harvested also after 1.5 to 2 cell cycles. In both cases, micro-
nuclei are counted only in binucleate cells so as to ensure that the 
cells have undergone a single nuclear division that is essential for 
micronucleus development. The assay avoids confusion owing to 
differences in cellular proliferation kinetics.
Although first devised using primary lymphocytes (Fenech 
et al., 2003; Fenech, 2008; Fenech et al., 2011b), the cytokinesis-
block micronucleus assay has since been adapted for use in con-
tinuous cell cultures, including the Chinese hamster, human TK6, 
and mouse lymphoma cells that are widely used in other geno-
toxicity assays (Kirsch-Volders et al., 2003; Corvi et al., 2008). 
Micronucleus assays should be conducted in such a way that cellular 
proliferation is monitored along with the micronucleus frequency, 
and this is facilitated by the cytokinesis block. Reliable data have 
been obtained in cultured cells both with and without cytokinesis 
block, but scoring results only in binucleate cells after blockage of 
cytokinesis with cytochalasin B confers advantages with respect to 
the measurement of proliferation, recognizing whether an agent is 
cytostatic, and obtaining clear dose–response relationships (Kirsch-
Volders et al., 2003).
Although micronuclei resulting from chromosome breakage 
comprise the principal endpoint in the cytokinesis-block micro-
nucleus assay, the method can also provide evidence of aneuploidy, 
chromosome rearrangements that form nucleoplasmic bridges, inhi-
bition of cell division, necrosis, apoptosis, and excision-repairable 
lesions (Fenech et al., 2003; Fenech, 2008; Fenech et al., 2011b). 
Micronuclei in a binucleate human lymphocyte are shown in 
Fig. 9-8. A recent review of the International Human Micronucleus 
(HUMN) Project provides a comprehensive description of standard-
ized protocols for micronucleus assays in human lymphocytes and 
buccal cells together with a review of associations between micro-
nucleus data and disease outcomes (Fenech et al., 2011a).
The in vivo micronucleus assay is often performed by counting 
micronuclei in immature (polychromatic) erythrocytes in the bone 
marrow of treated mice, but it may also be based on peripheral blood 
(Krishna and Hayashi, 2000; Hayashi et al., 2007). Micronuclei 
remain in the cell when the nucleus is extruded in the maturation 
of erythroblasts. In vivo micronucleus assays are increasingly used 
in genotoxicity testing as a substitute for bone marrow metaphase 
chromosome analysis. Micronucleus assays have been developed 
for mammalian tissues other than bone marrow and blood, includ-
ing skin, duodenum, colon, liver, lung, spleen, testes, bladder, buc-
cal mucosal cells, stomach, vagina, and fetal tissues (Coffing et al., 
2011; Morita et al., 2011). Although assays in bone marrow and 
blood are the mainstay of genotoxicity testing, the new assays are 
important for mechanistic studies and research on the site specific-
ity of genetic damage and carcinogenesis.
Micronuclei are most commonly visualized through micros-
copy, but automated means of detecting micronuclei have been 
developed through the application of flow cytometry. Flow cyto-
metric detection is effective in micronucleus assays in rodent bone 
marrow or blood (Dertinger et al., 2011). It can also be used to 
detect micronuclei in Chinese hamster CHO cells, where altered 
flow cytometric parameters can reveal whether the micronuclei 
arose primarily by chromosome breakage or by aneuploidy (Bryce 
et al., 2011).
Sister Chromatid Exchanges (SCE)  Sister Chromatid Exchanges 
(SCE), in which there has been an apparently reciprocal exchange 
of segments between the two chromatids of a chromosome, are vis-
ible cytologically through differential staining of chromatids. Fig. 
9-9 shows SCE in human cells. Many mutagens induce SCE in cul-
tured cells and in mammals in vivo (Tucker et al., 1993a; Wilson 
and Thompson, 2007). Despite the convenience and responsive-
ness of SCE assays, data on SCE are less informative than data on 
chromosome aberrations. There is uncertainty about the underlying 
mechanisms by which SCEs are formed and how DNA damage or 
perturbations of DNA synthesis stimulate their formation (Preston, 
1991). SCE assays are, therefore, best regarded as general indica-
tors of mutagen exposure, analogous to DNA damage and repair 
assays, rather than measures of a mutagenic effect.
Aneuploidy  Although assays for the induction of aneuploidy 
are not yet as refined as those for gene mutations and chromosome 
aberrations, they are being developed. The targets of aneugens 
Figure 9-8.  Micronucleus in a human lymphocyte. The cytochalasin B 
method was used to inhibit cytokinesis that resulted in a binucleate nucleus. 
The micronucleus (arrow) resulted from failure of an acentric chromosome 
fragment or a whole chromosome being included in a daughter nucleus 
following cell division. (Figure courtesy of James Allen, Jill Barnes, and 
Barbara Collins.)

527
Genetic Toxicology
Chapter 9
are often components of the mitotic or meiotic apparatus, rather 
than DNA. Therefore, aneugens should not be expected to overlap 
strongly with mutagens and clastogens. For example, a chemical 
that interferes with the polymerization of tubulin and thereby dis-
rupts the formation of a mitotic spindle is likely to show specificity 
as an aneugen. Assays for chemicals that induce aneuploidy should 
thus encompass all the relevant cellular targets that are required for 
the proper functioning of the mitotic and meiotic process. Means 
of detecting aneuploidy include chromosome counting (Galloway 
and Ivett, 1986; Natarajan, 1993; Aardema et al., 1998; Paccierotti 
and Sgura, 2008), the detection of micronuclei that contain kineto-
chores (Lynch and Parry, 1993; Natarajan, 1993; Aardema et al., 
1998; Fenech, 2008; Paccierotti and Sgura, 2008), and the observa-
tion of abnormal spindles or spindle–chromosome associations in 
cells in which spindles and chromosomes have been differentially 
stained (Parry, 1998). FISH-based assays have also been developed 
for the assessment of aneuploidy in interphase somatic cells (Rupa 
et al., 1997; Paccierotti and Sgura, 2008) and in sperm (Russo, 
2000; Marchetti et al., 2006, 2008).
A complication in chromosome counting is that a metaphase 
may lack chromosomes because they were lost during cell prepa-
ration for analysis, rather than having been absent from the liv-
ing cell. To avoid this artifact, cytogeneticists generally use extra 
chromosomes (i.e., hyperploidy) rather than missing chromosomes 
(i.e., hypoploidy) as an indicator of aneuploidy in chromosome 
preparations from mammalian cell cultures (Galloway and Ivett, 
1986; Aardema et al., 1998) or mouse bone marrow (Adler, 1993). 
Techniques for counting chromosomes in intact cells may allow 
reliable measures of hypoploidy (Natarajan, 1993), but the detec-
tion of hyperploidy remains the norm in lieu of clear evidence that 
artifactual chromosome loss has been avoided. It has been suggested 
that counting polyploid cells, which is technically straightforward, 
may be an efficient way to detect aneugens (Aardema et al., 1998), 
but there is disagreement on the point (Parry, 1994, 1998).
Micronucleus assays can detect aneugens as well as clasto-
gens. Micronuclei that contain whole chromosomes tend to be 
somewhat larger than those containing chromosome fragments, but 
the two categories are not readily distinguished in typically stained 
preparations (Natarajan, 1993). However, one can infer that a micro-
nucleus contains a whole chromosome if it is shown to contain a 
kinetochore or centromeric DNA. Aneuploidy may thus be detected 
by means of antikinetochore antibodies with a fluorescent label or 
FISH with a probe for centromere-specific DNA (Lynch and Parry, 
1993; Natarajan, 1993; Krishna and Hayashi, 2000; Fenech, 2008; 
Paccierotti and Sgura, 2008). Micronuclei containing kinetochores 
or centromeric DNA may be detected in cultured cells (Lynch and 
Parry, 1993; Aardema et al., 1998; Fenech, 2008; Paccierotti and 
Sgura, 2008) and in mouse bone marrow in vivo (Adler, 1993; 
Krishna and Hayashi, 2000). Frequencies of micronuclei ascribable 
to aneuploidy and to clastogenic effects may therefore be deter-
mined concurrently by tabulating micronuclei with and without 
kinetochores.
Germ Cell Mutagenesis
Gene Mutations  Germ cell mutagenesis assays are of special 
interest as indicators of genetic damage that can enter the gene pool 
and be transmitted through generations. Mammalian germ cell 
assays provide the best basis for assessing risks to human germ 
cells and therefore hold a central place in genetic toxicology despite 
their relative complexity and expense. The design of the test must 
compensate for the fact that mutations occur at low frequency, and 
even the simplest animal systems face the difficulty of having a 
sufficiently large sample size. One can easily screen millions of 
bacteria or cultured cells by selection techniques, but screening 
large numbers of mice poses practical limitations. Therefore, a 
germ cell assay must offer a straightforward, unequivocal iden-
tification of mutants with minimal labor (Singer and Yauk, 2010; 
Yauk et al., 2015).
The mouse specific-locus test detects recessive mutations 
that produce easily analyzed, visible phenotypes (coat pigmenta-
tion and ear size) conferred by seven genes (Russell and Shelby, 
1985; Ehling, 1991; Russell and Russell, 1992; Favor, 1999; 
Russell, 2004; Singer et al., 2006). Mutants may be classified as 
having point mutations or chromosomal alterations on the basis of 
genetic and molecular analysis (Favor, 1999). The assay has been 
important in assessing genetic risks of ionizing radiation and has 
been used to study various chemical mutagens. Although they have 
been used less extensively, there are other gene-mutation assays in 
mouse germ cells based on dominant mutations that cause skeletal 
abnormalities (Selby et al., 2004) or cataracts (Ehling, 1991) and 
recessive mutations that cause electrophoretic changes in proteins 
(Lewis, 1991).
Mammalian assays permit the measurement of mutagenesis 
at different germ cell stages (Favor, 1999; Russell, 2004). Late 
stages of spermatogenesis are often found to be sensitive to muta-
genesis, but effects in spermatocytes, spermatids, and spermato-
zoa are transitory. Mutagenesis in stem-cell spermatogonia and 
resting oocytes is of special interest in genetic risk assessment 
because of the persistence of these stages throughout reproductive 
life. Chemical mutagens show specificity with respect to germ cell 
stages. For example, ethylnitrosourea and chlorambucil are both 
potent mutagens in the mouse specific-locus test, but the former 
induces primarily point mutations in spermatogonia, whereas the 
latter mostly induces deletions in spermatids (Russell and Russell, 
1992). The ratio of deletions to point mutations is not only a func-
tion of the nature of the mutagen but depends on germ cell stage, 
as some mutagens induce higher proportions of gross alterations in 
late stages of spermatogenesis than in spermatogonia (Lewis, 1991; 
Favor, 1999; Russell, 2004).
There is currently no unequivocal evidence of induced gene 
mutations in human germ cells, but studies in mice leave little doubt 
about the susceptibility of mammalian germ cells to mutagenesis by 
radiation and chemicals. New molecular methods, particularly those 
involving the assessment of changes in tandem repeat loci (Yauk, 
2004; Dubrova, 2005; Singer et al., 2006; Somers, 2006; Yauk et al., 
2015), hold great promise for the development of systems that will 
permit the efficient detection of genetic alterations in human germ 
A
B
Figure 9-9.  Sister chromatid exchanges (SCEs) in human lymphocytes.  
(A) SCE in untreated cell. (B) SCE in cell exposed to ethyl carbamate. The 
treatment results in a very large increase in the number of SCE. (Figure 
courtesy of James Allen and Barbara Collins.)

528
Non-Organ-Directed toxicity
unit III
cells. The development of methods based on expanded simple tan-
dem repeat (ESTR) loci in mice and other species is important, 
in that it permits in situ monitoring for environmental mutagens 
and the quantification of mutagenesis after controlled exposures of 
laboratory animals using systems parallel to those being developed 
for human monitoring (Yauk, 2004; Dubrova, 2005; Wu et al., 2006; 
Somers, 2006). Basic research on mechanisms underlying ESTR 
changes is essential, as it is still unclear how ESTR changes relate 
to the gene mutations that have been long studied by population 
geneticists and are detected in classical gene-mutation assays.
Chromosomal Alterations  Cytogenetic assays in germ cells 
are not routinely included in mutagenicity testing, but they are 
an important source of information for assessing risks to future 
generations posed by the induction of chromosome aberrations. 
Metaphase analysis of germ cells is feasible in rodent spermatogo-
nia, spermatocytes, or oocytes (Kirkland et al., 1990; Tease, 1992; 
Russo, 2000; Marchetti et al., 2001). A micronucleus assay has also 
been developed in which chromosomal damage induced in meiosis 
is measured by the observation of rodent germ cells, principally 
spermatids (Russo, 2000; Hayashi et al., 2007).
Aneuploidy originating in mammalian germ cells may be 
detected cytologically through chromosome counting for hyper-
ploidy (Allen et al., 1986; Adler, 1993; Aardema et al., 1998; 
Russo, 2000; Marchetti et al., 2001) or genetically in the mouse sex- 
chromosome loss test (Russell and Shelby, 1985), but these meth-
ods are not widely used in toxicological testing. A promising devel-
opment is the detection of aneuploidy in the sperm of mice or rats 
by FISH with chromosome-specific probes (Baumgarthner et al., 
1999; Russo, 2000; Marchetti et al., 2006, 2008). The presence of 
two fluorescent spots indicates the presence of an extra copy of the 
chromosome identified by the probe; probes for several chromo-
somes are used simultaneously so that aneuploid sperm are distin-
guishable from diploid sperm.
Besides cytological observation, indirect evidence for chromo-
some aberrations is obtained in the mouse heritable translocation 
assay, which measures reduced fertility in the offspring of treated 
males (Russell and Shelby, 1985; Singer et al., 2006). This pre-
sumptive evidence of chromosomal rearrangements can be con-
firmed through cytogenetic analysis. Data from the mouse heritable 
translocation test in postmeiotic male germ cells have been used 
in an attempt to quantify human germ cell risk for ethylene oxide, 
a mutagen used as a fumigant, sterilizing agent, and monomer in 
chemical syntheses (Preston et al., 1995).
Dominant Lethal Mutations  The mouse or rat dominant lethal 
assay (Adler et al., 1994; Singer et al., 2006) has offered an exten-
sive database on the induction of genetic damage in mammalian 
germ cells. In the most commonly used version of the assay, males 
are treated on an acute or subchronic basis with the chemical of 
interest and then mated with virgin females at appropriate inter-
vals. The females are necropsied during pregnancy so that embry-
onic mortality may be characterized and quantified. Most dominant 
lethal mutations, manifested as intrauterine deaths, are thought to 
arise from chromosomal anomalies.
Development of Testing Strategies
Concern about adverse effects of mutation on human health, prin-
cipally carcinogenesis and the induction of transmissible damage 
in germ cells, has provided the impetus to identify environmental 
mutagens. Priorities must be set for testing because it is not fea-
sible to conduct multiple tests of all chemicals to which people are 
exposed. Such factors as production volumes, intended uses, the 
extent of human exposure, environmental distribution, and effects 
that may be anticipated on the basis of chemical structure or previ-
ous testing must be considered in order to ensure that compounds 
with the greatest potential for adverse effects receive the most com-
prehensive study. The most obvious use of genetic toxicology assays 
is screening chemicals to detect mutagens, but they are also used to 
obtain information on mutagenic mechanisms and dose–responses 
that contribute to an evaluation of hazards and risk. Besides test-
ing pure chemicals, environmental samples are tested because 
many mutagens exist in complex mixtures (DeMarini 1998; Ohe 
et al., 2003; White, 2004). The analysis of complex mixtures often 
requires a combination of mutagenicity assays and refined analyti-
cal methods (White, 2004; Hewitt and Marvin, 2005). Assessment 
of a chemical’s genotoxicity requires data from well-characterized 
and adequately validated assays. Assays are said to be validated 
when they have been shown to perform reproducibly and reliably 
with many compounds from diverse chemical classes in several 
laboratories. An evaluation of test performance and interpretabil-
ity, however, sometimes extends beyond determining whether the 
assay effectively detects the specific endpoint that it actually mea-
sures to whether it is predictive of other endpoints of interest. For 
example, there is great interest in the ability of mutagenicity tests, 
which do not measure carcinogenicity per se, to predict whether 
chemicals are carcinogens.
Mutagenicity testing, combined with an evaluation of chemical 
structure, has been found to identify a large proportion of trans-
species, multiple-site carcinogens (Tennant and Ashby, 1991; Gold 
et al., 1993). In contrast, some carcinogens are not detected as muta-
gens. Putatively non-genotoxic carcinogens often give responses 
that are more specific with respect to species, sites, and conditions 
(Ashby and Paton, 1993; Gold et al., 1993). In predicting carcinoge-
nicity, one should consider both the sensitivity and the specificity of 
an assay. Sensitivity refers to the proportion of carcinogens that are 
positive in the assay, whereas specificity is the proportion of non-
carcinogens that are negative (Tennant et al., 1987; McGregor et al., 
1999). Sensitivity and specificity both contribute to the predictive 
reliability of an assay. The commonly held view that deficiencies 
in the sensitivity or specificity of individual assays may be circum-
vented by using assays in complementary combinations called tiers 
or batteries has fallen into disfavor because, rather than offsetting 
each other’s strengths and weaknesses, genetic toxicology assays 
are often consistent with one another (Tennant et al., 1987; Ashby 
and Tennant, 1991; Kim and Margolin, 1999). The specificity of 
in vitro assays decreased to such an extent that nearly 95% of all 
noncarcinogens tested were detected as positive in at least one of 
the three in vitro assays (Ames, mouse lymphoma forward mutation 
assay, and in vitro cytogenetics; Kirkland et al., 2005).
Strategies for testing have evolved over the last few decades, 
such that data from a few well-chosen assays are now considered 
sufficient for intended applications (MacGregor et al., 2000; EFSA, 
2012; Bolognesi et al., 2017; Ji et al., 2017). Rather than trying to 
assemble extensive batteries of complementary assays, it is prudent 
to emphasize mechanistic considerations in choosing assays. The 
bacterial Ames (OECD TG 471, 1997) test has always been consid-
ered as the preferred starting point for mutagenicity assessment and 
it performed reliably with thousands of compounds in laboratories 
throughout the world; it affords reasonable sensitivity and relatively 
high specificity compared to in vitro mammalian cell mutagenicity 
tests to detect rodent carcinogens and in vivo mutagens (Kirkland 
et al., 2005; Ji et al., 2017). In cases where a material cannot be 
adequately tested in bacteria because of its excessive toxicity 
(e.g., certain antimicrobial agents), mammalian cell cultures can 
be used to investigate mutagenic effects. Beyond gene mutations,

529
Genetic Toxicology
Chapter 9
one should evaluate damage at the chromosomal level with a mam-
malian in vitro or in vivo cytogenetic assays. The preferred in vitro 
subset of mutagenicity and genotoxicity tests for regulatory muta-
genicity assessments include bacterial reverse mutation test (OECD 
TG 471, 1997) and in vitro mammalian cell gene mutation tests 
using Hprt or xprt genes (OECD TG 476, 2016) for gene mutations; 
alternatively in vitro mammalian cell gene mutation tests using tk 
gene (OECD TG 490, 2015) is used to detect both gene mutations 
and structural chromosomal aberrations (Ji et al., 2017). For the 
assessment of structural chromosomal aberrations either in vitro 
mammalian chromosomal aberration test (OECD TG 473, 2016) or 
in vitro mammalian cell micronucleus test (OECD TG 487, 2016) 
can be used; the latter test, in addition to structural chromosomal 
aberrations, provides information of numerical chromosomal aber-
rations (Ji et al., 2017). Typically, negative outcomes in the in vitro 
assays would not call for in vivo follow-up, unless the intended 
application or regulatory jurisdiction called for it (Ji et al., 2017). 
Cytogenetic and transgenic mutation assays in rodents are espe-
cially useful for validating positive in vitro outcomes because they 
combine a well-validated genetic assay with mammalian pharma-
codynamics and metabolism. The other assays in Table 9-1 offer 
an extensive database on chemical mutagenesis (i.e., Drosophila 
SLRL), a unique genetic endpoint (i.e., aneuploidy; mitotic recom-
bination), applicability to diverse organisms and tissues (i.e., DNA 
damage assays, such as the comet assay), or special importance in 
the assessment of genetic risk (i.e., germ cell assays). The more 
extensive listing of assays in Table 9-2 provides references that can 
be helpful in interpreting genetic toxicology data that can be found 
in the scientific literature.
HUMAN POPULATION MONITORING
For cancer risk assessment considerations, the human data utilized 
most frequently, in the absence of epidemiologic data, are those 
collected from genotoxicity/mutagenicity assessments in human 
populations. For this purpose, the studies conducted most fre-
quently are for chromosome aberrations, micronuclei, mutations 
(for several loci), and SCEs in peripheral lymphocytes. Cytogenetic 
alterations have also been assessed in a small number of bone mar-
row samples. Mutations at the HPRT locus have been assessed in 
peripheral lymphocytes. Glycophorin A variants have been studied 
in red blood cells. In the future, the Pig-a mutation assay using 
peripheral blood lymphocytes will likely gain popularity for human 
biomonitoring because of its technical simplicity.
An important component of any population monitoring study 
is the selection of the study groups, namely those individuals who 
are potentially exposed and the matched unexposed controls. The 
size of each study group should be sufficiently large to avoid any 
confounder having undue influence. It is also important to have a 
reliable measure to ascertain exposure(s). Certain characteristics 
should be matched among exposed and unexposed groups. These 
include age, sex, smoking status, and general dietary features. 
Certain characteristics are exclusionary, namely current or recent 
medication, radiation exposure, and certain illnesses. It is possi-
ble to develop a lengthy list of additional possible confounders of 
response that would make the selection of suitable study groups 
very difficult indeed. Study groups of 20 or more individuals can 
be used as a reasonable substitute for exact matching because 
confounders will be less influential on chromosome alteration or 
mutation frequency in larger groups (discussed in Au et al., 1998; 
Battershill et al., 2008). In some instances, it might be informative 
to compare exposed groups with a historical control, as well as to 
a concurrent control.
The magnitude of different known confounders varies consid-
erably among studies, based in part on the size of the study popula-
tions. Some general indication of the magnitude of the effects of age 
and smoking status on the frequencies of chromosome aberrations 
and SCE is presented to illustrate the importance of accounting for 
confounders in the design of a population monitoring study. The 
comparisons presented are for large studies only. For chromosome 
aberrations, the frequency of aberrations has been reported in one 
large study to be about 50% higher in smokers (l.5 aberrations 
per 100 cells in smokers vs. 1.0 per 100 cells in the nonsmokers) 
(Galloway et al., 1986) and in another no difference between smok-
ers and nonsmokers (Bender et al., 1988a, 1988b). The complete 
data set has been reviewed by Au et al. (1998). In general, the fre-
quency of SCE is increased by about one SCE per cell in smokers 
compared with nonsmokers (Bender et al., 1988a, 1988b; Barale 
et al., 1998). The study by Barale et al. (1998) also reported a dose-
response association between SCE frequency and smoking level. 
The differences among these studies might well be accounted for 
by differences among confounders in the respective groups, but it is 
virtually impossible to correct for these in this type of study.
Chromosome aberrations are among the most thoroughly stud-
ied effects of IR exposure (Awa, 1997). IR-induced chromosome 
aberrations include intrachromosomal exchanges that produce ring 
chromosomes or inversions, and interchromosomal exchanges, 
involving two chromosomes that produce dicentrics or transloca-
tions. A wide variability of the frequency of cells with chromo-
some aberrations between Hiroshima and Nagasaki atomic bomb 
survivors, different dose–response relationships in the two cities, 
significant effects of both time of assay, and age at the time of 
exposure were observed (Stram et al., 1993; Awa, 1997). Japanese 
atomic bomb survivor studies have demonstrated that translocation 
frequency is useful for the evaluation of IR dosimetry (Awa, 1997). 
Likewise, Chernobyl survivors exposed to very high IR doses 
showed complex chromosomal aberrations, with many dicentrics 
and reciprocal translocations (Awa, 1997).
The frequency of chromosome aberrations, particularly chro-
mosome-type (reciprocal) exchanges, has been shown to increase 
with age of subject (Tucker and Moore, 1996). Galloway et al. 
(1986) reported an increase from 0.8 per 100 cells at about 25 years 
of age to about 1.5 at 60. Bender et al. (1988a, 1988b) reported an 
increase with age only for chromosome-type dicentric aberrations, 
but the increase over a broad age range was small and just statisti-
cally significant. Ramsey et al. (1995), using chromosome painting 
techniques, reported that individuals 50 years and older had fre-
quencies of stable aberrations, dicentrics, and acentric fragments 
that were 10.6-, 3.3-, and 2.9-fold, respectively, greater than the 
frequency in cord bloods. Bender et al. (1988a, 1988b) did not find 
an increase in SCE frequency with the increasing age of the subject. 
The differences among the results from these large control studies 
emphasize the difficulty of adequately accounting for confounders 
(age and smoking presented here) when only a small control group 
is used, as is frequently the case.
Similar sources of variation have been identified for the moni-
toring of individuals for HPRT mutations. The data are reviewed 
in detail by Albertini and Hayes (1997). There is less information 
on sources of variation of glycophorin A (GPA) variants, although 
quite considerable inter-individual variation exists (reviewed in 
Cole and Skopek, 1994; Kyoizumi et al., 2005).
For cytogenetic assays (chromosome aberrations, SCEs, and 
micronuclei) the alterations are produced as a consequence of 
errors of DNA replication, as discussed in previous sections. From 
the nature of the alterations, assessed in traditional cytogenetic 
assays in which nontransmissible alterations are analyzed, it can be

530
Non-Organ-Directed toxicity
unit III
established that these alterations were produced at the first in vitro 
S phase. Irrespective of the duration of exposure, the frequency of 
cytogenetic alterations will be proportional to that fraction of the 
DNA damage that remains at the time of in vitro DNA replication. 
All the DNA damage induced by potent clastogens that results in 
chromosome alterations is repaired within a relatively short time 
after exposure for G0 human lymphocytes. Thus, for chronic expo-
sures the lymphocyte cytogenetic assay as typically conducted is 
insensitive.
Reciprocal translocations using FISH methods can also be 
analyzed (reviewed in Awa, 1997; Tucker et al., 1997; Beskid et al., 
2006; Kleinerman et al., 2006). The stable chromosome aberrations 
observed in peripheral lymphocytes exposed in vivo are produced in 
the hematopoietic stem cells or other precursor cells of the periph-
eral lymphocyte pool, but assessed following in vitro culture. To 
date, population cytogenetic monitoring studies involving the anal-
ysis of reciprocal translocations in chemically exposed individuals 
or radiation-exposed individuals have been rarely conducted (Lucas 
et al., 1992; Director et al., 1998; Smith et al., 1998; Kleinerman 
et al., 2006; Donner et al., 2010).
Another factor that certainly affects the utility of population 
monitoring data with reciprocal translocations using FISH is that 
the frequency of reciprocal translocations increases significantly 
with increasing age (Ramsey et al., 1995), but to a lesser extent for 
nontransmissible aberrations (Bender et al., 1988a, 1988b). Ramsey 
et al. (1995) provided data on the influence of other confounders on 
the frequency of reciprocal translocations in human groups. These 
confounders include smoking, consumption of diet drinks and/or 
diet sweeteners, exposure to asbestos or coal products, and having 
a previous major illness. This reemphasizes the point that the selec-
tion of study groups and accounting for confounders is essential for 
human population cytogenetic monitoring studies to be of utility.
Thus, very few of the published studies of cytogenetic popu-
lation monitoring for individuals have analyzed the appropriate 
endpoint for detecting the genetic effects of long-term exposure to 
chemicals. It is quite surprising that positive responses have been 
reported for increases in unstable, chromatid aberrations because 
these are nontransmissible, and as noted above are induced at the 
first in vitro S phase. This anomaly is especially concerning when 
positive responses at very low levels of exposure are reported 
(reviewed for ethylene oxide in Preston, 1999b).
The HPRT mutation assay can assess the frequency of induced 
mutations in stem cells or other precursor cells because a proportion 
of the mutations are induced as nonlethal events. The transmissible 
proportion will be greater for chemicals that do not induce large 
deletions; this will include the majority of nonradiomimetic chemi-
cals. Induction of mutations in lymphocyte precursor cells will lead 
to clonal expansion of mutations in the peripheral pool. However, 
assessment of the T-cell antigen receptor status of the mutant clones 
permits a correction for clonal expansion. The population of cells 
derived from any particular stem cell has a unique antigen receptor 
status (Albertini and Hayes, 1997). The GPA assay can similarly 
be used for the assessment of chronic exposures or for estimating 
exposures at some long time after exposure (Albertini and Hayes, 
1997). The predictive value of the assay for adverse health outcome 
appears to be limited, but it can provide an estimate of exposure.
The potential for cytogenetic endpoints being predictive of 
relative cancer risk has been addressed in recent reports from the 
European Study Group on Cytogenetic Biomarkers and Health 
(Hagmar et al., 1998a, 1998b; Bonassi et al., 2004; Norppa et al., 
2006). The groups selected for cytogenetic studies consisted of 
individuals with reported occupational exposure and unexposed 
controls. The association between cancer and the frequency of 
unstable chromosome aberrations in the study groups was not based 
on exposure status, but rather on the relative frequency of chromo-
some aberrations, namely, low (1 to 33 percentiles), medium (34 
to 66 percentiles), and high (67 to 100 percentiles). In general, the 
higher the relative frequency of unstable aberrations, the greater the 
risk of cancer death for all tumors combined. The authors make it 
clear that there is insufficient information on exposure for it to be 
used as a predictor of cancer development. In fact, the data indicate 
that individuals with higher frequencies of chromosome aberrations 
for whatever reason (genetic or environmental) are as a group at 
greater risk of dying from cancer. This is very different from con-
cluding that exposures to mutagens that result in a higher frequency 
of chromosome aberrations in peripheral lymphocytes leads to an 
increased risk of cancer, especially for specific tumor types. The 
relevance of exposure to mutagenic chemicals in these studies by 
Hagmar et al. (1998a, 1998b) is uncertain because there was no 
association between increased SCE frequencies, which may be 
indicative of higher exposure levels, and increased cancer mortality.
This latter concern was addressed by the same group (Bonassi 
et al., 2000) in a more recent study. The study again showed that 
there was a significantly increased risk for subjects with a high 
level of chromosome aberrations compared to those with a low 
level in both Nordic and Italian cohorts. Of particular relevance to 
risk assessment was the observation that the relationships were not 
affected by the inclusion of occupational exposure level or smoking. 
The risk for high versus low levels of chromosome aberrations was 
similar in individuals heavily exposed to carcinogens and in those 
who had never, to their knowledge, been exposed to any specific 
environmental carcinogen. These data highlight the need to use cau-
tion when considering the relevance of chromosome aberration data 
from human biomonitoring studies in cancer risk assessment.
NEW APPROACHES FOR GENETIC 
TOXICOLOGY
In the last 20 or so years, the field of genetic toxicology has 
moved into the molecular and computational era. The potential for 
advances in our understanding of basic cellular processes and how 
they can be perturbed is enormous. The ability to manipulate and 
characterize DNA, RNA, and proteins has been at the root of this 
advance in knowledge. New understanding in biological mecha-
nism and mode of action (MOA), along with new high-content and 
high-throughput approaches, and increasingly sensitive analytical 
methods, bring new information into the field of genetic toxicology 
and the quantitative risk assessment processes for DNA-reactive 
chemicals (MacGregor et al., 2015a, 2015b; Klapacz et al., 2016). 
The introduction of new high-throughput screening to assess 
various biomarker parameters, such as DNA damage to evaluate 
genotoxicity, offers rapid, cost-effective, and nonlabor-intensive 
screening approaches (Ranganatha et al., 2016). A clear focus on 
molecular and biological approaches to defining and understanding 
consequences of DNA damage at the cellular level fits well with the 
2007 NRC report, “Toxicity Testing in the 21st Century: A Vision 
and a Strategy” that envisions a future in which all routine test-
ing will use cell-based in vitro assays of toxicity pathways (NRC, 
2007b; Krewski et al., 2010). It is now becoming understood that 
complex interactions within a particular DNA repair pathway, as 
well as interplay between different DNA repair and DDR path-
ways exist that counteract the effects of ever-present background 
DNA damage. Together, these pathways appear sufficient to coun-
teract mutation at low exposures/doses and/or the propagation of 
cells harboring significant DNA damage at least for well-studied

531
Genetic Toxicology
Chapter 9
DNA-reactive classes (Klapacz et al., 2016). Hence, the examina-
tion of key cellular, mechanistic responses should be integrated into 
the designs of the mutagenic MOA studies and risk characterization 
processes for DNA-reactive chemicals.
Advances in Cytogenetics
Until quite recently, the analysis of chromosome alterations 
relied on conventional chromosome staining with DNA stains 
such as Giemsa or on the process of chromosome banding. Both 
approaches require considerable expenditure of time and a rather 
high level of expertise. However, chromosome banding does allow 
for the assessment of transmissible aberrations such as reciprocal 
translocations and inversions with a fairly high degree of accuracy. 
Knowing the induction frequency of such aberrations is very impor-
tant, given that they are generally not lethal to the cell and consti-
tute by far the major class observed in inherited genetic defects 
and a significant fraction of the alterations observed in tumors. In 
addition, because stable aberrations are transmissible from par-
ent to daughter cell, they represent accumulated effects of chronic 
exposures. The more readily analyzed, but cell-lethal, nontransmis-
sible aberrations such as dicentrics and deletions reflect only recent 
exposures and then only when analyzed at the first division after 
exposure. A more detailed discussion of these factors can be found 
in Preston (1999b).
There is an extensive literature on the use of FISH for tumors 
and in gene mapping but less on its utility for genetic toxicology 
studies, especially the assessment of stable chromosome aberrations 
at long periods after exposure or after long-term exposures. Three 
particular studies do, however, serve to exemplify the use of FISH 
in genetic toxicology.
Lucas et al. (1992) demonstrated that stable chromosomal 
aberrations could be detected in individuals decades after exposure 
to atomic bombs in Japan. How these frequencies relate to frequen-
cies at the time of exposure is not known with any certainty, given 
the fact that induced frequencies were not measured because appro-
priate techniques were not available at that time.
Studies by Tucker et al. (1997, 2005) provided some assess-
ment of the utility of FISH karyotyping for the analysis of radia-
tion-induced, stable chromosome alterations at various times after 
exposure. The frequency of reciprocal translocations induced by 
γ-rays in rat peripheral lymphocytes decreased with time after 
exposure, reaching a plateau at 4 days that was 55% to 65% of 
the induced frequency and with a dose dependency (Tucker et al., 
1997). Similar results were obtained for human samples (Tucker 
et al., 2005). These results suggest that reciprocal translocations 
fall into two classes, stable and unstable (cell-lethal). It is quite 
possible that these “unstable” translocations are lost because of the 
presence of other cell-lethal damage in the same cell. Additional 
work is required to clarify this conclusion and to extend the studies 
to the effects of chemicals. In addition, a recent study by Tucker 
and Luckinbill (2011) demonstrated how FISH translocation 
analysis could be used to detect extremely low doses of ionizing 
­radiation—a few cGy per year. Such analysis could be used to esti-
mate responses at very low doses for utility in risk assessments at 
similarly low doses.
FISH methods have also allowed for an accurate and sensi-
tive assessment of chromosomal alterations present in tumors. The 
particular advance that makes this assessment feasible is known 
as comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) (Kallioniemi et al., 
1992). CGH results in the ability to identify the role of chromo-
somal structural and numerical alterations in tumor development. 
The genomic instability present in all tumor types appears to have 
a specific genetic basis, as shown elegantly for colon cancer by 
Vogelstein and colleagues (Cahill et al., 1998). For CGH, tumor and 
control DNAs are differentially labeled with fluorescence probes 
and co-hybridized to normal metaphase chromosome preparations. 
The ratio of the fluorescence intensities of hybridized tumor and 
control DNA indicates regions of normal genomic content as well 
as those regions that are over- or underrepresented in tumors. The 
CGH method is being adapted for automated screening approaches 
using biochips (Solinas-Toldo et al., 1997; Hosoya et al., 2006). 
Assessing genetic alterations such as specific gene deletions in sin-
gle metastatic tumor cells is feasible using a slightly different but 
complementary approach (Pack et al., 1997, 2005).
The types of FISH approaches described here undoubtedly 
indicate the direction in which cytogenetic analysis will proceed. 
The types of data collected will affect our understanding of how 
tumors develop. Data on the dose–response characteristics for a spe-
cific chromosomal alteration as a proximate marker of cancer can 
enhance the cancer risk assessment process by describing effects of 
low exposures that are below those for which tumor incidence can 
be reliably assessed. Cytogenetic data of the types described above 
can also improve extrapolation from data generated with laboratory 
animals to humans.
Molecular Analysis of Mutations and Gene 
Expression
With the advent of molecular biology techniques, the exact basis 
of a mutation at the level of the DNA sequence can be established. 
In many cases, the genetic basis of human disease can be deter-
mined even though human genes have long DNA sequences and 
a complex genomic arrangement. Molecular biology techniques 
have also enabled a distinction to be made between background 
mutations and those induced by specific agents. The latter observa-
tions are addressed by analyzing the mutational spectra in target 
genes in laboratory organisms and in humans (DeMarini, 2000; 
Hemminki and Thilly, 2004). For reasons of inherent sensitivity 
of available methods, the genes analyzed for mutations are ones 
for which mutated forms can be selected. The confounding factor 
of many normal cells, which far outnumber a few mutant cells in 
an exposed cellular population, can be removed by mutant selec-
tion approaches. Methods to overcome the drawback of only being 
able to study selectable genes have been developed, and particu-
lar ones such as ligation-mediated PCR are close to the required 
sensitivity level (Albertini and Hayes, 1997; Makrigiorgos, 2004; 
Yeh et al., 2006). For example, COLD-PCR (co-amplification at 
lower denaturation temperature-PCR) was developed to selectively 
amplify minority alleles from mixtures of wild-type and mutation-
containing sequences (Li and Makrigiorgos, 2009).
A giant step forward in the ability to detect and characterize 
mutations at both the DNA and RNA level has been provided by 
the development of chip technology (Southern, 1996), array-based 
assay systems (Wodicka et al., 1997), and next-generation high-
throughput DNA sequencing technologies at the whole genome 
level in a very short period of time (Greenman et al., 2007; Watson 
et al., 2013; Yauk et al., 2015; Du et al., 2017). With hybridiza-
tion of test DNAs to oligonucleotide arrays, specific genetic altera-
tions or their cellular consequences can be determined rapidly 
and automatically (Houlston and Peto, 2004; Vissers et al., 2005). 
Genome-wide gene expression microarray technologies now allow 
the measurement of changes in expression of thousands of genes 
at one time (Harrington et al., 2000; Elvidge, 2006; Blencowe 
et al., 2009). There are parallel efforts in the area of proteomics and 
metabolomics whereby changes in a broad range of cellular proteins

532
Non-Organ-Directed toxicity
unit III
can be assessed in response to endogenous or exogenous factors, 
potentially leading to the development of biomarkers of effect 
(Aebersold et al., 2005; Robertson, 2005; Griffin, 2006; McGregor 
and De Souza, 2006). The biggest hurdle currently is the relative 
paucity of sequence data available for the world of proteins and 
their multiple posttranslational modifications. Certainly progress is 
rapid, and so methodologies akin to gene expression assessment 
are likely to be close at hand (Xie et al., 2011). The sensitivity of 
next-generation sequencing protocols is rapidly increasing and the 
costs are gradually coming down. Such techniques have been used 
to characterize the genetic alterations in a large number of tumor 
types, allowing for new insight and revealing unanticipated com-
plexities in the patterns of somatic alterations in cancers (Greenman 
et al., 2007; Stratton et al., 2009; Watson et al., 2013). Overall, the 
current potential for assessing specific cellular changes following 
chemical exposure is enormous.
The move in the field of genetic toxicology is away from the 
“yes/no” approach to hazard identification and much more toward a 
mechanistic understanding of how a chemical or physical agent can 
produce adverse cellular and tissue responses. In turn, such knowl-
edge can be used for the development of informative bioindicators 
representing the key events along the pathway from initial interac-
tions with cells to adverse outcome (Jarabek et al., 2009). The move 
is clearly toward analysis at the whole genome level and away from 
single gene responses. The challenges are apparent and the solu-
tions are being identified at a rapid pace. In a recent publication, 
Dearfield et al. (2017) laid the foundation for the next generation 
testing strategy to assess genomic damage. This strategy envisions 
a broader focus for assessing genomic damage instead of primarily 
fixating on carcinogen prediction.
CONCLUSIONS
The field of genetic toxicology has had an overall life of about 
70 years and has undergone several rebirths during this period. 
Genetic toxicology began as a basic research field with demonstra-
tions that ionizing radiation and chemicals could induce mutations 
and chromosome alterations in plant, insect, and mammalian cells. 
The development of a broad range of short-term assays for geno-
toxicity served to identify many mutagens and address the relation-
ship between mutagens and cancer-causing agents, or carcinogens. 
The inevitable failure of the assays to be completely predictive 
resulted in the identification of nongenotoxic carcinogens. In the 
1980s, genetic toxicology began to move toward providing insights 
into a better understanding of the mutagenic mechanisms underly-
ing carcinogenicity and heritable effects. In recent years, genetic 
toxicology studies began to turn away from hazard identification 
alone and move toward risk-based testing (Gollapudi, 2017).
Genetic toxicology has begun to take advantage of the knowl-
edge that cancer is a genetic disease with multiple steps, many of 
which require a mutation. The ability to distinguish between back-
ground and induced mutations, in some cases, can be achieved by 
mutation analysis at the level of DNA sequence. Next-generation 
sequencing technologies have allowed such whole genome muta-
tion analysis to be accomplished in a very short time. Key cellular 
processes related to mutagenesis have been identified, including 
multiple pathways of DNA repair, cell cycle controls, and the role 
of checkpoints in ensuring that the cell cycle does not proceed until 
the DNA and specific cellular structures are checked for fidelity. 
These observations have enhanced our knowledge of the impor-
tance of genotype in susceptibility to cancer. Recent developments 
in genetic toxicology have greatly improved our understanding of 
basic cellular processes and alterations that can affect the integrity 
of the genetic material and its functions. The incorporation of 
key cellular, mechanistic information should be integrated into 
the designs of the MOA studies of various types of DNA-reactive 
chemicals and applied to their risk assessment processes. The abil-
ity to detect and analyze mutations in mammalian germ cells con-
tinues to improve and can contribute to a better appreciation for 
the long-term consequences of mutagenesis in human populations. 
Improvements in the qualitative assessment of mutation in somatic 
cells and germ cells have been paralleled by advances in the ability 
to assess genetic alterations quantitatively, especially in ways that 
enhance the cancer and genetic risk assessment process (Preston, 
2005; Gollapudi, 2017). These new approaches will reduce overall 
uncertainty in the process, specifically for risk characterization and 
uncertainties surrounding exposures at environmentally relevant 
concentrations (Table 9-4).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Drs Robert Budinsky, Mathew LeBaron, and 
Richard Becker for their valuable comments as part of the review 
of this chapter. The editor and authors also recognize the contri-
butions of previous authors of this chapter: William G. Thilly and 
Howard L. Liber (2nd edition), William G. Thilly and Katherine M. 
Call (3rd edition), George R. Hoffmann (4th and 5th editions), and 
R. Julian Preston and George R. Hoffmann (6th to 8th editions).
This document has been reviewed in accordance with The 
Dow Chemical Company policy and approved for publication.
REFERENCES
Aardema MJ, Albertini S, Arni P, et al. Aneuploidy: a report of an ECETOC 
task force. Mutat Res. 1998;410:3–79.
Abul-Husn NS, Owusu Obeng A, Sanderson SC, Gottesman O, Scott SA. 
Implementation and utilization of genetic testing in personalized medi-
cine. Pharmgenomics Pers Med. 2014;7:227–240.
Aboussekhra A, Biggerstaff M, Shivji JA, et al. DNA nucleotide excision 
repair reconstituted with purified protein components. Cell. 1995;80: 
859–868.
Adar S, Izhar L, Hendel A, Geacintov N, Livneh Z. Repair of gaps opposite 
lesions by homologous recombination in mammalian cells. Nucleic Acids 
Res. 2009;37(17):5737–5748.
Adler I-D. Synopsis of the in vivo results obtained with the 10 known or 
suspected aneugens tested in the CEC collaborative study. Mutat Res. 
1993;287:131–137.
Adler I-D, Shelby MD, Bootman J, et al. Summary report of the working 
group on mammalian germ cell tests. Mutat Res. 1994;312:313–318.
Aebersold R, Anderson L, Caprioli R, et al. Perspective: a program to 
improve protein biomarker discovery for cancer. Proteome Res. 2005;4: 
1104–1109.
Aguilar F, Harris CC, Sun T, et al. Geographic variation of p53 mutational 
profile in nonmalignant human liver. Science. 1994;264:1317–1319.
Table 9-4  
Overview of Global Regulatory Requirements for 
Genotoxicity Data
A. Agrochemicals: Booth et al. (2017)
B. Industrial chemicals: Ji et al. (2017)
C. Food contact materials: Bolognesi et al. (2017)
D. Human pharmaceuticals: Galloway (2017)
E. Medical devices: Przygoda (2017)

533
Genetic Toxicology
Chapter 9
Ahnesorg P, Smith P, Jackson SP. XLF interacts with the XRCC4-DNA 
ligase IV complex to promote DNA nonhomologous end-joining. Cell. 
2006;124:301–313.
Alapetite C, Thirion P, De la Rochefordie A, Cosset JM, Moustacchi E. 
Analysis by alkaline comet assay of cancer patients with severe reactions 
to radiotherapy: defective rejoining of radioinduced DNA strand breaks 
in lymphocytes of breast cancer patients. Int J Cancer. 1999;90:83–90.
Albertini RJ. HPRT mutations in humans; biomarkers for mechanistic stud-
ies. Mutat Res. 2001;489:1–16.
Albertini RJ. Vinyl acetate monomer (VAM) genotoxicity profile: relevance 
for carcinogenicity. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2013;43(8):671–706.
Albertini RJ, Hayes RB. Somatic cell mutations in cancer epidemiology. 
IARC Sci Publ. 1997;142:159–184.
Albertini RJ, Sweeney LM. Propylene oxide: genotoxicity profile of a 
rodent nasal carcinogen. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2007;37(6):489–520.
Alexandrov LB, Nik-Zainal S, Wedge DC, et al. Signatures of mutational 
processes in human cancer. Nature. 2013;500:415–421.
Allen JW, Liang JC, Carrano AV, Preston RJ. Review of literature on 
chemical-induced aneuploidy in mammalian germ cells. Mutat Res. 
1986;167:123–137.
Alyea RA, Gollapudi BB, Rasoulpour RJ. Are we ready to consider trans-
generational epigenetic effects in human health risk assessment? Environ 
Mol Mutagen. 2014;55(3):292–298.
Ames BN, Gold LS. Chemical carcinogenesis: too many rodent carcino-
gens. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1990;87(19):7772–7776.
Ames BN, McCann J, Yamasaki E. Methods for detecting carcinogens and 
mutagens with the Salmonella/mammalian-microsome mutagenicity test. 
Mutat Res. 1975;31:347–364.
Araújo SJ, Tirode F, Coin F, et al. Nucleotide excision repair of DNA 
with recombinant human proteins: definition of the minimal set of 
factors, active forms of TFIIH, and modulation by CAK. Genes Dev. 
2000;14:349–359.
Aravind L, Koonin EV. The DNA-repair protein AlkB, EGL-9, and leprecan 
define new families of 2-oxoglutarate- and iron-dependent dioxygenases. 
Genome Biol. 2001;2(3):1–8.
Ashby J. Two million rodent carcinogens? The role of SAR and QSAR in 
their detection. Mutat Res. 1994;305:3–12.
Ashby J, Paton D. The influence of chemical structure on the extent and 
sites of carcinogenesis for 522 rodent carcinogens and 55 different 
human carcinogen exposures. Mutat Res. 1993;286:3–74.
Ashby J, Tennant RW. Definitive relationships among chemical structure, 
carcinogenicity and mutagenicity for 301 chemicals tested by the U.S. 
NTP. Mutat Res. 1991;257:229–306.
Ashby J, Waters MD, Preston J, et al. IPCS harmonization of methods for 
the prediction and quantification of human carcinogenic/mutagenic haz-
ard, and for indicating the probable mechanism of action of carcinogens. 
Mutat Res. 1996;352:153–157.
Au WW, Gajas-Salazar N, Salama S. Factors contributing to discrepancies 
in population monitoring studies. Mutat Res. 1998;400:467–478.
Auerbach C, Robson JM. Chemical production of mutations. Nature. 
1946;157:302.
Awa A. Analysis of chromosome aberrations in atomic bomb survivors for 
dose assessment: studies at the Radiation Effects Research Foundation 
from 1968 to 1993. Stem Cells. 1997;15(suppl 2):163–173.
Bansbach CE, Cortez D. Defining genome maintenance pathways 
using functional genomic approaches. Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol. 
2011;46:327–341.
Barale R, Chelotti L, Davini T, et al. Sister chromatid exchange and micro-
nucleus frequency in human lymphocytes of 1,650 subjects in an Italian 
population: II. Contribution of sex, age, and lifestyle. Environ Mol 
Mutagen. 1998;31:228–242.
Barrett JC. Mechanisms of multistep carcinogenesis and carcinogen risk 
assessment. Environ Health Prospect. 1993;100:9–20.
Bartek J, Falck J, Lukas J. CHK2 kinase—a busy messenger. Nat Rev Mol 
Cell Biol. 2001;2:877–886.
Bartek J, Lukas J. Mammalian G1- and S-phase checkpoints in response to 
DNA damage. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2001;13:738–747.
Battershill JM, Burnett K, Bull S. Factors affecting the incidence of geno-
toxicity biomarkers in peripheral blood lymphocytes: impact on design of 
biomonitoring studies. Mutagenesis. 2008;23:423–437.
Baumgarthner A, Van Hummelen P, Lowe XR, et al. Numerical and struc-
tural chromosomal abnormalities detected in human sperm with a com-
bination of multicolor FISH assays. Environ Mol Mutagen. 1999;33: 
49–58.
Beale G. The discovery of mustard gas mutagenesis by Auerbach and 
Robson in 1941. Genetics. 1993;134:393–399.
Becker RA, Ankley GT, Edwards SW, et al. Increasing scientific confidence 
in adverse outcome pathways: application of tailored Bradford-Hill con-
siderations for evaluating weight of evidence. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 
2015;72:514–537.
Becker RA, Dellarco V, Seed J, et al. Quantitative weight of evidence to 
assess confidence in potential modes of action. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 
2017;86:205–220.
Bell DW. Our changing view of the genomic landscape of cancer. J Pathol. 
2010;220(2):231–243.
Bender MA, Gooch PC. Persistent chromosome aberrations in irradiated 
human subjects. Radiat Res. 1962;16:44–53.
Bender MA, Preston RJ, Leonard RC, et al. Chromosomal aberration and 
sister-chromatid exchange frequencies in peripheral blood lymphocytes 
of a large human population sample. Mutat Res. 1988a;204:421–433.
Bender MA, Preston RJ, Leonard RC, et al. Chromosomal aberration and 
sister-chromatid exchange frequencies in peripheral blood lymphocytes 
of a large human population sample. II. Extension of age range. Mutat 
Res. 1988b;212:149–154.
Bentley KS, Sarrif AM, Cimino MC, Auletta AE. Assessing the risk of heri-
table gene mutation in mammals: Drosophila sex-linked recessive lethal 
test and tests measuring DNA damage and repair in mammalian germ 
cells. Environ Mol Mutagen. 1994;23:3–11.
Beranek DT. Distribution of methyl and ethyl adducts following alkylation 
with monofunctional alkylating agents. Mutat Res. 1990;231:11–30.
Beskid O, Dusek Z, Solansky I, et al. The effects of exposure to differ-
ent clastogens on the pattern of chromosomal aberrations detected by 
FISH whole chromosome painting in occupationally exposed individu-
als. Mutat Res. 2006;594:20–29.
Bavetsias V, Linardopoulos S. Aurora kinase inhibitors: current status and 
outlook. Front Oncol. 2015;5:278.
Bickel SE, Orr-Weaver TL. Holding chromatids together to ensure they go 
their separate ways. Bioessays. 1996;18:293–300.
Birrell L Cahill P, Hughes C, Tate M, Walmsley RM. GADD45a-GFP 
GreenScreen HC assay results for the ECVAM recommended lists of 
genotoxic and non-genotoxic chemicals for assessment of new genotoxic-
ity tests. Mutat Res: Genet Toxicol Environ Mutagen. 2009;695(1):87–95.
Bishop JM. Molecular themes in oncogenesis. Cell. 1991;64:235–248.
Blaisdell JO, Harrison L, Wallace SS. Base excision repair processing 
of radiation-induced clustered DNA lesions. Radiat Prot Dosimetry. 
2001;97:25–31.
Blencowe BJ, Ahmad S, Lee LJ. Current-generation high-throughput 
sequencing: deepening insights into mammalian transcriptomes. Genes 
Dev. 2009;23:1379–1386.
Boiteux S, Guillet M. Abasic sites in DNA: repair and biological conse-
quences in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. DNA Repair. 2004;3(1):1–12.
Boiteux S, Laval J. Imidazole open ring 7-methylguanine: an inhibitor of 
DNA synthesis. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1983;110(2):552–558.
Bolognesi C, Castoldi AF, Crebelli R, et al. Genotoxicity testing approaches 
for the safety assessment of substances used in food contact materials 
prior to their authorization in the European Union. Environ Mol Mutagen. 
2017;58(5):361–374.
Bonassi S, Hagmar L, Strömberg U, et al. Chromosomal aberrations in 
lymphocytes predict human cancer independently of exposure to carcino-
gens. Cancer Res. 2000;60:1619–1625.
Bonassi S, Znaor A, Norppa H, Hagmar L. Chromosomal aberrations 
and risk of cancer in humans: an epidemiologic perspective. Cytogenet 
Genome Res. 2004;104:376–382.
Boobis AR, Cohen S M, Dellarco V, et al. IPCS framework for analyzing 
the relevance of a cancer mode of action for humans. Crit Rev Toxicol. 
2006;36:781–792.
Booth ED, Rawlinson PJ, Maria Fagundes P, Leiner KA. Regulatory 
requirements for genotoxicity assessment of plant protection product 
active ingredients, impurities, and metabolites. Environ Mol Mutagen. 
2017;58(5):325–344.

534
Non-Organ-Directed toxicity
unit III
Borrego-Soto G, Ortiz-López R, Rojas-Martínez A. Ionizing radiation-
induced DNA injury and damage detection in patients with breast cancer. 
Genet Mol Biol. 2015;38(4):420–432.
Boysen G, Pachkowski BF, Nakamura J, Swenberg JA. The formation and 
biological significance of N7-guanine adducts. Mutat Res. 2009;678: 
76–94.
Brendler-Schwaab S, Czich A, Epe B, et al. Photochemical genotoxicity: 
principles and test methods. Report of a GUM task force. Mutat Res. 
2004;566:65–91.
Brewen JG, Preston RJ. Cytogenetic effects of environmental muta-
gens in mammalian cells and the extrapolation to man. Mutat Res. 
1974;26:297–305.
Brewen JG, Preston RJ. Cytogenetic analysis of mammalian oocytes in muta-
genicity studies. In: Hsu TC, ed. Cytogenetic Assays of Environmental 
Mutagens. Totowa, NJ: Allanheld, Osmun; 1982:277–287.
Bridge JA, Cushman-Vokoun AM. Molecular diagnostics of soft tissue 
tumors. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2011;135:588–601.
Broughton BC, Berneburg M, Fawcett H, et al. Two individuals with fea-
tures of both xeroderma pigmentosum and trichothiodystrophy highlight 
the complexity of the clinical outcomes of mutations in the XPD gene. 
Hum Mol Genet. 2001;10:2539–2547.
Brusick JD, ed. Methods for Genetic Risk Assessment. Boca Raton, FL: 
CRC Press; 1994.
Bryce SM, Avlasevich SL, Bemis JC, et al. Miniaturized flow cytpmetry-
basedCHO-K1 micronucleus assay discriminates aneugenic and clasto-
genic modes of action. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2011;52:280–286.
Burkhart JG, Malling HV. Mutagenesis and transgenic systems: perspec-
tive from the mutagen, N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea. Environ Mol Mutagen. 
1993;22:1–6.
Burkhart JG, Malling HV. Mutations among the living and the undead. 
Mutat Res. 1994;304:315–320.
Burma S, Chen BP, Chen DJ. Role of non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) 
in maintaining genomic integrity. DNA Repair. 2006;5:1042–1048.
Butterworth BE, Ashby J, Bermudez E, et al. A protocol and guide for the in 
vivo rat hepatocyte DNA-repair assay. Mutat Res. 1987;189(2):123–133.
Cadet J, Douki T, Ravanat JL. Measurement of oxidatively generated base 
damage in cellular DNA. Mutat Res. 2011;711:3–12.
Cahill D, Connor B, Carney JP. Mechanisms of eukaryotic DNA double 
strand break repair. Front Biosci. 2006;11:1958–1976.
Cahill DP, Lengauer C, Yu J, et al. Mutations of mitotic checkpoint genes in 
human cancers. Nature. 1998;392:300–303.
Calos MP, Miller JH. Genetic and sequence analysis of frameshift muta-
tions induced by ICR-191. J Mol Biol. 1981;153:39–66.
Cao X, Mittelstaedt RA, Pearce MG, et al. Quantitative dose-response anal-
ysis of ethyl methanesulfonate genotoxicity in adult gpt-delta transgenic 
mice. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2014;55(5):385–399.
Cariello NF, Skopek TR. Analysis of mutations occurring at the human hprt 
locus. J Mol Biol. 1993;231:41–57.
Cary RB, Peterson SR, Wang J, et al. DNA looping by Ku and the DNA-
dependent protein kinase. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997;94:4267–4272.
Casciano DA, Aidoo A, Chen T, et al. Hprt mutant frequency and molecular 
analysis of Hprt mutations in rats treated with mutagenic carcinogens. 
Mutat Res. 1999;431:389–395.
Cavenee WK, Dryja TP, Phillips RA, et al. Expression of recessive alleles by 
chromosomal mechanisms in retinoblastoma. Nature. 1983;305:779–784.
Cebula TA, Koch WH. Sequence analysis of Salmonella typhimurium rever-
tants. In: Mendelsohn ML, Albertini RJ, eds. Mutation and the Environment, 
Part D: Carcinogenesis. New York: Wiley-Liss; 1990:367–377.
Cejka P, Stojic L, Marra G, Jiricny J. Is mismatch repair really required 
for ionizing radiation-induced DNA damage signaling? Nat Genet. 
2004;36(5):432–433.
Chatterjee N, Siede W. Replicating damaged DNA in eukaryotes. Cold 
Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2013;5:a019836.
Chatterjee N, Walker GC. Mechanisms of DNA damage, repair, and muta-
genesis. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2017;58(5):235–263.
Chen Y, Sanchez Y. Chk1 in the DNA damage response: conserved roles 
from yeasts to mammals. DNA Repair (Amst). 2004;3:1025–1032.
Chevereau M, Glatt H, Zalko D, Cravedi JP, Audebert M. Role of human sul-
fotransferase 1A1 and N-acetyltransferase 2 in the metabolic activation 
of 16 heterocyclic amines and related heterocyclics to genotoxicants in 
recombinant V79 cells. Arch Toxicol. 2017;91(9):3175–3184.
Cimino MC. Comparative overview of current international strategies and 
guidelines for genetic toxicology testing for regulatory purposes. Environ 
Mol Mutagen. 2006;47:362–390.
Claxton LD, Umbuzeiro GD, Demarini DM. The Salmonella mutagenicity 
assay: the stethoscope of genetic toxicology for the 21st century. Environ 
Health Perspect. 2010;118:1515–1522.
Clements J. The mouse lymphoma assay. Mutat Res. 2000;455:97–110.
Clermont Y. Kinetics of spermatogenesis in mammals: seminiferous epi-
thelium cycle and spermatogonial renewal. Physiol Rev. 1972;52(1): 
198–236.
Ceccaldi R, Liu JC, Amunugama R, et al. Homologous-recombination-
deficient tumours are dependent on Polθ-mediated repair. Nature. 2015; 
518:258–562.
Clive D, Caspary W, Kirby PE, et al. Guide for performing the mouse lym-
phoma assay for mammalian cell mutagenicity. Mutat Res. 1987;189(2): 
143–156.
Coffing S, Engel M, Dickinson D, et al. The rat gut micronucleus assay: a 
good choice for alternative in vivo genetic toxicology testing strategies. 
Environ Mol Mutagen. 2011;52:269–279.
Cohen SM, Arnold LL. Chemical carcinogenesis. Toxicol Sci. 2011; 
120(S1):S76–S92.
Cohen SM, Ellwein LB. Genetic errors, cell proliferation, and carcinogen-
esis. Cancer Res. 1991;51(24):6493–6505.
Cohen SM, Purtilo DT, Ellwein LB. Ideas in pathology. Pivotal role of 
increased cell proliferation in human carcinogenesis. Mod Pathol. 
1991;4(3):371–382.
Coin F, Oksenych V, Egly JM. Distinct roles for the XPB/p52 and XPD/
p44 subcomplexes of TFIIH in damaged DNA opening during nucleotide 
excision repair. Mol Cell. 2007;26:245–256.
Cole J, Skopek TR. Somatic mutant frequency, mutation rates and mutational 
spectra in the human population in vivo. Mutat Res. 1994;304:33–105.
Coleman AE, Schrock E, Weaver Z, et al. Previously hidden chromosome 
aberrations in t(12;15)-positive BALB/c plasmacytomas uncovered by 
multicolor spectral karyotyping. Cancer Res. 1997;57:4585–4592.
Coleman KE, Huang TT. How SUMOylation fine-tunes the Fanconi anemia 
DNA repair pathway. Front Genet. 2016;7:61.
Collins A, El Yamani N, Dusinska M. Sensitive detection of DNA oxidation 
damage induced by nanomaterials. Free Radic Biol Med. 2017;107:69–76.
Collins AR. The comet assay for DNA damage and repair: principles, appli-
cations, and limitations. Mol Biotechnol. 2004;26:249–261.
Colussi C, Parlanti E, Degan P, et al. The mammalian mismatch repair path-
way removes DNA 8-oxodGMP incorporated from the oxidized dNTP 
pool. Curr Biol. 2002;12:912–918.
Conrad DF, Keebler JE, DePristo MA, et al. Variation in genome-
wide mutation rates within and between human families. Nat Genet. 
2011;43(7):712–714.
Corvi R, Albertini S, Hartung T, et al. ECVAM retrospective validation of in 
vitro micronucleus test. Mutagenesis. 2008;23:271–283.
Cotelle S, Férard JF. Comet assay in genetic ecotoxicology. Environ Mol 
Mutagen. 1999;34:246–255.
Covo S, Blanco L, Livneh Z. Lesion bypass by human DNA polymerase μ 
reveals a template-dependent, sequence-independent nucleotidyl trans-
ferase activity. J Biol Chem. 2004;279(2):859–65.
Cox JA, Fellows MD, Hashizume T, White PA. The utility of metabolic 
activation mixtures containing human hepatic post-mitochondrial 
supernatant (S9) for in vitro genetic toxicity assessment. Mutagenesis. 
2016;31(2):117–130.
Crespi CL, Miller VP. The use of heterologously expressed drug metaboliz-
ing enzymes—state of the art and prospects for the future. Pharmacol 
Ther. 1999;84:121–131.
Critchlow SE, Jackson SP. DNA end-joining from yeast to man. Trends 
Biochem Sci. 1998;23:394–398.
Croce CM. Oncogenes and cancer. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:502–511.
Crouse GF. Mutagenesis assays in yeast. Methods. 2000;22:116–119.
Cupples CG, Cabrera M, Cruz C, Miller JH. A set of lacZ mutations in 
Escherichia coli that allow rapid detection of specific frameshift muta-
tions. Genetics. 1990;125:275–280.

535
Genetic Toxicology
Chapter 9
Cupples CG, Miller JH. A set of lacZ mutations in Escherichia coli that 
allow rapid detection of each of the six base substitutions. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A. 1989;86:5345–5349.
d’Adda di Fagagna F. A direct role for small non-coding RNAs in DNA 
damage response. Trends Cell Biol. 2014;24(3):171–178.
Daigaku Y, Endo K, Watanabe E, et al. Loss of heterozygosity and DNA dam-
age repair in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mutat Res. 2004;556:183–191.
Datta A, Jinks-Robertson S. Association of increased spontaneous 
mutation rates with high levels of transcription in yeast. Science. 
1995;268:1616–1619.
Dearfield KL, Gollapudi BB, Bemis JC, et al. Next generation testing strat-
egy for assessment of genomic damage: a conceptual framework and 
considerations. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2017;58(5):264–283.
Dearfield KL, Moore MM. Use of genetic toxicology information for risk 
assessment. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2005;46(4):236–245.
Debiak M, Nikolova T, Kaina B. Loss of ATM sensitizes against 
O6-methylguanine triggered apoptosis, SCEs and chromosomal aberra-
tions. DNA Repair. 2004;3:359–368.
Decottignies A. Alternative end-joining mechanisms: a historical perspec-
tive. Front Genet. 2013;4:48.
Delaney JC, Essigmann JM. Mutagenesis, genotoxicity, and repair of 
1-methyladenine, 3-alkylcytosines, 1-methylguanine, and 3-methylthy-
mine in alkB Escherichia coli. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004;101(39): 
14051–14056.
Delaney JC, Smeester L, Wong C, et al. AlkB reverses etheno DNA lesions 
caused by lipid oxidation in vitro and in vivo. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 
2005;12:855–860.
Dellarco V, Fenner-Crisp PA. Mode of action: moving toward a more relevant 
and efficient assessment paradigm. J Nutr. 2012;142(12):2192S–2198S.
DeMarini DM. Mutation spectra of complex mixtures. Mutat Res. 
1998;411:11–18.
DeMarini DM. Influence of DNA repair on mutation spectra in Salmonella. 
Mutat Res. 2000;450:5–17.
DeMarini DM, Brockman HE, de Serres FJ, et al. Specific-locus mutations 
induced in eukaryotes (especially mammalian cells) by radiation and 
chemicals: a perspective. Mutat Res. 1989;220:11–29.
DeMarini DM, Shelton ML, Abu-Shakra A, et al. Spectra of spontaneous 
frameshift mutations at the his D3052 allele of Salmonella typhimurium 
in four DNA repair backgrounds. Genetics. 1998;149:17–36.
Demple B, Harrison L. Repair of oxidative damage to DNA: enzymology 
and biology. Annu Rev Biochem. 1994;63:915–948.
Dertinger SD, Torous DK, Hayashi M, et al. Flow cytometric scoring of 
micronucleated erythrocytes: an efficient platform for assessing in vivo 
cytogenetic damage. Mutagenesis. 2011;26:139–145.
Director AE, Tucker JD, Ramsey MJ, Nath J. Chronic ingestion of clasto-
gens by mice and the frequency of chromosome aberrations. Environ Mol 
Mutagen. 1998;32:139–147.
Dobrovolsky VN, Miura D, Heflich RH, et al. The in vivo Pig-a gene muta-
tion assay, a potential tool for regulatory safety assessment. Environ Mol 
Mutagen. 2010;51:825–835.
Dobo KL, Fiedler RD, Gunther WC, et al. Defining EMS and ENU dose-
response relationships using the Pig-a mutation assay in rats. Mutat Res. 
2011;725:12–21.
Dogliotti E, Hainant P, Hernandez T, et al. Mutation spectra resulting from 
carcinogenic exposures: from model systems to cancer-related genes. 
Recent Results Cancer Res. 1998;154:97–124.
Donner EM, Wong BA, James RA, et al. Reciprocal translocations in somatic 
and germ cells of mice chronically exposed by inhalation to ethylene 
oxide: implications for risk assessment. Mutagenesis. 2010;25:49–55.
Dourson M, Becker RA, Haber LT, et al. Advancing human health risk 
assessment: integrating recent advisory committee recommendations. 
Crit Rev Toxicol. 2013;43:467–492.
Du H, Pan B, Chen T. Evaluation of chemical mutagenicity using next gen-
eration sequencing: A review. J Environ Sci Health C Environ Carcinog 
Ecotoxicol Rev. 2017;16:1-19.
Dubrova YE. Radiation-induced mutation at tandem repeat DNA loci in the 
mouse germline: spectra and doubling doses. Radiat Res. 2005;163:200–207.
Duckett DR, Drummond JT, Murchie AI, et al. Human MutSalpha rec-
ognizes damaged DNA base pairs containing O6-methylguanine, 
O4-methylthymine, or the cisplatin-d(GpG) adduct. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
U S A. 1996;93:6443–6447.
Dusinska M, Collins AR. The comet assay in human biomonitoring: gene-
environment interactions. Mutagenesis. 2008;23:191–205.
Earley MC, Crouse GF. The role of mismatch repair in the prevention of base 
pair mutations in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
1998;95(26):15487–15491.
Eastmond DA. Factors influencing mutagenic mode of action determina­
tions of regulatory and advisory agencies. Mutat Res. 2012;751(1): 
49–63.
Eastmond DA. Recommendations for the evaluation of complex genetic 
toxicity data sets when assessing carcinogenic risks to humans. Environ 
Mol Mutagen. 2017;58(5):380–385.
Eastmond DA, Hartwig A, Anderson D, et al. Mutagenicity testing for 
chemical risk assessment: update of the WHO/IPCS Harmonized 
Scheme. Mutagenesis. 2009;24(4):341–349.
Eccles LJ, O’Neill P, Lomax ME. Delayed repair of radiation induced clus-
tered DNA damage: friend or foe? Mutat Res. 2011;711:134–141.
ECHA (European Chemical Agency). Guidance on Information 
Requirements and Chemical Safety Assessment, Chapter R.7a: Endpoint 
specific guidance, Version 5.0. Helsinki, Finland: European Chemicals 
Agency; 2016.
Echols H, Goodman MF. Fidelity mechanisms in DNA replication. Ann Rev 
Biochem. 1991;60:477–511.
EFSA. Scientific opinion on genotoxicity testing strategies applicable to 
food and feed safety assessment. EFSA J. 2012;9:2379.
Ehling UH. Genetic risk assessment. Annu Rev Genet. 1991;25:255–280.
Elespuru RK, Sankaranarayanan K. New approaches to assessing the 
effects of mutagenic agents on the integrity of the human genome. Mutat 
Res. 2007;616:83–89.
Elvidge G. Microarray expression technology: from start to finish. 
Pharmacogenomics. 2006;7:123–134.
EPA (US Environmental Protection Agency). Guidelines for carcinogen 
risk assessment. Fed Reg. 1986;51:33992–34003.
EPA (US Environmental Protection Agency). Proposed Guidelines for 
Carcinogen Risk Assessment. EPA/600P/P-92/003c. Office of Research 
and Development. Washington, DC: US Environmental Protection Agency; 
1996.
EPA (US Environmental Protection Agency). Guidelines for Carcinogen 
Risk Assessment. Risk Assessment Forum. Washington, DC: US 
Environmental Protection Agency; 2005. Available at: www.epa.gov/
cancerguidelines.
Erhola M, Toyokuni S, Okada K, et al. Biomarker evidence of DNA oxi-
dation in lung cancer patients: association of urinary 8-hydroxy-2′-
deoxyguanosine excretion with radiotherapy, chemotherapy, and response to 
treatment. FEBS Lett. 1997;409(2):287–291.
Evan G, Littlewood T. A matter of life and cell death. Science. 
1998;281:1317–1322.
Evans E, Fellows J, Coffer A, Wood RD. Open complex formation around a 
lesion during nucleotide excision repair provides a structure for cleavage 
by human XPG protein. EMBO J. 1997;16:625–638.
Evans HJ, Prosser J. Tumor-suppressor genes: cardinal factors in inherited 
predisposition to human cancers. Environ Health Perspect. 1992;98: 
25–37.
Fairbairn DW, Olive PL, O’Neill KL. The comet assay: a comprehensive 
review. Mutat Res. 1995;339:37–59.
Falck J, Mailand N, Syljuåsen RG, Bartek J, Lukas J. The ATM-Chk2-
Cdc25A checkpoint pathway guards against radioresistant DNA synthe-
sis. Nature 2001;410(6830):842–847.
Fan J, Wilson DM III. Protein-protein interactions and posttranslational 
modifications in mammalian base excision repair. Free Radic Biol Med. 
2005;38(9):1121–1138.
Fan W, Wu X. DNA polymerase lambda can elongate on DNA substrates 
mimicking non-homologous end joining and interact with XRCC4-ligase 
IV complex. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004;323(4):1328–1333.
Farmer PB, Singh R. Use of DNA adducts to identify human health risk 
from exposure to hazardous environmental pollutants: the increasing role 
of mass spectrometry in assessing biologically effective doses of geno-
toxic carcinogens. Mutat Res. 2008;659:68–76.

536
Non-Organ-Directed toxicity
unit III
Favor J. Mechanisms of mutation induction in germ cells of the mouse as 
assessed by the specific-locus test. Mutat Res. 1999;428:227–236.
Favor J, Layton D, Sega G, et al. International Commission for Protection 
Against Environmental Mutagens and Carcinogens. Genetic risk extrap-
olation from animal data to human disease. A Taskgroup Report. No. 
00105. Mutat Res. 1995;330:23–34.
Fearon ER, Vogelstein B. A genetic model for colorectal tumorigenesis. 
Cell. 1990;61:759–767.
Fenech M. The micronucleus assay determination of chromosomal level 
DNA damage. Methods Mol Biol. 2008;410:185–216.
Fenech M, Chang WP, Kirsch-Volders M, et al. HUMN project: detailed 
description of the scoring criteria for the cytokinesis-block micro-
noucleus assay using isolated human lymphocyte cultures. Mutat Res. 
2003;534:65–75.
Fenech M, Holland N, Zeiger E, et al. The HUMN and HUMNxL inter-
national collaboration projects on human micronucleus assays in lym-
phocytes and buccal cells—past, present and future. Mutagenesis. 
2011a;26:239–245.
Fenech M, Kirsch-Volders M, Natarajan AT, et al. Molecular mechanisms 
of micronucleus, nucleoplasmic bridge and nuclear bud formation in 
mammalian and human cells. Mutagenesis. 2011b;26:125–132.
Ferguson LR, Denny WA. Frameshift mutagenesis by acridines and other 
reversibly-binding DNA ligands. Mutagenesis. 1990;5:529–540.
Findlay JM, Middleton MR, Tomlinson I. A systematic review and meta-
analysis of somatic and germline DNA sequence biomarkers of esopha-
geal cancer survival, therapy response and stage. Ann Oncol. 2015;26(4): 
624–644.
Fischer AH, Young KA, DeLellis RA. Incorporating pathologists’ criteria of 
malignancy into the evolutionary model for cancer development. J Cell 
Biochem. 2004;93:28–36.
Fix D, Canugovi C, Bhagwat AS. Transcription increases methylmethane 
sulfonate-induced mutations in alkB strains of Escherichia coli. DNA 
Repair. 2008;7(8):1289–1297.
Freeman KM, Hoffmann GR. Frequencies of mutagen-induced coincident 
mitotic recombinationat unlinked loci in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. 
Mutat Res. 2007;616:119–132.
Frick LE, Delaney JC, Wong C, Drennan CL, Essigmann JM. Alleviation 
of 1,N6-ethanoadenine genotoxicity by the Escherichia coli adaptive 
response protein AlkB. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007;104:755–760.
Friedberg EC. DNA Repair. New York: Freeman; 1985.
Friedberg EC. Biological responses to DNA damage: a perspective in the 
new millennium. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2000;65:593–602.
Friedberg EC, Walker GC, Siede W. DNA Repair and Mutagenesis. 
Washington, DC: ASM Press; 1995.
Friedman N, Vardi S, Ronen M, Alon U, Stavans J. Precise temporal modu-
lation in the response of the SOS DNA repair network in individual bac-
teria. PLoS Biol. 2005;3:e238.
Fung H, Demple B. A vital role for Ape1/Ref1 protein in repairing spon-
taneous DNA damage in human cells. Mol Cell. 2005;17(3):463–470.
Futreal PA, Coin L, Marshall M, et al. A census of human cancer genes. Nat 
Rev Cancer. 2004;4(3):177–183.
Galloway SM. Cytotoxicity and chromosome aberrations in vitro: experi-
ence in industry and the case for an upper limit on toxicity in the aberra-
tion assay. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2000;35:191–201.
Galloway SM, Aardema MJ, Ishidate M Jr, et al. Report from work-
ing group on in vitro tests for chromosomal aberrations. Mutat Res. 
1994;312:241–261.
Galloway SM, Berry PK, Nichols WW, et al. Chromosome aberrations in 
individuals occupationally exposed to ethylene oxide, and in a large con-
trol population. Mutat Res. 1986;170:55–74.
Galloway SM, Ivett JL. Chemically induced aneuploidy in mammalian cells 
in culture. Mutat Res. 1986;167:89–105.
Galloway S, Lorge E, Aardema MJ, et al. Workshop summary: top concen-
tration for in vitro mammalian cell genotoxicity assays; and report from 
working group on toxicity measures and top concentration for in vitro 
cytogenetic assays (chromosome aberrations and micronucleus). Mutat 
Res. 2011;723:77–83.
Galloway SM. International regulatory requirements for genotoxicity test-
ing for pharmaceuticals used in human medicine, and their impurities and 
metabolites. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2017;58(5):296–324.
Gatehouse D, Haworth S, Cebula T, et al. Recommendations for the per-
formance of bacterial mutation assays. Mutat Res. 1994;312:217–233.
Gatenby RA, Vincent TL. An evolutionary model of carcinogenesis. Cancer 
Res. 2003;63:6212–6220.
Gealy R, Wright-Bourque JL, Kraynak AR, et al. Validation of a high-
throughput in vitro alkaline elution/rat hepatocyte assay for DNA dam-
age. Mutat Res. 2007;629:49–63.
Ge J, Prasongtanakij S, Wood DK, et al. CometChip: a high-throughput 
96-well platform for measuring DNA damage in microarrayed human 
cells. J Vis Exp. 2014;92:e50607.
Gee P, Maron DM, Ames BN. Detection and classification of mutagens: a 
set of base-specific Salmonella tester strains. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
1994;91:11606–11610.
Gentile JM, Gentile GJ, Plewa MJ. In vitro activation of chemicals by 
plants: a comparison of techniques. Mutat Res. 1986;164(1):53–58.
Gerkema MP, Davies WI, Foster RG, Menaker M, Hut RA. The nocturnal 
bottleneck and the evolution of activity patterns in mammals. Proc Biol 
Sci. 2013;280(1765):20130508.
Giglia-Mari G, Zotter A, Vermeulen W. DNA damage response. Cold 
Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2011;3:745–778.
Gillet LC, Scharer OD. Molecular mechanisms of mammalian global 
genome nucleotide excision repair. Chem Rev. 2006;106:253–276.
Glei M, Schneider T, Schlörmann W. Comet assay: an essential tool in toxi-
cological research. Arch Toxicol. 2016;90(10):2315–2336.
Gocke E, Muller L. In vivo studies in the mouse to define a threshold for the 
genotoxicity of EMS and ENU. Mutat Res. 2009;678:101–107.
Gold LS, Slone TH, Stern BR, Bernstein L. Comparison of target organs of 
carcinogenicity for mutagenic and non-mutagenic chemicals. Mutat Res. 
1993;286:75–100.
Goldmacher VS, Cuzick R, Thilly WG. Isolation and partial characteriza-
tion of human cell mutants differing in sensitivity to killing and mutation 
by methylnitrosourea and N-methyl-N′-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine. J Biol 
Chem. 1986;261:12462–12471.
Gollapudi B. An ongoing journey toward a risk-based testing in genetic 
toxicology. Curr Opinion Toxicol. 2017;3:71–74.
Gollapudi BB, Johnson GE, Hernandez LG, et al. Quantitative approaches 
for assessing dose-response relationships in genetic toxicology studies. 
Environ Mol Mutagen. 2013;54(1):8–18.
Gollapudi BB, Lynch AM, Heflich RH, et al. The in vivo Pig-a assay: a 
report of the International Workshop On Genotoxicity Testing (IWGT) 
Workgroup. Mutat Res Genet Toxicol Environ Mutagen. 2015;783:23–35.
Gollapudi P, Hasegawa LS, Eastmond DA. A comparative study of the 
aneugenic and polyploidy-inducing effects of fisetin and two model 
Aurora kinase inhibitors. Mutat Res Genet Toxicol Environ Mutagen. 
2014;767:37–43.
Goodhead DT. Initial events in the cellular effects of ionizing radiations: 
clustered damage in DNA. Int J Radiat Biol. 1994;65:7–17.
Gordon DJ, Resio B, Pellman D. Causes and consequences of aneuploidy in 
cancer. Nat Rev Genet. 2012;13:189–203.
Grant WF, Owens ET. Zea mays assays of chemical/radiation genotoxicity 
for the study of environmental mutagens. Mutat Res. 2006;613:17–64.
Guerard M, Baum M, Bitsch A, et al. Assessment of mechanisms driving 
non-linear dose-response relationships in genotoxicity testing. Mutat Res 
Rev Mutat Res. 2015;763:181–201.
Greenman C, Stephens P, Smith R, et al. Patterns of somatic mutation in 
human cancer genomes. Nature. 2007;446(7132):153–158.
Griffin DK. The incidence, origin, and etiology of aneuploidy. Int Rev 
Cytol. 1996;167:263–296.
Griffin JL. Understanding mouse models of disease through metabolomics. 
Curr Opin Chem Biol. 2006;10:309–315.
Grombacher T, Mitra S, Kaina B. Induction of the alkyltransferase 
(MGMT) gene by DNA damaging agents and the glucocorticoid dexa-
methasone and comparison with the response of base excision repair. 
Carcinogenesis. 1996;17:2329–2336.
Guengerich FP. Forging the links between metabolism and carcinogenesis. 
Mutat Res. 2001;488:195–209.
Guha R. The ups and downs of structure-activity landscapes. Methods Mol 
Biol. 2011;672:101–117.
Haber JE. Partners and pathways: repairing a double-strand break. Trends 
Genet. 2000;16:259–264.

537
Genetic Toxicology
Chapter 9
Hagmar L, Bonassi S, Strömberg U, et al. Cancer predictive value of cyto-
genetic markers used in occupational health surveillance programs: a 
report from an ongoing study by the European Study Group on Cyto-
genetic Biomarkers and Health. Mutat Res. 1998a;405:171–178.
Hagmar L, Bonassi S, Strömberg U, et al. Chromosomal aberrations in 
lymphocytes predict human cancer: a report from the European Study 
Group on Cytogenetic Biomarkers and Health (ESCH). Cancer Res. 
1998b;58:4117–4121.
Hahn WC, Counter CM, Lundberg AS, et al. Creation of human tumor cells 
with defined genetic elements. Nature. 1999;400:464–468.
Halliday JA, Glickman BW. Mechanisms of spontaneous mutation in DNA 
repair-proficient Escherichia coli. Mutat Res. 1991;250:55–71.
Hamilton JP. Epigenetics: principles and practice. Dig Dis. 2011;29:130–135.
Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. The hallmarks of cancer. Cell. 2000;100: 
57–70.
Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation. Cell. 
2011;144:646–674.
Harrington CA, Rosenow C, Retief J. Monitoring gene expression using 
DNA microarrays. Curr Opin Microbiol. 2000;3:285–291.
Harris CC. P53: at the crossroads of molecular carcinogenesis and risk 
assessment. Science. 1993;262:1980–1981.
Hastwell PW, Webster TW, Tate M, et al. Analysis of 75 marketed phar-
maceuticals using the GADD45a-GFP “GreenScreen HC” genotoxicity 
assay. Mutagenesis. 2009;24:455–463.
Hayashi M, MacGregor JT, Gatehouse DG, et al. In vivo erythrocyte micro-
nucleus assay III. Validation and regulatory acceptance of automated 
scoring and the use of rat peripheral blood reticulocytes, with discussion 
of non-hematopoietic target cells and a single dose-level limit test. Mutat 
Res. 2007;627:10–30.
Heflich RH. Chemical mutagens. In: Li AP, Heflich RH, eds. Genetic 
Toxicology: A Treatise. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 1991:143–202.
Helleday T, Lo J, van Gent DC, Engelward BP. DNA double-strand break 
repair: from mechanistic understanding to cancer treatment. DNA Repair. 
2007;6:923–935.
Hemminki K, Thilly WG. Implications of results of molecular epidemi-
ology on DNA adducts, their repair and mutations for mechanisms of 
human cancer. IARC Sci Publ. 2004;157:217–235.
Hewitt LM, Marvin CH. Analytical methods in environmental effects-
directed investigations of effluents. Mutat Res. 2005;589:208–232.
Hickman MJ, Samson LD. Role of DNA mismatch repair and p53 in signal-
ing induction of apoptosis by alkylating agents. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
1999;96:10764–10769.
Himmelstein MW, Boogaard PJ, Cadet J, et al. Creating context for the use 
of DNA adduct data in cancer risk assessment: II. Overview of meth-
ods of identification and quantitation of DNA damage. Crit Rev Toxicol. 
2009;39:679–694.
Hiom K. Coping with DNA double strand breaks. DNA Repair. 
2010;9:1256–1263.
Hoege C, Pfander B, Moldovan GL, Pyrowolakis G, Jentsch S. RAD6-
dependent DNA repair is linked to modification of PCNA by ubiquitin 
and SUMO. Nature. 2002;419(6903):135–141.
Hoffmann GR. Induction of genetic recombination: consequences and 
model systems. Environ Mol Mutagen. 1994;23(suppl 24):59–66.
Hoffmann GR, Calciano MA, Lawless BM, Mahoney KM. Frameshift 
mutations induced by three classes of acridines in the lacZ reversion 
assay in Escherichia coli: potency of responses and relationship to 
slipped mispairing models. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2003;42:111–121.
Hosoya N, Sanada M, Nannya Y, et al. Genomewide screening of DNA 
copy number changes in chronic myelogenous leukemia with the use of 
high-resolution array-based comparative genomic hybridization. Genes 
Chromosomes Cancer. 2006;45:482–494.
Houlston RS, Peto J. The search for low-penetrance cancer susceptibility 
alleles. Oncogene. 2004;23:6471–6476.
Howlett NG, Schiestl RH. Simultaneous measurement of the frequencies of 
intrachromosomal recombination and chromosome gain using the yeast 
DEL assay. Mutat Res. 2000;454:53–62.
Hsu TC. Human and Mammalian Cytogenetics: A Historical Perspective. 
New York: Springer-Verlag; 1979.
Hughes C, Rabinowitz A, Tate M, et al. Development of a high-throughput 
Gaussia luciferase reporter assay for the activation of the GADD45a gene 
by mutagens, promutagens, clastogens, and aneugens. J Biomol Screen. 
2012;17(10):1302–1315.
Hunt PA. Meiosis in mammals: recombination, non-disjunction and the 
environment. Biochem Soc Trans. 2006;34:574–577.
International Program on Chemical Safety (IPCS). Overview of the IPCS 
collaborative study on in vivo assay systems and conclusions. In: Ashby 
J, de Serres FJ, Shelby MD, Margolin BH, Ishidate M Jr, Becking GC, 
eds. Evaluation of Short-Term Tests for Carcinogens: Report of the 
International Programme on Chemical Safety’s Collaborative Study on 
In Vivo Assays. Vols I and II. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press; 1988:1–28.
Ionov Y, Peinado MA, Malkhosyan S, Shibata D, Perucho M. Ubiquitous 
somatic mutations in simple repeated sequences reveal a new mechanism 
for colonic carcinogenesis. Nature. 1993;363:558–561.
Ischenko AA, Saparbaev MK. Alternative nucleotide incision repair path-
way for oxidative DNA damage. Nature. 2002;415:183–187.
Ishidate M Jr, Harnois MC, Sofuni T. A comparative analysis of data on 
the clastogenicity of 951 chemical substances tested in mammalian cell 
cultures. Mutat Res. 1988;195:151–213.
Ito T, Nakamura T, Maki H, Sekiguchi M. Roles of transcription and repair 
in alkylation mutagenesis. Mutat Res. 1994;314:273–285.
Jarabek AM, Pottenger LH, Andrews LS, et al. Creating context for the use 
of DNA adduct data in cancer risk assessment: I. Data organization. Crit 
Rev Toxicol. 2009;39:659–678.
Jagger C, Tate M, Cahill PA, et al. Assessment of the genotoxicity of 
S9-generated metabolites using the GreenScreenHC GADD45a-GFP 
assay. Mutagenesis. 2009;24:35–50.
Jasin M, Rothstein R. Repair of strand breaks by homologous recombina-
tion. Cold Spring Harb Perspec Biol. 2013;5:a012740.
Jaworski A, Rosche WA, Gellibolian R, et al. Mismatch repair in Escherichia 
coli enhances instability of (CTG)n triplet repeats from human hereditary 
diseases. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995;92:11019–11023.
Jha AN. Genotoxicological studies in aquatic organisms: an overview. 
Mutat Res. 2004;552:1–17.
Ji Z, Ball NS, LeBaron MJ. Global regulatory requirements for mutagenic-
ity assessment in the registration of industrial chemicals. Environ Mol 
Mutagen. 2017;58(5):345–353.
Ji Z, LeBaron MJ. Applying the erythrocyte Pig-a assay concept to rat 
epididymal sperm for germ cell mutagenicity evaluation. Environ Mol 
Mutagen. 2017;58(7):485–493.
Ji Z, LeBaron MJ, Schisler MR, et al. Dose-response for multiple bio-
markers of exposure and genotoxic effect following repeated treat-
ment of rats with the alkylating agents, MMS and MNU. Mutagenesis. 
2016;31(3):297–308.
Jiang G, Sancar A. Recruitment of DNA damage checkpoint proteins to 
damage in transcribed and nontranscribed sequences. Mol Cell Biol. 
2006;26:39–49.
Jinks-Robertson S, Bhagwat AS. Transcription-associated mutagenesis. 
Annu Rev Genet. 2014;48:341–359.
Jiricny J. Eukaryotic mismatch repair: an update. Mutat Res. 
1998;409:107–121.
Jiricny J. The multifaceted mismatch-repair system. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 
2006;7:335–346.
Johnson KA. The kinetic and chemical mechanism of high-fidelity DNA 
polymerases. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010;1804:1041–1048.
Johnson GE, Soeteman-Hernández LG, Gollapudi BB, et al. Derivation 
of point of departure (PoD) estimates in genetic toxicology studies and 
their potential applications in risk assessment. Environ Mol Mutagen. 
2014;55(8):609–623.
Johnson RE, Haracska L, Prakash S, Prakash L. Role of DNA poly-
merase eta in the bypass of a (6-4) TT photoproduct. Mol Cell Biol. 
2001;21:3558–3563.
Johnson RD, Liu N, Jasin M. Mammalian XRCC2 promotes the repair 
of DNA double-strand breaks by homologous recombination. Nature. 
1999;401:397–399.
Josephy PD. The Escherichia coli lacZ reversion mutagenicity assay. Mutat 
Res. 2000;455:71–80.
Josephy PD. Genetically-engineered bacteria expressing human enzymes 
and their use in the study of mutations and mutagenesis. Toxicology. 
2002;181-182:255–260.

538
Non-Organ-Directed toxicity
unit III
Jun SH, Kim TG, Ban C. DNA mismatch repair system. Classical and fresh 
roles. FEBS J. 2006;273:1609–1619.
Jurado J, Alejandre-Durán E, Pueyo C. Mutagenicity testing in Salmonella 
typhimurium strains possessing both the His reversion and Ara forward 
mutation systems and different levels of classical nitroreductase or 
o-acetyltransferase activities. Environ Mol Mutagen. 1994;23:286–293.
Kadyrov FA, Dzantiev L, Constantin N, Modrich P. PCNA function in the 
activation and strand direction of MutLα endonuclease in mismatch 
repair. Cell. 2006;126:297–308.
Kaina B, Ziouta A, Ochs K, Coquerelle T. Chromosomal instability, repro-
ductive cell death and apoptosis induced by O6-methylguanine in Mex−, 
Mex+ and methylation-tolerant mismatch repair compromised cells: 
facts and models. Mutat Res. 1997;381(2):227–241.
Kallioniemi A, Kallioniemi O-P, Sudar D, et al. Comparative genomic 
hybridization for molecular cytogenetic analysis of solid tumors. Science. 
1992;258:818–821.
Kamber M, Flückiger-Isler S, Engelhardt G, et al. Comparison of the Ames 
II and traditional Ames test responses with respect to mutagenicity, strain 
specificities, need for metabolism and correlation with carcinogenicity. 
Mutagenesis. 2009;24:359–366.
Kannouche PL, Wing J, Lehmann AR. Interaction of human DNA poly-
merase eta with monoubiquitinated PCNA: a possible mechanism 
for the polymerase switch in response to DNA damage. Mol Cell. 
2004;14:491–500.
Kataoka H, Yamamoto Y, Sekiguchi M. A new gene (alkB) of Escherichia 
coli that controls sensitivity to methyl methane sulfonate. J Bacteriol. 
1983;153:1301–1307.
Kier LE, Brusick DJ, Auletta AE, et al. The Salmonella typhimurium/mam-
malian microsomal assay: a report of the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency Gene-Tox Program. Mutat Res. 1986;168:69–240.
Kim BS, Margolin BH. Prediction of rodent carcinogenicity utilizing a 
battery of in vitro and in vivo genotoxicity tests. Environ Mol Mutagen. 
1999;34:297–304.
Kim ST, Sancar A.Photochemistry, photophysics, and mechanism of 
pyrimidine dimer repair by DNA photolyase. Photochem Photobiol. 
1993;57(5):895–904.
Kim YJ, Wilson DM 3rd. Overview of base excision repair biochemistry. 
Curr Mol Pharmacol. 2012;5(1):3–13.
Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B. Lessons from hereditary colorectal cancer. Cell. 
1996;87:159–170.
Kirkland DJ, Gatehouse DG, Scott D, et al., eds. Basic Mutagenicity Tests: 
UKEMS Recommended Procedures. New York: Cambridge University 
Press; 1990.
Kirkland D, Speit G. Evaluation of the ability of a battery of three in vitro 
genotoxicity tests to discriminate rodent carcinogens and non-carcinogens 
III. Appropriate follow-up testing in vivo. Mutat Res. 2008;654:114–132.
Kirkland D, Aardema M, Henderson L, Müller L. Evaluation of the ability 
of a battery of three in vitro genotoxicity tests to discriminate rodent 
carcinogens and non-carcinogens I. Sensitivity, specificity and relative 
predictivity. Mutat Res. 2005;584(1–2):1–256.
Kirsch-Volders M, Aardema M, Elhajouji A. Concepts of threshold in muta-
genesis and carcinogenesis. Mutat Res. 2000;464(1):3–11.
Kirsch-Volders M, Sofuni T, Aardema M, et al. Report from the in vitro 
micronucleus assay working group. Mutat Res. 2003;540:153–163.
Klapacz J, Pottenger LH, Engelward BP, et al. Contributions of DNA repair 
and damage response pathways to the non-linear genotoxic responses of 
alkylating agents. Mutat Res Rev Mutat Res. 2016;767:77–91.
Kleinerman RA, Romanyukha AA, Schauer DA, Tucker JD. Retrospective 
assessment of radiation exposure using biological dosimetry: chromo-
some painting, electron paramagnetic resonance and the glycophorin a 
mutation assay. Radiat Res. 2006;166:287–302.
Knudsen TB, Houck KA, Sipes NS, et al. Activity profiles of 309 ToxCastTM 
chemicals evaluated across 292 biochemical targets. Toxicology. 
2011;282:1–15.
Knudson AG. Hereditary predisposition to cancer. Ann NY Acad Sci. 
1997;833:58–67.
Koch WH, Henrikson EN, Kupchella E, Cebula TA. Salmonella typhimurium 
strain TA100 differentiates several classes of carcinogens and mutagens 
by base substitution specificity. Carcinogenesis. 1994;15:79–88.
Kolodner RD. Mismatch repair: mechanisms and relationship to cancer sus-
ceptibility. Trends Biochem Sci. 1995;20:397–401.
Krejci L, Chen L, Van Komen S, Sung P, Tomkinson A. Mending the break: 
two DNA double-strand break repair machines in eukaryotes. Prog 
Nucleic Acid Res Mol Biol. 2003;74:159–201.
Krewski D, Acosta D Jr, Andersen M, et al. Toxicity testing in the 21st 
century: a vision and a strategy. J Toxicol Environ Health B Crit Rev. 
2010;13(2-4):51–138.
Krishna G, Hayashi M. In vivo rodent micronucleus assay: protocol, con-
duct and data interpretation. Mutat Res. 2000;455:155–166.
Krokan HE, Nilsen H, Skorpen F, Otterlei M, Slupphaug G. Base excision 
repair of DNA in mammalian cells. FEBS Lett. 2000;476(1-2):73–77.
Kurowski MA, Bhagwat AS, Papaj G, Bujnicki JM. Phylogenomic identi-
fication of five new human homologs of the DNA repair enzyme AlkB. 
BMC Genomics. 2003;4:48.
Krüger CT, Fischer BM, Armant O, et al. The in vitro PIG-A gene muta-
tion assay: glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-related genotype-to-phe-
notype relationship in TK6 cells. Arch Toxicol. 2016;90(7):1729–1736.
Kyoizumi S, Kusunoki Y, Hayashi T, et al. Individual variation of somatic 
gene mutability in relation to cancer susceptibility: prospective study 
on erythrocyte glycophorin a gene mutations of atomic bomb survivors. 
Cancer Res. 2005;65:5462–5469.
Lambert IB, Singer TM, Boucher SE, Douglas GR. Detailed review of 
transgenic rodent mutation assays. Mutat Res. 2005;590:1–280.
Larson K, Sahm J, Shenkar R, Strauss B. Methylation-induced blocks to in 
vitro DNA replication. Mutat Res. 1985;150:77–84.
Laval J, Boiteux S, O’Connor TR. Physiological properties and repair of 
apurinic/apyrimidinic sites and imidazole ring-opened guanines in DNA. 
Mutat Res. 1990;233:73–79.
Le XC, Xing JZ, Lee J, et al. Inducible repair of thymine glycol detected by 
an ultrasensitive assay for DNA damage. Science. 1998;280:1066–1069.
LeBaron MJ, Rasoulpour RJ, Klapacz J, Ellis-Hutchings RG, Hollnagel 
HM, Gollapudi BB. Epigenetics and chemical safety assessment. Mutat 
Res. 2010;705(2):83–95.
Lee DH, Jin SG, Cai S, Chen Y, Pfeifer GP, O′Connor TR. Repair of meth-
ylation damage in DNA and RNA by mammalian AlkB homologues. J 
Biol Chem. 2005;280:39448–39459.
Lee RF, Steinert S. Use of the single cell gel electrophoresis/comet assay 
for detecting DNA damage in aquatic (marine and freshwater) animals. 
Mutat Res. 2003;544:43–64.
Lee WR, Abrahamson S, Valencia R, et al. The sex-linked recessive lethal 
test for mutagenesis in Drosophila melanogaster: a report of the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency Gene-Tox Program. Mutat Res. 
1983;123:183–279.
Lemaître C, Soutoglou E. Double strand break (DSB) repair in heterochro-
matin and heterochromatin proteins in DSB repair. DNA Repair (Amst). 
2014;19:163–168.
Léonard A. Observations on meiotic chromosomes of the male mouse 
as a test of the potential mutagenicity of chemicals in mammals. In: 
Hollaender A, ed. Chemical Mutagens: Principles and Methods for Their 
Detection. Vol 3. New York: Plenum Press; 1973:21.
Levine JG, Schaaper RM, DeMarini DM. Complex frameshift mutations 
mediated by plasmid pKM101: mutational mechanisms deduced from 
4-aminobiphenyl-induced mutation spectra in Salmonella. Genetics. 
1994;136:731–746.
Lewis SE. The biochemical specific-locus test and a new multiple-endpoint 
mutation detection system: considerations for genetic risk assessment. 
Environ Mol Mutagen. 1991;18:303–306.
Lewtas J, DeMarini DM, Favor J, et al. Risk characterization strategies 
for genotoxic environmental agents. In: Brusick DJ ed. Methods for 
GenotoxicRisk Assessment. Boca Ratan, FL: CRC Press; 1994:125–169.
Li AP, Gupta RS, Heflich RH, et al. A review and analysis of the Chinese 
hamster ovary/hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyl transferase assay 
to determine the mutagenicity of chemical agents. A report of the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency Gene-Tox Program. Mutat Res. 
1988;196:17–36.
Li J, Makrigiorgos GM. COLD-PCR: a new platform for highly improved 
mutation detection in cancer and genetic testing. Biochem Soc Trans. 
2009;37:427–432.

539
Genetic Toxicology
Chapter 9
Li X, Heyer WD. Homologous recombination in DNA repair and DNA 
damage tolerance. Cell Res. 2008;18(1):99–113.
Li Z, Sun B, Clewell RA, Adeleye Y, Andersen ME, Zhang Q. Dose-
response modeling of etoposide-induced DNA damage response. Toxicol 
Sci. 2014;137(2):371–84.
Lieber MR. The mechanism of double-strand DNA break repair by the nonho-
mologous DNA end-joining pathway. Annu Rev Biochem. 2010;79:181–211.
Lieber MR, Ma Y, Pannicke U, Schwarz K. Mechanism and regulation 
of human non-homologous DNA end-joining. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 
2003;4:712–720.
Lindahl T. New class of enzymes acting on damaged DNA. Nature. 
1976;259:64–66.
Lindahl T. Instability and decay of the primary structure of DNA. Nature. 
1993;362:709–715.
Lindahl T. Suppression of spontaneous mutagenesis in human cells by DNA 
base excision-repair. Mutat Res. 2000;462:129–135.
Liu Y, Fang Y, Shao H, Lindsey-Boltz L, Sancar A, Modrich P. Interactions 
of human mismatch repair proteins MutSalpha and MutLalpha with pro-
teins of the ATR-Chk1 pathway. J Biol Chem. 2010;285:5974–5982.
Liyanage M, Coleman A, duManoir S, et al. Multicolour spectral karyotyp-
ing of mouse chromosomes. Nat Genet. 1996;14:312–315.
Lodish H, Berk A, Zipursky SL, et al. Molecular Cell Biology. 4th ed. New 
York: W. H. Freeman; 2000. Section 8.1, Mutations: Types and Causes.
Loechler EL, Green CL, Essigmann JM. In vivo mutagenesis by 
O6-methylguanine built into a unique site in a viral genome. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A. 1984;81:6271–6275.
Lommel L, Carswell-Crumpton C, Hanawalt PC. Preferential repair of the 
transcribed DNA strand in the dihydrofolate reductase gene throughout the 
cell cycle in UV-irradiated human cells. Mutat Res. 1995;366:181–192.
Lorge E, Moore MM, Clements J, et al. Standardized cell sources and rec-
ommendations for good cell culture practices in genotoxicity testing. 
Mutat Res. 2016;809:1–15.
Lucas JN, Awa A, Straume T, et al. Rapid translocation analysis in 
humans decades after exposure to ionizing radiation. Int J Radiat Biol. 
1992;62:53–63.
Lynch AM, Guzzie PJ, Bauer D, et al. Considerations on photochemi-
cal genotoxicity. II: report of the 2009 International Workshop on 
Genotoxicity Testing Working Group. Mutat Res. 2011;723:91–100.
Lynch AM, Parry JM. The cytochalasin-B micronucleus/kinetochore assay 
in vitro: studies with 10 suspected aneugens. Mutat Res. 1993;287:71–86.
Lynch HT, Lynch JF. Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. Semin 
Surg Oncol. 2000;18(4):305–313.
Ma TH, Cabrera GL, Owens E. Genotoxic agents detected by plant bioas-
says. Rev Environ Health. 2005;20:1–13.
Ma Y, Pannicke U, Schwarz K, Lieber MR. Hairpin opening and overhang 
processing by an Artemis/DNA-dependent protein kinase complex in non-
homologous end joining and V(D)J recombination. Cell. 2002;108:781–794.
MacGregor JT, Casciano D, Muller L. Strategies and testing methods for 
identifying mutagenic risks. Mutat Res. 2000;455:3–20.
MacGregor JT, Frötschl R, White PA, et al. IWGT report on quantitative 
approaches to genotoxicity risk assessment I. Methods and metrics for 
defining exposure response relationships and points of departure (PoDs). 
Mutat Res Genet Toxicol Environ Mutagen. 2015a;783:55–65.
MacGregor JT, Frötschl R, White PA, et al. IWGT report on quantitative 
approaches to genotoxicity risk assessment II. Use of point-of-departure 
(PoD) metrics in defining acceptable exposure limits and assessing human 
risk. Mutat Res Genet Toxicol Environ Mutagen. 2015b;783:66–78.
Mackinnon RN, Chudoba I. The use of M-FISH and M-BAND to define 
chromosome abnormalities. Methods Mol Biol. 2011;730:203–218.
Macville M, Veldman T, Padilla-Nash H, et al. Spectral karyotyping, a 
24-colour FISH technique for the identification of chromosomal rear-
rangements. Histochem Cell Biol. 1997;108:299–305.
Madle S, Dean SW, Andrae U, et al. Recommendations for the performance 
of UDS tests in vitro and in vivo. Mutat Res. 1994;312:263–285.
Mah LJ, El-Osta A, Karagiannis TC. Gamma H2AX: a sensitive molecular 
marker of DNA damage and repair. Leukemia. 2010;24:679–686.
Mahadevan B, Snyder RD, Waters MD, et al. Genetic toxicology in the 
21st century: reflections and future directions. Environ Mol Mutagen. 
2011;52:339–354.
Mahajan KN, McElhinny NSA, Mitchell BS, Ramsden DA. Association 
of DNA polymerase mu (pol mu) with Ku and ligase IV: role for pol 
mu in end-joining double-strand break repair. Mol Cell Biol. 2002;22: 
5194–5202.
Maillard O, Solyom S, Naegeli H. An aromatic sensor with aversion to dam-
aged strands confers versatility to DNA repair. PLoS Biol. 2007;5:e79.
Makrigiorgos GM. PCR-based detection of minority point mutations. Hum 
Mutat. 2004;23:406–412.
Malling HV. Incorporation of mammalian metabolism into mutagenicity 
testing. Mutat Res. 2004;566:183–189.
Malling HV, Frantz CN. In vitro versus in vivo metabolic activation of 
mutagens. Environ Health Prospect. 1973;6:71–82.
Malu S, Malshetty V, Francis D, Cortes P. Role of non-homologous end 
joining in V(D)J recombination. Immunol Res. 2012;54(1-3):233–246.
Marchetti F, Bishop JB, Lowe X, et al. Etoposide induces heritable chro-
mosomal aberrations and aneuploidy during male meiosis in the mouse. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001;98:3952–3957.
Marchetti F, Cabreros D, Wyrobek AJ. Laboratory methods for the detec-
tion of chromosomal structural aberrations in human and mouse sperm 
by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Methods Mol Biol. 2008;410: 
241–271.
Marchetti F, Essers J, Kanaar R, Wyrobek AJ. Disruption of maternal DNA 
repair increases sperm-derived chromosomal aberrations. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A. 2007;104(45):17725–17729.
Marchetti F, Massarotti A, Yauk CL, Pacchierotti F, Russo A. The adverse 
outcome pathway (AOP) for chemical binding to tubulin in oocytes lead-
ing to aneuploid offspring. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2016;57(2):87–113.
Marchetti F, Pearson FS, Bishop JB, et al. Etoposide induces chromosomal 
abnormalities in mouse spermatocytes and stem cell spermatogonia. Hum 
Reprod. 2006;21:888–895.
Marchetti F, Wyrobek AJ. Mechanisms and consequences of paternally-
transmitted chromosomal abnormalities. Birth Defects Res C Embryo 
Today. 2005;75(2):112–129.
Margison GP, Povey AC, Kaina B, Santibanez Koref MF. Variability and 
regulation of O6-alkylguanine-DNA alkyltransferase. Carcinogenesis. 
2003;24:625–635.
Maron DM, Ames BN. Revised methods for the Salmonella mutagenicity 
test. Mutat Res. 1983;113:173–215.
Marshall CJ. Tumor suppressor genes. Cell. 1991;64:313–326.
Martin RH, Ko E, Rademaker A. Distribution of aneuploidy in human ga-
metes: Comparison between human sperm and oocytes. Am J Med Genet. 
1991;39:321–331.
Martin RH, Spriggs E, Rademaker AW. Multicolor fluorescence in situ 
hybridization analysis of aneuploidy and diploidy frequencies in 225, 
846 sperm from 10 normal men. Biol Reprod. 1996;54:394–398.
Mason JM, Aaron CS, Lee WR, et al. A guide for performing germ 
cell mutagenesis assays using Drosophila melanogaster. Mutat Res. 
1987;189:93–102.
Mastrocola AS, Heinen CD. Nuclear reorganization of DNA mismatch repair 
proteins in response to DNA damage. DNA Repair. 2010;9:120–133.
Mathieu N, Kaczmarek N, Naegeli H. Strand- and site-specific DNA lesion 
demarcation by the xeroderma pigmentosum group D helicase. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A. 2010;107:17545–17550.
Masutani C, Kusumoto R, Iwai S, Hanaoka F. Mechanisms of accu-
rate translesion synthesis by human DNA polymerase eta. EMBO J. 
2000;19:3100–3109.
Masutani C, Kusumoto R, Yamada A, et al. The XPV (xeroderma pig-
mentosum variant) gene encodes human DNA polymerase eta. Nature. 
1999;399:700–704.
Mazurek A, Berardini M, Fishel RJ. Activation of human MutS homologs 
by 8-oxo-guanine DNA damage. Biol Chem. 2002;277:8260–8266.
McCullough AK, Dodson ML, Lloyd RS. Initiation of base excision 
repair: glycosylase mechanisms and structures. Annu Rev Biochem. 
1999;68:255–285.
McElhinny NSA, Kumar D, Clark AB, et al.Genome instability due to ribo-
nucleotide incorporation into DNA. Nat Chem Biol. 2010;6(10):774–781.
McIntyre J, Podlaska A, Skoneczna A, Halas A, Sledziewska-Gojska E. 
Analysis of the spontaneous mutator phenotype associated with 20S pro-
teasome deficiency in S. cerevisiae. Mutat Res. 2006:593:153–163.

540
Non-Organ-Directed toxicity
unit III
McGregor DB, Rice JM, Venitt S, eds. The Use of Short- and Medium-
term Tests for Carcinogens and Data on Genetic Effects in Carcinogenic 
Hazard Evaluation. IARC Sci Pub No. 146. Lyon, France: IARC; 1999.
McGregor E, De Souza A. Proteomics and laser microdissection. Methods 
Mol Biol. 2006;333:291–304.
McQueen CA, Williams GM. The hepatocyte primary culture/DNA 
repair test using hepatocytes from several species. Cell Biol Toxicol. 
1987;3(2):209–218.
Meek ME, Bucher JR, Cohen SM, et al. A framework for human relevance 
analysis of information on carcinogenic modes of action. Crit Rev 
Toxicol. 2003;33:591–653.
Meek ME, Boobis A, Cote I, et al. New developments in the evolution and 
application of the WHO/IPCS framework on mode of action/species con-
cordance analysis. J Appl Toxicol. 2014a;34(1):1–8.
Meek ME, Palermo CM, Bachman AN, North CM, Lewis RJ. Mode of 
action human relevance (species concordance) framework: evolution of 
the Bradford Hill considerations and comparative analysis of weight of 
evidence. J Appl Toxicol. 2014b;34(6):595–606.
Mellon I, Hanawalt PC. Induction of the Escherichia coli lactose operon 
selectively increases repair of its transcribed DNA strand. Nature. 
1989;342:95–98.
Mercer WE. Checking on the cell cycle. J Cell Biochem Suppl. 1998;30–31: 
50–54.
Michel B. After 30 Years of Study, the Bacterial SOS Response Still 
Surprises Us. PLoS Biol. 2005;3(7):e255.
Miller E, Miller J. Searches for ultimate chemical carcinogens and their 
reactions with cellular macromolecules. Cancer. 1981;47:2327–2345.
Miller JA, Miller EC. Ultimate chemical carcinogens as reactive mutagenic 
electrophiles. In: Hiatt HH, Watson JD, Winsten JA, eds. Origins of 
Human Cancer. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory 
Press; 1977:605–628.
Mimori T, Hardin JA, Steitz JA. Characterization of the DNA-binding pro-
tein antigen Ku recognized by autoantibodies from patients with rheu-
matic disorders. J Biol Chem. 1986;261:2274–2278.
Min JH, Pavletich NP. Recognition of DNA damage by the Rad4 nucleotide 
excision repair protein. Nature. 2007;449(7162):570–575.
Misík M, Ma TH, Nersesyan A, et al. Micronucleus assays with tradescan-
tia pollen tetrads: an update. Mutagenesis. 2011;26:215–221.
Misteli T, Soutoglou E. The emerging role of nuclear architecture 
in DNA repair and genome maintenance. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 
2009;10(4):243–254.
Miura D, Shaddock JG, Mittelstaedt RA, et al. Analysis of mutations in the 
Pig-a gene of spleen T-cells from N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea-treated Fischer 
344 rats. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2011;52:419–423.
Mladenov E, Iliakis G. Induction and repair of DNA double strand breaks: 
the increasing spectrum of non-homologous end joining pathways. Mutat 
Res. 2011;711:61–72.
Mocquet V, Laine JP, Riedl T, Yajin Z, Lee MY, Egly JM. Sequential recruit-
ment of the repair factors during NER: the role of XPG in initiating the 
resynthesis step. EMBO J. 2008;27:155–167.
Modrich P. Strand-specific mismatch repair in mammalian cells. J Biol 
Chem. 1997;272:24727–24730.
Modrich P, Lahue R. Mismatch repair in replication fidelity, genetic recom-
bination, and cancer biology. Annu Rev Biochem. 1996;65:101–133.
Mohrenweiser HW. Germinal mutation and human genetic disease. In: Li 
AP, Heflich RH, eds. Genetic Toxicology: A Treatise. Boca Raton, FL: 
CRC Press; 1991:67–92.
Moldovan GL, Pfander B, Jentsch S. PCNA, the maestro of the replication 
fork. Cell. 2007;129:665–679.
Moolenaar RJ. Carcinogen risk assessment: international comparison. 
Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 1994;20:302–336.
Moore MM, Honma M, Clements J, et al. Suitable top concentration for 
tests with mammalian cells: mouse lymphoma assay workgroup. Mutat 
Res. 2011;723:84–86.
Moore MM, Schoeny RS, Becker RA, White K, Pottenger LH.  Development 
of an adverse outcome pathway for chemically induced hepatocellular 
carcinoma: case study of AFB1, a human carcinogen with a mutagenic 
mode of action. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2018;48(4):312–337.
Morita T, Macgregor JT, Hayashi M. Micronucleus assays in rodent tissues 
other than bone marrow. Mutagenesis. 2011;26:223–230.
Mortelmans K, Riccio ES. The bacterial tryptophan reverse mutation assay 
with Escherichia coli WP2. Mutat Res. 2000;455:61–69.
Mortelmans K, Zeiger E. The Ames Salmonella/microsome mutagenicity 
assay. Mutat Res. 2000;455:29–60.
Moser J, Kool H, Giakzidis I, et al. Sealing of chromosomal DNA nicks 
during nucleotide excision repair requires XRCC1 and DNA ligase III 
alpha in a cell-cycle-specific manner. Mol Cell. 2007;27:311–323.
Muller HJ. Artificial transmutation of the gene. Science. 1927;66:84–87.
Nagaishi M, Yamamoto T, Iinuma K, et al. Chromosome abnormalities 
identified in 347 spontaneous abortions collected in Japan. J Obstet 
Gynaecol Res. 2004;30:237–241.
Nakamura A, Sedelnikova OA, Redon C, et al. Techniques for gamma-
H2AX detection. Methods Enzymol. 2006;409:236–250.
Natarajan AT. An overview of the results of testing of known or suspected 
aneugens using mammalian cells in vitro. Mutat Res. 1993;287:113–118.
National Academy of Sciences (US NAS). Risk Assessment in the Federal 
Government: Managing the Process. Washington, DC: National 
Academy Press; 1983.
National Research Council (NRC). Risk Assessment in the Federal Govern-
ment: Managing the Process. Washington, DC: The National Academy 
Press; 1983.
National Research Council (NRC). Science and Judgment in Risk 
Assessment. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 1994.
National Research Council (NRC). Committee on the Biological Effects of 
Ionizing Radiations. Health Effects of Exposure to Low Levels of Ionizing 
Radiation: BEIR VII. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2007a.
National Research Council (NRC). Toxicity Testing in the 21st Century—A 
Vision and a Strategy. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press; 
2007b.
Nay SL, O’Connor TR. Direct repair in mammalian cells. In: Clark C, 
ed. New Research Directions in DNA Repair. London, UK: InTech; 
2013:123–162.
NCRP. Ionizing Radiation Exposure of the Population of the United States 
NCRP Report No. 160. The National Council on Radiation Protection and 
Measurements, Bethesda, MD, USA. 2008. ISBN: 978-0-929600-98-7.
Neal JA, Meek A. Choosing the right path: does DNA-PK help make the 
decision? Mutat Res. 2011;711:73–86.
Nieminuszczy J, Mielecki D, Sikora A, et al. Mutagenic potency of 
MMS-induced 1meA/3meC lesions in E. coli. Environ Mol Mutagen. 
2009;50(9):791–799.
Nohmi T. Past, present and future directions of gpt delta rodent gene muta-
tion assays. Food Safety. 2016;4(1):1–13.
Noonan EM, Shah D, Yaffe MB, Lauffenburger DA, Samson LD. 
O6-Methylguanine DNA lesions induce an intra-S-phase arrest from 
which cells exit into apoptosis governed by early and late multi-pathway 
signaling network activation. Integr Biol (Camb). 2012;4(10):1237–1255.
Norppa H, Bonassi S, Hansteen IL, et al. Chromosomal aberrations and 
SCEs as biomarkers of cancer risk. Mutat Res. 2006;600:37–45.
Nunoshiba T, Watanabe E, Takahashi T, et al. Ames test-negative carcino-
gen, ortho-phenyl phenol, binds tubulin and causes aneuploidyin budding 
yeast. Mutat Res. 2007;617:90–97.
Oda Y, Hirayama T, Watanabe T. Genotoxic activation of the environmen-
tal pollutant 3,6-dinitrobenzo[e]pyrene in Salmonella typhimurium umu 
strains expressing human cytochrome P450 and N-acetyltransferase. 
Toxicol Lett. 2009;188:258–262.
OECD Guideline 471. Genetic Toxicology: Bacterial Reverse Mutation 
Test, Ninth Addendum to the OECD Guidelines for the Testing of 
Chemicals, adopted July 21, 1997.
OECD Guideline 473. In Vitro Mammalian Chromosomal Aberration Test; 
adopted 29 July 2016.
OECD Guideline 476. In Vitro Mammalian Cell Gene Mutation Tests using 
the Hprt and xprt genes; adopted 29 July 2016.
OECD Guideline 487. In Vitro Mammalian Cell Micronucleus Test; 
adopted 29 July 2016.
OECD Test Guideline 488. Transgenic Rodent Somatic and Germ Cell 
Gene Mutation Assays; adopted 26 July 2013.
OECD Test Guideline 489. In vivo mammalian alkaline comet assay; 
adopted 29 July 2016.
OECD Test Guideline 490. In Vitro Mammalian Cell Gene Mutation Tests 
Using the Thymidine Kinase Gene; adopted 28 July 2015.

541
Genetic Toxicology
Chapter 9
Ogi T, Limsirichaikul S, Overmeer RM, et al. Three DNA polymerases, 
recruited by different mechanisms, carry out NER repair synthesis in 
human cells. Mol Cell. 2010;37:714–727.
Ohe T, White PA, DeMarini DM. Mutagenic characteristics of river waters 
flowing through large metropolitan areas in North America. Mutat Res. 
2003;534:101–112.
Okada N, Masumura K, Nohmi T, Yajima N. Efficient detection of deletions 
induced by a single treatment of mitomycin C in transgenic mouse gpt 
delta using the Spi(-) selection. Environ Mol Mutagen. 1999;34:106–111.
Olive PL. Impact of the comet assay in radiobiology. Mutat Res. 
2009;681:13–23.
Olsen AK, Andreassen A, Singh R, et al. Environmental exposure of the 
mouse germ line: DNA adducts in spermatozoa and formation of de novo 
mutations during spermatogenesis. PLoS One. 2010;5:e11349.
Olsen AK, Lindeman B, Wiger R, Duale N, Brunborg G. How do male 
germ cells handle DNA damage? Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2005;207(2 
Suppl):521–531.
Olipitz W, Wiktor-Brown D, Shuga J, et al. Integrated molecular analysis 
indicates undetectable change in DNA damage in mice after continuous 
irradiation at ~ 400-fold natural background radiation. Environ Health 
Perspec. 2012;120(8):1130–1136.
Paccierotti F, Sgura A. Fluorescence in situ hybridization for the detection 
of chromosome aberrations and aneuploidy induced by environmental 
toxicants. Methods Mol Biol. 2008;410:217–239.
Pack S, Vortmeyer AO, Pak E, et al. Detection of gene deletion in single 
metastatic tumor cells in lymph node tissue by fluorescent in-situ hybrid-
ization. Lancet. 1997;350:264–265.
Pack SD, Weil RJ, Vortmeyer AO, et al. Individual adult human neurons 
display aneuploidy: detection by fluorescence in situ hybridization and 
single neuron PCR. Cell Cycle. 2005;4:1758–1760.
Parkinson JF, Wheeler HT, McDonald KL. Contribution of DNA repair 
mechanisms to determining chemotherapy response in high-grade gli-
oma. J Clin Neurosci. 2008;15(1):1–8.
Parry JM. Detecting and predicting the activity of rodent carcinogens. 
Mutagenesis. 1994;9:3–5.
Parry JM. Detecting chemical aneugens: a commentary to “Aneuploidy: a 
report of an ECETOC task force.” Mutat Res. 1998;410:117–120.
Parry JM, Jenkins GJ, Haddad F, Bourner R, Parry EM. In vitro and in vivo 
extrapolations of genotoxin exposures: consideration of factors which 
influence dose-response thresholds. Mutat Res. 2000;464(1):53–63.
Parry JM, Parry EM, Johnson G, et al. The detection of genotoxic activity 
and the qualitative assessment of the consequences of exposures. Exp 
Toxicol Pathol. 2005;57(Suppl 1):205–212.
Paull TT, Gellert M. A mechanistic basis for Mre11-directed DNA join-
ing at microhomologies. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000;97(12): 
6409–6414.
Paull TT, Gellert M. The 3′ to 5′ exonuclease activity of Mre 11 facilitates 
repair of DNA double-strand breaks. Mol Cell. 1998;1(7):969–979.
Philippin G, Cadet J, Gasparutto D, Mazon G, Fuchs RP. Ethylene oxide 
and propylene oxide derived N7-alkylguanine adducts are bypassed 
accurately in vivo. DNA Repair. 2014;22:133–136.
Phillips DH, Farmer PB, Beland FA, et al. Methods of DNA adduct deter-
mination and their application to testing compounds for genotoxicity. 
Environ Mol Mutagen. 2000;35:222–233.
Pieper RO. Understanding and manipulating O6-methylguanine-DNA 
methyltransferase expression. Pharmacol Ther. 1997;74:285–297.
Pottenger LH, Gollapudi BB. Genotoxicity testing: moving beyond qualita-
tive “screen and bin” approach towards characterization of dose-response 
and thresholds. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2010;51(8-9):792–799.
Piraino SW, Furney SJ. Beyond the exome: the role of non-coding somatic 
mutations in cancer. Ann Oncol. 2016;27(2):240–248.
Pleasance ED, Cheetham RK, Stephens DJ, et al. A comprehensive cata-
logue of somatic mutations from a human cancer genome. Nature. 
2010;463:191–197.
Plošnik A, Vracˇko M, Sollner Dolenc M. Mutagenic and carcinogenic 
structural alerts and their mechanisms of action. Arh Hig Rada Toksikol. 
2016;67:169–182.
Pluciennik A, Dzantiev L, Iyer RR, et al. PCNA function in the activation 
and strand direction of MutLα endonuclease in mismatch repair. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010;107:16066–16071.
Potter CJ, Turenchalk GS, Xu T. Drosophila in cancer research. Trends 
Genet. 2000;16:33–39.
Prakash S, Johnson RE, Prakash L. Eukaryotic translesion synthesis DNA 
polymerases: specificity of structure and function. Annu Rev Biochem. 
2005;74:317–353.
Preston RJ. Mechanisms of induction of chromosomal alterations and sister 
chromatid exchanges. In: Li AP, Heflich RF, eds. Genetic Toxicology: A 
Treatise. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 1991:41–66.
Preston RJ. A consideration of the mechanisms of induction of mutations in 
mammalian cells by low doses and dose rates of ionizing radiation. Adv 
Radiat Biol. 1992;16:125–135.
Preston RJ. Aneuploidy in germ cells: disruption of chromosome mover 
components. Environ Mol Mutagen. 1996;28:176–181.
Preston RJ. Chromosomal changes. In: McGregor DB, Rice JM, Venitt S, 
eds. The Use of Short- and Medium-Term Tests for Carcinogens and Data 
on Genetic Effects in Carcinogenic Hazard Evaluation. IARC Sci Pub 
146. Lyon, France: IARC; 1999a:395–408.
Preston RJ. Cytogenetic effects of ethylene oxide, with an emphasis on 
population monitoring. Crit Rev Toxicol. 1999b;29:263–282.
Preston RJ. Mechanistic data and cancer risk assessment: the need for quan-
titative molecular endpoints. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2005;45:214–221.
Preston RJ, Au W, Bender MA, et al. Mammalian in vivo and in vitro cyto-
genetic assays: a report of the U.S. EPA’s Gene-Tox Program. Mutat Res. 
1981;87:143–188.
Preston RJ, Fennell TR, Leber AP, et al. Reconsideration of the genetic 
risk assessment for ethylene oxide exposures. Environ Mol Mutagen. 
1995;26:189–202.
Preston RJ, Williams GM. DNA-reactive carcinogens: mode of action and 
human cancer hazard. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2005;35:673–683.
Prival MJ, Cebula TA. Sequence analysis of mutations arising dur-
ing prolonged starvation of Salmonella typhimurium. Genetics. 
1992;132:303–310.
Przygoda RT. Safety assessment and global regulatory requirements for 
genetic toxicity evaluations of medical devices. Environ Mol Mutagen. 
2017;58(5):375–379.
Pu X, Wang Z, Klaunig JE. Alkaline Comet Assay for Assessing DNA 
Damage in Individual Cells. Curr Protoc Toxicol. 2015;65:3–12.
Pullman A, Pullman B. Molecular electrostatic potential of the nucleic 
acids. Q Rev Biophys. 1981;14:289–380.
Putnam CD. Evolution of the methyl directed mismatch repair system in 
Escherichia coli. DNA Repair (Amst). 2016;38:32–41.
Quillardet P, Hofnung M. The SOS chromotest: a review. Mutat Res. 
1993;297:235–279.
Rabbitts TH. Chromosomal translocations in human cancer. Nature. 
1994;372:143–149.
Ramsden DA, Gellert M. Ku protein stimulates DNA end joining by mam-
malian DNA ligases: a direct role for Ku in repair of DNA double-strand 
breaks. EMBO J. 1998;17(2):609–614.
Ramsey MJ, Moore DH, Briner JF, et al. The effects of age and lifestyle 
factors on the accumulation of cytogenetic damage as measured by chro-
mosome painting. Mutat Res. 1995;338:95–106.
Ranganatha R, Chakravarthy S, Sukumaran S. High-throughput approaches 
for genotoxicity testing in drug development: recent advances. Intern J 
High Through Screen. 2016;2016(6):1–12.
Rattray AJ, Strathern JN. Error-prone DNA polymerases: when making a 
mistake is the only way to get ahead. Annu Rev Genet. 2003;37:31–66.
Reardon JT, Sancar A. Nucleotide excision repair. Prog Nuclei Acid Res 
Mol Biol. 2005;79:183–235.
Reed SH. Nucleotide excision repair in chromatin: damage removal at the 
drop of a HAT. DNA Repair. 2011;10:734–742.
Rees BJ, Tate M, Lynch AM, et al. Development of an in vitro PIG-A gene 
mutation assay in human cells. Mutagenesis. 2017;32(2):283–297.
Reliene R, Bishop AJR, Schiestl RH. Involvement of homologous recombi-
nation in carcinogenesis. Adv Genet. 2007;58:67–87.
Richardson SJ, Bai A, Kulkarni AA, Moghaddam MF. Efficiency in drug 
discovery: liver S9 fraction assay as a screen for metabolic stability. Drug 
Metab Lett. 2016;10(2):83–90.
Ringvoll J, Nordstrand LM, Vågbø CB, et al. Repair deficient mice reveal 
mABH2 as the primary oxidative demethylase for repairing 1meA and 
3meC lesions in DNA. EMBO J. 2006;25(10):2189–2198.

542
Non-Organ-Directed toxicity
unit III
Ripley LS. Mechanisms of gene mutations. In: Li AP, Heflich RH, eds. 
Genetic Toxicology: A Treatise. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 1991:13–40.
Roach JC, Glusman G, Smit AF, et al. Analysis of genetic inheri-
tance in a family quartet by whole-genome sequencing. Science. 
2010;328(5978):636–639.
Robertson DG. Metabonomics in toxicology: a review. Toxicol Sci. 
2005;85:809–822.
Rogakou EP, Boon C, Redon C, Bonner WM. Megabase chromatin 
domains involved in DNA double-strand breaks in vivo. J Cell Biol. 
1999;146:905–916.
Rogakou EP, Pilch DR, Orr AH, Ivanova VS, Bonner WM. DNA double-
stranded breaks induce histone H2AX phosphorylation on serine 139. 
J Biol Chem. 1998;273:5858–5868.
Roszkowski K, Olinski R. Urinary 8-oxoguanine as a predictor of survival 
in patients undergoing radiotherapy. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 
2012;21(4):629–634.
Ross CD, French CT, Keysar SB, et al. Mutant spectra of irradiated CHO 
AL cells determined with multiple markers analyzed by flow cytometry. 
Mutat Res. 2007;624:61–70.
Royds JA, Iacopetta B. p53 and disease: when the guardian angel fails. Cell 
Death Differ. 2006;13:1017–1026.
Rupa DS, Schuler M, Eastmond DA. Detection of hyperdiploidy and break-
age affecting the 1cen-1q12 region of cultured interphase human lym-
phocytes treated with various genotoxic agents. Environ Mol Mutagen. 
1997;29:161–167.
Rupert CS. Repair of ultraviolet damage in cellular DNA. J Cell Comparat. 
Physiol. 1961;58:57–68.
Rupert CS, Goodgal SH, Herriott RM. Photoreactivation in vitro of ultra-
violet-inactivated Hemophilus influenzae transforming factor. J Gen 
Physiol. 1958;41:451–471.
Russell LB. Effects of male germ-cell stage on the frequency, nature, and 
spectrum of induced specific-locus mutations in the mouse. Genetica. 
2004;122:25–36.
Russell LB, Russell WL. Frequency and nature of specific-locus mutations 
induced in female mice by radiations and chemicals: a review. Mutat Res. 
1992;296:107–127.
Russell LB, Shelby MD. Tests for heritable genetic damage and for evi-
dence of gonadal exposure in mammals. Mutat Res. 1985;154:69–84.
Russell LB, Selby PB, Von Halle E, et al. The mouse specific-locus test with 
agents other than radiations: interpretation of data and recommendations 
for future work. Mutat Res. 1981;86:329–354.
Russell WL. X-ray-induced mutations in mice. Cold Spring Harb Symp 
Quant Biol. 1951;16:327–336.
Russo A. In vivo cytogenetics: mammalian germ cells. Mutat Res. 
2000;455:167–189.
Sale JE. Translesion DNA synthesis and mutagenesis in eukaryotes. Cold 
Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2013;5(3):a012708.
Sancar A. Structure and function of DNA photolyase. Biochemistry. 
1994;33(1):2–9.
Sankaranarayanan K. Ionizing radiation and genetic risks: IX. Estimates of 
the frequencies of Mendelian diseases and spontaneous mutation rates in 
human populations: a 1998 perspective. Mutat Res. 1998;411:129–178.
Sankaranarayanan K. Estimation of the genetic risks of exposure to ionizing 
radiation in humans: current status and emerging perspectives. J Radiat 
Res (Tokyo). 2006;47(suppl B):B57–B66.
Sankaranarayanan K, Chakraborty R, Boerwinkle EA. Ionizing radiation 
and genetic risks. VI. Chronic multifactorial diseases: a review of epi-
demiological and genetical aspects of coronary heart disease, essential 
hypertension and diabetes mellitus. Mutat Res. 1999;436:21–57.
Sawada M, Kamataki T. Genetically engineered cells stably expressing 
cytochrome P450 and their application to mutagen assays. Mutat Res. 
1998;411:19–43.
Sax K. Induction by X-rays of chromosome aberrations in Tradescantia 
microspores. Genetics. 1938;23:494–516.
Sax K. The time factor in X-ray production of chromosome aberrations. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1939;25:225–233.
Sax K, Luippold H. The effects of fractional x-ray dosage on the frequency 
of chromosome aberrations. Heredity. 1952;6:127–131.
Scharer OD. Achieving broad substrate specificity in damage recognition 
by binding accessible nondamaged DNA. Mol Cell. 2007;28:184–186.
Schofield MJ, Hsieh P. DNA mismatch repair: Molecular mechanisms and 
biological function. Annu Rev Microbiol. 2003;57:579–608.
Scott D, Galloway SM, Marshall RR, et al. Genotoxicity under extreme 
culture conditions. Mutat Res. 1991;257:147–204.
Schisler MR, Moore MM, Gollapudi BB. In vitro mouse lymphoma 
(L5178Y Tk⁺/⁻-3.7.2C) forward mutation assay. Methods Mol Biol. 
2013;1044:27–50.
Seeberg E, Eide L, Bjoras M. The base excision repair pathway. Trends 
Biochem Sci. 1995;20:391–397.
Seidel SD, Sparrow BR, Kan HL, et al. Profiles of gene expression changes 
in L5178Y mouse lymphoma cells treated with methyl methanesulfonate 
and sodium chloride. Mutagenesis. 2004;19:195–201.
Seifried HE, Seifried RM, Clarke JJ, et al. A compilation of two decades 
of mutagenicity test results with the Ames Salmonella typhimurium and 
L5178Y mouse lymphoma cell mutation assays. Chem Res Toxicol. 
2006;19:627–644.
Selby PB, Earhart VS, Garrison EM, et al. Tests of induction in mice by 
acute and chronic ionizing radiation and ethylnitrosourea of dominant 
mutations that cause the more common skeletal anomalies. Mutat Res. 
2004;545:81–107.
Sengstag C. The role of mitotic recombination in carcinogenesis. Crit Rev 
Toxicol. 1994;24:323–353.
Serafimova R, Gatnik M, Andrew Worth A. Review of QSAR Models and 
Software Tools for Predicting Genotoxicity and Carcinogenicity. JRC 
Scientific and Technical Reports. European Commission, Joint Research 
Centre Institute for Health and Consumer Protection. EUR 24427 EN – 
2010. 2010.
Shane BS, Smith-Dunn DL, de Boer JG, Glickman BW, Cunningham ML. 
Mutant frequencies and mutation spectra of dimethylnitrosamine (DMN) 
at the lacI and cII loci in the livers of Big Blue transgenic mice. Mutat 
Res. 2000;452(2):197–210.
Shee C, Cox BD, Gu F, et al. Engineered proteins detect spontaneous DNA 
breakage in human and bacterial cells. Genes Chromosomes. 2013;2:e01222.
Shelby MD. Human germ cell mutagens. Environ Mol Mutagen. 
1994;23(suppl 24):30–34.
Shibata D, Peinado MA, Ionov Y, Malkhosyan S, Perucho M. Genomic 
instability in repeated sequences is an early somatic event in colorec-
tal tumorigenesis that persists after transformation. Nat Genet. 
1994;6(3):273–281.
Shiloh Y. ATM and related protein kinases: safeguarding genome integrity. 
Nat Rev Cancer. 2003;3:155–68.
Shinde D, Lai Y, Sun F, Arnheim N. Taq DNA polymerase slippage muta-
tion rates measured by PCR and quasi-likelihood analysis:(CA/GT)n and 
(A/T)n microsatellites. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003;31(3):974–980.
Sinha RP, Häder DP. UV-induced DNA damage and repair: a review. 
Photochem Photobiol Sci. 2002;1(4):225–236.
Sharma V, Collins LB, Clement JM, Zhang Z, Nakamura J, Swenberg JA. 
Molecular dosimetry of endogenous and exogenous O(6)-methyl-dG and 
N7-methyl-G adducts following low dose [D3]-methylnitrosourea expo-
sures in cultured human cells. Chem Res Toxicol. 2014;27(4):480–482.
Shinohara A, Ogawa T. Homologous recombination and the roles of double-
strand breaks. Trends Biochem Sci. 1995;20:387–391.
Singer TM, Lambert IM, Williams A, et al. Detection of induced male 
germline mutation: correlations and comparisons between traditional 
germline mutation assays, transgenic rodent assays and expanded simple 
tandem repeat instability assays. Mutat Res. 2006;598:164–193.
Singer TM, Yauk CL. Germ cell mutagens: risk assessment challenges in 
the 21st century. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2010;51:919–928.
Singh NP. Microgels for estimation of DNA strand breaks, DNA protein 
crosslinks and apoptosis. Mutat Res. 2000;455:111–127.
Smith MT, Zhang L, Wang Y, et al. Increased translocations and aneusomy 
in chromosomes 8 and 21 among workers exposed to benzene. Cancer 
Res. 1998;58:2176–2181.
Snyder RD. An update on the genotoxicity and carcinogenicity of marketed 
pharmaceuticals with reference to in silico predictivity. Environ Mol 
Mutagen. 2009;50:435–450.
Snyder RD, Pearl GS, Mandakas G, et al. Assessment of the sensitivity of 
the computational programs DEREK, TOPKAT, and MCASE in the pre-
diction of the genotoxicity of pharmaceutical molecules. Environ Mol 
Mutagen. 2004;43:143–158.

543
Genetic Toxicology
Chapter 9
Snyder RD, Smith MD. Computational prediction of genotoxicity: room for 
improvement. Drug Discov Today. 2005;10:1119–1124.
Sobels FH. The parallelogram: an indirect approach for the assessment 
of genetic risks from chemical mutagens. In: Bora KC, Douglas GR, 
Nestman ER, eds. Progress in Mutation Research. Vol 3. Amsterdam: 
Elsevier Biomedical Press; 1982:323–327.
Solinas-Toldo S, Lampel S, Stilgenbauer S, et al. Matrix-based compara-
tive genomic hybridization: biochips to screen for genomic imbalances. 
Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1997;20:399–407.
Somers CM. Expanded simple tandem repeat (ESTR) mutation induc-
tion in the male germline: lessons learned from lab mice. Mutat Res. 
2006;598:35–49.
Sonich-Mullin C, Fielder R, Wiltse J, et al. IPCS conceptual framework for 
evaluating a mode of action for chemical carcinogenesis. Regul Toxicol 
Pharmacol. 2001;34(2):146–152.
Sonoda E, Hochegger H, Saberi A, Taniguchi Y, Takeda S. Differential 
usage of nonhomologous end-joining and homologous recombination in 
double strand break repair. DNA Repair (Amst). 2006;5:1021–1029.
Sonoda E, Takata M, Yamashita YM, Morrison C, Takeda S. Homologous 
DNA recombination in vertebrate cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2001;98(15):8388–8394.
Sørensen CS, Syljuåsen RG, Falck J, et al. Chk1 regulates the S phase 
checkpoint by coupling the physiological turnover and ionizing radia-
tion-induced accelerated proteolysis of Cdc25A. Cancer Cell. 2003;3(3): 
247–258.
Sotomayor RE, Sega GA. Unscheduled DNA synthesis assay in mammalian 
spermatogenic cells: an update. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2000;36:255–265.
Southern EM. DNA chips: Analyzing sequence by hybridization to oligo-
nucleotides on a large scale. Trends Genet. 1996;12:110–115.
Sparks JL, Chon H, Cerritelli SM, et al. RNase H2-initiated ribonucleotide 
excision repair. Mol Cell. 2012;47:980–986.
Speicher MR, Carter NP. The new cytogenetics: blurring the boundaries 
with molecular biology. Nat Rev Genet. 2005;6:782–792.
Speit G, Kojima H, Burlinson B, et al. Critical issues with the in vivo comet 
assay: A report of the comet assay working group in the 6th International 
Workshop on Genotoxicity Testing (IWGT). Mutat Res Genet Toxicol 
Environ Mutagen. 2015;783:6–12.
Speit G, Vasquez M, Hartmann A. The comet assay as an indicator test for 
germ cell genotoxicity. Mutat Res. 2009;681:3–12.
Srivenugopal KS, Yuan XH, Friedman HS, Ali-Osman F. Ubiquitination-
dependent proteolysis of O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransfer-
ase in human and murine tumor cells following inactivation with 
O6-benzylguanine or 1,3-bis(2-chloroethyl)-1-nitrosourea. Biochemistry. 
1996;35(4):1328–1334.
Stadler ZK, Schrader KA, Vijai J, Robson ME, Offit K. Cancer genomics 
and inherited risk. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32(7):687–698.
Stram DO, Sposto R, Preston D, Abrahamson S, Honda T, Awa AA. Stable 
chromosome aberrations among A-bomb survivors: an update. Radiat 
Res. 1993;136(1):29–36.
Stojic L, Mojas N, Cejka P, et al. Mismatch repair-dependent G2 checkpoint 
induced by low doses of SN1 type methylating agents requires the ATR 
kinase. Genes Dev. 2004;18(11):1331–1344.
Stoler DL, Chen N, Basik M, et al. The onset and extent of genomic insta-
bility in sporadic colorectal tumor progression. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S 
A. 1999 ;96:15121–15126.
Storer RD, McKelvey TW, Kraynak AR, et al. Revalidation of the in vitro 
alkaline elution/rat hepatocyte assay for DNA damage: improved criteria 
for assessment of cytotoxicity and genotoxicity and results for 81 com-
pounds. Mutat Res. 1996;368:59–101.
Stracker TH, Petrini JH. The MRE11 complex: starting from the ends. Nat 
Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2011;12(2):90–103.
Stratton MR, Campbell PJ, Futreal PA. The cancer genome. Nature. 
2009;458:719–724.
Styles JA, Penman MG. The mouse spot test: evaluation of its perfor-
mance in identifying chemical mutagens and carcinogens. Mutat Res. 
1985;154:183–204.
Sugasawa K, Akagi J, Nishi R, Iwai S, Hanaoka F. Two-step recognition 
of DNA damage for mammalian nucleotide excision repair: Directional 
binding of the XPC complex and DNA strand scanning. Mol Cell. 
2009;36:642–653.
Sukup-Jackson MR, Kiraly O, Kay JE, et al. Rosa26-GFP direct repeat 
(RaDR-GFP) mice reveal tissue- and age-dependence of homologous 
recombination in mammals in vivo. PLoS Genet. 2014;10(6):e1004299.
Sung JS, Demple B. Roles of base excision repair subpathways in correct-
ing oxidized abasic sites in DNA. FEBS J. 2006;273:1620–1629.
Swenberg JA, Barrow CS, Boreiko CJ, et al. Non-linear biological responses 
to formaldehyde and their implications for carcinogenic risk assessment. 
Carcinogenesis. 1983;4(8):945–952.
Swenberg JA, Lu K, Moeller BC, et al. Endogenous versus exogenous DNA 
adducts: their role in carcinogenesis, epidemiology, and risk assessment. 
Toxicol Sci. 2011;120(Suppl 1):S130–S145.
Swiger RR. Just how does the cII selection system work in MutaTMMouse? 
Environ Mol Mutagen. 2001;37:290–296.
Swiger RR, Cosentino L, Shima N, Bielas JH, Cruz-Munoz W, Heddle 
JA. The cII locus in the MutaMouse system. Environ Mol Mutagen. 
1999;34:201–220.
Sykes PJ, Morley AA, Hooker AM. The pKZ1 recombination muta-
tion assay: a sensitive assay for low dose studies. Dose-Response. 
2006;4:91–105.
Taira K, Kaneto S, Nakano K, et al. Distinct pathways for repairing muta-
genic lesions induced by methylating and ethylating agents. Mutagenesis. 
2013;28:341–350.
Takigami H, Matsui S, Matsuda T, et al. The Bacillus subtilis rec-assay: 
a powerful tool for the detection of genotoxic substances in the water 
environment. Prospect for assessing potential impact of pollutants from 
stabilized wastes. Waste Manag. 2002;22:209–213.
Tanaka K. Multiple functions of the S-phase checkpoint mediator. Biosci 
Biotechnol Biochem. 2010;74:2367–2373.
Tang J, Chu G. Xeroderma pigmentosum complementation group 
E and UV-damaged DNA-binding protein. DNA Repair (Amst). 
2002;1:601–616.
Tano K, Shiota S, Collier J, et al. Isolation and structural characteriza-
tion of a cDNA clone encoding the human DNA repair protein for O6-
alkylguanine. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1990;87:686–690.
Tease C. Radiation- and chemically-induced chromosome aberrations in 
mouse oocytes: a comparison with effects in males. Mutat Res. 1992; 
296:135–142.
Tebbs RS, Flannery ML, Meneses JJ, et al. Requirement for the Xrcc1 DNA 
base excision repair gene during early mouse development. Dev Biol. 
1999;208(2):513–529.
Tennant RW, Ashby J. Classification according to chemical structure, muta-
genicity to Salmonella and level of carcinogenicity of a further 39 chemi-
cals tested for carcinogenicity by the U.S. National Toxicology Program. 
Mutat Res. 1991;257:209–227.
Tennant RW, Margolin BH, Shelby MD, et al. Prediction of chemical car-
cinogenicity in rodents from in vitro genetic toxicity assays. Science. 
1987;236:933–941.
Tennant RW, Spalding J. Predictions for the outcome of rodent carcinoge-
nicity bioassays: Identification of trans-species carcinogens and noncar-
cinogens. Environ Health Perspect. 1996;104(S5):1095–1100.
Tentner AR, Lee MJ, Ostheimer GJ, et al. Combined experimental and com-
putational analysis of DNA damage signaling reveals context-dependent 
roles for Erk in apoptosis and G1/S arrest after genotoxic stress. Mol Syst 
Biol. 2012;8:568.
Thacker J. Radiation-induced mutation in mammalian cells at low doses 
and dose rates. Adv Radiat Biol. 1992;16:77–124.
Thomas AD, Fahrer J, Johnson GE, Kaina B. Theoretical considerations 
for thresholds in chemical carcinogenesis. Mutat Res. 2015;765: 
56–67.
Thomas AD, Jenkins GJ, Kaina B, et al. Influence of DNA repair on nonlin-
ear dose-responses for mutation. Toxicol Sci. 2013;132(1):87–95.
Thybaud V, Lorge E, Levy DD, et al. Main issues addressed in the 2014–
2015 revisions to the OECD Genetic Toxicology Test Guidelines. Environ 
Mol Mutagen. 2017;58(5):284–295.
Tice RR, Agurell E, Anderson D, et al. Single cell gel/comet assay: guide-
lines for in vitro and in vivo genetic toxicology testing. Environ Mol 
Mutagen. 2000;35:206–221.
Tice RR, Hayashi M, MacGregor JT, et al. Report from the working group 
on the in vivo mammalian bone marrow chromosomal aberration test. 
Mutat Res. 1994;312:305–312.

544
Non-Organ-Directed toxicity
unit III
Tomasetti C, Li L, Vogelstein B. Stem cell divisions, somatic mutations, can-
cer etiology, and cancer prevention. Science. 2017;355(6331):1330–1334.
Tomasetti C, Vogelstein B. Variation in cancer risk among tissues 
can be explained by the number of stem cell divisions. Science. 
2015;347(6217):78–81.
Tomasetti C, Vogelstein B. On the slope of the regression between stem cell 
divisions and cancer risk, and the lack of correlation between stem cell 
divisions and environmental factors-associated cancer risk. PLoS One. 
2017;12(5):e0175535.
Townsend TA, Parrish MC, Engelward BP, Manjanatha MG. The devel-
opment and validation of EpiComet-Chip, a modified high-throughput 
comet assay for the assessment of DNA methylation status. Environ Mol 
Mutagen. 2017;58(7):508–521.
Trask BJ, Allen S, Massa H, et al. Studies of metaphase and interphase 
chromosomes using fluorescence in situ hybridizaiton. Cold Spring Harb 
Symp Quant Biol. 1993;58:767–775.
Trewick SC, Henshaw TF, Hausinger RP, Lindahl T, Sedgwick B. Oxidative 
demethylation by Escherichia coli AlkB directly reverts DNA base dam-
age. Nature. 2002;419(6903):174–178.
Trost D, Hildebrandt B, Beier M, et al. Molecular cytogenetic profiling of 
complex karyotypes in primary myelodysplastic syndromes and acute 
myeloid leukemia. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2006;165:51–63.
Tucker JD, Auletta A, Cimino M, et al. Sister-chromatid exchange: second 
report of the Gene-Tox program. Mutat Res. 1993a;297:101–180.
Tucker JD, Breneman JW, Briner JF, et al. Persistence of radiation-induced 
translocations in rat peripheral blood determined by chromosome paint-
ing. Environ Mol Mutagen. 1997;30:264–272.
Tucker JD, Cofield J, Matsumoto K, et al. Persistence of chromosome aberra-
tions following acute radiation: I, PAINT translocations, dicentrics, rings, 
fragments, and insertions. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2005;45:229–248.
Tucker JD, Luckinbill LS. Estimating the lowest detectable dose of ion-
izing radiation by FISH whole-chromosome painting. Radiat Res. 
2011;175:631–637.
Tucker JD, Moore DH 2nd. The importance of age and smoking in evalu-
ating adverse cytogenetic effects of exposure to environmental agents. 
Environ Health Perspect. 1996;104:489–492.
Tucker JD, Ramsey MJ, Lee DA, Minkler JL. Validation of chromo-
some painting as a biodosimeter in human peripheral lymphocytes fol-
lowing acute exposure to ionizing radiation in vitro. Int J Radiat Biol. 
1993b;64:27–37.
Tung BS, McGregor WG, Wang YC, Maher VM, McCormick JJ. 
Comparison of the rate of excision of major UV photoproducts in the 
strands of the human HPRT gene of normal and xeroderma pigmentosum 
variant cells. Mutat Res. 1996;362:65–74.
Turner DR, Dreimanis M, Holt D, Firgaira FA, Morley AA. Mitotic recom-
bination is an important mutational event following oxidative damage. 
Mutat Res. 2003;522:21–26.
Tweats DJ, Blakey D, Heflich RH, et al. Report of the IWGT working group 
on strategies and interpretation of regulatory in vivo tests I. Increases in 
micronucleated bone marrow cells in rodents that do not indicate geno-
toxic hazards. Mutat Res. 2007;627:78–91.
UN. Globally Harmonised System of Classification and Labelling of 
Chemicals (GHS). ST/SG/AC.10/13/Rev.6. Sixth revised edition, United 
Nations New York and Geneva, 2015.
United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation. 
Hereditary effects of radiation. UNSCEAR 2001 Report to the General 
Assembly, With Scientific Annex. New York: United Nations; 2001.
Valentine CR, Delongchamp RR, Pearce MG, et al. In vivo mutation analy-
sis using the φX174 transgenic mouse and comparisons with other trans-
genes and endogenous genes. Mutat Res. 2010;705:205–216.
Van Houten B, Albertini R. DNA damage and repair. In: Craighead JE, ed. 
Pathology of Environmental and Occupational Disease. St. Louis, MO: 
Mosby-Year Book; 1995:311–327.
Veldman T, Vignon C, Schrock E, et al. Hidden chromosome abnormalities 
in haematological malignancies detected by multicolour spectral karyo-
typing. Nat Genet. 1997;15:406–410.
Venkatachalam S, Shi YP, Jones SN, et al. Retention of wild-type p53 in 
tumors from p53 heterozygous mice: reduction of p53 dosage can pro-
mote cancer formation. EMBO J. 1998;17:4657–4667.
Verhofsrad N, van Oostrom CT, Zwart E, et al. Evaluation of benzo(a)
pyrene-induced gene mutations in male germ cells. Toxicol Sci. 
2011;119:218–223.
Villeneuve DL, Crump D, Garcia-Reyero N, et al. Adverse outcome 
pathway (AOP) development I: strategies and principles. Toxicol Sci. 
2014a;142(2):312–320.
Villeneuve DL, Crump D, Garcia-Reyero N, et al. Adverse outcome path-
way development II: best practices. Toxicol Sci. 2014b;142(2):321–330.
Vinken M. The adverse outcome pathway concept: a pragmatic tool in toxi-
cology. Toxicology. 2013;312:158–165.
Vissers LE, Veltman JA, van Kessel AG, Brunner HG. Identification 
of disease genes by whole genome CGH arrays. Hum Mol Genet. 
2005;14:R215–R223.
Vlasakova K, Skopek TR, Glaab WE. Induced mutation spectra at the upp 
locus in Salmonella typhimurium: response of the target gene in the FU 
assay to mechanistically different mutagens. Mutat Res. 2005;578:225–237.
Vogel EW, Graf U, Frei HJ, Nivara MM. The results of assays in 
Drosophila as indicators of exposure to carcinogens. IARC Sci Publ. 
1999;146:427–470.
Vogel EW, Nivard MJ. Parallel monitoring of mitotic recombination, clas-
togenicity and teratogenic effects in eye tissue of Drosophila. Mutat Res. 
2000;455:141–153.
Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW. The multistep nature of cancer. Trends Genet. 
1993;9(4):138–41.
Vogelstein B, Papadopoulos N, Velculescu VE, et al. Cancer genome land-
scapes. Science. 2013;339(6127):1546–1558.
Vorsanova SG, Yurov YB, Iourov IY. Human interphase chromosomes: a 
review of available molecular cytogenetic technologies. Mol Cytogenet. 
2010;3:1–15.
Votano JR, Parham M, Hall LH, et al. Three new consensus OSAR models 
for the prediction of Ames genotoxicity. Mutagenesis. 2004;19:365–377.
Yoshioka K, Yoshioka Y, Hsieh P. ATR kinase activation mediated by 
MutSalpha and MutLalpha in response to cytotoxic O6-methylguanine 
adducts. Molec Cell. 2006;22(4):501–510.
Wallace SS. DNA damages processed by base excision repair: biological 
consequences. Int J Radiat Biol. 1994;66:579–589.
Wang J, Sawyer JR, Chen L, et al. The mouse lymphoma assay detects 
recombination, deletion, and aneuploidy. Toxicol Sci. 2009;109:96–105.
Wang Y, Qin J.MSH2 and ATR form a signaling module and regulate two 
branches of the damage response to DNA methylation. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A. 2003;100:15387–15392.
Ward JF. DNA damage produced by ionizing radiation in mammalian cells: 
identities, mechanisms of formation, and reparability. Prog Nucl Acid 
Res Mol Biol. 1988;35:95–125.
Ward JF. The complexity of DNA damage: relevance to biological conse-
quences. Int J Radiat Biol. 1994;66:427–432.
Watson IR, Takahashi K, Futreal PA, Chin L. Emerging patterns of somatic 
mutations in cancer. Nat Rev Genet. 2013;14(10):703–718.
Watson RE, Goodman JI. Epigenetics and DNA methylation come of age in 
toxicology. Toxicol Sci. 2002;67(1):11–16.
Weingeist DM, Ge J, Wood DK, et al. Single-cell microarray enables high-
throughput evaluation of DNA double-strand breaks and DNA repair 
inhibitors. Cell Cycle. 2013;12(6):907–915.
West SC. Molecular views of recombination proteins and their control. Nat 
Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2003;4:435–445.
Westbye MP, Feyzi E, Aas PA, et al. Human AlkB homolog 1 is a mito-
chondrial protein that demethylates 3-methylcytosine in DNA and RNA. 
J Biol Chem. 2008;283(36):25046–25056.
White PA, ed. The sources and potential hazards of mutagens in complex 
environmental matrices. Mutat Res. 2004;567(2–3):105–479.
White PA, Johnson GE. Genetic toxicology at the crossroads-from quali-
tative hazard evaluation to quantitative risk assessment. Mutagenesis. 
2016;31(3):233–237.
Wichard JD. In silico prediction of genotoxicity. Food Chem Toxicol. 
2017;106(Pt B):595–599.
Wiktor-Brown DM, Kwon HS, Nam YS, So PT, Engelward BP. Integrated 
one- and two-photon imaging platform reveals clonal expansion as a 
major driver of mutation load. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008;105(30): 
10314–10319.

545
Genetic Toxicology
Chapter 9
Wielgoss S, Barrick JE, Tenaillon O, et al. Mutation rate inferred from 
synonymous substitutions in a long-term evolution experiment with 
Escherichia coli. G3. 2011;1:183–186.
Wills JW, Johnson GE, Doak SH, et al. Empirical analysis of BMD metrics 
in genetic toxicology part I: in vitro analyses to provide robust potency 
rankings and support MOA determinations. Mutagenesis. 2016;31(3): 
255–263.
Wilson DM, Thompson LH. Molecular mechanisms of sister-chromatid 
exchange. Mutat Res. 2007;616:11–23.
Wodicka L, Dong H, Mittmann M, et al. Genome-wide expression monitor-
ing in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nat Biotechnol. 1997;15:1359–1367.
Wood RD. DNA repair in eukaryotes. Annu Rev Biochem. 1996;65:135–167.
Wood RD, Mitchell M, Lindahl T. Human DNA repair genes, 2005. Mutat 
Res. 2005;577:275–283.
Wood RD, Mitchell M, Sgouros J, Lindahl T. Human DNA repair genes. 
Science. 2001;291(5507):1284–1289.
Wu J, Morimyo M, Hongo E, et al. Radiation-induced germline mutations 
detected by a direct comparison of parents and first-generation offspring 
DNA sequences containing SNPs. Mutat Res. 2006;596:1–11.
Wyatt MD, Pittman DL. Methylating agents and DNA repair responses: 
methylated bases and sources of strand breaks. Chem Res Toxicol. 
2006;19(12):1580–1594.
Xie F, Liu T, Qian WJ, et al. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry-
based quantitative proteomics. J Biol Chem. 2011;286:25443–25449.
Yamazaki Y, Fujita K, Nakayama K, et al. Establishment of ten strains 
of genetically engineered Salmonella typhimurium TA1538 each 
co-expressing a form of human cytochrome P450 with NADPH-cytochrome 
P450 reductase sensitive to various promutagens. Mutat Res. 2004;562: 
151–162.
Yasunaga K, Kiyonari A, Oikawa T, et al. Evaluation of the Salmonella umu 
test with 83 NTP chemicals. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2004;44:329–345.
Yauk CL. Advances in the application of germline tandem repeat instability 
for in situ monitoring. Mutat Res. 2004;566:169.
Yauk CL, Aardema MJ, Benthem JV, et al. Approaches for identifying 
germ cell mutagens: Report of the 2013 IWGT workshop on germ cell 
assays(☆). Mutat Res Genet Toxicol Environ Mutagen. 2015;783:36–54.
Yauk CL, Lambert IB, Meek ME, Douglas GR, Marchetti F. Development 
of the adverse outcome pathway “alkylation of DNA in male premeiotic 
germ cells leading to heritable mutations” using the OECD’s users’ hand-
book supplement. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2015;56(9):724–750.
Yeh HC, Ho YP, Shih IeM, Wang TH. Homogeneous point mutation detec-
tion by quantum dot-mediated two-color fluorescence coincidence analy-
sis. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006;34:e35.
Xanthoudakis S, Smeyne RJ, Wallace JD, Curran T. The redox/DNA repair 
protein, Ref-1, is essential for early embryonic development in mice. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996;93:8919–8923.
Zeiger E. Historical perspective on the development of the genetic toxicity 
test battery in the United States. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2010;51:781–791.
Zhang CZ, Pellman D. From mutational mechanisms in single cells to 
mutational patterns in cancer genomes. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant 
Biol. 2015;80:117–137.
Zhang Q, Bhattacharya S, Conolly RB, Clewell HJ, Kaminski NE, 
Andersen ME. Molecular signaling network motifs provide a mecha-
nistic basis for cellular threshold responses. Environ Health Perspect. 
2014;122(12):1261–1270.
Zhang Q, Bhattacharya S, Pi J, Clewell RA, Carmichael PL, Andersen ME. 
Adaptive posttranslational control in cellular stress response pathways 
and its relationship to toxicity testing and safety assessment. Toxicol Sci. 
2015;147(2):302–316.
Zhang Y, Gostissa M, Hildebrand DG, et al. The role of mechanistic factors 
in promoting chromosomal translocations found in lymphoid and other 
cancers. Adv Immunol. 2010;106:93–133.
Zhao H, Watkins JL, Piwnica-Worms H. Disruption of the checkpoint kinase 
1/cell division cycle 25A pathway abrogates ionizing radiation-induced S 
and G2 checkpoints. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002;99:14795–14800.
Zheng X, Epstein A, Klein HL. Methods to study mitotic homologous 
recombination and genome stability. Methods Mol Biol. 2011;745:3–13.
Zhou H, Xu A, Gillespie JA, et al. Quantification of CD59- mutants 
in human-hamster hybrid (AL) cells by flow cytometry. Mutat Res. 
2006;594;113–119.
Zimmering S. A note on the utility of repair-deficient st mus302 Drosophila 
females in detecting chromosome loss and sex-linked recessive lethals 
induced in the male genome by methyl methanesulfonate (MMS) and 
imethylnitrosamine (DMN). Environ Mutagen. 1982;4(3):291–293.
Zimmermann FK. Tests for recombinogens in fungi. Mutat Res. 
1992;284:147–158.
Zimmermann FK, von Borstel RC, von Halle ES, et al. Testing of chemi-
cals for genetic activity with Saccharomyces cerevisiae: a report of the 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Gene-Tox Program. Mutat Res. 
1984;133:199–244.

This page intentionally left blank