PROLOGUE
Suppose truth is a woman, what 
then? Would we not have good reason to suspect that all philosophers, insofar as 
they were dogmatists, have had a poor understanding of women, that the dreadful 
seriousness and the awkward pushiness with which they have so far habitually 
approached truth were clumsy and inappropriate ways to win over a woman? It’s 
clear that she did not allow herself to be won over. And every form of dogmatism 
nowadays is standing there looking dismayed and disheartened—if it’s 
still standing at all! For there are mockers who assert that they’ve collapsed, 
that all dogmatisms are lying on the floor—even worse, that all dogmatisms are 
at death’s door. Speaking seriously, there are good reasons to hope that every 
dogmatism in philosophy—no matter how solemnly, conclusively, and decisively it 
has conducted itself—may have been merely a noble and rudimentary childish game, 
and the time is perhaps very close at hand when people will understand over and 
over again just what has sufficed to provide the foundation stones for such 
lofty and unconditional philosophical constructions of the sort dogmatists have 
erected up to now—any popular superstition from unimaginably long ago (like the 
superstition of the soul, which even today, in the form of the superstition 
about the subject and the ego, has still not stopped stirring up mischief), 
perhaps some game with words, a seduction by some grammatical construction, or a 
daring generalization from very narrow, very personal, very human, all-too-human 
facts. The philosophies of the dogmatists were, one hopes, only a promise 
lasting for thousands of years, as astrology was in even earlier times. In its 
service, people perhaps expended more work, money, astute thinking, and patience 
than for any genuine scientific knowledge up to that point. To it and to its 
“super-terrestrial” claims in Asia and Egypt we owe the grand style of 
architecture. It seems that in order for all great things to register their 
eternal demands on the human heart, they first have to wander over the earth as 
monstrous and frighteningly distorted faces. Dogmatic philosophy has been such a 
grimace—for example, the Vedanta doctrine in Asia and Platonism in Europe. We 
should not be ungrateful to them, even though we must also certainly concede 
that the worst, most protracted, and most dangerous of all errors up to now has 
been the error of a dogmatist, namely, Plato’s invention of the purely spiritual 
and of the good as such. But that now has been overcome, and, as Europe breathes 
a sigh of relief after this nightmare and at least can enjoy a more healthy 
sleep, those of us whose very task it is to stay awake are the 
inheritors of all the forces which the struggle against this error has fostered. 
To speak of the spirit and the good in this way, as Plato did, was, of course, a 
matter of standing truth on its head and even of denying the fundamental 
condition of all life, perspective. Indeed, one could, as a doctor, 
ask, “How did such a disease get to Plato, the most beautiful plant of 
antiquity? Did the wicked Socrates really corrupt him? Could Socrates have been 
a corruptor of youth, after all? Did he deserve his hemlock?” But the struggle 
against Plato, or, to put the matter in a more intelligible way and for “the 
people,” the fight against the thousands of years of pressure from the Christian 
church—since Christianity is Platonism for “the people”—created in Europe a 
splendid tension in the spirit, unlike anything existing on earth before. With 
such a tensely arched bow, we can from now on shoot for the most distant 
targets. Naturally, European man experiences this tension as a state of 
emergency. Already there have been two attempts in the grand style to ease the 
tension in the bow—the first time with Jesuitism, the second time with the 
democratic Enlightenment, through which, with the help of freedom of the press 
and reading newspapers, a state might, in fact, be attained in which the spirit 
itself is not so easily experienced as “in need”! (Germans invented 
gunpowder—all honour to them!—but they made up for that when they invented the 
printing press). But those of us who are neither Jesuits, nor democrats, nor 
even German enough, we good Europeans and free, very free 
spirits—we still have the need, the entire spiritual need, and the total tension 
of its bow! And perhaps we also have the arrow, the work to do, and—who knows?—the 
target . . .
Sils-Maria,
Oberengadin, June 1885.
Part 1: On the Prejudices of Philosophers
Translated by Ian Johnston, Vancouver Island University, 
without charge. They may also freely edit the text for their own purposes. All 
of the translator. For comments and questions, please contact 
use the following link: 
Beyond Good and Evil [RTF] 
[Table 
of Contents for Beyond Good and Evil]
 PART ONE
ON THE PREJUDICES OF PHILOSOPHERS
1
The will to truth, which is 
still going to tempt us to many a daring exploit, that celebrated truthfulness 
of which all philosophers up to now have spoken with respect, what questions 
this will to truth has already set down before us! What strange, sinister, 
dubious questions! There is already a long history of that—and yet does it not 
seem that this history has only just begun? Is it any wonder that at some point 
we finally become mistrustful, lose patience, and, in our impatience, turn 
ourselves around—that we learn from this sphinx to ask questions for ourselves? Who is 
really asking us questions here? What is it in us that 
really wants “the truth”? In fact, we paused for a long time before the question 
about the origin of this will—until we finally remained completely and utterly 
immobile in front of an even more fundamental question. We asked about the value of 
this will. Suppose we want truth. Why should we not prefer untruth? And 
uncertainty? Even ignorance? The problem of the value of truth stepped up before 
us—or were we the ones who stepped up before the problem? Who 
among us here is Oedipus? Who is the Sphinx? 
It seems to be a tryst between questions and question marks. And could one 
believe that we are finally the ones to whom it seems as if the problem has 
never been posed up to now, as if we were the first ones to see it, to fix our 
eyes on it, and to dare confront it? For there is a risk involved in 
this—perhaps there is no greater risk.
2
“How could anything 
arise out of its opposite? For example, truth out of error? Or the will to truth 
out of the will to deception? Or selfless action out of self-seeking? Or the 
pure sunny look of the wise man out of greed? Origins like these are impossible. 
Anyone who dreams about them is a fool, in fact, something worse. Things of the 
highest value must have another origin peculiar to them. They cannot be 
derived from this ephemeral, seductive, deceptive, trivial world, from this 
confusion of madness and desire! Their basis must lie, by contrast, in the womb 
of being, in the immortal, in the hidden god, in ‘the thing in itself’—their 
basis must lie there, and nowhere else!” This way of shaping an 
argument creates the typical prejudice which enables us to recognize once more 
the metaphysicians of all ages. This way of establishing value stands behind all 
their logical procedures. From this “belief” of theirs they wrestle with their 
“knowledge,” with something that is finally, in all solemnity, christened “the 
truth.” The fundamental belief of the metaphysicians is the belief in 
oppositions of values. Even the most careful among them has never had the 
idea of raising doubts right here on the threshold, where such doubts are surely 
most essential, even when they promised themselves “de omnibus dubitandum” [one 
must doubt everything]. For we are entitled to doubt, first, whether such 
oppositions exist at all and, second, whether those popular ways of estimating 
worth and those oppositions of values on which the metaphysicians have impressed 
their seal are not perhaps only evaluations made in the foreground, only 
temporary perspectives, perhaps even a view from a corner, perhaps from 
underneath, a frog’s viewpoint, as it were, to borrow an expression familiar to 
painters. For all the value that the true, genuine, unselfish person may be 
entitled to, it might be possible that a higher and more fundamental value for 
everything in life must be ascribed to appearance, the will to deception, 
self-interest, and desire. It might even be possible that whatever creates 
the value of those fine and respected things exists in such a way that it is, in 
some duplicitous manner, related to, tied to, and intertwined with, perhaps even 
essentially the same as, those nasty, apparently contrasting things. Perhaps! 
But who is willing to bother with such dangerous Perhapses? For that we must 
await the arrival of a new style of philosopher, ones who have a different taste 
and inclination, the reverse of those so far—philosophers of the dangerous 
Perhaps, in every sense. And speaking in all seriousness, I see such new 
philosophers arriving on the scene.
3
After examining philosophers 
between the lines with a sharp eye for a sufficient length of time, I tell 
myself the following: we must still consider the greatest part of conscious 
thinking among the instinctual activities, even in the case of philosophical 
thinking. We must relearn here, in the same way we relearned about heredity and 
what is “innate.” Just as the act of birth merits little consideration in all 
the procedures and processes of heredity, so there is little point in setting up 
“consciousness” in any significant sense as something opposite to what 
is instinctual—most of the conscious thinking of a philosopher is led on 
secretly and forced into particular paths by his instincts. Even behind all 
logic and its apparent dynamic authority stand evaluations of worth or, putting 
the matter more clearly, physiological demands for the preservation of a 
particular way of life—for example, that what is certain is more valuable than 
what is uncertain, that appearance is of less value than the “truth.” 
Evaluations like these could, for all their regulatory importance for us, 
still be only foreground evaluations, a particular kind of niaiserie
[foolishness] that 
may necessary for the preservation of beings precisely like us. That’s assuming, 
of course, that not just man is the “measure of things” . . .
4
For us, the falsity of a 
judgment is still no objection to that judgment—that’s where our new way of 
speaking sounds perhaps most strange. The question is the extent to which it 
promotes and sustains life, maintains the species, perhaps even creates species. 
And, as a matter of principle, we are ready to assert that the falsest judgments 
(to which a priori synthetic judgments belong) are the most 
indispensable to us, that without our allowing logical fictions to count, 
without a way of measuring reality against the purely invented world of the 
unconditional and self-identical, without a constant falsification of the world 
through numbers, human beings could not live—that if we managed 
to give up false judgments, that would amount to a renunciation of life, a 
denial of life. 
To accept falsehood as a condition of life means, of course, taking a dangerous 
stand against the customary feelings about value, and, for this reason alone, a 
philosophy which dares to do so is already standing beyond good and evil.
5
What stimulates one to look at 
all philosophers in part suspiciously and in part mockingly is not that we find 
again and again how innocent they are—how often and how easily they make 
mistakes and get lost, in short, how childish and child-like they are—but that 
they are not honest enough in what they do, while, as a group, they make a huge, 
virtuous noise as soon as the problem of truthfulness is touched on, even 
remotely. Collectively they take up a position as if they had discovered and 
arrived at their real opinions through the self-development of a cool, pure, 
god-like, disinterested dialectic (in contrast to the mystics of all ranks, who 
are more honest than they are and more stupid with their talk of 
“inspiration”—), while basically they defend with reasons sought out after the 
fact an assumed principle, an idea, an “inspiration,” for the most part some 
heartfelt wish which has been abstracted and sifted. They are all advocates who 
do not want to call themselves that. Indeed, for the most part they are even 
mischievous pleaders for their own judgments, which they baptize as “truths,” 
and very remote from the courage of conscience which would admit this, even 
this, to itself, very remote from the courageous good taste which would concede 
as much, whether to warn an enemy or a friend, or whether to mock themselves as 
an expression of their own high spirits. That equally stiff and well-behaved Tartufferie [hypocrisy] of 
the old Kant with which he entices us onto the clandestine path of dialectic, 
leading or, more correctly, seducing us to his “categorical imperative”—this 
dramatic performance makes us discriminating people laugh, for it amuses us in 
no small way to keep a sharp eye on the sophisticated scheming 
of the old moralists and preachers of morality. 
Or that sort of mathematical hocus-pocus with which Spinoza presented his 
philosophy—in the last analysis “the love of his own wisdom,” to use 
the correct and proper expression—as if it were armed in metal and masked, in 
order in this way to intimidate from the start the courage of an assailant who 
would dare cast an eye on this invincible virgin and Pallas Athena—how 
much of his own shyness and vulnerability is betrayed by this masquerade of a 
solitary invalid!
6
Gradually I have come to learn 
what every great philosophy has been up to now, namely, the self-confession of 
its originator and a form of unintentional and unnoticed memoir, and also that 
the moral (or immoral) intentions in every philosophy made up the essential 
living seed from which, on every occasion, the entire plant has grown. In fact, 
when we explain how the most remote metaphysical claims of a philosopher really 
arose, it’s good (and shrewd) for us always to ask first: What morality is it 
(is he—) aiming at? Consequently, I don’t believe that a “drive to 
knowledge” is the father of philosophy but that here, as elsewhere, knowledge 
(and misjudgment) have functioned only as a tool for another drive. But whoever 
explores the basic drives of human beings, in order to see in this particular 
place how far they may have carried their game as inspiring geniuses 
(or demons and goblins), will find that all drives have already practised 
philosophy at some time or another—and that every single one of them would all 
too gladly like to present itself as the ultimate purpose of existence 
and the legitimate master of all the other drives. For every drive 
seeks mastery and, as such, tries to practise philosophy. Of course, 
with scholars, men of real scientific knowledge, things may be 
different—“better,” if you will—where there may really be something like a drive 
for knowledge, some small independent clock mechanism or other which, when well
wound up, bravely goes on working, without all the 
other drives of the scholar playing any essential role. 
The genuine “interests” of the scholar thus commonly lie entirely elsewhere, for 
example, in the family or in earning a living or in politics. Indeed, it is 
almost a matter of indifference whether his small machine is placed on this or 
on that point in science and whether the “promising” young worker makes a good 
philologist or expert in fungus or chemist—whether he becomes this or that does 
not define who he is. With a philosopher, by contrast, nothing at all 
is impersonal. And his morality, in particular, bears a decisive and crucial 
witness to who he is—that is, to the rank ordering in which the 
innermost drives of his nature are placed relative to each other.
7
How malicious philosophers can 
be! I know nothing more venomous than the joke which Epicurus permitted himself 
against Plato and the Platonists: he called them Dionysio-kolakes. The 
literal meaning of that, what stands in the foreground, is “flatterers 
of Dionysius,” hence accessories of tyrants and lickspittles. 
But the phrase says still more than that—“they are all actors, with 
nothing true about them” (for Dionysokolax was a popular description of 
an actor). And that last part is the real maliciousness which Epicurus hurled 
against Plato: the magnificent manners which Plato, along with his pupils, 
understood, the way they stole the limelight—things Epicurus did not 
understand!—that irritated him, the old schoolmaster from Samos, who sat hidden 
in his little garden in Athens and wrote three hundred books—who knows?—perhaps 
out of rage and ambition against Plato?—It took a hundred years until Greece 
came to realize who this garden god Epicurus was.—Did they realize?
8
In every philosophy there is a 
point where the “conviction” of the philosopher steps onto the stage, or, to 
make the point in the language of an old mystery play:
The ass arrived
Beautiful and most valiant.
9
Do you want to live “according 
to nature”? O you noble Stoics, what a verbal swindle! 
Imagine a being like nature—extravagant without limit, indifferent without 
limit, without purposes and consideration, without pity and justice, 
simultaneously fruitful, desolate, and unknown—imagine indifference itself as a 
power—how could you live in accordance with this indifference? 
Living—isn’t that precisely a will to be something different from what this 
nature is? Isn’t living appraising, preferring, being unjust, being limited, 
wanting to be different? And if your imperative “live according to nature” 
basically means what amounts to “live according to life”—how could you not do 
that? Why make a principle out of what you yourselves are and must be? The truth 
of the matter is quite different: while you pretend to be in raptures as you 
read the canon of your law out of nature, you want something which is the 
reverse of this, you weird actors and self-deceivers! Your pride wants to 
prescribe to and incorporate into nature, this very nature, your morality, your 
ideal. You demand that nature be “in accordance with the Stoa,” and you’d like 
to make all existence merely living in accordance with your own image—as a huge 
and eternal glorification and universalizing of Stoicism! With all your love of 
truth, you force yourselves for such a long time and with such persistence and 
hypnotic rigidity to look at nature falsely, that is, stoically, until 
you are no long capable of seeing nature as anything else—and some abysmal 
arrogance finally inspires you with the lunatic hope that, because you 
know how to tyrannize over yourselves—Stoicism is self-tyranny—nature also 
allows herself to be tyrannized. Is the Stoic then not a part of nature? . . . . 
But this is an ancient, eternal story: what happened then with the Stoics is 
still happening today, as soon as a philosophy begins to believe in itself. It 
always creates a world in its own image. It cannot do anything different. 
Philosophy is this tyrannical drive itself, the most spiritual will to power, to 
a “creation of the world,” to causa prima [first cause].
10
The enthusiasm and the 
subtlety—I might even say the cunning—with which people everywhere in Europe 
today go at the problem “of the real and the apparent world” make one think and 
listen—and whoever hears only a “will to truth” in the background and nothing 
else certainly does not enjoy the keenest hearing. In single rare cases such a 
will to truth, some extravagant and adventurous spirit, a metaphysician’s 
ambition to hold an isolated post, may really be involved, something which in 
the end continues to prefer a handful of “certainty” to an entire wagon full of 
beautiful possibilities. There may even be Puritan fanatics of conscience who 
would still rather lie down and die on a certain nothing than on an uncertain 
something. But this is nihilism and the indication of a despairing, deathly 
tired soul, no matter how brave the gestures of such virtue may look. But among 
stronger thinkers, more full of life, still thirsty for life, it appears to be 
something different. When they take issue with appearances and already 
in their arrogance mention the word “perspective,” when they determine that the 
credibility of their own bodies is about as low as they rank the credibility of 
visual evidence which asserts that “the earth stands still,” and, as a result, 
in an apparently good mood, let go of their surest possession (for nowadays what 
do we think is more secure than our bodies?), who knows whether they don’t, at 
bottom, want to win back something which people previously possessed with even more 
certainty, something or other of the old ownership of an earlier faith, 
perhaps “the immortal soul,” perhaps “the old god,” in short, ideas according to 
which life could be lived better, that is, more powerfully and more cheerfully 
than according to “modern ideas”? In this, there is a mistrust of these 
modern ideas, a lack of faith in everything which has been built up yesterday 
and today, and perhaps a slight mixture of aversion and scorn, which can no 
longer tolerate the bric-á-brac of ideas coming from very different 
places, of the sort so-called positivism brings to market these days, a disgust 
of the more discriminating taste with the fairground colourful patchiness of all 
these pseudo-philosophers of reality, in whom there is nothing new or genuine, 
other than these motley colours. In my view, we should, in these matters, side 
with today’s sceptical anti-realists and  microscopists of knowledge: their 
instinct, which forces them away from modern reality, is unrefuted—what 
do we care about their retrogressive secret paths! The fundamental issue with 
them is not that they want to go “back,” but that they want to go away. 
With some more power, flight, courage, and artistry they’d want to 
move beyond—and not back!
11
It strikes me that nowadays 
people everywhere are trying to direct attention away from the real influence 
Kant exercised on German philosophy and, in particular, prudently to overlook 
the value he ascribed to himself. Above everything else, Kant was, first and 
foremost, proud of his table of categories. With this table in hand, he said, 
“That is the most difficult thing that ever could be undertaken on behalf of 
metaphysics.”—But people should understand this “could be”! He was proud of the 
fact that he had discovered a new faculty in human beings, the ability 
to make synthetic judgments a priori. Suppose that he deceived himself 
here. But the development and quick blood of German philosophy depend on this 
pride and on the competition among all his followers to discover, if possible, 
something even prouder—at all events “new faculties”! But let’s think this over. 
It’s time we did. “How are synthetic judgments a priori possible?” Kant 
asked himself. And what did his answer essentially amount to? Thanks to a 
faculty [Vermöge eines Vermögens]. Unfortunately, however, he did not 
answer in four words, but so laboriously, venerably, and with such an 
expenditure of German profundity and flourishes that people failed to hear the 
comical niaiserie allemande [German foolishness] inherent in such an 
answer. People even got really excited about this new faculty, and the rejoicing 
reached its height when Kant discovered yet another additional faculty—a moral 
faculty—in human beings, for then the Germans were still moral and not yet all 
complete “political realists.” Then came the honeymoon of German philosophy. All 
the young theologians of the Tubingen seminary went off right away into the 
bushes—all looking for “faculties.” And what didn’t they find—in that innocent, 
rich, still youthful time of the German spirit, in which Romanticism, that 
malicious fairy, played her pipes and sang, a time when people did not yet know 
how to distinguish between “finding” and “inventing”! Above all, a faculty for 
the “super-sensory.” Schelling christened this intellectual intuition and, in so 
doing, complied with the most heartfelt yearnings of his Germans, whose cravings 
were basically pious.—The 
most unfair thing we can do to this entire rapturously enthusiastic movement, 
which was adolescent, no matter how much it boldly dressed itself up in gray and 
senile ideas, is to take it seriously and treat it with something like moral 
indignation. Enough—people grew older—the dream flew away. There came a time 
when people rubbed their foreheads. People are still rubbing them today. They 
had dreamed: first and foremost—the old Kant. “By means of a faculty,” he had 
said, or at least meant. But is that an answer? An explanation? Or is it not 
rather merely a repetition of the question? How does opium make people 
sleep? “By means of a faculty,” namely, the virtus dormitiva [sleeping 
virtue], answers that doctor in Moliere.
Because it has the sleeping 
virtue
whose nature makes the senses sleep.
But answers like that belong in 
comedy, and the time has finally come to replace the Kantian question “How are 
synthetic judgments a priori possible?” with another question, “Why is 
the belief in such judgments necessary?”—that is, to understand that 
for the purposes of preserving beings of our type we must believe that such 
judgments are true, although, of course, they could still be false judgments! 
Or to speak more clearly, crudely, and fundamentally: synthetic judgments a 
priori should not “be possible” at all: we have no right to them. In our 
mouths they are nothing but false judgments. Only, of course, a belief in their 
truth is necessary as a foreground belief and appearance which belong in the 
perspective optics of living. In order finally to recall the immense influence 
which “German philosophy”—you understand, I hope, its right to quotation 
marks?—has exercised throughout Europe, there should be no doubt that a certain virtus dormitiva [virtue 
of making people sleep] was a part of that: people—among them noble 
loafers, the virtuous, the mystics, the artists, the three-quarter Christians, 
and political obscurantists of all nations—were delighted to have, thanks to 
German philosophy, an antidote to the still overpowering sensualism flowing over 
from the previous century into this one, in short—to have a “sensus assoupire” [way 
of putting the senses to sleep].
12
So far as materialistic atomism 
is concerned, it belongs with the most effectively refuted things we have, and 
perhaps nowadays in Europe no scholar remains so unscholarly that he still 
ascribes a serious meaning to it other than for convenient hand-and-household 
use (that is, as an abbreviated way of expressing oneself)—thanks primarily to 
that Pole Boscovich, who, together with the Pole Copernicus, 
has so far been the greatest and most victorious opponent of appearances. For 
while Copernicus convinced us to believe, contrary to all our senses, that the 
earth does not stand still, Boscovich taught us to renounce the belief 
in the final thing on the earth that “stood firm,” the belief in “stuff,” in 
“matter,” in what was left of the earth, in atomic particles. It was the 
greatest triumph over the senses ever achieved on earth so far. But we must go 
even further and also declare war, a relentless war to the bitter end, against 
the “atomistic need,” which still carries on a dangerous afterlife in places 
where no one suspects, like that more celebrated “metaphysical need.”—We must 
first of all get rid of that other and more disastrous atomism, as well, which 
Christianity has taught best and longest, the atomism of the soul. With 
this phrase let me be permitted to designate the belief which assumes that the 
soul is something indestructible, eternal, indivisible—like a monad, like an atomon. 
We should rid scientific knowledge of this belief! Just between us, it 
is not at all necessary here to get rid of “the soul” itself and to renounce one 
of the oldest and most venerable hypotheses, as habitually happens with the 
clumsiness of the naturalists, who hardly touch upon “the soul” without 
immediately losing it. But the way to new versions and refinements of the 
hypothesis of the soul stands open: and ideas like “mortal soul” and “soul as 
the multiplicity of the subject” and “soul as the social structure of drives and 
affects” from now on want to have civil rights in scientific knowledge. While 
the new psychologist is preparing an end to the superstition which so 
far has flourished with an almost tropical lushness in the way the soul has been 
imagined, at the same time he has naturally pushed himself, as it were, into a 
new desert and a new mistrust—it may be the case that the older psychologists 
had a more comfortable and happier time of it—; finally, however, he knows that 
in that very process he himself is also condemned to invent, and—who 
knows?—perhaps to discover.
13
Physiologists should think 
carefully about setting up the drive to preserve the self as the cardinal drive 
in an organic being. Above everything else, something living wants to release its 
power—living itself is will to power. Self-preservation is only one of the 
indirect and most frequent consequences of that. In short, here as 
everywhere, beware of all extraneous teleological principles! The drive for 
self-preservation is one such principle (we have Spinoza’s inconsistency to 
thank for it—). For that is demanded by the method, which must, in essence, be 
economy of principles.
14
Nowadays in perhaps five or six 
heads the idea is dawning that even physics is only an interpretation and 
explication of the world (for our benefit, if I may be permitted to say so) and
not an explanation of the world. But to the extent it rests upon a 
faith in the senses, it counts for more and must continue to count for more for 
a long time yet, that is, as an explanation. Physics has eyes and fingers on its 
side; it has appearance and tangibility on its side. That works magically on an 
age with basically plebeian taste—persuasively and convincingly—indeed, 
it follows instinctively the canon of truth of eternally popular sensualism. 
What is clear, what is “explained”? Only whatever lets itself be seen and 
felt—every problem has to be pushed that far. By contrast, the reluctance to 
accept obvious evidence of the senses constituted the magic of the Platonic way 
of thinking, which was a noble way of thinking—perhaps among human 
beings who enjoyed even stronger and more discriminating senses than our 
contemporaries have, but who knew how to experience a higher triumph in 
remaining master of these senses and to do this by means of the pale, cool, 
gray, conceptual nets which they threw over the colourful confusion of sense, 
the rabble of the senses, as Plato called them. That form of enjoyment in 
overcoming this world and interpreting the world in the manner of Plato was 
different from the one which today’s physicists offer us, as well as the 
Darwinists and anti-teleologists among the physiological workers, with their 
principle of the “smallest possible force” and the greatest possible stupidity. 
“Where human beings have nothing more to look at and to grip, there they have 
also no more to seek out”—that is, of course, an imperative different from the 
Platonic one, but nonetheless for a coarse, diligent race of mechanics and 
bridge builders of the future, who have nothing but rough work to do, 
it might be precisely the right imperative.
15
In order to carry on physiology 
in good conscience, people must hold to the principle that the sense organs 
are not phenomena in the sense of idealistic philosophy: as such they could not, 
in fact, be causes! And so sensualism at least as a regulative hypothesis, if 
not as a heuristic principle.—What’s that? And other people even say that the 
outer world is the work of our organs? But then our body, as a part of this 
outer world, would, in fact, be the work of our organs! But then our organs 
themselves would, in fact, be—the work of our organs. It seems to me that this 
is a complete reductio ad absurdum [absurd conclusion]provided that the 
idea of causa sui [something being its own cause] is fundamentally 
absurd. Consequently, is the exterior world not the work of our 
organs—?
16
There are still harmless 
observers of themselves who believe that there are “immediate certainties,” for 
example, “I think,” or that superstition of Schopenhauer’s, “I will,” just as if 
perception here were able to seize upon its object pure and naked, as 
the “thing in itself,” and as if there were no falsification either on the part 
of the subject or of the object.
However, the fact is that “immediate 
certainty,” just as much as “absolute cognition” and “thing in itself,” contains 
within itself a contradictio in adjecto [contradiction in terms]. I’ll 
repeat it a hundred times: people should finally free themselves from the 
seduction of words! Let folk believe that knowing is knowing all of something. 
The philosopher must say to himself, “When I dismantle the process that is 
expressed in the sentence ‘I think,’ I come upon a series of daring assertions 
whose rational grounding is difficult, perhaps impossible—for example, that I am 
the one who thinks, that there must really be something that thinks, that 
thinking is an action and effect of a being who is to be thought of as a cause, 
that there is an ‘I’, and finally that it is already established what we mean by 
thinking—that I know what thinking is. For if I had not yet decided 
these questions in myself, how could I assess that what is now  happening might 
not perhaps be ‘willing’ or ‘feeling’?” In short, this “I think” presupposes 
that I compare my immediate condition with other conditions which I 
know in myself in order to establish what it is. Because of this referring back 
to other forms of ‘knowing,’ it certainly does not have any immediate 
‘certainty’ for me.” Thus, instead of that “immediate certainty,” which people 
may believe in the case under discussion, the philosopher encounters a series of 
metaphysical questions, really essential problems of intellectual knowledge, as 
follows: “Where do I acquire the idea of thinking? Why do I believe in cause and 
effect? What gives me the right to speak of an ‘I,’ and indeed of an ‘I’ as a 
cause, finally even of an ‘I’ as the cause of thinking?” Anyone who ventures to 
answer those metaphysical questions right away with an appeal to some kind of
intuitive cognition, as does the man who says “I think and know that at 
least this is true, real, and certain”—such a person nowadays will be met by a 
philosopher with a smile and two question marks. “My dear sir,” the philosopher 
will perhaps give him to understand, “it is unlikely that you are not mistaken 
but why such absolute insistence on the truth?”—
17
So far as the superstitions of 
the logicians are concerned, I will never tire of emphasizing over and over 
again a small brief fact which these superstitious types are unhappy to 
concede—namely, that a thought comes when “it” wants to and not when “I” wish, 
so that it is a falsification of the facts to say that the subject “I” 
is the condition of the predicate “think.” It thinks: but that this “it” is 
precisely that old, celebrated “I” is, to put it mildly, only an assumption, an 
assertion, in no way an “immediate certainty.” After all, we’ve already done too 
much with this “it thinks”: this “it” already contains an interpretation of 
the event and is not part of the process itself. Following grammatical habits 
people conclude here as follows: “Thinking is an activity. To every activity 
belongs someone who does the action, therefore—.” With something close to this 
same pattern, the older atomism, in addition to the “force” which created 
effects, also looked for that clump of matter where the force is located, out of 
which it works—the atom. Stronger heads finally learned how to cope without this 
“remnant of earth,” and perhaps one day people, including even the logicians, 
will also grow accustomed to cope without that little “it” (to which the honest 
old “I” has reduced itself).
18
It’s true that the fact that a 
theory can be disproved is not the least of its charms: that’s precisely what 
attracts more sophisticated minds to it. Apparently the theory of “free will,” 
which has been refuted hundreds of times, owes its continuing life to this very 
charm alone—again and again someone or other comes along and feels he’s strong 
enough to refute it.
19
Philosophers customarily speak 
of the will as if it were the best-known thing in the world. Indeed, 
Schopenhauer let it be known that the will is the only thing really known to us, 
totally known, understood without anything taken away or added. But still, again 
and again it seems to me that Schopenhauer, too, in this case has only done what 
philosophers just do habitually—he’s appropriated and exaggerated a popular 
opinion. Willing seems to me, above all, something complicated, 
something that is unified only in the word—and popular opinion simply inheres in 
this one word, which has overmastered the always inadequate caution of 
philosophers. So if we are, for once, more careful, if we are 
“un-philosophical,” then let’s say, firstly, that in every act of willing there 
is, to start with, a multiplicity of feelings, namely, the feeling of the 
condition away from which, a feeling of the condition 
towards which, the feeling of this “away” and “towards” themselves, then again, an accompanying 
muscular feeling which comes into play through some kind of habit, without our 
putting our “arms and legs” into motion, as soon as we “will.” Secondly, just as 
we acknowledge feelings, indeed many different feelings, as ingredients of 
willing, so we should also acknowledge that thinking is an ingredient as 
well. In every act of will there is a commanding thought, and people should not 
believe that this thought can be separated from the “will,” as if then the will 
would still be left over! Thirdly, the will is not only a complex of feeling and 
thinking but, above all, an affect, and, indeed, an affect of the 
command. What is called “freedom of the will” is essentially the feeling of 
superiority with respect to the one who has to obey: “I am free; ‘he’ must 
obey”—this awareness inheres in every will, as does that tense attentiveness, 
that direct gaze fixed exclusively on one thing, that unconditional value 
judgment “Do this now—nothing else needs to be done,” that inner certainty about 
the fact that obedience will take place, and everything else that accompanies 
the condition of the one issuing commands. A person who wills—gives 
orders to something in himself that obeys or that he thinks obeys. But now 
observe what is the strangest thing about the will—about this multifaceted thing 
for which the people have only a single word: insofar as we are in a given case 
the one ordering and the one obeying, both at the same time, and as the 
one obeying we know the feelings of compulsion, of pushing and pressing, 
resistance and movement, which usually start right after the act of will, and 
insofar as we, by contrast, have the habit of disregarding this duality and of 
deceiving ourselves, thanks to the synthetic idea of “I,” a whole series of 
mistaken conclusions and, consequently, of false evaluations of the will itself 
has attached itself to the act of willing, in such a way that the person doing 
the willing believes in good faith that willing is sufficient for 
action. Because in the vast majority of cases a person wills something only 
where he may expect his command to take effect—that is, in obedience and 
action—what is apparent has translated itself into a feeling, as if 
there might be some necessary effect. In short, the one who is doing 
the willing believes, with a reasonable degree of certainty, that will and 
action are somehow one thing—he ascribes his success, the carrying out of the 
willing, to the will itself and, in the process, enjoys an increase in that 
feeling of power which all success brings with it. “Freedom of the will”—that’s 
the expression for the multifaceted condition of enjoyment in the person 
willing, who commands and, at the same, identifies himself with what is carrying 
out the order. As such, he enjoys the triumph over things which resist him, but 
within himself is of the opinion that it is his will by itself which really 
overcame this resistance. The person doing the willing thus acquires the joyful 
feelings of the successful implements carrying out the order, the serviceable 
“under-wills” or under-souls—our body is, in fact, merely a social construct of 
many souls—in addition to his joyful feeling as the one who commands. L’effet c’est moi [The 
effect is I]. What happens here is what happens in every well-constructed 
and happy community—the ruling class identifies itself with the successes of the 
community. All willing is simply a matter of giving orders and obeying, on the 
basis, as mentioned, of a social construct of many “souls”: for this reason a 
philosopher should arrogate to himself the right to include willing as such 
within the field of morality: morality, that is, understood as a doctrine of the 
relationships of dominance under which the phenomenon “living” arises.
20
That individual philosophical 
ideas are not something spontaneous, not things which grow out of themselves, 
but develop connected to and in relationship with each other, so that, no matter 
how suddenly and arbitrarily they may appear to emerge in the history of 
thought, they nevertheless belong to a system just as much as do the collective 
members of the fauna of a continent, that point finally reveals itself by the 
way in which the most diverse philosophers keep filling out again and again a 
certain ground plan of possible philosophies. Under an invisible spell 
they always run around the same orbit all over again: they may feel they are 
still so independent of each other with their critical or systematic wills, but 
something or other inside leads them, something drives them in a particular 
order one after the other, namely, that inborn structural arrangement and 
relationship of ideas. Their thinking is, in fact, much less a discovery than a 
recognition, a remembering, a return journey back home into a distant primordial 
collective household of the soul, out of which those ideas formerly grew. To 
practise philosophy is to this extent a form of atavism of the highest order. 
The strange family similarity of all Indian, Greek, and German ways of 
practising philosophy can be explained easily enough. It’s precisely where a 
relationship between languages is present we cannot avoid the fact that, thanks 
to the common philosophy of grammar—I mean thanks to the unconscious mastery and 
guidance exercised by similar grammatical functions—everything has been prepared 
from the beginning for a similar development and order of philosophical systems, 
just as the road to certain other possibilities of interpreting the world seems 
sealed off. There will be a greater probability that philosophers from the 
region of the Ural-Altaic languages (in which the idea of the subject is most 
poorly developed) will look differently “into the world” and will be found on 
other pathways than Indo-Germans or Muslims: the spell of particular grammatical 
functions is, in the final analysis, the spell of physiological judgments 
of value and racial conditions.—So much for the repudiation of 
Locke’s superficiality in connection with the origin of ideas.
21
The causa sui [something 
being its own cause] is the best self-contradiction that has been thought 
up so far, a kind of logical rape and perversity. But the excessive pride of 
human beings has worked to entangle itself deeply and terribly with this very 
nonsense. The demand for “freedom of the will,” in that superlative metaphysical 
sense, as it unfortunately still rules in the heads of the half-educated, the 
demand to bear the entire final responsibility for one’s actions oneself and to 
relieve God, the world, ancestors, chance, and society of responsibility for 
them, is really nothing less than this very causa sui and a pulling 
oneself into existence out of the swamp of nothingness by the hair, with more 
audacity than Munchhausen. Suppose someone in this way gets behind the boorish 
simplicity of this famous idea of the “free will” and erases it from his head, 
then I would invite him now to push his “enlightenment” still one step further 
and erase also the inverse of this non-idea [Unbegriffs] of “free will” 
from his head: I refer to the “un-free will,” which amounts to an abuse of cause 
and effect. People should not mistakenly reify “cause” and “effect,” 
the way those investigating nature do (and people like them who nowadays 
naturalize their thinking—), in accordance with the ruling mechanistic 
foolishness which allows the cause to push and shove until it “have an effect.” 
People should use “cause” and “effect” merely as pure ideas, that is, 
as conventional fictions to indicate and communicate, not as an 
explanation. In the “in itself” there is no “causal connection,” no “necessity,” 
no “psychological un-freedom,” no “effect following from the cause”; no 
“law” holds sway. We are the ones who have, on our own, made up causes, 
causal sequences, for-one-another, relativity, compulsion, number, law, freedom, 
reason, and purpose, and when we fabricate this world of signs inside things as 
something “in itself,” when we stir it into things, then we’re once again acting 
as we have always done, namely, mythologically. The “un-free will” is a 
myth: in real life it’s merely a matter of strong and weak wills.—It is 
almost always already a symptom of something lacking in a thinker himself when 
he senses in all “causal connections” and “psychological necessity” some 
compulsion, necessity, requirement to obey, pressure, and un-freedom. That very 
feeling is a tell-tale giveaway—the person is betraying himself. And if I have 
seen things correctly, the “un-freedom of the will” has generally been viewed as 
a problem from two totally contrasting points of view, but always in a deeply
personal way: some people are not willing at any price to let go of 
their “responsibility,” their belief in themselves, their personal 
right to their merits (the vain races belong to this group—); others 
want the reverse: they do not wish to be responsible for or guilty of anything, 
and demand, out of an inner self-contempt, that they can shift blame for 
themselves somewhere else. People in this second group, when they write books, 
are in the habit nowadays of taking up the cause of criminals; a sort of 
socialist pity is their most attractive disguise. And in fact, the fatalism of 
those with weak wills brightens up amazingly when it learns how to present 
itself as “(T)la religion de la souffrance humaine” [the religion 
of human suffering]—that’s its “good taste.”
22
People should forgive me, as an 
old philologist who cannot prevent himself from maliciously setting his finger 
on corrupt methods of interpretation—but “nature’s conformity to law,” which you 
physicists talk about so proudly, as if—it exists only thanks to your 
interpretation and bad “philology”—it is not a matter of fact, a “text, but 
instead nothing but a naively humanitarian emendation and distortion of meaning, 
with which you make ample concessions to the democratic instincts of the modern 
soul! “Equality before the law everywhere—in that respect nature is no different 
and no better than we are”: a charming ulterior motive, in which once again lies 
disguised the rabble’s hostility to everything privileged and autocratic, as 
well as a second and more sophisticated atheism. Ni dieu, ni maître [neither 
god nor master]—that is how you want it, too, and therefore “Up with 
natural law!” Isn’t that so? But, as mentioned, that is interpretation, not 
text, and someone could come along who had an opposite intention and style of 
interpretation and who would know how to read out of this same nature, with a 
look at the same phenomena, the tyrannically inconsiderate and inexorable 
enforcement of power claims—an interpreter who set right before your eyes the 
unexceptional and unconditional quality in all “will to power,” in such a way 
that almost every word, even that word “tyranny,” would finally appear unusable 
or an already weakening metaphor losing its force—as too human—and who 
nonetheless in the process finished up asserting the same thing about this world 
as you claim, namely, that it has a “necessary” and “calculable” course, but not because 
laws rule the world but because there is a total absence of laws, and 
every power draws its final consequence in every moment. Granted that this also 
is only an interpretation—and you will be eager enough to raise that 
objection?—well, so much the better.
23
All psychology so far has 
remained hung up on moral prejudices and fears. It has not dared to go into the 
depths. To understand it as the morphology and doctrine of the development 
of the will to power—the way I understand it—no one in his own thinking has 
even touched on that, insofar, that is, as one is permitted to recognize in what 
has been written up to now a symptom of what people so far have kept silent 
about. The power of moral prejudices has driven deep into the most spiritual, 
the most apparently cool world, the one with the fewest assumptions, and, as is 
self-evident, in a way that damages, limits, blinds, and distorts. A true 
physical psychology has to fight against an unconscious resistance in the heart 
of the researcher. It has “the heart” against it. Even a doctrine of the mutual 
interdependence of the “good” and the “bad” drives creates, as a more 
sophisticated immorality, distress and aversion in a still powerful and hearty 
conscience—even more so a doctrine of how all the good drives are derived from 
the bad ones. But assuming that someone takes the affects of hate, envy, greed, 
and desire to rule as the affects which determine life, as something that, in 
the whole balance of life, have to be present fundamentally and essentially, 
and, as a result, have to be enhanced if life is to be further enhanced—he 
suffers from an orientation in his judgment as if he were seasick. Nevertheless, 
even this hypothesis is not nearly the most painful or the strangest in this 
immense and still almost new realm of dangerous discoveries;—and, in fact, there 
are a hundred good reasons why everyone should stay away from it, anyone who can! 
On the other hand, if someone aboard ship wanders here at some point—well, then! 
Come on! Now’s the time to keep one’s teeth tightly clenched, one’s eyes open, 
and one’s hand firm on the tiller!—We’re moving away directly over morality, and 
in the process, as we dare make our way there, we’re overwhelming, perhaps 
smashing apart, what’s left of our morality,—but what do we matter! 
Never before has a more profound world of insights revealed itself to 
venturesome travellers and adventurers: and the psychologist who in this manner 
“makes a sacrifice”—it is not the sacrifizio dell’intelletto [sacrifice of 
the intellect], quite the opposite—will for that reason at least be 
permitted to demand that psychology is recognized again as the mistress of the 
sciences, with the other sciences there to prepare things in her service. For 
from now on psychology is once more the route to fundamental problems.