Prologue

1

We don’t know ourselves, we
knowledgeable people—we are personally ignorant about ourselves. And there’s
good reason for that. We’ve never looked for ourselves—how could
it happen that one day we’d discover ourselves? With justice it’s
been said, “Where your treasure is, there shall your heart be also.”

Our treasure lies where the beehives of our knowledge stand. We are
always busy with our knowledge, as born winged creatures and collectors of
intellectual honey. In our hearts we are concerned with really only one thing—to
“bring something home.” As far as the rest of life is concerned, what people
call “experiences,”—who of us is serious enough for that? Or has enough time? In
these matters, I fear, we’ve been “missing the point.”  Our hearts have simply
not been engaged with that—nor, for that matter, have our ears! Instead we’ve
been more like someone divinely distracted and self-absorbed into whose ear the
clock has just pealed the twelve strokes of noon with all its force and who all
at once wakes up and asks himself  “What exactly did that clock strike?”—so now
and then we even rub our ears afterwards and ask, totally surprised and
completely embarrassed— “What have we really just experienced?” And more: “Who
are we really?” Then, as I’ve mentioned, we count—after the fact—all
the twelve trembling strokes of the clock of our experience, of our lives, of
our being—alas! in the process we keep losing count . . . We remain
simply and necessarily strangers to ourselves, we do not understand ourselves,
we must be confused about ourselves. For us this proposition holds for
all eternity: “Each man is furthest from himself”—where we ourselves are
concerned, we are not “knowledgeable people” . . .

2

My thoughts about the origin of
our moral prejudices—for this polemical tract is concerned about that origin—had
their first brief, provisional expression in that collection of aphorisms which
carried the title Human, All-too Human: A Book for Free Spirits, which
I started to write in Sorrento, during a winter when I had the chance to pause,
just as a traveller stops, and to look over the wide and dangerous land through
which my spirit had wandered up to that point. This happened in the winter of
1876-77, but the ideas themselves are older. In the main points, they were
already the same ideas which I am taking up again in the present essays:—let’s
hope that the long interval of time has done them some good, that they have
become riper, brighter, stronger, and more complete! But the fact that today
I still stand by these ideas, that in the intervening time they themselves have
constantly become more strongly associated with one another, in fact, have grown
into each other and intertwined, that reinforces in me the joyful confidence
that they may not have originally developed in me as single, random, or sporadic
ideas, but up out of a common root, out of a fundamental will for
knowledge ruling from deep within, always speaking with greater clarity, always
demanding greater clarity. For that’s the only thing appropriate to a
philosopher. We have no right to be isolated in any way: we are not
permitted either to make isolated mistakes or to run into truths in isolation.
By contrast, our ideas, our values, our affirmations and denials, our if’s
and whether’s grow out of us from the same necessity which makes a tree
bear its fruit—totally related and interlinked amongst each other, witnesses of
one will, one health, one soil, one sun.—As for the question whether these
fruits of ours taste good to you—what does that matter to the trees!
What concern is that to us, we philosophers!

3

Because of a doubt peculiar to
my own nature, which I am reluctant to confess—for it concerns itself with morality,
with everything which up to the present has been celebrated on earth as
morality—a doubt which came into my life so early, so uninvited, so
irresistibly, in such contradiction to my surroundings, my age, precedent, and
my origin, that I would almost have the right to call it my “a priori
[before experience]—because of this, my curiosity as well as my suspicion
had to pause early on at the question of where our good and evil really originated.
In fact, already as a thirteen-year-old lad, my mind was occupying itself with
the problem of the origin of evil. At an age when one has “half children’s play,
half God in one’s heart,” I devoted my first childish literary trifle, my first
written philosophical exercise, to this problem—and so far as my “solution” to
it at that time is concerned, well, I gave the honour to God, as is reasonable,
and made him the father of evil. Is that precisely what my “a
priori” demanded of me, that new immoral, at the very least unmoral “a
priori” and the “categorical imperative” which spoke out from it, alas, so

anti-Kantian and so cryptic, which I have increasingly listened
to ever since—and not just listened to?
Luckily at an early stage I learned to separate theological prejudices from
moral ones, and I no longer sought the origin of evil behind the world.
Some education in history and philology, along with an inherently refined sense
concerning psychological questions in general, quickly changed my problem into
something else: Under what conditions did people invent for themselves those
value judgments good and evil? And what value do they inherently possess?
Have they hindered or fostered human wellbeing up to now? Are they a sign of
some emergency, of impoverishment, of an atrophying life? Or is it the other way
around? Do they indicate fullness, power, a will for life, its courage, its
confidence, its future? To these questions I came across and proposed all sorts
of answers for myself. I distinguished between ages, peoples, and different
ranks of individuals. I kept refining my problem. Out of the answers arose new
questions, investigations, assumptions, and probabilities, until at last I had
my own country, my own soil, a totally secluded, flowering, blooming world, a
secret garden, as it were, of which no one could have the slightest inkling. O
how lucky we are, we knowledgeable people, provided only that we know
how to stay silent long enough!

4

The initial stimulus to
publish something of my hypotheses concerning the origin of morality was given
to me by a lucid, tidy, clever, even precocious little book, in which for the
first time I clearly ran into a topsy-turvy, perverse type of genealogical
hypotheses—a genuinely English style. It drew me with that power of
attraction that everything opposite, everything antipodal, contains. The title
of this  booklet was The Origin of the Moral Feelings,
its author was Dr Paul Rée, and it appeared in the year 1877.
I have perhaps never read anything which I would have denied, statement by
statement, conclusion by conclusion, as I did with this book, but entirely
without any annoyance or impatience. In the work I mentioned above, with which I
was engaged at the time, I made opportune and inopportune references to
statements in Dr. Rée’s book, not in order to prove them wrong—what have I to do
with preparing refutations!—but, as is appropriate to a positive spirit, to put
in the place of something unlikely something more likely and, in some
circumstances, in the place of some error another error. In that period, as I
said, for the first time I brought into the light of day those hypotheses about
genealogy to which these essays have been dedicated—but clumsily, as I myself
would be the last to deny, still fettered, still without my own language for
these concerns of mine, and with all sorts of retreating and vacillating. For
particular details, you should compare what I say in Human, All-too Human,
p. 51 [Section 45], about the double nature of the prehistory of good
and evil (that is, in the spheres of the nobility and the slaves); similarly,
pages 119 ff. [Section 136], concerning the worth and origin of ascetic
morality, as well as pages 78, 82, and II, 35 [Sections 96, 99, and
Volume II, Section 89] concerning the “Morality of Custom,” that much older
and more primitive style of morality, which lies toto coelo [by all the
heavens, i.e., absolutely]from the altruistic way of valuing (which Dr. Rée,
like all English genealogists of morality, sees as the very essenceof
moral evaluation); similarly, page 74 [Section 1.92](T); Wanderer,
page 29 [Section 26]; and Daybreak, page 99 [Section 112],
concerning the origin of justice as a compromise between approximately equal
powers (equality as precondition of all contracts and therefore of all law);
likewise concerning the origin of punishment in Wanderer, pages 25 and
34 [Sections 22 and 33], for which an intent to terrify is neither
essential nor original (as Dr. Rée claims:—it is far more likely first

brought in under a specific set of conditions and always as
something incidental, something additional).

5

Basically at that point the
real concern for me at heart was something much more important than coming up
with the nature of hypotheses about the origin of morality, either my own or
from other people (or, more precisely stated—this latter issue was important to
me only for the sake of a goal to which it is one way out of many). For me the
issue was the value of morality—and in that matter I had to take issue
almost alone with my great teacher Schopenhauer, the one to whom, as if to a
contemporary, that book, with its passion and hidden
contradiction, addresses itself (—for it, too, was a “polemical tract”).
The most specific issue was the worth of the “unegoistic,” of the instincts for
pity, for self-denial, and for self-sacrifice, of things which Schopenhauer
himself had painted with gold, deified, and projected into another world [verjenseitigt]
for so long that they finally remained for him “value as such” and the reason
why he said No to life and even to himself, as well. But a constantly
more fundamental suspicion of these very instincts voiced itself in me,
a scepticism which always dug deeper! It was precisely here that I saw the great danger
to humanity, its most sublime temptation and seduction.—But in what direction?
To nothingness?—It was precisely here I saw the beginning of the end, the
standing still, the backward-glancing exhaustion, the will turning itself against
life, the final illness tenderly and sadly announcing itself. I understood the
morality of pity, which was always seizing more and more around it and which
gripped even the philosophers and made them sick, as the most sinister symptom
of our European culture, which itself had become sinister, as its detour to a
new Buddhism? to a European Buddhism? to—nihilism? . . . This modern
philosophical preference for and overvaluing of pity is really something new.
Concerning the worthlessness of pity, philosophers up to now have been
in agreement. I cite only Plato, Spinoza, La Rochefoucauld, and Kant—four

spirits as different from one another as possible, but united
in one thing, in the low value they set on pity.—

6

This problem of the value of
pity and of the morality of pity (—I’m an opponent of the disgraceful modern
effeminacy of feeling—) appears at first to be only something isolated, a
detached question mark. But anyone who remains here for a while and learns to
ask questions will experience what happened to me:—a huge new vista opens up
before him, a possibility grips him like an attack of dizziness, every kind of
mistrust, suspicion, and fear springs up, his belief in morality, in all
morality, totters—and finally he recognizes a new demand. Let’s proclaim this new
demand: we need a critique of moral values, we must first
question the very value of these values—and for that we need a knowledge of
the conditions and circumstances out of which these values grew, under which
they have developed and changed (morality as consequence, as symptom, as mask,
as Tartufferie [hypocrisy], as illness, as misunderstanding, but also
morality as cause, as means of healing, as stimulant, as scruple, as poison), a
knowledge of a sort that has not been there up to this point, that has not even
been wished for. We have taken the worth of these “values” as given, as
self-evident, as beyond all dispute. Up until now people have not even had the
slightest doubts about or wavered in setting up “the good man” as more valuable
than “the evil man,” of higher worth in the sense of improvement, usefulness,
and prosperity with respect to mankind in general (along with the future of
humanity). What about this? What if the truth were the other way around? Well?
What if in the “good man” there even lay a symptom of regression, like a danger,
a seduction, a poison, a narcotic, something which, for example, made the
present live at the cost of the future? Perhaps in greater comfort and
less danger, but also on a smaller scale and in a more demeaning way? . . . So
that morality itself would be guilty if the inherently possible highest
power and magnificence of the human type were never attained? So that
morality itself might be the danger of dangers? . . .

7

Suffice it to say that once
this insight revealed itself to me, I had reasons to look around me for learned,
bold, and hard-working comrades (today I’m still searching). It’s a matter of
travelling through the immense, distant, and so secretive land of
morality—morality which has really existed, which has really been lived—with
nothing but new questions and, as it were, with new eyes. Isn’t that almost like
discovering this land for the first time? . . . In this matter, it so
happened that, among others I thought of, the above-mentioned Dr. Rée, because I
had no doubts at all that by the very nature of his questions he would be driven
on his own to a more correct methodology in order to arrive at any answers. Did
I deceive myself in this? At any rate, my desire was to provide a better
direction for such a keen and objective eye as his, a direction leading to a
true history of morality, and to advise him in time against such an
English way of making hypotheses into the blue. For, indeed, it’s
obvious which colour must be a hundred times more important for a genealogist of
morality than this blue: namely, gray, in other words, what has been
documented, what can be established as the truth, what really took place, in
short, the long and difficult-to-decipher hieroglyphic writing of the past in
human morality.—This was unknown to Dr. Rée. But he had read
Darwin:—and so to some extent in his hypotheses the Darwinian beast and the most
modern modest and tender moral sensibility, which “no longer bites,” politely
extend their hands to each other in a way that is at least entertaining—with the
latter bearing a facial expression revealing a certain good-natured and refined
indolence, in which is even mixed a grain of pessimism and
exhaustion, as if it is really not worth taking all these things—the problems of
morality—so seriously.
But for me things appear reversed: there are no issues at all which provide
more incentives to take them seriously; among the rewards, for example, is
the fact that one day perhaps people will be permitted to take them cheerfully.
For cheerfulness, or, to say it in my own language, the gay science, is
a reward, a reward for a lengthy, brave, hard-working, and underground
seriousness, which, of course, is not something for everyone. But on that day
when, from full hearts, we say “Forward! Our old morality also belongs in a
comedy!” we’ll have discovered a new complication and possibility for the
Dionysian drama of “the fate of the soul”:—and we can bet that he will put it to
good use, the grand old immortal comic poet of our existence! . . .

8

If this writing is
incomprehensible to someone or other and hurts his ears, the blame for that, it
strikes me, is not necessarily mine. The writing is sufficiently clear given the
conditions I assume—that people have first read my earlier writings and have
taken some trouble to do so, for, in fact, these works are not easily
accessible. For example, so far as my Zarathustra is concerned, I don’t
consider anyone knowledgeable about it who has not at some time
or another been deeply wounded by and profoundly delighted with every word in
it.

For only then can he enjoy the
privilege of sharing with reverence the halcyon element out of which that work
was born, its sunny clarity, distance, breadth, and certainty. In other cases
the aphoristic form creates difficulties. These stem from the fact that nowadays
people do not take this form seriously enough. An aphorism,
properly stamped and poured, has not yet been “deciphered” simply by being read.
It’s much more the case that only now can one begin to explicate it,
and that requires an art of interpretation. In the third essay of this book I
have set out a model of what I call an “interpretation” for such a case.—In this
essay an aphorism is presented, and the essay itself is a commentary on it. Of
course, in order to practice this style of reading as art, one thing is
above all essential, something that today especially has been preferably
forgotten—and so it will require still more time before my writings are
“readable”—something for which one almost needs to be a cow, at any rate not a
“modern man”—rumination.

Sils-Maria, Oberengadin

July 1887

ENDNOTES


The quotation is from Matthew 6.21.


a priori: This phrase
refers to some idea or capacity one possesses inherently, something not provided
by experience (like the ability to reason without taking the senses into
account). The phrase is commonly associated with the theories of Immanuel Kant
(1724-1804) the great German philosopher; categorical imperative: the
key phrase in Kant’s morality, the idea that moral action consists of acting
upon a principle which could become a rational moral principle without creating
a moral contradiction (“Act so that the maxim [which determines your will] may
be capable of becoming a universal law for all rational beings”).


Paul Rée
(1849-1901): a
German philosopher and friend of Nietzsche’s.


Human, All-too Human was
published in 1878, Wanderer in 1880 and Daybreak (or Dawn)
in 1881.  


Arthur Schopenhauer
(1788-1860): German philosopher, whose work exercised a significant influence on
Nietzsche, especially his emphasis on the importance of the human will.


Plato
(428-348 BC): the
most important of the classical Greek philosophers; Baruch de Spinoza
(1632-1677): Dutch philosopher; Francois de La Rochefoucauld
(1613-1680): French author, famous for his maxims.


Charles Darwin
(1809-1882): English natural scientist whose Origin of Species was
published in 1859.  


Nietzsche’s Thus Spake Zarathustra was written between 1883 and 1885.


[Back
to Genealogy of Morals, Table of Contents]

[Link to Genealogy, Essay One]

Nietzsche, Genealogy of Morals, Essay 1


On the Genealogy of Morals
A Polemical Tract

2014


If you  would like to
download a Rich Text Format (Word) text of this text, please

Genealogy

First Essay
Good and Evil, Good and Bad

1

—These English psychologists,
whom we have to thank for the only attempts up to this point to produce a
history of the origins of morality—in themselves they serve up to us no small
riddle. By way of a living riddle, they even offer, I confess, something
substantially more than their books—they are interesting in themselves!
These English psychologists—what do they really want? We find them, willingly or
unwillingly, always at the same work, that is, shoving the partie honteuse
[shameful part] of our inner world into the foreground and looking for the
truly effective and operative factor which has determined our development in the
very place where man’s intellectual pride would least wish to find it
(for example, in the vis inertiae [force of inertia] of habit or in
forgetfulness or in a blind, contingent, mechanical joining of ideas or in
something purely passive, automatic, reflex, molecular, and fundamentally
stupid)—what is it that really drives these psychologists always in this particular
direction? Is it a secret, malicious, and common instinct, perhaps one which
cannot be acknowledged even to itself, for belittling humanity? Or something
like a pessimistic suspicion, the mistrust of idealists who’ve become
disappointed, gloomy, venomous, and green? Or a small underground hostility and
rancune [rancour] towards Christianity (and Plato), which perhaps has
never once managed to cross the threshold of consciousness? Or even a lecherous
taste for what is odd or painfully paradoxical, for what in existence is
questionable and ridiculous? Or finally—a bit of all of these: a little
vulgarity, a little gloominess, a little hostility to Christianity, a little
thrill, and a need for pepper? . . . But I’m told that these men are simply old,
cold, boring frogs, who creep and hop around and into people, as if they were in
their own proper element, that is, in a swamp. I resist that idea when
I hear it. What’s more, I don’t believe it. And if one is permitted to hope
where one cannot know, then I hope from my heart that the situation with these
men might be reversed, that these investigators and the ones peering at the soul
through their microscopes may be thoroughly brave, generous, and proud animals,
who know how to control their hearts and their pain and who at the same time
have educated themselves to sacrifice all desirability for the sake of the
truth, for the sake of every truth, even the simple, bitter, hateful, repellent,
unchristian, immoral truth. . . . For there are such truths. —

2

So all respect to the good
spirits that may govern in these historians of morality! But it’s certainly a
pity that they lack the historical spirit, that they’ve been left in
the lurch especially by all the good spirits of history itself! As a group they
all think essentially unhistorically, in what is now the traditional
manner of philosophers. Of that there is no doubt. The incompetence of their
genealogies of morals reveals itself at the very beginning, where the issue is
to determine the origin of the idea and of the judgment “good.” “People,” so
they proclaim, “originally praised unegoistic actions and called them good from
the perspective of those for whom they were done, that is, those for whom such
actions were useful. Later people forgot how this praise
began, and simply because unegoistic actions had, according to custom,
always been praised as good, people also felt them as good—as if they were
something inherently good.” We perceive right away that this initial derivation
already contains all the typical characteristics idiosyncrasies of English
psychologists—we have “usefulness,” “forgetting,” “habit,” and finally “error,”
all as the foundation for an evaluation in which the higher man up to this time
has taken pride, as if it were a sort of privilege of men generally. This pride is
to be humbled, this evaluation of worth emptied of value. Has that been
achieved? . . .  Now, first of all, it’s obvious to me that from this theory the
essential source for the origin of the idea “good” has been sought for and
established in the wrong place: the judgment “good” does not originate
from those to whom “goodness” was shown! On the contrary, it was the “good
people” themselves, that is, the noble, powerful, higher-ranking, and
higher-thinking people who felt and set themselves and their actions up as good,
that is to say, of the first rank, in opposition to everything low, low-minded,
common, and vulgar. From this pathos of distance they first arrogated
to themselves the right to create values, to stamp out the names for values.
What did they care about usefulness! Particularly in relation to such a hot
pouring out of the highest rank-ordering, rank-setting judgments of value, the
point of view which considers utility is as foreign and inappropriate as
possible. Here the feeling has reached the very opposite of the low level of
warmth which is a condition for that calculating shrewdness, that reckoning  by
utility—and not just for a moment, not for one exceptional hour, but
permanently. The pathos of nobility and distance, as I mentioned, the lasting
and dominating feeling, something total and fundamental, of a higher ruling
nature in relation to a lower type, to a “beneath”—that is the origin
of the opposition between “good” and “bad.” (The right of the master to give
names extends so far that we could permit ourselves to grasp the origin of
language itself as an expression of the power of the rulers: they say
“That is such and such”; they seal every object and event with a sound, and in
the process, as it were, take possession of it.) Given this origin, the word
“good” is from the start in no way necessarily tied up with “unegoistic”
actions, as it is in the superstition of those genealogists of morality. Instead
that occurs for the first time with the decline of aristocratic value
judgments, when this entire contrast between “egoistic” and “unegoistic” presses
itself ever more strongly into the human conscience—it is, to use my own words,
the instinct of the herd which, through this contrast, finally gets its
word (and its words). And even then, it takes a long time until this
instinct in the masses becomes master, so that moral evaluation remains
thoroughly hung up on and bogged down in that opposition (as is the case, for
example, in modern Europe: today the prejudice that takes “moralistic,” “unegoistic,”
and “désintéressé [distinterested]” as equally valuable ideas already
governs with the force of a “fixed idea” and a disease of the brain).

3

Secondly, however, and quite
apart from the fact that this hypothesis about the origin of the value judgment
“good” is historically untenable, it suffers from an inherent psychological
contradiction. The utility of the unegoistic action is supposed to be the origin
of the praise it receives, and this origin has allegedly been forgotten:—but
how is this forgetting even possible? Could the usefulness of such
actions at some time or other perhaps just have stopped? The opposite is the
case: this utility has rather been an everyday experience throughout the ages,
and thus something that has always been constantly re-emphasized. Hence, instead
of disappearing from consciousness, instead of becoming something forgettable,
it must have pressed itself into the consciousness with ever-increasing clarity.
How much more sensible is that contrasting theory (which is not therefore closer
to the truth—) advocated, for example, by Herbert Spencer: he proposes that the
idea “good” is essentially the same as the idea “useful” or “functional,” so
that in judgments “good” and “bad” human beings sum up and endorse the
experiences they have not forgotten and are unable
to forget concerning the useful-functional and the harmful-useless.
According to this theory, good is something which has always proved useful, so
that it may assert its validity as “valuable in the highest degree,” as
“valuable in itself.” This path to an explanation is, as I said, also false, but
at least the account itself is inherently sensible and psychologically tenable.

4

I was given a hint of the right direction
by the following question: What, from an etymological perspective, do the
meanings of “good,” as manifested in different languages, really signify? There
I found that all of them lead back to the same
transformation of ideas—that everywhere “noble” and “aristocratic” in a
social sense is the fundamental idea out of which “good” in the sense of
“spiritually noble,” “aristocratic,” “spiritually high-minded,” “spiritually
privileged” necessarily develops, a process which always runs in parallel with
that other one that finally transforms “common,” “vulgar,” and “low” into the
concept “bad.” The most eloquent example of the latter is the German word “(schlect [bad]” itself,
which is identical with the word “schlicht
[plain]” —compare “schlectweg [simply]” and “schlechterdings
[simply]”—and which originally designated the plain, common man, still
without any suspicious side glance, simply in contrast to the noble man. Around
the time of the Thirty Years War approximately, hence late enough, this sense
changed into the one used now.
As far as the genealogy of morals is concerned, this point strikes me as a fundamental
insight; that it was first discovered so late we can ascribe to the repressive
influence which democratic prejudice in the modern world exercises concerning
all questions of origin. And this occurs in what appears to be the most
objective realm of natural science and physiology, a point I can only hint at
here. But the sort of mischief this prejudice can cause, once it has become
unleashed and turned into hatred, particularly where morality and history are
concerned, is revealed in the well-known case of Buckle: the plebeian nature of the modern spirit,
which originated in England, broke out once again on its home turf, as violently
as a muddy volcano and with that salty, over-loud, and common eloquence with
which all previous volcanoes have spoken up to now.

5

With respect to our problem—which
for good reasons we can call a quiet problem and which addresses in a
refined manner only a few ears—there is no little interest in establishing the
point that often in those words and roots which designate “good” there still
shines through the main nuance of what made the nobility feel they were men of
higher rank. It’s true that in most cases they perhaps name themselves simply
after their superiority in strength (as “the powerful,” “the masters,” “those in
command”) or after the most visible sign of this superiority, for example, as
“the rich” or “the owners” (that is the meaning of arya [noble], and
the corresponding words in Iranian and Slavic). But they also name themselves
after a typical characteristic, and this is the case which is our concern
here.  For instance, they call
themselves “the truthful,” above all the Greek
nobility, whose mouthpiece is the Megarian poet Theogonis.
The word developed for this characteristic, &#7952;&#963;&#952;&#955;&#959;&#962; [esthlos: fine, noble],
indicates, according to its root meaning, a man who is, who possesses
reality, who really exists, who is true. Then, with a subjective transformation,
it indicates the true man as the truthful man. In this phase of conceptual
transformation it becomes the slogan and catch phrase for the nobility, and its
sense shifts entirely over to mean “aristocratic,” to mark a distinction from
the lying common man, as Theogonis takes and presents him—until
finally, after the decline of the nobility, the word remains as a designation of
spiritual noblesse [nobility] and becomes, as it were, ripe and sweet.

In
the word

κακός

[kakos: weak, worthless], as
in the word δειλός

[deilos:
cowardly] (the plebeian in contrast to the αγαθός

[agathos: good man]), the cowardice is emphasized.
This perhaps provides a hint about the direction in which we have to seek the
etymological origin for the multiple meanings of
αγαθός  [agathos: good].
In the Latin word malus [bad](which I place alongside μέλας

[melas: black, dark]) the common man could be
designated as the dark-coloured, above all as the dark-haired (“hic niger
est” [“this man is dark”]), as the pre-Aryan inhabitant of Italian soil, who
through this colour stood out most clearly from those who became dominant, the
blonds, that is, the conquering races of Aryans. At any rate, Gaelic offers me
an exactly corresponding example—the word fin (for example, in the
name Fin-Gal), the term designating nobility and finally the good, noble,
and pure, originally referred to the blond-headed man in contrast to the dusky,
dark-haired original inhabitants. Incidentally, the Celts were a thoroughly
blond race. People are wrong when they link those traces of a basically
dark-haired population, which are noticeable on the carefully prepared
ethnographic maps of Germany, with any Celtic origin and mixing of blood, as
Virchow still does.
It is much rather the case that in these places the pre-Aryan population of Germany predominates. (The same is true for almost
all of Europe: essentially the conquered races have finally attained the upper
hand for themselves once again in colour, shortness of skull, perhaps even in
the intellectual and social instincts. Who can confirm for us that modern
democracy, the even more modern anarchism, and indeed that preference for the
“Commune,” for the most primitive form of society, which all European socialists
now share, does not indicate for the most part a monstrous throwback
[Nachschlag]—and that the conquering master race, the race of
Aryans, is not being physiologically defeated, too?). The Latin word bonus [good]
I believe I can explicate as “the warrior,” provided that I am correct in
tracing bonus back to an older word duonus (compare (T)bellum
[war] = duellum [war] = duen-lum, which seems to me
to contain that word duonus). Hence, bonus as a man of war, of
division (duo
[two]), as a warrior. We see what constituted a man’s “goodness” in ancient
Rome. What about our German word “Gut” [good] itself?
Doesn’t it indicate “den Göttlichen” [the god-like man],
the man of “göttlichen
Geschlechts” [“the family of gods”]? And isn’t that identical to the people’s
(originally the nobles’) name for the Goths? The reasons for this hypothesis do
not belong here.—

6

To this rule that the concept
of political superiority always resolves itself into the concept of spiritual
superiority, it is at first not an exception (although it may provide room for
exceptions), when the highest caste is also the priestly caste and
consequently for its overall description prefers an attribute which recalls its
priestly function. Here, for example, the words “pure” and “impure” first appear
as contrasting marks of one’s social position, and here, too, a “good” and a
“bad” also develop later with a meaning which no longer refers to social
position. Incidentally, people should be warned not to begin by taking these
ideas of “pure” and “impure” too seriously, too broadly, or even symbolically.
Instead they should understand that all the ideas of ancient humanity, to a
degree we can hardly imagine, are originally much more coarse, crude,
superficial, narrow, blunt, and, in particular, unsymbolic. The “pure man” is initially simply a man who
washes himself, who forbids himself certain foods that produce diseases of the
skin, who doesn’t sleep with the dirty women of the lower people, who has a
horror of blood—no more, not much more! On the other hand, of course, from the
very nature of an essentially priestly aristocracy it is clear enough how
precisely here the opposition between different evaluations could early on
become dangerously internalized and sharpened. And, in fact, they finally ripped
open fissures between man and man, over which even an Achilles of the free
spirit could not cross without a shudder.
From the beginning there has been something unhealthy about such
priestly aristocracies and about the customary attitudes which govern in them,
which turn away from action, sometimes brooding, sometimes exploding with
emotion, as a result of which in the priests of almost all ages there have
appeared almost unavoidably those debilitating intestinal illnesses and
neurasthenia. But what they themselves came up with as a remedy for this
pathological disease—surely we must assert that it has finally shown itself,
through its effects, even a hundred times more dangerous than the illness for
which it was to provide relief. Human beings themselves are still sick from the
after-effects of this priestly naïveté in healing! Let’s think, for example, of
certain forms of diet (avoiding meat), of fasting, of celibacy, of the flight
“into the desert” (Weir-Mitchell’s isolation, but naturally without the
fattening-up cure and overeating which follow it and which constitute the most
effective treatment for all hysteria induced by the ascetic ideal): consider
also the whole metaphysic of the priests, so hostile to the senses, making men
lazy and sophisticated, the way they hypnotize themselves in the manner of
fakirs and Brahmins—Brahmanism employed as a crystal ball and fixe Idee [fixed idea]—and
finally the only too understandable and common dissatisfaction with its radical
cure, with nothingness (or God—the desire for a
unio mystica

[mystical union] with God is the longing of the Buddhist
for nothingness, nirvana—and nothing more!).
Among the priests, everything simply becomes more dangerous—not only
the remedies and arts of healing, but also pride, vengeance, mental acuity,
dissipation, love, thirst for power, virtue, and illness—although it’s fair
enough also to add that on the foundation of this fundamentally dangerous form
of human existence, the priestly, for the first time the human being became, in
general, an interesting animal, that here the human soul first
attained depth in a higher sense and became evil—and, indeed, these
are the two basic reasons for humanity’s superiority, up to now, over other
animals!

You will have already guessed
how easily the priestly way of evaluating can split from the
knightly-aristocratic and then continue to develop into its opposite. Such a
development receives a special stimulus every time the priestly caste and the
warrior caste confront each other jealously and are not willing to agree amongst
themselves about the reward. The knightly-aristocratic judgments of value have
as their basic assumption a powerful physicality, a blooming, rich, even
overflowing health, together with those things required to maintain these
qualities—war, adventure, hunting, dancing, war games, and, in general,
everything which involves strong, free, and happy action. The priestly-noble
method of evaluating has, as we saw, other preconditions: these make it
difficult enough for them when it comes to war! As is well known, priests are
the most evil of enemies—but why? Because they are the most powerless.
From their powerlessness, their hate grows among them into something huge and
terrifying, to the most spiritual and most poisonous manifestations. The really
great haters in world history and also the cleverest haters have always been
priests—in comparison with the spirit of priestly revenge all the remaining
spirits are hardly worth considering at all. Human history would be a really
stupid affair without the spirit that entered it from the powerless. Let us
quickly consider the greatest example. Nothing on earth which has been done
against “the nobility,” “the powerful,” “the masters,” and “the possessors of
power” is worth mentioning in comparison with what the
Jews have done against them: the Jews, that priestly people, who knew how
to get final satisfaction from their enemies and conquerors merely through a
radical transformation of their values, that is, through an act of the most spiritual revenge.
This was appropriate only to a priestly people with the most deeply suppressed
priestly desire for revenge. In opposition to the aristocratic value equation (good =
noble = powerful = beautiful = fortunate =
loved by god), the Jews, with a consistency inspiring fear, dared to
reverse things and to hang on to that with the teeth of the most profound hatred
(the hate of powerlessness), that is, to “only those who suffer are good; the
poor, the powerless, the low are the only good people; the suffering, those in
need, the sick, the ugly are also the only pious people; only they are blessed
by God; for them alone there is salvation.—By contrast, you privileged and
powerful people, you are for all eternity the evil, the cruel, the lecherous,
the insatiable, the godless; you will also be the unblessed, the cursed, and the
damned for all eternity!” . . . We know who inherited this Judaic
transformation of values . . . In connection with that huge and immeasurably
disastrous initiative which the Jews launched with this most fundamental of all
declarations of war, I recall the sentence I wrote at another time (in Beyond Good and Evil, page 118 (T)[Section 195])—namely,
that with the Jews the slave rebellion in morality begins: that rebellion which
has a two-thousand-year-old history behind it and which we nowadays no longer
even notice because it—has triumphed.

8

But you fail to understand
that? You have no eye for something that needed two millennia to emerge
victorious? . . . That’s nothing to wonder at: all lengthy things are
hard to see, to assess. However, that is what took place: out of the
trunk of that tree of vengeance and hatred, of Jewish hatred—the deepest and
most sublime hatred, that is, a hatred which creates ideals and transforms
values, something whose like has never existed on earth—from that grew something
just as incomparable, a new love, the most profound and most sublime of all the forms of
love:—from what other trunk could it have even grown? . . . However, one should
not assume that this love arose essentially as the denial of that thirst for
revenge, as the opposite of Jewish hatred! No. The reverse is the truth! This
love grew out of that hatred, as its crown, as the victorious crown unfolding
itself wider and wider in the purest brightness and radiant sunshine, the crown
which, so to speak, was seeking in the kingdom of light and height the goal of
that hate, aiming for victory, trophies, and seduction, with the same urgency
with which the roots of that hatred were sinking down ever deeper and more
greedily into everything profound and evil. This Jesus of Nazareth, the
personified evangelist of love, this “Saviour” bringing holiness and victory to
the poor, to the sick, to the sinners—was he not that very seduction in its most
sinister and most irresistible form, the seduction and detour to exactly those Judaic values and innovations in ideals? Didn’t Israel attain,
precisely with the detour of this “Saviour,” of this apparent enemy against and
dissolver of Israel, the final goal of its sublime thirst for vengeance? Isn’t
it part of the secret black art of a truly great politics of revenge, a
farsighted, underground, slowly expropriating, and premeditated revenge, that
Israel itself had to disown and nail to the cross, like some mortal enemy, the
tool essential to its revenge before all the world, so that “all the world,”
that is, all Israel’s enemies, could then take this particular bait without a
second thought? On the other hand, could anyone, using the full subtlety of his
mind, even imagine a more dangerous bait, something to match the
enticing, intoxicating, narcotizing, corrupting power of that symbol of the
“holy cross,” that ghastly paradox of a “god on the cross,” that mystery of an
unimaginable and ultimate final cruelty and self-crucifixion of God for the salvation of
mankind? . . . At least it is certain that sub hoc signo [under this
sign] Israel, with its vengeance and revaluation of the worth of all other
previous values, has triumphed again and again over all other ideals, over all nobler ideals.

9

—”But what are you doing still
talking about nobler ideals! Let’s follow the facts: the people have
triumphed—or ‘the slaves,’ or ‘the rabble,’ or ‘the herd,’ or whatever you want
to call them—if this has taken place because of the Jews, then good for them! No
people ever had a more world-historical mission. ‘The masters’ have been
disposed of. The morality of the common man has prevailed. We may also take this
victory as a blood poisoning (it did mix the races up together)—I don’t deny
that. But this intoxication has undoubtedly been successful. The
‘salvation’ of the human race (namely, from ‘the masters’) is well under way.
Everything is visibly turning Jewish or Christian or plebeian (what do the words
matter!). The progress of this poison through the entire body of humanity seems
irresistible, although its tempo and pace may seem from now on constantly
slower, more delicate, less audible, and more circumspect—well, we have time
enough. . . From this point of view, does the church today still have necessary work
to do, does it still have a right to exist at all? Or could we dispense with it?
Quaeritur [That’s a question to be asked]. It seems that it rather
obstructs and hinders the progress of that poison, instead of speeding it up?
Well, that just might be what makes the church useful . . . Certainly the church
is for all intents and purposes something gross and vulgar, which a more
delicate intelligence, a truly modern taste, resists. Shouldn’t the church at
least be something more sophisticated? . . . Today it alienates more than it
seduces. . . . Who among us would really be a free spirit if the church were not
there? The church repels us, not its poison. . . . Apart from the church,
we even love the poison. . . .”—This is the epilogue of a “freethinker” to my
speech, an honest animal, as he has richly revealed, and in addition a
democratic one. He listened to me up to that point and could not bear to hear my
silence—since for me at this juncture there is much to be silent about.

10

The slave revolt in morality
begins when the ressentiment itself becomes creative and gives birth to
values: the ressentiment of those beings who are prevented from a

genuine reaction,
that is, something active, and who compensate for that with a merely imaginary
vengeance.
Whereas all noble morality grows out of a triumphant affirmation of one’s own
self, slave morality from the start says “No” to what is “outside,” “other,”
“not itself.” And this ”No” is its creative act. This transformation of the
glance which confers value—this necessary projection towards what is
outer instead of back onto itself—that is inherent in ressentiment. In
order to arise, slave morality always requires first an opposing world, a world
outside itself. Psychologically speaking, it needs external stimuli in order to
act at all—its action is basically reaction. The reverse is the case with the
noble method of valuing: it acts and grows spontaneously. It seeks its opposite
only to affirm its own self even more thankfully, with even more rejoicing—its
negative concept of “low,” “common,” “bad” is merely a pale contrasting image
after the fact in relation to its positive basic concept, thoroughly saturated
with life and passion, “We are noble, good, beautiful, and happy!” When the
noble way of evaluating makes a mistake and abuses reality, this happens with
reference to the sphere which it does not know well enough, indeed, the
sphere it has strongly resisted learning the truth about: under certain
circumstances it misjudges the sphere it despises, the sphere of the common man,
of the low people. On the other hand, even if we assume that the feeling of
contempt, of looking down, or of looking superior falsifies the image
of the person despised, we should note that such distortion will fall short by a
long way of the distortion with which the suppressed hatred and vengeance of the
powerless man assaults his opponent—naturally, in effigy. In fact, contempt
contains too much negligence, too much lack of concern, too much looking away
and impatience mixed in with it, even too much of a personal feeling of joy, for
it to be capable of converting its object into a truly distorted image and
monster. We should not fail to hear the almost benevolent nuances which, for
example, the Greek nobility places in all the words with which it separates
itself from the lower people—how a constant form of pity, consideration, and
forbearance is mixed in there, sweetening the words, to the point where almost
all words referring to the common man finally remain as expressions for
“unhappy” and “worthy of pity” (compare δειλός

[deilos: cowardly], δείλαιος

[delaios: mean, low], πονηρός

[poneros: oppressed by toil, wretched],

μοχθηρός

[mochtheros: suffering, wretched]—the last two basically designating the
common man as a slave worker and beast of burden)—and how, on the other hand,
for the Greek ear the words “bad,” “low,” and “unhappy” have never stopped
echoing a single note, one tone colour, in which “unhappy” predominates. This is
the inheritance of the old, nobler, and aristocratic way of evaluating, which
does not betray its principles even in contempt. (—Philologists should recall
the sense in which

οϊζυρος
[oizuros: miserable],

άνολβος
[anolbos:
unblessed], τλήμων [tlemon:
wretched]

δυστυχεῖν

[dystychein: unfortunate] and

ξυμφορά
[xymfora: misfortune] were used). The “well born”
simply felt
they were “the happy ones”; they did not have to construct their happiness
artificially first by looking at their enemies, or in some circumstances to talk
themselves into it, to lie to themselves into it (the way all
men of ressentiment habitually do). Similarly they knew, as complete
men overloaded with power and thus necessarily active, that they must
not separate action from happiness—they considered being active necessarily
associated with happiness (that’s where the phrase  εὖ πράττειν

[eu prattein:
do well, succeed] derives its origin)—all this is very much the opposite of
“happiness” at the level of the powerless and oppressed, those festering with
poisonous and hostile feelings, among whom happiness comes out essentially as a
narcotic, an anaesthetic, quiet, peace, “Sabbath,” relaxing the soul, and
stretching one’s limbs, in short, as something passive. While the noble
man lives for himself with trust and candour (γενναῖος

[gennaios], meaning “of noble birth,” stresses the nuance “upright” and
also probably “naive”), the man of ressentiment is neither upright nor
naive, nor honest and direct with himself. His soul squints. His spirit
loves hiding places, secret paths, and back doors. Everything furtive attracts
him as his world, his security, his refreshment. He
understands about remaining silent, not forgetting, waiting, temporarily
diminishing himself, humiliating himself. A race of such men of ressentiment
will inevitably end up cleverer than any noble race. It will also value
cleverness to a completely different extent, that is, as a condition of
existence of the utmost importance; whereas, cleverness among noble men easily
acquires a delicate aftertaste of luxury and sophistication about it:—here it is
simply far less important than the complete functional certainty of the ruling
unconscious instincts or even a certain lack of cleverness, something
like brave recklessness, whether in the face of danger or of an enemy, or those
wildly enthusiastic, sudden fits of anger, love, reverence, thankfulness, and
vengeance, by which in all ages noble souls have recognized each other. The ressentiment
of the noble man himself, if it comes over him, consumes and exhausts itself in
an immediate reaction and therefore does not poison. On the other hand,
in countless cases it just does not appear at all; whereas, in the case of all
weak and powerless people it is unavoidable. Being unable to take one’s enemies,
one’s misfortunes, even one’s bad deeds seriously for
any length of time—that is the mark of strong, complete natures, in whom there
is a surplus of plastic, creative, healing power, as well as the power to make
one forget (a good example for that from the modern world is Mirabeau, who had
no memory of the insults and the maliciousness people directed at him and who
therefore could not forgive, merely because he—forgot). Such a man with a single
shrug simply throws off himself the many worms which eat into other men.
Only here is the real “love for one’s enemy” even possible—provided
that it is at all possible on earth.—How much respect a noble man already has
for his enemies!—and such a respect is already a bridge to love. . . . In fact,
he demands his enemy for himself, as his mark of honour. Indeed, he has no enemy
other than one in whom there is nothing to despise and a great deal to
respect! By contrast, imagine for yourself “the enemy” as a man of ressentiment
conceives him—and right here we have his action, his creation: he has
conceptualized “the evil enemy,” “the evil one,” as, in
fact, a fundamental idea from which he now also thinks his way to a
complementary image and counterpart, a “good man”—himself! . . .

11

We see exactly the opposite with the noble man, who
conceives the fundamental idea “good” in advance and spontaneously, that is,
from himself, and from there he first creates a picture of “bad” for himself!
This “bad” originating from the noble man and that “evil” arising out of the
stew pot of insatiable hatred—of these the first is a later creation, an
afterthought, a complementary colour; by contrast, the second is the original,
the beginning, the essential act in the conception of a slave
morality—although the two words “bad” and “evil” both seem opposite to the same
idea of “good,” how different they are! But it is not the same idea of
“good.” Instead we should ask who the “evil person” really is in the sense of
the morality of ressentiment. The strict answer to that is as follows: simply the “good person” of the other morality, the noble man,
the powerful, the ruling man, only coloured over, only re-interpreted, only
looked at again through the poisonous eyes of ressentiment. Here there
is one thing we will be the last to deny: whoever has come to know those “good
men” only as enemies, has known them also as nothing but evil enemies, and the
same people who are kept within such strict limits by custom, honour, habit,
gratitude, and even more by mutual surveillance and jealousy inter pares
[among equals] and who, by contrast, demonstrate in relation to each other
such resourceful consideration, self-control, refinement, loyalty, pride, and
friendship—to the outside, where the strange world, the world of what is foreign
to them, begins, these men are not much better than beasts of prey turned loose.
Here they enjoy freedom from all social constraints. In the wilderness they make
up for the tension which a long fenced-in confinement within the peace of the
community brings about. They go back to the innocent conscience of a
beast of prey, as joyful monsters, who perhaps walk away from a dreadful
sequence of murder, arson, rape, and torture with an exhilaration and spiritual
equilibrium, as if they had merely pulled off a student prank, convinced that
now the poets once again have something to sing about and praise for a long time
to come. At the bottom of all these noble races we cannot fail to recognize the
beast of prey, the blond beast splendidly roaming around in its lust
for loot and victory. This hidden basis from time to time needs to be
discharged: the beast must come out again, must go back into the wilderness once
more,—Roman, Arab, German, Japanese nobility, Homeric heroes, Scandinavian
Vikings—in this need they are all alike.  It is the noble races that left behind
the concept of the “barbarian” in all their tracks, wherever they went. A
consciousness of and even a pride in this fact still reveals itself in their
highest culture (for example, when Pericles says to his Athenians, in that
famous funeral speech, “our audacity has broken a way through to every land and
sea, putting up permanent memorials to itself for good and ill”). This
“audacity” of the noble races, mad, absurd, and sudden in the way it expresses
itself, its unpredictability, even the improbability of its
undertakings—Pericles emphatically praises the

ῥαθuμία

[rathumia: freedom of anxiety] of the
Athenians—their indifference to and contempt for safety, body, life, comfort,
their fearsome cheerfulness and the depth of their joy in all destruction, in
all the physical pleasures of victory and cruelty—all this was summed up for
those who suffered from such audacity in the image of the “barbarian,” of the
“evil enemy,” of something like the “Goth” or “Vandal.” The deep, icy
mistrust which the German evokes, as soon as he comes to power, once more again
today—is still an after-effect of that unforgettable terror with which for
centuries Europe confronted the rage of the blond Germanic beast (although there
is hardly any idea linking the old Germanic tribes and we Germans, let alone any
blood relationship). Once before I have remarked on Hesiod’s dilemma

when he
thought up his sequence of cultural periods and sought to express them as Gold,
Silver, and Iron. He didn’t know what to do with the contradiction
presented to him by the marvellous but, at the same time, so horrifying and
violent world of Homer, other than to make two cultural ages out of one and then
place one after the other—first the Age of Heroes and Demigods from Troy and
Thebes, just as that world remained in the memories of the noble families who
had their own ancestors in it, and then the Age of Iron as that same world
appeared to the descendants of the downtrodden, exploited, ill treated, and
those carried off and sold—an age of iron, as mentioned:
hard, cold, cruel,
empty of feeling and scruples, with everything crushed and covered with blood.
Assuming as true what in any event is taken as “the truth” nowadays, that it is
the point of all culture simply to breed a tame and civilized animal,
a domestic pet, out of the beast of prey “man,” then we would
undoubtedly have to consider all those instincts of reaction and of ressentiment
with whose help the noble races and all their ideals were finally disgraced and
overpowered as the essential instruments of culture—though to do that
would not yet be to claim that the bearers of these instincts also in
themselves represented culture. Instead, the opposite would not only be
probable—no! nowadays it is visibly apparent! These people carrying
instincts of oppression and of a lust for revenge, the descendants of all
European and non-European slavery, of all pre-Aryan populations in
particular—they represent the regression of mankind! These “instruments of
culture” are a disgrace to humanity and more a reason to be suspicious of or a
counterargument against “culture” in general! We may well be right when we hang
onto our fear of the blond beast at the bottom of all noble races and keep up
our guard. But who would not find it a hundred times better to fear, if he could
at the same time admire, rather than not fear but in the process no
longer be able to rid himself of the disgusting sight of the failures, the
stunted, the emaciated, and the poisoned? And is not that our fate?
Today what is it that constitutes our aversion to “man”?—For we suffer from man.
There’s no doubt of that. It is not a matter of fear. Rather it’s the fact that we have
nothing more to fear from man, that the maggot “man” is in the foreground
swarming around, that the “tame man,” the hopelessly mediocre and unedifying
man, has already learned to feel that he is the goal, the pinnacle, the meaning
of history, “the higher man,”—yes indeed, that he has a certain right to feel
that about himself, insofar as he feels separate from the excessive number of
failed, sick, tired, and spent people, who are nowadays beginning to make Europe
stink, so that he senses that he is at least relatively successful, at least
still capable of life, of at least saying “Yes” to life.

12

—At this point I won’t suppress
a sigh and a final confidence. What is it exactly that I find so totally
unbearable? Something which I cannot deal with on my own, which makes me choke
and feel faint? Bad air! Bad air! That something which has failed is coming
close to me, that I have to smell the entrails of a failed soul! . . . Apart
from that what can we not endure by way of need, deprivation, bad weather,
infirmity, hardship, and loneliness? Basically we can deal with all the other
things, born as we are to an underground and struggling existence. We come back
again and again into the light, we live over and over our golden hour of
victory—and then we stand there, just as we were born, unbreakable, tense, ready
for something new, for something even more difficult, more distant, like a bow
which all troubles only serve to pull even tighter. But if there are heavenly
goddesses who are our patrons, beyond good and evil, then from time to time
grant me a glimpse, just grant me a single glimpse at something perfect,
something completely developed, happy, powerful, triumphant, from which there is
still something to fear! A glimpse of a man who justifies the human
being, of a complementary and redeeming stroke-of-luck [Glücksfall] of
a man, for whose sake we can hang onto a
faith in humanity! . . .  For matters stand like this: the diminution and levelling
of European man conceal our greatest danger, since we grow tired at the
sight of him . . . We see nothing today which wants to be greater. We suspect
that things are still going down, down into something thinner, more
good-natured, more prudent, more comfortable, more mediocre, more indifferent,
more Chinese, more Christian—humanity, there is no doubt, is becoming constantly
“better.” . . .  Europe’s fate lies right here—with the fear of man we also have
lost the love for him, the reverence for him, the hope for him, indeed, our will
to him. A glimpse at man nowadays makes us tired—what is contemporary nihilism,
if it is not that? . . . We are weary of man. . . .

13

—But let’s come back: the
problem with the other origin of the “good,” of the good man, as the
person of ressentiment has imagined it for himself, demands its own
conclusion.—That the lambs are upset about the great predatory birds is not
strange, but the fact that these large birds of prey snatch away small lambs
provides no reason for holding anything against them. And if the lambs say among
themselves, “These predatory birds are evil, and whoever is least like a
predatory bird and instead is like its opposite, a lamb—shouldn’t that animal be
good?” there is nothing to find fault with in this setting up of an ideal,
except for the fact that the birds of prey will look down on them with a little
mockery and perhaps say to themselves, “We are not at all annoyed with
these good lambs. We even love them. Nothing is tastier than a tender lamb.” To
demand from strength that it does not express itself as strength, that
it does not consist of a will to overpower, a will to throw down, a
will to rule, a thirst for enemies and opposition and triumphs, is just as
unreasonable as to demand from weakness that it express itself as strength. A
quantum of force is simply such a quantum of drive, will, and action—rather, it
is nothing but this very driving, willing, and acting itself—and it cannot
appear as anything else except through the seduction of language (and the
fundamental errors of reason petrified in it), which understands and
misunderstands all action as conditioned by something which causes actions, by a
“subject.” For, in just the same way as people separate lightning from its flash
and take the latter as an action, as the effect of a subject called
lightning, so popular morality separates strength from manifestations of
strength, as if behind the strong person there were an indifferent substrate
that is free to express strength or not. But there is no such
substrate; there is no “being” behind the doing, acting, or becoming. “The doer”
is merely fabricated and added into the action—the act is everything. People
basically duplicate the action: when they see a lightning flash, that is an
action-action [ein Thun-Thun]: they set up the same event first as the
cause and then yet again as its effect. Natural scientists are no better when
they say “Force moves, force causes,” and so on—our entire scientific knowledge,
for all its coolness and freedom from feelings, still remains exposed to the
seduction of language and has not gotten rid of the changelings foisted on it,
the “subjects” (the atom, for example, is such a changeling, like the Kantian
“thing-in-itself”): it’s no wonder, then, that the repressed, secretly smouldering
feelings of revenge and hate use this belief for their own purposes and even, in
fact, maintain a faith in nothing more fervently than in the idea that the strong person is free to
be weak and that the predatory bird is free to be a lamb:—in so doing, of
course, they arrogate to themselves the right to blamethe bird of prey
for being a bird of prey. . . . When the oppressed, the downtrodden, and the
violated say to each other, with the vengeful cunning of the powerless, “Let us
be different from evil people, namely, good! And every person is good who does
not oppress, who hurts no one, who does not attack, who does not retaliate, who
hands revenge over to God, who keeps himself hidden, as we do, the person who
avoids all evil and demands little from life in general, like us, the patient,
humble, and upright”—what that amounts to, coolly expressed and without bias, is
essentially nothing more than “We weak people are merely weak. It’s good if we
do not do anything for
which we are not strong enough”—but this bitter state, this shrewdness of the
lowest ranks, which even insects possess (when in great danger they act as if
they were dead in order not to do “too much”), has, thanks to that
counterfeiting and self-deception of powerlessness, dressed itself in the splendour
of a self-denying, still, patient virtue, as if the weakness of the weak man
himself—that means his essence, his actions, his entire single,
inevitable, and irredeemable reality—is a voluntary achievement, something
willed, chosen, an action, something of merit. This kind of man has
to believe in the disinterested, freely choosing “subject” out of an instinct
for self-preservation and self-affirmation, in which every falsehood is
habitually sanctified. Hence, the subject (or, to use a more popular style, the soul)
has up to now perhaps been the best principle for belief on earth, because for
the majority of the dying, the weak, and the downtrodden of all sorts it makes
possible that sublime self-deception that establishes weakness itself as freedom
and their being like this or that as a commendable act.

14

Is there anyone who would like
to take a little look down on and under that secret how man fabricates ideals on earth? Who has
the courage for that? . . . Come on, now! Here’s an open glimpse into this dark
workshop. Just wait a moment, my dear Mr. Curious Daredevil: your eye must first
get used to this artificial flickering light. . . . So, enough! Now speak!
What’s going on down there? Speak up. Say what you see, man of the most
dangerous curiosity—now I’m the one who’s listening.—

—“I see nothing, but I hear all the more. It is a
careful, crafty, light rumour-mongering and whispering from every nook and
cranny. It seems to me that people are lying; a sugary mildness clings to every
sound. Weakness is going to be falsified into something of merit. There’s
no doubt about it—things are just as you said.”

—Keep talking!

—“And powerlessness that does
not retaliate is being falsified into ‘goodness,’ anxious baseness into
‘humility,’ submission before those one hates to ‘obedience’ (of course,
obedience to the one who, they say, commands this submission—they call him God).
The inoffensiveness of the weak man—cowardice itself, in which he is rich, his
standing at the door, his inevitable need to wait around—here acquires good
names, like ‘patience,’ and is even called the virtue. That incapacity
for revenge is called the lack of desire for revenge, perhaps even forgiveness
(‘for they know not what they do—only we know what they do!’). People are even talking about ‘love for
one’s enemies’—and sweating as they say it.”

—Keep talking!

—“They are miserable—there’s no doubt about that—all
these rumour-mongers and counterfeiters in the corners, although crouched down
beside each other in the warmth—but they are telling me that their misery is
God’s choice, His sign, that one beats the dog one loves the most, that this
misery may perhaps be a preparation, a test, an education, perhaps it is even
more—something that will one day be requited and paid out with huge interest in
gold, no, in happiness. They call that ‘blessedness’.”

—Go on!

—“Now they are letting me know
that they are not only better than the powerful, the masters of the earth, whose
spit they have to lick (not out of fear, certainly not out of fear, but because God commands that
they honour all those in authority)—that they are not only better than these,
but also ‘better off,’ or at any rate will one day have it better. But enough!
Enough! I can’t take it anymore. Bad air! Bad air! This workshop where man fabricates ideals—it seems to me it stinks of nothing but lies.”

—No! Just one minute more! So
far you haven’t said anything about the masterpiece of these black magicians who
make whiteness, milk, and innocence out of every blackness:—have you not noticed
the perfection of their raffinement [sophistication], their most
daring, most refined, most imaginative, and most fallacious artistic attempt?
Pay attention! These cellar animals full of vengeance and hatred—what exactly
are they making out of that vengeance and hatred? Have you ever heard these
words? If you heard only their words, would you suspect that you were completely
among men of ressentiment?
. . .

—“I understand. Once again I’ll
open my ears (oh! oh! oh! and hold my nose). Now I’m hearing for the
first time what they’ve been saying so often: ‘We good men—we are the righteous’—what
they demand they don’t call repayment but ‘the triumph of righteousness.’
What they hate is not their enemy. No! They hate ‘injustice,’
‘godlessness.’ What they believe and hope for is not a hope for revenge, the
intoxication of sweet vengeance (something Homer has already called ‘sweeter
than honey’), but the victory of God, the righteous God, over the godless. What remains for them
to love on earth is not their brothers in hatred but their ‘brothers in love,’
as they say, all the good and righteous people on the earth.”

—And what do they call what serves them as a
consolation for all the suffering of life—the phantasmagoria of future
blessedness which they are waiting for?

—“What’s that? Am I hearing
correctly? They call that ‘the last judgment,’ the coming of their
kingdom, the coming of ‘God’s kingdom’—but in the meanwhile they live ‘in faith,’ ‘in love,’ ‘in hope.’”

—Enough! Enough!

15

In belief in what? In love with
what? In hope for what?—There’s no doubt that these weak people—at some time or
another they also want to be the strong people, some day their ”kingdom”
is to arrive—they call it simply “the kingdom of God,” as I mentioned. People
are indeed so humble about everything! Only to experience that, one has to live a long time, beyond death—in fact, people
must have an eternal life, so they can also win eternal recompense in the
“kingdom of God” for that earthly life “in faith, in love, in hope.” Recompense
for what? Recompense through what? . . . In my view, Dante was grossly in error
when, with an ingenuousness inspiring terror, he set that inscription over the
gateway into his hell: “Eternal love also created me.”
Over the gateway into the Christian paradise and its “eternal blessedness” it
would, in  any event, be more fitting to let the inscription stand “Eternal hate also
created me”—provided it’s all right to set a truth over the gateway to a lie!
For what is the bliss of that paradise? . . . Perhaps we might have
guessed that already, but it is better for it to be expressly described for us
by an authority we cannot underestimate in such matters, Thomas Aquinas, the
great teacher and saint: “In the kingdom of heaven” he says as gently as a lamb,
“the blessed will see the punishment of the damned, so that they will derive
all the more pleasure from their heavenly bliss.” Or do you want to
hear that message in a stronger tone, for example, from the mouth of a

triumphant father of the church, who warns his Christians against the cruel
sensuality of the public spectacles.
But why? “Faith, in fact, offers much more to us,” he says (in de Spectaculis [On Spectacles] c. 29 ff),
“something much stronger. Thanks to the redemption, very different joys
are ours to command; in place of the athletes, we have our martyrs. If we want
blood, well, we have the blood of Christ . . . But what awaits us on the day of
His coming again, of His triumph!”—and now he takes off, the rapturous
visionary: ”However, there are other spectacles—that last eternal day of
judgment, ignored and derided by nations, when after so many years the old age
of the world and all the many things they produced will be burned in a single
fire. What a broad spectacle then appears! How I will be lost in admiration!
How I will laugh! How I will rejoice! How I will exult, as I see so many
great kings who by public report were accepted into heaven groaning in the
deepest darkness alongside those very men who testified on their behalf, along
with Jove himself! They will include governors of provinces who persecuted the
name of our Lord melting in flames fiercer than those with which they proudly
raged against the Christians! And then those wise philosophers who convinced
their disciples that nothing was of any concern to God and who claimed either
that there is no such thing as a soul or that our souls would not return to
their original bodies are shamed before those very disciples as they burn in the
conflagration with them! And the poets, too, shaking with fear, not in front of
the tribunal of Rhadamanthus or Minos, but of the Christ they did not
anticipate!
Then it will be easier to hear the tragic actors, because their voices will be
more resonant in their own calamity” (better voices since they will be screaming
in even greater terror). “The comic actors will then be easy to recognize, for
the fire will make them much more agile. Then the charioteer will be on show,
all red in a wheel of fire, and the athletes will be visible, thrown, not in the
gymnasium, but into the flames, unless I have no wish to look
at them then, so that I can more readily cast an insatiable gaze on those who raged against our Lord.‘This is the man,’ I will say,
‘the son of a workman or a prostitute’” (in everything that follows and
especially in the well-known description of the mother of Jesus from the Talamud,
Tertullian from this point on is referring to the Jews) “the destroyer of the
Sabbath, the Samaritan possessed by the devil. He is the man whom you bought
from Judas, the man who was beaten with a reed and with fists, reviled with
spit, who was given gall and vinegar to drink. He is the man whom his disciples
took away in secret, so that it could be said that he was resurrected, or whom
the gardener took away, so that the crowd of visitors would not harm his
lettuce.’ What praetor or consul or quaestor or priest will from his own
generosity grant you this so that you may see such sights, so that you can
exult in such things? And
yet we already have these things to a certain extent through faith,
represented to us by the imagining spirit. Besides, what sorts of things has the
eye not seen or the ear not heard and what sorts of things have not arisen in
the human heart? (1. Cor. 2, 9). I believe these are more pleasing than the race
track and the circus  and both enclosures” (the first and
fourth tier of seats or, according to others, the comic and tragic stages). Through faith: that’s how it’s written.

16

Let’s bring this to a
conclusion. The two opposing values “good and bad” and “good and evil”
have fought a fearful battle on earth for thousands of years. And if it’s true
that the second value has for a long time had the upper hand, even now there is
still no lack of places where the battle goes on without a final decision. We
could even say that in the intervening time the battle has been constantly drawn
to greater heights and, in the process, to constantly greater depths and has
become constantly more spiritual, so that nowadays there is perhaps no more
decisive mark of a “higher nature,” a more spiritual nature, than that
it is split in that sense and is truly still a battleground for those opposites.
The symbol of this battle, written in a script which has remained legible
through all human history up to the present, is called “Rome against Judea,
Judea against Rome.” To this point there has been no greater event than this war, this
posing of a question, this contradiction between deadly enemies. Rome
felt that the Jew was like something contrary to nature itself, its monstrous
polar opposite, as it were. In Rome the Jew was considered “convicted of
hatred against the entire human race.” And that view was correct, to the extent
that we are right to link the health and the future of the human race to the
unconditional rule of aristocratic values, to Roman values. By contrast, how did
the Jews feel about Rome? We can guess that from a thousand signs, but it is
sufficient to treat ourselves again to the Apocalypse of John, that wildest of
all written outbursts which vengeance has on its conscience. (Incidentally, we
must not underestimate the deep consistency of the Christian instinct when it
ascribed this particular book of hate to the name of the disciple of love, the
same man to whom it attributed that enthusiastic amorous gospel—: there is some
truth to this, no matter how much literary counterfeiting may have been
necessary for this purpose). The Romans were indeed strong and noble men,
stronger and nobler than any people who had lived on earth up until then or even
than any people who had ever been dreamed up. Everything they left as remains,
every inscription, is delightful, provided that we can guess what is
doing the writing there. By contrast, the Jews were par excellence that
priestly people of ressentiment, who possessed an unparalleled genius
for popular morality. Just compare people with related talents—say, the Chinese
or the Germans—with the Jews, in order to understand which is ranked first and
which is ranked fifth. Which of them has proved victorious for the time
being, Rome or Judea? Surely there’s not the slightest doubt. Just think of who
it is people bow down to today in Rome itself as the personification of all the
highest values—and not only in Rome, but in almost half the earth, all the
places where people have become merely tame or want to become tame—in front of three Jews,
as we know, and one Jewess (in front of Jesus of Nazareth, the
fisherman Peter, the carpet maker Paul, and the mother of the first-mentioned
Jesus, named Mary). This is very remarkable: without doubt Rome has been
conquered. It is true that in the Renaissance there was an incredibly brilliant
reawakening of the classical ideal, of the noble way of evaluating everything.
Rome itself behaved like someone who had woken up from a coma induced by the
pressure of the new Jewish Rome built over it, which looked like an ecumenical
synagogue and was called “Church.” But Judea immediately triumphed again, thanks
to that thoroughly vulgar (German and English) movement of ressentiment we call
the Reformation, together with what had to follow as a result, the
re-establishment of the church—as well as the re-establishment of the old
grave-like tranquillity of classical Rome. In what is an even more decisive and
deeper sense than that, Judea once again was victorious over the classical ideal
with the French Revolution. The last political nobility which there was in
Europe, in seventeenth and eighteenth century France, broke apart under
the instincts of popular ressentiment—never on earth has there been
heard a greater rejoicing, a noisier enthusiasm! It’s true that in the midst of
all this the most dreadful and most unexpected events took place: the old ideal
itself stepped physically and with unheard of splendour before the eyes
and the conscience of humanity—and once again stronger, simpler, and more
urgently than ever rang out, in opposition to the old lying slogan of ressentiment
about the privileged rights of the majority, in opposition to that will
for a low condition, for abasement, for equality, for the decline and twilight
of mankind—in opposition to all that there rang out the fearsome and delightful
counter-slogan about the privilege of the very few! As a last signpost
to a different road, Napoleon appeared, that most singular and
late-born man there ever was, and in him the problem of the noble ideal itself was
made flesh—we should consider well what a problem that is: Napoleon,
this synthesis of monster [Unmensch] and superman [Übermensch] . . .

17

—Did that end it? Was that
greatest of all oppositions of ideals thus set ad acta [aside] for
all time? Or was it merely postponed, postponed indefinitely? . . .  Someday
would there not have to be an even more fearful blaze from the old fire, one
which would take much longer to prepare?  More than that: would this not be
exactly what we should hope for with all our strength? Even will it?
Even demand it? Anyone who, like my readers, begins to reflect on these points,
to think further, will have difficulty coming to a quick conclusion—reason
enough for me to come to a conclusion myself, provided that it has been
sufficiently clear for a long time what I want, precisely what I want
with that dangerous slogan which is written on the body of my last book: “Beyond Good and Evil”
. . . At least this does not mean “Beyond Good and Bad.”—

Note

I am taking the opportunity
provided to me by this essay publicly and formally to state a desire which I
have expressed up to now only in occasional conversations with scholars, namely,
that some faculty of philosophy might set up a series of award-winning academic
essays in order to serve the advancement of studies into the history of morality. Perhaps
this book could serve to provide a forceful push in precisely such a direction.
Bearing in mind a possibility of this sort, let me propose the following
question—it merits the attention of philologists and historians as much as of
truly professional philosophical scholars:

What suggestions does the scientific study of
language, especially etymological research, provide for the history of the
development of moral concepts?

—On the other hand, it is, of
course, just as necessary to attract the participation of physiologists and
doctors to these problems (of the value of all methods of evaluating up
to now). Also for this task it might be left to the professional philosophers in
this particular case to become advocates and mediators, after they have
completely succeeded in converting the relationships between philosophy,
physiology, and medicine, originally so aloof and so mistrusting, into the most
friendly and most fruitful exchange. In fact, all the tables of value, all
examples of “thou shalt” that history or ethnological research knows about,
need, first and foremost, illumination and interpretation from physiology—at
any rate before one from psychology. All of them similarly await a critique from
the point of view of medical science. The question “What is this or that table
of values and ‘morality’ worth?” needs to be viewed from the most
varied perspectives. For we cannot analyze the question “Value for what?”
too finely. Something, for example, that would have an apparent value with
respect to the longest possible capacity for the survival of a race (or to an
increase in its power to adapt to a certain climate or to the preservation of
the greatest number) would have nothing like the same value, if the issue were
one of developing a stronger type. The well-being of the greatest number and the
well-being of the smallest number are opposing viewpoints where values are
concerned. We wish to leave it to the naïveté of English biologists to take the
first as already the one of inherently higher value. . . . All
the sciences from now on have to do the preparatory work for the future job of
the philosopher, understanding that the philosopher’s task is to solve the problem of value,
that he has to determine the rank order of
values.

ENDNOTES


Herbert Spencer (1820-1903), English philosopher and
liberal political theorist, who extended Darwin’s evolutionary theories into
sociology. 


Thirty Years War: a prolonged, devastating, and
inconclusive European war over religion (1618-1648). 


Buckle: Henry Thomas Buckle (1821-1862), English
historian, author of The History of Civilization in England. Buckle’s attempt to
explain historical events as the results of certain mathematically precise laws
generated a great deal of controversy. 


Theogonis: a Greek poet from Megara in the sixth
century BC. 


Virchow: Rudolf Virchow
(1821-1902), German doctor and anthropologist. 


Achilles: the warrior hero of Homer’s Iliad, one of
the greatest Greek heroes. 


Weir-Mitchell: Silas Weir-Mitchell (1829-1914),
American doctor and writer, well known for his rest cure for nervous
diseases. 


Beyond Good and Evil: Nietzsche published this work
in 1886. 


. . . ressentiment: Nietzsche uses this French word,
which since his writing, and largely because of it, has entered the English
language as an important term in psychology: a short definition is as follows:
“deep-seated resentment, frustration, and hostility, accompanied by a sense of
being powerless to express these feelings directly” (Merriam-Webster). Ressentiment is
thus significantly different in meaning from resentment. 


Mirabeau: Honore Gabriel Riqueti, Comte de Mirabeau
(1749-1791), French politician and writer at the time of the French
Revolution. 


Pericles (495-429 BC),
political leader and general in Athens at the outbreak of the Peloponnesian
War. He delivered his famous funeral oration at the end of the first year of the
war. The Goths: tribes from Eastern Germany who attacked the Roman Empire in the
third and fourth centuries. Later (as the Visigoths and Ostrogoths) they gained
political dominance in parts of Europe, once the Roman Empire
collapsed; Vandals: Eastern Germanic tribes, allied to the Goths, who invaded
the Roman Empire. 


Hesiod (c. 700 BC), Greek
poet. 


Nietzsche’s point here is
that Hesiod broke the last of his ages into two: a Heroic Age, symbolized by the
legendary heroes of Troy and Thebes, and an Iron Age. The latter was, in effect,
the same as the Heroic Age except it was that era as seen by the suffering and
oppressed (i.e., not a heroic and glorious period, but one full of
wretchedness). Hesiod (in Works and Days) describes five ages: Gold, Silver,
Bronze, Heroic, and Iron. Nietzsche’s German word Erz can mean ore, bronze, or
iron.


Dante: Dante Alighieri
(1265-1321), a Florentine poet who wrote The Divine Comedy. The phrase Nietzsche
quotes comes from the first book, The Inferno, and stands over the gateway to
hell. 


Thomas Aquinas (1225-1274), Catholic saint, one of
the great Catholic theologians. Nietzsche quotes the Latin, as follows: “Beati
in regno coelesti videbunt poenas damnatorum, ut beatitudo illis magis
complaceat.”


The “triumphant father of
the church” is Tertullian (c. 155-230), an important figure in the early church
and a fierce Christian apologist. 


Rhadamanthus or Minos:
These were the names of the judges in the pagan underworld. 


Nietzsche's Latin quotation of
Tertullian contains in this sentence a slight misquote: “vivos” [living] rather
than visos [seen]. The English text above uses visos
(Tertullian’s word).


praetor or consul or quaestor:
important Roman political officials. 


Nietzsche quotes the Latin
and inserts some of his own comments, as follows: “At enim supersunt alia
spectacula, ille ultimus et perpetuus judicii dies,ille nationibus insperatus,
ille derisus, cum tanta saeculi vetustas et tot eius nativitates uno igne
haurientur. Quae tunc spectaculi latitudo! Quid admirer! Quid rideam! Ubi
gaudeam! Ubi exultem, spectans tot et tantos reges, qui in coelum recepti
nuntiabantur, cum ipso Jove et ipsis suis testibusin imis tenebris
congemescentes! Item praesides” (die Provinzialstatthalter) “persecutores
dominici nominis saevioribus quam ipsi flammis saevierunt insultantibus contra
Christianos liquescentes! Quos praeterea sapientes illos philosophos coram
discipulis suis una conflagrantibus erubescentes, quibusnihil ad deum pertinere
suadebant, quibus animas aut nullas aut non in pristina corpora redituras
affirmabant! Etiam poetas non ad Rhadamanti nec ad Minois, sed ad inopinati
Christi tribunal palpitantes! Tunc magis tragoedi audiendi, magis scilicet
vocales” (besser bei Stimme, noch ärgere Schreier) “in sua propria calamitate;
tunc histriones cognoscendi, solutiores multo per ignem; tunc spectandus auriga
in flammea rota totus rubens, tunc xysticicontemplandi non in gymnasiis, sed in
igne jaculati, nisi quod ne tunc quidem illos velim vivos, ut qui malim ad eos
potius conspectum insatiabilem conferre, qui in dominum desaevierunt. Hic est
ille,’ dicam, ‘fabri aut quaestuariae filius’” (wie alles Folgende und
insbesondere auch diese aus demTalmud bekannte Bezeichnung der Mutter Jesu zeigt,
meint Tertullian von hier ab die Juden), “‘sabbati destructor, Samarites et
daemonium habens. Hic est, quem a Juda redemistis, hic est ille arundine et
colaphis diverberatus, sputamentis dedecoratus, felle et aceto potatus. Hic est,
quem clam discentes subripuerunt, ut resurrexisse dicatur vel hortulanus
detraxit, ne lactucae suae frequentia commeantium laederentur.’ Ut talia spectes,
uttalibus exultes, quis tibi praetor aut consul aut quaestor aut sacerdos de sua
liberalitate praestabit? Et tamen haec jam habemus quodammodo per fidem spiritu
imaginante repraesentata. Ceterum qualia illa sunt, quae nec oculus vidit nec
auris audivit nec in cor hominis ascenderunt?” (1. Cor. 2, 9.) “Credo circo et
utraque cavea” (erster und vierter Rang oder, nach anderen, komische und
tragische Bühne) “et omni stadio gratiora.”


[Link
to Genealogy of Morals, Table of Contents]

Link to
Second Essay

Nietzsche, Genealogy, Essay 2


On the Genealogy of Morals
A Polemical Tract

2014


If you  would like to download a Rich Text Format text of this text, please
Genealogy

Second Essay
Guilt, Bad Conscience, and Related Matters

1

To breed an animal that is
entitled to make promises—is that not precisely the paradoxical task nature
has set itself where human beings are concerned? Isn’t that the real
problem of human beings? . . . The fact that this problem has to a great extent
been solved must seem all the more astonishing to a person who knows how to
appreciate fully the power which works against this promise-making, namely
forgetfulness. Forgetfulness is not merely a vis interiae [a force of
inertia], as superficial people think. Is it much rather an active
capability to repress, something positive in the strongest sense, to which we
can ascribe the fact that while we are digesting what we alone live through and
experience and absorb into ourselves (we could call the process mental
ingestion [Einverseelung]), we are conscious of what is going  on as
little as we are with the entire thousand-fold process which our bodily
nourishment goes through (so-called physical ingestion [Einverleibung]).
The doors and windows of consciousness are shut temporarily; they remain
undisturbed by the noise and struggle with which the underworld of our
functional organs keeps working for and against one another; a little stillness,
a little tabula rasa [blank slate] of the consciousness, so that there
will again be room for something new, above all, for the nobler functions and
officials, for ruling, thinking ahead, determining what to do (for our organism
is arranged as an oligarchy)—that is, as I said, the use of active
forgetfulness, a porter at the door, so to speak, a custodian of psychic order,
quiet, etiquette.  From that we can see at once how, if forgetfulness were not
present, there could be no happiness, no cheerfulness, no hoping, no pride, no present.
The man in whom this repression apparatus is harmed and not working properly we
can compare to a dyspeptic (and not just compare)—he is “finished” with nothing.
. . . Now, this particular animal, which is necessarily forgetful, in which
forgetfulness is present as a force, as a form of strong health, has
had an opposing capability bred into it, a memory, with the help of which, in
certain cases, forgetfulness will cease to function—that is, for those cases
where promises are to be made. This is in no way a merely passive inability ever
to be rid of an impression once it has been etched into the mind, nor is it
merely indigestion over a word one has pledged at a particular time  and which
one can no longer be over and done with. No, it’s an active wish not to
be free of the matter again, an ongoing and continuing desire for what one
willed at a particular time, a real memory of one’s will, so that
between the original “I will,” “I will do,” and the actual discharge of the
will, its action, a world of strange w things, circumstances, even acts
of the will can be interposed without a second thought and not break this long
chain of the will. But how much all that presupposes! In order to organize the
future in this manner, human beings must have first learned to separate
necessary events from chance events, to think in terms of cause and effect, to
see distant events as if they were present, to anticipate them, to set goals and
the means to reach them with certainty, to develop a capability for figures and
calculations in general—and for that to occur, a human being must
necessarily have first himself become something one could predict,
something bound by regular rules, even in the way he imagined himself to
himself, so that finally he is able to act like someone who makes promises—he
can make himself into a pledge for the future!

2

Precisely that development is
the long history of the origin of responsibility. That task of breeding
an animal which is permitted to make promises contains within it, as we have
already grasped, as a condition and prerequisite, the more precise task of
first making a human being necessarily uniform to some extent, one
among others like him, regular and consequently predictable. The immense task
involved in this, what I have called the “morality of custom” (cf. Daybreak 9,
14, 16)—the essential work of a man on his own self in the longest-lasting age
of the human race, his entire pre-historical work, derives its meaning,
its grand justification, from the following point, no matter how much hardship,
tyranny, monotony, and idiocy it also manifested: with the help of the morality
of custom and the social strait jacket, the human being was made truly
predictable. Let’s position ourselves, by contrast, at the end of this immense
process, in the place where the tree at last yields its fruit, where society and
the morality of custom finally bring to light the end for which they
were simply the means: then we find, as the ripest fruit on that tree, the
sovereign individual, something which resembles only itself, which has
broken loose again from the morality of custom, the autonomous individual beyond
morality (for “autonomous” and “moral” are mutually exclusive terms), in short,
the human being who possesses his own independent and enduring will, who is entitled
to make promises—and in him a consciousness quivering in every muscle,
proud of what has finally been achieved and has become a living
embodiment in him, a real consciousness of power and freedom, a feeling of
completion for human beings generally. This man who has become free, who really is
entitled to make promises, this master of free will, this
sovereign—how is he not to realize the superiority he enjoys over everything
which is not permitted to make a promise and make pledges on its own behalf,
knowing how much trust, how much fear, and how much respect he creates—he “is
worthy”of all three—and how, with this mastery over himself, he has
necessarily been given in addition mastery over his circumstances, over nature,
and over all less reliable creatures with a shorter will? The “free” man, the
owner of an enduring unbreakable will, by possessing this, also acquires his
own standard of value: he looks out from himself at others and confers
respect or contempt. And just as it will be necessary for him to honour those
like him, the strong and dependable (who are entitled to make
promises)—in other words, everyone who makes promises like a sovereign,
seriously, rarely, and slowly, who is sparing with his trust, who honours another
when he does trust, who gives his word as something reliable, because he knows
he is strong enough to remain upright even when opposed by misfortune, even when
“opposed by fate”—in just the same way it will be necessary for him to keep his
foot ready to kick the scrawny unreliable men, who make promises without being
entitled to, and to hold his cane ready for the liar, who breaks his word in the
very moment it comes out of his mouth. The proud knowledge of the extraordinary
privilege of responsibility, the consciousness of this rare freedom, of
this power over oneself and destiny, has become internalized into the deepest
parts of him and grown instinctual, has become an instinct, a dominating
instinct:—what will he call it, this dominating instinct, assuming that he finds
he needs a word for it? There’s no doubt: the sovereign man calls this instinct
his conscience.

3

His conscience? . . . To begin
with, we can conjecture that the idea “conscience,” which we are encountering
here in its highest, almost perplexing form, has a long history and changing
developmental process behind it already. To be entitled to pledge one’s word,
and to do it with pride, and also to be permitted to say “Yes” to
oneself—that is a ripe fruit, as I have mentioned, but it is also a late fruit:—for
what a long stretch of time this fruit must have hung tart and sour on the tree!
And for an even much longer time it was impossible to see any such fruit—no one
could have promised it would appear, even if everything about the tree was
certainly getting ready for it and growing in that very direction!—“How does one
create a memory for the human animal? How does one stamp something like that
into this partly dull, partly flickering, momentary understanding, this living
embodiment of forgetfulness, so that it stays current?” . . .  This ancient
problem, as you can imagine, was not resolved right away with tender answers and
methods. Indeed, there is perhaps nothing more fearful and more terrible in the
entire prehistory of human beings than the technique for developing his
memory. “We burn something in so that it remains in the memory. Only
something which never ceases to cause pain remains in the memory”—that
is a leading principle of the most ancient (unfortunately also the longest)
psychology on earth. We might even say that everywhere on earth nowadays where
there is still solemnity, seriousness, mystery, and gloomy colours in the lives
of men and people, something of that terror continues its work, the
fear with which in earlier times everywhere on earth people made promises,
pledged their word, made a vow. The past, the longest, deepest, most severe
past, breathes on us and surfaces in us when we become “solemn.” When the human
being considered it necessary to make a memory for himself, it never happened
without blood, martyrs, and sacrifices, the most terrible sacrifices and pledges
(among them the sacrifice of the first born), the most repulsive
self-mutilations (for example, castration), the cruellest forms of ritual in all
the religious cults (and all religions are in their deepest foundations systems
of cruelty)—all that originates in that instinct which discovered in pain the
most powerful means of helping to develop the memory. In a certain sense all
asceticism belongs here: a couple of ideas are to be made indissoluble,
omnipresent, unforgettable, “fixed,” in order to hypnotize the entire nervous
and intellectual system through these “fixed ideas”—and the ascetic procedures
and forms of life are the means whereby these ideas are freed from jostling
around with all the other ideas, in order to make them “unforgettable.” The
worse humanity’s “memory” was, the more terrible its customs have always
appeared. The harshness of the laws of punishment, in particular, provide a
standard for measuring how much trouble people went to in order to triumph over
forgetfulness and to maintain a present awareness of a few primitive
demands of social living together for this slave of momentary feelings and
desires. We Germans certainly do not think of ourselves as an especially cruel
and hard-hearted people, even less as particularly careless people who live only
in the present. But just take a look at our old penal code in order to
understand how much trouble it takes on this earth to breed a “People of
Thinkers” (by that I mean the European people among whom today we still
find a maximum of trust, seriousness, tastelessness, and practicality, and who,
with these characteristics, have a right to breed all sorts of European
mandarins). These Germans have used terrible means to make themselves a memory
in order to attain mastery over their vulgar basic instincts and their brutal
crudity: think of the old German punishments, for example, stoning (—the legend
even lets the mill stone fall on the head of the guilty person), breaking on the
wheel (the most characteristic invention and specialty of the German genius in
the realm of punishment!), impaling on a stake, ripping people apart or stamping
them to death with horses (“quartering”), boiling the criminal in oil or wine
(still done in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries), the well-loved practice
of flaying (“cutting flesh off in strips”), carving flesh out of the chest, and
probably covering the offender with honey and leaving him to the flies in the
burning sun. With the help of such images and procedures people finally retained
five or six “I will not’s” in the memory, and, so far as these precepts were
concerned, they gave their word in order to live with the advantages of
society—and it’s true! With the assistance of this sort of memory people finally
came to “reason”!—Ah, reason, seriousness, mastery over emotions, this whole
gloomy business called reflection, all these privileges and showpieces of human
beings: how expensive they were! How much blood and horror is at the bottom of
all “good things”! . . .

4

But then how did that other
“gloomy business,” the consciousness of guilt, the whole “bad conscience” come
into the world?—And with this we turn back to our genealogists of morality. I’ll
say it once more—or have I not said anything about it yet?—they are useless.
With their own merely “modern” experience extending through only a brief period [fünf
Spannen lange], with no knowledge of and no desire to know the past, even
less a historical instinct, a “second sight”— something necessary at this very
point—they nonetheless pursue the history of morality. That must justifiably
produce results which have a less than tenuous relationship to the truth. Have
these genealogists of morality up to now allowed themselves to dream, even
remotely, that, for instance, that major moral principle “guilt” [Schuld] derived
its origin from the very materialistic idea “debt” [Schulden]? Or that
punishment developed as a repayment, completely without reference to
any assumption about freedom or lack of freedom of the will?—and did so, by
contrast, to the point where it always first required a high degree of
human development so that the animal “man” began to make those much more
primitive distinctions between “intentional,” “negligent,” “accidental,”
“responsible,” and their opposites and bring them to bear when meting out
punishment? That idea, nowadays so trite, apparently so natural, so unavoidable,
which has even had to serve as the explanation how the feeling of justice in
general came into existence on earth, “The criminal deserves punishment because he
could have acted otherwise,” this idea is, in fact, an extremely late
achievement, indeed, a sophisticated form of human judgment and decision making.
Anyone who moves this idea back to the beginnings is sticking his coarse fingers
inappropriately into the psychology of older humanity. For the most extensive
period of human history, punishment was certainly not meted out
because people held the instigator of evil responsible for his actions, and
thus it was not assumed that only the guilty party should be
punished:—it was much more as it still is now when parents punish their children
out of anger over some harm they have suffered, anger vented on the
perpetrator—but anger restrained and modified through the idea that every injury
has some equivalent and that compensation for it could, in fact, be
paid out, even if that is through the pain of the perpetrator. Where
did this primitive, deeply rooted, and perhaps by now ineradicable idea derive
its power, the idea of an equivalence between punishment and pain? I have
already given away the answer: in the contractual relationship between
creditor and debtor, which is, in general, as ancient as the idea
of “legal subject” and which, for its part, refers back to the basic forms of
buying, selling, bartering, trading, and exchanging goods.

5

It’s true that recalling this
contractual relationship arouses, as we might initially expect from what I have
observed above, all sorts of suspicion of and opposition to older humanity,
which established or allowed it. It’s at this particular moment that people make
promises. At this very point the pertinent issue is to create a
memory for the person who makes a promise, so that precisely here, we can
surmise, there will exist a place for harshness, cruelty, and pain. In order to
inspire trust in his promise to pay back, in order to give his promise a
guarantee of its seriousness and sanctity, in order to impress on his own
conscience the idea of paying back as a duty, an obligation, the debtor, by
virtue of a contract, pledges to the creditor, in the event that he does not
pay, something else that he still “owns,” something else over which he still
exercises power, for example, his body or his woman or his freedom or even his
life (or, under certain religious conditions, even his blessedness, the
salvation of his soul, finally even his peace in the grave, as was the case in
Egypt, where the dead body of the debtor even in the tomb found no peace from
the creditor—and among the Egyptians, in particular, such peace certainly
mattered). That means that the creditor could inflict all kinds of ignominy and
torture on the body of the debtor, for instance, slice off the body as much as
seemed appropriate for the size of the debt:—and this point of view early on and
everywhere gave rise to precise, sometimes horrific estimates going into the
smallest detail, legally established estimates about individual limbs
and body parts. I consider it already a step forward, as evidence of a freer
conception of the law, something which calculates more grandly, a more Roman idea
of justice, when Rome’s Twelve Tables of Laws decreed it was all the same, no
matter how much or how little the creditor cut off in such
cases: “let it not be thought a crime if they cut off more or less.”
Let us clarify for ourselves the logic of this whole method of compensation—it
is weird enough. The equivalency is given in this way: instead of an advantage
making up directly for the harm (hence, instead of compensation in gold, land,
possessions of some sort or another), the creditor is given a kind of pleasure as
repayment and compensation—the pleasure of being allowed to discharge his power
on a powerless person without having to think about it, the delight in “de
fair le mal pour le plaisir de le faire” [doing wrong for the pleasure of doing
it], the enjoyment of violation. This enjoyment is more highly prized the
lower and baser the creditor stands in the social order, and it can easily seem
to him a delicious mouthful, in fact, a foretaste of a higher rank. By means of
the “punishment” of the debtor, the creditor participates in a right
belonging to the masters. Finally he also for once comes to the lofty
feeling of despising a being as someone “beneath him,” as someone he is entitled
to mistreat—or at least, in the event that the real force of punishment, of
executing punishment, has already been transferred to the “authorities,” the
feeling of seeing the debtor despised and mistreated. The compensation
thus consists of an order for and a right to cruelty.

6

In this area, that is,
in the laws of obligation, the world of the moral concepts “guilt,”
“conscience,” “duty,” and “sanctity of obligation” has its origin—its beginning,
like the beginning of everything great on earth, was watered thoroughly and for
a long time with blood. And can we not add that this world deep down has never
again been completely free of a certain smell of blood and torture—(not even
with old Kant whose categorical imperative stinks of cruelty)? In addition, here
that weird knot linking the ideas of “guilt and suffering,” which perhaps has
become impossible to undo, was first knit together. Let me pose the question
once more: to what extent can suffering be a compensation for “debts”? To the
extent that making someone suffer provides the highest degree of
pleasure, to the extent that the person hurt by the debt, in exchange for the
injury as well as for the distress caused by the injury, got an extraordinary
offsetting pleasure: creating suffering—a real celebration,
something that, as I’ve said, was valued all the more, the greater it
contradicted the rank and social position of the creditor. I have been
speculating here, for it’s difficult to see through to the foundations of such
subterranean things, quite apart from the fact that it’s embarrassing. And
anyone who crudely throws into the middle of all this the idea of “revenge” has
buried and dimmed his insights rather than illuminated them (—revenge itself, in
fact, simply takes us back to the same problem: “How can making someone suffer
give us a feeling of satisfaction?”). It seems to me that the delicacy and, even
more, the Tartufferie [hypocrisy] of tame house pets (I mean modern
man, I mean us) resist imagining with all our power how much cruelty contributes
to the great celebratory joy of older humanity, as, in fact, an ingredient mixed
into almost all their enjoyments and, from another perspective, how naive, how
innocent, their need for cruelty appears, how they fundamentally think of its
particular “disinterested malice” (or to use Spinoza’s words, the sympathia
malevolens [malevolent sympathy]) as a normal
human characteristic:—and hence as something to which their conscience says a
heartfelt Yes!
A more deeply penetrating eye might still notice, even today, enough of this
most ancient and most fundamental celebratory human joy. In Beyond Good and
Evil, 229 (even earlier in Daybreak, 18, 77, 113), I pointed a
cautious finger at the constantly growing spiritualization and “deification” of
cruelty, which runs through the entire history of higher culture (and, in a
significant sense, even constitutes that culture). In any case, it’s not so long
ago that people wouldn’t think of an aristocratic wedding and folk festival in
the grandest style without executions, tortures, or something like an auto-da-fé
[burning at the stake], and similarly no noble household lacked creatures
on whom people could vent their malice and cruel taunts without a second thought
(—remember, for instance, Don Quixote at the court of the duchess; today we read
all of Don Quixote with a bitter taste on the tongue; it’s almost an
ordeal. In so doing, we would become very foreign, very obscure to the author
and his contemporaries—they read it with a fully clear conscience as the most
cheerful of books. They almost died laughing at it). Watching suffering makes
people feel good; creating suffering makes them feel even better—that’s a harsh
principle, but an old, powerful, and human, all-too-human major principle,
which, by the way, even the apes might perhaps agree with as well. For people
say that, in thinking up bizarre cruelties, the apes already anticipate a great
many human actions and are, as it were, an “audition.” Without cruelty there is
no celebration: that’s what the oldest and longest human history teaches us—and
with punishment, too, there is so much celebration!

7

With these ideas, by the way, I
have no desire whatsoever to give our pessimists grist for their discordant
mills grating with weariness of life. On the contrary, I want to state very
clearly that in that period when human beings had not yet become ashamed of
their cruelty, life on earth was happier than it is today, now that we have our
pessimists. The darkening of heaven over men’s heads has always increased
alarmingly in proportion to the growth of human beings’ shame before human
beings. The tired, pessimistic look, the mistrust of the riddle of life,
the icy denial stemming from disgust with life—these are not the signs of the wickedest eras
of human beings. It’s much more the case that they first come to light as the
swamp plants they are when the swamp to which they belong is there—I mean the
sickly mollycoddling and moralizing, thanks to which the animal “man” finally
learns to feel shame about all his instincts. On his way to becoming an “angel”
(not to use a harsher word here), man cultivated for himself that upset stomach
and that furry tongue which not only made the joy and innocence of the animal
repulsive but also made life itself distasteful:—so that now and then he stands
there before himself, holds his nose, and with Pope Innocent III disapproves and
makes a catalogue of his nastiness (“conceived in filth, disgustingly nourished
in his mother’s  body, developed out of evil material stuff,
stinking horribly, a secretion of spit, urine, and excrement”).
Now, when suffering always has to march out as the first among the arguments against existence,
as its most serious question mark, it’s good for us to remember the times when
people judged things the other way around, because they couldn’t do without making people
suffer and saw a first-class magic  in it, a really tempting enticement for living.  Perhaps,
and let me say this as a consolation for the delicate, at that time pain did not
yet hurt as much as it does nowadays. That at least could be the conclusion of a
doctor who had treated a Negro (taking the latter as a representative of
pre-historical man) for a bad case of inner inflammation, which drives the
European, even one with the best constitution, almost to despair, but which
does not have the same effect on the Negro. (The graph of the human
sensitivity to pain seems in fact to sink down remarkably and almost immediately
after one has moved beyond the first ten thousand or ten million of the top
members of the higher culture. And I personally have no doubt that, in
comparison with one painful night of a single hysterical well-educated female,
the total suffering of all animals which up to now have been interrogated by the
knife in search of scientific answers is simply not worth considering). Perhaps
it is even permissible to concede the possibility that that pleasure in cruelty
does not really need to have died out. It would only require a certain
sublimation and subtlety, in proportion to the way pain hurts more nowadays; in
other words, it would have to appear translated into the imaginative and
spiritual and embellished with nothing but names so unobjectionable that they
arouse no suspicion in even the most delicate hypocritical conscience (“tragic
pity” is one such name; another is “les nostalgies de la croix” [nostalgias
for the cross]). What truly enrages people about suffering is not the
suffering itself, but the meaninglessness of suffering. But neither for the
Christian, who has interpreted into suffering an entire secret machinery for
salvation, nor for the naive men of older times, who understood how to interpret
all suffering in relation to the spectator or to the person inflicting the
suffering, was there generally any such meaningless suffering. In order
for the hidden, undiscovered, unwitnessed suffering to be removed from the world
and for people to be able to deny it honestly, they were then almost compelled
to invent gods and intermediate beings at all levels, high and low—briefly put,
something that also roamed in hidden places, that also looked into the darkness,
and that would not readily permit an interesting painful spectacle to escape its
attention. For with the help of such inventions life then understood and has
always understood how to justify itself by a trick, how to justify its “evil.”
Nowadays perhaps it requires other helpful inventions for that purpose (for
example, life as riddle, life as a problem of knowledge). “Every evil a glimpse
of which edifies a god is justified”: that’s how the pre-historical logic of
feeling rang out—and was that really confined only to prehistory? The gods
conceived of as friends of cruel spectacle—O how widely this primitive
idea still rises up even within our European humanity! We might well seek advice
from, say, Calvin and Luther on this point. At any rate it is certain that even
the Greeks knew of no more acceptable snack to offer their gods to make
them happy than the joys of cruelty. With what sort of expression, do you think,
did Homer allow his gods to look down on the fates of men? What final sense was
there basically in the Trojan War and similar tragic terrors? We cannot
entertain the slightest doubts about this: they were intended as celebrations for
the gods: and, to the extent that the poet is in these matters more “godlike”
than other men, as festivals for the poets as well. . . . Later the Greek moral
philosophers in the same way imagined the eyes of god no differently, still
looking down on the moral struggles, on heroism and the self-mutilation of the
virtuous: the “Hercules of duty” was on a stage, and he knew he was there.
Without someone watching, virtue for this race of actors was something entirely
inconceivable. Surely such a daring and fateful philosophical invention, first
made for Europe at that time, the invention of the “free will,” of the
absolutely spontaneous nature of human beings in matters of good and evil, was
created above all to justify the idea that the interest of gods in men, in human
virtue, could never run out? On this earthly stage there was never to
be any lack of really new things, really unheard of suspense, complications, and
catastrophes. A world conceived of as perfectly deterministic would have been
predictable to the gods and therefore also soon boring for them—reason enough
for these friends of the gods, the philosophers, not to ascribe such a
deterministic world to their gods! All of ancient humanity is full of sensitive
consideration for “the spectator,” for a truly public, truly visible world,
which did not know how to imagine happiness without dramatic performances and
festivals. And, as I have already said, in great punishment there is
also so much celebration!

8

To resume the path of our
enquiry, the feeling of guilt, of personal obligation has, as we saw, its origin
in the oldest and most primitive personal relationship there is, in the
relationship between seller and buyer, creditor and debtor. Here for the first
time one person moved up against another person, here an individual measured
himself against another individual. We have found no civilization still at
such a low level that something of this relationship is not already perceptible.
To set prices, to measure values, to think up equivalencies, to exchange
things—that preoccupied man’s very first thinking to such a degree that in a
certain sense it’s what thinking itself is. Here the oldest form of
astuteness was bred; here, too, we can assume are the first beginnings of man’s
pride, his feeling of pre-eminence in relation to other animals. Perhaps our
word “man” (manas) continues to express directly something of this feeling
of the self: the human being describes himself as a being which assesses values,
which values and measures, as the “inherently calculating animal.” Selling and
buying, together with their psychological attributes, are even older than the
beginnings of any form of social organizations and groupings; out of the most
rudimentary form of personal legal rights the budding feeling of exchange,
contract, guilt, law, duty, and compensation was instead first transferred to
the crudest and earliest social structures (in their relationships with similar
social structures), along with the habit of comparing power with power, of
measuring, of calculating. The eye was now adjusted to this perspective, and
with that awkward consistency characteristic of thinking in more ancient human
beings, hard to get started but then inexorably moving forward in the same
direction, people soon reached the great generalization: “Each thing has its
price, everything can be paid off”—the oldest and most naive moral
principle of justice, the beginning of all “good nature,” all
“fairness,” all “good will,” all “objectivity” on earth. Justice at this first
stage is good will among those approximately equal in power to come to terms
with each other, to “come to an agreement” again with each other by
compensation—and in relation to those less powerful, to compel them to
arrive at some settlement among themselves.—

9

Always measured by the standard
of prehistory (a prehistory which, by the way, is present at all times or is
capable of returning), the community also stands in relation to its members in
that important basic relationship of the creditor to his debtor. People live in
a community. They enjoy the advantages of a community (and what advantages they
are! Nowadays we sometimes underestimate them); they live protected, cared for,
in peace and trust, without worries concerning certain injuries and enmities
from which the man outside the community, the “man without peace,” is
excluded—a German understands what “misery” [Elend] or êlend [other
country] originally means—and how people pledged themselves to and entered
into obligations with the community bearing in mind precisely these injuries and
enmities.  What will happen with an exception to this case? The
community, the defrauded creditor, will see that it gets paid as well as it
can—on that people can rely. The issue here is least of all the immediate damage
which the offender has caused. Setting this to one side, the lawbreaker [Verbrecher] is
above all a “breaker” [Brecher], a breaker of contracts and a breaker
of his word against the totality, with respect to all the good features
and advantages of the communal life in which, up to that point, he has had a
share. The lawbreaker is a debtor who does not merely not pay back the benefits
and advances given to him, but who even attacks his creditor. So from this point
on not only does he forfeit, as is reasonable, all these good things and
benefits—but he is also now reminded what these good things are all about.
The anger of the injured creditor, the community, gives him back again to the
wild outlawed condition, from which he was earlier protected. It pushes him away
from itself—and now every form of hostility can vent itself on him. At this
stage of cultural behaviour “punishment” is simply the copy, the mimus,
of the normal conduct towards the hated, disarmed enemy  who has been thrown
down, who has forfeited not only all legal rights and protection but also all
mercy; hence it is a case of the rights of war and the victory celebration of vae
victis [woe to the conquered] in all its ruthlessness and cruelty:—which
accounts for the fact that war itself (including the warlike cult of sacrifice)
has given us all the forms in which punishment has appeared in history.

10

As it acquires more power, a
community no longer considers the crimes of the single individual so serious,
because it no longer is entitled to consider him as dangerous and unsettling for
the existence of the totality as much as it did before. The wrongdoer is no
longer “outlawed” and thrown out, and the common anger is no longer permitted to
vent itself on him without restraint to the same extent as earlier— instead the
wrongdoer from now on is carefully protected by the community against this
anger, especially from that of the immediately injured person, and is taken into
protective custody. The compromise with the anger of those particularly affected
by the wrong doing, and thus the effort to localize the case and to avert a
wider or even a general participation and unrest, the attempts to find
equivalents and to settle the whole business (the compositio), above
all the desire, appearing with ever-increasing clarity, to consider every crime
as, in some sense or other, capable of being paid off, and thus, at
least to a certain extent, to separate the criminal and his crime from
each other—those are the characteristics stamped more and more clearly on the
further development of criminal law. If the power and the self-confidence of a
community keep growing, the criminal law also grows constantly milder. Every
weakening and deeper jeopardizing of the community brings its harsher forms of
criminal law to light once again. The “creditor” has always became
proportionally more humane as he has become richer. Finally the amount of
his wealth even becomes measured by how much damage he can sustain without
suffering from it. It would not be impossible to imagine a society with a
consciousness of its own power which allowed itself the most privileged
luxury which it can have—letting its criminals go without punishment.
“Why should I really bother about my parasites?” it could then say. “May they
live and prosper; for that I am still sufficiently strong!” . . . Justice, which
started with “Everything is capable of being paid for; everything must be paid
off” ends at that point, by shutting its eyes and letting the person incapable
of payment go free—it ends, as every good thing on earth ends, by doing away
with itself. This self-negation of justice: we know what a beautiful name
it calls itself—mercy. It goes without saying that mercy remains the
privilege of the most powerful man, or even better, his beyond the law.

11

A critical comment here about a
recently published attempt to find the origin of justice in a completely
different place—that is, in ressentiment. But first a word in the ear of the
psychologists, provided that they have any desire to study ressentiment itself
up close for once: this plant grows most beautifully nowadays among anarchists
and anti-Semites;  in addition, it blooms, as it always has, in
hidden places, like the violet, although it has a different fragrance.
And since like always has to emerge necessarily from like, it is not surprising
to see attempts coming forward again from just such circles, as they have
already done many times before—see above, Section 14 [First Essay]—to
sanctify revenge under the name of justice—as if justice were
basically only a further development of a feeling of being injured—and to bring
belated honour to reactive emotions generally, all of them, using the idea of
revenge. With this last point I personally take the least offence. It even seems
to me a service, so far as the entire biological problem is concerned
(in connection with which the worth of those emotions has been underestimated up
to now). The only thing I am calling attention to is the fact that it is the
very spirit of ressentiment out of which this new emphasis on scientific
fairness grows (which favours hate, envy, resentment, suspicion, rancour, and
revenge). This “scientific fairness,” that is, ceases immediately and gives way
to tones of mortal enmity and prejudice as soon as it deals with another group
of emotions which, it strikes me, have a much higher biological worth than those
reactive ones and which therefore have earned the right to be scientifically
assessed and respected first—namely, the truly active emotions, like
desire for mastery,  acquisitiveness, and so on (E. Dühring, The
Value of Life: A Course in Philosophy, the whole book really).
So much against this tendency in general. But in connection with Dühring’s
single principle that we have to seek the homeland of justice in the land of the
reactive feeling, we must, for love of the truth, rudely turn this around by
setting out a different principle: the last territory to be conquered
by the spirit of justice is the land of the reactive emotions! If it is truly
the case that the just man remains just even towards someone who has injured him
(and not merely cold, moderate, strange, indifferent: being just is always a positive
attitude), if under the sudden attack of personal injury, ridicule, and
suspicion, the gaze of the lofty, clear objectivity of the just and judging eye,
as profound as it is benevolent, does not itself grow dark, well, that’s a piece
of perfection and the highest mastery on earth—even something that it would be
wise for people not to expect here; in any event, they should not believe
in it too easily. It’s certainly true that, on average, among the most just
people themselves even a small dose of hostility, malice, and insinuation is
enough to make them see red and chase fairness out of their eyes. The
active, aggressive, over-reaching human being is still placed a hundred steps
closer to justice than the reactive person. For him it is simply not necessary
in the slightest to estimate an object falsely and with bias, the way the
reactive man does and must do. Thus, as a matter of fact, at all times the
aggressive human being, as the stronger, braver, more noble man, has had on his
side a better conscience as well as a more independent eye; by
contrast, we can already guess who generally has the invention of “bad
conscience” on his conscience—the man of ressentiment! Finally, let’s look
around in history: up to now in what area has the whole implementation of law in
general as well as the essential need for law been at home on earth? Could it be
in the area of the reactive human beings? That is entirely wrong. It is much
more the case that it’s been at home with the active, strong, spontaneous, and
aggressive men. Historically considered, the law on earth—let me say this to the
annoyance of the above-mentioned agitator (who once even confessed about himself
“The doctrine of revenge runs through all my work and efforts as the red thread
of justice”)—represents that very struggle against the reactive
feelings, the war with them on the part of active and aggressive powers, which
have partly used up their strength to put a halt to or to restrain the excess of
reactive pathos and to compel some settlement with it. Wherever justice is
practised, wherever justice is upheld, we see a stronger power in relation to a
weaker power standing beneath it (whether with groups or individuals), seeking
ways to bring an end among the latter to the senseless rage of ressentiment,
partly by dragging the object of ressentiment out of the hands of revenge,
partly by setting in the place of revenge a battle against the enemies of peace
and order, partly by coming up with compensation, proposing it, under certain
circumstances making it compulsory, partly by establishing certain equivalents
for injuries as a norm, into which from now on ressentiment is directed once and
for all. The most decisive factor, however, which the highest power carries out
and sets in place against the superior numbers of the feelings of hostility and
animosity—something that power always does as soon as it is somehow strong
enough to do it—is to set up law, the imperative explanation of those
things which, in its own eyes, are generally considered allowed and legal and
things which are considered forbidden and illegal, while after the establishment
of the law, the authorities treat attacks and arbitrary acts of individuals or
entire groups as an outrage against the law, as rebellion against the highest
power itself, and they steer the feeling of those beneath them away from the
immediate damage caused by such outrages and thus, in the long run, achieve the
reverse of what all revenge desires, which sees only the viewpoint of the
injured party and considers only that valid. From now on, the eye becomes
trained to evaluate actions always impersonally, even the eye of the
harmed party itself (although this would be the very last thing to occur, as I
have remarked earlier).—Consequently, only with the setting up of the law is
there a “just” and “unjust” (and not, as Dühring will have it, from the
time of the injurious action). To talk of just and unjust in themselves has
no sense whatsoever; it’s obvious that in themselves harming, oppressing,
exploiting, destroying cannot be “unjust,” inasmuch as life essentially works
that way, that is, in its basic functions it harms, oppresses, exploits, and
destroys, and cannot be conceived at all without this character. We have to
acknowledge something even more disturbing: the fact that from the highest
biological standpoint, conditions of justice must always be only exceptional
conditions, partial restrictions on the basic will to live, which is set on
power; they are subordinate to the total purpose of this will as individual
means, that is, as means to create larger units of power. A legal
system conceived of as sovereign and universal, not as a means in the struggle
of power complexes, but as a means against all struggles in general,
something along the lines of Dühring’s communist cliché in which each will must
be considered as equal to every will, that would be a principle hostile to
life, a destroyer and dissolver of human beings, an assassination attempt
on the future of human beings, a sign of exhaustion, a secret path to
nothingness.—

12

Here one more word concerning
the origin and purpose of punishment—two problems which are separate or should
be separate. Unfortunately people normally throw them together into one. How do
the previous genealogists of morality deal with this issue? Naively—the way they
have always worked. They find some “purpose” or other for punishment, for
example, revenge or deterrence, then in a simple way set this purpose at the
beginning as the causa fiendi [creative cause] of punishment
and—they’re finished. The “purpose in law,” however, is the very last idea we
should use in the history of the emergence of law. It is much rather the case
that for all forms of history there is no more important principle than that one
which we reach with such difficulty but which we also really should reach—namely
that what causes a particular thing to arise and the final utility of that
thing, its actual use and arrangement in a system of purposes, are separate toto
coelo [by all the heavens, i.e., absolutely] from each other, that
something existing, which has somehow come to its present state, will again and
again be interpreted by the higher power over it from a new perspective,
appropriated in a new way, reorganized for and redirected to new uses, that all
events in the organic world involve overpowering, acquiring mastery and
that, in turn, all overpowering and acquiring mastery involve a new
interpretation, a readjustment, in which the “sense” and “purpose” up to then
must necessarily be obscured or entirely erased. No matter how well we have
understood the usefulness of some physiological organ or other (or a
legal institution, a social custom, a political practice, some style in the arts
or in a religious cult), we have still not, in that process, grasped anything
about its origin—no matter how uncomfortable and unpleasant this may sound in
elderly ears. From time immemorial people have believed that in demonstrable
purposes, in the usefulness of a thing, a form, or an institution, they could
also understand the reason it came into existence—the eye as something made to
see, the hand as something made to grasp. So people also imagined punishment as
invented to punish. But all purposes, all uses, are only signs that a
will to power has become master over something with less power and has stamped
on it its own meaning of some function, and the entire history of a “thing,” an
organ, a practice can by this process be seen as a continuing chain of signs of
constantly new interpretations and adjustments, whose causes do not even need to
be connected to each other—in some circumstances they rather follow and take
over from each other by chance. Consequently, the “development” of a thing, a
practice, or an organ has nothing to do with its progressus [progress] towards
a single goal, even less is it the logical and shortest progressus
reached with the least expenditure of power and resources—but rather the
sequence of more or less profound, more or less mutually independent processes
of overpowering which take place on that thing, together with the resistance
which arises against that overpowering each time, the changes of form which have
been attempted for the purpose of defence and reaction, as well as the results
of successful counter-measures. Form is fluid; the “meaning,” however, is even
more so. . . . Even within each individual organism things are no different:
with every essential growth in the totality, the “meaning” of the individual
organ also shifts—in certain circumstances its partial destruction, a reduction
of its numbers (for example, through the obliteration of intermediate
structures) can be a sign of growing power and perfection. What I wanted to say
is this: the partial loss of utility, decline, and degeneration, the
loss of meaning, and purposiveness, in short, death, also belong to the
conditions of a real progressus [progress], which always appears in the
form of a will and a way to a greater power and always establishes
itself at the expense of a huge number of smaller powers. The size of a “step
forward” can even be estimated by a measure of everything that had to
be sacrificed to it. The humanity as mass sacrificed for the benefit of a
single stronger species of man— that would be a step forward .
. . . I emphasize this major point of view about historical methodology all the
more since it basically runs counter to the very instinct which presently rules
and to contemporary taste, which would rather still go along with the absolute
contingency, even the mechanical meaninglessness, of all events rather than with
the theory of a will to power playing itself out in everything that
happens.  The democratic idiosyncrasy of being hostile to everything which rules
and wants to rule, the modern hatred of rulers [Misarchismus] (to make
up a bad word for a bad thing) has gradually transformed itself into and dressed
itself up as something spiritual, of the highest spirituality, to such an extent
that nowadays step by step it is already infiltrating the strictest, apparently
most objective scientific research, and is allowed to infiltrate it.
Indeed, it seems to me already to have attained mastery over all of physiology
and the understanding of life, to their detriment, as is obvious, because it has
conjured away from them their fundamental concept, that of real activity.
By contrast, under the pressure of this idiosyncrasy we push “adaptation” into
the foreground, that is, a second-order activity, a mere reactivity; in fact,
people have defined life itself as an always purposeful inner adaptation to
external circumstances (Herbert Spencer). But that simply misjudges the essence
of life, its will to power. That overlooks the first priority of the
spontaneous, aggressive, over-reaching, re-interpreting, re-directing, and
shaping powers, after whose effects the “adaptation” then follows. Thus, the
governing role of the highest functions in an organism itself, the ones in which
the will for living appear active and creative, are denied. People should
remember the criticism Huxley directed at Spencer for his
“administrative nihilism.” But the issue here concerns much more than
“administration”. . .  

13

Returning to the business at
hand, that is, to punishment, we have to differentiate between two
aspects of it: first its relative duration, the way it is carried out,
the action, the “drama,” a certain strict sequence of procedures and, on the
other hand, its fluidity, the meaning, the purpose, the expectation
linked to the implementation of such procedures. In this matter, we can here
assume, without further comment, per analogium [by analogy], in
accordance with the major viewpoints about the historical method we have just
established, that the procedure itself will be somewhat older and earlier than
its use as a punishment, that the latter was only first injected and
interpreted into the procedure (which had been present for a long time but was a
custom with a different meaning), in short, that it was not what our
naive genealogists of morality and law up to now have assumed, who collectively
imagined that the procedure was invented for the purpose of punishment,
just as people earlier thought that the hand was invented for the purpose of
grasping. Now, so far as that other element in punishment is concerned, the
fluid element, its “meaning,” in a very late cultural state (for example in
contemporary Europe) the idea of “punishment” actually presents not simply one
meaning but a whole synthesis of “meanings.” The history of punishment up to
now, in general, the history of its use for different purposes, finally
crystallizes into a sort of unity, which is difficult to untangle, difficult to
analyze, and, it must be stressed, totally incapable of definition.
(Today it is impossible to say clearly why we really punish; all ideas
in which an entire process is semiotically summarized elude definition. Only
something which has no history is capable of being defined). At an earlier
stage, by contrast, that synthesis of “meanings” still appears easier to
untangle, as well as even easier to adjust. We can still see how in every
individual case the elements in the synthesis alter their valence and rearrange
themselves accordingly, so that soon this or that element steps forward and
dominates at the expense of the rest; indeed, under certain circumstances one
element (say, the purpose of deterrence) appears to rise above all the other
elements. In order to give at least an idea of how uncertain, how belated, how
accidental “the meaning” of punishment is and how one and the same procedure can
be used, interpreted, or adjusted for fundamentally different purposes, let me
offer here an example which presented itself to me on the basis of relatively
little random material: punishment as a way of rendering someone harmless, as a
prevention from further harm; punishment as compensation for the damage to the
person injured, in some form or other (also in the form of emotional
compensation); punishment as isolation of some upset to an even balance in order
to avert a wider outbreak of the disturbance; punishment as way of inspiring
fear of those who determine and carry out punishment; punishment as a sort of
compensation for the advantages which the law breaker has enjoyed up until that
time (for example, when he is made useful as a slave working in the mines);
punishment as a cutting out of a degenerate element (in some circumstances an
entire branch, as in Chinese law, and thus a means to keep the race pure or to
sustain a social type); punishment as festival, that is, as the violation and
humiliation of some enemy one has finally thrown down; punishment as a way of
making a conscience, whether for the man who suffers the punishment— so- called
“reform”—or whether for those who witness the punishment being carried out;
punishment as the payment of an honorarium, set as a condition by those in
power, which protects the wrong doer from the excesses of revenge; punishment as
a compromise with the natural condition of revenge, insofar as the latter is
still upheld and assumed as a privilege by powerful families; punishment as a
declaration of war and a war measure against an enemy to peace, law, order, and
authority, which people fight with the very measures war makes available, as
something dangerous to the community, as a breach of contract with respect to
its conditions, as a rebel, traitor, and breaker of the peace.

14

Of course, this list is not
complete. Obviously punishment is overloaded with all sorts of useful purposes,
all the more reason why people can infer from it an alleged utility,
which, in the popular consciousness at least, is considered its most essential
one—faith in punishment, which nowadays for several reasons is getting shaky,
still finds its most powerful support in precisely that. Punishment is supposed
to be valuable in waking the feeling of guilt in the guilty party. In
punishment people are looking for the actual instrument for that psychic
reaction called “bad conscience,” “pangs of conscience.” But in doing this,
people are misappropriating reality and psychology, even for today, and how much
more for the longest history of man, his prehistory! Real pangs of conscience
are something extremely rare, especially among criminals and prisoners. Prisons
and penitentiaries are not breeding grounds in which this species of
gnawing worm particularly likes to thrive:—on that point all conscientious
observers agree, in many cases delivering such a judgment with sufficient
unwillingness, going against their own desires. In general, punishment makes
people hard and cold. It concentrates. It sharpens the feeling of estrangement;
it strengthens powers of resistance. If it comes about that punishment shatters
a man’s energy and brings on a wretched prostration and self-abasement, such a
consequence is surely even less pleasant than the typical result of punishment,
characteristically a dry, gloomy seriousness. However, if we consider those
thousands of years before the history of humanity, without a second
thought we can conclude that the very development of a feeling of guilt was most
powerfully hindered by punishment—at least with respect to the victims
onto whom this force of punishment was vented. For let us not underestimate just
how much the criminal is prevented by the very sight of judicial and executive
procedures themselves from sensing that his act, the nature of his action, is
something inherently reprehensible, for he sees exactly the same kind
of actions committed in the service of justice, then applauded and practised in
good conscience, like espionage, lying, bribery, entrapment, the whole tricky
and sly art of the police and prosecution, as it manifests itself in the various
kinds of punishment—the robbery, oppression, abuse, imprisonment, torture,
murder, all done, moreover, as a matter of principle, without even any emotional
involvement as an excuse—all these actions are in no way rejected or condemned in
themselves by his judges, but only in particular respects when used for
certain purposes. “Bad conscience,” this most creepy and most interesting plant
among our earthly vegetation, did not grow in this soil—in fact, for
the longest period in the past nothing about dealing with a “guilty
party” penetrated the consciousness of judges or even those doing the punishing.
By contrast, they were dealing with someone who had caused harm, with an
irresponsible piece of fate. And even the man on whom punishment later fell,
once again like a piece of fate, experienced in that no “inner pain,” other than
what might have come from the sudden arrival of something unpredictable, a
terrible natural event, a falling, crushing boulder against which there is no
way to fight any more.

15

At one point Spinoza became
aware of this issue in an incriminating way (something which irritates his
interpreters, like Kuno Fischer, who really go to great lengths to
misunderstand him on this matter), when one afternoon, he came up against some
memory or other (who knows what?) and pondered the question about what, as far
as he was concerned, was left of the celebrated morsus conscientiae [the
bite of conscience]—for him, the man who had expelled good and evil into
human fantasies and had irascibly defended the honour of his “free” God against
those blasphemers who claimed that in everything God worked sub ratione boni
[with good reason] (“but that means that God would be subordinate to Fate,
a claim which, in truth, would be the greatest of all contradictions”). For
Spinoza the world had gone back again into that state of innocence in which it
had existed before the invention of bad conscience. So with that what, then, had
become of the morsus conscientiae? “The opposite of gaudium [joy],”
Spinoza finally told himself “is sorrow, accompanied by the image of something
over and done with which happened contrary to all expectation” (Ethics III,
Proposition XVIII, Schol. I. II). In a manner no different from Spinoza’s,
those instigating evil who incurred punishment have for thousands of years felt,
so far as their “crime” is concerned, “Something has unexpectedly gone awry
here,” not “I should not have done that”—they submitted to their
punishment as people submit to a sickness or some bad luck or death, with that
brave fatalism free of revolt which, for example, even today gives the Russians
an advantage over us westerners in coping with life. If back then there was some
criticism of the act, such criticism came from prudence: without question we
must seek the essential effect of punishment above all in an increase
of prudence, in an extension of memory, in a will to go to work from now on more
carefully, more mistrustfully, more secretly, with the awareness that we are in
many things definitely too weak, in a kind of improved ability to judge
ourselves. In general, what can be achieved through punishment, in human beings
and animals, is an increase in fear, a honing of prudence, and control over
desires. In the process, punishment tames human beings, but it does not
make them “better”—people could with more justification assert the opposite.
(Popular wisdom says “Injury makes people prudent,” but to the extent that it
makes them prudent, it also makes them bad. Fortunately, often enough it makes
people stupid).

16

At this point, I can no longer
avoid setting out, in an initial, provisional statement, my own hypothesis about
the origin of “bad conscience.” It is not easy to get people to attend to it,
and it requires them to consider it at length, to guard it, and to sleep on it.
I consider bad conscience the profound illness which human beings had to come
down with under the pressure of that most fundamental of all the changes which
they ever experienced—that change when they finally found themselves locked
within the confines of society and peace. Just like the things water animals
must have gone though when they were forced either to become land animals or to
die off, so events must have played themselves out with this half-beast so
happily adapted to the wilderness, war, wandering around, adventure—suddenly all
its instincts were devalued and “disengaged.” From this point on, these animals
were to go on foot and “carry themselves”; whereas previously they had been
supported by the water. A terrible heaviness weighed them down. In performing
the simplest things they felt ungainly. In dealing with this new unknown world,
they no longer had their old leaders, the ruling unconscious drives which guided
them safely—these unfortunate creatures were reduced to thinking, inferring,
calculating, bringing together cause and effect, reduced to their
“consciousness,” their most impoverished and error-prone organ! I believe that
never on earth has there been such a feeling of misery, such a leaden
discomfort—while at the same time those old instincts had not all of a sudden
stopped imposing their demands! Only it was difficult and seldom possible to do
their bidding. For the most part, they had to find new and, as it were,
underground satisfactions for themselves. All instincts which are not discharged
to the outside are turned back inside—this is what I call the
internalization [Verinnerlichung] of man. From this first grows in man what
people later call his “soul.” The entire inner world, originally as thin as if
stretched between two layers of skin, expanded and extended itself, acquired
depth, width, and height, to the extent that what a person discharged out into
the world was obstructed. Those frightening fortifications with which
the organization of the state protected itself against the old instincts for
freedom—punishments belong above all to these fortifications—brought it about
that all those instincts of the wild, free, roaming man turned themselves
backwards, against man himself. Enmity, cruelty, joy in pursuit, in
attack, in change, in destruction—all those turned themselves against the
possessors of such instincts. That is the origin of “bad conscience.”
The man who, because of a lack of external enemies and opposition, was forced
into an oppressive narrowness and regularity of custom impatiently tore himself
apart, persecuted himself, gnawed away at himself, grew upset, and did himself
damage—this animal which scraped itself raw against the bars of its cage, which
people want to “tame,” this impoverished creature, consumed with longing for the
wild, which had to create out of its own self an adventure, a torture chamber,
an uncertain and dangerous wilderness—this fool, this yearning and puzzled
prisoner, became the inventor of “bad conscience.” But with him was introduced
the greatest and weirdest illness, from which humanity up to the present time
has not recovered, the suffering of man from man, from himself, a
consequence of the forcible separation from his animal past, a leap and, so to
speak, a fall into new situations and living conditions, a declaration of war
against the old instincts, on which, up to that point, his power, joy, and
ability to inspire fear had been based. Let us at once add that, on the other
hand, the fact that there was on earth an animal soul turned against itself,
taking sides against itself, meant there was something so new, profound, unheard
of, enigmatic, contradictory, and full of the future, that with it the
picture of the earth was fundamentally changed. In fact, it required divine
spectators to appreciate the dramatic performance which then began and whose
conclusion is by no means yet in sight—a spectacle too fine, too wonderful, too
paradoxical, to be allowed to play itself out senselessly and unobserved on some
ridiculous star or other! Since then man has been included among the
most unexpected and most thrillingly lucky rolls of the dice in
the game played by Heraclitus’ “great child,” whether he’s called Zeus or
chance.
For himself he arouses a certain interest, a tension, a hope, almost a
certainty, as if something is announcing itself with him, something is preparing
itself, as if the human being were not the goal but only a way, an episode, a
bridge, a great promise . . .

17

Inherent in this hypothesis
about the origin of bad conscience is, firstly, the assumption that the change
was not gradual or voluntary and did not manifest itself as an organic growth
into new conditions, but as a break, a leap, something forced, an irrefutable
disaster, against which there was no struggle, nor even any ressentiment.
Secondly, however, it assumes that the adaptation of a populace hitherto
unchecked and shapeless into a fixed form, just as it was initiated by an act of
violence, was carried to its conclusion by nothing but acts of violence—that
consequently the oldest “State” emerged as a terrible tyranny, as an oppressive
and inconsiderate machinery, and continued working until such raw materials of
people and half-animals finally were not only thoroughly kneaded and submissive
but also given a shape. I used the word “State”: it is self-evident who
is meant by that term—some pack of blond predatory animals, a race of conquerors
and masters, which, organized for war and with the power to organize, without
thinking about it, sets its terrifying paws on a subordinate population which
may perhaps be vast in numbers but is still without any form, is still wandering
about. That is, in fact, the way the “State” begins on earth. I believe that
fantasy has been done away with which sees the beginning of the state in a
“contract.” The man who can command, who is by nature a “master,” who comes
forward with violence in his actions and gestures—what has he to do with making
contracts! We do not negotiate with such beings. They come like fate, without
cause, reason, consideration, or pretext. They are present as lightning is
present, too fearsome, too sudden, too convincing, too “different” even to
become merely hated. Their work is the instinctive creation of forms, the
imposition of forms. They are the most involuntary and most unconscious artists
in existence:—where they appear something new is soon present, a power structure
which lives, something in which the parts and functions are demarcated
and coordinated, in which there is, in general, no place for anything which does
not first derive its “meaning” from its relationship to the totality. These men,
these born organizers, have no idea what guilt, responsibility, and
consideration are. In them that fearsome egotism of the artist is in charge,
which stares out like bronze and knows how to justify itself for all time in the
“work,” just as a mother does in her child. They are not the ones in
whom “bad conscience” grew—that point is obvious from the outset. But this
hateful plant would not have grown without them. It would have failed
if an immense amount of freedom had not been driven from the world under the
pressure of their hammer blows, their artistic violence, or at least had not
been driven from sight and, as it were made latent. This powerful instinct
for freedom, once made latent—we already understand how—this instinct for
freedom driven back, repressed, imprisoned inside, and finally still able to
discharge and direct itself only against itself—that and that alone is what bad
conscience is in its beginning.

18

We need to be careful not to
entertain a low opinion of this entire phenomenon simply because it is from the
start nasty and painful. In fact, it is basically the same active force which is
at work on a grander scale in those artists of power and organizers and which
builds states. Here it is inner, smaller, more mean spirited, directing itself
backwards, into “the labyrinth of the breast,” to use Goethe’s words, and it
creates bad conscience for itself and builds negative ideals, just that instinct
for freedom (to use my own language, the will to power). Only the material
on which the shaping and violating nature of this force directs itself here is
simply man himself, his entire old animal self—and not, as in that
greater and more striking phenomenon, on another man or on other men.
This furtive violation of the self, this artistic cruelty, this pleasure in
giving a shape to oneself as a tough, resisting, suffering material, to burn
into it a will, a critique, a contradiction, a contempt, a denial, this weird
and horribly pleasurable work of a soul willingly divided against itself, which
makes itself suffer for the pleasure of creating suffering, all this active “bad
conscience,” as the essential womb of ideal and imaginative events, finally
brought to light—we have already guessed—also an abundance of strange new beauty
and affirmation and perhaps for the first time the idea of the beautiful in
general. . . . For what would be “beautiful,” if its opposite had not yet come
to an awareness of itself, if ugliness had not already said to itself, “I am
ugly”? At least, after this hint the paradox will be less puzzling, the extent
to which in contradictory ideas, like
selflessness, self-denial, self-sacrifice, an ideal can be indicated,
something beautiful. And beyond that, one thing we do know—I have no doubt about
it—namely, the nature of the pleasure which the selfless, self-denying,
self-sacrificing person experiences from the beginning: this pleasure belongs to
cruelty. So much for the moment on the origin of the “unegoistic” as something
of moral worth and on the demarcation of the soil out of which this
value has grown: only bad conscience, only the will to abuse the self, provides
the condition for the value of the un-egoistic.

19

Bad conscience is a
sickness—there’s no doubt about that—but a sickness the way pregnancy is a
sickness. Let’s look for the conditions in which this illness has arrived at its
most terrible and most sublime peak:—in this way we’ll see what really brought
about its entry into the world at the start. But that requires a lot of
endurance—and we must first go back once more to an earlier point of view. The
relationship in civil law between the debtor and his creditor, which I have
reviewed extensively already, has been interpreted once again in an extremely
remarkable and dubious historical manner into a relationship which we modern men
are perhaps least capable of understanding, namely, into the relationship
between those people presently alive and their ancestors. Within the
original tribal cooperatives—we’re talking about primeval times—the living
generation always acknowledged a legal obligation to the previous generations,
and especially to the earliest one which had founded the tribe (and this was in
no way merely a sentimental obligation: the latter is something we could even
reasonably claim was, in general, absent for the longest period of the human
race). Here the reigning conviction is that the tribe exists at all
only because of the sacrifices and achievements of its ancestors—and that people
have to pay them back with sacrifices and achievements.  In this people
recognize a debt which keeps steadily growing because these ancestors
in their continuing existence as powerful spirits do not stop giving the tribe
new advantages and lending them their power. Do they do this gratuitously? But
there is no “gratuitously” for those raw and “spiritually destitute” ages. What
can people give back to them? Sacrifices (at first as nourishment understood
very crudely), festivals, chapels, signs of honour, above all, obedience—for all
customs, as work of one’s ancestors, are also their statutes and commands. Do
people ever give them enough? This suspicion remains and grows. From time to
time it forcefully requires a huge wholesale redemption, something immense as a
repayment  to the “creditor” (the notorious sacrifice of the first born, for
example, blood, human blood in any case). The fear of ancestors and
their power, the awareness of one’s debt to them, according to this kind of
logic, necessarily increases directly in proportion to the increase in the power
of the tribe itself, as the tribe finds itself constantly more victorious, more
independent, more honoured, and more feared. It’s not the other way around!
Every step towards the decline of the tribe, all conditions of misery, all
indications of degeneration, of approaching dissolution, rather lead to a
constant lessening of the fear of the spirit of its founder and give a
constantly smaller image of his wisdom, providence, and powerful presence. If we
think this crude form of logic through to its conclusion, then the ancestors of
the most powerful tribes must, because of the fantasy of increasing
fear, finally have grown into something immense and have been pushed back into
the darkness of a divine mystery, something beyond the powers of imagination, so
that finally the ancestor is necessarily transfigured into a god. Here
perhaps lies even the origin of the gods, thus an origin out of fear! .
. . And the man to whom it seems obligatory to add “But also out of piety” could
hardly claim to be right for the longest period of the human race, for his
primaeval age. Of course, he would be all the more correct for the middle period,
in which the noble tribes developed—those who in fact paid back to their
founders, their ancestors (heroes, gods), with interest, all the characteristics
which in the meantime had become manifest in themselves, the noble
qualities. Later we will have another look at the process by which the gods were
ennobled and exalted (which is naturally not at all the same thing as their
becoming “holy”). But now, for the moment, let’s follow the path of this whole
development of the consciousness of guilt to its conclusion.

20

As history teaches us, the
consciousness of being in debt to the gods did not in any way come to an end
after the downfall of the organization of the “community” based on blood
relationships. Just as humanity inherited the ideas of “good and bad” from the
nobility of the tribe (together with its fundamental psychological tendency to
set up orders of rank), in the same way people also inherited, as well as the
divinities of the tribe and of the extended family, the pressure of as yet
unpaid debts and the desire to be relieved of them. (The transition is made with
those numerous slave and indentured populations which adapted themselves to the
divine cults of their masters, whether through compulsion or through
obsequiousness and mimicry; from them this inheritance then overflowed in all
directions). The feeling of being indebted to the gods did not stop growing for
several thousands of years, always, in fact, in direct proportion to the extent
to which the idea of god and the feeling for god grew on earth and were carried
to the heights. (The entire history of ethnic fighting, victory, reconciliation,
mergers, everything which comes before the final rank ordering of all the
elements of a people in every great racial synthesis, is mirrored in the tangled
genealogies of its gods, in the sagas of their fights, victories, and
reconciliations. The progress towards universal empires is always also the
progress toward universal divinities. In addition, despotism, with its overthrow
of the independent nobility always builds the way to some variety of
monotheism). The arrival of the Christian god, as the greatest [Maximal] god
which has yet been reached, thus brought about the maximum feeling of
indebtedness on earth. Assuming that we have gradually set out in the
reverse direction, we can infer with no small probability that, given the
inexorable decline of faith in the Christian god, even now there may already be
a considerable decline in the human consciousness of guilt. Indeed, we cannot
dismiss the idea that the complete and final victory of atheism could release
humanity from this entire feeling of being indebted to its origin, its causa
prima [prime cause]. Atheism and a kind of second innocence belong
together.—

21

So much for a brief and rough
preface concerning the connection between the ideas “guilt” and “obligation”
with religious assumptions. Up to this point I have deliberately set aside the
actual moralizing of these ideas (the repression of them into the conscience, or
more precisely, the complex interaction of the bad conscience with the
idea of god). At the end of the previous section I even talked as if there were
no such thing as this moralizing and thus as if those ideas were now necessarily
coming to an end after the collapse of their presuppositions, the faith in our
“creditor,” in God. But to a terrifying extent the facts indicate something
different. The moralizing of the ideas of debt and duty, with their repression
into the bad conscience, actually gave rise to the attempt to reverse the
direction of the development I have just described, or at least to bring its
motion to a halt. Now, in a fit of pessimism, the prospect of a final
installment must once and for all be denied; now, our gaze must bounce
and ricochet back despairingly off an iron impossibility, now those ideas of
“debt” and “duty” must turn back. But against whom? There can
be no doubt: first of all against the “debtor,” in whom from this point on bad
conscience sets itself firmly, gnaws away, spreads out, and, like a polyp, grows
wide and deep to such an extent that finally, with the impossibility of
discharging the debt, people also come up with the notion that it is impossible
to remove the penance, the idea that it cannot be paid off (“eternal punishment”):—finally
however, those ideas of “debt” and “duty” turn back even against the “creditor.”
People should, in this matter, now think about the causa prima [first cause] of
humanity, about the beginning of the human race, about their ancestor who from
now on is loaded down with a curse (“Adam,” “original sin,” “no freedom of the
will”) or about nature from whose womb human beings arose and into which the
principle of evil is now inserted (“the demonizing of nature”) or about
existence in general, which remains something inherently without value  (nihilistic
turning away from existence, longing for nothingness, or a desire for its
“opposite,” in an alternate state of being, Buddhism and things like that)—until
all of a sudden we confront the paradoxical and horrifying expedient with which
a martyred humanity found temporary relief, that stroke of genius of
Christianity: God sacrificing himself for the guilt of human beings, God
paying himself back with himself, God as the only one who can redeem man from
what for human beings has become impossible to redeem—the creditor sacrificing
himself for the debtor, out of love (can people believe that?), out of
love for his debtor! . . .

22

You will already have guessed what really
went on with all this and under all this: that will to self-torment,
that repressed cruelty of animal man pushed inward and forced back into himself,
imprisoned in the “state” to make him tame, who invented bad conscience in order
to lacerate himself, after the more natural discharge of this will to
inflict pain had been blocked—this man of bad conscience seized upon religious
assumptions to drive his self-torment to its most horrifying hardship and
ferocity. Guilt towards God: this idea becomes his instrument of
torture. In “God” he seizes on the ultimate contrast he is capable of
discovering to his real and indissoluble animal instincts. He interprets these
animal instincts themselves as a crime against God (as enmity, rebellion, revolt
against the “master,” the “father,” the original ancestor and beginning of the
world). He grows tense with the contradiction of “God” and “devil.” He hurls
from himself every “No” which he says to himself, to nature, naturalness, the
factual reality [Tatsächlichkeit] of his being as a “Yes,” as something
existing, as living, as real, as God, as the blessedness of God, as God the
Judge, as God the Hangman, as something beyond him, as eternity, as perpetual
torment, as hell, as punishment and guilt beyond measure. In this spiritual
cruelty there is a kind of insanity of the will which simply has no equal: a
man’s will finding him so guilty and reprehensible that there is no
atonement, his will to imagine himself punished, but in such a way that
the punishment could never be adequate for his crime, his will to
infect and poison the most fundamental basis of things with the problem of
punishment and guilt in order to cut himself off once and for all from any exit
out of this labyrinth of “fixed ideas,” his will to erect an ideal—that
of the “holy God”—in order to be tangibly certain of his own absolute
worthlessness when confronted with it. O this insane, sad beast man! What ideas
it has, what unnaturalness, what paroxysms of nonsense, what bestiality of
thought breaks from it as soon as it is prevented, if only a little, from
being a beast in deed! . . . All this is excessively interesting, but
there’s also a black, gloomy, unnerving sadness about it, so that man must
forcefully hold himself back from gazing too long into these abysses. Here we
have illness—no doubt about that—the most terrifying illness that has
raged in human beings up to now:—and anyone who can still hear (but nowadays
people no longer have the ear for that!—) how in this night of torment and
insanity the cry of love has resounded, the cry of the most yearning
delight, of redemption through love, turns away, seized by an
invincible horror. . . In human beings there is so much that is terrible! . . .
The world has already been a lunatic asylum for too long!

23

These remarks should be
sufficient, once and for all, concerning the origin of the “holy God.”—The fact
that conceiving gods does not necessarily, in itself, have to lead to
this degraded imagination, that’s something we could not excuse ourselves from
recalling for a moment, the point that there are more uplifting ways to
use the invention of the gods than for this human self-crucifixion and
self-laceration, in which Europe in the last millennia has become an
expert—fortunately that’s something we can still infer with every glance we cast
at the Greek gods, these reflections of nobler men, more rulers of
themselves, in whom the animal in man felt himself deified and did not tear
himself apart, did not rage against himself! These Greeks for the
longest time used their gods for the very purpose of keeping that “bad
conscience” at a distance, in order to be permitted to continue enjoying their
psychic freedom. Hence, their understanding was the opposite of how Christianity
used its God. In this matter the Greeks went a very long way, these
splendid and lion-hearted Greeks, with their child-like minds. And no lesser
authority than that of Homer’s Zeus himself now and then lets them understand
that they are making things too easy for themselves. “It’s strange,” he says at
one point in relation to the case of Aegisthus, a very bad case—

It’s strange how these
mortal creatures complain about the gods!
Evil comes only from us, they claim, but
they themselves
Stupidly make themselves miserable, even contrary
to fate.

But at the same time we hear
and see that even this Olympian spectator and judge is far from being irritated
and from thinking them evil because of this: “How foolish they are,” he
thinks in relation to the bad deeds of mortal men—and even the Greeks of the
strongest and bravest times conceded that much about themselves—the
“foolishness,” “stupidity,” a little “disturbance in the head” were the basis
for many bad and fateful things—foolishness, not sin! Do you understand
that? . . . But even this disturbance in the head was a problem, “Indeed, how is
this even possible? Where could this have really come from in heads like the
ones we have, we men of noble descent, happy, successful, from the best society,
noble, and virtuous?”—for hundreds of years the aristocratic Greek posed this
question to himself in relation to every horror or outrage incomprehensible to
him which had defiled one of his peers. “Some god must have deluded
him,” he finally said, shaking his head . . . This solution is typical of
the Greeks . . . In this way, the gods then served to justify men to a certain
extent, even in bad things. They served as the origins of evil—at that time the
gods took upon themselves, not punishment, but, what is nobler, the
guilt. . .

24

—I’ll conclude with three
question marks—that’s clear enough. You may perhaps ask me, “Is an ideal
actually being built up here or shattered?” . . . But have you ever really asked
yourself enough how high a price has been paid on earth for the construction of every ideal?
How much reality had to be constantly vilified and misunderstood for that to
happen, how many lies had to be consecrated, how many consciences corrupted, how
much “god” had to be sacrificed every time? In order to enable a shrine to be
built, a shrine must be destroyed: that is the law—show me the case
where it has not been fulfilled! We modern men, we are the inheritors of
thousands of years of vivisection of the conscience and self-inflicted animal
torture. That’s what we have had the longest practice doing, that is perhaps our
artistry; in any case, it’s something we have refined, the corruption of our
taste. For too long man has looked at his natural inclinations with an “evil
eye,” so that finally in him they have become twinned with “bad conscience.” An
attempt to reverse this might, in itself, be possible—but who is strong
enough for it, that is, to link as siblings bad conscience and the unnatural inclinations,
all those aspirations for what lies beyond, those things which go against our
senses, against our instincts, against nature, against animals—in short, the
earlier ideals, all the ideals which are hostile to life, ideals of those who
vilify the world? To whom can we turn to today with such hopes and
demands? . . .  In this we would have precisely the good people against
us, as well, of course, as the comfortable, the complacent, the vain, the
enthusiastic, the tired. . . .  But what is more deeply offensive, what cuts us
off so fundamentally, as letting them take some note of the severity and
loftiness with which  we deal with ourselves? And, by contrast, how obliging,
how friendly all the world is in relation to us, as soon as we act as all the
world does and “let ourselves go” just like all the world! To attain the goal
I’m talking about requires a different sort of spirit from those which
are likely to exist at this particular time: spirits empowered by war and
victory, for whom conquest, adventure, danger, and even pain have become a need.
That would require getting acclimatized to keen, high air, winter wanderings, to
ice and mountains in every sense. That would require even a kind of sublime
maliciousness, an ultimate self-conscious wilfulness of knowledge, which comes
with great health. Simply and seriously put, that would require just this
great health! . . . Is this even possible today? . . . But at some time or
other, in a more powerful time than this mouldy, self-doubting present, he must
nonetheless come to us, the redeeming man of great love and contempt,
the creative spirit, constantly pushed again and again away from every sideline
or from the beyond by his own driving power, whose isolation is misunderstood by
people as if it were a flight from reality—whereas it is only his
immersion, burial, and absorption in reality, so that, once he comes
out of it into the light again, he brings home the redemption of this
reality, its redemption from the curse which the previous ideal has laid upon
it. This man of the future, who will release us from that earlier ideal just as
much as from what had to grow from it, from the great loathing, from
the will to nothingness, from nihilism—that stroke of noon and of the great
decision which makes the will free once again, who gives back to the earth its
purpose and to the human being his hope, this anti-Christ and anti-nihilist,
this conqueror of God and of nothingness—at some point he must come . . .

25

But what am I talking about
here? Enough, enough! At this stage there’s only one thing appropriate for me to
do: keep quiet. Otherwise, I’ll make the mistake of arrogating to myself
something which only someone younger is free to do, someone “more of the
future,” someone more powerful than I am—something that only
Zarathustra is free to do, Zarathustra the Godless . . . .

ENDNOTES

  Nietzsche
quotes the Latin: “si plus minusve secuerunt, ne fraude esto.” 

 Spinoza: Baruch de
Spinoza (1632-1677), important Dutch rationalist philosopher.


  Pope Innocent III:
(1161-1216), an important and powerful medieval Pope.


  . . . ressentiment: As
mentioned above (in the First Essay), Nietzsche uses this French word, which
since his writing, and largely because of it, has entered the English language
as an important term in psychology: a short definition is as follows:
“deep-seated resentment, frustration, and hostility, accompanied by a sense of
being powerless to express these feelings directly” (Merriam-Webster).
Ressentiment is thus significantly different in meaning from resentment.


  E. Dühring:
(1833-1921), German philosopher and economist.  

  Herbert Spencer:
(1820-1903), English philosopher who advanced the idea of evolution as a
progressive process in society. Huxley: Thomas Huxley (1825-1895): a major
English champion of Darwin’s evolutionary ideas.  

  Heraclitus: (c. 535-475 BC)
an important pre-Socratic Greek philosopher.  

  Zeus makes these remarks to the
other Olympian gods at the start of Homer’s Odyssey. Aegisthus seduced
Clytaemnestra, and the two of them murdered Agamemnon, her husband, as soon as
he returned home from the Trojan War. The gods, according to Homer, had warned
him against these actions.  


Zarathustra: a name for the Persian prophet Zoroaster, which Nietzsche
appropriates to designate a spokesman for his own ideas.


Link to Genealogy of Morals, Table of Contents

Nietzsche, Genealogy of Morals, Third Essay


On the Genealogy of Morals
A Polemical Tract

2014

[Students, teachers,
artists, and members of the general public may download and distribute this text
free of charge and without permission. They may also freely edit the text to
suit their purposes. However, no commercial publication of this text or any part
of it is allowed without


If you  would like to
download a Rich Text Format (Word) text of this text, please
Genealogy

Third Essay
What do ascetic ideals mean?

Carefree, mocking, violent—
that what Wisdom wants us to be.
She is a woman. She always loves only a man of war.

Thus Spoke
Zarathustra

1

What do ascetic ideals mean?—Among artists they mean nothing or too many different things; among philosophers and scholars they mean something like having a nose or an instinct for the most auspicious conditions of a higher spirituality; among women, at best one additional seductive charm, a little morbidezza [small
morbidity] on beautiful flesh, the angelic quality of a nice-looking, plump
animal; among physiologically impaired and peevish people (that is, among the majority of
mortals) they are an attempt to imagine themselves as “too good” for this world,
a holy form of orgiastic excess, their chief tool in the fight with their
enduring pain and boredom; among the clergy they  are the essential priestly
belief, their best instrument of power, and also the “highest of all” permits
for power; finally among the saints they are a pretext for hibernation, their novissima gloriae cupido [most
recent desire for glory], their repose in nothingness (“God”), their form
of insanity. However, the fact that generally the ascetic ideal has
meant so much to human beings is an expression of the basic fact of the human
will, its horror vacui [horror of a vacuum]. It requires a goal—and it prefers to will nothingness than not to will.—Do you
understand me? . . . Have you understood me? . . . “Not in the slightest, my
dear sir!”—so, let’s start from the beginning.

2

What do ascetic ideals
mean?—Or, to take a single example which I have been asked to give advice about
often enough, what does it mean, for instance, when an artist like Richard
Wagner in his later years pays homage to chastity? In a certain sense, of
course, he always did this, but in an ascetic sense he did it for the first time
at the very end. What does this change in “sense” mean, this radical change in
sense?—For that’s what it was: with it Wagner leapt right over into his
opposite. What does it mean when an artist leaps over into his opposite? . . .
If we are willing to pause for a while at this question, we immediately
encounter here the memory of perhaps the best, strongest, most cheerful, and bravest period
in Wagner’s life, the time when he was inwardly and deeply preoccupied with the
idea of Luther’s marriage. Who knows the circumstances which
really saw to it that today, instead of this wedding music, we have Die
Meistersinger?
And how much of the former work may
perhaps still echo in the latter? But there is no doubt that this “Luther’s
Wedding” would also have involved the praise of chastity. Of course, it would
have contained a praise of sensuality, as well —and that, it strikes me, would
have been very much in order, very “Wagnerian,” too. For between chastity and
sensuality there is no necessary opposition. Every good marriage, every genuine
affair of the heart transcends this opposition. In my view, Wagner
would have  done well if he had enabled his Germans to take this pleasant fact
to heart once more, with the help of a lovely and brave comedy about Luther, for
among the Germans there are and always have been a lot of people who slander
sensuality, and Luther’s merit is probably nowhere greater than precisely here:
in having had the courage of his own sensuality (—at that time people
called it, delicately enough, “evangelical freedom”). But even if it were the
case that there really is that antithesis between chastity and sensuousness,
fortunately there is no need for it to be a tragic antithesis. At least this
should be the case for all successful and cheerful mortals, who are far from
considering their unstable equilibrium between “animal and angel” an immediate
argument against existence—the finest and brightest, like Goethe, like Hafiz,
even saw in this one more attraction of life.  It’s precisely such
“contradictions” that make existence enticing. . . . On the other hand, it’s
easy enough to understand that once pigs who have had bad luck are persuaded to
worship chastity—and there are such swine!—they see in chastity only their
opposite, the opposite to unlucky pigs, and will worship that—and with such
zealous tragic grunting! We can imagine it—that embarrassing and unnecessary
antithesis, which Richard Wagner at the end of his life unquestioningly still
wanted to set to music and produce on stage. But what for? That’s a
fair question. For why should he be concerned about pigs? Why should we?—

3

In this matter there is, of
course, another question we cannot circumvent: why was Wagner really concerned
about that manly (alas, so unmanly) “simpleton from the country,” that
poor devil and nature boy Parsifal, whom he finally turned into a Catholic in
such an embarrassing way.
What? Was this Parsifal meant to be taken at all seriously? For we
could be tempted to assume the reverse, even to desire it—that the Wagnerian
Parsifal was intended to be cheerful, a concluding piece and satyr drama, as it
were, with which the tragic writer Wagner wanted to take his farewell, in a
respectful manner worthy of him, from us, also from himself, and, above all, from
tragedy, that is, with an excess of the highest and most high-spirited
parody of the tragic itself, of the entire dreadful earthly seriousness and
earthly wailing of his earlier works, of the crudest form in the
anti-nature of the ascetic ideal, conquered at last. That would have been, as
mentioned, particularly worthy of a great tragedian, who, like every artist,
first attains the final peak of his greatness when he knows how to see himself
and his art beneath him—when he knows how to laugh at himself.
Is Parsifal Wagner’s secret superior laughter at himself, the triumph
of his achieving the ultimate and highest artistic freedom, the artist’s
movement into another world [Künstler-Jenseitigkeit]? As I’ve said, we
might wish that. For what would Parsifal be if intended seriously?
Do we need to see in it (as it was put to me) “the epitome of an insane hatred
for knowledge, spirit, and sensuality”? A curse on the senses and the spirit in
one breath of hatred? An apostasy and going back to sickly Christian and
obscurantist ideals? And finally even a denial of the self, a cancellation of
the self on the part of an artist who up to that point had directed all the
power of his will to attain the reverse, namely, the highest
spiritualization and sensuousness in his art? And not only in his art, but
also in his life. We should remember how Wagner in his day so enthusiastically
followed in the footsteps of the philosopher Feuerbach. Feuerbach’s phrase about
“healthy sensuality”—in Wagner’s thirties and forties, as with many Germans
(—they called themselves the “young Germans”), that phrase rang out
like a word of redemption. Did Wagner finally learn something different?
It appears, at least, that he finally wanted to teach something different.
And not only on the stage with the Parsifal trombones:—in the cloudy
writings of his last years—as constricted as they are baffling—there are a
hundred places which betray a secret wish and will, a despondent, uncertain,
unacknowledged will essentially to preach nothing but going back, conversion,
denial, Christianity, medievalism, and to say to his followers “It’s nothing!
Seek salvation somewhere else!” In one place he even calls out to the “Blood of
the Redeemer” . . . .

4

In a case like Wagner’s, which
is in many ways an embarrassing one, although the example is typical, my opinion
is that it’s certainly best to separate an artist far enough from his work, so
that one does not take him with the same seriousness as one does his work. In
the final analysis, he is only the precondition for his work, its maternal womb,
the soil or, in some cases, the dung and manure, on and out of which it
grows—and thus, in most cases, something that we must forget about, if we want
to enjoy the work itself. Insight into the origin of a work is a matter
for physiologists and vivisectionists of the spirit, never the aesthetic
men, the artists—never! In a deep, fundamental, even terrifying way the poet and
composer of Parsifal could not escape living inside and descending into
the conflicts of the medieval soul, a hostile distance from all spiritual
loftiness, rigour, and discipline, a form of intellectual perversity (if
you will forgive the expression), any more than a pregnant woman can escape the
repellent and strange aspects of pregnancy, something which, as I have said, one
must forget if one wants to enjoy the child. We should be on our guard
against that confusion which arises from psychological contiguity (to use an
English word), a confusion in which even an artist can only too easily get
caught up, as if he himself were what he can present, imagine, and
express. In fact, the case is this: if that were what he was, he simply
would not present, imagine, or express it. A Homer would not have written a poem
about Achilles or a Goethe a poem about Faust if Homer had been an Achilles or
if Goethe had been a Faust. A complete and entire artist is forever separated
from the “real,” from what actually is. On the other hand, one can understand
how he can sometimes grow weary of this eternal “unreality” and falseness of his
innermost existence to the point of desperation—and that he then makes an
attempt for once to reach over into what is forbidden precisely to him, into
reality, in an attempt truly to be. What success does he have? We can
guess . . . That is the typical wishfulness of the artist: the same wishfulness which
fell over Wagner once he’d grown old and for which he had to pay such a high,
fatal price (—because of it he lost a valuable number of his friends). Finally,
however, and quite apart from this mere wishfulness of his, who could not
desire—for Wagner’s own sake—that he had taken his leave of us and his art in
a different manner, not with a Parsifal, but more victoriously, more
self-confidently, more like Wagner—less deceptive, less ambiguous about all his
intentions, less like Schopenhauer, less nihilistic?

5

—So what do ascetic ideals
mean? In the case of an artist, we know the answer immediately:—absolutely
nothing! . . . Or they mean so many things, that they amount to nothing at
all! . . . So let’s eliminate the artists right away. They do not stand
independent of the world and against the world long enough for their
evaluations and the changes in those evaluations to merit our interest for
their own sake! They have in all ages been valets to a morality or
philosophy or religion, quite apart from the fact that, often enough, they
unfortunately have been the all-too-adaptable courtiers of groups of their
followers and their patrons and flatterers with a fine nose for old or simply
newly arriving powers. At the very least, they always need a means of
protection, a support, an already established authority. The artists never stand
for themselves—standing alone contravenes their deepest instincts. Hence, for
example, “once the time had come” Richard Wagner took the philosopher
Schopenhauer as his point man, as his protection. Who could have even imagined
that he would have had the courage for an ascetic ideal without the
support which Schopenhauer’s philosophy offered him, without the authority of
Schopenhauer, which was becoming predominant in Europe in the 1870's?
(And that’s not even considering whether in the new Germany it would
have been generally possible to be an artist without the milk
of a pious, imperially pious way of thinking).—And
with this we come to the more serious question: What does it mean when real
philosopher pays homage to the ascetic ideal, a truly independent spirit
like Schopenhauer, a man and a knight with an bronze gaze, who is courageous to
himself, who knows how to stand alone and does not first wait for a front man
and hints from higher up?—Here let us consider right away the remarkable and for
many sorts of people even fascinating position of Schopenhauer on art,
for that was apparently the reason Richard Wagner first moved over to
Schopenhauer (persuaded to do that, as we know, by a poet, by Herwegh). That
shift was so great that it opened up a complete theoretical contrast between his
earlier and his later aesthetic beliefs— between, for example, the earlier views
expressed in “Opera and Drama” and the later views in the writings which he
published from 1870 on. In particular, what is perhaps most surprising is that
from this point on Wagner ruthlessly altered his judgment of the value and place
of music itself. Why should it concern him that up to that point he had
used music as a means, a medium, a “woman,” something which simply required a
purpose, a man, in order to flourish—that is, drama! Suddenly he realized that
with Schopenhauer’s theory and innovation he could do more in majorem
musicae gloriam [for the greater glory of music]—that is, through the
sovereignty of music, as Schopenhauer understood it: music set apart from
all other arts, the inherently independent art, not, like the other
arts, offering copies of phenomena, but rather the voice of the will
itself speaking out directly from the “abyss” as its most authentic, most
primordial, least derivative revelation. With this extraordinary increase in the
value of music, as this seemed to grow out of Schopenhauer’s philosophy, the
musician himself also suddenly grew in value to an unheard of extent: from
now on he would be an oracle, a priest, more than a priest, in fact, a kind of
mouthpiece of the “essence” of things, a telephone from the world beyond—in
future he didn’t speak only of music, this ventriloquist of God—he talked
metaphysics. Is it any wonder that finally one day he spoke about ascetic
ideals? . . .

6

Schopenhauer used Kant’s
formulation of the aesthetic problem— although he certainly did not examine it
with Kantian eyes. Kant thought he had honoured art when among the predicates of
the beautiful he gave priority to and set in the foreground those which
constitute the honour of knowledge—impersonality and universal validity. Here is
not the place to explore whether or not this is for the most part a false idea.
The only thing I wish to stress is that Kant, like all philosophers, instead of
taking aim at the aesthetic problem from the experiences of the artist (the
creator), thought about art and the beautiful only from the point of view of the
“looker on” and in the process, without anyone noticing it, brought the
“spectator” himself into the concept “beautiful.” If only these philosophers of
beauty had also been at least sufficiently knowledgeable about this
“spectator”!— that is, as a great personal fact and experience, as a
wealth of very particular, strong experiences, desires, surprises, and delights
in the realm of the beautiful! But I fear the opposite has always been the case.
And so from the very start we get from them definitions like that famous one
which Kant gives for the beautiful, in which the lack of a finer self-experience
sits in the shape of a thick worm of fundamental error. “The beautiful,” Kant
said, “is what pleases in a disinterested way.” In a disinterested way!
Let’s compare this definition with that other one formulated by a true
“spectator” and artist—Stendhal, who once called the beautiful a promesse de bonheur [a
promise of happiness]. Here, at any rate, the very thing which Kant
emphasises in the aesthetic state is clearly rejected
and deleted: déintéressement
[disinterestedness]. Who is right, Kant or Stendhal?—Naturally,
if our aestheticians never get tired of weighing the issue in Kant’s favour,
claiming that under the magic spell of beauty people can look even at
unclothed female statues “without interest,” we are entitled to laugh a little
at their expense:—in relation to this delicate matter, the experiences of artists are
“more interesting,” and Pygmalion was in any event not necessarily an
“unaesthetic man.”
Let’s think all the better of the innocence of our aestheticians, which is
reflected in such arguments. For example, let’s count it to Kant’s honour that
he knew how to lecture on the characteristic properties of the sense of touch
with the naïveté of a country parson.—This point brings us back to Schopenhauer,
who stood measurably closer to the arts than Kant but who nonetheless did not
get away from the spell of the Kantian definition. How did that happen? The
circumstance is sufficiently odd. He interpreted the word “disinterested” in the
most personal manner from a single experience which must have been something
routine with him. There are few things Schopenhauer talks about with as much
confidence as he does about the effect of aesthetic contemplation. In connection
with that, he states that it counteracts sexual “interest” in
particular—and thus acts like lupulin or camphor. He never got tired of
extolling this emancipation from the “will” as the great advantage and
use of the aesthetic state. Indeed, we could be tempted to ask whether his basic
conception of “Will and Idea,” the notion that there could be a redemption from
the “will” only through “representation,” might have taken its origin from a
universalizing of that sexual experience. (With all questions concerning
Schopenhauer’s philosophy, incidentally, we should never fail to consider that
it is the conception of a twenty-six-year-old young man, so that it involves not
merely the specific details of Schopenhauer but also the particular details of
that time of life). If, for example, we listen to one of the most expressive
passages from the countless ones he wrote to honour the aesthetic state (World
as Will and Idea, I, 231), we hear its tone, the suffering, the happiness,
the gratitude uttered in words like these: “That is the painless condition which
Epicurus valued as the highest good and as the condition of the gods. For that
moment, we are relieved of the contemptible drive of the will. We celebrate a
holiday[den Sabbat] from the penal servitude to the will. The wheel of Ixion stands
motionless.”
. . . What vehemence in the words! What a picture of torment and long weariness!
What an almost pathological temporal contrast between “that moment” and the
usual “wheel of Ixion,” the “penal servitude to the will,” the “contemptible
drive of the will”!—But assuming that Schopenhauer were right a hundred times
about himself, what would that provide by way of insight into the essence of the
beautiful? Schopenhauer wrote about one effect of the beautiful—the way it calms
the will—but is it a regularly occurring effect? Stendhal, as mentioned, a no
less sensual person, but with a natural constitution much happier than
Schopenhauer’s, emphasizes another effect of the beautiful: “the beautiful promises happiness.”
To him the fact of the matter seemed to be precisely the arousal of the will (“of interest”)
by the beautiful. And could we not finally object about Schopenhauer himself
that he was very wrong to think of himself as a Kantian in this matter, that he
had completely failed to understand Kant’s definition of the beautiful in a
Kantian manner—that even he found the beautiful pleasing out of an “interest,”
even out of the strongest and most personal interest of all, that of a torture
victim who escapes from his torture? . . . And to come back to our first
question, “What does it mean when a philosopher renders homage to the
ascetic ideal?”—we get here at least our first hint: he wants to escape a
torture.

7

Let’s be careful not to make
gloomy faces right away at that word “torture.” In this particular case there
remain enough objections to take into account, enough to subtract—there even
remains something to laugh about. For let’s not underestimate the fact that
Schopenhauer, who in fact treated sexuality as a personal enemy (including its
instrument, woman, this “instrumentum diaboli” [tool of the devil]),
needed enemies in order to maintain his good spirits, that he loved
grim, caustic, black-green words, that he got angry for the sake of getting
passionately angry, that he would have become ill, would have become a pessimist
(—and he wasn’t a pessimist, no matter how much he wanted to be one)
without his enemies, without Hegel, woman, sensuousness, and the whole will for
existence, for continuing on. Had that not been the case, Schopenhauer would not
have kept going—on that we can wager. He would have run off. But his enemies
held him securely; his enemies seduced him back to existence again and again.
Just like the ancient cynics, his anger was his refreshment, his relaxation, his
payment, his remedy for disgust, his happiness. So much with respect to
the most personal features in the case of Schopenhauer. On the other hand, with
him there is still something typical—and here we only come up against our
problem once more. As long as there have been philosophers on earth and wherever
there have been philosophers (from India to England, to name two opposite poles
of talent in philosophy) there unquestionably have existed a genuine
philosophical irritability with and rancor against sensuousness—Schopenhauer is
only the most eloquent eruption of these and, if one has an ear for it, also the
most captivating and delightful. In addition, there exist a real philosophical
bias and affection favouring the whole ascetic ideal. No one should fool himself
about or against that. As mentioned, both belong to the philosophical type: if
both are missing in a philosopher then he is always only a “so-called
philosopher”—of that we may be certain. What does that mean? For we
must first interpret these facts of the case: in itself stands there
eternally stupid, like every “thing in itself.” Every animal, including also la
bête philosophe [the philosophical animal] instinctively strives for the
optimal beneficial conditions in which it can let out all its power and attain
the strongest feeling of its strength. Every animal in an equally instinctual
way and with a refined sense of smell that “is loftier than all reason” abhors
any kind of trouble maker and barrier which lies or which could lie in its way
to these optimal conditions (—I’m not speaking about its path to
“happiness,” but about its way to power, to action, to its most powerful deeds,
and, in most cases, really about its way to unhappiness). Thus, the philosopher
abhors marriage, as well as what might persuade him into it—marriage is
a barrier and a disaster along his route to the optimal. What great philosopher
up to now has been married? Heraclitus, Plato, Descartes, Spinoza, Leibnitz,
Kant, Schopenhauer—none of these got married. What’s more, we cannot even imagine them
married. A married philosopher belongs in a comedy, that’s my
principle. And Socrates, that exception, the malicious Socrates, it appears,
ironically got married specifically to demonstrate this very principle.
Every philosopher would speak as once Buddha spoke when someone told him of the
birth of a son, “Rahula has been born to me. A shackle has been forged for me.”
(Rahula here means “a little demon”). To every “free spirit” there must come a
reflective hour, provided that previously he has had one without thought, of the
sort that once came to this same Buddha—“Life in a house,” he thought to
himself, “is narrow and confined, a polluted place. Freedom consists of
abandoning the house”; “because he thought this way, he left the house.” The
ascetic ideal indicates so many bridges to independence that a
philosopher cannot, without an inner rejoicing and applause, listen to the
history of all those decisive people who one day said “No” to all lack of
freedom and went off to some desert or other, even assuming that such
people were merely strong donkeys and entirely opposite to a powerful spirit. So
what, then, does the ascetic ideal mean as far as a philosopher is concerned? My
answer is—you will have guessed it long ago—the philosopher smiles when he sees
in it an optimal set of conditions for the loftiest and boldest spirituality—in
so doing, he does not deny “existence”; rather that’s how he affirms his existence
and only his existence and does this perhaps to such a degree that he
is not far from the wicked desire pereat mundus, fiat philosophia, fait
philosophus, fiam! [let the world perish, let philosophy exist, let the
philosopher exist, let me exist!] . . .

8

You see that these philosophers
are not unprejudiced witnesses to and judges of the value of ascetic
ideals! They think about themselves—what concern to them is “the
saint”! In this matter they think about what is most immediately indispensable to
them: freedom from compulsion, disturbance, fuss, from business, duties,
worries: a bright light in the head, dance, the leap and flight of ideas; good
air—thin, clear, free, dry—like the air at high altitudes, with which everything
in animal being grows more spiritual and acquires wings; calm in all basement
areas; all dogs nicely tied up in chains; no hostile barking and shaggy rancour;
no gnawing worm of wounded ambition; modest and humble inner organs busy as
windmills but at a distance; the heart in an alien place, beyond, in the future,
posthumous—all in all, so far as the ascetic ideal is concerned, they think of
the cheerful asceticism of some deified animal which has become independent,
roaming above life rather than being at rest. We know what the three great catch
phrases of the ascetic ideal are: poverty, humility, chastity. Now look closely
at the lives of all great, prolific, inventive spirits—over and over again
you’ll rediscover all three there to a certain degree. Not at all—this
is self-evident—as if it were something to do with their “virtues” —what does
this kind of man have to do with virtues?—but as the truest and most natural
conditions of their best existence, their most beautiful fecundity. At
the same time, it is indeed entirely possible that their dominating spirituality
at first had to set aside an unbridled and sensitive pride or the reins of a
wanton sensuality or that they perhaps had difficulty enough maintaining their
will for the “desert” against an inclination for luxury, for something very
exquisite, as well as against a lavish liberality of heart and hand. But their
spirituality did it, simply because it was the dominating instinct,
which achieves its own demands in relation to all the other instincts—it still
continues to do so. If it did not, then it would simply not dominate. Hence,
this has nothing to do with “virtue.” Besides, the desert I just
mentioned, into which the strong spirits with an independent nature withdraw and
isolate themselves—O how different it seems from the desert educated people
dream about!—for in some circumstances these educated people are themselves this
desert. And certainly no actor of the spirit could simply endure it—for them it
is not nearly romantic and Syrian enough, not nearly enough of a theatrical
desert! It’s true there’s no lack of camels there, but that’s the only
similarity between them. Perhaps a voluntary obscurity, a detour away from one’s
self, a timidity about noise, admiration, newspapers, influence; a small
official position, a daily routine, something which hides more than it brings to
light, contact now and then with harmless, cheerful wildlife and birds whose
sight is relaxing, a mountain for company, not a dead one but one with eyes (that
means with lakes); in some circumstances even a room in a full, nondescript inn,
where one is sure to be confused for someone else and can talk to anyone with
impunity—that’s what a “desert” is here. O, it’s lonely enough, believe me! When
Heraclitus withdrew into the courtyard and colonnades of the immense temple of
Artemis, that was a worthier “desert,” I admit. Why do we lack such
temples? (—Perhaps we do not lack them. I’ve just remembered my most
beautiful room for study,  the Piazza San Marco, assuming it’s
in the spring, and in the morning, too, between ten and twelve o’clock).
But what Heraclitus was getting away from is still the same thing we go out of
our way to escape nowadays: the noise and the democratic chatter of the
Ephesians, their politics, their news about the “empire” (you understand I mean
the Persians), their market junk of “today”— for we philosophers need peace and
quiet from one thing above all— from everything to do with “today.” We honour
what is still, cold, noble, distant, past, in general everything at the sight of
which the soul does not have to defend itself or tie itself up—something with
which a person can speak without having to speak aloud. People should
just listen to the sound which a spirit has when it is talking. Every spirit has
its own sound, loves its own sound. The man over there, for example, must be a
real agitator, I mean a hollow head, a hollow pot [Hohlkopf, Hohltopf]);
no matter what goes into him, everything comes back out of him dull and thick,
weighed down with the echo of a huge emptiness. That man over there rarely
speaks in anything other than a hoarse voice. Has he perhaps imagined himself
hoarse? That might be possible—ask the physiologists—but whoever thinks in
words thinks as a speaker and not as a thinker (it reveals that
fundamentally he does not think of things or think factually, but only in
relation to things, that he really is thinking of himself and his
listeners). A third man over there speaks with an insistent familiarity, he
steps in too close to our bodies, he breathes over us—instinctively we shut our
mouths, even though he is speaking to us through a book. The sound of his style
tells us the reason for that—he has no time, he has little faith in himself,
he’ll have his say today or never again. But a spirit which is sure of itself,
speaks quietly. He’s looking for seclusion. He lets people wait for him. We
recognize a philosopher by the following: he walks away from three glittering
and garish things—fame, princes, and women. That doesn’t mean that they might
not come to him. He shrinks from light which is too bright. Hence, he shies away
from his time and its “day.” In that he’s like a shadow: the lower the sun
sinks, the bigger he becomes. So far as his “humility” is concerned, he endures
a certain dependence and obscurity, as he endures the darkness. More than that,
he fears being disturbed by lightning and recoils from the unprotected and
totally isolated and abandoned tree on which all bad weather can discharge
its mood, all moods discharge their bad weather. His “maternal” instinct, the
secret love for what is growing in him, directs him to places where his need to
think of himself is removed, in the same sense that the maternal instinct
in women has up to now generally kept her in a dependent situation. Ultimately
they demand little enough, these philosophers. Their motto is “Whoever
owns things is owned”—not, as I must say again and again, from virtue,
from an admirable desire for modest living and simplicity, but because their
highest master demands that of them, demands astutely and
unrelentingly. He cares for only one thing and for that gathers up and holds
everything—time, power, love, interest. This sort of man doesn’t like to be
disturbed by hostile things and by friendships; he easily forgets or scoffs. To
him martyrdom seems something in bad taste—“to suffer for the truth”—he
leaves that to the ambitious and the stage heroes of the spirit and anyone else
who has time enough for it (—they themselves, the philosophers, have something
to (do for the truth). They use big words sparingly. It’s said that
they resist using even the word “truth”: it sounds boastful. . . . Finally, as
far as “chastity” concerns philosophers, this sort of spirit apparently keeps
its fertility in something other than in children; perhaps they also keep the
continuity of their names elsewhere, their small immortality (among philosophers
in ancient India people spoke with even more presumption, “What’s the point of
offspring to the man whose soul is the world?”). There’s no sense of chastity
there out of some ascetic scruple and hatred of the senses, just as it has
little to do with chastity when an athlete or jockey abstains from women. It’s
more a matter of what their dominating instinct wants, at least during its great
pregnant periods. Every artist knows how damaging the effects of sexual
intercourse are to states of great spiritual tension and preparation. The most
powerful and most instinctual artists among them don’t acquire this knowledge
primarily by experience, by bad experience—no, it’s simply that “maternal”
instinct of theirs which here makes the decision ruthlessly to benefit the
developing work among all the other stores and supplies of energy, of animal
vitality. The greater power then uses up the lesser. Incidentally,
apply this interpretation now to the above-mentioned case of Schopenhauer: the
sight of the beautiful evidently worked in him as the stimulus for the main
power in his nature (the power of reflection and the deep look), so that
this then exploded and suddenly became master of his consciousness. In the
process, we should in no way rule out the possibility that that characteristic
sweetness and abundance typical of the aesthetic condition could originate
precisely from the ingredient “sensuality” (just as from the same source is
derived that “idealism” characteristic of sexually mature young girls)—so that
thus, with the onset of the aesthetic condition, sensuality is not shoved out,
as Schopenhauer believed, but is transformed and does not enter the
consciousness any more as sexual stimulation. (I will come back to this point of
view at another time, in connection with the even more delicate problems of the physiology
of aesthetics, so untouched up to this point, so unanalyzed).

9

A certain asceticism, as we
have seen, a hard and cheerful renunciation with the best intentions, belongs to
those conditions favourable to the highest spirituality and is also among its
most natural consequences. So it’s no wonder from the outset that philosophers
in particular never treat the ascetic ideal without some bias. A serious
historical review demonstrates that the tie between the ascetic ideal and
philosophy is even much closer and stronger. We could say it was in the leading
reins of this ideal that philosophy in general learned to take its first
steps and partial steps on earth—alas, still so awkwardly, alas, still with such
a morose expression, alas, so ready to fall over and lie on its belly, this
small, tentative, clumsy, loving infant with crooked legs! With philosophy
things initially played themselves out as with all good things: for a long time
it had no courage for itself—it always looked around to see if anyone would come
to its assistance, and even more it was afraid of all those who gazed at it.
Just make a list of the individual drives and virtues of the philosopher—his
impulse to doubt, his impulse to deny, his impulse to wait (the “ephectic”
impulse), his impulse to analyze, his impulse to research, to seek out, to take
chances, his impulse to compare, to weigh evenly, his desire for neutrality and
objectivity, his will to every “sine ira et studio” [without anger
and partiality]—have we not already understood that for the longest time
all of them went against the first demands of morality and conscience (to say
nothing at all about reason in general, which even Luther liked to call
Madam Clever, the Clever Whore) and that if a philosopher were to have come to
an awareness of himself, he would really have had to feel that he was almost the
living manifestation of “nitimur invetitum” [we search for what’s
forbidden]—and thus taken care not to “feel himself,” not to
become conscious of himself? As I’ve said, the case is no different with all the
good things of which we are nowadays so proud. Even measured by the standards of
the ancient Greeks, our entire modern being, insofar as it is not weakness but
power and consciousness of power, looks like sheer hubris and godlessness; for
the very opposite of those things we honour today have for the longest period
had conscience on their side and God to guard over them. Our entire attitude to
nature today, our violation of nature, with the help of machines and the
unimaginable inventiveness of our technicians and engineers, is hubris; our
attitude to God is hubris—I mean our attitude to some alleged spider spinning
out purposes and morality behind the fabric of the huge fishing net of
causality—we could say with Charles the Bold in his struggle with Ludwig XI, “Je
combats l’universealle araignée” [I am fighting the universal spider];
our attitude to ourselves is hubris—for we experiment with ourselves in
a manner we would not permit with any animal and happily and inquisitively slit
the souls of living bodies open. What do we still care about the “salvation” of
the soul? We cure ourselves later. Being sick teaches us things—we don’t doubt
that—it’s even more instructive than being healthy. The person who makes us
ill appears to us nowadays to be more important even than any medical
people and “saviours.” We violate ourselves now, no doubt about it, we
nutcrackers of the soul, we questioning and questionable people, as if life were
nothing else but cracking nuts. And in so doing, we must necessarily become
every day constantly more questionable, more worthy of being
questioned, and in the process perhaps also worthier—to live? All good things
were once bad things; every original sin has become an original virtue. For
example, marriage for a long time seemed to be a sin against the rights of the
community. Once people paid a fine for being so presumptuous as to arrogate a
woman to themselves (that involves, for instance, the jus primae noctis [the
right of the first night], even today in Cambodia the privilege of the
priest, this guardian of “good ancient customs”). The gentle, favourable,
yielding, sympathetic feelings—which over time grew so valuable that they are
almost “value in itself”—for the longest period were countered by self- contempt
against them. People were ashamed of being mild, just as today they are ashamed
of being hard (compare Beyond Good and Evil, Section 260). Subjugation
under the law—O with what resistance of conscience the noble races
throughout the earth had to renounce the vendetta and to concede the power of
the law over themselves! For a long time the “law” was a vetitum [something
prohibited], a sacrilege, an innovation; it appeared with force, as force,
something to which people submitted only with a feeling of shame for their
conduct. Every one of the smallest steps on earth in earlier days was fought for
with spiritual and physical torture. This whole historical point, “that not only
moving forward—no!—but walking, moving, and changing necessarily required their
countless martyrs,” nowadays sounds so strange to us. In The Dawn,
Section 18, I brought out this point. “Nothing has come at a higher price,” it
says there, “than the small amount of human reason and feeling of freedom, which
we are now so proud of. But because of this pride it is now almost impossible
for us to sense how that huge stretch of time of the ‘morality of custom,’ which
comes before ‘world history,’ is the really decisive and important history which
established the character of humanity, when everywhere people recognized
suffering as virtue, cruelty as virtue, pretence as virtue, revenge as virtue,
the denial of reason as virtue and, by contrast, well-being as danger, the
desire for knowledge as danger, peace as danger, pity as danger, being pitied as
disgrace, work as disgrace, insanity as divinity, change as inherently
immoral and pregnant with ruin!”

10

The same book, in Section 42,
explains the system of values, the pressure of a system of values,
under which the most ancient race of contemplative men had to live—a race that
was despised exactly to the extent that it was not feared! Contemplation first
appeared on earth in a disguised shape, with an ambiguous appearance, with an
evil heart, and often with a worried head. There’s no doubt about that. For a
long time the inactive, brooding, unwarlike elements in the instincts of
contemplative people fostered a deep mistrust around them, against which the
only way to cope was to arouse an emphatic fear of them. The ancient Brahmins,
for example, understood that! The oldest philosophers knew how to earn meaning
for their existence and their appearance, some security and background, because
of which people learned to fear them. To look at the matter more closely, this
happened because of an even more fundamental need, that is, the need to win fear
and respect for themselves. For they discovered that inside them all judgments
of value had turned against them; they had to beat down all kinds of
suspicions about and resistance to “the philosopher inside them.” As men of
dreadful times, they achieved this with dreadful means: cruelty against
themselves, inventive self-denial—that was the major instrument of these
power-hungry hermits and new thinkers, who found it necessary first to overthrow
the gods and traditions inside themselves, in order to be able to believe in
their innovation. I recall the famous story of King Vishvamitra, who, through a
thousand years of self-torments, acquired such a feeling of power and faith in
himself that he committed himself to building a new heaven, that weird
symbol of the oldest and most recent history of philosophers on earth. Everyone
who at some time or another has built a “new heaven,” found the power to do that
first in his own hell. . . . Let’s condense all these facts into short
formulas: the philosophical spirit always had to begin by disguising itself,
wrapping itself in a cocoon of the previously established forms of the
contemplative man, as priest, magician, prophet, generally as a religious man,
in order to make any kind of life at all possible. The ascetic ideal for
a long time served the philosopher as a form in which he could appear, as a
condition for his existence—he had to play the role, in order to be
able to be a philosopher. And he had to believe in what he was doing,
in order to play that role. The characteristically detached stance of
philosophers, something which denies the world, is hostile to life, has no faith
in the senses, and is free of sensuality, which was maintained right up to the
most recent times and thus became valued almost as the essence of the
philosophical posture—that is, above all, a consequence of the critical
conditions under which, in general, philosophy arose and survived. In fact, for
the longest time on earth philosophy would not have been at all possible without
an ascetic cover and costume, without an ascetic misunderstanding of the self.
To put the matter explicitly and vividly: up to the most recent times the ascetic
priest has provided the repellent and dark caterpillar form which was the
only one in which philosophy could live and creep around. . . . Has that really changed?
Is the colourful and dangerous winged creature, that “spirit” which this
caterpillar hid within itself, at last really been released and allowed out into
the light, thanks to a sunnier, warmer, brighter world? Nowadays do we have
sufficient pride, daring, bravery, self-certainty, spiritual will, desire to
assume responsibility, and freedom of the will so that from now on “the
philosopher” is truly possible on earth? . . .

11

Only now that we have taken a
look at the ascetic priest can we seriously get at our problem: What
does the ascetic ideal mean—only now does it become “serious.” From this point
on we confront the actual representative of seriousness. “What does all
seriousness mean?”—this even more fundamental question perhaps lies already on
our lips, a question for physiologists, naturally, but nonetheless one which we
will still evade for the moment. In that ideal, the ascetic priest preserves,
not merely his faith, but also his will, his power, his interest. His right to
existence stands and falls with that ideal. No wonder that here we run into a
fearful opponent, given, of course, that we were people antagonistic to that
ideal?—an opponent of the sort who fights for his existence against those who
deny the ideal. . . On the other hand, it is from the outset improbable that
such an interesting stance to our problem will be particularly beneficial to it.
The ascetic priest will hardly in himself prove the most successful defender of
his ideal, for the same reason that a woman habitually fails when it’s a matter
of defending “woman as such”—to say nothing of his being able to provide the
most objective assessment of and judgment about the controversy we are dealing
with here. Rather than having to fear that he will refute us too well—this much
is clear enough—it’s more likely we’ll still have to help him defend himself
against us. . . . The idea being contested at this point is the value of
our lives in the eyes of ascetic priests: this same life (along with what
belongs to it, “nature,” “the world,” the whole sphere of becoming and
transience) they set up in relation to an existence of a totally different kind,
a relationship characterized by opposition and mutual exclusion, except
where life somehow turns against itself, denies itself. In this case,
the case of an ascetic life, living counts as a bridge over to that other
existence. The ascetic treats life as an incorrect road, where we must finally
go backwards, right to the place where it begins, or as a misconception which
man refutes by his actions—or should refute. For he demands that people go with him. Where he can, he enorces his evaluation of
existence. What’s the meaning of that? Such a monstrous way of assessing value
does not stand inscribed in human history as something exceptional and curious.
It is one of the most widespread and enduring extant facts. If read from a
distant star, the block capital script of our earthly existence might perhaps
lead one to conclude that the earth is the inherently ascetic star, a
corner for discontented, arrogant, and repellent creatures, incapable of ridding
themselves of a deep dissatisfaction with themselves, with the earth, with all
living, creatures who inflict as much harm on themselves as possible for the
pleasure of inflicting harm—probably their single pleasure. We should consider
how regularly, how commonly, how in almost all ages the ascetic priest makes an
appearance. He does not belong to one single race. He flourishes everywhere. He
grows from all levels of society. And it’s not the case that he breeds and
replants his way of assessing value somehow through biological inheritance: the
opposite the case—generally speaking, a deep instinct forbids him from
reproducing. There must be a high-order necessity which makes this species hostile
to life always grow again and flourish—it must be in the interest of
life itself not to have such a type of self-contradiction die out. For an
ascetic life is a self-contradiction. Here a ressentiment without equal is in
control, something with an insatiable instinct and will to power, which wants to
become master, not over something in life but over life itself, over its
deepest, strongest, most basic conditions; here an attempt is being made to use
one’s power to block up the sources of that power; here one directs one’s green
and malicious gaze against one’s inherent physiological health, particularly
against its means of expression—beauty, joy—while one experiences and seeks for
a feeling of pleasure in mistrust, atrophy, pain, accident,
ugliness, voluntary loss, self-denial, self-flagellation, self-sacrifice. All this is paradoxical to the highest degree. Here we stand in front of a dichotomy which essentially wants a dichotomy, which enjoys
itself in this suffering and always gets even more self-aware and more
triumphant in proportion to the decrease in its own prerequisite, the
physiological capacity for life. “Triumph precisely in the ultimate agony”—under
this supreme sign the ascetic ideal has fought from time immemorial. Inside this
riddle of seduction, in this picture of delight and torment, it sees its highest
light, its salvation, its final victory. Crux, nux, lux [cross, nut, light]—for
the ascetic ideal these are all one thing.

12

Given that such a living desire
for contradiction and hostility to nature is used to practise philosophy,
on what will it discharge its most inner arbitrary power? It will do that on
something it perceives, with the greatest certainty, as true, as real. It will
seek out error precisely where the essential instinct for life has
established its most unconditional truth. For example, it will demote physical
life to an illusion, as the ascetics of the Vedanta philosophy did. Similarly it
will treat pain, the multiplicity of things, the whole ideational opposition
between “subject” and “ object” as error, nothing but error! To deny faith in
one’s own self, to deny one’s own “reality”—what a triumph!—and not just over
the senses, over appearances, but a much loftier kind of triumph, an
overpowering of and act of cruelty against reason: a process in which
the highest peak of delight occurs when ascetic self-contempt and self-mockery
of reason proclaims: “There is a kingdom of truth and being, but reason
is expressly excluded from it” . . .  (By the way, even in the Kantian
idea of the “intelligible character of things” there still remains something of
this lecherous ascetic dichotomy, which loves to turn reason against reason: for
the “intelligible character” with Kant means a sort of composition of things
about which the intellect understands just enough to know that for the intellect
it is—wholly and completely unintelligible).—But precisely because we
are people who seek knowledge, we should finally not be ungrateful for such
determined reversals of customary perspectives and evaluations with which the
spirit has for so long raged against itself with such apparent wickedness and
futility. To use this for once to see differently, the will to see
things differently, is no small discipline and preparation of the intellect for
its coming “objectivity”—the latter meant not in the sense of “disinterested
contemplation” (which is inconceivable nonsense),  but as the capability of having
power over one’s positive and negative arguments and of raising them and
disposing of them so that one knows how to make the very variety of
perspectives and interpretations of emotions useful for knowledge. From now on,
my philosophical gentlemen, let us protect ourselves better from the dangerous
old conceptual fantasy which posits a “pure, will-less, painless, timeless
subject of cognition”; let’s guard ourselves against the tentacles of such
contradictory ideas as “pure reason,” “absolute spirituality,” “knowledge in
itself”—those things which demand that we think of an eye which simply cannot be
imagined, an eye which is to have no direction at all, in which the active and
interpretative forces are supposed to stop or be absent—the very things through
which seeing first becomes seeing something. Hence, these things always demand
from the eye something conceptually absurd and incomprehensible. The only seeing
we have is seeing from a perspective; the only knowledge we have is
knowledge from a perspective; and the more emotions we allow to be
expressed  in words concerning something, the more eyes, different
eyes, we know how to train on the same thing, the more complete our “idea” of
this thing, our “objectivity,” will be. But to eliminate the will in general, to
suspend all our emotions without exception—even if we were capable of that—what
would that be? Wouldn’t we call that castrating the intellect?

13

But let’s go back to our
problem. The sort of self-contradiction which seems to be present in ascetic
people, “life opposing life,” is—this much is clear—physiologically
(and not only physiologically) considered—simply absurd. It can only be apparent.
It must be some kind of temporary expression, an interpretation, formula, make
up, a psychological misunderstanding of something whose real nature could not be
understood for a long time, could not for a long time be described in itself—a
mere word, caught in an old gap in human understanding. So let me
counter that briefly with the facts of the matter: the ascetic ideal arises
out of the instinct for protection and salvation in a degenerating life,
which seeks to keep itself going by any means and struggles for its existence.
It indicates a partial physiological inhibition and exhaustion, against which
those deepest instincts for living which still remain intact continuously fight
on with new methods and innovations. The ascetic ideal is one such method. The
facts are thus precisely the opposite of what those who honour this ideal
claim—life is struggling in that ideal and by means of that ideal with death
and against death: the ascetic ideal is a manoeuvre for the preservation of
life. As history teaches us, to the extent that this ideal could prevail over
men and become powerful, particularly wherever civilization and the taming of
humans have been successfully implemented, it expresses an important fact: the pathological
nature of the earlier form of human beings, at least of those human beings
who had been tamed, the physiological struggle of men against death (more
precisely, against weariness with life, against exhaustion, against desire for
the “end”). The ascetic priest is the incarnation of the desire for another
state of being, an existence somewhere else—indeed, the highest stage of this
desire, its characteristic zeal and passion. But the very power of this
desire is the chain which binds him here. That’s simply what turns him into a
tool which has to work to create more favourable conditions for living here and
for living as a human being—with this very power he keeps the whole
herd of failures, discontents, delinquents, unfortunates, all sorts of people
who inherently suffer, focussed on existence, because instinctively he goes
ahead of them as their herdsman. You understand already what I mean: this
ascetic priest, this apparent enemy of living, this man who denies—he
belongs precisely with all the great conserving and affirming
forces of life. . . . To what can we ascribe this pathology? For the human being
is more ill, less certain, more changeable, more insecure than any other
animal—there’s no doubt about that. He is the sick animal. Where does
that come from? To be sure, he has also dared more, innovated more, defied more,
and demanded more from fate than all the other animals combined. He is the great
experimenter with himself, unhappy, dissatisfied, who struggles for ultimate
mastery with animals, nature, and gods—still unconquered, always a man of the
future, who no longer gets any rest from the force of his own powers, so that
his future relentlessly burrows like a thorn into the flesh of his entire
present:—how should such a brave and rich animal not also be the animal in most
danger, the one which, of all sick animals, suffers the most lengthy and most
profound illness? Human beings, often enough, get fed up: there are entire
epidemics of this process of getting fed up (—for example, around 1348, at the
time of the dance of death): but even this very disgust, this exhaustion, this
dissatisfaction with himself—all this comes out of him so powerfully that it
immediately becomes a new chain. The No which he speaks to life brings to light,
as if through a magic spell, an abundance of more tender Yeses; in fact, when
he injures himself, this master of destruction, of self-destruction —it
is the wound itself which later forces him to live on. . . .

14

The more normal this pathology
is among human beings—and we cannot deny its normality—the higher we should
esteem the rare cases of spiritual and physical power, humanity’s strokes of
luck, and the more strongly successful people should protect themselves
from the most poisonous air, the atmosphere of illness. Do people do that? . .
.  Sick people are the greatest danger for healthy people. For strong people
disaster does not come from the strongest, but from the weakest. Are we
aware of that? . . . If we consider the big picture, we should not wish for any
diminution of the fear we have of human beings, for this fear compels the strong
people to be strong and, in some circumstances, terrible—that fear sustains
the successful types of people. What we should fear, what has a disastrous
effect unlike any other, would not be a great fear of humanity but a great loathing for
humanity; similarly, a great pity for humanity. If both of these were
one day to mate, then something most weird would at once inevitably appear in
the world, the “ultimate will” of man, his will to nothingness, to nihilism.
And, as a matter of fact, a great deal of preparation has gone on for this
union. Whoever possesses, not only a nose to smell with, but also eyes and ears,
senses almost everywhere, no matter where he steps nowadays, an atmosphere
something like that of an insane asylum or hospital—I’m speaking, as usual, of
people’s cultural surroundings, of every kind of “Europe” there is right here on
this earth. The invalids are the great danger to humanity: not the
evil men, not the “predatory animals.” Those people who are, from
the outset, failures, oppressed, broken— they are the ones, the weakest,
who most undermine life among human beings, who in the most perilous way poison
and question our trust in life, in humanity, in ourselves. Where can we escape
it, that downcast glance with which people carry a deep sorrow, that reversed
gaze of the man originally born to fail which betrays how such a man speaks to
himself—that gaze which is a sigh. “I wish I could be someone else!”—that’s what
this glance sighs. “But there is no hope here. I am who I am. How could I detach
myself from myself? And yet—I’ve had enough of myself!”. . . On such a
ground of contempt for oneself, a truly swampy ground, grows every weed, every
poisonous growth, and all of them so small, so hidden, so dishonest, so sweet.
Here the worms of angry and resentful feelings swarm; here the air stinks of
secrets and duplicity; here are constantly spun the nets of the most malicious
conspiracies—the plotting of suffering people against the successful and
victorious; here the appearance of the victor is despised. And what
dishonesty not to acknowledge this hatred as hatred! What an extravagance of
large words and postures, what an art of “decent” slander! These failures: what
noble eloquence streams from their lips! How much sugary, slimy, humble
resignation swims in their eyes! What do they really want? At least to make
a show of justice, love, wisdom, superiority— that’s the ambition of these
“lowest” people, these invalids! And how clever such an ambition makes people!
For let’s admire the skillful counterfeiting with which people here imitate the
trademarks of virtue, even its resounding tinkle, the golden sound of virtue.
They have now taken a lease on virtue entirely for themselves, these weak and
hopeless invalids—there’s no doubt about that: “We alone are the good men, the
just men”—that’s how they speak: “We alone are the homines bonae voluntatis [men
of good will].” They wander around among us like personifications of
reproach, like warnings to us—as if health, success, strength, pride, and a
feeling of power were already inherently depraved things, for which people must
atone some day, atone bitterly. O how ready they themselves basically are to make people
atone, how they thirst to be hangmen! Among them there are plenty of
people disguised as judges seeking revenge. They always have the word “Justice”
in their mouths, like poisonous saliva, with their mouths always pursed, always
ready to spit at anything which does not look discontented and goes on its way
in good spirits. Among them there is no lack of that most disgusting species of
vain people, the lying monsters who aim to present themselves as “beautiful
souls” and who, for example, carry off to market their ruined sensuality,
wrapped up in verse and other swaddling clothes, as “purity of heart,” the
species of self-gratifying moral masturbators. The desire of sick people to
present some form or other of superiority, their instinct for secret
paths leading to a tyranny over the healthy—where can we not find it, this very
will to power of the weakest people! The sick woman, in particular: no one
outdoes her in refined ways to rule others, to exert pressure, to tyrannize. For
that purpose, the sick woman spares nothing living or dead. She digs up again
the most deeply buried things (the Bogos say “The woman is a hyena”). Take a
look into the background of every family, every corporation, every community:
everywhere you see the struggle of the sick against the healthy—a quiet
struggle, for the most part, with a little poison powder, with needling, with
deceitful expressions of long suffering, but now and then also with that sick
man’s Pharisaic tactic of loud gestures, whose favourite role is “noble
indignation.” It likes to make itself heard all the way into the consecrated
rooms of science, that hoarse, booming indignation of the pathologically ill
hound, the biting insincerity and rage of such “noble” Pharisees (—once again I
remind readers who have ears of Eugene Dühring, that apostle of revenge from
Berlin, who in today’s Germany makes the most indecent and most revolting use of
moralistic gibberish  [Bumbum]—Dühring, the
pre-eminent moral braggart we have nowadays, even among those like him, the
anti-Semites).
They are all men of ressentiment, these physiologically impaired and worm-eaten
men, a totally quivering earthly kingdom of subterranean revenge, inexhaustible,
insatiable in its outbursts against the fortunate, and equally in its
masquerades of revenge, its pretexts for revenge. When would they truly attain
their ultimate, most refined, most sublime triumph of revenge? Undoubtedly, if
they could succeed in pushing their own wretchedness, all misery in
general, into the consciences of the fortunate, so that the latter one
day might begin to be ashamed of their good fortune and perhaps would say to
themselves, “It’s  shameful to be fortunate. There’s too much misery!”.
. . But there could be no greater and more fateful misunderstanding than if,
through this process, the fortunate, the successful, the powerful in body and
spirit should start to doubt their right to happiness. Away with this
“twisted world”! Away with this disgraceful softening of feelings! That the
invalids do not make the healthy sick—and that would be such a
softening—that should surely be ruling point of view on earth:—but that would
require above everything that the healthy remain separated from the
sick, protected even from the gaze of sick people, so that they don’t confuse
themselves with the ill. Or would it perhaps be their assignment to attend on
the sick or be their doctors? . . . But they could not misjudge or negate their work
more seriously—something higher must not demean itself by becoming the
tool of something lower. The pathos of distance must keep the work of
the two groups forever separate! Their right to exist, the privilege of a bell
with a perfect ring in comparison to one that is cracked and off key, is indeed
a thousand times greater. They alone are the guarantors of the future;
they alone stand as pledge for humanity’s future. Whatever they can
do, whatever they should do—the sick can never to do and should not do.
But so that they are able to do what only they should do, how
can they have the freedom to make themselves the doctor, the consoler, the
“person who cures” for the invalids? . . . And therefore let’s have fresh
air! fresh air! In any case, let’s keep away from the neighbourhood of all
cultural insane asylums and hospitals! And for that let’s have good
companionship, our companionship! Or loneliness, if that’s necessary!
But by all means let’s stay away from the foul stink of inner rotting and of the
secret muck from sick worms! In that way, my friends, we can defend ourselves,
at least for a while, against the two nastiest scourges which may be lying in
wait precisely for us—against a great disgust with humanity and against
a great pity for humanity!

15

If you’ve grasped the full
profundity of this—and precisely here I require that you grasp deeply,
understand profoundly—of the extent to which it simply cannot be the
task of healthy people to attend to the sick, to make invalids well, then you’ve
understood one more necessary matter—the necessity for doctors and nurses who
are themselves ill. And now we have the meaning of the ascetic priest—we’re
holding it in both hands. We need to look on the ascetic priest as the
preordained healer, shepherd, and advocate of the sick herd; in that way we can,
for the first time, understand his immense historical mission. The ruling
power over suffering people is his kingdom. His instinct instructs him to
do that; in that he has his very own art, his mastery, his sort of success. He
must be sick himself; he must be fundamentally related to the sick and those who
go astray, in order to understand them—in order to be understood among them. But
he must also be strong, master over himself even more than over others, that is,
undamaged in his will to power, so that he inspires the confidence and fear of
the invalids, so that he can be their support, resistance, protection,
compulsion, discipline, tyrant, god. He has to defend his herd, but against
whom? Against the healthy people undoubtedly, also against their envy of the
healthy. He has to be the natural opponent and critic of all rough,
stormy, unchecked, hard, violent, predatory health and power. The priest is the
first form of the more delicate animal which despises more easily than it hates.
He will not be spared having to conduct war with predatory animals, a war of
cunning (of  the “spirit”) rather than of force, as is obvious—for that purpose,
in certain circumstances it will be necessary for him to develop himself almost
into a new type of beast of prey, or at least to represent himself as
such a beast—with a new animal ferocity in which the polar bear, the sleek,
cold, and patient tiger, and, not least, the fox seem to be combined in a unity
which attracts just as much as it inspires fear. If need compels him to, he will
walk even in the midst of the other sort of predatory animals with the
seriousness of a bear, venerable, clever, cold, and with a duplicitous
superiority, as the herald and oracle of more mysterious forces, determined to
sow this ground, where he can, with suffering, conflict, self-contradiction, and
only too sure of his art, to become the master over suffering people at
all times. There’s no doubt he brings with him ointments and balm. But in order
to be a doctor, he first has to inflict wounds. Then, while he eases the pain
caused by the wound, at the same time he poisons the wound—for that is,
above all, what he knows how to do, this magician and animal trainer, around
whom everything healthy necessarily becomes ill and everything sick necessarily
becomes tame. In fact, he defends his sick herd well enough, this strange
shepherd—he protects them also against themselves, against the smouldering
wickedness, scheming, and maliciousness in the herd itself, against all those
addictions and illnesses characteristic of their associating with each other. He
fights shrewdly, hard, and secretly against the anarchy and self-dissolution
which start up all the time within the herd, in which that most dangerous
explosive stuff and blasting material, ressentiment, is constantly
piling and piling up. To detonate this explosive stuff in such a way that it
does not blow up the herd and its shepherd, that is his essential work of art
and also his most important use. If we want to sum up the value of the priestly
existence in the shortest slogan, we could at once put it like this: the priest
is the person who alters the direction of ressentiment. For every
suffering person instinctively seeks a cause for his suffering, or, more
precisely, an agent, or, even more precisely, a guilty agent sensitive
to suffering—in short, he seeks some living person on whom he can, on some
pretext or other, unload his feelings, either in fact or in effigy: for the
discharge of feelings is the most important way a suffering man seeks
relief—that is, some anaesthetic—it’s his involuntarily desired narcotic against
any kind of torment. In my view, only here can we find the true physiological
cause of ressentiment, revenge, and things related to them, in a longing for
some anaesthetic against pain through one’s emotions. People usually look for
this cause, most incorrectly, in my opinion, in the defensive striking back, a
merely reactive protective measure, a “reflex movement” in the event of some
sudden damage and threat, of the sort a decapitated frog still makes in order to
get rid of corrosive acid. But the difference is fundamental: in one case,
people want to prevent suffering further damage; in the other case, people want
to deaden a tormenting, secret pain which is becoming unendurable by
means of a more violent emotion of some kind and, for the moment at least, to
drive it from their consciousness—for that they need some emotion, as unruly an
emotion as possible, and, in order to stimulate that, they need the best pretext
available. “Someone or other must be guilty of the fact that I am ill”—this sort
of conclusion is characteristic of all sick people, all the more so if the real
cause of their sense that they are sick, the physiological cause, remains hidden
(—it can lie, for example, in an illness of the nervus sympathicus [sympathetic
nerve], or in an excessive secretion of gall, or in a lack of potassium
sulphate and phosphate in the blood, or in some pressure in the lower abdomen,
which blocks the circulation, or in a degeneration of the ovaries, and so on).
Suffering people all have a horrible willingness and capacity for inventing
pretexts for painful emotional feelings. They enjoy even their suspicions, their
brooding over bad actions and apparent damage. They ransack the entrails of
their past and present, looking for dark, dubious stories, in which they are
free to feast on an agonizing suspicion and to get intoxicated on the poison of
their own anger—they rip open the oldest wounds, they bleed themselves to death
from long-healed scars, they turn friends, wives, children, and anyone else who
is closest to them into criminals. “I am suffering. Someone or other must be to
blame for that”—that’s how every sick sheep thinks. But his shepherd, the
ascetic priest, says to him: “That’s right, my sheep! Someone must be to blame
for that.  But you yourself are this very person. You yourself are the only one
to blame—you alone are to blame for yourself!” . . . That is bold
enough, and false enough. But one thing at least is attained by that, as I have
said, the direction of ressentiment has been—changed.

16

By now you will have guessed
what, according to my ideas, the healing artistic instinct for life at least
has attempted with the ascetic priest and why he had to use a temporary
tyranny of such paradoxical and illogical ideas, like “guilt,” “sins,”
“sinfulness,” “degeneration,” and “damnation”: to make sick people to a certain
extent harmless, to enable the incurable to destroy themselves by their
own actions, to redirect the ressentiment of the mildly ill sternly back onto
themselves (“there’s one thing necessary”—), and in this manner to utilize the
bad instincts of all suffering people to serve the purpose of self-discipline,
self-monitoring, self-conquest. As is obvious, this kind of “medication,” a
merely emotional medication, has nothing at all to do with a real cure for
an illness, in a physiological sense. We are never entitled to assert that the
instinct for life has any sort of chance or intention to heal itself in this
way. A kind of pressure to come together and organize the invalids on one side
(—the word “church” is the popular name for this), some form of temporary
guarantee for the more healthy successful people, the ones more completely
fulfilled, on another side, and in the process the creation of rift between
the healthy and sick—for a long time that’s all there was. And that was a lot!
It was a great deal! (In this essay, as you see, I proceed on an assumption
which, so far as the readers I require are concerned, I do not have to prove
first—that the “sinfulness” of human beings is not a matter of fact, but much
rather only the interpretation of a factual condition, that is, of a bad
psychological mood—with the latter seen from a moral-religious perspective,
something which is no longer binding on us.—The fact that someone feels himself
“guilty” or “sinful” does not in itself yet demonstrate clearly that he is
justified in feeling like that, just as the mere fact that someone feels healthy
does not mean that he is healthy. People should remember the famous witch
trials: at that time the most perspicacious and philanthropic judges had no
doubt that they were dealing with guilt; the “witches” themselves had no
doubts about that point—nonetheless, there was no guilt.—To express that
assumption in broader terms: I consider that “spiritual pain” itself is not, in
general, a fact, but only an interpretation (a causal interpretation) of facts
which up to that point have not been precisely formulated, and thus something
that is still completely up in the air and not scientifically
binding—essentially a fat word set in place of a very spindly question mark. To
put the matter crudely, when someone cannot cope with a “spiritual pain,” that
has nothing to do with his “soul”; it’s more likely something to do
with his belly (speaking crudely, as I said: but in saying that I’m not
expressing the slightest wish to be crudely heard or crudely understood . . .).
A strong and successful man digests his experiences (his actions, including his
evil actions) as he digests his meals, even when he has to swallow down some
hard mouthfuls. If he is “unable to finish with” an experience, this kind of
indigestion is just as much a physiological matter as that other one—and in many
cases, in fact, only one of the consequences of that other one.—With such an
view, a person can, just between ourselves, still be the strongest opponent of
all materialism. . . .)

17

But is he really a doctor,
this ascetic priest?—We already understand the extent to which one can hardly be
permitted to call him a doctor, no matter how much he likes feeling that he is a
“saviour” and allowing himself to be honoured as a “saviour.” But he fights only
against suffering itself, the unhappiness of the suffering person, not against
its cause, not against the essential sickness—this must constitute our
most fundamental objection to priestly medication. But if for once we look at
things from the perspective which only the priest understands and adopts, then
it will not be easy for us to limit our amazement at all the things he has
noticed, looked for, and found by seeing things in that manner. The alleviation of
suffering, every kind of “consolation”—that manifests itself as his particular
genius: he has understood his task as consoler with so much innovation and has
selected the means for that so spontaneously and so fearlessly! We could call
Christianity, in particular, a huge treasure house of the most elegant forms of
consolation —there are so many pleasant, soothing, narcotizing things piled up
in it, and for this purpose it takes so many of the most dangerous and most
audacious chances. It shows such sophistication, such southern refinement,
especially when it guesses what kind of emotional stimulant can overcome, at
least for a while, the deep depression, leaden exhaustion, and black sorrow of
the physiologically impaired. For, generally speaking, with all great religions,
the main issue concerns the fight against a certain endemic exhaustion and
heaviness. We can from the outset assume as probable that from time to time, in
particular places on the earth, a feeling of physiological inhibition must
necessarily become master over wide masses of people, but, because of a lack of
knowledge about physiology, it does not enter people’s consciousness as
something physiological, so they look for and attempt to find its “cause” and
remedy only in psychology and morality (—this, in fact, is my most general
formula for whatever is commonly called a “religion”). Such a feeling
of inhibition can have a varied ancestry; for instance, it can be the result of
cross-breeding between different races (or between classes—for classes also
always express differences in origin and race: European “Weltschmerz” [pain
at the state of the world] and nineteenth-century “pessimism” are
essentially the consequence of an irrational, sudden mixing of the classes), or
it can be caused by incorrect emigration—a race caught in a climate for which
its powers of adaptation are not sufficient (the case of the Indians in India);
or by the influence of the age and exhaustion of the race (Parisian pessimism
from 1850 on); or by an incorrect diet (the alcoholism of the Middle Ages, the
inanity of vegetarians, who, of course, have on their side the authority of
Squire Christopher in Shakespeare); or by degeneration in the blood, malaria,
syphilis and things like that (German depression after the Thirty Years’ War,
which spread bad diseases in an epidemic through half of
Germany and thus prepared the ground for German servility, German timidity).
In such a case, a war against the feeling of a lack of enthusiasm will
always be attempted in the grand style. Let’s briefly go over its most important
practices and forms. (Here I leave quite out of account, as seems reasonable,
the actual war of the philosophers against this lack of enthusiasm,
which always has a habit of appearing at the same time—that war is interesting
enough, but too absurd, with too little practical significance, too full of
cobwebs and loafing around—as, for example, when pain is to be shown an error,
on the naive assumption that the pain must disappear as soon as it is
recognized as a error—but, lo and behold, it sees to it that it does not
disappear . . . ). First, people fight that domineering listlessness
with means which, in general, set our feeling for life at their lowest point.
Where possible, there is generally no more willing, no more desire; they stay
away from everything which creates an emotional response, which makes “blood”
(no salt in the diet, the hygiene of the fakir); they don’t love; they don’t
hate—equanimity—they don’t take revenge, they don’t get wealthy, they don’t
work; they beg; where possible, no women, or as few women as possible; with
respect to spiritual matters, Pascal’s principle “Il faut s’abêtir” [it’s
necessary to make oneself stupid]. The result, expressed in
moral-psychological terms, is “selflessness,” “sanctification”; expressed in
physiological terms: hypnotizing—the attempt to attain for human beings
something approaching what winter hibernation is for some kinds of
animals and what summer sleep is for many plants in hot climates, the
minimum consumption and processing of material stuff which can still sustain
life but which does not actually enter consciousness. For this purpose an
astonishing amount of human energy has been expended. Has it all gone for
nothing? . . . We should not entertain the slightest doubts that such sportsmen
of “holiness,” whom almost all populations have in abundance at all times, in
fact found a real release from what they were fighting against with such a
rigorous training—with the help of their systemic methods for hypnosis, in
countless cases they really were released from that deep physiological
depression. That’s the reason their methodology belongs with the most universal
ethnological facts. For the same reason, we have no authority for considering
such an intentional starving of one’s desires and of one’s physical well being
as, in itself, symptoms of insanity (the way a clumsy kind of roast-beef-eating
“free spirit” and Squire Christopher like to do). It’s much more the case that
it opens or can open the way to all sorts of spiritual disruptions, to
“inner light,” for example, as with Hesychasts on Mount Athos, to
hallucinating sounds and shapes, to sensual outpourings and ecstasies of
sensuality (the history of St. Theresa).
It’s self-evident that the interpretation which has been given for conditions of
this sort by those afflicted with them has always been as effusively false as
possible. Still, people should not fail to catch the tone of totally convincing
gratitude ringing out in the very will to such a form of
interpretation. They always value the highest state, redemption itself,
that finally attained collective hypnosis and quietness, as the inherent
mystery, which cannot be adequately expressed even by the highest symbols, as a
stop at and return home to the basis of things, as an emancipation from all
delusions, as “knowledge,” as “truth,” as “being,” as the removal of all goals,
all wishes, all acts, and thus as a place beyond good and evil. “Good and evil,”
says the Buddhist, “are both fetters: the perfect one became master over both”;
“what’s done and what’s not done,” says the man who believes in the Vedanta,
“give him no pain; as a wise man he shakes good and evil off himself; his
kingdom suffers no more from any deed; good and evil—he has transcended both”—
an entirely Indian conception, whether Brahman or Buddhist. (Neither in the
Indian nor in the Christian way of thinking is this “redemption” considered attainable through
virtue, through moral improvement—no matter how high a value they place on
virtue as a form of hypnotism. People should note this point—it corresponds,
incidentally, to the plain facts. That on this point they kept to the truth
might perhaps be considered the best piece of realism in the three largest
religions, which, apart from this, are religions so fundamentally concerned with
moralizing. “The man who knows has no duties” . . . “Redemption does not come
about through an increase in virtue, for it consists of unity with
Brahma, who is incapable of any increase in perfection; even less does it come
through setting aside one’s faults, for the Brahma, unity with whom
creates redemption, is eternally pure”—these passages from the commentary of Shankara are
cited by the first genuine authority on Indian philosophy in Europe, my
friend Paul Deussen).
So we want to honour “redemption” in the great religions; however, it will be a
little difficult for us to remain serious about the way these people, who’ve
grown too weary of life even to dream, value deep sleep—that is, deep
sleep as already an access to the Brahma, as an achieved unio mystica
[mysterious union]with God. On this subject, the oldest and most venerable
“Scripture” states: “When he is soundly and completely asleep and is in a state
of perfect calm, so that he is not seeing any more dream images, at that moment,
O dear one, united with Being, he has gone into himself—now that he has been
embraced by a form of his knowing self, he has no consciousness any more of what
is outer or inner. Over this bridge comes neither night nor day, nor old age,
nor death, nor suffering, nor good works, nor evil works.” Similarly, believers
in this most profound of the three great religions say, “In deep sleep the soul
lifts itself up out of this body, goes into the highest light, and moves out in
its own form: there it is the highest spirit itself which wanders around, while
it jokes and plays and enjoys itself, whether with women or with carriages or
with friends; there it no longer thinks back to its bodily appendages, to which
the prana (the breath of life) is harnessed like a draught animal to a
cart.” Nevertheless, as in the case of “redemption,” we also need to keep in
mind here that no matter how great the splendour of oriental exaggeration, what
this states is basically the same evaluation which was made by that clear, cool,
Greek-cool, but suffering Epicurus: the hypnotic feeling of nothingness, the
silence of the deepest sleep, in short, the loss of suffering—something
which suffering and fundamentally disgruntled people are already entitled to
consider their highest good, their value of values, and which they must appraise
as positive and experience as the positive in itself. (With the same
logic of feeling, in all pessimistic religions nothingness is called God).

18

Against this condition of
depression, a different and certainly easier training is tried far more often
than such a hypnotic collective deadening of the sensibilities, of the ability
to experience pain, for the method requires rare powers, above all, courage,
contempt for opinion, and “intellectual stoicism.” This different training is
mechanical activity. There’s no doubt whatsoever that this can
alleviate a suffering existence to a degree which is not insignificant. Today we
call this fact, somewhat dishonestly, “the blessings of work.” The relief comes
about because the interest of the suffering person is basically diverted from
his suffering—because some action and then another action are always entering
his consciousness, thus leaving little space there for suffering. For it’s narrow,
this room of human consciousness! Mechanical activity and what’s associated with
it—like absolute regularity, meticulous and mindless obedience, a style of life
set once and for all, filling in time, a certain allowance for, indeed, training
in, “impersonality,” in forgetting oneself, in “incuria sui” [no
care for oneself]—how fundamentally, how delicately the ascetic priest knew
how to use them in the struggle with suffering! Especially when it involved the
suffering people of the lower classes, working slaves, or prisoners (or women,
most of whom are, in fact, simultaneously both working slaves and prisoners)
what was needed was little more than the minor art of changing names and
re-christening, so as to make those people in future see a favour, some relative
good fortune, in things they hated—the slave’s discontent with his lot, in any
case, was not invented by the priests. An even more valuable tool in
the battle against depression is prescribing a small pleasure which is
readily accessible and can be made habitual. People frequently use this
medication in combination with the one just mentioned. The most common form in
which pleasure is prescribed in this way as a cure is the pleasure in creating pleasure
(as in showing kindness, giving presents, providing relief, helping,
encouraging, trusting, praising, honouring). The ascetic priest orders “love of
one’s neighbour”; in so doing, he is basically prescribing an arousal of the
strongest, most life-affirming drive, even if only in the most cautious
doses—the will to power. The happiness which comes from “the smallest
feeling of superiority,” which all doing good, being useful, helping, and
honouring bring with them, is the most plentiful way of providing consolation,
which the physiologically impaired habitually use, provided that they have been
well advised. In a different situation, they harm each other, doing so, of
course, in obedience to the same basic instinct. If we look for the beginnings
of Christianity in the Roman world, we find organizations growing up for mutual
support, combinations of the poor and sick, for burial, on the lowest levels of
society at the time, in which that major way of combating depression, the minor
joys which habitually develop out of mutual demonstrations of kindness, were
consciously employed—perhaps at the time this was something new, a real
discovery? “The will to mutual assistance,” to the formation of the herd, to “a
community,” to “a congregation,” summoned in this manner, must call up again, if
only in the smallest way, that aroused will to power and come to a new and much
greater outburst. In the fight against depression, the development of the
herd is an essential step and a victory. By growing, the community also
reinforces in the individual a new interest, which often enough raises him up
over the most personal features of his bad disposition, his
dislike of himself (Geulincx’s despectio sui [contempt for oneself]).
All sick pathological people, in their desire to shake off a stifling lack of
enthusiasm and a feeling of weakness, instinctively strive for the organization
of a herd. The ascetic priest senses this instinct and promotes it. Where there
is a herd, it’s the instinct of weakness which has willed the herd and the
cleverness of the priest which has organized it. For we should not overlook the
following point: through natural necessity strong people strive to separate from each
other, just as much as weak people strive to be with each other. When
the former unite, that happens only at the prospect of an aggressive combined
action and a collective satisfaction of their will to power, with considerable
resistance from the individual conscience. By contrast, the latter organize
themselves collectively, taking pleasure precisely in this
collective—their instinct is satisfied by this in the same way that the instinct
of those born “Masters” (i.e., the solitary man of the predatory species of
human being) is basically irritated and upset by organization. Under every
oligarchy—all history teaches us—is always concealed the craving for tyranny.
Every oligarchy is constantly trembling with the tension which every individual
in it necessarily has in order to remain master of this craving. (That was the
case, for example, with the Greeks. Plato provides evidence of this in
a hundred passages—Plato, who understood his peers—and himself . . .).

19

The ascetic priest’s methods,
which we learned about earlier—the collective deadening of the feeling for life,
mechanical activity, minor joys, above all, the joy in “loving one’s neighbour,”
the organization of the herd, the awakening of the feeling of power in the
community, as a result of which the dissatisfaction of the individual with
himself is drowned out by his pleasure in the flourishing of the community—
these things are, measured by modern standards, his innocent methods in
the war against unhappiness. But now let’s turn our attention to more
interesting methods, to his “guilty” ones. With all of them there is one thing
involved: some kind of excess of feeling—employed as the most effective
anaesthetic against stifling, crippling, and long-lasting pain. For that reason,
the priest’s powers of innovation have been tireless in addressing this one
question in particular: “Through what means do people reach emotional
excess?”. . . That sounds harsh. It’s clear enough that it would sound more
appealing and perhaps please our ears better if I said something like “The
ascetic priest has always used the enthusiasm which lies in all strong
emotions.” But why keep caressing the mollycoddled ears of our modern delicate
sensibilities? Why should we, for our part, retreat even one step back
from the Tartufferie [hypocrisy] of their vocabulary? Doing something
like that would already make us psychologists active hypocrites—apart from the
fact that for us it would be disgusting. For if a psychologist today has good
taste anywhere (others might say his honesty), it’s because he detests that
disgraceful moralizing way of talking, which effectively covers in
slime all modern judgments about human beings and things. For we must not
deceive ourselves in this business. The most characteristic feature which forms
modern souls and modern books is not lying but the ingrained innocence in
their moralistic lying. To have to discover this “innocence” again all over the
place—that is perhaps the most repellent part of our work, of all the
inherently dangerous  work which nowadays a psychologist has to undertake. It is
a part of our great danger—it is a path that perhaps takes us in
particular to a great revulsion. I have no doubt about what single purpose will
be served, or can be served, in a coming world by modern books (provided they
last, which, of course, we need not fear, and provided there will one day be a
later world with a stronger, harder, and healthier taste), or what
general purpose all things modern will have: they will serve as
emetics—and they’ll do that thanks to their moralistic sugar and falsity, their
innermost femininity, which likes to call itself “idealism” and which, at all
events, has faith in idealism. Today our educated people, our “good people,”
don’t tell lies—that’s true. But that’s no reason to respect them! The
real lie, the genuine, resolute, “honest” lie (people should listen to Plato on
its value) for them would be something far too demanding, too strong. It would
require what people are not allowed to demand of them, that they opened up their
eyes and looked at themselves, so that they would know how to differentiate
between “true” and “false” with respect to themselves. But they are fit only
for ignoble lies. Everyone today who feels that he is a “good man” is
completely incapable of taking a stand on any issue at all, other than with dishonest
falseness—an abysmal falsity, which is, however, innocent falsity,
true-hearted falsity, blue-eyed falsity, virtuous falsity. These “good
people”—collectively they are now utterly and completely moralized and, so far
as their honesty is concerned, they’ve been disgraced and ruined for all
eternity. Who among them could endure even one truth “about human
beings”! . . . Or, to ask the question more precisely, who among them could bear
a true biography! Here are a couple of indications: Lord Byron recorded
some very personal things about himself, but Thomas Moore was “too good” for
them. He burned his friend’s papers. The executor of Schopenhauer’s will, Dr. Gwinner,
is alleged to have done the same thing, for Schopenhauer had also recorded some
things about himself and also perhaps against himself (“eis auton” [against
himself]). The capable American Thayer, the biographer of Beethoven, all of
a sudden stopped his work: at some point or other in this venerable and naive
life he could no longer continue . . . Moral: What intelligent man nowadays
would still write an honest word about himself?—He would already have to be a
member of the Order of Holy Daredevils. We have been  promised
an autobiography of Richard Wagner. Who has any doubts that it will be a prudent autobiography?
Let’s remember the comical horror which the Catholic priest Janssen aroused in
Germany with his incomprehensibly bland and harmless picture of the German
Reformation movement.  How would people react if one day someone explained this
movement differently, if, for once, a true psychologist with spiritual
strength and not a shrewd indulgence toward strength pictured a true Luther
for us, no longer with the moralistic simplicity of a country parson, no longer
with the sweet and considerate modesty of a protestant historian, but with
something like the fearlessness of a Taine? . . . (Parenthetically, the
Germans have finally produced a sufficiently beautiful classical type of such
shrewd indulgence—they can classify him as one of their own and be proud of him,
namely, their Leopold Ranke, this born  classical advocate of
every causa fortior [stronger cause], the shrewdest of all the shrewd
“realists”).

20

But you will already have
grasped what I’m getting at. All in all, that’s surely reason enough, is it not,
why we psychologists nowadays cannot rid ourselves of a certain distrust in
ourselves? . . . We also are probably “too good” for the work we do. We are
probably sacrificial victims and prey, as well, made sick by this contemporary
taste for moralizing, no matter how much we also feel we’re its critics—it
probably infects even us as well. What was that diplomat warning about,
when he addressed his colleagues? “Gentlemen, let us mistrust our first
impulses above  all!” he declared; “they are almost always good.”
That’s also how every psychologist today should speak to his peers.  And so we
come back to our problem, which, in fact, requires a certain rigour from us,
especially some distrust of our “first impulses.” The ascetic ideal in the
service of intentional emotional excess—whoever remembers the previous
essay will, with the compressed content of these ten words, already have a
preliminary sense of the essential content of what I now have to demonstrate. To
remove the human soul for once from its entire frame, to immerse it in terror,
frost, glowing embers, and joys of that kind, so that it rids itself, as if with
a bolt of lightning, of all pettiness and small-mindedness of lack of interest,
apathy, and irritation. What paths lead to this goal? And which of them
is the most reliable? . . .  All the greatest emotions basically have this
capacity, provided they discharge themselves suddenly—anger, fear, lust,
revenge, hope, triumph, despair, cruelty. And the ascetic priest has, in fact,
without a second thought, taken the entire pack of wild hounds in the
human being into his service and let loose one of them at one time, another at
another time, always for the same purpose, to wake human beings up out of their
long sadness, to chase away, at least for a while, their stifling pain, their
tentative misery, and always covered up in a religious interpretation and
“justification.” Every emotional excess of this sort demands payment later;
that’s self-evident—it makes sick people sicker. And thus, this way of providing
a remedy for pain, measured by modern standards, is a “guilty” method. However,
to be fair, we must insist all the more that it was used in good conscience,
that the ascetic priest prescribed it with the deepest faith in its utility,
indeed, its indispensability—often enough almost falling apart himself in front
of the misery he created; and, similarly, that the vehement physiological
revenges of such excesses, perhaps even psychic disturbances, basically do not
really contradict the whole meaning of this kind of medication, which, as I’ve
pointed out above, was not designed to heal sick people, but to fight
their enervating depression, to alleviate and anaesthetize it. With this
method that goal was attained. The main instrumental fingering which the
ascetic priest allowed himself in order to bring every kind of disorienting
ecstatic music ringing out in the human soul was achieved, as everyone knows, by
the fact that he made use of the feeling of guilt. The previous essay
indicated, in brief, the origin of this feeling—as a part of animal psychology,
nothing more. The feeling of guilt we encountered there in its raw state, as it
were. In the hands of the priest, this true artist in guilt feelings, it first
acquired a form—and what a form! “Sin”—for that’s how the priest’s new
interpretation of the animal “bad conscience” ran (cruelty turned backwards)—has
been the greatest event in the history of the sick soul so far. In it we have
the most dangerous and the most fateful artistic work of religious
interpretation. The human being, suffering from himself somehow—at any rate,
psychologically—something like an animal barred up in a cage, confused about why
this has happened and what purpose it serves, longing for reasons—reasons
provide relief—longing also for treatments and narcotics, finally discussed the
matter with one who also knew about hidden things—and lo and behold! He gets a
hint. He gets the first hint about the “cause” of his suffering from
his magician, the ascetic priest. He is to seek this cause in himself,
in his guilt, in a piece of the past. He is to understand his own
suffering as a condition of punishment . . . He heard, he
understood—this unfortunate man: now things stand with him as with a hen around
which a line has been drawn. He is not to come outside this circle of lines
again. The “sick man” is turned into the “sinner” . . . And now for a couple of
millennia people have not rid themselves of the look of this new sick man, the
“sinner.”—Will people ever be rid of him?—No matter where we look, we see
everywhere the hypnotic glance of the sinner, who always moves in one direction
(in the direction of “guilt” as the single cause of suffering),
everywhere the bad conscience, this “horrifying animal,” to use Luther’s words,
everywhere the past regurgitated, the fact distorted, the “green eye” cast on
all action, everywhere the desire to misunderstand suffering turned
into the meaning of life, with suffering reinterpreted into feelings of guilt,
fear, and punishment, everywhere the whip, the hair shirt, the starving body,
remorse, everywhere the sinner’s breaking himself on the terrible torture wheel
of a restless conscience, greedy for its own sickness; everywhere silent
torment, extreme fear, the agony of the tortured heart, the spasms of an unknown
joy, the cry for “redemption.” As a matter of fact, with this system of
procedures the old depression, heaviness, and exhaustion were basically overthrown.
Life became very interesting once again: lively, always lively,
sleepless, glowing, charred, exhausted, and yet not tired—that’s how man looked,
the “sinner,” who was initiated into these mysteries. This grand old
magician in the war against the lack of excitement, the ascetic priest—he had
apparently won. His  kingdom had come. Now people no longer
moaned against pain; they longed for pain: “More pain! More
pain!”—that had been the demanding cry of his disciples and initiates for
centuries. Every excess of feeling which brought grief, everything that broke
apart, knocked over, smashed to bits, carried away, enraptured, the secrets of
the torture chambers, the very invention of hell—from now on everything was
discovered, surmised, put into practice. Everything now was available for the
magician’s use. Everything in future served for the victory of his ideal, the
ascetic ideal. . . . “My empire is not of this world”—he said
afterwards (as he said before). Does he really have the right still to speak
this way? . . . Goethe asserted that there were only thirty-six tragic
situations. From that we can surmise, if we did not know it anyway, that Goethe
was no ascetic priest. He—knows more . . .

21

So far as this whole
sort of priestly medication is concerned, the “guilty” sort, any word of
criticism is too much. That an excess of feeling of the sort the ascetic priest
habitually prescribes for his sick people in this case (under the holiest of
names, as is obvious, while convinced of the sanctity of his purpose) has truly
been of use to some invalid: who would really want to defend the truth
of this kind of claim? At least we should come to an understanding of that
phrase “been of use.” If with those words people wish to assert that such a
system of treatment has improved human beings, then I won’t contradict
them. I would only add what “improved” indicates to me—it’s as much as saying
“tamed,” “weakened,” “disheartened,” “refined,” “mollycoddled” (hence, almost
equivalent to damaged . . .). But when we are mainly concerned with
sick, upset, and depressed people, such a system, even supposing that it makes
them “better,” always makes them sicker. You only have to ask doctors
who treat the mentally ill [Irrenärzte] what a methodical application
of the torments of repentance, remorse, and convulsions of redemption always
brings with it. We should also consult history: wherever the ascetic priest has
put in place this way of dealing with the sick, illness has always spread far
and wide at terrifying speed. What has its “success” always involved? The person
who was already ill gets in addition a shattered nervous system, and that occurs
on the largest and smallest scale, among individuals and among masses of people.
As a consequence of a training in repentance and redemption, we witness huge
epidemics of epilepsy, the greatest known to history, as in the St. Vitus’ and
St. John’s dances in the Middle Ages. We find its repercussions in other forms
of fearful paralysis and enduring depression, with which, under certain
circumstances, the temperament of an entire people or city (Geneva, Basel) is
changed into its opposite once and for all—with these belong also the witch
crazes, something related to sleep walking (eight major epidemics of this  broke
out between 1564 and 1605 alone);—among its consequences we also find that
death-seeking mass hysteria whose horrific cry “eviva la morte” [long
live death] was heard far across the whole of Europe, interrupted by
idiosyncratic outbursts—sometimes of lust, sometimes of destructive frenzies,
just as the same alternation of emotions, with the same intermissions and
reversals, can also still be observed nowadays all over the place, in every case
where the ascetic doctrine of sin once again enjoys a great success (religious
neurosis appears as a form of an “evil nature”—that’s indisputable.
What is it? Quaeritur [that’s what we need to ask]). Generally
speaking, the ascetic ideal and its cult of moral sublimity, this supremely
clever, most dubious, and most dangerous systematization of all the ways to
promote an excess of emotion under the protection of holy purposes, has etched
itself into the entire history of human beings in a dreadful and unforgettable
manner, and, alas, not only into their history. . . Apart from this
ideal, there’s scarcely anything else I would know to point to which has had
such a destructive effect on the health and racial power, particularly
of Europeans. Without any exaggeration, we can call it the true disaster in
the history of the health of European people. At most, the specifically German
influence might be comparable to its effect: I refer to the alcohol poisoning of
Europe, which up to now has marched strictly in step with the political and
racial superiority of the Germans (—wherever they have infused their blood, they
have also infused their vices).—The third in line would be syphilis—magno sed proxima
intervallo [next in line, but after a large gap].

22

Wherever he achieved mastery,
the ascetic priest has ruined spiritual health. As a result, he has also ruined
taste in artibus et litteris [in arts and letters]—he is still ruining
that. “As a result”?—I hope you will simply concede me this “as a result.” At
least, I have no desire to demonstrate it first. A single indication: it
concerns the fundamental text of Christian literature, its essential
model, its “book in itself.” Still in the middle of the Graeco-Roman
magnificence, which was also a magnificent time for books, faced with a ancient
world of writing which had not yet declined and fallen apart, an age in which
people could still read some books for which one would now exchange half of all
literature, the simplicity and vanity of Christian agitators—we call them the
church fathers—already dared to proclaim, “We also have our classical
literature. We don’t need Greek literature.”—And with that, they
pointed with pride to books of legends, letters of the apostles, and little
apologetic treatises, in somewhat the same way as nowadays the English
“Salvation Army” with its related literature fights its war against Shakespeare
and other “pagans.” I don’t like the “New Testament”—you will already have
guessed as much. It almost disturbs me that I stand alone in my taste with
respect to this most highly regarded and most overvalued written work
(the taste of two thousand years is against me). But how can I help it!
“Here I stand. I can do no other”—I
have the courage of my own bad taste. The Old Testament—now, that’s
something totally different: all honour to the Old Testament! In that I find
great men, a heroic landscape, and something of the very rarest of all elements
on earth, the incomparable naïveté of the strong heart; even more—I
find a people. In the New Testament, by contrast, I find nothing but small
sectarian households, nothing but spiritual rococo, nothing but ornament, twisty
little corners, oddities, nothing but conventional air, not to mention an
occasional breeze of bucolic sweet sentimentality, which belongs to the age (and the
Roman province), something not so much Jewish as Hellenistic. Humility and
pomposity standing shoulder to shoulder; a chatting about feelings which are
almost stupefying; vehement feelings but no passion, with awkward gestures.
Here, it seems, there’s a lack of all good upbringing. How can people make such
a fuss about their small vices, the way these devout little men do? No cock—and
certainly not God—would crow about such things. Finally, they even want to
possess “the crown of eternal life,” all these small people from the
provinces. But what for? What for? It is impossible to push presumption any
further. An “immortal” Peter: who could endure him? They have an
ambition that makes one laugh: one of them spells out his most personal things,
his stupidities, melancholy, and indolent worries, as if the essence of all
things had a duty to worry about such matters. Another one never gets tired of
wrapping up God himself in the smallest misery he finds himself stuck in. And
the most appalling taste of this constant familiarity with God! This Jewish, and
not merely Jewish, excessive importuning God with mouth and paw! . . . There are
small despised “pagan people” in east Asia from whom these first Christians
could have learned something important, some tact in their reverence.
As Christian missionaries reveal, such people are not generally allowed to utter
the name of their god. This seems to me sufficiently delicate. It was certainly
too delicate not only for the “first” Christians. To sense the contrast, we
should remember something about Luther, the “most eloquent” and most
presumptuous peasant Germany ever had, and the tone Luther adopted as the one he
most preferred in his conversations with God. Luther’s resistance to the
interceding saints of the church (especially to “the devil’s sow, the Pope”) was
undoubtedly, in the last analysis, the resistance of a lout irritated by the good
etiquette of the church, that etiquette of reverence of the priestly taste,
which lets only the more consecrated and the more discreet into the holy of
holies and shuts the door against the louts, who in this particular place are
never to speak. But Luther, the peasant, simply wanted something different—this
situation was not German enough for him. Above all, he wanted to speak
directly, to speak for himself, to speak “openly” with his God. Well, he
did it.—You can conjecture easily enough that there has never been a place
anywhere in which the ascetic ideal has been a school of good taste, even less
of good manners—in the best cases, it was a school for priestly manners. That
comes about because it carries something in its own body which is the deadly
enemy of all good manners—it lacks moderation, it resists moderation, it is
itself a “non plus ultra” [an ultimate extreme].

23

The ascetic ideal has not only
ruined health and taste; its has also ruined a third, fourth, fifth, and sixth
something as well—I’ll be careful not to mention everything (when would
I come to the end!). I’m not going to reveal what this ideal has brought
about. I would much rather confine myself to what it means, what
it allows us to surmise, what lies hidden behind, under, and in it, what it
provisionally and indistinctly expresses, overloaded with question marks and
misunderstandings.  And only with this purpose in mind, I cannot spare
my readers a glimpse into the monstrosity of its effects, as well as its
disastrous consequences, in order, that is, to prepare them for the ultimate and
most terrifying aspects which the question of the meaning of this ideal has for
me. Just what does the power of this ideal mean, the monstrous nature
of this power? Why was it given room to grow to this extent? Why was there not a
more effective resistance? The ascetic ideal is the expression of a will. Where is
the opposing will, in which an opposing ideal finds its expression? The
ascetic ideal has a goal—a goal which is universal enough that all other
interests in human existence, measured against it, seem small and narrow. It
interprets times, people, and humanity unsparingly with this goal in mind. It
permits no other interpretation. No other goal counts. It rejects, denies,
affirms, and confirms only through its own interpretative meaning (—and
has  there ever been a system of interpretation more thoroughly thought
through?); it does not submit to any power; by contrast, it believes in its
privileged position in relation to all power, in its absolutely higher
ranking with respect to every power—it believes that there is no power on
earth which does not have to derive its meaning first from it, a right to exist,
a value, as a tool in its own work, as a way and a means to its own goal,
to a single goal. . . Where is the counterpart to this closed system of
will, goal, and interpretation? Why is this counterpart missing? . . .
Where is the other “single goal”? But people tell me that counterpart
is not missing, claiming it has not only fought a long and successful
war with that ideal, but has already mastered that ideal on all major points:
all our modern science is a testament to that—this modern science,
which, as a true philosophy of reality, evidently believes only in itself,
evidently possesses courage and will in itself,  and has got along up to this
point well enough without God, a world beyond, and virtues which deny. However,
I’m not impressed at all with such a fuss and chattering from agitators: these
trumpeters of reality are bad musicians. One can hear well enough that
their notes  do not sound out of the depths. The abyss of scientific
conscience does not speak through them—for today the scientific
conscience is an abyss—the phrase “science” in such trumpeting mouths is mere
fornication, an abuse, an indecency. The truth is precisely the opposite of what
is claimed here: science nowadays has simply no faith in itself, to say
nothing of an ideal above it—and where it consists at all of passion,
love, ardour, suffering, that doesn’t make it the opposite of that
ascetic ideal but rather its newest and most pre-eminent form. Does
that sound strange to you? . . .There are indeed a sufficient number of upright
and modest working people among scholars nowadays, happy in their little
corners, and because their work satisfies them, they make noises from time to
time, demanding, with some presumption, that people today should in
general be happy, particularly with science—there are so many useful things to
do precisely there. I don’t deny that. The last thing I want to do is to ruin
the pleasure these honest labourers take in the tasks they perform. For I’m
happy about their work. But the fact that people are working rigorously in
science these days and that there are satisfied workers is simply no proof
that science today, as a totality, has a goal, a will, an ideal, a passion in a
great faith. As I’ve said, the opposite is the case: where science is not the
most recently appearing form of the ascetic ideal—and then it’s a matter of
cases too rare, noble, and exceptional to be capable of countering the general
judgment—science today is a hiding place for all kinds of unhappiness,
disbelief, gnawing worms, despectio sui [self-contempt], bad
conscience—it is the anxiety of the very absence of ideals, suffering
from the lack of a great love, the dissatisfaction with a condition of involuntary
modest content. O, what nowadays does science not conceal! How much, at least,
it is meant to conceal! The efficiency of our best scholars, their
mindless diligence, their heads smoking day and night, the very mastery of their
handiwork—how often has all that really derived its meaning from the fact that
they don’t permit some things to become visible to them any more! Science as a
means of putting themselves to sleep. Are you acquainted with that? . .
. People wound scholars to the bone—everyone who associates with them
experiences this—sometimes with a harmless word. We make our scholarly
friends angry with us when we intend to honour them. We drive them wild, merely
because we were too coarse to figure out the people we are truly dealing with, suffering
people, who don’t wish to admit to themselves what they are, narcotised and
mindless people, who fear only one thing—coming to consciousness.

24

Now, let’s consider, on the
other hand, those rarer cases I mentioned, the last idealists remaining today
among the philosophers and scholars. Perhaps in them we have the opponents of
the ascetic ideal we’re looking for, the counter-idealists? In fact,
that’s what they think they are, these “unbelievers” (for that’s what
they are collectively). That, in particular, seems to be their last item of
belief, that they are opponents of this ideal, for they are so serious about
this stance, their words and gestures are so passionate on this very point:—but
is it therefore necessarily the case that what they believe is true? We
“knowledgeable people” are positively suspicious of all forms of believers. Our
suspicion has gradually cultivated the habit in us of concluding the reverse of
what people previously concluded: that is, wherever the strength of a faith
steps decisively into the foreground, we infer a certain weakness in its ability
to demonstrate its truth, even the improbability of what it believes.
We, too, do not deny that the belief “makes blessed,” but for that very
reason we deny that the belief proves something—a strong belief
which confers blessedness creates doubts about what it has faith in. It does not
ground “truth.” It grounds a certain probability—delusion. Well, how do
things stand in this case?—These people who say no today, these outsiders, these
people who are determined on one point, their demand for intellectual probity,
these hard, strong, abstemious, heroic spirits, who constitute the honour of our
age, all these pale atheists, anti-Christians, immoralists, nihilists, these
sceptics, ephectics, hectics of the spirit (collectively they are all
hectic in some sense or other), the last idealists of knowledge, the only ones
in whom intellectual conscience lives and takes on human form nowadays— they
really do believe that they are as free as possible from the ascetic ideal,
these “free, very free spirits,” and yet I am revealing to them what
they cannot see for themselves—for they are standing too close to
themselves—this ascetic ideal is also their very own ideal. They
themselves represent it today. Perhaps they are the only ones who do. They
themselves are its most spiritual offspring, the furthest advanced of its troops
and its crowd of scouts, itsmost awkward, most delicate, most incomprehensibly
seductive form. If I am any kind of solver of puzzles, then I want to be that
with this statement! . . . They are not free spirits—not by any
stretch—for they still believe in the truth.  When the Christian
crusaders in the Orient came across that unconquerable Order of Assassins, that
free-spirited order par excellence, whose lowest ranks lived a life of
obedience of the sort no order of monks attained, then they also received by
some means or other a hint about that symbol and slogan which was reserved for
only the highest ranks as their secret, “Nothing is true. Everything is
permitted.” . . . Well now, that was freedom of the spirit. With
that the very belief in truth was cancelled. . . .  Has a European, a
Christian free spirit ever wandered by mistake into this proposition and its
labyrinthine consequences? Has he come to know the Minotaur of this
cavern from experience? . . .  I doubt it. More than that: I know
differently:— nothing is more immediately foreign to people set on one thing,
these so-called “free spirits,” than freedom and emancipation in this
sense:  in no respect are they more firmly bound; in their very belief in the
truth they are, as no one else is, firm and unconditional. Perhaps I understand
all this from far too close a distance: that admirable philosophical abstinence
which such a belief requires, that intellectual stoicism, which ultimately
forbids one to deny just as strongly as it forbids one to affirm, that desire to
come to a standstill before the  facts, the factum brutum [brute
fact], that fatalism of the “petits faits” [small facts] (what
I call ce petit faitalisme [this small factism]), that quality with
which French science nowadays seeks a sort of moral precedence over German
science, the attainment of a state where one, in general, abandons
interpretation (violating, emending, abbreviating, letting go, filling in the
cracks, composing, forging, and the other actions which belong to the nature of
all interpretation)—generally speaking, this attitude expresses just as much
virtuous asceticism as any denial of sensuality (basically it is only one mode
of this denial). However, what compels a person to this unconditional
will for truth  is the faith in the ascetic ideal itself, even though
it may be its unconscious imperative. We should not deceive ourselves on this
point—it is a belief in a metaphysical value, a value of truth in
itself, something guaranteed and affirmed only in that ideal (it stands or
falls with that ideal). Strictly speaking, there is no science “without
presuppositions.” The idea of such a science is unimaginable, paralogical: a
philosophy, a “belief,” must always be there first, so that with it science can
have a direction, a sense, a border, a method, a right to exist.
(Whoever thinks the reverse, whoever, for example, is preparing to place
philosophy “on a strictly scientific foundation,” first must place, not just
philosophy, but also truth itself on its head—the worst injury to
decency one could possibly give to two such venerable women!). In fact, there is
no doubt about this matter—and here I’m letting my book The Gay Science have
a word (see its fifth book, Section 344)—“The truthful person, in that daring
and ultimate sense which the belief in science presupposes in him, thus affirms
a world different from the world of life, of nature, and of history, and to
the extent that he affirms this “other world,” well? Must he not in the process
deny its opposite, this world, our world? . . . Our faith in science
rests on something which is still a metaphysical belief—even we knowledgeable
people of today, we godless and anti-metaphysical people—we, too, still take our fire
from that blaze kindled by a thousand years of old belief, that faith in
Christianity, which was also Plato’s belief, that God is the truth, that the
truth is divine. . . . But how can we do that, if this very claim is
constantly getting more and more difficult to believe, if nothing reveals itself
as divine any more, unless it’s error, blindness, lies—if even God manifests
himself as our longest lasting lie?” At this point it’s necessary to
pause and reflect for a long while. Science itself from now on requires some
justification (by that I don’t yet mean to claim that there is such a
justification for it). People should examine the oldest and the most recent
philosophers on this question. They all lack an awareness of the problem of the
extent to which the will to truth itself first needs some justification—here is
a hole in every philosophy. How does that come about? It’s because the ascetic
ideal up to this point has been master of all philosophies, because
truth has been established as being, as god, as the highest authority itself,
because truth was not allowed to be problematic. Do you understand this
“allowed”?—From  the moment when the belief in the god of the ascetic ideal is
denied, there is also a new problem: the problem of the value of
truth.—The will to truth requires a critique—let us identify our own work with
that requirement—for once to place in question, as an experiment, the
value of truth. . . . (Anyone who thinks this has been stated too briefly is
urged to read over that section of The Gay Science, pp. 160 ff, which
carries the title “The Extent to Which We Also Are Still Devout,” Section 344—or
better, the entire fifth book of that work, as well as the preface to (The
Dawn.)

25

No! People should not come at
me with science when I am looking for the natural antagonist of the ascetic
ideal, when I ask, “Where is the opposing will, in which an opposing
ideal expresses itself?” For that purpose, science does not stand
sufficiently on its own, not nearly; for that it first requires an value ideal,
a power to make value, in whose service it could have faith in
itself—science is never in itself something which creates values. Its
relationship to the ascetic ideal is still not inherently antagonistic at all.
It’s even more that case that, for the most part, it represents the
forward-driving force in the inner development of this ideal. Its resistance and
struggle, when we inspect more closely, are not concerned in any way with the
ideal itself, but only with its external trappings, clothing, masquerade, its
temporary hardening, petrifaction, dogma. Science makes the life in this ideal
free again, since it denies what is exoteric in it. These two things, science
and the ascetic ideal—they really stand on a single foundation—I’ve just
clarified the point—namely, on the same overvaluing of the truth (or more
correctly, on the same faith in the inestimable value of the truth, which is beyond criticism).
In that very claim they are necessarily allies—so that, if someone is
going to fight against them, he can only fight them together and place them both
in question. An appraisal of the value of the ascetic ideal unavoidably also
involves an appraisal of the value of science; while there’s still time people
should to keep their eyes open for that, their ears alert! (As for art—let
me offer a preliminary remark, for I’ll be coming back to it at some point or
other at greater length—the very art in which the lie sanctifies itself
and the will to deceive has good conscience on its side is much more
fundamentally opposed to the ascetic ideal than is science: that’s what Plato’s
instinct experienced—the greatest enemy of art which Europe has produced up to
this point. Plato versus Homer: that’s the entire, the true
antagonism—on one side, the “beyond” of the best will, the great slanderer of
life; on the other side, life’s unintentional worshipper, the golden nature.
An artistic bondage in the service of the ascetic ideal is thus the truest corruption of
the artist there can be. Unfortunately it’s one of the most common, for nothing
is more corruptible than an artist.) Physiologically considered, science
also rests on the same foundation as the ascetic ideal: a certain impoverishment
of life is the precondition for both—emotions become cool, the tempo slows
down, dialectic replaces instinct, seriousness stamped on faces and
gestures (seriousness, this most unmistakable sign of a more laborious
metabolism, of a life of struggle and hard work). Just look at those periods in
a population when the scholars step up into the foreground: they are times of
exhaustion, often of evening, of decline. The overflowing force, the certainty
about life, the certainty about the future have gone. The preponderance
of mandarins never indicates anything good—no more than does the arrival of
democracy, the peace tribunal instead of war, equal rights for women, the
religion of pity, and all the other things symptomatic of a degenerating life.
(Science grasped as a problem: what does science mean?—on this point see the
Preface to The Birth of Tragedy).—No! This “modern science”—keep your
eyes open for this—is for the time being the best ally of the ascetic
ideal, and precisely for this reason: because it is the most unconscious, the
most involuntary, the most secret and most subterranean ally!  They have up to
now been playing a single game, the “poor in spirit” and the scientific
opponents of that ideal (we should be careful, incidentally, not to think that
these opponents are the opposite of that ideal, something like the rich in
spirit—that they are not; I call them hectics of the spirit). The
famous victories of the latter—and they have undoubtedly been victories—but over
what? They in no way overcame the ascetic ideal. With those victories, the ideal
instead became stronger, that is, harder to understand, more spiritual, more
dangerous, as science ruthlessly and continually kept breaking off and
demolishing a wall, an external structure which had built itself onto the ideal
and coarsened its appearance. Do people really think that, for example, the
downfall of theological astronomy indicates a downfall  of that ideal? . . .
Because of that, have human beings perhaps become less dependent on
redemption in a world beyond as a solution for the puzzle of their existence,
given that existence since then looks, in the visible order of things,
even more arbitrary, indolent, and dispensable? Isn’t it the case that since
Copernicus the very self-diminution of human beings, their will to
self-diminution, has made inexorable progress?
Alas, the faith in their dignity, uniqueness, irreplaceable position in the
chain of being has gone—the human being has become an animal, not a metaphorical
animal, but absolutely and unconditionally—the one who in his earlier faith was
almost God (“child of God,” “God-man” [Gottmensch]) . . .  Since
Copernicus human beings seem to have reached an inclined plane—they’re now
rolling at an accelerating rate past the mid-point—where to? Into
nothingness? Into the “penetrating sense of their own nothingness”? .
. .Well, then, wouldn’t this be precisely the way—into the old ideal? .
. . All science (and not just astronomy, about whose humbling and
destructive effects Kant made a noteworthy confession, “it destroys my
importance”. . .)—all science, natural as well as unnatural—the name I
give to the self-criticism of knowledge—is nowadays keen to talk human beings
out of the respect they used to have for themselves, as if the latter were
nothing more than a bizarre arrogance about themselves. In this matter we could
even say science has its own pride, its characteristically acrid form of
stoical ataraxia [indifference], in maintaining
this laboriously attained self-contempt for human beings as their
ultimate, most serious demand for self respect (and, in fact, that’s justified,
for the one who despises is still one person who “has not forgotten respect” . .
.). Does doing this really work against the ascetic ideal? Do people really
think in all seriousness (as theologians imagined for quite a while)  that, say,
Kant’s victory over dogmatic theological concepts (“God,” “Soul,”
“Freedom,” “Immortality”) succeeded in breaking up that ideal?—in asking that
question, it should not concern us at the moment whether Kant himself had
anything at all like that in mind. What is certain is that all sorts of
transcendentalists since Kant have once more won the game—they’ve been
emancipated from the theologians. What a stroke of luck!—Kant showed them that
secret path by which from now on they could, on their own initiative and with
the finest scientific decency, follow their “hearts’ desires.” Similarly who
could now hold anything against the agnostics, if they, as admirers of what is
inherently unknown and secret, worship the question mark itself as
their God? (Xaver Doudan once spoke of the ravages brought on by “l’habitude d’admirer
l’inintelligible au lieu de rester tout simplement dans l’inconnu”  [the
habit of admiring the  unintelligible instead of simply staying
in the unknown]; he claimed that the ancients had not done this). If
everything human beings “know” does not satisfy their wishes and, instead,
contradicts them and makes them shudder, what a divine excuse to be allowed to
seek the blame for this not in “wishes” but in “knowledge”! . . . “There is no
knowledge. Consequently—there is a God”—what a new elegantia syllogismi [syllogistic
excellence]! What a triumph of the ascetic ideal!

26

Or does modern historical
writing collectively perhaps display an attitude more confident about life, more
confident about ideals? Its noblest claim nowadays asserts that it is a mirror.
It eschews all teleology. It doesn’t want to “prove” anything any more. It
spurns playing the role of judge and derives its good taste from that—it affirms
as little as it denies. It establishes the facts. It “describes” . . . All this
is ascetic to a high degree. However, it is also, to an even higher degree, nihilistic.
We must not deceive ourselves on this point. We see a sad, hard, but determined
gaze—an eye which looks into the distance, the way a solitary traveller
at the North Pole gazes out (perhaps so as not to look inside? not to look
behind? . . .) Here is snow; here life is quite silent. The final crows that
make noise here are called “what for?” “in vain,” “nada” [nothing]—here
nothing thrives and grows any more, at most Petersburg metapolitics and Tolstoian “pity.”
But so far as that other style of historian is concerned, maybe an even “more
modern” style, which is comfortable and sensual and makes eyes at life as much
as at the ascetic ideal—this style uses the word “artist” as a glove and has
taken an exclusive lease on the praise of contemplation. O what a thirst these
sweet and witty types arouse in people even for ascetics and winter landscapes!
No! Let the devil take these “meditative” people! I would much prefer to keep
wandering with those historical nihilists through the gloomiest cold gray
fog!—In fact, if I had to choose, I might find it better to lend a ear to a
completely and essentially unhistorical or anti-historical man (like that Dührung,
whose tones intoxicate a species of “beautiful souls” in Germany today, people
who up to now have been a still timid, still unassuming species, the species
anarchistica [the anarchists] within the educated proletariat).
The “contemplative ones” are a hundred times worse—: I know nothing that creates
so much disgust as such an objective armchair, such a sweet-smelling man
luxuriating in history, half cleric, half satyr, with perfume by Renan, who
reveals at once in the high falsetto of his approval what he lacks, where is
he deficient, where in his case the Fates have
wielded their dreadful shears with, alas, so much surgical precision!
That affronts my taste as well as my patience: confronted with such sights, let
those be patient who have nothing to lose by them—such a picture infuriates me,
such “lookers on” make me angry with the “spectacle,” even more than the
spectacle itself (history itself, you understand). Seeing that, I fall
unexpectedly into an Anacreontic mood. This nature, which gave the bull his
horns, the lion his  chasmodonton [chasm of teeth],
why did nature give me a foot? . . . To kick with—by holy Anacreon!—and
not merely to run off, but to kick apart these decrepit armchairs, this cowardly
contemplation, this lascivious acting like eunuchs in front of history, the
flirting with ascetic ideals, the Tartufferie [hypocrisy] in the
justice of impotence! I grant all honour to the ascetic ideal, insofar as it
is honest! So long as it believes in itself and does not play games with
us! But I can’t stand all these coquettish insects, with their insatiable
ambition to sniff out the infinite, until finally the infinite stinks of bugs. I
can’t stand these white sepulchres who treat life as play acting. I can’t stand
the tired and useless people, who wrap themselves up in wisdom and gaze out
“objectively.” I can’t stand the agitators who dress themselves up as heroes,
who wear a magic hat of ideals on heads stuffed with straw. I can’t stand the
ambitious artists, who like to present themselves as ascetics and priests, but
who are basically tragic clowns. And I can’t stand these most recent speculators
in idealism, the anti-Semites, who nowadays roll their eyes around in a
Christian-Aryan-Bourgeois way and seek to inflame all the horned-animal elements
among the people by abusing the cheapest form of agitation, moral posturing, in
a way that exhausts all my patience (—the fact that every kind of
spiritual fraud succeeds in present-day Germany is the result of the absolutely
undeniable and already tangible desolation of the German spirit, whose
cause I look for in an excessively strict diet limited to newspapers, politics,
beer, and Wagnerian music, together with the pre-condition for such a diet:
first, a restricting nationalism and vanity, that strong but narrow principle
“Germany, Germany, over everything,” as well as the paralysis agitans
[trembling palsy] of “modern ideas”).
Today Europe is rich and resourceful, above all, in ways of arousing people.
Nothing seems to be more important to possess than stimulants and firewater:
hence, the monstrous falsification of ideals, the most powerful firewater of the
spirit. Hence also the unfavourable, stinking, lying,
pseudo-alcoholic air everywhere. I’d like to know how many shiploads of
counterfeit idealism, of heroic costumes and rattles full of nonsensical big
words, how many tons of sugary spiritual sympathy (its business name: la
religion de la souffrance [the religion of suffering]), how many stilts of
“noble indignation” to assist the spiritually flat-footed, and how many play
actors of the Christian moral ideal would have to be exported from Europe
today so that its air might smell cleaner once again. . . . Obviously, as far as
this overproduction is concerned, a new commercial possibility has
opened up: obviously there is new “business” to be made with small gods of
ideals and their accompanying “idealists”—people should not fail to hear this
hint! Who has the courage for it? We have it in our hands to “idealize”
the entire earth! . . . But why am I talking about courage? Only one thing is
necessary here, just the hand, an uninhibited, a very uninhibited hand.—

27

Enough! Enough! Let’s leave
these curiosities and complexities of the most modern spirit, which inspire as
much laughter as irritation. Our problem can do without them, the problem of the
meaning of the ascetic ideal. What has that to do with yesterday and today! I am
going to approach these issues more fundamentally and more forcefully in another
connection (under the title On The History of European Nihilism. I
refer to a work which I am preparing: The Will to Power: An Attempt
To Re-evaluate all Values). What I have been dealing with here is only the
following—to establish that the ascetic ideal has, for the time being, even in
the most spiritual sphere, only one kind of true enemy who can inflict harm, and
that enemy is those who play-act this ideal—for they awaken distrust. Everywhere
else, where the spirit nowadays is strong, powerful, and working without
counterfeiting, it generally dispenses with the ideal—the popular expression for
this abstinence is “atheism,” except for its will to truth. But this will, this
remnant of the ideal is, if people wish to believe me, that very ideal in its
strongest, most spiritual formulation, thoroughly esoteric, stripped of all its
outer structures, and thus not so much a remnant, as its kernel. Consequently,
absolutely unconditional atheism (—and that’s the only air we breathe, we more
spiritual men of this age!) does not stand opposed to this ideal, as it appears
to do. It is much rather only one of its last stages of development, one of its
concluding forms and innerly logical outcomes. It demands reverence, this
catastrophe of two thousand years of breeding for the truth which concludes by
forbidding itself the lie of a faith in God. (The same process of development in
India, which was fully independent of Europe and therefore proof of
something—this same ideal forced things to a similar conclusion. The decisive
point was reached five centuries before the European calendar, with Buddha, or
more precisely, with the Sankhya philosophy. For this was popularized by Buddha
and made into a religion.) Putting the question as forcefully as possible, what
really triumphed over the Christian God? The answer stands in my Gay Science,
p. 290: “Christian morality itself, the increasingly strict understanding of the
idea of truthfulness, the subtlety of the father confessor of the Christian
conscience, transposed and sublimated into scientific conscience, into
intellectual cleanliness at any price. To look at nature as if it were a proof
of the goodness and care of a god, to interpret history in such a way as to
honour divine reason, as a constant testament to a moral world order and moral
intentions, to interpret one’s own experiences, as devout men have interpreted
them for long enough, as if everything was divine providence, everything was a
sign, everything was thought out and sent for the salvation of the soul out of
love—now that’s over and done with. That has conscience against it. Among more
sensitive consciences that counts as something indecent, dishonest, as lying,
feminism, weakness, cowardice. With this rigour, if with anything, we are good
Europeans and heirs to Europe’s longest and bravest overcoming of the self. All
great things destroy themselves by an act of self-cancellation. That’s what the
law of life wills, that law of the necessary “self-overcoming” in the essence of
life—eventually the call always goes out to the lawmaker himself, “patere legem,
quam ipse tulisti” [submit to the law which you yourself have
established]. That’s the way Christianity was destroyed as dogma by its own
morality; that’s the way Christendom as morality must now also be destroyed. We
stand on the threshold of this event. After Christian truthfulness has come to a
series of conclusions, it will draw its strongest conclusion, its conclusion
against itself. However, this will occur when it poses the question: “What is
the meaning of all will to truth?” Here I move back again to my problem, to our
problem, my unknown friends (—for I still don’t know anything about friends):
what sense would our whole being have if not for the fact that in us that will
to truth became aware of itself as a problem? . . . Because this will to truth
from now on is growing conscious of itself, morality from now on is
dying—there’s no doubt about that. That great spectacle in one hundred acts,
which remains reserved for the next two centuries in Europe, that most fearful,
most questionable, and perhaps also most hopeful of all spectacles . . .

28

If we leave aside the ascetic
ideal, then man, the animal man, has had no meaning up to this point.
His existence on earth has had no purpose. “Why man at all?” was a question
without an answer. The will for man and earth was missing. Behind every
great human destiny echoes as refrain an even greater “in vain” That is
just what the ascetic ideal means: that something is missing, that a
huge hole surrounds man—he did not know how to justify himself to
himself, to explain, to affirm; he suffered from the problem of his
meaning. He also suffered in other ways as well: he was for the most part a
pathological animal, but the suffering itself was not his problem,
rather the fact that he lacked an answer to the question he screamed out, “Why
this suffering?” Man, the bravest animal, the one most accustomed to
suffering, does not deny suffering in itself; he desires it;
he seeks it out in person, provided that people show him a meaning for
it, a purpose of suffering. The curse that earlier spread itself over
men was not suffering, but the senselessness of suffering—and the
ascetic ideal offered him a meaning! The ascetic ideal has been the only
meaning offered up to this point. Any meaning is better than no meaning at all;
however one looks at it, the ascetic ideal has so far been the “faute de mieux” [for
lack of something better] par excellence. In it suffering was interpreted,
the huge hole appeared filled in, the door shut against all suicidal nihilism.
The interpretation undoubtedly brought new suffering with it—more profound, more
inner, more poisonous, and more life-gnawing suffering; it brought all suffering
under the perspective of guilt. . . . But nevertheless—with it man was saved.
He had a meaning; from that point on he was no longer like a leaf in
the wind, a toy ball of nonsense, of “without sense”; he could now will something—at
first it didn’t matter where, why, or how he willed: the will itself was
saved. We simply cannot conceal from ourselves what is really
expressed by that total will which received its direction from the ascetic
ideal: this hate against what is human, even more against animality, even more
against material things—this abhorrence of the senses, of reason itself, this
fear of happiness and beauty, this longing for the beyond away from all
appearance, change, becoming, death, desire, even longing itself—all this means,
let’s have the courage to understand this, a will to nothingness, an
aversion to life, a revolt against the most fundamental preconditions of
life—but it is and remains a will! . . . And to finish up by repeating
what I said at the beginning: man will sooner will nothingness than not will
. . .

ENDNOTES


Thus Spoke Zarathustra: a work written by Nietzsche between 1883 and
1885. 

 Luther: Martin
Luther (1483-1546), German monk and university professor whose revolutionary
break with the Catholic Church launched the Reformation; Die Meistersinger: The
Mastersingers of Nuremburg, an opera by Richard Wagner, first performed in
1868. 

  Parsifal: the hero of
Wagner’s opera of the same name, first performed in 1882. 

 Schopenhauer:
Arthur Schopenhauer (1788-1860), influential German philosopher, whose work
emphasized the importance of the Will.  

  Stendhal: pen name of
Marie-Henri Beyle (1783-1842), a French novelist whom Nietzsche admired for his
psychological acuity. 

  Pygmalion: In classical
mythology a sculptor who carved a woman so lifelike and beautiful, that he fell
in love with it. 

  Ixion: In Greek mythology a
mortal man who tried to seduce Zeus’ wife, Hera, and was punished in Hades by
being bound on a fiery wheel which was always spinning. 

  The Latin here is a reworking of the
famous legal saying “Fiat Justitia et pereat mundus” [Let justice be done,
though the world perish]. The saying is attributed to Ferdinand I
(1503-1564), the Holy Roman Emperor, who adopted it as his motto. 

  Piazza San Marco: the main
city square in Venice. 

  . . . ressentiment:
Nietzsche introduces this important term in the First Essay of Genealogy of
Morals, in Section 10: a short definition is as follows: “deep-seated
resentment, frustration, and hostility, accompanied by a sense of being
powerless to express these feelings directly” (Merriam-Webster). 

  . . . Eugene Dühring (1833-1921),
a German philosopher and socialist who attacked Marxism, Christianity, and
Judaism. 

  The reference to
Shakespeare’s Squire Christopher [Junker Christoph] may be (as Walter
Kaufmann suggests) an allusion to The Taming of the Shrew, where the
hero, Petruchio refers to a vegetarian diet (see Kaufmann’s translation of Genealogy
of Morals, 131); or it may be (as Maudemarie Clark and Alan J. Swensen propose)
an allusion to Twelfth Night, where Sir Andrew Aguecheek (called Junker
Christoph in one German translation of the play) comments on his eating habits.
See the Clark and Swensen translation of Genealogy of Morality, 156.
Nietzsche refers to Junker Christoph’s meat-eating habits again later on in this
section. The Thirty Years War (1618-1648) was a disastrous European conflict
which began as a fight over religion. 

  Hesychasts: a religious
tradition in the Eastern Orthodox Church which emphasizes an inner spiritual
retreat and abandonment of sense experience. St Theresa (1515-1582), a
famous Spanish mystic. 

  Shankara (788?-820),
Indian philosopher who played a formative role in the historical development of
Hinduism. Paul Deussen (1845-1919), an important German scholar of
Indian religion. 

  Geulincx: Arnold Geulincx (1624-1669),
a Flemish philosopher. 

  Thomas Moore (1779-1852),
an Irish poet; Dr. Gwinner: Wilhelm von Gwinner (1825-1917), German
lawyer and civil servant. Thayer: Alexander Thayer (1817-1897). 

  Taine: Hippolyte Adolphe Taine
(1828-1893), a French historian; Leopold Ranke: (1795  to 1886) a very famous
and influential German historian. 

  . . . no other: This is
one of Martin Luther’s most famous quotations, allegedly his reply when asked to
take back his criticisms of the church, a response which launched the
Reformation in 1521. 

 Copernicus: Nicolaus Copernicus
(1473-1543), the Polish astronomer and monk who produced a scientifically based
theory of a sun-centred solar system. 

  Xaver Doudan: Ximénès Doudan (1800-1872),
a French writer. 

  Renan: Ernest Renan
(1823-1892), French writer and philosopher, particularly famous for his Life of
Jesus. 

  Anacreon: (born c. 570
BC), Greek lyric poet famous for his drinking songs. 


“Germany, Germany, over everything”: the opening lines of the German
national anthem “Deutschland, Deutschland, über alles”; the lyrics were written
in 1841 to music by Haydn. The song was adopted as the national anthem in 1922. 

Link to Genealogy of Morals, Table of Contents