THE SHADOW
»3

Whereas the contents of the personal unconscious are acquired during the individual's lifetime, the contents of the collective unconscious are invariably archetypes that were present
from the beginning. Their relation to the instincts has been dis-

The archetypes most clearly characterized
from the empirical point of view are those which have the most
frequent and the most disturbing influence on the ego. These
are the shadow, the anima, and the animus. 2 The most accessible
of these, and the easiest to experience, is the shadow, for its
nature can in large measure be inferred from the contents of the
cussed elsewhere. 1

personal unconscious. The only exceptions to this rule are those
rather rare cases where the positive qualities of the personality
are repressed, and the ego in consequence plays an essentially

negative or unfavourable role.

H

The shadow is a moral problem that challenges the whole
ego-personality, for no one can become conscious of the shadow

*5

without considerable moral effort. To become conscious of it
involves recognizing the dark aspects of the personality as present and real. This act is the essential condition for any kind of
self-knowledge, and it therefore, as a rule, meets with considerable resistance. Indeed, self-knowledge as a psychotherapeutic
measure frequently requires much painstaking work extending
over a long period.
Closer examination of the dark characteristics— that is, the
inferiorities constituting the shadow— reveals that they have an
emotional nature, a kind of autonomy, and accordingly an obsessive or, better, possessive quality. Emotion, incidentally, is
1 "Instinct and the Unconscious" and "On the Nature of the Psyche," pars. 3978.
2 The contents of this and the following chapter are taken from a lecture deliv-

ered to the Swiss Society for Practical Psychology, in Zurich, 1948. The material
was first published in the Wiener Zeitschrift fur Nervenheilkunde und deren
Grenzgebiete, I (1948)

:

4.

8

THE SHADOW

16

*7

not an activity of the individual but something that happens to
him. Affects occur usually where adaptation is weakest, and at
the same time they reveal the reason for its weakness, namely a
certain degree of inferiority and the existence of a lower level
of personality. On this lower level with its uncontrolled or
scarcely controlled emotions one behaves more or less like a
primitive, who is not only the passive victim of his affects but
also singularly incapable of moral judgment.
Although, with insight and good will, the shadow can to
some extent be assimilated into the conscious personality, experience shows that there are certain features which offer the most
obstinate resistance to moral control and prove almost impossible to influence. These resistances are usually bound up with
projections, which are not recognized as such, and their recognition is a moral achievement beyond the ordinary. While some
traits peculiar to the shadow can be recognized without too
much difficulty as one's own personal qualities, in this case both
insight and good will are unavailing because the cause of the
emotion appears to lie, beyond all possibility of doubt, in the
other person. No matter how obvious it may be to the neutral
observer that it is a matter of projections, there is little hope
that the subject will perceive this himself. He must be convinced that he throws a very long shadow before he is willing to
withdraw his emotionally-toned projections from their object.
Let us suppose that a certain individual shows no inclination whatever to recognize his projections. The projection-making factor then has a free hand and can realize its object— if it has
one— or bring about some other situation characteristic of its
power. As we know, it is not the conscious subject but the
unconscious which does the projecting. Hence one meets with
projections, one does not make them. The effect of projection is
to isolate the subject from his environment, since instead of a
real relation to it there is now only an illusory one. Projections
change the world into the replica of one's own unknown face. In
the last analysis, therefore, they lead to an autoerotic or autistic
condition in which one dreams a world whose reality remains
forever unattainable. The resultant sentiment d'incompletude
and the still worse feeling of sterility are in their turn explained
by projection as the malevolence of the environment, and by

means of this vicious circle the isolation is intensified. The more

AION
projections are thrust in between the subject and the environ-

18

J

9

ment, the harder it is for the ego to see through its illusions. A
forty-five-year-old patient who had suffered from a compulsion
neurosis since he was twenty and had become completely cut off
from the world once said to me: "But I can never admit to myself that I've wasted the best twenty-five years of my life!"
It is often tragic to see how blatantly a man bungles his own
life and the lives of others yet remains totally incapable of seeing how much the whole tragedy originates in himself, and how
he continually feeds it and keeps it going. Not consciously, of
course— for consciously he is engaged in bewailing and cursing a
faithless world that recedes further and further into the distance. Rather, it is an unconscious factor which spins the illusions that veil his world. And what is being spun is a cocoon,
which in the end will completely envelop him.
One might assume that projections like these, which are so
very difficult if not impossible to dissolve, would belong to the
realm of the shadow— that is, to the negative side of the personality. This assumption becomes untenable after a certain point,
because the symbols that then appear no longer refer to the
same but to the opposite sex, in a man's case to a woman and
vice versa. The source of projections is no longer the shadow—

which is always of the same sex as the subject— but a contrasexual
figure. Here we meet the animus of a woman and the anima of a
man, two corresponding archetypes whose autonomy and unconsciousness explain the stubbornness of their projections. Though

the shadow is a motif as well known to mythology as anima and

animus,

it

represents

first

and foremost the personal uncon-

scious, and its content can therefore be made conscious without

too much difficulty. In this it differs from anima and animus,
shadow can be seen through and recognized

for whereas the

fairly easily, the anima and animus are much further away from

consciousness and in normal circumstances are seldom

if

ever

With a little self-criticism one can see through the
shadow— so far as its nature is personal. But when it appears as
an archetype, one encounters the same difficulties as with anima
and animus. In other words, it is quite within the bounds of

realized.

possibility for a man to recognize the relative evil of his nature,

but it is a rare and shattering experience for him to gaze into
the face of absolute evil.
10

Ill

THE SYZYGY: ANIMA AND ANIMUS
