THE SELF

1

We shall now turn to the question of whether the increase

43

in self-knowledge resulting from the withdrawal of impersonal

projections— in other words, the integration of the contents of
the collective unconscious— exerts a specific influence on the egopersonality. To the extent that the integrated contents are parts
of the self, we can expect this influence to be considerable.
Their assimilation augments not only the area of the field of
consciousness but also the importance of the ego, especially
when, as usually happens, the ego lacks any critical approach to
the unconscious. In that case it is easily overpowered and becomes identical with the contents that have been assimilated.
In this way, for instance, a masculine consciousness comes under
the influence of the anima and can even be possessed by her.
44
I have discussed the wider effects of the integration of unconscious contents elsewhere 2 and can therefore omit going into
details here. I should only like to mention that the more numerous and the more significant the unconscious contents which are
assimilated to the ego, the closer the approximation of the ego
to the self, even though this approximation must be a neverending process. This inevitably produces an inflation of the ego, 3
unless a critical line of demarcation is drawn between it and the
unconscious figures. But this act of discrimination yields practical results

only if it succeeds in fixing reasonable boundaries

to the ego and in granting the figures of the
self, anima,

1

unconscious— the
animus, and shadow— relative autonomy and reality

The material for this chapter is drawn from a paper, "t)ber das Selbst," pub-

lished in the Eranos-Jahrbuch 1948.
2 "The Relations

between the Ego and the Unconscious."

used in I Cor. 5 2: "Infiati estis [ire^vatdjfjievoi] et non
magis luctum habuistis" (And you are puffed up, and have not rather mourned)—
with reference to a case of tolerated incest with the mother ("that a man should
have his father's wife").
3 In the sense of the words

:

23

AION

45

(of a psychic nature). To psychologize this reality out of existence either is ineffectual, or else merely increases the inflation
of the ego. One cannot dispose of facts by declaring them unreal.
The projection-making factor, for instance, has undeniable
reality. Anyone who insists on denying it becomes identical with
it, which is not only dubious in itself but a positive danger to the
well-being of the individual. Everyone who has dealings with
such cases knows how perilous an inflation can be. No more than
a flight of steps or a smooth floor is needed to precipitate a fatal
fall. Besides the "pride goeth before a fall" motif there are other
factors of a no less disagreeable psychosomatic and psychic
nature which serve to reduce "puffed-up-ness." This condition
should not be interpreted as one of conscious self-aggrandizement. Such is far from being the rule. In general we are not
directly conscious of this condition at all, but can at best infer
its existence indirectly from the symptoms. These include the reactions of our immediate environment. Inflation magnifies the
blind spot in the eye, and the more we are assimilated by the
projection-making factor, the greater becomes the tendency to
identify with it. A clear symptom of this is our growing disinclination to take note of the reactions of the environment and
pay heed to them.
It must be reckoned a psychic catastrophe when the ego is
assimilated by the self. The image of wholeness then remains
in the unconscious, so that on the one hand it shares the archaic
nature of the unconscious and on the other finds itself in the
psychically relative space-time continuum that is characteristic
of the unconscious as such. 4 Both these qualities are numinous
and hence have an unlimited determining effect on ego-consciousness, which is differentiated, i.e., separated, from the unconscious and moreover exists in an absolute space and an
absolute time. It is a vital necessity that this should be so. If,
therefore, the ego falls for any length of time under the control
of an unconscious factor, its adaptation is disturbed and the way

opened for all sorts of possible accidents.
46

Hence it is of the greatest importance that the ego should
be anchored in the world of consciousness and that consciousness should be reinforced by a very precise adaptation. For this,
certain virtues like attention, conscientiousness, patience,
4 Cf. "On the Nature of the Psyche," pars. 414s., 439,ff.

24

etc.,

THE SELF
are of great value on the moral side, just as accurate observation
of the symptomatology of the unconscious

and objective self-

criticism are valuable on the intellectual side.
47

However, accentuation of the ego personality and the world
may easily assume such proportions that the
figures of the unconscious are psychologized and the self consequently becomes assimilated to the ego. Although this is the

of consciousness

exact opposite of the process we have just described it is followed by the same result: inflation. The world of consciousness

must now be levelled down in favour of the reality of the unconscious. In the first case, reality had to be protected against an
archaic, "eternal" and "ubiquitous" dream-state; in the second,
room must be made for the dream at the expense of the world of
consciousness. In the first case, mobilization of all the virtues is

48

indicated; in the second, the presumption of the ego can only
be damped down by moral defeat. This is necessary, because
otherwise one will never attain that median degree of modesty
which is essential for the maintenance of a balanced state. It is
not a question, as one might think, of relaxing morality itself
but of making a moral effort in a different direction. For instance, a man who is not conscientious enough has to make a
moral effort in order to come up to the mark; while for one who
is sufficiently rooted in the world through his own efforts it is no
small moral achievement to inflict defeat on his virtues by
loosening his ties with the world and reducing his adaptive performance. (One thinks in this connection of Brother Klaus, now
canonized, who for the salvation of his soul left his wife to her
own devices, along with numerous progeny.)
Since real moral problems all begin where the penal code
leaves off, their solution can seldom or never depend on precedent, much less on precepts and commandments. The real moral
problems spring from conflicts of duty. Anyone who is sufficiently humble, or easy-going, can always reach a decision with
the help of some outside authority. But one who trusts others as
little as himself can never reach a decision at all, unless it is
brought about in the manner which Common Law calls an "Act
of God." The Oxford Dictionary defines this concept as the
"action of uncontrollable natural forces." In all such cases there
is an unconscious authority which puts an end to doubt by

creating a fait accompli. (In the last analysis this is true also of

25

AION
those who get their decision from a higher authority, only in

more veiled form.) One can describe this authority either as the
"will of God" or as an "action of uncontrollable natural forces,"
though psychologically it makes a good deal of difference how
one thinks of it. The rationalistic interpretation of this inner
authority as "natural forces" or the instincts satisfies the modern
intellect but has the great disadvantage that the

apparent vic-

tory of instinct offends our moral self-esteem; hence we like to

49

persuade ourselves that the matter has been decided solely by
the rational motions of the will. Civilized man has such a fear
of the "crimen laesae maiestatis humanae" that whenever possible he indulges in a retrospective coloration of the facts in
order to cover up the feeling of having suffered a moral defeat.
He prides himself on what he believes to be his self-control and
the omnipotence of his will, and despises the man who lets himself be outwitted by mere nature.
If, on the other hand, the inner authority is conceived as
the "will of God" (which implies that "natural forces" are divine
forces), our self-esteem is benefited because the decision then
appears to be an act of obedience and the result a divine intention. This way of looking at it can, with some show of justice,
be accused not only of being very convenient but of cloaking
moral laxity in the mantle of virtue. The accusation, however,
is justified only when one is in fact knowingly hiding one's own
egoistic opinion behind a hypocritical facade of words. But this
is by no means the rule, for in most cases instinctive tendencies
assert themselves for or against one's subjective interests no
matter whether an outside authority approves or not. The inner
authority does not need to be consulted first, as it is present at
the outset in the intensity of the tendencies struggling for deci-

In this struggle the individual is never a spectator only;
he takes part in it more or less "voluntarily" and tries to throw
the weight of his feeling of moral freedom into the scales of
decision. Nevertheless, it remains a matter of doubt how much
his seemingly free decision has a causal, and possibly unconscious, motivation. This may be quite as much an "act of God"
as any natural cataclysm. The problem seems to me unanswerable, because we do not know where the roots of the feeling of
moral freedom lie; and yet they exist no less surely than the
instincts, which are felt as compelling forces.

sion.

26

THE SELF
50

All in

all,

it

is

not only more beneficial but more "cor-

rect" psychologically to explain as the "will of God" the natural
forces that appear in us as instincts. In this way we find ourselves living in harmony with the habitus of our ancestral psy-

chic life; that is, we function as man has functioned at all times

and in all places. The existence of this habitus is proof of its viability, for, if it were not viable, all those who obeyed it would
long since have perished of maladaptation. On the other hand,
by conforming to it one has a reasonable life expectancy. When
an habitual way of thinking guarantees as much as this there is
not only no ground for declaring it incorrect but, on the contrary, every reason to take it as "true" or "correct" in the psychological sense. Psychological truths are not metaphysical
insights; they are habitual modes of thinking, feeling,

51

52

and be-

having which experience has proved appropriate and useful.
So when I say that the impulses which we find in ourselves
should be understood as the "will of God," I wish to emphasize
that they ought not to be regarded as an arbitrary wishing and
willing, but as absolutes which one must learn how to handle
correctly. The will can control them only in part. It may be able
to suppress them, but it cannot alter their nature, and what is
suppressed comes up again in another place in altered form, but
this time loaded with a resentment that makes the otherwise
harmless natural impulse our enemy. I should also like the term
"God" in the phrase "the will of God" to be understood not so
much in the Christian sense as in the sense intended by Diotima,
when she said: "Eros, dear Socrates, is a mighty daemon." The
Greek words daimon and daimonion express a determining
power which comes upon man from outside, like providence or
fate, though the ethical decision is left to man. He must know,
however, what he is deciding about and what he is doing. Then,
if he obeys he is following not just his own opinion, and if he
rejects he is destroying not just his own invention.

The purely biological or scientific standpoint falls short in
psychology because it is, in the main, intellectual only. That
this should be so is not a disadvantage, since the methods of
natural science have proved of great heuristic value in psychological research. But the psychic phenomenon cannot be grasped
in its totality by the intellect, for it consists not only of meaning but also of value, and this depends on the intensity of the
27

AION

53

accompanying feeling-tones. Hence at least the two "rational"
functions B are needed in order to map out anything like a complete diagram of a given psychic content.
If, therefore, in dealing with psychic contents one makes
allowance not only for intellectual judgments but for value
judgments as well, not only is the result a more complete picture
of the content in question, but one also gets a better idea of the
particular position it holds in the hierarchy of psychic contents
in general. The feeling-value is a very important criterion which
psychology cannot do without, because it determines in large
measure the role which the content will play in the psychic
economy. That is to say, the affective value gives the measure of
the intensity of an idea, and the intensity in its turn expresses
that idea's energic tension, its effective potential. The shadow,
for instance, usually has a decidedly negative feeling- value,
while the anima, like the animus, has more of a positive one.
Whereas the shadow is accompanied by more or less definite

and describable feeling-tones, the anima and animus exhibit
feeling qualities that are harder to define. Mostly they are felt
to be fascinating or numinous. Often they are surrounded by an
atmosphere of sensitivity, touchy reserve, secretiveness, painful
intimacy, and even absoluteness. The relative autonomy of the
anima- and animus-figures expresses itself in these qualities. In
order of affective rank they stand to the shadow very much as

shadow stands in relation to ego-consciousness. The main
emphasis seems to lie on the latter; at any rate it is
able, by means of a considerable expenditure of energy, to
repress the shadow, at least temporarily. But if for any reason
the unconscious gains the upper hand, then the valency of the
shadow and of the other figures increases proportionately, so
that the scale of values is reversed. What lay furthest away from
waking consciousness and seemed unconscious assumes, as it
were, a threatening shape, and the affective value increases the
higher up the scale you go: ego-consciousness, shadow, anima,
self. This reversal of the conscious waking state occurs regularly
during the transition from waking to sleeping, and what then
emerge most vividly are the very things that were unconscious
by day. Every abaissement du niveau mental brings about a
the

affective

relative reversal of values.
5 Cf. Psychological

Types, Deis., "Rational" and "Irrational.

28

THE SELF
54

I am speaking here of the subjective feeling- value, which is
subject to the more or less periodic changes described above.
But there are also objective values which are founded on a consensus omnium—moral, aesthetic, and religious values, for

instance, and these are universally recognized ideals or feeling-

toned collective ideas (Levy-Bruhl's "representations collectives"). 6 The subjective feeling-tones or "value quanta" are
easily recognized by the kind and number of constellations, or
symptoms of disturbance, 7 they produce. Collective ideals often
have no subjective feeling-tone, but nevertheless retain their
feeling-value. This value, therefore, cannot be demonstrated
by subjective symptoms, though it may be by the attributes
attaching to these collective ideas and by their characteristic
symbolism, quite apart from their suggestive effect.
55

The problem has a practical aspect, since it may easily happen that a collective idea, though significant in itself, is— because of its lack of subjective feeling- tone— represented in a
dream only by a subsidiary attribute, as when a god is represented by his theriomorphic attribute, etc. Conversely, the idea
may appear in consciousness lacking the affective emphasis that
properly belongs to it, and must then be transposed back into
its archetypal context— a task that is usually discharged by poets
and prophets. Thus Holderlin, in his "Hymn to Liberty," lets
this concept, worn stale by frequent use and misuse, rise up
again in its pristine splendour:
Since her arm out of the dust has raised me,

Beats my heart so boldly and serene;
And my cheek still tingles with her kisses,

Flushed and glowing where her lips have been.
Every word she utters, by her magic
Rises new-created, without flaw;

Hearken to the tidings of my goddess,
Hearken to the Sovereign, and adore! 8
56

It is not difficult to see here that the idea of liberty has been
changed back to its original dramatic state— into the shining

6 Les Fonctions
1

mentales dans les societis inferieures.

"On Psychic Energy," pars. 14ft., 2off.

ZSamtliche Werke, I, p. 126.

29

AION
figure of the anima, freed from the weight of the earth and the

tyranny of the senses, the psychopomp who leads the way to the
Elysian fields.
57

The first case we mentioned, where the collective idea is
represented in a dream by a lowly aspect of itself, is certainly the
more frequent: the "goddess" appears as a black cat, and the
Deity as the lapis exilis (stone of no worth). Interpretation then

demands a knowledge of certain things which have less to do
with zoology and mineralogy than with the existence of an historical consensus omnium in regard to the object in question.

These "mythological" aspects are always present, even though
in a given case they may be unconscious. If for instance one
doesn't happen to recall, when considering whether to paint the
garden gate green or white, that green is the colour of life and
hope, the symbolic aspect of "green" is nevertheless present as

an unconscious sous-entendu. So we find something which has
the highest significance for the life of the unconscious standing
lowest on the scale of conscious values, and vice versa. The figure of the shadow already belongs to the realm of bodiless phantoms—not to speak of anima and animus, which do not seem to
appear at all except as projections upon our fellow human beings. As for the self, it is completely outside the personal sphere,
and appears, if at all, only as a religious mythologem, and its
symbols range from the highest to the lowest. Anyone who identifies with the daylight half of his psychic life will therefore
declare the dreams of the night to be null and void, notwithstanding that the night is as long as the day and that all consciousness is manifestly founded on unconsciousness, is rooted
in it and every night is extinguished in it. What is more, psychopathology knows with tolerable certainty what the unconscious
can do to the conscious, and for this reason devotes to the unconscious an attention that often seems incomprehensible to the
layman. We know, for instance, that what is small by day is big
at night, and the other way round; thus we also know that
besides the small by day there always looms the big by night,
even when it is invisible.
58

This knowledge is an essential prerequisite for any integration—that is to say a content can only be integrated when its
double aspect has become conscious and when it is grasped not
merely intellectually but understood according to its feeling-

30

THE SELF
value. Intellect and feeling, however, are difficult to put into

one harness— they conflict with one another by definition. Whoever identifies with an intellectual standpoint will occasionally
find his feeling confronting him like an enemy in the guise of
the anima; conversely, an intellectual animus will make violent
attacks on the feeling standpoint. Therefore, anyone who wants
to achieve the difficult feat of realizing something not only intellectually, but also according to its feeling-value, must for better
or worse come to grips with the anima /animus problem in order
to open the way for a higher union, a coniunctio oppositorum.
This is an indispensable prerequisite for wholeness.
Although "wholeness" seems at first sight to be nothing but
59
an abstract idea (like anima and animus), it is nevertheless empirical in so far as it is anticipated by the psyche in the form of
spontaneous or autonomous symbols. These are the quaternity
or mandala symbols, which occur not only in the dreams of
modern people who have never heard of them, but are widely
disseminated in the historical records of many peoples and many
epochs. Their significance as symbols of unity and totality is
amply confirmed by history as well as by empirical psychology.
What at first looks like an abstract idea stands in reality for
something that exists and can be experienced, that demonstrates
its a priori presence spontaneously. Wholeness is thus an objective factor that confronts the subject independently of him, like
anima or animus; and just as the latter have a higher position in
the hierarchy than the shadow, so wholeness lays claim to a position and a value superior to those of the syzygy. The syzygy
seems to represent at least a substantial portion of it, if not actually two halves of the totality formed by the royal brothersister pair, and hence the tension of opposites from which the
divine child 9 is born as the symbol of unity.
60
Unity and totality stand at the highest point on the scale of
objective values because their symbols can no longer be distinguished from the imago Dei. Hence all statements about the

God-image apply also to the empirical symbols of totality. Experience shows that individual mandalas are symbols of order, and
that they occur in patients principally during times of psychic
»C£.

my "Psychology of the Child Archetype"; also Psychology and Alchemy,

index, s.v. "Alius Philosophorum," "child," "hermaphrodite."

31

AION
disorientation or re-orientation. As magic circles they bind and

subdue the lawless powers belonging to the world of darkness,
and depict or create an order that transforms the chaos into a
cosmos. 10 The mandala at first comes into the conscious mind as
an unimpressive point or dot, 11 and a great deal of hard and
painstaking work as well as the integration of many projections
are generally required before the full range of the symbol can
be anything like completely understood. If this insight were
purely intellectual it could be achieved without much difficulty,
for the world-wide pronouncements about the God within us
and above us, about Christ and the corpus mysticum, the personal and suprapersonal atman, etc., are all formulations that
can easily be mastered by the philosophic intellect. This is the
common source of the illusion that one is then in possession of
the thing itself. But actually one has acquired nothing more
than its name, despite the age-old prejudice that the name magically represents the thing, and that it is sufficient to pronounce

the name in order to posit the thing's existence. In the course
of the millennia the reasoning mind has been given every oppor-

tunity to see through the futility of this conceit, though that has
done nothing to prevent the intellectual mastery of a thing from

being accepted at its face value. It is precisely our experiences
in psychology which demonstrate as plainly as could be wished
that the intellectual "grasp" of a psychological fact produces no
more than a concept of it, and that a concept is no more than a
name, a flatus vocis. These intellectual counters can be bandied
about easily enough. They pass lightly from hand to hand, for
they have no weight or substance. They sound full but are hollow; and though purporting to designate a heavy task and obligation, they commit us to nothing. The intellect is undeniably
useful in its own field, but is a great cheat and illusionist outside
of it whenever it tries to manipulate values.
61

It would seem that one can pursue any science with the intel-

lect

alone except psychology, whose subject— the psyche— has

more than the two aspects mediated by sense-perception and
thinking. The function of value— feeling— is an integral part of

our conscious orientation and ought not to be missing in a psychological judgment of any scope, otherwise the model we are
trying to build of the real process will be incomplete. Every
10 Cf. Psychology

and Alchemy, Part II, ch. 3.

32

11 [Cf. infra, par. 340.]

THE SELF
it, namely its
This indicates the degree to which the subject is

psychic process has a value quality attached to
feeling-tone.

affected by the process or how much it means to him (in so far
as the process reaches consciousness at all). It

is

through the

"affect" that the subject becomes involved and so comes to feel

the whole weight of reality. The difference amounts roughly to

62

that between a severe illness which one reads about in a textbook and the real illness which one has. In psychology one possesses nothing unless one has experienced it in reality. Hence a
purely intellectual insight is not enough, because one knows
only the words and not the substance of the thing from inside.
There are far more people who are afraid of the unconscious
than one would expect. They are even afraid of their own
shadow. And when it comes to the anima and animus, this fear

turns to panic. For the syzygy does indeed represent the psychic
contents that irrupt into consciousness in a psychosis (most
clearly of all in the paranoid forms of schizophrenia). 12 The

63

overcoming of this fear is often a moral achievement of unusual magnitude, and yet it is not the only condition that must
be fulfilled on the way to a real experience of the self.
The shadow, the syzygy, and the self are psychic factors of
which an adequate picture can be formed only on the basis of
a fairly thorough experience of them. Just as these concepts
arose out of an experience of reality, so they can be elucidated
only by further experience. Philosophical criticism will find
everything to object to in them unless it begins by recognizing
that they are concerned with facts, and that the "concept" is
simply an abbreviated description or definition of these facts.
Such criticism has as little effect on the object as zoological criticism on a duck-billed platypus. It is not the concept that matters; the concept is only a word, a counter, and it has meaning
and use only because it stands for a certain sum of experience.
Unfortunately I cannot pass on this experience to my public.
I have tried in a number of publications, with the help of case
material, to present the nature of these experiences and also the
method of obtaining them. Wherever my methods were really
applied the facts I give have been confirmed. One could see the
A classic case is the one published by Nelken: "Analytische Beobachtungen
uber Phantasien eines Schizophrenen." Another is Schreber's Memoirs of My
Nervous Illness.
12

33

AION

moons of Jupiter even in Galileo's day if one took the trouble
to use his telescope.
64

Outside the narrower field of professional psychology these
figures meet with understanding from all who have any knowl-

65

edge of comparative mythology. They have no difficulty in recognizing the shadow as the adverse representative of the dark
chthonic world, a figure whose characteristics are universal. The
syzygy is immediately comprehensible as the psychic prototype
of all divine couples. Finally the self, on account of its empirical
peculiarities, proves to be the eidos behind the supreme ideas
of unity and totality that are inherent in all monotheistic and
monistic systems.
I regard these parallels as important because it is possible,
through them, to relate so-called metaphysical concepts, which
have lost their root connection with natural experience, to living, universal psychic processes, so that they can recover their
true and original meaning. In this way the connection is reestablished between the ego and projected contents now formulated as "metaphysical" ideas. Unfortunately, as already said,
the fact that metaphysical ideas exist and are believed in does
nothing to prove the actual existence of their content or of the
object they refer to, although the coincidence of idea and reality
in the form of a special psychic state, a state of grace, should not
be deemed impossible, even if the subject cannot bring it about
by an act of will. Once metaphysical ideas have lost their capacity to recall and evoke the original experience they have not
only become useless but prove to be actual impediments on the
road to wider development. One clings to possessions that have
once meant wealth; and the more ineffective, incomprehensible,
and lifeless they become the more obstinately people cling to
them. (Naturally it is only sterile ideas that they cling to; living
ideas have content and riches enough, so there is no need to
cling to them.) Thus in the course of time the meaningful turns
into the meaningless. This is unfortunately the fate of metaphysical ideas.

66

Today it is a real problem what on earth such ideas can
mean. The world— so far as it has not completely turned its back
on tradition— has long ago stopped wanting to hear a "message";
it would rather be told what the message means. The words that
resound from the pulpit are incomprehensible and cry for an
34

THE SELF
explanation.

How has the death of Christ brought us redemp-

tion when no one feels redeemed? In what way is Jesus a God-

man and what is such a being? What is the Trinity about, and
the parthenogenesis, the eating of the body and the drinking of
the blood, and all the rest of it? What connection can there be

between the world of such concepts and the everyday world,
whose material reality is the concern of natural science on the
widest possible scale? At least sixteen hours out of twenty-four
we live exclusively in this everyday world, and the remaining
eight we spend preferably in an unconscious condition. Where
and when does anything take place to remind us even remotely
of phenomena like angels, miraculous feedings, beatitudes,
the resurrection of the dead, etc.? It was therefore something of
a discovery to find that during the unconscious state of sleep
intervals occur, called "dreams," which occasionally contain
scenes having a not inconsiderable resemblance to the motifs of
mythology. For myths are miracle tales and treat of all those
things which, very often, are also objects of belief.
67

In the everyday world of consciousness such things hardly
is to say, until 1933 only lunatics would have been
found in possession of living fragments of mythology. After this
date the world of heroes and monsters spread like a devastating
fire over whole nations, proving that the strange world of myth
had suffered no loss of vitality during the centuries of reason
and enlightenment. If metaphysical ideas no longer have such a
fascinating effect as before, this is certainly not due to any lack
of primitivity in the European psyche, but simply and solely to
the fact that the erstwhile symbols no longer express what is
now welling up from the unconscious as the end-result of the
development of Christian consciousness through the centuries.
This end-result is a true antimimon pneuma, a false spirit of
arrogance, hysteria, woolly-mindedness, criminal amorality, and
doctrinaire fanaticism, a purveyor of shoddy spiritual goods,
spurious art, philosophical stutterings, and Utopian humbug,
fit only to be fed wholesale to the mass man of today. That is
exist; that

what the post-Christian spirit looks like.

35

CHRIST, A SYMBOL OF THE SELF
