THE SYZYGY: ANIMA AND ANIMUS
2°

What, then, is this projection-making factor? The East calls
— Maya, who creates illusion by her
dancing. Had we not long since known it from the symbolism
of dreams, this hint from the Orient would put us on the right
track: the enveloping, embracing, and devouring element points
x
it the "Spinning Woman"

21

22

unmistakably to the mother, 2 that is, to the son's relation to the
real mother, to her imago, and to the woman who is to become
a mother for him. His Eros is passive like a child's; he hopes to
be caught, sucked in, enveloped, and devoured. He seeks, as it
were, the protecting, nourishing, charmed circle of the mother,
the condition of the infant released from every care, in which
the outside world bends over him and even forces happiness
upon him. No wonder the real world vanishes from sight!
If this situation is dramatized, as the unconscious usually
dramatizes it, then there appears before you on the psychological
stage a man living regressively, seeking his childhood and his
mother, fleeing from a cold cruel world which denies him understanding. Often a mother appears beside him who apparently
shows not the slightest concern that her little son should become
a man, but who, with tireless and self-immolating effort, neglects
nothing that might hinder him from growing up and marrying.
You behold the secret conspiracy between mother and son, and
how each helps the other to betray life.
Where does the guilt lie? With the mother, or with the son?
Probably with both. The unsatisfied longing of the son for life
and the world ought to be taken seriously. There is in him a
1 Erwin

Rousselle, "Seelische Fiihrung im lebenden Taoismus," PI. I, pp. 150, 170.

Rousselle calls the spinning

woman the "animal soul." There is a saying that

runs, "The spinner sets in motion." I have denned the anima as a personification

of the unconscious.

what follows, the word "mother" is not meant in the literal sense
but as a symbol of everything that functions as a mother.
2 Here and in

11

AION

embrace the earth and fructify the
But he makes no more than a series of fitful
starts, for his initiative as well as his staying power are crippled
by the secret memory that the world and happiness may be had
as a gift— from the mother. The fragment of world which he, like
every man, must encounter again and again is never quite the
right one, since it does not'fall into his lap, does not meet him
half way, but remains resistant, has to be conquered, and submits only to force. It makes demands on the masculinity of a
man, on his ardour, above all on his courage and resolution
when it comes to throwing his whole being into the scales. For
this he would need a faithless Eros, one capable of forgetting his
mother and undergoing the pain of relinquishing the first love
desire to touch reality, to
field of the world.

of his life. The mother, foreseeing this danger, has carefully inculcated into him the virtues of faithfulness, devotion, loyalty,
so as to protect him from the moral disruption which is the risk

of every life adventure. He has learnt these lessons only too well,

and remains true to his mother. This naturally causes her the
deepest anxiety (when, to her greater glory, he turns out to be
a homosexual, for example) and at the same time affords her an
unconscious satisfaction that is positively mythological. For, in
the relationship now reigning between them, there is consummated the immemorial and most sacred archetype of the marriage of mother and son. What, after all, has commonplace
reality to offer, with its registry offices, pay envelopes, and
monthly rent, that could outweigh the mystic awe of the hieros

23

gamos? Or the star-crowned woman whom the dragon pursues,
or the pious obscurities veiling the marriage of the Lamb?
This myth, better than any other, illustrates the nature of
the collective unconscious. At this level the mother is both old
and young, Demeter and Persephone, and the son is spouse and
sleeping suckling rolled into one. The imperfections of real life,

with its laborious adaptations and manifold disappointments,
naturally cannot compete with such a state of indescribable fulfilment.
24

In the case of the son, the projection-making factor is idenwith the mother-imago, and this is consequently taken to
be the real mother. The projection can only be dissolved when
the son sees that in the realm of his psyche there is an imago not
only of the mother but of the daughter, the sister, the beloved,
tical

12

the syzygy: anima and animus
the heavenly goddess, and the chthonic Baubo. Every mother
and every beloved is forced to become the carrier and embodiment of this omnipresent and ageless image, which corresponds
to the deepest reality in a man. It belongs to him, this perilous
image of Woman; she stands for the loyalty which in the interests of life he must sometimes forgo; she is the much needed
compensation for the risks, struggles, sacrifices that all end in

disappointment; she is the solace for all the bitterness of life.

And, at the same time, she is the great illusionist, the seductress,
who draws him into life with her Maya— and not only into life's
reasonable and useful aspects, but into its frightful paradoxes
and ambivalences where good and evil, success and ruin, hope
and despair, counterbalance one another. Because she is his
greatest danger she demands from a man his greatest, and if he
has it in him she will receive it.
25

This image is "My Lady Soul," as Spitteler called her. I have
suggested instead the term "anima," as indicating something
specific, for which the expression "soul" is too general and too
vague. The empirical reality summed up under the concept of
the anima forms an extremely dramatic content of the unconscious. It is possible to describe this content in rational, scientific language, but in this way one entirely fails to express its
living character. Therefore, in describing the living processes of
the psyche, I deliberately and consciously give preference to
a dramatic, mythological way of thinking and speaking, because
this is not only more expressive but also more exact than an
abstract scientific terminology, which is wont to toy with the
notion that

its

theoretic formulations

may one fine day be

resolved into algebraic equations.
*6

The projection-making factor is the anima, or rather the
unconscious as represented by the anima. Whenever she appears,
in dreams, visions, and fantasies, she takes on personified form,
thus demonstrating that the factor she embodies possesses all the
outstanding characteristics of a feminine being. 3 She is not an
invention of the conscious, but a spontaneous product of the
3 Naturally,

she

is

a typical figure in belles-lettres. Recent publications

on the

subject of the anima include Linda Fierz-David, The Dream of Poliphilo, and my

"Psychology of the Transference." The anima as a psychological idea first appears
in the

i6th-cent.

humanist Richardus Vitus.

pars. 9 iff.

13

Cf.

my Mysterium Coniunctionis,

AION
unconscious. Nor is she a substitute figure for the mother. On
the contrary, there is every likelihood that the numinous qualities which make the mother-imago so dangerously powerful
derive from the collective archetype of the anima, which is incarnated anew in every male child.
27

Since the anima is an archetype that is found in men, it is
reasonable to suppose that an equivalent archetype must be
present in women; for just as the man is compensated by a
feminine element, so woman is compensated by a masculine
one. I do not, however, wish this argument to give the impression that these compensatory relationships were arrived at by

On the contrary, long and varied experience was
needed in order to grasp the nature of anima and animus empirically. Whatever we have to say about these archetypes, therefore, is either directly verifiable or at least rendered probable
by the facts. At the same time, I am fully aware that we are discussing pioneer work which by its very nature can only be

deduction.

provisional.
28

29

Just as the mother seems to be the first carrier of the projection-making factor for the son, so is the father for the daughter.
Practical experience of these relationships is made up of many
individual cases presenting all kinds of variations on the same
basic theme. A concise description of them can, therefore, be
no more than schematic.
Woman is compensated by a masculine element and therefore her unconscious has, so to speak, a masculine imprint. This
results in a considerable psychological difference

between men

and women, and accordingly I have called the projection-making factor in women the animus, which means mind or spirit.
The animus corresponds to the paternal Logos just as the
anima corresponds to the maternal Eros. But I do not wish or
intend to give these two intuitive concepts too specific a definition. I use Eros and Logos merely as conceptual aids to describe
the fact that woman's consciousness is characterized more by
the connective quality of Eros than by the discrimination and
cognition associated with Logos. In men, Eros, the function of
relationship, is usually less developed than Logos. In women, on
the other hand, Eros is an expression of their true nature, while
their Logos is often only a regrettable accident. It gives rise to
misunderstandings and annoying interpretations in the family

14

the syzygy: anima and animus
circle and among friends. This is because it consists of opinions

instead of reflections, and by opinions I mean a priori assump-

Such assumptions, as
everyone knows, can be extremely irritating. As the animus is
partial to argument, he can best be seen at work in disputes
where both parties know they are right. Men can argue in a very
womanish way, too, when they are anima-possessed and have
thus been transformed into the animus of their own anima.
With them the question becomes one of personal vanity and
touchiness (as if they were females); with women it is a question
of power, whether of truth or justice or some other "ism"
for
the dressmaker and hairdresser have already taken care of their
vanity. The "Father" (i.e., the sum of conventional opinions)
always plays a great role in female argumentation. No matter
how friendly and obliging a woman's Eros may be, no logic on
earth can shake her if she is ridden by the animus. Often the
man has the feeling— and he is not altogether wrong— that only
seduction or a beating or rape would have the necessary power
of persuasion. He is unaware that this highly dramatic situation would instantly come to a banal and unexciting end if he
were to quit the field and let a second woman carry on the battle
(his wife, for instance, if she herself is not the fiery war horse).
This sound idea seldom or never occurs to him, because no man
can converse with an animus for five minutes without becoming the victim of his own anima. Anyone who still had enough
sense of humour to listen objectively to the ensuing dialogue
would be staggered by the vast number of commonplaces, misapplied truisms, cliches from newspapers and novels, shopsoiled platitudes of every description interspersed with vulgar
abuse and brain-splitting lack of logic. It is a dialogue which,
irrespective of its participants, is repeated millions and millions
of times in all the languages of the world and always remains
essentially the same.
3°
This singular fact is due to the following circumstance:
when animus and anima meet, the animus draws his sword of
power and the anima ejects her poison of illusion and seduction. The outcome need not always be negative, since the two
tions that lay claim to absolute truth.

—

are equally likely to fall in love (a special instance of love at first
sight).

The language of love is of astonishing uniformity, using

the well-worn formulas with the utmost devotion and fidelity,
15

AION
so that once again the two partners find themselves in a banal
collective situation. Yet they live in the illusion that they are

related to one another in a most individual way.
31

In both its positive and its negative aspects the anima/animus
i.e., it is emotional,
and hence collective. Affects lower the level of the relationship
and bring it closer to the common instinctual basis, which no
longer has anything individual about it. Very often the relationship runs its course heedless of its human performers, who
afterwards do not know what happened to them.
Whereas the cloud of "animosity" surrounding the man is
composed chiefly of sentimentality and resentment, in woman it
expresses itself in the form of opinionated views, interpretations, insinuations, and misconstructions, which all have the
purpose (sometimes attained) of severing the relation between
relationship is always full of "animosity,"

32

two human beings. The woman, like the man, becomes wrapped
in a veil of illusions by her demon-familiar, and, as the daughter

who alone understands her father (that is, is eternally right in
everything), she is translated to the land of sheep, where she is
33

put to graze by the shepherd of her soul, the animus.
Like the anima, the animus too has a positive aspect.
Through the figure of the father he expresses not only conventional opinion but— equally— what we call "spirit," philosophical
or religious ideas in particular, or rather the attitude resulting

from them. Thus the animus is a psychopomp, a mediator between the conscious and the unconscious and a personification
of the latter. Just as the anima becomes, through integration,
the Eros of consciousness, so the animus becomes a Logos; and
in the same way that the anima gives relationship and relatedness to a man's consciousness, the animus gives to woman's
consciousness a capacity for reflection, deliberation, and selfknowledge.
34

The effect of anima and animus on the ego is in principle
the same. This effect is extremely difficult to eliminate because,
in the first place, it is uncommonly strong and immediately fills

the ego-personality with an unshakable feeling of Tightness and
righteousness. In the second place, the cause of the effect is pro-

and appears to lie in objects and objective situations.
Both these characteristics can, I believe, be traced back to the
peculiarities of the archetype. For the archetype, of course, exists

jected

16

the syzygy: anima and animus
a priori. This may possibly explain the often totally irrational
yet undisputed and indisputable existence of certain moods and
opinions. Perhaps these are so notoriously difficult to influence

because of the powerfully suggestive effect emanating from the
archetype. Consciousness is fascinated by it, held captive, as if

hypnotized. Very often the ego experiences a vague feeling of
moral defeat and then behaves all the more defensively, defiantly, and self-righteously, thus setting up a vicious circle

which only increases its feeling of inferiority. The bottom is
then knocked out of the human relationship, for, like megalomania, a feeling of inferiority makes mutual recognition impossible, and without this there is no relationship.
As I said, it is easier to gain insight into the shadow than
35
into the anima or animus. With the shadow, we have the advantage of being prepared in some sort by our education, which
has always endeavoured to convince people that they are not
one-hundred-per-cent pure gold. So everyone immediately understands what is meant by "shadow," "inferior personality,"
etc. And if he has forgotten, his memory can easily be refreshed
by a Sunday sermon, his wife, or the tax collector. With the
anima and animus, however, things are by no means so simple.
Firstly, there is no moral education in this respect, and secondly,
most people are content to be self-righteous and prefer mutual
vilification (if nothing worse!) to the recognition of their projections. Indeed, it seems a very natural state of affairs for men

and women irrational opinions. Presumably this situation is grounded on instinct and must remain
as it is to ensure that the Empedoclean game of the hate and
love of the elements shall continue for all eternity. Nature is
conservative and does not easily allow her courses to be altered;
she defends in the most stubborn way the inviolability of the
preserves where anima and animus roam. Hence it is much more
difficult to become conscious of one's anima/animus projections
than to acknowledge one's shadow side. One has, of course, to
overcome certain moral obstacles, such as vanity, ambition, conceit, resentment, etc., but in the case of projections all sorts of
purely intellectual difficulties are added, quite apart from the
contents of the projection which one simply doesn't know how
to cope with. And on top of all this there arises a profound
doubt as to whether one is not meddling too much with nature's
to have irrational moods

17

AION
business by prodding into consciousness things which it would
have been better to leave asleep.

Although there are, in my experience, a fair number of peo-

36

ple who can understand without special intellectual or moral
difficulties what is meant by anima

and animus, one finds very

many more who have the greatest trouble in visualizing these
empirical concepts as anything concrete. This shows that they
a little outside the usual range of experience. They are

fall

unpopular precisely because they seem unfamiliar. The consequence is that they mobilize prejudice and become taboo like
37

everything else that is unexpected.
So if we set it up as a kind of requirement that projections
should be dissolved, because it is wholesomer that way and in
every respect more advantageous, we are entering upon new
ground. Up till now everybody has been convinced that the idea
"my father," "my mother," etc., is nothing but a faithful reflection of the real parent, corresponding in every detail to the

"my father" he means no
more and no less than what his father is in reality. This is actuoriginal, so that when someone says

ally what he supposes he does mean, but a supposition of identity by no means

fallacy of the

brings that identity about. This is where the
enkekalymmenos ('the veiled one') comes in. 4 If

one includes in the psychological equation X's picture of his
father, which he takes for the real father, the equation will not
work out, because the unknown quantity he has introduced does

X

not tally with reality.
has overlooked the fact that his idea of
a person consists, in the first place, of the possibly very incomplete picture he has received of the real person and, in the second place, of the subjective modifications he has imposed upon
this picture. X's idea of his father is a complex quantity for
which the real father is only in part responsible, an indefinitely
larger share falling to the son. So true is this that every time he
criticizes

or praises his father he is unconsciously hitting back

at himself, thereby bringing about those psychic

that overtake people

consequences

who habitually disparage or overpraise

themselves. If, however,

X carefully compares his reactions with

reality, he stands a chance of noticing that he has miscalculated
* The fallacy, which stems

from Eubulides the Megarian, runs: "Can you recog-

nize your father?" Yes. "Can you recognize this veiled one?" No. "This veiled one
is

your father. Hence you can recognize your father and not recognize him."

18

the syzygy: anima and animus
somewhere by not realizing long ago from his father's behaviour
that the picture he has of him is a false one. But as a rule X is
convinced that he is right, and if anybody is wrong it must be
the other fellow. Should X have a poorly developed Eros, he
will be either indifferent to the inadequate relationship he has

38

39

with his father or else annoyed by the inconsistency and general
incomprehensibility of a father whose behaviour never really
corresponds to the picture X has of him. Therefore X thinks he
has every right to feel hurt, misunderstood, and even betrayed.
One can imagine how desirable it would be in such cases to
dissolve the projection. And there are always optimists who believe that the golden age can be ushered in simply by telling people the right way to go. But just let them try to explain to these
people that they are acting like a dog chasing its own tail. To
make a person see the shortcomings of his attitude considerably
more than mere "telling" is needed, for more is involved than
ordinary common sense can allow. What one is up against here
is the kind of fateful misunderstanding which, under ordinary
conditions, remains forever inaccessible to insight. It is rather
like expecting the average respectable citizen to recognize himself as a criminal.
I mention all this just to illustrate the order of magnitude
to which the anima/animus projections belong, and the moral
and intellectual exertions that are needed to dissolve them. Not
all the contents of the anima and animus are projected, however. Many of them appear spontaneously in dreams and so on,
and many more can be made conscious through active imagination. In this way we find that thoughts, feelings, and affects are
alive in us which we would never have believed possible. Naturally, possibilities of this sort seem utterly fantastic to anyone who has not experienced them himself, for a normal person "knows what he thinks." Such a childish attitude on the
part of the "normal person" is simply the rule, so that no one
without experience in this field can be expected to understand
the real nature of anima and animus. With these reflections one
gets into an entirely new world of psychological experience,
provided of course that one succeeds in realizing it in practice. Those who do succeed can hardly fail to be impressed by
all that the ego does not know and never has known. This increase in self-knowledge is still very rare nowadays and is usually

19

AION

4°

paid for in advance with a neurosis, if not with something worse.
The autonomy of the collective unconscious expresses itself
in the figures of anima and animus. They personify those of its
contents which, when withdrawn from projection, can be integrated into consciousness. To this extent, both figures represent functions which filter the contents of the collective unconscious through to the conscious mind.

They appear or behave

as such, however, only so long as the tendencies of the conscious

and unconscious do not diverge too greatly. Should any tension
arise, these functions, harmless till then, confront the conscious

mind in personified form and behave rather like systems split
off from the personality,

or like part souls. This comparison is
inadequate in so far as nothing previously belonging to the egopersonality has split off from it; on the contrary, the two figures

represent a disturbing accretion. The reason for their behaving
in this way is that though the contents of anima and animus can

be integrated they themselves cannot, since they are archetypes.

As such they are the foundation stones of the psychic structure,
which in its totality exceeds the limits of consciousness and
therefore can never become the object of direct cognition.
Though the effects of anima and animus can be made conscious,
they themselves are factors transcending consciousness and beyond the reach of perception and volition. Hence they remain
autonomous despite the integration of their contents, and for
this reason they should be borne constantly in mind. This is
extremely important from the therapeutic standpoint, because
constant observation pays the unconscious a tribute that more
or less guarantees its co-operation. The unconscious as we know

can never be "done with" once and for all. It is, in fact, one of
the most important tasks of psychic hygiene to pay continual
attention to the symptomatology of unconscious contents and
processes, for the good reason that the conscious mind is always
in danger of becoming one-sided, of keeping to well-worn paths
and getting stuck in blind alleys. The complementary and compensating function of the unconscious ensures that these dangers, which are especially great in neurosis, can in some measure
be avoided. It is only under ideal conditions, when life is still
simple and unconscious enough to follow the serpentine path of
instinct without hesitation or misgiving, that the compensation
works with entire success. The more civilized, the more uncon20

the syzygy: anima and animus
scious and complicated a man is, the less he is able to follow his
instincts.

His complicated living conditions and the influence

of his environment are so strong that they drown the quiet voice

of nature. Opinions, beliefs, theories, and collective tendencies
appear in its stead and back up all the aberrations of the conscious mind. Deliberate attention should then be given to the
unconscious so that the compensation can set to work. Hence it
is especially important to picture the archetypes of the unconscious not as a rushing phantasmagoria of fugitive images but as
constant, autonomous factors, which indeed they are.
Both these archetypes, as practical experience shows, possess
a fatality that can on occasion produce tragic results. They are

quite literally the father and mother of all the disastrous entan-

glements of fate and have long been recognized as such by the

whole world. Together they form a divine pair, 5 one of whom,
in accordance with his Logos nature, is characterized by pneuma
and nous, rather like Hermes with his ever-shifting hues, while
the other, in accordance with her Eros nature, wears the features
of Aphrodite, Helen (Selene), Persephone, and Hecate. Both of

them are unconscious powers, "gods" in fact, as the ancient
world quite rightly conceived them to be. To call them by this
name is to give them that central position in the scale of
psychological values which has always been theirs whether consciously acknowledged or not; for their power grows in proportion to the degree that they remain unconscious. Those who do
not see them are in their hands, just as a typhus epidemic flourishes best when its source is undiscovered. Even in Christianity
the divine syzygy has not become obsolete, but occupies the
highest place as Christ and his bride the Church. 6 Parallels like
these prove extremely helpful in our attempts to find the right
not meant as a psychological definition, let alone a metaphysiAs I pointed out in "The Relations between the Ego and the Uncon-

5 Naturally this is

cal one.

scious" (pars. 296!!.), the syzygy consists of three elements: the femininity pertain-

ing to the man and the masculinity pertaining to the woman; the experience
which man has of woman and vice versa; and, finally, the masculine and femi-

nine archetypal image. The first element can be integrated into the personality

by the process of conscious realization, but the last one cannot.
6 "For the Scripture says, God made man male and female; the male is Christ,
the female is the Church." Second Epistle of Clement to the Corinthians, xiv, 2

—

(trans, by Lake, I, p. 151). In pictorial representations,

of the Church.

21

Mary often takes the place

AION
criterion for gauging the significance of these

two archetypes.

What we can discover about them from the conscious side is so
slight as to be almost imperceptible. It is only when we

throw

light into the dark depths of the psyche and explore the strange

and tortuous paths of human fate that it gradually becomes clear
to us how immense is the influence wielded by these two factors
that complement our conscious life.
42

Recapitulating, I should like to emphasize that the integration of the shadow, or the realization of the personal unconscious, marks the first stage in the analytic process, and that with-

out it a recognition of anima and animus is impossible. The
shadow can be realized only through a relation to a partner, and
anima and animus only through a relation to a partner of the
opposite sex, because only in such a relation do their projections become operative. The recognition of the anima gives rise,
in a man, to a triad, one third of which is transcendent: the
masculine subject, the opposing feminine subject, and the transcendent anima. With a woman the situation is reversed. The
missing fourth element that would make the triad a quaternity
is, in a man, the archetype of the Wise Old Man, which I have
not discussed here, and in a woman the Chthonic Mother.
These four constitute a half immanent and half transcendent
quaternity, an archetype which I have called the marriage
quaternio. 7 The marriage quaternio provides a schema not
only for the self but also for the structure of primitive society
with its cross-cousin marriage, marriage classes, and division of
settlements into quarters. The self, on the other hand, is a Godimage, or at least cannot be distinguished from one. Of this the
early Christian spirit was not ignorant, otherwise Clement of
Alexandria could never have said that he who knows himself

knows God. 8
7 "The Psychology of the Transference," pars. 425ff. Cf. infra, pars. 3583., the
Naassene quaternio.

8 Cf. infra, par. 347.

22

IV

THE SELF
