HOANG-THAM, PIRATE

PART THREE
AND NOTHING IS CHANGED

I — Đề Thám Submitted

Tham is submitted.

And the military are not pleased. Oh, I know. It is ever easy to say that the pirates — that Đề Thám himself — are the soldier's providence, that columns of repression bring promotion and crosses. Indeed. All too often wooden crosses¹.

At any rate, General Duchemin judges that Upper Tonkin is sufficiently tainted by the two cankers that are the fiefs of Lương Tam Kỳ and Ba Kỳ — inviolate refuges for the pirate bands. It was hardly indicated to create there, for Đề Thám, a domain that touches the railway line. As it happens, eighteen officers' graves have been dug in Yen Thế from 1891 to — well, since the General Government has treated with the pirate, it thereby admits his good faith. Pointless, from then on, to maintain troops in Yen Thế. Gallieni requests and obtains their withdrawal. And the native guard occupies the posts.

Tham is submitted. And the four cantons awarded to him constitute the whole of Upper Yen Thế. The bandit chief has become a gentleman-farmer. He is tranquil, satisfied, and the reports he maintains with the French delegate at Nhã Nam are of the most courteous. Visits, protocol gifts. The rice-fields returned to cultivation. Doubtless the pirates of the band have suddenly become peaceable nha-qués…

Certainly not. The people who labour on the glebe are those of the villages. Tham commands and they obey. They know well that a day will come when the great chief will take up the rifle again. Woe to those who might have balked at the work.

And there he is, bent over his toil — that peasant who, over yonder, swarms, resigned, instinctive and industrious, in truth the source of all wealth. He neither pillages nor steals, that creature with the frightened, cunning, ferreting gaze, who, rising from the mat on which he was born and which will serve as shroud for his corpse, leaves his poor hut at dawn and sets off, along the crest of the rice-field dikes, in Indian file with his companions — all ragged, all chattering on a high note, all bursting into laughter at nothing, just as though life were fair. As soon as the sun, high risen, begins to hammer hard, there he is alone in the rectangle which is his own, sunk to his belly in the mixture of water and mud, his legs constellated with leeches, bent over the primitive plough — the cày — which disappears almost entirely into the mire, following his buffalo through the whirlwinds of mosquitoes, passive, silent, and as though curled into a stupor transmitted to him by the centuries of servitude of his ancestors, bent under the yoke of masters for whom the nha-qué was only the machine that makes the rice grow. At this moment, Đề Thám is the chief. It is for him that the man ploughs and harrows, that the woman sows and transplants, and that all harvest the paddy. It is for him that they grow buckwheat, maize, and sweet potato. For him today, perhaps tomorrow for someone else.

What matter, so long as the buffalo lives, the woman, the children! What matter, so long as one can eat and the strokes of the rattan are rare!

And if, by chance, the chief one day orders them to abandon the plough for the rifle, the nha-qué will obey — ever passive, ever resigned, the ideal fighting man in the hands of him who takes charge of thinking for him.

But for a man who has held for months in his hands the Mauser, the Winchester, the Gras rifle, or the Lebel² — the return to the rice-field is a degradation. To be sure, the mandarin despises the man of war. What matter, since in the villages of Yen Thế and of many another region, great and petty notables tremble and bow before him who bears arms. Đề Thám's men are not of those who scratch the mud following the buffalo. They are men of prey and wish to remain so. The honours and profits that the French — easy folk to dupe — have reserved for the great chief give his lieutenants the hope of obtaining like advantages by becoming, in their turn, as redoubtable as he. Upper Yen Thế is submitted. Agreed. But are there not other regions, close by and just as impenetrable, where it is natural to earn one's living by fire and sword? How could Tham blame those who continue to walk in his glorious footsteps?

He could not deny his companions-in-arms, so faithful. And besides, he would not dare.

And so, while at Phong Xuong Đề Thám leads the life of a feudal lord, surrounded by his three wives, his son Ca-Trong, and a praetorian guard of armed partisans who, like him, live off the villages that constitute his fief — his lieutenants, scattered across a zone of which Upper Yen Thế is the centre, continue the carousel. Đề Thám's domain remains for them a sure refuge. How would we dare pursue them there without violating the word given to a bandit?

But of this refuge they will avail themselves only if they cannot do otherwise. There are, in Yen Thế, other secret lairs and complicit villages. And other forests are near which offer their dense thickets. The close-woven forest clothes, from foot to summit, the enormous massif of Tam Đảo with its three peaks — a monstrous green dragon couched upon the province of Vĩnh Yên and obsessing with its menace that of Thái Nguyên, whose name means "high origin" and which deserves its name. The eagle and the tiger alone can dispute the peaks of Tam Đảo with the pirates. On its slopes labour the woodcutters, sawing the rare timbers: the tán mật and the thiết đinh, two of the four ironwoods that last for centuries, and the most precious ngọc am, pale yellow, with harmoniously drawn veins, from which are made the coffins of the richest Annamites. Fifteen years later, when France shall have put an end to piracy, Tam Đảo — which culminates at 1,300 metres — will see rise near its summit an upland station, sure and healthful, for the French of Tonkin.

But we are not there yet, and at the moment where we stand, Tam Đảo is nothing less than safe. Đề Nguyễn scours the region. In February 1895, his band attacks the two telegraphists Holley and Sabot. The first is killed, the second captured, and taken to Kẻ Thượng, to the lair of Ba Kỳ, who, as everyone knows, has humbly submitted to our authority… As for the malefactors of Yen Thế, they operate in Bảo Đáy, in Đông Triều, and, on occasion, in Tam Đảo, whose approaches are not pillage-ground reserved solely for the friends of Ba Kỳ.

But let us stay in the environs of Bắc Ninh. At the point where the Sông Thương, the Sông Cầu, the Sông Thái Bình, and the Canal des Rapides converge, the movement of junks never ceases. There rises the little town of Sept-Pagodes, and directly opposite, the village of Phả Lại. On the 23rd of March 1895, in the dead of night, sampans draw up before the village. Forty bandits disembark. A few instants later, the cai-nhas are ablaze, the nha-qués killed or in flight, and the pillagers, re-embarked, streak away in the direction of Bắc Ninh. The village of Phả Lại is no more. Thông Luận, lieutenant of Đề Thám³, has erased it.

30 April, eleven o'clock at night. Spread around its great citadel, Bắc Ninh sleeps under the rain. All is calm in the town, and in its environs reigns tranquillity — I mean to say that the pirates content themselves with stealing a buffalo here and there, from time to time stripping a few isolated nha-qués on their way to market, occasionally assassinating some native couriers, and opening fire now and then on some militia detachment, bringing down two or three linhs without anyone knowing whence the shots came… Nothing out of the ordinary, in sum, and Bắc Ninh may sleep.

Moreover, here in the main street comes a militia patrol. Twelve men and a doi. All of fine bearing, marching in order and silent, arms at the sling. Suddenly they halt before the house of a rich Chinese merchant. Doubtless they wish to shelter a moment under the eaves, for the rain redoubles. But no: four men detach themselves from the group, and the doi himself places them — invisible sentinels — at the mouths of nearby alleys. Then, having extinguished the paraffin lantern that casts a vague light in that corner, he knocks at the Chinaman's door. No answer… Then the rifle-butts begin to hammer the panels, which are about to give.

The blows ring strangely in the night. In the neighbouring houses, Annamites and Chinese, awakened, refrain from intervening. But two Frenchmen — Moulhaud, a customs officer, and Gendarme Verdene — come running. Each carries a lantern whose gleam lights their silhouettes without managing to pierce the thick curtain of rain. But two flashes suddenly streak the darkness. Two dry detonations. The sentinels have fired, and the Frenchmen fall, killed clean, at point-blank range, each with a bullet in the head.

The gunshots have raised the alarm, and here comes, at full run, another gendarme, Maréchal-des-Logis Jean. Two bullets in the chest bring him down, and they finish him with the cutlass.

Then the Annamites melt into the darkness, while other Frenchmen run toward the citadel to give the alarm — too late. A militia section, arrived on the run, gathers up the corpses. The patrol of a moment ago, the patrol that killed, was only a detachment of pirates in disguise. Their doi was a lieutenant of Đề Thám — Doc Thu — and his brother Doc Xuyet accompanied him.

And here are other exploits.

Less than a thousand metres from Phủ Lạng Thương rises the village of Phú Liễm. The earth there is rich. Orange trees and mandarin trees flourish there, as do banana trees and lychees. The pagoda with the curved roof stands at the edge of a pond enamelled with lotus. A clump of areca palms dominates it, dusting the sky. By day, the people of Phú Liễm labour all around the village in the rice-fields or in the fields of sugar cane, sweet potatoes, maize, or beans. By night, they return to their cai-nhas and sleep tranquilly. Phú Liễm is a village of the plain, a happy village with no history. Its palisade of living bamboo is all breached. What matter! Phủ Lạng Thương is close by, and its militia watches.

Now, a little before midnight on the 15th of September, the sentinels of Phủ Lạng Thương raise the alarm and the gong of warning resounds. In the countryside, flames have sprung up as from a hundred thousand torches. Phú Liễm is ablaze. A detachment of militiamen dashes out at a run to bring aid and soon hears the entire village howling its terror. Help arrives too late. The massacre has preceded the fire which illuminates a vision of horror. One would swear a band of furious beasts had passed that way. The butchery is unspeakable. Everywhere severed heads, hacked limbs, human debris strew the ground. The cutthroats have spared neither women nor children. The thatched roofs burned first. The mud walls collapsed. Only the half-calcined pillars of ironwood remain standing, those of the pagoda and of the richest cai-nhas. To those of the pagoda are bound the notables of Phú Liễm; to those of the cai-nhas are tied the wealthiest nha-qués: all in their death-agony, bellies opened by the cutlass. The buffaloes and the pigs have been bled like the men. Only a few dogs have escaped the carnage and lick the spilled blood…

A month earlier, the notables of Phú Liễm had refused money and rice to an emissary of Linh Túc, lieutenant of Đề Thám. That night, Linh Túc avenged himself.

The glow of the fires illuminates the meaning of Tham's message to Tôn Thất Thuyết: "Nothing is changed in the huyện of Thiên Đức, even when all things appear transformed."

In other words, the piracy continues despite the submissions.

II — Repression

In truth, extremely well-informed of our internal affairs, the pirates have profited from the governmental interregnum which lasted from the recall of Lanessan to the arrival of Rousseau.

For Lanessan, having, it appears, communicated to a third party who "had no right" to an official document, was dismissed abruptly, brutally, as one sends away an unwanted servant or an indiscreet functionary. A Havas telegram notified the sentence. A dry guillotine, wielded by a Government which, at that time, was too little versed in colonial matters to understand that the dismissal, without formality, of the Governor-General made us lose face in this country of Annam where the sense of hierarchies is like a religion — in this Indochina in the full crisis of growth. One must read all that Lyautey wrote about Lanessan⁴, all that I summarise in a few words. He was truly a "governor", full of life and audacity, energetic, tenacious, as supple as he was intelligent, riding roughshod over the chinoiseries of regulations, visiting the country, seeing everything himself, and leaving everywhere in his wake the sparks of the fire that burned within him.

To Lanessan succeeded Rousseau — a man of high culture, noble character, upright, scrupulous, and tenacious. A fortnight after his arrival in Tonkin, convinced of the necessity of the sanitation that Gallieni preached, the new Governor-General gave the order, and in eighteen days — from the 16th of April to the 4th of May 1895 — the fief of the submitted Ba Kỳ was cleansed. The lair of Kẻ Thượng, reputed impregnable, was in our hands. Ba Kỳ was in flight. And for the first time, a European was delivered without having to pay ransom, for the telegraphist Sabot was retaken from the pirates by surprise and by main force⁵. Gallieni was at the head of the columns of repression, and his Chief of Staff was named Lyautey.

Chased from Kẻ Thượng, the pirates naturally flowed back toward Yen Thế. But there too Gallieni gave the sweep of the broom. He operated slowly. He had to. Since Đề Thám was submitted, the General Government required that negotiations be held, and that took time. The submittee was begged to evacuate his fortified posts and surrender his arms. He was pressed to punish his lieutenants Doc Thu and Linh Túc himself, whose submission we refused to accept. He was asked to help the authorities enter into relations with the bands of Thông Luận and Thông Trứ. Letter followed letter. To each, Đề Thám replied most courteously that his good will was entire and that none could reproach him with anything. While taking care not to explain the doings of his lieutenants, he despatched them, with their bands, to the rear of our troops, to attempt to loosen the grip that was beginning to trouble him. Doc Thu then operated in the newly created province of Bắc Giang⁶, whose capital is Phủ Lạng Thương, while Thông Luận and Thông Trứ, descended from Tam Đảo, fell upon the villages of the Đa Phúc region. Bands were reported at the approaches to the railway line.

In a book that is a model of clarity and concision⁷, Gallieni has related the operation that I here summarise, and for which that great chief had foreseen everything a human brain could foresee, and given orders that bear the stamp of his genius.

Đề Thám, with some 300 rifles, was solidly entrenched in the heart of the jungle. The exact location of the lair was unknown, but it was known to be somewhere inside the triangle entirely covered with impenetrable forest whose vertices are Bố Hạ, Nhã Nam, and Mỏ Tràng⁸. Our troops occupied its three sides, then slowly, methodically, without leaving an inch of ground unexplored, they advanced. Marsouins, legionaries, marine artillerymen, engineer detachments, Tonkinese tirailleurs, militiamen, and armed partisans — all, under the command of Gallieni, searched the dark undergrowth. Each detachment remained linked to the neighbouring detachment, and little by little the investment tightened until the day — the 29th of November 1895 — when a rapid fire, falling upon two of our groups, showed them they were at the site and that the lair was there. It was in the very heart of the forest, at Bãi Mết, some two kilometres east of Phong Xuong. The fort rested on the Arroyo Sông Sỏi. It was flanked by the two small forts of Lim Rừ and Hồ Koi.

Cutlass in hand, cutting their route through the vegetal tangle, pushing back the pirate outposts, seizing the advanced works, the groups converged on the stronghold of Đề Thám. Volleys, issuing from invisible redoubts, tried to check our advance. Our vanguards encountered the usual ambushes: poisoned stakes, triple palisades, wolf-pits, ditches hidden by brush. Sometimes, forced to halt, our men entrenched on the spot. The lair was invested, and no one would fall back. And now our mountain batteries of 80 mm. They had forced their passage through the jungle and stood before the forts. Shells of melinite, newly arrived from France, filled the caissons. And those shells, fired at point-blank range, wrought marvels. In the fort, the pirates howled their dismay. And the night of the 29th to the 30th of November fell upon the forest. All our soldiers kept watch, ready for the assault.

At dawn on the 30th, the artillery again thundered. Then the infantry drew near. Silence everywhere!

At eleven o'clock, our lads rushed to the attack. Not a rifle-shot answered their charge. The fort was empty. The forest had saved the bandits! They had slipped between our fingers at five in the morning through a thicket nearly impenetrable that separated two of our columns. A precipitate flight, for in the fort were found munitions in piles, tonnes of rice, and even the correspondence of Đề Thám…

Useless to give chase to the fugitives. They had hidden their arms and, scattered among the complicit villages, were impossible to find.

But, thus dispersed, the pirates were, for a time, in no state to do harm. Some twenty had been killed. A few presented themselves at Phủ Lạng Thương and surrendered their arms. The operation cost us exactly three dead — one marine infantryman and two tirailleurs — and about ten wounded, of whom only one European. Gallieni was sparing with his men's blood.

III — Pursuits

The dissolved military columns had regained their garrisons. They now operated only within the four military territories⁹. The civil provinces had their own police. The dispersed bands of Đề Thám gradually reformed under the command of petty chiefs. Ever elusive, by virtue of the complicity of forest and mountain, they ravaged the provinces neighbouring Bắc Giang, where Yen Thế lies. But Yen Thế remained their rallying point.

The Tổng Đốc Lê Hoàn had once again taken the head of a police column that lived off the country while appearing to pursue the bands — whose existence was, in truth, for this mandarin, an inexhaustible source of profits and honours…

The native guard, for its part, did its best. The linhs of Bắc Ninh and those of Bắc Giang drove the pirates back toward Tam Đảo. At the foot of this massif and in the middle valley of the Sông Công, in 1896, the militia fought sixteen times against the pirates. The hunt for the bandits was often hard and bloody. On the 20th of February, Inspector Burcklé¹⁰ was killed by the band of Thông Luận. On the 15th of September, near Đa Phúc, Principal Guard Racagel and the colonist Haguelon, an employee of the Gobert concession, were killed by Linh Túc's band. But the pirates no longer had an easy life of it, and about ten of Đề Thám's lieutenants finally surrendered, with their men. Linh Túc, Thông Luận, and Doc Ké submitted, as did Ca-Rinh, whom we shall meet again. Four hundred and forty-nine rifles thus fell into our hands. And Doc Thu — whom we saw operating in the heart of Bắc Ninh town — gravely wounded in a skirmish, killed himself.

In the month of December 1896, Governor-General Rousseau died. Two months later, his successor was named. It was Paul Doumer — the true creator of the Indochinese Union, the man who endowed our colony with the economic tools and industrial equipment that engendered its prosperity and made it definitively enter the path of modern progress.

Let us return to Đề Thám. Become a nomad by force, yet ever slipping between the fingers of his pursuers, he was reported in turn in the provinces of Bắc Ninh, Thái Nguyên, and Sơn Tây. But it was to Yen Thế — whose least paths and most secret hiding-places he knew — that Đề Thám finally returned to ground. Periodically, the newspapers of Tonkin announced his imminent capture or his submission. In truth, the boar remained unfindable in his forest, but, ceaselessly hunted, he fled from one den to another, ever anxious and harried without respite, surrounded by faithful followers grown ever rarer. He dreamed of the fine days when he had been the master, recognised by us, of the four richest cantons of Yen Thế.

And at the beginning of February 1897 — Doumer had not yet taken up his post — the curé of Bỉ Nội brought to the Resident of Bắc Giang the pirate's oaths. "None shall henceforth be more faithful than he. He asks to surrender and that a truce be granted him urgently so that he may celebrate the feast of Tết¹¹. He swears to lead an exemplary existence in the concession that cannot fail to be granted him." There was no longer any question of a concession, replied the French authority: Đề Thám would have his life spared, nothing more.

Then Tham plunged once more into the bush. In the month of June, his son Ca-Trong killed, in an ambush, Principal Guard Beauvais. Immediately the pursuit resumed. A flying column of 150 linhs set out in chase. The militia of the neighbouring provinces of Bắc Giang, the military posts bordering the civil territory, were alerted. On the 22nd of September, the invulnerable Đề Thám, in flight toward Lạng Sơn, was surprised by a detachment commanded by Lieutenant Maurel and wounded in the right hand. At that moment, the band was reduced to about twenty rifles. Ceaselessly harried, it was at the end of its breath.

But here came a glimmer of hope. The Kỳ Đồng was in Yen Thế.

IV — The Child of the Miracle

The Kỳ Đồng — is he the predestined man who will drive the French from Tonkin, restore the ancient kings, and give happiness to all?

This new Messiah, whose true name was Nguyễn Cam, showed from childhood extraordinary literary aptitudes. At the time of the conquest, at Nam Định, he raised the standard of revolt against our troops. Convinced that Nguyễn Cam could walk on water and that bullets passed through him without wounding him, the Tonkinese people called him Kỳ Đồng — the Child of the Miracle. In 1887, an order of the Resident of Tonkin sent the Kỳ Đồng to be educated at the Lycée of Algiers. He remained there nine years and, constantly frequenting Hàm Nghi, the ex-Emperor of Annam¹², learned at our expense the hatred of France.

Upon his return to Tonkin, he presented himself to Governor-General Doumer, proclaimed his gratitude toward our country and his devotion to its representatives. Then he betook himself to Yen Thế, under colour of exploiting, on joint account with a Frenchman, a territorial concession. In truth, it was the reputation of Đề Thám that drew him to those parts. Where find a better nucleus of rebellion than among the pirate bands?

No sooner installed than the Kỳ Đồng despatched throughout the delta emissaries supposedly charged with recruiting nha-qués to develop the rich lands of Yen Thế. Strange labourers, these folk who, by the hundreds, left Lower Tonkin for the middle region without bringing their families. Few had the debonair and resigned aspect of the poor rice-field cultivator. And, astonishing thing, all were provided with sums of money which they remitted to the Kỳ Đồng. All believed, with rock-solid faith, in the supernatural power of this man. For he had spread everywhere poems and tracts in which it was said that a genie would soon deliver Tonkin — a genie that all true Tonkinese must aid and join.

The deliverance of Tonkin was, for Đề Thám, a secondary preoccupation; but around the Kỳ Đồng there were men — more than 3,000 in number — and money, that indispensable manna for the hunted pirate. As for the men, they would dig up all the hidden rifles. With the money, Tham would buy other arms and munitions. And the good life would resume. In truth, Đề Thám acted wisely in rallying to Yen Thế. Already, through emissaries, he had entered into liaison with the liberating genie. And this one had sent him funds, men, and arms.

But Doumer was well informed. He gave the order, and, one fine night, he who had been the miraculous child — seized by the battalion commander who commanded the circle of Yen Thế — was brought to Phủ Lạng Thương and embarked on a launch that made off immediately for Haiphong. At the same time, the chiefs of the villages situated on the Kỳ Đồng's concession were arrested and interned at Nhã Nam.

Later, the Kỳ Đồng, deported to Tahiti, would have all the time needed to meditate upon the dangers of a poorly-organised revolt.

Meanwhile, his partisans — henceforth without a guide and deprived of the support of the Yen Thế village chiefs — gradually took the road back to the delta. It was only put off, they thought: the Kỳ Đồng would return when he wished, and if the French took it into their heads to cut his throat, it would be wasted effort; for he was not one miracle short, and everyone knew that another head would immediately grow back upon his shoulders. Fortunately, the some three thousand deluded souls were a drop of water in the ocean of the healthy and industrious population of the Tonkinese delta.

V — Submission… Yet Again

Colonel Péroz, who commanded the circle of Yen Thế in 1897, has given a very vivid account, of fine literary quality¹³, of the submission of Đề Thám — a greatly romanticised account, moreover, and often inaccurate¹⁴.

The affair is simple enough. Governor-General Doumer wished to contract a loan of 200 million to undertake the great works of Indochina. But how to obtain from Parliament the vote of such a loan in favour of a country where piracy still reigned?

He must finish it, cost what it may. He must reduce Đề Thám or accept his submission. The battue for the pirate continued in Yen Thế. The militia posts and military posts that encircled the region were multiplied or reinforced. The troops and the native guard were ordered to work together, regardless of the theoretical limits of their action. All must rush at the first sound of gunfire.

The Governor-General spent three days in Yen Thế. The chiefs of the suspect villages trembled. Such a visit boded, for them, nothing good. But truly the Lord Tham must be a very great personage indeed for the very high French mandarin who governed an empire to put himself out so for him.

Ong Tham himself was not a little flattered when he received — always through the intermediary of Mgr Velasco — notification of the fact that the Governor-General would accept his submission on condition that he hasten. Doubtless the pirate would once again demand suzerainty over the richest cantons of Yen Thế.

The moment would be ill-chosen. And Tham was too cunning not to understand this. Admirably informed, he knew himself surrounded by a tight network of armed watchers. Reduced by defections, his band was weary of a perpetual existence as hunted game. It behooved him, therefore, to show himself very humble. And, on the 13th of November 1897, Đề Thám wrote to the Governor-General of Indochina:

"I have received from Monseigneur the Bishop of Bắc Ninh a letter in which he tells me that he has spoken to you in my favour so that I might submit to the Government, and that you have had the kindness to allow me to make my submission in the interest of the general tranquillity."

The submission was immediately accepted. It was now a matter only of life spared, nothing more. Đề Thám received lands once again, always at Phong Xuong. A boon so unexpected that he gave thanks in these words: "I am like a sick man near death receiving a saving remedy."

VI — The Great Lays

The 17th of April 1901, the 29th day of the 2nd month of the 13th year of Thành Thái. The delegation at Nhã Nam was under arms. Toward it had flowed the mandarins of the province of Bắc Giang, the notables of the villages of Yen Thế — all those who, by curiosity or by order, must assist at the official surrender of the Lord Tham.

For forty months he had laid down his arms. For forty months he had lived, tranquil in appearance, on the concession that, by French generosity, was his. But he had not yet consented to perform the ritual act that consecrated submission. Never would he yield, thought the people of Yen Thế. Yet the hour had come.

Arriving from Phủ Lạng Thương, here come the great mandarins in long robes of ceremony — of silk or of brocaded gauze, drawn tight at the waist by the red belt with plaques of gold, tortoise-shell, or horn. All wear the Chinese boots, black with square toes. All are crowned with the hat which, seen from the front, seems a bishop's mitre and falls at the back into a chignon-cover adorned with two cicada wings in great horizontal projection to right and left.

All are respectable and inflexible of aspect. All bow before our authority — certain of them knowing very well how to violate the laws as soon as the sum that such violation will bring is worth the trouble. They are ready to entertain any request, oral or written, provided the petitioner be rich enough to grease the eternally outstretched paws of the bodyguards, servants, and secretaries who swarm about them.

First comes Lê Hoàn — still young and still Tổng Đốc of Bắc Ninh. His robe is of blue silk without embroidery. Two parasols of pale blue quyến silk, from which hang eight multicoloured tassels, shelter his head, guarded from flies, mosquitoes, and other flying insects by three immense feather fans with long purple handles. His suite is made up of his secretary of command, his pipe-bearer, his betel-bearer, his cudgel-bearer, and a number of servants of lesser importance.

Here come the high functionaries of Bắc Giang: the Tuần Phủ, clad in green silk without embroidery; the Án Sát, whose black robe is embroidered with flowers and whose suite is enlarged by the executioner walking before a boy who carries the sabre. Here come the Đốc Học and the Thượng Tá¹⁵, dressed in brocaded gauze heightened with the red plastron bearing the stork embroidered amid clouds. The silk of their parasols is black, and their retinue is less important than that of the Tổng Đốc.

Then present themselves other lords with immoderate fingernails, but of lesser rank — the mandarins with a single parasol: the Tri Phủ¹⁶ of Lạng Giang and of Đa Phúc, their breasts displaying the stork in full flight, while the six Tri Huyện¹⁷ of the province flaunt on their plastrons only the white pheasant.

From the very high Tổng Đốc to the modest Tri Huyện, all are subtle functionaries, installed by us and understanding marvellously how to simplify the task of the French authority, while making life sufficiently hard for their administrated that the piastres flow into their coffers as into those of the Protectorate. Of their power they make adroit use, so that complaints remain rare enough that complainants may be questioned with strokes of the rattan. Subject to these local potentates, the nha-qué suffers nonetheless infinitely less than in the era before the conquest, when no curb restrained the exactions of the mandarins — extortionists by essence. Besides, someone must steal, else the Annamite would not understand, and the scrupulously honest native functionary would spoil the trade and lose face.

Tonkin, like Annam, was in a period of painful growth. Our Residents were still drowned in paperwork, entangled in hasty regulations that hampered white colonisation — but all full of ardour and good will, and scrupulously honest. The Europeans who live today in Tonkin or Annam do not know how heavy was the task of the French there during the twenty years that followed the conquest. Surrounded by an inert or hostile population, they worked hard and died in droves. He who wishes to learn and to understand must read the works of Lyautey, of Gallieni, of Boissière, of Pouvourville, and of Ajalbert. But the golden book remains to be written — that which will give the names of the colonists, the functionaries, and the soldiers who left their bones over there to prepare the fine reality of today¹⁸.

Let us return to Nhã Nam. Leaving their suites outside, the mandarins of the provinces have entered the delegation. Under the veranda are grouped the canton chiefs and the village chiefs — major notables and minor notables, hierarchised according to the most meticulous etiquette. Most are old, mummified by opium. All are dressed in the wide white trousers floating about their skeletal legs and the long tunic of black silk with high collar, tight sleeves, fastened on the left side by tiny spherical gilded buttons that engage in silk loops. All are crowned with the flat black turban. Dragging their leather sandals, they converse solemnly about unimportant matters, letting the conversation drop as soon as one of them touches upon the subject that preoccupies them all: the submission of the Đề Đốc Tham, about which it is prudent to hide one's opinion, for here no one trusts anyone.

On the esplanade, the entire native guard of Bắc Giang is drawn up, arms at rest — a dull line of khaki uniforms heightened by the blue belts. Bắc Ninh, Thái Nguyên, Lạng Sơn, and Sơn Tây have also sent detachments. The militiamen must be many to know the features of him who, in a few months perhaps, will be again the enemy.

The bugles sound "to the field," the militia presents arms. By the fine, great road oriented from South to North, which leads from Đáp Cầu to Nhã Nam, arrives at full speed the carriage that is awaited. It stops before the delegation, and the representatives of France descend. At the head walks Morel, Inspector of the Civil Services — small, lean, the silhouette and moustache of an officer. Quennec, Resident of France at Bắc Giang, accompanies him and dominates with his frame of a solid Breton, energetic and good. Then comes Chéon, Chief of Staff of the Superior Resident of Tonkin.

The mandarins of all classes are ranged for the welcome. After the deep salutations — spines bent to the limit of breaking — they have frozen into the immobility that etiquette imposes. On the plastrons of the robes trail the goatees of sparse white hairs. Crossed hands are hidden in the wide sleeves, from which emerge long, flat ivory tablets — tablets of composure, which it is fitting to fix with a vacant gaze, by the tradition ten centuries old that defines the rite of respect without expression: the body of marble and the spirit absent, whatever the duration of the ceremony.

Beyond the cordon of the militia, the crowd of natives of Nhã Nam and of the villages of Yen Thế is likewise frozen and silent. The linhs have grounded their arms. They await Đề Thám and his bands.

Here he is. He walks at the head of those who were his accomplices and remain his faithful. Is he a hunted beast? Is he a reduced chief, but keeping the pride of the man who has fought and who was sometimes victor? Is his bearing so particular that, seeing him mingled with his men, one could say without possible error: "This one is the master"? Certainly not. From his companions, from the militiamen who stand there under arms, and from the crowd that gazes avidly, he differs only by his tall stature, his robust frame which might perhaps prove his Chinese ancestry, and his shaven head like those of the bonzes. With his long black tunic, his wide white trousers, his flat black turban, and the babouches that shoe his bare feet, he resembles, more than anything, a well-fed peasant. His heavy eyelids let filter a gaze more cunning than intelligent, with flashes of mocking good-nature.

Those who follow him — if they had not the high head of men who have borne arms — would be like the nha-qués of the rice-field or the woodcutters of the forest. Some former servants of Europeans have, however, kept the feline and servile bearing of boys and the small gestures of hands skilled at rifling drawers and pockets, or the aspect of insolent pimps of certain saïs¹⁹. Yet a few faces — those of Tinh, of Muoi, of Khải, of Phong, of Mai, of Lộc, of Tiếp, of Hựu, that of Ca-Huynh especially — sweat the lowest ferocity. They are neither more nor less dangerous than the others. All have blood on their hands. All have pillaged, burned, massacred…

Before them are the band chiefs in tunics of linh green, embroidered with red, green and red belts, and salaccos. There they are, very docile and well aligned. The Án Sát of Bắc Giang presents them to the Resident. Then, in their turn, they recite in a loud voice the names of their men and proffer the tablets where those names are inscribed.

Forty months earlier, the rifles of the pirates had been handed over at the post of Nhã Nam. Đề Thám kept fifteen, for his personal security. But, as it was important that all rites be observed, toward Đề Thám advanced the people of his suite — whose rags could be guessed beneath their ceremonial clothes. They brought the ceremonial sabre and the great seal, which were immediately received by the Án Sát, whose suite seized the multicoloured banners. That of Tham bore the character "vinh," which gives victory.

Then came the ritual gifts: the jars of alcohol, the rice, the hens, the eggs, and finally a cage containing two doves — symbols of peace and love. Before all these gestures, the French remained of stone.

Then Đề Thám advanced toward the group of whites and mandarins. He spoke.

"I, Hoàng Thám, of the village of Ngọc Cúc — I, your subject who fades in obscurity, full of fear, head lowered, have dared to raise my voice to you. Your generosity has deigned to grant me peace. Your goodness has been for me the rain falling upon the parched rice-field. I swear fidelity here and before the altar of my ancestors. I swear for myself and for those who follow me. They have all abandoned arms to resume the labours of the fields. And my heart is swollen with gratitude."

Then he fell to his knees and, abruptly projecting the upper part of his body forward, he abased himself, his forehead in the dust. Five times he performed the great lay, the ritual prostration — the gesture of very humble respect which, beyond all those present, addresses him who reigns at Huế, the Emperor who is at the centre of the support²⁰.

After Đề Thám, his lieutenants, all at once, executed the great lays. Then, by groups of ten and with a single movement as regular as the gestures of a ballet corps, those who had been the pirates five times prostrated themselves.

A few hours later, they had regained their lodgings at Phong Xuong, at Chợ Go, and in the villages round about.

More than two hundred rifles lay hidden there, waiting.

VII — In Pacified Yen Thế…

Four years have passed. We are in the fourth month of the 17th year of Thành Thái — May 1905.

Đề Thám lives tranquilly on his concession. Sometimes he stays at Phong Xuong, sometimes at Chợ Go, of which he is the first notable. The runner of the woods has become sedentary. He is a worthy retired man of piracy — a pious man, a faithful observer of the rites. Never does a village of Yen Thế call in vain his attention to the dilapidation of the communal house or the pagoda. Tham at once supplies the wood and repairs, or has repairs done.

He maintains the best relations with the French authority, whose delegate resides at Nhã Nam. Relations spaced-out, it is true: only one visit in four years. But, in truth, Tham goes out so little. At most he goes, from time to time, to pass a few moments with one or another of his devoted partisans in some neighbouring hamlet. Admire his modesty: he is then accompanied only by six armed bodyguards, whereas he could bring fifteen, since, officially, he holds fifteen rifles.

Under his aegis, the lands of Yen Thế have become fertile again and the people of Yen Thế happy. Happy and rich. In the province of Bắc Giang, the taxes come in well. They even claim that piastres also enter — in the form of requisitions — into the coffers of Đề Thám. The people who set such rumours about are perfidious and slanderous. I know well that, during the four great ritual feasts and during the commemorative feasts of Hoàng Thám, he receives gifts. Nothing could be more regular, and none ignore that, of all possible presents, the most precious and the easiest to transport are those made of hard cash. And are not those gifts the sign of the happiness and gratitude of the nha-qués of Bắc Giang… and even from much farther afield, for they come also from the province of Bắc Ninh and even from the canton of Vũ Nhai, which is in the heart of Thái Nguyên?

Some Annamites and some French colonists are discontented. Agreed. But do you know a country where everyone is satisfied?

To be fair, let us hear one or two of these complainants.

Here, for instance, is the chief of the canton of Hương Vĩ. He affirms that in January two buffaloes from the village of Bố Hạ disappeared. Their tracks were followed as far as Làng Mặc, which forms part of the canton of Hữu Thượng, which touches the concession of Đề Thám. Two buffaloes stolen! A fine affair! They must have been very ill-guarded, those animals… They must have strayed into the jungle and simply met the Lord Tiger. Besides, the canton chief is, as all know, an irreconcilable enemy of Đề Thám and accuses him of every crime committed in the region. A woman was stripped and murdered on the bridge that crosses the Sông Thương at 5 kilometres from Cao Thượng… Đề Thám is guilty. During the last Tết festivities, an armed robbery was committed at Bảo Lộc; people were killed by rifle-fire. Still Đề Thám. But no — Đề Thám had nothing to do with it. No one had anything to do with it, the official inquiry proved it. To hear this petty chief of a canton that encompasses barely four villages, Yen Thế trembles under the tyranny of Hoàng Thám, who, with a single word, could requisition anywhere any coolies he needed. Pure exaggeration. Tham requests, and each is free. Whoever wishes comes. And if, in the end, all consent, it is through love and respect for the great venerated chief… And, in truth, this canton chief of Hương Vĩ has his heart blackened by lies.

More serious: French colonists complain. Ah! If one had to listen to the eternal complaints of the colonists, there would be no end to it, and the Administration has enough worries with the Annamites and the Chinese. What business is it of these "marsh-dwellers" who dare to clear land and pretend to exploit the soil of Yen Thế? Could they not settle in provinces long pacified? Why choose lands neighbouring the concession of Đề Thám? They know well that this man knows French law no more than Annamite law.

And, truly, one must have a twisted mind to hold it against him. His childhood as a buffalo-herd left Tham no time to study the Chinese characters and the Four Books of the Doctrine. Born in Yen Thế, militarily organised by the Emperors of Annam to bar the way against Chinese incursions, he abandoned his cattle only to fight against our troops at the time of the conquest and, after it, against us still as lieutenant of the great pirates. The only laws he ever saw applied were first the irrevocable decisions of Đề Nam, then his own — summary, brutal, definitive. A beast, even chained, does not obey like a dog. And we have not even known how to chain the beast.

Like the creatures of the forest, Tham is skittish, mistrustful, ready to bite, ready also for panic. Since his submission, he has come once — only once — to Nhã Nam to speak with the French delegate. On that day, the militiamen of the post had to be made to disappear, while Đề Thám entered the delegation with his fifteen armed guards. For he has forgotten neither the cup of poisoned tea, nor the traps set for him by the Tổng Đốc of Bắc Ninh, nor Ba-Phuc's bomb. When he seems no longer to think of it, his lieutenants take charge of keeping alive his mistrust, which makes them indispensable. A morbid mistrust, mingled with a superstition that makes of the house at Phong Xuong a paradise for charlatans, sorcerers, and soothsayers.

Let us enter that house on a day in May 1905.

VIII — At Phong Xuong

It is not of wattle-and-daub mixed with straw, the dwelling of Đề Thám, but of solid brick. Its roof is of glazed tiles. It is a rich man's house, but, as everywhere, beaten earth is its only floor. Before the door rises the low wall that stops evil spirits and, if need be, bullets. As soon as this entrance is crossed, one is in the central room — the reception hall — which bamboo partitions separate from two side chambers. Behind the house are the outbuildings: kitchen, stable, cowshed, henhouse, and guardhouse.

In the centre of the room, a small table is flanked by two enormous benches of lim wood, well polished and varnished by greasy friction. On the wall, on panels lacquered black, blazes in large golden characters the vertical enumeration of the master's virtues, and, in columns of humbler writing, the names of the donors. Other panels, in red trắc wood, bear, inlaid in mother-of-pearl, the four allegorical beasts: the dragon, the unicorn, the tortoise, and the phoenix²¹. In the corner of the blue dragon — which is the east, the side of pure light — rises the ancestral altar with the black tablet inlaid with mother-of-pearl, the wax flowers of violent colours, the incense sticks planted in the sand of a Chinese vase and spreading a subtle perfume, and the little bronze gong that is sounded before each meal to invite the souls of the dead to sit at table. In the centre of the room is the camp bed, of a single block of precious wood, with the fresh mats for the body, the cái gối for the head, and the smoking-tray.

At the edge of the camp bed, Tham is seated, scratching himself pensively. At the door, a voice rises.

"O great general, your servant Diên An is here."

"Let him enter."

And here is Diên An. He carries the four precious objects: the brush, the rice-paper, the ink-stick, and the ink-stone. Having set them on the table, he bows, retreats to the wall, and, respectfully, summarises the news given by the newspapers of Tonkin. Today, as every day for months, there is talk of the Russo-Japanese War. Of the great victory of Liaoyang, the local sheets scarcely speak. But the Chinese newspapers have sung the high deeds of the Army of the Rising Sun. The Mikado triumphs over the white Tsar. Good news, in sum — on which Diên An insists so that the master may receive with serenity what follows, which is less cheering. It is, in three columns of the newspaper L'Avenir du Tonkin, a long indictment against Đề Thám. The author is M. de Baïx, a colonist of Yen Thế… He resurrects old grievances, exhumes affairs long since settled. Tham is livid with anger. He detests seeing the Tonkinese press occupy itself with Yen Thế… This de Baïx is truly intolerable. During the last visit of Đề Thám to the delegate at Nhã Nam, did he not dare to interrupt the audience and launch into an undignified tirade? Fortunately, Mgr Velasco was present — and it was above all to greet him that Tham had left his fief. Ong Velasco would testify to the pure intentions of the submittee and his men…

While Diên An was reading the press news, four men — so familiar that none announced them — have entered the home of Đề Thám. Crouched in the Annamite fashion, they have listened, impassive. They know well that, of all they have heard, only the Japanese victories matter. These four men are: Ca-Trong, son of Đề Thám and his first wife Thị Tao; Ca-Rinh and Ca-Huynh, whom the master has adopted; and the handsome Ba-Biểu, with his androgyne body, his delicate legs, his perfumed chignon — a ferocious beast in the mask of a vicious boy. Diên An having finished his report, Ca-Trong rises.

"Most venerated father, here is a letter brought from Nhã Nam."

At a gesture from the master, the paper is transmitted to Diên An, who reads it at once. Through the native secretary of the delegate at Nhã Nam, one of the notables has learned this: the French still expect that Đề Thám will betake himself to Phủ Lạng Thương first, to greet the Resident of France, then to Hanoi to render homage to the Governor-General.

"The Governor-General came to Yen Thế," murmurs Tham. "It will be necessary that one day I go yonder."

Which of the four men will dare to answer? Ba-Biểu is on his feet. Beneath his eyebrows, plucked until only the thin line of courtesans remains, his eyes full of a hypocritical caress regard the master. And his soft voice rises.

"Thou shalt not go, O venerated ancestor. Thou shalt not go because thou knowest that the French and all the Lu dogs of Annamites who lick their hands set traps for thee, as already they have set them. Thou shalt not go because here, in Yen Thế, and elsewhere also, all admire thy warlike exploits and are ready to aid thee in all that thou shalt command. Before thy thousand and ten thousand partisans, thou must not lose face. Thou shalt not go because it is here only, in our midst, that thou canst be happy and feel thyself in safety."

"I shall not go," answers Đề Thám.

For he knows well that he would risk death in leaving his faithful. He is their chief, but he is also their prisoner. For them, his departure would be a flight, and from one of the thickets of the forest would come a rifle-shot that would bring down the fugitive…

Now, while Ba-Biểu was speaking, a woman has entered. Pretty, slender, painted and smiling, she advances, harmonious in her lascivious swaying. Then she stops; disdaining to crouch before the master, she remains erect as a statue of bronze, proud. Three collars of red gold encircle her neck. The bands of her black hair, parted by a line that one might call light, seem lacquered. Her long tunic with tight sleeves is of blue silk, and her flowing trousers of white silk. Her graceful arms hang along her body and, according to the ritual of dances, her hands with nails sheathed in silver make a right angle with her wrists adorned with jade bracelets. This woman is Cô Ba, third wife and favourite of Đề Thám — Cô Ba, kneaded of frantic ambition and bravery, expert in the handling of the carbine and the revolver, and a sorceress into the bargain. Her feline eyes — wicked, penetrating — give the lie to the grace of her smile. Hear her.

"Thou art mistaken, Ba-Biểu. My master will go to Phủ Lạng Thương and to Hanoi. He will go at the moment he shall have chosen, at the head of ten thousand faithful, and will hurl the French out of Annam."

Tham says not a word. And Ba-Biểu whispers.

"Be silent, O precious stone. The hour has not come."

"O great man," says Ca-Trong then, "hundreds and hundreds of writings have been brought from China and from Japan. They relate, with a hundred thousand details, the victories of the Empire of the Rising Sun."

"Let them be spread throughout my villages," orders Đề Thám. "Let them be distributed in all the cantons of Bắc Giang, Bắc Ninh, Lạng Sơn, Vĩnh Yên. Let them everywhere be read to the four classes of the people and to the peasants of the four conditions²²."

And soon, in all the villages, those who know the characters read the writings of the victorious yellows. Everywhere the tracts penetrate. The discontented lettered — I mean all those whom the administration cannot employ, for they are too many — comment in their hateful manner upon the papers come from China. "The French," they say, "are rapacious vultures who strip the Annamites of their money to send it to France and keep the people in ignorance and slavery the better to exploit them. The French are ferocious beasts avid for blood, dogs full of cowardice who would flee before the people if they revolted against their state of servitude, in which they have been held since the conquest…"

The nha-qué listens curiously and is astonished. It was before the conquest that he knew slavery and ferocious beasts. Never will the man of the rice-field — the gentle peasant of Tonkin — betray those who protect him. But among the lettered, the artisans, and the merchants of the towns, the bad seed is going to germinate.

And Đề Thám awaits the hour of the harvest.

NOTES

¹ The Lebel rifle, arrived in Tonkin in 1890, was given at once to the marine infantry regiments. The Tonkinese tirailleurs received it only in 1895. But a year earlier, some were found in the hands of a few pirates.

² The Lebel rifle, arrived in Tonkin in 1890, was given at once to the marine infantry regiments. The Tonkinese tirailleurs received it only in 1895. But a year earlier, some were found in the hands of a few pirates.

³ The band of Thông Luận was sometimes at the orders of Đề Thám, sometimes at the disposal of Ba Kỳ.

⁴ Letters from Tonkin and Madagascar, vol. I, p. 98 et seq.

⁵ By the detachment of Captain Bulleux, commanding the post of Bắc Kạn, newly created by Gallieni.

⁶ By decree of 10 October 1895, signed Rousseau. The new province is composed of the two phủ (prefectures) of Lạng Giang and Đa Phúc, and the six huyện (arrondissements) of Yên Dũng, Việt Yên, Kim Anh, Yên Thế, and Hiệp Hòa. The police of the province is constituted by 423 linhs and 327 linh-cơ (mandarin guards) furnished by the province of Bắc Ninh.

⁷ General Gallieni, Trois colonnes au Tonkin, 1894-1895, Paris, Chapelot, 1899.

⁸ See the sketch-map p. 201.

⁹ 1st Military Territory: Sept-Pagodes, Móng Cái; 2nd Territory: Lạng Sơn; 3rd Territory: Hà Giang-Tuyên Quang; 4th Territory: Lào Cai.

¹⁰ The European cadres of the native guard are composed of principal inspectors, inspectors of 1st, 2nd, and 3rd class, principal guards of 1st, 2nd, and 3rd class, and probationary principal guards. The native non-commissioned officers are the phó quản (adjutants), the doi (sergeants), and the cai (corporals).

¹¹ Tết is the Annamite New Year festival. It is the greatest festival of the year. It falls between the 20th of January and the 10th of February, according to the Chinese calendar, which ten centuries of domination have imposed upon the Annamites. The rejoicings of Tết last several days.

¹² See the note on page 55.

¹³ "Le dernier grand pirate," Revue de Paris, August-September, 1911.

¹⁴ Especially concerning the history of Đề Thám before 1897. Colonel Péroz in particular confuses Ba Kỳ, a Chinese bandit chief, with Ba-Phuc.

¹⁵ The Tuần Phủ is the governor of a secondary province; the Án Sát is the chief justice; the Đốc Học is the head of education; and the Thượng Tá is the counsellor of the French Resident of the province.

¹⁶ Prefects of Lạng Giang and Đa Phúc, subdivisions of the province of Bắc Giang.

¹⁷ Chiefs of the huyện (arrondissements) of the province, which are the huyện of Yên Thế, Yên Dũng, Việt Yên, Kim Anh, Hiệp Hòa, and Phương Nhơn.

¹⁸ The work has been begun. The Militia has its golden book. M. E. Daurès, Principal Inspector of the Native Guard (retired), has just published La garde indigène de l'Indochine de sa création à nos jours (Avignon, Séguin, 1933).

¹⁹ Coachmen.

²⁰ Annam is as the support of the two baskets of rice that are Tonkin and Cochinchina.

²¹ The dragon symbolises power and nobility; the unicorn is the sign of prosperity; the tortoise is the sign of longevity; and the phoenix is the sign of beauty and elegance.

²² The four classes of the people are: the lettered, the cultivators, the artisans, and the merchants. The peasants of the four conditions are: fishermen, woodcutters, farmers, and shepherds.
