HOANG-THAM, PIRATE

PART FIVE
THE HUNTED DÉ THAM, 1909–1910

II — FACE LOST AND REGAINED (continued)

...and with that he could breathe again. Ca-Rinh and Ba-Bieu are in flight toward Monajuong, the Dé Tham and his son Ca-Trong toward Rungphé, Ca-Huynh passes into the province of Phuc-yen.

The Yen-thé is cleansed. They organise it. Marines, legionaries, sappers and riflemen take up spade and pickaxe and build fortified posts which bar the pirates' road of return and cut off their supplies.

By order of the Resident Superior of Tonkin, a price is set on the Dé Tham's head: two thousand piastres and a rank in the mandarinate is the prize promised to him who delivers the outlaw's corpse.

Veil your faces, O humanitarians who operate in France, snug and safe. And leave in peace those who operate in the colonies. They, they know that your utopias are not articles for export. Once his head is priced, the Dé Tham will live in fear of his own acolytes and will not dare recruit new partisans. The decision of the French authority accords with the traditions of the land of Annam. And moreover it proves to the natives that we shall go through to the end. In Tonkin, yellows and whites alike applaud. And later, the heads of the old pirate's lieutenants will be priced, like his own.

Encounter follows encounter. The blows of armed partisans, military reconnaissances, operations of the native guard are incessant and decimate the bands. That of Ca-Huỳnh is three-quarters destroyed.

In the month of April Ca-Trong was killed. The pirates fragment into small groups which make for the provinces of Vinh-yen, Phuc-yen and Bac-ninh, without the hunt stopping for a single instant. Weary of the eternal flight, twenty-six ruffians make their submission.

In the last days of April, the problem is resolved. The Yen-thé, pacified, has re-entered the common law. Forty-four pirates have been killed, fifteen are prisoners. The affair has cost us twenty-nine dead — seven of them European — and seventy-four wounded, among them five officers and twenty-four white soldiers. The Dé Tham is at bay. He writes letter upon letter, attesting his devotion to the Protectorate.

On the first of May, the authority declares the operations concluded.

The Dé Tham hides in Phuc-yen where the native guard operates in police column. The submissions continue. Old Ly-Thu surrenders; the Dé Tham's brother-in-law, Can, and his physician Langcong surrender.

The pirate chief has decidedly lost face.

The newspapers, each day, announce his submission for the morrow.

In truth, the old boar regathers the debris of his forces. On the twenty-fourth of June he is at Phu-lo, fifteen kilometres from Hanoi. His lieutenants Ca-Rinh, Ba-Bieu, Caï-Son and Haï-Nom have rejoined him.

On the fifth of July, he captures a European.

The face is regained.

III — WITH THE PIRATE BAND

A pousse-pousse of the rice-fields, a "choléra-cart", makes its way along the grand road, two hundred and sixty-seven kilometres long, which links Hanoi to Cao-bang, through the provinces of Phuc-yen, Thaï-Nguyen and Bac-kan: a fine road, passable for carriages everywhere, so fine that the occupant of the pousse-pousse is accustomed to covering it by bicycle.

But on this fifth of July 1909, the heat is too crushing, and Voisin, who is travelling from Hanoi to Backan to supervise some works, has preferred the hard jolts of the vehicle that three ragged coolies pull and push. Voisin could have taken the motor-car that makes the service from Dong-anh to Thaï-Nguyen, but that costs dear, and besides, on that day, the car was taken by a traveller.

At Dong-anh station, leaving the train that had brought him from Hanoi, Voisin met a lieutenant of Tonkinese riflemen and a principal guard of the militia. Conversation. Naturally, they speak of piracy. The region is calm, says the principal guard. "No suspicious movement," announce the posts of Dong-anh, of Phu-lé and of Phu-da.

"Nonetheless," adds the principal guard, "you would do better to take an escort."

"Never in life," replies Voisin. "I need to go fast and your linhs would delay me. Besides, I have in my pocket a respect-compeller."

And he shows a big Browning bought the day before in Hanoi.

"With that, I do not fear pirates."

"I knew Monsieur Voisin at Cao-bang," the lieutenant puts in. "That was in the time when no one ventured on the roads without an armed guard. He never would take an escort."

Before the station are the pousse-pousse, numerous as always. The coolies at first press forward. But learning that it is a matter of going to Thaï-Nguyen, they refuse. It takes a quarter of an hour to recruit three.

En route. From eight in the morning the heat pounds. Not a breath of air. The road is bordered by rice-fields. Some show the green velvet of young shoots recently transplanted. Others, still full of water, reflect the white-hot sky and seem rectangles of mercury. The backs of buffaloes emerge like round reefs. Perched on the pink spines, egrets pick the vermin from the enormous beasts. In the distance rise, sole landmarks in the monotonous plain, the live hedges of bamboos masking the villages they protect from all intruders, tigers or pirates, and which are dominated by the slender watch-towers of the lookouts.

The road, deserted, powders with dust. The trotting of the coolies invites drowsiness. Look! There are only two of them now... Where has the third gone?

Mystery. Bah! They'll attend to it at the next halt.

The road crosses the village of Phu-lo.

On the long grey ribbon, Voisin's white helmet makes a spot that can be seen from very far. But who might be watching for white spots on the road?

Soon nine o'clock. The heat increases. Voisin shakes himself, opens an eye. Here is Vé-linh, a palisaded village some five hundred metres to the left. And here, much nearer, a hut of thatch, a cantonniers' shelter no doubt.

Voisin wakes fully, for two men come out of the shelter. They look armed. Yes indeed. Each carries a short-barrelled rifle. Two partisans without doubt, auxiliaries of the Phuc-yen police — or two pirates. But that is little for a good Browning. The Frenchman seizes his weapon. Besides, the two men separate. One walks northward, like the pousse-pousse. The other takes a dozen paces toward Voisin, then disappears behind a bank.

The trot of the coolies has slowed. And suddenly, from the shelter of the bank, twelve Annamites surge up, all armed. A volley sweeps the road. The coolies flee, belly to the ground. Barricaded behind his vehicle, Voisin makes a stand and begins to empty his Browning at the attackers. But they are too far. No shot tells. Twelve bullets. Thirteen. It is recommended to keep the last for oneself, in case of extreme urgency.

Which Voisin wisely does, and now he takes to his heels toward Dong-anh.

A fine six hundred metres flat under the burning sun. Voisin zigzags to dodge the bullets. But the pirates fire little. They run terribly fast. Some launch across the fields to cut off the fugitive's retreat. He leaves the road then, takes a rice-field dike. To right and left nha-qués are at work. Here the men do the last ploughing of the fifth month. Further on women busy themselves with transplanting. Despite the Frenchman's calls and the pirates' shouts, all remain as indifferent as the buffaloes harnessed to the ploughs. This affair, evidently, could not interest them.

Voisin can go no further. Little by little, the dike becomes a mire where his shoes sink. The pursuers, barefoot, gain ground and cap the unhappy man as a pack caps the boar. A turban ties his arms behind his back and, as he continues to struggle, a rifle-butt opens his right leg at the instep and another bruises his shoulder. One of the attackers has seized the Browning and, drawing cartridges from his belt, reloads both magazines. Then the group sets off toward Vé-linh.

All obey one man, dressed all in red and coiffed with a black felt hat. This is the Doï-Huan, chief of a Phuc-yen band, who has ranged himself as is fitting under the banner of the Lord Tham as soon as the latter did the province the honour of his presence. The Doï-Huan is a ferocious beast, pillager, murderer and incendiary. He hates the French to the limit of execration.

Behind Vé-linh is a grove of strong bamboos surrounding a sort of rectangular redoubt, with thick walls of rammed earth and a patrol-path.

The whole band of the Dé Tham is there. Some fifty men.

Sly faces, honeymouthed expressions, muzzles of hyenas, jaws of bulldogs blossom in laughter that reveals blackened teeth. A white! A white prisoner! This capture will force, as is customary, the French to accept the band's submission. Thus will end the abominable life of hunted game that the pirates have led for five months. And who knows whether a solid ransom will not come to sweeten the peace reconquered? The captured man is perhaps a functionary or a colonist of importance. Besides, they will soon know.

Voisin is brought before the Dé Tham for interrogation. The pirate chief has abandoned Annamite clothing. He is dressed in khaki drill and coiffed with a black felt hat. Like his skull, his face is now shaved. Near him rests his Winchester carbine. In his cartridge-belt is thrust a Browning. Beside him stand the gentle Co-Ba, Mauser pistol at her side, and the handsome Ba-Bieu who, almost alone of all the band, has kept his silk tunic and his long hair which he so loves to spread over his shoulders — he can toss his head at a single stroke, for the great joy of Co-Ba, who adores passing her fingers softly through the abundant black fleece.

Tham interrogates. In truth, he wanted to seize a European, any European at all. Voisin states his name and qualities. He is but a modest works supervisor operating for the account of the contractor Leroy.

"Hai," says the Dé Tham then, addressing a pirate, "you will go to Hanoi and you will bring back the French newspapers that speak of the prisoner. You will rejoin me in four days. I shall see if the man has told the truth."

At that instant, five or six brigands of the Doï-Huan's band burst into the redoubt, bringing an Annamite they have just arrested on the grand road. From the fact that the man is decently dressed and carries an identity card from Hanoi, they deduce that he is Voisin's servant. With great difficulty, the latter demonstrates that this is not so. And the captured native is about to be released, when a nha-qué arrives who, in a low voice, speaks to the Dé Tham, who addresses Voisin:

"This man tells me that a detachment of linhs of the province is advancing toward this village to surround it. If these dogs pass to the attack, you will be decapitated. Write at once to their chief. The man they took for a boy in your service will carry the letter."

Inspector Lambert of the native guard is duly warned that at the first shot fired on Vé-linh, Voisin will have his head cut off. That is the order of the Dé Tham.

The interrogation has ended. The prisoner's toilette remains to be done. They shave his moustache. They take away his shoes and replace them with Chinese slippers. They cover his helmet with khaki cloth. Finally they pass around his neck a rattan cord which descends to his wrists, bound behind his back.

And, while sentinels watch around the redoubt, the torrid hours pass slowly. Toward five o'clock in the evening, Voisin is constrained to send to the chief of the militia detachment at Phu-da an invitation to stay quiet. A woman of Vé-linh, a ba-gia with rheumy eyes eaten by ophthalmia, with empty flabby breasts hanging on her belly, a sort of skeleton surmounted by a head ravined with grimy wrinkles and coiffed like a mop, takes charge of the message and receives a piastre from the Dé Tham for her pains.

At six o'clock, the chief makes a sign. The band gathers around him. It is the hour of the evening prayer. Disturbed in their rest, the pirates grumble. But at a menacing glance from the chief, the faces, suddenly become hateful, resume an aspect of vague indifference or lively interest in the ceremony about to unfold. Over his khaki, Tham has put a red ceremonial tunic. Before a makeshift altar where the ritual offerings are laid, he officiates. The liminary invocation to the Jade Emperor is followed by prayers to the Dragon, god of the waters, whose veins are the rivers and whose navel is at Hanoi, in the citadel. Then comes the call to the genies of the mountains, of the storm, of the soil they tread today, to the genie of the pirates who is King Lam of Tong. Finally comes the thanksgiving to Buddha who has prolonged by one day the life of all. The thanksgiving is repeated by the lieutenants who, in their heart of hearts, care very little for Buddha, then by the men who could well do without this psalmody in the open air.

In a corner are ranked the notables of Vé-linh, kept under guard. Their seizure as hostages is also a rite by which the Dé Tham obtains the aid of the villages he deigns to honour with his visit. At once into the hands of the ly-truong the great chief pours some twenty piastres, payment for the symbolic offerings to Buddha. Every evening it is the same, and the Dé Tham's acolytes consider this expense a shameful waste.

Having then settled the sum due for the food supplied to his men, the Dé Tham makes his entry into Vé-linh, at the moment when the daily storm unleashes itself which salutes with its formidable cannonade the agony of July evenings. The lightning, which no one ignores, disperses ghosts, and also blinds the militia detachments that the resident of Phuc-yen has posted at the village exits. Toward midnight, the Dé Tham, his band and his prisoner slip away and flee northward, keeping at a distance from the Thaï-Nguyen road of which one glimpses vaguely, at moments, the telegraph poles standing out as black verticals against the rain of fire of the incessant flashes.

At three o'clock in the morning, here is a pagoda where the band shelters. It is built on a height commanding a village where the pirates enter at daybreak, not without having made a great detour in order to penetrate by the north face, as if they came from the province of Thaï-Nguyen, toward which, in reality, they are heading. The Dé Tham neglects no ruse and mistrusts everything and everyone.

Yet this place is as safe as the safest. All day long there file past ly-truongs and notables from neighbouring communes come to salute the Dé Tham. They are old men full of prudence and judgment. They know how to hold the balance even between the redoubtable host of today and the police forces which tomorrow will doubtless come. But the Lord Tham is master of the hour since he has captured a European. And each of the respectable functionaries, with white and wispy goatees, with fingernails of immoderate length, brings the pirate chief all the useful intelligence. The bandits, who amuse themselves seeing the old men tremble, nevertheless speak to them only using all the polite formulas of the land of Annam. The "O ancestor," "O most wise," "O born before me," resound, accompanied by bows.

In the evening, the band resumes its road. The region seems calm. The sentinels who have watched all day at the tops of the tall trees surrounding the village have perceived no suspicious movement. And the emissaries have brought no alarming news.

Each night the band is on the march. It passes each day in a different lair. Sometimes it comes up against a palisade girdling a hostile village where the alarm gong resounds, while the inhabitants raise great cries and refuse to lift the heavy portcullis that closes the enclosure. The band then does not insist and pushes further. Phuc-yen is not the Yen-thé, and the Dé Tham here is not the king of the country.

Despite which, guides never fail, sent by the notables of friendly villages. Four unarmed nha-qués pilot the band through rice-field, wood and marsh. The relief of the guides occurs every six or eight kilometres very regularly, without any need for palaver. On the march, the Dé Tham demands total silence.

The country is now broken, wooded, bristling with hillocks dressed in grasses that grow to a man's height. The massif of the Tam-Dao is not far. On the eighth of July at six in the morning, the band enters Lang-laï. Hard by the village, a thick wood hides a clearing where a fortified pagoda rises. A wide, deep, water-filled ditch surrounds it. It runs along an enceinte all of trenches, firing-steps and traverses. A communication trench links the line of defence to the leafy underwood. Pirates are on guard in the tallest trees at the wood's edge. In the pagoda, where twenty statues of Buddha in Chinese mortar are erected, holes are dug to shelter marksmen in case attackers should breach the wall.

The pagoda is, in sum, a solid lair. Tham is there, day by day, informed of the movements and the strength of the native guard by the man named Thu, who is ly-truong of Lang-laï, and by the former ly-truong Sou. Both also take charge of the post, for the pirate chief engages in negotiations with the French authority. He attempts, once again, the dodge that has until now succeeded. He asks to submit, to return to the Yen-thé. He counts on Monsignor Velasco, still Bishop of Bac-ninh, to discuss the conditions.

Busy organising a new military column, the Government lets the parleys drag.

IV — THE HUNT RESUMES

On the sixth of July, in Hanoi, the news burst like a bomb. Voisin carried off twenty kilometres from the capital! The Dé Tham is not at bay, then. His surrender is no longer a question of hours. Everything must begin again.

The Governor General orders the despatch of a column — still another — against the old pirate. Objective: to free Voisin and destroy the bands. General Geil, superior commander of the troops of Indochina, puts at the head of the troops Chef de Bataillon Chofflet, of the colonial infantry.

Chofflet is invested with full military and civil powers. He has proved himself in Madagascar. His way is the hard way. When he judges that pity would be weakness, he is without pity.

While the conversation with the Dé Tham is allowed to drag, Chofflet concentrates his troops at Phuc-yen, then directs them on Lang-laï, already invested by the native guard.

The twelfth of July is, for the Dé Tham, a fateful date. The Government's reply is clear: "Free Voisin and you shall have your life, and nothing more. A maintenance pension shall be granted, if need be, to the people of your family, who for the moment have been arrested in the Yen-thé and will be deported immediately if any harm comes to the Frenchman you hold prisoner."

At the same time, letters arrive from Nha-nam, addressed to various bandits, whose parents have been locked up and who strongly advise the recipients to submit as soon as possible. These latter will know nothing of it. Tham reads everyone's post before anyone else and burns the letters at once when he judges the measure useful. And these letters are good for burning. It is rendering the men a service to keep their morale intact. But today, the chief's anger bursts. On his order, they bind Voisin more tightly. The pirates insult him. The tender Co-Ba puts her Mauser pistol under his nose. And Tham has barely time to raise the rifle of the red man, the Doï-Huan, who wants at all costs to shoot the Frenchman.

On the thirteenth, the black series continues. The notables Sou and Thu bring bad news. The Government demands from the Dé Tham an immediate reply. And, graver still, the French troops have encircled Lang-laï. They will attack at the following dawn.

Now, that very evening, the Dragon master of the waters and the genie of the thunder, bent by the old pirate's invocation, unleash a storm among storms, more violent than the most violent. Rain of fire and waterspouts block the view at two metres for every eye, save those of the hunted pirates.

And when, on the fourteenth of July, at dawn, under the cleaned sky and in the warm mist rising from the ground, Chofflet launches the attack, the pagoda is empty. The people of Lang-laï manifest, at the entry of our troops, a joy too marked ever to be the joy of Annam... The ly-truong Thu makes grand salaams and offers the gifts of welcome. He affirms he has had no contact with the pirates. The former ly-truong Sou, for his part, entered the pagoda. The bandits kept him as hostage and pushed audacity so far as to bind him at the moment of flight. Happily, he was able to free himself from his bonds. It all stinks of lies.

"But," says Chofflet, "the Dé Tham was provisioned by the village and you, both of you, made the necessary purchases."

"Was it the Dé Tham? O great mandarin, how could we know? The Dé Tham is in the Yen-thé..."

Fists joined and frantically agitated before their faces, the two notables multiply their bows.

Five minutes later, they are, both of them, shot on the spot.

Burn the village? Impossible. It lies on the concession of a French colonist.

V — THE BOAR IN FLIGHT

The Dé Tham is in flight, but, like a boar, he will deal some fierce thrusts.

The tropical storm unleashes itself. The rain batters the roads, the rice-fields and the woods, powerful and as if poured from an inexhaustible reservoir, opened wide forever. It seems it must exterminate under its bludgeoning blows or drown under its flood all the exasperating insects, which nonetheless will surge forth more numerous and more avid as soon as the deluge ceases. Under the bombardment of the lightning, accompanied by the drumming of the downpour, the pirates make their way. Two hundred metres ahead march six men as scouts. Then comes the main body of the band, Dé Tham at the head, Co-Ba and Ba-Bieu near him. The chief carries on him only his arms and cartridges; all the others transport in haversacks, slung crosswise, their baggage and, turn and turn about, food and reserve ammunition. Only three coolies march with the bandits. One, a former soldier of the artillery workers' company, is the Dé Tham's bearer. The other two are loaded with French and Annamite picks, indispensable accessories for pirates sent out for intelligence who must then take on the look of harmless nha-qués.

In the centre of the group marches Voisin, arms bound, held on a leash by the pirate Haï, Co-Ba's protégé, former boy of a colonial adjutant and, as such, speaking French. The pirate Khaï also watches the prisoner. Both declare, in low voices, that they have had enough of their present existence. But both tremble before the Dé Tham.

In its hasty departure from Lang-laï, the band has not had time to take guides. Three times in the night it loses its way, deceived by tracks that lead the vanguard, through copses, up to great pools bordered by grasses taller than a man and which, surely, serve as watering-points for the beasts whose pads have traced the deceptive paths. Sometimes, in the darkness thickened by the rain, the flank guards separate from the main body. The Dé Tham stops then and sounds the croaking of the frog, which he repeats until everyone has rallied. They confer then and set off again. Discipline is as tight as in the best troops.

The trek lasts the whole night of the thirteenth to the fourteenth of July and continues through the warm mist of the morning. At eleven o'clock, here is a hamlet of four or five poor cai-nhas. It belongs to the concession of the French colonist Bellan. As it is important to keep secret the passage of the band, the Dé Tham, who has used Voisin's waterproof all night, gives it back to him in order to hide the cord that binds the Frenchman's neck and wrists. To the nha-qués who come running, he explains:

"This is Ong Bellan inspecting his concession. He does not know Annamite. And, as he fears pirates, he has had himself accompanied by a troop of partisans of which I am the chief. He orders you to bring, for us all, everything needed to eat. I shall pay the price."

The natives obey. But during the meal, Voisin, whose one arm is untied, manages to make the coat slip. The cord appears that encircles his neck. The nha-qués understand and, without a word, one by one they flee. In a few instants the hamlet is deserted.

With half his band, the Dé Tham then climbs to the summit of a hillock of three hundred metres that commands the country. At every view appears the embankment of the railway line. Nearer runs the road that links Phu-lo to Phuc-yen. Two large villages are in sight and the chief chooses the one that will shelter his men. The band approaches it, but, this time again, the alarm tam-tam resounds. Nothing doing. The pirates resume their road.

Exhausted, suffering from the wounds left by the rifle-butt blows he received, Voisin advances with great pain. His knees are swollen fit to burst. From ten o'clock in the evening, he cannot cover more than a kilometre without being forced to stop. The bandits copiously abuse him. But the precious hostage must be allowed to catch his breath a little.

At three o'clock in the morning, the sixteenth of July, the Dé Tham finally finds a village that consents to receive him. Rest for all, save for the sentinels who are relieved every three hours. The Dé Tham sleeps. No one must disturb his slumber, not even Ca-Rinh, who, dressed in khaki and coiffed with a black felt hat, arrives with his partisans toward four o'clock and will wait twelve hours before daring to disturb the great chief.

Reinforced by the fifty or so brigands that Ca-Rinh brings, the pirate troop is at full strength. With stupor, Voisin contemplates the rag-tag of well-armed bandits, ready for anything, sturdy and healthy, for the sick and the lame are left in complicit villages, where one easily finds ten volunteers for a single available rifle.

Voisin has counted: twelve Lebel rifles, fifteen Lebel carbines, about a dozen magazine carbines of a new model, about a dozen Winchesters, a dozen Mauser pistols, two Brownings, four service revolvers, about twenty Gras rifles in good condition, others sawn-off and without foresight. A few rifles whose barrels have burst have been re-soldered with copper.

Depots of ammunition are also found there. Tham has them bought in Hanoi, from Chinese merchants. Women transport the cartridges in baskets hidden under vegetables.

Two days' halt, then the wandering resumes. Night marches under the terrible downpour. Rest by day. The band passes into the province of Thaï-Nguyen only to return to that of Phuc-yen. Each evening, Tham invokes Buddha. In the night of the twenty-first of July, the pirates cross the Song Calo by sampan and establish themselves at Xuan-laï, where the welcome is cordial.

Yet the Dé Tham fears a surprise. He has just learned that the day before, the band of Haï-Nom, a Phuc-yen pirate chief, was destroyed by Lieutenant Bouffé at the head of a platoon of the Foreign Legion. Haï-Nom was killed. Order to all to keep arms slung even during rest.

VI — AT XUAN-LAÏ

Commandant Chofflet presses forward. By a proclamation posted everywhere, he declares that the tablets of the genies will be broken in every village where the pirates have found refuge. In one week, sixteen natives are shot in Phuc-yen: informers, scouts or emissaries of the Dé Tham, or, quite simply, pirates disguised as nha-qués. The notables begin to believe that, decidedly, the French fist is stronger than that of the Lord Tham. At a stroke, many Annamites second us and inform us. And many villages refuse to open their gates to the wandering band. Moreover, Chofflet has had all the agglomerations with their inextricable alleys cut by two wide avenues in a cross. And the bamboo hedges of the suspect villages have been razed.

Let us rejoin the Dé Tham at Xuan-laï. The square enceinte is made of a bamboo palisade intact and impenetrable. Inside are a few brick houses and thatch huts which the pirate chief has burned from dawn on the twenty-second of July, to clear the view. Xuan-laï possesses a pagoda and a Catholic church. The Song Calo flows at some distance east of the village.

On the twenty-second of July, Principal Guard Martineau, warned of the presence of a pirate party at Xuan-laï, heads toward that point with a small group of militiamen. At the approaches to the position, a volley of fire greets him and kills four linhs. A nha-qué runs up: "It is Ong Tham who is there, with his band and that of Ca-Rinh." Nothing to be attempted for the moment. The militiamen fall back and await reinforcements.

They are on their way. At daybreak, Captain Saillens of the colonial artillery has seen, from the post where his guns were cantoned, the flames and smoke of the fire lit by the Dé Tham. He marches to the fire and warns Chofflet, who at once despatches the company of marines of Captain Perthuis and the company of riflemen of Captain Chastelier.

They must move fast and our men have great difficulty advancing on the gluey road that skirts the Song Calo, whose muddy waters cast a sinister reflection in the sad light of early morning.

The riflemen march in single file on a narrow rice-field dike. All are silent. Sometimes one hears the clink of a bayonet striking a mess-tin, sometimes the soft noise of a man falling who has slipped in the mud. The others then seek more carefully the place to set their bare feet.

The marines follow a road that the tall grasses have invaded. It crosses a wood of latanier palms with bluish trunks. Not a nha-qué in the countryside. The rice-fields are dead, the plantations ruined. The villages one glimpses to right and left are mute and as if deserted. This is the country of fear. Ca-Rinh has scoured it with his band, and now Chofflet makes a salutary terror reign there.

Hourly halt in one of the rare villages the road crosses. The nha-qués come running, curious. Here are the French, that troop of tall, big and heavy men, agitated and noisy, ceaselessly in the act of ordering something, those people whose apparent anger hides a soul always ready to swallow the coarsest lies when those lies appeal to pity, that virtue unknown in the land of Annam — the French, with their ready kick and their open purse. They say these French are going to rid the country of pirates and that one must reveal to them the place where the Lord Tham lies. In reality they will say nothing. The fear of terrible reprisals seals mouths threefold. For it is always the same: the French arrive with soldiers in number, they say even that today they have brought cannon; they attack the bands, they kill some pirates, but the others flee with their chiefs, their invulnerable chiefs, to return afterwards terrible and unleashed, when the troops have gone and only a few rare militiamen occupy the region. A very old and very wise mandarin who has lived in Hanoi affirms that over there, in France, the assembly of notables, hundreds of men who talk much and are all-powerful, has refused to send to the land of Annam enough soldiers to finish forever with the bandits. Thus prudence commands silence.

Now the ly-truong advances, humble and eager. On a tray he offers the colonial captain bananas and eggs, the ritual gifts of welcome. But when the officer questions him about the Dé Tham, the man's smile fades. He seems bewildered. He does not understand. How would he know? And the notables who have come make chorus: "Pirates? O great three-stripe mandarin, we have not seen pirates for many days. How would they dare to come now that the French soldiers are in the region?" The eyes lie, and the trembling of the goatee reveals the lie despite a remnant of fixed smile. That ly-truong would do well to flee as fast as possible if he wants to avoid the dozen bullets that Chofflet destines for him if it is proved that the pirates have passed this way.

The sun is high now and the heat intolerable. It falls from the sky and rises from the ground. A French sergeant collapses, knocked out by the "coup de bambou." He will die in a few hours. The steel of the weapons burns the hands. Throats are dry. Over the plain, the air is at boiling point. The column heads toward the smoke, more and more tenuous, rising in the distance and indicating Xuan-laï.

At noon, our men are at the work-site. The village is encircled. The attack is unleashed under the atrocious bombardment of the sun's rays. The native guard affirms that the Dé Tham is there. We shall see.

Marines, riflemen and militiamen are deployed and shelter as best they can, ready to give the assault. Our volleys search the palisade. The pirates, invisible as always, reply, aim at whoever shows himself. But it is no longer the nourished fire of old. They are economising their ammunition.

The Dé Tham has taken post in a trench behind the church. Voisin is near him, still bound and guarded by two men. Tham sometimes leaves his shelter, goes from one fighter to another, gives orders and advice, but without firing a single shot himself.

Our officers have quickly understood that an attempt at assault — more than two hundred metres to cover across a bare muddy zone — would result in a useless massacre. They must give the floor to the cannon. The church and the pagoda, glimpsed above the bamboo hedge, are good aiming-points. The artillery opens fire. Slowly, patiently, shrapnel and percussion shells fall on Xuan-laï. Tham then rallies all his men in an old, deep ditch dug in the south-east angle of the village. And, as all our shots fall too long, the pirates do not lose a man.

As is his custom, the Dé Tham awaits the night and the nightly storm to escape. But he fears that our shells may finally breach the palisade. He knows that then, even at the price of heavy losses, the French would not hesitate to give the assault — the irresistible assault of the colonial troops. He must gain time. During a pause in the firing, Voisin's voice rings out: "Cease fire. The Dé Tham is going to surrender."

And we cease fire. Three times the stratagem succeeds. No matter. The reinforcements that Chofflet sends from Da-phuc will arrive on the twenty-third at dawn and they will attack thoroughly. And night falls.

Our troops encircle Xuan-laï. They watch especially the south palisade, where the gate is.

Some six hundred metres from the north palisade runs a fairly high rice-field dike. A Tonkinese rifleman stands sentry there. Moreover, this whole zone is lit by the flames leaping from a pagoda which the marines have just set ablaze. No chance for the band to slip away that way.

Yet it is from this side that the Dé Tham has decided to escape. At his order, the fusillade redoubles. The pirates fire at random to make noise. Our men shoot back by guess. The night resounds with the whip-crack of the Lebels, the muffled and grave detonation of the Gras rifles, the bizarre sound of modern weapons loaded with Chinese powder and primed with hunting caps. Hard by the burning pagoda, a clump of bamboos catches fire and the dry bursting of the stems crackles louder than the fusillade. The noise of the sharp cutlasses attacking the north palisade is covered by the uproar. Soon the breach is practicable.

Across a fallow rice-field, some pirates, Ba-Bieu at the head, run northward, flattening themselves on the muddy ground when the burning pagoda throws too clear a light. Here they are at the dike. Ba-Bieu hails the Tonkinese sentry.

"O dog who fights against your brothers, we come to their aid with two hundred rifles. Get yourself out of here without raising the alarm. If you do not obey, I shall make you prisoner and tomorrow Ong Tham will apply to you the slow-death torture. Rejoin your men and tell the doï of your section that the linhs of the native guard occupy the dike."

Trembling, the poor rifleman vanishes. Little by little, the pirates rally on the dike and, posted upon it, open fire against Xuan-laï, now evacuated, just as if they were part of the troops sent to reduce the village.

But one cannot blaze away all night. They must make good their escape while deceiving the vigilance of the French and Tonkinese watchers with whom the ground is sown. But, this time again, fate is complicit with the pirates. Beyond the dike stretches a wide, deep pool. In groups of eight or ten, the pirates throw themselves into it and, sometimes walking on the muddy bottom, sometimes swimming, cross it unseen. Two pirates support Voisin, still bound.

And then the nightly storm bursts. The Dé Tham and his band are saved again.

Rest on the twenty-third in a village. Voisin is at the end of his strength. For three days, a bout of fever has laid him low. Tham gives him Annamite medicines which, naturally, aggravate the ill. And, as on the twenty-fourth of July the pirates are about to set out again, the Frenchman declares to the Dé Tham:

"You may kill me if you wish, but if you intend to march during the night, I shall not follow you. I have no more strength."

"Kill him, O most wise," murmurs the suave Co-Ba, holding out her automatic pistol to the great chief.

"Be quiet, younger sister," replies Tham.

Then, addressing Voisin:

"If I gave you your freedom, could you walk?"

"If you released me," replies the prisoner, "I would lie down on the ground and await rescue or death."

"He will follow nonetheless," says Ca-Rinh then, "and without fatigue."

And the terrible lieutenant, human for once, has bamboos cut from which a stretcher is made. Coolies from the village will carry the Frenchman.

Tham has reflected long. Every night that will come will be a night of desperate flight, for the French troop is on his heels. He feels it coming. He will not give in. But by keeping Voisin, he risks seeing him perish from exhaustion and fever. Then —

Then, without doubt, the French would not hesitate to have the women and children arrested in the Yen-thé judged by the native tribunal. The Annamite law is harsh for the close kin of pirates. No decree of the Protectorate has abrogated it, and it is out of humanity that France has never applied it to this day. But Tham has exhausted our patience. Judged by the mandarins, the hostages would be sent to the bagne of Poulo-Condore. That must at all costs be prevented.

At the moment of departure, the Dé Tham approaches Voisin and, slipping a letter into his pocket:

"Tonight, I shall set you free. You will give this letter to the French mandarins, you will tell them that I have always treated you well. Do not forget that all your words will be reported to me and that I shall always know how to find you wherever you go."

And the band sets off. Exhausted by fever, Voisin is half dead. It seems to him that they cross swamps, that they cross the grand road where he was captured. The moon at its setting shows him that the pirates are marching westward. The hours drag heavily. The feverish man vaguely feels his wrists untied. Insensible to the squalls that lash him, he finally falls into a sleep cut by atrocious nightmares.

Toward one in the morning, a terrible shock wakes him. He finds himself lying, in impenetrable darkness, on beaten earth. The Dé Tham having ordered the bearers to deposit Voisin in a peasant's cai-nha, they entered and simply capsized the stretcher, emptying Voisin as they would have emptied water from a bucket. Then they left, without a word.

In the dark, the inhabitant of the cai-nha strikes a match to see. Voisin questions him: "Where am I? How did I come in? Where are the pirates?" Without deigning to answer, the nha-qué makes his two children, who were sleeping on a camp bed in a corner, get up. Voisin hoists himself painfully into their place and falls back into his torpor.

A lancinating sting in the ear makes him suddenly start. He brings his hand to it and feels, under his fingers, an enormous centipede. The pain and the disgust wake him completely. The fever makes his arteries beat. His ears ring so loud he thinks he hears a gong resounding in the vicinity. He listens more carefully. The rhythm of the sounds is not that of the heartbeats. It is indeed a gong, it is the watch tam-tam of a friendly post. Voisin gets up, leaves the cai-nha, drags himself toward the sound. At half past three in the morning, he is before the post of Kim-anh, occupied by partisans armed by the resident of Phuc-yen.

Voisin is saved.

Toward six o'clock, a nha-qué, breathless and pale with terror, rushes into the post. "I have just come from Hien-luong," he says. "The pirates have just entered there. They are burning everything."

VII — LAST COMBATS

On the twenty-fifth of July, Commandant Chofflet attacks Hien-luong, terribly fortified. Two bloody assaults. Disappointing result and heavy losses. Thirteen dead on our side — among them Captain Perthuis of the colonial infantry — and twenty wounded, all European save one militia caï hit by a bullet while carrying off the body of a French soldier.

For one must, above all, carry off the dead, white or yellow. Otherwise their heads, cut off by the bandits, would serve as trophies to affirm the Dé Tham's power.

In the night, according to the immutable rite, the pirates slip between our fingers. Our troops are on their heels. Here they are at Ninh-bac on the twenty-sixth. Shall we have them this time? Not yet. Five riflemen perish. But the band loses nine men: six dead and three prisoners.

In that harsh summer of 1909, the heat and the fever decimate our columns. They must be spared.

The Governor General decides then to act according to the Annamite legislation. He names a Kham-saï. And this Kham-saï is Lé-Hoan, then Tong-doc of the province of Haï-duong — Lé-Hoan, whom we have seen operating at Bac-ninh and whose hatred for the Dé Tham has not slackened.

On the thirtieth of July, at Phuc-yen, in the presence of the Resident Superior de Miribel and General Geil, Lé-Hoan is enthroned in great pomp. The general reviews the four hundred partisans that the mandarin will command. The Kham-saï receives the brevet bearing the great seal of the Emperor of Annam. This is in conformity with the treaties and with the tradition in force in Tonkin regarding the attribution of ranks and honorary titles. The Kham-saï is "the king's envoy." The intervention of the sovereign in this matter places the Dé Tham and his partisans beyond the pale of the empire, enemies of public order. It obliges the inhabitants to refuse all succour to the pirates, to give chase to them over the whole extent of Annamite territory.

The four hundred partisans of the Kham-saï are to make contact with the pirates and hold it until the arrival of our troops.

Encounter on the thirteenth of August at Bach-da between the Dé Tham's band and a group of Chofflet's column, which loses one killed and three wounded, among them Sub-Lieutenant Braun of the colonial infantry. The extract that follows, from a letter of this young officer to a comrade, gives the affair its most vivid aspect:

"First, I scarcely deserve congratulations. I did my duty and that is all. You would have done absolutely the same. I had luck, that is a fact — a double luck: that of being the first to attack a strongly entrenched pirate position, and that which permits me to write you today, for I have seen the Great Reaper very close. I am more fanatical than ever, naturally, and I have had rare sensations. I lived for five weeks — from the eighth of July to the thirteenth of August only — when I was in column.

"I had the exquisite impression of commanding a convoy, sole European with five riflemen, crossing at night a region infested with pirates, on frightful roads, with a hundred coolies. Fatigues that, in normal times, would make you stay by the side of the road, but that do not appear under nervous excitement. It is true that, all spirit of arms aside, our men are marvellous, having nothing in common with the mediocre subjects we have in France — whose number has much diminished in the past two or three years that engagements have been terminable. Here, nothing but sturdy old gaillards: an impression of unimaginable strength.

"Example. One day, at five in the evening, while the men were eating, we receive the order to leave. A quarter-hour later, the company was formed on the road in march order.

"We set out. At seven o'clock, sound of a lively fusillade, machine-guns, artillery — a real concert. At ten o'clock, we leave the road to go onto gluey, wet dikes where the foot slips. It is pitch dark. At eleven o'clock, we arrive on our position to prevent the pirates from scarpering. Forward combat posts, the men two paces behind a dike, bayonets fixed; a sentry five paces ahead, you cannot see him. It begins to rain — not the least shelter; we remain thus standing, searching the darkness. The cold rain falls, falls always — not a groundsheet, nothing. The men's teeth chatter. At five in the morning, day begins to break, very grey. It has not stopped raining.

"At seven o'clock, we learn that the pirates have scarpered, as chance would have it, on the side watched by the militiamen.

"Rest in a pagoda. We make big fires to dry ourselves a little. The men have some bread that has been soaked all night. At eight o'clock, we set off again. It has stopped raining; the weather clears. Long march on ever muddier dikes. At eleven o'clock, it begins to get hot. We make a halt of one hour. Nothing to eat, save a remnant of jam that the captain finds in one of his holsters and that we swallow with wet bread.

"At noon, we set off again under a torrid heat: forty degrees in the shade — and at five o'clock we return to cantonment, absolutely grilled, hanging our tongues a little, nothing in the belly. The next day at sick parade, no sick men. It is true that each man had absorbed fifty centigrams of quinine before departure.

"There are days that count, and men to whom you will not deny a certain value. And we had not even taken part in the combat; the company that marched that day was much closer than we were.

"What you read in the France Militaire is, it seems, exact, and does not surprise me. I have not seen it myself. The story of the types hidden in the pools and breathing through bamboos was noted by Gallieni and Voyron when they operated against the Dé Tham some ten years ago.

"But I am not surprised by it, and I will give you the example of Bach-da where I was wounded.

"Picture a green island in the middle of the rice-field, surrounded by a bank two metres to two and a half high and crowned by a bamboo hedge that makes it impenetrable except for the gates, which are solidly barricaded. Behind, twenty to thirty metres back, a second similar hedge. Between the two hedges, pools, then an inextricable tangle of houses with mud walls, sometimes of stone covered with thatch, and everywhere, here and there, pools, walls without any order. One cannot see more than seven or eight metres ahead. Those are the positions that must be attacked.

"Well! That village of Bach-da was surrounded — a post of eight or ten men before each gate at seven or eight metres, no more. Those posts linked by support posts lying behind a rice-field bank. Men all around the village.

"Twice the pirates tried to scarper; each time they had to go back into the village carrying their dead. In the morning we entered Bach-da. Not a rifle-shot, nothing, not a soul. A whole company searched for two hours: everywhere, thrusting bamboos into doubtful spots, men stabbing their bayonets to right and left. Nothing, nothing, nothing. Had they saved themselves, or had they hidden? We stayed in the village from six in the morning until noon without finding anything. After that, the bamboo story does not seem to me improbable. Besides, these pirates are never very numerous, hence their ease in escaping. In general, twenty rifles for forty men; the others have cutlasses and hammocks to carry the wounded.

"It is in approaching such a wood-edge and seeking to make a breach that I received at twenty-five metres two shots from a popgun that passed through my thigh. I kept my head and, lying in the mud and water of the rice-field, I continued to command fire while a squad of riflemen cleared a gate obstructed by thorny bamboos. I had unforgettable sensations then. Each time I raised my head from behind the bank, a bullet whistled and lodged near me. It is true I was the only one with a helmet. Finally, after a good while spent in that mud and water, I was able to use the crawl and gain a few metres. Then comes the delicious moment when one says to oneself: 'Look out, I am going to stand up — the man or men twenty metres from there are going to shoot at me.'

"I have them lay down a covering fire ahead, I hop on one foot, dragging my leg. Ping! Pang! A few bullets whistle and miss me, and it's over. It's curious. I wanted to stay a while longer, hoping to manage to penetrate the village, but my leg gave way. A man had bandaged me with my individual first-aid packet — jolly useful it was — but the captain had me evacuated. It seems I was beginning to turn greenish.

"But after all, none of that is terrible. I had a jolly command — twenty marines, forty riflemen, about twenty linh-co guards of the mandarins drilled with the militia, and finally twenty or thirty partisans of that phenomenon Lé-Hoan of whom you must have heard in the newspapers. So, eighty serious rifles, the partisans not counting — that's a pretty command for a sub-lieutenant.

"I had a jolly European sergeant, Abgrall, who was killed a month later in an affair.

"This life is marvellous and there are some of those patrols of riflemen that are stunning. They are not afraid to do eight hundred to nine hundred metres of gymnastics on the rice-field banks. It's really jolly to launch a patrol when you expect to receive prunes. A more bizarre sensation is that of a man killed two metres from you, as happened to me running along a wood-edge, a partisan before me. One stops dead! It's rather bizarre — the poor devil had been cleanly done for, a simple groan, then nothing more. The philosophers may philosophise.

"P.S. — Re-reading your letter, I see 'six hundred men against twenty pirates.' It's true. One could, evidently, carry the position. But the losses would not be in proportion to the objective. And the watchword comes from Paris: 'Above all, no casualties; Tonkin is at peace.'"

At Thuong-Ven, on the sixteenth, we mark a point. Ba-Bieu is established there with his faithful. From dawn until two in the afternoon, the native guard, the partisans of the Kham-saï and the linh-co of the Quan-an of Bac-ninh invest the village, then dislodge the pirate from his first positions. Then Chofflet arrives with two companies. The fight lasts until night and the bandits slip away. They carry off eight wounded and abandon eight corpses, among which lies that of their chief. Tied to a tree on the Hanoi-Thaï-Nguyen grand road, the body of Ba-Bieu, seated legs crossed in the Buddha position, remains exposed for the greater edification of the people of Phuc-yen.

In that province, the villages tremble. The Kham-saï has a heavy hand. At the least suspicion of connivance with the bandits, he strikes the locality with an enormous fine and confiscates the property of the notables. Profit and security at once. He extends over the country the antennae of his yellow diplomacy, opens parleys with the Dé Tham's lieutenants, promises them the indulgence of the authorities, compromises them in the eyes of their chief, thus dividing the band to crumble it. Pirates submit. But Tham remains untouchable. Must it not be, say the ill-intentioned, that the Dé Tham live so that Lé-Hoan may continue to command?

Chofflet, for his part, acting by fire and sword, cannot remain long in accord with the Kham-saï, any more than with the resident of Phuc-yen. His position quickly becomes untenable. Recalled on the thirtieth of August, he is replaced by Chef de Bataillon Bonifacy, a markworthy Annamitiser, as smitten with Tonkin as with a second fatherland, and very well acquainted with the recesses of the native soul. He brings fresh troops, for it is high time to let the two companies of the 9th Colonial, which have held the bush through the furnace and under the storms for the whole atrocious summer, catch their breath.

The Kham-saï provides intelligence and invests. Bonifacy attacks. On the sixth of September comes the assault on the village of Yen-lo. The debris of the Phuc-yen pirate bands are entrenched there in a formidable lair. Through the inextricable defences, our lads charge with the bayonet. Four killed and six wounded, among them Captain Fontaine. The enemy takes flight leaving seven corpses.

At a stroke, the last ruffians of Phuc-yen submit en masse to the Kham-saï.

The Dé Tham is still in flight. Ca-Rinh, Caï-Son and the faithful and hateful Co-Ba are with him. He has left, it is said, forty armed men. In the mountainous maze of the Nui-lang, on the left bank of the Claire River, he has installed a fort furnished with all accessory defences, visible or hidden.

Bonifacy moves to the northern exits of the massif. The Kham-saï and his men hold the southern paths that lead to the Red River.

Combat on the fifth of October, from two o'clock to seven in the evening. Our soldiers crawl, cutlass in hand, through a dense tangle of shrubs and thorny lianas. From their trenches dug in the heart of the bush, the pirates fire and kill. But the well-directed fire of our cannon terrifies them and, more still, the extraordinary grit of our soldiers who carry, one by one, every position. By night, the fort of Nui-lang is in our hands, dearly bought by the death of seventeen combatants, among them seven Europeans. Lieutenant Gressin, twenty marines and fifteen riflemen are wounded.

The Dé Tham managed to flee, but he is discouraged. He believed himself inexpugnable in his Nui-lang lair, better fortified than all the pirate posts he has defended in his life, in the Yen-thé and elsewhere — and his lair is taken. Henceforth he will flee, without entrenching.

And then, every day is marked by defections of his companions. Wounded at Nui-lang, the famous Ca-Rinh surrenders on the twenty-fourth of October with eight bandits. Tham has taken refuge in the province of Thaï-Nguyen, where no village will receive him. Hunted, harried, having sometimes barely two hours' lead on the pack of militiamen, partisans and soldiers who pursue him, the old boar finally rebeds himself in the Yen-thé. On the twentieth of November, his lieutenant Caï-Son abandons him and surrenders with three men. Like Ca-Rinh, he obtains only his life. The Kham-saï leaves the submitters at liberty, in order to make them auxiliaries and spies. But, before them, the nha-qués take fright, and soon the prison of Hanoi shelters the former pirates, seventy-eight in all.

The Dé Tham has no longer with him but nine rifles and the irreducible Co-Ba. He holes up in the triangle Mo-trang, Cho-go, Dzinh-tep, in the inextricable forest. Our reconnaissances explore it bush by bush and capture one fine day, crouched in a thicket, Co-Ba — who was beautiful and remains enraged, but reduced to a rag of humanity by the eternal flight and privations. She is a precious lure to trap the Dé Tham.

Our men lie in ambush and here, in the night of the first to the second of December, comes the old chief seeking his third, his warrior wife. In the darkness, our fusillade kills a pirate. The others vanish. The Dé Tham, who was as if touching the fallen man, flees almost alone.

On the ninth of December 1909, the Bonifacy column is dissolved. Its chief remains in the Yen-thé, which has become an autonomous circle. On the twenty-eighth of February 1910, the military operations come to an end.

PART SIX
THE DEATH OF THE DÉ THAM

I — TREMORS AND PARLEYS

The Dé Tham, still alive, has vanished.

In reality, he no longer leaves his Yen-thé forest. The days and nights of this pirate of fifty-two years are the days and nights of a hunted beast. For the native guard watches, and Administrator Bouchet is the French delegate at Nha-nam.

Bouchet speaks and writes the Annamite language like a mandarin of Hué if need be, and, if need be, expresses himself like a nha-qué of the rice-field or the forest. Bouchet was detached to the staff of Colonel Bataille during the operations of 1909. He knows the Dé Tham. Better than the notables of the Yen-thé, he knows their administrés. And, in the forest, he finds his bearings as a pirate would. It is, in truth, Bouchet who should have written this book.

So the Dé Tham has vanished. Silence has fallen on his name. Natives claim that the fatigues and sufferings of the harsh 1909 campaign have killed him. Others say he committed suicide after the capture of his family and the disappearance of his faithful.

Nevertheless, in July 1911, the rumour runs that Tham has been sighted, roaming in the upper Yen-thé. On the twenty-first of November, he is reported at Yen-lé. The native guard hastens, surrounds him on a hill dressed with giant grasses and reeds. The old pirate's bullets kill five militiamen and wound seven. Then he vanishes.

He vanishes for four months. It is said that five men are with him: two Annamites, two Mán, and one Chinese. How does he live? Mystery. Bouchet watches every supply route. And now the peasants of the Yen-thé are with us.

On the twelfth of March 1912, a Chinese brings a letter to Nha-nam. The Dé Tham asks to submit. Bouchet acknowledges receipt, no more.

Ten days later, the village of Ngoc-cuc is attacked. A nha-qué killed, a house burned, two wealthy natives carried off. Five Chinese, it is said, did the deed. Was the Dé Tham with them? Perhaps.

The residents of Bac-giang, of Phuc-yen and of Thaï-Nguyen have patrols out on every road.

The Dé Tham seeks in vain to recruit partisans. The nha-qués of Bac-giang remain deaf to his calls. And the thieves escaped from the towns, the escapees from village prisons, the militiamen or riflemen deserters will no longer rally to his banner. They know it leads no longer to pillage and the good life of old, but to long nights of ambush in the evil forest, to furtive struggles, to perpetual flight, with fear in the belly and the belly empty.

At the end of June, the Dé Tham writes again. He would like to surrender. He will settle wherever they wish, to live there in peace.

Albert Sarraut, Governor General of Indochina since the fifteenth of July 1911, replies: "No."

It is a question of prestige, and Sarraut is not among those who allow French prestige to be eroded. And this great proconsul knows admirably how to profit from the lessons of the past. The Dé Tham, once submitted, would not fail, under cover of an apparent loyalism, to attract the malcontents and the debris of the old hordes. All would come to him. All would say: "Ong Tham the invulnerable is still all-powerful and invincible, since the French Government has treated with him."

During the negotiations, Bouchet has exactly located, on the map of the Yen-thé, the point where the pirate is lodged. Must they attack?

"No," Sarraut replies again. He refuses to send, into the inextricable bush, the native guard — which has no artillery — to get itself killed without result by half a dozen bandits installed in a lair that Bouchet himself declares imprenable. And the Governor General will not hear of a military expedition in the height of the hot season. Always the lessons of the past.

And then, like Gallieni before him, Albert Sarraut husbands the blood of our men, European or Annamite. "Let them continue to watch him closely," he says. "That suffices for the moment."

The surveillance shows that the Dé Tham is in relations with the bandits of Quang-si and especially with the Chinese pirate Vuong-Sam, who has recruited his band from among former revolutionaries of the Celestial Empire, expelled from their country, and coolies of the Ba-lao mine, and among the feudatories of the great submitter Luong-tam-Ky.

Decidedly, they must finish it. There are, for that, other means than violence.

II — AT THE HOUSE OF LUONG-TAM-KY

Ong-Luong, the former Taïping, the former pirate, still resides at Lyn-dam, near Cho-chu. A submitter since 1890, he has nonetheless held in his hands the threads of piracy in Tonkin and many times given refuge to the hunted bands. Then, with age — he is seventy-two in this year 1912 — he has calmed down. When troops of Chinese reformists, driven from their country, flooded back into Tonkin, Luong intervened to make them lay down their arms. His fief is calm, prosperous and well administered. His vassals fear him. He does not hesitate to eliminate those who act in complicity with pirates. During the 1909 campaign, not a man of the Dé Tham found asylum with him.

It is through his intermediation that Albert Sarraut, in full accord with Destenay, Resident Superior in Tonkin, and on the suggestions of Bosc, Director of Political Affairs of the General Government, intends to bring the Dé Tham to book.

One day in December 1912, Bosc, a shrewd man, a fine diplomat, more apt than anyone to engage in the most delicate parleys, finding himself on an excursion in the middle region, stops, as if by chance, at Lyn-dam, at the home of Luong-tam-Ky.

After having, according to the custom of the Far East, exchanged views on twenty subjects far removed from the purpose of the interview, the two men approach it slowly. They speak of the piracy that still rages in the Yen-thé.

"The neighbourhood of that territory is a constant source of trouble for you," says Bosc. "The bad subjects — there are them everywhere, alas — of your concession are tempted to join the Dé Tham. Happily, you stop them in time."

"I stop them when I can," replies the old Chinese modestly. "I am very severe for that sort of thing. I try to maintain calm on my soil."

"I know it. And the Governor General knows your loyalty and your virtues. Thanks to you, the pirate chief Vuong-Sam has just submitted to the resident of Thaï-Nguyen, with his men and his arms. Without your very wise influence, Vuong-Sam would have joined the Dé Tham and the region would still know the worst misfortunes. In truth, Ong Sarraut would be happy to seize the Dé Tham to re-establish everywhere the five felicities."

"The thing is difficult," objects Luong. "So many men have died trying."

"One must use ruse," says Bosc then. "He who could capture Tham would receive twenty-five thousand piastres."

"Who would be mad enough to draw misfortune onto his head by laying hands on the Dé Tham? In truth, the people of Annam feel a hundred thousand macaques in the belly at the mere thought of approaching him. No sum could decide them to face in combat the one they say is invulnerable. They are sure to be killed before they kill. Tham is suspicious to the limit of suspicion. He would strike first, and without pity."

"It is a question neither of striking nor of killing," replies Bosc. "Only of capturing the man. He is almost alone. Only two servants accompany him. It would suffice to separate them from him."

"I have understood very well," says Luong-tam-Ky without smiling.

"And then," continues Bosc, "Tham wishes to link up with reformists from your country. He would receive, I think, those who asked to see him."

"I have understood very well," repeats Luong. "But that would be bad work..."

The old Taïping is visibly tired. One must not insist today. Slowly, Bosc extends his hand toward his teacup. The old man imitates his gesture. Which signifies, according to Celestial etiquette, that the audience has lasted long enough. And, as the Frenchman politely sees the old man out, the latter murmurs:

"My son Luong-Van-Phuc will go very soon to Hanoi and will be happy to call on you."

Bosc, too, has understood very well. He will receive Luong-Van-Phuc, who is Tri-huyen of one of the districts embraced within his father's fief.

Phuc arrives a few days later. Long palavers with Bosc. The affair arranges itself. At the end of the conversation, the Director of Political Affairs declares further:

"The Governor General does not want the Dé Tham to be killed, but that he be arrested, simply, by surprise. He wants him taken alive and, alive, shown to the people of Tonkin who claim that he can be neither captured nor reduced."

"One does not surprise the Dé Tham," objects the Chinese. "He will try to strike, to kill. He is strong and agile as a tiger."

"Then," declares Bosc, "listen well, to repeat it to those who may profit from it. French law permits striking when one is in a case of legitimate defence. And you know as well as I that it is written in Annamite law: 'When the guilty are armed and resist those who pursue them, if those who pursue them kill them in fighting against them, they shall not be punished.'"

III — THREE CHINESE REFORMISTS

They are three former reformists, three Chinese from Quang-si. The oldest is Ky, fifty-one springs. The second is Chai, who counts thirty-seven years diversely filled. The third, Tsan, is only twenty-eight years old.

Three honest merchants: Ky and Tsan buy and sell at Cho-chu, Heaven knows what wares. Chai operates at Cho-moi.

Three well-armed merchants. Each his Lebel and his cartridge-belt. Ky adds a service revolver. Commerce is not safe in Tonkin...

Ky is all muscle and bone. Emaciated, tanned face, hollow cheeks, a glance like a knife-cut. A hare-lip exposes two yellowish incisors. He is, like his two comrades, dressed in European fashion, in worn, faded clothes. No linen. What for? On the head, a wide-brimmed black felt hat, the legacy of an ancestor to judge by its shape and colour.

Chai wears the flat Annamite turban, which masks a chimpanzee's facial angle. The over-prominent shelf of the brows does not manage to hide the furtive eyes, bloodshot, full of ferocious cunning.

Tsan sports a black felt hat over a regular face, almost pretty, the expression of which would inspire confidence, were it not for the fixed, hard gaze of the barely slanted eyes.

Three merchants on the run from the counter, for here they are, on the tenth of January 1913, promenading in the upper Yen-thé, through the sombre vegetation that the tender green of bamboo brakes tries in vain to enliven. They travel in the region of Cho-go, avoiding the roads. Visibly Ky, the hare-lip, a man of age and experience, knows the forest. He serves as guide to his companions. From time to time, he stops, and the croaking of the frog resounds. Ten times, twenty times. Suddenly, a similar croaking answers.

"It is time to hide our arms," announces Ky.

Then, alone, he advances through the copse. But a voice hails him:

"Halt, uncle Cac-tiou. And do not move. What seek you?"

"I seek Ong Tham and I have found him, for I recognise his voice. I salute you, O born before me. I am Tsan-Tac-Ky, the man with the split lip. You saw me at Phong-xuong four years ago. I was one of Xuan's faithful. I come from Quang-si with two friends, and I bring you the greeting of the great chief Lien who works beyond the frontier."

Silence. And suddenly from a thicket springs the Dé Tham, accompanied by two servants, his last two faithful. They are armed and surround the Chinese. Their approach was made without sound. Tham examines the stranger.

"I recognise you, uncle Cac-tiou. Tell me why Lien sends you to me."

"Lien says that with my two friends we can serve you greatly. In Quang-si, we three learned to make bombs that can be transported without danger and primed at a blow the moment one throws them. They would be, for you, precious weapons. Moreover, here is a letter from Lien."

The Dé Tham recognises the seal of the Celestial pirate. The letter was fabricated at Lyn-dam, at the home of Luong-tam-Ky, but the Chinese refrains from giving that detail.

"I shall have this missive read by my scholar," declares Tham, just as if he still had a secretary. "Where are your companions? Are they armed?"

"I shall lead you to them," replies the Chinese. "We each have a Lebel rifle and I possess a French revolver."

"Alone, I command here," declares the Dé Tham. "Let your friends present themselves, one by one and unarmed. My servants will then go to fetch your rifles. If you have spoken true, you may stay with me to make the bombs. I want a whole supply of them."

IV — THE DEATH

The days pass. Tham changes lair constantly. Sometimes it is a cave with two exits which brambles mask hermetically. Sometimes it is an excavation covered with a roof of planks upon which earth has been piled. In two days, the devouring bush invades this roof flush with the ground, and one may walk over the lair without suspecting its existence. Sometimes, but more rarely, it is some abandoned pagoda, three-quarters eaten by the forest.

Patiently, the Chinese await the moment when the servants will leave the Dé Tham alone. A minute would suffice to leap on the old pirate and pinion him. But Tham is never left alone. His two satellites watch over him night and day. And the days pass, and the nights.

Ky seems impatient to receive from Quang-si the bomb casings, the explosive and the fuses. Tham is impassive, but hardly takes his eyes off the three gaillards.

"O Ky," he says one day abruptly, "have you not lived in the province of Thaï-Nguyen, on the lands of Ong-Luong?"

"Yes," replies the hare-lip. "All three of us resided in the concession of the Lord Luong-tam-Ky. But his service is hard and we deserted to go to Quang-si to the chief Lien."

Suspicion! Suspicion! Three weeks pass. A native of the Yen-thé, always the same one, brings food regularly. One day, he speaks low to the Dé Tham. The three Chinese understand that he is talking about their presence, which the man finds strange. Has someone from Luong-tam-Ky's entourage spoken? Or someone from the Résidence Supérieure?

But no, the secret is total. Bouchet himself does not know that Ky, Chai and Tsan are in the Yen-thé.

All three begin to feel suspected.

February 1913. The old wolf of the Yen-thé has changed lair again. He is lodged in the heart of an inextricable thicket, quite near Dzinh-tep, that village where, in 1888, the thousand pirates gathered for the great congress.

On the night when he marched, stopping suddenly on the path that leads from Cho-go to Dzinh-tep, the Dé Tham declared to the Chinese:

"Here died, three months ago, the Pho-Doï who wanted to lay an ambush for me. I killed that dog with a bullet in the back... Forty days later at Luc-gioi, quite near here, I executed a notable. That one tried to have me taken three years ago. I killed him at night, in his house. He who wishes me ill does not leave my forest alive."

The unease of the three Chinese is close to terror. They live in a crude thatch hut and never sleep all at the same time. The hunters feel themselves become the hunted. Tham rests in a similar hut, on a camp bed of juxtaposed bamboos. Within reach of his hand, three rifles and two Annamite picks — those picks with which one quickly digs a marksman's shelter in the forest humus. The old pirate's two servants spend the night before the entrance of the hut, loaded rifles in hand.

Alarm on the ninth of February. That day, Ky hears the Dé Tham say to his two faithful:

"In this place, three trees bother me. Prepare to cut them down. The biggest first. Thus my view will be cleared and we shall be more at ease."

Three trees... The Chinese are three. Ky has understood. He alerts his companions. It must be now.

Night falls. The Dé Tham's two servants watch at the entrance of the chief's hut. Crouched in their own hut, without stirring, the Chinese spy on them.

A clear, dry and cool night, a night of the fine Tonkinese period, the season the Annamites call the beginning of spring.

The last night of the Dé Tham.

Five o'clock in the morning. The two servants have fallen asleep. With a gesture, without a word, Ky gives the signal. The three Chinese go out. Their steps are muffled. Three tiger-cats. Ky, the hare-lipped man, enters the pirate's hut. Tsan and Chai follow him. All three are unarmed.

This night, Tham has smoked long. The little opium lamp vaguely lights the shaven face, the athletic body hardened by life in the deep forest — the body of steel. It also lights three rifles and a revolver, set near the tray.

Tham sleeps. Does he still possess the jade stone that renders invulnerable? And is the protection of the forest genies still upon him?

He has, in any case, kept intact his instinct of the great beast, to whom the lightest brush gives the alarm.

Did he sense or hear the approach of the Chinese? At the instant the hare-lipped man advances toward the camp bed, the pirate opens his eyes and, in the same instant, Ky absorbs a formidable blow of the fist and the Dé Tham seizes one of the rifles.

But the Chinese strikes back with the fist too, with all his force, at the right flank, then at the left flank of the bandit who, breath cut short, hesitates a second to get to his feet. One second suffices the hare-lip to seize one of the Annamite picks.

Han! Right in the ribs, on the left, near the heart.

Han! Full in the face, below the left eye.

The Dé Tham is dead.

And his two servants are dead. Having run up, rifle at the ready, to aid their master, they fell at once. With the revolver from the camp bed. Tsan or Chai aimed well.

"We must carry the corpse at once to Nha-nam, to collect the bounty," declares Tsan then.

"No," replies the hare-lipped man. "The body is too heavy..."

V — THE HEAD AND THE BODY

That morning, the tenth of February 1913, Bouchet, the French delegate at Nha-nam, studies, as every day, the reports of the post chiefs of the delegation. He interrogates the partisans who watch the Yen-thé.

He listens to the grievances of some nha-qués.

It is the usual routine, the work that has lasted for him four years. Four years of hard labour, during which it has constantly been a matter of battles, of pillagings, of cut-off heads, of ambushes. Four years that have tired his body, yellowed his complexion, undermined his liver.

Nothing new this morning. Information, carefully cross-checked, proves that the provisioning of the Dé Tham — where can he be at this minute? — comes from the village of Thuy. Bouchet will organise a close watch on that side.

But someone knocks at the office door. The militiaman on duty enters.

"Bam quan lon, three Chinese are there, three armed Chinese; they ask to speak to the delegate alone."

"Disarm them and let them in."

Enter Ky, Chai and Tsan. On a chair, the hare-lipped man, calmly, sets down a bundle. A ball wrapped in a cloth that was once khaki. He undoes the wrapping, then, still calm:

"Bam quan lon, it is the head of the Dé Tham."

Bouchet has recognised it at once. He rises, staggering, as if hallucinated. The head is there, bloodless. The drama that lasted twenty years is finished.

"Tell me everything," says Bouchet to the Chinese.

When the man has finished his story, Bouchet resumes:

"Where are the other two?"

"Bam quan lon, they remained on the spot."

"It is well. Do not leave the delegation without my order. This afternoon you will lead me to the bodies."

Bouchet then ciphers telegrams for the Resident of France at Bac-giang and for the Résidence Supérieure. Then he summons Principal Guard Richy, chief of the militia post at Nha-nam.

"Here is the head of the 'old one.' Let your men ensure its guard. If it were to disappear, the Annamites would never believe he is dead."

Richy, stupefied, asks for details, but Bouchet is already gone.

He is at the cemetery of Nha-nam. Collected, he files past the tombs of the officers, the soldiers, the militiamen who died on the field of honour in the course of twenty years of struggle.

Three hours later, Bouchet has reached the Dé Tham's last lair. But someone has preceded him. The headless corpse is open from the nape to the small of the back. They have removed the liver — the liver that will give to whoever eats it all the bravery of the old pirate. The gall too has disappeared.

"The heads," orders Bouchet, designating the corpses of the two servants.

Flanking that of the Dé Tham, these heads will be, for three days, exposed at Nha-nam. Before them, all the Yen-thé will file past — the Yen-thé which, at last, breathes. And all Tonkin will know that Hoang-Tham, pirate, is dead.

"A pyre," says the French delegate then. "And let the bodies be burned."

A Thô partisan, furious, seizes a sharpened bamboo and plunges it into the belly of the Dé Tham, belching a blasphemy. An old notable of the Yen-thé conscientiously brings wood to the pyre, murmuring: "Chet zoï... Chet zoï." Is it joy, is it sadness? Who could know?

Three days later, an old nha-qué among nha-qués presents himself at the delegation for some grievance or other. And, as Bouchet speaks to him of the dismemberment of the Dé Tham's body, the old man draws from his pocket a notebook bearing the name of the Samaritaine department store, opens it, extracts a little paper that contains, dry and shrivelled, the gall of him who was the king of the Yen-thé:

"Bam quan lon," he says, "take this gall. It is a sovereign remedy against asthma. Steep it in a cup of hot water, breathe deeply, and you are cured."

The next day, a very aged ba-gia, in white mourning clothes, comes to see Bouchet. It is the widow of the "old one," the former "first wife" of the Dé Tham.

"Ah!" she says. "My husband was not the most guilty. If he had not had Co-Ba, that third woman eaten by ambition, he would still be alive, my son Ca-Trong too, and we would be happy."

"He would still be alive," thinks Bouchet. "Maybe. It is better that he is dead. Tonkinese piracy died with him."

Hanoi, 1909–1910
Paris, September 1933

THE END

TABLE OF CONTENTS

PART ONE
BA-PHUC, OR THE ADOPTIVE FATHER
I — The Yen-thé ......................................... 3
II — Joint-stock Piracy ................................. 6
III — The Dé-Doc Tham and some others ................ 45
IV — A colonist... escroc .............................. 19
V — A propos of a medal .............................. 20
VI — The band ......................................... 22
VII — A Chinese ........................................ 27
VIII — Exactions ....................................... 34
IX — On the bench of gou wood... and beneath......... 59
X — The band ........................................... 68
XI — The attack on the fort of Huu-thué .............. 70

PART TWO
RAPE AND SUBMISSION
I — Tham is alive ..................................... 75
II — The railway in 1894 .............................. 79
III — Two Frenchmen captured .......................... 83
IV — The attack on the Phu-dan ....................... 88
V — At Lang-thuong .................................... 93
VI — Negotiations ..................................... 98

PART THREE
AND NOTHING HAS CHANGED
I — The Dé Tham submits ............................... 109
II — The pact ......................................... 117
III — The outrages .................................... 122
IV — The miracle child ............................... 125
V — Submission... again .............................. 128
VI — The great days ................................... 130
VII — In the pacified Yen-thé ........................ 138
VIII — At Phong-xuong ................................. 142

PART FOUR
BY FIRE AND BY POISON
I — The bad grain germinates .......................... 149
II — Audiences ........................................ 154
III — The orders ...................................... 160
IV — The sorcerer of the Rue des Voiles .............. 168
V — The death of the Thong-thuong .................... 168
VI — Division of labour ............................... 178
VII — Hanoi, 27 June 1908 .............................. 181
VIII — French justice ................................ 188

PART FIVE
THE HUNTED DÉ THAM, 1909–1910
I — Disquiet .......................................... 191
II — Face lost and regained ........................... 198
III — With the pirate band ............................ 208
IV — The hunt resumes ................................ 219
V — The boar in flight ................................ 222
VI — At Xuan-laï ...................................... 226
VII — Last combats .................................... 236

PART SIX
THE DEATH OF THE DÉ THAM
I — Tremors and parleys ............................... 249
II — At the house of Luong-tam-Ky .................... 252
III — Three Chinese reformists ........................ 256
IV — The death ........................................ 259
V — The head and the body ............................ 263
