HOANG-THAM, PIRATE

PART FOUR

BY THE SWORD AND BY POISON

I — THE BAD SEED GERMINATES

September 1905. The treaty of peace has consecrated the victory of the Japanese. A yellow people has triumphed over the army of the white Tsar, the army that men believed invincible. The Far East stirs. In Tokyo, in Yokohama, they are organising the insurrection that will drive the French out of Indochina. Those who prepare the revolt are not Japanese. The Mikado's Government is correct.

But in Japan lives Prince Cuong-Dé, who wishes to overthrow the Emperor of Annam and take his place. Beside him works the agitator Phan-Boi-Chau. Around them gravitate hundreds of Annamites: lettered men and sons of mandarins. Their stay in Japan and their study expenses are paid by associations in Annam and Tonkin which call themselves Societies for Commercial and Historical Instruction but are in reality secret revolutionary hearths. They gather native auxiliaries, Annamite soldiers, interpreters, and above all lettered men who proclaim their hatred of France.

Everywhere seditious pamphlets spread. Tonkin is flooded with them. What do they say?

"An understanding with Japan, Siam, Yunnan and Quang-Tung will allow us to fight the French dogs. In the interior of the country, we must seek the means to combat to the uttermost. He who wishes to go abroad to study must be encouraged. He who can serve us by his fortune must be sounded out.… You, interpreters and lettered men, to aid us, secretly observe the situation and intentions of the French Government. You, cantonal and communal authorities, seek the means to deceive your chiefs and turn against them. You, servants, seek the means to assassinate your masters. You, women who live with Frenchmen, poison them…"

Brochures more venomous still circulate. They are, like the tracts, carefully sent to mandarins in office.

Thus two parties form in Tonkin.

Against us are united all those to whom a political crisis would permit the glutting of their rancours and their appetites. Among them are some members of the reigning family, mandarins and lettered men without employment, malcontents and intriguers of every class, and many employees of the administration and of commerce. These last speak French and, at a stroke, believe themselves saturated with all the science of the West and capable of taking our place everywhere and of overthrowing the old mandarin organisation, battered, without strength and without respect.

Opposed to our enemies stands the healthy element. The mandarin in office cannot separate from us; he supports us because we support him. The merchant is also of our side. He owes his wealth to French order. Finally, the nha-qué, the man of the rice-field, more than all others, dreads upheavals. He has no ideal other than his land, his wife, his children, his daily pittance and his tranquillity. As long as calm reigns, he eats, and when he has eaten, he is happy. Only the seasons regulate his hard labour. They bring also the ceremonies which, in the poorest village, celebrate the smallest circumstances of time and life: feasts of the new year, rejoicings that mark the beginning of each season and the middle of autumn, the anniversary of the birth and death of the tutelary genius of the commune, feasts given in honour of that genius every time the moon is full or new. On those days the poor mud-backed one dons his ceremonial clothes whose vivid colours somehow never manage to be gay. He assists, without understanding a thing, at the ritual ceremonies, he joins the processions. And, felicity without alloy, the day ends with the absorption — chopsticks wielded at top speed — of all the foods brought in offering to the pagoda. The nha-qué stuffs himself to the limit of fullness. Supreme delights. Joys that peace assures and that cease when comes the famine which war, revolt and political crises engender. In truth, every change brings blood and ruin. And the poor, gentle nha-qué is the first struck.

The apostolate of the rebels has no effect in the countryside. It succeeds better in the towns where, far too often, the local French newspapers attack the administration for the most insignificant motives. Certain sheets declare our functionaries lazy and incapable. They pity the poor Annamites crushed by taxes! and, the same day, treat them as monkeys, thieves, schemers and lousy wretches… And the Annamite, always ready to lend credence to what is written, feels rising in him contempt for our authority and hatred for our race.

Worse still, no one feels protected any longer against criminals. Inexpiable folly: it is the French code that is applied to the Annamites of Hanoi and Haiphong, which is to say that repression is null. The culprit scoffs at the fine he is always incapable of paying. Prison delights him: well-fed and well-treated, he rests there. Only decapitation is, for the Annamite, an infamous punishment. But they never decapitate.

Yet, in the provinces, it is the mandarins who judge harshly, without pity. But the Fourth Chamber of the Court of Appeal of Hanoi hastens to soften the sentences… From then on, all respect is abolished towards the mandarins, henceforth without force. Everywhere the number of crimes increases.

The ground is, in truth, ready to receive the bad seed.

In the towns the insurrection organises. Outside the towns, the nha-qué remains inert, but the hope of the leaders is based on the support of the pirate bands. There exists one man who ceaselessly corresponds with the malefactors of every Tonkinese region and would know, when need arises, how to unleash them at the chosen moment.

That man is the Dé Tham — the Dé Tham, always submissive and ceaselessly protesting his fidelity towards us.

II — AUDIENCES

The year 1907 opens upon evil omens. Sorcerers and bonzes predict calamities: misfortune is to fall upon the land the whites dominate. Among the lettered, a password circulates: "Unite to fight them."

The Yen-Thé is peopling. I say "the Yen-Thé", but from now on and throughout all that follows, this word will designate only that part of the arrondissement granted to the Dé Tham. At Phong-Xuong where he lives, at Cho-Go where dwells the beautiful Co-Ba, at Lang-Nua where once stood the fort of Huu-Thué, in the fortified traï villages where live the Dé Tham's two other women, in the traï where his adopted sons are lodged, one meets strange figures. These are neither nha-qués nor subdued pirates. And truly the Yen-Thé rarely sees such guests. The dead-leaf face of the forest lads contrasts with the waxen complexion of the newcomers. These are lettered men, come in number from the provinces of Annam and Tonkin, all without employment, all proud of a knowledge that will lift them to the foremost posts of the empire, when the emperor shall be called Cuong-Dé… These lettered men have all the confidence of Tham the illiterate, who lodges them at Phong-Xuong.

In the traï that Ca-Rinh occupies with Ca-Huynh and old Ly-Thu are housed forty Chinese come from the Two Quangs — Chinese luxuriously dressed and smiling ceaselessly with that yellow smile which lights no face, for the eyes remain searching, cold, cruel. All obey their compatriot Long-Tu-Xuan, a reformist chief, former lieutenant of Marshal Sou and a great friend of the Dé Tham. All these Chinese are armed, and truly this traï would be well defended against attack, for Ca-Rinh is at the head of twenty-five rifles, Ca-Huynh's troop numbers forty and Ly-Thu's fifteen.

At Lang-Thuong, the traï of the master's first wife, reside Thos come from the Black River and the province of Tuyen-Quang. These are tall and muscular fellows, with wide-open eyes, men of the bush who never part with their cutlasses in their wooden sheaths, rough souls, resigned, people whom the Annamite and the Chinese exploit without mercy, tireless marchers and porters — precious recruits for the hour when one will dig up the four hundred rifles hidden in the deep jungle two hours' march from Phong-Xuong, in the fortified hamlets.

But it is not yet a question of taking up arms. The fruit is not ripe. Yet soon, perhaps… We are now in the month of August 1907. It is the seventh month of the nineteenth year of Thanh-Thai, and the following month will see the dawn of the first year of the Emperor Duy-Tan. The fifth year of the proconsulate of Governor-General Beau draws to its close, for Beau succeeded Doumer on the 15th of October 1902.

This present day is the Dé Tham's audience day. Those who wish to see him are many, and the master has decided to receive them in the communal house, the dinh of Phong-Xuong.

It is a great square hall. Strong pillars of light-brown tan-mat wood support the tiled roof and mark out aisles. In the centre aisle rises the altar of the tutelary genius of the village. Four camp beds and benches furnish the hall.

Around the Dé Tham are his bodyguards, his secretaries and his sorcerer. Here and there, in groups, converse the chief's faithful and the notable guests of the Yen-Thé: lettered men of Annam, Chinese surrounding their chief Xuan — paunchy and of pacific aspect, clad in heliotrope silk, crowned with a false panama, shod in shoes of thick felt sole. Outside, about thirty visitors await the chief's pleasure, sheltered as best they can be from the heavy, incessant rain by the sort of veranda formed by the roof extended as an overhang.

Near the Dé Tham are seated two men whom it behoves us to examine closely. One of them has been, for some months, the confidant of the lord of the Yen-Thé. His name is Ly-Nho. This former ly-truong of a village of Ha-Dong, the suburban province of Hanoi, is in that province the agent charged with preparing the revolt against France. He has rather the appearance of a sickly nha-qué than that of an insurrection chief. The other is the Doi-Ho, an old habitué of Phong-Xuong, former sergeant of tirailleurs, former overseer of Dr. Gillard's concession, which lies in the Yen-Thé. He is a man of age and experience, intelligent and full of energy. He possesses all the confidence of the great chief.

The Dé Tham makes a sign and, under the furtive gaze of Ca-Trong, under the eyes of Ca-Rinh — ardent, wide-open and of a simian mobility — the visitors file before the master. All offer gifts and hear the same declaration:

"Prince Cuong-Dé is ready to come and reign over Annam. I count on you to march against the French. How many partisans can you recruit?"

When the man has answered, the Dé Tham adds:

"You must enrol yourself in the Ngia-Hing Society which I have founded to aid those of our people who are in Japan and are learning the science of beating the whites. Give fifty piastres to my treasurer and you shall be inscribed."

The tax is heavy. It is added to a number of piastres already extorted. For each visitor, excepting of course recognised and known friends, must, before gaining access to the Dé Tham, pass through the hands of the brother of the beautiful Co-Ba, whose name is Can and whose hands are expert at searching the newcomer and gently stripping him of every object worth pocketing. Then, if the man's face inspires confidence, he is led to the post of Ca-Trong for a more minute and even more costly examination. That done, the wretch is sent back with these words: "Good, you shall see Ong Tham, but first bring a suitable gift."

Who would dare complain? One speaks to the great chief only in the presence of his faithful, who miss not a word. One day, however, a notable emissary began to describe the introductory ceremonial, thinking perhaps that the chief was ignorant of its rites. Tham cut him short from the first words:

"Bah!" he said, "these are my faithful and brave children."

But here come two visitors of importance. Ly-Nho rushes forward and presents them himself to the Dé Tham.

"O great mandarin, here is Lang-Seo, the celebrated sorcerer of the Rue des Voiles, and here is his brother Lang-Lan the tailor. I have spoken to you already of these faithful ones. Lang-Seo is a man full of learning. In him all our partisans of Hanoi have entire confidence. I have brought him here so that he may hear your orders. He implores you to accept these two sentences which a very old and very learned professor of characters has written for you."

The sorcerer then unrolls two panels of very sumptuous red silk whereon the sentences are embroidered.

In the silence Ly-Nho chants:

"Protect the Northern coast, defend the Southern coast of Annam. The reputation of the Dé-Doc Tham spreads over ten thousand lands."

"Only the Dé Tham may be compared to the genii who exterminated the Nguyen dynasty and suppressed that of the An."

"I thank the diviner and his brother," replies the Dé Tham. "Let them stay near me today. I shall speak with them presently, at the pagoda."

Ly-Nho continues to present emissaries he has brought to Phong-Xuong. Here is the student Dau-Xu, who was received first at the examination of the province of Ha-Dong. Here is Do-Dam, a lettered man without employment, ready for any task. Here is Ong-Bay, a physician of the Rue des Changeurs in Hanoi. This one speaks low and brief: "O great man, thirty rifles and ten cases of cartridges will be carried to Cho-Go in two nights."

The audience is ended.

"Let us go to the pagoda," says the Dé Tham.

III — THE ORDERS

Passing between the stone horse and the stone elephant which serve the spirits for travelling between earth and heaven, only the familiars of the great chief and the partisans of note enter the pagoda of Phong-Xuong, freshly whitewashed, whose glazed tiles the rain washes and rewashes on the horned roof. In the interior shadow gleams the reflection of golds and lacquers, the shimmer of silk bands in vivid colours embroidered with sentences, flowers and symbolic animals. In incense-burners sticks of incense smoulder. On the altar of precious carved wood, around the tablet of Confucius, are deposited the votive objects suitably arranged and the offerings: alcohol, meat, betel, flowers and fruits.

The Dé Tham deposits them on the altar, then, having rinsed his mouth, he chants:

"Above, in the centre and below, all must be clear and pure. I am between heaven and earth like all animals, like all plants. The smoke of the incense rises into space and becomes pure air, then the subtle and powerful ether, essence of the Buddha, spirit of the Buddha; it will reach as far as the third planet. I invoke Ngoc-Hoang, the Jade Emperor, and I believe I see him appear before me. He will grant my prayer, he will have pity on me, for his heart is vast as heaven and earth and resplendent as the moon and the sun.

"And now listen well. All those whose hearts are rightly placed must execute my orders. These are the orders of Ky-Ngoai-Haoi, who will come from Japan and will reign over Annam when the French have been driven from the land. You must push to revolt the four classes of the people, the peasants of the four conditions, and all the soldiers of our race who serve under the French banner.

"You, Nguyen, who come from Thanh-Hoa, you shall speak to the Muongs of that province and to those of Hoa-Binh. You, Dau-Xu, and you, Quach-Hop, you shall enrol likewise the Muongs of the Black River and the Thos of Hung-Hoa.

"You, Ly-Nho, I name you general-in-chief. Here is your title of thong-thuong with the sabre and the seal. Here is a great cachet and a small cachet with which you and Do-Dam the lettered man shall seal military brevets for the most worthy.

"And here for my two troop commanders, Lang-Seo the sorcerer and his brother the tailor, are titles of tan-ly and tan-thung. Act, all of you, and I will aid you, and my faithful Doi-Ho will aid you."

All salute and withdraw. They are about to depart to execute their occult and evil work.

Mark them well. These people hate France and hate each other far more. Soon, after the failure of two criminal attempts, some will accuse others before French justice and heads will fall: the heads of Lang-Seo the sorcerer, of Do-Dam the lettered man, of Doi-Ho, and ten other heads, for the greatest good of the land of Indochina.

But, beforehand, Lang-Seo, the sorcerer of the Rue des Voiles, will have slain the general-in-chief Ly-Nho and the Muong chief Quach-Hop.

IV — THE SORCERER OF THE RUE DES VOILES

Lang-Seo dwells at Number 51 of the Rue des Voiles, which, over three hundred metres in length, runs from the Rue des Pavillons-Noirs to the Rue des Cantonais, in Hanoi.

Lang-Seo is famous throughout the whole city. He knows magic thoroughly — that supreme science which sums all sciences, science of happiness and misfortune, of death and of life. Like a rat three centuries old, Lang-Seo sees through walls. He enslaves spirits. Each night, during the third and fourth watches, he betakes himself to the cemetery, and the fireflies, which are wandering souls, hasten at his call to aid him in his magical operations. He knows the stars and the genii. He excels at expelling evil spirits from haunted houses, and his friends say he will know how to drive the detested whites from the land.

Lang-Seo sells very dear the knucklebones of the "noble master", of the "prince", of the "general" before whom all animals kneel, while the jungle, that his eyes illuminate, trembles beneath his roar as beneath the onslaught of the typhoon. But the Lord Tiger — may he forgive me for calling him by his vulgar name — prudently turns about before whoever carries a knucklebone. Lang-Seo sells very dear those thunder-stones which, as none ignores, spring from the soil a hundred days after the storm, at the exact spot where the lightning struck: most precious stones, for they preserve man from thunder and silk-worms from death.

Lang-Seo knows the incantations that heal and the rites of the death-spell that kills. The amulets he traffics in have sovereign power. He has not his equal for ridding people of their nightmares by means of the talisman of the White Serpent, whose image he traces himself on sacred paper, with vermilion mixed with the blood of a yellow eel.

In truth, Lang-Seo is a powerful and dreaded diviner.

Great is the number of Annamites of every class who frequent his house. Such an influx might awaken the suspicions of the Hanoi police. But the Rue des Voiles swarms with the native clientele that peoples, at every hour of the day, a score of Chinese eating-houses and restaurants. And the sorcerer's visitors are drowned in the crowd.

They enter on this evening in May and are straightway introduced into the chamber of incantations.

The room is red, the walls are red, the hangings are red, and red is the lacquer of the furniture. Red is the colour of fire, of the sun, of all forces that drive away phantoms and demons, beings of darkness. The chamber is cluttered with sorcery accessories: flags of the five elements, wooden swords, cudgels of every sort for thrashing incarnate demons, rattles and gongs whose noise frightens evil genii, amulets of every virtue. By the hundreds lie spell-statuettes, all decapitated. All represent Frenchmen. The light is veiled and discreet. The odour of incense-sticks catches at the throat.

Lang-Seo, after the necessary ablutions, gravely officiates. He first conjures the evil spirits with the torch of thirty-six bamboo slivers, whose fire disperses malevolent influences. Then, having pronounced the incantation which precedes every ceremony, he convokes the three patrons of sorcery and the five tigers that are at the orders of the diviners, and respectfully calls to his aid the immortal gods, the saints and the omnipotent genii whose statuettes the altar bears: Tich-Gia-Mau-Ni-Phat (Gakiamouni), Khong-Tu, preceptor of kings, Lao-Quan, great master of the doctrine of Tao, the genius of the kitchen, that of the soil, and the five genii of thunder. On a table lower than the altar he then places the offerings and lights a ritual lamp.

And all the assistants, one by one, solemnly, bind themselves to kill or drive out the French and to keep secret the decisions that are about to be taken.

"Before the lamp that shines I swear. If I fail in my oath, I shall die as it is extinguished."

Thus speak the general-in-chief, the lettered man, the Muong chief and, after them, many others: non-commissioned officers and native gunners of the 4th Artillery Regiment, Tonkinese tirailleurs, students, a merchant of greasy water and a timber merchant, lettered men come from Annam — all leaders of the revolt that must be unleashed at once.

Ly-Nho is about to speak — Ly-Nho, whom the Dé Tham has named general-in-chief, wherefore the sorcerer of the Rue des Voiles holds him in profound hatred. The said sorcerer is a master diplomat after the yellow manner. Hear him:

"O elder brother, before telling us your will, deign to hear the faithful Co-Tai. She has arrived from the Yen-Thé with a letter from the Dé-Doc Tham."

Here is Co-Tai, slender and lithe. Her face, of an almost European oval, is pitted with smallpox. She is elegant but wears no jewellery. Expert in the art of disguise, she assures liaison between the Dé Tham and the agitators of Hanoi. In the train of Phu-Lang-Thuong, what policeman would suspect this little nha-qué who, baskets in hand, goes from one market to another? And on the roads of the Yen-Thé, what militiaman would think of stopping this young woman who travels in a rice-field rickshaw with its hood a hundred times patched, its springs mended with string, its wheels squeaking, its seat spitting out horsehair — a vehicle pulled and pushed by two emaciated coolies who trot without tiring for hours and hours, two coolies who are two men of the Dé Tham, revolvers concealed, ready for anything.

Co-Tai speaks in a low voice. Only the sorcerer and the general can hear.

"O elder brother," she says to Ly-Nho, "the anger of the Lord Tham is not calmed. He will pardon you your failure of the tenth month if you repair it without delay."

"I must," replies the general-in-chief, "await a favourable day."

"O great mandarin," retorts the sorcerer, "that is my affair and, presently, I shall indicate to you the favourable date."

"I bring also an order," says Co-Tai.

Ly-Nho runs his eyes over it, then, aloud, so that none may be ignorant:

"Here is what the Dé-Doc Tham writes: 'The commander-in-chief of the troops of Tonkin says that His Majesty Cuong-Dé orders that the recovery of the country be carried out in the course of this year. The principal chiefs are invited to do what they judge useful to procure the money necessary for the expenses of the war.'"

A silence. Then the sorcerer Lang-Seo speaks:

"Concerning the money, all is simple. When our faithful shall have taken Hanoi, the bank and the treasury will be ours. Will the general-in-chief deign to tell us what he has decided?"

And, saying this, the diviner reckons that Ly-Nho will immediately lose face. But the latter replies:

"All is ready. In the province of Ha-Dong, which girds Hanoi, my partisans await only my signal. The other provinces are ready to rise, and the Dé-Doc Tham, I know, takes charge of taking Dap-Cau and the province of Bac-Giang. His lieutenants Ca and Thiet will come to Gia-Lam with their men. Our brothers of the artillery and the tirailleurs of Hanoi will come out of the citadel to clasp the hands of the assailants. I shall give the signal on the night of the 23rd, if the date is favourable."

"The genius of Bach-Ma will tell me," declares the sorcerer.

Bach-Ma, the White Horse, is the spirit who inspired the Chinese general Cao-Bien, who, as governor of Hanoi, made of it an immense city and girdled it, in 867, with marvellous entrenchments. The Chinese, like the Annamites, venerate the pagoda of Bach-Ma, dedicated to the genius of the city, who protects Hanoi and the kingdom.

Lang-Seo penetrates into the pagoda, deep to the far end, into the square chamber where sits the statue of the genius in perfumed carved wood surrounded by four other statues. The very old and respectable bonze of the pagoda soon remits to the sorcerer grimoires which the latter deciphers: the day Ly-Nho has chosen is a favourable day, and the projected operation will succeed.

V — THE DEATH OF THE THONG-THUONG

"Water that has no slope cannot flow; troops that are not well commanded cannot conquer; it is the general who decides all."

It is not enough to have been ly-truong of a village of Ha-Dong and to hate the French to possess the hundred thousand qualities demanded of a thong-thuong. In bombarding Ly-Nho general-in-chief, the Dé Tham chose badly.

Ly-Nho had sustained a first setback on the 17th of November 1907. On that day the native garrison of Hanoi was to revolt. Ly-Nho had organised the insurrection at meetings held in a cai-nha near the citadel. Fortunately, M. de Miribel, inspector of civil services, had the suspect house watched. Despite the inertia of the Parquet and the clumsiness of the police, Miribel did not hesitate to alert General Piel, superior commander of the troops of Indochina. All cartridges were removed from the native soldiers. The rebellion miscarried.

No matter. Ly-Nho then decided that it would erupt at the moment the tirailleurs went to the camp of Tong for the annual group firing exercises. General Piel, mistrustful, sent the regiments by small groups and cartridges were distributed only on the firing range. Second failure of Ly-Nho. In a fit of black rage, the sorcerer Lang-Seo demolished with kicks the altar of the genii in the chamber of incantations and hurled at Ly-Nho's face the varied and scatological insults of the Annamite repertory.

And now, despite the certainty acquired at the pagoda of Bach-Ma, the operation planned for the 22nd of May 1908 fails miserably. At nine o'clock in the evening, the non-commissioned officers and soldiers of the conspiracy are ready. Without insignia and without visible arms, they file out of the citadel to go to meet the rebels who are to come from Son-Tay and Gia-Lam. Already the artillery brigadier Cai-Nga — the executioner will sever his head on the 6th of August — has dismantled the breeches of the cannon. All is prepared. But, among the non-commissioned officers, disputes arise. Are the troops really certain? Are the civilian assailants numerous enough? The French soldiers will resist and their strength is terrible. A doï of tirailleurs refuses to march. The date is bad, he says, and they must wait for the fifth month to act. Incapable of imposing his will, the general-in-chief Ly-Nho renounces giving the signal… And, soon, on the road to Son-Tay, a glow of fire bursts forth. The hundred insurgents come from that province signal their retreat and their disappointment by burning a cai-nha.

This is too much! The sorcerer Lang-Seo prophesied success. They must, at any cost, succeed. And the diviner convokes the conspirators anew at his house in the Rue des Voiles.

That evening the assembly is complete. Doi-Ho has come from the Yen-Thé and, with him, Xuan, the Chinese chief.

Straightway Ly-Nho takes the offensive.

"O Lang-Seo, I had confidence in you. In the pagoda, you affirmed that the day fixed for the attack was favourable and that we must succeed. Your science, this time, betrayed you, and everything miscarried."

"O great general," replies the sorcerer ironically, "Kong-Fou-Tseu has said: 'There are plants that do not come to flower; there are also those which, having flowered, bear no grain.' Such are the plants that you sow. The great Dé-Doc Tham made you general-in-chief, he remitted to you the seal, the insignia and the sabre. He judged you capable of walking in the track of heroes. But, until this day, you have been but a man whose spleen is shrunken and who has not dared to go to the end of his designs. Today you dare accuse the spirit of the temple of Bach-Ma, who spoke through my voice. The Dé Tham will judge you, and, higher than him, Prince Cuong-Dé, who, despite your incapacity, will reign over Annam."

Then Do-Dam, professor of characters and licentiate, takes the word:

"The great and venerated Lien has written: 'To find excuses, one throws the fault upon the genii. To make the kingdom strong and resist the enemy, one thing is needed: wisdom.' We seek in vain your wisdom, O Ly-Nho. And to Xuan, who has warred under the banner of the powerful Marshal Sou, I ask if he would range his troops under your direction."

"Ou-Tsé answers for me," jibes Xuan. "'A warrior without any talent for his art is a dead man. A warrior without experience is a vanquished man.'"

"I command here by the will of the Dé Tham," says Ly-Nho then. "He alone can judge my acts. From tomorrow, I shall depart for my village and await his orders. As for you, Xuan, and for all, I add this: I was not vanquished and I am not dead."

"Not yet," murmurs the sorcerer of the Rue des Voiles, while Ly-Nho departs, escorted by his friend Quach-Hop, the Dé Tham's agent in Muong country.

And the diviner resumes:

"O elder brothers, Ly-Nho is decidedly incapable. He is unworthy of the Dé Tham's confidence. We have not the power to withdraw his title of general-in-chief. He must die. The genii of the temple of Bach-Ma will see to it that he disappears. I shall now betake myself to the pagoda to invoke them."

Having allowed the assistants time to return to their homes, the sorcerer, accompanied by the elegant Co-Tai, directs himself towards the pagoda. But truly, is it so necessary to adjure the spirit of Bach-Ma? The genius knows his duty and one risks mightily irritating him by giving counsel. The sorcerer reflects. Perhaps the Dé Tham will support Ly-Nho nonetheless, and it behoves one to assuage his resentment by a well-chosen gift. He is fond of fine pastries, and there happens to be, at Number 59 of the Rue des Voiles, the shop of the Chinese Siac, who has no equal for concocting the pâté of high savour that is called gio. Without doubt Ly-Nho will be sensible to the gift of such a dish.

Having therefore bought a gio whose aroma is fragrant, the sorcerer regains his dwelling, and, the next day, at the moment Ly-Nho sets out towards his village, Co-Tai accosts him.

"O great mandarin, Lang-Seo, being ill, begs excuse for not greeting you. He charged me to tell you that his words of yesterday were inspired by evil spirits which he has now driven out. He traced for you, this night, this amulet of ten thousand powers. You shall burn it and carry the ashes upon you, which will preserve you from all dangers. And, as a sign of friendship, he implores you to accept this gio. May you regale yourself greatly upon it."

"Younger sister," replies Ly-Nho, "I thank the powerful diviner. He has understood that nothing should separate those who pursue the same designs. I return, happy, to my native village, and there I shall work for our next combat."

And Ly-Nho makes his way towards Thach-Nam, which is in Ha-Dong. Quach-Hop accompanies him. On the road, the two travellers share fraternally the delicious gio.

And both die five or six days later.

Such is the influence of the genius of the pagoda of Bach-Ma… or of a poisoned pâté.

VI — DIVISION OF LABOUR

The sorcerer of the Rue des Voiles is jubilant. He is the thong-thuong Lang-Seo, the general-in-chief. The Dé Tham has named him to replace Ly-Nho, suppressed so discreetly.… Good work, all in all. Having, without further delay, retrieved from the dead man the letter of command and the written powers, the sorcerer can henceforth deliver brevets, or sell them at varying prices according to the man. To the poor, the late Ly-Nho asked only five piastres. That is little for a title bearing the great seals of the Dé-Doc Tham and Prince Cuong-Dé. In Lang-Seo's hands are also the marks of recognition, which are of violet cardboard for the chiefs and of yellow satin for the subordinates, and bear, in red, the square cachet of the Court prescribing fidelity and, in black, the characters Dich-Khai, which signify "Against the hostile kingdom", separated by the character meaning "Approved".

And now comes the month of June, the fifth month of the Annamite calendar, the month favourable above all, the month of the rice harvest, the month during which enterprises must succeed. They must hasten.

Incessant shuttling of conspirators between Hanoi and the Yen-Thé. The Dé Tham is in liaison with the pirate chiefs of the upper Tonkinese region, with the Muongs of the Black River, with the agitators of Annam. The name of this illiterate bandit, barely civilised, is for all a rallying sign. He distributes placards calling to revolt for the provinces of Ha-Dong, Ha-Nam and Thanh-Hoa. During a solemn session at the pagoda of Phong-Xuong, he hypnotises the guardian and asks him the date to choose for the great attack. The sleeping man dictates two verses:

The attack will succeed during the fifth month;
In the sixth month, the French will flee by the Eastern sea.

And the Dé Tham has two ceremonial sabres forged for those who will command the assault on the capital. He sends to Hanoi the red silk from which will be made the flags that will float over the captured citadel.

The hot season, the terrible Tonkinese summer, has begun. Each evening of June, around five o'clock, on the threshold of the upper Tonkinese region, the sky is streaked with bluish lightning which, leaping from the thick clouds, ceaselessly stab at Ba-Vi, the sacred three-peaked mountain whence the tigers and the genii descend upon Son-Tay and upon Hong-Hoa, and at the Tam-Dao, which seems a Fuji-Yama clad in green. Over Hanoi the heaviness increases. The thirsty city implores the wind, begs for rain. But the formidable summer downpours will not descend until July from upper Tonkin upon the delta. They will simply change the furnace into a steam-bath.

The heat is unbearable. Thirty degrees night and day, without an hour of respite. The electrical tension is at its maximum. The humidity of the air is such that sweat never dries on the body. It is the epoch of sleepless nights, of furunculosis, of lancing prickly heat, of dysenteries, of pernicious fevers — the epoch when mortality increases amongst Europeans as amongst the natives.

Like a whip-crack, night falls upon Hanoi, the night as stifling as the day. In the French houses, fans and punkahs churn warm air. On the quais of the Red River, rickshaws come and go. Their movement gives the occupants the illusion of a fan's draught. In the cafés of the Rue Paul-Bert and the Boulevard Henri-Rivière, iced drinks — whisky-sodas, Singapore lemonade — fill the immense colonial glasses on which humidity condenses as mist. One drinks, one drinks again; it is too hot to speak, too hot to risk a gesture, too hot to return home. The sky has cleared, the constellations glitter.

The coming of the four terrible months weighs upon everyone. And yet none knows the true menace that hovers.

Nevertheless the hour approaches. The sorcerer of the Rue des Voiles receives new adepts each night. Repeated incantations, the interpretation of magical sentences, and above all the twenty-times repeated examination of chicken feet have given assurance of complete success, provided the attack takes place on the twenty-ninth day of the fifth month.

It is Do-Dam the lettered man who will command it, and Doi-Ho seconds him. Such is the order of the Dé Tham. Do-Dam has gone to fetch, from the Yen-Thé, forty proclamations bearing the great seal. Then he has installed his headquarters in an inn of the Rue Neyret where, each evening, come ever more numerous the native non-commissioned officers and soldiers.

They have but a few steps to make, for the Rue Neyret is hard by the citadel where the troops of Hanoi are barracked — that citadel surrounded by a simple wall replacing the ramparts that French officers built in 1803 in the service of the Emperor Gia-Long, that citadel which Lieutenant de Vaisseau Francis Garnier took in 1873 and which Capitaine de Vaisseau Rivière reoccupied in 1882.

Five days before the date fixed for the attack, a solemn session takes place in the inn of the Rue Neyret. Do-Dam presides, assisted by Doi-Ho. About them are Tri-Binh and Duong-Bé, auxiliary maréchaux-des-logis, and Nhan, brigadier — all three of the sixth company of artillery workers: three heads that the executioner will sever seventeen days later. Here is the artillery brigadier Cai-Nga and the tirailleur Cai-Ton: those two will be executed in August. Finally here is Hien, the merchant of greasy water, chief of the secret syndicate of the citadel's boys, and here is the former ly-truong of a village of Bac-Ninh, named Chanh, who will be decapitated on the 6th of December at the same time as Do-Dam and Doi-Ho. Others are there too: some fifteen in all. All have taken the great oath of the blood by drinking a glass of rice alcohol mixed with chicken blood.

And to each is assigned his task.

At nine o'clock in the evening, on the 27th of June, Cai-Nga will fire three cannon shots to launch the attack. At that signal, the same Cai-Nga, doubled by Hien the merchant of greasy water, will assault the citadel towards the northern blockhouse. From the Pont de Papier, where Commandant Rivière perished at the head of his men, will then come those of Son-Tay with Phokhet. They will rush into the military buildings, seize arms and munitions and, aided by the native troops under the orders of Do-Dam the lettered man and Doi-Ho, will massacre the European soldiers, harness the artillery mules to the cannon and transport them to the Doumer Bridge and the Pont de Papier, so as to stop the loyal troops that might come from Son-Tay, Bac-Ninh or Haiphong.

At the same time, two hundred men with the student Dau-Xu, lying in ambush on a sandbank of the Red River facing the Concession, will pillage it from top to bottom, while Ca and Hoa — lieutenants of the Dé Tham — will sack Gia-Lam, destroy the railway station and the track, and cut the telegraph wires.

Massacre the European soldiers? Indeed. The operation seems difficult.

Pardon. The sorcerer of the Rue des Voiles, Hien the chief of the citadel boys' syndicate, Cai-Nga the artillery brigadier, the rickshaw-maker Cai-Xé, and Vinh the timber merchant will have them poisoned.

Thus is logically applied the principle of the division of labour.

At the sorcerer's house, at Hien's and at Nga's, they occupy themselves with pounding in mortars and reducing to very fine grey powder the dry seeds of datura. Then the cooks and scullions of the troops are convoked by the chief of the boys. But his house is too small. So, on the 24th of June, the rickshaw-maker receives them for the oath of secrecy and obedience. All the chiefs of the plot are there.

"Tomorrow," declares Brigadier Nga, "the poison will be ready. Meet all of you at the Botanical Garden, where we shall try it. And in three days we shall see if it kills the French."

Each evening, between five and seven o'clock, the carriages and automobiles of the Hanoians, betaking themselves to the traditional promenade of the Digue Parreau, traverse the delightful Botanical Garden. Its twenty-five hectares surround the Old Hill, which bears on its eastern flank the royal pagoda and from which one commands, on one side, the Great Lake and, on the other, the citadel. The Allée des Manguiers leads to the Hill, at whose foot there once stretched a brickworks that has been made into a charming little lake. Other harmoniously laid-out avenues run in the shade of the finest trees of Tonkin and among the lacework of bamboos and tree-ferns, and pass the aviaries, the cages of the tigers and those of the serpents, the bears' pit, the monkeys' house, the elephant's kraal and the deer park.

Hard by the deer shelter is the cai-nha of Den, the head-lamplighter of the garden.

Den is absent, but his friend Pho, a coolie gardener of the Gouvernement Général, does the honours of the lodging on the 25th of June. The visitors are many. To each, Brigadier Nga offers tea. He presents the last three cups to the gardener and to two children — fourteen and sixteen years old — helpers of the lamplighter.

"Tell me, Pho, do you not find this tea has a bizarre taste?" asks the artillery brigadier.

"It is tea from Son-Tay," replies Pho. "It is the tea my friend the lamplighter always offers me."

"It is tea that puts to sleep," says Nga then. "Look at the two children."

These already stagger, eyelids heavy, gestures limp. After a quarter of an hour they slump, legs suddenly cut from under them, flattened by a leaden sleep.

Pho, for his part, is a colossus. It would take many cups of this soporific tea to put him to sleep. But, after a moment, he turns green, seized by uncontrollable nausea. The malaise lasts about two hours, then ceases.

"That is sufficient," says then the sorcerer of the Rue des Voiles. "Give the children an infusion of banana root, and they will be cured."

Then, coldly, he orders:

"For the French soldiers, we shall put a triple dose, and from their sleep they will wake no more."

"Well enough," says the student Dau-Xu then, "but the brass-bound doctors will know, as well as you yourself, how to cure them."

"The doctors will be poisoned like the soldiers," replies the sorcerer.

Then, addressing himself to Doi-Ho, he adds:

"You may now regain the Yen-Thé and say to the Dé Tham that all is prepared. We shall act in three days. We count on him to attack the provinces of Bac-Ninh and Bac-Giang. And bear him our most humble salutation."

VII — HANOI, 27 JULY 1908

In Tonkin, minds are oppressed as bodies are oppressed when the storm threatens. The torrid summer sharpens the edginess of all. The smallest incidents seem catastrophes. The demonstration of a handful of malcontents from the Annamite provinces is baptised a rebellion. Each time in Tonkin — and it is not rare — that a few pirates steal buffaloes or pillage a market, a certain press affirms the impotence of the Protectorate, and the Annamites delight in such affirmation. Read a few local newspapers. They have poisoned the reservoirs of Saigon, they say. Haiphong has escaped by a hair's breadth from a general massacre darkly prepared. The convicts of Poulo-Condore are in full revolt. Eighty thousand Chinese, massed in Quang-Si, are about to pour down upon Tonkin. This flight of ducks keeps the dull uneasiness alive. In Hanoi, grave events are feared. But few people know the true danger that threatens the city.

By good fortune, the superior authority has information. Hanoi is surrounded by the province of Ha-Dong, a lettered province above all, the cradle of many native functionaries, of university graduates, of mandarins with or without employment. Ha-Dong is a nursery of malcontents. Now the Resident of France at Ha-Dong, Duvillier, is one of those who know to the depths the native soul and politics. Watching very closely the movements of some of his administrés, he knows that at Hanoi their pole of attraction is a house in the Rue Neyret, where the revolt is being prepared. He knows that Do-Dam, the professor of characters, presides at the meetings. He has been able to learn the names of the principal leaders. At his insistence, a search is made. In vain. Nothing can be done without proofs. Yet Duvillier's emissaries affirm that the rebellion will erupt in the last days of June. The military authority has the arms and munitions depots watched.

An anonymous letter has revealed to General Piel, commander-in-chief of the troops of Indochina — a sad, energetic, bearded man — the names of the three non-commissioned officers of the sixth company of artillery workers: Duong-Bé, Nhan and Binh, who are to place themselves at the head of the revolted soldiers.

On the 26th, at midnight, in the kitchen of the artillery workers, these three men assemble about fifteen comrades for the oath of blood. They swear to march against the French, with the rebels who will invade the citadel. Then they return to the bunkroom, and Duong-Bé speaks to the soldiers:

"The attack is for tomorrow evening. Those on leave will be free to go out into the town. The others must hold themselves ready to obey me and to receive the rebels. Red leggings will be the rallying sign. Those who refuse will be killed during the combat or after."

Then, taking aside the four gunners employed at the mess of the French non-commissioned officers:

"Here is poison. You will mix it tomorrow evening with the food you serve."

And, as none of the men will take charge of the packet of toxic powder:

"Very well," says Duong-Bé, "you are cowards, and your heads will be the first to fall."

And we come now to Saturday, 27 June.

At half past nine in the morning, Lieutenant Delmont-Bebet, commanding the sixth company of artillery workers, receives in his office the master-workman Truong, who is capable of expressing himself in French intelligibly.

"Mon lieutenant," says the man, "this evening the pirates will attack the citadel. They will enter by the non-commissioned officers' garden. Almost all the Annamite gunners of the company will aid them, for they are terrified by the maréchaux-des-logis and the brigadiers who threaten to kill those who will not march. They are to seize arms and massacre the Europeans."

"How did you learn all that?" asks the officer.

Truong then recounts the nocturnal session in the bunkroom. He denounces the three non-commissioned officers, chiefs of the movement, and gives the names of seven gunners, including a deserter.

"But," says the lieutenant, "do you not fear being killed if your comrades learn that you have revealed the plot to me?"

"I am a Catholic, mon lieutenant, and I have been told that revolts have always been accompanied by massacres of Christians. So I thought I would risk less by telling you the truth. I have three friends, Catholics like myself, who are ready to testify. Besides, if you wish, I shall run no danger. You have only to have me put in prison by inventing a fault."

"Invent one yourself," replies Delmont-Bebet.

"Well then!" says Truong. "I accuse Brigadier Nhan of having struck me brutally at the morning roll-call."

"Is that the same Nhan whose name you gave me just now, who is one of the chiefs of the plot?"

"Yes, mon lieutenant."

Having then had the brigadier brought before him, the officer summons the gunner Truong to prove his accusation and, faced with the latter's embarrassment, has him locked up on the spot pending an enquiry.

The result being that Truong's three friends, seeing him led to the prison, lose all desire to testify. But, still fearing for their heads, they run to the curé of the Annamite parish of Hanoi and reveal the whole affair to him. Of the poisoning there is no mention. These men know nothing of the project.

While the curé goes to find the commandant of arms of Hanoi, Lieutenant Delmont-Bebet warns his superiors through the chain of command.

Thus General Piel learns, from two different sources, of the imminence of the attack and finds, among the names of suspects, those of the three non-commissioned officers indicated in the anonymous letter received some days before. He orders them arrested at the first abnormal movement.

Let us now rejoin the rebels.

In the morning Doi-Ho has returned from the Yen-Thé. He brings red pennants which are to be hoisted at the four corners of the citadel. For the rebels, here are brevets and laissez-passers. The whole lot, wrapped in a mat, is deposited at the lamplighter's house in the Botanical Garden.

Noon. The man named Ngoc, in charge of the gunners' kitchen and nicknamed Ao-Giay — the long robe — obeying Hien the syndicate chief, goes to Brigadier Nga's to fetch the bottles and packets of poison and distributes them towards four o'clock among the various cooks, scullions and plate-boys of the citadel. In two of the kitchens, he mixes the datura powder into the food himself.

Six o'clock in the evening. Brigadier Nga designates the men who will saddle the mules and lead away the cannon. The French soldiers are at table.

Around Hanoi, the attack detachments are hidden in rice-fields, in sampans on the Red River, everywhere. The population of certain villages situated around the Great Lake is ready to pillage the town. Informed of this, the insurrection leaders have charged the thirty men under the command of Xa-Tuan, a noted bandit, to guard the Bank and the Treasury. Xa-Tuan obeys the sorceress Ba-Dong, an old friend of the Dé Tham, who has no desire at all to see the precious piastres slip into the pockets of nha-qués.

On the Digue Parreau, at the Botanical Garden, on the riverbank, the carriages and cars of the Europeans brush past, without suspecting it, the lurking bands.

Seven o'clock in the evening. Commandant Grimaud, major of the garrison, learns that more than two hundred French soldiers of the 4th Artillery and the 9th Colonial have been poisoned.

Thus the coup de force is for this night.

The three non-commissioned officers of the workers' company, denounced that morning, are arrested instantly. Detachments of colonial infantry occupy the electric plant and the principal points of the town. Patrols criss-cross the streets.

The news of the arrests spreads at once. The bands that were holding themselves ready to attack the town and the citadel melt away. Brigadier Nga slips off prudently. The guilty cooks and scullions have left the citadel as soon as the poison was mixed with the food. The chiefs of the plot have fled or are in hiding. Almost all will be found.

The insurrection miscarries. The affair has failed.

The military doctors, hastening to the quarters, find the men staggering, legs cut from under them, faces congested, hallucinating, half mad. Hot water and massive doses of ipecac attack the malady and conquer it in two hours. Some excitement persists, nonetheless. Men climb trees; one completely naked soldier will cycle all night long around Hanoi. On the morning of the 28th, all are cured. The Annamites, though thoroughly expert in matters of poisoning, have botched their job.

VIII — FRENCH JUSTICE

What a windfall for the newspapers! This time they have an exact piece of news. They need only amplify it; and certain gazettes of Hanoi and Haiphong do not fail to do so.

By good fortune, most of the French of Hanoi keep their cool.

But there are others: a minority weak in number but excessively clamorous. It is composed chiefly of a kind of European proletariat that has survived the execution of the great public works of the Doumer programme. Their completion has also struck certain contractors who imagined no doubt that the golden age of railway, bridge and engineering construction would never end. Those contractors readily make common cause with the aforesaid proletariat.

Governor-General Beau is absent. The interim is assured by Bonhoure, lieutenant-governor of Cochinchina, an administrator of the elite, a man with a cool and solid head and a great heart. On the 28th of June, the day after the attack, he reassures the Chambers of Commerce, the notabilities of Tonkin, and the press.

Labour lost. On the 30th, one of the contractors I have spoken of and a journalist of the eternal opposition organise a meeting to demand exceptional measures. The meeting is at half past six in the evening. A dentist, a municipal councillor, presides. Violent speeches. Then the assistants mass themselves to go to the Gouvernement Général. Two hundred and fifty persons, among them three women and five soldiers of the colonial infantry, scale the railings and penetrate the palace precincts. They stand before the perron. Bonhoure dominates the crowd with his tall stature and powerful build. "Give us arms!" "Let all suspects be executed immediately!" Such are the cries of the demonstrators.

But Bonhoure, very calm, raises his hand. Silence! They listen.

"From the very day after the attack," he says, "in agreement with the general-in-chief, the Résident Supérieur in Tonkin and the Procureur Général, I decided to divest the ordinary justice of the case and to remit the compromised natives to the Criminal Commission provided for by the decrees in force. The political nature of the offence is clear, and the repression will be prompt. The Criminal Commission began its labours yesterday. It will not yield to popular pressure. The law will not be violated, and the accused will have all legal guarantees."

And, as they murmur, Bonhoure adds, in a yet louder voice:

"Your dignity as Frenchmen demands that you remain calm; otherwise you lower yourselves in the eyes of the Annamites. Will you permit them to doubt our strength? In truth, the situation is serious, but it is not critical."

The crowd is calmed. After forty minutes everyone goes away. Some curious souls have entered the palace, which they visit without committing any damage. On the first floor, three demonstrators have entered the billiard room and, calmly, are playing a game.

On the way back, the crowd continues shouting "Arms!" The sentinels of the citadel hear "To arms!" The générale is sounded, the garrison is alerted. A frantic military telegrapher signals that a native regiment has just revolted. A false report, naturally. By eight in the evening calm has returned.

But the natives find us nervous…

From 29 June to 27 November 1908, the Criminal Commission works without let-up. Five months of investigation and patient instruction. Not all the suspects are known from the first day, and many people are in flight: the poisoner cooks and the civilian leaders of the plot. Time is needed to find them. But, from the 8th of July, the non-commissioned officers of the artillery workers' company — Binh, Duong-Bé and Nhan — are executed according to the Annamite rite, as will be decapitated on 3 August Hien the merchant of greasy water, the artillery brigadier Nga and the cook Xuan; on 29 August Lang-Seo the sorcerer of the Rue des Voiles, the rickshaw-maker Cai-Xé and the tirailleur Cai-Ton; finally, on 27 November, Do-Dam the lettered man, Vinh the timber merchant, Doi-Ho the right arm of the Dé Tham, and the professor Ong-Chanh.

Thirteen executions in all. Had Governor Bonhoure yielded to the frantic crowd, eighty-four heads would have rolled under the executioner's sabre.

But, judging without hatred and without fear, the Criminal Commission solidly underpinned its conviction. It surrounded itself with all guarantees to avoid errors. Justly hard towards the instigators of the attack, humane and indulgent towards the accessories, it applied a scale of penalties which proves that it weighed in all conscience every culpability.

It did the work of sound French justice and high equity.

The instruction, the debates, as well as the investigations and the luminous reports of the Resident of France Bosc — who replaced Duvillier, called to other functions, in the province of Ha-Dong in August — showed, clear as crystal, the role played by the Dé Tham in the whole affair.

Yet the Dé Tham is not disturbed… He keeps his prestige intact.

Provisionally.

PART FIVE

LE DÉ THAM TRAQUÉ (1909-1910)

I — UNEASE

The Lord of the Yen-Thé begins to tremble for his skin.

The miscarriage of the Hanoi plot first muted the audacity of his partisans. Then the executioner made thirteen heads fall, and seven belonged to emissaries or friends of the Dé Tham… Others, and not the least, are in the penal colony for twenty years or for ever.

In the villages of the Yen-Thé stupefaction reigns. France has just proved her serene strength. It is henceforth unhealthy to be an accomplice of the bandits. Villages that until then trembled at the mere name of Hoang-Tham range themselves openly on our side. The prestige of the submissionary chief crumbles.

And his fear grows. He dreads being assassinated. He never sleeps two nights running in the same place. His son Ca-Trong and the beautiful Co-Ba watch over his sleep in turn. At his door mount guard night and day his most faithful companions.

In all his letters to the Delegate of Nha-Nam, he protests his fidelity: "I am old," he writes. "They had the kindness to give me a concession. I ask only to live there in peace with the aid of the French administration."

Such are the words. And here are the deeds. The Dé Tham concentrates his men around him. He recalls his lieutenants who, with their bands, pillaged and ransomed in the province of Bac-Giang and the neighbouring regions. From Phuc-Yen hasten Ca and Hoa with their fifty rifles. The elegant Ba-Bieu rallies with his acolytes. Quan-My quits the neighbourhood of Sept-Pagodes, where he has just killed the inspector of the native guard, Dubarry. The Yen-Thé again becomes a stronghold of piracy. A stronghold of which the village of Cho-Go is the redoubt and whose defences are feverishly completed. Every road, every track that leads there is flanked by posts hidden by the thick jungle and around which, during the night, circulate packs of dogs. Their barking keeps the sentinels awake. Around the redoubt rises an earthwork forming a firing-step. "Why are you building this épaulement?" the Delegate of Nha-Nam asks the Dé Tham one day. "To make it pretty," the pirate answers coldly.

Beyond the earthwork stretches a cleared glacis surrounded by a very high and very thick pisé wall. Further yet runs a bamboo palisade over two metres high. Scaling is impossible.

And the Dé Tham guards against surprises. In each village, one of his men watches the movements of the native guard and the soldiers. Pirate patrols circulate on every road, sometimes descending as far as Nha-Nam itself.

The master of the Yen-Thé passes the summer of 1908 in terrors. In Hanoi heads fall on 8 July, on 6 August, on 29 August. At Phu-Lang-Thuong, Maire installs himself, succeeding Quennec as Resident of France at Bac-Giang. Maire is energetic, shrewd, intelligent. Tham fears him. Yet the days pass. Calm everywhere. Come, the faithful lieutenants can go into campaign again. Doing nothing they risk growing rusty, and their men have had enough of the meagre ball of rice the Dé Tham feeds them each day, believing that stuffed men make poor warriors. All thirst for pillage. The great chief then lets Ca and his band leave, duly provisioned. They steer towards the province of Vinh-Yen. The others continue to milk the Yen-Thé, which truly can bear it no more, delivered over to the terrible tyrant that is the Dé Tham, whose pillagings and cruelties we cover so long as he makes his lieutenants commit them without acting himself. And yet the French authority is ignorant of nothing. Lacombe, the Delegate of Nha-Nam — a function infinitely delicate — uses all his diplomacy to try to set the pirate chief back on the right path and to calm conflicts. Better supported, he would do fine work, for he is one of those who know the language of the lettered and that of the people. He is, like certain very old colonists of yonder, one of those whom the people recognise and love, for the Annamite, despite his atavistic duplicity, sometimes obscurely admires certain high consciences.

But where the Dé Tham is concerned, no one dares speak. One day, however, Lacombe receives the confidences of the quan-huyen of the Yen-Thé. This emaciated old man, with his long grey beard, suddenly emerges from his impassivity. Dismounting from his horse in the middle of the bush, he begins to roll on the slope weeping. This old man, sobbing like a very small child who is hurt, says more, and more largely, than all the written reports in the world. Through the spasms of his grief, he groans: "I can bear it no more. I prefer that they kill me or drive me away, that they send me to the delta or to the Quang-Si frontier, anywhere. Here I am nothing, I am less than a dog kicked out of the way… I, the chief of the notables, am more despised than the lowest coolie of Phong-Xuong. There is but one master here, and that is the Dé Tham. Every day he makes me lose face. He mocks me, he has killed those who would obey me. Why does he not cut off my head and be done with it once and for all? I do not want to continue this miserable life. I cannot go on. The rice we harvest, the fish we catch, the beef we kill are not ours…"

Since the energetic repression of the Hanoi plot, it sometimes happens that the nha-qués dare to warn us of the passage of pirates. At Vinh-Yen, on 8 September, a detachment of linhs commanded by Principal Guard Lagarde attacks Ca's band, which holds trenches dug in a field of sugar-cane. Dislodged, the pirates flee under cover of night. But Ca is mortally wounded.

Panic in the Yen-Thé. The old men, the women, the children quit the Dé Tham's concession and scatter through the complicit villages.

Now comes autumn. By order of the great chief, his lieutenants stay quiet. He keeps an eye on them and, while remaining in constant relations with the reformists and the Chinese smugglers of the Tam-Dao and the Dong-Trieu, he protests ever more loudly his fidelity towards France.

Meanwhile, Quan-My's band, operating in the very heart of Bac-Giang, is surrounded and destroyed on 17 November in the pagoda of Lieu-Dé by the marsouins of Lieutenant Moing and the linhs of Inspector Lafferrère. Thus is avenged the death of Inspector Dubarry, killed five months before by the same Quan-My, whom the Dé Tham hastens to disavow in clamorous fashion, without any risk since he is dead, he and all his men.

And now comes winter. All is calm. Come, come! The Yen-Thé is a good fief that will remain in the hands of the Dé Tham, submissive and loyal… And his great lieutenants Ca-Trong, Ca-Rinh, Ca-Huynh, Ba-Bieu and old Ly-Thu will no doubt transform themselves into as many model farmers.

II — THE FACE LOST… AND REGAINED

Governor-General Klobukowski has decided to finish with the Dé Tham.

In great secrecy, this time well-kept, the civil and military chiefs prepare the operation. It will last eleven months. And, when after three hundred and twenty-eight days of struggles and pursuits our soldiers regain their garrisons and the militiamen their provinces, the Dé Tham will still be alive, but hunted, powerless, miserable.

The attack takes place on 29 January 1909. A date well-chosen, for it is winter — the cool, dry winter of Tonkin — and it is reckoned that all will be finished before the hot season. And since it is the end of the Tet festivities, the Annamite New Year, the people of the Yen-Thé have probably exhausted the rice reserves of the past year. That of the new harvest is not yet husked. Its transport, in case of flight into the forest, is very difficult.

A very thick book would not suffice to describe the operations. Readers curious about colonial expeditions will find the technical account in works of high interest. For the rest, it is nothing but a series of pursuits, reconnaissances, marches and counter-marches in the forest of the Yen-Thé and also at Vinh-Yen, at Phuc-Yen and on the slopes of the Tam-Dao. One acts upon information often false. One picks up the trail, one loses it, one finds it again. Guerrilla most deceptive of all and without glory. Hard existence for the French and Tonkinese soldiers and for the militia, harder still for the pirates.

I will therefore simply summarise the events as our men lived them. We shall rejoin, afterwards, the hunted band, still irreducible.

Colonel Bataille commands the column. It is a matter of encircling the Dé Tham's domain and seizing his lairs.

On the eve of the attack, an ultimatum to the king of the Yen-Thé: "Surrender your arms and munitions. Deliver up the deserters, thieves, contumacious, bandits and rebels who have found asylum in the Yen-Thé. Present yourself at Hanoi and enter finally into the common law."

No reply. Ten times already the Dé Tham has received such summons without turning a hair. It is but one more paper, a paper that scarcely moves him. Yesterday nha-qués of Phong-Xuong and Cho-Go went, as usual, to the market at Nha-Nam. All was calm. All will remain calm. It is useless to recall to Cho-Go the numerous companions who have gone to celebrate Tet in the villages where they were born.

Now, on the morning of the 29th of January, in every agglomeration of the province of Bac-Giang, a proclamation is posted on the wall of the communal house. The nha-qués, none of whom can read, gather — instinctively respectful before the poster — and wonder. Today it is not the well-known cachet, the great seal of the Dé-Doc Tham, that is affixed along the vertical columns of Chinese characters. But here is one of the oldest notables, whom a sickly pot-bellied child has gone to fetch. The old man adjusts his horn-rimmed spectacles. He reads, at first low, for himself alone, then begins to chant on the five tones of Annam:

"The Résident Supérieur in Tonkin makes known to the population the following:

"The French Government permitted Hoang-Hoa-Tham, some years ago, to make his submission on condition that he be, in the future, an honest man.

"Never has this pirate chief kept his word. His concession became the refuge of poisoners, robbers, assassins and brigands. The Government, whose generous sentiments all honest folk know, wearied of the abominable conduct of this bandit, has decided, to support the working population and to assure their tranquillity, to put an end to the present situation of the Yen-Thé, which will be placed under the ordinary régime.

"Hoang-Hoa-Tham has deceived the Government. He oppresses the people harshly. That is why, today, he and all his partisans must be driven from their lair and pursued without cease by the troops of the Protectorate.

"To succeed in quickly and completely exterminating these bandits and to restore peace and confidence to all, the Government calls for the most active support of the population.

"Mandarins of every grade, canton chiefs and sub-chiefs, notables and simple inhabitants who have suffered from the exactions of the Dé Tham's partisans, gather together and march with our troops. The Annamite country must no longer be troubled by bands of pirates. Inform yourselves of their movements, capture the brigands who come to take refuge among you. You will thus render service to your country and you will be delivered forever from those who oppress you cruelly.

"The Government is resolved to go to the very end. All is ready. It will reward all who aid it. Deliver up the Dé Tham, who has violated every law.

"Do not believe that the Government will accept a submission from Hoang-Hoa-Tham.

"It is finished. Too many crimes have been committed. They must be punished so that the population may be tranquil and the inhabitants, delivered henceforth from all fear, become happy and rich.

"If Annamites have allowed themselves to be compromised, through fear, by working for the Dé Tham, and by accompanying his lieutenants in their expeditions through the villages they ransomed, they may, by surrendering their arms and by aiding us to capture Hoang-Hoa-Tham's partisans, redeem their faults and escape severe punishments.

"In no case shall honest folk who aid us to avenge themselves for the rapine and violence they have suffered have cause to fear the rebirth of these misfortunes. The malefactors must disappear forever.

"Mandarins of every grade, cantonal and communal authorities, old notables, and you all, honest folk, once again, courage! Aid the Government to exterminate the pirate bands for the greatest good and the fair renown of the land of Annam.

"Let this notice be posted wherever need shall be, by the care of the mandarins and the representatives of the people.

"The 28th of January 1909, being the seventh day of the first Annamite month of the third year of Duy-Tan."

"Well," thinks the notable, having finished his reading, "well, here is astonishing news. We must simply wait and stay quiet. The Government is powerful and Ong Tham is powerful. Let us act prudently and avoid the nearest danger, whatever it may be."

The very day the proclamation is posted, the troops are at work. The secret has been so well kept that our soldiers, setting out from different points, did not know, until the moment of their arrival, their true destination. The surprise will be complete.

Alas! An inexplicable misunderstanding between the civil authority and the military authority causes the native guard to attack alone and too soon for the troops to arrive in time — the lair of Cho-Go where the Dé Tham is, and the lair of Am-Dong where his adopted sons Ca-Rinh and Ca-Huynh are. Two hundred pirates armed with modern rifles defend them. The linhs and their chiefs display marvellous grit. But, too few to carry the pirates' positions by assault, they are forced to fall back upon Nha-Nam.

Their attack is, for the Dé Tham, a free warning, a precious notice completed by intelligence that natives of the Yen-Thé bring him. French troops are approaching, numerous. Then, at seven in the evening, the pirate chief abandons all his fortified lairs and takes to the bush with all his people.

The next day, 30 January, our soldiers occupy Cho-Go and Am-Dong. The pursuit begins through the jungle of the upper Yen-Thé.

The main body of pirates is at Rung-Tré with the Dé Tham. Attacked on 1 February, the old bandit, as is his custom, resists, kills some of our men, and flees. On the 11th, one of our detachments encounters at Dong-Dang the combined bands of Ca-Rinh, Ca-Huynh and Ly-Thu. Combat from one o'clock to six in the evening. We lose six killed and sixteen wounded. The pirates vanish. Ca-Huynh slips away on his side. The others entrench themselves at Dong-Den, kill five of our men, wound thirteen including two officers, and melt away…

It is, each time, the same disappointment. One encircles the bandits, one attacks them, and the band slips through our fingers, saved by the forest…

But each time also, one kills pirates. And our men will not weaken. The bandits are set upon as soon as they stop. They no longer have time to rest and reorganise. And they are too exhausted to think of attacking. They have neither supplies nor direction. They wander in the forest, living on roots, on that wild banana which, eaten raw, gorges the stomach after the fashion of a diarrhoea. They lose their cartridges in the swamps, kill those who can no longer walk, and abandon the women and children who encumber their flight.

The hunt resumes.
