BOOK ONE — DEED AND EXPERIENCE / IV. IMMEDIACY: EXPERIENCE

This is that power "undissolvable through understanding and reason" which Goethe too had sensed in Napoleon.

Napoleon's doing is the unmediated translation of his inner world into the outer. But another thing than the immediacy of the outward-placing of his inner being is the immediacy of this being itself — the immediacy with which he becomes aware of the world, outer and inner, takes it into himself, feels through it, the immediacy with which it enters his world of conception and feeling and works upon it — in short, the immediacy of his inward bearing toward men and things. In the visible and audible utterances of his life this drive toward an original, untransmitted, untranslated bearing toward men and things expresses itself most forcefully. Therefore — according to the plan of this work, to proceed from the simplest and most graspable to the deeper and more hidden — its presentation was placed before this complex of appearances. But the world of his inner happening too, which cannot be taken hold of by the senses but must be inferred from deed and bearing — the world that causes these outward appearances — is wholly ruled by the drive to set outer and inner immediately at one. It wills, just as his doing casts the most human of primeval experiences immediately outward, that the outer in its sensory, bodily form be drawn into the most original experience and made the immediate substance of his being. His access to the world and his effect upon it are one and the same: the unmediated taking-in of the exteriors of things and persons into his inner experience, and their equally unmediated casting-out again in his doing.

Napoleon takes in the world with the most original of all creative organs: the eye. His is the power of a seeing that goes from the outward sensory impression to the innermost kernel and determines his whole relation to men and things. In this seeing he is master of the inner content of things and familiar with it. His is more the artist's eye than the statesman's, certainly not the scholar's. All men who have an organ for these differences of seeing have become aware of it, astonished and often dazzled. The great statesman whose art it was, with the most polished intellectual means, to weigh the things of the world and carefully balance them, Talleyrand, was so struck on first encountering Napoleon's early successes by this way of grasping the world, so contrary to his own — he recognized in it, from his limitations, something so fundamental, the truly genial element of the new conqueror — that at Napoleon's return from the Italian campaign he placed it at the center of the speech of welcome addressed to him and emphasized with all his force as the essential object of his wondering admiration "the sudden inspirations which through unforeseen resources threw the most artful calculations of the enemy into confusion [déconcertaient]." The choice of the words inspirations, déconcerter, ressources inespérées leaves no doubt that Talleyrand here intended not a general praise of Napoleon's capacities as a commander but that peculiar, inspired, immediate way of his inner seeing and understanding. All his ministers and councillors of state recognized this as the core of his talent, as the truly genial content in him that set him above themselves and above all the world. One writes: "What he did not know, he had in his feeling or found through inspiration." Another: "Napoleon had no conception of the forms of pre-revolutionary government. But he had done much dreaming [beaucoup rêvé], though never really studied [jamais étudié]." This is, of course, factually incorrect insofar as Napoleon during his officer years had studied hard on all fields — and not only in matters of the art of war — and had gathered a broad, many-sided body of knowledge. But what the observer expresses with these words is the inner truth: that Napoleon's knowledge and understanding were not won by threshing through the material by study, but were, for essential realms of his activity, immediate inspirations that sprang from his own being, supported and fertilized only by the accidental and irregular reading of his youth.

Creative seeing is the means of every creative spirit. How it works itself out — in artistic, in statesmanlike, or in world-shaping, religious creation — depends on the interplay of the manifold inner and outer conditions to which the development of man is in general subject. In the most richly endowed spirits this gift will press toward expression in various fields, will long waver, and will often find its decisive determination only through a particular inner or outer impulse. That Napoleon's most proper field of activity became that of the military commander is not yet grounded in the way he saw and grasped the world; but it is certainly no accident; rather, aside from various outer conditions, it is the result of the particular kind — the immediacy — of his need for expression and effect. That this, moreover, did not remain the exclusive field of his activity, but that his effectiveness very soon embraced all fields of state, proves how extensive were his possibilities of giving visible form to his inner inspirations. This breadth of his possibilities of expressing inner world — together with a central and comprehensive experiencing of outer reality — is what properly constitutes the being of his universality. To be sure, he was also not far from it — his genius lacked not much of the capacity to express his inner images, his inner experience, in immediate and absolute artistic form. In his youth he long and much occupied himself with poetic works, and the nature of his human bearing — think of the scene with Junot depicted earlier — shows something of a born artist and portrayer.

Thus he once, before the painter David, developed his ideas on art in a way that anticipates the deepening of vision that the most recent spiritual movements have brought to the theory of painting. David had asked to paint him and for that purpose needed him to sit. Napoleon at first refused with what would today be called a "historical" argument: "Sit? What for? Do you believe the great men of antiquity, of whom we have portraits, sat for them?" And when David insisted, with the objection: "But I paint you for your age, for people who have seen you, who know you; and they want to see you true to life," Napoleon developed out of that historical argument the inner, deeper meaning — the reason why in his opinion the great men of antiquity had not "sat" for their artists. He says: "True to life? Not the exact reproduction of the features, not a little wart on the nose, makes the likeness. One must paint the character of the physiognomy — what animates it"; and further: "Surely Alexander never sat for Apelles. No one asks whether the portraits of the great men are like. It is enough if their genius lives in them." In substance, and even in its form, this comes to the same thing that the last decades have developed as the fundamental content of artistic knowledge. The contrast of the painter of genre, detail, realism, who wants to characterize through surface-reproduction and to interest through surface-traits, with the artist of primary stamp, who brings up the inner reality of things and sets it before us in a large-featured form — this is the position from which the spiritual science of the modern age has made possible the right appreciation of ancient art and furthered the rise of a new living art. It is no flattery when David replied to this discussion: "You are teaching me to paint." Napoleon had disclosed to him — who as an artist was still thoroughly the representative of his age, which, despite the Revolution, saw in a social and socially-mediated way — a principal means of art: that of the primarily artistic seeing as opposed to the derivative-secondary kind.

But — for the line of this investigation — this relation to art is only one expression, if the most spiritual, of a general attitude that grounds and determines his whole relation to the world: of the want of things and persons that can exercise a fertile effect on his nature in his particular way of sensory, experience-bound apprehension. Only from objects, men, events constituted in such a way can he take the stuff for building his inner world — i.e., nourish inspirations of an independent spiritual carrying-power and formation — while everything derivative, already passed through concept and thought, handlingly worn down by the understanding, can exercise no immediate effect on him but can have only the value of a spiritual tool. One of his most gifted generals, who had been close to him from early days, grasped and brought to light, almost with second sight, this deep inner conditioning of his creative doing. It is on the eve of the Battle of Wagram. Napoleon has finished inspecting the preparations for crossing the Danube and receives Marshal Marmont, who has hurried from Dalmatia with his troops and whom he has not seen for a long while. Still wholly filled with the consciousness of the triumphant course the campaign has so far taken — which he has conducted with only a small force — he gives Marmont a brief, factual account of all that has lately happened, the day of Essling, and then basks in the feeling of strength of his now assembled army, for that time enormous: 187,000 fighting men and 700 guns. His certainty of victory is confirmed, the force of his inspirations wingèd. Marmont says: "I have always seen him extremely susceptible to the display of his power. When his senses were struck by the sight of a great mass of troops, he felt each time a living impression that influenced his decisions. A man of his superiority should have been proof against such an enchantment; his senses should not have had so much power over his mind; for he knew beforehand, before he saw them, how many troops he had." This is the most unequivocal establishing of the unconquerable force with which Napoleon's creative power was bound to his sensory, bodily apprehension of the concrete situation. And it is not only the sight of his military apparatus that gives wings to his inspirations; the whole setting of a great enterprise must be bodily present before his senses to become effective as impulse. The plan for the march into Italy, the artistic heights of his strategic career — he conceived it impetuously, as he himself says, at the sight of the map of the theater of war, "with a passionate grip of his right hand." The map is only a symbol for the spatially-present, tangible reality of the things; it is the substitute, the compression into the short formula, of the world of sensory objects of action that his nature demands for the release of his creative powers. The drive, unheard-of for his time, of a military man to go back not only to historical accounts and compilations but to the source-documents themselves, is again only an outgrowth of his nature, which seeks original phenomena, the first living, sensory impression. That is also why, wherever he can, he supplements the insights into the situation and condition of the theater of operations that he has won from written sources, through oral reports from those familiar with the locality. Often he would expressly and suddenly summon to him, from the most remote regions, those of his officers who had already served in a theater of war unknown to him, for such reports. A case of this kind has already been touched upon: in 1812 he telegraphed for Battalion Chief Bertrand to come from Antwerp to Paris to give him a report on the conditions of Ragusa. Whatever his lively, gripping senses had once seized in tangible reality stood fixed in his inner conception for all time, with indestructible plastic clarity, and became the living starting-point and nourishment of his thoughts, plans, actions. It was on the battlefield that what his demand for a purely visual overview of his troops, for an exact foreknowledge of the terrain, the enemy's strength, and so forth, really meant, showed itself. The whole battle lives and moves with tremendous concreteness in his brain as its most proper plane. This constitutes the most primary of his gifts as a commander — that gift which even his spiteful daily observer had to concede with the words: "He possessed on the day of battle, in the highest degree, that perfect knowledge of the reciprocal positions of both armies."

That the sensory presence of things was an inescapable need for his imagination became obvious to all who worked with him. He demanded facts from whoever reported to him, no reasoning, no conceptual construction; least of all would he tolerate any oratorical flourish. Again and again in the Council of State the words: "Facts! I must have facts!" were heard. A document or a report that could represent an indispensable requirement for a practical decision, but whose bare conceptual content could make no sensory pictorial impression on him, he often laid aside without reading, and gave the order to reduce the same content again to pictorial reality. Once when the Police Ministry submitted him, before a decision on the extradition of one of the plotters of the infernal machine, who was in Prussian territory, a lengthy juridical and political exposition of the lawfulness and timeliness of the step, he threw back the document directly and ordered: "Two words: will the government cede him or not?" The fact reduced to its simplest form — that was what related to his nature; everything else was superfluous, unclear, disturbing.

Thus he demanded from everything that concerned his person and his activity the most concentrated factual expression — an expression that for him could only be won from the living, sensory impression of the things themselves. The same need for objectified reality is shown by his grasp of persons. Here too he needs the apparition itself, the bodily sensory appearance, the visible, audible phenomenon. When, as First Consul, he sent General Lejeune as courier to Vienna to conduct negotiations at the imperial court for the return of the art treasures taken by the French, he demanded from him, on his return, first of all not the result and details of the negotiations but a description of the persons and a portrait of the Archduchess. Then, without regard for the silently waiting Lejeune, he throws himself upon the portrait across the table, close under the lamp, examines it carefully, and questions the general in detail about every particular. That during the first years of his marriage to Josephine he constantly carried her portrait with him and often showed it to his generals means for him more than a merely conventional bearing — to which he certainly gave little room — indeed more than the expression of a general tenderness: it means with him the satisfaction of his need for her sensory presence and his joy in it. From his envoys he demands, first of all, accurate information about the living, human appearance and bearing of the foreign princes and persons who fall within their sphere of business. He himself subjects every newcomer who may in any way become important for his plans to the sharpest examination of his appearance. His glance at such moments has such a piercing force that it utterly unmans anyone he meets for the first time. This is attested by Napoleon's later cabinet secretary Meneval, who in describing his reporting for duty expressly emphasizes that only his knowledge of this glance had saved him from extreme dismay: "He looked at me for a moment with a piercing eye that would have intimidated me greatly, had I seen it for the first time." Even at ceremonial visits and receptions he seeks a pose that allows him this examination unobserved. He himself confesses this, in intimate company, on the occasion of the reception of the king and queen of Etruria whom he had set in place: "Sometimes, seemingly occupied with something else, I observe and eavesdrop on the two." And reads with his sensory organs, with eye and ear, from their faces the inner relation that will determine their future government. "She says or does something that shows she is a true Spaniard, full of pride." What Napoleon is here enacting as a deliberate method is nothing other than the conscious directedness of his talent of immediate, sensory perception on the given task: a talent that otherwise, in the natural course of his life, is active in and of itself as automatic function.

From this gift of immediate sensory apprehension is explained that unheard-of certainty with which Napoleon, at the very outset of his career, from among the undistinguished youth of the Revolutionary armies — distinguished by no rank — picked out those who later proved themselves the most valuable and reliable members of his following, capable of bearing the weight of his gigantic work. One must bring before one's eyes that under the very walls of Toulon, himself still only a captain, he picked Junot from the non-commissioned officers and Marmont from the subalterns — both of about his age — and saw their initial proving in the smallest tasks afterward confirmed through decades and in the greatest. Here the attaching of Junot in particular — Marmont had been known to him superficially from their military school days and, thanks to his rank, had had the opportunity to show higher intellectual capacities at once — was entirely the result of the living apprehension of a person, inconspicuous in his outward position, in the kernel of his being. It is reliably attested by the agreement of the most various sources — what makes altogether the impression of a legendary event — that Junot alone through the absoluteness of his human bearing in carrying out some subordinate military commissions and the compressed hitting-power of some utterances very characteristic of him, awakened Napoleon's attention and at once held his confidence. These facts gain weight as evidence of Napoleon's essentially experience-bound selection of men when one considers that under the besieging army of Toulon there was a whole series of officers — older and proven men as well — whose carrying-out of professionally more significant tasks Napoleon, by virtue of his position as commander of artillery, had the opportunity to observe, without their prompting any personal approach in him. So decisively did the immediate wholeness of a human being outweigh for him the most thorough technical reporting of capacities not stamped by it.

Napoleon's words to his brother Lucien at the first state council after the coup: "All men of talent who are in France I summon to myself; they will serve me as long as they want; after that they can go wherever they like" — these words are the theoretical formulation of this talent: they express the consciousness of the certainty with which he identifies and captures creative forces immediately present to his perception — and with which, later, he also lets them run free when they have fulfilled their function. The phrase, mystical and almost schooled in Neo-Platonism, is a variation of the thought developed above: that the genius is capable of grasping and appropriating foreign being through immediate experience because all such being is primarily present in him. Goethe, who was akin to Napoleon's genius, finds a matter-of-fact, self-evident expression for this capacity: "Napoleon, who certainly had a quite particular tact in the choice of his men, who knew how to set every significant power at the place where it would appear in its proper sphere, and who was therefore in his life, in all great undertakings, served as hardly another has been." Napoleon himself designated this way of entering, wholly humanly, sensorily, bodily, into relation with another being in order to learn its fundamental disposition, its soul-tone, as the most proper means of his finding and testing of men. In a placard that appeared suddenly everywhere on the walls of Paris before the 18th Brumaire, with the obvious intention of winning the population through making the personal impression of Napoleon living in their imagination, it says: "One of his gifts is to set every man in his place and keep him there. Even before his time as general, he had created for himself an effective means of seeing through men. He would rough them up at first encounter. From the way they answer, he declared, I know the ring of their soul. Strike with a glove on bronze, it gives no sound; strike with a hammer, it rings." What is here given out, in the rationalistic manner of the age, as a means, a procedure, is only the immediate, automatically working expression of the man's being. The designation of this procedure as "roughing them up at first encounter" [brusquer du premier abord] shall only forcefully bring to expression the violence with which, in such moments, he casts his whole being into a single word, a single gesture, and from the reaction of the man before him receives back his inner bearing like a firm, sure sound, and with final certainty determines his worth for his work — just as in his political actions he lets himself be ruled by the immediacy of his passion, so here in his political judgment by that of his visual perception.

The manly dignity and unshakable firmness that the head of the conspiracy of 1804, Georges Cadoudal, had once shown at a personal meeting with him worked so enduringly in him that after the conspiracy he had a regimental command offered to him instead of any punishment — which Cadoudal, however, declined. Indeed, he considered the possibility of later making him his adjutant. And that not groundlessly or lightly. For this kind of living expression of inner self-command and closure was indeed the decisive yardstick for his selection of adjutants. The power of his personal, immediate experience here leads Napoleon to one of those acts that, by turning a political problem into a supremely human one, bear that trait of simple, sensory magnanimity which works on the imagination of the world more than political or military successes, and first lends the great statesman the legendary radiance of the heroic man. How this gift of immediate apprehension of foreign being opens up its deeper humanity to him and enables him himself to those acts of supremely human, supra-political character that constitute his essential distance from the merely great statesman — that he himself deeply felt and, on this occasion, with a side-glance at Moreau — who with his characteristic uncertainty had entered into a half-connection with the conspirators — expressed: "Moreau saw in Georges only a man of force; I see something else in him."

One day, near the camp of Boulogne, two captured English sailors tried to escape on a skiff hastily cobbled together with their knives. They were caught, brought before Napoleon, and by his order released with a gift of money. The deed is noble and popular; it is also conventional — it could have been done by any monarch of the old stamp. But what gives it a particular, stronger emphasis is Napoleon's word on this occasion, which in its brevity illuminates the depth of his immediate taking-in of the two men's being: "These seamen! with such seamen!" — a word he would not have spoken had it been two soldiers of the great Frederick caught at an escape attempt. In it the whole man is present, with the fullness of his sense for the self-reliant, venturesome spirit of the English seafaring folk that had been his first and strongest experience of foreign power in his youth — before the walls of the English-held Toulon.

The effect of the immediate human appearance of a foreign being on his perception was so powerful that it shaped his political decisions. Thus he, who knew no political sentimentality, but the hardest practical evaluation of the political balance of forces, nevertheless omitted after Tilsit — visited now by a flood of personal impressions from Russia and the Russian Imperial House — the weakening of Russia that had lain in his plan. The personality of Alexander had fixed him, with all its questionable, still undecided character; the sensory, bodily impression of the vast Russian Empire — the boundlessness of its spaces, the strange, not-to-be-overcome uncanniness that the foreignness of a world and a people lying outside all European measure awakened in him, had cast such a spell over his political judgment that he abandoned the advantageous proposal held ready. So too he undertook the campaign of 1812 with quite differently tempered intentions from those he would have had but for the personal impression of Alexander and his Empire. Similarly he failed in his Spanish policy to follow through on the liquidation, clearly recognized by him as necessary, of the Bourbon rule in Spain, because he was disarmed by the personal appearance of the old Charles IV and his wife, as it presented itself at the meeting in Bayonne. That this impression, in its unshapely misery and helpless confusion, was of a directly opposite kind to that which the picture of Alexander had produced, makes no difference in principle: in both cases his political action is determined by the power of his immediate sensory impression. He subordinates the conditions of the situation in which he stands before such an apparition; he lets himself be ruled — as in his political actions by the immediacy of his passion — so here in his political judgment by that of his visual perception.

The same effect that a self-collected human appearance exercised on him in men revealed itself too — and with special force — when this appearance had the stamp of a higher spiritual culture. Goethe's being as it was expressed in his whole person had won from Napoleon at their Erfurt meeting that ever-memorable word "Voilà un homme!" and had determined him to acts and effects that reached deep into the cultural policy of Germany. That same effect was produced on him by Goethe's princely friend, Karl August of Weimar, who through the force of his personal appearance — the embodiment of a purely formed human being — overcame the political animosity that Napoleon, as the head of the Rhine Confederation, felt toward the independent-minded prince. Franz von Dessau, the founder of the Wörlitz Gardens and of the picture collection in the Gothic House, through the spiritual significance that expressed itself in his whole figure, attained with Napoleon a veneration similar to that of Goethe himself. Napoleon showed himself constantly inclined toward him with particular favor, and was concerned to accede to his wishes and interests. It is well known how Karl August's consort, Duchess Luise, solely through the effect that emanated from her majestic, firm bearing, quieted Napoleon's wrath and saved the state and house of Weimar from certain ruin. In the same way a similarly constituted German princess, Pauline of Lippe, through her personal dignity, determined Napoleon's judgment in favor of her house. Napoleon himself was conscious of the peculiar effect that the bearing of these and other German women of princely blood produced in him. He contrasts them with the ladies of the French court, whose excessive excitability often painfully disquieted him, in the words transmitted by the princess herself: "Nevertheless, the German princesses have differently constituted nerves." He, whose whole being was set upon assuring himself of foreign being through sensory perception, found here, in contrast to the shimmering way of the great French ladies, a firm closure of higher human formation that confronted him with the assuring calm of a figure and guaranteed him duration and inviolability of appearance. Of all French women of the higher rank he felt the same impression only from one — that Duchess of Angoulême, of whom for that reason, to the disadvantage of the male members of her house, he said she was the only man of the house of Bourbon who deserved to wear trousers. For in a French woman a calm, firm closure of appearance was inseparable for him from the form and attributes of masculinity. An opposite effect was exerted on him by the boundless flexibility and unresisting amiability of the Queen of Naples, Caroline Murat, wholly lacking in that closedness — an effect that could at most be called entertainment.

And not only the higher, extraordinary phenomenon of consummate humanity, but also the simplest, the peasant woman of the field, could exercise an influence on him and on his political action through the mere appearance of her firmly bounded being — if it was only a true, unbroken, naturally tangible apparition. In the year 1805, when he was about to determine the extent of the share of Marshal Ney in his victorious army of that year, a woman from the people forced her way to him in the camp at Strassburg. She came from the Alsatian border region and asked him to protect the harvest of her little field from the damage of the troops, as she depended on it for her living. Napoleon asked her name and what she had to lose. She answered: "Barbara Wagner; all that I have in the world is a small field of wheat." The immediate impression of this simple, bounded existence — the condition of a little human being wholly concentrated in the possession of a field of wheat — forced Napoleon to the highest, to the very highest measure of what she had dared to ask. He gave her a detachment to guard her field and ordered the protection of harvests throughout the area. And that he should say of the owner of this little field: "Well, I have to take care of Barbara Wagner" — this humorous exaggeration only shows again how strongly his immediate perception of the simple, self-contained phenomenon held him. And this in a man who had just received on the heights of Strassburg, at the end of a march of unheard-of boldness, the report of the capitulation of Ulm.

Thus within him the simplest sensory conception of being stands at the side of the most comprehensive and universal, and in such a way that both spring from one and the same root: the immediate sensuous taking-in and feeling-through of his world. Richest fullness and simplest limitation of human and worldly apparition work upon him with equal elementary power and move him to the same kind of unmediated effect, sometimes touching, sometimes terrible, but always direct and from the fullest individuality — an effect, to use a characteristic expression of his, like "a blow with a hammer on bronze." So too his first sight of the Swiss landscape once struck him, as he confesses, in the old rationalistic language of the Encyclopedists, with the force of a moral effect: "At last I begin to understand moral feeling; I have been a rationalist until now." A thousand-times-literary and common feeling, that of the sublime in mountain nature, becomes for him, who knows only the effect of the directly living, the living-sensory impression, a new experience, an at last opening eye for a kind of effect that had previously been closed to him.

This possession of a naturally sensory, immediate conception of men and things had from early on filled him with deep mistrust of the confusing, endlessly talking garrulity of great society. Here too, as with women, what alarmed him was the ungraspable formlessness in which the factual, the thought, the felt all flowed into one another, the conscious met him in the forms of the unconscious. Against this he invokes the meager but compact and unambiguous judgment of the poorest in spirit, the peasants — with whom he feels himself connected because they, exactly like him, are thrown back on the immediately concrete, the originally workmanlike. "What do I care" he once cried out bitterly, "what the salons and the gossips think. I don't listen to it. I know only one opinion — that of the simple peasants." Here lies too one of the deepest grounds for the permanent aversion he felt to everything parliamentary; here too is probably the ultimate cause to be sought for the complete — even physical — collapse he suffered before the Council of Five Hundred on the eve of Brumaire. The immediate sensory impression of the gigantic assembly, which seemed ruled by no unified thought and capable of being ruled by none, threw him, as it struck him with the force of a first experience, so entirely out of himself that all his power of thought, feeling — even of movement — failed him as before a terrible, elemental event he could not overcome. It is the same consciousness of powerlessness, of helplessness of his being — set as it was upon deed, upon effect — before an invisible, formless, tangibly ungraspable adversary, that fundamentally determines his bearing toward the press as well: it subjects the part of it that falls within his sphere of influence to strict unifying censorship, but leaves him defenseless against the attacks of the foreign press. For these too are nothing other than that same formless void that resists the effect of his immediate personality.

Now these observations on the nature of Napoleon's world of sensory, immediate inner experience have taken us farther into the next, and central, region of his being: the life of conception and feeling, the second book of this work. One more observation, which at the same time forms the transition, is the question: what do these operations of his nature signify for those who approach him? How does the abundance, always fresh, always the first, the only one of its kind, of this immediately experiencing nature affect its environment, the circle — chosen with such certainty — of the men destined to serve his work, the great world with which he acts and creates? The answer to this question is at the same time the closing chord of the account of his personal being, allowing the picture of his inner nature to go over into that of the shaping forces of his life: it is the question of the personal relations of his life — of friendship, hospitality, and human nearness.
