BOOK THREE — THE CLASSICAL BLOOD

...gods," the reference to Napoleon gives it a more essential meaning. Napoleon's eye measures the things of the world with its inborn standard and therefore glides unmoved over the phenomena of the ephemeral environment, in which the lesser man must each time seek his standard anew in a new orientation. In this difference of the eye lies expressed the opposition of two types: the spiritual, factually engaged, inwardly concentrated — as perfected only antiquity developed it — and the outwardly radiated, peripherally oriented — as it is the result and mark of modernity. "The characteristic of the earth-gods" points toward the first type. That this word means for the author not merely a general trope or pompous circumlocution of worldly power-position, but includes the idea of a most highly intensified humanity, is proved by the use of the same expression at the just recalled passage where he speaks, with reference to Caesar and Napoleon, of the "feeling of power of an earth-god who can summon harmony out of chaos." It remains strange that the author wants to find this type realized in the "noble princes" of his epoch. The enlightened absolute monarch of the classicist era may have absorbed some of the gifts of perfected classical humanity through his education and may have sometimes developed approaches to a type of this kind, but he never realized its true being, let alone its definitive expression as apparition; he never bore "the characteristic of the earth-gods" — that is, the visible signs of the spirit descended to earth, become flesh — upon himself. This bold and beautiful formula — let it be especially noted for the author — encompasses a deeper, a more spiritual reality than belongs to the prince of this time, signifies almost the same as that rapturous word of Hegel at the sight of the Emperor in Jena: "I saw the Emperor — this world-soul — riding out of the city on reconnaissance" — a word that still always shakes us through the enormity, the immediacy, with which it lets the spiritual step into the world of the bodily: a word that could spring only from a German's imagination. Down to our own day, the ancient hero is the only true realization of this earth-divinity. It is his features, not those of a classicist prince, that Napoleon bears. Compare the unambiguously clear consciousness of his eye, the undistracted closedness of his head, in contrast to the many-times-illuminated eye, the furrowed features of the greatest prince of classicist education-time, Frederick — who, capable of manifold interpretation, did not realize that ultimate unity of the heroic man.

Other observers too find in the form and mien of Napoleon's face his earth-divine, his heroic-classical perfection and originality vividly expressed. Especially eye and forehead seem in a definitively impressive way to have expressed the fullness and closedness of a perfected inner world. A member of his court says: "Genius and power throned on his broad and high forehead. His forehead alone would have sufficed to express what in another the whole physiognomy conveys. Lightnings shot from his eyes and revealed all his thoughts. But when the serene calm of his spirit was not disturbed, then the most amiable smile lit this beautiful face and lent it an unfathomable charm, such as I have seen in no other man before. Then it was impossible to see him without loving him." Here then, in his forehead alone is perceived the full expressive power of a whole personality, in his eye the immediate reflection of his inner world, and in the equilibrium-state of his being that trait of smiling movement that made the face a compulsion to love for everyone who saw it, thereby lifting it above the impression-power of all other men.

To this charm the German poet also succumbed, who says: "A smile that warmed and calmed every heart hovered about his lips... It was an eye clear as the sky, it could read in the hearts of men, it saw all things of this world at once, while we others see them only one after another and in their colored shadows. The forehead was not so clear. On it nested the spirits of future battles, and now and then a twitch crossed this forehead, and these were the creating thoughts, the great seven-league boots with which the Emperor's spirit strides over the world." And the observer who knew him since earliest youth gave the unsurpassable formulation to the feeling shared by all: "When this smile was occasioned by any noble feeling, however, his face assumed a superhuman expression. In such moments the man was no longer man." This essential power, exceeding human capacity, not expressible within the human, would within the Christian-ethicizing circle of ideas tend toward the beings of the heavenly sphere, the angel say; within the worldly-sensuous sphere, however, it would mean the hero of antique stamp. And it is he indeed who hides behind the far-reaching words of this enthusiastic description. The authoress — solely through the effort to express the inexpressible of the overwhelming apparition — hits upon that watchword of the new philosopher ("superhuman"), in which he, long after her, summarized the highest concept of man and proclaimed it to new-European humanity as its law. But this word and this law he did not draw from insubstantial fantasy: it was for him filled with the figure and spirit of the ancient hero, whom he first experienced again in original essentiality. And this experience was nourished for him by the stamp that this figure and this spirit had found for his eyes in modernity — was nourished by the apparition of Napoleon, as he confesses in the "Genealogy of Morals": "The ancient ideal itself stepped bodily and with unheard-of splendor before the eye and conscience of humanity — and once more, stronger, simpler, more penetrating than ever, there rang out, against the old lying watchword of ressentiment of the privilege of the many, against the will to lowliness, to abasement, to the downward and westward of man, the terrible and delightful counter-watchword of the privilege of the fewest! Like a last signpost to the other way appeared Napoleon, that most solitary and latest-born man that ever existed, and in him the incarnate problem of the noble ideal as such — consider well what a problem it is: Napoleon, this synthesis of the inhuman and the superhuman." This problem glows from the words of the description reproduced above. It was — Nietzsche has hardly known this description — given in the bodily apparition of Napoleon. Nietzsche's spiritual vision is anticipated and justified by the eye-impression of that female observer.

Already in Napoleon's beginnings, the approaches of this highest human formation broke through for those whose gaze understood human nature. One of his future marshals describes him to us before Toulon. Even then eye and forehead vividly radiate the main powers of his inner being outward, but, it seems, still less condensed into unity than separated in individual expression: the eye more the passionately youthful life-movement, the forehead more greatness and dignity of the inner designs. Yet the whole of the face, the noble restraint of the features and its color — or rather colorlessness — give the face its closedness and balanced unity, from which those heroic ground-endowments in eye and forehead — passion and spirituality — emerge all the more powerfully and each enhancing the other. "His features had an unusual nobility; the pallor peculiar to his face heightened the glow of his eyes, which shot flames from the depth of their sockets; the thoughtful earnest stamped upon his powerful forehead formed to his youth a strange but impressive contrast. There was something mysterious in this man." The "mysterious" that determined the overall impression of even the youthful Napoleon seems, according to the words of the report, to have had its ultimate ground in the fact that the most opposed life-powers met in extreme intensification in Napoleon's head. But highest passionateness and deepest spirituality — though they seem unbridgeable in men of lesser degree — are precisely in their interpenetrating unity the fundamental prerequisite of genius, of the heroic, of the all-sided man. Others too sense as the "wonder of his face" the "force au repos," the "grandeur dans la quiétude." What makes these impressions into riddle and wonder is that they meet an age for which the bound all-sidedness of heroic expression is no longer visible as reality, but known only as pictorial outline and intellectual representation — that a figure of immediately ancient stamp steps into a derived classicist present. Precisely the equilibrium of seemingly opposing life-elements — "force in the state of rest" and "greatness in the expression of restraint" — constitutes the sublime effect of the perfected humanity we admire in the statues of classical antiquity. The balanced interpenetration of passionate sensuousness and spiritual binding is the driving germ of all plastic art, whose definitive stage was ancient sculpture. Sculpture is the prescribed expression of heroic being, its inborn representational form. Therefore Canova unconsciously hits the right, fulfills only a human and artistic ground-law — where he thinks he is creating a new artistic expression, a new school-form, when he wants to develop a heroic style in sculpture. Sculpture is the heroic style. Therefore he can rightly say that he found in Napoleon's figure the ground-endowments of plastic form already present. As Napoleon realizes in himself the nature and structure of the heroic type, he necessarily also bears its perfected form, bears the cut and features of the ancient type on his body. It cannot fail that the eye of his contemporaries — accustomed in their greatest apparitions at most to the unfilled outline, the suggested sketch of a classical facial formation — noticed the elementary bodily form of the classical that confronted them here, as such, as the origin-type falling out of and surpassing the temporal form.

Thus he remained unforgettable throughout his life to the German poet who in his youth saw the Emperor riding down the Hofgartenallee in Düsseldorf, and it symbolized for him the heroic-half-divine nature and mission of the Emperor. In the Book Le Grand it says: "The face also had that color we find in marble Greek and Roman heads; its features were likewise nobly measured, like those of the antiques, and on this face was written: You shall have no other gods but me." The consistent reports of his daily surroundings convey the same impression: "His profile and the totality of his features were of remarkable regularity. In a word, his head and upper body yielded nothing in nobility and dignity to the most beautiful busts bequeathed us by antiquity." And a description seeking the antique form in the details of his facial formation: "The profile of his forehead, the hollow of his eye, the line of his nose — all that is beautiful and remembers perfectly the ancient medals." In the republican-classicist usage of the Directory, the same impression appears, in a strange twist, as a similarity precisely with the Caesar-conspirators. "How should I convey to you the expression of Bonaparte's head? his painter Appiani said to me," it says in that Parisian placard of June 1798 already mentioned (page 48), "it encompasses the characteristic of the heads of all the Caesar-conspirators. He has several Bruti in him." Remarkable here is also the emphatic reference to the impression of a fullness of individual forces in the one head, to the supraindividual scope of his personality-expression. It recalls the just reproduced notation of that other witness who ascribed to his forehead alone the expressive power of a whole physiognomy.

But the actual bodily pre-apparition of Napoleon among all figures of antiquity remains — and is recognized as such very soon by those gifted with a more spiritual eye — that in which the heroic ground-form of antiquity has united with a luminous spiritual consciousness into an eternal symbol of the ruler: that of Augustus. Just as by itself in Canova's Napoleon statue the features of Augustus break through, so in the gallery, before the statue of Augustus, beholders stand struck by the head of the Consul or Emperor that looks at them from the ancient work of art. In Reichardt's notes it says: "At my morning devotions today in the Gallery of the Antiques I made the not-insignificant discovery that the colossal statue of Augustus has a quite strikingly similar feature with Bonaparte. It is the fine sardonic smile that must have been as fixed and permanent in Augustus as one always sees it on Bonaparte's lips; otherwise the Roman artist would surely not have given it to his imperial head. This was once found in Velletri, the homeland of Augustus, and is generally recognized as genuine. The rest of the face, to be sure, is different from that of the new Augustus, but yet not at all contradictory." Also the worldly-wise and humanly knowing Princess Pauline of Lippe, spiritual kinswoman of Duchess Luise of Weimar, noted during her stay in Paris: "Napoleon bears a striking resemblance to several busts of Augustus, especially one in the Museum." In a strange way, Reichardt's critic, who with such penetrating gaze had read from Napoleon's features his essentially classical human type, goes astray from this palpable impression. Where he seeks to determine the concrete form of the classical pre-apparition, he lets himself be seduced by the strongest peculiarity of Napoleon's head-formation — his forceful chin — into likening Napoleon to another Emperor, Domitian, who with a roughly similar general ground-plan of the face also exhibits precisely this particularity.

THE CLASSICAL SPIRIT

What made the apparition of Napoleon for the classicist world an incomprehensible wonder, for the classical artist an unattainable ideal image, was that he bore the classical trait not — like many a great man of the time — as an acquired adjunct, as a personal note, but as a ground-element — a ground-element that by its nature precisely excluded the personal differentiation of the modern type and brought to expression only the suprapersonal form of objective human values, as the ancient man realized them. In the age of the last classicism, which had begun to dissolve ancient lawfulness from its late dilution into society wholly into individual chaos, this suprapersonally closed type had to work, conversely, as the most personal of all, as a violation of the generally valid temporal character by an individual formation. The classical means unity of form and content, body and spirit. The classical type shows only the great suprapersonal outlines, because it has to embody an elementary humanity, not personally narrowed or overgrown. As to the contemporary eye the external type, so to the Spirit of the Age the spiritual type Napoleon was monstrous and ungraspable. In an age concluding the ancient tradition, using it in secondary derivative forms, Napoleon stands as the man of originally ancient essentiality; in an epoch that heroizes man in conceptual and pictorial abstractions — the heroic man himself. A historian from the middle of the century, who already then undertook to interpret Napoleon's work spiritually, found the beautiful formula: "In the heart of modern civilization, the deification of the ancient heroes once more took place. They became demi-gods because tradition heaped upon their head all the great and beautiful things that whole ages had accomplished. Napoleon is a hero of myth." This deification, this mythicizing, is however only possible where a hero, a man of universally valid measures, of a scope of being exists that condenses in itself the content of all other essences and has raised it to lawfulness. Therefore antiquity — in which the individual is always initially expression and bearer of a folk-whole and strives to develop in himself the type-representing and elevating essential endowments — is the given, the sole ground of true heroism. Modernity, in which the individual from century to century more and more seeks his validity as a personally conditioned particular being, offers from itself no foundation for the rise and even the reception of a hero. In this respect one can speak of the ancient as of a properly and essentially heroic type of humanity; in this respect, antique, classical, and heroic are in a certain sense synonyms. If Napoleon, as that historian rightly says, was once more capable and partook of such mythicizing in the heart of modern civilization, this lies precisely in the fact that he was not of modern-personal but of suprapersonal-heroic, of ancient essential stuff.
