BOOK THREE — THE CLASSICAL SPIRIT

...the representation of the sitter with Augustus is weakened and the bodily Napoleon is realized more closely and penetratingly through the ancient statue of Augustus than through his own. There is no stronger proof that Canova did not piece together details of the Augustus image into an ideal picture of Napoleon, but that all the essential traits of Augustus that his Napoleon statue exhibits stem from his living original, the Emperor himself, and that he, as the artists of the classicist epoch always did, took away more from the forceful origin-expression of antiquity — in which a primordial humanity here embodied itself — than he added, in order to attain his intellectually diluted ideal schema of it. Where the artists more strongly assert their personal dispositions against this ideal schema, surrender themselves more independently to the great present-day expression of the hero — as Houdon in his famous bust of the Emperor and the makers of the above-mentioned portrait-sketches from nature — the origin-peculiarly total expression of the Augustan head immediately emerges more strongly than in Canova's antique-style statue. Canova himself repeatedly testified orally how perfectly the formation of Napoleonic forms fulfilled the conditions of plastic creation — that creation which he called the heroic, because it was to realize for him the classical model of unconditional human greatness. His biographer reports on this: "Canova loved to say that he found in the features and facial formation of his original the forms most suitable for statuary representation and most usable for the heroic style of the figure as he planned it."

Through the art of drawing and sculpture, Napoleon's figure has been transmitted to us most nearly and completely. Painting has done justice to his image only to a very limited degree. The art of drawing had from itself the advantage of more immediate proximity to reality over painting. But sculpture in this respect has hardly any advantage over painting. If nonetheless it has come as close to the true image of Napoleon as drawing has, while painting has not, this must have a yet deeper ground, rooted in the nature of the various visual arts — a ground that the cited judgments of David and Canova indicate. By its nature, painting is not capable of capturing and holding ancient substance. The painterly and the classical are two elements that separate like oil and water; painting can as little be the likeness of the classical as the ring can be the likeness of a sphere. For this reason too, painting had to be denied the ability to grasp and reproduce the last, true antique ur-being-content of Napoleon. But even to capture his modern apparition-form, it was not capable. A painterly style that should reflect the impression of an essentiality of Napoleon's kind relatively unabridged cannot be conjured out of the ground. This would have required the art to fall back on a Giottoesque ethos — that of a Piero della Francesca. Painting can only give the atmosphere of a thingliness, not the thing itself. And Napoleon was too isolated an apparition for his person to have found its expression already in his time in the style of painting and to have transformed this style according to its true being. Only a considerable time after his death did something of his atmosphere communicate itself to painterly style under the hands of Delacroix — but also only something of his atmosphere, the air-circle of his surroundings, not the density of his own being. All the painters who sought to shape his personal bearing or gesture during his lifetime must, the more they grasped his being, have become the more aware of the limits and conditioning of their art. Through the artistic means of color, only the semblance of essentiality can be given, its mirroring in the eye, not its invisible but feelable core (which poetry and also sculpture can accomplish). Thus the painters of that epoch were from the outset directed to make less the peculiarities themselves of his outer body than the shimmering frame of his peripheral apparition — uniform, decor, accessories — the object of their artistic striving. But even in the reproduction of these things, in which the painterly style of an epoch most properly manifests itself, their artistic impotence shows itself.

Where it is not a matter of representing the central phenomenon of the age and its particular atmosphere, but of general events and apparitions of the time for which a constant typical artistic expression still existed — as in the conventional glorifications of battles, equestrian and women's portraits — these artists by all means maintain the height of their task; something like a unitary, supraprivate total style impresses itself in their works. Here the unexhausted sources of force of earlier cultural epochs — of Baroque and Rococo — still serve them, which had created and transmitted for these events and apparitions a social, yet still unbourgeois, life-sustaining, and thus truly artistic expression. But where a new suprapersonal temporal expression is being prepared, where the life-circle of the heroic ruler sets tasks of indeed also typical, yet from his creative power swollen breadth — for which in any case all external prerequisites and promises (developed technical artistic means, highly endowed commissions, and the immortal content of the theme) were given — there, naturally, their artistic incapacity to create for the unitary suprapersonal life-formation a binding artistic expression, a "style," emerges shamefully; each artist suddenly stands with his particular conditioning alone in artistic airlessness. The spiritualization of which they are capable, upon contact with the elementary spirit, falls apart into a helplessness that reveals their wretched person with its inadequate technical striving. Even the most eminent among them — a David, a Gros, an Ingres — have in the struggle for the solution of this task diminished the total value of their work, regardless that they were borne by true admiration, indeed by passionate veneration, for the hero of their work. They misunderstood the impossibility of the demand they wanted to fulfill — an impossibility that had a deeper ground than this inadequacy of their person, let alone of their artistic abilities.

One must recall the pious admonitory words of the German poet, with which he denied his far more expressive and personally almost boundless verbal art the attempt to utter the ungraspable force of the new genius:

 Holy vessels are the poets,
 In which the wine of life, the spirit
 Of heroes is preserved.
 But the spirit of this youth —
 Would it not smash the vessel,
 The swift one, where it would grasp him?
 Let the poet leave him untouched,
 Like the spirit of nature.
 On such stuff the master becomes a boy.
 He should live and remain in the poem?
 He lives and remains in the world.

These verses of the seer-spirit Hölderlin mean more than a trope of glorification. They set the sacred measure of things, which the balanced, self-certain sense may not overstep: the natural breadth and fullness of the hero, which no ordered art-creation can attain. From painterly reproduction it is removed many times further than from the other arts, because painting has the least means to approach the substance of the apparitions themselves, while conversely the seer-poet stands closest to it, since the word is at once the most contentful and most expressive artistic means. Drawing and formative art hold approximately the middle between them. Therefore even those painters who failed so utterly before the Napoleonic phenomenon in their finished works were able, in studies and sketches, to attain a more essential expression of his person, a higher degree of artistic perfection. Among the visual arts, however, sculpture represents the direct opposite of painting. Where the latter strives to capture the charm of the moment, of color and light, and to that extent belongs to the circle of romantic soul-movement, sculpture struggles for the eternity-content in its bodily givenness: is from itself classical, sensuously elementary. This is what Canova means when in his above-cited utterance he speaks of the immanent suitability of Napoleon's bodily forms for sculpture and the "heroic style." Hence the masters of sculpture were never exposed to the same perils before the apparition of Napoleon as those of painting. While Napoleon's figure pressed down the level of painterly art, indeed burst and dissolved the genre, here it is able to help anonymous, indeed purely handicraft attempts to the breath of mastery. The space and time of his appearing are connected, as with a fading of the painterly, with a brief revival of plastic art. The most concentrated content, the most immediate element of Napoleonic being, seems captured in the coins and medals of his time. In struck metal, in cut stone, his image — since he became a figure of European public life and soon its center — experiences, beyond all other representations, an intensification into the essential, which under the hand of a Galle, Droz, Bresset comes very close to his completed expression, his typical form. This proves that among all image-forms, striking and cutting are the most appropriate to the givens of his apparition, that being-content and expression have interpenetrated in it to that final unambiguousness, that symbolic-quality of a type of thought, which is the goal and ground-form of the striking and cutting art. His bodiliness is not only, as Canova says, sculptural and heroic (which we have called "classical") pure and simple, but in its concentrated and representative part — his head — all this at the stage of perfection: symbolically monumental of the kind of coin and gem. "His profile gives," as David expresses it, "by itself a perfectly finished medal or cameo." More than that of Caesar — indeed, in Christian times only one head, that of Dante — was his predestined for enduring stamping. His features are plastic ur-forms, such as from historical men only Alexander and a few Julians were granted.

THE CLASSICAL TYPE NAPOLEON: REPORTS

Works of art only reproduce what the living eye of knowledgeable beholders saw, and reproduce it with all the attenuation conditioned by the humanly and artistically limited personality of their creators. Canova and David, in their oral utterances, struck precisely the essential core of Napoleon's apparition, while in their work they only more or less approached it. "Sculptural" and "heroic," as Canova says, "medal- and cameo-cut," as David says, are unchallengeable characterizations of his bodily essentiality, definitive formulations of the artistic impression that these masters were able to shape only suggestively. To their person and time it was not given to capture perfectly in material the ancient man who suddenly stepped before them, to renew him bodily in bronze or marble: but in the more mobile word, in those highest and definitive generic designations, the natural re-existence of the ancient type — for whose artistic reawakening they labored a whole generation — stamped itself completely and unconditionally. And even that formula of school-jargon with which David introduces his rapturous exclamation to his pupils — the "pure, great, beautiful like antiquity" — gains in application to Napoleon, and precisely from his being, another, more factual meaning than it had according to the general understanding of the time. In these adjectives, which are the extreme expression of what the powerless school-language offered for the characterization of a bodily ancient apparition, are hidden — admittedly emptied — the husks of those comprehensively simple descriptive words with which the ancient authors designated the far-stretched but factually condensed, the elementary and wholly unsentimental being of their heroes. They are the afterglow of the key-words of a Plutarch and Livy for Alexander, Caesar, and Hannibal. Thus even they, so discolored and abstracted as they are, are a reflex of the classical origin-type stepping mightily and unpreparedly among classicist humanity.

That this was their deeper meaning, even if unconscious to the speaker — that Napoleon at his first sight actually realized the great objective, feeling-wise not yet decomposed endowments of the ancient heroes, and precisely thereby threw out of countenance the men of his time who strove toward antiquity more from a sentimental than from a spiritual drive — this is proved by the effect he produced on one of David's pupils who saw him for the first time, on the occasion of that sitting. "Etienne," as the historian of the David school describes this encounter from the latter's recollections, "was first struck by Napoleon's youth, thinking of all he had already accomplished, but an attentive observation let him perceive in the facial features of this man an extraordinary reserve... Bonaparte looked attentively, without letting his impressions be recognized in his face in the least, at the two paintings, 'The Horatii' and 'Brutus,' one after the other. The only feeling that appeared in his expression was a certain impatience, such as one feels when one senses that one is wasting one's time uselessly." Without any leaning on classicist models and formulas, an attempt is made here to reproduce the actual impression the informant received. And one recognizes already from the uncertainly strange circumlocutions how alien and extraordinary this impression must have been — that here a new and unknown essentiality surpassed all the accustomed ideas of the beholder. His cultivated and moderated spirit, to whom social participation and devotion was the self-evident foundation of all life, scarcely found words for the inaccessibility and impenetrability that confronted him in Napoleon. The "extraordinary reserve" only faintly indicates what he wants to say. But the twice-emphasized absence of any expression of feeling (except that of impatience) in Napoleon's features leaves no doubt as to wherein the actually strange aspect of the apparition lay. This impenetrability and inaccessibility: these were, in the midst of a world wholly attuned to stimulus, peripherally radiated — the endowments and signs of another kind of humanity, gathered inward, factually and sensuously engaged — precisely that whose definitive apparition-form was the ancient man.

More completely and immediately in bodily expression, the musician Reichardt — trained by Goethe, and granted by his critic Julius von Voss, for the sake of this school, a particular reliability of human observation and description — captured these endowments: "The sharply taut skin is as much olive-color as yellow, without the least trace of blood-color and without noticeable mobility." What stretches the skin so firmly and — as other observers say — almost fleshlessly over the bones, is the intense fire of will that holds the whole man core-like together, consumes all forces in itself, and permits no swelling or fleshing-out. What produces its indeterminable color, its "pâleur" or colorlessness, as others clumsily say — and its almost complete immobility — is the inaccessibility to the ephemeral stimulus-phenomena of the outer world, the deep absorption, the impenetrability of his inner world. In him, in truth, outer and inner are one: nothing accidental shows itself, nothing about him that is not determined and formed by his being; he has nothing essential that has not expressed itself bodily in him. How the skin is described here — its tautness, the indeterminability of its bronze tone, its immobility — this amounts to the idea of something statuary, as a type of living humanity was realized only once, only in the ancient man, who brought in himself a perfect world of most mobile life to impenetrable unity and balanced bodily expression. All this remains unsaid beneath the surface in Reichardt's description. He keeps himself, an anxious pupil of his great master, only to the immediately visible and describable. Thus even the most central and most proper organ of genius — his eye — betrays to him nothing definitive about his essentiality. He relates all sorts of details about it, which, incoherent, lead astray as a whole. Only with the "gray inconspicuousness," as he somewhat clumsily tries to render the color of the eye, does he hit something right, without however being able to give this unsettling strangeness a deeper interpretation. It finds, with an astonishing sureness of intuition, his already mentioned critic. This otherwise insignificant writer, notable more for the number than the value of his novels, has here, as happens to secondary minds occasionally, risen upon an imperfect model to insights that otherwise lie far beyond his spiritual horizon. In his "Illumination of the Confidential Letters about France by Mr. J. F. Reichardt," from which an astonishing, almost visionary word about Napoleon's heroic essentiality was already communicated above (p. 110), he remarks on Reichardt's description of Napoleon's eye: "I found the eye neither too small nor unfiery, but very interesting through this: that the characteristic of the earth-gods lies so perfectly in it, as if Bonaparte had been born from the cradle for a high throne. In the eye of noble princes without exception, whether otherwise beautifully organized or not, lies a great indifference, a half-strength of all interest and passionateness." Again it is remarkable what unusual circumlocutions the author must use to clarify his impression. "The great indifference and half-strength of all interest and passionateness," which is supposed to lie in the eye of all noble princes, recalls the "extraordinary reserve" with which that pupil of David circumscribed his impression of Napoleon's being. This strange turn of phrase, according to its nearest literal sense, was certainly meant only to designate the inaccessibility of the courtly prince, but the context, the combination with "the characteristic of the earth-gods," the relation to Napoleon, gives it a more essential meaning.
