BOOK FIVE — GOD AND FAITH

I. GOD

Over the individual soul lie the spheres of suprapersonal encompassment of being: in society, state, God. Society is the primitively earthly sphere, unfolding from the drive of the existing majority. State is the consummated earthly sphere, in which this drive has become face and creation. God is at once the outermost rim of the world-circle consummated in face and creation, but on the other side running out into a sphere of the supramundane, the creation-alien, ultimately the beingless. Every soul is from the outset bound by its substance, with a greater or lesser portion, into one of these spheres. The countless many today exhaust themselves in the first, feel themselves merely as members of society, as herd animals — a smaller number than commonly believed strike into the second, bear state-consciousness, are ζῷον πολιτικόν — a certainly greater number seek their encompassment in what is properly no longer an encompassment but a dissolution, in the protuberance of the earthly circle-rim outward, in untraceable deification: the heirs of an earlier human type.

There are those — these the majority — who passively resist their transsubstantiation into a suprapersonal; others who oversurge and dissolve in it. The soul of creative stamp seeks in the process to assert itself actively, to penetrate and realize its being in the higher being. In the first sphere, that of social encompassment, one finds this at most among the libertines of art, the literati of the various art-domains and their following, the Bohemians. The anarchists and communists already strive more into the second — however inadequately intimated — the state-creative sphere. The furthest sphere, the circle of deification streaming out into All and Nothing, according to its meaning basically excludes every earthly-creative formative power. But there exist in a curious play of nature souls with a drive into this sphere, to whom at the same time an earthy creative drive denies will-less surrender. They consume themselves in the unfruitful but often grandiose attempts to master humanly that which resists all human creation — who put only a part of their substance, their spiritual force, in a special sense, their power of thought, into the effort: the metaphysicians, who set the All of their being against the All of the world: the mystics.

Only the middle sphere, in which the supraindividual presents itself as state, as creative total-expression of objective, visible world, is truly appropriate to the drive of the individual soul to press creatively beyond itself into a higher encompassment of being. Only here, where a supersensuous content is captured in visible objective forms, do the arbitrary floodings of merely social drive-life no longer have room, nor yet those that mock every power of the soul — the infinite. Here is a ground on which the soul can realize its impulse to self-representation in a spiritual expression that lies beyond it, with the means of its earth-bound creative power. The sharper and deeper it stamps its individual face into this supraindividual spiritual form, the more comprehensively and conclusively it can personalize this form in itself, the more it approaches the creative perfection determined for it by its being.

He who can capture the spiritual world-expression of his age entirely in his person, who knows how to make the supraindividual spiritual structure of the state individually visible and corporeal in himself — he is the truly heroic man: after the foundational myth of antiquity the demigod, who stands between men and gods, insofar as he leads divine power into the earthly, compels it from the world-stuff in which it has become absorbed and whose rim it laps shorelessly, to apparition in worldly face. With an absoluteness such as the Christian age has not known, Napoleon is the state-maker out of the stateless, he who recaptured and radiated forth the divine world-norm bound up in the state to the limits of sensuous expressive power, bound up again in his individual corporeality. He has measured, lived through, and filled the second, the middle sphere of supraindividual being — the state-sphere — to its outermost rim, where it still holds the divine sensuously and worldily fast before it floods over into formless all-unity, with his individual vitality. From here, from this his position at the boundary between God and world, from his mission of leading God anew into the world in the highest spiritual form, the state — from this determines itself ultimately on the height of his life his comportment toward God, religion, church. For him God lives as an original certainty in the feeling of his self, which as everywhere so especially palpably here coincides with the state-idea, but since it aims at state self-realization, it permits as little a desensualization into theocratic deformations of the state as an overgrowth into the individual-speculative. He stands, permeated as a matter of course by the fact of divine existence, with his front set just as much against the metaphysical God-deniers and speculative God-eschewers, as against the churchly state-power that consumes the worldly state-expression of God.
