BOOK FIVE — GOD AND FAITH

VI. FAITH AND THE STATE

". . . bind the priests again to the Republic." This proves how immediately, from the very impulses of his state-forming will, Napoleon threw himself upon the ordering of religion as a state necessity. In the Council of State he once justified it with a turn against the hybrid religious surrogates of the age, the magical and metaphysical systems that were especially a flowering of German intellectuality: "Religion is a kind of grafting or inoculation that satisfies our love of the marvelous and at the same time protects us from charlatans and sorcerers; priests are worth more than a Cagliostro, a Kant, and all the dreamers of Germany." In the "German dreamers," in the speculative grund-trait of German intellectuality, he felt instinctively the opposite of his own objective-southern, sensuously engaged nature, for whom God was an undisputable givenness, a beginning, not the product of a boundless and formless individuality. On St. Helena he proclaimed religion as the foundation of every earthly government, in particular application to Catholicism as that of European kingship: "The Catholic religion is an almighty support of kingship. What would kingship be, if it too did not speak to the imagination and rested only on cold reason? For if the King is only a man like any other, why is he born King, whether he be simple, corrupt, or a great man? From the moment you take away from kingship the reverence it receives from the Lord's Anointed and deliver it to the cold calculation of reason, it ceases to be kingship and becomes an office; and from that moment ambition enters the lists, the era of revolutions begins. Fortunately for peoples, the marvelous has an irresistible charm for the human imagination, which ultimately always regains its power, whatever effects the passing rule of reason may . . ."

. . . four propositions of Bossuet, laid down in the Edict of Louis XIV and the Declaration of the French Clergy of 1682. They form the actual core of a state church as Napoleon conceived it, and were accordingly raised to law throughout the extent of his Empire by a Napoleonic decree of February 25, 1810. But Napoleon's state idea reached beyond the principle of the national state. His universally directed will and spirit did not satisfy itself in the traditional French particular monarchy, but strove beyond it toward the European universal empire in succession to the great Charlemagne. And this direction of his state volition and action naturally sought its spiritual foundation and consolidation in a form of Christianity that corresponded to it — namely, that which the Roman-German Empire of Charlemagne and his successors had planned to develop and enforce, but never could: a Christianity whose ecumenical salvific character excluded national-state expression, but was instead wholly restricted to spiritual universality, renouncing every earthly dominion. Thus Napoleon's Minister of Worship said in the address with which he opened the Council of 1811: "His Majesty has restored the religion of Christ as Charlemagne and Saint Louis professed it." But just as in European actuality Napoleon's world-government sought its realization by fusing the elements of the Roman-German medieval Empire with those of the national Ancien Régime, so those forms of Christianity also interpenetrated to form a unity that served as the spiritual fabric of the Napoleonic state-creation. To the restriction of the ecumenical power of Christianity to the spiritual domain — which the Empire of Charlemagne and his successors had striven for — was added the intrusion into the ecumenical character of Christianity itself, arising from the national principle of the strengthened . . .

. . . in a work on the Concordat, this conception resonates: "It is an established fact, which will become clearer daily, that Napoleon loved his religion, that he wished to bring it to flower, to honor it, but at the same time also to use it as a social means to suppress anarchy, to consolidate his rule in Europe, and to increase the prestige of France and the influence of Paris: the goal of all his thoughts." A few pages earlier, he appeals in defense of the Concordat to the immemorial existence of temporal church power: "Admittedly, the Concordat recognized within the state a foreign power capable of causing it trouble one day. But the Concordat did not introduce it. That power has always existed." If one proceeds from his personal spiritual and emotional constitution — he had no choice but to depart from the confessional "foundation and root" that had accrued to his sphere of action, arbitrarily to give his state-work, created from the given state-materials, an entirely new religious substructure, whether of purely personal invention or of foreign provenance. Certainly, when Napoleon went about reintroducing a cult, many reasons spoke for a thoroughgoing reorganization: if not for the state establishment of the cult of the Theophilanthropists — which was intolerable to him as a purely ideological product — then at least for the introduction of Protestantism as a state religion. There was no lack of voices — especially from the ranks of generals and councilors of state — that sought to push him in this direction. It could not be overlooked that Protestantism would have given him full independence from papal authority and the Catholic hierarchy, which he sought and had to seek in all his striving for a religious foundation of his rule. But within the framework of Protestantism, for him . . .

. . . brought about. These two parties would have torn each other to pieces and thereby annihilated France and made her the slave of Europe." It appears as if Napoleon here actually means to speak of a double inner possibility, an inner freedom of choice between one or the other form of faith for himself. But in truth the passage does not say that. Napoleon merely gives — as so often with an eventful happening that has grown organically from the whole of his life — the expression of a mental operation corresponding to the contemporary way of thinking and most accessible to it, substitutes a psychological interpretation for the complex process. The rejection of Protestantism and the reinstatement of Catholicism as the national form of faith could not, even for Napoleon's elemental conception of the determination of his work by his own disposition, his mission, present itself as a willed measure, an intellectual choice among several possibilities open to him, but only as an objective alternative whose decision was from the outset contained in his work-determination, his essential disposition. Through the direction of his nature toward total-human unfolding in his work, in the national-imperial state-building, the resumption of the Catholic cult was, as shown, inescapably given for Napoleon: as the spiritual under- or superstructure of this new state-creation, which offered itself to him with and from its precursor forms. With proclamatory decisiveness there stands over the entrance to his ecclesiastical restorative efforts that famous word he spoke shortly before they began, a few days before Marengo on June 5, 1800, to the Milanese clergy: "In the conviction that the Catholic, Roman Apostolic religion is the only one that can bring true happiness to a well-ordered society and give firmness to the foundations of a government, I give you . . ."

. . . regions I entered. All the changes that occurred then, especially those in church discipline, took place against my wishes and my way of thinking. As a simple officer of a government that in no way took the Catholic religion into account, I could not at that time prevent all the disturbances it wanted to stir up at any cost in order to overthrow it. At present, since I am armed with all plenitude of power, I am resolved to employ all means that, in my conviction, can be in any way useful for granting this religion security and protection. . . . The modern philosophers have endeavored to persuade France that the Catholic religion is the irreconcilable enemy of every democratic system and every republican government. . . . I too am a philosopher, and I know that in no kind of society, be it what it may, can a man be called virtuous and just if he does not know whence he comes and whither he goes. Mere reason can give us no certainty about this; without religion one walks constantly in darkness; and the Catholic religion is the only one that gives man a sure and infallible illumination concerning his origin and his ultimate end. . . . France — taught by her misfortunes — has finally opened her eyes; she has perceived that the Catholic religion was like an anchor that alone could give her stability in her waverings and save her from the assaults of the storm; consequently she has recalled it to her bosom. I cannot deny that I have contributed much to this beautiful work. I give you the assurance that in France the churches have been reopened, that the Catholic religion there is regaining its ancient splendor." This speech is more than a political program, which it naturally also is: it is an express document of the Napoleonic being, which this program . . .

. . . through him for the state: it vouches, in a sensuousness reliably convincing to the eyes and ears of men, for the spiritual significance, the God-givenness of the state. In this manner, as an objectively visible presentification of this God-givenness, it disclosed itself to the work and being of Napoleon, and indeed in a twofold way: once as the ecumenical principle pure and simple that sustained the ecumenical state, the old universal edifice of the Empire (which he could not yet speak of at this point because it was still remote from the then-current stage of his being's unfolding), and then as the spiritual form with which the French people had permeated itself in its old national state. Thus the sensuous-concrete fundamental trait of Napoleon's nature, which compelled him to seek his realization in the visible apparition of the state-creation, led him to receive the Christian myth and dogma in the forms that the Catholic confession had given them. Thereby the as yet state-unbound striving of his youth after the primordial contents of Christ's person and teaching was offered a counterbalance, which restrained its degeneration and rank growth into the fruitless anti-state quality of formless and being-less individual belief and preserved Napoleon from falling into a sensuous Protestantism that would have been a greater and more immediate danger for him than the Nordic-rational one. This latter also, in the beginnings of Napoleon's development, exerted its dogma-loosening and dissolving effect and thus contributed to clearing the way for his personal power of intuition and experience; but at the height of Napoleonic life this alien effect wholly vanished before the organic union in which that individual sensuous trait to the primordial facts of the Christian myth and the universal-state sensuous form of its confessional clothing came together. An independently rational . . .

. . . developed and cultivated. Not that he lacked positive knowledge in this domain. As shown above, as a young officer he made very thorough excerpts from church-history and canon-law writings and even attempted refutations of apologetic works. Later, when he negotiated with the Holy See about ecclesiastical restoration, he studied — true to his nature — all relevant questions with the help of source documents under the guidance of his Minister of Worship Portalis, with such penetrating success that Cardinal Caprara, after one of their numerous discussions of spiritual questions, testified: "When he came to the canonical institution of bishops, he let himself go and delivered a very long discourse, speaking no longer like a military man but entirely like a canon lawyer." He was himself so convinced of the reliability of his knowledge in this domain that in a conversation with the Pope, an incidental remark by the Holy Father about alleged errors in his theological understanding threw him into extreme anger, and he burst out against him: "Does Your Holiness take me for a Charles IV [of Spain]?" But his spirit, hungering for substantial, for sensuous-concrete contents, rebelled against the conceptualization by which theological science removed all givennesses outside itself into a being-empty air of distinctions and conclusions and claimed for this realm the same reality-value as for that of tangible and visible reality. His strong intellectual faculty could perhaps temporarily find an unexpected stimulus therein, as the historian of his church policy believes to observe, but one of Napoleon's closest spiritual advisors (whom he himself immediately adduces), the Abbé de Pradt, confesses nonetheless: "One understands . . ."

. . . has. Among the things I most deeply abhor, religious quarrels and squabbles stand foremost." Here again the agreement in which the sensuous immediacy of his primary human disposition stood with his creative state accomplishment emerges irrefutably. Where his senses could no longer directly serve his spirit, there was a domain in which his state-creation also stood in immediate jeopardy. Hence he storms so against the "sophistiqueries romaines et théologiques" with which he felt himself constantly hindered by the Curia from restoring the church as he planned it as foundation and part of his sensuous world-government. The result and effect of the particular kind of religious faith that belonged to Napoleon, alongside his nature-elemental devotion to a general divinity, is to be determined as follows: he traced in a certain way the path for that middle measure of religiosity that determined the spirits of the ruling stratum in the nineteenth century. They are fundamentally convinced of the existence of a divine being. Even its incarnation in Christ is still a tolerable conception for them up to a certain degree. Its confessional expression as dogma they have rationally overcome, but they are without hesitation ready to accept it as a churchly form, as a rite within the framework of what is state-necessary and socially prescribed. All the utterances with which Napoleon himself, all the statements with which his contemporaries, sought to find a general formula for his multiply conditioned and bound norm of faith point to such a middle line of faith-attitude. First there is the already cited assurance of Napoleon on St. Helena: "I am certainly far from being an atheist; but I cannot believe everything I am taught in disregard of my reason; the opposite would be a lie and hypocrisy": . . .

. . . to conceal religiosity. But one thing must be emphasized: all these various words do not represent, as most think, the arbitrarily changing expression of a coreless rational spiritual constitution depending on the momentary occasion. Against this imputation Napoleon himself protests with the caveat "that in him unbelief arose neither from perversity nor from spiritual indiscipline." All these words are rather only the various refractions that his norm of faith, composed of these elements into a middle unity, undergoes from the momentary givennesses. In programmatic declarations from the time of his state-creative work, the operation of such a uniform middle norm of faith becomes evident. It appears as a principle of state youth education in the discussion of university plans before the Council of State in 1806: "One must arrange it so that young people become neither too sanctimonious nor too unbelieving; they must be adapted to the condition of the nation and society. It is a noteworthy fact that education in its origins has always been accompanied by religious ideas." The picture that Napoleon's surroundings and environment formed of his faith corresponded to this: they did not by any means consider him unbelieving, nor inconstant or wavering in his faith-attitude; rather it appeared to them as a moderate kind of faith that avoided excess as much as deficiency. His cabinet secretary says: "Bonaparte was sincerely religious, indeed I add, Catholic. He abhorred equally the philosophical cynicism that inspires contempt for religion — he himself on the contrary regarded it as a support of morality and good morals — and the sanctimony that limits human reason." One of his spiritual dignitaries, mistakenly attributing what pertains to Napoleon as a person as a class characteristic . . .

. . . The feelingful primordial givenness of God remains an ever untouchable possession of the Napoleonic being, but not in equal measure Napoleon's belief in the divinity of Christ and the Christian salvific facts. This belief, the personal non-ecclesiastical image of the Christian myth that made him see Christ almost in the light of antique semi-divinity and the salvific facts as the creation of a new spiritual world-form by a divinely inspired one, grew out of the elemental sensuous power of his individual human disposition. In the further course it is overtaken by a no less elemental force — that which expands his individual being into the universal, tears him toward the world-historical, the state realization of his person: the Christian myth now becomes perceptible to him as confession, as the faith-form of a present folk community. Personal intuitive belief now renounces its independent validity and significance, interpenetrates with the acquired dogmatic expression, indeed goes so far in merging with it that it operates within it only as a vitalizing current that swells its traditional stock of images and words with new and fresh insights and inspirations. But since confession never became a soul-experience for Napoleon but always remained an external factual givenness, means or material through which he executed the work of his state-creative mission, in and through it Napoleon's own intuition of the Christian myth was also subordinated to the general work-goal, objectified as it were, itself becoming material and object of political expression. It sometimes disappears so indistinguishably within it that it can no longer be determined how much belongs to his personal belief and how much to his political intentions. Only the more passionate movement, the more lively sensuous power with which he sometimes seizes and penetrates a problem, reveals . . .

. . . of these church-political affairs lie highly personal questions of faith, he as a rule does not even notice. They vanish for him under the weight of state necessities. Only where the distorted contemporary apparition of church institutions and conditions with compelling power conjures up the simple grandeur of the primordial facts of faith as its counter-image, there awakens in him, alongside the immediate state-creative and formative drive, the more secret trait of his faith-interior, a highly personal confessional element. Thus it cannot be dismissed that in the abolition of the Pope's temporal power, indeed in the removal of the Papal States, behind the immediate state tasks his living conception of primitive Christianity also exerted its effect. In accordance with his everywhere confirmed unified spiritual constitution, one may see it not merely as a political expedient but rather as the revelation of a genuinely co-determining motive flowing from his personal religious conception, when he constantly returns to the point that Christ founded His Church as a pure spiritual power, left His stewards the commandment of poverty, when he opposes the worldly ambitions of the Pope with the Redeemer's — sprung from royal stock — renunciation of every dignity of this world. It appears as though the deep conflict between an ecumenical spiritual dominion and a tiny worldly particular power in the person of the Pope genuinely outraged him in his innermost being and, alongside the current political reasons, further influenced his action against him. "The triple tiara is a monstrous product of pride and ambition, completely contradicting the humility of a Vicar of Christ. . . . Religion is a clear matter. Christ and His Apostles preached it from the rooftops that all might know it. Do you want the Pope, who . . ."

. . . the interest of religion at heart, you will often want to dwell where the affairs of Christendom have their center. Thus Saint Peter preferred Rome to residence in the Holy Land." Quite similarly in his own and in the address of his Minister of Worship inspired by him to the Council three days later: "The wise and pious men in the various centuries have regarded that mixture of worldly power, limited to a small corner of Italy, and spiritual power, extending over the whole globe, as vexatious and harmful to religion; that commingling of worldly affairs, which change like the things of earth — and that especially in certain great epochs of history, such as that in which we find ourselves — and of spiritual affairs, which are unalterable like God and never change." When he convokes the Council, it is the episcopal original constitution of the Christian church upon which he relies for justification. In it he sees the true character of the Apostolic teaching and the unbroken tradition of the church guaranteed. He wishes to restore it against the violation it has suffered from the Bishop of Rome. It need not be remarked that this was certainly not the immediate, not the actual ground for the enormous revival of the obsolete institution, but initially only a welcome argument for the church-political action. But it would be equally one-sidedly mistaken to reduce Napoleon to a merely political phenomenon, a "statesman" in the conventional sense of the word (instead of its actual meaning, which signifies "state creator"), if one were to deny that his immediate intention — to free himself through a council of national bishops from the spiritual authority of the Pope — was inspired and sustained by those Christian primordial conceptions. Ever there lives and works in the . . .

. . . raised up again, did not ask whether it thereby did something agreeable to the Roman Curia or not. Not for them did the Emperor restore it. . . . Thus the Emperor only followed the stirring of his own conscience; he wished to restore the religion of our fathers for the good and salvation of his peoples and for the consolidation of his throne. Accordingly His Majesty, following the example of Charlemagne, Saint Louis, Charles VII, and all his predecessors on similar occasions, has united the bishops of two-thirds of Christendom into a council and charged it with taking measures so that . . . provision be made for the nomination and canonical institution of bishops, . . . so that no one be able to deprive the dioceses of their bishops or to put an end or interruption to that succession of shepherds that must go from the Apostles to the end of time." All state action is for Napoleon only the highest form of the working-out of his personal, uniformly undivided manhood, not — as for liberal doctrine since the eighteenth century — the exercise of an office or at best the demonstration of a special talent. His intervention in state-church affairs is also determined only by the one goal: his self-perfection in worldly power-expression. But it lies in the nature of these great ingenii, directed toward a single goal, developed from a single core, that they also comprehend all givennesses with which they work in their simply unitary primordial state and, if necessary, trace them back thereto in order to develop and rebuild them according to their inner necessity, in accordance with their own spirit. The primordial state of the Roman church was for him accordingly apostolic Christianity and the episcopal constitution of the primitive communities. Thereby, as he now aimed not merely through political consideration but from within at the recovery, the restoration of . . .

. . . Similarly with the abolition of the orders and spiritual brother- and sisterhoods. This too is occasioned primarily by the ever secret and sometimes open opposition that these closed societies, unconditionally subject to their own superiors and ultimately to the Pope, make in the midst of the state into necessary adversaries of every strong regime. In the Council of State of March 11, 1806, Napoleon declared: "The monks formed the striking force of the Pope; they recognized no other head but him; therefore they were more to be feared by rulers than the secular clergy. . . . I venerate what religion venerates; but as a statesman I cannot reconcile myself with the fanaticism of celibacy; that was a means by which the Roman Curia wished to forge the chain of Europe, thereby preventing religious from becoming citizens." The monks as striking force of the Pope, animated by a "fanatisme du célibat," a community spirit peculiar to them — he is the man to appreciate these values and to shape them in their counter-image: "Military fanaticism is the only one that is of any use to me; that is what is needed to get oneself killed," he continues. The education of youth, which is at issue in these discussions, he will not entrust to the anti-state monastic corporations, but he will give it that other community spirit, that of military organization, which with its unrelenting discipline, its strict ranks and insignia, its inspiring symbols and customs appears to him as a worldly mirror-form of monasticism. More than his state action against other church institutions, his struggle against the orders seems determined and sustained by immediate impulses of his innermost being. His passionate will-to-action, which seizes upon the state as the given soil for its realization, abhors just as instinctively in the contemplative life the . . .

". . . bishops, good priests, well-run seminaries, that is all that is of use." The effect of the orders on the state presents itself to him as an immediate intrusion into his personal being and work. Monks and nuns alike take from him his world-stuff, rob him of the men with whom he must make and support his state. Of the monks in Italy his Foreign Minister writes in a note of 1807: "First the monks — the Emperor wants none. In the time of the Apostles there were none, there are none in France. Italy does not need them, but in this critical time it needs soldiers to defend it against the infidels and the heretics [that is, the Russians and the English]"; and of the nuns he himself says explicitly and with a principled turn: "Convents attack the folk strength at its root. One cannot calculate the loss to a state from ten thousand convent women; war does very little harm because the number of men is at least one twenty-fifth higher than that of women. One should permit vows only at fifty years of age; at that age their task is fulfilled." This seems the most monstrous violation of a spiritual need by the worldly power-will. But the all-sidedness of the Napoleonic nature, for which there exists nothing wholly antithetical, ever incompatible, which also seizes the seemingly most alien thing at the given time as its own, generates from itself a counter-force that takes the final edge from this destructive will. Napoleon, who himself never thinks of assuring himself of the core and meaning of the world through contemplative or mystical absorption — which he embodies in his deed, in his person — feels that there are differently constituted beings to whom this his own path to the elevating perfection of the I in a universally world-historical is denied. From this he is able to achieve an at least conditional . . .

. . . amounted to, yet without hypocrisy held up to the Pope in 1805: "Most (Italian) cloisters were disorganized and stood immediately before their dissolution; I reorganized them and, because I desired their continued existence, contradicted the philosophical spirit of the age and fundamentally recognized the utility of the religious houses." Indeed, he extended to individual members of them, despite all the emphatic divergence of his state viewpoint from their church-bound one, extraordinary and pronounced goodwill: so to the aged superior of the Sulpicians, the learned and manly Abbé d'Emery, who during the council disputes had alone dared to represent the rights of the Pope before him. "You are mistaken, gentlemen," said Napoleon after the decisive interview with him to the bishops who thought they must apologize for him, "I am not at all angry with Emery. He spoke as a man who understands his subject, and I love it when people speak to me like that. Admittedly he does not think as I do. But everyone must have his free opinion." And a few days later to Fesch, when the latter tried to influence him on the pending spiritual questions: "Be silent, you are an ignoramus. Where did you study theology? I must discuss this with M. Emery, who understands something of it." Later to Molé: he would die calmly if he could entrust the care of educating the youth of his realm to such a man. In all this speaks the respect that the in-himself completed type feels for the unconditionality even of a life-form opposed to him — a respect that also determined Napoleon's attitude toward Frederick and Goethe. It gives the figure that breath of sublime objectivity, of great-human majesty and breadth, that contributes to spreading the genuinely heroic atmosphere around it. With the churchman who, unequivocal and unswerving from his experience of the spiritual counter-world, but . . .

. . . romantic devotion and enthusiasm even for the purest counter-type — he puts in question. As against every spiritual association, he also maintains a permanent distrust precisely toward Emery's brotherhood, the Sulpicians, since in the heart of Paris, with seemingly purely spiritual exercises, they nourished a secret opposition to his worldly state-church administration. He suspects them of an inner connection with the Jesuits and wants to track it down. He issues a note of October 19, 1807: "What are the Sulpicians? Some assert they are Jesuits, others Molinists. How many are there? What is their teaching? Do they maintain connections with foreign courts?" Already in 1802 he had written: "Distrust the Sulpicians. . . . They are intriguers." And his personal goodwill for Emery did not prevent him, when he saw the spiritually and morally exemplary but unshakably papist brotherhood, due to its numerous representation in all the seminaries, as a serious threat to his state intentions, from first restricting their sphere of activity and finally summarily abolishing them altogether. In September 1809, from the Austrian campaign, he writes from Schönbrunn to his Police Minister Fouché: "It seems that in the gatherings held at St. Sulpice, the priests conduct themselves badly and stir up bigotry. It is indicated that you should, without noise, give the vicars of Paris to understand that these gatherings, if they take place, should be postponed until Advent, and in the meantime make them well understand that I will no longer tolerate these gatherings. If they are no longer held, advise them immediately not to let them resume, for I cannot consent to their continuing." And two years later, in October 1811, he directed the final decree to the Minister of Worship: "I want in the Paris seminary no . . ."

. . . There he is from his state-creative spirit the natural ally of all persecutors that the Age of Enlightenment had aroused against this order. Already in the earliest time of the Empire he proceeds against them, in full agreement with the old declared adversaries of the order, ruthlessly: "I am informed" — he said in the Council of State on May 22, 1804 — "that in Beauvais and other cities the Jesuits have formed establishments under the name 'Pères de la Foi.' That is not to be tolerated. The King of Spain has already had official notes delivered to me by his ambassador, in which he complains that we are giving the Jesuits the opportunity to re-establish themselves among us, and that they are making progress daily." With the symbolic incisiveness peculiar to him, he calls against the closed community spirit of the Jesuits the spirit of the judges, the only group of state organs that was then held together by its own intellectual order: "One must set the courts in motion, robe against robe, corps spirit against corps spirit. The judges are in their way a kind of theologian like the priests. They too have their precepts, their rules, their canon law. . . . The monarchy has been able to resist the clergy only by opposing the Parlements [the courts of royal France] to them." His state spirit is incessantly occupied with attention to this order; his measures against it are as persistent as they are incisive and definitive. He orders: "Begin by sending all the Jesuits home; I do not recognize this order." In October 1804 to Talleyrand: "I wish you to write to Spain and make known that I view the reintroduction of the Jesuits with concern; I will tolerate them neither in France nor in the Italian Republic." The same day to Fouché: "I see from your report . . ."

. . . even from Poland. The deep state grund-antithesis of his nature against them turns into embattled feud: in the note to the Minister of Foreign Affairs ordering their expulsion from the Confederation of the Rhine states and Poland, he storms against them (March 25, 1808): "This is a re-emergence of the Jesuits, who are driven from all Europe. Nothing that will be said to me against these monks will surprise me: they bear the greatest hatred for France. It therefore appears necessary that they be driven from Warsaw, that their society be dissolved, their establishment closed, and each be required to return to his birthplace." Among the monks whose resistance appears to him so disastrous for the reconstruction of the Italian state that he demands from the Pope their total suppression in Italy, the Jesuits stand foremost. Against them above all is directed the vehement expression of this demand in that note of his Foreign Minister to Caprara from 1807, inspired by himself, in which it says, following the passage previously communicated (p. 354): "The Emperor believes he must express his will in this regard, since the documents he holds prove to him that in Rome there is the intention to reintroduce the Jesuits, this hateful sect to which France owes the death of the best of its kings. . . ." Their machinations, their influences and ramifications that undermine the life of the state, he scents everywhere and seeks to counter them. With intuitive certainty he finds their traces, uncovers their disguises. Against the women of the "Institution chrétienne de Poitiers" he hurls his verdict: "All this seems to me Jesuit intrigue." The Pères de la Foi awaken his deep suspicion that the hated order hides behind them: "What are these 'Pères de la Foi'?" it says in the aforementioned decree of October 1807. "One assures that they have relations with Rome . . ."

. . . However essentially Napoleon's aversion and defense against monasticism are conditioned by his world-political, his state spirit and will-to-realization, yet here too a drive from his personal domain of faith, his elemental comprehension of God, works in secret. Religion means for him expression and experience of the divine center and unity. From this, monasticism and the cloister system are too derivative formations for his unconditional spirit to still be able to grasp them within this domain. They represent for him no primordial givenness of faith, on the contrary a distance from its actual core, from the germ from which the Christian religion unfolded. The often-mentioned letter with which his minister communicates to Cardinal Caprara the imperial resolve to suppress the monks in Italy does not fail to point, in justification, to the primitive state of the church: "In the times of the Apostles there were none." The wording and content of this turn leave no doubt that it goes back to Napoleon's own most personal inspiration, and prove anew that his personal immediate intuition of the salvific givennesses remains involved to a certain degree in the factual-state treatment of religious questions. But where his spirit, seeking the elemental and unconditional, does not invoke the primitive state of the church as measure and rule against the proscribed orders, there he at least summons their earliest models and predecessors as witnesses to let the primitive sense of the institution refute its de-essentialized deformations vividly: "The monks of the Thebaid are the only ones who have led a true life of contemplation. The monks of Europe, on the contrary, led such an active life that they dominated the peoples among whom they settled, and everywhere they still exist, they continue to dominate." And it sounds like a memory of the origins of the institution when on St. Helena he says to his . . .

. . . influence on his otherwise wholly state-goal-dominated treatment of the Catholic church. That here a personal element of faith is actually at work — Napoleon's sensuous need for the primordiality of the facts of faith, and not merely an informed spirit of church-political action wanting to attach a historical argument or ornament — for this, besides many particulars, that famous already-recounted conversation of Napoleon with one of his councilors of state in the garden of Malmaison provides proof. The First Consul is about to discuss the possibilities of church restoration in France: a state moment decides for the choice of a particular, the old confession of France, the Catholic. But that a religion must exist at all — this penetrates him in the midst of the factual discussions as a vivid impression from the surrounding world, as a compelling feeling from the depth of experience. He exclaims: "I am nothing; I was in Egypt a Mohammedan, here I will be a Catholic — for the good of the people. I do not believe in religions. . . . But the idea of God" — and he throws his arms toward heaven — "who made all this?" Generally he was in that time still more unreservedly surrendered to the living powers of his inner being, intuition and feeling, than later in the years of his solidified state expression: the pull of his youthful expansions of feeling, as Junot experienced and vividly described them, still worked in him. Indeed, he intentionally gives these immediate personal drives of his nature room and opportunity to work themselves out, almost calls them forth. It is as if, faced with the progressive absorption of his person in its central, state expression, he would once more go back to its human source-springs, draw new nourishment from them for his natural intuition, his elemental emotional powers. Every Sunday he makes his . . .

. . . opinion. It is again the case that the Emperor speaks through his officials as through a living organ: "To command the submission of subjects to the head of state only in general terms would, under present assumptions, not direct this submission to its actual goal. The general prescription may suffice in ordinary times, when one lives under an order of things that has long existed; but today the word 'head of state' is only a vague expression that everyone can apply arbitrarily according to his intentions and prejudices. I have therefore found it necessary to speak my opinion openly and to base the prescription in clear terms on Your Majesty. That eliminates all ambiguity by fixing heart and mind on him who alone is capable and actually called to captivate heart and mind." The same thought is formulated a few lines earlier as a principle with all inexorability: "It is a question of binding the conscience of peoples to the sublime person of Your Majesty, whose government and victories guarantee the security and happiness of France." More sharply, the spiritual, the faith-need of a worldly creation cannot be made tributary to a state power-will expression. And this usurpation of a spiritual power-means has its root not in some world-political system of the age, as was the case in the Middle Ages (to which the Emperor so gladly appeals), but ultimately and exclusively in the person of the Emperor himself, in its inconceptual and inconceivable will-power, which here harnesses a timeless, a cultic element under the yoke of its present and immediate vitality. Having set the needs and requirements of his own power-realization as the decisive moment for the formation and binding of consciences, Napoleon does not shrink even from the most external and violent of his power-means . . .

". . . to conceal commercial interests. . . . It is known how useful the Lazarists of the foreign missions have been as diplomatic agents in China, Japan, and all of Asia. There are even such in Africa and Syria; they cost little, are respected by the barbarians, and since they bear no official character, can neither compromise the government nor cause it trouble; the religious zeal that animates the priests makes them undertake labors and brave dangers beyond the strength of a civil servant. . . . The missionaries will be able to serve my colonization plans in Egypt and on the African coasts." And equally clearly on the same subject in a letter to the Archbishop of Paris: "I feel the importance of this matter. I wish you to let me know how things stand with our missionaries, and what would have to be done to make their zeal useful for religion and the state." Indeed, not even to the Pope does he conceal his intentions to exploit the spiritual organization as a purely political weapon for executing his world-empire plans; on the contrary, before him they condense into an almost provocative, programmatic announcement. Never before had a ruler so unconcernedly and unveiledly transformed the civilizing conscience-power of Christianity into colonial territorial gain: "I would like to give the Chinese missions a new activity, and I do not wish to hide from Your Holiness that — independently of the general good of religion — I am prompted to this by the intention of taking away from the English the direction of these missions, which they are beginning to appropriate." Faith-life and faith-power lose for Napoleon at the height of his life their independent significance as an inner human order: they become one of the fields for the realization of that other, his state order, in which he encompasses inner and outer . . .

. . . can. But Napoleon extended the authoritarian binding of the individual conscience far beyond the boundaries even of Catholic dogmatic faith, removed it from the still somewhat more permeable ecclesiastical under his inexorable state power-command. Freedom of conscience became for him from an ecclesiastical problem ultimately a purely state one. As a young man, when he was still free from the state-formative compulsion of his maturity, feeling only his own powerful individual existence and swelling it with Rousseau's doctrine of the sovereignty of individual reason, he knew no more inviolable human good than freedom of conscience. He places it at the center of decision in the "Lettres sur la Corse." Against its violation by church statute he rebels with the passion peculiar to him: "Whoever would impair the dominion of reason, whoever would put the clamor of prejudices in place of the infallible stirrings of conscience, is a rascal bent on fraud." From the independently judging reason of the individual — thus with a truly Protestant means — he then wanted to enforce what appeared to him with Rousseau as the state, the reason-given association of individual human beings, against churchly power, in which he saw only the expression of arbitrary reason-hostile lust for domination. "Tearing the bonds that unite fathers with their children, the fatherland with its citizens — that was called a spiritual matter," he cried out indignantly then. Since then — recall his famous word about his inner illumination after Lodi — he has experienced that the state is no product of intellectual agreement but the creation of a universally disposed individual, for the present his own most personal mission. He sees that to this mission the rational power of any arbitrary individual can offer no furtherance but only distraction and resistance, that the . . .

". . . Catholic, Roman Apostolic religion is the religion of the great majority of Frenchmen." His state is built upon the equilibrium of a freedom of conscience of all its members and thereby the insurmountable measure and the most violent restriction of the individual conscience. This compulsion of conscience against the individual arising from the freedom of the rest is once harshly and sharply opposed by Napoleon to the Pope. The aged Pope, at Savona without the spiritual advisors of his cardinalate that he desired and hindered in free communication with the faithful, believed in the distress of his conscience, anguished by responsibility, that he must refuse the desired unrestricted sanction to the decree of the National Council on episcopal institution. To win him over, some bishops of imperial confidence are dispatched to him. The Emperor himself dictates their instruction. There it says with reference to the Pope's obstructive scruples of conscience: "He always speaks of his conscience, but does the Emperor not also have his own? Conscience is the property of each, which no other can dominate; but each must also enlighten his own, and how can the Pope, who has no confidence in his own insight, reject that of a hundred bishops, who also each have their conscience?" Here adaptation of his conscience to that of the council bishops is demanded of the Pope, because these cover the demands of the Napoleonic state-creation, just as on another occasion he demands from the clergy unconditional surrender of conscience to the authority of the superior when this superior goes with the imperial state-will. Thus quite consistently with him, the tolerance that the state must distribute equally to all and guarantee with its power leads necessarily to intolerance toward all, to universal compulsion of conscience. He demands that the non-constitutional priests who refuse spiritual communion with their . . .

24 Vallentin, Napoleon

". . . words: 'They are people who cling to trifles,'" and punishes this spiritual renitence against his state-will with ruthless persecution of the church dignitary, hitherto so highly esteemed by him, which begins by excluding him from the Sulpician seminary he directed. The state represents for him the permissible measure of freedom of conscience and thereby fulfills, in place of the church but far more thoroughly than it did, one of its own requirements: the subordination of the individual conscience to that of the community. To rebel against this means for him a "minutie" of conscience that he cannot tolerate if he does not want to endanger his state edifice, with which he guarantees the balanced inner communal freedom. Connected with this is his unwillingness to tolerate the detachment of individuals from the general cult, such as the independent satisfaction of religious needs in private chapels, which temporarily gained ground in Paris, and where he permits them for country houses, he attaches the obligation to attend the parish church for certain cultic acts. In this way the state, by realizing the concentration of inner as well as outer folk forces, intrudes into the most privileged domain, that of the believing individual conscience: precisely here, as its creator is aware, it has its last and most sustainable foundation. Individual faith, the individual conscience, has its binding and visible representation in the faith and conscience of those entrusted with ecclesiastical authority: the priests, bishops, and the Pope. Thus these interventions direct their decisive, their most emphatic force against the consciences of these shepherds of souls. The manner in which the worldly order wrests from their hands the means of the spiritual order in order to fortify itself therewith, acts as the overpowering of a spiritual principle by ruthless external forces. Yet if one looks deeper, one perceives that the worldly . . .

. . . belongs to state action. Thus ultimately the entire church-political struggle of this period works like a sustained personal attack of the one great man against the spirit of humanity symbolized in religion — an impression for which the historian of his church policy found the concise and beautiful formulation: "Napoleon, the greatest man of modern times, first in negotiation, then in feud, with religion, the greatest matter of all times . . ." Napoleon arrogates to himself, as the same historian says, the "supreme direction of all Catholic consciences," wants to be the "évêque extérieur" of all dioceses of his realm. Thus he threatens the priests who oppose his church plans not only with all earthly misfortune but also with eternal damnation. But above all he sets his very effective earthly power-means in motion to force their readiness for service to his state-creation. He threatened the priests who refused to follow the constitutional bishops and to take the oath, summarily with exile, indeed with degradation; later he suspended the exemptions of all aspiring priests from military service in those dioceses whose bishops appeared unreliable to him, and in the course of his disputes with the Pope he eliminated the conscientious resistance of a whole number of simple priests by imprisoning them without trial for indefinite periods. At his fall, the prisons of Vincennes, Fenestrelle, and Ivrea were still filled with them, and they were also found in the inhospitable interior of Corsica. Napoleon himself on St. Helena did not deny this, only protested against the exaggeration of their number. Indeed, he was about to degrade these victims of his state-will and inquired of his Minister of Worship about the canonical formula for it. The ordination of priests depended on his approval, and in order to . . .

. . . considerations that had formerly, as earlier explained, prompted him to tolerate or even encourage them, receded by contrast. He had to feel himself unconditionally master of all his weapons and would rather deprive himself of one than leave it accessible to foreign direction. To prevent a dangerous divergence and intermingling of minds, the influence of hard-to-control special opinions on the priests, he suppressed all spiritual journals in France; a single one, the "Journal des Curés," had to serve him to penetrate the clergy too with the uniform state mentality that his work required. Its editors were appointed by the Archbishop of Paris, who was in his hand. Thus he achieved the ability to use the whole power that the priests possessed over the consciences of individuals like his own state instrument. He realized what he once said to his confidant: "You will see what use I can draw from the priests." With their help, he confessed with satisfaction, military conscriptions proceeded more smoothly and productively at one stroke. The priests were more useful to him there, as in many other relations, through the immediate influence they exerted on the inner forum of man, than his officials who governed the outer; they truly were what he once jokingly called his "gendarmerie sacrée." But more violent, further-reaching in effect and visibility than against the lower shepherds of souls was the exercise of power with which he compelled the heads of the spiritual shepherd-office in the dioceses, the bishops, to hold and use their spiritual leadership at the disposal of the state. In the oath they had to take after the Concordat directly into the hands of the First Consul, they had to pledge themselves not only to abstain from any agreement or understanding that might disturb the public peace, but also from any state . . .

. . . that the appointment of bishops is effected by the personal will-decree of the Emperor, guided herein exclusively by the interests of his state-creation, and that even beyond the borders of France, also in those parts of his realm whose state administration he largely left to foreign hands. To Eugène, the Viceroy of Italy, he writes: "My son, let me know your opinion on the refilling of the vacant bishoprics. One should appoint priests who are very devoted to me, without fetching old cardinals who would not support us in a given case." His persistent endeavor is, in accordance with its original constitution, to trace church administration back to its root in the bishops and thus make the church independent of its extra-state leadership in Rome, which necessarily crippled his state idea. He takes care in the Concordat to retain co-determination in the new circumscription of the dioceses. To this also belonged that after the incorporation of the Papal States, as already mentioned, he suppressed a great number of small bishoprics that have no support in the original church constitution of Italy and actually always stood only at the immediate disposal of papal power, thereby creating room for a proper and purpose-determined, effective exercise of episcopal authority. In so doing he professes as the grund-thought of his reorganization unambiguously its inner supra-historical purposiveness and consistency. "One will arrange things as they ought to be, and definitively, as if there were no Pope." The ultimate standard is here too his creative formative drive, which — unhindered by spiritual scruples — wants to realize itself in the construction of the church no differently than in that of the state. Of thirty-two bishoprics he first thinks of reducing to thirteen, then even to five, of eighty parishes of the city of Rome . . .

. . . to be granted to the bishops. Napoleon writes on April 2, 1811 to the Minister of Worship: "Since it is our principle that the graces of the church can be granted to the faithful only through the bishops, all who apply should be referred to their bishop. Submit to us the draft of a circular to the bishops in this sense, and then one would have to send an official to the Pope through whom the correspondence of the bishops would be transmitted. I have given the cardinals [who were in France] to understand that they have no business interfering in anything and, since they after all do not want to order the affairs of the church, at least they must not disturb those of the state." Through this participation in the highest ecclesiastical powers — which, had the imperial regime continued, might perhaps have been transferred to them — the bishops were to be given the actually central significance in church government and through them the administration of the goods of salvation also to be drawn into the state sphere of power. This goal comes expression quite unhesitatingly and very emphatically in the provision that the correspondence of bishops with the Pope in these matters should take place through a state official, and in the fact that the interference of cardinals in these matters is repelled as a disturbance of the state. Napoleon held the bishops, like the simple priests, under the strictest surveillance. While the gendarmes supervised their sermons, Napoleon subjected the pastoral letters of the bishops to the censorship of the prefects. Even if they did not require the formal visa of the prefecture, they still had to be submitted to it and approved by it. To crown it all, the bishops were permitted to multiply their writings only through the prefecture printing press, whereby in effect their spiritual shepherd-office was delivered over to the state authority. On the proceedings of the united . . .

. . . the commission they had chosen. But the humiliating designation "bureau chargé de la police de l'assemblée," which outraged them, they changed in the documents of the council to "bureau de l'administration intérieure," without of course being able to induce the Emperor himself to concede even this formal mitigation. He wanted in the council to sum up the Catholic church power in the same state manner as at his rise he had united the free spiritual powers, sciences and arts, into corporate bodies (Institut National) and continually strove to further organize. Since the Pope could not be moved to place his power-means, which flowed from a source inaccessible to Napoleon — the Catholic tradition — at the unlimited disposal of the new worldly state idea, the entire ecclesiastical power-complex was to receive from the new state idea in the council a form independent of all tradition, corresponding to the present world-givennesses. If the Pope in his resistance to the Emperor wished to leave the vacant bishoprics still longer unfilled, the council was to arrogate to itself the power to exercise this care for the spiritual office over his head. But too firmly rooted in the minds of the church princes was the consciousness of the supreme shepherd-office of the Roman bishop and the summing-up of the whole church in him for the commission set up to solve that problem simply to yield to the Emperor's will. Intending to find a tolerable way out of their conflict of conscience, they did the worst thing they could: they offended against the grund-thought from which all these attempts of Napoleon sprang. They declared they wished to consult with the Pope. That meant calling into question the pure national state character into which Napoleon wanted to translate church affairs, in favor of its anational counter-power. For Napoleon this . . .

". . . if the archbishop does not want to use them, I will close the seminaries, and religion will have no more servants." And a few days later, upon a renewed rejection of the imperial proposals by the now wavering council, to the bishops of Tours, Trier, and Nancy: "Good, if that is so — I have my commission, which meets at the Grand Judge's. I will proceed when I wish, and will dissolve the council tomorrow." The passage shows the true ground and ultimate meaning of the convocation of the council, as set forth previously. Right behind the council, should it fail, stand the justice committee and the prefects: if it cannot be achieved to give religion a state embodiment with its own means — the bishops, in the last resort the council — then religion must simply be organized as a function of the state body itself. It does not come to that. The council yields, establishes — albeit with a clause to ease its conscience — the Pope's duty of institution and the right and duty of the archbishops to exercise it in his stead. But the means by which this decision was obtained were wholly those of worldly-state power. The Emperor did not shrink from actually dissolving the national representation of the church, imprisoning the most influential of the opposition bishops — those of Ghent, Troyes, and Tournai — and influencing the rest through clever intermediaries and negotiators so that they consented to a subsequent council session and there, without prior deliberation, issued the decree according to the Emperor's wishes. And what further state acts of violence did the resistance of those bishops not cause! Again the state authority penetrated deep into the spiritual domain. Napoleon, the worldly ruler, forced those three bishops to submit their resignation no differently than he would have done toward any state official . . .

. . . The Bishop of Séez, who continued to observe the feast days suppressed by the Emperor and otherwise did not support the state institutions, he called upon during a journey to resign summarily and had his spiritual advisor taken into custody. When annexing the Papal States in 1810, he likewise had a large number of bishops who refused the oath of loyalty transported to France under gendarme escort and simply "gave them their dismissal," while thereby, as already mentioned, simultaneously creating room and justification for the violent reorganization and simplification of the church in those territories. With such measures he also did not spare the central administration of the church, the immediate entourage of the Pope, the College of Cardinals: on the contrary, he directed his sharpest and most unrelenting weapons against them. He removed from the Pope these his natural counselors, banished them — who should have been inseparable from his person — from Rome and tore them from his side. Occasionally he mitigated this strict isolation, but only to delegate a few arbitrarily chosen and devoted cardinals to advise and support the Pope and thus to influence him. But as soon as the Pope's decisions did not satisfy his state demand, he tore them away from him again. Finally, the cardinals were refused all influence on spiritual affairs, complete inactivity was imposed on them with unveiled harshness. In their banishment at Fontainebleau, a subordinate officer entrusted with their surveillance appeared before them and announced: if they wished to remain in this city, they must refrain from speaking to the Pope about business, must write no letters of any kind — not within France nor to Italy — must hold themselves in most perfect inactivity and restrict themselves to purely conventual . . .

. . . and then he even forced them to lay aside the purple and content themselves with the simple dress of the clergy. From then on, in France one distinguished the more imperially and the more papally minded as "cardinaux rouges" and "cardinaux noirs." Napoleon wished to give the church in a national episcopal constitution a state organization independent of the Roman external, the spiritual universal power. To achieve this goal he set in motion — as for any other state accomplishment — all the state power-means at his disposal: he extended their application even to the purely spiritual domain, the inner forum of the church. By deposing bishops or at least forcing them to abdicate, by violently depriving communities of their canonized shepherds, by restricting these through imprisonment or other threats in the exercise of their shepherd-office, he abolished the actual otherworldly character of the church and put in its place a new determining force, the creation of his spirit, the state: the worldly spiritual order reawakened in him, in place of the Christian tradition that never attained definitive world-expression and remained stuck in the spiritual. This process takes place with ultimate sharpness, with almost symbolic violence against the office and person of him in whom the total life of Christian tradition is summed up: against the Pope. All encroachments of the secular arm into the purely spiritual domain, to which priests, bishops, and cardinals were subjected, receive their definitive significance and symbolic representation in what befell the Pope from the driving state-creative drive of Napoleon. When after Napoleon's death the Pope said of him that, despite all the distress he had caused the church and himself its shepherd, it must be acknowledged that no one in his place would have done so much for the church, this is certainly literally true. Only the church received this . . .

. . . spiritual supremacy the Pope had to let fall. At the very beginning the Emperor extorts from him the admission and recognition of the bishops who had sworn the constitution of the Republic and would not revoke this violation of their church duties: state necessity determines the inner order of the church. He further restricts the inner church power by imposing the state catechism and forcing the Pope to grant institution to bishops nominated by the Emperor, the outer by the secularization of church territories. All this almost more impressive and of more immediate effect on the imagination through the manner and means with which Napoleon realized these great goals than through the results themselves. Napoleon confronted the resistance that the Pope offered to the inner, the spiritual universality of his claim to power with the same vehemence, the same sallies as the challenges that this claim to power encountered territorially from his worldly adversaries. Of the traditional invectives of this kind there are countless. That Napoleon branded the Pope, where he exercised the rights of temporal church power, as "work of the devil," as "enemy of religion," has been mentioned. Napoleon is so penetrated by the inner authority, the world-lawfulness of his state spirit and by his mission to realize it, that he actually regards the head of the church as the counter-spirit risen up against him, to be fought with all means, the demon hostile to world-order. The Pope becomes in this view almost the Antichrist for him. When the latter wanted to call upon the world for protection against the injustice done him, he threatened: "Does His Holiness perhaps believe that the rights of the throne are less sacred than those of the tiara? There were kings before there were popes. . . . The Pope who let himself be carried away to such a step would . . ."

". . . His Majesty sees the Pope, it is only welcome to him if the Pope does not accept the decree, so that in case of his refusal he remains covered with the shame of his ignorance. And if he does not consider himself sufficiently authorized by the Holy Spirit and the hundred bishops, not sufficiently enlightened, why does he not confess his inability to distinguish between what belongs to dogma, to the essence of religion, and what is temporal and changeable, and abdicate? Why does the Pope — if he does not grasp this difference, which is so simple that the first seminarian would understand it — not voluntarily descend from the papal throne, to let it be occupied by a man stronger in spirit and principles, who will finally remedy all the damage that the Pope has done in Germany and all lands of Christendom?" And in a private audience at the beginning of 1813 he repeated these sallies to the Pope's face. The Pope reported complainingly of this, that Napoleon had treated him with arrogance and contempt, indeed as an "ignoramus" in spiritual matters. But the Pope's attempts to defend his rights with external power-means, spiritual or even worldly, become in Napoleon's eyes a single chain of the gravest moral transgressions. Thus at the very beginning of their disputes, on the occasion of the institution of the constitutional bishops, he accuses the Pope: they wanted to make a fool of him and trip him up; it was a lure and a trap, the way they had delayed the issuance of the bull. A little later: "Oh, these are your usual tricks." In a decree to his Minister of Worship of 1811: "These dark machinations are unworthy of a Pope. . . . He will bear the blame for the misfortune of all with whom he corresponds. . . . It is troublesome for Christendom and for the church to have such a Pope, . . ."

. . . Then when he already seems to have exhausted all his punitive measures: still further, ever new intimidations, to make the Pope wholly pliable to his state will. The Pope, already stripped of all his power-means, was under strict surveillance at Fontainebleau. Then the unfortunate Russian campaign awakens in him the hope of escaping once more from the bondage of state power, of regaining his spiritual and temporal dominion. He opposes the most stubborn inactivity to all the Emperor's demands, especially the demand for confirmation of the bishops nominated by him. The Emperor does not let this pass. On the point of beginning the fateful campaign of 1813, he instructs his minister: "You will declare that if the Pope ever becomes a worldly ruler, we will break with him. We will not on that account bring about a schism. You will let the Pope know: since he takes counsel only with people like Di Pietro and Litta, one will soon see anew the unpleasant consequences of the incapacity of these people." But beyond threat and punishment with which the Emperor seeks to break the resisting will of the Pope,

his procedure against the head of the church as a whole means an almost unveiled violation, in no way different from that with which he imposed his will on worldly princes. Without obtaining any of the counter-performances he hoped for, the Pope — as none of his predecessors for centuries — had to accommodate himself to leaving Rome, the seat of his spiritual dominion, to crown the Emperor at the seat of his worldly one. Moreover, the arduous journey to Paris lacked every due consideration for his office and his age: scarcely the necessary time for rest was allowed him; he was rushed by imperial functionaries in flying haste from post station to post station. And what a worse journey, what a planless-tormenting to and fro across half of France, before he began his long detention in the desolate bishop's palace of Savona: to see here, deprived of the assistance of his cardinals, indeed of all trusted spiritual advisors, not only the possibility of an organized resistance of the church against the overmighty state spirit, but all ordered church administration founder! The execution of these measures and the surveillance of the Pope was entrusted to the local authority, the Prefect of Montenotte. For the Emperor, the Pope no longer possessed any special state significance, let alone anything like sovereignty: he was subject as a subject like any other to the given state authorities. When he then nevertheless succeeded in breaking through his unprecedented claustration and getting one of his letters to the Vicar-General of the Diocese of Paris, his isolation from the world was further intensified; he was wholly restricted to the counsel and distress of his own conscience. The Emperor gave his Minister of Worship the following instruction for the Prefect of Montenotte: "Give him orders to prevent a courier with letters for the Pope and his suite . . ."

. . . to pressure him, extort the resolution from him. When the Pope, thereby deprived of all decisiveness, was held by his conscience in an actionless resistance, Napoleon did not hesitate to attempt, like the conscientious resistance of so many bishops and priests, now also to eliminate the resistance of this supreme conscience of Christendom by the ruthless removal of its bearer. In the already above-communicated instruction for the bishops devoted to him who were to go to Savona to make a last attempt to win the Pope over in the sense of the council decree, he charges them, if the Pope believes he cannot take responsibility for the decision demanded of him, to suggest his abdication to him: "And if he does not consider himself sufficiently authorized by the Holy Spirit and the hundred bishops, not sufficiently enlightened, why does he not abdicate? . . . Why does he not voluntarily descend from the papal throne, to let it be occupied by a man stronger in spirit and principles?" But it lay in the nature of the Napoleonic genius that inner compulsion, already often characterized, to heighten all relations in any way essential to him — friendships as well as enmities — beyond their required emotional and factual expression into the symbolic, which elevated them at one stroke and for always into form-visible clarity and into the sphere of definitive, tragic-heroic event. So too here. After Napoleon had deprived his ecclesiastical adversary even of the most elementary tools of his office — books and writing implements — he demands the surrender of that high insignia with which since time immemorial the Popes had given sealing power to their bulls: the Fisherman's Ring. In the ring, the symbol of the highest church power, Napoleon's action against it finds its crowning conclusion and expression. All Rome is searched for it. It cannot be found. A visitation of the palace . . .

. . . leaves the hand of its last bearer, but it does not pass into the hand of the Emperor. It is destroyed, no longer has the form in which the Apostle and all his successors bore it. In the great struggle between the Emperor, the "greatest man," and the last representative of the "greatest matter" for the complete becoming-state of faith, nothing falls to the former at last but this destroyed ring. It is to be noted here that Napoleon never succumbed to the temptation to depart from his worldly domain, to arrogate to himself the highest spiritual world-leadership. If once, in an earlier phase of his state-church struggle, he thought of erecting a "contra altare" against the recalcitrant Pope with the help of the cardinals deputed to Paris, this always remained within the framework of the traditional spiritual world-government without the intention of making himself the high priest of this "contra altare," of uniting papacy and empire in his person. He had, as always here too, too strong a feeling of the necessity of the once-existing world-order, of his own limitation within the realm of embodied world-forces, to give in to such temptation. To be sure, as a result of his boundless extension of power into the spiritual domain, his image shifted in this direction in the eyes of anxious church servants: "Soon he will" — writes the Archbishop of Bordeaux once — "lay his hand on the censer, and perhaps later he will want to mount the altar." He himself, however, cut short the proposal of one of his councilors of state to eliminate all difficulties summarily by making himself "chef de la religion," with the word: "No, that would mean smashing the windows." He knew too well: that would have meant nothing but a schism in the direction of Protestantism, not the founding of a new theocracy, for which he had no point of connection either in his person or in the givennesses of the world . . .

. . . of purely classical stamp through its mere existence shatters the classicist deformations and actually summons up their counter-form, Romanticism, so his enormous sensuous compulsion — by wanting to renew religion in a simultaneously more primordial and more world-historical state — leads to its complete demolition. All the Enlightenment doctrines of the God-deniers of the eighteenth century did not strike the church in its core as did the irrefutable power of impression with which it sprang to the eyes of the world: that a man ultimately and exclusively grounded in himself, of its stem and kind, took possession piece by piece of the constraints of this supposedly external spiritual power and broke them. This, entirely in the sense of his own utterances, proved the form of faith, the church, to be a human creation, a human institution, and stripped it forever of its otherworldly magical power. Certainly Napoleon thereby robbed himself of this important aid for the consolidation of his world-dominion. It availed him nothing that, when the Pope, despite his complete constriction at Savona, did not yield in his resistance, he also took the last step toward his subjugation to the state-will, brought him into his next personal power-circle, to Fontainebleau. The Pope persisted in his resistance until Napoleon's world-power exhausted itself on its own most proper, the worldly terrain of battlefields, against the weapons of the world, and thus prevented the great Napoleonic design — to give his world-empire a visible spiritual consecration-form through the Pope's relocation to Paris — from being realized. All preparations had already been made, the archiepiscopal palace in Paris prepared for his residence — the Pope did not occupy it, and the now mutually chasing storms of Napoleon's worldly downfall swept over this project. But the Pope too . . .
