BOOK FIVE — GOD AND FAITH

V. MYTH AND DOGMA: MATURITY

The bestowal of consecrated candles by the Pope stood outside any relation to the sensuous origin-dispositions of his faith. It had always been granted only to the great ones of the earth. The son of the advocate on the remote island had never received a living impression of it — to which, given the nature of his disposition, he would hardly have closed himself. Thus later too he had no understanding for this ceremony, felt it again only as an encroachment of the isolary spiritual power opposed to his own world-force, destined to detract from his dignity. Hence he instructs his Interior Minister at New Year 1809: "The Pope has the habit of donating candles to the various powers. You will write to my representative in Rome that I want none... My chargé d'affaires will make known that at Candlemas I receive candles consecrated by my parish priest, and that neither the purple nor the power gives value to this kind of thing. There can be popes as well as parish priests in hell; thus the candle consecrated by my parish priest can be as holy a thing as that of the Pope."

This word in the mouth of Napoleon, who more than any other possessed a fine organ for the intensification of an impression by the person from whom it proceeded, can only mean that the impressiveness of this particular consecration-form had never become palpable to him in his origin-dispositions and had thus remained forever alien. Into this context also belongs the expression of contemptuous mockery with which he received and dismissed the Pope's bull of excommunication. The detailed discussion of this event must be reserved for another part of the exposition: as a testimony of his personal-individual comportment toward the worldly faith-form, it belongs here. The conflict between the antiquatedly overmighty gesture and the actual impotence that stood behind it, which could not even prevent cardinals and bishops from continuing to communicate with him "in divinis," had to make the whole action a mockery to his sensuous perception.

MYTH AND DOGMA: YOUTH PERIOD

Not in the same way as the ritual are myth and dogma of the Church component parts of tribal origin-dispositions for Napoleon. They could not presentify themselves to him early through sensuous impression as did the rites of the Church through the practice of his surroundings. What Napoleon received from home and school for the inner core of faith was too meager to allow a form to grow from it that could have embodied for him the great primal being-power that God represents for him. It has already been pointed out how far from a more ensouled reception and penetration of the faith-elements lay Napoleon's mother — to say nothing of his father — and even his clerical uncle, and how they honored them only in the observance of traditional rite. While we are otherwise precisely informed about all Napoleon's studies from earliest childhood, we hear almost nothing of his religious education. From this we can conclude directly — which corresponds to the direction of the age and the particular character of his homeland — that religion in Napoleon's education was not cultivated as an element of soul-formation and spiritual deepening as in more northerly regions, but rather, after the manner of Southern Catholicism, was transmitted only as a norm for the observation and handling of cult-forms, supported by a superficial instruction in the most important dogmatic propositions.

It corresponds in a curious inversion again precisely to the sensuous impulse of this Catholicism that even the instruction in these few dogmatic propositions surely occurred without any more impressive animation of salvation history: it was directed entirely at a fixed, tangible stock of learning and memory material, such as scholastic dogma had made available and brought into fashion. Its goal was authority in the most immediate, most palpable, most memorable expression. Even at the schools of Autun, Brienne, and Paris, religious education seems to have taken no essentially different course. We hear more of religious practice than religious instruction. At Brienne: morning and evening prayer, Mass once daily, confession once monthly for the older pupils. Alongside this a purely mechanical catechism teaching, which became the object of a connectedly explanatory lecture only on Sundays after High Mass and Vespers. The Minimes brothers who directed the school at Brienne and gave this instruction were moreover so secularized that nothing remained of the small effect this formal faith-teaching could have had on youthful souls but a drive, strengthening the tendency of the age, toward contempt for religion. We are told of the school at Brienne that the pupils of the upper classes maliciously noted how many minutes the various brothers took for Mass — that one finished it in only four and a half minutes and read only requiem Masses because these, without Gloria and Credo, were the shortest.

What Napoleon might therefore have brought with him of naive church-faith, such as every child has, from his home island was surely already attacked here. His inborn faith in a divine ground-being however preserved him longer and more enduringly from the faithless shallowing of his schoolmates. He remains mindful into mature age of the religious instruction that Père Charles had given him, and proves this remembrance as Consul by granting a pension to the said person with express acknowledgment of the influence that instruction had exerted on him. With him — who may indeed willingly give inner facts a particular coloring and emphasis for political occasion, but hardly invents or falsifies them in open contradiction with his experience — it means more than a merely diplomatic phrase when he confesses in the already cited pension document: "I have not forgotten that I owe the high lot I have attained to your excellent example, your insightful instruction. Without religion there is no happiness, no future possibility." This word falls in the period when, after long years of churchly disbelief, confession — church-faith — opened itself again before Napoleon as a spiritual encompassment of his state being, as comes to expression in the still-to-be-cited contemporary programmatic address to the Milan clergy. In this context the memory of that first religious instruction received a stronger coloring, but precisely its re-emergence from the living river of his development toward a new churchliness makes certain in his nature that it must have become for him an element of his inner being somehow vividly felt. This is probably also connected with the fact that it still stood under the shudders with which every impressible child-soul approaches first Communion. Napoleon received this during his school time at Brienne, and it speaks again for the living effect of this first religious consecratory act on him and for his essentially still intact church-piety at that time, that he also showed his gratitude to the dispenser of this sacrament, Abbé Geoffroy, on his visit to Brienne in 1805.

After this however — without this development being traceable in detail — his churchly faith seems to have rapidly decayed. The enlightener faithlessness among his comrades seems now to have spread to him as well. Of his religious education at the military school in Paris no such living memory remained to him as of the faith-teaching of Père Charles at Brienne. The education was here arranged about the same and equally external as that at Brienne. Morning, table, and evening prayer. Mass once daily. On holidays catechism teaching for the newcomers, every Sunday for the pupils. Confession every Saturday, and every two months Communion. In addition very sharpened fasting precepts. This meager religious cultivation, essentially directed at the cultic, met however not the still unbiasedly faith-receptive child-soul, but the just awakened and all the more passionately its rights demanding intellect of early youth, strengthened by the general skepticism of the age and the cavalierly emphasized faithlessness of schoolfellows. This education had no resistant, substantial faith-elements to oppose to this. Napoleon's church-faith found no support and no hold any more. In this sense he says on St. Helena: "My faith has been in uncertainty ever since I began to think." That is the content of this epoch of his faith-life that remained vividly conscious to Napoleon.

Only the incisive sacral act in the life of every Catholic Christian — Confirmation — imprinted itself on him, but without any admixture of deeper religious impression. As Consul he turns his grateful memory to the former Archbishop of Paris, Mgr. de Juigné, who confirmed him and had in the meantime emigrated, and makes him a member of the chapter of St. Denis. But this expression of thanks differs from that toward Père Charles very characteristically in that it is accompanied by no sort of reference to any connection of the prelate with Napoleon's personal faith-life. In the audience he grants the aged church prince, only his personal standing and merit are spoken of: "If I give you these fifteen thousand livres pension, it is to do honor to the chapter and to show my recognition of your virtues." And an anecdote communicated by Napoleon himself on St. Helena makes clear how slight the inner effect of his Confirmation on him, how faith-alien he must already then have been, given over to the contemporary rationalism in which he had grown up. When the archbishop, surprised at the name Napoleon before Confirmation, remarks that this name does not occur in the calendar and is unknown to him, Napoleon is said to have replied that this could prove nothing, since there were a great many saints, but only three hundred and sixty-five days.

Thus neither home nor school awakened in Napoleon a living and firm conception of the Catholic foundations of faith. On the contrary, he brings from his homeland the general Southern-pagan indifference toward the psychic content of religious symbols, and from the school at Brienne and still more from that at Paris a pronounced aversion toward these symbols. He still has his general religious ground-feeling of the primary existence of God. But this has taken on no investiture from the Catholic faith-conceptions: they have remained, insofar as Napoleon's spirit has taken possession of them at all, pure memory-material that he has not fused with his inner experience. If he preserved such a grateful memory of Père Charles's religious instruction, this lies precisely in the fact that this elementary instruction was surely directed more at the externally sensuous aspect of religious events than at their inner content.

His felt ground-faith in an impersonal existence of God found itself more appropriately expressed — than in the mysteriously significant Catholic faith-distinctions — in the simply rational formulas of the Enlightenment age. Already in a letter of 1784 appears his circumlocution for the divine being, held with preference in the next decade: "le grand moteur des choses humaines," which then recurs in phrases like "moteur de l'Univers, Créateur, Conservateur, Régulateur de la vie, Créateur de ce vaste Univers" and in similar forms. In this already breathes the air of Voltairian, by Rousseau with his living natural drive shot through, rational explanation of God — which Napoleon took in at the schools of Brienne and Paris, even before he succumbed to the actual seduction of studying the writings of these enlightener leaders. The echo of this first, most immediate influence from the surrounding current of the Spirit of the Age still resounds on St. Helena, where, confessing his incomprehension of the atheism of the great scholars — a Monge and Berthollet — he gives the following explanation: "I can explain their materialism only as a remnant of youthful impressions. Voltaire's and Diderot's school has done much mischief."

When Napoleon, released from school, then entered that epoch of an unbridled reception of spiritual material that created the actual foundation of what can be called his spiritual "formation," Rousseau and Raynal became the poles of this self-education. Their writings, which completed the destruction of faith in revealed religion begun by Voltaire, Diderot, and the Encyclopedists through the establishment of a positive but purely conceptually conceived Divinity, had in this domain no resistance of the Napoleonic faith-disposition to overcome, but served only to lend his inborn dogma-alienness its apparent, rational justification and to strengthen it.

Among the first notes that emerged from his independent studies during his officer period belongs that slim notebook in which he attacks Roustan's "Defense of Christianity" against Rousseau on his side and defends the positions of this spiritual leader then highly revered by him. The writing shows clearly how he is still in the process of passionately, penetratingly saturating himself with Rousseau's objections against the received saving doctrine. The writing is full of repetitions, the exegeses for his own use that are characteristic of such works from the beginnings of acquaintance with a doctrine. But it remains remarkable how here the negative-rationalistic spirit, contrary to the shallow church-hostility usual at this age, seeks to support itself on a factual-sensuous substrate. Napoleon has without hesitation seized from Rousseau's system the positive element that for him lay behind all life-problems, the predestined nourishment of his own most proper being: the state. From there, Rousseau's position toward the Church, his own decision in the question of church-faith, becomes centrally determined for him.

Roustan has attacked Rousseau precisely on this point, in his thesis about the state-destroying effect of Christianity. That works like an attack on himself. For the first and only time Napoleon feels driven to an independent working-out on religious ground. It is astonishing to see with what deep, beyond-Rousseau, in our sense still "spiritual" interpretation he traces the problem of church and state back to its primal state. He sees the danger of an independent church for the state in this: that here a power, concentrated outside the earthly and receiving its uncontrollable commands from there alone, is, according to the nature of all things human, dependent on bringing these commands to execution with earthly power-means: just as the worldly power of the papacy was the necessary — if in itself contradictory — consequence of the exclusiveness, the independence of its pure spiritual sovereignty from all earthly state power. The referral of the individual to a purely spiritual salvation lying outside earthly reality leads with necessity — legitimized by the very words of Scripture (one must obey God rather than men) — to a contempt for the state power that wants to embody salvation visibly in this world through the protection of right. The individual conscience becomes the judge over authority.

Napoleon is by origin of Catholic spirit. Thus this thesis does not flow for him into the general dissolution of all sensuous world-unity, as Protestantism ultimately means, but into the destruction of the unified state-formation by the detour through which Catholicism brings this about: namely that of the gathering of individuals into one body within the state-body — the priestly estate. This represents the spirit and conscience-power of individuals independent of the state, with the claim — necessary according to human nature — by virtue of its independence to want to rule the state in its turn: and thus tears apart the state unity by opposing to the legitimate worldly state power its own power emanating from a supraworld. Thereby it cannot fail to seek to seize all power-means also of this world, to pile up riches contrary to the saving precepts, and thus to become worldly against its own law.

Toward Roustan's attempts to explain this condition as a degeneration of Christianity, not as its necessary consequence, Napoleon insists that it is already given in the primal state of the teaching, in the spirit that has loosened itself from its secure earthly encompassment, its world-expression in the state. Here speaks — brought onto this path by Rousseau, but already freed from him and beyond him — Napoleon's own most proper manhood, clearly uttering its determining ground-law: that which makes him the most pronounced opponent of the substance-dissolving, conceptualizing spirit of the age, even of Rousseau himself in the end. That is the origin-trieb of his being, which acknowledges spirit only in represented corporeality, with it as unity, presses in his own person to realization in the state, the classical-heroic manhood, hurling the spirit comprehended in the individual imperiously against the humanitarian tendencies that would dissolve it, making it effective from the imagined totality of all individuals.

In his defense of Christianity as inimical to the state, Napoleon quite explicitly supports himself on the antique-pagan sensuous perception, to which a religious state would have been intolerable. "They knew the human heart too well not to see with their own eyes that this would lead both to the destruction of their religion and of their government." For their sensuously directed seeing, Christianity could appear only as a skillfully worn mask of worldly aspirations. It is immediately impressive and moving how this innermost driving force of the Napoleonic being — the classical-heroic, state-worldly — works itself up to bright consciousness in this writing, thrustingly, with ever new turns and repetitions. Its present-day editor rightly finds here already the germ of the faith-conception to which Napoleon as Consul and Emperor presses always more decisively: the dominating fundamental principle of statehood, to which the churchly is only a means of its presentification and consolidation.

But he overlooks that this churchly is here, at the beginning of his development, completely overwhelmed and altogether eliminated by Napoleon's state-spirit still following the Rousseauvian path, while the mature epoch of his activity differs from this initial one in that in the meantime precisely his own creative state-spirit has made the given world-form of the Catholic Church again palpable and comprehensible to him as his sensuous ground-encompassment. On the height of his life he recognizes a worldly representation of faith in the inherited structure of the Catholic Church as an element of the spirit to be realized by him state-wise — as the sensuous presentification of his supratemporal and supramundanely given origin. Here however there is as yet no question of this. However much he already seizes and treats the state defended by him against Rousseau as his own most proper affair, he still sees it here more with the eyes of a mere observer, not as a directly creative participant. Thus he does not yet feel the necessity with which his own state-creative nature must seek its last spiritual encompassment in a Divinity of sensuous expressive form; rather he can still follow the enlightener state-theory of Rousseau, at whose furthest end, instead of a living God, stands the humanitarian idea as the fundamental principle of the state. This rational reduction of God from His primary cultic givenness to a highest earthly utility principle has also left its clear trace in Napoleon's writings: in his Discours de Lyon, in which God appears only as the "Régulateur de la vie," destined to set in motion and thereby keep in order the apriori laws of a happy life. Everything supersensuous, everything that requires faith, is here — as this being of highest lawfulness — thought only as existing for the ordering of earthly affairs. The God of sentimental Rousseau, who in the Savoyard vicar's confession makes the heart the starting point of belief in God, is not his God either; the heart, feeling, is for him at this stage a much too indeterminate quantity; with a true instinct for the essence and bounds of his own being he rejects the vicar's confession and presses forward to the rational ordering of the political community as the only ground that can bear his world-directed, state-hungry nature.

This period of rational-exclusive state-direction of his being does not however extend much further than the first Italian campaign. His independent activity in Italy brings him to a complete revision of his religious views, produces his first positive relation to the Church. This is evident in his behavior toward the Curia. In the first flush of his victorious advance, as the Republican general, he treats the Curia and its state as something to be annihilated. But soon the political man in him awakens and grasps the papal sovereignty as a politically useful and necessary institution. Immediately afterward, his individual human feeling for the givenness of a higher being, which had never really gone under in him, stirs again and gives the political insight the force of personal experience. So he holds his hand protectively over the spiritual power whose political annihilation he had just before felt as desirable and to be combated. All this comes to light in that report to the Directory of June 1796: "To frighten the Roman court and make it feel that its magical effect on the people fails against us, I have authorized the Senate of Bologna to consider all decrees of Rome that contain an attack on the liberty of the city as null and void." And shortly thereafter, a few days after that letter in which he speaks of the Pope as "the old fox," he "already aspires more to the title of 'savior' than 'destroyer' of the Holy See" and underscores this attitude as having been always his own, in contrast to the Directory. For the narrowly measured span of his activity in Upper Italy this can indeed hold true, since it had at once become visible to him here how all possibility of state renewal must depend on the spiritual power of the Church embodied by the priests. His particular attention is devoted to their attitude. In two letters to the Bishop of Como and the Archbishop of Genoa (May and September 1797) he seizes with highest satisfaction the spiritual support coming to his state authority from these church princes and praises this support as a restoration of the character inherent in the original Church. "I believed I was hearing one of the twelve Apostles. Thus once spoke St. Paul. How venerable is religion when it has servants like you! A true apostle of the Gospel... convert the unbeliever yourself... The rule of the people and liberty constitute the political law of the Gospel." Here there has already opened for Napoleon, from the impulse of his state being-realization, the access to that state-colored expression of church-faith that later, on the height of his activity, offers and establishes itself to him as the existing, inescapable givenness of his state-building.

But here and for years to come — there follow the Egyptian campaign and the first period of the Consulate — the specifically religious, the state-colored relation to the Church, recedes still far behind the general human, the individual-personal elements of his experience of God. The more rational state-directed phase in the Italian campaign had already brought Napoleon closer to his true nature — which found satisfaction only in an objective activity that included the whole man — than the purely rational-utilitarian period of his early youth. But his being still does not wholly coincide with his work; he still stands free, in some measure contemplatively, over against it: the fusion of his own person with the state form, the work, into a unity, which characterizes his mature creative epoch, is not yet accomplished. He is still becoming, not yet "the apparition."

Always, as the confessional faith-expression also changed in the various epochs of Napoleon, untouched and quite independent of these changes remained his origin-feeling of the givenness of a Divinity at the ground of all things. Napoleon, with all his senses open to the world and saturated by the totality of its phenomena, encompasses the Divine as their necessary center, from which his living feeling for earthly things radiates and to which it always returns. And it would have been only fitting for this sensuously directed feeling if it had found as its origin a great tangibility, an essential being. But to draw primal being out of its undifferentiated ground into the light for a so elementarily sensuous spiritual force as Napoleon possessed, a myth would have been needed that could have revealed itself to him with present originative power — had Napoleon had to live in an age in which the power of faith could realize itself with the same intensity as his own power of action.

To the sensuously tremendous impression of the uniquely definitive figure of Christ as He walked on earth, the originally-essential perceptive and feeling power of Napoleon would have been accessible without resistance, however far the world-feeling it embodied might have diverged from his own. The image of this figure in the de-essentialized reduction of church tradition could not capture in its outline and expression the boundless primal spirit that the individual world-force Napoleon set as its origin. Too conditioned, too burdened with the needs of countless lesser generations and individuals was this image, to have been able to satisfy the elementary feeling-need of Napoleon that spanned and filled the space of a world. Thus for Napoleon the actual core of faith, the divine ground-power, necessarily remained formless, impersonal: the natural givenness of an Ur-One as the final, indefinable ground of all being. This root and source of his spiritual essence could never become a person for him. The gods of the Greeks and Romans, which had faced their believers as living forms, were nearer to him than the incarnate God of the Church dogma. Only one form of human-divine union was thinkable for his antique-directed perception: not the God-become-man of Christianity, which demands the sacrifice of the full human form and its replacement by a new, higher type of man, but rather in the manner of the demigod, as antiquity saw its heroes — as a transfer of the spiritual God-content into sensuous world-form with the continuance of both these elements in the mixed type. For this conception he found more than anyone else a living precondition in the disposition of his own manhood: insofar as he possessed by nature the particular kind of antique world-seeing — the immediate perception of something supersensuous-spiritual in the boundedness of world-forms — and that not to be understood as transferred, but as an actual sense-disposition that fell out of the manner of modern seeing and threw the spirits of this sphere off balance.

One thinks of his conception of the sonship of Alexander to Jupiter Ammon, which for him had an inner reality because it had taken form in the thoughts and actions of the entire Orient. Napoleon is definitively separated from all modern mankind — which with split life-forces, with soul or body, with understanding, mind, feeling, seeks to orient itself in external events and phenomena — by the fact that through the outwardness of things he grasps their being with the whole of his person, experiencing it as their inner, their actual reality. The action-and-event externality of things and men is for him indissolubly bound to their inner meaning, means for him, seen in itself, at best a symbolic presentification of the life-power that creates in them and has created them. Thus he can, with an entirely sensuous spirit, see a wholeness of forces in the same bodily factuality as other men, with their intellectual aids, see only their conceptually interpretable surface-parts and properties: and can thus see even the Divine as essential presence in human form before him, where others, concluding from the apparition, always see under the human skin only the experiential man.

Thus for Napoleon, independently of the imageless ground-givenness of God as it stood firm in his originally elementary feeling, and far from the purely churchly faith in revelation, there was also — from his elementary sensuous capacity — an access to the Christian world-form of the supersensuous, to the divinity of Christ, even if this lay far from the authoritative one of dogma. From this source comes, and this worldily-seen divinity expresses it, when on St. Helena he defends the certainty of his faith in the divinity of Christ thus: "I know men; so I tell you: Christ is no man." From his sensuous experience of that which confronted him in human form, Napoleon proceeds, measures by it the distance of what is transmitted of Christ, and finds it too great to be explained only by an intensified measure of human powers. Despite many contrary utterances of Napoleon on St. Helena that deny the divinity, even the existence of Christ — which will have to be considered — the genuineness of this statement is not to be doubted. The self-evident finality of the assertion is entirely of Napoleon's manner. No other could have found this formulation. It is inimitable — not rhetorical style, but objective expression of a kind of being too great, too original, to be imitated by one who does not possess it. Beyond this however the content of the utterance is as Napoleonic as possible. So immediately self-evidently from the human side drew in this period only one his conclusions: he for whom, after his particular disposition, man was the immediate object, starting point, and goal of his effecting: Napoleon.

Admittedly, from some other utterances it might seem as if man was for Napoleon — in intuitive anticipation — only the most highly developed animal, an organic transition to higher forms. "What leads us not to assume that man is only better organized matter, only its almost perfect condition?" And he can, beyond that, while preserving entirely the same matter, still imagine a more excellent kind of earthly creatures. "Perhaps one day beings will come whose matter is still more perfect?" That sounds as if for Napoleon the whole problem of existence had been accessible to a one-sidedly materialistic explanation. But all the many utterances cited in earlier sections, running through his whole life like a guideline, about the world-creative natural givenness of God prove the contrary. Here too he does not let it rest with this explanation as a final one. He supplements it by the acknowledgment of a particular psychic capacity that goes beyond this matter and finds no explanation in it alone. He holds fast to the material boundedness of the soul, but only in the sense that it forms an inseparable unity with the body: "The soul follows the corporeal, it grows with the child... If it is immortal, has it then already existed before us? So it is without memory?" But then his more spiritual view of the own supramaterial nature of spirit-powers breaks through, opposes to his previous apparently materialistic train of thought the spiritual moment: "On the other hand, how is one to explain thought? Look, at this moment, while I speak with you, I transport myself back to the Tuileries, I see it, I see Paris... That is the same thing I once said to explain premonitions. I meant: the hand accuses the eye of lying when the latter claims it sees a mile away. The hand objected: I see only two feet away, how can you see a mile away. So it is with premonitions — they are the eyes of the soul." Here therefore the soul, the spirit, is ascribed a power by which it places itself outside the body, disembodies itself. Here thus — and the whole conversation moves in great swings between these poles — matter, which holds the body prisoner, is not the ultimate essence, but rather the soul, the spirit, which premonitions allow us to sense as a power of a higher, a divine order.

Nevertheless Napoleon often takes pleasure in playing the role of the materialist, particularly in his St. Helena conversations on the origin of the world, in which he constantly embarrasses his conversation partners through his purely materialistic arguments. But even so he could not convince them of the earnestness of his positions, could not take from them the conviction that for him it was merely a dialectical exercise of his intellect, rendered unemployed and challenged by contradiction. Montholon gives expression to this without reserve at the Emperor's retort that he did not participate in the conversation at all: "Because I am firmly convinced that Your Majesty does not really think one word of all that you have just said." If this conviction, given the narrator's close familiarity with Napoleon's way of thinking, still needed confirmation — Napoleon himself gives it in an obvious upsurge of his inner being. He concludes — and the jocular address he always used as a sign of his good will lets his approving satisfaction with this view be recognized: "You rogue, so that is your opinion. Well yes, perhaps you are right; at any rate an hour is got through. We do like the English who at the moment dine with Captain Blackney and seek to forget time by getting drunk."

Thus indeed man is for Napoleon only a more highly organized animal. But this higher organization comes from the soul, whose immortality was already certain to the young Napoleon, whose powers seem to him to belong to another world, whose origin seems to flow from God. And the elevation of man beyond himself toward a more perfect stage of existence does not occur by way of a materially-mechanically conceived improvement of the species according to nineteenth-century biological doctrine, nor in the spiritual sublimation that Nietzsche gave it. It appears altogether not as a product of development, but as an event, is there at once, in that the Divine in man — in an individual, deed-setting life — embodies itself in a new, higher world-form, attaining a more perfect state of existence. But this deification of man takes from the Divinity its abstract otherworldliness, its supramundane incomprehensibility; the Divinity becomes a world-power. This is the secret of Napoleon's view of Christ. From this vantage point one must understand his famous exposition of the origin of the three Occidental religions at the beginning of the fifth chapter of the "Campagnes d'Egypte et de Syrie." Faithful to his view that faith-forms are all pure human work, he arrives, on the basis of his above-characterized view of man, at an explanation of religions also from mainly economic or other situational drives — which on the one hand makes unmistakable a kinship with similar expositions of the eighteenth century, on the other anticipates that of Taine. He explains the origin of Islam from the need of the poor and savage peoples living in the desert for the conception of a sensuously richer beyond, whereas the inwardly directed psychic impulse of Christianity corresponded to the need of man in the luxury and abundance of Greece for spiritual deepening. Mohammed's astonishing force of success is derived not so much from the greatness of his person — a world-stirring human power — as from the life-circumstances of his people that came to meet him: "When he appeared, the Arabs had for long years been practiced in war through their internal struggles. All that peoples have done great on the world stage they have done when they emerged from those crises that equally steel soul and body. If the battles of Kadesia... which allowed the fearless Mohammedans to plant the prophet's banner on the Oxus and on the borders of China; those at Aiznadin and at Yarmouk, which subjected Syria and Egypt to their rule — if these had turned against them — if the Khaled, the Derar, the Amrou had been defeated and thrown back into their immense deserts, the Arabs would have taken up their nomadic life again, would have lived poor and in misery like their fathers, and the names of Mohammed, Ali, Omar would be unknown to the world."

Mohammed, in whom Napoleon always saw a — and as will be shown at once, a related — being, appears here purely as a phenomenon determined by worldly, earthy conditioning. His divinity dissolves into the situation. And yet — this idea now presses forward — within the Mohammed thus comprehended lurks the possibility of another, a higher being, which would make him more than man, would make him appear as God. "Mohammed was a prince who rallied his compatriots... Even if Mohammed had only created an empire instead of a religion, he would have been great and extraordinary in his century." Indeed Napoleon takes the final step in the thought: if Mohammed had produced his work not with and through existing means, but in independence of them, indeed against them, from his own creative spiritual power — then he would have been God. Here the thought-form of his Christology announces itself. Mohammed's conditional divinity is the negative to the positive of Christ. But the background of both is the same view: the Divine works in man, man becomes "God" when his work is brought forth not from the circumstances of space and time, but independently of them, even against them, from the creative power of his own individual but world-comprehending existence. And further this word reveals that for Napoleon's sensuously immediate seeing, God-manhood was not an allegory but a naked fact — that for him bodily man appears capable and ultimately destined to extend the limits of manhood into the Divine, to move into the divine sphere, to become God.

Thus for him the conception and claiming of his own elevation of being into the Divine, following the precedent of Alexander — and not only this precedent itself — is more than metaphor, inner reality and livingly felt expression of being. This can in its whole enormity be conveyed to general understanding only by taking seriously the separation of Napoleon from the chronological contingency of the succession of generations, placing him in his organic context, assigning him to that mankind to which he essentially belongs: precisely the antique, which sees man as a living unity of spirit and body and at the same time as the given measure of all things, and for which therefore divinity means only the intensification and crown, only the embodiment of a highest spiritual power exceeding human measure — not a being foreign in essence: such that for it, without further ado and of itself, its realm-founding and world-forming spirits — Alexander and the Caesars — moved among the gods. That is the kind of being that enables Napoleon, not in the form of metaphorical circumlocution but in the pure factual sense of the word, to explain of Mohammed that he would really (effectivement) have been a god if the revolution he set in motion had not been prepared by the circumstances of the age. And Christ is for him in this sense the God in man: not in the spiritual suprareality of church faith, but in that sensuous reality of antique world-vision that knows as God what it sees in the world beyond the human measure certain to it.

Napoleon refrains at the discussed passage from continuing the discussion of God-manhood — decided negatively by him for Mohammed — with naked words in positive application to the person of Christ. But the whole context shows that he wants to say this, that he wants to acknowledge to Christ, in contrast to Mohammed, the God-power no longer dependent on human givennesses. He continues, namely, in immediate connection with the paragraph reproduced above: "The increasing upsurge of Christianity has on the contrary not been dependent on the outcome of any secondary event. This religion spread and established itself as a teaching that captivates, convinces, and can be stopped in its course by nothing. Constantine accelerated its triumph; but if he had not desired baptism, as soon would one of his successors have done so. Christ was a preacher; He gave His apostles the gift of the Word. Moses and Mohammed were leaders of the people who gave laws and ordered the affairs of this world." He thus leaps — for whatever reason — after having just spoken of Mohammed as person, as religious founder, to treating Christianity as such, as institution, lets the person of its founder recede here. But in immediate reading from the preceding to this paragraph, one cannot but read into the text the superhuman spiritual power that he opposes to the earthly boundedness of the person of Mohammed in the institution of Christianity as necessarily also adhering to the person of the bearer of that institution. If Mohammed was excluded from godhood only by the earthly conditionality of his religious foundation, the rise of Christianity on the contrary dependent "on no secondary circumstance," then precisely he who created it partakes of this God-power. And if Napoleon then calls Christ a "prédicateur," one must not take this apparently human-emphasizing characterization as a contradiction to this total result of the passage. He speaks here only of Christianity, does not intend to set forth Christ's higher being in its full extent and independent significance. Both — Christianity and Christ — are for him only means of clarification e contrario for Mohammed and Islam. And toward the human determinacy of Mohammed he speaks only of the determined human apparition of Christ: there He is the preacher, while Mohammed is the leader of the people. But in His characterization: "He gave His apostles the gift of the Word" — in contrast to Mohammed who "gave laws and ordered the affairs of the world" — lies contained the confession of His divine power. Christ works not with the means of the world, "the law," but with the "Word," the λόγος, the spiritual power with which from man to man He inspires the generations and forms them according to His will: an effect that exceeds human capacity and can be understood only from the God-power of the λόγος. This man-and-world-forming power from a unity that belongs to no man, but only to one standing beyond man, a Divine — this is what moves Christ beyond human measure, realizes God in Him, embodies Him, represents Him in human form.

This is no speculation in the Church's sense, but immediate perception in the origin-form of Roman-Hellenic world-spirit, as it breathes in that word from which this discussion started: "I know men; so I tell you: Christ is no man." It lets him see in the sensuous apparition that exceeds human measure — bodily the God, the God in man — and comprehend the sublime final figure of the antique, the origin-figure of the new world — to us strange under the antique myth of the demigod, the hero. For to emphasize this once more emphatically: he does not touch, by recognizing Christ's divinity, His bodily apparition, His human existence; rather the human form of Christ is for him precisely the starting point of his particular manner of seeing the God in Christ. This emerges precisely also from the sentence just cited, and with all clarity confirms that exposition of the "Campagnes d'Egypte et de Syrie." Christ is there entirely presupposed as human existence, the "prédicateur" who grants His apostles the gift of the Word, placed in parallel to Mohammed.

Certainly there are utterances of Napoleon that cast doubt on the human existence of Christ altogether or definitively deny it. So that word transmitted by Gourgaud: "As for me, my opinion is fixed; I do not believe Jesus ever lived" — with the curious reason he derives from the forgery of a Josephus manuscript he found in Milan. Further the question to Wieland, so surprising to him, as to whether he held the existence of Christ to be true. But these remarks clearly show that they do not give Napoleon's innermost opinion but were occasioned by a particular stimulus: the remark to Gourgaud — as Napoleon himself explained on a similar occasion — by the need to fill a dead hour dialectically and the pleasure of embarrassing the very church-believing Gourgaud; that to Wieland by Napoleon's certainly defective information about the poet, in whom he suspected a skeptic of Voltaire's type. But how little in earnest the denial of Christ's existence was for him emerges from the visible satisfaction with which he — similarly to that after the Spinoza conversation with Montholon — receives Wieland's reply, that to doubt Christ's existence was as meaningful as to doubt that of the Emperor himself: whereby Wieland intends not merely hyperbolically to strengthen his confession of Christ's existence, but to summon the visible factuality of the superhuman present apparition Napoleon as proof for the reality of the otherwise unfathomable Christ. Napoleon starts, and says only: "Good, good." Wieland's answer seems to have set in motion Napoleon's own, similarly directed manner of perception.

He has indeed been tempted to regard his own existence, exceeding all human measures, as a human embodiment of a Divine. With the antique absoluteness of his sensuous-substantial sight he can, like Alexander, see himself as a divine earthly presence. Wieland however, prevented equally by his rationalism and his sure tact for the conditions of the present, has certainly not wished nor been able to go so far as to speak expressly to Napoleon of his own earthly divinity. That similar ideas nevertheless moved the most enlightened spirits of the time is proved by that enthusiastic word about the "world-soul" that Hegel thought to perceive in the Emperor riding across the marketplace at Jena. Wieland however stops at suggesting in Napoleon as in Christ a greatness exceeding human measure, while nonetheless keeping its form, without characterizing this more precisely. Napoleon however, to whom in this conversation it is not a matter of divine quality but of the human existence of Christ, is seized only by Wieland's sensuous argumentation for the manhood of Christ, running parallel to his own, and sees, as he inwardly spins its thread further, confirmed by it what he himself feels the inner impulse to acknowledge. Napoleon differs from Wieland in that the latter has in his apriori rational world-understanding the ground and limit of his world-picture and can thus see the superhuman in Christ also only as an effect of conceptually graspable highest human gifts, while Napoleon, free from this limitation, sees as foundations of all being entities that, where they exceed the accustomed human measure, he does not reduce to it by conceptual analysis, but accepts in the state in which he finds them as independent, superhuman — that is, divine — powers. But in this there is a deep agreement of being between him and Wieland: that what he thus recognizes as substance — Wieland as conceptual summary — remains necessarily bound as world-form to a sensuously perceptible apparition. Christ's divinity, as it belongs to the world and has come to him through tradition, is not an unimaginable or only symbolically imaginable supersensuousness, but the sensuous existence of a particular kind of being — inaccessible indeed to explanation by human standards, but not inaccessible to human sense-impression.

Only through the sensuous apparition, with which it is indissolubly grown after the manner of all living nature, does the higher being it represents become recognizable for Napoleon. The tremendous uniqueness of the visible sacrificial death of Christ and the circumstances accompanying it, which more than an individual destiny express a world-meaning sensuously — this was needed to show human eyes the Savior, the existence of a God. "Christ," it presses to his lips on St. Helena as a recognition obviously moving him in his deepest being, the result of a solitary meditative ride, "without His crown of thorns would not be God today; it is His martyrdom that has spoken to the imagination of peoples." And again he brings his own fate into parallel — a proof of how sensuously near he felt the presentification of God in the world. Indeed, if anything makes the confession of Christ difficult for Napoleon, constantly incites him to compare Christ with Mohammed, and at times brings him very close to the faith of Islam, it is precisely the desensualizing impulse inherent in Christianity — which separates soul from body and would assign the former sovereignty over the latter. He himself is too near to that sensuous perception of the Eastern peoples, inaccessible to such a faith-teaching, to make the observation only purely objectively, entirely without inner participation: "The religion of Christ is too subtle for Orientals; they needed political doctrines. In their eyes Mohammed is superior to Christ; one sees him act, while there are people who even doubt the existence of Jesus."

But indeed Napoleon in his mature period had so interpenetrated the East-oriented, entirely sensuously determined being of his origins with the Occidental reality of spiritual and psychic experience, that the sensuous power of Islam, which satisfied only that one side of man's inner being, could no longer displace the apparition of Christ — who, though pointing to a supersensuous-psychic sphere, had through His bodily reality anchored it so firmly in the world that it remained graspable for the balanced sensuous-psychic spiritual totality of Napoleon. This corporeality and sensuous presentness of the saving figure, which the Catholic confession still offered him to a certain degree, was entirely lacking in Protestantism. He comprehends with the immediacy of his sight even then the completely desensualizing, the form-dissolving impulse of this confession, which has prevented it from developing an art. To Canova the word occurs: "The Protestants have nothing beautiful." From a similar attitude he reproached Judaism with the lack of creative imagination that excludes it from more general diffusion.

This essential lack of sensuous impressiveness would have made forever simply impossible for him an attachment to this confession — even if only within the limits in which he adhered to the Catholic one — regardless of all political advantages that sometimes seemed to draw him toward Protestantism. When he sets it against this confession, his love flies almost passionately to Catholicism: "I love the Catholic religion because it speaks to my soul, because when I pray it sets my whole being in motion, while the Protestant religion speaks only to my reason." Then follows that already reproduced passage: "Doubtless the Protestants have reason on their side when they maintain that the Communion is only 'representation'; but why suppress the flight of my spirit that drives me to raise myself up to God and to believe in 'reality'?"

Thus for Napoleon Catholicism holds — entirely according to its true being — the right Occidental middle of an embodied spirituality between the from-its-center-loosened, peripherally roaming sensuous impulse of Islam in the East and the equally centripetal, Northern psychic impulse of Protestantism. The bodily reality of Christ, the living Catholic myth — in contrast to its at best symbolic or merely allegorical representation in Protestantism — represents this middle. This myth was not transmitted to Napoleon in the same impressive manner by childhood and homeland as the consecration-forms and customs of the Church. Its image established itself for him only through his own sensuous perception, with which he penetrated Christ's worldly life-course. Indeed, a very strong drive guides him to find back, through the deformations and disguises of the myth in church tradition, to its primal givennesses, its primary reality. On St. Helena he repeatedly takes up the Bible and immerses himself in it with persistence and penetration. In November 1817 he devotes a full hour to it. Following one of those conversations about the natural ground-givenness of God, he reads salvation history from the beginning to the Sermon on the Mount and is visibly gripped by the originative power with which here a living mouth proclaims a new order of existence. "He confessed himself carried away and inspired by the purity, sublimity, and beauty of such a moral law."

However much as a state-man he was penetrated by the elementary significance of the great Christian moral law for world-order, in these hours he is too far removed from his state being-realization, too immediately an individual living only to himself, for the tremendous fact of the living-new spiritual proclamation in and of itself not to have seized him in the first place. Even if he emphasizes the purity, sublimity, beauty of the moral law, this is still only a cultural-political garb familiar to him for the impressiveness of the origin-revelation that here strikes him personally and directly: this can be unambiguously heard from the opening words "he confessed himself carried away and inspired." Indeed, his particular worldly disposition as statesman and military commander leads him rather to a more living illustration of the scriptural content than to a conceptualization of it. In the holy scriptures he sees the glorification of spirits of the deed related to him and seeks to reawaken them with his homogeneous spirit. He reads the Bible with the map in hand and resolves to write down the campaigns of Moses as he had written down those of Turenne and Frederick. With him it is more to be explained from his need for sensuous presence than from a search for new truths — as with his rational predecessors, contemporaries, and successors — when he traces the institutions and customs of salvation back to the natural conditions of this world. So when he once in the Council of State gives the following self-assured derivation of baptism: "In Cairo as in the desert, the mosques are at the same time inns; six thousand persons sometimes receive shelter and food there; they even find a fountain and water for bathing: hence our ceremony of baptism. It could not have taken its origin in our climate; there the water is not valuable enough." Likewise when in his above-discussed presentation of the origin of Christianity and Islam in the fifth chapter of the "Campagnes d'Egypte et de Syrie" he regards these religions as the psychic compensation for the particular life-condition of their adherents caused by the landscape — Islam as a cult of the senses for the substance-poor desert peoples, Christianity as a cult of the soul for the substance-overfilled peoples of rich Greece. Also the more detailed consideration that is devoted to the origin of Christianity and explains it as a triumph of Greek spirit-and-soul greatness — of Socrates, Plato, Aristides — over the world-forces of Rome — of Flaminius, the Scipios, the Aemilii — has its starting point there.

Certainly it was this deep and rounded vividness, produced from his own sense-impression, that in a conversation about this subject so struck and carried away the great historian Johannes von Müller that he fell completely under Napoleon's spell, turned at once from a passionate opponent into an equally enthusiastic admirer of the Emperor, and abandoned the national cause he had previously championed for Napoleon's. Mere intellectual depth could not have so fundamentally altered the image of the Emperor for a mind so enlightened itself. The conversation must have revealed to him another man, another being — the immediacy of his world-penetrating vision in contrast to the derivative perception of all spirits known to him until then.

If in that treatise Christ then appears for Napoleon directly in the conception of a worldly heir to David's throne who rejects his worldly claims to the throne in order to establish a purely spiritual sovereignty, then for this conception the concrete political direction of Napoleon's will, directed at separation of state and church, was indeed co-determinative. This emerges convincingly from the fact that this passage is taken almost word for word from the state communication with which he after Wagram made known to the French bishops his unshakable intention to enforce the independence of the Gallican Church from Rome and that of religion as such from the world-power of the Church. But it is also not to be overlooked that this so extraordinarily state-enhanced conception of Christ is grounded from the outset in Napoleon's disposition to transfer all phenomena of life into the sense-sphere most accessible to him. Here, where he disputed with the Pope over the temporalia, Christ became quite of himself a man of his sphere — the heir to the throne who renounced his worldly claim to rule — and this renunciation, as it almost sounds, not only the necessary consequence and effect of Christ's spiritual mission, but equally of His active care not to disturb the balance between worldly and spiritual power. Otherwise Napoleon would have had no occasion at this point to emphasize so strongly the royal descent of Christ: "Our Lord Christ, though He sprang from David's line, desired no worldly sovereignty."

It is very characteristic that this descent, which was certainly inserted into the Gospels not without regard to the sense-need of the Eastern peoples for external legitimation of power, now still strikes its late kindred spirit as immediate reality and displaces the image of Christ in this direction. This objective orientation toward the primal givennesses of the saving doctrine — or what presented itself to him as such — permeates his disputations with the Pope in the state-church struggle, gives them at times the thrust that makes them appear almost more as instinctive outbursts of his inner being than as state-political actions: thus in the passionate accusations against the Pope and the secularized Church when he measures them against the original apparitions of the Church: "You should emulate St. Peter, St. Paul, and the holy Apostles, who are worth a Julius, Boniface, Gregory, and Leo," or another time toward the Archbishop of Genoa: "Christ preferred to die rather than annihilate His enemies except through faith; the corrupt priest on the other hand with his gloomy eye preaches revolt, murder, blood; he is paid with the gold of the rich; he has like Judas sold the poor people. Cleanse your Church of them." He demands of the Pope "that he confess his inability to distinguish between what belongs to dogma, to the essence of religion, and what is temporal and changeable... this distinction, which is so simple that the first seminary student would understand it." And with regard to the excommunication pronounced against him: "We are too enlightened not to be able to distinguish between the teaching of Christ and that of Gregory VII."

Here too the emphasis of his "enlightenedness" should not deceive us that the actual element of this "Enlightenment" in Napoleon is the sense-impression from the origin-formations of the Church. The ecclesiastical institution, as the worldly conditions of the determination and diffusion of faith have brought it about, is not the thing itself, not religion itself. To free this from the distorting and constricting conditions of the Church that has become worldly — this drives his innermost being. Hardly has he seized the Church State, he turns against the levying of fees for the granting of papal legal acts or acts of grace. He orders on August 13, 1809 to his Minister of Worship: "At whatever price, I do not want Rome to be paid anything for the issuance of bulls, dispensations, etc. That is a profanation of holy things." It becomes a ground-law of his own state that in it the satisfaction of religious needs must remain free from all impositions; the dispensing of churchly benefits of salvation must not be linked to any payment, not be profaned by any contact with business matters. In the Council of State of March 4, 1806, he proclaims: "We have no right to impose a tax on death; the priests cost the state thirty million; they have no more pretext with which they could justify their exactions. Everything in worship must be gratuitous and for the people; the obligation to pay at the door or to pay for seats is an outrageous thing; one must not deprive the poor, because they are poor, of what consoles them for their poverty." Thus he never wished to permit that tickets be issued for worship in his own chapel. The places were to be for him who first took them.

He certainly does not overlook the impressiveness that accrues to developed religion through the sensuous splendor of churchly dignities. But when his spirit presentifies the primal givennesses of the Church, he feels the churchly rank and dignity insignia precisely from this deeper sensuous perception as intolerable. Thus he calls the triple tiara "a monstrous product of pride and ambition, entirely in contradiction with the humility of a vicar of Christ." Because he does not regard the offices and dignities of the Church as an essential component grounded in their salvific character, but as a purely administrative institution, it means nothing to him, on the occasion of the Concordat, to sacrifice sixty of the oldest bishoprics of the Church to the reorganization of the French dioceses, and later how many other venerable institutions and persons to other state purposes. And the Pope himself, already at the time of the Concordat, is stripped by Napoleon — precisely as the latter becomes aware of his significance for the church reorganization and seems to emphasize it — of his spiritual consecration-character and reduced to the level of an ad hoc state administrative expedient: "If the Pope had not existed, one would have had to create him for this occasion, as the Roman consuls in difficult circumstances appointed a dictator." The Pope as dictator, called by the actual holders of state power to worldly, and moreover auxiliary and temporally limited exercise of power — this leaves every thought of his divine institution absent. Later after their falling-out Napoleon can therefore in his orders with the same composure set the Pope entirely aside, can give his Minister of Worship as guideline for the treatment of Italian church affairs: "One will arrange things as they must be, and in a definitive manner, as if there were no Pope." And when he declares in his embittered address of March 16, 1811 to the spiritual committee called by him: "I know that one must give to God what is God's, but the Pope is not God" — this reveals in any case how far from him lies every thought of the divine origin, of the divine institution of this dignity. Certainly one can also see this utterance as an offshoot of the church-hostile Enlightenment age. But whoever has ears cannot miss the peculiarly pointed impetus of the last half-sentence, the "imperatoria brevitas" that points back to the originative power of his personal-immediate seeing as its source.

This autocracy of perception, given the great spiritual and active force at its disposal, could certainly of itself have become a danger for the objective existence, the Catholic-ecumenical character of the Church. But from such an overgrowth of the become Church by individual faith, from the danger of a new, more violent Protestantizing, the Church was preserved precisely by the same sensuous impulse of the Napoleonic disposition that summoned it forth. Napoleon's middlemost drive aims at creative realization of his being in the stuffs and forms of the world, ultimately in those of the state. This state self-realization will does not permit any special strivings of an individual conscience to arise at all. They necessarily enter the ban-circle of his state action. Even the cult of the Divine becomes graspable for him on the height of his unfolded life only as the worldly representation of the supersensuous content, in which it serves the state as indicated ground and bond. He confesses that explicitly on St. Helena: "When I took the helm of affairs, I already had decided views on all the great foundations of life; I had weighed the whole importance of religion." Then he sees at once in the Church no more "the mystery of the Incarnation but that of social order." That is in his mouth no dialectical turn, but only an express testimony of how immediately and entirely without his intervention the mysteries of religion reveal themselves to him in the sense that bears the middle of his life. "No law," he elucidates that insight, "no moral law traceable to its origin by merely intellectual means can reconcile the citizens of a state with the necessary inequality of their external destinies. For this there is needed a givenness extending beyond their conceptions: that is the belief in a Divine — religion." Another time, in the famous address to the Milan clergy of 1805, he expresses it thus: "No society can exist without morality; there is no genuine morality without religion. A society without religion is like a ship without a compass; a ship in this condition can neither ascertain its course nor hope to enter harbor. A society that is always in unrest, constantly shaken by the most violent passions, experiences within itself all the wildnesses of an internal war that plunges it into an abyss of suffering and sooner or later infallibly brings about its downfall." The religious spirit is essential to every folk-community as such. Thus its cultivation is also needed by him to whom the leadership of the community falls. In that familiar conversation about religion in the park of Malmaison the First Consul expounds: "The clergy always exists; it will exist as long as there is a religious sense in the people, and this sense is inborn in them. We have seen republics and democracies, but whatever we also see, never a state without religion, without cult, without priests. Is it not better to organize the cult and discipline the priests than to let things go their way?... What makes the present system of government popular is its reverence for the cult... One must therefore..."
