VII. ARCHITECTURE

and as an educational element for the future, he, as the first among the revolutionary generals, concerned himself with the transfer of foreign art treasures to Paris, later with the protection and promotion of native sculpture and painting. Already in the first onset of his career of victory, he saw in the enrichment of the state art-possession an essential part of his military successes, which he preferred to many a more tangible one. "It was the first example of this kind encountered in modern history," he notes with pride still on St. Helena in the memoirs of the Italian campaign. "The Duke [of Parma]," he continues, "offered two million to keep the painting [that chief work of Correggio, the St. Jerome]. The army officials were very much for it. The Commander-in-Chief declared that of the two million soon nothing would remain, while the possession of such a masterpiece in Paris would mean an ornament of the capital for centuries and would engender other masterpieces." This agrees with what the already mentioned German observer notes about a visit by Napoleon to the Louvre gallery based on communications from an attendant: "He paused a short time before the new paintings, but all the longer before those masterpieces that we owe to him. He must, as one may easily surmise, have viewed things here with a feeling of heroic satisfaction and pride." With this general care for the visual arts, it was done. The details of artistic judgment he considered outside his domain and left them to the art commissioners sent by the Directory at his request, among whom were Monge and Barthélemy. One of his reports to the Directory attests it: "Citizen Barthélemy is currently occupied with selecting paintings from Bologna. He expects to take about fifty of them, among which

in the marble works he acquired for Malmaison, e.g., the Paris and the Dancer by Canova, there is an individual artistic touch. One might be tempted to see one also in the fact that in the gallery at St. Cloud the hanging panels were exchanged from time to time. But it is too uncertain by whose order and according to what criteria this was done for one to draw from it a conclusion about a particular artistic inclination of Napoleon's. That his estimation of the visual arts in general followed the general judgment is shown by his friendly jest about Greuze, who, a representative of the art-epoch with which he himself had grown up, had now died in misery. "What did he say nothing? I would have given him a Sèvres jug full of gold to pay for all his broken jugs." To be sure, Greuze's art contained no element that could speak to Napoleon's personal being, especially the mature Napoleon. But it was the perfect artistic expression of the general emotional world of Napoleon's youth. That sufficed to legitimate it to him as a genuine representation of "nature," as true art. A weighing of artistic values, lifted out of their temporal frame, a contemplation of the individual artist-personality as such and its significance, was entirely foreign to him.

With all this, however, his comprehensively original nature did not lack a certain immediate feeling for the core also of the visual arts. To be sure, it is not like his poetic feeling, which is rooted in a particular disposition, developed and cultivated. But that inexhaustible treasure of elementary sensory power gave him, where he confronted art unreservedly as a personality without state apparatus, without dependence on the authorities invoked by himself, almost always the knowledge of what constituted and conditioned it essentially. From the various testimonies of this, let

of the Gérard portrait of the Empress, he initially remarks that the satin dress looks as if the dress had become wet. Before David's "Sacre," his first exclamation is: "How great that is! How all things stand out! That is very beautiful! What truth to reality! That is not painting, one walks right into the picture." But he did not remain stuck at the exterior of the apparition; he highlights it only as the self-evidently first element of the optical art-work, in order to find in it the expression of the total being, the inner nature of the represented. A violation, an arbitrary perversion of the sense of things through an artistic whim, drives him beside himself. They want to place Naiads in the Place de la Concorde that spout water from their breasts. Laughing, he flares up: "That is improper; take away these wet-nurses. The Naiads were maidens." He has the immediate feeling for the inner lawfulness of things in the first perception of the outer form. Both are for him indissolubly connected. He cannot see surface without sense, has no thought without representing it to himself sensorially. Where the age-old artistic play with allegories has blunted all feeling for the inner truth of representation in others, it is for him naively alive, as on the first day. The mere exterior has no independent right for him; naturalistic truth without the core of a personal or thingly being counts for little with him. This he presses toward, this he grasps as the dominating element in every art-work. This he developed to David as the inner law of all representational art in that already communicated word: "Not the exact reproduction of features, not a small wart on the nose make the likeness. One must paint the character of the physiognomy, that which animates it ... Certainly Alexander never sat for Apelles. No one asks whether the portraits of great men are similar. Enough that their genius lives in them." That is

generally wants to separate — Napoleon turns: "I have never seen our soldiers fight like yours ... Your soldiers lack ardor, movement, enthusiasm. Believe me, change that, and all the world will be satisfied." Here one feels almost how the blood-drive in Napoleon rises up against the bloodless artistic coolness: it is not merely his eye that misses the accustomed form of external apparition. From the consciousness of the essential, the inner reality of his own existence, he takes such offense at Canova's work that represents him as a naked Imperator with the Nike in hand that he forbids its public display. In the allegorizing victory figure he found not the embodiment of his true doership — which he would have tolerated even with the strongest intensification — but only an indecorously hand-grasping challenge to his opponents. To represent him, the general and leader of the French Republic, naked like an ancient hero, violates the facticity of his existence, falsifies and weakens the greatness that he himself wants to present anew to the world. It demands, just as it tolerates him entirely artistically, the expression of his immediate, his actual existence. This feeling may also have contributed to the aforementioned rejection of a portrait by David. He is conscious, in his nature of blood and spirit, of offering the sensory sphere of his effect immediately heroic reality, the stuff for a new heroic art, not only for allegories. Therein is rooted his attack on David's Thermopylae painting and his summons to him and other painters of his time to represent subjects of his epoch and the nation. The inner knowledge, drawn from his own existence, of the true power and apparition of heroic humanity opens his eye for the basic givens of plastic art. He grasps that it, through making visible

very beautiful. It might seem appropriate to return to the custom of placing statues on tombs, but to avoid all kinds of allegories as much as possible in the composition." To see in such utterances only a profession of "vérité" in the sense of naturalistic imitation, as a recent French art historian would, presupposes that one regards with French classicism the inherited formal stock of idealistic representation, what Canova calls the "style héroïque," as the given expression of experience and every deviation from it as naturalism. Only from this standpoint can one explain the Emperor's renunciation of allegory, his demand for a "figural representation" on tombs, for the reproduction of himself or his generals in the costume of his time, his praising criticism of the Sacre and his critical remarks on the Sabine Women, with a pitiful need for surface reality. In truth, in truth there lives and works the drive of a nature entirely overfull of inner knowledge of things toward its alone fitting sensory expression. This drive, the longing for the most perfect, the definitive sensory expression of inner reality, drives him quite consistently to the promotion of the statuary, the plastic, in contrast to the painterly. The guiding thoughts he sets forth for the arrangement and decoration of the Temple de la Gloire (the Madeleine) attest this: "I want nothing of wood... Nothing in this temple may be movable and changeable. On the contrary, everything must be fixed in its place... I start from the assumption that the sculptures inside will be of marble, and that one does not propose to me such as are suitable for the salons and dining rooms of the bankers' wives of Paris. Everything that is playful is not simple and noble; everything that is not durable may not be used for this monument. I say it again: there may be no kind of furniture, not even curtains... Un

"Lady" (which is not incompatible with a more conditional estimation of this building) and regrets not being able to transport St. Peter's to Paris, like so many movable art-works. The same contrast, even with the same word, when he confesses himself "humilié de la mesquinerie de notre Champ de Mars" at the sight of the arena of Verona. It is inwardly certain to him what chasm separates the heroic, which is bound to a definitive sensory apparition, to plasticity, from the body-denying, flowing spirit of the Christian Middle Ages, and thus its formations and artworks appear to him necessarily as pitifully fragmentary in contrast to the simple perfection of antique works. Much more sharply in his eyes this reproach strikes Protestantism, which over the independence of the individual soul has lost every formal common expression, every possibility of artistic, even if only painterly, pictorial embodiment of life-contents. Hence that contemptuous word to Canova: "The Protestants have nothing beautiful." Seen in this context, it means much, means more than a profession of a conditional time-style, of classicism, when the astonished German visitors find Winckelmann's work lying in the antechamber of his audience hall. It betrays an inclination toward the plastic life- and art-spirit, which he, independent of the time-style, experiences as a command of his I. It is precisely from this that classicism, the secondary formal expression of this spirit, is intensified beyond itself into "Empire"; from this Empire receives that breath of immediacy and liveliness that we in this style repeatedly feel as something other, new, in contrast to the idealistic schema of classicism. That it is so, that in him his heroic existence from itself entirely generated the feeling for being and effect of plastic expression, is proven by the already repeatedly cited word about

myth of painting. It too is not created by the mere existence of the heroic man, but only by the spirit and hand of him who experiences it with formative senses — as the Emperor says of Cellini. But such an artist can — even more certainly than the tragic poet — only be the fruit of an epoch that has already so thoroughly imbued itself with the experience of the heroic man that its definitive universally-binding utterance, its pictorial expression, can proceed from it. Indeed, as history teaches and as lies in the nature of the matter, the pictorial world-expression can always follow only after that in the linguistic structure. Even today, when perhaps the epoch has ripened to this, when a heroic poetry is in becoming, the birth-hour of a new true plastic art does not seem to have come. Why and how Napoleon could not leave art quietly to its development, to the growth of its experiential image; why and how he had to disturb artistic production through immediate intervention, was discussed in the consideration of poetry. He knew, although the knowledge of the true being of art and its conditions lay in his blood, for himself only one expression of human creation: the state. Beside it there was for other forms no independent right of existence. All had to serve him, be useful to him. Even more than in the field of poetry, that deeper knowledge remained in the field of the visual arts limited in its effect to the domain of his — if one may thus distinguish — most personal, extra-state existence, and came only occasionally, through a particular conjunction of circumstances, also to bear in his state action. To be sure, his instinctive artistic inclination could not be entirely suppressed here either. More passionately and more immediately than any ruler before him, Napoleon from his first appearance also drew the visual arts into the circle of his willing and acting

includes and subordinates. A merely personal artistic demand does not assert itself here as within poetry, for which Napoleon possessed natural disposition and organs. The immediate drive toward purely human intercourse, which early drew him close to Talma, is not noticeable in his relations with David, Gros, Gérard, and the others. The manner in which he, without actual inner participation, with the help of "art commissioners," swept together art-works from all Italy to pile them up in the great museums in Paris, is quite an act of state care, indeed a denial of independent art-spirit, which knows that an art-work can thrive and work only in its own place. In the field of poetry such insight was Napoleon's own, as his utterance about Lucian's poetic attempts abroad proves. The visual arts, however, for which he lacked the particular organ, appeared to him without further ado as part and expression of his mighty state organism. He believes that when he has united the greatest art-works in the heart of this new organism, he can force their fruitful effect. Just as at the beginning of his career he rejected the Duke of Parma's offer of paying two million to France instead of surrendering the Correggio, with the argument that "such a masterpiece would engender other masterpieces in Paris," so he still tries late to win Canova for Paris by estimating to him: "Here is your center. Here the antique masterpieces are united; only the Farnese Hercules is still missing, and we will get that too." He remains deaf to Canova's passionate objections: "But will you leave nothing to Italy? The antique sculptures form a whole, a collection connected with a countless number of other works that can neither be removed nor transported." He wants the Roman excavation booty, the art treasures of the Florentine churches, everything at the place where they

as Canova, Goethe too cautiously but stubbornly avoided the lure of the imperial court, conscious like him of the artistic unfruitfulness and general unsuitability of this soil. The development of the whole following century has proved them right, demonstrated the unfruitfulness of all state art-enterprise. The museum, which Napoleon did not create but properly developed as a state institution and scientific apparatus (innovations that already then that German visitor of Paris noted with his characteristic thoroughness), has become the law of the century and has brought about and sealed the complete uprooting of the visual arts from their given conditions, their degeneration into works of today's wholly individual arbitrariness. To be sure, this endeavor of state art-care — like all his state activity — also rests on an elementary experiential ground, springs from the drive of his creativity to present itself in all apparitions of public life. But this drive here does not work itself out with its own, livingly immediate forces, but slips — and here earlier and more necessarily than, say, in the field of poetry — imperceptibly into the all-devouring husk of the ever more mechanically handled state apparatus. To be sure, the initial dissuasions from classicist-mythological subjects to David and other artists (Thermopylae battle), the pointing to national and contemporary subjects, the demand for representation in his costume show his personal need for a reality more equal to him, more genuine, more alive. But this demand of his still unboundly creating self becomes over time an ordinance within the framework of a state system into which his creative work has frozen. The mass commissions with which Napoleon entrusted David, Gros, Gérard, Vien, Prud'hon, Philippoteaux with the glorification

31 Vallentin, Napoleon

Berthier and Citizen Denon will be able to give the necessary information to the painters you designate." It sufficed for him that such works arose in abundance and, like the military, also drew a unified art-front around his state edifice. Characteristic is already the form of the commissions. They are sometimes kept in a lump sum like a merchandise order, with only measure and price given. Under February 27, 1804, he demands from Denon a series of designs for monuments for almost all the battlefields and other memorable sites from the Italian campaigns and notes: "For each at least ten thousand, at most twenty thousand francs." Simultaneously, Denon is to have three paintings made by Gros: one "with the Comitia of Lyon," one "with the journey to Rouen," and one for the Court of Appeals in Paris "with the Code Civil." Here at least a price is not fixed. On March 3, 1806, fourteen paintings are ordered for the Tuileries, all with brief indication of their content: eight representing scenes from the military history of the Emperor, "three meters three decimeters high, four or five meters wide; the price fixed for each of these pieces is twelve thousand francs, making for the eight ninety-six thousand francs" — four more belonging more to political history, "one meter eight decimeters by two meters two decimeters; the price fixed for each is six thousand francs, making for the four twenty-four thousand francs" — then also a Victory goddess for six thousand francs and a sea battle, the latter "two meters two decimeters high, three meters wide" for eight thousand francs. The temple of glory that he erects for his army on the square of the old Madeleine church becomes more a stone catalog than a symbolic testimony of their deeds: there on marble tablets the names of all participants in the battles of Ulm, Austerlitz and Jena, on golden

the exact fixation of political situations in the expression as he imagines it. The just-mentioned instruction to Denon from February 1804 concludes: "Have a large painting made of the Mediation Act given to the Swiss cantons, with many deputies, nineteen of them in costume." And it does not fail to happen that the general director of the museums, who is as familiar with the manner in which the Emperor wishes to present himself as with the artistic means for this, on passing on the order to Gérard, formulates the imperial instructions so precisely, so thoroughly, that the artistic composition is thereby influenced from the ground up: "All in all, put much splendor in the clothing of the officers who surround the Emperor, with consideration that this contrasts with the simplicity that he prefers: that lifts him immediately out from among them." This intention of the Emperor, correctly understood and transmitted by Denon, has, as cannot be denied, its origin in that genuine knowledge of the being of art and its conditions, a knowledge that comes from the depth of his universal creative spirit. He knows how the definitive works most strongly through its simple utterance within the confusing world of apparition. It is the same consciousness that makes him demand of David that he paint him "in calm bearing on a fiery horse." But this basic law of artistic creation, seized by Napoleon as a living thing, has here and elsewhere become thoroughly a means of expression in the service of his state-directed will to work.

There is no lack of emphatic highlighting of these purely state intentions of the Emperor in placing his commissions. His intendant Daru writes to the director of the state Gobelin manufactory: "His Majesty desires that you concern yourself with reproducing the paintings that represent subjects from French history, especially those from the history

of the Emperor, then from the history of the Revolution and France. In general, one must leave no circumstance unused to humiliate the Russians and English. William the Conqueror and Duguesclin may be honored in these monuments." After, however, the Peace of Tilsit re-established good understanding with Russia, the Emperor curtly orders that everything be removed from the bas-reliefs of the Austerlitz column that recalled the victory of the French army over the Russians.

That the art-works fulfill their political purpose, are finished and can work at the right, politically given moment, counts with him admittedly more than their artistic perfection. That far-reaching decree of March 3, 1806, which orders the production of several dozen paintings only by measure and price, closes with the characteristic remark: "All artists who by this time (by August 15, 1808, the Emperor's birthday) have not completed their work without sufficient excuse will be regarded as unfit for the work that the government could subsequently commission." So too the "prix décennaux," the great prize foundation with which he wants to give the arts a new impetus, have, according to the foundation charter itself, their root entirely in state considerations. Not even the trouble that every ruler since the 19th century takes to feign personal participation and purely artistic motivation is reflected in the document. The opening formula reads: "Intending to encourage the sciences, literature and arts, which contribute extraordinarily to the distinction and fame of nations; in the wish that France not only maintain the preeminence it has attained in sciences and arts, but that the beginning century may still surpass its predecessors in them; likewise also determined to favor the

"that with the establishment of the Prix décennaux he pursued no other purpose than to offer the minds an occupation, to prevent them from occupying themselves with more serious things." And in fact the distribution of the prizes never came about. Nevertheless, the Emperor with that disparaging remark does not do justice to the deeper motives of the plan. Certainly that moment also played a part. But the harsh formula gives it a significance that does not belong to it. It belongs in that domain of sarcasms with which Napoleon sometimes wanted to give his political action an exaggeratedly realistic coloring, himself the appearance of a pure opportunist politician. In truth, the basic trait of his state being always remains bound by a definitively unconditional work-goal resting in his creative person.

Even less than the visual can architecture boast of having come close to Napoleon's spirit, even if it occupied a wide space in his planning and acting. Even less than that does a particular disposition in his nature correspond to this. The sequence in which Napoleon's capacity of reception for the individual arts diminishes stands in accord with the decreasing measure of world-stuff that these embody. Poetry, as the most universal among them, as a perfect and independent creation, is of one being with him: he lives in it with the whole of his nature, indeed streams over from it immediately into it. The visual art, which does not create spirit and body in unison, but only "incorporates" the former in and with the latter, makes only form, not also being, and therefore must always follow — as an art of second times — after poetry as that of the first, meets Napoleon only in his general drive for sensory expression, his longing for embodiment of the spirit, for shaped representation of his being: for the heroic figure. From there he finds an access to the

he holds here to what his sensory nature first refers him to: the determination of purpose of the building (which sometimes at least grants him a certain insight into the most general of the laws of building) and to that which has little to do with its core as art, the "detail," the external decorative forms. That same minister who already doubted his receptivity for the visual arts notes, not without astonishment, that he, who in other fields gave himself up to the impression of the thing in its whole, often to the point of preference for the brutally large, the mass, here stuck to the individual forms. This is certainly insofar incorrect as Napoleon also here, as will immediately be shown, was not only receptive to the great total effect, but often went directly after it. But it remains besides that indeed true that he here more than elsewhere let himself be taken by the individual, the particular. His much-occupied spirit, which had never found time to familiarize itself with the requirements and laws of this art, is more strongly and immediately struck by the more conspicuous charm of ornamentation than by the power of the constructive building-idea that conceals itself in the formation of spatial relations. Only thus can it be explained that he — especially under the spell of his medieval-romantic ideas — did justice to Gothic buildings, the Milan Cathedral, the Château of Fontainebleau, occasionally even Notre-Dame. The total artistic apparition of a Gothic building, the Gothic art-spirit as such, certainly cannot have awakened his participation. For it his wholly Romanesque, wholly antique spirit surely had no organ. As soon as a building of this style comes into comparison with a classical one or one of the Renaissance, it loses its significance for him. He writes in 1807 on the occasion of the designs for the Temple de la Gloire: "What could one build as a church that would be capable of

without a particular organ for it, to a general grasp of the artistic significance of its monuments. That wondrous glorification of the amphitheater of Verona in his report to the Directory had caught fire at the idea of the immense capacity, the hundred thousand spectators who could follow the spectacle here: it had opened for him the artistic power of the building. Not much else holds for his appreciation of the Romanesque building wonder of the Église de Brou, which he calls one of the most beautiful churches of France, and of which he regrets that no service is held in it. Let one not deceive oneself: here too it was not what one today calls the building idea, the native artistic conception, that he grasped and admired. Here it was entirely only the impression of the building in the large, its externally powerful form that drew his gaze and worked its effect upon him (which thus refutes that one-sided observation of Chaptal). In this culminates all that he himself knows to say about architecture, where he once expresses himself fundamentally about it. That word "What is great is beautiful," which already emerged in his judgments about poetry and visual art, gains here a completely exclusive significance. It forms the concluding word in one of the many consultations about the treatment of the space between the Louvre and the Tuileries. Fontaine, the architect of the Emperor's trust, had as always urged a building link; Murat and Fesch wanted, like Napoleon, to leave the space free. The Emperor ends the session with the declaration: "What is great is always beautiful; and I cannot bring myself to divide into two a space whose main advantage must be its grandeur. Everything that one can put between the Louvre and the Tuileries will never outweigh a beautiful courtyard." And when he nevertheless, through the unceasing pressure of Fontaine, conceded a connecting wing

may be impaired. Nothing else, when in 1811 during the expansion of the Château of Versailles he demands that the eye must be able to survey the whole of the palace from the front, and orders the freeing of the side wings for this reason. And when for the same building he proposes the creation of a system of colonnades, encloses the Rue de Rivoli with the still today impressive arcades, even there that same basic view is operative. He leaves no doubt about this. He says of the column arrangement for Versailles: "This whole would present on the Paris side a courtyard surrounded by a peristyle, which could have a character of grandeur." What touches this feeling of grandeur ignites him immediately. And it can happen that even the economical state spirit is outrun by such inspirations. An occasional suggestion thrown out in conversation by Fontaine to build a palace on the Chaillot hill "fermented," as his palace prefect, to whom we owe many valuable reports from this field, expresses it, "in Napoleon's imagination, which was necessarily directed toward everything that bore the character of grandeur or beauty," and gradually condensed into the commission for a corresponding design. Beyond this most general principle rooted in his nature, Napoleon did not venture far in his discussions of the being of architecture. The word is transmitted from him: "Unity, beautiful arrangement, and planfulness are conditions without which, in architecture, as in more important affairs in general, nothing can be beautiful and impressive." These are leading principles of organic creation in general, as they have resulted for Napoleon partly from his nature, partly from his all-sided activity, without any reference to the particular needs of architecture. Nothing here indicates that he had even an intimation of its character as an

quickly have a plaster model made for the union of the Louvre with the Tuileries. That will be exhibited in the next Salon, and the public's judgments will be collected." "Fontaine will also make a beautiful design for the opera in relief. It will be submitted for criticism." Compare with this his self-confident stance in questions of poetry. When would it ever have occurred to him to call upon the public or committees as judge here, to make his judgment dependent on theirs!? Of those generally held conditions, at bottom only a single one attained a more concrete significance, a certain effect on the architecture of his time. The "unity" — his own being's ownmost law — which expressed itself in the thin but pure forms of classicist building style, made this style immediately acceptable to him, indeed self-evident. It let him feel with necessity its elements — straight line, symmetry — as the art-expression suited to him, turned his preference to the long, uniformly directed, well-arranged colonnades, just as in the landscape he lined the highways with the linear ornament of poplars, with both repeating the beloved uniformity of his well-aligned parades. To be sure, he also remained not inaccessible to the countercurrents of this style. His life is too rich, his spirit too extended, for any significant apparition to have been able to remain out of connection with him and his effect. It cannot be overlooked that Egypto- and Gothomania found in episodic radiations of his life — the Egyptian campaign and the Charlemagne dream — intensified impetus and at the same time temporarily receptive soil. But the great main artery of his life — the unremitting drive of the universal I to make its classical-heroic measure, its rounded unity, the law of the world — touched the heroizing line of the native, if also

the longing for the free space between Louvre and Tuileries had damaged regularity for the sake of grandeur. Not the regularity of arbitrary parts of space mattered to Napoleon, but only that of a unified whole. Only there was his elemental thingly nature involved, not however in perspectival demands of the artist's eye. He indicates this — in a passage to be cited later more precisely — by declaring that only the experts noticed such faults. He saw the Louvre, he saw the Tuileries, and sought to emphasize each in its own uniqueness, not to compose from their differences a whole more painterly than bodily. Classical and great are one for him. Therefore he demands that the Louvre be remarkable through its size and form like the Temple of Minerva in Athens or the Imperial Library in Vienna. But this demand does not remain a mere vague impression or mood. Quite similarly as in dramatic art, he attempts to go back to the genuine style, the primal image of antiquity. He wants — as was already mentioned on the occasion of the visual arts — the "Temple de la Gloire" as an actual temple, not as a church. He insists emphatically: "By temple I have meant a building monument such as existed in Athens and does not exist in Paris." Doubtless the wish to get away from the usual types of sacred buildings to a fundamentally new style, already impressive through that, played a part here. "Napoleon wanted to create something new, to surpass the buildings of former kings in grandeur, to link his name with a gigantic creation," says that same state councillor on another occasion. But it is characteristic that this new type was found as a matter of course precisely in the form of the ancient temple. This is obviously caused by Napoleon's ownmost disposition. Despite the already far

he saw before him "bizarre buildings." Accordingly he also rejects the fashion of English gardens. He mocks the owners who, at great expense, had small lakes built by their architects, most of the time without water, little rocks in miniature, and little immovable rivers. "These stupidities," he said, "are bankers' whims. My English garden is the forest of Fontainebleau." The law of nature is different from that of art. He rejects their arbitrary mixing, the hybrid intrusion of the human spirit into the impenetrable creation and its artificial imitation. Apart from this great basic law of his own nature, the law of unity, he had no artistic standards for judging architecture: he did not regard it as an independent art like poetry, painting, or sculpture, but more as a state utility or decorative form. It has to adapt itself to the given tasks. "Right down to the charcoal-burner's hut one can do architecture," he says once with regard to a clumsy barracks facade. His examination and judgment of designs therefore directs itself mainly to the manner in which the determination of purpose of the buildings is satisfied. And here his nature, hungry for sense and substance, works itself out in a methodical questioning about the details of construction and furnishing. In connection with the prize competition for the conversion of the Madeleine church into the Temple de la Gloire, he orders the convocation of a commission that is to examine the four award-winning designs according to thirteen questions elaborated by him for their feasibility and usefulness. There are found the necessities of the intended use, so often forgotten by princely art-lovers: questions about access for court and public, about capacity, lighting, acoustics, and the like. But strangely: precisely this exact attention to the building's purpose then inadvertently leads to a stylistic demand: not

the building is destined." To this also belongs when, on a hunting visit in the Château of Raincy, he criticizes that the owners had sunk enormous sums into trifling and arbitrary things. He especially criticizes the facade, which at the entrance to the castle offered a columned hall in Ionic style and then for the rest went back to the form and plan of a simple hunting lodge. That is a contradiction, he thinks.

Occasionally Napoleon advances from the primitive impressiveness of the outer form to the higher one of the inner building laws. But as a rule, the consideration of the building's purpose does not lead him so far. It stops at the suitability of the building for its purpose. There are basic differences here between utility buildings, private structures, and those that have to embody the state's prestige. For the construction of the so-called Palace of the King of Rome, which Napoleon intended as a kind of summer house in Paris, he dictates in 1813 a note that says among other things: "I want this palace to be in some way a reinforced Sans Souci. I want above all that this be more a pleasant than a beautiful palace, two things that are incompatible; it is to lie between garden and courtyard like the Tuileries; I must be able to walk from my room into the garden and park ... my rooms must face north and south, so that I can change my quarters according to the temperature ... my living quarters are to be those of a rich private individual ... my rooms must be very close to those of the Empress and on the same floor. In short, it is to be a castle for relaxation or a residence for a man on the decline of life ... I want a small theater, a small chapel, and above all one must be very careful that there is no standing water around the castle." Versailles, the Louvre, and the Tuileries, however, are buildings of state significance. Here architecture means a piece of representation and decoration, intended to express the state's

On St. Helena he returns to these plans: "I disapproved of Versailles in its layout, but in my sometimes gigantic designs for Paris I dreamed of making use of it and with time turning it into something like a mere kind of suburb, a neighboring place, a point of view for the capital." He wanted, he said, "to banish all those tasteless nymphs" from the gardens and replace them with panoramas of all the capitals his armies had entered, and of all the battles his arms had glorified — and indeed in authentic masonry. "These would have become as many eternal monuments of our triumphs and national glory, erected before the gates of the capital of Europe, which would necessarily have to be visited by the whole rest of the world." Similar points of view also appeared in the renovation of the Louvre. "The Louvre will never be a comfortable residence. I regard it as a state palace, in which one must unite everything one possesses in treasures of objects of art and science, such as statues, bronzes, paintings, libraries, archives, medals, casts." And according to another report: "Grandeur and majesty shall be the distinguishing character of this palace, which the ruler will visit only temporarily to receive here the homage and marks of reverence due to his station: for comfort and convenience of his private life he must seek in a dwelling of less extensive mass, must seek far from the throne and outside the representation of which he cannot divest himself." Thus the renovation is to work through its size and forms like the Temple of Minerva in Athens or the Imperial Library in Vienna. Naturally, the longing for a worthy expression of the new state power makes itself felt above all in its center itself, the capital. From his spirit and hands went forth a renewed and rejuvenated Paris. "One must,"

for its own sake, but as historical documents of state existence. This its significance certainly promoted his tolerance of styles otherwise not very congenial to him, e.g., Gothic. He has deep reverence for everything organically grown, everything historically become, insofar as it at the same time guarantees his own validity for posterity. Thus he resists with all emphasis, in the Louvre construction, the architects' plans to replace the various style-forms of this great building with a unified one. "The architects," he says in a note to his interior minister from 1805, "would like to follow a single plan and change everything. Economy, sound sense, and good taste lead to a completely different view; one must leave to each of the existing parts the character of its century." The Château of Fontainebleau he loves, praises, expands as "the residence of kings, the house of centuries." In Versailles he abhors the wasteful extravagance of Louis XIV's show-palace. But nevertheless he cannot bring himself to intervene violently in what exists, to eliminate it; rather he renounces even living there longer himself. In the state council he complains: "Why did the Revolution, which destroyed so much, not tear down the Château of Versailles? I would then not have today one of Louis XIV's mistakes on my neck and an old, badly built castle to make tolerable." He proclaims it indeed as a basic law of architecture that great state buildings, destined for centuries, can also only be built by centuries and must preserve their form. That is what he meant by that previously communicated strange word about the renovation of Versailles, that it was a thing that would have to be done with centuries. With all emphasis he sets this principle against the ever-recurring proposals of Fontaine for creating a connecting link between

perpetuate memory on earth. A few days after his birthday in 1811, which had been celebrated with brilliant events in the gardens of St. Cloud, illuminations, theater, fireworks, and popular festivities, Napoleon remarks thoughtfully to his entourage: "Well yes, what remains of so many, so beautiful and costly things? Which of you will still be able to remember in six months how these things were, when you admired them. There will hopefully come a time when we can arrange better things to preserve our memory and not let our joys go up in smoke. Buildings, installations, institutions of public utility shall then be the annals of the Empire, and the date of a happy event, the celebration of a memorable festival, shall be marked by the erection of the building that will preserve its date." When, in falsely understood concern for his incomparable greatness, it is proposed to him to remove all old inscriptions and coats of arms from the Louvre, he emphasizes all the more forcefully the significance precisely of these symbols of the past for his own historical standing: "I believe that the signs and coats of arms that rulers have affixed to their works are dates that no one has the right to erase. Let each one mark what he has created; I see nothing wrong in it; on the contrary, art and curiosity can only gain by it. Does one not see at St. Peter's in Rome the names, the signs of all the popes who participated in the erection of this great building? I would not be angry if one day my name were found next to that of Henry IV; one will see which of us has done the most for the welfare and glory of his country." And so at various places of the building parts erected by him in the Louvre, his great symbol N as well as his full name are found, and in the tympanum of the colonnade

Duroc with all sharpness: "Augustus only had the battle of Actium; Germanicus could win the Romans for himself through his misfortune, but he distinguished his life only through very moderate memoirs. One sees in the memoirs of the Roman emperors nothing one could wish for. One of the greatest cares of the Institute and of scholars must be to strive to make a great difference between them (the Roman emperors) and the tablets of our history." ... The Emperor's title is "Emperor of the French." So he wants no assimilation, neither the name "Augustus," nor "Germanicus," not even "Caesar." The language in which the inscriptions must be composed is French... And then he himself drafts eight different inscriptions, all terse and brief, but full of compressed pictorial and striking force, hammering his being and effect into spirits and times, and precisely for that reason a more genuine recurrence of Roman spirit than any artificial imitation. The first and most beautiful begins: "The Emperor Napoleon planted in the same year in which he was crowned Emperor his eagles on the walls of Vienna and carried off, one year after his coronation, the victory of the three emperors." Historical document, political means of expression, state utility and decorative form — all that architecture is for Napoleon, only no actual art. Accordingly durability, speed, economy are the essential guidelines that he sets for the execution of his buildings. That is what on the whole remained of those general basic thoughts of organic effect, of "unity, beautiful arrangement, and planfulness" in their actual application to architecture. How to produce what he built as the external symbol of his power, as imperishable as possible, but at the same time as quickly as possible and at as low a cost as possible — that occupied him. The first of these

the material of this building would have to be." He asks: "Why should one not use iron or even baked clay for the vault that has given rise to disputes?" In the construction of the Pantheon some time before, he had considered having the pillars made of cast iron; he inquired about the advantages and disadvantages of such construction, and similarly some time later he asks his minister: "Let me know what there is to say against the idea of making the Pont d'Iéna of iron like the Pont des Arts." But he also does not entirely approve this bridge; would have preferred it built of stone. On an inspection of the Louvre, he suddenly stops at one of the windows overlooking the river and remarks: "I understand that in England, where stone is scarce, they use iron even for bridges of great span. But in France, where everything is in abundance!" Incidentally, his desire for iron constructions is itself a further proof of how foreign he was to the formal conditions and tasks of architecture. Speed of execution was his second law of building. As the Temple de la Gloire was to be imperishable, it was also to be finished as soon as possible. For "this building touches politics, it therefore belongs to those that must be constructed rapidly." No other law held here than for state affairs in general — war, administration, legislation. Three months were to suffice for the preliminary work on the definitive version of the Code civil, and it is still in force today. A couplet of the time says: "En paix, en guerre également / Son génie ardent l'accompagne; / Il fait construire un monument / Comme il termine une campagne." The political, the contemporary effect of the Temple de la Gloire was so important to the Emperor that even the thought of posterity had to yield: "If, however, it should be proved that the use of granite would entail too great expenses or too long a delay

the spot." Hardly has he returned from Elba in 1815, when — on March 26 already — he commands Fontaine to resume his building plans. He says to him: "I have given the intendant of the household orders to make me a report on the buildings to be executed. But since I am not disposed to lose a moment, I authorize you to put the workshops for the new gallery and the exterior works at the Louvre back into operation as early as tomorrow." Where it concerns the prompt execution of his great glory-buildings, he can even postpone the third principle of his building activity, economy. In June 1810 he writes to his minister: "Make me a report on the triumphal arch, on the sums allocated for it this year. Push the work on it forward vigorously. If necessary, I will give you a supplementary credit of 500,000–600,000 francs." Otherwise, however, he is inexorable also in observing this principle. Speed of building may extort some extra expense, but durability, his other law of building, must yield even to cost-saving. As to the state's contemporary effect, he also sacrifices it to the requirements of state economy. To save money, he occasionally does not shrink from using false materials. "In the Luxembourg," the architects complain, "everything is false." The walls, the columns are painted marble, the candelabra painted bronze; for the Pantheon he had even proposed cast-iron columns. Like the Prussian soldier-kings of the 18th century, he had an insuperable suspicion against mismanagement and swindling by architects. It sounds like a pronouncement of the first Frederick William when he storms against them: "They ruin the state and private individuals alike... One would not find a family in Paris that they have not ruined... One should hold them responsible

Napoleon notes in the margin: "What do I care about Monsieur Beaujon, and what he may have done! The builder has lost my confidence and will hand over his accounts to the one who has been proposed to me and whom I will appoint within eight days." Another case gives him occasion for the following decree to his police minister: "They suspect Calmelet and a certain Bataille, whom he uses as architect and decorator, of being in collusion in a way contrary to my interests, and I would be quite inclined to give credit to the various reports reaching me, when I consider that they have presented me with a bill of one million in expenses for a house of Prince Eugene that they furnished and for which they certainly did not spend two hundred thousand francs." He commissions Fouché with the investigation of the matter within fourteen days to create "a strict and useful example" if necessary. Eugène himself must endure reproaches: "My son, you have arranged your affairs in Paris very badly; a bill of 1,500,000 francs for your house is presented to me; this sum is monstrous. Calmelet, Bataille, and that little intendant are rascals; and I see that they have confused everything so that one will not be able to avoid paying a great deal. I see this with sorrow; I thought you more orderly. One must have nothing done without a cost estimate, with the obligation not to exceed it. You have done just the opposite. The architect has feasted on it as much as he wanted, and thus enormous sums have been thrown into the water. Apply more care and understanding than here to the affairs of my Italian civil list; architects are the same everywhere." His suspicion of builders even led him — despite his inner strangeness to their art and his aversion

to be incurred for it: thus for the renovation of the Château of Versailles. And when in 1813, after long resistance to the equalization of architecture with the visual arts in Fontaine, he appoints his "Premier Architecte," it does not happen without linking to it the task of checking all plans and accounts of civil and military buildings.

This deep distrust of architects has its last, its true ground in the fact that their actual intentions are impenetrable to the Emperor, able to escape his influence. He sees in them nothing but unmastered personal inspirations and whims that run counter to his higher state necessities, his own needs. Actually he is satisfied with none of the European princely palaces. "Why," he exclaims, "have all architects who had to build rulers' residences managed so badly?" "He had," a state councillor further reports, "seen no castle, no palace that could please him. Frederick's Sans Souci was uncomfortable and tasteless. Trianon in the park of Versailles was uninhabitable; Marly, which had been destroyed, was no longer. All the villas of Italy presupposed masters who always lived in the open air and sun. The great palaces of Germany were insipid, ponderous, boring." He admits "that it is more difficult to build a house for a head of state than for anyone else ... Majesty and comfort do not go well together; one always suffers." He himself, as shown, strictly separated both in his building instructions, but nonetheless suffered from this separation, from the constraint of representational buildings that confined his expansive nature, just as from the constraint of etiquette and gala. He believes he may demand of architecture that it must find a means of resolving these difficulties, and blames the builders

when he makes preparations for his stay in the Strasbourg palace, he orders: "Recommend Fontaine to work neither with paste nor smell. That is the worst of all." That architecture would like to count as art, pursue its own work-goals and laws, appears to him as an unbearable presumption, only as an attempt to enrich itself at the expense of the state and to evade its order and supervision. With the same means as those Prussian soldier-kings, he therefore seeks to remedy this state-endangering disorder fundamentally: by trying to transfer it from its impenetrable guild and art-fog into the transparent atmosphere of his state-military household. In that conversation with Fontaine in which he complains about the incomprehensible confusion of building accounts, he threatens to appoint, to counter all this, an engineer whom the interior minister had proposed to him. To be sure, it does not seem to have been without effect on him when Fontaine frankly countered him: "to degrade a profession is not the right means to help it flourish, and to put architects under the direction of an engineer is to give a pupil as superior to his masters, for architects also master the whole engineering field, not the reverse." In fact, however, Napoleon at least in general had recourse to the help of engineers. In his engineering corps, whose training he had taken especially to heart since his earliest beginnings, whose leaders (Gassendi, Marescot) counted among his trusted friends and advisors, he had a militarily organized, at the same time with the necessary professional knowledge equipped organization, on which he could rely when it came to countering the self-willed and opaque claims of the architects. From this corps he takes several of his interior ministers, to whose business area the

to see recognized as works of architecture. In December the interior minister must write to the president of the Class of Fine Arts in the Institut National: "His Majesty wishes to know for what reason the Institute in its report on the Prix décennaux ... on the occasion of the seventeenth grand prize made no mention of the canal of St. Quentin, the Mont Cenis and Simplon roads, which can obviously be considered as architectural works" (to which the class then replies that the canals and roads "do not belong to the fine arts"). It cannot be overlooked that Napoleon's almost passionate interest in road-building — for which still today in all countries under his dominion the poplar-lined great connecting roads bear witness — is also involved here. One need not yet believe in an intention of the Emperor to degrade architecture through equalization with the technical achievements of his engineers. Indirectly, however, such utterances did amount to that. But there is no lack of obvious proofs of his contempt. Neither in the decree that introduces the Prix décennaux nor in the administrative constitution of the Kingdom of Italy is architecture mentioned among the fine arts. In the former case, the Institute permits itself the timid remark as to whether there might not be an oversight here. A contemporary, however, confides in the time before 1813, before the appointment of the Premier Architecte, to his diary the lament: "Nothing is forgotten, except poor, unhappy architecture. Who will build buildings, who will maintain those built? Napoleon has appointed no First Architect. Louis XIV did not forget him." It is generally known among contemporaries that Napoleon harbored the utmost aversion for this art and its creators. The same witness notes: "The ruler does not love architecture; consequently they fear

determined; conditions and laws that justify the finding that music stands enigmatic and foreign among the other arts" (Wolfskehl, Über den Geist der Musik). Napoleon's participation in the other arts is dependent on the measure of creative formation that they bring into the world-stuff. Poetry, which does this most perfectly, seized the whole man in him. Visual arts and architecture, with their mere stampings or even application of pre-stamped forms, came close to him only insofar as there was still something creative in them that required no artificial means for its utterance, no special disposition for its reception. With music, none of that matters at all. Its effect rests not on creation, i.e., formation of world-stuff according to the measure of human ideas, but on this itself, its immediate, unspiritualized communication. It works, like the other arts, through an individual sense, but not, like them, first on the idea- and image-holding spirit and from there on the soul, but without transformation into image and idea, without passing through consciousness, solely and immediately on the soul. Its effect is thus in contrast to that of the other arts — elementary and nature-like, not spiritual and form-like. It is clear that here — without connection with those — a path was given to the elementary and nature-like being of Napoleon. He often and lastingly succumbed to music as such, its inborn power as a magical enchantment of his senses. One has seen him, on hearing particularly emotional pieces of music, deeply affected, fall into his well-known dreamy abstraction. "He loved music passionately," reports his valet, and other records from his entourage confirm this, "above all Italian music, and like great art-lovers, he was very hard to satisfy." The melodious Italian song-ways, which entirely toward feeling

and in the cheerful days of Malmaison the refrains: "Ah c'en est fait, je me marie" and "Si le roi m'avait donné Paris sa grand' ville." These were sequences of tones that struck his ear immediately and sharply and therefore could settle in him. Many of these melodies had so intimately intertwined with his life-rhythm that they returned again and again as constant accompaniment of the same events. When the well-known "Marlborough s'en va-t-en guerre" sounded from his lips, his valet knew that an imminent departure for a new campaign was impending. In the time of his most highly tensed energies, one of those chansons becomes at once release and incitement. He has — immediately after the return from Elba — held a review of the troops of the Duke of Berry. Now he betakes himself — so runs the report — for the first time to his government affairs at that very desk on which Louis XVIII had left his devotional books. One more glance at the map of France with the new frontiers, a murmur: "Poor France!", a few moments of silence — then he begins between his teeth to sing the refrain: "S'il est un temps pour la folie / Il en est un pour la raison." Expression of the situation, certainly, but even more original life-utterance. In the nature-like effect of tones on senses and feelings lies for Napoleon the actual power and significance of music. In his "Discours de Lyon," he designates music as the most original of the arts, that which "is born with man." Even on animals, it exerts its soothing, delighting, and shaking effect. For man, however, music means even more. Willingly Napoleon follows here — his own elementary feeling brothering itself with it — the rapturous spirit of the time, which venerates in music the original power of all feelings and therefore precisely the foundation of all social life. "To the fluting of the little bird," it says in the Dis

ever scheming violent deeds in constant unrest, may let itself be seized. The voluptuary may sense and penetrate himself with disgust at his licentiousness. The heart of the financier and the powerful may soften, so that the pearls of feeling may stray into their eyes ... In all their misfortunes may men maintain their virtue! The tone of music can work this miracle! Therefore it must be valuable to the moral teacher." If one subtracts from this somewhat bombastic utterance everything that smacks of moral application, of dogmatization of feeling through the time-style, there always remains as factual content the recognition of the original effect that belongs to music on feeling: and this is not merely an expression of taste of the time, but Napoleon's most personal, in his nature rooted share of experience. Therefore he calls at the same place Rousseau's well-known Singspiel "Devin de village" a "masterpiece of music or rather of natural feeling." From this conception, but also limited to it, music counts for him as a particularly essential, to some extent superior to the other arts, expedient and component of his new state-creation. It appears here in the task and significance that Plato assigns to it for the state. About six years after that literary appreciation of music, Napoleon writes, in the first possession of public standing, from his headquarters in Milan to the inspectors of the Music Conservatory in Paris: "Of all the fine arts, music has the most influence on the passions; the legislator must encourage it the most. A piece of morally uplifting music, made by a master hand, infallibly seizes the feeling and has more influence than a fine work on morality that convinces reason without gaining influence on our habits." The obvious intention of the writer to say something pleasing to the recipients no more impairs

one could doubt whether the author had it before his eyes when writing his work. So literally can no one, let alone such a creative nature as Napoleon, repeat himself after more than twenty years. To be sure, Napoleon does not go so far as to except music from the other arts. He holds fast to the generic concept under which modern European culture groups music with poetry, painting, sculpture, architecture. But the force for which he elevates it above these arts — that immediate effect on feelings and passions which, by skipping all conscious ideas, strikes man in his innermost being, stirs and transforms him — this force means, without his being properly aware of it, an essential difference that separates music from the other arts: it is rooted in a deeper domain than the — spiritual — germs and forces of the other arts, an unconscious nature-stratum, exercises an immediate magical-demonic power. This elementary force of music, felt by him dully and deeply, is also the object of a practical application of that programmatic declaration to the Paris Conservatory of 1797 — an army order from the next year in Egypt: "Every day at noon, on the squares opposite the hospitals, national melodies will be played by the bands of the various troop units, to give the sick courage to live and to recall the most beautiful moments of past campaigns." To awaken an echo in the hearts of the soldiers of fallen great commanders, he orders at their funeral ceremonies the singing of appropriate songs: thus at Hoche's funeral the singing of Chénier's hymn to the fallen and Lebrun's hymn to the 18th Fructidor. He believes he cannot strengthen their memory among their former comrades-in-arms more effectively than by linking their name with music dedicated to them. One day before the
