V. POETRY AND POLITICS

of the educational culture of the age, did not notice this deeper significance in Corneille and preferred the representative Racine: "Corneille is a great man. Far from the court, from intrigues, from affairs, he has so to speak intuitively grasped (deviné) the true situation, the position of realms, of peoples and of rulers. When the great Condé heard some piece of Corneille — I believe it was 'Sertorius' — he cried out: 'Where did Corneille learn the art of war?' And I for my part declare: to appreciate him properly, one would need a parterre composed of kings, ministers, and high officials as listeners to his beautiful tragedies." According to another report, this glorification sounds even more definitive, going so far as to proclaim Corneille — strangely for us — as a creative genius of antique measure: "Corneille understood the art of war out of himself: for whence should he have learned it, and yet he understood it! His state basic ideas are all of immense scope, and none is from his epoch. They are not the intrigues of Mazarin, not the cruelties of Richelieu, they are antique greatness. Where did he get this? From himself, from his soul. Good. Do you know what that is called, Cardinal? It is genius, And genius, you see, is a flame fallen from heaven, but which rarely finds a head ready to receive it." Because Corneille — in Napoleon's opinion — takes the image of the world from his own interior, does not re-form already formed images of the world, does not merely stamp a decorative state and society expression like Racine, therefore he is for him of the same kind as those who form their own selves in the state, the princes and statesmen, and has only in them his wholly fitting auditorium: a circle that Napoleon as vividly awakens to living existence as he preserves the name and honor of the poet

mythical through their deeds, creators of their race and boasting divine origin."

To present-day artistic sense it may seem astonishing that for Napoleon an original and creative world-vision could be revealed in French tragedy — even if only in Corneille. We see in it precisely a derived, a temporally literary form of this vision, the state-courtly socialized exercise of once creative doing: the genre. Even Corneille rises above this for our eye not in essence but only in degree, as a stronger talent that succeeds in bringing the genre somewhat closer to the creative primal givens, lending it an appearance of primary form and color. In essence he too belongs in the series of secondary literature, of the declamation theater, to which Napoleon with full consciousness assigns Racine. But Napoleon saw here, as already pointed out, an essential difference: "He tolerated Racine, but he admired, he loved Corneille." In Racine the seemingly rhetorical character presses upon him so strongly that he cannot see in him the inwardly certain primal power of the tragic. "I find him bombastic, your Racine," he says in the just-mentioned conversation with Maury, "with all his love scenes. For he needs a love story in his plays as actors need a prompter. Only young people can love Racine." Right after that, Racine is for him the "poète de femmes," the ladies' poet, while Corneille "is a man who knew the world." "How should he have come to know it? He saw no one," asks his partner with astonishing naivety, whereupon the Emperor — as the report continues — looks at him with a kind of disdain, as if he were judging him correctly for the first time at this moment, and declares: "That is precisely why I maintain that he is a great man." (And now follows

himself forces him to accept the fulfillment of this demand in the presently existing forms, in the highest model that the genre (become literature) offers him instead of the primal type. Added to this is the fact that this genre — French tragedy — contains a particular temptation for him, in that it demonstrates state spirit, which in the original sense it neither represents nor produces, all the more emphatically and unambiguously as ordinance. It is the most penetrating attestation of great state sentiment and to that extent the more significant for Napoleon's actual state accomplishment and the more immediately suited to him, as it is immediately usable in contrast to the heroic primal spirit, which must first create man, the state element. Thus Corneille means to him the most perfect poetic organ of the state spirit, and, since he is at least wafted by the pathos of genuine heroic spirit, beyond that precisely the tragic-heroic poet in the actual sense. But the lesser specimens of the genre — and in times when his elemental spirit pierces through the state-bound one, this also holds for the genre in general — do not conceal from him what essential difference separates French national tragedy from creative poetry. In his remarks on a proposal for the establishment of a special literature and history class at the Collège de France, he says: "The talent to create is in literature, as in music and painting, a personal gift. In these creations of the spirit or of genius, the spirit or genius achieves its greatest success immediately and through itself. We have not surpassed the Greeks either in tragedy or in comedy or in epic poetry: for still they are our models." Too deep, too instinctive is the sense for the creative primal forms inborn in him for him to overlook definitively the constricted narrowness of the French court drama

"Truth" does not mean the reproduction of a "naturalistic," of a surface reality, not the contrast of realistic to idealistic representation, but the deeper and definitive reality of unconditional and original human being. This conception is confirmed both by the whole context in which the remark occurs, and also by further utterances of Napoleon himself. Goethe here opposes the "naivety of the Greeks" as an immediate contrast to the "faibles" of the French theater so well known to Napoleon, and leaves no obscurity about the fact that the Emperor's demand was directed toward that. (Cf. Biedermann, Goethes Gespräche, Vol. I, p. 547, and here in the following pp. 442-3.) For emphatic proof of this he can rightly appeal to a word of the Emperor himself to Talma: "I would like to see a piece of Sophocles in a word-for-word translation." The "naivety of the Greeks" does not mean some particular capacity for natural representation or even conception, but a most general total way of being: their original sensuality, their elemental bodyliness. By virtue of this, they grasp the world in its symbolic primal states and primal apparitions, inaccessible to the interpreting intellect: the forces of the world in their divine primal forms, and shape them into their eternal tragic and plastic works. In their nature-immediate abundance and strength lies their deepest effect: "The Emperor," says the St. Helena report, "has read the Agamemnon of Aeschylus and admired very much the union of utmost strength and simplicity." Not a distinguishing beauty of form, but the creative basic element determines his estimation. During a reading from the Odyssey on St. Helena, he is above all seized and overwhelmed by the traits of elementary emotional movement: "The details of Odysseus' return, the recognition scene with the nurse, brought tears to his

authors say, spent his life in the schools of Chios. When one reads the Aeneid, one notices that the work is made by a schoolmaster who has never done anything... The third book is entirely a copy of the Odyssey; and in the fourth book the narrative is not in Homer's manner, where all days are marked, where all actions have their beginning, their middle and their end, and are not compressed into a general report." There is perfect poetry, as there is perfect statecraft, where the inborn knowledge of the givens, of the "nature des choses," lies at the bottom. Poetry is for him only the other apparitional form of his unified creativity, which in him is expressed in the state. Even where he venerates Corneille — wholly rooted in the state — as the perfect tragic poet, he locates his actual strength, as shown before, in this natural knowledge of the foundations of what he likewise naturally masters as statesman. He praised of him: "Far from the court, from intrigues, from affairs, he has so to speak intuitively grasped the true situation, the position of realms, of peoples and of rulers." "He grasped policy from within and, had he been trained in state affairs, would have become a statesman." This creative foundational insight is what Goethe praises as "nature" and "truth," as the "naivety" of the ancient theater. Precisely from this, however, French tragedy as a genre departs, in that it does not from its own being of its folk create the symbol appropriate to it, but has made a foreign, inherited one — namely that of the Greeks — into the bearer of certain reflections of its state-arrested consciousness. Napoleon says it expressly: "In French tragedy there reigns a great emptiness; so far tragedy on our stage — except for a few rare attempts — has remained Greek or Roman." Instead of from the elementary givens, the primal substances

of the French theater had fought for: an unfolding that strove to realize precisely that watchword "Nature and Truth" and precisely that "Naivety of the Greeks" which Napoleon along with Goethe felt as the deepest contrast to French tragedy. To be sure, it cannot be overlooked that Napoleon rejected the arbitrary breaches of that stricter art principle of the unities, which were not grounded in any new life-law, just as he himself strove for its organic renewal. Apart from the fact that he possessed a natural respect for everything that has become and once proved itself, which French tragedy as an organ of the French state spirit claimed particularly, he felt more than the uncreative dramatists of mere literature the living primal force that once had generated this law as well. Against Constant's romanticizing tragedy "Walstein" he has, again not unlike Goethe, turned the weapons of his criticism: "Benjamin Constant has written a tragedy and a poetics. These sorts of people want to write and have not studied the rudiments of literature. They should first read the poetics, especially Aristotle's. Not arbitrarily does tragedy limit the action to twenty-four hours, but because it seizes the passions at their peak, at the level of their most concentrated force, where they can tolerate neither distractions nor long duration. He wants people to eat during the action. That is precisely the point! When the action begins, the actors are in excitement; by the third act they are in a sweat, by the last they are bathed in it." If Napoleon in that utterance cited by Goethe to Talma expresses the desire to see a piece of Sophocles in a word-for-word translation, this is quite obviously again only based on the hope of being able to recover the image of the original type in contrast to the corrupted off-form of the French theater.

would satisfy the Emperor: "It would be possible to present him the same subjects (of the French theater) in a different treatment, approximating more closely the naivety of the Greeks. But this nation must not be forced out of the forms once determined." That means: one cannot make the basic content of Greek tragedy usable by casting it into forms alien to its being. What one can do is only to renew this type in its own forms. He sets this as a goal. "One should much rather set up the theater firmly in the Greek manner, so that all dispute about the unity of place would end." From this he promises: "There is still much, very much that one could offer the Emperor even in this limited form." And he is certain, with this conception and goal-setting, to hit the intention of the Emperor, for which he cites as evidence that utterance to Talma. Precisely because from his own creativity he grasps the eternal effect of Greek tragedy in its unique originality, i.e., in the "nature and truth" of its formations, and the flawedness of French tragedy in its deviation from this basic law of all creation, he cannot want to repeat the foreign primal image on the native stage. He wants to preserve the inborn conditions of creative poetry as much as possible, in order to partake of its most proper, untransferable effects. From this he hopes not for a fertilization of the rigid forms of the native stage — precisely their impossibility becomes evident to him from the native growth of ancient tragedy. He knows that great tragic, like every other creation, grows only from its own seed, from the heroic-tragic beingness of the folk-whole. Not even the Greeks can directly form such a seed in a foreign folk or even merely promote its growth. They only show how it forms itself. From the creative abundance of his own, in its elemental force

of a formative kind to be generated on one's own native soil, that its immortal element be only the myth in which it has embodied this first-time revelation (which he then re-forms in his own stock and blood) — so to the primal spirit Napoleon, from the tragedy of the ancients, ascends the sunken secret of the folk-forming, hero-engendering power of their eternal myth. After he has, in that previously communicated utterance, lamented the essential emptiness, the imitative poverty of the French stage, he asks: "This emptiness, whence does it come?" and answers himself: "From the total lack of a significant thought in the dramatic action, or if you prefer — a hidden driving force that sets everything in motion." If after the first half-sentence it could still seem that he, from the spiritual constitution of his time, missed a literary-dramaturgical element, the second half-sentence, which beyond the educational language of the epoch indicates the sensorially graspable image of a creative process, shows that the Emperor means something more essential, the secret primal force of everything tragic. Attic tragedy shows him the direction and kind of this force: "The ancients had fate, to which even their gods were subject, and this intermingling was quite natural, since the events of their dramas were woven together with their religion." The tragedy of the Greeks is the expression of their cultic life-constitution, the outflow of a final supersensory power, of a law of fate that governs even the gods themselves and which they at bottom only formfully symbolize. And like one of the great interpreters of history of the nineteenth century — a Taine, Burckhardt, Nietzsche — he already grasps the fall of this driving elementary power in the de-Christianized world, its cause and its consequence for poetry. Art and cult have fallen apart. The symbolic expression of life, the theater of the Emperor would have "art"

and gripping spiritual power must be found that would mean for the new tragedy what the fate-myth meant for the old. This power he now sees in "politics." "One must seek elsewhere: in default of religion, take refuge in politics. Yes, in modern drama it must replace fate." For Napoleon, politics was precisely no mere thought-, but his actual creator-, an immediate life-power. For him, as he says to Goethe, politics is fate — a word that Goethe in one of his last conversations makes his own, as he also at that time conceives the tragic fate-idea of the Greeks, its meaning and validity, in complete agreement with Napoleon. Politics, the great state-necessity as fate, becomes for Napoleon, out of his actual state action and experience, an innermost article of faith, an innermost law of his new world-order. It is as characteristic for his universal ingenium as it is strange for our partially developed way of seeing that, in the midst of the greatest military actions, indeed precisely at the turning points of state destinies and decisions, this sentence again and again enters his thoughts and occupies them. On the eve of Austerlitz — after he has just dictated the famous stirring proclamation to his army — at table in the Moravian hut, to the astonishment of the whole general staff around him, following a casual remark by Junot he comes to speak of Raynouard's Templar drama, and immediately that sentence stands in the midst of the discussion: "Today, when the magic of pagan religion no longer exists, our tragic stage needs another impetus. Politics must be the great driving force of modern tragedy. It is what on our theater must replace the ancient fate, that fate which makes Oedipus a criminal without his being guilty, which inspires us with sympathy for Phaedra,

moderated by necessity and that a new and constant sympathy would develop." A year later, in the snowfields of Russia on the last day of the year, the same train of thought and again in connection with Raynouard's drama, this time even in an official letter to his police minister, set forth with the brevity of a fixed ordinance of state significance: "Raynouard is very capable of making good things if he truly penetrates the true spirit of ancient tragedy. Fate pursues the Atridae, and the heroes are guilty without being criminals; they participated in the crimes of the gods. In modern history this means cannot be applied; what must be applied is the nature of things: that is, politics, which without real crimes leads to collapses." State necessity as inexorable law, as insuperable power of life, has in his present realm, indeed in his person, in which the idea of this realm embodies itself for all the world, won that impressive visibility that could intensify it into symbolic expression, into myth. In his eye and in his mouth it was monstrous truth: politics not a calculation, but spiritual creation upon the world and thus source and driving force of a new myth. But only in his eye and mouth, which as mirror radiated his own existence outward. Only in him himself, only through him himself, only insofar and as long as it experienced this overpowering rounding from a conceptual complex into a living body in him, was statecraft also state, world necessity. He believed in it to recognize a general world-forming force of the new ages, while it was that only in and through his person. This error he wanted to establish as a binding law for the world. But politics is for the new world not, even through him, the fa

supra-temporal personality has contributed to the arising of the new sensory expression of the world-soul, has formed the germ-form of the new myth. The Christian symbol is no longer this expression; since the sixteenth century given over to continual decomposition, it has in the nineteenth century definitively lost this sense-powerful life-force. No extra-mundane, no superterrestrial symbol announces itself today: no life-apparition of the spirit projected into a beyond, removed. Rather, man himself, the immediate earthly body-visibility of the spirit, steps as his sensory expression, as sensory version of the world-soul, as the new myth into the center of the world. As little as the germ of this myth has formed in the aged French blood and soil, but rather in the European primal stuff of an untouched constituent of the old folk-hearth on the Mediterranean, so little has it experienced its unfolding in that blood and soil, but rather in another originally preserved part of European earth: the northern, German, which, despite much difference, in two mighty and myth-creating elements — spirit and language — proves a strange essential kinship with the old, southern formers of the European primal myth, the Greeks. According to this special disposition and stage of development, the unfolding of the new myth has shifted here from the realm of creative deed, in which it took its origin, into that of the creative word. Taken up by the mighty poetic movement in Germany at the beginning of the nineteenth century and nourished with new world-images, with new means of human expression, it has gradually, beneath the surface of a slack literary operation, grown into the figure of a spiritual former and leader who dominates the German present. From him, from his symbolizing eye, all being and having of past world has taken on new form and color: Plato, S

the testimony with which, in assimilation to Alexander, he claims for himself the sonship of God. But this word also contains in its core why he could not himself create the new myth. He realized the new myth, but could not yet perceive it himself and therefore could not make it visible for his contemporaries in his person. He still had to represent it to himself in the ideas, the images of the old world: hence Alexander, Jupiter and the triune God. Myth is the spiritual power of life raised into sensory consciousness, become image. It becomes that not already through a mere new embodiment, but through an inner eye, formed at this embodiment, that gathers the spiritual vision of generations and radiates it as a fixed outline, the mouth that proclaims this vision and stamps it into a word-image. Not the Greek heroes, but Homer; not Christ, but the Gospels established the Greek, the Christian myth. Not the heroic man of the new age, but only the seer poet, in whose eye his existence had become form, in whose mouth it had become sound, could create the myth of the new age. But that Napoleon could not become. He stands in the event of the epoch, is the man of immediately realized energies, not a world-shaper through reshaping of the human countenance as Homer and Plato, Dante and Shakespeare were. Of this power of poetry and its becoming, at least a dark intimation seems to have touched Napoleon's conception, within the measure and framework of the concepts of his time. On a report from his interior minister about measures for the promotion of literature, he replies (1807 in Finkenstein): "Poetry is a child of society: only society, by renewing itself through public peace and welfare, can lead poets back to good taste, to that pleasing kind

of the renewal of the folk-whole, the word about their "renewal" furnishes proof: it can only designate the organic reshaping of the folk-whole. In this context, then, "the pleasing kind and highest grace," to which society is to lead the poets back, does not signify artificial perfections of an educational poetry, but original values of genuine poetry (just as Goethe designates the original capacity of the creative artist with the word "facility"). In those concepts that expressed the highest art judgment of his socialized time, there floated before him the eternal models of earlier poetry, in which he measured elemental creativity according to his own kind (beyond his time), even if he could not express it in our words (cf. above pp. 438f.). But our strengthened and expanded linguistic form must not seduce us into always assuming a lesser cognitive capacity behind the for us devalued language forms of an earlier epoch.

NAPOLEON felt the necessity of the mythical element for tragic poetry, of a new myth for the French, without this conception having yet grown to living clarity for him as for us today. Thus he also did not see that only a new heroic humanity, which had to mature and to which he himself contributed the stuff, could produce this element. Rather, following his drive toward the immediately present, he believes it already given in his state-creation or its spiritual ground-power. This he calls "politics," a word indeed much too narrow for what he comprehends under it. It plays an innermost life-fact, the core-formation of a new reality, over into the field of spiritual skills. "Politics" has always only denoted state handcraft and the correspondingly limited capacities

To be sure, he himself also — similarly as toward religion in church policy — in his immediate state activity exercised an influence on drama and theater that was not limited to the assertion of politics in this deepened, spiritualized sense. He deviated from this to the application of its primitive handcraft apparatus. Just as his passionate self-realization drive makes him incapable of forming a new tragic myth himself poetically, or of awaiting its unfolding in a new human type, but rather drives him to introduce his state-expressed self in the idea of "politics" as a new mythical element into poetry, so it also prevents him from leaving this germ, which he himself had willed, to its organic development, from awaiting its effect on poetry. This impatience of the creative doer, who wants to get to his work, is reflected in that strange letter from Russia to his police minister about Raynouard's "Templars." There — in the midst of the military-political actions that keep him breathless — he sets forth how politics constitutes the spirit of the new tragedy, its misrecognition the basic defect of that drama. But suddenly he breaks off roughly and with unconcealed abandonment of the subject: "It would take time to develop this thought, and you understand that I have other things to think about" — a turn that recalls that significant word to Roederer: "All the tragedies of the world could lie on one side and inventory lists on the other, I would not even look at the tragedy." But if the unremitting tension in deed and work does not grant him to form the new tragic law intellectually, still less does it grant him to let it ripen quietly as a growing life-power around him. He wanted to see "politics" as life-element, as driving force of tragedy, immediately effective, and proceeded to

that paralyze it. As soon as his creative will no longer speaks through them and communicates to them its own immediacy of being, the institution gains its independence in her, its functions work on soullessly and violently. Instead of contenting himself with nourishing through his person and apparition a new human substance as bearer of a new myth, so that one day in later poetry it might grow into form with him, he insists on seeing his currently state person glorified in the existing forms, in the inherited tragedy, takes the nearest given but derived and intellectually thinned expression of his heroic apparition for its actual and definitive one, contents himself with the image of a Louis XIV where he could be certain of becoming the figure of an Alexander. That in all this he was not blind to the genuine power of myth, the power of poetic glorification, which he gave up, is testified by the word that one day he addressed to Joseph: "I would like to be my own posterity and experience what a poet of the kind of the great Corneille will have me feel, do, and say."

In his judgments about earlier French tragedy, in the choice of pieces for certain performances important to him, the starting point of this development is still recognizable. There the political moment is still determined by personal experience, seems the immediate expression of his own heroic existence. He believes he recognizes Corneille's greatness more correctly than others because he measures him not with the merely literary yardstick, but with the eye of the statesman, that is, by a lived, immediate, sensory reality, not by its poetic fictions. "Politics" here represents for him the state-heroic as opposed to the sentimental-human world. He says: "Corneille ... grasped policy from within and, had he been trained in state affairs,

appeared. One must always speak this verse so that, among all who hear it, there is only one who is deceived: Cinna." That means: as in all poetry, so also in Cinna, this tragedy so strangely representative for him, the deepest sense opens to him through a going back to its material, its actual, state content. This in itself, not the particular kind of its application — "dissimulation," "calculation" — is what is important for him. The word "calcul" must not be misinterpreted. It is, as already explained on another occasion, the expression of a conceptualized time-culture for any purposeful action. Certainly Napoleon would have found it rather laughably presumptuous than great, had a tragedy wanted to teach him the application and use of political handcraft. What struck him, struck him not intellectually, but — as his report shows — suddenly as an experience in the middle of a performance, was the immediate political action that this "calcul" realized: that a moment of supra-personal, of state, of world significance instead of a private-human one determined the action, a state actor instead of a dramatic raisonneur stood on the stage and enlarged this from a mere show- to a world-stage. There he found the true face of Augustus again, as he was accustomed to see it as the astonishingly pre-lived symbol of his own existence. And this "nature-authenticity" of its representation makes tragedy great for him. That he could grasp a political man from the depth and abundance of his being and form him in it, not that he could grasp and expound the maxims of political knowledge, raised its poet above all others. And only the turn to the fundamental, to the general, which Napoleon gives to the formulation of his impression — that without "politics" as basis, "clémence" is a miserable little virtue, and the actor of

is contemptible. It is important not to let him speak with inner conviction." This instruction to the actor of Caesar sounds almost like a self-confession, an allusion to his own past. Here the political is more material than goal and task of poetry: it serves to present on the stage the state man, as Napoleon himself lives and experiences him and therefore considers him "true." This means less a political influence on poetry than its opposite: its inner refreshment by the state factual content, which precisely political handcraft tricks resist revealing. From the living impression of his existence and effect, not from a political purpose-idea, there arise for Napoleon and with him for all the people the main pieces of the national tragedy in their immediate reference to his rule, they work indeed as its justification and proclamation. All those sententiously colored glorifications of state-seen human greatness and dignity with which this tragedy is filled, run of themselves toward his apparition as their goal. Without effort, indeed without being able to resist, one gives them the sense they seem to contain precisely for his person. On the occasion of the Consulta in Lyon in 1802, Voltaire's Mérope is performed for him at the local theater. When the verse falls: "Le premier qui fut roi, fut un soldat heureux," all eyes, all hands are torn toward Napoleon's box. A storm of applause breaks out, which hurts Napoleon more than it satisfies. He immediately feels, and all the more through this applause, the sentence as his ownmost affair. But here, in contrast to Corneille's representation of rulerly greatness, he sees this greatness, which he himself presents, exposed and degraded before the public in a fateful misunderstanding. It certainly happens in a broader sense not without political

of the displacement of poetry into politics only to the impression it had already assumed under the compelling power of his apparition in all eyes. Similarly are to be understood the prohibitions that during the time of the Moreau trial were issued against a series of dramatic performances. Besides Phèdre, almost everything was objected to, and even in this drama many passages were suppressed. Here too the immediate relation to the dangerous situation of the state, which soon offered the public welcome occasion for loud partisanship, forced political intervention. Here too, therefore, in the last resort he himself, his being and work embodied in the state, not a systematic program, is point of departure and impulse of the state measures against poetry. Similarly, it is not system, frozen expression of a state convention, but a command of the personal state-creation in the process of living formation, that leads him to prohibit Duval's tragedy "Edouard en Écosse." The Royalists sought and easily found connections of the unfortunate English prince with the fate of the Bourbons and used them for noisy demonstrations. Napoleon, who was advised to forbid the play, seemed at first entirely captured by the poetic, the human content of the drama. Only when also in his presence significant applause in the sense of royalist propaganda underscored the connection with the present did he proceed to prohibition. But even on this occasion it becomes very clear that for Napoleon it was not yet a matter of a fundamental regulation of poetry, but of combating the state-attack material contained in this piece itself: "There you see the ministers, they allow political pieces to be performed without consulting the government's view. Nothing like that has ever happened, even in the calmest times. Afterwards they say it was I who had such pieces played

in the last analysis a revival and re-formation of the heroic being in man. And what was French tragedy, especially the classical, other than the unceasing, if more or less rhetorical, utterance of this great humanity and its destinies in a state turn? Thus it had inevitably to recall — with almost each of its pieces one of his actions, one of his traits of being, with some his whole wonderful history and apparition before the stricken eyes of the multitude — thereby an effect on the folk-spirit and on the state itself was given. If Napoleon then reacted to this political content of tragedy in one way or another, using or suppressing it, this is not yet actually a political stance toward poetry, but only the immediate utterance of his elemental state-spirit upon the poetic occasion challenging him. Similarly, it is more the living consciousness of the state-heroic significance of his person and its expression in tragedy than calculated political handcraft that determines the selection of pieces at the great scenic presentation of his power at Erfurt. Corresponding to this is the surprisingly immediate effect that these produce externally. The impression of the oneness of the hero in the parterre with that on the stage is so overwhelming, so compelling, as no merely clever arrangement could have produced. It rests not merely on the ambiguous allusions that could have been artificially referred to Napoleon or also to another, as was always the practice in the theater of the 18th and 19th centuries, but on the fact that his substance, his total soul-bearing is embodied in these dramas. His person, his life, his actions possess that unconditionality, that definitiveness in present state expression, as on the stage

had wanted to appeal to total state obligation. In their ownmost existence they had to feel themselves — he emphasizes vividly — struck and shaken when the actor Lafont with somber voice hurled at them the words from "Mahomet": "Vois l'empire romain tombant de toutes parts, / Ce grand corps déchiré dont les membres épars / Languissent dispersés sans honneur et sans vie, / Sur ces débris du monde élevons l'Arabie. / Il faut un nouveau culte, il faut de nouveaux fers, / Il faut un nouveau Dieu pour l'aveugle Univers." Talleyrand finds his conception of Napoleon's motives confirmed by an instruction that Talma received from Napoleon for his role in Iphigénie. It concerned the passage: "L'honneur parle, il suffit, ce sont là nos oracles. / Les dieux sont de nos jours les maîtres souverains. / Mais, seigneur, notre gloire est dans nos propres mains, / Pourquoi nous tourmenter de leurs ordres suprêmes? / Ne songeons qu'à nous rendre immortels comme eux-mêmes, / Et laissant faire au sort, courons où la valeur / Nous promet un destin aussi grand que le leur." The Emperor wished Talma to speak these verses slowly and distinctly. In them, for Napoleon, the actual sense and content of state-heroic existence is concentrated. Therefore, the awakening of this spark in men, their formation into bearers of his state-creation, not particular practical state goals that he wants to make acceptable to them, is what concerns Napoleon here. To be sure, this highest state meaning of the new hero presents itself poetically in definite graspable deeds and destinies of the earlier age. "In the pieces taken from history whose performance he had ordered," Talleyrand notes, "the politics of one or another principal character always recalled related circumstances that daily presented themselves since he had appeared on the throne of the world." But this does not yet mean that Napoleon
