BOOK SIX — ART

I. POETRY: DISPOSITIONS AND PRACTICE

ART is secret, is inner state, is just as much as the manifest outer state a supra-personal encompassing of being in face and creation: like the latter it bounds and flows into the rim-circle of the outermost supra-individual sensory expression, of the divine, which already runs into the extra-mundane, the foreign to creation (cf. p. 282). Art there touches even more visibly than the state upon unformed soul or spiritual expression: upon mysticism and metaphysics. Art is the same force that a creative individual will of the highest measure realizes as deed in the state, shapes as spirit in the formed work. Both are, when brought to perfection, a new-facialization of the world in the creation of an individual spirit of universal tension. While the spirit of the state performs this creation upon the world by positing a new life-order from the totality of mankind, from the periphery, from without, and from there arrives at the reshaping also of the individual man, creative art on the contrary, through the formation of a new life-spirit, first attacks the individual man and from him penetrates from within, reshaping, into the world. All great state-creations — those of Alexander, Caesar, Charlemagne, Napoleon — have brought forth, together with the renewed expression of the folk-totality, the state, also a new race of men; and all creative poetry — of the arts, she alone, the most spiritual and at the same time the most sensual, the most concentrated and at the same time the most expansive among them — possesses this immediate creative power: the Greek tragedians and Plato (who in this deepest sense is a poet), Dante and Goethe, even the more secondary French tragedians, realized, in that through their creations they called forth a new human form or at least made it sensuously conscious, also the elements of a new inner order of things, of a new comportment toward man and things, a spiritual state as enduring monument.

Also the being and work of the further-named poets makes this evident, though less conspicuously, without it being possible to demonstrate this here in detail. One need only refer to the observations Goethe devotes to the significance of Corneille in his conversations with Eckermann on March 30, 1824 and April 1, 1827. Art, seen thus as creation, as reshaping of the spirit in the material of man and world in opposition to its intellectual evaluation in the sense of an ethical or aesthetic educational factor, occupies, like the state that fulfills this mission, the middle place between the extra-mundane Unlimited and the objective figurate. The creative poet is, like the state-creator mentioned earlier, the awakener, the shaper, the make-visible (the seer) of the invisible spiritual, of the divine in the realm of the bodily world, the human vessel of God, a hero in the sense of myth. It was shown at that earlier place with what rare unconditionality Napoleon, under his passionate state-creator compulsion, realizes this highest human form, is a hero of antique blood, of antique formation. He gives the divine spark form in the immediately present world-forms, as the poet more mediately, through the awakening of a new human type, determines the future. But he is of one blood and stock with him, of the same creativity, the same drive to make spirit body. Napoleon feels the commonality of this drive as the deepest, the ultimate determination of his being. He conceives his power as state-creativity on the same plane as an artist his art, and feels the same exclusive, compulsive possession by it as that artist: "I, I love power; but I love it as an artist. I love it as a musician loves his violin; I love it to draw forth tones, chords, harmonies from it." Entirely under the same image, Goethe has conceived the creative primal force of his nature as a "daemon."

His drive wants world-effect, formation in the space of the world, like that of the poet wants formation in the individual creation of language and man. Thus the perfected individual form, the beautiful work as such, does not mean to him the same, not an unconditional goal of effect as to the artist. To him it is the perfection of the whole of the world seen as unity, of the total earthly spirit-space condensed to body, to state. That he wants to make pictorial, to represent, to shape, to force with his creating breath out of its undeterminacy into the harmony, the formal unity of his spiritual vision. Thereby "great" becomes for him "beautiful" in the higher unity of heroic world-creatorship, which enables the beautiful individual creation of the poet, beyond its spatial apparition, to work a new form in spirits, makes it "great." In this sense the perfect art-creation becomes for him the expression and symbol of the heroic man. He says: "There are all sorts of wretchednesses in man, all sorts of waverings and doubts; all that must disappear in the hero. On the monumental statue the frailties and horrors of the flesh are no longer noticeable. In Benvenuto Cellini's Perseus, that perfect and sublime work of art, one truly hardly suspects the presence of the common lead and the tin plates that the artist in his passion had thrown into the seething mold to let his bronze demigod arise from them." As a result of the deep drive-unity of state and artistic creation, the elements of the world-creative poet, the immediate world-vision and its irresistible power to make it newly sensory, are given in Napoleon's being, at least as disposition: to be sure only as disposition, and not developed to the form of realization proper to the poet, his particular world-expression, the poem. The innermost core of Napoleonic being stood opposed to such a development, drove in another direction: toward world-creative embodiment, not in the word-work, but in the body-work of the state. But this disposition is there as a driving underground stream, which becomes active indeed not in the formation of a poem, but in all his works that bear the character of a world-, of a total view: above all the Proclamations and the Bulletins. Here he himself attains to an expression that, in the beginning of his career especially, approaches the great form-giving of language, the creative word of the poet.

The original direction of this creative seeing, which in the later head of state comes to apply to the external, governmental world-material, is the same in Napoleon as in the great poets. The primal germ of poetic creation is inborn in Napoleon with his form-driving creative drive as in them. The proclamations bear not only the trace of it, they have the living breath of it. The first of them, which opens the Italian campaign and thereby the actual world-career of the genius, works at the same time like the revelation of a primary poetic gift. (This was discussed in more detail in the first book.) Let one read this or another of them again, and one will, as only with the manifestations of the great, visionary poets themselves, be seized by the tremendous original power of his vision and language. One is astonished, but after what has been said it is not astonishing to see Napoleon in his youth constantly occupied with poetic drafts. The world has not yet placed at his disposal the actual material of his creation, its wide spatiality and its inhabitants. Language is still for him the most immediate, the only means of shaping his inspirations. And so he condenses the pressing visions of his inner self, which resist the intellectual analysis with which he approaches the problems of the outer world, into artistic form. We have, attested by documents, two short novellas from him: "Le Comte d'Essex" and "Le Masque Prophète," both of which clearly betray their inner origin. They are two episodes, one of which he found recorded in the English history of Barrow, the other in the history of the Arabs by Marigny. They seized him as much through an indeterminately heroic trait of the acting persons as through the monstrous circumstances of their downfall. The dry historical presentation does not satisfy him. In both cases he feels a significant humanity raised beyond its individual givenness to symbolic greatness through the unusualness of its fate.

which cannot be grasped in its insoluble wholeness by the means of historical exposition. The oriental legend makes vivid how the spirit can communicate itself to men only in sensory apparition, how all earthly greatness draws its effect only from the form in which it embodies itself. "Hakem, of tall stature, of a manly and captivating eloquence, called himself the envoy of God" and won the people against the Caliph. As long as he preserves his brilliant apparition, he remains invincible. Then his face is disfigured by an affliction. "That was no longer the most beautiful among the Arabs; those noble and proud features, those great and fiery eyes were disfigured. Hakem became blind. This change could have dampened the enthusiasm of his followers." He feels that if his work is not to sink, he must maintain the power of his personality, its external impressiveness and dignity. His violated exterior becomes the occasion for an unheard-of intensification of his external apparition: he puts on a silver mask and convinces his followers "that he wore the mask only to prevent men from being blinded by the light that streamed from his countenance." This extraordinary condensation of the spiritual into visible apparition as means and condition of heroic effect must have exercised a compelling power on Napoleon. It is his own kind that is made present in the intensified symbol. A meager excerpt, such as he otherwise extracts from his reading, does not capture this for him. He must fix the form in this seen, overwhelming symbolism. He notes not their deeds, the details of their apparition, not their campaigns of conquest. He holds fast their uniquely definitive impression, compresses the whole history of the hero into a single event, the decisive hour of his life, his heroic self-sacrifice. Here, in the utmost tension and concentration of his first, still unmediated formative power, he stands at the threshold of creative poetic vision. The fact that the two novellas are written in prose — and not very accomplished prose at that — should not obscure this. At that time, only one form of expression was available to him for the outpouring of his inner visions: the poetic. This is an internal argument for the fact, communicated by him on St. Helena, that in his youth he carried the plan of a Caesar-tragedy. Herein — as was also pointed out earlier — the opinion of those who would see in him the author of the well-known Caesar-fable finds a certain support. Yet very weighty reservations remain. It cannot be denied that both the poetic genre and the treatment are ill-suited to the heroically oriented disposition of the presumed author and to the subject. One could counter this with his childish age of only thirteen — the fable is said to date from 1782 — and the taste of the time. But these reasons lose their persuasiveness when faced with the only somewhat reliably attested poetic attempt of Napoleon, those clumsy verses that he scribbled in his mathematics book at the Military School in Paris in early 1785. One may consider that this was a fleeting notion of school hours, but the verses show too clearly the lack of skill, the struggle with rhythm and meter, for one to credit the same author, three years earlier, with a poem as rounded as the Caesar-fable — which moreover lacks all the Italianisms that still clung to Napoleon's linguistic expression at that time. This fact must also speak from the outset against a tradition that wishes to ascribe to Napoleon the authorship of another verse product, a homage poem for the then-celebrated singer Mme. St. Huberty. It goes back to the memoirs of Mme. Junot, later Duchess of Abrantès. The source itself urges extreme caution. To be sure, Mme. Junot was linked through her mother, from the Corsican-based Stephanopouli family, with Napoleon's family in confidential relations, and she herself — though then only ten years old —
