CONCLUSION

The progressive liberation of personality from commonly binding orders, the fruit of the Renaissance, passing through the Reformation — the liberation of conscience — led in the Age of Enlightenment to the — admittedly initially theoretical — recognition of the equal value and equal rights of all individual beings, which necessarily abolished the significance of the great individual being. The circle of development seemed to have been run through, but a difference remained compared with the starting point. The new universal validity to which the living individual was sacrificed did not rest, as that of antiquity and the Middle Ages, on a life-power growing from generation to generation, but solely on a represented, from the needs of the time out of thought and demand constructed life-order. And this was much more inexorable than the former, since as an abstract ordinance (the hard law of tolerance, the harder law of socialism) it lacked the imponderable mitigations that multiform nature imparts even to its sternest creations and bonds. Today the ground seems entirely withdrawn from the creative formation of the individual; the fate of the world is abandoned to the impulse of movements that, in their apparition ungraspable, exhaust their content in ideas and programs as they arise namelessly from the depth of the age. ——

So far the development had not yet progressed when Napoleon entered the midst of events. Around the great turning-point of the age, in which the new world-condition established itself — the French Revolution — the circle of activity for the individual was not yet so narrowed. Its elemental significance still demanded elemental powers. The new depersonalized world-constitution also needed — strange as it is — for its definitive breakthrough the great self-responsibility of personal agency, and thus it was its fate to nourish in its own womb the counter-force that, beyond itself, continued the continuity of human . . .

. . . the — by him himself determined — boundary of all that had existed, a measure driven to the extreme. Ideas, programs, actions signify here, as in all ages not yet wholly torn from their human ground, two things: they are indeed once the willed aids with which the epoch seeks to move itself forward from its given situation, to develop. But they are at the same time also involuntary life-expression, necessary realization of the great person who sums up the direction and goal of the epoch. Therefore all these things have a different face, according to whether they are seen in their reference to the time or as a constituent part of the spirit that moves it. The same thought, the same deed can appear once as the purposive satisfaction of cultural or political needs of the age and then again as elemental utterance of a personal creative will. The Egyptian expedition, Brumaire, the Congress of Erfurt, the Russian campaign have their temporal conditionality as results of the world-situation and their trans-temporal unconditionality as existence-expression of the great person who draws these results, thinks thoughts, accomplishes deeds, indeed suffers fate. Even where he does not actually "do," but something seems to be done, to happen with him, this double aspect is given. St. Helena seals not only the definitive overcoming of Napoleonic rule by the allied powers of civilized Europe, but at the same time also the martyrdom of this heroic creator-man, which completes his legendary personal power. For this person, the agent, the accomplisher, and thereby for the definitive fate and face of the epoch, ideas and programs count only insofar as they had value for the embodiment of his own power-will. Napoleon could in his beginnings set out from the revolution-conditioning ideas of Rousseau, could then nevertheless employ the anarchic shattering of the state regime with its destructive excesses . . .

. . . state-theories of the century, the extensively and opaquely combined constitutional draft of Sieyès. But it lies in the nature of the matter that even the great accomplisher regularly conceives and expresses his thoughts only out of the age, with its representations and imaginings. This has its ground, first, in the fact that even the hero — and precisely he, who is more rooted than others in the concrete — accomplishes his creation only out of the given. Precisely he cannot, like the political project-maker or literary sign-reader, act in airless space. To draft out of individual fantasy the dream-image of a future state and to mirror himself therein is not his way. Caesars invent no utopias. Napoleon has only a shrug for Theophilanthropy. He has, as he says, on the dark paths of life the principle of following those who would have gone before him. To make state from the existing material, to build world, is the deed assigned to him, necessarily his own. But this his work too initially retains for his eye the forms of visible present. Even insofar as it reaches beyond the frame of contemporary events, it presents itself to him first as the fulfillment of temporal tasks. Secondly, however, even to him, the doer in contrast to the poet, only in special cases is another language, another conceptual domain available than that which his age has. Thereby the true face that the hero bears within himself of his person and his deeds — beyond that time-conditioned view — as the kernel-husk of his creation, as the feeling of his "mission," is necessarily darkened, the unconditionality of his face obscured by the conditionality of the age and its expression. The spirit that creatively changes state and world must, however little conscious, carry such a preformed image of his creation (like the artist) within him. Genius is no machine of the world-spirit, but . . .

. . . gives things of the age their face, which in truth is his own — his own, nourished from all living forces of the past and contemporary world. Only by the formation of the chain of creative geniuses, by the showing-forth of the passing-on of the world-substance embodied in them from one creator-hand into another, will a true history of the operative world-forces be created. From them, from the geniuses and not conversely from the time-conditioned individuals, from us, our needs and views, must history be written. Not the age can judge him who gave it its face creatively, but conversely the age and what it was worth must be measured with the eyes, from the visual domain and thoughts of the genius. Napoleon himself once repelled criticism of his deeds with the indignant outburst: "Does that not mean that the creature gives his creator the lie?"

Only from this shift of standpoint was the recently advanced historical view possible, which sees in Napoleon the close of occidental culture and the beginning of modern civilization, and his tragic fate in the fact that he actually led the power of England — which he had wanted to fight — to victory himself. Such a conclusion could only be drawn by grasping the being and work of Napoleon entirely from his conditioned actuality. Such a view differs only in degree, not essentially, from the opinions that the previous bourgeois age developed of Napoleon: opinions that limited Napoleon's significance to his fall and saw his influence on the course of the world as exhausted in the course of his statesmanlike and military activity. That newer historical view, like the preceding age whose last expression it in truth is, overlooked that all external empire exists only "of its time and for its time," and that the ever-effective universal . . .

. . . symbolically establishes, stamps its myth. But what do the vicissitudes of Napoleonic politics and warfare matter to such a creator-poet? He will be inflamed by other events and powers in the life of his hero — those that lie beyond his time and its conditions in his world-lawfulness. For the creative poet answers with his innermost only to the great determining forces of the world. His participation and enthusiasm show where these are present. Political and state actions are the rightly notorious domain of the dramatic litterateur. In the work of the great poet who forms the Napoleonic spirit as a creation, his temporal activity might not even need to be spoken of. Indeed it would be conceivable that even his name not be mentioned. Only his great world-sustaining, world-forming soul would have to grow to figure therein.

When Napoleon appeared, humane civilization from England had long been on its triumphal march. Napoleon — considered as his whole person, as acting apparition — certainly did not submit to this march. All his being and working is on the contrary an indelible protest against the power of civilization. One need only recall that word of Talleyrand about the "personal enmity of Napoleon against good taste," from which he, in the Grand Chancellor's opinion, would most gladly have freed himself with cannon. That is indeed the symbolically compressed core of his being. He set up, in the midst of modern civilization, once more the figure of the heroic doer, of him for whom, as he himself says, the laws of morality and custom are not made — i.e., can only count insofar as they serve the completion of his own I — but this I is the embodied world. Nor is it his fate, let alone his tragedy, that he perhaps unwittingly or even against his will led this triumph of the civilized counter-powers . . .

. . . that moves the world in a direction opposed to the bourgeois, mechanizing spirit: toward the man who completes himself in the world and the world in himself. To make Napoleon the inaugurator or even merely the bearer of modern civilization would mean not wanting to see his apparitional being, his great personal existence; it would mean: Lodi, Egypt, Brumaire, Austerlitz, Moscow, Elba, Waterloo, St. Helena — narrowing them to the significance of political daily events; while they are the monstrous outbreaks of a rising world-power against the rigidifying stream of time. They are eternal names, in that they pass this power beyond their time into the course of generations. And it matters little what the fate and situation of a people may be, what its form of thought and state, as long as those names still hold and, still partaking of their power, make the people certain of the immortal present of its hero.

CHRONOLOGY

1769 — August 15. Napoleon born in Ajaccio (Corsica).
1779 — Napoleon is brought to France by his father. First schooling at Autun.
1779–1784 — Military school at Brienne.
1784–1785 — Military school at Paris.
1785 — Second lieutenant in the La Fère artillery regiment.
1785–1786 — Garrison at Valence.
1786–1787 — Leave in Corsica and Paris.
1788–1789 — Garrison at Auxonne.
1789–1791 — Leave in Corsica. The Revolution spreads to Corsica. Napoleon actively involved, meets Paoli.
1791 — Garrison at Auxonne. First lieutenant in the 4th Artillery Regiment. Garrison at Valence ("Discours de Lyon").
1791–1792 — Leave in Corsica. Commander of the volunteer battalion. Party struggles in Corsica.
1792 — Leave in Paris. Captain.
1792–1793 — Service in Corsica. Expeditions against La Maddalena.
1793 — Captain-commandant in the 4th Artillery Regiment. Struggles in Corsica with the Paolists. Napoleon leaves Corsica definitively with his family. Struggles in southern France ("Le Souper de Beaucaire"). Toulon. Commander-in-chief of the siege artillery. Brigadier general.
1794–1795 — Commander-in-chief of the artillery with the Army of Italy. Arrest after the fall of Robespierre (July 1794).
1795 — Summer in Paris. Napoleon struck from the list of active generals. Projects, friendships, connections: Barras. Vendémiaire: suppression of the Sections. Divisional general. Commanding general of the Army of the Interior.
1796 — Supreme command of the Army of Italy. Marriage to Joséphine.
1796–1797 — First Italian campaign: Montenotte. Lodi. Milan. Florence. Arcole. Rivoli. Peace of Tolentino (with the Pope). Sojourn at Mombello and Passariano. 18 Fructidor. Peace of Campoformio.
1797 — Commanding general of the Army against England. Congress of Rastatt. Paris.
1798–1799 — Egyptian expedition.
1799 — Brumaire: coup d'état. Napoleon First Consul.
1800 — Second Italian campaign. Crossing of the Great St. Bernard. Marengo.
1801 — Peace of Lunéville. Concordat. Expedition to Santo Domingo.
1802 — Consular plebiscite. Consulta at Lyon. Peace of Amiens.
1803 — Rupture of the Peace of Amiens. Occupation of Hanover. Expedition against Haiti.
1804 — Conspiracy of Cadoudal, Pichegru, Moreau. Execution of the Duke of Enghien. Proclamation of the Empire. First distributions of the Legion of Honor. Camp at Boulogne.
1805 — King of Italy. Coronation in Milan. Battle of Trafalgar. Austrian campaign: Ulm. Austerlitz. Peace of Pressburg.
1806 — Kingdom of Holland: Louis King. Confederation of the Rhine. Prussian campaign: Jena and Auerstädt. Berlin Decree (Continental Blockade).
1807 — Eylau. Peace of Tilsit. Foundation of the Kingdom of Westphalia: Jérôme King.
1808 — Spanish campaign (until 1814). Joseph King of Spain. Murat King of Naples. Congress of Erfurt. Goethe. Weimar. Napoleon on the Spanish theater of war. Capitulation of Madrid.
1809 — Campaign against Austria. Eckmühl. Aspern. Wagram. Peace of Schönbrunn. Divorce from Joséphine.
1810 — Marriage to Marie Louise. Incorporation of the Papal States and Holland.
1811 — Birth of the King of Rome. National Council.
1812 — The Pope at Fontainebleau. Russian campaign. Battle of the Moskowa. Moscow. Beresina.
1813 — War with Prussia, Russia, Austria. Leipzig.
1814 — Winter campaign. Battle of Paris. Abdication (April 7). Elba.
1815 — Napoleon leaves Elba (February 26), lands in the Gulf of Juan (March 1). March to Paris. Napoleon in the Tuileries (March 20). The Hundred Days. Ligny. Waterloo. Second abdication of Napoleon. Napoleon aboard the Bellerophon.
1815–1821 — St. Helena.
1821 — May 5. Death of Napoleon.

CORRECTIONS

p. 17, l. 28: Barbé-Marbois instead of Barbé-Marois.
p. 27, l. 14: Leoben instead of Tolentino.
p. 161, l. 4: Landsman Pontornini instead of schoolmate Pontormini.
p. 200, l. 11 fr. b.: autochthon instead of antochthon.
p. 262, l. 10 fr. b.: Geoffroy instead of Geoffoy.
p. 282, l. 9 fr. b.: Bohême instead of Bohème.
