# ICH_M7(R2)_Guideline_Step4_2023_0216_0.pdf
# Category: ich/M
# Pages: 32

INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL FOR HARMONISATION OF TECHNICAL 
REQUIREMENTS FOR PHARMACEUTICALS FOR HUMAN USE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ICH HARMONISED GUIDELINE 
 
 
 
ASSESSMENT AND CONTROL OF DNA REACTIVE (MUTAGENIC) 
IMPURITIES IN PHARMACEUTICALS TO LIMIT POTENTIAL 
CARCINOGENIC RISK 
M7(R2) 
 
 
Final version  
Adopted on 3 April 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This Guideline has been developed by the appropriate ICH Expert Working Group and has been 
subject to consultation by the regulatory parties, in accordance with the ICH Process. At Step 4 
of the Process the final draft is recommended for adoption to the regulatory bodies of the ICH 
regions.

M7(R2) 
Document History 
 
 
 Code 
 History 
 Date 
M7 
Approval by the Steering Committee under Step 2 and 
release for public consultation. 
6 February 2013 
M7 
Approval by the Steering Committee under Step 4 and 
recommendation for adoption to the three ICH regulatory 
bodies. 
5 June 2014 
M7 
Corrigendum to fix typographical errors and replace word 
“degradants” with “degradation products” throughout the 
document. 
23 June 2014 
M7(R1) 
Addendum 
Endorsement by the Members of the ICH Assembly under 
Step 2 and release for public consultation. 
11 June 2015 
M7(R1) 
Addendum 
Adoption by the Regulatory Members of the ICH 
Assembly under Step 4 and recommendation for adoption 
to the ICH regulatory bodies. 
31 May 2017 
M7(R2)  
Endorsement by the Members of the ICH Assembly under 
Step 2, including separation of the document into a 
M7(R2) Guideline and a standalone M7(R2) Addendum, 
and release for public consultation. 
6 October 2021 
 
Current Step 4 version 
 
M7(R2) 
Adoption by the Regulatory Members of the ICH 
Assembly under Step 4. 
3 April 2023 
 
 
 
Legal notice: This document is protected by copyright and may be used, reproduced, incorporated 
into other works, adapted, modified, translated or distributed under a public license provided that 
ICH's copyright in the document is acknowledged at all times. In case of any adaption, modification 
or translation of the document, reasonable steps must be taken to clearly label, demarcate or otherwise 
identify those changes were made to or based on the original document. Any impression that the 
adaption, modification or translation of the original document is endorsed or sponsored by the ICH 
must be avoided. 
The document is provided "as is" without warranty of any kind. In no event shall the ICH or the 
authors of the original document be liable for any claim, damages or other liability arising from the 
use of the document. 
The above-mentioned permissions do not apply to content supplied by third parties. Therefore, for 
documents where the copyright vests in a third party, permission for reproduction must be obtained 
from this copyright holder.

ICH Harmonised Guideline 
ASSESSMENT AND CONTROL OF DNA REACTIVE (MUTAGENIC) IMPURITIES IN 
PHARMACEUTICALS TO LIMIT POTENTIAL CARCINOGENIC RISK 
M7(R2) 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. 
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. 1 
2. 
SCOPE OF GUIDELINE ....................................................................................................... 1 
3. 
GENERAL PRINCIPLES ...................................................................................................... 2 
4. 
CONSIDERATIONS FOR MARKETED PRODUCTS .............................................................. 3 
4.1 
Post-Approval Changes to the Drug Substance Chemistry, Manufacturing, and Controls 
3 
4.2 
Post-Approval Changes to the Drug Product Chemistry, Manufacturing, and Controls .. 4 
4.3 
Changes to the Clinical Use of Marketed Products .......................................................... 4 
4.4 
Other Considerations for Marketed Products .................................................................... 4 
5. 
DRUG SUBSTANCE AND DRUG PRODUCT IMPURITY ASSESSMENT ................................. 4 
5.1 
Synthetic Impurities .......................................................................................................... 5 
5.2 
Degradation Products ........................................................................................................ 5 
5.3 
Considerations for Clinical Development ......................................................................... 6 
6. 
HAZARD ASSESSMENT ELEMENTS ................................................................................... 6 
7. 
RISK CHARACTERIZATION ............................................................................................... 7 
7.1 
TTC-based Acceptable Intakes ......................................................................................... 7 
7.2 
Acceptable Intakes Based on Compound-Specific Risk Assessments ............................. 7 
7.2.1 
Mutagenic Impurities with Positive Carcinogenicity Data (Class 1 in Table 1)   7 
7.2.2 
Mutagenic Impurities with Evidence for a Practical Threshold ........................... 8 
7.3 
Acceptable Intakes in Relation to LTL Exposure ............................................................. 8 
7.3.1 Clinical Development ............................................................................................... 9 
7.3.2 Marketed Products ................................................................................................... 9 
7.4 
Acceptable Intakes for Multiple Mutagenic Impurities..................................................... 9 
7.5 
Exceptions and Flexibility in Approaches ...................................................................... 10 
8. 
CONTROL ........................................................................................................................ 10 
8.1 
Control of Process Related Impurities ............................................................................ 11 
8.2 
Considerations for Control Approaches .......................................................................... 12 
8.3 
Considerations for Periodic Testing ................................................................................ 12 
8.4 
Control of Degradation Products .................................................................................... 13 
8.5 
Lifecycle Management .................................................................................................... 13

8.6 
Considerations for Clinical Development ....................................................................... 14 
9. 
DOCUMENTATION ........................................................................................................... 14 
9.1 
Clinical Trial Applications .............................................................................................. 14 
9.2 
Common Technical Document (Marketing Application) ............................................... 15 
NOTES ....................................................................................................................................... 15 
GLOSSARY ................................................................................................................................ 20 
REFERENCES ............................................................................................................................ 22 
APPENDICES ............................................................................................................................. 23 
Appendix 1: Scope Scenarios for Application of the ICH M7 Guideline ................................ 23 
Appendix 2: Case Examples to Illustrate Potential Control Approaches ................................. 24 
Appendix 3: List of Compounds in ICH M7 Addendum ......................................................... 27 
 
ICH M7 Addendum ....................................................................................... Separate Document

1 
 
 
ASSESSMENT AND CONTROL OF DNA REACTIVE (MUTAGENIC) IMPURITIES IN 
PHARMACEUTICALS TO LIMIT POTENTIAL CARCINOGENIC RISK 
M7(R2) 
 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
The synthesis of drug substances involves the use of reactive chemicals, reagents, solvents, 
catalysts, and other processing aids. As a result of chemical synthesis or subsequent 
degradation, impurities reside in all drug substances and associated drug products. While ICH 
Q3A(R2): Impurities in New Drug Substances and Q3B(R2): Impurities in New Drug 
Products (Ref. 1, 2) provides guidance for qualification and control for the majority of the 
impurities, limited guidance is provided for those impurities that are DNA reactive. The 
purpose of this guideline is to provide a practical framework that is applicable to the 
identification, categorization, qualification, and control of these mutagenic impurities to limit 
potential carcinogenic risk. This guideline is intended to complement ICH Q3A(R2), Q3B(R2) 
(Note 1), and ICH M3(R2): Nonclinical Safety Studies for the Conduct of Human Clinical 
Trials and Marketing Authorizations for Pharmaceuticals (Ref. 3). 
This guideline emphasizes considerations of both safety and quality risk management in 
establishing levels of mutagenic impurities that are expected to pose negligible carcinogenic 
risk. It outlines recommendations for assessment and control of mutagenic impurities that 
reside or are reasonably expected to reside in final drug substance or product, taking into 
consideration the intended conditions of human use. 
 
2. 
SCOPE OF GUIDELINE 
This document is intended to provide guidance for new drug substances and new drug products 
during their clinical development and subsequent applications for marketing. It also applies to 
post-approval submissions of marketed products, and to new marketing applications for 
products with a drug substance that is present in a previously approved product, in both cases 
only where: 
• Changes to the drug substance synthesis result in new impurities or increased 
acceptance criteria for existing impurities; 
• Changes in the formulation, composition or manufacturing process result in new 
degradation products or increased acceptance criteria for existing degradation 
products; 
• Changes in indication or dosing regimen are made which significantly affect the 
acceptable cancer risk level. 
Assessment of the mutagenic potential of impurities as described in this guideline is not 
intended 
for 
the 
following 
types 
of 
drug 
substances 
and 
drug 
products: 
biological/biotechnological, peptide, oligonucleotide, radiopharmaceutical, fermentation 
products, herbal products, and crude products of animal or plant origin. 
This guideline does not apply to drug substances and drug products intended for advanced 
cancer indications as defined in the scope of ICH S9 (Ref. 4). Additionally, there may be 
some cases where a drug substance intended for other indications is itself genotoxic at 
therapeutic concentrations and may be expected to be associated with an increased cancer 
risk.   Exposure to a mutagenic impurity in these cases would not significantly add to the

2 
 
 
cancer risk of the drug substance. Therefore, impurities could be controlled at acceptable 
levels for non-mutagenic impurities. 
Assessment of the mutagenic potential of impurities as described in this guideline is not 
intended for excipients used in existing marketed products, flavoring agents, colorants, and 
perfumes. Application of this guideline to leachables associated with drug product packaging 
is not intended, but the safety risk assessment principles outlined in this guideline for limiting 
potential carcinogenic risk can be used if warranted. The safety risk assessment principles of 
this guideline can be used if warranted for impurities in excipients that are used for the first 
time in a drug product and are chemically synthesized. 
 
3. 
GENERAL PRINCIPLES 
The focus of this guideline is on DNA reactive substances that have a potential to directly 
cause DNA damage when present at low levels leading to mutations and therefore, potentially 
causing cancer. This type of mutagenic carcinogen is usually detected in a bacterial reverse 
mutation (mutagenicity) assay. Other types of genotoxicants that are non-mutagenic typically 
have threshold mechanisms and usually do not pose carcinogenic risk in humans at the level 
ordinarily present as impurities. Therefore to limit a possible human cancer risk associated 
with the exposure to potentially mutagenic impurities, the bacterial mutagenicity assay is used 
to assess the mutagenic potential and the need for controls. Structure-based assessments are 
useful for predicting bacterial mutagenicity outcomes based upon the established knowledge. 
There are a variety of approaches to conduct this evaluation including a review of the available 
literature, and/or computational toxicology assessment. 
A Threshold of Toxicological Concern (TTC) concept was developed to define an acceptable 
intake for any unstudied chemical that poses a negligible risk of carcinogenicity or other toxic 
effects. The methods upon which the TTC is based are generally considered to be very 
conservative since they involve a simple linear extrapolation from the dose giving a 50% 
tumor incidence (TD50) to a 1 in 106 incidence, using TD50 data for the most sensitive species 
and most sensitive site of tumor induction. For application of a TTC in the assessment of 
acceptable limits of mutagenic impurities in drug substances and drug products, a value of 1.5 
μg/day corresponding to a theoretical 10-5 excess lifetime risk of cancer, can be justified. 
Some structural groups were identified to be of such high potency that intakes even below the 
TTC would theoretically be associated with a potential for a significant carcinogenic risk. 
This group of high potency mutagenic carcinogens referred to as the “cohort of concern”, 
comprises aflatoxin-like-, N-nitroso-, and alkyl-azoxy compounds. 
During clinical development, it is expected that control strategies and approaches will be less 
developed in earlier phases where overall development experience is limited. This guideline 
bases acceptable intakes for mutagenic impurities on established risk assessment strategies. 
Acceptable risk during the early development phase is set at a theoretically calculated level of 
approximately one additional cancer per million. For later stages in development and for 
marketed products, acceptable increased cancer risk is set at a theoretically calculated level of 
approximately one in one hundred thousand. These risk levels represent a small theoretical 
increase in risk when compared to human overall lifetime incidence of developing any type of 
cancer, which is greater than 1 in 3. It is noted that established cancer risk assessments are 
based on lifetime exposures. Less-Than-Lifetime (LTL) exposures both during development 
and marketing can have higher acceptable intakes of impurities and still maintain comparable 
risk levels. The use of a numerical cancer risk value (1 in 100,000) and its translation into 
risk-based doses (TTC) is a highly hypothetical concept that should not be regarded as a 
realistic indication of the actual risk.  Nevertheless, the TTC concept provides an estimate of

3 
 
 
safe exposures for any mutagenic compound. However, exceeding the TTC is not necessarily 
associated with an increased cancer risk given the conservative assumptions employed in the 
derivation of the TTC value. The most likely increase in cancer incidence is actually much 
less than 1 in 100,000. In addition, in cases where a mutagenic compound is a non-carcinogen 
in a rodent bioassay, there would be no predicted increase in cancer risk. Based on all the 
above considerations, any exposure to an impurity that is later identified as a mutagen is not 
necessarily associated with an increased cancer risk for patients already exposed to the impurity.  
A risk assessment would determine whether any further actions would be taken. 
Where a potential risk has been identified for an impurity, an appropriate control strategy 
leveraging process understanding and/or analytical controls should be developed to ensure 
that the mutagenic impurity is at or below the acceptable cancer risk level. 
There may be cases when an impurity is also a metabolite of the drug substance. In such 
cases the risk assessment that addresses mutagenicity of the metabolite can qualify the impurity. 
 
4. 
CONSIDERATIONS FOR MARKETED PRODUCTS 
This guideline is not intended to be applied retrospectively (i.e., to products marketed prior to 
adoption of this guideline). However, some types of post-approval changes warrant a 
reassessment of safety relative to mutagenic impurities. This section applies to these post- 
approval changes for products marketed prior to, or after, the adoption of this guideline. 
Section 8.5 (Lifecycle Management) contains additional recommendations for products 
marketed after adoption of this guideline. 
4.1 
Post-Approval Changes to the Drug Substance Chemistry, Manufacturing, and 
Controls 
Post-approval submissions involving the drug substance chemistry, manufacturing, and 
controls should include an evaluation of the potential risk impact associated with mutagenic 
impurities from changes to the route of synthesis, reagents, solvents, or process conditions 
after the starting material. Specifically, changes should be evaluated to determine if the 
changes result in any new mutagenic impurities or higher acceptance criteria for existing 
mutagenic impurities. Reevaluation of impurities not impacted by changes is not 
recommended. For example, when only a portion of the manufacturing process is changed, 
the assessment of risk from mutagenic impurities should be limited to whether any new 
mutagenic impurities result from the change, whether any mutagenic impurities formed during 
the affected step are increased, and whether any known mutagenic impurities from up-stream 
steps are increased. Regulatory submissions associated with such changes should describe the 
assessment as outlined in Section 9.2. Changing the site of manufacture of drug substance, 
intermediates, or starting materials or changing raw materials supplier will not require a 
reassessment of mutagenic impurity risk. 
When a new drug substance supplier is proposed, evidence that the drug substance produced 
by this supplier using the same route of synthesis as an existing drug product marketed in the 
assessor’s region is considered to be sufficient evidence of acceptable risk/benefit regarding 
mutagenic impurities and an assessment per this guideline is not required. If this is not the 
case, then an assessment per this guideline is expected.

4 
 
 
4.2 
Post-Approval Changes to the  Drug  Product Chemistry, Manufacturing, and 
Controls 
Post-approval submissions involving the drug product (e.g., change in composition, 
manufacturing process, dosage form) should include an evaluation of the potential risk 
associated with any new mutagenic degradation products or higher acceptance criteria for 
existing mutagenic degradation products. If appropriate, the regulatory submission would 
include an updated control strategy. Reevaluation of the drug substance associated with drug 
products is not recommended or expected provided there are no changes to the drug substance. 
Changing the site of manufacture of drug product will not require a reassessment  of mutagenic 
impurity risk. 
4.3 
Changes to the Clinical Use of Marketed Products 
Changes to the clinical use of marketed products that can warrant a reevaluation of the 
mutagenic impurity limits include a significant increase in clinical dose, an increase in duration 
of use (in particular when a mutagenic impurity was controlled above the lifetime acceptable 
intake for a previous indication that may no longer be appropriate for the longer treatment 
duration associated with the new indication), or for a change in indication from a serious or 
life threatening condition where higher acceptable intakes were justified (Section 7.5) to an 
indication for a less serious condition where the existing impurity acceptable intakes may no 
longer be appropriate. Changes to the clinical use of marketed products associated with new 
routes of administration or expansion into patient populations that include pregnant women 
and/or pediatrics will not warrant a reevaluation, assuming no increases in daily dose or 
duration of treatment. 
4.4 
Other Considerations for Marketed Products 
Application of this guideline may be warranted to marketed products if there is specific cause 
for concern. The existence of impurity structural alerts alone is considered insufficient to 
trigger follow-up measures, unless it is a structure in the cohort of concern (Section 3). 
However, a specific cause for concern would be new relevant impurity hazard data (classified 
as Class 1 or 2, Section 6) generated after the overall control strategy and specifications for 
market authorization were established. This new relevant impurity hazard data should be 
derived from high-quality scientific studies consistent with relevant regulatory testing 
guidelines, with data records or reports readily available. Similarly, a newly discovered 
impurity that is a known Class 1 or Class 2 mutagen that is present in a marketed product 
could also be a cause for concern. In both of these cases when the applicant becomes aware 
of this new information, an evaluation per this guideline should be conducted. 
 
5. 
DRUG SUBSTANCE AND DRUG PRODUCT IMPURITY ASSESSMENT 
Actual and potential impurities that are likely to arise during the synthesis and storage of a 
new drug substance, and during manufacturing and storage of a new drug product should be 
assessed. 
The impurity assessment is a two-stage process: 
• Actual impurities that have been identified should be considered for their mutagenic 
potential. 
• An assessment of potential impurities likely to be present in the final drug substance is 
carried out to determine if further evaluation of their mutagenic potential is required.

5 
 
 
The steps as applied to synthetic impurities and degradation products are described in Sections 
5.1 and 5.2, respectively. 
5.1 
Synthetic Impurities 
Actual impurities include those observed in the drug substance above the ICH Q3A reporting 
thresholds. Identification of actual impurities is expected when the levels exceed the 
identification thresholds outlined by ICH Q3A. It is acknowledged that some impurities 
below the identification threshold may also have been identified. 
Potential impurities in the drug substance can include starting materials, reagents and 
intermediates in the route of synthesis from the starting material to the drug substance. 
The risk of carryover into the drug substance should be assessed for identified impurities that 
are present in starting materials and intermediates, and impurities that are reasonably expected 
by-products in the route of synthesis from the starting material to the drug substance. As the 
risk of carryover may be negligible for some impurities (e.g., those impurities in early synthetic 
steps of long routes of synthesis), a risk-based justification could be provided for the point in 
the synthesis after which these types of impurities should be evaluated for mutagenic potential. 
For starting materials that are introduced late in the synthesis of the drug substance (and 
where the synthetic route of the starting material is known) the final steps of the starting 
material synthesis should be evaluated for potential mutagenic impurities. 
Actual impurities where the structures are known and potential impurities as defined above 
should be evaluated for mutagenic potential as described in Section 6. 
5.2 
Degradation Products 
Actual drug substance degradation products include those observed above the ICH Q3A 
reporting threshold during storage of the drug substance in the proposed long-term storage 
conditions and primary and secondary packaging. Actual degradation products in the drug 
product include those observed above the ICH Q3B reporting threshold during storage of the 
drug product in the proposed long-term storage conditions and primary and secondary 
packaging, and also include those impurities that arise during the manufacture of the drug 
product. Identification of actual degradation products is expected when the levels exceed the 
identification thresholds outlined by ICH Q3A/Q3B. It is acknowledged that some 
degradation products below the identification threshold may also have been identified. 
Potential degradation products in the drug substance and drug product are those that may be 
reasonably expected to form during long term storage conditions. Potential degradation 
products include those that form above the ICH Q3A/B identification threshold during 
accelerated stability studies (e.g., 40°C/75% relative humidity for 6 months) and confirmatory 
photo-stability studies as described in ICH Q1B (Ref. 5), but are yet to be confirmed in the 
drug substance or drug product under long-term storage conditions in the primary packaging. 
Knowledge of relevant degradation pathways can be used to help guide decisions on the 
selection of potential degradation products to be evaluated for mutagenicity e.g., from 
degradation chemistry principles, relevant stress testing studies, and development stability 
studies. 
Actual and potential degradation products likely to be present in the final drug substance or 
drug product and where the structure is known should be evaluated for mutagenic potential as 
described in Section 6.

6 
 
 
5.3 
Considerations for Clinical Development 
It is expected that the impurity assessment described in Sections 5.1 and 5.2 applies to 
products in clinical development. However, it is acknowledged that the available information 
is limited. For example, information from long term stability studies and photo-stability 
studies may not be available during clinical development and thus information on potential 
degradation products may be limited. Additionally, the thresholds outlined in ICH Q3A/B do 
not apply to products in clinical development and consequently fewer impurities will be 
identified. 
 
6. 
HAZARD ASSESSMENT ELEMENTS 
Hazard assessment involves an initial analysis of actual and potential impurities by 
conducting database and literature searches for carcinogenicity and bacterial mutagenicity 
data in order to classify them as Class 1, 2, or 5 according to Table 1. If data for such a 
classification are not available, an assessment of Structure-Activity Relationships (SAR) that 
focuses on bacterial mutagenicity predictions should be performed. This could lead to a 
classification into Class 3, 4, or 5. 
 
Table 1: Impurities Classification with Respect to Mutagenic and Carcinogenic Potential 
and Resulting Control Actions 
 
Class 
Definition 
Proposed action for control 
(details in Section 7 and 8) 
1 
Known mutagenic carcinogens 
Control 
at or below compound- 
specific acceptable limit 
2 
Known mutagens with 
unknown carcinogenic potential 
(bacterial mutagenicity positive*, no rodent 
carcinogenicity data) 
Control at or  below acceptable limits 
(appropriate TTC) 
3 
Alerting structure, unrelated to the 
structure of the drug substance; 
no mutagenicity data 
Control at or below acceptable limits 
(appropriate 
TTC) 
or 
conduct 
bacterial mutagenicity assay; 
If non-mutagenic = Class 5 
If mutagenic = Class 2 
4 
Alerting structure, same alert in drug 
substance or compounds related to the drug 
substance 
(e.g., 
process 
intermediates) 
which have been tested and are non- 
mutagenic 
Treat as non-mutagenic impurity 
5 
No structural alerts, or alerting structure 
with sufficient data to demonstrate lack of 
mutagenicity or carcinogenicity 
Treat as non-mutagenic impurity 
 
*Or other relevant positive mutagenicity data indicative of DNA-reactivity related induction 
of gene mutations (e.g., positive findings in in vivo gene mutation studies) 
 
A computational toxicology assessment should be performed using (Q)SAR methodologies 
that predict the outcome of a bacterial mutagenicity assay (Ref. 6). Two (Q)SAR prediction 
methodologies that complement each other should be applied.  One methodology should be

7 
 
 
expert rule-based and the second methodology should be statistical-based. (Q)SAR models 
utilizing these prediction methodologies should follow the general validation principles set 
forth by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 
The absence of structural alerts from two complementary (Q)SAR methodologies (expert rule- 
based and statistical) is sufficient to conclude that the impurity is of no mutagenic concern, 
and no further testing is recommended (Class 5 in Table 1). 
If warranted, the outcome of any computer system-based analysis can be reviewed with the 
use of expert knowledge in order to provide additional supportive evidence on relevance of 
any positive, negative, conflicting or inconclusive prediction and provide a rationale to support 
the final conclusion. 
To follow up on a relevant structural alert (Class 3 in Table 1), either adequate control 
measures could be applied or a bacterial mutagenicity assay with the impurity alone can be 
conducted. An appropriately conducted negative bacterial mutagenicity assay (Note 2) would 
overrule any structure-based concern, and no further genotoxicity assessments would be 
recommended (Note 1). These impurities should be considered non-mutagenic (Class 5 in 
Table 1). A positive bacterial mutagenicity result would warrant further hazard assessment 
and/or control measures (Class 2 in Table 1). For instance, when levels of the impurity cannot 
be controlled at an appropriate acceptable limit, it is recommended that the impurity be tested 
in an in vivo gene mutation assay in order to understand the relevance of the bacterial 
mutagenicity assay result under in vivo conditions. The selection of other in vivo genotoxicity 
assays should be scientifically justified based on knowledge of the mechanism of action of the 
impurity and expected target tissue exposure (Note 3). In vivo studies should be designed 
taking into consideration existing ICH genotoxicity Guidelines. Results in the appropriate in 
vivo assay may support setting compound specific impurity limits. 
An impurity with a structural alert that is shared (e.g., same structural alert in the same 
position and chemical environment) with the drug substance or related compounds can be 
considered as non-mutagenic (Class 4 in Table 1) if the testing of such material in the 
bacterial mutagenicity assay was negative. 
 
7. 
RISK CHARACTERIZATION 
As a result of hazard assessment described in Section 6, each impurity will be assigned to one 
of the five classes in Table 1. For impurities belonging in Classes 1, 2, and 3 the principles of 
risk characterization used to derive acceptable intakes are described in this section. 
7.1 
TTC-based Acceptable Intakes 
A TTC-based acceptable intake of a mutagenic impurity of 1.5 µg per person per day is 
considered to be associated with a negligible risk (theoretical excess cancer risk of <1 in 
100,000 over a lifetime of exposure) and can in general be used for most pharmaceuticals as a 
default to derive an acceptable limit for control. This approach would usually be used for 
mutagenic impurities present in pharmaceuticals for long-term treatment (> 10 years) and 
where no carcinogenicity data are available (Classes 2 and 3). 
7.2 
Acceptable Intakes Based on Compound-Specific Risk Assessments 
7.2.1 Mutagenic Impurities with Positive Carcinogenicity Data (Class 1 in Table 1) 
Compound-specific risk assessments to derive acceptable intakes should be applied instead of 
the TTC-based acceptable intakes where sufficient carcinogenicity data exist. For a known 
mutagenic carcinogen, a compound-specific acceptable intake can be calculated based on

8 
 
 
carcinogenic potency and linear extrapolation as a default approach. Alternatively, other 
established risk assessment practices such as those used by international regulatory bodies 
may be applied either to calculate acceptable intakes or to use already existing values published 
by regulatory authorities (Note 4). 
Compound-specific calculations for acceptable intakes can be applied case-by-case for 
impurities which are chemically similar to a known carcinogen compound class (class-specific 
acceptable intakes) provided that a rationale for chemical similarity and supporting data can 
be demonstrated (Note 5). 
7.2.2 Mutagenic Impurities with Evidence for a Practical Threshold 
The existence of mechanisms leading to a dose response that is non-linear or has a practical 
threshold is increasingly recognized, not only for compounds that interact with non-DNA 
targets but also for DNA-reactive compounds, whose effects may be modulated by, for 
example, rapid detoxification before coming into contact with DNA, or by effective repair of 
induced damage. The regulatory approach to such compounds can be based on the 
identification of a No-Observed Effect Level (NOEL) and use of uncertainty factors (ICH 
Q3C(R5), Ref. 7) to calculate a Permissible Daily Exposure (PDE) when data are available. 
The acceptable intakes derived from compound-specific risk assessments (Section 7.2) can be 
adjusted for shorter duration of use in the same proportions as defined in the following 
sections (Section 7.3.1 and 7.3.2) or should be limited to not more than 0.5%, whichever is 
lower. For example, if the compound specific acceptable intake is 15 µg/day for lifetime 
exposure, the less than lifetime limits (Table 2) can be increased to a daily intake of 100 µg (> 
1-10 years treatment duration), 200 µg (> 1-12 months) or 1200 µg (< 1 month). However, 
for a drug with a maximum daily dose of, for instance, 100 mg the acceptable daily intake for 
the < 1 month duration would be limited to 0.5% (500 µg) rather than 1200 µg. 
7.3 
Acceptable Intakes in Relation to LTL Exposure 
Standard risk assessments of known carcinogens assume that cancer risk increases as a function 
of cumulative dose. Thus, cancer risk of a continuous low dose over a lifetime would be 
equivalent to the cancer risk associated with an identical cumulative exposure averaged 
over a shorter duration. 
The TTC-based acceptable intake of 1.5 µg/day is considered to be protective for a lifetime of 
daily exposure. To address LTL exposures to mutagenic impurities in pharmaceuticals, an 
approach is applied in which the acceptable cumulative lifetime dose (1.5 µg/day x 25,550 
days = 38.3 mg) is uniformly distributed over the total number of exposure days during LTL 
exposure. This would allow higher daily intake of mutagenic impurities than would be the 
case for lifetime exposure and still maintain comparable risk levels for daily and non-daily 
treatment regimens. Table 2 is derived from the above concepts and illustrates the acceptable 
intakes for LTL to lifetime exposures for clinical development and marketing. In the case of 
intermittent dosing, the acceptable daily intake should be based on the total number of dosing 
days instead of the time interval over which the doses were administered and that number of 
dosing days should be related to the relevant duration category in Table 2. For example, a 
drug administered once per week for 2 years (i.e., 104 dosing days) would have an acceptable 
intake per dose of 20µg.

9 
 
 
Table 2: Acceptable Intakes for an Individual Impurity 
 
Duration of 
treatment 
< 1 
month 
>1 - 12 
months 
>1 - 10 
Years 
>10 years 
to lifetime 
Daily intake 
[µg/day] 
120 
20 
10 
1.5 
 
7.3.1 Clinical Development 
Using this LTL concept, acceptable intakes of mutagenic impurities are recommended for 
limited treatment periods during clinical development of up to 1 month, 1 to 12 months and 
more than one year up to completion of Phase 3 clinical trials (Table 2). These adjusted 
acceptable intake values maintain a 10-6 risk level in early clinical development when benefit 
has not yet been established and a 10-5 risk level for later stages in development (Note 6). 
An alternative approach to the strict use of an adjusted acceptable intake for any mutagenic 
impurity could be applied for Phase 1 clinical trials for dosing up to 14 days. For this 
approach, only impurities that are known mutagenic carcinogens (Class 1) and known 
mutagens of unknown carcinogenic potential (Class 2), as well as impurities in the cohort of 
concern chemical class, should be controlled (see Section 8) to acceptable limits as described 
in Section 7. All other impurities would be treated as non-mutagenic impurities. This 
includes impurities which contain structural alerts (Class 3), which alone would not trigger 
action for an assessment for this limited Phase 1 duration. 
7.3.2 Marketed Products 
The treatment duration categories with acceptable intakes in Table 2 for marketed products 
are intended to be applied to anticipated exposure durations for the great majority of patients. 
The proposed intakes along with various scenarios for applying those intakes are described in 
Table 4, Note 7. In some cases, a subset of the population of patients may extend treatment 
beyond the marketed drugs categorical upper limit (e.g., treatment exceeding 10 years for an 
acceptable intake of 10 µg/day, perhaps receiving 15 years of treatment).  This would result in 
a negligible increase (in the example given, a fractional increase to 1.5/100,000) compared to 
the overall calculated risk for the majority of patients treated for 10 years. 
7.4 
Acceptable Intakes for Multiple Mutagenic Impurities 
The TTC-based acceptable intakes should be applied to each individual impurity. When there 
are two Class 2 or Class 3 impurities, individual limits apply. When there are three or more 
Class 2 or Class 3 impurities specified on the drug substance specification, total mutagenic 
impurities should be limited as described in Table 3 for clinical development and marketed 
products. 
For combination products each active ingredient should be regulated separately. 
Table 3: Acceptable Total Daily Intakes for Multiple Impurities 
 
Duration of 
treatment 
< 1 month 
>1 - 12 months 
>1 - 10 years 
>10 years to 
lifetime 
Total Daily 
intake 
[µg/day] 
120 
60 
30 
5

10 
 
 
Only specified Class 2 and 3 impurities on the drug substance specification are included in the 
calculation of the total limit. However, impurities with compound-specific or class-related 
acceptable intake limits (Class 1) should not be included in the total limits of Class 2 and 
Class 3 impurities. Also, degradation products which form in the drug product would be  
controlled individually and a total limit would not be applied. 
7.5 
Exceptions and Flexibility in Approaches 
• Higher acceptable intakes may be justified when human exposure to the impurity will 
be much greater from other sources e.g., food, or endogenous metabolism (e.g., 
formaldehyde). 
• Case-by-case exceptions to the use of the appropriate acceptable intake can be justified 
in cases of severe disease, reduced life expectancy, late onset but chronic disease, or 
with limited therapeutic alternatives. 
• Compounds from some structural classes of mutagens can display extremely high 
carcinogenic potency (cohort of concern), i.e., aflatoxin-like-, N-nitroso-, and alkyl- 
azoxy structures. If these compounds are found as impurities in pharmaceuticals, 
acceptable intakes for these high-potency carcinogens would likely be significantly 
lower than the acceptable intakes defined in this guideline. Although the principles of 
this guideline can be used, a case-by-case approach using e.g., carcinogenicity data 
from closely related structures, if available, should usually be developed to justify 
acceptable intakes for pharmaceutical development and marketed products. 
The above risk approaches described in Section 7 are applicable to all routes of administration 
and no corrections to acceptable intakes are generally warranted. Exceptions to consider may 
include situations where data justify route-specific concerns that should be evaluated case-by- 
case. These approaches are also applicable to all patient populations based upon the 
conservative nature of the risk approaches being applied. 
 
8. 
CONTROL 
A control strategy is a planned set of controls, derived from current product and process 
understanding that assures process performance and product quality (ICH Q10, Ref. 8). A 
control strategy can include, but is not limited to, the following: 
• Controls on material attributes (including raw materials, starting materials, 
intermediates, reagents, solvents, primary packaging materials); 
• Facility and equipment operating conditions; 
• Controls implicit in the design of the manufacturing process; 
• In-process controls (including in-process tests and process parameters); 
• Controls on drug substance and drug product (e.g., release testing). 
When an impurity has been characterized as Classes 1, 2, or 3 in Table 1, it is important to 
develop a control strategy that assures that the level of this impurity in the drug substance and 
drug product is below the acceptable limit. A thorough knowledge of the chemistry associated 
with the drug substance manufacturing process, and of the drug product manufacturing 
process, along with an understanding of the overall stability of the drug substance and drug 
product is fundamental to developing the appropriate controls. Developing a strategy to 
control mutagenic impurities in the drug product is consistent with risk management processes 
identified in ICH Q9 (Ref. 9). A control strategy that is based on product and process 
understanding and utilisation of risk management principles will lead to a combination of 
process design and control and appropriate analytical testing, which can also

11 
 
 
provide an opportunity to shift controls upstream and minimize the need for end-product 
testing. 
8.1        Control of Process Related Impurities 
There are 4 potential approaches to development of a control strategy for drug substance: 
Option 1 
Include a test for the impurity in the drug substance specification with an acceptance criterion 
at or below the acceptable limit using an appropriate analytical procedure. 
For an Option 1 control approach, it is possible to apply periodic verification testing per ICH 
Q6A (Ref. 10). Periodic verification testing is justified when it can be shown that levels of 
the mutagenic impurity in the drug substance are less than 30% of the acceptable limit for at 
least 6 consecutive pilot scale or 3 consecutive production scale batches. If this condition is 
not fulfilled, a routine test in the drug substance specification is recommended.  See Section 
8.3 for additional considerations. 
Option 2 
Include a test for the impurity in the specification for a raw material, starting material or 
intermediate, or as an in-process control, with an acceptance criterion at or below the 
acceptable limit using an appropriate analytical procedure. 
Option 3 
Include a test for the impurity in the specification for a raw material, starting material or 
intermediate, or as an in-process control, with an acceptance criterion above the acceptable 
limit of the impurity in the drug substance, using an appropriate analytical procedure coupled 
with demonstrated understanding of fate and purge and associated process controls that assure 
the level in the drug substance is below the acceptable limit without the need for any additional 
testing later in the process. 
This option can be justified when the level of the impurity in the drug substance will be less 
than 30% of the acceptable limit by review of data from laboratory scale experiments (spiking 
experiments are encouraged) and where necessary supported by data from pilot scale or 
commercial scale batches. See Case Examples 1 and 2. Alternative approaches can be used 
to justify Option 3. 
Option 4 
Understand process parameters and impact on residual impurity levels (including fate and 
purge knowledge) with sufficient confidence that the level of the impurity in the drug substance 
will be below the acceptable limit such that no analytical testing is recommended for this 
impurity.  (i.e., the impurity does not need to be listed on any specification). 
A control strategy that relies on process controls in lieu of analytical testing can be appropriate 
if the process chemistry and process parameters that impact levels of mutagenic impurities 
are understood and the risk of an impurity residing in the final drug substance above the 
acceptable limit is determined to be negligible. In many cases justification of this control 
approach based on scientific principles alone is sufficient. Elements of a scientific risk 
assessment can be used to justify an option 4 approach. The risk assessment can be based on 
physicochemical properties and process factors that influence the fate and purge of an 
impurity including chemical reactivity, solubility, volatility, ionizability and any physical 
process steps designed to remove impurities. The result of this risk assessment might be 
shown as an estimated purge factor for clearance of the impurity by the process (Ref. 11).

12 
 
 
Option 4 is especially useful for those impurities that are inherently unstable (e.g., thionyl 
chloride that reacts rapidly and completely with water) or for those impurities that are 
introduced early in the synthesis and are effectively purged. 
In some cases an Option 4 approach can be appropriate when the impurity is known to form, 
or is introduced late in the synthesis, however process-specific data should then be provided to 
justify this approach. 
8.2 
Considerations for Control Approaches 
For Option 4 approaches where justification based on scientific principles alone is not 
considered sufficient, as well as for Option 3 approaches, analytical data to support the control 
approach is expected. This could include as appropriate information on the structural changes 
to the impurity caused by downstream chemistry (“fate”), analytical data on pilot scale batches, 
and in some cases, laboratory scale studies with intentional addition of the impurity (“spiking 
studies”). In these cases, it is important to demonstrate that the fate/purge argument for the 
impurity is robust and will consistently assure a negligible probability of an impurity residing 
in the final drug substance above the acceptable limit. Where the purge factor is based on 
developmental data, it is important to address the expected scale-dependence or 
independence. In the case that the small scale model used in the development stage is 
considered to not represent the commercial scale, confirmation of suitable control in pilot 
scale and/or initial commercial batches is generally appropriate. The need for data from 
pilot/commercial batches is influenced by the magnitude of the purge factor calculated from 
laboratory or pilot scale data, point of entry of the impurity, and knowledge of downstream 
process purge points. 
If Options 3 and 4 cannot be justified, then a test for the impurity on the specification for a 
raw material, starting material or intermediate, or as an in-process control (Option 2) or drug 
substance (Option 1) at the acceptable limit should be included. For impurities introduced in 
the last synthetic step, an Option 1 control approach would be expected unless otherwise 
justified. 
The application of “As Low As Reasonably Practicable” (ALARP) is not necessary if the 
level of the mutagenic impurity is below acceptable limits. Similarly, it is not necessary to 
demonstrate that alternate routes of synthesis have been explored. 
In cases where control efforts cannot reduce the level of the mutagenic impurity to below the 
acceptable limit and levels are ALARP, a higher limit may be justified based on a risk/benefit 
analysis. 
8.3 
Considerations for Periodic Testing 
The above options include situations where a test is recommended to be included in the 
specification, but where routine measurement for release of every batch may not be necessary. 
This approach, referred to as periodic or skip testing in ICH Q6A could also be called 
“Periodic Verification Testing.” This approach may be appropriate when it can be 
demonstrated that processing subsequent to impurity formation/introduction clears the 
impurity. It should be noted that allowance of Periodic Verification Testing is contingent 
upon use of a process that is under a state of control (i.e., produces a quality product that 
consistently meets specifications and conforms to an appropriately established facility, 
equipment, processing, and operational control regimen). If upon testing, the level of the 
mutagenic impurity fails to meet the acceptance criteria established for the periodic test, the 
drug producer should immediately commence full testing (i.e., testing of every batch for the 
attribute specified) until the cause of the failure has been conclusively determined, corrective

13 
 
 
action has been implemented, and the process is again documented to be in a state of control. 
As noted in ICH Q6A, regulatory authorities should be notified of a periodic verification test 
failure to evaluate the risk/benefit of previously released batches that were not tested. 
8.4 
Control of Degradation Products 
For a potential degradation product that has been characterized as mutagenic, it is important to 
understand if the degradation pathway is relevant to the drug substance and drug product 
manufacturing processes and/or their proposed packaging and storage conditions. A well- 
designed accelerated stability study (e.g., 40°C/75% relative humidity, 6 months) in the 
proposed packaging, with appropriate analytical procedures is recommended to determine the 
relevance of the potential degradation product. Alternatively, well designed kinetically 
equivalent shorter term stability studies at higher temperatures in the proposed commercial 
package may be used to determine the relevance of the degradation pathway prior to initiating 
longer term stability studies. This type of study would be especially useful to understand the 
relevance of those potential degradation products that are based on knowledge of potential 
degradation pathways but not yet observed in the product. 
Based on the result of these accelerated studies, if it is anticipated that the degradation product 
will form at levels approaching the acceptable limit under the proposed packaging and storage 
conditions, then efforts to control formation of the degradation product is expected. In these 
cases, monitoring for the drug substance or drug product degradation product in long term 
primary stability studies at the proposed storage conditions (in the proposed commercial pack) 
is expected unless otherwise justified. Whether or not a specification limit for the mutagenic 
degradation product is appropriate will generally depend on the results from these stability 
studies. 
If it is anticipated that formulation development and packaging design options are unable to 
control mutagenic degradation product levels to less than the acceptable limit and levels are as 
low as reasonably practicable, a higher limit can be justified based on a risk/benefit analysis. 
8.5 
Lifecycle Management 
This section is intended to apply to those products approved after the issuance of this guideline. 
The quality system elements and management responsibilities described in ICH Q10 are 
intended to encourage the use of science-based and risk-based approaches at each lifecycle 
stage, thereby promoting continual improvement across the entire product lifecycle. Product 
and process knowledge should be managed from development through the commercial life of 
the product up to and including product discontinuation. 
The development and improvement of a drug substance or drug product manufacturing process 
usually continues over its lifecycle. Manufacturing process performance, including the 
effectiveness of the control strategy, should be periodically evaluated. Knowledge gained from 
commercial manufacturing can be used to further improve process understanding and process 
performance and to adjust the control strategy. 
Any proposed change to the manufacturing process should be evaluated for the impact on the 
quality of drug substance and drug product. This evaluation should be based on 
understanding of the manufacturing process and should determine if appropriate testing to 
analyze the impact of the proposed changes is required. Additionally, improvements in 
analytical procedures may lead to structural identification of an impurity. In those cases the 
new structure would be assessed for mutagenicity as described in this guideline.

14 
 
 
Throughout the lifecycle of the product, it will be important to reassess if testing is 
recommended when intended or unintended changes occur in the process. This applies when 
there is no routine monitoring at the acceptable limit (Option 3 or Option 4 control 
approaches), or when applying periodic rather than batch-by-batch  testing.  This  testing should 
be performed at an appropriate point in the manufacturing process. 
In some cases, the use of statistical process control and trending of process measurements can 
be useful for continued suitability and capability of processes to provide adequate control on 
the impurity. Statistical process control can be based on process parameters that influence 
impurity formation or clearance, even when that impurity is not routinely monitored (e.g., 
Option 4). 
All changes should be subject to internal change management processes as part of the quality 
system (ICH Q10). Changes to information filed and approved in a dossier should be reported 
to regulatory authorities in accordance with regional regulations and guidelines. 
8.6 
Considerations for Clinical Development 
It is recognized that product and process knowledge increases over the course of development 
and therefore it is expected that data to support control strategies in the clinical development 
trial phases will be less than at the marketing registration phase. A risk-based approach based 
on process chemistry fundamentals is encouraged to prioritize analytical efforts on those 
impurities with the highest likelihood of being present in the drug substance or drug product. 
Analytical data may not be expected to support early clinical development when the 
likelihood of an impurity being present is low, but in a similar situation analytical data may be 
appropriate to support the control approach for the marketing application. It is also recognized 
that commercial formulation design occurs later in clinical development and therefore efforts 
associated with drug product degradation products will be limited in the  earlier phases. 
 
9. 
DOCUMENTATION 
Information relevant to the application of this guideline should be provided at the following 
stages: 
9.1 
Clinical Trial Applications 
• It is expected that the number of structures assessed for mutagenicity, and the 
collection of analytical data will both increase throughout the clinical development 
period. 
• For Phase 1 studies of 14 days or less a description of efforts to mitigate risks of 
mutagenic impurities focused on Class 1, and Class 2 impurities and those in the 
cohort of concern as outlined in Section 7 should be included. For Phase 1 clinical 
trials greater than 14 days and for Phase 2a clinical trials additionally Class 3 impurities 
that require analytical controls should be included. 
• For Phase 2b and Phase 3 clinical development trials, a list of the impurities assessed 
by (Q)SAR should be included, and any Class 1, 2 or 3 actual and potential impurities 
should be described along with plans for control. The in silico (Q)SAR systems used 
to perform the assessments should be described. The results of bacterial mutagenicity 
tests of actual impurities should be reported. 
• Chemistry arguments may be appropriate instead of analytical data for potential 
impurities that present a low likelihood of being present as described in Section 8.6.

15 
 
 
9.2 
Common Technical Document (Marketing Application) 
• For actual and potential process related impurities and degradation products where 
assessments according to this guideline are conducted, the mutagenic impurity 
classification and rationale for this classification should be provided: 
o This would include the results and description of in silico (Q)SAR systems used, 
and as appropriate, supporting information to arrive at the overall conclusion for 
Class 4 and 5 impurities. 
o When bacterial mutagenicity assays were performed on impurities, study reports 
should be provided for bacterial mutagenicity assays on impurities. 
• Justification for the proposed specification and the approach to control should be 
provided (e.g., ICH Q11 example 5b, Ref. 12). For example, this information could 
include the acceptable intake, the location and sensitivity of relevant routine 
monitoring. For Option 3 and Option 4 control approaches, a summary of knowledge 
of the purge factor, and identification of factors providing control (e.g., process steps, 
solubility in wash solutions, etc.) is important. 
 
NOTES 
Note 1 The ICH M7 Guideline recommendations provide a state-of-the-art approach for 
assessing the potential of impurities to induce point mutations and ensure that such 
impurities are controlled to safe levels so that below or above the ICH Q3A/B 
qualification threshold no further qualification for mutagenic potential is required. 
This includes the initial use of (Q)SAR tools to predict bacterial mutagenicity. In 
cases where the amount of the impurity exceeds 1 mg daily dose for chronic 
administration, evaluation of genotoxic potential as recommended in ICH Q3A/B 
could be considered. In cases where the amount of the impurity is equal to or less than 
1 mg, no further genotoxicity testing is required regardless of other qualification 
thresholds. 
Note 2 To assess the mutagenic potential of impurities, a single bacterial mutagenicity assay 
can be carried out with a fully adequate protocol according to ICH S2(R1) and 
OECD 471 guidelines (Ref. 13 and 14). The assays are expected to be performed in 
compliance with Good Laboratory Practices (GLP) regulations; however, lack of full 
GLP compliance does not necessarily mean that the data cannot be used to support 
clinical trials and marketing authorizations. Such deviations should be described in 
the study report. For example, the test article may not be prepared or analyzed in 
compliance with GLP regulations. In some cases, the selection of bacterial tester 
strains may be limited to those proven to be sensitive to the identified alert. For 
impurities that are not feasible to isolate or synthesize or when compound quantity is 
limited, it may not be possible to achieve the highest test concentrations 
recommended for an ICH-compliant bacterial mutagenicity assay according to the 
current testing guidelines. In this case, bacterial mutagenicity testing could be 
carried out using a miniaturized assay format with proven high concordance to the 
ICH-compliant assay to enable testing at higher concentrations with justification.

16 
 
 
Note 3 
Tests to Investigate the in vivo Relevance of in vitro Mutagens (Positive Bacterial 
Mutagenicity) 
 
In vivo test 
Factors to justify choice of test 
as fit-for-purpose 
Transgenic mutation assays 
• For any bacterial mutagenicity positive. Justify 
selection of assay tissue/organ 
Pig-a assay 
(blood) 
• For directly acting mutagens (bacterial mutagenicity 
positive without S9)* 
Micronucleus test 
(blood or bone marrow) 
• For directly acting mutagens (bacterial mutagenicity 
positive without S9) and compounds known to be 
clastogenic* 
Rat liver Unscheduled DNA 
Synthesis (UDS) test 
• In particular for bacterial mutagenicity positive with S9 
only 
• Responsible liver metabolite known 
o to be generated in test species used 
o to induce bulky adducts 
Comet assay 
• Justification needed (chemical class specific mode of 
action to form alkaline labile sites or single-strand 
breaks as preceding DNA damage that can potentially 
lead to mutations 
• Justify selection of assay tissue/organ 
Others 
• With convincing justification 
*For  indirect  acting  mutagens  (requiring  metabolic  activation),  adequate  exposure  to 
metabolite(s) should be demonstrated. 
Note 4 
Example of linear extrapolation from the TD50 
It is possible to calculate a compound-specific acceptable intake based on rodent 
carcinogenicity potency data such as TD50 values (doses giving a 50% tumor 
incidence equivalent to a cancer risk probability level of 1:2). Linear extrapolation 
to a probability of 1 in 100,000 (i.e., the accepted lifetime risk level used) is achieved 
by simply dividing the TD50 by 50,000. This procedure is similar to that employed 
for derivation of the TTC. 
Calculation example: Ethylene oxide 
TD50 values for ethylene oxide according to the Carcinogenic Potency Database are 
21.3 mg/kg body weight/day (rat) and 63.7 mg/kg body weight/day (mouse). For the 
calculation of an acceptable intake, the lower (i.e., more conservative) value of the 
rat is used. 
To derive a dose to cause tumors in 1 in 100,000 animals, divide by 50,000: 
21.3 mg/kg  50,000 = 0.42 µg/kg 
To derive a total human daily dose: 
0.42 µg/kg/day x 50 kg body weight = 21.3 µg/person/day 
Hence, a daily life-long intake of 21.3 µg ethylene oxide would correspond to a 
theoretical cancer risk of 10-5 and therefore be an acceptable intake when present as 
an impurity in a drug substance.

17 
 
 
Alternative methods and published regulatory limits for cancer risk assessment 
As an alternative of using the most conservative TD50 value from rodent 
carcinogenicity studies irrespective of its relevance to humans, an in-depth 
toxicological expert assessment of the available carcinogenicity data can be done in 
order to initially identify the findings (species, organ, etc.) with highest relevance to 
human risk assessment as a basis for deriving a reference point for linear 
extrapolation. Also, in order to better take into account directly the shape of the 
dose-response curve, a benchmark dose such as a Benchmark Dose Lower 
Confidence Limit 10% (BMDL10, an estimate of the lowest dose which is 95% 
certain to cause no more than a 10% cancer incidence in rodents) may be used 
instead of TD50 values as a numerical index for carcinogenic potency. Linear 
extrapolation to a probability of 1 in 100,000 (i.e., the accepted lifetime risk level 
used) is then achieved by simply dividing the BMDL10 by 10,000. 
Compound-specific acceptable intakes can also be derived from published 
recommended values from internationally recognized bodies such as World Health 
Organization (WHO, International Program on Chemical Safety [IPCS] Cancer Risk 
Assessment Programme) and others using the appropriate 10-5 lifetime risk level. In 
general, a regulatory limit that is applied should be based on the most current and 
scientifically supported data and/or methodology. 
Note 5  A compound-specific calculation of acceptable intakes for mutagenic impurities may 
be applied for mutagenic impurities (without carcinogenicity data) which are 
structurally similar to a chemically-defined class of known carcinogen. For example, 
factors that are associated with the carcinogenic potency of monofunctional alkyl 
chlorides have been identified (Ref. 15) and can be used to modify the safe 
acceptable intake of monofunctional alkyl chlorides, a group of alkyl chlorides 
commonly used in drug synthesis. Compared to multifunctional alkyl chlorides 
the monofunctional compounds are much less potent carcinogens with TD50 values 
ranging from 36 to 1810 mg/kg/day (n=15; epichlorohydrin with two distinctly 
different functional groups is excluded). A TD50 value of 36 mg/kg/day can thus 
be used as a still very conservative class-specific potency reference point for 
calculation of acceptable intakes for monofunctional alkyl chlorides. This potency 
level is at least ten-fold lower than the TD50 of 1.25 mg/kg/day corresponding to 
the default lifetime TTC (1.5 µg/day) and therefore justifies lifetime and less-than-
lifetime daily intakes for monofunctional alkyl chlorides ten times the default ones. 
Note 6 Establishing less-than-lifetime acceptable intakes for mutagenic impurities in 
pharmaceuticals has precedent in the establishment of the staged TTC limits for 
clinical development (Ref. 16). The calculation of less-than-lifetime Acceptable 
Intakes (AI) is predicated on the principle of Haber’s rule, a fundamental concept in 
toxicology where concentration (C) x time (T) = a constant (k). Therefore, the 
carcinogenic effect is based on both dose and duration of exposure.

18 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Illustration of calculated daily dose of a mutagenic impurity corresponding 
to a theoretical 1:100,000 cancer risk as a function of duration of treatment in 
comparison to the acceptable intake levels as recommended in Section 7.3. 
 
The solid line in Figure 1 represents the linear relationship between the amount of 
daily intake of a mutagenic impurity corresponding to a 10-5 cancer risk and the 
number of treatment days. The calculation is based on the TTC level as applied in 
this guideline for life-long treatment i.e., 1.5 µg per person per day using the formula: 
Less-than-lifetime AI = 1.5 µg x (365 days x 70 years lifetime = 25,550) 
Total number of treatment days 
The calculated daily intake levels would thus be 1.5 µg for treatment duration of 70 
years, 10 µg for 10 years, 100 µg for 1 year, 1270 µg for 1 month and approximately 
38.3 mg as a single dose, all resulting in the same cumulative intake and therefore 
theoretically in the same cancer risk (1 in 100,000). 
The dashed step-shaped curve represents the actual daily intake levels adjusted to 
less-than-lifetime exposure as recommended in Section 7 of this guideline for 
products in clinical development and marketed products. These proposed levels are 
in general significantly lower than the calculated values thus providing safety factors 
that increase with shorter treatment durations. 
The proposed accepted daily intakes are also in compliance with a 10-6 cancer risk 
level if treatment durations are not longer than 6 months and are therefore applicable 
in early clinical trials with volunteers/patients where benefit has not yet been 
established. In this case the safety factors as shown in the upper graph would be 
reduced by a factor of 10.

19 
 
 
Note 7 
Table 4:  Examples of clinical use scenarios with different treatment durations for 
applying acceptable intakes 
 
Scenario1 
Acceptable Intake 
(µg/day) 
Treatment duration of < 1 month: e.g., drugs used in emergency 
procedures (antidotes, anesthesia, acute ischemic stroke), actinic 
keratosis, treatment of lice 
120 
Treatment duration of  > 1-12 months: e.g., anti-infective therapy 
with maximum up to 12 months treatment (HCV), parenteral nutrients, 
prophylactic flu drugs (~ 5 months),  peptic ulcer, Assisted 
Reproductive Technology (ART), pre-term labor, preeclampsia, pre- 
surgical (hysterectomy) treatment, fracture healing (these are acute use 
but with long half-lives) 
20 
Treatment duration of >1-10 years:  e.g., stage of disease with short 
life expectancy (severe Alzheimer’s), non-genotoxic anticancer 
treatment being used in a patient population with longer term survival 
(breast cancer, chronic myelogenous leukemia), drugs specifically 
labeled for less than 10 years of use, drugs administered intermittently 
to treat acute recurring symptoms2 (chronic Herpes, gout attacks, 
substance dependence such as smoking cessation), macular 
degeneration 
10 
Treatment duration of >10 years to lifetime: e.g., chronic use 
indications with high likelihood for lifetime use across broader age 
range (hypertension,  dyslipidemia, asthma, Alzheimer’s (except severe 
Alzheimer disease), hormone therapy (e.g., growth hormone, thyroid 
hormone, parathyroid hormone), lipodystrophy, schizophrenia, 
depression, psoriasis,  atopic dermatitis, Chronic Obstructive 
Pulmonary Disease (COPD), cystic fibrosis, seasonal and perennial 
allergic rhinitis, HIV3 
1.5 
1 This table shows general examples; each example should be examined on a case-by-case 
basis.  For example, 10 µg/day may be acceptable in cases where the life expectancy of the 
patient may be limited e.g., severe Alzheimer’s disease, even though the drug use could 
exceed 10-year duration. 
2 Intermittent use over a period >10 years but based on calculated cumulative dose it falls 
under the >1-10 years category. 
3 Changed in M7(R2) from 1-10 years to >10 years to lifetime because of clinical treatment 
advances. See Q&A.

20 
 
 
GLOSSARY 
Acceptable intake: 
In the context of this guideline, an intake level that poses negligible cancer risk, or for 
serious/life-threatening indications where risk and benefit are appropriately balanced. 
Acceptable limit: 
Maximum  acceptable  concentration  of  an  impurity in  a  drug  substance  or  drug  product 
derived from the acceptable intake and the daily dose of the drug. 
Acceptance criterion: 
Numerical limits, ranges, or other suitable measures for acceptance of the results of analytical 
procedures. 
Control strategy: 
A planned set of controls, derived from current product and process understanding  that ensures 
process performance and product quality. The controls can include parameters and attributes 
related to drug substance and drug product materials and components, facility and equipment 
operating conditions, in-process controls, finished product specifications, and the associated 
methods and frequency of monitoring and control. 
Cumulative intake: 
The total intake of a substance that a person is exposed to over time. 
Degradation Product: A molecule resulting from a chemical change in the drug molecule 
brought about over time and/or by the action of light, temperature, pH, water, or by reaction 
with an excipient and/or the immediate container/closure system. 
DNA-reactive: 
The potential to induce direct DNA damage through chemical reaction with DNA. 
Expert knowledge: 
In the context of this guideline, expert knowledge can be defined as a review of pre-existing 
data and the use of any other relevant information to evaluate the accuracy of an in silico 
model prediction for mutagenicity. 
Genotoxicity: 
A broad term that refers to any deleterious change in the genetic material regardless of the 
mechanism by which the change is induced. 
Impurity: 
Any component of the drug substance or drug product that is not the drug substance or an 
excipient. 
Mutagenic impurity: 
An impurity that has been demonstrated to be mutagenic in an appropriate mutagenicity test 
model, e.g., bacterial mutagenicity assay. 
Periodic verification testing: 
Also known as periodic or skip testing in ICH Q6A. 
(Q)SAR and SAR:

21 
 
 
In the context of this guideline, refers to the relationship between the molecular (sub) structure 
of a compound and its mutagenic activity using (Quantitative) Structure-Activity 
Relationships derived from experimental data. 
Purge factor: 
Purge reflects the ability of a process to reduce the level of an impurity, and the purge factor is 
defined as the level of an impurity at an upstream point in a process divided by the level of an 
impurity at a downstream point in a process. Purge factors may be measured or predicted. 
Structural alert: 
In the context of this guideline, a chemical grouping or molecular (sub) structure which is 
associated with mutagenicity.

22 
 
 
REFERENCES 
1. International Conference on Harmonisation (2006). Q3A(R2): Impurities in New Drug 
Substances. 
2. International Conference on Harmonisation (2006). Q3B(R2): Impurities in New Drug 
Products. 
3. International Conference on Harmonisation (2009). M3(R2): Guidance on Nonclinical 
Safety Studies for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for 
Pharmaceuticals. 
4. International Conference on Harmonisation (2009). S9: Nonclinical Evaluation for 
Anticancer Pharmaceuticals. 
5. International Conference on Harmonisation (1996). Q1B: Stability Testing: Photostability 
Testing of New Drug Substances and Products. 
6. Sutter A, Amberg A, Boyer S, Brigo A, Contrera JF, Custer LL, Dobo KL, Gervais V, 
Glowienke S, van Gompel J, Greene N, Muster W, Nicolette J, Reddy MV, Thybaud V, 
Vock E, White AT, Müller L. Use of in silico systems and expert knowledge for 
structure-based assessment of potentially mutagenic impurities. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 
2013;67:39-52. 
7. International Conference on Harmonisation (2011). Q3C(R5): Impurities: Guideline for 
Residual Solvents. 
8. International Conference on Harmonisation (2008). Q10: Pharmaceutical Quality System. 
9. International Conference on Harmonisation (2005). Q9: Quality Risk Management. 
10. International Conference on Harmonisation (2000). Q6A: Test Procedures and Acceptance 
Criteria for New Drug Substances and New Drug Products: Chemical Substances. 
11. Teasdale A, Elder D, Chang S-J, Wang S, Thompson R, Benz N, Sanchez Flores I. 
Risk assessment of genotoxic impurities in new chemical entities: strategies to 
demonstrate control. Org Process Res Dev 2013;17:221-230. 
12. International Conference on Harmonisation (2012). Q11: Development and Manufacture 
of Drug Substances (Chemical Entities and Biotechnological/Biological Entities). 
13. International Conference on Harmonisation (2011). S2(R1): Guidance on Genotoxicity 
Testing and Data Interpretation for Pharmaceuticals Intended for Human Use. 
14. Test 471. Bacterial Reverse Mutation Test OECD Guideline for Testing of Chemicals 
Section 4 1997 July 
15. Brigo, A Müller, L. (2011) Development of the Threshold of Toxicological Concern 
Concept and its Relationship to Duration of Exposure, in Genotoxic Impurities (Ed. A. 
Teasdale), John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ, USA. doi: 10.1002/9780470929377.ch2 
16. Müller L, Mauthe RJ, Riley CM, Andino MM, De Antonis D, Beels C, DeGeorge J, De 
Knaep AGM, Ellison D, Fagerland JA, Frank R, Fritschel B, Galloway S, Harpur E, 
Humfrey CDN, Jacks ASJ, Jagota N, Mackinnon J, Mohan G, Ness DK, O’Donovan MR, 
Smith MD, Vudathala G, Yotti L. A rationale for determining, testing, and controlling 
specific impurities in pharmaceuticals that possess potential for genotoxicity. Regul 
Toxicol Pharmacol 2006;44:198-211.

23 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
Appendix 1: Scope Scenarios for Application of the ICH M7 Guideline 
 
 
Scenario 
Applies to 
Drug 
Substance 
Applies 
to Drug 
Product 
Comments 
Registration of new drug 
substances and associated 
drug product 
Yes 
Yes 
Primary intent of the M7 Guideline 
Clinical trial applications 
for new drug substances 
and associated drug 
product 
Yes 
Yes 
Primary intent of the M7 Guideline 
Clinical trial applications 
for new drug substances 
for a anticancer drug per 
ICH S9 
No 
No 
Out of scope of M7 Guideline 
Clinical trial applications 
for new drug substances 
for an orphan drug 
Yes 
Yes 
There may be exceptions on a case by 
case basis for higher impurity limits 
Clinical trial application 
for a new drug product 
using an existing drug 
substance where there are 
no changes to the drug 
substance manufacturing 
process 
No 
Yes 
Retrospective application of the M7 
Guideline is not intended for 
marketed products unless there are 
changes made to the synthesis.  Since 
no changes are made to the drug 
substance synthesis, the drug 
substance would not require 
reevaluation.  Since the drug product 
is new, application of this guideline is 
expected. 
A new formulation of an 
approved drug substance 
is filed 
No 
Yes 
See Section 4.2 
A product that is 
previously approved in a 
member region is filed for 
the first time in a different 
member region. The 
product is unchanged. 
Yes 
Yes 
As there is no mutual recognition, an 
existing product in one member 
region filed for the first time in 
another member region would be 
considered a new product. 
A new supplier or new 
site of the drug substance 
is registered.  There are no 
changes to the 
manufacturing process 
used in this registered 
application. 
No 
No 
As long as the synthesis of the drug 
substance is consistent with 
previously approved methods, then 
reevaluation of mutagenic impurity 
risk is not necessary.  The applicant 
would need to demonstrate that no 
changes have been made to a 
previously approved process/product. 
See Section 4.1.

24 
 
 
 
An existing product 
(approved after the 
issuance of ICH M7 with 
higher limits based on 
ICH S9) associated with 
an advanced cancer 
indication is now 
registered  for use in a 
non-life threatening 
indication 
Yes 
Yes 
Since the patient population and 
acceptable cancer risk have changed, 
the previously approved impurity 
control strategy and limits will 
require reevaluation.  See Section 4.3. 
New combination product 
is filed that contains one 
new drug substance and 
an existing drug substance 
Yes (new 
drug 
substance) 
No 
(existing 
drug 
substance) 
Yes 
M7 would apply to the new drug 
substance.  For the existing drug 
substance, retrospective application 
of M7 to existing products is not 
intended.  For the drug product, this 
would classify as a new drug product 
so the guideline would apply to any 
new or higher levels of degradation 
products. 
 
 
 
Appendix 2:  Case Examples to Illustrate Potential Control Approaches 
Case 1: Example of an Option 3 Control Strategy 
An intermediate X is formed two steps away from the drug substance and impurity A is 
routinely detected in intermediate X. The impurity A is a stable compound and carries over to 
the drug substance. A spike study of the impurity A at different concentration levels in 
intermediate X was performed at laboratory scale. As a result of these studies, impurity A 
was consistently removed to less than 30% of the TTC-based limit in the drug substance even 
when impurity A was present at 1% in intermediate X. Since this intermediate X is formed 
only two steps away from the drug substance and the impurity A level in the intermediate X is 
relatively high, the purging ability of the process has additionally been confirmed by 
determination of impurity A in the drug substance in multiple pilot-scale batches and results 
were below 30% of the TTC-based limit. Therefore, control of the impurity A in the 
intermediate X with an acceptance limit of 1.0% is justified and no test is warranted for this 
impurity in the drug substance specification. 
Case 2: Example of an Option 3 Control Strategy: Based on Predicted Purge from a 
Spiking Study Using Standard Analytical Methods 
A starting material Y is introduced in step 3 of a 5-step synthesis and an impurity B is 
routinely detected in the starting material Y at less than 0.1% using standard analytical 
methods.  In order to determine if the 0.1% specification in the starting material is acceptable, 
a purge study was conducted at laboratory scale where impurity B was spiked into starting 
material Y with different concentration levels up to 10% and a purge factor of > 500-fold was 
determined across the final three processing steps. This purge factor applied to a 0.1% 
specification in starting material Y would result in a predicted level of impurity B in the drug 
substance of less than 2 ppm. As this is below the TTC-based limit of 50 ppm for this 
impurity in the drug substance, the 0.1% specification of impurity B in starting material Y is

25 
 
 
justified without the need for providing drug substance batch data on pilot scale or 
commercial scale batches. 
Case 3: Example of an Option 2 and 4 Control Strategy: Control of Structurally Similar 
Mutagenic Impurities 
The step 1 intermediate of a 5-step synthesis is a nitroaromatic compound that may contain 
low levels of impurity C, a positional isomer of the step 1 intermediate and also a 
nitroaromatic compound. The amount of impurity C in the step 1 intermediate has not been 
detected by ordinary analytical methods, but it may be present at lower levels. The step 1 
intermediate is positive in the bacterial mutagenicity assay. The step 2 hydrogenation reaction 
results in a 99% conversion of the step 1 intermediate to the corresponding aromatic amine. 
This is confirmed via in-process testing. An assessment of purge of the remaining step 1 
nitroaromatic intermediate was conducted and a high purge factor was predicted based on 
purge points in the subsequent step 3 and 4 processing steps. Purge across the step 5 
processing step is not expected and a specification for the step 1 intermediate at the TTC- 
based limit was established at the step 4 intermediate (Option 2 control approach). The 
positional isomer impurity C would be expected to purge via the same purge points as the step 
1 intermediate and therefore will always be much lower than the step 1 intermediate itself and 
therefore no testing is required and an Option 4 control strategy for impurity C can be 
supported without the need for any additional laboratory or pilot scale data. 
Case 4: Example of an Option 4 Control Strategy: Highly Reactive Impurity 
Thionyl chloride is a highly reactive compound that is mutagenic. This reagent is introduced 
in step 1 of a 5-step synthesis. At multiple points in the synthesis, significant amounts of 
water are used. Since thionyl chloride reacts instantaneously with water, there is no chance of 
any residual thionyl chloride to be present in the drug substance. An Option 4 control 
approach is suitable without the need for any laboratory or pilot scale data.

26 
 
 
Implementation of Guideline: 
Implementation of M7 is encouraged after publication; however, because of the complexity of 
the guideline, application of M7 is not expected prior to 18 months after ICH publication. 
The following exceptions to the 18-month timeline apply. 
1. Ames tests should be conducted according to M7 upon ICH publication. However, 
Ames tests conducted prior to publication of M7 need not be repeated. 
 
2. When development programs have started phase 2b/3 clinical trials prior to publication 
of M7 these programs can be completed up to and including marketing application 
submission and approval, with the following exceptions to M7. 
o No need for two QSAR assessments as outlined in Section 6. 
o No need to comply with the scope of product impurity assessment as outlined in 
Section 5. 
o No  need  to  comply  with  the  documentation  recommendations  as  outlined  in 
Section 9. 
 
3. Given the similar challenges for development of a commercial manufacturing process, 
application of the aspects of M7 listed above to new marketing applications that do not 
include Phase 2b/3 clinical trials would not be expected until 36 months after ICH 
publication of M7.

27 
 
 
Appendix 3: List of Compounds in ICH M7 Addendum Acceptable Intakes 
(AIs) or Permissible Daily Exposures (PDEs) 
 
Compound 
CAS# 
Chemical 
Structure 
AI  or  PDE 
(µg/day) 
Comment 
Linear extrapolation from TD50 
Acrylonitrile 
107-13-1 
6 
TD50 linear 
extrapolation 
Benzyl chloride 
100-44-7 
41 
TD50 linear 
extrapolation 
Bis(chloromethyl)ether 
542-88-1 
0.004 
TD50 linear 
extrapolation 
1-Chloro-4- 
nitrobenzene 
100-00-5 
117 
TD50 linear 
extrapolation 
p-Cresidine 
120-71-8 
45 
TD50 linear 
extrapolation 
1,2-Dibromoethane 
106-93-4 
2 
TD50 linear 
extrapolation 
Dimethylcarbamyl 
chloride 
79-44-7 
0.6 (inhalation)* 
5 (all other 
routes) 
 
TD50 linear 
extrapolation 
Epichlorohydrin 
106-89-8 
3 
TD50 linear 
extrapolation 
Ethyl bromide 
74-96-4 
32 
TD50 linear 
extrapolation 
Ethyl chloride 
75-00-3 
1,810 
TD50 linear 
extrapolation 
Glycidol 
556-52-5 
4 
TD50 linear 
extrapolation 
Hydrazine 
302-01-2 
0.2 (inhalation)* 
39 (all other 
routes) 
TD50 linear 
extrapolation 
Methyl Chloride 
74-87-3 
1,361 
TD50 linear 
extrapolation 
Styrene 
100-42-5 
 
154 
TD50 linear 
extrapolation 
Threshold-based PDE

28 
 
 
Aniline 
62-53-3 
720 
PDE based on 
Aniline HCl 
142-04-1 
threshold mode of 
action 
(hemosiderosis) 
Endogenous and/or Environmental Exposure 
Acetaldehyde 
75-07-0 
2,000 (oral)* 
185 (all other 
routes) 
Oral PDE is based 
on average food 
intake; all other 
routes based on 
TD50 linear 
extrapolation from 
an inhalation study 
Formaldehyde 
50-00-0 
8,000 or 215 
ppb, whichever 
is lower 
(inhalation)* 
10,000 (all other 
routes) 
Inhalation route 
based on TD50 
linear extrapolation 
or local irritation; 
all other routes 
based on average 
food intake 
Hydrogen peroxide 
7722-84-1   
68,000 or 0.5%, 
whichever is 
lower 
68 mg/day is 1% of 
estimated 
endogenous 
production 
Vinyl acetate 
108-05-4 
2,000 (oral)* 
758 (all other 
routes) 
Oral PDE is based 
on average food 
intake for 
acetaldehyde; all 
other routes based 
on TD50 linear 
extrapolation from 
an inhalation study 
Other Cases 
p-Chloroaniline 
p-Chloroaniline HCl 
106-47-8 
20265-96-7 
 
34 
AI based on liver 
tumors for which 
mutagenic mode of 
action cannot be 
ruled out 
Dimethyl Sulfate 
77-78-1 
1.5 
Carcinogenicity 
data available, but 
inadequate to 
derive AI. Default 
to TTC 
* route specific limit