# M3_R2__Guideline.pdf
# Category: ich/M
# Pages: 31

INTERNATIONAL 
CONFERENCE 
ON 
HARMONISATION 
OF 
TECHNICAL 
REQUIREMENTS FOR REGISTRATION OF PHARMACEUTICALS FOR HUMAN USE 
 
 
 
ICH HARMONISED TRIPARTITE GUIDELINE 
 
 
 
GUIDANCE ON NONCLINICAL SAFETY STUDIES FOR THE 
CONDUCT OF  
HUMAN CLINICAL TRIALS AND MARKETING AUTHORIZATION 
FOR PHARMACEUTICALS 
M3(R2) 
 
 
Current Step 4 version 
dated 11 June 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
This guideline has been developed by the appropriate ICH Expert Working Group and has 
been subject to consultation by the regulatory parties, in accordance with the ICH Process. 
At Step 4 of the Process the draft is recommended for adoption to the regulatory bodies of 
the European Union, Japan and the USA.

M3(R2) 
Document History 
 
Code 
History 
Date 
M3 
Approval by the Steering Committee under Step 2 and release 
for public consultation. 
7 November
1996 
M3 
Approval by the Steering Committee under Step 4 and 
recommendation for adoption to the three ICH regulatory 
bodies. 
16 July 
1997 
M3(R1) 
Approval by the Steering Committee of minor revisions 
without further public consultation under Step 4 and 
recommendation for adoption to the three ICH regulatory 
bodies. 
9 November
2000 
M3(R2) 
Approval by the Steering Committee of M3(R1) Revision 
under Step 2 and release for public consultation. 
15 July 
2008 
M3(R2) 
Approval by the Steering Committee of minor post Step 2 
editorial correction. 
17 July 
2008 
 
Current Step 4 version 
M3(R2) 
Approval by the Steering Committee of M3(R1) Revision 
under Step 4 and recommendation for adoption to the three 
ICH regulatory bodies. 
11 June 
2009

i 
GUIDANCE ON NONCLINICAL SAFETY STUDIES FOR THE CONDUCT OF  
HUMAN CLINICAL TRIALS AND MARKETING AUTHORIZATION FOR 
PHARMACEUTICALS 
 
ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline 
Having reached Step 4 of the ICH Process at the ICH Steering Committee meeting 
on June 11, 2009, this guideline is recommended for adoption to the three 
regulatory parties to ICH. 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
1. 
INTRODUCTION ...............................................................................................1 
1.1 Objectives of the Guideline ...................................................................................1 
1.2 Background ...........................................................................................................1 
1.3 Scope of the Guideline...........................................................................................1 
1.4 General Principles.................................................................................................2 
1.5 High Dose Selection for General Toxicity Studies................................................2 
2. 
PHARMACOLOGY STUDIES ..........................................................................5 
3. 
TOXICOKINETIC AND PHARMACOKINETIC STUDIES..........................5 
4. 
ACUTE TOXICITY STUDIES...........................................................................5 
5. 
REPEATED-DOSE TOXICITY STUDIES.......................................................6 
5.1 Clinical Development Trials .................................................................................6 
5.2 Marketing Authorization ......................................................................................7 
6. 
ESTIMATION OF THE FIRST DOSE IN HUMAN .......................................8 
7. 
EXPLORATORY CLINICAL TRIALS.............................................................8 
7.1 Microdose Trials....................................................................................................9 
7.2 Single-Dose Trials at Sub-therapeutic Doses or into the Anticipated 
Therapeutic Range ................................................................................................9 
7.3 Multiple Dose Trials..............................................................................................9 
8. 
LOCAL TOLERANCE STUDIES ...................................................................17 
9. 
GENOTOXICITY STUDIES............................................................................17 
10. 
CARCINOGENICITY STUDIES ....................................................................17 
11. 
REPRODUCTION TOXICITY STUDIES......................................................17 
11.1  Men.....................................................................................................................18 
11.2  Women Not of Childbearing Potential...............................................................18 
11.3  Women of Childbearing Potential......................................................................18 
11.4  Pregnant Women................................................................................................19 
12. 
CLINICAL TRIALS IN PEDIATRIC POPULATIONS ...............................19

Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies  
for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals 
ii 
13. 
IMMUNOTOXICITY ........................................................................................20 
14. 
PHOTOSAFETY TESTING.............................................................................20 
15. 
NONCLINICAL ABUSE LIABILITY.............................................................21 
16. 
OTHER TOXICITY STUDIES ........................................................................22 
17. 
COMBINATION DRUG TOXICITY TESTING ............................................22 
18. 
CONTINUING EFFORTS TO IMPROVE HARMONIZATION .................23 
19. 
ENDNOTES.......................................................................................................23 
20. 
REFERENCES..................................................................................................24

Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies  
for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals 
iii 
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
 
AUC 
Area Under the Curve 
Cmax 
Maximum Plasma Concentration 
EU 
European Union 
GLP 
Good Laboratory Practices 
HCG 
Human Chorionic Gonadotropin 
HIV 
Human Immunodeficiency Virus 
ICH 
International Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for 
Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use 
i.v. 
Intravenous 
MFD 
Maximum Feasible Dose 
MTD 
Maximum Tolerated Dose 
NOAEL 
No Observed Adverse Effect Level  
PET 
Positron Emission Tomography 
PK 
Pharmacokinetics 
PD 
Pharmacodynamics 
SAR 
Structure-Activity Relationship   
siRNA 
Small Interfering RNA  
WOCBP  
Women of Childbearing Potential

1
GUIDANCE ON NONCLINICAL SAFETY STUDIES FOR THE CONDUCT OF 
HUMAN CLINICAL TRIALS AND MARKETING AUTHORIZATION FOR 
PHARMACEUTICALS 
 
 
1.  
INTRODUCTION 
1.1 
Objectives of the Guideline 
The purpose of this document is to recommend international standards for, and promote 
harmonisation of, the nonclinical safety studies recommended to support human clinical 
trials of a given scope and duration as well as marketing authorization for 
pharmaceuticals. 
Harmonisation of the guidance for nonclinical safety studies will help to define the 
current recommendations and reduce the likelihood that substantial differences will 
exist among regions. 
This guidance should facilitate the timely conduct of clinical trials, reduce the use of 
animals in accordance with the 3R (reduce/refine/replace) principles and reduce the use 
of other drug development resources.  Although not discussed in this guidance, 
consideration should be given to use of new in vitro alternative methods for safety 
evaluation.  These methods, if validated and accepted by all ICH regulatory authorities, 
can be used to replace current standard methods.  
This 
guidance 
promotes 
safe, 
ethical 
development 
and 
availability 
of 
new 
pharmaceuticals. 
1.2 
Background 
The recommendations of this revised guidance further harmonise the nonclinical safety 
studies to support the various stages of clinical development among the regions of 
European Union (EU), Japan, and the United States. The present guidance represents 
the consensus that exists regarding the type and duration of nonclinical safety studies 
and their timing to support the conduct of human clinical trials and marketing 
authorization for pharmaceuticals. 
1.3 
Scope of the Guideline 
The nonclinical safety assessment for marketing approval of a pharmaceutical usually 
includes pharmacology studies, general toxicity studies, toxicokinetic and nonclinical 
pharmacokinetic studies, reproduction toxicity studies, genotoxicity studies and, for 
drugs that have special cause for concern or are intended for a long duration of use, an 
assessment of carcinogenic potential.  Other nonclinical studies to assess phototoxicity, 
immunotoxicity, juvenile animal toxicity and abuse liability should be conducted on a 
case-by-case basis.  The need for nonclinical safety studies and their relation to the 
conduct of human clinical trials is delineated in this guidance. 
This document applies to the situations usually encountered during the development of 
pharmaceuticals and should be viewed as general guidance for drug development.  
Nonclinical safety studies and human clinical trials should be planned and designed to 
represent an approach that is scientifically and ethically appropriate.  
For biotechnology-derived products (as defined in Ref. 1), appropriate nonclinical safety 
studies should be determined in accordance with ICH S6. For these products, ICH

Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies  
for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals 
 2
M3(R2) only provides guidance with regard to timing of nonclinical studies relative to 
clinical development.   
Pharmaceuticals under development for indications in life-threatening or serious 
diseases (e.g., advanced cancer, resistant HIV infection, and congenital enzyme 
deficiency diseases) without current effective therapy also warrant a case-by-case 
approach to both the toxicological evaluation and clinical development in order to 
optimise and expedite drug development.  In these cases and for products using 
innovative therapeutic modalities (e.g., siRNA), as well as vaccine adjuvants, particular 
studies can be abbreviated, deferred, omitted, or added.  Where ICH guidances for 
specific product areas exist, they should be consulted.  
1.4 
General Principles 
The development of a pharmaceutical is a stepwise process involving an evaluation of 
both animal and human efficacy and safety information.  The goals of the nonclinical 
safety evaluation generally include a characterisation of toxic effects with respect to 
target organs, dose dependence, relationship to exposure, and, when appropriate, 
potential reversibility.  This information is used to estimate an initial safe starting dose 
and dose range for the human trials and to identify parameters for clinical monitoring 
for potential adverse effects.  The nonclinical safety studies, although usually limited at 
the beginning of clinical development, should be adequate to characterise potential 
adverse effects that might occur under the conditions of the clinical trial to be supported. 
Human clinical trials are conducted to investigate the efficacy and safety of a 
pharmaceutical, starting with a relatively low systemic exposure in a small number of 
subjects.  This is followed by clinical trials in which exposure to the pharmaceutical 
usually increases by duration and/or size of the exposed patient population.  Clinical 
trials should be extended based on the demonstration of adequate safety in the previous 
clinical trial(s), as well as on additional nonclinical safety information that becomes 
available as clinical development proceeds.   
Serious adverse clinical or nonclinical findings can influence the continuation of clinical 
trials. Within the overall clinical context, these findings should be evaluated to 
determine the appropriateness and design of additional nonclinical and/or clinical 
studies.   
Clinical trials are conducted in phases for which different terminology has been utilised 
in the various regions.  This document generally uses the terminology as defined in the 
ICH E8 guideline (Ref. 2).  However, as there is a growing trend to merge phases of 
clinical development, in some cases this document also relates the nonclinical studies to 
the duration and size of clinical trials and the characteristics of the subjects included. 
1.5 
High Dose Selection for General Toxicity Studies 
Generally, in toxicity studies, effects that are potentially clinically relevant can be 
adequately characterized using doses up to the maximum tolerated dose (MTD). It is not 
essential to demonstrate the MTD in every study. Other equally appropriate limiting 
doses include those that achieve large exposure multiples or saturation of exposure or 
use the maximum feasible dose (MFD).  These limit doses (see additional details below 
and Figure 1) prevent the use of doses in animals that would not add value to predicting 
clinical safety. These recommendations are consistent with those for reproduction and 
carcinogenicity study designs that already have defined limit doses and/or exposures 
(Refs. 3 and 4).   
Limit doses for acute, subchronic, and chronic toxicity studies of 1000 mg/kg/day for 
rodents and non-rodents are considered appropriate in all cases except those discussed

Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies  
for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals 
 
3
below. In the few situations where a dose of 1000 mg/kg/day does not result in a mean 
exposure margin of 10-fold to the clinical exposure and the clinical dose exceeds 1 g per 
day, then the doses in the toxicity studies should be limited by a 10-fold exposure margin 
or a dose of 2000 mg/kg/day or the MFD, whichever is lower. In those rare situations in 
which the dose of 2000 mg/kg/day results in an exposure that is less than the clinical 
exposure, a higher dose up to the MFD can be considered.  
Doses providing a 50-fold margin of exposure (usually based on group mean AUC values 
[see Note 1] of the parent drug or the pharmacologically active molecule of a pro-drug) to 
the clinical systemic exposure generally are also considered acceptable as the maximum 
dose for acute and repeated-dose toxicity studies in any species.  
To support Phase III clinical trials for the United States, dose-limiting toxicity generally 
should be identified in at least one species when using the 50-fold margin of exposure as 
the limit dose.  If this is not the case, a study of one-month or longer duration in one 
species that is conducted at the 1000 mg/kg limit dose, MFD or MTD, whichever is 
lowest, is recommended. However, on a case-by-case basis this study might not be 
warranted if a study of a shorter duration identifies dose-limiting toxicity at doses 
higher than those resulting in a 50-fold exposure margin. 
If genotoxicity endpoints are to be incorporated into a general toxicity study, then an 
appropriate maximum dose should be selected based on a MFD, MTD or limit dose of 
1000 mg/kg/day.

Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies  
for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals 
 4
Figure 1  
Recommended high dose selection for general toxicity studies  
 
Are/were any 
of the above situations 
met?
Yes
1000 mg/kg 
limit dose 
reached?
Mean exposure 
margin ≥10x clinical?
Human Dose 
<1 gram/day?
2000 mg/kg 
dose level tested?
1. MTD
2. Exposure saturation
3. MFD
4. Mean exposure margin 50x clinical*
MFD or mean 
exposure margin 
≥10x clinical?
Exposure 
animals ≥ humans ?
Consider testing up to MFD 
* For the US: see additional recommendations in section 1.5
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
In completed or subsequent studies :
Additional studies might 
be warranted
No
No
No
No
No
Tested dose level 
is considered 
adequate
Tested dose level 
is considered 
adequate
Additional studies might 
be warranted

Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies  
for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals 
 
5
 
2. 
PHARMACOLOGY STUDIES 
Safety pharmacology and pharmacodynamic (PD) studies are defined in ICH S7A (Ref. 
5).  
The core battery of safety pharmacology studies includes the assessment of effects on 
cardiovascular, central nervous and respiratory systems, and should generally be 
conducted before human exposure, in accordance with ICH S7A and S7B (Refs. 5 and 6).  
When warranted, supplemental and follow-up safety pharmacology studies can be 
conducted during later clinical development.  Consideration should be given to inclusion 
of any in vivo evaluations as additions to general toxicity studies, to the extent feasible, 
in order to reduce animal use. 
In addition, primary PD studies (in vivo and/or in vitro) are intended to investigate the 
mode of action and/or effects of a substance in relation to its desired therapeutic target. 
Such studies are generally conducted during the discovery phase of pharmaceutical 
development and as such, are not generally conducted in accordance with Good 
Laboratory Practices (GLP). These studies can contribute to dose selection for both 
nonclinical and clinical studies. 
3. 
TOXICOKINETIC AND PHARMACOKINETIC STUDIES 
In vitro metabolic and plasma protein binding data for animals and humans and 
systemic exposure data (ICH S3A, Ref. 7) in the species used for repeated-dose toxicity 
studies generally should be evaluated before initiating human clinical trials.  Further 
information on pharmacokinetics (PK) (e.g., absorption, distribution, metabolism and 
excretion), in test species and in vitro biochemical information relevant to potential drug 
interactions should be available before exposing large numbers of human subjects or 
treating for long duration (generally before Phase III).  These data can be used to 
compare human and animal metabolites and for determining if any additional testing is 
warranted. 
Nonclinical characterization of a human metabolite(s) is only warranted when that 
metabolite(s) is observed at exposures greater than 10% of total drug-related exposure 
and at significantly greater levels in humans than the maximum exposure seen in the 
toxicity studies. Such studies should be conducted to support Phase III clinical trials. For 
drugs for which the daily administered dose is <10 mg, greater fractions of the drug 
related material might be more appropriate triggers for testing. Some metabolites are 
not of toxicological concern (e.g., most glutathione conjugates) and do not warrant 
testing. The nonclinical characterization of metabolites with an identified cause for 
concern (e.g., a unique human metabolite) should be considered on a case-by-case basis. 
4. 
ACUTE TOXICITY STUDIES 
 
Historically, acute toxicity information has been obtained from single-dose toxicity 
studies in two mammalian species using both the clinical and a parenteral route of 
administration.  However, such information can be obtained from appropriately 
conducted dose-escalation studies or short-duration dose-ranging studies that define an 
MTD in the general toxicity test species (Refs. 8 and 9).  
When this acute toxicity information is available from any study, separate single-dose 
studies are not recommended.  Studies providing acute toxicity information can be 
limited to the clinical route only and such data can be obtained from non-GLP studies if 
clinical administration is supported by appropriate GLP repeated-dose toxicity studies. 
Lethality should not be an intended endpoint in studies assessing acute toxicity.

Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies  
for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals 
 6
In some specific situations (e.g., microdose trials; see Section 7) acute toxicity or single-
dose studies can be the primary support for studies in humans.  In these situations, the 
high dose selection can be different from that described in Section 1.5 but should be 
appropriate for supporting the intended clinical dose and route. These studies should be 
performed in compliance with GLP.  
Information on the acute toxicity of pharmaceutical agents could be useful to predict the 
consequences of human overdose situations and should be available to support Phase III.  
An earlier assessment of acute toxicity could be important for therapeutic indications for 
which patient populations are at higher risk for overdosing (e.g., depression, pain, and 
dementia) in out-patient clinical trials. 
5. 
REPEATED-DOSE TOXICITY STUDIES 
The recommended duration of the repeated-dose toxicity studies is usually related to the 
duration, therapeutic indication and scope of the proposed clinical trial.  In principle, the 
duration of the animal toxicity studies conducted in two mammalian species (one non-
rodent) should be equal to or exceed the duration of the human clinical trials up to the 
maximum recommended duration of the repeated-dose toxicity studies (Table 1).  Limit 
doses/exposures that are considered appropriate in repeated-dose toxicity studies are 
described in Section 1.5. 
In circumstances where significant therapeutic gain has been shown, trials can be 
extended beyond the duration of supportive repeated-dose toxicity studies on a case-by-
case basis. 
5.1 
Clinical Development Trials 
Repeated-dose toxicity studies in two species (one non-rodent) for a minimum duration of 
2 weeks (Table 1) would generally support any clinical development trial up to 2 weeks 
in duration. Clinical trials of longer duration should be supported by repeated-dose 
toxicity studies of at least equivalent duration.  Six month rodent and 9 month non-
rodent studies generally support dosing for longer than 6 months in clinical trials (for 
exceptions see Table 1 footnotes). 
Table 1 
Recommended Duration of Repeated-Dose Toxicity Studies to 
Support the Conduct of Clinical Trials 
 
Maximum Duration of 
Clinical Trial 
Recommended Minimum Duration of 
Repeated-Dose Toxicity Studies to Support 
Clinical Trials 
 
Rodents 
Non-rodents 
Up to 2 weeks  
2 weeksa  
2 weeksa 
Between 2 weeks and 6 
months  
Same as clinical trialb 
Same as clinical trialb 
> 6 months 
6 monthsb, c 
9 months b, c, d 
 
a. In the United States, as an alternative to 2 week studies, extended single-dose 
toxicity studies (see footnote c in Table 3) can support single-dose human trials. 
Clinical studies of less than 14 days can be supported with toxicity studies of the 
same duration as the proposed clinical study.

Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies  
for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals 
 
7
b. In some circumstances clinical trials of longer duration than 3 months can be 
initiated, provided that the data are available from a 3-month rodent and a 3-
month non-rodent study, and that complete data from the chronic rodent and 
non-rodent study are made available, consistent with local clinical trial 
regulatory procedures, before extending dosing beyond 3 months in the clinical 
trial. For serious or life-threatening indications or on a case-by-case basis, this 
extension can be supported by complete chronic rodent data and in-life and 
necropsy data for the non-rodent study. Complete histopathology data from the 
non-rodent should be available within an additional 3 months.   
c. There can be cases where a pediatric population is the primary population, and 
existing animal studies (toxicology or pharmacology) have identified potential 
developmental concerns for target organs. In these cases, long-term toxicity 
testing starting in juvenile animals can be appropriate in some circumstances 
(see Section 12).   
d. In the EU, studies of 6 months duration in non-rodents are considered acceptable.  
However, where studies with a longer duration have been conducted, it is not 
appropriate to conduct an additional study of 6 months.  
 
The following are examples where non-rodent studies of up to 6 months duration 
can also be appropriate for Japan and the United States: 
• 
When immunogenicity or intolerance confounds conduct of longer term 
studies. 
• 
Repeated short-term drug exposure even if clinical trial duration exceeds 6 
months, such as intermittent treatment of migraine, erectile dysfunction, 
or herpes simplex. 
• 
Drugs administered on a chronic basis to reduce the risk of recurrence of 
cancer.  
• 
Drugs for indications for which life expectancy is short. 
 
5.2 
Marketing Authorization 
Because of the size of the population at risk and the relatively less controlled conditions 
in clinical practice in contrast to clinical trials, longer durations of nonclinical testing 
can be valuable. The durations of repeated-dose toxicity studies to support marketing for 
different treatment durations are outlined in Table 2.  However, for a small number of 
conditions in which the indicated use is between 2 weeks and 3 months, but for which 
there is extensive clinical experience suggesting both widespread and long-term use 
beyond that recommended (e.g., anxiety, seasonal allergic rhinitis, pain), the duration of 
testing might more appropriately be equivalent to that recommended for treatment of 
greater than 3 months.

Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies  
for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals 
 8
Table 2 
Recommended Duration of Repeated-Dose Toxicity Studies to 
Support Marketing 
 
Duration of Indicated 
Treatment 
Rodent 
Non-rodent 
Up to 2 weeks 
1 month  
1 month 
>2 weeks to 1  month 
3 months 
3 months 
>1 month to 3 months 
6 months 
6 months 
>3 months 
6 monthsc 
9 months c,d  
N.B., See footnotes c and d in Table 1. 
 
6. 
ESTIMATION OF THE FIRST DOSE IN HUMAN 
The estimation of the first dose in humans is an important element to safeguard subjects 
participating in first-in-human studies.  All of the relevant nonclinical data, including 
the pharmacological dose response, the pharmacological/toxicological profile, and 
pharmacokinetics, should be considered when determining the recommended starting 
dose in humans. 
In general, the No Observed Adverse Effect Level (NOAEL) determined in nonclinical 
safety studies performed in the most appropriate animal species gives the most 
important information.  The proposed clinical starting dose will also depend on various 
factors, including PD, particular aspects of the molecule, and the design of the clinical 
trials.  See available regional guidance for specific approaches that can be used. 
Exploratory clinical trials (see Section 7) in humans can be initiated with less, or 
different, nonclinical support than is generally warranted for clinical development trials 
(see Section 5.1); therefore, the estimation of the clinical starting (and maximal) dose can 
differ.  The recommended criteria for starting doses for various exploratory clinical trial 
designs are described in Table 3. 
7. 
EXPLORATORY CLINICAL TRIALS 
It is recognized that in some cases earlier access to human data can provide improved 
insight 
into 
human 
physiology/pharmacology, 
knowledge 
of 
drug 
candidate 
characteristics and therapeutic target relevance to disease. Streamlined early 
exploratory approaches can accomplish this end.  Exploratory clinical studies for the 
purpose of this guidance are those intended to be conducted early in Phase I, involve 
limited human exposure, have no therapeutic intent, and are not intended to examine 
clinical tolerability.  They can be used to investigate a variety of parameters such as PK, 
PD and other biomarkers, which could include PET receptor binding and displacement 
or other diagnostic measures. The subjects included in these studies can be patients from 
selected populations or healthy individuals. 
The amount and type of nonclinical supporting data that is appropriate in these 
situations will be dependent on the extent of proposed human exposure, both with 
respect to the maximum clinical dose used and the duration of dosing.  Five different 
examples of exploratory clinical approaches are summarized below and in more detail in 
Table 3, together with the nonclinical testing programs that would be recommended in 
these particular approaches.  However, alternative approaches not described in this 
guidance can also be used, including strategies to support biotechnology-derived

Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies  
for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals 
 
9
products. It is recommended that these alternative approaches be discussed and agreed 
upon with the appropriate regulatory authority.  The use of any of these approaches can 
reduce overall animal use in drug development. 
Recommended starting doses and maximal doses for the five approaches are included in 
Table 3.  In all cases, characterization of PD and pharmacology using in vivo and/or in 
vitro models as noted in Table 3 and Section 2 is important and should be used in 
support of human dose selection. 
7.1 
Microdose Trials 
Two different microdose approaches are described below with details provided in Table 3. 
The first approach would involve not more than a total dose of 100 µg that can be 
administered as a single dose or divided doses in any subject.  This could be useful to 
investigate target receptor binding or tissue distribution in a PET study.  A second use 
could be to assess PK with or without the use of an isotopically labelled agent.   
A second microdose approach is one that involves < 5 administrations of a maximum of 
100 µg per administration (a total of 500 µg per subject).  This can be useful for 
applications similar to the first microdose approach described above, but with less active 
PET ligands.  
In some situations it could be appropriate to carry out a clinical microdose study using 
the i.v. route on a product intended for oral administration and for which an oral 
nonclinical toxicology package already exists.  In this case the i.v. microdose can be 
qualified by the existing oral toxicity studies as described in Table 1 or Table 3, 
Approach 3, where adequate exposure margins have been achieved.  It is not 
recommended to investigate i.v. local tolerance of the drug substance in this situation 
because the administered dose is very low (100 µg maximum). If a novel i.v. vehicle is 
being employed then local tolerance of the vehicle should be assessed. 
7.2 
Single-Dose Trials at Sub-therapeutic Doses or into the Anticipated 
Therapeutic Range 
The third approach involves a single-dose clinical study typically starting at 
subtherapeutic doses and possibly escalating into the pharmacological or anticipated 
therapeutic range (see Table 3).  The maximum allowable dose should be based on the 
nonclinical data, but could be further limited based on emerging clinical information 
obtained during the course of the study.  This approach could allow, for example, 
determination of PK parameters with non-radiolabeled drug at or near the predicted 
pharmacodynamically active dose. Another example could be assessment of target 
engagement or pharmacology after a single dose. This approach is not intended to 
support the determination of the maximum tolerated clinical dose (see exception, Table 
1, footnote a). 
7.3 
Multiple Dose Trials 
Two different nonclinical approaches (numbers 4 and 5) to support multiple dose clinical 
trials are provided in Table 3. These approaches support up to 14 days of dosing for 
determination of PK and PD in human in the therapeutic dose range, but are not 
intended to support the determination of maximum tolerated clinical dose. 
Approach 4 involves 2-week repeated-dose toxicity studies in rodents and non-rodents 
where dose selection in animals is based on exposure multiples of anticipated AUC at the 
maximum clinical dose.

Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies  
for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals 
 
10
Approach 5 involves a 2-week toxicity study in a rodent species and a confirmatory non-
rodent study that is designed to investigate whether the NOAEL in the rodent is also not 
a toxic dose in the non-rodent. If toxic effects are observed in the non-rodent at the 
rodent NOAEL exposure, clinical administration should be deferred until further 
nonclinical studies in this species have been conducted (usually a standard toxicity study 
(see Section 5)).

Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies  
for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals 
 
11
Table 3  
Recommended Non-Clinical Studies to Support Exploratory Clinical Trials 
Clinical: 
Non clinical: 
Dose to be Administered 
Start and Maximum 
Doses 
Pharmacology 
General Toxicity 
Studiesa 
Genotoxicityb / Other 
Approach 1: 
Total dose ≤ 100 µg (no 
inter-dose interval 
limitations) 
AND  
Total dose ≤ 1/100th NOAEL 
and ≤1/100th 
pharmacologically active 
dose (scaled on mg/kg for 
i.v. and mg/m2 for oral). 
Maximal and starting doses 
can be the same but not 
exceed a total accumulated 
dose of 100 µg. 
In vitro target/ receptor 
profiling should be 
conducted.  
 
Appropriate 
characterization of primary 
pharmacology (mode of 
action and/or effects) in a 
pharmacodynamically 
relevant model should be 
available to support human 
dose selection. 
Extended single dose 
toxicity study (see footnotes 
c and d in one species, 
usually rodent, by intended 
route of administration 
with toxicokinetic data, or 
via the i.v. route.  A 
maximum dose of 1000-fold 
the clinical dose on a mg/kg 
basis for i.v. and mg/m2 for 
oral administration can be 
used. 
Genotoxicity studies are not 
recommended, but any 
studies or SAR assessments 
conducted should be 
included in the clinical trial 
application.  
For highly radioactive 
agents (e.g., PET imaging 
agents), appropriate PK and 
dosimetry estimates should 
be submitted.  
Approach 2:  
Total cumulative dose ≤ 500 
µg, maximum of 5 
administrations with a 
washout between doses (6 
or more actual or predicted 
half-lives) 
AND  
each dose ≤ 100 µg  
AND  
each dose ≤ 1/100th of the 
NOAEL and ≤ 1/100th of the 
pharmacologically active 
dose. 
Maximal daily and starting 
doses can be the same, but 
not exceed 100 µg. 
In vitro target/receptor 
profiling should be 
conducted.  
 
Appropriate 
characterization of primary 
pharmacology (mode of 
action and/or effects) in a 
pharmacodynamically 
relevant model should be 
available to support human 
dose selection. 
 
7-day repeated-dose toxicity 
study in one species, 
usually rodent, by intended 
route of administration 
with toxicokinetic data, or 
via the i.v. route. 
Hematology, clinical 
chemistry, necropsy, and 
histopathology data should 
be included.  A maximum 
dose of 1000-fold the clinical 
dose on a mg/kg basis for 
i.v. and mg/m2 for oral 
administration can be used. 
Genotoxicity studies are not 
recommended, but any 
studies or SAR assessments 
conducted should be 
included in the clinical trial 
application. 
For highly radioactive 
agents (e.g., PET imaging 
agents), appropriate PK and 
dosimetry estimates should 
be submitted.

Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies  
for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals 
 
 
12
Table 3  
Recommended Non-Clinical Studies to Support Exploratory Clinical Trials 
Clinical: 
Non clinical: 
Dose to be Administered 
Start and Maximum 
Doses 
Pharmacology 
General Toxicity 
Studiesa 
Genotoxicityb 
Approach 3 
Single Dose Studies at Sub-
therapeutic Doses or into 
the Anticipated Therapeutic 
Range. 
Starting dose should be 
based on the types of 
toxicity findings observed in 
the most sensitive species 
and a consideration of the 
pharmacologically active 
dose.  For other 
considerations on initial 
dosing in humans, regional 
guidances should be 
consulted. 
 
Maximum dose can be that 
yielding up to ½ NOAEL 
exposure in the more 
sensitive species, in cases 
where any relevant toxicity 
observed in animals is 
anticipated to be 
monitorable and reversible 
in humans. 
In vitro target/receptor 
profiling should be 
conducted.  
 
Appropriate 
characterization of primary 
pharmacology (mode of 
action and/or effects) in a 
pharmacodynamically 
relevant model should be 
available to support human 
dose selection. 
 
Core battery of safety 
pharmacology (see Section 
2). 
Extended single dose 
toxicity studies in both the 
rodent and non-rodent (see 
footnote c by intended 
clinical route of 
administration with 
toxicokinetics, hematology, 
clinical chemistry, 
necropsy, and 
histopathology data.  For 
this situation the top dose 
should be MTD, MFD or 
limit dose (see Section 1.5). 
Ames assay (or an 
alternative assay if Ames is 
inappropriate, for example, 
for an antibacterial 
product).

Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies  
for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals 
 
13
Table 3  
Recommended Non-Clinical Studies to Support Exploratory Clinical Trials 
Clinical: 
Non clinical: 
Dose to be 
Administered 
Start and Maximum Dose 
Pharmacology 
General toxicity 
studiesa 
Genotoxicityb 
Approach 4: 
Dosing up to 14 days into 
the therapeutic range but 
not intended to evaluate 
clinical MTD.  
With toxicity in both species, follow 
appropriate regional guidance for 
clinical starting dose.  If toxicity is 
not seen in either species (i.e., the 
NOAELs are the highest dose tested 
and doses used were not otherwise 
limited, e.g., not an MFD), or is seen 
only in one species, the clinical 
starting dose should be one that gives 
a predicted clinical AUC value 
(based on either interspecies PK 
modelling or mg/m2 conversion) that 
is approximately 1/50th of the AUC 
at the NOAEL from the species 
yielding the lower exposure. For 
other considerations on initial dosing 
in humans, e.g., predicted PD 
activity, regional guidance should be 
consulted. 
 
Without toxicity in both species, 
it is recommended that the 
maximum clinical dose not 
exceed 1/10th the lower exposure 
(AUC) in either species at the 
highest dose tested in the  
animals.  
When only one species 
demonstrates toxicity, the 
maximum clinical dose should 
In vitro target/receptor 
profiling should be 
conducted.  
 
Appropriate 
characterization of 
primary pharmacology 
(mode of action and/or 
effects) in a 
pharmacodynamically 
relevant model should 
be available to support 
human dose selection. 
Core battery of 
safety pharmacology 
(see Section 2) using 
doses similar to 
those used for the 
toxicity studies. 
 
2-week repeated-dose 
toxicity studies in rodent 
and non-rodent with 
standard parameters 
assessed and where dose 
selection in animals is 
based on exposure 
multiples of anticipated 
clinical AUC at 
maximum dose. 
 
Ames assay (or an 
appropriate alternative 
assay if Ames is 
inappropriate, for 
example, for an 
antibacterial product) 
and an assay (in vitro or 
in vivo) capable of 
detecting chromosomal 
damage in a mammalian 
system.

Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies  
for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals 
 
14
not be higher than the NOAEL 
in the species showing toxicity, 
or 1/2 the AUC at the highest 
dose tested in the species not 
showing toxicity, whichever is 
lower. 
With toxicity in both species, 
the maximum clinical dose 
should be based on standard 
risk assessment approaches 
and, in this specific case, the 
clinical MTD can be explored.

Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies  
for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals 
 
15
Table 3  
Recommended Non-Clinical Studies to Support Exploratory Clinical Trials 
Clinical: 
Non clinical: 
Dose to be Administered
Start and Maximum 
Doses 
Pharmacology 
General Toxicity Studiesa 
Genotoxicityb 
Approach 5: 
Dosing up to 14 days and 
not to exceed duration of 
dosing in non-rodent; into 
therapeutic range but not 
intended to evaluate 
clinical MTD. 
Starting dose predicted 
exposures should not 
exceed 1/50th the NOAEL 
in the more sensitive 
species on a mg/m2 basis.  
For other considerations on 
initial dosing in humans, 
regional guidance should 
be consulted. 
The maximum exposure in 
humans should not be 
higher than the AUC at 
the NOAEL in the non-
rodent species or higher 
than ½ the AUC at the 
NOAEL in the rodent 
species, whichever is 
lowere. 
In vitro target/receptor 
profiling should be 
conducted  
Appropriate 
characterization of 
primary pharmacology 
(mode of action and/or 
effects) in a 
pharmacodynamically 
relevant model should 
be available to support 
human dose selection. 
Core battery of safety 
pharmacology (see 
Section 2) using 
doses similar to those 
used for the toxicity 
studies.  
Standard 2-week repeated-
dose toxicity study in 
rodents (with justification 
of the rodent as an 
appropriate species). The 
top dose should be the 
MTD, MFD or limit dose 
(see Section 1.5). 
Confirmatory study in non-
rodent (n=3) at the 
anticipated NOAEL 
exposure in rodent, with 
duration of a minimum of 3 
days and at least the 
intended clinical study 
duration. 
Alternatively, an escalating 
dose study in the non-
rodent with duration of a 
minimum of 3 days and at 
least the intended clinical 
study duration at the 
anticipated NOAEL 
exposure in the rodent.   
 
Ames assay (or an 
appropriate alternative 
assay if Ames is 
inappropriate, for example, 
for an antibacterial 
product) and an assay (in 
vitro or in vivo) capable of 
detecting chromosomal 
damage in a mammalian 
system. If an in vivo 
assessment is used then 
this could be part of the 
rodent toxicity study.

Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies  
for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals 
 
16
a. 
General toxicity studies should be conducted according to GLP regulations. 
b. 
See Ref. 10 for genotoxicity study design and dose selection. 
c. 
Generally, extended single dose toxicity studies should be designed to evaluate hematology, clinical chemistry, necropsy, and 
histopathology data (control and high dose only if no treatment-related pathology is seen at the high dose) after a single 
administration, with further evaluations conducted 2 weeks later to assess delayed toxicity and/or recovery.  The usual design for 
rodents consists of 10 animals/sex/group to be assessed on the day following dosing, and 5 animals/sex at the dose level(s) selected 
to be assessed on day 14 post-dose. The usual design for non-rodents consists of 3/sex/group for all groups on day 2 and 2/sex for 
the dose level(s) assessed on day 14.  
d. 
A single dose level to assess reversibility/delayed toxicity on day 14 can support the microdose approach. The dose level used need 
not be the high dose but should be a dose that is at least 100 times the clinical dose. 
e. 
In the absence of adverse effects in the clinical trial, escalation above this  AUC can be appropriate  if the  findings  in the  toxicity 
studies are anticipated to be monitorable, reversible, and of low severity in humans.

Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies  
for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals 
 
17
 8. 
LOCAL TOLERANCE STUDIES 
It is preferable to evaluate local tolerance by the intended therapeutic route as part of 
the general toxicity studies; stand alone studies are generally not recommended. 
To support limited human administration by non-therapeutic routes (e.g., a single i.v. 
dose to assist in the determination of absolute bioavailability of an oral drug), a single 
dose local tolerance study in a single species is considered appropriate.  In cases where 
the anticipated systemic exposure (AUC and Cmax) from the non-therapeutic 
administration is covered by the existing toxicology package, the endpoints in the local 
tolerance study can be confined to clinical signs and macroscopic and microscopic 
examination of the application site. The formulation delivered for local tolerance need 
not be identical but should be similar to the clinical formulation. 
For an i.v. microdose study that is supported by an oral toxicology package (see Section 
7), evaluation of local tolerance of the drug substance is not warranted. If a novel i.v. 
vehicle is being employed, then local tolerance of the vehicle should be assessed. 
For parenteral products, evaluation for local tolerance at unintended injection sites, 
when appropriate, should be conducted before exposure of large numbers of patients 
(e.g., Phase III clinical trials).  The approach to such studies differs in the various 
regions.  Such studies are generally not recommended in the United States (an example 
of an exception would be intrathecal for the epidural route).  Japan and the EU 
recommend single dose paravenous administration for the i.v. route. Other parenteral 
routes should be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. 
9. 
GENOTOXICITY STUDIES 
An assay for gene mutation is generally considered sufficient to support all single dose 
clinical development trials.  To support multiple dose clinical development trials, an 
additional assessment capable of detecting chromosomal damage in a mammalian 
system(s) should be completed (Ref. 10). A complete battery of tests for genotoxicity 
should be completed before initiation of Phase II trials (Ref. 10). 
If a positive finding occurs, an assessment, and then possibly additional testing (Ref. 10), 
should be conducted to determine if further administration to humans is still 
appropriate. 
The genotoxicity studies recommended to support Exploratory Clinical Study approaches 
are discussed in Section 7. 
10. 
CARCINOGENICITY STUDIES 
Conditions relevant for carcinogenicity testing are discussed in the ICH S1A document 
(Ref. 11). If carcinogenicity studies are recommended for the clinical indication, they 
should be conducted to support the marketing application.  Only in circumstances where 
there is a significant cause for concern for carcinogenic risk should the study results be 
submitted to support clinical trials.  A long clinical study duration alone is not 
considered to be a significant cause for concern. 
For pharmaceuticals developed to treat certain serious diseases for adults or pediatric 
patients, carcinogenicity testing, if recommended, can be concluded post-approval. 
11. 
REPRODUCTION TOXICITY STUDIES 
Reproduction toxicity studies (Ref. 3) should be conducted as is appropriate for the 
population that is to be exposed.

Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies  
for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals 
 
18
11.1 
Men 
Men can be included in Phase I and II trials before the conduct of the male fertility study 
since an evaluation of the male reproductive organs is performed in the repeated-dose 
toxicity studies (Note 2). 
A male fertility study (Ref. 3) should be completed before the initiation of large scale or 
long duration clinical trials (e.g., Phase III trials). 
11.2 
Women Not of Childbearing Potential 
Women not of childbearing potential (i.e., permanently sterilised, postmenopausal) can 
be included in clinical trials without reproduction toxicity studies if the relevant 
repeated-dose toxicity studies (which include an evaluation of the female reproductive 
organs) have been conducted.  Postmenopausal is defined as 12 months with no menses 
without an alternative medical cause.   
11.3 
Women of Childbearing Potential 
For women of childbearing potential (WOCBP) there is a high level of concern for the 
unintentional exposure of an embryo or fetus before information is available concerning 
the potential benefits versus potential risks. The recommendations on timing of 
reproduction toxicity studies to support the inclusion of WOCBP in clinical trials are 
similar in all ICH regions. 
It is important to characterize and minimize the risk of unintentional exposure of the 
embryo or fetus when including WOCBP in clinical trials.   One approach to achieve this 
objective is to conduct reproduction toxicity studies to characterize the inherent risk of a 
drug and take appropriate precautions during exposure of WOCBP in clinical trials.  A 
second approach is to limit the risk by taking precautions to prevent pregnancy during 
clinical trials. Precautions to prevent pregnancy include pregnancy testing (e.g., based 
on the β-subunit of HCG), use of highly effective methods of birth control (Note 3), and 
study entry only after a confirmed menstrual period. Testing for pregnancy during the 
trial and subject education should be sufficient to ensure compliance with the measures 
designed to prevent pregnancy during the period of drug exposure (which could exceed 
the length of study). To support these approaches, informed consent should be based on 
any known pertinent information related to reproduction toxicity, such as a general 
assessment of potential toxicity of pharmaceuticals with related structures or 
pharmacological effects. If no relevant reproductive information is available, the 
potential for unidentified risks to the embryo or fetus should be communicated. 
In all ICH regions, WOCBP can be included in early clinical trials without non-clinical 
developmental toxicity studies (e.g., embryo-fetal studies) in certain circumstances.  One 
circumstance could be intensive control of pregnancy risk over short duration (e.g., 2 
weeks) clinical trials.  Another circumstance could be where there is a predominance of 
the disease in women and the objectives of the clinical trial cannot be effectively met 
without inclusion of WOCBP and there are sufficient precautions to prevent pregnancy 
(see above).  
Additional considerations for the conduct of studies in WOCBP without the non-clinical 
developmental toxicity studies include knowledge of the mechanism of action of the 
agent, the type of pharmaceutical agent, the extent of fetal exposure or the difficulty of 
conducting developmental toxicity studies in an appropriate animal model. For example, 
for monoclonal antibodies for which embryo-fetal exposure during organogenesis is 
understood to be low in humans based on current scientific knowledge, the

Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies  
for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals 
 
19
developmental toxicity studies can be conducted during Phase III. The completed reports 
should be submitted with the marketing application.   
Generally, where appropriate preliminary reproduction toxicity data are available (see 
Note 4) from two species, and where precautions to prevent pregnancy in clinical trials 
(see above) are used, inclusion of WOCBP (up to 150) receiving investigational treatment 
for a relatively short duration (up to 3 months) can occur before conduct of definitive 
reproduction toxicity testing. This is based on the very low rate of pregnancy in 
controlled clinical trials of this size and duration (see Note 5), and the ability of 
adequately designed preliminary studies to detect most developmental toxicity findings 
that could raise concern for enrolment of WOCBP in clinical trials.  The number of 
WOCBP and the duration of the study can be influenced by characteristics of the 
population that alter pregnancy rates (e.g., age, disease). 
In the United States, assessment of embryo-fetal development can be deferred until 
before Phase III for WOCBP using precautions to prevent pregnancy in clinical trials 
(see above).  In the EU and Japan, other than the situations described in the above 
paragraphs, definitive nonclinical developmental toxicity studies should be completed 
before exposure of WOCBP.   
In all ICH regions, WOCBP can be included in repeated-dose Phase I and II trials before 
conduct of the female fertility study since an evaluation of the female reproductive 
organs is performed in the repeated-dose toxicity studies (Note 2). Nonclinical studies 
that specifically address female fertility (Ref. 3) should be completed to support inclusion 
of WOCBP in large-scale or long-duration clinical trials (e.g., Phase III trials). 
In all ICH regions, the pre-postnatal development study should be submitted for 
marketing approval.   
All female reproduction toxicity studies (Ref. 3) and the standard battery of genotoxicity 
tests (Ref. 10) should be completed before inclusion, in any clinical trial, of WOCBP not 
using highly effective birth control (see Note 3) or whose pregnancy status is unknown. 
11.4 
Pregnant Women 
Before the inclusion of pregnant women in clinical trials, all female reproduction toxicity 
studies (Refs. 3) and the standard battery of genotoxicity tests (Ref. 10) should be 
conducted.  In addition, safety data from previous human exposure should be evaluated. 
12. 
CLINICAL TRIALS IN PEDIATRIC POPULATIONS  
When pediatric patients are included in clinical trials, safety data from previous adult 
human experience would usually represent the most relevant information and should 
generally be available before initiation of pediatric clinical trials.  The appropriateness 
and extent of adult human data should be determined on a case-by-case basis.  Extensive 
adult experience might not be available before pediatric exposures (e.g., for pediatric-
specific indications).   
Results from repeated-dose toxicity studies of appropriate duration in adult animals (see 
Table 1), the core safety pharmacology package, and the standard battery of genotoxicity 
tests should be available before initiation of trials in pediatric populations.  
Reproduction toxicity studies relevant to the age and gender of the pediatric patient 
populations under study can also be important to provide information on direct toxic or 
developmental risks (e.g., fertility and pre-postnatal developmental studies).  Embryo-
fetal developmental studies are not critical to support clinical studies for males or 
prepubescent females.

Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies  
for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals 
 
20
The conduct of any juvenile animal toxicity studies should be considered only when 
previous animal data and human safety data, including effects from other drugs of the 
pharmacological class, are judged to be insufficient to support pediatric studies. If a 
study is warranted, one relevant species, preferably rodent, is generally considered 
adequate. A study in a non-rodent species can be appropriate when scientifically 
justified.   
Generally, juvenile animal toxicity studies are not considered important for short-term 
PK studies (e.g., 1 to 3 doses) in pediatric populations. 
Depending on the therapeutic indication, age of the pediatric population, and safety data 
from adult animal and human exposure, the appropriateness of obtaining juvenile 
animal study results before initiation of short-duration multiple-dose efficacy and safety 
trials should be considered. The age of the trial participants in relation to the duration of 
the clinical study (i.e., the fraction of a developmental period of concern during which 
clinical study participants are exposed) is among the most important considerations. 
This evaluation can determine whether juvenile animal studies are warranted and, if 
warranted, their timing in relation to clinical trials.  
For long-term clinical trials in pediatric populations when an assessment of juvenile 
animal toxicity is recommended, the nonclinical studies should be completed before the 
initiation of the trials. 
There can be cases where a pediatric population is the primary population and existing 
animal studies have identified potential developmental concerns for target organs 
(toxicology or pharmacology). In some of these cases long-term juvenile animal toxicity 
testing can be appropriate.  A chronic study initiated in the appropriate age and species 
with the relevant end points to address this developmental concern (e.g., 12 months 
duration in dog or 6 month in rodent) can be appropriate.  A 12-month study can cover 
the full development period in the dog. For either species, this design could be adapted to 
replace the corresponding standard chronic study and a separate juvenile animal study 
in some circumstances. 
 The appropriateness of carcinogenicity testing should be addressed before long-term 
exposure in pediatric clinical trials.  However, unless there is a significant cause for 
concern (e.g., evidence of genotoxicity in multiple tests, or concern for pro-carcinogenic 
risk based on mechanistic considerations or findings from general toxicity studies), 
carcinogenicity studies are not recommended to support the conduct of pediatric clinical 
trials. 
13. 
IMMUNOTOXICITY 
As stated in the ICH S8 guidance (Ref. 14), all new human pharmaceuticals should be 
evaluated for the potential to produce immunotoxicity using standard toxicity studies 
and additional immunotoxicity studies conducted as appropriate based on a weight-of-
evidence review, including immune-related signals from standard toxicity studies.  If 
additional immunotoxicity studies are indicated, these should be completed before 
exposure of a large population of patients (e.g., Phase III). 
14. 
PHOTOSAFETY TESTING 
The appropriateness or timing of photosafety testing in relation to human exposure 
should be influenced by: 1) the photochemical properties (e.g., photoabsorption and 
photostability) of the molecule; 2) information on the phototoxic potential of chemically 
related compounds; 3) tissue distribution; and 4) clinical or nonclinical findings 
indicative of phototoxicity.

Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies  
for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals 
 
21
An initial assessment of phototoxic potential based on a drug’s photochemical properties 
and pharmacological/chemical class should be performed.  If assessment of all the 
available data and the proposed clinical plan indicates a potential for a significant 
human phototoxicity risk, appropriate protective measures should be taken during 
outpatient clinical studies. In addition, a subsequent evaluation of the nonclinical drug 
distribution to skin and eye should be completed to inform further on the human risk 
and the need for further testing.  Then, if appropriate, an experimental evaluation 
(nonclinical, in vitro or in vivo, or clinical) of phototoxic potential should be undertaken 
before exposure of large numbers of subjects (Phase III). 
Alternatively, instead of the above stepwise approach, a direct assessment of phototoxic 
potential in a nonclinical or clinical study can be undertaken. If this study is negative, 
an early assessment of eye/skin distribution studies and clinical protective measures are 
not called for. 
If the phototoxicity assessment indicates a potential photocarcinogenic risk, the risk can 
usually be adequately managed in patients by protective measures including a warning 
statement in the informed consent for clinical trials and in product information for 
marketing (Note 6). 
15. 
NONCLINICAL ABUSE LIABILITY 
For drugs that produce central nervous system activity, regardless of therapeutic 
indication, it should be considered whether or not an evaluation of abuse liability is 
warranted. Nonclinical studies should support the design of clinical evaluations of abuse 
potential, classification/scheduling by regulatory agencies, and product information.  
There are regional guidance documents on the conduct of nonclinical abuse liability 
assessment that can be helpful in designing specific abuse liability packages.   
Nonclinical data collected early in the drug development process can be useful in 
identification of early indicators of abuse potential.  These early indicators would 
typically be available before first human dose and include the PK/PD profile to identify 
the duration of action, similarity of chemical structure to known drugs of abuse, receptor 
binding profile, and behavioural/clinical signs from in vivo nonclinical studies.  When no 
abuse potential is apparent from these early studies, extensive testing in nonclinical 
abuse liability models might not be warranted.  Generally, if the active substance shows 
signals associated with known abuse liability patterns or the active substance has a 
novel mechanism of action on the central nervous system, further nonclinical studies are 
recommended to support large clinical trials (e.g., Phase III).   
When the metabolite profile and the target for drug activity in rodent are consistent with 
that of human, the nonclinical abuse liability evaluations should be conducted in 
rodents.  Nonhuman primates should be reserved only for those limited cases where 
there is clear evidence that they would be predictive of human abuse liability and the 
rodent model is inadequate.  Three types of studies are often completed to evaluate the 
potential for abuse liability: drug discrimination, self-administration of the compound, 
and an assessment of withdrawal.  When conducted, studies of drug discrimination and 
self-administration are generally stand-alone. Assessments of withdrawal can sometimes 
be incorporated within the design of the reversibility arm of a repeated-dose toxicity 
study.  A maximum dose that produces a plasma concentration several-fold higher than 
that obtained at the therapeutic clinical dose is considered appropriate for these 
nonclinical abuse assessments.

Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies  
for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals 
 
22
16. 
OTHER TOXICITY STUDIES 
Additional nonclinical studies (e.g., to identify potential biomarkers, to provide 
mechanistic understanding) can be useful if previous nonclinical or clinical findings with 
the product or related products have indicated special safety concerns. 
The approaches for qualifying impurities and degradants are outlined in ICH Guidelines 
Q3A and Q3B (Refs. 12 and 13). If specific studies are warranted to qualify an impurity 
or degradant, generally these studies are not warranted before Phase III, unless there 
are changes that result in a significant new impurity profile (e.g., a new synthetic 
pathway, a new degradant formed by interactions between the components of the 
formulation). In these latter cases, appropriate qualification studies can be warranted to 
support Phase II or later stages of development. 
17. 
COMBINATION DRUG TOXICITY TESTING 
This section covers combination drugs that are intended to be co-packaged or 
administered in a single dosage form (‘fixed formulation’).  The principles outlined can 
also 
apply 
when 
developing 
products 
that 
will 
have 
product 
information 
recommendations for co-use with a specific drug, even if not in a fixed combination, and 
for which there is minimal clinical information regarding the combination.   
Combinations covered might involve: (1) two or more late stage entities (defined as 
compounds with significant clinical experience (i.e., from Phase III studies and/ or post 
marketing)); (2) one or more late stage entity(ies) and one or more early stage entities 
(defined as compounds with limited clinical experience (i.e., Phase II studies or less)); or 
(3) more than one early stage entity. 
For most combinations which involve two late stage entities and for which there is 
adequate clinical experience with co-administration, combination toxicity studies would 
generally not be recommended to support clinical studies or marketing unless there is 
significant toxicological concern (e.g., similar target organ toxicity).  This concern would 
be modified depending on the margins of safety and the ability to monitor the adverse 
effects in humans. If a study is being conducted to address a cause for significant 
toxicological concern it should generally be completed before carrying out clinical studies 
with the combination. 
Where there are two late stage products for which there is not adequate clinical 
experience with co-administration, but there are no causes for significant toxicological 
concern based on the available data, nonclinical combination studies generally are not 
recommended to support small-scale, relatively short-duration clinical studies (e.g., 
Phase II studies of up to 3 months duration). Nonclinical combination studies, however, 
are recommended before large-scale or long-term combination trials, as well as for 
marketing.  
For combinations of an early stage entity(ies) with clinical experience with a late stage 
entity(ies), for which there is no significant toxicological concern, combination toxicity 
studies are not recommended to support clinical proof-of-concept studies of up to one-
month duration. The clinical study of the combination should not be longer than the 
clinical experience of the individual entities. Later stage or longer duration clinical 
studies should be supported by a nonclinical combination toxicity study. 
For combinations of two early stage entities, nonclinical combination toxicity studies are 
recommended to support clinical trials. 
Provided complete nonclinical development programs are being conducted on the 
individual entities and a nonclinical combination toxicity study is warranted to support

Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies  
for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals 
 
23
combination clinical trials, the duration of the combination study should be equivalent to 
that of the clinical trial, up to a maximum duration of 90 days. A 90-day combination 
toxicity study would also support marketing. A combination toxicity study of shorter 
duration can also support marketing, depending on the duration of the intended clinical 
use. 
The design of the nonclinical studies recommended to characterize the combination will 
depend on the pharmacological, toxicological and PK profiles of the individual entities, 
the treatment indication(s), the intended patient population, and the available clinical 
data. 
Combination nonclinical studies should generally be limited to a single relevant species. 
If unexpected toxicity is identified, additional testing can be appropriate. 
When complete nonclinical development programs are not conducted on the individual 
entities, then a complete nonclinical toxicology program with the combination only can 
be appropriate, provided that the individual agents are only intended for use in 
combination. 
Combination genotoxicity, safety pharmacology, or carcinogenicity studies generally are 
not recommended to support clinical trials or marketing if the individual agents have 
been tested according to current standards.  In those cases where the patient population 
includes WOCBP and studies with the individual agent(s) have shown findings 
indicative of embryo-fetal risk, combination studies are not recommended as a potential 
human developmental hazard has already been identified.  If nonclinical embryo-fetal 
studies have indicated that neither agent poses a potential human developmental risk, 
combination studies are not recommended unless concerns exist, based on the properties 
of individual components, that their combination could give rise to a hazard for humans.  
In circumstances when the individual agents have been tested in embryo-fetal studies 
but embryo-fetal studies of the drug combination are warranted, the study(ies) of the 
combination should be available to support the marketing application. 
18. 
CONTINUING EFFORTS TO IMPROVE HARMONIZATION 
It is recognised that significant advances in harmonisation of the timing of nonclinical 
safety studies for the conduct of human clinical trials for pharmaceuticals have already 
been achieved and are detailed in this guideline.  However, differences remain in a few 
areas.  Regulators and industry will continue to consider these differences and work 
towards further improving the drug development process. 
19. 
ENDNOTES  
Note 1: In this document “exposure” generally means group mean AUC. In some 
circumstances (e.g., if the compound or compound class is known to produce acute 
functional cardiovascular changes or central nervous system-related clinical signs) it 
might be appropriate to base the exposure margin on group mean Cmax values rather 
than AUC. 
Note 2: An assessment of male and female fertility by thorough standard 
histopathological examination on the testis and ovary in a repeated-dose toxicity study 
(generally rodent) of at least 2-week duration is considered to be as sensitive as fertility 
studies in detecting toxic effects on male and female reproductive organs (Refs. 3, 15, 
16). 
Note 3: Highly effective methods of birth control are defined as those, alone or in 
combination, that result in a low failure rate (i.e., less than 1% per year) when used

Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies  
for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals 
 
24
consistently and correctly.  For subjects using a hormonal contraceptive method, 
information regarding the product under evaluation and its potential effect on the 
contraceptive should be addressed. 
Note 4: A preliminary embryo-fetal study useful for this purpose is one with adequate 
dose levels; that includes assessment of fetal survival, body weight and external and 
visceral examinations; that uses a minimum of six dams per group; and that has dams 
treated over the period of organogenesis. This preliminary nonclinical study should be 
conducted under high-quality scientific standards with data collection records readily 
available or under GLP conditions. 
Note 5: The pregnancy rate of women initially attempting to become pregnant is ~17% 
per menstrual cycle.  Pregnancy rates estimated from Phase III studies conducted in 
WOCBP were observed to be <0.1% per menstrual cycle.  During these studies, subjects 
were encouraged to avoid pregnancy and measures were instituted to prevent pregnancy.  
Survey information from earlier Phase II studies suggests that the pregnancy rates were 
lower than in Phase III studies but the extent of further reduction could not be 
estimated due to the limited number of women enrolled. Based on the above Phase III 
experience, Phase II trials enrolling 150 WOCBP for 3 months are estimated to result in 
significantly less than 0.5 pregnancies per pharmaceutical under development. 
Note 6: Testing for photocarcinogenicity in rodents using currently available models 
(e.g., hairless rodent) is not considered useful in support of pharmaceutical development 
and generally is not recommended.  If the phototoxicity assessment suggests a potential 
photocarcinogenic risk and an appropriate assay becomes available, the study should 
usually be completed before marketing and the results should be considered in the 
human risk assessment. 
20. 
REFERENCES 
1. 
ICH S6 Guideline: Preclinical Safety Evaluation for Biotechnological-Derived 
Pharmaceuticals; July 1997. 
2. 
ICH  E8 Guideline: General Considerations for Clinical Trials; July 1997. 
3. 
ICH S5(R2) Guideline: Detection of Toxicity to Reproduction for Medicinal Products 
and Toxicity to Male Fertility; June 1993. 
4. 
ICH 
S1C(R2) 
Guideline: 
Dose 
Selection 
for 
Carcinogenicity 
Studies 
of 
Pharmaceuticals; March 2008. 
5. 
ICH S7A Guideline: Safety Pharmacology Studies for Human Pharmaceuticals; 
November 2000.  
6. 
ICH  S7B  Guideline:  The  Nonclinical  Evaluation  of  the  Potential   for   Delayed 
Ventricular Repolarization (QT Interval Prolongation) By Human Pharmaceuticals; 
May 2005. 
7. 
ICH S3A Guideline: Note for Guidance on Toxicokinetics: The Assessment of 
Systemic Exposure in Toxicity Studies; October 1994. 
8. 
National Centre for the Replacement, Refinement and Reduction of Animals in 
Research. Challenging Requirements for Acute Toxicity Studies: Workshop Report; 
May 2007. 
9. 
Robinson S, Delongeas JL, Donald E, Dreher D, Festag M, Kervyn S et al. A 
European 
pharmaceutical 
company 
initiative 
challenging 
the 
regulatory 
requirement for acute toxicity studies in pharmaceutical drug development. Regul 
Toxicol Pharmacol 2008;50:345-352.

Guidance on Nonclinical Safety Studies  
for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization for Pharmaceuticals 
 
25
10. ICH S2B Guideline: Genotoxicity: A Standard Battery for Genotoxicity Testing for 
Pharmaceuticals; July 1997. 
11. ICH S1A Guideline: Guideline on the Need for Carcinogenicity Studies of 
Pharmaceuticals; November 1995. 
12. ICH Q3A(R2) Guideline: Impurities in New Drug Substances; October 2006. 
13. ICH Q3B(R2) Guideline: Impurities in New Drug Products; June 2006. 
14. ICH S8 Guideline: Immunotoxicity Studies for Human Pharmaceuticals; 
September 2005. 
15. Sakai T, Takahashi M, Mitsumori K, Yasuhara K, Kawashima K, Mayahara H et 
al. Collaborative work to evaluate toxicity on male reproductive organs by 2-week 
repeated-dose toxicity studies in rats.  Overview of the studies.  J  Toxicol  Sci 
2000;25:1-21. 
16. Sanbuissho A, Yoshida M, Hisada S, Sagami F, Kudo S, Kumazawa T et al. 
Collaborative work on evaluation of ovarian toxicity by repeated-dose and fertility 
studies in female rats. J  Toxicol  Sci 2009;34:1-22.