Risk Assessment in
the Federal
Government:
Managing the Process

NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS
Washington, D.C. 1993

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

i

Risk Assessment in
the Federal
Government:
Managing the Process

Committee on the Institutional Means for Assessment of Risks to
Public Health
Commission on Life Sciences
National Research Council

NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS
Washington, D.C. 1983

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ii
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the
National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy
of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of
the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competencies and with regard
for appropriate balance.
This report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to procedures
approved by a Report Review Committee consisting of members of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council was established by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916
to associate the broad community of science and technology with the Academy's purposes of furthering knowledge and of advising the federal government. The Council operates in accordance with
general policies determined by the Academy under the authority of its congressional charter of
1863, which establishes the Academy as a private, nonprofit, self-governing membership corporation. The Council has become the principal operating agency of both the National Academy of
Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in the conduct of their services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. It is administered jointly by both
Academies and the Institute of Medicine. The National Academy of Engineering and the Institute of
Medicine were established in 1964 and 1970, respectively, under the charter of the National
Academy of Sciences.
The study reported here was supported by Contract 223–81–8251 between the National
Academy of Sciences and the Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health and Human
Services.
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 83–80381
International Standard Book Number 0–309–03349–7
Available from NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS 2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W. Washington,
D.C. 20418
Printed in the United States of America
First Printing, March 1983
Second Printing, October 1983
Third Printing, August 1984
Fourth Printing, June 1985
Fifth Printing, August 1987
Sixth Printing, May 1988
Seventh Printing, December 1989
Eighth Printing, July 1991
Ninth Printing, March 1992
Tenth Printing, February 1993
Eleventh Printing, May 1994
Twelfth Printing, July 1995
Thirteenth Printing, October 1996

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

iii

NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL
2101 CONSTITUTION AVENUE WASHINGTON, D. C. 20418
OFFICE OF THE CHAIRMAN
March 1, 1983
Arthur Hull Hayes, Jr., M.D.
Commissioner of Food and Drugs
Food and Drug Administration
5600 Fishers Lane Rockville, MD 20857
Dear Dr. Hayes:
I am pleased to transmit the enclosed report entitled "Risk Assessment in the
Federal Government: Managing the Process." This study was authorized by P.L. 96–528
and carried out by a committee of the National Research Council's Commission on Life
Sciences with support from the Food and Drug Administration under Contract No. 223–
81–8251.
The Congress made provision for this study to strengthen the reliability and
objectivity of scientific assessment that forms the basis for federal regulatory policies
applicable to carcinogens and other public health hazards. Federal agencies that perform
risk assessments are often hard pressed to clearly and convincingly present the scientific
basis for their regulatory decision. In the recent past, for example, decisions on
saccharin, nitrites in food, formaldehyde use in home insulations, asbestos, air pollutants
and a host of other substances have been called into question.
The report recommends no radical changes in the organizational arrangements for
performing risk assessments. Rather, the committee finds that the basic problem in risk
assessment is the incompleteness of data, a problem not remedied by changing the
organizational arrangement for performance of the assessments. Instead, the committee
has suggested a course of action to improve the process within the practical constraints
that exist.
THE NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL IS THE PRINCIPAL OPERATING
AGENCY OF THE NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES AND THE NATIONAL
ACADEMY OF ENGINEERING TO SERVE GOVERNMENT AND OTHER
ORGANIZATIONS.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

iv

Arthur Hull Hayes, Jr., M.D.
March 1, 1993
Page Two
One proposal by the committee requires explanation. It would provide that there be
established under Academy auspices a Board on Risk Assessment Methods. This
recommendation emerges strictly from the committee's internal deliberation. The
committee alone is responsible for the substantive contents and findings of the report.
Were a request made to the Academy along the lines of that particular recommendation
to establish such a Board, the request would be considered de novo by the appropriate
governing bodies of the institution.
Yours sincerely,

Frank Press
Chairman

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

v

Committee on the Institutional Means for Assessment of Risks
to Public Health
REUEL A. STALLONES, School of Public Health, University of Texas,
Houston, Tex., Chairman
MORTON CORN, Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Johns
Hopkins University School of Hygiene and Public Health, Baltimore, Md.
KENNY S. CRUMP, Science Research Systems, Inc., Ruston, La.
J. CLARENCE DAVIES, Conservation Foundation, Washington, D.C.
VINCENT P. DOLE, Rockefeller University, New York, N.Y.
TED R. I. GREENWOOD, Department of Political Science, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass.
RICHARD A. MERRILL, University of Virginia School of Law,
Charlottesville, Va.
FRANKLIN E. MIRER, Department of Health and Safety, International Union,
UAW, Detroit, Mich.
D. WARNER NORTH, Decision Focus, Inc., Los Altos, Calif.
GILBERT S. OMENN, Department of Environmental Health, University of
Washington School of Public Health and Community Medicine, Seattle,
Wash.
JOSEPH V. RODRICKS, ENVIRON Corporation, Washington, D.C.
PAUL SLOVIC, Decision Research, A Branch of Perceptronics, Inc., Eugene,
Oreg.
H. M. D. UTIDJIAN, American Cyanamid Company, Wayne, N.J.
ELIZABETH WEISBURGER, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Md.
Staff
LAWRENCE E. McCRAY, Project Director
CATHERINE L. ST. HILAIRE, Staff Officer
WILLIAM M. STIGLIANI, Staff Officer
RENEE M. ST. PIERRE, Administrative Secretary
NORMAN GROSSBLATT, Editor

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

vi

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

vii

Acknowledgments

The Committee acknowledges with appreciation information provided by the
following persons.
KARIM AHMED, Research Director, Natural Resources Defense Council
ELIZABETH ANDERSON, Director, Office of Health and Environmental
Assessment, Environmental Protection Agency
EDWIN L. BEHRENS, Procter and Gamble Corporation (representing
American Industrial Health Council)
JACKSON B. BROWNING, Union Carbide Corporation (representing
Chemical Manufacturers Association)
WILLIAM D. CAREY, Executive Officer, American Association for the
Advancement of Science
PETER F. CARPENTER, Vice President for Corporate Strategy, Alza Corp.,
Palo Alto, Calif. (representing Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association)
PAUL F. DEISLER, JR., Vice President, Health Safety and Environment,
Shell Oil Company
ROBERT I. FIELD, Research Associate, Analysis and Inference, Inc., Boston,
Mass.
W. GARY FLAMM, Deputy Associate Commissioner for Health Affairs
(Science), Food and Drug Administration
SHERWIN GARDNER, Vice President, Science and Technology, Grocery
Manufacturers of America, Inc.
MICHAEL GOUGH, Health Program Project Director, Office of Technology
Assessment, U.S. Congress.
THOMAS P. GRUMBLY, Senior Consultant, Temple, Barker and Sloan, Inc.,
Lexington, Mass.
PAUL T. HOPPER, General Foods Corporation, (representing Social and
Economic Committee, Food Safety Council)
NATHAN J. KARCH, Assistant Professor, Howard University; and Senior
Science Advisor, Clement Associates

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

viii

RAPHAEL G. KASPER, Executive Director, Commission on Physical
Sciences, Mathematics, and Resources, NAS-NRC
ARNOLD M. KUZMACK, Chevy Chase, Md.
RICHARD LEMEN, Director, Division of Standards Development and
Technology Transfer, National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health
JOHN MARTONIK, Deputy Director of Health Standards Programs,
Occupational Safety and Health Administration
WILLIAM McCARVILLE, Monsanto Co., (representing American Industrial
Health Council)
SANFORD A. MILLER, Director, Bureau of Foods, Food and Drug
Administration.
PAUL MILVY, Environmental Law Institute
WARREN R. MUIR, Visiting Associate Professor,
Environmental Sciences, Johns Hopkins University

Department

of

DENIS PRAGER, Assistant Director for Life Sciences and Institutional
Relations, Office of Science and Technology Policy, Executive Office of the
President
PETER PREUSS, Associate Executive Director, Directorate of Health
Sciences, Consumer Product Safety Commission
DAVID RALL, Director, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences
WILLIAM D. ROWE, Director, Institute for Risk Analysis; and Professor of
Decision and Risk Analysis, American University
JAMES H. SAMMONS, Executive Vice President, American Medical
Association
SHELDON SAMUELS, Director, Health Safety and Environmental Industrial
Union Department, AFL/CIO
BRUCE SILVERGLADE, Director for Legal Affairs, Center for Science in the
Public Interest
M. J. SLOAN, Manager, Regulatory Affairs, Shell Oil Company
STEVEN M. SWANSON, Director, Health and Safety Regulation, American
Petroleum Institute
ROBERT G. TARDIFF, Executive Director, Board on Toxicology and
Environmental Health Hazards, NAS-NRC
MONTE C. THRODAHL, Monsanto Corporation (representing American
Industrial Health Council)
HAROLD TRABOSH, Deputy Director, Residue Evaluation and Surveillance
Division, Food Safety Inspection Service, Department of Agriculture
REP. WILLIAM C. WAMPLER (D-VA), U.S. House of Representatives

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

PREFACE

ix

Preface

In response to a directive from the Congress of the United States, the Food
and Drug Administration contracted with the National Academy of Sciences to
conduct a study of the institutional means for risk assessment. The Committee
on the Institutional Means for Assessment of Risks to Public Health was formed
in the National Research Council's Commission on Life Sciences in October
1981 and completed its work in January 1983. The members of the Committee
were chosen to represent a broad array of backgrounds and special skills, both
in the technology of risk assessment and in the formulation and application of
policy in this field, and brought together extensive experience in industry,
government, and academic life.
The Committee, with outstanding staff support, reviewed much of the
published literature on risk assessment, studied the structures and operations of
federal regulatory and research agencies, analyzed the history of regulation of
selected chemicals, and sought and received the judgments of some
exceptionally knowledgeable people. We are most grateful for the assistance so
generously provided to us, but, of course, the responsibility for this report is
entirely ours.
The Committee has sought to examine and codify past experience with risk
assessment and relate that experience to patterns and practices. Our judgments
are necessarily subjective, but we have endeavored to be impartial. In the
process, we developed a disinclination for sweeping changes; we believe that
more gradual, evolutionary alterations will result in greater improvements in the
conduct and use of risk assessment.
REUEL A. STALLONES
Chairman

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
PREFACE
x

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

CONTENTS

xi

Contents

Summary

1

Introduction

9

I

The Nature of Risk Assessment
Terminology
Scientific and Policy Judgments in Risk Assessment
Risk Assessment in Practice
Conclusions

17
18
28
37
48

II

Inference Guidelines for Risk Assessment
Introduction and Definitions
History of the Use of Guidelines
Variation in the Form of Guidelines
Arguments for and against the Use of Guidelines
Conclusions

51
51
52
62
68
79

III

Organizational Arrangements for Risk Assessment
Types of Organizational Arrangements
Review of Agency Procedures for Risk Assessment
Proposed Changes in Organizational Arrangements for
Risk Assessment
Conclusions

86
89
93
131
140

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
CONTENTS

IV

xii

Recommendations
Improving Risk Assessment through Procedural
Changes
Improving Risk Assessment through Uniform Inference Guidelines
A Central Board on Risk Assessment Methods
150
151

162

171

Appendix A
Background Information on Committee Members
177

Appendix B
Bibliography
181

Appendix C
Working Papers
191

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

xiii

Risk Assessment in the Federal
Government: Managing the Process

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

xiv

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

SUMMARY

1

Summary

SETTING
This report explores the intricate relations between science and policy in a
field that is the subject of much debate—the assessment of the risk of cancer
and other adverse health effects associated with exposure of humans to toxic
substances. It is a report of a search for the institutional mechanisms that best
foster a constructive partnership between science and government, mechanisms
to ensure that government regulation rests on the best available scientific
knowledge and to preserve the integrity of scientific data and judgments in the
unavoidable collision of the contending interests that accompany most
important regulatory decisions.
Many decisions of federal agencies in regulating chronic health hazards
have been bitterly controversial. The roots of the controversy lie in
improvements in scientific and technologic capability to detect potentially
hazardous chemicals, in changes in public expectations and concerns about
health protection, and in the fact that the costs and benefits of regulatory
policies fall unequally on different groups within American society.
The decade of the 1970s was a period of heightened public concern about
the effects of technology on the environment. Individuals and groups urged
strict government regulation as scientific evidence emerged that various
chemical substances may induce cancers or other chronic health effects in
humans, and new government programs were established to control potential
hazards. The evidence of health effects of a few chemicals, such as asbestos,
has been clear; in many more cases the evidence is meager and indirect. To aid
decision-making,

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

SUMMARY

2

agencies have developed procedures for identifying chronic health hazards and
estimating the risks to human health posed by products and activities. However,
rather than alleviating the controversy attending regulatory decisions, the
procedures themselves have become a focus of criticism by scientists, industry
representatives, and public-interest groups.
STUDY OBJECTIVES AND SCOPE
The Committee on Institutional Means for Assessment of Risks to Public
Health was formed, in response to a congressional directive, to fulfill three
primary objectives:
• To assess the merits of separating the analytic functions of developing
risk assessments from the regulatory functions of making policy
decisions.
• To consider the feasibility of designating a single organization to do
risk assessments for all regulatory agencies.
• To consider the feasibility of developing uniform risk assessment
guidelines for use by all regulatory agencies.
The Committee considered the current practice of risk assessment and its
relation to the process of regulation of hazards to human health, past efforts to
develop and use risk assessment guidelines, the experience of government
regulatory agencies with different administrative arrangements for risk
assessment, and various proposals to modify risk assessment procedures. Our
study was directed primarily, although not exclusively, to the issue of increased
risk of cancer resulting from exposure to chemicals in the environment, an issue
that has aroused great public concern in recent years, as illustrated by the
controversies involving the control of saccharin, asbestos, and formaldehyde.
Despite this emphasis, however, our conclusions and recommendations are
applicable in some degree across the broad field of environmental health.
Criticisms of risk assessment have ranged broadly from details of the
process to administrative management to statutory authority. The mandate to
this Committee did not include examination of the scientific issues involved in
risk assessment or the broad social policy questions

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

SUMMARY

3

that have been raised. The Committee's more limited purpose was to examine
whether altered institutional arrangements or procedures can improve regulatory
performance.
THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT
Regulatory actions are based on two distinct elements, risk assessment ,
the subject of this study, and risk management. Risk assessment is the use of the
factual base to define the health effects of exposure of individuals or
populations to hazardous materials and situations. Risk management is the
process of weighing policy alternatives and selecting the most appropriate
regulatory action, integrating the results of risk assessment with engineering
data and with social, economic, and political concerns to reach a decision.
Risk assessments contain some or all of the following four steps:
•

Hazard identification: The determination of whether a particular
chemical is or is not causally linked to particular health effects.
• Dose-response assessment: The determination of the relation between
the magnitude of exposure and the probability of occurrence of the
health effects in question.
• Exposure assessment: The determination of the extent of human
exposure before or after application of regulatory controls.
• Risk characterization: The description of the nature and often the
magnitude of human risk, including attendant uncertainty.
In each step, a number of decision points (components) occur where risk to
human health can only be inferred from the available evidence. Both scientific
judgments and policy choices may be involved in selecting from among
possible inferential bridges, and we have used the term risk assessment policy
to differentiate those judgments and choices from the broader social and
economic policy issues that are inherent in risk management decisions. At least
some of the controversy surrounding regulatory actions has resulted from a
blurring of the distinction between risk assessment policy and risk management
policy.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

SUMMARY

4

UNIFORM GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT
An inference guideline is an explicit statement of a predetermined choice
among alternative methods (inference options) that might be used to infer
human risk from data that are not fully adequate or are not drawn directly from
human experience. For example, a guideline might specify the mathematical
model to be used to estimate the effects of exposure at low doses on the basis of
the effects of exposure at high doses.
Over the last 2 decades, most federal regulatory agencies and other
institutions responsible for risk assessment of toxic chemicals have sought to
develop such guidelines. Their efforts have met with varied success. Agencies
have cited several reasons for writing guidelines: to provide a systematic way to
meet statutory requirements, to inform the public and regulated industries of
agency policies, to stimulate public comment on those policies, to avoid arguing
generic questions anew in each specific case, and to foster consistency and
continuity of approach. Interagency guidelines for carcinogens, although shortlived, were developed by the agencies of the Interagency Regulatory Liaison
Group (IRLG) and adopted by the President's Regulatory Council in 1979. The
stated objective of that effort was to reduce inconsistency, duplication of effort,
and lack of coordination among the federal agencies.
The form of guidelines varies widely. Some guidelines are comprehensive
and detailed, addressing most of the components of risk assessment and
describing underlying scientific concepts; others address only a few broad
principles. Guidelines differ greatly in their degree of flexibility, i.e., the degree
to which they permit assessors to consider scientific evidence that may justify
departures from the prescribed inference options. And they vary in the legal
authority vested in them: some are adopted as formal regulations and others by
less formal means.
The Committee concludes that guidelines are feasible and, if properly
designed, desirable; that clear statements of the inferences to be made in each
step would be of advantage to the regulatory agencies, to the industries
concerned, and to the general public; and that guidelines should be used
uniformly by the governmental agencies.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

SUMMARY

5

INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT
Dissatisfaction with government regulatory actions has led to proposals to
restructure the institutional arrangements for risk assessment by:
• Organizational separation of risk assessment from risk management.
• Centralization of risk assessment activities in a single organization to
serve all the regulatory agencies.
Four federal agencies—the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Food
and Drug Administration (FDA), Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA), and Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC)—
have been given primary authority to regulate activities and substances that
pose chronic health risks, and these four agencies' past actions have inspired
many of the proposals for institutional change. The Committee reviewed a
number of agency structures and procedures in an attempt to determine the
merits of institutional separation and centralization. Examples were selected to
illustrate different degrees of separation and centralization in the four agencies.
Independent scientific review panels have been used to obtain some of the
advantages proposed for organizational separation, and some of their
experiences were examined.
Cross-agency comparisons are difficult, because the regulatory agencies
and their various programs differ markedly in structure, procedures, personnel
characteristics, administrative history, and statutory direction. In addition,
agencies and programs change, and practices adhered to for several years may
be altered substantially. These practical limitations to the evaluation of agency
structures and practices led the Committee to conclude that predicting the likely
effects of organizational rearrangements on agency performance of risk
assessment is unavoidably judgmental. However, the available evidence shows
no clear advantage of one administrative structure over another.
CONCLUSIONS AND MAJOR RECOMMENDATIONS
Dissatisfaction with the actions of federal regulatory agencies is often
expressed as criticism of the conduct and administration of the risk assessment
process. The

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

SUMMARY

6

Committee believes that the basic problem in risk assessment is the sparseness
and uncertainty of the scientific knowledge of the health hazards addressed, and
this problem has no ready solution. The field has been developing rapidly, and
the greatest improvements in risk assessment result from the acquisition of
more and better data, which decreases the need to rely on inference and
informed judgment to bridge gaps in knowledge.
Proposals to separate the administrative responsibility for risk assessment
from risk management imply that the change would lead to improved risk
assessment and hence better risk management decisions. Administrative
relocation will not, however, improve the knowledge base, and, because risk
assessment is only one element in the formulation of regulatory actions, even
considerable improvements in risk assessment cannot be expected to eliminate
controversy over those actions.
Organizational separation may have the advantage of establishing firmly
the distinction between risk assessment and risk management, but it also has
some disadvantages. The importance of distinguishing between risk assessment
and risk management does not imply that they should be isolated from each
other; in practice they interact, and communication in both directions is
desirable and should not be disrupted. Institutional separation would surely
reduce the responsiveness of the risk assessment process to the needs of the
regulatory agencies for timely reports in accord with their priorities. In addition
to the operational disadvantages, the disruption of current patterns of activity
would be great, and the benefits uncertain. On balance, the Committee believes
that transfer of risk assessment functions to an organization separate from the
regulatory agencies is not appropriate.
We believe that risk assessment can be improved more surely and more
effectively by adopting a program with three major parts: (A) implementation
of procedural changes to ensure that individual assessments routinely take full
advantage of the available scientific knowledge, while preserving the
diversified approaches to the administration of risk assessment necessary to
accommodate the varied needs of federal regulatory programs; (B)
standardization of analytic procedures among federal programs through the
development and use of uniform inference guidelines; and (C) creation of a
mechanism that will ensure orderly and continuing review and modification of

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

SUMMARY

7

risk assessment procedures as the scientific knowledge base expands.
(A) We recommend that regulatory agencies take steps to establish and
maintain a clear conceptual distinction between assessment of risks
and consideration of risk management alternatives; that is, the
scientific findings and policy judgments embodied in risk
assessments should be explicitly distinguished from the political,
economic, and technical considerations that influence the design
and choice of regulatory strategies.
We agree with proponents of such measures as the American Industrial
Health Council's proposed science panel and H.R. 638 that efforts should be
made by regulators and others to distinguish clearly between the assessment of
risk and the choice of regulatory options.
We advocate the adoption of specific procedural measures that can be
introduced under current arrangements. These measures include timely
independent scientific review of major agency risk assessments and, to facilitate
both scientific and public review of risk assessments, the routine preparation of
written risk assessments that explicitly state the basis of choice among inference
options.
(B) We recommend that uniform inference guidelines be developed for
the use of federal regulatory agencies in the risk assessment process.
The Committee endorses the development and use of guidelines for risk
assessment. These guidelines, which would structure the interpretation of
scientific and technical information relevant to the assessment of health risks,
should be followed by all federal agencies. They should address all elements of
risk assessment, but allow flexibility to consider unique scientific evidence in
particular instances.
The use of uniform guidelines would promote clarity, completeness, and
consistency in risk assessment; would clarify the relative roles of scientific and
other factors in risk assessment policy; would help to ensure that assessments
reflect the latest scientific understanding; and would enable regulated parties to
anticipate government decisions. In addition, adherence to inference

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

SUMMARY

8

guidelines will aid in maintaining the distinction between risk assessment and
risk management.
(C) We recommend to the Congress that a Board on Risk Assessment
Methods be established to perform the following functions:
(1) To assess critically the evolving scientific basis of risk assessment
and to make explicit the underlying assumptions and policy
ramifications of the inference options in each component of the risk
assessment process.
(2) To draft and periodically to revise recommended inference
guidelines for risk assessment for adoption and use by federal
regulatory agencies.
(3) To study agency experience with risk assessment and evaluate the
usefulness of the guidelines.
(4) To identify research needs in the risk assessment field and in
relevant underlying disciplines.
The Committee concludes that success in improving the risk assessment
process requires the establishment of an independent board of scientific stature.
Such a board can serve as a continuing locus of discussion about ways to
improve scientific and procedural aspects of risk assessment.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INTRODUCTION

9

Introduction

Through Congress the American public has granted authority to federal
administrative agencies to restrict private actions, such as the production and
use of chemicals, when this is deemed necessary to protect the health of the
public. The 1970s are notable for the large number of new federal regulatory
laws that are applicable to the environment, both in the workplace and in the
community. These laws reflect a dramatic and relatively rapid shift in public
priorities toward the protection of health. Concurrently with shifts in social
priorities, advances in science have contributed to policy problems, for the
advances have revealed the extent of the environmental health problem. Some
earlier regulatory programs had addressed exposure to toxic chemicals, but they
were directed mainly at the risk of poisoning and other acute effects. Much
policy-making related to such effects involved routine, short-term, acute animal
studies to establish ''no-observed-effect" doses and then the straightforward
calculation of allowable human exposure based on the application of safety
factors to relatively uncomplicated scientific findings. Such an approach
reflected little recognition of problems that might be associated with smaller
exposures. Cancer, birth defects, and other conditions were seldom seen as
preventable by government intervention. Only in the last 15 years has the
potential extent of the linkage between such conditions and toxic substances
been revealed. The often-cited estimate that a large fraction of all cancers may
be attributed to human exposure to toxic agents (including smoking, diet,
lifestyle, and occupation) originated fairly recently (Boyland, 1969; Higginson,
1969), and it

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INTRODUCTION

10

was not until the 1970s that regulatory agencies focused their attention on
cancer and other chronic health risks.
Scientific advances entered the picture in a second way. The technology
that has made it possible to detect relations between particular agents and
cancer or other chronic effects has evolved rapidly from the days when
exposure through skin-painting and subcutaneous injection were relied on in
animal tests of carcinogenicity. Increasingly, epidemiologic investigations have
either confirmed the findings of animal experiments or provided evidence that
linked exposures to particular chemicals to particular chronic health effects. The
introduction of reliable testing methods resulted in broader government testing
requirements and, steadily, the discovery of more and more suspect chemicals—
many of them in common use—that demanded agency attention. The
techniques are still developing, and we are still looking for better ways to
design and interpret animal bioassay experiments.
The increase in newly suspect chemicals was accompanied by the
development of instruments and procedures that permitted the detection of
chemicals at lower and lower concentrations. Even if the number of suspect
chemicals had not increased dramatically, these sensitive detection methods
would have revealed the presence of such chemicals in concentrations that
earlier methods would have missed. Combined with all those changes were the
development and refinement of analytic methods of estimating the degree of
human risk on the basis of data from human studies and animal experiments.
Public policies are not immediately adaptable to rapid changes in social
priorities and scientific advances. Many of the fundamental difficulties of
regulatory risk assessment result from attempts to bend old laws and policies to
fit newly perceived risks. For instance:
• A regulatory framework based on the traditional approach involving noobserved-effect doses and safety factors is now being applied to health
effects for which a no-effect dose cannot be demonstrated, except at
zero exposure.
• Regulatory laws and programs designed for the elimination of what
was understood to be the very rare event of chronic hazard now
operate in the presence of the recognition that many agents are suspect.
• Agencies must evaluate hundreds of chemicals on which no data
related to human risk are available and on

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INTRODUCTION

11

which few animal tests were required and many other chemicals that
were tested with methods that do not meet modern standards.
• Laws were written and programs designed before current quantitative
methods for estimating human risks on the basis of data from animal
studies were developed.
DIFFICULTIES IN DECISION-MAKING
Agency decisions regarding potential carcinogens and similar hazards are
commonly beset by two types of difficulties: inherent limitations on the power
of analysis and practical constraints imposed by external pressures. Several
such factors are particularly relevant to the consideration of scientific aspects of
risk assessment.
Inherent Limitations
Uncertainty
The dominant analytic difficulty is pervasive uncertainty. Risk assessment
draws extensively on science, and a strong scientific basis has developed for
linking exposure to chemicals to chronic health effects. However, data may be
incomplete, and there is often great uncertainty in estimates of the types,
probability, and magnitude of health effects associated with a chemical agent,
of the economic effects of a proposed regulatory action, and of the extent of
current and possible future human exposures. These problems have no
immediate solutions, given the many gaps in our understanding of the causal
mechanisms of carcinogenesis and other health effects and in our ability to
ascertain the nature or extent of the effects associated with specific exposures.
Because our knowledge is limited, conclusive direct evidence of a threat to
human health is rare. Fewer than 30 agents are definitely linked with cancer in
humans (Tomatis et al., 1978); in contrast, some 1,500 substances are
reportedly carcinogenic in animal tests, although they include substances tested
in studies of questionable experimental design. We know even less about most
chemicals; only about 7,000 of the over 5,000,000 known substances have ever
been tested for carcinogenicity (Maugh, 1978) --a small fraction of those
theoretically under regulatory jurisdiction. We

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INTRODUCTION

12

know still less about chronic health effects other than cancer.
Ethical considerations prevent deliberate human experimentation with
potentially dangerous chemicals, and the length of the latent period for cancer
and some other effects greatly complicates epidemiologic studies of
uncontrolled human exposures. Animal models must be used to investigate
whether exposure to a chemical is related to the incidence of health effects, and
the results must be extrapolated to humans. To make judgments amid such
uncertainty, risk assessors must rely on a series of assumptions.
Limited Analytic Resources
The number of chemicals in the jurisdiction of federal regulatory agencies
is enormous. For example, of the roughly 5,000,000 known chemicals, more
than 70,000 are in commercial use (Fishbein, 1980). The Environmental
Protection Agency's Chemical Activities Status Report lists about 3,500
chemicals as being under some sort of active consideration in the Agency's
various regulatory programs. Similarly, the Food and Drug Administration's
food program must cope with over 2,000 food-related chemicals (900 flavors,
700 items listed as "generally recognized as safe," 350 food additives, 175
animal drugs, and 60 color additives) and an additional 12,000 indirect
additives (Flamm, 1981).
The many problem chemicals in an agency's jurisdiction compete for
attention of analysts and decision-makers. If an agency is considering new
action on many substances at once, its scientific staff is stretched thin. Most
agencies do not have the analytic resources to do a thorough risk assessment for
priority-setting and must rely on less formal methods to ensure that the highestrisk chemicals are examined first.
Complexity
For most chemical agents that might be subject to regulation, a great
variety of factors must be assessed, including potential toxicity, extent of
human exposure, effectiveness of technologies to reduce exposure, the nature of
possible substitute chemicals, effects on and interests of various population
groups, and economic effects of

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INTRODUCTION

13

regulatory alternatives. Decision-makers in a regulatory agency may encounter
a large amount of highly technical information as they work toward their
decisions; many scientific disciplines and technical fields are usually involved.
An agency would like to have simple rules and analytic procedures to ensure
consistency and competence in its decision-making, but, in the face of scientific
uncertainty, such simplicity is difficult to achieve without an inadvertent loss of
crucial scientific insight from the decision process.
External Pressures
Public Concern with Health Protection
When the risk involves a serious disease, such as cancer, or birth defects,
feelings are likely to run high, particularly if the groups exposed to a chemical
are mobilized to express themselves in an agency's deliberations. Such groups
insist that regulatory action need not await conclusive evidence of cause and
effect and need not be based exclusively on the most scientifically advanced
testing methods.
Visible Economic Interests
Although it is rarely known which individuals are likely to be saved from
adverse health effects through a regulation that reduces exposure to a particular
chemical, those who bear the economic costs of such restrictions can identify
themselves without any difficulty. These parties can provide relatively concrete
projections of a prospective regulation's inflationary influence, effect on
employment, and other immediate economic effects, and such consequences
may be substantial. They may question the wisdom of balancing concrete
evidence of economic damage against evidence of health protection that
depends on a complex series of assumptions derived from sparse and indirect
data.
Congressional Action
In fulfilling its role as the legislative voice of popular concerns, Congress
can act in ways that influence decision

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INTRODUCTION

14

processes. It can dictate the factors to be included in and excluded from
decision-making (the Delaney clause is an example), and it can pass special
legislation to preempt agency discretion, as it did in acting to prevent the
removal of saccharin from the market.
PROPOSED REFORMS
Under these conditions, it would perhaps be surprising if calls for major
reform were not heard. Some have sought to improve the techniques that the
government uses to analyze and evaluate risks; for example, the House of
Representatives in 1982 passed H.R. 6159 (commonly known as the "Ritter
bill"), to establish a government-wide program of research and demonstration
projects on quantitative and comparative risk analysis.
Much of the recent controversy is general; it reflects the conflict in values
between different groups in society, particularly with regard to the relative
importance of economic factors and health protection in the formulation of
regulatory decisions. Different groups will inevitably disagree about the degree
of risk (if any) that is defined as acceptable in a particular case. However, some
criticisms directly address the risk assessment component of the overall
decision-making process. Some critics question whether current practices
adequately safeguard the quality of the scientific interpretations needed for risk
assessment. With a scientific base that is still evolving, with large uncertainties
to be addressed in each decision, and with the presence of great external
pressures, some see a danger that the scientific interpretations in risk
assessments will be distorted by policy considerations, and they seek new
institutional safeguards against such distortion.
Among the institutional reforms suggested, two major categories are the
focus of this report: reorganization to ensure that risk assessments are protected
from inappropriate policy influences and development and use of uniform
guidelines for carrying out risk assessments.
Some argue that scientific quality, consistency, and distinction between
scientific judgment and policy judgment can be improved through the use of
explicit guidelines for agency risk assessments. Such guidelines would specify
methods for interpreting scientific data and would seek to limit analysts who
confront data gaps or

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INTRODUCTION

15

extrapolation questions to methods that are consistent with the best current
scientific judgment. Analysts following the guidelines would find it easier to
describe systematically and explicitly the methods that are incorporated in their
risk assessments.
Several other recent proposals call for major restructuring of federal
processes to separate the risk assessment function organizationally from
decision-making. The objectives would be to permit analysts to work
independently of policy pressures and to foster consistency of risk assessments.
Various approaches have been suggested, including creation of a single body
outside the government for the performance or review of risk assessments,
creation of a single government unit to conduct risk assessments for the entire
government, and creation of separate risk assessment units in particular
programs or agencies and systematic review of assessments by independent
scientific advisory groups.
THE STUDY
This report responds to a congressional request to examine the merits of
the two major types of reform proposal. It is the final report of the National
Research Council's Committee on the Institutional Means for Assessment of
Risks to Public Health. Chapter I describes the structure of risk assessment, the
role of science in the assessment process, and current federal uses of risk
assessment. Chapter II examines the feasibility and desirability of the
development and use of uniform guidelines. Chapter III reviews various
organizational arrangements for risk assessment. The Committee's overall
conclusions and recommendations appear in Chapter IV.
REFERENCES
Boyland, E. 1969. The correlation of experimental carcinogenesis and cancer in man. Prog. Exp.
Tumor Res. 77:222-234.
Fishbein, L. 1980. Potential industrial carcinogenic and mutagenic alkylating agents, pp. 329-363.
In D. B. Walters, ed. Safe Handling of Chemical Carcinogens, Mutagens, Teratogens, and
Highly Toxic Substances, vol. I. Ann Arbor, Mich.: Ann Arbor Science.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INTRODUCTION

16

Flamm, W. G. October 13, 1981. Remarks to the Committee on the Institutional Means for
Assessment of Risks to Public Health.
Higginson, J. 1969. Present trends in cancer epidemiology. In Proc. Can. Cancer Conf. 8:40-75.
Maugh, T. 1978. Who chooses chemicals for testing? Science 201:1200.
Tomatis, L., C. Agthe, H. Bartsch, J. Huff, R. Montesano, R. Saracci, E. Walker, and J. Wilbourn.
1978. Evaluation of the carcinogenicity of chemicals: a review of the monograph program
of I.A.R.C. Cancer Res. 38:877.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT

17

I
The Nature of Risk Assessment

Recent criticisms of the conduct and use of risk assessment by regulatory
agencies have led to a wide range of proposed remedies, including changes in
regulatory statutes and the development of new methods for assessing risk. The
mandate to this Committee was more limited. Our objective was to examine
whether alterations in institutional arrangements or procedures, particularly the
organizational separation of risk assessment from regulatory decision-making
and the use of uniform guidelines for inferring risk from available scientific
information, can improve federal risk assessment activities.
Before undertaking to determine whether organizational and procedural
reforms could improve the performance and use of risk assessment in the
federal government, the Committee examined the state of risk assessment and
the regulatory environment in which it is performed. In this chapter, we define
risk assessment and differentiate it from other elements in the regulatory
process, analyze the types of judgments made in risk assessment, and examine
its current government context. Because one chronic health hazard, cancer, was
highlighted in the Committee's congressional mandate and has dominated
public concern about public health risks in recent years, most of our report
focuses on it. Furthermore, because activities in four agencies—the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA), the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), and the
Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC)—have given rise to many of the
proposals for changes in risk assessment practices, our review focuses on these
four agencies. The conclusions of this report, although directed primarily at risk
assessment of potential carcinogens as performed by these

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT

18

four agencies, may be applicable to other federal programs to reduce health risks.
TERMINOLOGY
Despite the fact that risk assessment has become a subject that has been
extensively discussed in recent years, no standard definitions have evolved, and
the same concepts are encountered under different names. The Committee
adopted the following terminology for use in this report.
Risk Assessment and Risk Management
We use risk assessment to mean the characterization of the potential
adverse health effects of human exposures to environmental hazards. Risk
assessments include several elements: description of the potential adverse
health effects based on an evaluation of results of epidemiologic, clinical,
toxicologic, and environmental research; extrapolation from those results to
predict the type and estimate the extent of health effects in humans under given
conditions of exposure; judgments as to the number and characteristics of
persons exposed at various intensities and durations; and summary judgments
on the existence and overall magnitude of the public-health problem. Risk
assessment also includes characterization of the uncertainties inherent in the
process of inferring risk.
The term risk assessment is often given narrower and broader meanings
than we have adopted here. For some observers, the term is synonymous with
quantitative risk assessment and emphasizes reliance on numerical results. Our
broader definition includes quantification, but also includes qualitative
expressions of risk. Quantitative estimates of risk are not always feasible, and
they may be eschewed by agencies for policy reasons. Broader uses of the term
than ours also embrace analysis of perceived risks, comparisons of risks
associated with different regulatory strategies, and occasionally analysis of the
economic and social implications of regulatory decisions—functions that we
assign to risk management.
The Committee uses the term risk management to describe the process of
evaluating alternative regulatory actions and selecting among them. Risk
management, which is carried out by regulatory agencies under various
legislative

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT

19

mandates, is an agency decision-making process that entails consideration of
political, social, economic, and engineering information with risk-related
information to develop, analyze, and compare regulatory options and to select
the appropriate regulatory response to a potential chronic health hazard. The
selection process necessarily requires the use of value judgments on such issues
as the acceptability of risk and the reasonableness of the costs of control.
Steps in Risk Assessment
Risk assessment can be divided into four major steps: hazard
identification, dose-response assessment, exposure assessment, and risk
characterization. A risk assessment might stop with the first step, hazard
identification, if no adverse effect is found or if an agency elects to take
regulatory action without further analysis, for reasons of policy or statutory
mandate.
Of the four steps, hazard identification is the most easily recognized in the
actions of regulatory agencies. It is defined here as the process of determining
whether exposure to an agent can cause an increase in the incidence of a health
condition (cancer, birth defect, etc.). It involves characterizing the nature and
strength of the evidence of causation. Although the question of whether a
substance causes cancer or other adverse health effects is theoretically a yes-no
question, there are few chemicals on which the human data are definitive.
Therefore, the question is often restated in terms of effects in laboratory animals
or other test systems, e.g., ''Does the agent induce cancer in test animals?"
Positive answers to such questions are typically taken as evidence that an agent
may pose a cancer risk for any exposed humans. Information from short-term in
vitro tests and on structural similarity to known chemical hazards may also be
considered.
Dose-response assessment is the process of characterizing the relation
between the dose of an agent administered or received and the incidence of an
adverse health effect in exposed populations and estimating the incidence of the
effect as a function of human exposure to the agent. It takes account of intensity
of exposure, age pattern of exposure, and possibly other variables that might
affect response, such as sex, lifestyle, and other modifying factors. A doseresponse assessment usually

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT

20

requires extrapolation from high to low dose and extrapolation from animals to
humans. A dose-response assessment should describe and justify the methods of
extrapolation used to predict incidence and should characterize the statistical
and biologic uncertainties in these methods.
Exposure assessment is the process of measuring or estimating the
intensity, frequency, and duration of human exposures to an agent currently
present in the environment or of estimating hypothetical exposures that might
arise from the release of new chemicals into the environment. In its most
complete form, it describes the magnitude, duration, schedule, and route of
exposure; the size, nature, and classes of the human populations exposed; and
the uncertainties in all estimates. Exposure assessment is often used to identify
feasible prospective control options and to predict the effects of available
control technologies on exposure.
Risk characterization is the process of estimating the incidence of a health
effect under the various conditions of human exposure described in exposure
assessment. It is performed by combining the exposure and dose-response
assessments. The summary effects of the uncertainties in the preceding steps are
described in this step.
The relations among the four steps of risk assessment and between risk
assessment and risk management are depicted in Figure I-1. The type of
research information needed for each step is also illustrated.
Scientific Basis for Risk Assessment
Step 1. Hazard Identification
Although risk assessment as it is currently practiced by federal agencies
for the estimation of carcinogenic risk contains several relatively new features,
the scientific basis for much of the analysis done in risk assessment is well
established. This is especially true of the first step in the assessment process,
hazard identification. Four general classes of information may be used in this
step: epidemiologic data, animal-bioassay data, data on in vitro effects, and
comparisons of molecular structure.
Epidemiologic Data
Well-conducted epidemiologic studies that show a positive association
between an agent and a disease are

FIGURE I-1 Elements of risk assessment and risk management.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT
21

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT

22

accepted as the most convincing evidence about human risk. This evidence
is, however, difficult to accumulate; often the risk is low, the number of persons
exposed is small, the latent period between exposure and disease is long, and
exposures are mixed and multiple. Thus, epidemiologic data require careful
interpretation. Even if these problems are solved satisfactorily, the
preponderance of chemicals in the environment has not been studied with
epidemiologic methods, and we would not wish to release newly produced
substances only to discover years later that they were powerful carcinogenic
agents. These limitations require reliance on less direct evidence that a health
hazard exists.
Animal-Bioassay Data
The most commonly available data in hazard identification are those
obtained from animal bioassays. The inference that results from animal
experiments are applicable to humans is fundamental to toxicologic research;
this premise underlies much of experimental biology and medicine and is
logically extended to the experimental observation of carcinogenic effects.
Despite the apparent validity of such inferences and their acceptability by most
cancer researchers, there are no doubt occasions in which observations in
animals may be of highly uncertain relevance to humans.
Consistently positive results in the two sexes and in several strains and
species and higher incidences at higher doses constitute the best evidence of
carcinogenicity. More often than not, however, such data are not available.
Instead, because of the nature of the effect and the limits of detection of animal
tests as they are usually conducted, experimental data leading to a positive
finding sometimes barely exceed a statistical threshold and may involve tumor
types of uncertain relation to human carcinogenesis. Interpretation of some
animal data may therefore be difficult. Notwithstanding uncertainties associated
with interpretation of some animal tests, they have, in general, proved to be
reliable indicators of carcinogenic properties and will continue to play a pivotal
role in efforts to identify carcinogens.
Short-Term Studies
Considerable experimental evidence supports the proposition that most
chemical carcinogens are mutagens and that many mutagens are carcinogens.
As a result, a positive response in a mutagenicity assay is supportive

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT

23

evidence that the agent tested is likely to be carcinogenic. Such data, in the
absence of a positive animal bioassay, are rarely, if even, sufficient to support a
conclusion that an agent is carcinogenic. Because short-term tests are rapid and
inexpensive, they are valuable for screening chemicals for potential
carcinogenicity and lending additional support to observations from animal and
epidemiologic investigations.
Comparisons of Molecular Structure
Comparison of an agent's chemical or physical properties with those of
known carcinogens provides some evidence of potential carcinogenicity.
Experimental data support such associations for a few structural classes;
however, such studies are best used to identify potential carcinogens for further
investigation and may be useful in priority-setting for carcinogenicity testing.
Step 2. Dose-Response Assessment
In a small number of instances, epidemiologic data permit a dose-response
relation to be developed directly from observations of exposure and health
effects in humans. If epidemiologic data are available, extrapolations from the
exposures observed in the study to lower exposures experienced by the general
population are often necessary. Such extrapolations introduce uncertainty into
the estimates of risk for the general population. Uncertainties also arise because
the general population includes some people, such as children, who may be
more susceptible than people in the sample from which the epidemiologic data
were developed.
The absence of useful human data is common for most chemicals being
assessed for carcinogenic effect, and dose-response assessment usually entails
evaluating tests that were performed on rats or mice. The tests, however,
typically have been designed for hazard identification, rather than for
determining dose-response relations. Under current testing practice, one group
of animals is given the highest dose that can be tolerated, a second group is
exposed at half that dose, and a control group is not exposed. (The use of high
doses is necessary to maximize the sensitivity of the study for determining
whether the agent being tested has carcinogenic potential.) A finding in such
studies that increased exposure leads to an increased incidence has been used
primarily

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT

24

to corroborate hazard identification, that is, to show that the agent does indeed
induce the adverse health effect.
The testing of chemicals at high doses has been challenged by some
scientists who argue that metabolism of chemicals differs at high and low doses;
i.e., high doses may overwhelm normal detoxification mechanisms and provide
results that would not occur at the lower doses to which humans are exposed.
An additional factor that is often raised to challenge the validity of animal data
to indicate effects in man is that metabolic differences among animal species
should be considered when animal test results are analyzed. Metabolic
differences can have important effects on the validity of extrapolating from
animals to man if, for example, the actual carcinogen is a metabolite of the
administered chemical and the animals tested differ markedly from humans in
their production of that metabolite. A related point is that the actual dose of
carcinogen reaching the affected tissue or organ is usually not known; thus,
dose-response information, of necessity, is based on administered dose and not
tissue dose. Although data of these types would certainly improve the basis for
extrapolating from high to low doses and from one species to another, they are
difficult to acquire and often unavailable.
Regulators are interested in doses to which humans might be exposed, and
such doses usually are much lower than those administered in animal studies.
Therefore, dose-response assessment often requires extrapolating an expected
response curve over a wide range of doses from one or two actual data points.
In addition, differences in size and metabolic rates between man and laboratory
animals require that doses used experimentally be converted to reflect these
differences.
Low-Dose Extrapolation
One may extrapolate to low doses by fitting a mathematical model to
animal dose-response data and using the model to predict risks at lower doses
corresponding to those experienced by humans. At present, the true shape of the
dose-response curve at doses several orders of magnitude below the observation
range cannot be determined experimentally. Even the largest study on record—
the ED01 study involving 24,000 animals—was designed only to measure the
dose corresponding to a 1% increase in tumor incidence. However, regulatory
agencies are often concerned about much lower risks (1 in 100,000 to 1

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT

25

in 1,000). Several methods have been developed to extrapolate from high doses
to low doses that would correspond to risk of such magnitudes. A difficulty
with low-dose extrapolation is that a number of the extrapolation methods fit
the data from animal experiments reasonably well, and it is impossible to
distinguish their validity on the basis of goodness of fit. (From a mathematical
point of view, distinguishing among these models on the basis of their fit with
experimental data would require an extremely large experiment; from a
practical point of view, it is probably impossible). As Figure 1-2 shows, the
dose-response curves derived with different models to diverge below the
experimental doses and may diverge substantially in the dose range of interest
to regulators. Thus, low-dose extrapolation must be more than a curve fitting
exercise, and considerations of biological plausibility must be taken into account.
Although the five models shown in Figure 1-2 may fit experimental data
equally well, they are not equally plausible biologically. Most persons in the
field would agree that the supralinear model can be disregarded, because it is
very difficult to conceive of a biologic mechanism that would give rise to this
type of low-dose response. The threshold model is based on the assumption
that, below a particular dose (the "threshold" dose of a given carcinogen) there
is no adverse effect. This concept is plausible, but not now confirmable. The
ED01 study showed an apparent threshold for bladder cancers caused by 2acetylaminofluorene; when the data were replotted on a scale giving greater
resolution (OTA, 1981), the number of bladder tumors consistently increased
with dose, even at the lowest doses, and no threshold was detected. Another
aspect of the debate over thresholds for inducing carcinogenic effects is the
argument that agents that act through genotoxic mechanisms are not likely to
have a threshold, whereas agents whose effects are mediated by epigenetic
mechanisms are possibly more likely to have a threshold. The latter argument is
also currently open to scientific challenge. Finally, apparent thresholds
observable in animal bioassays cannot be equated with thresholds for entire
populations. Even if a threshold exists for individuals, a single threshold would
probably not be applicable to the whole population.
Animal-to-Human Dose Extrapolation
In extrapolating from animals to humans, the doses used in bioassays must
be adjusted to allow for differ

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT

FIGURE 1-2 Results of alternative extrapolation models for the same
experimental data. NOTE: Dose-response functions were developed (Crump,
in press) for data from 1a benzopyrene carcinogenesis experiment with mice
conducted by Lee and O'Neill (1971).

26

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT

27

ences in size and metabolic rates. Several methods currently are used for
this adjustment and assume that animal and human risks are equivalent when
doses are measured as milligrams per kilogram per day, as milligrams per
square meter of body surface area, as parts per million in air, diet, or water, or
as milligrams per kilogram per lifetime. Although some methods for conversion
are used more frequently than others, a scientific basis for choosing one over
the other is not established.
Step 3. Exposure Assessment
The first task of an exposure assessment is the determination of the
concentration of the chemical to which humans are exposed. This may be
known from direct measurement, but more typically exposure data are
incomplete and must be estimated. Models for estimating exposure can be
complex, even in the case of structured activity, as occurs in the workplace.
Exposure measurements made on a small group (e.g., workers in a particular
industrial firm) are often applied to other segments of the worker population.
Exposure assessment in an occupational setting consists primarily of
estimation of long-term airborne exposures in the workplace. However, because
an agent may be present at various concentrations in diverse occupational
settings, a census of exposures is difficult and costly to conduct. In the
community environment, the ambient concentrations of chemicals to which
people may be exposed can be estimated from emission rates only if the
transport and conversion processes are known. Alternative engineering control
options require different estimates of the reduction in exposure that may be
achieved. For new chemicals with no measurement data at all, rough
estimations of exposure are necessary. Some chemical agents are of concern
because they are present in foods or may be absorbed when a consumer product
is used. Assessments of exposure to such agents are complicated by variations
in diet and personal habits among different groups in the population. Even when
the amount of an agent in a food can be measured, differences in food storage
practices, food preparation, and dietary frequency often lead to a wide variation
in the amount of the agent that individuals ingest. Patterns of use affect
exposure to many consumer products; for example, a solvent whose vapor is
potentially toxic may be used outdoors or it may be used in a small, poorly
ventilated room, where the concentration of vapor in the air is much higher.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT

28

Another important aspect of exposure assessment is the determination of
which groups in the population may be exposed to a chemical agent; some
groups may be especially susceptible to adverse health effects. Pregnant
women, very young and very old people, and persons with impaired health may
be particularly important in exposure assessment. The importance of exposures
to a mixture of carcinogens is another factor that needs to be considered in
assign human exposures. For example, exposure to cigarette smoke and
asbestos gives an incidence of cancer that is much greater than anticipated from
carcinogenicity data on each substance individually. Because data detecting
such synergistic effects are often unavailable, they are often ignored or
accounted for by the use of various safety factors.
Step 4. Risk Characterization
Risk characterization, the estimate of the magnitude of the public-health
problem, involves no additional scientific knowledge or concepts. However, the
exercise of judgment in the aggregation of population groups with varied
sensitivity and different exposure may affect the estimate.
SCIENTIFIC AND POLICY JUDGMENTS IN RISK
ASSESSMENT
The uncertainties inherent in risk assessment can be grouped in two
general categories: missing or ambiguous information on a particular substance
and gaps in current scientific theory. When scientific uncertainty is encountered
in the risk assessment process, inferential bridges are needed to allow the
process to continue. The Committee has defined the points in the risk
assessment process where such inferences must be made as components. The
judgments made by the scientist/risk assessor for each component of risk
assessment often entail a choice among several scientifically plausible options;
the Committee has designated these inference options.
Components of Risk Assessment
A list of components in carcinogenicity risk assessments was compiled by
the Committee and is given below. This

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT

29

list is not exhaustive or comprehensive, nor would all components listed be
found in every risk assessment. The actual array of components in a particular
risk assessment depends on a number of factors, including the types and extent
of available data.
Hazard Identification
Epidemiologic Data
• What relative weights should be given to studies with differing results?
For example, should positive results outweigh negative results if the
studies that yield them are comparable? Should a study be weighted in
accord with its statistical power?
• What relative weights should be given to results of different types of
epidemiologic studies? For example, should the findings of a
prospective study supersede those of a case-control study, or those of
a case-control study those of an ecologic study?
• What statistical significance should be required for results to be
considered positive?
• Does a study have special characteristics (such as the questionable
appropriateness of the control group) that lead one to question the
validity of its results?
• What is the significance of a positive finding in a study in which the
route of exposure is different from that of a population at potential risk?
• Should evidence on different types of responses be weighted or
combined (e.g., data on different tumor sites and data on benign
versus malignant tumors)?
Animal-Bioassay Data
• What degree of confirmation of positive results should be necessary? Is
a positive result from a single animal study sufficient, or should positive
results from two or more animal studies be required? Should negative
results be disregarded or given less weight?
• Should a study be weighted according to its quality and statistical power?
• How should evidence of different metabolic pathways or vastly different
metabolic rates between animals and humans be factored into a risk
assessment?
• How should the occurrence of rare tumors be treated? Should the
appearance of rare tumors in a treated group be considered evidence
of carcinogenicity even if the finding is not statistically significant?

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT

•
•
•
•

•

•
•
•

How should experimental-animal data be used when the exposure
routes in experimental animals and humans are different?
Should a dose-related increase in tumors be discounted when the
tumors in question have high or extremely variable spontaneous rates?
What statistical significance should be required for results to be
considered positive?
Does an experiment have special characteristics (e.g., the presence of
carcinogenic contaminants in the test substance) that lead one to
question the validity of its results?
How should findings of tissue damage or other toxic effects be used in
the interpretation of tumor data? Should evidence that tumors may
have resulted from these effects be taken to mean that they would not
be expected to occur at lower doses?
Should benign and malignant lesions be counted equally?
Into what categories should tumors be grouped for statistical purposes?
Should only increases in the numbers of tumors be considered, or
should a decrease in the latent period for tumor occurrence also be
used as evidence of carcinogenicity?
Short-Term Test Data

• How much weight should be placed on the results of various short-term
tests?
• What degree of confidence do short-term tests add to the results of
animal bioassays in the evaluation of carcinogenic risks for humans?
• Should in vitro transformation tests be accorded more weight than
bacterial mutagenicity tests in seeking evidence of a possible
carcinogenic effect?
• What statistical significance should be required for results to be
considered positive?
• How should different results of comparable tests be weighted? Should
positive results be accorded greater weight than negative results?
Structural Similarity to Known Carcinogens
•

What additional weight does structural similarity add to the results of
animal bioassays in the evaluation of carcinogenic risks for humans?

30

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT

General
•

What is the overall weight of the evidence of carcinogenicity? (This
determination must include a judgment of the quality of the data
presented in the preceding sections.)
Dose-Response Assessment
Epidemiologic Data

•

What dose-response models should be used to extrapolate from
observed doses to relevant doses?
Should dose-response relations be extrapolated according to best
estimates or according to upper confidence limits?
How should risk estimates be adjusted to account for a comparatively
short follow-up period in an epidemiologic study?
For what range of health effects should responses be tabulated? For
example, should risk estimates be made only for specific types of
cancer that are unequivocally related to exposure, or should they apply
to all types of cancers?
How should exposures to other carcinogens, such as cigarette smoke,
be taken into consideration?
How should one deal with different temporal exposure patterns in the
study population and in the population for which risk estimates are
required? For example, should one assume that lifetime risk is only a
function of total dose, irrespective of whether the dose was received in
early childhood or in old age? Should recent doses be weighted less
than earlier doses?
How should physiologic characteristics be factored into the doseresponse relation? For example, is there something about the study
group that distinguishes its response from that of the general population?
Animal-Bioassay Data

•
•
•

•
•

•

•

What mathematical models should be used to extrapolate from
experimental doses to human exposures?
• Should dose-response relations be extrapolated according to best
estimates or according to upper confidence limits? If the latter, what
confidence limits should be used?
• What factor should be used for interspecies conversion of dose from
animals to humans?

31

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT

• How should information on comparative metabolic processes and rates
in experimental animals and humans be used?
• If data are available on more than one nonhuman species or genetic
strain, how should they be used? Should only data on the most
sensitive species or strain be used to derive a dose-response function,
or should the data be combined? If data on different species and
strains are to be combined, how should this be accomplished?
• How should data on different types of tumors in a single study be
combined? Should the assessment be based on the tumor type that
was affected the most (in some sense) by the exposure? Should data
on all tumor types that exhibit a statistically significant dose-related
increase be used? If so, how? What interpretation should be given to
statistically significant decreases in tumor incidence at specific sites?
Exposure Assessment*
•
•

•
•
•
•
•
•

How should one extrapolate exposure measurements from a small
segment of a population to the entire population?
How should one predict dispersion of air pollutants into the atmosphere
due to convection, wind currents, etc., or predict seepage rates of toxic
chemicals into soils and groundwater?
How should dietary habits and other variations in lifestyle, hobbies, and
other human activity patterns be taken into account?
Should point estimates or a distribution be used?
How should differences in timing, duration, and age at first exposure be
estimated?
What is the proper unit of dose?
How should one estimate the size and nature of the populations likely
to be exposed?
How should exposures of special risk groups, such as pregnant women
and young children, be estimated?

* Current methods and approaches to exposure assessment appear to be medium- or route-

specific. In contrast with hazard identification and dose-response assessment, exposure
assessment has very few components that could be applicable to all media.

32

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT

33

Risk Characterization
• What are the statistical uncertainties in estimating the extent of health
effects? How are these uncertainties to be computed and presented?
• What are the biologic uncertainties in estimating the extent of health
effects? What is their origin? How will they be estimated? What effect
do they have on quantitative estimates? How will the uncertainties be
described to agency decision-makers?
• Which dose-response assessments and exposure assessments should
be used?
• Which population groups should be the primary targets for protection,
and which provide the most meaningful expression of the health risk?

The Interplay of Science and Policy in Risk Assessment
A key premise of the proponents of institutional separation of risk
assessment is that removal of risk assessment from the regulatory agencies will
result in a clear demarcation of the science and policy aspects of regulatory
decision-making. However, policy considerations inevitably affect, and perhaps
determine, some of the choices among the inference options. To examine the
types of judgments required in risk assessment, the Committee has analyzed
several components and the inference options for each.
Hazard Identification
The Committee has identified 25 components in hazard identification.
These components differ in a number of ways. However, two major differences
germane to the question considered here are the degree of scientific uncertainty
encountered in each and the effect of choosing different inference options on
the outcome of the risk assessment. Consider the following examples.
One component of risk assessment is the decision as to whether to use
experimental animal data to infer risks to humans. Although data from studies
of rats and mice may not always be predictive of adverse health effects in
humans, the scientific validity of this approach is widely accepted. The use of
positive animal data is the more conservative choice for this component. The
use of

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT

34

negative animal data to determine the absence of carcinogenic risk is less
conservative, especially when the sensitivity of the assay is low. (The
Committee uses the term conservative with appropriate modifiers to describe
the degree to which a particular inference option for components in hazard
identification will increase the likelihood that a substance will be judged to be a
significant hazard to human health).
A component about which there is considerably more scientific uncertainty
than the preceding example is the question of whether to count all types of
benign tumors as evidence of carcinogenicity. Some benign tumors probably
can progress to malignant lesions and some probably do not. The judgment that
benign tumors and malignant tumors should be counted equally will affect
tumor incidence and may influence the yes-no determination in hazard
identification, and it can also affect the dose-response relation by increasing
incidence at the doses tested. Thus, counting benign tumors is often the more
conservative approach.
The examples just given differ in the degree to which scientific
understanding can inform the judgments to be made. They are similar, however,
in that for each, the available inference options differ in conservatism. For many
components, this difference in degree of conservatism among plausible
inference options is not as clear as in the preceding examples and depends on
the data available on a given substance. For example, the decision to combine
incidences for all tumor types and calculate an overall tumor incidence can
influence the final yes-no decision in hazard identification. However, in this
case, whether such a choice is more conservative than not combining incidences
depends on the incidences for each tumor type in test and control animals. If the
incidence in control animals is slightly below the incidences in test animals for
all tumor types and individual differences are not statistically significant,
combining all tumor types would be more conservative. However, if incidences
show no consistent trend and differences are statistically significant for only
one tumor type, combining the tumors would be less conservative.
Dose-Response Assessment
The Committee has identified 13 components of dose-response
assessment. Two major components are high- to low-dose extrapolation and
interspecies dose conversion.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT

35

In a recent NRC report on the health effects of nitrate, nitrite, and N-nitroso
compounds (National Academy of Sciences, 1981), three extrapolation models
(the one-hit model, the multistage model, and the multihit model) were used to
estimate the dose of a carcinogenic nitrosamine (dimethylnitrosamine) needed
to cause cancer in one of a million rats. The doses calculated were 0.03 parts
per billion (one-hit), 0.04 ppb (multistage), and 2.7 ppb (multihit); that is, the
risk estimate per unit of dose would be lower for the one-hit and multistage
models than for the multihit model for this experiment.
Other judgments in dose-response assessment that will affect the final
estimate include choice of the experimental data set (from among many that
might be available) to be used to calculate the relation between dose and
incidence of tumors (e.g., use of the most sensitive animal group will result in
the most conservative estimate), choice of a scaling factor for conversion of
doses in animals to humans (the risks calculated can vary by a factor of up to
35, depending on the method used), and the decision of whether to combine
tumor types in determining incidence (as mentioned earlier, the decision to
lump tumors might be more or less conservative than the decision not to
combine incidences from different tumor types).
Exposure Assessment
Discussion of specific components in exposure assessment is complicated
by the fact that current methods and approaches to exposure assessment appear
to be medium- or route-specific. In contrast with hazard identification and doseresponse assessment, exposure assessment has very few components that could
be applicable to all media. For example, a model describing transport of a
chemical through the atmosphere is necessarily quite different from a model
describing transport through water or soil, whereas the use of a particular doseresponse extrapolation model in dose-response assessment is independent of the
medium or route of exposure. In any event, an assessor has several options
available for estimating exposure to a particular agent in a particular medium,
and these options will yield more or less conservative estimates of exposure.
Among the options are different assumptions about the frequency and duration
of human

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT

36

exposure to an agent or medium, rates of intake or contact, and rates of
absorption.
Risk Characterization
The final expressions of risk derived in this step will be used by the
regulatory decision-maker when health risks are weighed against other societal
costs and benefits to determine an appropriate action. Little guidance is
available on how to express uncertainties in the underlying data and on which
dose-response assessments and exposure assessments should be combined to
give a final estimate of possible risk.
Basis for Selecting Inference Options
The Committee has presented some of the more familiar, and possibly
more controversial, components of risk assessment. A review of the list of
components reveals that many components lack definitive scientific answers,
that the degree of scientific consensus concerning the best answer varies (some
are more controversial among scientists than others), and that the inference
options available for each component differ in their degree of conservatism. The
choices encountered in risk assessment rest, to various degrees, on a mixture of
scientific fact and consensus, on informed scientific judgment, and on policy
determinations (the appropriate degree of conservatism).
That a scientist makes the choices does not render the judgments devoid of
policy implications. Scientists differ in their opinions of the validity of various
options, even if they are not consciously choosing to be more or less
conservative. In considering whether to use data from the most sensitive
experimental animals for risk assessment, a scientist may be influenced by the
species, strains, and gender of the animals tested, the characteristics of the
tumor, and the conditions of the experiment. A scientist's weighting of these
variables may not easily be expressed explicitly, and the result is a mixture of
fact, experience (often called intuition), and personal values that cannot be
disentangled easily. As a result, the choice made may be perceived by the
scientist as based primarily on informed scientific judgment. From a regulatory
official's point of view, the same choice

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT

37

may appear to be a value decision as to how conservative regulatory policy
should be, given the lack of a decisive empirical basis for choice.
A risk assessor, in the absence of a clear indication based on science, could
choose a particular approach (e.g., the use of an extrapolation model) solely on
the basis of the degree to which it is conservative, i.e., on the basis of its policy
implications. Furthermore, a desire to err on the side of overprotection of public
health by increasing the estimate of risk could lead an assessor to choose the
most conservative assumptions throughout the process for components on
which science does not indicate a preferred choice. Such judgments made in
risk assessment are designated risk assessment policy, that is, policy related to
and subservient to the scientific content of the process, in contrast with policy
invoked to guide risk management decisions, which has political, social, and
economic determinants.
When inference options are chosen primarily on the basis of policy, risk
management considerations (the desire to regulate or not to regulate) may
influence the choices made by the assessors. The influence can be generic or ad
hoc; i.e., assessments for all chemicals would consistently use the more or less
conservative inference options, depending on the overall policy orientation of
the agency (''generic"), or assessments would vary from chemical to chemical,
with more conservative options being chosen for substances that the agency
wishes to regulate and less conservative options being chosen for substances
that the agency does not wish to regulate. (The desire to regulate or not would
presumably stem from substance-specific economic and social considerations.)
The possible influence of risk management considerations, whether real or
perceived, on the policy choices made in risk assessment has led to reform
proposals (reviewed later in this report) that would separate risk assessment
activities from the regulatory agencies.
Table I-1 recapitulates the terms introduced in this discussion.
RISK ASSESSMENT IN PRACTICE
This section addresses past agency practices of risk assessment associated
with efforts to regulate toxic substances.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT

38

TABLE I-1 Summary of Terms
Risk Assessment. Risk assessment is the qualitative or quantitative characterization
of the potential health effects of particular substances on individuals or populations.
Risk Management. Risk management is the process of evaluating alternative
regulatory options and selecting among them. A risk assessment may be one of the
bases of risk management.
Steps. Risk assessments comprise many or all of the following steps: hazard
identification, dose-response assessment, exposure assessment, and risk
characterization.
Components. Steps in risk assessment comprise many components—points in a risk
assessment at which judgments must be made regarding the analytic approach to be
taken.
Inference options. For many components, two or more inference options are available.
Risk Assessment Policy. Risk assessment policy consists of the analytic choices that
must be made in the course of a risk assessment. Such choices are based on both
scientific and policy considerations.

Risk Assessment and Regulatory Decision-Making
The regulatory process can be initiated in many ways. Each regulatory
agency typically has jurisdiction over a large number of substances, but
circumstances force an allocation of resources to a few at a time. The decision
as to which substances to regulate is based, at least in part, on the degree of
hazard. Thus, some notion of relative hazard (implicit or explicit, internally
generated or imposed by outside groups) is necessary. Critics of federal
regulation have contended that the agencies have not set their priorities
sensibly. In general, agency risk assessments for priority-setting have been
more informal, less systematic, and less visible than those for establishing
regulatory controls.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT

39

Agenda-setting involves decisions about which substances should be
selected (and often in what order) for more intense formal regulatory review.
All programs face this problem, but it assumes different configurations: some
programs cover a finite and known set of chemicals that must be reviewed, so
the order of the regulatory reviews is the key question, and the primary job of
the risk assessor is to help the agency implement a worst-first approach. For
example, EPA's pesticides program has long had lists of suspect pesticide
ingredients, and agency officials have had to decide which ones warrant formal
consideration of cancellation or of new controls. An agency's agenda may also
respond to private-sector initiatives (in the case of approval of new drugs or
pesticides), conform to statutory directives, or react to new evidence of hazards
previously unrecognized or thought to be less serious. This agenda formation
phase, too, involves elements of risk assessment by the agency, the Congress, or
private-sector entities; that is, there must be some assessment, however
informal, that indicates reason for concern.
For many items on an agency's regulatory agenda, hazard identification
alone will support a conclusion that a chemical presents little or no risk to
human health and should be removed from regulatory consideration, at least
until new data warrant renewed concern. If a chemical is found to be potentially
dangerous in the hazard-identification step, it could then be taken through the
steps of dose-response assessment, exposure assessment, and risk
characterization. At any of these steps, the evaluation might indicate that a
substance poses little or no risk and therefore can be removed from regulatory
consideration until new data indicate a need for reevaluation.
Chemicals that are judged to present appreciable risks to health are
candidates for regulatory action, and an agency will begin to develop options
for regulating exposures. Regulatory options usually involve specific product or
process changes and typically need to be based on extensive engineering and
technical knowledge of the affected industry. Evaluation of the regulatory
options includes recomputation of the predicted risk, in accord with altered
expectations of exposure intensity or numbers of persons exposed.
Many of the activities of regulatory agencies do not conform to this
sequential approach. However, regardless of the sequence of steps and the
number of steps used to

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT

40

determine whether regulatory action is warranted, risk assessment serves at
least two major functions in regulatory decisions: first, it provides an initial
assessment of risks, and, if the risk is judged to be important enough to warrant
regulatory action, it is used to evaluate the effects of different regulatory
options on exposure. In addition, it may be used to set priorities for regulatory
consideration and for further toxicity testing.
These varied functions place different requirements on risk assessors, and
a single risk assessment method may not be sufficient. A risk assessment to
establish testing priorities may appropriately incorporate many worst-case
assumptions if there are data gaps, because research should be directed at
substances with the most crucial gaps; but such assumptions may be
inappropriate for analyzing regulatory controls, particularly if the regulator
must ensure that controls do not place undue strains on the economy. In
establishing regulatory priorities, the same inference options should be chosen
for all chemicals, because the main point of the analysis is to make useful risk
comparisons so that agency resources will be used rationally. However, this
approach, which may be reasonable for priority-setting, may have to yield to
more sophisticated and detailed scientific arguments when a substance's
commercial life is at stake and the agency's decision may be challenged in
court. Furthermore, the available resources and the resulting analytic care
devoted to a risk assessment for deciding regulatory policy are likely to be
much greater for analyzing control actions for a single substance than for setting
priorities.
The Agencies That Regulate
The approach to risk assessment varies considerably among the four
federal agencies. Differences stem primarily from variations in agency structure
and differences in statutory mandates and their interpretation.
Organizational Arrangements
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is a component of the
Department of Health and Human Services, whose Secretary is the formal
statutory delegate of the powers exercised by FDA. FDA is headed by a single
official,

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT

41

the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, who is appointed by and serves at the
pleasure of the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services. It is
organized in product-related bureaus, each of which employs its own scientists,
technicians, compliance officers, and administrators. FDA has a long (75-year)
and strong scientific tradition. According to a recent Office of Technology
Assessment summary, FDA had taken or proposed action on 24 potential
carcinogens by 1981.
Like FDA, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is headed by a
single official, but EPA's Administrator is appointed by the President subject to
Senate confirmation. Also like FDA, EPA resembles a confederation of
relatively discrete programs that are coordinated and overseen by a central
management. The agency was established in 1970, but many of its programs
(e.g., air and water pollution control and pesticide regulation) predate its
formation and previously were housed in and administered by other
departments. Other programs, such as those for toxic substances and hazardous
waste, are rather new. EPA's research, policy evaluation, and, until recently,
enforcement efforts were separated organizationally from the program offices
that write regulations. EPA has had the widest experience with regulating
carcinogens; as of 1981, it had acted on 56 chemicals in its clean-water
program, 29 in its clean-air program, 18 in its pesticide program, and two in its
drinking-water program.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) is part of the
Department of Labor. The agency's head is an Assistant Secretary of Labor,
who requires Senate confirmation. Although FDA and EPA derive their
scientific support largely from their own full-time employees, until the late
1970s OSHA relied on other agencies, primarily the National Institute of
Occupational Safety and Health, an agency of the Department of Health and
Human Services. This division reflects a conscious congressional choice in
1970 to place the health experts on whom OSHA was expected to rely in an
outside environment believed more congenial to scientific inquiry and less
vulnerable to political influence. As of 1981, 18 potential carcinogens had been
acted on by OSHA.
The Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) enforces five statutes,
including the Consumer Product Safety Act and the Federal Hazardous
Substances Act. Both empower CPSC to regulate unreasonable risks of injury
from products used by consumers in the home, in schools, or in

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT

42

recreation. The much smaller CPSC differs sharply from the other three
agencies in two important respects: it does not have a single administrative
head, but instead is governed by five Commissioner, who can make major
regulatory decisions only by majority vote; and the Commissioners are
appointed for fixed terms by the President with Senate confirmation. Before
1981, CPSC had acted on five potential carcinogens.
The four agencies have attempted to coordinate risk assessment activities
in the past, most notably through the Interagency Regulatory Liaison Group
(IRLG), which formed a work group on risk assessment to develop a guideline
for assessing carcinogenic risks. Assisted by scientists from the National Cancer
Institute and the National Institute for Environmental Health Sciences, it
examined the various approaches used by the four agencies to evaluate evidence
of carcinogenicity and to assess risk. The IRLG (1979a,b) then integrated and
incorporated these evaluative procedures into a document, "Scientific Bases for
Identification of Potential Carcinogens and Estimation of Risks," which
described the basis for evaluation of carcinogenic hazards identified through
epidemiologic and experimental studies and the methods used for quantitative
estimation of carcinogenic risk.
Regulatory Statutes*
Examination of the statutes that the four agencies administer reveals
important differences in the standards that govern their decisions. The Office of
Technology Assessment has summarized (Table 1-2) statutes that pertain to the
regulation of carcinogenic chemicals. In particular, the statutes accord different
weights to such criteria as risk, costs of control, and technical feasibility. In
addition, different modes of regulation vary in their capacity to generate the
scientific data necessary to perform comprehensive risk assessments.
Several laws require agencies to balance regulatory costs and benefits.
Examples of balancing provisions are found in the Safe Drinking Water Act; the
Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act; the Toxic Substances

* This discussion draws heavily on the Office of Technology Assessment report,
Technologies for Determining Cancer Risks from the Environment , 1981.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT

43

Control Act; and the section on fuel additives in the Clean Air Act. Under such
provisions, a risk assessment can be used to express the nature and extent of
public-health benefits to be attained through regulation.
Some regulatory programs involve the establishment of technology-based
exposure controls. This approach is followed, for example, in portions of the
clean-water program and the part of the hazardous-wastes program that deals
with waste-incineration standards. In such programs, a risk assessment may be
used to show the human exposure that corresponds to a specific degree of risk
or to calculate the risk remaining after control technologies are put in place.
Some statutes mandate control techniques to reduce risks to zero whenever
hazard is affirmed. Such techniques include outright bans of products, as
envisioned in the Delaney clause in the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
In addition, if the concept of a threshold below which carcinogens pose no risk
is not accepted, strict interpretations of ample margin of safety language in
federal clean-air and clean-water legislation would require that exposures to
carcinogenic pollutants be reduced to zero. The role of risk assessment in cases
where mandatory control techniques must reduce risks to zero may be simply to
affirm that a hazard exists.
The difference between programs that involve premarketing approval of
substances and programs that operate through post hoc mechanisms , such as
environmental emission limits, may have an important influence over the
quality of risk assessments. The most important effect of this difference may lie
in the fact that premarketing approval programs (such as those for pesticides,
for new human drugs, and for new food additives) empower an agency to
require the submission of sufficient data for a comprehensive risk assessment,
whereas other programs tend to leave agencies to fend for themselves in the
acquisition of necessary data.
There can be little question that differing statutory standards for decision
affect the weight that agencies accord risk assessments. Like differences in the
mode of regulation, they probably have affected the rigor and scope of many
assessments. If risk is but one of several criteria that a regulator must consider
or if data are expensive to obtain, it would not be surprising if an agency
devoted less effort to risk assessment. However, the Committee has not
discovered differences in existing statutes that should impede the adoption of
uniform,

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT
44

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT
45

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT
46

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT
47

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT

48

government-wide risk assessment guidelines. Indeed, it is not satisfied that
there are legal bases for interagency differences in the performance—as distinct
from the use—of risk assessment for chronic health hazards.
CONCLUSIONS
On the basis of a review of the nature and the policy context of risk
assessment, the Committee has drawn the following general conclusions:
1.

Risk assessment is only one aspect of the process of regulatory
control of hazardous substances. Therefore, improvements in risk
assessment methods cannot be assumed to eliminate controversy
over federal risk management decisions.
Restrictive regulation has seemed onerous to manufacturers,
distributors, and users of products judged useful and valuable;
conversely, inaction and delay with respect to regulatory
proceedings have appeared callous and irresponsible to others.
These dissatisfactions have been manifested in many ways,
including criticism of risk assessment processes. The Committee
believes that much of this criticism is inappropriately directed and
gives rise to an unrealistic expectation that modifying risk
assessment procedures will result in regulatory decisions more
acceptable to the critics. Certainly risk assessment can and should
be improved, with salutary effects on the appropriateness of
regulatory decisions. However, risk management, although it uses
risk assessment, is driven by political, social, and economic forces,
and regulatory decisions will continue to arouse controversy and
conflict.
2. Risk assessment is an analytic process that is firmly based on
scientific considerations, but it also requires judgments to be made
when the available information is incomplete. These judgments
inevitably draw on both scientific and policy considerations.
The primary problem with risk assessment is that the
information on which decisions must be based is usually
inadequate. Because the decisions cannot wait, the gaps in
information must be bridged by inference and belief, and these
cannot be evaluated in the same way as facts. Improving the quality
and comprehensiveness of knowledge is by far the most effective
way to improve risk assess

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT

49

ment, but some limitations are inherent and unresolvable, and
inferences will always be required. Although we conclude that the
mixing of science and policy in risk assessment cannot be
eliminated, we believe that most of the intrusions of policy can be
identified and that a major contribution to the integrity of the risk
assessment process would be the development of a procedure to
ensure that the judgments made in risk assessments, and the
underlying rationale for such judgments, are made explicit.
3. Two kinds of policy can potentially affect risk assessment: that
which is inherent in the assessment process itself and that which
governs the selection of regulatory options. The latter, risk
management policy, should not be allowed to control the former,
risk assessment policy.
Risk management policy, by its very nature, must entail value
judgments related to public perceptions of risk and to information
on risks, benefits, and costs of control strategies for each substance
considered for regulation. Such information varies from substance
to substance, so the judgments made in risk management must be
case-specific. If such case-specific considerations as a substance's
economic importance, which are appropriate to risk management,
influence the judgments made in the risk assessment process, the
integrity of the risk assessment process will be seriously
undermined. Even the perception that risk management
considerations are influencing the conduct of risk assessment in an
important way will cause the assessment and regulatory decisions
based on them to lack credibility.
4. Risk assessment suffers from the current absence of a mechanism
for addressing generic issues in isolation from specific risk
management decisions.
Although the practice of risk assessment has progressed in
recent years, there is currently no mechanism for stimulating and
monitoring advances on generic questions in relevant scientific
fields or for the timely dissemination of such information to risk
assessors.
REFERENCES
Crump, K. S. In press. Issues related to carcinogenic risk assessment from animal bioassay data.
Paper

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

THE NATURE OF RISK ASSESSMENT

50

presented May 1981 at the International School of Technological Risk Assessment, a
NATO Advanced Study Institute, Erice, Italy.
IRLG (Interagency Regulatory Liaison Group), Work Group on Risk Assessment. 1979a. Scientific
bases for identification of potential carcinogens and estimation of risks. Fed. Reg. 44:39858.
IRLG (Interagency Regulatory Liaison Group), Work Group on Risk Assessment. 1979b. Scientific
bases for identification of potential carcinogens and estimation of risks. J. Natl. Cancer
Inst. 63:242.
Lee, P. N., and J. A. O'Neill. 1971. The effect both of time and dose applied on tumor incidence rate
in benzopyrene skin painting experiments. Brit. J. Cancer 25:759-770.
National Academy of Sciences. 1981. The Health Effects of Nitrate, Nitrite, and N-Nitroso
Compounds. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press. 544 pp.
OTA (Office of Technology Assessment). 1981. Assessment of the Technologies for Determining
Cancer Risks from the Environment. 240 pp.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

51

II
Inference Guidelines for Risk Assessment

INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
An inference guideline* is an explicit statement of a predetermined choice
among the options that arise in inferring human risk from data that are not fully
adequate or not drawn directly from human experience. A guideline might, for
example, specify the mathematical model to be used to estimate the effects of
exposure at low doses from observations based on higher doses. The most
important feature of guideline use is that it changes the risk assessment process
from one in which inference options are selected on a substance-by-substance
basis to one in which they are selected once and thereafter

* The Committee hopes to avoid any misunderstanding resulting from its use of the
terms inference guideline and guideline (used for brevity in lieu of inference guideline).
This terminology is potentially confusing, because guidelines can be understood as
codified principles addressed to a particular subject matter, risk assessment, or as
describing the legal weight of any codified standards or principles. For the Committee, it
has the former meaning. Inference guidelines are the principles followed by risk
assessors in interpreting and reaching judgments based on scientific data. (Thus, our
inference guidelines are distinct from the standards for toxicologic and other testing
standards that many regulatory agencies and scientific bodies have adopted to govern, or
at least influence, the generation of data later used in risk assessment.)
For many lawyers, the term guideline connotes the weight to be given to any set of
codified principles, not

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

52

applied to an entire series of chemicals. In the absence of guidelines, assessors
may well select the same inference options for substance after substance in a
given agency program, and a common set of inference options may emerge, in
common law fashion, from their consistent application in the program. But even
the continued use of the same set of inference options over time does not
necessarily imply that the assessors would make the same choices for every
substance. Furthermore, outsiders would have no way of knowing what the
common set is. In contrast, the use of guidelines makes more evident the
generic choice of inference options, which we have seen in Chapter I, is based
on both scientific and risk assessment policy considerations.
HISTORY OF THE USE OF GUIDELINES
SAFETY EVALUATION GUIDELINES FOR EFFECTS OTHER THAN
CANCER
The development and use of guidelines by a regulatory agency first
became of major importance after Congress

only those addressed to risk assessment, in legal proceedings. The Food and Drug
Administration, for example, has defined a guideline as an official pronouncement of the
agency describing a procedure that satisfies legal requirements, but is not mandated by
law. A more complete treatment of the distinction between binding regulations and other
formal agency pronouncements appears in the section of this chapter entitled "Degree to
Which Guidelines May Be Binding on an Agency and a Regulated Party."
The Committee has used the term guideline to describe the principles by which risk
assessments are to be performed, because that is the term Congress used in the
legislation that authorized this study. The Committee was asked to consider the
feasibility of establishing uniform "risk assessment guidelines." There is no evidence that
Congress was aware of the different meanings of the term. It obviously was seeking
advice about the intellectual and scientific bases for codified principles for risk
assessment, not the appropriate legal form for their adoption. Faced with possible
confusion no matter which terminology it chose, the Committee has retained the
language that Congress itself used to describe our inquiry.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

53

enacted amendments to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetics Act in the 1950s
and early 1960s. These laws, as applied to noncarcinogenic agents, required that
food additives, color additives, drugs for animals, and pesticides be shown to be
safe under their intended conditions of use before premarket approval by the
Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The agency developed guidelines to
provide a systematic way to deal with the legal requirements embodied in the
amendments. Although guidelines for the conduct of various types of toxicity
tests received greatest notice, some attention was given to the problem of data
interpretation for inferring human risk. For example, a 1959 publication written
by several members of the FDA Division of Pharmacology, Appraisal of the
Safety of Chemicals in Foods, Drugs, and Cosmetics, is devoted primarily to
toxicity testing methods, but contains one chapter called "Some Interpretative
Problems in Evaluating the Safety of Food Additives" (Lehman et al., 1959).
Although that publication, which served as a guide for both FDA and the
regulated industry for at least a decade, was never published as a regulation, it
was widely accepted by affected industrial concerns.
In all cases except that of carcinogens, establishment of acceptable intakes
was accomplished by applying safety factors to experimentally derived noobserved-effect exposures. Testing involved mostly the use of acute and
subchronic (90-day) animal tests, although some long-term tests were required.
The use of safety factors to establish acceptable intakes was also recommended
by the Food Protection Committee of the National Research Council (NRC/
NAS, 1970) and adopted by the Joint Food and Agricultural Organization and
World Health Organization Expert Committees on Food Additives (1972) and
Pesticide Residues (1965). This approach continues to be used for
noncarcinogenic food additives and pesticides and, in slightly modified form, to
define acceptable exposures to occupational and various environmental
pollutants.
These methods of assigning acceptable limits of exposure imply that the
application of safety factors of various magnitudes to experimentally derived noobserved-effect exposures will ensure low risk. The acceptable exposure,
whether expressed as an acceptable daily intake for a food additive or as a
permissible exposure limit for an occupational agent, is derived by imposing
untested assumptions (e.g., about the likely nature of dose-response relations at
low doses) and by drawing inferences from sparse data. Safety evaluation
schemes may therefore

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

54

be classified as a set of guidelines that emphasize testing methods heavily and
that afford methods of inference only scant attention.
Recent efforts have dealt more directly with developing guidelines for risk
assessment of noncarcinogenic effects. The Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) has proposed guidelines for chemical mutagenesis (EPA, 1980a) and has
collected public comments on them, but has yet to publish a final rule. In
addition, the agency cosponsored two conferences with Oak Ridge National
Laboratory on risk assessment methods for reproductive and teratogenic effects;
the proceedings of the conferences have been published (ORNL/EPA, 1982).
The Interagency Regulatory Liaison Group began to develop guidelines for risk
assessment of reproductive and teratogenic effects, but the effort ceased with
the disbanding of the group in 1981. The March of Dimes Birth Defects
Foundation (1981) has published the proceedings of a conference dealing with
guidelines for studies of human populations exposed to mutagenic and
reproductive hazards. Despite the increasing interest in noncarcinogenic effects,
methods of estimating the risk of these effects have not been the subject of
major public and scientific debate; attention has been devoted mainly to
carcinogenic risk assessment. Much more critical review of the inferential
methods for assigning risks to noncarcinogenic agents is warranted.
Guidelines for Carcinogenic Risk
Until the late 1950s, few agents, either chemical or physical, had been
regulated in this country on the basis of their carcinogenic action. One
important regulated agent was ionizing radiation. Permissible exposures to
radiation were set in a manner similar to that for noncarcinogenic agents, by
application of safety factors applied to specified exposures. In the debate over
health effects of radioactive fallout from atomic weapons tests in the 1950s,
evidence to support a nonthreshold theory for cancer induction emerged.
Evidence was also accumulated to indicate that the nonthreshold theory might
be applicable to chemical carcinogens. It was in this context that Congress
enacted statutes* in the 1950s and early

* The enactment of these statutes did not necessarily bring a unique new concept to
FDA. In the early 1950s,

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

55

1960s that required FDA to ban the use of food and color additives shown to be
carcinogenic. The assumption, which differed from that underlying safety
evaluation of noncarcinogens, was that no exposure could be presumed safe.
Thus, a full risk assessment scheme was not needed for carcinogens. The
process stopped at hazard identification.
Many factors contributed to the later use of dose-response assessment,
exposure assessment, and risk characterization to determine quantitative
estimates of risk. One of these may have been the growing perception during
the 1960s and 1970s that many kinds of risk could not be eliminated completely
without unacceptable social and economic consequences. New laws reflecting
this belief were enacted, and some agencies were required to balance the risk
posed by carcinogenic agents against their perceived benefits. Quantitative risk
assessment was the system developed to estimate the risk side of the balance.
Over a period of 2 decades, various expert committees sponsored by
government agencies and other organizations published numerous reports
dealing with carcinogenicity evaluation. Most of these were state-of-the art
reports on aspects of carcinogenicity inference, and many suggested guidelines
for hazard identification. More recent reports have dealt explicitly with
quantitative risk assessment. The impetus for producing these reports was
probably a belief in the federal research and regulatory communities that some
scientific principles related to carcinogenicity data evaluation had to be
continually reexamined and reaffirmed. This belief pervaded the public-health
establishment not only in the United States, but also in other countries and in
the United Nations.
The following discussion examines efforts to develop and apply guidelines
for the evaluation of carcinogenicity data by the federal regulatory agencies and
the International Agency for Research on Cancer over the last decade—efforts
that developed out of 2 decades of scientific consensus-building.

before their enactment, the agency had prohibited three food additives on the
grounds that they were found to be carcinogenic in test animals.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

56

International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC)
In 1971, the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), an
agency of the World Health Organization, began publication of a series of
monographs on known and suspected carcinogens. These monographs are
prepared by international groups of experts assembled by IARC, who critically
review pertinent literature and draw conclusions regarding the carcinogenicity
of various substances. The results of IARC reviews and evaluations are widely
accepted. The guidelines used for evaluation by the IARC expert committees
are set forth in the monographs. They are expressed in very general terms and
are related to only six components of hazard identification, completely covered
in six pages of text. A major feature of the guidelines is the presentation of
criteria that classify the evidence of suspected carcinogens as sufficient or
limited. The IARC allows the expert committees considerable latitude to
evaluate many inference options on a case-by-case basis, although the agency
appears to insist on adherence to the few stated guidelines.
Food and Drug Administration
The 1958 Food Additives Amendment to the Food, Drug, and Cosmetics
Act prohibited the use of food additives found to be carcinogenic. The law was
also interpreted as prohibiting FDA approval of any drug, for use in animals
produced for human food, that had been shown to cause cancer. In 1962, by
congressional amendment, FDA was permitted to approve the use of a
carcinogenic animal drug if the agency was convinced that no residue of a drug
would be found in edible tissues of the treated animals. Congress specified that
FDA was to prescribe the analytic methods for verifying the absence of
residues. This directive proved to be unworkable, for two reasons: progress in
analytic quickly became obsolete and improved detection methods showed that
no drug administered to animals is ever entirely absent from animal tissues. The
problem of enforcing the 1962 amendment was highlighted in the early 1970s,
when diethylstilbestrol residues were discovered in beef liver with highly
sensitive, but as yet unapproved, analytic methods.
In an attempt to provide a consistent and predictable procedure for
approving methods to search for drug resi

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

57

dues, FDA proposed sensitivity-of-method guidelines in the form of regulations
(FDA, 1973, 1977, 1979b). Rather than gear criteria to an analytic technique,
the agency defined its standards in terms of risk. It proposed that any assay
approved for controlling a carcinogenic drug must be capable of measuring
residues that present more than an insignificant risk of cancer, and specified a
10-6 lifetime risk of cancer as a quantitative criterion of insignificance. If a drug
sponsor could provide a detection method capable of measuring residues posing
a risk of this magnitude or greater, FDA would ignore residues that could not be
detected with this method. Thus, FDA found guidelines for quantitative
estimation of risk necessary. FDA's sensitivity-of-method guidelines are unique
in several ways. They address a narrow though complex set of issues
encountered in regulating a single class of products, animal drugs. Although
they deal to a large extent with testing, they were the first to address
quantitative risk assessment methods, listing assumptions for dose-response
assessment, exposure assessment, and risk characterization. And they are the
only guidelines that attempt to establish a definition of significant risk. The
guidelines have yet to be adopted, a decade after they were first proposed, but
the agency has applied the methods of quantitative risk assessment embodied in
the sensitivity-of-method document in connection with the regulation not only
of animal drugs, but also of food contaminants, such as aflatoxin (FDA, 1979a)
and trace constituents of some additives (FDA, 1982b). The sensitivity-ofmethod guidelines were proposed as regulations, as were the cancer guidelines
of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA). In both cases,
regulation engendered substantial controversy. The major debate over the
sensitivity-of-method guidelines has dealt not so much with risk assessment or
the definition of significant risk as with the amount and cost of testing that FDA
would require from industry before product approval.
Environmental Protection Agency
During the early to middle 1970s, EPA initiated actions to prohibit or
restrict the use of several pesticides. The agency lacked internal procedures for
assessing carcinogenic risk and relied heavily on the judgment of scientists
outside EPA. Attorneys for EPA, in summar

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

58

izing the testimony of their expert witnesses during administrative hearings on
actions against the pesticides, set forth several statements that, in the legal brief,
were referred to as cancer principles (EPA, 1972, 1975). They conveyed the
idea that the only acceptable degree of regulation would be a total ban on
exposures. The principles, perceived as EPA's cancer policy, incurred wide
criticism from the scientific community, the private sector, and Congress. The
impracticability of achieving zero risk on a broad scale for a large number of
economically important chemicals became increasingly apparent. In response to
this new perception, and perhaps out of a desire to avoid misunderstanding of
its cancer policy, the EPA became the first agency to adopt formal guidelines
embracing a two-step process of risk assessment (EPA, 1976). The first step is a
determination of whether a particular substance constitutes a cancer risk (hazard
identification). The second step is a determination of what regulatory action, if
any, should be taken to reduce the risk. As part of the second step, the agency
explicitly endorses the use of quantitative risk assessment as the means of
determining the magnitude of the likely impact of a potential human carcinogen
on public health. These guidelines were not published as regulations and enjoy
fairly wide acceptance from most interested parties. As stated in the preface to
the guidelines, they were published to improve agency procedures, to provide
public notice of the approach that EPA would take, and to stimulate
commentary from all sources on that approach. The guidelines were probably
more important as a statement of a novel approach to risk assessment than for
their content. They are quite general, cover less than a page of Federal Register
text, and address only a few components of hazard identification, dose-response
assessment, exposure assessment, and risk characterization. More detailed
guidelines that specify assumptions for the choice of extrapolation models,
scaling factors, and other elements of dose-response assessment were published
in 1980 by program offices in EPA (EPA, 1980b). These rely in part on the
Interagency Regulatory Liaison Group (IRLG) guidelines (IRLG, 1979a) and
are currently undergoing review.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration
In 1977, OSHA published guidelines in a proposed regulation,
''Identification, Classification, and Regulation of

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

59

Toxic Substances Posing a Potential Occupational Risk of Cancer" (OSHA,
1977); after extensive administrative hearings, it published a final rule in 1980
(OSHA, 1980). The guidelines proved to be highly controversial, and the
hearings were marked by vigorous debate on almost every component of risk
assessment covered by the guidelines.
The OSHA rule, written by agency staff, was a detailed scientific and
regulatory document that took several hundred pages of Federal Register text
and addressed almost every component of hazard identification. The final rule
did not address exposure assessment and rejected the use of dose-response
assessment for any regulatory purpose except priority-setting. The main
purposes of the guidelines, as stated in the preface, were to streamline the
process of risk assessment, to speed up regulation, and to reduce the workload
of agency staff. Another purpose was to foster continuity of approach, even in
the face of changes of policy-makers. OSHA staff perceived that the case-bycase approach to risk assessment was long and time-consuming, because the
same controversial questions had to be argued each time a chemical was under
consideration for regulation. The agency believed that the generic approach to
risk assessment would reduce debate on these questions; the controversial issues
could be decided once, incorporated into guidelines, and applied to all
chemicals. For reasons of efficiency, the guidelines were written in language
that permitted little deviation from the judgments embodied in them. Because
they were written as regulations, regulated parties were required to abide by
them. The agency has not used the rule as a basis for any published scientific
assessment of carcinogenic hazard. It was revised in 1981 (OSHA, 1981) to
accommodate the Supreme Court's ruling on benzene, which required that
OSHA make a finding that the risk to workers in the absence of regulation was
significant and would be reduced by the proposed standard. But this change and
additional amendments were recently withdrawn, and the entire policy is under
reconsideration (OSHA, 1982).
Consumer Product Safety Commission
The Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) proposed cancer
guidelines dealing mainly with hazard identification (CPSC, 1978). Ten
components related to that step were addressed in several pages of Federal
Register text.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

60

Some minor attention was given to exposure assessment and dose-response
assessment, for priority-setting purposes only. The rationale for publishing the
guidelines, as stated in the preface of that document, was to establish CPSC's
general principles and to solicit comments on them, to assist the general public
and the regulated industries in understanding standards that CPSC would apply
and regulatory actions that it was likely to take, and to set forth its approach to
some issues that tended to recur in each case. The guidelines had no regulatory
status; they were a statement of selected inference options to which the agency
would adhere. The CPSC guidelines were never used; they were challenged in
court, and the court ruled that CPSC had promulgated them illegally inasmuch
as they were adopted without an opportunity for public comment. Furthermore,
at that time CPSC had decided to rely on the guidelines of IRLG.
Interagency Regulatory Liaison Group
The four agencies represented in IRLG undertook the task of developing
guidelines to "ensure that the regulatory agencies evaluate carcinogenic risk
consistently." In 1979, after an 18-month interagency effort, IRLG published a
report, "Scientific Bases for Identification of Potential Carcinogens and
Estimation of Risk." The report was prepared by personnel of CPSC, EPA,
FDA, and OSHA, with the assistance of senior scientists from the National
Cancer Institute and the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences. It
was published in a scientific journal (IRLG, 1979b) and in the Federal Register
(IRLG, 1979a); IRLG requested public comment in the Federal Register. The
IRLG report was said to represent an interagency consensus on the scientific
aspects of carcinogenic risk assessment.* It was the most comprehensive set of
guidelines that had been developed for agency use, addressing most
components of hazard identification and dose-response assessment with some
general discussion of

* Because rule-making was under way in connection with its cancer policy, OSHA
declined to participate in the IRLG notice and comment procedure. After the report was
completed, the Food Safety Quality Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture joined
IRLG and participated in the notice and comment.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

61

exposure assessment and risk characterization; it had, however, no official legal
status. The report was noteworthy, in that it constituted the first evidence that
all the federal regulatory agencies agreed on the inference options applicable to
the identification of carcinogenic hazards and measurement of risks. The
document made clear, however, that not all the agencies were bound to conduct
quantitative assessments; it stated only that, if such assessments were to be
conducted, they would be conducted uniformly. This language was probably a
concession to OSHA's view, as expressed in its cancer policy, that quantitative
risk assessment was to play no more than a priority-setting role in that agency's
regulatory activities. Almost immediately after its publication, the IRLG report
was adopted by the President's Regulatory Council and incorporated as the
scientific basis of the Council's government-wide statement on regulation of
chemical carcinogens. The Council viewed the IRLG guidelines as a major step
in reducing inconsistency, duplication of effort, and lack of coordination among
agencies in carcinogenic risk assessment (Regulatory Council, 1979).
The scientific aspects of the final OSHA cancer policy, which was written
to allow less latitude in the choice of inference options, were, nevertheless, in
general agreement with the IRLG guidelines. CPSC and EPA stated that they
relied on the IRLG document, but the degree to which they rely on it today is
not clear. FDA has made no statement other than that associated with the
document's initial publication; in fact, in a recent proposal concerning the
application of risk assessment to a class of trace constituents of additives, FDA
did not even cite the IRLG document as a reference (FDA, 1982b). Although
IRLG received a great deal of public comment on the guidelines, no report of
the agencies' review of these comments has appeared. In fact, the document was
heavily criticized by industry, because it was published in its final form and
adopted before the comments could be analyzed and revisions incorporated.
The Reagan Administration has officially disbanded the entire IRLG effort, so it
is unlikely that review of the public comments will ever occur.
Although the IRLG charter was not renewed, a similar group has been
established, but one that is coordinated by the White House Office of Science
and Technology Policy. This group has prepared a draft document on the
scientific basis of risk assessment and has distributed

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

62

it for comment (OSTP, 1982). The group anticipates that this document may
serve as a reference point for later development of general guidelines for the
agencies.
VARIATION IN THE FORM OF GUIDELINES
Comprehensiveness
Guidelines developed by agencies in the past have varied in the extent to
which they have addressed each of the steps of risk assessment. IARC's
guidelines address only hazard identification; OSHA's guidelines (1980) dealt
mainly with hazard identification, with some discussion of dose-response
assessment and none of exposure assessment and risk characterization; and
IRLG's guidelines focused in detail on hazard identification and dose-response
assessment, with some discussion of exposure assessment and risk
characterization.
Guidelines also have varied in the extent to which they have addressed the
components of the risk assessment steps. IARC's guidelines address a small
number of components. Study of the latest IARC monograph (1982) reveals
only six selected options that deal with inference of risk: treatment of benign
versus malignant tumors, the choice of statistical methods for application of
data from animal studies, the relevance of negative results of epidemiologic
studies, the evaluation of tumors that occur spontaneously, the utility of shortterm tests, and the overall weighting of evidence. The OSHA (1980) and IRLG
documents, in contrast, each discussed and embraced over 20 selected options
dealing with hazard identification.
Extent of Detail
Guidelines have differed not only in their comprehensiveness, but also in
the detail with which they have treated specific components of risk assessment.
When the content of a guideline is detailed, the assessor is presented with more
complete information than would be available from a more general guideline.
For example, the statement in IARC's guidelines on benign tumors is general,
compared with that in the IRLG guidelines. IARC concludes briefly:
If a substance is found to induce only benign tumors in experimental animals,
it should be

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

63

suspected of being a carcinogen and requires further investigation.

The IRLG document made a similar statement, but in addition elaborated
on several issues relevant to the evaluation of benign tumors that are not
mentioned by IARC—e.g., evaluation of tumor incidence when both benign and
malignant tumors are present; a listing of tumor types commonly observed as
benign in test animals, but known to progress to frank malignant stages;
evaluation of the quality of a histologic examination that might be presented as
evidence; and an illustrative example of the dependence of response on the
genetic characteristics of the test animal. The additional material could have
been used by an assessor, particularly one not familiar with the newest
information on benign tumors, to ensure that a more thorough analysis of the
relevant issues had been performed.
Flexibility
Detail can often be confused with inflexibility, and it is important to make
a distinction between these characteristics. Certainly, detailed guidelines can be
inflexible if the detail is designed to limit agency discretion, and thus public
debate, on an issue that is subject to multiple scientific interpretations.
However, detailed guidelines can have quite a different effect if their intent is to
provide an assessor with background information that describes the complexity
of an issue, with nuances that may influence particular judgments, or with
examples of cases that are legitimate exceptions to the general rule.
As described in Chapter I, almost all components of risk assessment
theoretically embrace one or more inference options. For example, in
determining which dose-response curve to choose, the biologically plausible
inference options may include the linear, multistage, sublinear, and threshold
models. A guideline usually prefers one option, although some guidelines
permit the selection of more than one or of all the options. The preferred
inference option may be viewed as a default option, i.e., the option chosen on
the basis of risk assessment policy that appears to be the best choice in the
absence of data to the contrary. A guideline may be said to be flexible
according to the degree to which it

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

64

allows the default option to be superseded by another inference option as a
result of convincing scientific evidence.*
Comparison of IRLG's guidelines with OSHA's guidelines illustrates how
comprehensive and detailed guidelines have varied in flexibility. On the issue of
benign versus malignant tumors, IRLG's guideline stated:
The induction of benign neoplasms would, therefore, be considered evidence
of carcinogenic activity unless definitive evidence is provided that the test
chemical is incapable of inducing malignant neoplasms.

The guideline did not attempt to define the type of definitive evidence that
would be needed to demonstrate that a "test chemical is incapable of inducing
malignant neoplasms." In contrast, OSHA created strict minimal criteria for
acceptance of such evidence:
(i) Benign tumors. Results based on the induction of benign or malignant
tumors, or both, will be used to establish a qualitative inference of
carcinogenic hazard to workers. Arguments that substances that induce benign
tumors do not present a carcinogenic risk to workers will be considered only if
evidence that meets the criteria set forth in 1990.144(e) is provided.
Section 1990.144(e) stated:
(e) Benign tumors. The Secretary will consider evidence that the substance
subject to the rule-making proceeding is capable only of inducing benign
tumors in human or experimental animals provided that the evidence for the
specific substance meets the following criteria:
Criteria. (i) Data are available from at least two well-conducted bioassays in
each of two species of mammals (or from equivalent evidence in more than
two species).

* Flexibility is also intimately related to the legal weight that the agency desires a
guideline to have; the implications for flexibility of adopting guidelines under different
legal authorities are reviewed in the next section.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

65

(ii) Each of the bioassays to be considered has been conducted for the full
lifetime of the experimental animals.
(iii) The relevant tissue slides are made available to OSHA or its designee and
the diagnoses of the tumors as benign are made by at least one qualified
pathologist who has personally examined each of the slides and who provides
specific diagnostic criteria and descriptions; and
(iv) All of the induced tumors must be shown to belong to a type which is
known not to progress to malignancy or to be at a benign stage when observed.
In the latter case, data must be presented to show that multiple sections of the
affected organ(s) were adequately examined to search for invasion of the
tumor cells into adjacent tissue, and that multiple sections of other organs were
adequately examined to search for tumor metastases.

By leaving open the type of evidence needed to supersede the default
option (benign tumors should be considered evidence of carcinogenic activity),
IRLG allowed more flexibility than OSHA.
In no case did the IRLG guidelines attempt to restrict the type of evidence
that would be needed for acceptance of alternative interpretations. In contrast,
OSHA specified minimal criteria for acceptance of alternative interpretations on
the issues of negative epidemiologic studies, proof of metabolic differences
between animals and humans, and rejection of the use of data from testing at
high doses. By invoking such criteria, OSHA attempted to limit the definition of
acceptable interpretation and, in so doing, eliminate or reduce scientific debate
on controversial issues in its rule-making proceedings.
IRLG also created flexibility by not choosing a default option, i.e., by
citing a range of possible inference options to be used in a risk assessment. The
statement on interspecies conversion factors illustrates this point:
Several species-conversion factors should be considered in estimating risk
levels for humans from data obtained in another species.

All OSHA guidelines were restricted to the choice of a single inference
option.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

66

Degree To Which Guidelines May Be Binding on An Agency
and A Regulated Party
The guidelines developed by or for regulatory agencies may vary in their
legal status and thus in their procedural implications. For example, OSHA's
guidelines (1980) appeared as regulations formally published, after opportunity
for public comment, in the Federal Register . In contrast, EPA's guidelines
(1976), although eventually printed in the Federal Register, have never been
officially subjected to public comment and do not purport to be regulations.
To appreciate the practical differences among the approaches that an
agency might follow, it is useful to distinguish three types of administrative
documents: regulations (or, synonymously, rules), established procedures (a
term we have devised to refer to agency pronouncements that are in some
contexts referred to as guidelines ), and recommendations. There is no single
authoritative definition of the latter two types of document. The discussion here
is an attempt to reflect common understanding; it draws as well on the practice,
but not the terminology of one agency, FDA (1982a).* An illustration will
illuminate the practical differences among these three types of documents.
Suppose that an agency decides to adopt, as one of its risk assessment
guidelines, the default option that benign tumors should be aggregated with
malignant tumors in determining whether a mammalian bioassay demonstrates
that an agent causes cancer in the test species. This guideline could be adopted
as a regulation, as what we term an established procedure, or simply as a
recommendation. For internal purposes, it is not likely to matter which form the

* FDA officially recognizes three types of documents: binding regulations, guidelines,
and recommendations. That terminology is potentially confusing here, because we have
given guidelines a special meaning, connoting codified principles for risk assessment,
that diverges from FDA's legal definition. The reader is referred to the footnote at the
beginning of this chapter for a more complete treatment of this discrepancy. We have
therefore coined the substitute phrase established procedures, to describe any standards
of criteria for fulfilling a regulatory requirement that the agency commits itself to follow
until they are formally revoked or revised.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

67

agency's guideline takes. If the guideline is understood to represent prevailing
agency policy, the agency's managers can assume that assessors will adhere to it
in evaluating test data, regardless of its form. Important differences will be
observed, however, in the guideline's impact on interested third parties.
If the guideline were adopted as a regulation, it would be reciprocally
binding. Neither the agency nor any private party would be free to argue in a
regulatory proceeding that benign and malignant tumors should never be
aggregated or should not in a particular instance be aggregated; the agency's
regulation would render such arguments legally irrelevant. It is precisely this
effect of regulations—i.e., their treatment of previously contested (and in theory
still contestable) issues as authoritatively resolved—that OSHA sought when it
published its risk assessment guidelines as regulations.
If the guidelines were merely a recommendation, manufacturers of
chemicals under evaluation would not be bound by it. They could argue, to the
agency or in court, that benign tumors should never be aggregated with
malignant tumors or that they should not be aggregated in a particular case.
They might not convince the agency, but the agency could not lawfully refuse
to consider their arguments or reject evidence supporting them, and they might
convince a court that the agency guideline—i.e., its choice of inference options
—is wrong generally or inapplicable in a particular case.
If the guideline were an established agency procedure, a private party
could similarly argue that it is wrong generally or inapplicable to a particular
case. An established procedure does not, therefore, preclude efforts by third
parties to treat the benign-versus-malignant issue as an open question. The
difference between a recommendation and an established procedure lies in the
latter's effect on the agency itself. An agency can depart from a
recommendation at any time. Under FDA's practice, however, it may not depart
from an established procedure unless it has previously announced that it no
longer regards the procedure as sound. In other words, such an established
procedure is binding on the agency until formally revoked or changed, and third
parties can rely on it and insist that the agency adhere to it.*

* The practical effects of the legal distinctions drawn here are possibly overdrawn. The
flexibility accorded by

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

68

There is another important difference between regulations and established
procedures or, indeed, recommendations. To adopt regulations that have the
reciprocally binding effects described above, an agency must follow the
procedures prescribed by the Administrative Procedure Act, or by its own
statute, for rule-making. At a minimum, these procedures include publication of
a proposal, an opportunity for the submission of public comments, and
promulgation of a final document that discusses and responds to all significant
comments. The process can be long and acrimonious, and that helps to explain
why agencies sometimes choose not to adopt policies, particularly those
addressing complex issues, in the form of regulations. The same process must
be followed to effect changes in regulations once adopted, and that inhibits
rapid response to changes in scientific understanding.
ARGUMENTS FOR AND AGAINST THE USE OF GUIDELINES
The advantages and disadvantages listed below constitute an inventory of
arguments that have been brought forward by the proponents and critics of
guidelines for risk assessment. In most cases, an argument is most convincing
for guidelines of a particular form and content, rather than for guidelines in
general. For these cases, the characteristics of guidelines that would support or
refute an argument are indicated.

any set of guidelines depends as much on the language chosen as on the legal
form in which they appear. Suppose that an agency's default option is:
"Ordinarily benign and malignant tumors shall be equated and their sum used to
determine the significance of observed effects, unless (a) new data suggest the
inappropriateness of this practice generally, or (b) results from the test in
question or other tests of the compound make aggregation inappropriate in the
particular case." This text anticipates exceptions, and would not prevent either
the agency or a third party from taking a different view about the meaning of a
particular test, whether it appeared as a regulation or in some other form.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

69

Advantages of Guideline Use
Separation of Risk Assessment from Risk Management
Proponents of guidelines argue that their use would help to separate risk
assessment from other parts of the regulatory process. They contend that, when
selected inference options are clearly delineated in a formal document, risk
assessments will not likely be influenced to fit prior conclusions about
regulation of a particular substance. The use of guidelines can also dispel the
appearance of such influence when, in fact, there is none. Agencies can defend
their assessments on the grounds that they always do them in the way set forth
in the guidelines. Compared with reliance on the ad hoc selection of inference
options, the use of guidelines could reduce the controversy focused on
individual assessments. Debate will shift to the more general discussion of the
generic choice of inference options addressed in the guidelines. Guidelines that
are comprehensive and detailed will define and bracket the components of risk
assessment most completely and explicitly. Thus, such guidelines could
probably provide the sharpest distinction between risk assessment and risk
management.
Quality Control
Proponents of guidelines argue that their use would ensure the application
of selected inference options based on the informed judgment of experts. A
single risk assessment requires knowledge in diverse fields, such as
epidemiology, biostatistics, toxicology, biochemistry, chemistry, and clinical
medicine. Generally, assessors have advanced expertise in no more than a few
fields. Guidelines could help to bridge gaps in knowledge by ensuring that
decisions are based on judgments formulated by experts in each subject.
Guidelines could also help to ensure that assessors apply judgments that are in
accord with current scientific thinking in each field. This argument highlights
the importance of including experts from a wide range of scientific disciplines
in the formulation of guidelines. Furthermore, it suggests that guidelines should
be reviewed periodically so that new scientific developments can be
accommodated.
Proponents believe that comprehensive, detailed guidelines would be most
helpful in providing guidance to

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

70

assessors. Comprehensiveness is necessary to provide guidance on all or most
of the components of risk assessment. Detailed guidelines could provide an
assessor with an expert's insight into aspects of risk assessment that require
special consideration. How flexibility could affect quality control is not clear;
however, a flexible framework could have a positive effect, especially if
guidelines can help an assessor to know when exceptional or novel scientific
evidence should be admitted.
Consistency
Almost all guideline documents have stated, in their introductions, that
consistency is a major rationale for guideline use. Consistency in risk
assessment is important to the agencies, because it helps to ensure fairness and
rationality by precluding the arbitrary application of selected inference options
that differ from one time to the next. Consistency also permits comparison of
risks associated with different chemicals, and this is useful for priority-setting
and for facilitating regulatory decision-making. When the same set of
guidelines is applied uniformly by all the agencies, government-wide
consistency may be improved. This has important implications for interagency
coordination and for reducing the possibility that risk assessments by different
agencies will be pitted against each other during litigation on a given chemical.
Guidelines of a type that fosters consistency among agencies have yet to be
adopted and used. In the absence of such guidelines, there are increased
opportunities for inconsistency in the choice of inference options available for
each risk assessment component and in the conclusions based on those choices.
Proponents of guidelines contend it is often difficult even to know whether
there is consistency among risk assessments, because of lack of explicit
documentation of inference options used.
Comprehensive, detailed guidelines applied uniformly across the agencies
appear to be the most suitable form for reducing inconsistency. To ensure
thoroughness and clarity in drawing conclusions, assessors should explicitly
document the use of such guidelines in their reports. Flexibility does not imply
inconsistency in the application of risk assessment policy. The same inference
options can be applied consistently, except in instances where convincing
contrary scientific evidence is pre

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

71

sented. When such evidence is available, the choice of different inference
options has a scientific rationale and does not imply an arbitrary shift in risk
assessment policy. It is not the same kind of inconsistency as that which can
occur when, for example, one assessor uses a species-to-human conversion
factor based on surface-area ratios and another, for no better scientific reason,
uses a factor based on body-weight ratios.
Predictability
Proponents of guidelines argue that the private sector should be told
explicitly which inference options the government will select to evaluate healtheffects data. Industry needs this information to assess its own activities and
testing programs. Without uniformly applied guidelines, a regulated party may
have to call on the agencies for judgments on numerous issues and have no
assurance that the judgments will not change unexpectedly or that one agency's
judgment will be consistent with another's. Industry representatives have stated
their preference for uniform federal guidelines (although they have been much
more cautious in discussing the content of and legal weight given to the
guidelines). Consider, for example, the following comment by the American
Industrial Health Council, regarding the publication of the IRLG cancer
guidelines (AIHC, 1979):
The report is a significant step toward the formulation of a national cancer
policy. AIHC supports the report's stated objective of ensuring that regulatory
agencies evaluate carcinogenic risks consistently. We strongly urge that this
initial step be followed up so that a national cancer policy is developed and
conflicting policies among the regulatory agencies are minimized.

This point of view takes on added significance in view of the increasing
desire of some states to develop their own cancer policies. Six states have
initiated programs thus far, and California has already published its own
guidelines (State of California, 1982a,b). For the private sector to have to
contend with a range of different policies in different states would clearly be
disadvantageous and burdensome. A federal cancer policy could serve as a
model to the states and foster a more uniform approach to risk assessment.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

72

Proponents believe that the most useful guidelines in gauging government
actions would be detailed and comprehensive. Although flexibility may
undermine predictability, it is reasonable to assume that industry would
welcome such a trade-off. Guidelines published as established procedures
would be the best option, for the regulatory agencies would not change their
procedures without formal notice, but the procedures would not be binding on
the regulated parties.
Evolutionary Improvement of the Risk Assessment Process
Proponents of guidelines argue that their use provides a locus for debate,
examination, and revision of the selected inference options generally used in
risk assessment. By contrast, the argument proceeds, when chemicals are
evaluated on an ad hoc basis, the focus of debate is shifted from generic issues
to case-specific issues, and the methods and assumptions of risk assessment are
obscured from critical view.
Over the last decade, new and refined techniques of risk assessment have
emerged. Two important examples are the use of short-term in vitro tests to
infer carcinogenicity and mutagenicity and the use of dose-response assessment
to estimate the magnitude of human risk at low doses. Guidelines may have
contributed to the evolution of both by proposing generic interpretations that
would be evaluated and tested both in theory and in the laboratory. The choice
of a low-dose extrapolation model is a specific example. The first guidelines
(FDA, 1973) proposed the use of the Mantel-Bryan model. This choice was the
subject of much debate (FDA, 1977, 1979b); newer guidelines have suggested
that this model has been discounted by the agencies, in part because it is
essentially empirical and lacks biologic relevance with respect to current
knowledge about carcinogenesis (IRLG, 1979b; EPA, 1980a). Furthermore, the
debate over an appropriate model helped to foster a major research effort. The
ED01 experiment, also known as the ''megamouse study," involved the testing
of 24,000 female mice given known carcinogens at low doses in an attempt to
determine the shape of the response curve at low doses.
Guidelines that are comprehensive and detailed would invite the most
opportunity for debate and evolutionary refinement.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

73

Public Understanding
Because risk assessment is complex, it is easy to parody and demean the
process. For example, the decision to label soft drinks containing saccharin was
satirized in several highly publicized jokes, e.g., "Caution: Saccharin is
hazardous to your rat" and "Drink 800 bottles of pop a day and get cancer."
Proponents of guidelines argue that comprehensive, detailed guidelines setting
forth the scientific and policy bases of risk assessment could improve public
understanding and help to dispel the impression that government actions are
based on tenuous and inadequate reasoning.
Administrative Efficiency
Some contend that when risk assessments are performed on a chemical-bychemical basis without the use of guidelines, too many agency resources are
devoted to reargument of the same issues with regulated parties. For example:
Should animal carcinogenicity data be used to assess human risk? Should data
on animals with a high incidence of spontaneous tumors be considered valid?
Should benign tumors be assigned the same weight as malignant ones? Which
statistical methods should be applied? Guidelines could reduce repetitious
discussion by specifying which types of interpretations are acceptable, given the
current state of scientific understanding.
OSHA, in its "Identification, Classification, and Regulation of Potential
Carcinogens" (1980), registered concern about its efficiency (only seven rulemaking proceedings completed in 9 years) and cited one major reason for its
low productivity:
The necessity to resolve basic scientific policy issues anew, in each
rulemaking, has increased the burden on the Department of Labor and
members of the scientific community called upon to address these widely
accepted policies. Moreover, relitigation of these issues in the federal courts
has also drained staff time and energy and has inhibited OSHA initiatives
while its policy determinations were repeatedly relitigated.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

74

OSHA maintained that the adoption of cancer guidelines was vital to
efficient regulation:
OSHA believes that this general policy and procedure will facilitate the sifting
through the evidence concerning substances which may be interpreted to be
potential carcinogens. … Without such a system and appropriate criteria,
OSHA believes that this task cannot be accomplished in a timely and efficient
manner.

Efficiency could best be served by guidelines that are comprehensive,
detailed, and inflexible and are adopted as regulations binding on all parties, but
this would entail other costs. The disadvantages of such guidelines are
described in some of the arguments cited in the following discussion.
Disadvantages of Guideline Use
Oversimplification
The adoption of guidelines may foster a cookbook approach to risk
assessment. The more assessors look at chemicals from a generic point of view,
the less they are able to draw distinctions among them on the basis of specific
data. The critics' ultimate concern is that blind adherence to guidelines might
cause scientific information relevant to a particular chemical to be arbitrarily
cast aside because it has not been accommodated in the guidelines.
The following underlined phrases are examples of guidelines that critics
believe may lead to oversimplification:
• Use of the most sensitive species to determine risk. Critics contend
that, if information shows that metabolic similarity to humans is
greater for a species that is less sensitive, data on this species may be
preferable.
• Absence of a threshold for carcinogenesis. Critics argue that tumors
may be induced by a genetic mechanism or by an epigenetic
mechanism. In the latter case, a threshold may exist.
• Unqualified acceptance of positive results at

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

75

high-dose testing. Critics believe that validity should depend on
whether there is a pharmaco kinetic difference between high and low
dose. Special consideration should be given to whether detoxifying or
repair processes are saturated and to whether competing metabolic
pathways are involved and become saturated.
Another potential problem is the lack of attention to weighting of evidence.
For example, a guideline may simply state that "positive results in animal tests
should always outweigh negative results." This does not take into account the
quality and statistical power of the different tests; it could foster the attitude that
such considerations are of minor importance.
To a large extent, the strength of such criticisms depends on the form and
contents of the guidelines. Those which are comprehensive and leave little
latitude for exceptional cases tend to maximize the problem of
oversimplification; those which are flexible could be most effective in
mitigating the problem. In addition, guidelines may explicitly direct the assessor
to consider the weight of evidence of a given test result. For example, the IRLG
guideline stated that positive results should supersede negative results, but
added a caveat: "If the positive result is itself not fully conclusive or if reasons
exist for questioning its validity as evidence of carcinogenicity, the result is
generally classified as 'inconclusive' or 'only suggestive' even in the absence of
other negative results."
Detailed guidelines can reduce the possibility of oversimplification if the
intent of detail is to capture for the assessor the complexity of the issue
addressed. For example, a guideline might state the scientific basis for the
chosen inference option, the kinds of evidence that are typically applicable,
circumstances in which acceptance of exceptional evidence may be appropriate,
and other rationales for choosing a particular inference option.
Regardless of the form of a guideline, there are some parts of risk
assessment, particularly those dealing with the quality of data and the
magnitude of uncertainty, that defy or at least resist generic interpretation.
Individual judgment is most important in such cases. A guideline should not be
viewed as a formula for producing risk assessments without the need for such
judgment.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

76

Mixing of Scientific Knowledge and Risk Assessment Policy
Guidelines unavoidably embody both scientific knowledge and risk
assessment policy. In the past, regulatory agencies typically used a conservative
approach in the development of risk assessment policy, as in the choice of the
most sensitive species, use of the most conservative dose-response curve, and
the lack of acceptance of negative epidemiologic data. Industry has been highly
critical of this approach. Some representatives believe that risk assessment
should be solely a scientific function and should be separated from policy
decisions. Consider, for example, the American Industrial Health Council's
criticism of the IRLG guidelines (AIHC, 1980):
When the IRLG report speaks of the importance of using conservative methods
or assumptions so as not to underestimate human risk, the report is mixing
regulatory considerations into the scientific function. The scientific
determination should be made separately from the regulatory determinations.
On the basis of the best scientific estimate of the real risk, the regulatory
agency can then consider costs, benefits and other elements that enter into a
regulatory determination.

Furthermore, there is a fear that the mixing will go unrecognized outside
the scientific community (AIHC, 1980):
When value judgments are formalized by the selection, for "conservative"
reasons, of a mathematical model or an assumption used for extrapolating
human risk, the fact that value judgments have been made escapes the
regulator and the public.

The first criticism appears to miss the crucial fact that risk assessment must
always include policy, as well as science. The important issues are what the risk
assessment policy content is and whether it will be applied consistently or not.
The second criticism is most applicable to guidelines that permit an agency to
represent as science the conclusions that have been reached in part on the basis
of policy considerations. The argument is less applicable to guidelines that
explicitly distinguish between scientific knowledge and risk assessment policy

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

77

and direct the assessor to address such distinctions when reaching conclusions.
Furthermore, it is not clear that risk assessment performed on an ad hoc basis
would reduce the opportunity for unrecognized mixing of science and policy;
indeed, carefully designed guidelines could help to inhibit such mixing.
Guidelines very different from the kinds described could be designed to be
devoid of risk assessment policy choices. They would state the scientifically
plausible inference options for each risk assessment component without
attempting to select or even suggest a preferred inference option. However, a
risk assessment based on such guidelines (containing all the plausible options
for perhaps 40 components) could result in such a wide range of risk estimates
that the analysis would not be useful to a regulator or to the public.
Furthermore, regulators could reach conclusions based on the ad hoc exercise of
risk assessment policy decisions.
Misallocation of Agency Resources to Development and Amendment of
Guidelines
Critics contend that the dedication of time and resources to the process of
guideline development and amendment detracts from an agency's ability to
conduct regulatory activities. For example, OSHA's cancer guidelines required
3 years of effort before promulgation of the final rule in January 1980. The full
rule-making record eventually exceeded 250,000 pages. OSHA itself offered
some 45 witnesses who addressed the scientific content and the policy
implications of the proposal, and a much larger number of witnesses appeared
in behalf of other participants. The final policy consisted of more than 280
Federal Register pages of preamble and a dozen pages of regulatory text.
Notwithstanding this intensive effort, the guidelines have yet to be applied, and
new leadership at OSHA is in the process of reevaluating some provisions of
the standard.
The procedures required by the Administrative Procedure Act are so
elaborate that development and amendment of guidelines written as regulations
are expected to demand more intensive effort than guidelines written as
established procedures or recommendations. Regardless of the legal status given
to the guidelines, their stability over time is susceptible to major changes in
policy stances. However, guidelines that clearly distinguish

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

78

scientific knowledge from risk assessment policy judgments could provide a
locus for facilitating changes in policy orientation. They would define elements
of risk assessment policy that are amenable to change and scientific elements
that should not be changed for policy reasons. When risk assessment is done on
an ad hoc basis, such distinctions may not exist.
Freezing of Science
Critics believe that guidelines would hinder the timely incorporation of
important new scientific evidence during standard-setting. The Dow Chemical
Company raised this concern about OSHA's cancer guidelines (OSHA, 1980):
The record … has now made it clear that there is absolutely no assurance that
the latest scientific evidence in the field will be permitted to be applied under
the proposal to any given regulation of a specific chemical substance.

OSHA responded to this criticism by incorporating three amendment
procedures into its cancer policy: a general review of the guidelines every 3
years by the directors of the National Cancer Institute, the National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, and the National Institute for Occupational
Safety and Health; recommendations at any time from the National Cancer
Institute, the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, or the
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health; and petitions from the
public. Final amendments would occur only through formal, independent rulemaking, to ensure that major changes in the guidelines would not be made
during the litigation of individual cases. In industry's perception, the
amendment provision did not answer its initial criticism. The American
Industrial Health Council characterized the amendment procedures as "a timeconsuming and ponderous mechanism for incorporating into the regulatory
standards newly available evidence or data concerning heretofore unresolved
issues" (OSHA, 1980).
This argument is most applicable to guidelines that are adopted as
regulations and to those which are comprehensive and inflexible. When
guidelines are flexible and adopted as established procedures or
recommendations, the rapid incorporation of novel scientific information is

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

79

more easily accommodated. The intent of flexibility is to allow the acceptance
of exceptional evidence based on convincing scientific justification. In the case
of established procedures or recommendations, changes in guidelines could
occur without the necessity of a lengthy rule-making process.
CONCLUSIONS
On the basis of its review of the historical record of guideline development
and use and its evaluation of the arguments for and against guideline use, the
Committee has drawn several conclusions.
1. All agencies have found it necessary to write guidelines, in part, to
make their choice of inference options more evident to the public.
However, the application of inference options to specific risk
assessments has been marked by a general lack of explicitness.
Because of the lack of explicitness in identifying the choice of
inference options in specific risk assessments, it has often been
difficult to know whether assessors adhere to guidelines. Within a
given program, a consistent set of selected inference options may
emerge over time. However, the degree of consistency among
programs and agencies is not well defined.
2. Agency guidelines have varied markedly in form and content.
Without a deliberate coordinating effort, there is no reason to
assume that guidelines will become more nearly uniform.
Although the scientific bases of cancer guidelines developed in
the past by the agencies have been generally consistent, the degree
to which the guidelines are comprehensive, detailed, flexible, and
legally binding has varied widely. EPA's guidelines are statements
of broad principles covering a few components in the four steps of
risk assessment; they have no regulatory status. OSHA's guidelines
were comprehensive and detailed and dealt mainly with hazard
identification; they were regulations. CPSC's guidelines were not
comprehensive and dealt mainly with hazard identification; they
had no regulatory status. FDA's proposed sensitivity-of-method
guidelines are comprehensive and detailed for dose-response
assessment and exposure assessment; they are regulations. The
formation of the IRLG caused the agencies to adopt a single set of

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

80

guidelines for the first time, but, since its disbanding in 1981, there
has been no further progress on guideline development.*
3. Uniform guidelines for risk assessment (except for exposure
assessment) are feasible and desirable.
Guidelines are feasible. The Committee believes that current
statutory requirements would not prevent the use of uniform
guidelines. Regulators administer laws reflecting social policies
that suggest different degrees of acceptable risk. Some argue that
uniform guidelines would keep regulators from applying different
standards of risk that were based on these laws. However,
regulators can apply such standards on the basis of risk
management decisions after completion of the risk assessment.
Furthermore, feasibility has already been demonstrated by the
adoption of the IRLG guidelines.
Uniform guidelines are desirable for several reasons. First, the
use of different guidelines by the agencies could undermine the
credibility of their risk assessments. Critics of an agency risk
assessment might argue persuasively that another agency estimates
risk differently, on the basis of a different set of inference options.
Second, almost every regulated chemical is in the jurisdiction of
two or more agencies, and the possibility of duplication of effort in
performing risk assessments on a given chemical could be
minimized if the guidelines were applied uniformly. Adoption of
uniform guidelines could foster joint risk assessment efforts by
agencies interested in regulating the same chemical; or one agency
could rely on the assessment of another agency. Through such
cooperative efforts, a small agency like CPSC, which lacks the
scientific capability of EPA and FDA, could gain help in evaluating
complex data. Third, government-wide guidelines could help
industry to gauge government actions and to define the types of
data and interpretations relevant to industries' own testing
programs. Fourth, federal policy could orchestrate efforts toward
uniformity among the states.

* The Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP), with agency participation,
has written a document describing the scientific basis of risk assessment. OSTP
envisions the ultimate evolution of a set of principles for risk assessment from this
document.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

81

Exposure guidelines, in contrast with guidelines for other risk assessment
steps, are not now readily amenable to uniform application in the various
agencies. Apart from EPA, the agencies have rather narrowly defined interests
regarding exposure, i.e., foods and drugs at FDA, consumer products at CPSC,
and occupational hazards at OSHA. Whereas guidelines for the identification of
hazard and for the quantitative estimation of risk in test animals may be
commonly applied, no such common basis exists for applying exposure
assessment guidelines.
4. Even well-designed guidelines may be unsuccessful unless:
• Attention is given to the process by which they are developed.
• They can accommodate change.
• They are viewed as valuable tools, rather than formulas for
producing risk assessments.
Because guidelines must include both scientific knowledge and policy
judgments, designing a development procedure is a difficult task. Risk
assessment requires advanced knowledge in a number of disciplines, and
guidelines should be formulated in part on the basis of the best possible
scientific expertness in those disciplines. The best mechanism for determining
risk assessment policy must be carefully defined. Because of the necessity of
considering policy aspects in guidelines, duly appointed public officials must
take responsibility for the policy implications. A major goal of the development
process should be the assurance that the guidelines preserve a sharp distinction
between scientific knowledge and risk assessment policy.
The Committee believes that guidelines should be capable of
accommodating evolving scientific concepts in two ways. First, they should be
periodically reviewed and, if necessary, revised. Second, they should permit
acceptance of new evidence that differs from what was previously perceived as
the general case, when scientifically justifiable. However, an unavoidable tradeoff results from the use of such flexible guidelines: predictability and
consistency may be reduced for the sake of flexibility.
Every risk assessment involves consideration of case-specific factors, such
as the quality of the data or the overall strength of the evidence. These factors
cannot

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

82

be addressed effectively in guidelines. If assessors were to use guidelines in a
strictly mechanical fashion, without recognizing the importance of case-specific
judgments, the quality of risk assessments could be diminished.
5. Uniform guidelines for effects other than cancer are desirable, but
typically they would be based on a less extensive scientific data
base.
The same reasons enunciated for the desirability of cancer
guidelines impel the conclusion that guidelines are needed to guide
assessments of other effects. Scientific data available on these
effects may be organized to provide useful information for
assessing risk. In fact, guidelines have already been developed for
some of these (although never adopted by the agencies), i.e.,
guidelines for mutagenesis (EPA, 1980; March of Dimes Birth
Defects Foundation, 1981) and guidelines for reproductive and
teratogenic effects (ORNL/EPA, 1982; March of Dimes Birth
Defects Foundation, 1981).
REFERENCES
AIHC (American Industrial Health Council). October 17, 1979. AIHC comments on: A Report of
the Interagency Regulatory Liaison Group (IRLG), Work Group on Risk Assessment,
entitled ''Scientific Basis for Identification of Potential Carcinogens and Estimation of
Risks," p. 2.
AIHC (American Industrial Health Council). April 30, 1980. In Review of Public Comments on
Statement on Regulation of Chemical Carcinogens; prepared for the U.S. Regulatory
Council, Washington, D.C., pp. B-7, B-10.
CPSC (Consumer Product Safety Commission). 1978. Interim policy and procedure for classifying,
evaluating, and regulating carcinogens in consumer products. Fed. Reg. 43:25658.
EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). April 5, 1972. Respondents brief in support of proposed
findings, conclusions and order at 63-64, in re: Stevens Indus., Inc. (consolidated DDT
hearings).
EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). September 5, 1975. Respondents motion to determine
whether or not the registrations of mirex should be canceled or amended; Attachment A.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

83

EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). 1976. Health risk and economic impact assessments of
suspected carcinogens. Fed. Reg. 41:21402.
EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). 1980a. Mutagenicity risk assessments; proposed
guidelines. Fed. Reg. 45:74984.
EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). Office of Water Regulations and Standards. 1980b. Water
quality criteria documents; availability. Fed. Reg. 45:79350-79353.
EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). Office of Research and Development, Carcinogen
Assessment Group. August 8, 1980c. The Carcinogen Assessment Group's method for
determining the unit risk estimate for air pollutants. External review copy, prepared for
Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards and Office of Air, Noise and Radiation.
FDA (Food and Drug Administration). 1973. Chemical compounds in food-producing animals;
criteria and procedures for evaluating assays for carcinogenic residues. Fed. Reg. 38:19226.
FDA (Food and Drug Administration). 1977. Chemical compounds in food-producing animals;
criteria and procedures for evaluating assays for carcinogenic residues. Fed. Reg. 42:10412.
FDA (Food and Drug Administration). 1979a. Assessment of Estimated Risk Resulting from
Aflatoxins in Consumer Product Peanut Products and Other Contaminants. Rockville, Md.:
Food and Drug Administration.
FDA (Food and Drug Administration). 1979b. Chemical compounds in food-producing animals;
criteria and procedures for evaluating assays for carcinogenic residues. Fed. Reg. 44:17070.
FDA (Food and Drug Administration). 1982a. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 21, Section 10.90.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
FDA (Food and Drug Administration). 1982b. D & C Green, No. 6, listing as a color additive in
externally applied drugs and cosmetics. Fed. Reg. 47:14138.
IRAC (International Agency for Research on Cancer). 1982. General principles for evaluating the
carcinogenic risk of chemicals; in IARC monographs on the Evaluation of the
Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Humans. IARC, Lyon, France, vol. 29.
IRLG (Interagency Regulatory Liaison Group), Work Group on Risk Assessment. 1979a. Scientific
bases for identification of potential carcinogens and estimation of risks. Fed. Reg. 44:39858.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

84

IRLG (Interagency Regulatory Liaison Group), Work Group on Risk Assessment. 1979b. Scientific
bases for identification of potential carcinogens and estimation of risks. J. Natl. Cancer
Inst. 63:242.
Joint Food and Agricultural Organization and World Health Organization Expert Committee on
Pesticide Residues. 1965. Evaluation of the Toxicity of Pesticide Residues in Food: Report
of the 2nd Joint Meeting. FAO Meet. Rep. No. PL/1965/10, WHO/Food Add./26.65.
Joint Food and Agricultural Organization and World Health Organization Expert Committee on
Food Additives. 1972. Evaluation of Certain Food Additives and the Contaminants
Mercury, Lead, and Cadmium. WHO Tech. Rep. Ser. 505. Geneva.
Lehman, A. J., F. A. Vorhes, Jr., L. L. Ramsey, E. C. Hagan, O. G. Fitzhugh, P. J. Schouboe, J. H.
Draize, E. I. Goldenthal, W. D'Aguanno, E. T. Lang, E. J. Umberger, J. H. Gass, R. E.
Zwickey, K. J. Davis, H. A. Braun, A. A. Nelson, and B. J. Vos. 1959. Appraisal of the
Safety of Chemicals in Foods, Drugs and Cosmetics. Association Food and Drug Officials
of the United States (AFDOUS).
March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation. January 26-27, 1981. Guidelines for Studies of Human
Populations Exposed to Mutagenic and Reproductive Hazards; Proceedings of Conference,
Washington, D.C.
NRC/NAS (National Research Council/National Academy of Sciences), Food Protection
Committee, Food and Nutrition Board. 1970. Evaluating the Safety of Food Chemicals.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy of Sciences.
ORNL/EPA (Oak Ridge National Laboratory/Environmental Protection Agency). February 1982.
Assessment of Risks to Human Reproduction and to Development of the Human
Conceptus from Exposure to Environmental Substances. ORNL/EIS-197, EPA/9-82-001.
OSHA (Occupational Safety and Health Administration). 1977. Proposed rule: identification,
classification and regulation of potential occupational carcinogens. Fed. Reg. 42:54148.
OSHA (Occupational Safety and Health Administration). 1980. Final rule: identification,
classification and regulation of potential occupational carcinogens. Fed. Reg. 45:5001.
OSHA (Occupational Safety and Health Administration). 1981. Identification, classification and
regulation of potential occupational carcinogens; conforming deletions . Fed. Reg. 46:4889.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

INFERENCE GUIDELINES FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

85

OSHA (Occupational Safety and Health Administration). 1982. Identification, classification and
regulation of potential occupational carcinogens. Fed. Reg. 47:187.
OSTP (Office of Science and Technology Policy), Regulatory Work Group on Science and
Technology, Executive Office of the President. October 1, 1982. Potential Human
Carcinogens: Methods for Identification and Characterization. Part 1: Current Views:
Discussion Draft.
Regulatory Council. 1979. Statement on regulation of chemical carcinogens: policy and request for
public comment. Fed. Reg. 44:60038.
State of California, Health and Welfare Agency. July 1982a. Carcinogen Identification Policy: A
Statement of Science as a Basis of Policy.
State of California, Health and Welfare Agency. October 1982b. Carcinogen Identification Policy:
A Statement of Science as a Basis of Policy; Section 2: Methods for Estimating Cancer
Risks from Exposures to Carcinogens.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

86

III
Organizational Arrangements for Risk
Assessment
The different structures, procedures, and histories of the agencies
responsible for regulating toxic substances have produced diversity in their
approaches to risk assessment, but common patterns can be discerned, and they
permit some broad generalizations about agency organizational arrangements.
First, most agencies have exerted little effort to maintain a sharp
organizational separation between employees engaged in assessing the risks
associated with substances and those responsible for identifying and evaluating
regulatory responses. This is not to suggest that the same persons perform both
functions; generally, they do not, for agency organizations reflect considerable
specialization, recognizing the distinctive training and capabilities of staff
members. However, the two functions are often housed in one organizational
unit that is responsible for preparing integrated analyses that incorporate
assessments both of risk and of recommended regulatory responses. Sometimes,
risk assessment staff are employed in an office that is separate from the office
of those who formulate and analyze regulatory options, but, with some notable
exceptions, this organizational structure does not lead to a rigid separation of
the two staffs.
Second, with the exception of a few experiments in interagency risk
assessment during the late 1970s and continuing informal exchanges of
information, each agency has performed its own assessments of the risks posed
by substances that are candidates for regulation. This operational autonomy
does not reflect willful ignorance of the activities of sister agencies or
indifference to the desirability of consistency in the evaluation of common
candidate substances. Rather, it is a product of

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

87

several factors, including the lack of obvious mechanisms for formalized
interagency collaboration, the desire of agency policy-makers to reserve
authority for policy discretion in reaching conclusions based on risk assessment,
the perception that the diversity of types of exposure for which each agency is
responsible makes collaborative risk assessment impractical, and differences in
regulatory priorities and schedules.
Third, although the four agencies have viewed themselves as ultimately
responsible for the risk assessments that support their actions, they often extend
their own staff resources available for performing risk assessment by relying on
consultants and contractors who are closely supervised by agency personnel.
Some agencies—notably the Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA) and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH)
—whose staffs are small or lack needed expertise rely very heavily on
nongovernment contractors and outside scientists in the academic community
and government research institutions for performance of risk assessments or
specific tasks related to risk assessment (such as literature reviews).
In addition, outside scientists are often called on to review assessments
produced by agency staff. Such consultations sometimes take place informally,
but often through special advisory committees. These committees can be
permanent, such as the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Clean Air
Science Advisory Committee, or can be created to review particular risk
assessments, as is done for many of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
Bureau of Foods assessments. Some are established by statute, with
requirements that they review agency assessments before regulations are
proposed. Others are created voluntarily by an agency itself. The members of all
federal advisory committees are appointed by the agencies, perhaps with the
approval of higher executive-branch authority. Candidates for committee
membership usually are identified by agency staff, although some agencies seek
nominees from professional organizations and other interested parties.
Nominations for some statutorily mandated committees are supplied by an
external body, such as the National Academy of Sciences or the National
Science Foundation. Advisory panels generally exercise considerable influence
and, although legally they are only advisory, share to some extent the agencies'
authority to reach conclusions about risk.

a Separate, centralized assessment body.

FDA Bureau of Foods

National Toxicology Program Panel
on Formaldehyde a

TABLE III-1 Examples of Four Models of Organizational Arrangements for Risk Assessment
Integration
Intra-agency Separation
Extra-agency Separation
OSHA Directorate of Health
EPA Carcinogen Assessment
NIOSH-OSHA; FDA Drug
Standards Programs
Group a
Evaluation Panels; Committees of
the National Research Council
Scientific Review Panels
EPA Scientific Advisory Panel;
EPA Science Advisory Board
Subcommittee on Airborne
Carcinogens

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT
88

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

89

TYPES OF ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
The prominent proposals for reforms in organizational structures and
procedures for risk assessment have featured three interrelated principles:
•

Risk assessment activities should be strictly separated from the
analysis of risk management options and selection of regulatory
strategies.
• Risk assessment activities should be centralized in a single body that
serves all regulatory agencies.
• Expert panels composed of nonagency scientists should be used either
to perform risk assessments for an agency or to review assessments
developed by agency staff.
The Committee outlined four idealized models that reflect various
combinations of these three principles. The models are integration, intra-agency
separation (with or without centralization), extra-agency separation (with or
without centralization), and use of scientific review panels. Examples of agency
organizations that roughly approximate each model are identified below and in
Table III-I. Most of the examples chosen have many distinctive characteristics
that obscure or at least outweigh the three organizational principles. In addition,
they are not the only examples of a particular model; others could have been
reviewed.*
Integration
In this type of arrangement, a single organizational unit both performs risk
assessments and develops regulations. In general, this arrangement is the most
common for regulatory programs. For example, for the assessment of chronic
hazards involved with chemicals from consumer products, the Consumer
Product Safety Commission (CPSC)

* The Committee considered the possible merits of reviewing risk assessment
procedures used by other countries as well and decided not to pursue this line of
investigation, because of the great differences in political and institutional structures
between this country and other countries. Such differences would make it very difficult,
if not impossible, to extrapolate findings on institutional structures used in other
countries to the United States.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

90

Directorate for Health Sciences is the responsible unit. Before 1977, the
Directorate for Health Sciences had few people involved in the risk assessment
process, and risk assessments as such were not generally used. Since then, the
Directorate has acquired the expertise needed to perform risk assessments itself.
The risk assessment is performed within the Directorate, which is distinct from
the Commission's politically appointed policy decision-makers. Two different
examples of this model examined by the Committee are the OSHA Directorate
of Health Standards Programs and the FDA Bureau of Foods (Table III-1). In
the former example, risk assessors and those responsible for formulating and
recommending regulatory strategies are in the same organizational unit. FDA's
Bureau of Foods has a separate office that performs risk assessment, but this
separation stems from a functional division of scientific disciplines; it is not
intended to and does not result in formal separation of the risk assessment staff
from the regulatory staff.
Intra-Agency Separation
In this model, risk assessment is performed by a group that is ostensibly
separate from and independent of the office responsible for regulation in the
same agency. An intra-agency risk assessment unit could be program-specific
or agency-wide. There are examples of program-specific, organizationally
separate risk assessment units (notably the Environmental Criteria and
Assessment Offices in EPA), but the Committee did not examine them; instead,
it reviewed activities of the EPA Carcinogen Assessment Group as an example
of an internally separate, agency-wide body.
Extra-Agency Separation
In this model, an agency's risk assessment is developed outside the agency.
The examples reviewed demonstrate the wide variety of arrangements included
in this model. Full organizational separation can be achieved by having one
institution perform risk assessment and a separate institution regulate exposure
to hazardous substances. The relation between NIOSH and OSHA was studied
as an example of a permanent, statutory arrangement of this kind. A regulatory
agency's use of expert panels to

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

91

perform risk assessments can also result in extra-agency separation of risk
assessment and regulation. Committees of the National Research Council and
several groups of panels used by FDA to review the safety and effectiveness of
drugs provide varied examples of such arrangements. The National Toxicology
Program Panel on Formaldehyde is an example of an ad hoc assessment group
that consisted of government scientists, was organizationally separate from the
regulatory agencies (although not without agency members), and served all four
agencies (i.e., it was centralized). Because the Interagency Regulatory Liaison
Group did not perform risk assessments, it has not been examined as an
example of an extra-agency assessment body.
Use of Scientific Review Panels
Agencies may use independent scientific panels to perform risk
assessments or to review assessments prepared by the agencies. This distinction
has been used by the Committee to facilitate separate discussion of panels that
perform assessments as examples of full organizational separation (see
preceding discussion) and panels that review agency assessments as examples
of independent review panels. However, the dichotomy is somewhat artificial,
in that there may be difficulty in classifying a particular panel. For example, if a
panel responsible for performing risk assessments comes to rely heavily on
preliminary analyses prepared by agency staff, it can be thought of as acting in
a review capacity. Conversely, panels assembled solely for the purpose of
reviewing agency assessments have often displayed remarkable independence,
sometimes preparing long critiques of agency documents and suggesting
substitute findings and reasons. In such cases, to specify which group had
performed and which had reviewed the agency's final assessment of risk is
difficult.
The extent to which agencies have used independent scientific panels has
varied considerably. For example, OSHA has available two types of advisory
committees: standing bodies, such as the National Advisory Committee on
Occupational Safety and Health, and ad hoc committees that provide advice on
specific standards. Members of both types of committee are expected to be
knowledgeable about occupational safety and health and may include persons
mainly interested in law or regulatory policies. In addition to their professional
expertise, however, members of OSHA committees are intended to be represen

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

92

tative of groups interested in occupational health and safety. Several
committees have reviewed risk assessments prepared by OSHA or NIOSH.
However, because members were intended to be representatives of interest
groups, reviews were usually forums for policy debates, not scientific
evaluations of risk assessments. In its initial years, OSHA routinely appointed
an advisory committee for each regulatory proceeding.
CPSC has had the least experience with expert panels. Before 1981, the
Commission was not required to have any assessment of carcinogenic hazard
reviewed by an outside panel, although it did make occasional use of such
panels (most notably CPSC's request for the National Toxicology Program to
form a panel on formaldehyde). CPSC's reauthorization in 1981 included a
provision that, before any regulatory action could be proposed on a substance
potentially presenting a carcinogenic, teratogenic, or mutagenic hazard, a
chronic hazard advisory panel (CHAP) must be established, with the
cooperation of the National Academy of Sciences, to review the toxicity of the
substance. The first CHAP has recently been convened to review the toxicity of
asbestos. Thus, CPSC relies on two methods of peer review for any proposed
action. First, independent peer review by outside experts, as well as by a
scientific review panel, is performed before a notice of proposed rule-making is
issued. Second, the Commission relies on a public rule-making proceeding in
accordance with the Administrative Procedure Act during which comment is
invited through a Federal Register notice on all aspects of the proposed action.
Extensive written comments have been received in the past by this procedure,
from industry, consumer groups, members of the academic and scientific
communities, and others. Additionally, open, informal public hearings may be
held in which interested groups present their views orally; in the past, several
such hearings were held during the consideration of a single substance
(formaldehyde).
FDA has often used independent scientific panels both to perform and to
review agency assessments. The Bureau of Drugs has used standing committees
to review and evaluate data on the safety and effectiveness of drug products and
to make appropriate recommendations to the Commissioner (see preceding
discussion). The use of independent panels by the Bureau of Foods, however,
has been on an ad hoc basis, usually at the agency's discretion. However, there
are exceptions; for example, the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act requires that
carcinogenicity

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

93

issues related to color additives be referred to a committee of experts selected
by the National Academy of Sciences.
EPA, in contrast, has had less choice in its relations with its advisory
committees. Several statutes require EPA to consult such committees for
scientific review of agency risk assessments or regulations. Examples of
mandated advisory committees with a primarily scientific role include the
Agency-wide Science Advisory Board; the Clean Air Scientific Advisory
Committee, a part of this Board, which reviews criteria documents for airquality standards; and the Scientific Advisory Panel, which focuses on scientific
issues in the Agency's Office of Pesticide Programs. The Committee has
examined this panel and a subcommittee of the Science Advisory Board as
examples of scientific review panels.
Agency actions, including risk assessments, have been reviewed in the
Executive Office of the President; however, because these reviews have, with a
few notable exceptions, focused primarily on risk management concerns, the
Committee has not examined them.
REVIEW OF AGENCY PROCEDURES FOR RISK
ASSESSMENT
This section describes the practices used for risk assessment in each of the
organizational examples reviewed by the Committee. The descriptions that
follow reveal some strengths and weaknesses of particular approaches and
permit some tentative generalizations to be made. Such generalizations,
augmented by the experience and judgment of Committee members, lead in turn
to recommendations applicable to organizational arrangements for the
performance of risk assessment.
The Committee's necessarily retrospective review of agency performance
has focused on events and practices of the 1970s, which triggered the current
proposals for reform. Changes have been implemented, or at least are
contemplated, in the procedures of several of the agencies studied, and the
Committee recognized that such changes could alter the performance of risk
assessment. Some of the descriptions of agency practices presented here may be
dated. However, our purpose is not to describe the current organizational
structure of agencies, but rather to discern in the historical record any general
relationships between organizational design and procedures and the quality of
risk assessments. The

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

94

paucity of experience with recent organizational changes and the tendency of
any new administration to disclaim the approaches of predecessors while
proclaiming the effectiveness of reforms make very recent history less germane
to the Committee's purpose.
OSHA's Directorate of Health Standards Programs (DHSP)
OSHA's health standards were expected by Congress to be based on
criteria and recommended standards provided by NIOSH. However,
improvements in OSHA's scientific capability and a court directive that OSHA
itself review all studies included in the risk assessment supporting a proposed
standard prompted the agency to rely less heavily on NIOSH and to begin
performing its own risk assessments. Until 1976, OSHA had only a few
personnel in the health sciences; however, DHSP has since become an
organization staffed primarily by health professionals, including industrial
hygienists, responsible for performing risk assessments and for preparing
standards, relying on economic and technical analyses supplied by the Office of
Regulatory Analysis in a separate directorate (Figure III-1). In addition, the
Directorate normally has used a number of consultants who assist with risk
assessment or other aspects of standard development, contributing considerable
specialized expertise to the organization.
OSHA tried to achieve organizational separation of risk assessment from
the preparation of standards in the case of carcinogens. One office in DHSP was
supposed to do risk assessment, another to draft standards. In practice, however,
such separation was not achieved, largely because personnel shortages required
that individual staff members perform both functions.
Agenda and Procedures
DHSP's regulatory and risk assessment agenda has been determined
largely by two external forces: petitions by labor unions for action on particular
hazards and dramatic discoveries of previously unidentified workplace hazards.
Court remands of several OSHA standards, such as the benzene standard,
provided new work for OSHA, but none of the mandated re-examinations has
led to a final standard. Criteria documents prepared by NIOSH also contributed
to OSHA's agenda, in that DHSP staff always read these docu

FIGURE III-1 Organization chart of OSHA.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT
95

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

96

ments when they were received and normally published a Federal Register
notice soliciting further information. DHSP's risk assessments usually began
with a NIOSH criteria document or other NIOSH input, whatever information
was submitted with a labor petition if there was one, the data available from any
precipitating discovery, and assessments performed by others, such as the
National Academy of Sciences. A literature search and review were conducted
by DHSP personnel, often with the help of consultants and NIOSH personnel;
and sometimes environmental data on the workplace were solicited or obtained
by contractors to contribute to the exposure assessment.
DHSP has not prepared special assessment documents before issuing
notices of proposed rule-making. Thus, the first indication provided to the
public of the results of an OSHA risk assessment and of the conclusions it
intended to draw therefrom was in the Federal Register preamble to its proposed
standard. Public comment was invited on all aspects of the proposed standard,
including the risk assessment. Extensive written comments were usually
received from industry, labor, and others, such as members of the academic
scientific community. Customarily a hearing was held at which oral
presentations were made and at which questioning of witnesses by OSHA
personnel and other witnesses was permitted. The preamble to the final rule, if
one were issued, included OSHA's final risk assessment, which incorporated a
literature review and OSHA's conclusions on the available scientific data.
In 10 years, OSHA produced permanent health standards for 23 substances
or processes, 14 of which were regulated together in a single rule-making.
OSHA has also proposed standards for eight substances for which final
standards have never been issued, and assessments were conducted for several
substances for which new or updated standards are now being considered
(Table III-2).
Methods and Use of Guidelines
For most of its history, OSHA has not had formal guidelines for
carcinogenic risk assessment. Instead, agency staff have conducted their
assessments by choosing options for the components of risk assessment on a
case-by-case basis. However, the generic guidelines for identification and
classification of carcinogens proposed in 1977 and revised and promulgated in
1980 were intended to

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

97

replace criteria used in individual cases with generic guidelines that would be
applied consistently to all risk assessments of potential carcinogens. The
choices incorporated in the 1980 cancer policy reflected the policy orientations
of incumbent senior agency officials. Changes now contemplated in these
guidelines reflect the policy orientation of the current OSHA management.
Similarly, although for many years OSHA did not perform quantitative risk
estimates for use in setting standards for carcinogens, it now intends to do so
where appropriate. This change results from policy decisions of senior agency
officials, based, at least in part, on their interpretation of the Supreme Court's
decision on benzene. (Agency officials have interpreted the decision to mean
that quantitative dose-response assessments should be
TABLE III-2 A Summary of OSHA Standards
Standards Completed
Standards Proposed, But Not
Completed
Asbestos; Vinyl chloride;
Arsenica; Beryllium; Sulfur
Arsenica; Benzene
dioxide; Ketones
Coke-oven emission
14 carcinogens; Lead;
Cotton dust; 1,2Dibromo-3chloropropane
Acrylonitrile

Standards Being
Developed
Ethylene oxide;
Asbestos; Ethylene
dibromide; Cotton
dust, nontextile sectors

Hearing conservation (noise)
Toluene Ammonia MOCA;
Trichloroethylene

a The arsenic standard was remanded to OSHA by the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit

for purposes of making a significant-risk determination consistent with the Supreme Court's
benzene decision.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

98

performed for individual substances if data are sufficient.)
Peer Review
OSHA historically has done a less thorough job than other agencies in
obtaining relevant scientific information and independent peer review of this
information before issuing a notice of proposed rule-making. Instead, the
agency has relied primarily on the public rule-making proceeding to identify
new information, much of which is in the possession of interested parties and is
unlikely to be brought forward except in the context of rule-making. Similarly,
although NIOSH's and OSHA's initial assessments often did not provide a
critical review of relevant data, critiques of this information were given to the
agency during rule-making proceedings, and the agency's final assessment of
the risks posed by a chemical often was substantially changed as a result.
OSHA's use of rule-making proceedings to provide scientific review stands in
sharp contrast with the other agencies' procedures for review. In the
Committee's opinion, this reliance on public proceedings to strengthen and
refine the scientific basis for the agency's regulatory actions has not been an
adequate substitute for independent peer review. In addition, reliance on public
proceedings surely precipitated some of the criticism of agency actions and may
have jeopardized the scientific integrity and procedural legitimacy of the
agency's risk assessments.
Although OSHA's standard-setting actions have stimulated intense
controversy, much of it has focused on issues separate from risk assessment.
Questions of costs and technologic feasibility (risk management issues) have
stimulated much debate. Discussions of the agency's risk assessments have
usually focused on its conclusions and their relationship to the agency's
regulatory mandate, rather than on its characterization of risk. When OSHA's
risk assessments were challenged during rule-making, some key subjects of
contention were OSHA's adherence to the assumption that carcinogens have no
threshold for causing adverse effects, its tendency to give positive data greater
weight than negative data, its use of single epidemiologic studies to support
regulatory action, the validity of specific experiments and the agency's
interpretation of the data from them, and the decision as to

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

99

whether quantitative assessments of risk should be considered. These issues, of
course, have both policy and scientific implications.
FDA's Bureau Of Foods
The Food and Drug Administration enforces the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act and several related statutes. Its jurisdiction ranges from basic
foods to the most advanced pharmaceuticals and medical equipment. The
agency assesses the risks associated with thousands of new and existing
products every year, functioning through product-oriented units whose
responsibilities are reflected in their titles: Foods, Drugs and Biologics,
Veterinary Medicine, and Devices and Radiological Health (Figure III-2). The
bureaus' agendas are dictated both through internal planning and by external
events, particularly applications for approval of new products. Because the
Bureau of Foods has had considerable experience with products that pose
potential cancer risks, the Committee has focused on this part of FDA in its
review.
Agenda and Procedures
The Bureau's risk assessment functions fall into three broad categories:
review of petitions for marketing of new compounds for which the
manufacturer provides supporting toxicologic and exposure (or use) data;
planned retrospective or cyclic review of approved compounds, supporting data
on which the Bureau generally must take as it finds them; and review of
inadvertent contaminants in food, supporting data on which are derived from
many sources, including open scientific literature, monographs, reports,
manufacturers' data, and agency-generated data.
In 1981, the Bureau of Foods evaluated 65 food additives, two color
additives, and approximately 45 animal-drug petitions. These totals, however,
do not reveal the total number of Bureau inquiries that could qualify as risk
assessments, albeit perfunctory. Each time a new contaminant is discovered, for
example, the Bureau performs some assessment of the risks, although the
available data are often limited and little time is available to gather data before
it must decide whether to initiate control measures. Similarly, every reported
change in

FIGURE III-2 Organization chart of FDA.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT
100

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

101

degree of contamination invites a new risk assessment. As one would
predict, the time and effort required vary with the context. The Bureau's
procedures for reviewing food additives, color additives, and residues of animal
drugs are more routine than those for evaluating food contaminants, whose
occurrence is largely unpredictable. On receipt in the Division of Food and
Color Additives, a food-additive petition is evaluated to determine whether it is
acceptable for filing. This involves not only review of its formal adequacy, but
a preliminary assessment of the toxicologic data to determine whether all
potential health effects have been studied.
After official filing of the petition, scientists from the appropriate divisions
(ordinarily with the assistance of scientists outside the agency) study the
supporting chemical, toxicologic, and exposure data to decide whether the
compound is safe. The food-additive law has been construed as requiring, even
when the Delaney clause is not applicable, ''reasonable certainty" that no
consumer will be harmed. No effort is made to evaluate the benefits that an
additive might provide, but the Bureau must be satisfied that the additive
achieves its intended effects. This exercise usually has two parts: first, Division
of Toxicology scientists determine a no-observed-effect concentration for the
additive on the basis of acute, subchronic, and chronic feeding studies in
animals; second, applying a so-called safety factor, they determine a
permissible extent of use in human food or an acceptable daily intake. This
value is then compared with the estimated daily human exposure based on the
manufacturer's proposed use and predicted human consumption of the foods in
which the additive is to be used. An acceptable exposure to an additive is one at
which human exposure is at or below the acceptable daily intake. Under current
law, this intake value cannot be established for a direct food or color additive
that is carcinogenic; such a substance may not be approved for use.
The risk assessment function is performed entirely by Bureau scientists.
Bureau staff, including the reviewing scientists, may meet with representatives
of the petitioner to discuss uncertainties, request additional data, or suggest
reduced use. Typically, both the scientific and the regulatory aspects of foodadditive petitions are reviewed and resolved at the division level in the Bureau
of Foods. On petitions that raise difficult scientific and policy issues or that
pose the question of carcinogenicity, the divisions generally seek advice or
direction

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

102

from the associate directors, Bureau deputy directors, or the Bureau Director.
The Bureau may, in turn, seek advice from the Chief Counsel, from other
bureaus, or from the Commissioner's office during the review of petitions that
present particular scientific, legal, or policy questions.
Once the responsible unit is satisfied that an additive is approvable and
thus that a regulation is appropriate, the Division of Food and Color Additives
prepares a document package consisting of an action memorandum, a draft
Federal Register document, and supporting material, which is then forwarded
through established review channels to the Director's office for final Bureau
approval and transmission to the Commissioner's office. The action
memorandum recommending approval by the Associate Commissioner for
Regulatory Affairs, to whom the Commissioner has delegated formal approval
authority, necessarily incorporates both scientific assessments and regulatory
judgments. Because the governing legal standard focuses exclusively on the
health effects of the additive, the approval process is not influenced by
consideration of economic or other benefits.
The sequence of analysis in the Bureau for environmental contaminants
does not differ sharply from that described above for food additives, although
different divisions may participate in the process and economic factors are
consciously considered. The statutory provision under which FDA regulates
food contaminants contemplates that it will balance the risk posed by a
substance against the effects of reducing consumer exposure, such as loss of
food and increases in price. Accordingly, the action memorandum sent to the
Bureau Director recommends an exposure limit based on three criteria: an
assessment of the risk posed by the contaminant, an evaluation of available
method's of chemical analysis to monitor its presence, and an estimate of the
economic effects of alternative limits.
Methods and Use of Guidelines
Although the Bureau's approach to the evaluation of acute toxicants has
remained stable over a long period, its methods for evaluating potential
carcinogens have undergone substantial change since the early 1970s. In 1978,
the Bureau Director formed a Cancer Assessment Committee in the Office of
Toxicological Sciences to evaluate the carcinogenicity of substances being
considered for

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

103

approval or regulation and to perform risk assessment. A list of substances
reviewed by this Committee in 1981 is given in Table III-3. The 12 members of
the Committee are all FDA employees and include toxicologists, pathologists,
mathematicians, and chemists. The role of the Committee is to render all final
decisions on carcinogenicity for the Bureau of Foods on the basis of scientific
information available to it. Its primary function is to determine whether, on the
basis of a fair evaluation of all available data, a chemical is a potential or actual
carcinogen. Because the Delaney clause, which forbids exposure of any food or
color additive that induces cancer, applies to many substances in the Bureau's
jurisdiction, quantitative (e.g., dose-response) assessments are not always
performed. For some substances, such as contaminants, the magnitude of the
risk is relevant, and scientists from the various divisions collaborate with staff
responsible for gathering information on human exposure to perform risk
characterizations. The Cancer Assessment Committee does not typically
prepare formal written assessments, so there is no document available that
outlines the relevant data and the rationale for the choices of options made in
the assessment of risks. The Cancer Assessment Committee apparently does not
follow comprehensive written guidelines, although it does follow some general
guidelines that were used in previous decisions and are set out in the agency's
drug-residue proposal.
Peer Review
In recent years, the Bureau of Foods has sought independent scientific
review of the data on a number of substances. Often Bureau staff informally
solicit the judgments of individual outside scientists on major issues. The
Bureau routinely uses outside panels established under the auspices of the
Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology for periodic review
of substances now generally recognized as safe (GRAS). Ad hoc panels were
convened to evaluate the data on such substances as cyclamate, saccharin, Red
No. 2, and Red No. 40.
More recently, the Bureau has turned to a standing panel, the Board of
Scientific Counselors of the National Toxicology Program. The Board's review
of the data on color additive Green No. 5 illustrates the Bureau's approach to
external peer review. The Board reviewed the

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

104

original data from a study done by a commercial laboratory, which were
submitted with a petition for approval of the substance. The Board also
considered aspects of the analysis done by Bureau staff and conducted an
independent evaluation of the pathology slides and a statistical analysis of the
study results. Bureau scientists asked that the Board reach a conclusion
concerning the strength of the evidence of carcinogenicity. Thus, the Board was
limited to scientific issues and did not consider the possible social implications
of its finding. After the Board's finding that the evidence was inconclusive and
before the Bureau's conclusion that the additive was unlikely to be a human
carcinogen, Bureau staff performed a risk characterization to estimate the
potential risks if this conclusion were in error.
TABLE III-3 Substances Evaluated for Carcinogenicity by the FDA Cancer
Assessment Committee in 1981
1,2-Dichloroethane
Acrylonitrile
Lead acetate
Diethylhexylphthalate
Vinyl chloride
Diethylhexyladipate
Dioxane
Furazolidone
p-Toluidine
Cinnamyl anthranilate
Hydrazine
Trimethylphosphate

The decision to consult an outside panel for review of risk assessment for
potential carcinogens is made by the Chairman of the Cancer Assessment
Committee. The Bureau currently is considering establishing a standing
committee that could be called on to review agency assessments. It is likely that
the impetus to form a standing review committee stems from criticisms of past
agency practices, especially those followed in the evaluation of the data on
nitrite. In this instance, FDA's contemplated action against nitrite in 1979 was
announced before Bureau scientists had had an opportunity to evaluate the
critical toxicity data and to refer the data to an independent panel. This
controversial chapter in FDA's history of regulating food ingredients has often
been cited as demonstrating the need for systematic peer review of the agency's
risk analyses in order to avoid the problems that can arise when risk
management considerations affect the conduct of risk assessments. The
existence of a standing panel, although no guarantee, may discourage

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

105

agency officials from deviating from standard Bureau procedures that are now
designed to ensure adequate peer review.
EPA's Carcinogen Assessment Group
EPA's Carcinogen Assessment Group (CAG) was created in 1976 by the
EPA Administrator to implement generic and uniform agency guidelines for
carcinogenic risk assessment. Initially, it was a separate body in the Agency's
Office of Research and Development and reported directly to its Assistant
Administrator. In 1979, however, the Office of Health and Environmental
Assessment was established in the Office of Research and Development, and
CAG became one of several assessment groups (Figure III-3). Organizationally,
CAG staff are separate from, and independent of, the risk management
function; i.e., it is an example of intra-agency separation. It also serves as an
example of an internally centralized assessment body, in that it performs
assessments for several different regulatory programs in EPA.
Although CAG personnel do meet and talk with regulatory program
personnel and are customarily well aware of any programmatic interest in
particular substances and of interest-group preferences, this office is insulated
from the day-to-day pressures of program offices. Thus, the organizational
arrangement that places CAG in the Office of Research and Development does
have the initial effect of freeing risk assessment personnel from specific policy
issues that arise when risk management options are considered. However, when
a scientific review committee examines documents produced by this office later
in the process, interest groups are able to express their views and CAG
personnel are no longer isolated from such influences.
Currently, all CAG assessments are done by in-house staff, although in the
past some were done by consultants. Usually, contractors are employed only for
the time-consuming and mechanical task of conducting literature searches.
Responsibility for each assessment is assigned to a particular person, but other
staff members contribute to various sections according to their particular
specialties and expertness. Its staff has been remarkably stable; since 1976, only
one person has left the group. As of October 1982, 11 full-time professionals
were on its staff, nine of whom had doctorates. Most staff members have an
academic background, and their professional work experience averages 10
years. The staff includes

FIGURE III-3 Organization chart of EPA.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT
106

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

107

three biostatisticians, two biochemists, two epidemiologists, one
biophysicist, one pathologist, one pharmacologist, and one endocrinologist. The
former Director, now a consultant, is the only physician associated with the
office.
Agenda and Procedures
CAG does not initiate its own assessments; instead, it responds to requests
from regulatory (program) offices in EPA. It does, however, set its own
priorities in consultation with the program offices, on the basis of the workload
of requests and the urgency of the need for the assessments. Although it serves
as a risk assessment body for the whole Agency, not all programs in EPA use
CAG. The most notable exception is the Office of Toxic Substances.
Apparently, one factor cited by program offices as leading to this lack of use is
the length of time CAG requires to complete an assessment.
Since 1976, CAG has prepared assessments for approximately 150
chemicals. The length and scope of the documents produced vary with the data
available, with their purpose, and with the needs of the requesting office. They
can range from brief and preliminary literature reviews relevant to hazard
identification or tentative estimates of risk as a function of dose to complete and
thorough literature reviews leading to a comprehensive risk characterization. Indepth evaluations may or may not include quantitative dose-response
assessments. As an example of its work agenda, CAG has covered 41 chemicals
for the Agency's Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards. In-depth
evaluations were performed for nine (see Table III-4), and preliminary
assessments for 32.
Methods and Use of Guidelines
The risk assessments performed by this group are based on Agency
guidelines developed initially by CAG in 1976 for use by the entire Agency.
These guidelines have been revised after initial publication, and some of the
changes have also been published (EPA, 1979, 1980). Normally, individual
assessment documents produced do not reexamine or indeed articulate
underlying guidelines; rather, the reader is presumed to know that EPA and
CAG rely on guidelines that embody particular choices among several

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

108

inference options available. Also, the changes made in the guidelines have not,
in many cases, been formally acknowledge; i.e., the current guidelines do not
exist in a single publicly accessible written document. CAG's use of guidelines,
especially for hazard identification, has been regarded by some EPA review
panels—notably, the Subcommittee on Airborne Carcinogens—as too
inflexible, possibly misleading, and interfering with critical analysis of
underlying data. In fact, the initial published guidelines (EPA, 1976) did permit
different interpretations of data and the use of different risk assessment
methods; however, the methods embodied in CAG assessments and those
related to dose-response assessment and published in EPA's Water Quality
Methodology for Carcinogens
do not reflect this flexibility. The
misunderstandings experienced with the Subcommittee on Airborne
Carcinogens (and other review bodies) have stemmed to a great degree from the
facts that CAG's guidelines are in flux, remain unwritten, and are not presented
in the individual assessment documents provided to the review committees. As
a result, reviewers are likely to be unaware of the operational ground rules used
in interpreting carcinogenicity data and developing risk estimates. The absence
of an explicit discussion of the application of Agency guidelines and of
discussion of the rationale for the choices made in a risk assessment blurs the
distinction between science and policy considerations in CAG assessments.
TABLE III-4 Substances Fully Evaluated by the Carcinogen Assessment Group for
the EPA Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards
Methyl chloroforma
Arsenic
Benzene
Methylene chloridea
Vinyl chloride
Tetrachloroethylenea
a
Acrylonitrile
Trichloroethylenea
Coke-oven emissiona
a Under review as of October 1982.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

109

Peer Review
Drafts are reviewed by all members of the CAG staff and its Director.
Drafts are also usually sent for review on an ad hoc basis to knowledgeable
persons outside the agency. However, this review process is not part of the
public record,and criticism may be accepted or rejected at CAG's discretion.
The lack of adequate procedures to ensure that peer review comments are given
proper consideration may lessen any benefits to be derived from peer review
early in the process of developing a risk assessment. Draft risk assessments are
usually reviewed by the Director of the Office of Health and Environmental
Assessment, directors of other units in this office, and Office of Research and
Development staff before being submitted to the requesting program office.
CAG assessments are often submitted to committees of EPA's Science Advisory
Board or to the Scientific Advisory Panel for peer review. Such reviews take
place in public sessions, in accordance with the requirements of the Federal
Advisory Committee Act. They provide an opportunity for interested members
of the public to review CAG documents and to communicate criticisms to the
reviewing committee and EPA. Reviews of CAG assessments by EPA panels
have been mixed, with some panels, such as the Scientific Advisory Panel,
often approving the assessments and others finding numerous shortcomings
related to both substance and format (e.g., the Subcommittees on Arsenic as a
Possible Hazardous Air Pollutant and on Airborne Carcinogens of the Agency's
Science Advisory Board). This public review process usually leads to revisions.
NIOSH-OSHA
The Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 created two new
organizations: OSHA and NIOSH. OSHA was a new component of the
Department of Labor. NIOSH was placed in the Department of Health,
Education, and Welfare, now the Department of Health and Human Services.
Since 1973, NIOSH has been a part of the Centers for Disease Control in the
U.S. Public Health Service. The common mission set for both agencies was the
protection of the health of American workers. NIOSH's primary functions
included the conduct of research and development of criteria for
recommendations to OSHA for occupational health standards. In addition, the
Act authorized NIOSH to "develop and estab

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

110

lish recommended occupational safety and health standards." Although it is not
technically correct to refer to NIOSH criteria documents simply as risk
assessments, because the documents contain additional information concerning
risk management (e.g., engineering considerations) as well as recommended
standards, the documents normally included sections that dealt with the adverse
health effects of the substances being considered. The health-effects sections
would correspond to the Committee's definition of hazard identification.
The legislative history of the Act makes it clear that Congress intended a
close coupling between NIOSH's recommendations and OSHA's standards.
Nevertheless, relatively few NIOSH criteria documents have led to OSHA
standards. This disjunction between the two agencies has stemmed from the
difficulty of coordinating two organizations that are physically separated and
responsible to different departments. As mentioned earlier, the degree to which
OSHA has relied on NIOSH for its scientific expertise has varied. In the early
1970s, OSHA relied heavily on NIOSH for evaluation of health effects; later,
OSHA developed its own staff of health scientists and, with considerable help
from consultants and contractors, performed its own risk assessments to support
agency standard-setting activities.
Because OSHA conducts its own assessments of risk, as well as setting
standards, and NIOSH does risk assessments and recommends standards, the
relation of NIOSH and OSHA as it has existed since 1976 represents, in some
sense, duplication, rather than true extra-agency separation. The earlier relation
between the two agencies is, however, an example of extra-agency separation.
This section focuses on NIOSH's production of criteria documents during both
phases and reflects procedures used throughout the 1970s.
Agenda and Procedures
In the past, NIOSH had an elaborate procedure for setting priorities, which
included soliciting nominations of candidate substances from OSHA and the
public. In practice, however, before 1976, NIOSH's criteria document agenda
was set by agency personnel and the Director, on the basis of their views of the
seriousness of various occupational hazards and the number of workers exposed
to such hazards. OSHA played little or no role in the selection process,

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

111

and NIOSH's agenda for documents therefore did not reflect or greatly
influence OSHA's regulatory agenda. One cause of this lack of correlation
between the two schedules was their physical and organizational separation. In
the late 1970s, NIOSH did receive communications from OSHA that led
NIOSH to begin production of process- and industry-oriented criteria
documents. Table III-5 lists criteria documents transmitted to OSHA.
Methods and Use of Guidelines
Preparation of a criteria document involved a preliminary review of
literature and the identification of gaps in the relevant knowledge. This gap
analysis was fed into NIOSH's research planning and led to research directed at
filling the gaps. Brief studies could be completed in time for their results to be
incorporated into the document. Others would continue after the document was
completed and sometimes resulted in revision or updating. The literature review
and preparation of a draft document were commonly performed by an external
contractor under the supervision of NIOSH personnel. Because NIOSH does
not have written guidelines for risk assessment, whether personnel preparing the
documents used similar approaches to evaluate data and reach conclusions
regarding risks is unclear. NIOSH's failure to develop risk assessment
guidelines has helped to obscure the distinction between scientific and policy
judgments in the risk assessment process. Although the rationale for separating
NIOSH from OSHA has been to allow an independent scientific evaluation
without the consideration of economic implications that is necessary in OSHA
rule-making activities, the effectiveness of this institutional separation in
eliminating the effects of such risk management considerations on the conduct
of risk assessment by NIOSH is difficult to determine.
Peer Review
The initial review of a draft criteria document was typically performed by
NIOSH staff in the same division of the agency that produced the document.
The division draft was then submitted to other NIOSH divisions for review.
This was followed by a review performed by knowledgeable experts from
industry, labor organizations,

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

TABLE III-5 NIOSH Criteria Documents Sent to OSHA by May 1982
Substance or Subject
Transmitted to OSHA
Acetylene
1976
Acrylamide
1976
Acrylonitrile
1977
Alkanes
1977
Allyl chloride
1976
Ammonia
1974
Antimony
1978
Arsenic, inorganic
1974, 1975
Asbestos
1972, 1976
Asphalt fumes
1977
Benzene
1974, 1977
Benzoyl peroxide
1977
Benzyl chloride
1978
Beryllium
1972, 1977
Boron trifluoride
1976
Cadmium
1976
Carbaryl
1976
Carbon black
1978
Carbon dioxide
1976
Carbon disulfide
1977
Carbon monoxide
1972
Carbon tetrachloride
1975, 1976
Chlorine
1976
Chloroform
1974, 1976
Chlorophene
1977
Chromic acid
1973
Chromium (VI)
1975
Coal-gasification plants
1978
Coal-liquefaction (Vols. I and II)
1981
Coal-tar products
1977
Cobalt
1981
Coke-oven emission
1973
Confined spaces (as workplaces)
1980
Cotton dust
1974
Cresol
1978
Cyanide, hydrogen, and cyanide salts
1976
Decomposition products of fluorocarbon
1977
Dibromochloropropane
1977
Diisocyanates
1978
Dinitro-o-cresol
1978
Dioxane
1977
Emergency egress from elevated work stations
1975
Epichlorohydrin
1976
Ethylene dibromide
1977
Fibrous glass
1977
Fluorides, inorganic
1975
Formaldehyde
1976
Furfuryl alcohol
1979
Glycidyl ethers
1978
Hot environments
1972
Hydrazines
1978

112

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

Substance or Subject
Hydrogen fluoride
Hydrogen sulfide
Hydroquinone
Identification system for occupationally hazardous materials
Isopropyl alcohol
Kepones
Ketones
Lead, inorganic
Logging—from felling to first haul
Malathion
Mercury, inorganic
Methyl alcohol
Methylene chloride
Methyl parathion
Nickel, inorganic and compounds
Nitric acid
Nitriles
Nitrogen oxides
Nitroglycerin—ethylene glycol dinitrate
Noise
Organotin compounds
Parathion
Pesticide manufacturing and formulation
Phenol
Phosgene
Polychlorinated biphenyls
Refined petroleum solvent
Silica, crystalline
Sodium hydroxide
Sulfur dioxide
Sulfuric acid
1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane
Tetrachloroethylene
Thiols: n-alkane mono-, cyclohexane, and benzene
Toluene
Toluene diisocyanate
o-Toluidine
1,1,1-Trichloroethane
Tungsten and cemented tungsten carbide
Ultraviolet radiation
Vanadium
Vinyl acetate
Vinyl chloride
Vinyl halides
Waste anesthetic gases and vapors
Xylene
Zinc oxide

113

Transmitted to OSHA
1976
1977
1978
1974
1976
1976
1978
1973, 1977
1976
1976
1973
1976
1976
1976
1977
1976
1978
1976
1978
1972
1976
1976
1978
1976
1976
1977
1977
1974
1975
1974, 1977
1974
1976
1976
1978
1973
1973, 1978
1978
1976
1977
1972
1977
1978
1974
1978
1977
1975
1975

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

114

and universities. In addition, other appropriate government agencies,
professional associations, and trade organizations were invited to review the
document. After these various reviews were complete and changes were made
as deemed appropriate by division staff, the document was forwarded to the
Director of NIOSH.
Several shortcomings of NIOSH criteria documents were cited in a recent
review of the program funded by the agency: the lack of field experience of
criteria document managers, the lack of critical analysis of data, and the alleged
disregard of reviewers' comments. The latter claim highlights the importance of
procedures that ensure that reviewers' comments are adequately addressed. The
lack of critical analysis of data has been attributed at least in part to the facts
that the documents were often developed by outside contractors and that
NIOSH had little control over the personnel assigned to the contract staff.
Committees of the National Research Council
The National Research Council (NRC) is the operating unit for the
National Academy of Sciences' advisory function. As part of this advisory
function, NRC has been called on by a number of regulatory agencies to
perform risk assessments. Regulatory agencies request assessments by NRC for
several reasons, including statutory requirements that particular agencies or
programs consult with NRC, inadequacy of agency staff to perform the
assessments (as in the case of the FDA request for a review of pre-1962
prescription drugs), and such political objectives as a desire for outside
scientific support of an anticipated agency action or a desire to defuse or
postpone controversy. Agencies remain free to accept or reject the analyses and
conclusions included in NRC reports. NRC risk assessment reports are usually
not sufficient by themselves to dictate specific regulatory action, and a separate
assessment is usually conducted by the agency, even if in only the most
perfunctory fashion.
NRC has done risk assessments for several agencies with jurisdiction over
carcinogenic chemicals. However, NRC is in no real sense a centralized risk
assessment body and is a very imperfect model for recent proposals to create
such a body. First, most of the evaluative work of the NRC is actually
performed by individual committees created on an ad hoc basis for each study.
Thus, NRC is not a single risk assessment body, but

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

115

rather an umbrella for the work of many diverse, if outwardly similar,
committees. Second, each ad hoc committee generally reports to a single
agency and does not perform assessments for several bodies at once. The
committees of NRC have been included in our survey as examples of ad hoc
risk assessment groups that are entirely separate from government regulators.
Table III-6 is a partial list of NRC reports (published since 1977) that examined
the carcinogenic risks associated with exposure to particular chemicals.
Agenda and Procedures
Committee members are appointed on the strength of their professional
qualifications; they may come from universities, industry, government, or
another sector of society, but they do not serve as representatives of any agency,
group, or institution unless they are specifically so designated on appointment.
Occasionally when, by virtue of special expertise or for other reasons, persons
affiliated with interested parties are placed on committees, every effort is made
to achieve a balance of interests. In any case, all committee members are asked
to complete a statement, ''On Potential Sources of Bias," which includes
information on sources of personal income, sources of research support, and
more subtle forms of personal bias, including values held that may influence a
member's judgment. The membership of every committee that will formulate a
position, take an action, or prepare a report is reviewed by NRC staff and must
be approved by the Chairman of NRC. The work of the committees is facilitated
by professional and support staff employed by NRC.
The conduct of a study varies with its nature and objective, the time
permitted to complete it, its political sensitivity, and the personalities involved.
In general, committees have considerable latitude in carrying out their
responsibilities and may hold public meetings and schedule technical
conferences to collect pertinent information. Committees typically meet three to
six times a year. Meetings are concerned with planning, discussions of issues
and drafts of reports, and, later, the development of final conclusions and
recommendations. Although a committee has much freedom in planning and
executing its study and reaching its conclusions, several restrictions include the
obvious necessity to respond to the charge stipulated in the contract, time and
budgetary

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

TABLE III-6 Some NRC Reports Dealing with Carcinogenic Chemicals (1977-1982)
Report
Parent Unita
Year
An Assessment of Mercury in the Environment
CPSMR
1977
An Evaluation of the Carcinogenicity of Chlordane and
CLS
1977
Heptachlor
Drinking Water and Health
CLS
1977
Arsenic
CLS
1977
Nitrates
CPSMR
1978
Saccharin—Technical Assessment of Risks and Benefits
CLS
1978
Polychlorinated Biphenyls
CPSMR
1979
Drinking Water and Health, Vol. III
CLS
1980
The Alkyl Benzenes
CLS
1980
Formaldehyde—An Assessment of Its Health Effects
CLS
1980
Regulating Pesticides
CPSMR
1980
Aromatic Amines: An Assessment of the Biological and
CLS
1981
Environmental Effects
Formaldehyde and Other Aldehydes
CLS
1981
The Health Effects of Nitrate, Nitrite, and N-Nitroso
CLS
1981
Compounds
Indoor Pollutants
CLS
1981
Selected Aliphatic Amines and Related Compounds: An
CLS
1981
Assessment of the Biological and Environmental Effects
Alternatives to the Current Use of Nitrite in Foods
CLS
1982
An Assessment of the Health Risks of Seven Pesticides for
CLS
1982
Termite Control
Diet, Nutrition, and Cancer
CLS
1982
Drinking Water and Health, Vol. IV
CLS
1982
Quality Criteria for Water Reuse
CLS
1982
Possible Long-Term Health Effects of Short-Term Exposure
CLS
1982
to Chemical Agents, Vol. 1—Anticholinesterases and
Anticholinergics
a CPSMR = Commission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and Resources; CLS =

Commission on Life Sciences.

116

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

117

limitations, and the necessity for a central NRC-monitored review of the
final report.
In addition to providing scientific analyses on which policy or regulatory
decisions can be based, NRC reports sometimes make specific
recommendations for changes in government policy.
Methods and Use of Guidelines
NRC risk assessments are not easily classified or characterized. Because
different committees prepare risk-related reports and NRC does not have any
guidelines on the conduct of risk assessments for the committees to follow,
approaches and final products show pronounced variations. The absence of
guidelines, coupled with the occasional practice of not including a clear
explanation of how conclusions concerning risk were reached or of the
assumptions used in the quantitation of risk, has led to a blurring of the
distinction between scientific and policy judgments made in the assessment of
risks. The lack of guidelines has also led to inconsistencies in approach and
final decisions among committees. However, the absence of specific guidance
for interpreting data and for choosing methods of dose-response assessment or
risk characterization is probably to be expected, inasmuch as NRC committees
consist of scientific experts whose independent judgments are being sought.
Probably only guidelines that are extremely flexible could be adopted by NRC.
A subject of much discussion over the last several years has been the value of
including quantitative assessments (in our terms, dose-response assessments or,
if exposure data are incorporated, risk characterizations) in reports. The trend in
recent years has been to include some form of a quantitative risk estimate.
Peer Review
Every report from the NRC is reviewed by a group other than the authors.
The process of reviewing is overseen by the Report Review Committee. The
reports likely to receive reviews coordinated by that Committee are those
judged to have significant policy implications and likely to be controversial;
most reports that address risk-related questions would be in this category. (The
Report Review Committee also coordinates the review of noncontro

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

118

versial reports on an ad hoc basis to monitor the overall quality of NRC
reports.) A report not receiving such a review is reviewed under the auspices of
its parent commission, independent office, or board. Report Review Committee
review entails submission of a draft report to a set of reviewers selected in a
cooperative process by the the parent body and the Report Review Committee.
These reviewers are invited to comment on technical adequacy and accuracy
(the expertness of the authors), on clarity and appropriateness of presentation,
on response to charge, on cogency of recommendations with respect to data
presented, and on degree of objectivity and freedom from bias. The committee
and staff respond to reviewers' criticisms and suggestions, and the responses are
examined by a monitor, usually a member of the Report Review Committee, to
determine their appropriateness. Thus, a person outside the unit that prepared
the report decides whether adequate consideration has been given to reviewers'
comments. In cases of persistent and severe disagreement between reviewers
and authors, the matter may be referred to the NRC chairman for resolution.
Like the regulatory agencies, NRC has been the subject of controversy in
recent years. Some NRC committees have been accused of bias related to their
judgments on the risks associated with the substances they are studying. The
absence of a member from a discipline that is important for a balanced
assessment of risk can also weaken the credibility of an NRC report. For
example, an internal NRC study (1981) stated that, in a small sample of riskrelated studies completed before 1979, such disciplines as epidemiology were
often not represented on the rosters of committees whose subjects appeared to
warrant such knowledge.
FDA's Drug Evaluation Panels
Under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, FDA regulates the
marketing of all medicines for human use--prescription pharmaceuticals, overthe-counter drugs, and biologic products, which are also subject to the 1902
Biologics Act. In its efforts to ensure the safety and effectiveness of drugs in
these three classes, FDA has relied heavily on advisory panels composed
primarily of scientists from academic medicine. Two major programs illustrate
the important role of such independent expert panels in agency assessments of
human

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

119

drugs: the Drug Efficacy Study, a review of the effectiveness of pre-1962
prescription drugs undertaken by NRC in 1966; and the over-the-counter Drug
Review, in which advisory panels established directly by FDA have evaluated
the effectiveness and safety of ingredients of such drugs.
Both the NRC review and the FDA-directed review enabled FDA to
undertake systematic studies of product performance that would have
overwhelmed the agency's own resources and personnel. The two reviews
differed in a number of respects that may shed some light on optimal structures
and procedures for scientific panels.
NRC Review
The 1962 Kefauver-Harris Amendments to the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act required that all new drugs be proved effective, as well as safe,
and obliged FDA, after a 2-year grace period, to require proof of efficacy of all
pre-1962 drugs. In discharging this obligation for prescription drugs, the agency
turned to NRC to establish some 30 panels of six to eight experts in
pharmaceutical therapy; each panel was responsible for a class of drugs.
The panels evaluated the data supplied to them by FDA and manufacturers
and rated the drugs as effective, probably effective, possibly effective,
ineffective, ineffective as a fixed combination, or inferior to other better or safer
therapies for the same indications. Their main function was thus to assess
therapeutic efficacy, not risk to patient health (except indirectly); all the drugs
reviewed had been judged to be safe before original FDA approval.
Nevertheless, the panels included comments on the safety of individual drugs,
particularly those whose effectiveness was in doubt. An informal NRC
coordinating group attempted to review each panel's ratings before forwarding
them to FDA, in the hope of ensuring some consistency. In practice, however,
the panel's verdicts reached FDA largely unreviewed.
The clinical and other data on which the panels relied came from FDA
files, the medical and scientific literature, and the manufacturers of the drugs.
The panels neither performed nor ordered any new research, although their
assessments often identified subjects on which further studies were needed. The
panels met and worked privately; apart from being invited to submit supporting
data, manufacturers had no opportunity to participate in the panels'
deliberations, nor did representatives of consumers or FDA staff.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

120

To reconstruct precisely how the panels worked or to determine what
criteria for evaluation each followed is difficult. The predetermined categories
in which they were to rate drugs produced apparent homogeneity in their
results, but did not sharply confine or direct their analyses. Evidently, wide
variations occurred among the panels. The panels' assessments were reported to
FDA largely as statements of conclusions; many of the reports were only one or
two paragraphs long. Explanations for the ratings typically took the form of
bare references to published studies or invocations of the informed judgment of
the panelists. In short, the panels provided verdicts, rather than documented
evaluations.
The weight to be given the panels' assessments was not squarely addressed
when FDA contracted for NRC assistance. Apparently, it was understood that
FDA remained free to accept or reject a panel's judgment, but it must have
expected to accept most of the panels' assessments when it contracted with
NRC. The agency's primary goal was to spare its own scientific staff the
enormous burden of evaluating the effectiveness of thousands of pre-1962
drugs. In practice, FDA has accorded substantial weight to the assessments
provided by the NRC panels, usually accepting the rating provided and
initiating appropriate regulatory action. A rating of less than "effective" led to
notification of a drug manufacturer that more data were needed to support a
claim of effectiveness; later (often years later), if data were still considered
inadequate, the agency took steps to remove the drug from the market. Some of
the agency's efforts provoked protracted litigation and administrative hearings.
However, pharmaceutical manufacturers have acceded to the panels' judgments
in the majority of instances, occasionally by withdrawing products from the
market, more frequently by eliminating claims for which supporting evidence
was lacking, and sometimes by sponsoring new clinical research. One important
determinant of the acceptance of panel assessments was the commercial
importance of the product or claim at issue. When a panel rating and ultimate
FDA judgment jeopardized the continued marketing of an important product,
the manufacturer often insisted on its full legal rights in the course of combating
FDA's efforts at implementation.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

121

FDA-Directed Drug Panels
The NRC review of pre-1962 drugs did not address the marketing status of
most over-the-counter drugs. In 1972, FDA launched a second comprehensive
review, this time on both the effectiveness and the safety of all active
ingredients in over-the-counter drugs. At the outset of this review, FDA
chartered 17 advisory committees representing therapeutic groupings. These 17
panels met a total of 522 times over a 9-year period; they reviewed 722 active
ingredients for over 1,400 indications and submitted over 75 reports on different
therapeutic categories, e.g., internal analgesics, antimicrobials, and vaginal
contraceptives.
The central function of these review panels was to report and explain their
assessments of the safety and effectiveness of the ingredients used in over-thecounter drugs. These reports were to set forth not only the panels' judgments
rating each ingredient (as generally recognized as safe and effective, as unsafe
or ineffective, or as requiring additional study), but also supporting
documentation and rationale. The panel reports became treatises on the various
therapeutic categories, some well over 1,000 pages long. The recommendation
segments of the reports were considerably shorter.
FDA intended from the outset to rely heavily on the panels' assessments
and thus insisted that they produce thoroughly documented findings. In
addition, the panels were required to meet in public and to adhere to other
requirements of the Federal Advisory Committee Act. Together, these
obligations prolonged the panels' deliberations. Although the Antacid Panel
completed its report in less than a year, more complex categories, containing
more ingredients, occupied panels for several years, during which they may
have met once a month.
The responsibility of producing a fully documented report required the
panels to rely on FDA staff to assemble information, handle administrative and
stenographic responsibilities, and often do much of the drafting. Thus, the sharp
separation that existed between FDA's Bureau of Drugs and the NRC panels
never characterized its relation with the over-the-counter panels. However,
because discussions of draft reports were held in public meetings and panel
members reached their judgments in these meetings, the fact that the final text
and judgments represented their views, rather than those of agency staff, was
clear. The assessments

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

122

of the panels generally have commanded considerable acceptance, because they
were reached through public debate and were thoroughly documented.
At the outset of the review, FDA forecast that it would implement most of
the panels' assessments. The agency has released the panels' recommendations
in the form of notices of proposed rule-making, which are published in the
Federal Register as the first step in translating them into regulations. The
Bureau of Drugs has expressly reserved the privilege of disagreeing with a
panel's findings either immediately or in a tentative final monograph, and it has
sometimes done so. These occasions have been few, but usually controversial;
and sometimes the Bureau has retreated from its initial disagreement. No
manufacturer has been successful in overturning, administratively or in court, a
panel judgment in which the Bureau of Drugs concurred.
Perhaps an even better measure of the credence given the panels'
assessments is the high degree of voluntary compliance displayed by
manufacturers. They have abandoned, albeit often reluctantly, most of the
ingredients whose effectiveness the panels have doubted. Almost without
exception, they have acceded to the panels' safety judgments. Similarly, they
have generally accepted the panels' recommendations for changes in labeling.
This remarkable commercial deference to scientific judgment has several
explanations, in addition to the credibility of the panels. The slow pace of the
review permitted manufacturers to make changes in their formulas or labeling
without serious market disruption. The procedures of the panels themselves
afforded opportunities for manufacturers to submit information and make
arguments before a judgment was rendered. Perhaps as important, the panels'
assessments, thus far, have not often jeopardized the continued marketing of
major products or whole classes of drugs. If that occurs, it is likely that the
panels' findings will encounter more determined opposition.
National Toxicology Program Panel on Formaldehyde
The National Toxicology Program (NTP) was established in 1978 by the
Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services to coordinate all
toxicity testing of chemicals in the Department and to facilitate communication
between the research and regulatory agencies. NTP

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

123

embraces the relevant toxicity testing activities of the National Cancer Institute,
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, FDA (and its National
Center for Toxicological Research), and the Centers for Disease Control.
OSHA, EPA, and CPSC also participate in NTP. A major advisory group for
NTP is its Executive Committee, which is made up of the heads of the agencies
listed above, as well as the Director of the National Institutes of Health and the
Assistant Secretary for Health. NTP thus serves as a vehicle for cooperation
among the four regulatory agencies—FDA, EPA, OSHA, and CPSC—
especially in recommending candidate substances for testing. At least one
agency has also called on NTP to review risk assessments: the FDA has on two
occasions asked another NTP advisory group—the Board of Scientific
Counselors—to review the carcinogenicity data and the agency's analysis of
those data on two color additives being considered for agency approval. In
addition, NTP has served on one occasion as a structure through which a risk
assessment of interest to all four regulatory agencies was performed.
In April 1980, CPSC (in cooperation with the Interagency Regulatory
Liaison Group) requested that the NTP help to form an interagency panel on
formaldehyde to review the carcinogenicity data on this chemical. The Panel
consisted of 16 government scientists, most of whom were experts in
toxicology, pharmacology, and epidemiology. Three of the IRLG agencies—
EPA, FDA, and OSHA—also supplied scientists as members. Although no
employee of CPSC was an official Panel member, a liaison representative of the
agency attended all meetings and contributed to portions of the final report. In
addition, CPSC personnel assisted the Panel by preparing bibliographies and
handling arrangements.
The Panel on Formaldehyde thus serves as an example of a centralized
assessment body that, although placed outside the agencies, maintained some
association with the scientific staffs of each. The decision to confine the
membership to government scientists was driven, in part, by a desire to avoid
delays associated with compliance with the Federal Advisory Committee Act's
requirements for establishing outside committees. The Panel's creation was
viewed as an experiment in interagency coordination.
The Panel met three times. It generally deliberated in private, and its
meetings were not announced. The Panel did consult with Chemical Industry
Institute of Toxicology scientists who were responsible for designing

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

124

and conducting the carcinogenicity study being evaluated, and it permitted both
oral and written statements from the Formaldehyde Institute, a trade association
of users and manufacturers. Although the Panel reported its findings somewhat
later than initially forecast by CPSC, the time required was a relatively brief 6-7
months. One unanticipated delay resulted from the necessity for a second
review of the pathology slides from the major study being evaluated. The report
stated that evaluation of the findings on carcinogenic effect and other related
data convinced the Panel members that formaldehyde is an animal carcinogen
when inhaled. This finding has been supported by many other scientists, and the
Panel's report has since been published in a peer-reviewed scientific journal.
The Panel also concluded that none of the available epidemiologic studies
negated the inference that formaldehyde posed a cancer risk for humans. It did
not attempt to estimate the risk of cancer for any exposed segment of the
population. It did include, however, a quantitative dose-response assessment.
The NTP Panel's formation and performance demonstrate that such ad hoc
collaboration is manageable and can function well. Despite the quality of its
report and its timely production, however, the NTP Panel's deliberations and
report have not yielded any regulatory efficiencies. In early 1982, CPSC banned
further use of urea-formaldehyde foam insulation, in part on the basis of the
Panel's report, as well as the agency's own risk assessments of formaldehyde's
acute and chronic effects. In contrast, EPA has declined to initiate regulation of
formaldehyde in response to the Panel's assessment. The Agency declined to act
under Section 4(f) of the Toxic Substances Control Act, noting that the animal
data available on carcinogenicity did not constitute a "reasonable basis to
conclude that [formaldehyde] presents or will present a significant risk of
serious or widespread harm to human beings from cancer. …" However,
because the Agency's posture is equivocal and not clearly documented, the
degree to which it relied on the Panel's assessment in reaching the conclusion is
unclear.
Neither of the other two agencies followed CPSC's lead. OSHA declined to
issue an emergency standard for worker exposure to formaldehyde, concluding
that it poses no imminent hazard; and it recently announced that it was unable to
proceed to establish a permanent standard, because the evidence of animal
carcinogenicity did not

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

125

reveal what, if any, risk exposed workers might confront. These decisions were
also based on OSHA's own assessment of risks, but the degree to which OSHA
relied on the Panel's assessment for the agency's hazard identification step is
unclear. Both EPA and OSHA are continuing to collect data on formaldehyde,
but no regulatory action appears likely in the near future. FDA has not acted,
because the potential formaldehyde exposures from agency-regulated products
were judged to be very low.
The contrasting regulatory outcomes should not be interpreted as
indicative that the Panel on Formaldehyde failed in its mission. Although the
four agencies planned to consider its report carefully, the Panel's findings were
not expected to be binding. Each agency remained free not only to fashion its
own regulatory response on formaldehyde, but to qualify, or to dissent from, the
Panel's determination of carcinogenicity and estimate of risk. Factors other than
the Panel report's validity and utility are more likely explanations for the
divergent agency responses. First, the Panel's report was submitted shortly
before the 1980 national election, whose outcome forecast fundamental shifts in
regulatory policy at EPA and OSHA. Second, the agencies confront exposures
to formaldehyde that differ widely in character and intensity, yielding important
differences in potential risk. Finally, the statutory criteria governing their
decisions could plausibly lead them to accord different weights to the Panel's
findings. OSHA, for example, had to decide whether formaldehyde posed a risk
sufficient to justify emergency protective measures despite any costs of
immediate action.
EPA's Use of Scientific Review Panels
The EPA has had considerable experience with independent scientific
panels, but they have served the Agency differently from the risk assessment
panels discussed in the preceding section. EPA's panels typically have reviewed
the work of Agency scientists and analysts, rather than perform their own risk
assessments. Also, most panels serving EPA are mandated by Congress and
play legally prescribed roles in the Agency's decision-making process. We
examined two such panels: EPA's Scientific Advisory Panel and the
Subcommittee on Airborne Carcinogens (a unit of EPA's Science Advisory
Board).

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

126

EPA's Scientific Advisory Panel (SAP)
The Scientific Advisory Panel was established by Congress in the 1975
Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act to review EPA's
evaluations of the environmental and health risks posed by specific pesticide
uses. Broadly speaking, the Panel reviews risk assessments prepared by EPA's
Office of Pesticide Programs to support contemplated regulatory actions against
hazardous pesticides. It also reviews the proposed and final forms of such
actions. Consultation was initially required only when the Agency contemplated
suspending or canceling a pesticide's registration or issuing general regulations
governing pesticide registration. Cancellations and general pesticide regulations
must be submitted to the Panel for review before they take effect. Suspensions
of registration do not require prior review, but EPA must submit the underlying
studies for review promptly after any suspension action. EPA must also submit
for peer review the ''design, protocols, and conduct of major scientific studies"
conducted under the pesticide act. The following description reflects activities
undertaken before September 1981.*
The Panel normally consists of seven members selected by the EPA
Administrator from among six persons nominated by the National Institutes of
Health and six nominated by the National Science Foundation. Until its last
meeting in June 1981, the Panel generally met once a month. Topics covered
during 1980 and 1981 are shown in Table III-7. The Panel does not set its own
agenda, although the chairman may control the sequence and conduct of
individual sessions. The risk assessments that the Panel reviews are selected by
the two divisions (Hazard Evaluation and Special Pesticide Review) of the
Office of Pesticide Programs that use its recommendations. Virtually all the
scientific and exposure information available to the Panel is provided by the
division whose assessment is being reviewed, although much of this
information comes originally from the registrant of the product in question.
Panel members necessarily accept the authenticity of the information provided,
although they sometimes question its quality.

* Authorizing legislation expired in September 1981, and new legislation has not been
enacted (as of December 1982).

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

TABLE III-7 EPA Actions Reviewed by the Scientific Advisory Panel (1980-1981)
A.
Regulations under Section 25(a) of The Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and
Rodenticide Act
1.Final Rulemaking for Registering Pesticides in the United States, Subpart
E, Hazard Evaluation: Wildlife and Aquatic Organisms
2.Proposed Rulemaking for Registering Pesticides in the United States,
Subpart L, Hazard Evaluation: Nontarget Insects
3.Proposed and Final Rulemaking for Registering Pesticides in the United
States, Subpart D, Chemistry Requirements: Product Chemistry
4.Final Rulemaking for Amendment of 40 CFR 162.31 by Adding Certain
Uses of Eight Active Ingredients as Restricted Pesticides
5.Proposed Rulemaking for Registering Pesticides in the United States,
Subpart M, Data Requirements for Biorational Pesticides
6.Final Rulemaking for Registering Pesticides in the United States, Subpart
N, Chemistry Requirements: Environmental Fate
7.Informal Review of Draft Proposed Pesticide Registration Guidelines,
Subpart K, Exposure Data Requirements: Reentry Protection
8.Review of Proposed Pesticide Registration Guidelines, Subpart H,
Labeling of Pesticide Products
9.Review of Final Rule on Classification of 11 Active Ingredients for
Restricted Use
B.
Cancellations under Section 6(b) of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and
Rodenticide Act
1.Dimethoate
2.Diallate
3.Lindane
4.Strychnine
5.Ethylene dibromide
6.Oxyfluorfen (Goal 2E)
7.Wood preservatives, pentachlorophenol, creosote, arsenicals

127

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

128

Meetings are open to the public, and interested parties are generally
encouraged to make presentations. These meetings sometimes focus on risk
management issues, rather than on the health and environmental assessments
submitted to the Panel, in part because participants making presentations are not
confined to addressing scientific aspects of the Agency's risk assessments.
Equally important in the consideration of nonscientific issues has been
Congress's decision not to restrict the Panel to a strictly scientific review of the
Agency's risk assessments. (The Panel's mandated review responsibilities
extend to contemplated EPA actions that combine both risk assessment and
regulatory policy elements.) Although the rationale for the Panel's creation was
to introduce independent scientific review into EPA's deliberations, the
mechanism chosen has routinely resulted in the Panel's commenting on the
Agency's choice of regulatory options. The Agency has sought to anticipate the
Panel's tendency to stray from the scientific issues before it and has attempted
to frame specific questions on which comments are requested.
The participation of the Panel probably has improved the quality of EPA
analyses and added to their credibility among both environmental and industry
groups. However, expectations of some EPA critics that it would repudiate the
Agency's scientific analyses have not been realized. Over the last 5 years, the
Panel has agreed with most Agency risk assessments brought before it. There
have been some notable exceptions, such as the Panel's disagreement with the
Agency's handling of 2,4,5-T. The endorsement of most Agency assessments
and Agency actions based on those assessments by the Panel have been
extremely helpful in improving Agency credibility and rendered its actions less
vulnerable to challenge in administrative or judicial hearings, as with the Panel's
support of EPA action on wood preservatives. The Panel's success can be traced
to several causes: its public deliberations, which may have made it difficult for
EPA to ignore its comments; its continuity (until its authorizing legislation
expired), which permitted it to understand EPA's approaches and
simultaneously strengthened its influence with EPA staff; and the scientific
distinction of individual Panel members.
In the case of EPA's decision to suspend use of 2,4,5-T and Silvex (its
companion product) for some applications and to hold wide-ranging hearings on
other applications, the Panel declined, after 3 days of public meetings, to
support the Agency's proposed proceedings.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

129

The Panel believed that additional data, including results of further tests for
carcinogenicity and reproductive toxicity and of more complete monitoring for
residues, were required before a hearing could be held profitably. Because EPA
had not asked the Panel to approve the holding of a hearing and believed that it
would be more efficient to deal with all uses of 2,4,5-T at one time, the Agency
persisted and announced a hearing on the risks and benefits of 2,4,5-T, which
began in March 1980. This difference, coupled with congressional displeasure
with EPA's original suspension of 2,4,5-T and Silvex, led ultimately to the 1980
statutory amendment mandating that the Scientific Advisory Panel review the
studies that underlie suspension decisions.
EPA's Subcommittee on Airborne Carcinogens
The Subcommittee on Airborne Carcinogens, a part of EPA's Science
Advisory Board, was not mandated by statute. It was created in 1980 at the
request of the Assistant Administrator for Air, Noise, and Radiation to review
the assessments that the Agency is statutorily required to submit for Board
review. Members of this Subcommittee were appointed by the Administrator;
however, it no longer exists, having recently been merged with the
Environmental Health Committee of the Science Advisory Board.
The Subcommittee reviewed six pairs of draft documents that included
hazard identification and dose-response assessments produced by the
Carcinogen Assessment Group and exposure assessments produced by private
contractors for EPA's Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards. The
chemicals evaluated in those documents were trichloroethylene,
perchloroethylene, methylene chloride, methyl chloroform, acrylonitrile, and
toluene. Subcommittee members reviewing these documents included a
biochemist, a biostatistician, a pathologist, an engineer, an oncologist, a
toxicologist, and a meteorologist. Five members were affiliated with
universities and one with a research consulting organization; the seventh was a
private consultant.
In accordance with the Federal Advisory Committee Act, the
Subcommittee's review was held in public and announced in the Federal
Register, and interested members of the public were invited to make oral and
written presentations. Several such presentations were made, primarily by
representatives of industries that would be affected

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

130

by EPA regulation of the substances under discussion. EPA and contractor
personnel also attended the review and participated actively, briefing the
Subcommittee on the contents of documents, answering members' questions,
and defending their work against criticism.
The Subcommittee did not write a report after its review, and the absence
of a summary report has led to some confusion regarding the nature of its
criticisms. Review of the transcript of its second meeting (September 5, 1980)
and discussions with various participants in that review meeting have revealed
several general criticisms of the Carcinogen Assessment Group's risk
assessments. One was that the documents provided to the Subcommittee were
not sufficiently detailed; i.e., they did not provide enough scientific information
from the various studies cited to permit the Subcommittee to make an
independent assessment of the quality and validity of the studies. Another
criticism raised by the Subcommittee was that the conclusions drawn did not
reflect the quality of the data on which the risk assessments were based. Some
Subcommittee members asserted that such considerations may, in fact, be
precluded by rigid adherence to the Agency's guidelines for risk assessment.
Other criticisms focused on specific issues, including the validity of basing
a conclusion of carcinogenicity on an increase in mouse liver tumors, the
importance of contaminants in the test chemicals, and the wisdom of using a
single model for extrapolating from high to low doses. The Subcommittee
viewed these issues as primarily scientific, whereas Agency staff considered
them, although resting on scientific principles, as resolvable through the choice
of conservative policy options—a choice embodied in the Agency's guidelines.
These differences between the Subcommittee and Agency staff emphasize the
conclusion set forth in Chapter I that many components of risk assessment lack
a firm scientific answer and require a judgment to be made. In some cases, such
judgments may be informed by scientific arguments, but may ultimately rest on
policy preferences. The difficulties in communication between the Agency and
the Subcommittee also underscore the importance of explicit risk assessments
and written reviews.
The differences reported above have not yet been fully resolved. The
Agency's experience with the Subcommittee highlights some difficulties in
using a review body that has not had sufficient time to develop a working
approach to its task. It also emphasizes the importance of ex

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

131

plaining Agency risk assessment procedures, including the adherence to specific
guidelines, to review panels. Concerns similar to those of the Subcommittee
have been expressed by members of the Environmental Health Committee,
which replaced it, and Agency staff are currently considering changes in the
risk assessment procedures embodied in their guidelines.
PROPOSED CHANGES IN ORGANIZATIONAL
ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT
Proposals to reform the organizational arrangements for risk assessment
have been advanced to reduce perceived shortcomings in agency practices. The
criticisms to which these proposals respond may be summarized as follows:
•

Bias. Critics of agency performance suggest that decision-makers
approach risk assessment with attitudes about regulation that preclude
objectivity. Regulators, for example, may skew their assessment of
risks associated with a particular substance to support a preference to
regulate or not to regulate that substance.
• Exaggeration. This criticism is closely related to the first. The
suggestion is that regulatory agencies, accustomed to operating in an
adversary mode and expecting their judgments to be challenged in
administrative hearings or in court, typically overstate the risks
associated with hazards that they decide to regulate or understate the
risks associated with hazards that they decide not to regulate. The
instinct to support a position with every available argument may distort
interpretations of scientific data, choice of extrapolation procedures,
and assumptions about human exposure. The critical role of legal staff
in preparing agency documents is thought to foster the adversarial style.
• Poor Public Understanding. If risks are misdescribed, it follows that
public perception of the risks will be inaccurate. In addition, because
agency announcements of regulatory actions typically stress the
ultimate risk management strategy, such as the banning of saccharin,
and do not explain why a particular action is being taken, the public is
led to infer the degree of risk from the action proposed or from the
decision not to act. However, an agency's ultimate decision may be
dictated by statutory language or regulatory policies that emphasize
considerations other than degree of risk.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

132

•

Poor-Quality Personnel. This argument is straightforward, if
unflattering. It is that regulatory agencies cannot attract or retain
adequate numbers of highly qualified scientists to perform risk
assessments. Many of their personnel are removed from active
research by time and distance and are unfamiliar with the latest
developments in their fields.
• Inconsistency. This criticism supports proposals for centralization of
risk assessment. To the extent that separation is a prerequisite to
centralization, this criticism would also support institutional
separation. The suggestion is simply that agencies have applied
inconsistent criteria and reached inconsistent results in assessing the
risks posed by the same hazards. Such inconsistency is more likely
when each agency is responsible for performing its own assessment.
• Redundancy. Starting from the assumption that different regulatory
agencies have been, and are likely often to be, concerned with the
same hazards, the critics argue that current arrangements force
government regulators, affected industries, and interested scientists to
deal with litigation on the risks of a given substance several times.
Accordingly, a central institution responsible for performing risk
assessments for all agencies might yield process efficiencies and
reduce costs for all participants.
Description of Proposals

The central proposals for changes in institutional arrangements for risk
assessments developed by the office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP)
and the American Industrial Health Council (AIHC) and presented in H.R. 638
have sparked much of the current debate and precipitated this study. For several
years before, however, dissatisfaction had been expressed with the procedures
by which government bodies used scientific data and resolved what purported
to be scientific issues. This dissatisfaction led to one of the precursors of the
current proposals: the idea of a science court for resolving scientific issues
underlying regulatory decisions. That suggestion and other, more recent
proposals for procedural and structural reforms are discussed briefly below. The
primary objective of this section, however, is to facilitate evaluation of the three
main proposals that inspired this study.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

133

Science Court
An important precursor of the OSTP proposal was the science court
concept of Kantrowitz (1975). The science court was proposed to assist
decision-makers with disputed scientific aspects of a decision. Hence, a basic
premise of the science court is that it is both possible and desirable to separate
the scientific elements of a public-policy decision from social and political
considerations. The judges of a court were to be impartial, competent scientists
from relevant disciplines who were not involved in the dispute. These judges
would hear testimony from scientific experts on both sides of the issue, who
would be allowed to cross-examine each other. The rationale was that scientist
advocates are best qualified to present their own cases and to probe the
weaknesses of their opposition. In the environment created in such a court,
complete objectivity would be neither assumed nor necessary. After hearing all
witnesses, the judges would issue a summary of their opinion of the meaning of
the scientific evidence. Their opinions would deal only with scientific questions
and could not include recommendations for public policy. Many details of a
science court's procedures and operations are, however, unclear. Even after
several years of sometimes heated debate in the scientific and regulatory
communities, the overall reactions to the concept can be characterized as at best
only lukewarm. Although a genuine science court will probably not be
established, the underlying idea of separation of scientific issues from social
and political considerations in decision-making has since appeared in other
proposals.
FDA's creation and use of public boards of inquiry is the nearest analogue
to the science court that has been put into practice. In 1975, FDA, on its own
initiative, adopted regulations describing a public board of inquiry, a new kind
of decisional body that could substitute for the traditional trial type of hearing
before an administrative law judge if parties to formal disputes before the
agency could agree. A board of inquiry is an ad hoc panel of three independent
scientists, qualified in relevant disciplines, who hear evidence and arguments
and render a preliminary decision, which may be appealed (like that of an
administrative law judge) to the Commissioner of FDA. The procedure assumes
that disputes that are primarily scientific can be resolved more accurately,
faster, and with greater credibility by an

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

134

expert tribunal. FDA's novel procedure has been tried only once, to resolve
safety issues concerning aspartame, a new artificial sweetener. This experience
yielded, at best, equivocal support for the new procedure. Perhaps because of its
novelty, the process took over a year to complete. The parties disagreed at
length over the makeup of the board, the objectivity of its members, and the
procedures it should follow. The FDA Commissioner ultimately rejected the
board's conclusion that aspartame should not be approved and issued an opinion
that both questioned the board's scientific rationale and corrected its
interpretation of the legal criteria for approval of food additives. Other
regulatory disputes, including FDA's refusal to approve the injectable
contraceptive, Depo-Provera, are scheduled to be heard by boards of inquiry.
OSTP Proposal
A 1978 report from OSTP gave impetus to emerging proposals for
separation and centralization of scientific aspects of risk assessment. The report
recommended several steps to ensure consistency in the identification,
characterization, and assessment of potential human carcinogens. Two
interrelated stages in regulatory decision-making were delineated: Stage I,
identification of a substance as a potential human carcinogen, qualitative and
quantitative characterization of the risk it poses, and explication of the
uncertainties; and Stage II, evaluation of regulatory options and their
consequences. This dichotomy closely parallels our own distinction between
risk assessment and risk management. The OSTP report recommended that a
uniform decision-making framework be used in all agencies and that Stage I
and Stage II functions be separated within or outside regulatory agencies while
sufficient linkages were maintained to ensure relevance and timeliness. Such
organizational experiments as the Carcinogen Assessment Group in EPA were
highlighted. The report also suggested that the then-fledgling National
Toxicology Program might eventually assume an expanded role in coordinating
or overseeing some risk assessments for the regulatory agencies.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

135

H.R. 638 and the AIHC Proposal
The 1978 OSTP report was a broad statement of principles. Two detailed
proposals to create new risk assessment institutions have since been advanced.
Because these proposals have several features in common, but also present
important contrasts, they are summarized together (Table III-8).
In February 1980, Representative William Wampler first introduced
legislation (U.S. Congress, 1981c) to establish a National Science Council. H.R.
638 calls for the creation of a new panel of scientists, entirely independent of
the regulatory agencies, that would decide disputed scientific issues posed by
regulatory initiatives. The AIHC had previously (1979) advanced a similar
proposal to create an expert science panel that would evaluate the hazards of
chemicals considered for regulation. Both proposals stress the importance of
uniform, consistent resolution of the scientific questions underlying regulatory
decisions. Both espouse the separation of risk assessment from the design and
selection of regulatory responses, and both would use independent scientific
experts to perform the assessments.
There are some basic differences between the two proposals. Under H.R.
638, any party could request referral of scientific issues to the National Science
Council. The AIHC proposal specifies that, although any party may request a
review, only federal agencies or Congress would have the authority to initiate
mandatory review of scientific questions by the central science panel. H.R. 638
would apply only in formal adjudications. The AIHC proposal would apply to
any agency proceeding in which risk assessment was at issue. Because rulemaking is the primary mode for regulating hazardous substances, the AIHC
proposal would apply to more regulatory actions than would H.R. 638. Under
H.R. 638, decisions of the National Science Council would be binding on
regulatory agencies. In contrast, assessments of the AIHC's science panel would
not bind the agencies, but would carry a presumption of validity, subject to
rebuttal in later regulatory proceedings.
The risk assessment bodies contemplated by the two proposals also differ
in composition and procedures. The National Science Council would be a
standing body of 15 full-time voting members serving 2-year terms. Individual
chemicals would be assessed initially by advisory panels made up only of
Council members. Each panel would have

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

TABLE III-8 Comparison of Major Features of H.R. 638 and the AIHC Proposal
H.R. 638
AIHC Proposal
Structure: Single continuing panel
Single continuing body with rotating
separate from agencies; centralized
members; in the NASa
15 part-time members selected
Membership: 15 full-time members
according to NAS procedures;
appointed by chairman of NSBb from
members to represent the best scientists
NAS nominees; members to be
qualified, distinguished scientists
Scope: Referral by any party of
Referral by any party or agency (only
adjudications involving harm to human
latter require mandatory consideration)
health from substances considered by
concerning proposed rules or agency
CPSC, FDA, USDA,c DHHS,d OSHA,
adjudications; all agencies with
and EPA
regulatory jurisdiction would be affected
Functions: Panel could prepare an
Panel could prepare an independent
independent risk assessment; its decision
risk assessment; its findings would be
would be binding on the agency
advisory, but would be part of record
Public Participation: Parties to
Federal Register notice of referral
adjudication would be involved
would solicit submission of data by
public
Implementation: Legislation
Legislation
a National Academy of Sciences.
b National Science Board.
c U.S. Department of Agriculture.
d Department of Health and Human Services.

136

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

137

at least five voting members. The AIHC science panel would be
established under the umbrella of the National Academy of Sciences and consist
of 15 part-time members who would serve for terms of 3 years. The panel could
establish working groups, which could be composed largely of outside experts.
These divergent approaches to placement and composition of the panels and
terms of members reflect different expectations about which status would attract
the best scientists and perhaps about the extent to which the results would be
binding. For example, the AIHC proposal assumes that distinguished academic
and industry scientists would be unwilling to serve on a full-time basis for any
substantial period.
Under H.R. 638, the National Science Council would decide scientific
questions after conducting a formal ''hearing on the record," in which all parties
to the agency proceeding could participate. Under the AIHC proposal, referral
of scientific issues to the panel would be announced, and the submission of
written evidence and arguments would be invited. The less formal procedures
visualized by the AIHC are consistent with its objective of obtaining
nonbinding expert judgments on scientific issues that underlie decisions.
The two proposals embody different expectations as to speed of response.
H.R. 638 would require the National Science Council to make a final report to
the referring agency within 90 days of receiving a dispute. The AIHC proposal,
however, imposes no time limits on the panel's assessment, except that the panel
"operate expeditiously but not precipitously" (Higginson, 1982).
Single-Agency Proposals
H.R. 638 and the AIHC proposal espouse government-wide reform of the
institutional means for risk assessment. Other notable recommendations for
institutional restructuring have been addressed to individual agencies or agency
programs. In 1981, for example, Senator Orrin Hatch introduced legislation
(U.S. Congress, 1981d) to amend the food-safety provisions of the Federal
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. His bill included a provision permitting FDA to
request, or affected third parties to demand, assessment of the risks associated
with specific food constituents, with such assessment to be performed by a
panel of scientific experts appointed by the National Academy of Sciences. The
panel's assessment would be

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

138

advisory, rather than binding on the agency. Similar provisions have appeared
in other proposals to revise government regulation of food safety, including a
proposal developed by the Food Safety Council (1979). These proposals appear
to share assumptions underlying the AIHC proposals: that agency risk
assessments cannot be assumed to be objective, thorough, or expert and that an
independent review should be available before a final decision is made. These
proposals for independent scientific panels differ from H.R. 638 in three
important ways: they would apply to one agency or program; they contemplate
only an advisory role, rather than a resolving function, for the scientific panel;
and they would apply to any agency proceeding in which risk assessments were
at issue. The proposals thus can be viewed as agency- or program-specific
illustrations of the AIHC proposal to create one central scientific panel to serve
all agencies.
One such single-agency proposal has been adopted. In 1981, Congress
amended the Consumer Product Safety Act (U.S. Congress, Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Act, 1981a) to require CPSC to consult with an ad hoc chronic
hazards advisory panel whenever it contemplates rule-making concerning a
product believed to pose a risk of cancer, birth defects, or gene mutation. A
panel will consist of seven members appointed by the Commission from among
21 scientists nominated by the President of the National Academy of Sciences.
Nominees may not be employees of the government or have any financial ties
to any manufacturer or seller of consumer products. Each nominee must have
"demonstrated the ability to critically assess chronic hazards and risk to human
health presented by the exposure of humans to toxic substances or as
demonstrated by the exposure of animals to such substances." The panel's
responsibility is to prepare for the Commission a report on the substance that
the agency is considering regulating. The panel is to review the scientific data
and other information related to the substance and "determine if any substance
in the product is a carcinogen, mutagen, or teratogen." The panel will also
"include in its report an estimate, if such an estimate is feasible, of the probable
harm to human health that will result from exposure to the substance." The Act
requires that a panel submit its report within 120 days of convening, unless the
Commission allows it additional time. A panel's report ''shall contain a complete
statement of the basis for its determination." The Commission must consider the
panel's report and incorporate its evaluation into any advance

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

139

notice of proposed rule-making and any final rule. Apparently, the agency is not
bound by a panel's determination of carcinogenicity or its estimation of the risk
associated with exposure. Although it appears that each panel is to perform its
own risk assessment, the statute is silent on the role to be played by agency staff
and on the weight that a panel might legitimately accord to analyses prepared
by the agency itself. These panels are exempted from the Federal Advisory
Committee Act; the exemption presumably means that they are not required to
provide advance notice of their meetings or to deliberate in public. A panel may
seek information from third parties, but only through CPSC.
Criticisms of Proposals for Separation and Centralization
The four federal regulatory agencies have responded skeptically to
proposals to separate and centralize the function of assessing the risks of
chemicals that are candidates for regulation (U.S. Congress, 1981b). Other
observers have also found flaws in the proposals. A central criticism made by
those who argue against full organizational separation between risk assessment
and regulatory policy-making is that simply separating risk assessment from the
regulatory agencies would not separate science from policy. This argument is
based on the fact that the risk assessment process requires analytic choices to be
made that rest, at least in part, on the policy consideration of whether to be
more or less conservative when determining possible public-health risks. A
second point is that, although extra-agency separation of risk assessment may
help to minimize the influence of risk management considerations on this
process, the agency responsible for deciding what exposure to permit or what
costs to impose must make what is ultimately a political judgment based on the
extent of risk determined in the risk assessment and often on the benefits and
costs of regulatory action and its feasibility and political acceptability. For its
decision to be politically acceptable and the decision-maker accountable, the
agency must have responsibility for each of these components of regulatory
decision-making. A third argument against institutional separation is related to
the internal process by which agencies reach decisions. It is claimed that this
process is unavoidably an interactive one. Different specialists are called on
repeatedly for analysis and advice as an agency

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

140

identifies and considers new control options in attempting to reach a decision.
Although this description may overstate the fluidity of internal agency
deliberations, it captures something of their ad hoc character. Closely coupled
with this argument is the necessity for agencies to retain scientific capability so
that they can understand what a risk assessment means and how to use it in
developing risk management strategies. Thus, even if risk assessment were
performed outside the agency, a scientific staff representing many different
disciplines would still be required, to ensure that an assessment would be
interpreted and used correctly.
Other criticisms of proposals for risk assessment by a centralized panel
stress the logistic difficulties of meshing independent risk assessment activities
with the internal workings of different agencies. Experience suggests that it will
be difficult for any risk assessment body to meet even generous time limits.
Thus, agency decisions will probably be delayed by a requirement to consult, or
refer issues to, such a body. A central panel also might become overburdened
and cause additional delays. Critics of H.R. 638 and the AIHC proposal
challenge the assumption that the regulatory agencies have reached inconsistent
conclusions in evaluating various chemicals. The recent differences in the
regulation of formaldehyde constitute a rare example of disparate treatment of
the same chemical, and even this disparity may not betray basic disagreement
over the interpretation of scientific data, as distinct from the degree of risk that
justifies regulation. In the past, the agencies have often selected different
control options or imposed different exposure limits for a given chemical, but
these disparities have typically reflected differences in exposure (and thus in
risk characterization) or differences in regulatory policy or statutory or
administrative requirements; none of the current proposals addresses such
differences.
CONCLUSIONS
The Committee was asked by the Congress to consider "the merits of an
institutional separation of scientific functions of developing objective risk
assessment from the regulatory process of making public and social policy
decisions and the feasibility of unifying risk assessment functions." In this
chapter, the Committee has addressed

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

141

these two issues and a third, related issue: the value of independent scientific
review of agency risk assessments.
In its review, the Committee was sensitive to a number of considerations,
including the scientific quality and regulatory relevance of the assessments
performed. It also tried to ascertain how scientific and policy considerations
were handled in the performance of risk assessment. To reach its conclusions, in
the absence of accepted criteria for evaluating agency practices and proposals
for change and in view of the sparseness of relevant empirical data, the
Committee has relied on discussions with other persons knowledgeable and
experienced in risk assessment activities, the limited available literature, and
especially its own knowledge and experience in regulatory-agency risk
assessments, as well as its review and analysis of past agency practices.
Value of Institutional Separation
1.

Although organizational separation may help to ensure that risk
management considerations do not influence the conduct of risk
assessment, the degree of organizational separation that is optimal
for individual agencies cannot be determined on the basis of the
Committee's review.

Regulatory programs differ substantially in their degree of organizational
separation. In the cases of NIOSH assessments that in the early 1970s were
adopted by OSHA and NRC assessments relied on by agencies, the assessment
function has been outside the regulatory agencies. At EPA, the risk assessment
units in the Office of Health and Environmental Assessment of the Office of
Research and Development prepare assessments for regulatory program offices
that are organizationally under different assistant administrators. However, the
Office of Toxic Substances does its own assessments, and several other
program offices are responsible for their own exposure assessments. The risk
assessments for the FDA'S Bureau of Foods are produced within the Bureau,
but by an office distinct from offices responsible for formulating regulations
and enforcement; since 1976, the Directorate of Health Standards Programs in
OSHA has both performed risk assessments and formulated all early risk
management options. Different agencies also have success

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

142

fully used different organizational arrangements for risk assessment. FDA, for
example, has often called on NRC and NTP for assessments, but in other cases
relied on its own staff. The Committee's review of different agency structures
and procedures did not demonstrate that one particular structure produced risk
assessments of superior quality and integrity. In addition, the Committee notes
that, even if there were a clear finding that a particular arrangement works for a
given agency or program, it would be extremely difficult (given the diversity in
agency and program mandates, personnel needs, and histories) to justify a
suggestion that that arrangement would best serve all agencies or programs
2. Organizational separation has several important drawbacks that are
likely to be intensified with increasing degrees of separation.
There are several arguments against organizational separation. Separation
of the risk assessment function from an agency's regulatory activities is likely to
inhibit the interaction between assessors and regulators that is necessary for the
proper interpretation of risk estimates and the evaluation of risk management
options. Separation can lead to disjunction between assessment and regulatory
agendas and cause delays in regulatory proceedings. Common sense suggests
that increased separation would aggravate these drawbacks. In its review, the
Committee observed these disadvantages when assessors and regulators were in
different organizations (e.g., NIOSH and NRC). Another perceived drawback in
extra-agency separation that was neither detected nor likely to emerge in the
Committee's review is the erosion of scientific competence within agency staffs
if risk assessments are routinely performed outside the agency. Also, any major
organizational change may have a disruptive effect on agency performance;
thus, such organizational changes are especially questionable when the benefits,
if any, are unclear.
3.

Organizational arrangements that separate risk assessment from
risk management decision-making will not necessarily ensure that
the policy basis of choices made in the risk assessment process is
clearly distinguished from the scientific basis of such choices.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

143

If risk assessment as practiced by the regulatory agencies were pure
science, perhaps an organizational separation could effectively sharpen the
distinction between science and policy in risk assessment and regulatory
decision-making. However, many of the analytic choices made throughout the
risk assessment process require individual judgments that are based on both
scientific and policy considerations. The policy considerations in risk
assessment are of a different character from those involved in specific risk
management decisions and are generally common to all assessments for similar
health effects. Thus, even when one has drawn the relatively obvious distinction
between risk assessment and risk management, there remains the more difficult
task of distinguishing between the science and policy dimensions of risk
assessment itself. We believe that the latter distinction cannot be ensured or
maintained through organizational arrangements. Given the inherent mixture of
science and policy in risk assessment, organizational separation would simply
move risk assessment policy into a different organization that would then have
to become politically accountable. The Committee believes that other
approaches are more likely to maintain the distinction between science and
policy in risk assessment, most notably the development of and adherence to
guidelines.
Value of Centralization
4.

Common risk assessments performed primarily by scientists from
all interested agencies on an ad hoc basis may capture the major
advantages of centralization without the drawbacks that accompany
permanent, extra-agency centralization.

An argument often advanced for centralization is that it might expedite and
perhaps reduce the administrative costs of decision-making when two or more
agencies contemplate regulation of the same substance. And if two or more
agencies are going to regulate the same substance, there is much to be said for
developing a system that facilitates production of a single, common risk
assessment. This was one rationale for CPSC's decision to empanel a group of
scientists to evaluate the carcinogenicity data on formaldehyde, and it argues in
support of the central panels suggested in H.R. 638 and the American Industrial
Health Council's proposal. Although the Com

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

144

mittee endorses government-wide consistency in risk assessment, it is less
sanguine concerning the prospects of a permanent arrangement for such
centralized risk assessment as contemplated by these proposals, in which the
idea of centralized assessment is inextricably linked to extra-agency separation.
The Committee concluded that extra-agency separation would have
disadvantages that would offset any advantages.
The Committee did find, however, that agency scientists could collaborate
to perform joint risk assessments on an ad hoc basis. Because agency scientists
would perform an assessment, such an arrangement would avoid most of the
drawbacks of extra-agency separation. The Committee looked at the Panel on
Formaldehyde as an example of a centralized assessment group. In the
Committee's view, the Panel functioned well and produced an assessment that
has been accepted by the scientific community. The Panel's assessment has not
produced parallel regulatory action among the agencies, and the Committee
observed that similar risk assessments should not necessarily lead to similar
regulatory decisions, which reflect considerations that often justify different risk
management responses.
Use of Scientific Review Panels
5. Independent scientific review of agency risk assessments improves
the scientific quality of the assessments and strengthens them
against later challenge.
Agencies and programs with mandated peer review panels, such as EPA's
Office of Pesticide Programs, which is required to submit to a Scientific
Advisory Panel proposals to cancel or restrict pesticide use, produce final risk
assessments in support of regulatory decisions that are generally of high
scientific quality and are accepted by the public and the regulated parties. In
contrast, the Committee found several cases in which mechanisms for peer
review could be markedly improved: OSHA, which uses public comments to
refine its risk assessments, rather than formal peer review; NIOSH, which has
not had a mechanism to ensure that reviewers' comments are given appropriate
consideration; and FDA's Bureau of Foods, which uses ad hoc panels to review
its assessments (a procedure that unfortunately can be circumvented).

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

•

145

Standing and continuing review panels that have mechanisms to
maintain the independence of their members appear to be the most
useful review bodies.

Continuity and independence of review panels help to ensure that such
panels are sensitive to regulatory needs while retaining the necessary scientific
objectivity. Examples of standing committees, such as the Scientific Advisory
Panel in EPA, support this perception. Conversely, the Committee observed that
short-lived or ad hoc groups, such as the Subcommittee on Airborne
Carcinogens, often do not have sufficient time to develop a working
relationship among panel members and that much of the time allotted to review
is actually spent in clarifying individual versus panel viewpoints and
understandings. Similarly, an ad hoc panel may not clearly understand its role in
relation to the regulatory process. Thus, standing panels appear to be of greater
value to the agency than ad hoc committees. Furthermore, the existence of a
standing panel might encourage an agency to seek its advice more frequently.
Because it is important for review committees to be free to express their
scientific judgments without concern for regulatory implications, panels that are
formed in a manner that neither compromises nor appears to compromise their
independence are more likely to improve ultimate risk assessments. The
Committee observed that several review panels used by EPA already have a
nomination process that places the responsibility for developing a slate of
possible panel members outside the agency. Although the EPA Administrator
makes the final selections of panel members, the fact that nominations come
from outside the agency emphasizes the intent that EPA panels be independent
and as free of agency influence as possible. A related point is that membership
on EPA panels, and in fact on most review panels used by the regulatory
agencies, rotates; members are usually selected for staggered, fixed terms
(generally 3-4 years). This rotation itself reduces the likelihood that members
will develop an institutional bias.
• Review panels are best qualified to give scientific advice when they are
composed of scientists who are highly knowledgeable in the
appropriate disciplines.
For carcinogenicity risk assessments, for example, some relevant
disciplines would be toxicology, pathology, biostatistics, chemistry, and
epidemiology. The Com

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

146

mittee believes that professional or organizational affiliation should not be used
as a primary criterion in the determination of the makeup of a particular panel.
That is, in contrast with the advisory panels used by OSHA, which are
constituted to reflect balance among different affiliations and presumed biases,
the Committee believes that scientific competence must be the primary factor
determining panel membership if review panels are to be asked to give their
advice on the scientific aspects of an agency's risk assessments. However, the
Committee notes that panel members who understand the policy implications of
their scientific judgments are more likely to be helpful to an agency's
assessment process and that an attempt to balance viewpoints of scientifically
qualified panel members may increase a panel's credibility.
• Review panels will be most effective if they have the authority to
review agency risk assessments before announcement of the agency's
intended regulatory actions, except in cases of emergency.
The Committee believes that review panels serving regulatory agencies
should serve in an advisory capacity. That is, the judgments of a panel should
not be binding on the agency. Nevertheless, the Committee also believes that
the authority of agency review panels should be such that agencies must
demonstrate that adequate consideration has been given to reviewers'
judgments, and prior consultation with review panels helps to ensure this.
Because announcements of intended actions or proposed regulations must be
thoroughly developed and substantiated, review at the time of announcement or
later is likely to be too late to influence an agency; although the regulation is
only proposed, the decision of whether to act has, for all practical purposes,
already been made. In the Committee's judgment, exceptions to this idea of
prior review are appropriate in the case of emergency actions, such as
suspension of pesticide registration. Risk assessments supporting such actions
could be reviewed after the announced action.
• Independent panels with authority to review risk assessments for all
agency regulatory decisions, including decisions not to act, are more
likely to ensure that agency decisions rest on valid scientific grounds.
Panels with the authority to request the review of any agency risk
assessment supporting a particular regulatory

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

147

decision will have a greater impact on agency decision-making. For example, if
a panel can review only assessments referred to it by an agency, some agency
decisions might not benefit from independent review of their scientific basis.
This is especially likely if an agency has decided not to regulate. Such a
decision may have considerable impact and should receive the same careful
review as decisions to regulate. In addition, panels with the authority to request
reviews can respond to suggestions for review from the public.
• Although most requirements of the Federal Advisory Committee Act
are salutary, others may inhibit agency use of review panels.
The Committee believes that most provisions of the Act are beneficial and
endorses such provisions as the requirement that advisory committees meet in
public and provide advance notice of their meetings. However, the Act does
impose requirements, some burdensome, for agency-created bodies that meet
the definition of advisory committee. Notably, the Act requires that an advisory
committee be formally chartered by an agency head and approved by the
General Services Administration. This procedure has often proved cumbersome.
Some agencies, such as FDA, lack independent chartering authority and thus
require approval at the departmental level. In addition, procedures used by the
General Services Administration for screening new committees have often
imposed long delays, sometimes inspired by political concerns about committee
membership or by resistance to the creation of new government "agencies."
These legal requirements of the Act have caused some agencies to seek other
ways of obtaining the views of scientific experts, especially when the issues
involve single chemicals or tests. In such cases, regulators often confine their
consultations to government scientists, who can be accessible immediately and,
if necessary, for extended periods.
•

Written reviews help to ensure agency consideration of scientific
criticism.

A summary of a panel's review that is transmitted in written form and
made available to the public will help to avoid confusion and to ensure agency
consideration of the panel's comments. As mentioned earlier, in the absence of
adequate mechanisms to ensure agency consideration of reviewers' comments,
the comments might be

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

148

ignored, or the public might perceive that they are ignored. Putting its summary
in writing should also ensure that the panel states its findings clearly and make
it more likely that the agency will interpret its comments correctly.
Other Observations
6.

Preparation of fully documented written risk assessments that
explicitly define the judgments made and attendant uncertainties
clarifies the agency decision-making process and aids the review
process considerably.

When a fully documented written risk assessment is not produced before
an agency's decision to regulate or not to regulate, it is difficult to understand
the process by which an agency made its assessment. The Committee believes
that the creation of such a document encourages public understanding of and
respect for agency procedures and provides a basis for review by a scientific
advisory panel. Furthermore, a detailed risk assessment document that clearly
identifies the inference options chosen in the assessment and explains the
rationale for those choices will help to maintain a sharper distinction between
science and policy in the assessment of risk and will guard against the
inappropriate intrusion of risk management considerations.
REFERENCES
AIHC (American Industrial Health Council). 1979. Recommended Framework for Identifying
Carcinogens and Regulating Them in Manufacturing Situations .
EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). 1976. Health risk and economic impact assessments of
suspected carcinogens: interim procedures and guidelines. Fed. Reg. 41(102):21402-21405.
EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). 1979. Water Quality Criteria, Request for Comments.
Fed. Reg. 44(52):15926.
EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). 1980. Water Quality Criteria Documents; Availability.
Fed. Reg. 45(231):79350-79353.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

ORGANIZATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR RISK ASSESSMENT

149

Food Safety Council. Social and Economic Committee. 1979. Principles and Processes for Making
Food Safety Decisions. 54 pp.
Higginson, John. 1982. Report of the Scientific Workshop on the Critical Evaluation of Proposals
by the American Industrial Health Council to Strengthen the Scientific Base for
Regulatory Decisions.
Kantrowitz, Arthur. 1975. Controlling technology democratically. Am. Sci. 63:505-509.
NRC (National Research Council). 1981. The Handling of Risk Assessments in NRC Reports. A
Report to the Governing Board, National Research Council, by the Governing Board
Committee on the Assessment of Risk. 19 pp.
Office of Science and Technology Policy. 1978. Identification, Characterization, and Control of
Potential Human Carcinogens: A Framework for Federal Decision-Making.
U.S. Congress. 1981a. Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act. (P.L. 97-35, August 13, 1981) 15
U.S.C. 2077.
U.S. Congress. 1981b. House of Representatives, Committee on Agriculture, Hearings on the
National Science Council Act, H.R. 638. Hearings Before the Subcommittee on
Department Operations, Research, and Foreign Agriculture of the Committee on
Agriculture, June 23, 1981.
U.S. Congress. 1981c. House of Representatives H.R. 638. National Science Council Act 97th
Congress, 1st Session, 1981.
U.S. Congress. 1981d. Senate. S. 1442. Food Safety Amendments of 1981, 97th Congress, 1st
Session, 1981.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

RECOMMENDATIONS

150

IV
Recommendations

The Committee has reviewed federal risk assessment for hazards to public
health, particularly for chemically induced cancer, and has presented its
findings concerning the nature of risk assessment, the nature and utility of risk
inference guidelines, and the effects of alternative organizational arrangements
on risk assessment. The Committee's review leads to the general observation
that the process of risk assessment, as performed by and for federal regulatory
agencies, has been developing rapidly in recent years, both with respect to its
scientific basis and with respect to the agencies' organizational arrangements.
Change this rapid is bound to lead to misunderstanding about the use of risk
assessment in regulatory policy-making, particularly if some misconstrue risk
assessment to be a strictly scientific undertaking. Much of the criticism of risk
assessment stems from dissatisfaction with regulatory outcomes, and many
proposals for change are based largely on the unwarranted assumption that
altering the administrative arrangements for risk assessment would lead to
regulatory outcomes that critics will find less disagreeable. Because risk
assessment is only one aspect of risk management decision-making, however,
even greatly improved assessments will not eliminate dissatisfaction with risk
management decisions.
The Committee believes that the basic problem with risk assessment is not
its administrative setting, but rather the sparseness and uncertainty of the
scientific knowledge of the health hazards addressed. Reorganization of the risk
assessment function will not create the data and underlying knowledge that
assessors need to make risk assessments more precise. We hold that the most
productive path to a solution has three parts:

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

RECOMMENDATIONS

151

• Implementation of procedural changes that ensure that risk assessments
take full advantage of the available scientific knowledge while
maintaining the diverse organizational approaches to administration of
risk assessment needed to accommodate the varied requirements of
federal regulatory programs.
• Standardization of analytic procedures among federal programs
through the development and use of uniform inference guidelines.
• Creation of a mechanism that will ensure orderly, continuing review
and modification of risk assessment procedures as scientific
understanding of hazards improves.
The Committee offers in the following pages 10 recommendations whose
implementation it believes will meet these general objectives.
IMPROVING RISK ASSESSMENT THROUGH PROCEDURAL
CHANGES
Recommendation 1
Regulatory agencies should take steps to establish and maintain a clear
conceptual distinction between assessment of risks and the consideration of risk
management alternatives; that is, the scientific findings and policy judgments
embodied in risk assessments should be explicitly distinguished from the
political, economic, and technical considerations that influence the design and
choice of regulatory strategies.
Although the Committee concludes that risk assessment cannot be made
completely free of policy considerations, it also believes that policy associated
with specific risk management decisions should not influence risk assessment
unduly. Risk assessment and risk management involve different goals, kinds of
expertness, and operating principles. The goal of risk assessment is to describe,
as accurately as possible, the possible health consequences of changes in human
exposure to a hazardous substance; the need for accuracy implies that the best
available scientific knowledge, supplemented as necessary by assumptions that
are consistent with science, will be applied. The ultimate aim of risk
management is to evaluate tradeoffs between health consequences and other
effects of specific regulatory actions; this evaluation includes the application of
value judgments to reach a policy decision.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

RECOMMENDATIONS

152

Experience shows the difficulties that can arise from a blurring of the
distinction between the two elements. If risk management considerations (for
example, the economic or political effects of a particular control action for a
particular chemical) are seen to affect either the scientific interpretations or the
choice of inference options in a risk assessment, the credibility of the
assessment inside and outside the agency can be compromised, and the risk
management decision itself may lose legitimacy. Indeed, such consequences
can flow from the mere perception, as well as the fact, of such influences. Each
regulatory agency should commit itself to safeguarding the distinction between
the processes of risk assessment and risk management. One among several
suggestions for accomplishing this safeguarding is to restructure the formal
organization, separating an agency's or program's risk assessment staff from its
policy-making staff, possibly by establishing a separate risk assessment unit
outside the agency. The Committee does not, however, recommend that
agencies use any particular organizational arrangement for risk assessment. One
might surmise that separating the staffs would help to reduce the likelihood that
risk management considerations will influence risk assessment, but our survey
of agency structures provided no clear evidence that such an influence was
related to the degree of administrative separation.
Formal separation has disadvantages that must be balanced against its
value in maintaining a distinction between risk assessment and risk
management. Risk assessment and risk management functions are analytically
distinct, but in practice they do—and must—interact. Organizational
arrangements that completely isolate risk assessors from regulatory policymakers may inhibit important communication in both directions. For example,
to complete risk characterization, risk assessors must know what policy options
are to be used to calculate alternative projected exposures, and new options may
develop as the risk management process proceeds. Moreover, direct
communication with the risk assessors is desirable to ensure that the regulatory
decision-maker understands the relative quality of the available scientific
evidence, the degree of uncertainty implicit in the final risk assessment, and the
sensitivity of the results to the assumptions that have been necessary to produce
the assessment. Such separation could also impair the risk manager's ability to
obtain assessments that are timely and in a useful form. The advisability of
organizational

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

RECOMMENDATIONS

153

separation hinges on comparison of its benefits and costs in particular agencies
and programs.
Because drawbacks are likely to be most pronounced in the case of extraagency separation, the Committee does not believe that it is appropriate to
remove the risk assessment function and place it in an organization completely
separated from the regulatory agencies, as is contemplated in the AIHC
proposal and H.R. 638. This judgment is supported by the conclusion that the
benefits of increased separation are uncertain and that the disruption and
confusion caused by reorganization could be considerable.
Measures other than organizational separation can ensure the distinction
between the assessment of risk and the consideration of risk management
alternatives. These measures include the practice of preparing written risk
assessments (Recommendation 2), arranging for independent peer review
(Recommendation 3), and adhering to uniform guidelines for risk assessment
(Recommendations 5 through 9).
Recommendation 2
Before an agency decides whether a substance should or should not be
regulated as a health hazard, a detailed and comprehensive written risk
assessment should be prepared and made publicly accessible. This written
assessment should clearly distinguish between the scientific basis and the policy
basis for the agency's conclusions.
Although agencies commonly perform risk assessments before they take
regulatory actions, the written assessments that are prepared vary in coverage,
amount of explanatory detail, format, and completeness to an extent that limits
their use as instruments of communication. The Committee believes that the
matters addressed are so important and the consequences so far-reaching that a
written risk assessment should be prepared for every significant regulatory
decision and that each should be a clear, detailed, and comprehensive account
of the analysis performed. A written assessment should describe the volume and
weight of scientific evidence to help to clarify the scientific and policy bases for
regulatory decisions.
The written assessment should be made accessible to the public at a time
and in a form that facilitates public participation in any attendant risk
management decision.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

RECOMMENDATIONS

154

The Committee believes that the requirement to prepare a written
assessment imposes a salutary discipline that, for several reasons, will improve
the performance of risk assessment. First, the requirement to prepare a
comprehensive written assessment will encourage the agency to explain how
each component of the assessment was treated; that should minimize the
likelihood that risk management considerations will, unnoticed, affect the
outcome of the assessment. Second, a written assessment can help to distinguish
the factual basis of a risk assessment from inferences drawn where there is a
lack of scientific consensus; this distinction will facilitate scientific review of
the risk assessment, document the scientific basis of the assessment for outside
observers, and acquaint the regulatory decision-maker with the relative
completeness of the scientific evidence. Third, it will aid communication among
specialists working on different parts of the assessment. Fourth, the existence of
an explicit description should simplify the conduct of later assessments of the
same chemical, if additional scientific evidence comes to light or other
regulatory programs review the same substance. Finally, written risk
assessments will be useful to institutions that oversee regulatory agencies,
notably Congress and those responsible for judicial review. It is important,
however, that the format and scope of written assessments not become an
independent basis for legal attack.
Content and Form
An agency's written risk assessment should set forth in detail the nature
and quality of the relevant scientific evidence concerning the substance in
question and should cover all relevant components of risk assessment. It should
reflect attention to any applicable guidelines relied on in interpreting the
evidence, so that a reader can ascertain what inference options were used, and
should describe the scientific rationale for any departures from methods
prescribed in such guidelines. If the choice of inference options is not governed
by guidelines, the written assessment itself should make explicit the
assumptions used to interpret data or support conclusions reached in the
absence of data. The document should acknowledge gaps and uncertainties in
available information.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

RECOMMENDATIONS

155

An agency's written assessments are likely to prove most useful if they
follow a consistent format, so that readers, once familiar with the format, can
use them efficiently. We believe that each program or agency can establish a
uniform structure for its written assessments, and we hope that similarity, if not
uniformity, will be possible in written assessments prepared throughout the
government.
Actions Covered
This recommendation is not intended to apply to the risk posed by every
substance, use, or exposure that engages an agency's attention. It is intended to
apply to agency decisions concerning important human exposure to a hazard.
Such decisions would include (but not be limited to) establishment of an
occupational safety and health standard by OSHA, cancellation by EPA of the
federal registration of a pesticide to which there is widespread human exposure,
and EPA promulgation of limits for an air or water pollutant. The categories of
actions covered by this recommendation could be defined precisely only after
detailed statutory analysis. EPA appears to have had satisfactory experience
with the practice of classifying its regulations as ''major" (those with very large
economic and other effects that require an extensive regulatory analysis and
formal review by the Office of Management and Budget), "significant" (a larger
category defined by internal EPA criteria), and "minor" (a similarly large group
of routine and technical actions). We suggest that EPA prepare a written
assessment for every major and significant action, and we encourage other
agencies to devise similar methods of identifying which regulatory actions
require written assessments.
An agency's decision to refrain from regulation can often have important
consequences, both for health and for the economy, and such decisions should
rest on accurate, objective assessments of risk. The denial of a petition to act on
a chemical to which exposure is extensive is an example. When an agency is
confronted with choosing between limiting exposures to a substance and taking
some lesser action and there is serious dispute over the character or extent of the
risk posed, a written assessment is advisable.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

RECOMMENDATIONS

156

Recommendation 3
An agency's risk assessment should be reviewed by an independent science
advisory panel before any major regulatory action or decision not to regulate.
Peer review may be performed by science panels already established or
authorized under current law or, in their absence, by panels created for this
purpose.
• If an agency's workload is substantial, a standing advisory panel (or
panels) should be established to review its risk assessments; otherwise,
ad hoc panels should be established on a case-by-case basis.
• Panel members should be selected for their scientific or technical
competence.
• The appointment of members should be the responsibility of each
agency director, but nominations from the public and scientific
organizations should be invited, unless current law prescribes another
procedure.
• Panels should provide to the referring agencies written evaluations of
agency risk assessments, and the evaluations should be available for
public inspection.
This recommendation endorses outside peer review of agency risk
assessments. Such review should contribute to the important distinction
between risk assessment and risk management, because risk management
information would be excluded from the review; should improve the scientific
quality of the assessments through the process of criticism and response; and
should increase the credibility of agency assessments. The practice of preparing
written risk assessments will facilitate the review process.
The peer review function that we visualize is already evident in some
agencies. We believe that a single approach would not fit all contexts, but that
any mechanism for scientific peer review should meet the general criteria
described below.
Panel Form
The review function we recommend could be performed effectively by an
appropriately qualified standing panel of independent scientists that is
responsible for reviewing agency assessments of a particular class of hazards.
Any agency program responsible for a large number of

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

RECOMMENDATIONS

157

compounds to which humans are exposed in large amounts seems to be an
appropriate candidate for a standing scientific review panel, but some programs
may deal with so few chronic health hazards that a standing panel is not
warranted. The Committee specifically contemplates that the review function
recommended here can be performed by panels already available to several
agency programs.
Panel Composition and Selection
Members of a scientific review panel should be selected for their
competence in fields relevant to the assessment of risks of the kind being
evaluated. In our judgment, employees of private business organizations,
members of environmental groups, and government research or regulatory
agency employees should not necessarily be disqualified; but no panel members
should be employees of the agency whose risk assessments are to be reviewed,
nor should any members participate in the review of substances in which they
or their employers have substantial economic or other interests or on whose
risks they or their employers have publicly taken a position. It is important to
safeguard both the reality and the appearance of complete objectivity for each
review.
We contemplate that, as is common for existing panels, the appointing
official would be the head of the agency whose risk assessments are to be
reviewed. Such an arrangement could be thought to jeopardize a panel's
independence from the agency, particularly in cases in which it is known which
chemicals the panel will review. Accordingly, each agency should establish
procedures for obtaining nominees for panel membership whose objectivity is
ensured. For example, some current procedures call for agency selection of
members from lists of nominees provided by the President of the National
Academy of Sciences and by the Directors of the National Institutes of Health
and the National Science Foundation. We see no magic in any particular
nomination process. The important objective is a process that, first, ensures that
panel members are selected for their training and experience in relevant fields;
second, prevents the appointing official from forming a panel that will produce
(or appear to produce) a predetermined result; and, third, operates
expeditiously. We recommend that this process include an opportunity for
members of the public to nominate persons for panel membership.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

RECOMMENDATIONS

158

Panel Functions
Our recommendation contemplates that, in a typical case, the responsible
agency will have prepared a written assessment of the risk posed by a
substance. The independent scientific panel would be asked to review that
assessment for comprehensiveness, scientific accuracy, and consistency with
any applicable risk assessment guidelines. If such guidelines are flexible, an
important panel function will be to ensure that departures from the inference
options favored by the guidelines are justified on scientific grounds. In
performing this role, the panel should, if it desires, have access to all the data
available to the agency, including those on which the agency's analysts relied,
as well as the agency's written assessment. The panel should subject the
agency's risk assessment to such scrutiny as the members find necessary to
satisfy themselves that it is, with or without revisions, as complete and objective
as available data permit. The panel should provide a written evaluation of the
agency's risk assessment, including recommendations for revision, if
appropriate. This evaluation should be available for public examination by the
time the agency initiates public proceedings to alter human exposure to the
substance in question for example, when the agency issues a notice of proposed
rule-making.
Panel Agenda
Independent review of agency risk assessments is designed to ensure the
integrity and quality of the scientific bases for regulatory decisions affecting
human health. Therefore, the Committee recommends that every action,
including a decision not to regulate, that requires a written risk assessment be
available for independent scientific review. A scientific review panel's agenda
may also include risk assessments for other decisions of interest to panel
members, or its review could be initiated after a request by a third party. In the
latter case, panels should have the authority to decide whether or not to respond
to such requests for review. In general, the Committee expects that the panels
would exercise discretion in invoking their authority to review assessments for
routine, minor actions.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

RECOMMENDATIONS

159

Timing of Review
Independent scientific review of agency risk assessments should occur
before an agency commences the public process leading to regulatory action.
The purpose is to expose the agency's initial assessment of the risk posed by a
substance to expert scrutiny at a time when review can influence the agency's
course of action. Experience suggests that agencies are less receptive to
criticism of the basis of their actions after they have announced a proposed
course of action. Furthermore, although independent review can sometimes
forestall misguided regulatory actions even after they are initiated, prior review
of such actions may help to avoid serious damage to agency credibility and
unnecessary costs to private interests that would be adversely affected by public
proposals for regulatory action. We recognize an important exception to our
general recommendation of precaution peer review. Several statutes expressly
empower agencies to act in an emergency to curtail human exposure to a
substance that poses a serious health risk. Agencies have also devised informal
procedures to effect immediate protection of humans exposed to dangerous
substances in other contexts. Our recommendation is not intended to cast doubt
on the legitimacy of such authority or to impede its appropriate exercise. When
an agency concludes that a hazard warrants immediate regulatory action to limit
human exposure, it should be able to take action consistent with existing law
without first going through the review process that we recommend. Promptly
thereafter, however, the agency should submit its written risk assessment for
independent review in accordance with the procedures outlined here.
Weight of Panel Evaluation
A scientific review panel's critique of an agency's risk assessment should
not be binding; that is, the agency should not be obliged to revise its risk
assessment if the panel regards it as deficient. Agencies have a responsibility to
state the basis of their actions, and the authority for their actions must remain
their own. Serious panel criticism, however, would in practice cause any agency
at least to reconsider, and ordinarily to revise, its risk assessment. The agency
should discuss any important criticisms of its assessment in its proposed
regulatory action, and its response to a panel's criti

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

RECOMMENDATIONS

160

cisms would be an appropriate subject for public comment, as well as a possible
basis for judicial challenge to any final action.
We believe that an important benefit of peer review occurs before the
review begins: risk assessors who expect an assessment to be subjected to
serious scrutiny by eminent qualified reviewers are likely to be more careful
and clear about the use and limits of scientific evidence.
Federal Advisory Committee Act
The Federal Advisory Committee Act imposes many salutary requirements
on panels established to advise federal agencies, including notably the
requirement that panel meetings be held in public. But the Act's requirement
that new advisory committees be chartered by the General Services
Administration imposes substantial delays and its requirement that panel
meetings be announced in the Federal Register at least 15 days in advance can
markedly slow a panel's work. Consideration should be given to modifying both
requirements or exempting such panels from the Act, as Congress did for
CPSC's Chronic Hazard Advisory Panels.
Recommendation 4
When two or more agencies share interest in and jurisdiction over a health
hazard that is a candidate for regulation by them in the near term, a joint risk
assessment should be prepared under the auspices of the National Toxicology
Program or another appropriate organization. Joint risk assessments should be
prepared primarily by scientific personnel provided by the agencies and assisted
as necessary by other government scientists.
This recommendation endorses coordination in assessing the risks of
chemicals that are likely candidates for regulation by two or more agencies.
Although all the end uses of a substance may fall within the jurisdiction of one
agency (such as FDA for a food additive), exposures occurring during
production, transportation, and distribution usually are within other agencies'
jurisdictions. Thus, chemicals that pose a hazard to human health are at least
theoretically subject to regulation by two or more

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

RECOMMENDATIONS

161

federal agencies. The Committee agrees with proponents of the centralization of
risk assessment responsibilities that the agencies involved should operate on the
basis of a common assessment of the substance's risks. However, the
Committee differs with respect to the method for achieving this end.
Actions Covered
Our recommendation does not call for the performance of a joint risk
assessment in every instance in which a substance potentially falls within the
jurisdiction of two or more agencies; we limit our proposal to circumstances in
which assessment by more than one agency is likely in the near future. This
limitation has two rationales. First, substantial risk may be associated with
routes of exposure of concern to only one agency. Under such circumstances, it
would be unreasonable to invest time and resources to establish an interagency
panel of scientists. Second, even if different types of exposure entail risks, a
substance may legitimately rank low in priority for one agency and high for
another.
Placement and Procedures
The approach we visualize is similar to that followed in 1980, when the
Interagency Regulatory Liaison Group, at the suggestion of CPSC, sought the
assistance of the National Toxicology Program to examine the carcinogenicity
of formaldehyde. The Program formed an ad hoc panel that consisted entirely of
government scientists, including some from EPA, OSHA, and FDA.
We suggest that the National Toxicology Program be the usual vehicle for
coordinating preparation of joint risk assessments. The National Toxicology
Program has been in operation for several years and, in the Committee's
judgment, has performed capably as coordinator of federal toxicologic research.
It has displayed an ability to command the service of the government's best
scientists. And it has developed effective working relationships with the
regulatory agencies, which have become accustomed to looking to it for
assistance in evaluating substances that are candidates for regulation.
We expect that suggestions for establishment of an interagency task force
to evaluate a hazard will come

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

RECOMMENDATIONS

162

from the interested regulatory agencies. The personnel assigned to assemble the
relevant data and perform the assessment could include scientists from the
interested regulatory agencies, including the initiating agencies, and scientists
from government research organizations, such as the National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, the National Cancer Institute, and the National
Center for Toxicological Research. The Committee recommends that task
forces follow the same guidelines used by the regulatory agencies. Joint risk
assessments should be subjected to independent scientific review.
For reasons presented in the discussion of Recommendation 1, the
Committee believes that such an ad hoc approach is preferable to creation of a
centralized risk assessment body.
IMPROVING RISK ASSESSMENT THROUGH UNIFORM
INFERENCE GUIDELINES
Recommendation 5
Uniform inference guidelines should be developed for the use of federal
regulatory agencies in the risk assessment process.
In the Committee's judgment, the development of uniform inference
guidelines is feasible and desirable. However, the Committee emphasizes that
guidelines cannot provide a formula for automatically calculating risk from
available data; case-by-case scientific interpretation will still be crucial, and risk
assessments must reflect experts' characterizations of the quality of the data and
of the uncertainty associated with the final assessment.
Adherence to uniform guidelines has several advantages over ad hoc
performance of risk assessments. Guidelines could help to separate risk
assessment from risk management considerations, improve public
understanding of the process, foster consistency, and prevent oversights and
judgments that are inconsistent with current scientific thought. The
development and application of guidelines would help to focus discussion by
the public and the scientific community on the generic issues of risk
assessment, outside the sometimes charged context of particular regulatory
decisions. Such discussion could stimulate research interest and lead to
evolutionary improvement in the guidelines and thus in the quality of

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

RECOMMENDATIONS

163

risk assessment—improvement that would not occur if risk assessments were
performed on an ad hoc basis. Guidelines also provide an efficient means to
ensure the quality and relevance of data generated in new bioassay,
epidemiologic, and other pertinent studies on the toxicity of particular
chemicals, thus improving the scientific data base for future risk assessments of
those chemicals. Guidelines can also help regulated parties to know in advance
the criteria that agencies will apply in evaluating substances. Industry would
benefit if all federal agencies used the same guidelines. Furthermore, uniform
federal guidelines could help to harmonize the current development of risk
assessment methods by an increasing number of state programs.
Uniform guidelines should be prepared for hazard identification, doseresponse assessment, and risk characterization. Government-wide guidelines for
exposure assessment may be impractical, and this aspect of risk assessment is
treated separately in Recommendation 9.
The Committee is aware of several arguments to the effect that uniform
guidelines could have adverse effects. We believe, however, that well-designed
and carefully applied guidelines will minimize these disadvantages.
Recommendation 6
The inference guidelines should be comprehensive, detailed, and flexible.
They should make explicit the distinctions between the science and policy
aspects of risk assessment. Specifically, they should have the following
characteristics:
• They should describe all components of hazard identification, doseresponse assessment, and risk characterization and should require
assessors to show that they have considered all the necessary
components in each step.
• They should provide detailed guidance on how each component should
be considered, but permit flexibility to depart from the general case if
an assessor demonstrates that an exception is warranted on scientific
grounds.
• They should provide specific guidance on components of data
evaluation that require the imposition of risk assessment policy
decisions and should clearly distinguish those decisions from scientific
decisions.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

RECOMMENDATIONS

164

• They should provide specific guidance on how an assessor is to present
the results of the assessment and the attendant uncertainties.
Distinguishing Science from Policy
A frequent deficiency of agency risk assessments is the failure to
distinguish between scientific and policy considerations in risk assessment.
Critics contend that the results of risk assessment are often seen as scientific
findings by regulators and the public, whereas in fact they are based in part on
other considerations. The Committee believes that guidelines can lead to risk
assessments that clearly delineate the limits of current scientific knowledge and
the policy basis for choosing among inference options.
Comprehensive and Detailed Nature
Comprehensive, detailed guidelines are needed to delineate risk
assessment as a process distinct from risk management. Comprehensive
guidelines are those which address all components of risk assessment that are
subject to generic treatment. Detailed guidelines are those which provide
substantial supplementary scientific discussion of each component. Such
discussion helps to reduce the possibility that analysts will misuse guidelines as
cookbook instructions and helps analysts to anticipate special conditions for
which particular inference options are appropriate or inappropriate.
Broad statements of principle are inadequate, because they leave
components undefined and may permit excessive discretion in particular cases.
An explicit, comprehensive statement has the advantages of improving public
understanding of government risk assessment and of assisting regulated parties
to anticipate government actions.
Another reason for specifying comprehensive, detailed guidelines is that
they hold the greatest promise of preventing inconsistency within and among
agencies. At numerous points in a risk assessment, different risk assessors may
select different (but scientifically valid) inference options; guidelines should
specifically address each of these. A related advantage is an improvement in
quality control that could occur if all assessors were

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

RECOMMENDATIONS

165

required to consider the broad range of issues addressed in such guidelines; that
would decrease the likelihood that important considerations would be neglected
or that uninformed judgment would occur.
Flexibility
The Committee espouses flexible guidelines. Rigid guidelines, which
permit no variation, might preclude the consideration of relevant scientific
information peculiar to a particular chemical and thus force assessors to use
inference options that are not appropriate in a given case. Also, rigid guidelines
might mandate the continued use of concepts that become obsolete with new
scientific developments. Large segments of the scientific community would
undoubtedly object to such guidelines as incompatible with the use of the best
scientific judgment for policy decisions.
Flexibility can be introduced by the incorporation of default options . The
assessor would be instructed to use a designated (default) option unless specific
scientific evidence suggested otherwise. The guidelines would thus permit
exceptions to the general case, as long as each exception could be justified
scientifically. Such justifications would be reviewed by the scientific review
panels and by the public under procedures described above. Guidelines could
profitably highlight subjects undergoing relatively rapid scientific development
(e.g., the use of metabolic data for interspecies comparisons) and any other
components in which exceptions to particular default options were likely to
arise. They should also attempt to present criteria for evaluating whether an
exception is justified.
Presenting the Results of the Assessment
Conclusions based on a large number of sequential, discretionary choices
necessarily entail a large, cumulative uncertainty. The degree of uncertainty
may be masked to some extent when, in the final form of an assessment, risk is
presented as a number with an associated measure of statistical significance. If
they are to be most instructive to decision-makers, assessments should provide
some insight into qualitative characteristics of the data and interpretations that
may impute more or less certainty to the final results.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

RECOMMENDATIONS

166

Recommendation 7
The process for developing, adopting, applying, and revising the
recommended inference guidelines for risk assessment should reflect their dual
scientific and policy nature:
•

•

•

•

•

An expert board should be established to develop recommended
guidelines for consideration and adoption by regulatory agencies. The
board's recommended guidelines should define the scientific
capabilities and limitations in assessing health risks, delineate subjects
of uncertainty, and define the consequences of alternative policies for
addressing the uncertainties.
The expert board's report and recommendations should be submitted to
the agencies responsible for regulating the hazards addressed by the
guidelines for their evaluation and adoption. The agencies, perhaps
with central coordination, should, when possible, choose a preferred
option from among the options that are consistent with current
scientific understanding. The procedures for adoption should afford an
opportunity for members of the public to comment.
The process followed by the government for adoption of inference
guidelines should ensure that the resulting guidelines are uniform
among all responsible agencies and are consistently adhered to in
assessing the risks of individual hazards.
The resulting uniform guidelines should govern the performance of
risk assessments by all the agencies that adopt them until they are reexamined and revised; they should not prevent members of the public
from disputing their soundness or applicability in particular cases. In
short, the guidelines should have the status of established agency
procedures, rather than binding regulations.
The guidelines should be reviewed periodically with the advice and
recommendations of the expert board. The process for revising the
guidelines, like the process for adoption, should afford an opportunity
for comment by all interested individuals and organizations.

Inference guidelines for risk assessment are based largely on science, but
other considerations are involved in components with substantial scientific
uncertainty. For these, the choice among inference options can have substantial
policy ramifications. Thus, we recommend a

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

RECOMMENDATIONS

167

two-step process in which a board of experts recommends guidelines and
provides scientific commentary on available inference options and then the
government adopts final guidelines based in part on the board's
recommendations.
The Board and Its Role
The recommended guidelines should be developed by a congressionally
chartered board of experts who are independent of regulatory policy-making.
We describe this board, its placement, and other functions that it can serve in
Recommendation 10. In general terms, the board should be permanent, should
represent professional excellence on a national scale, and should have facility
with issues that have policy ramifications. We see advantages in locating the
board outside the government.
The board's role is mainly scientific. It should define the components of
risk assessment and describe the scientific basis for each. When it finds general
scientific agreement on the proper inference option for a component, it should
designate that option in a recommended guideline. When the board finds no
general scientific agreement on the available inference options, it should
recommend against the use of options that are scientifically unsupportable and
comment on the relative strength of the scientific support for the options that
remain.*
Agency Adoption
The Committee envisions that the second step in the establishment of
guidelines will be in the hands of the

* Some members of the Committee believe that the board should also be encouraged
in such cases to recommend the option that it judges to have the most scientific support,
as long as the board clearly indicates that such choices are based on members' informed
scientific judgment, not on general agreement in the scientific community. Other
Committee members believe that such recommendations would imply scientific certainty
where none exists and thus would result in scientists' improperly recommending policy
on the basis of their subjective judgments.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

RECOMMENDATIONS

168

government. The choice of guidelines is, ultimately, the responsibility of duly
elected or appointed public officials, and public review and comment on the
proposed guidelines should be completed before they are adopted. The
Committee emphasizes that, to be most useful, the final guidelines should
prescribe default options for all components of risk assessment. Thus, the
second step should further limit the inference options available to the agencies,
even for components in which the board found that no single option could be
chosen on scientific grounds. In that case, full consideration should be given to
the board's comments on the merit of the scientific support that is available for
each option.
It is important that the process result in a timely, uniform set of inference
guidelines to be used by all agencies. We thus see advantage in coordination of
the agencies' adoption of guidelines by a single, central authority such as the
Office of Science and Technology Policy, or by a mechanism designated by
Congress.
The Committee believes that adopting the guidelines as established
procedures, rather than as formal regulations, would have several important
advantages: it would allow guidelines to be adopted and amended more easily;
it would bind the agencies to adhere to the guidelines until they were reviewed
and revised (thus fostering predictability and consistency—any agency's failure
to comply with its own guidelines could be noted by independent scientific
review panels and could be cited as grounds for interested parties' legal appeal
of an associated regulatory decision); and it would permit members of the
public to advocate new or alternative approaches to risk assessment.
Joint risk assessments performed by interagency task forces should be
governed by the guidelines that emerge from this process.
Uniformity
The Committee has presented its case for uniformity in guidelines:
consistency in the conduct of risk assessment reduces the appearance of unfair
and inconsistent regulatory policies, improves priority-setting among regulators'
programs, increases public understanding, and provides coherence for those
subject to various regulatory authorities. A frequent argument against
government-wide guidelines is that different agencies have statutory respon

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

RECOMMENDATIONS

169

sibilities that reflect different social policies and therefore require different
approaches to risk assessment. This argument reflects a misunderstanding of the
purpose of guidelines. An agency would remain free to incorporate whatever
social judgments are embodied in its mandate when deciding whether and how
to regulate. Such risk management choices can be made independently of and
after the completion of a risk assessment. Thus, two agencies could use the
same risk assessment of a substance, but regulate it differently on the basis of
statutory or policy criteria applied after risk assessment.
Periodic Review
The scientific basis of risk assessment is evolving rapidly. Guidelines must
continue to evolve to accommodate scientific innovations and theories. By their
very nature, guidelines themselves will help to foster evolutionary
improvements by defining generic principles of risk assessment and focusing
debate and empirical research on these principles.
Furthermore, new public perceptions of risk occur, and guidelines will
evolve in response to these changes as well. For example, attitudes about the
practicality of the outright elimination of carcinogenic risk as a regulatory goal
have changed in the last decade. New methods of quantitative risk assessment
have developed, and public discussions have increasingly focused on that field.
These changes can be expected to continue, so regular periodic review of
guidelines appears to be essential. Such review should follow the same
procedures recommended for the initial guidelines, including ultimate agency
adoption after public comment.
Recommendation 8
The Committee recommends that guidelines initially be developed,
adopted, and applied for assessment of cancer risks. Consideration of other
types of health effects should follow. It may not yet be feasible to draw up as
complete a set of inference guidelines for some other health effects. For these,
defining the extent of scientific knowledge and uncertainties and suggesting
methods for dealing with uncertainties would constitute a useful first step.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

RECOMMENDATIONS

170

The Committee believes that guidelines for carcinogenic risk assessment
should be drawn up first: both because cancer is perceived as a major publichealth hazard and because there is considerable experience with carcinogenic
risk assessment from which to draw. Several guideline documents for
carcinogenic risk assessment have already been produced, and review of these
documents and of their history should provide a useful point of departure.
However, the other health effects that result from exposure to hazardous
substances are equally amenable to prevention by regulatory action. Guidelines
are desirable for these types of effects, which include mutagenicity,
reproductive and teratogenic effects, neurotoxicity, and behavioral changes.
Less information (and, in some cases, less knowledge of causal mechanisms) is
usually available on these effects. In fact, in some situations where the
knowledge base is less adequate than in cancer, stipulated methods for handling
scientific uncertainty may be even more important. Risk assessments for cancer
are likely more frequently to engage the problems of evaluating data on
exposure of experimental animals, whereas many other health effects will
require greater reliance on epidemiologic evidence.
The Committee believes that the absence of guidelines for a health effect is
not a justification for agency failure to perform risk assessments or to regulate
on a case-by-case basis.
Recommendation 9
Agencies should develop guidelines for exposure assessment. Because of
diverse problems in estimating different means of exposure (e.g., through food,
drinking water, and consumer products), separate guidelines may be needed for
each.
Operating assumptions are needed to estimate exposures when direct
measurements cannot be obtained. Examples of cases in which such estimates
would be important are the projection of exposure to new chemicals and
determination of the exposure reduction that would result from implementation
of a particular control option. In only a few narrow cases (e.g., food additives)
have general guidelines been developed for exposure assessment.
Although they are no less important than techniques for hazard
identification and dose-response assessment,

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

RECOMMENDATIONS

171

exposure assessment techniques have not been the subject of major scientific
debate and scrutiny. For example, if exposure were known more accurately,
priority-setting for testing new chemicals or for initiating regulation of one of a
group of chemicals could be organized on a more rigorous basis; consideration
of both the apparent potency and the estimated exposure would be factored into
such decisions.
Exposure assessment guidelines that are uniform across federal programs
may not be feasible, because of the diversity of media that must be addressed
and the large variation in exposures. Medium-specific exposure models (such as
dispersion models for air, water, and soil) are used by programs in the agencies
with various degrees of sophistication and validation. Each agency or each
program in an agency should develop medium-specific guidelines to stimulate
evolutionary improvement, increase consistency and predictability, and isolate
the choice among inference options from inappropriate risk management
considerations. Two or more programs that deal with a given medium of
exposure should use the same guidelines.
Agencies should make their proposed exposure assessment guidelines
available for public comment and should subsequently issue final guidelines as
established procedures.
A CENTRAL BOARD ON RISK ASSESSMENT METHODS
Recommendation 10
The Committee recommends to Congress that a Board on Risk Assessment
Methods be established to perform the following functions:
• To assess critically the evolving scientific basis of risk assessment and
to make explicit the underlying assumptions and policy ramifications
of the different inference options in each component of the risk
assessment process.
• To draft and periodically to revise recommended inference guidelines
for risk assessment for adoption and use by federal regulatory agencies.
• To study agency experience with risk assessment and evaluate the
usefulness of the guidelines.
• To identify research needs in the risk assessment field and in relevant
underlying disciplines.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

RECOMMENDATIONS

172

To avoid possible misunderstanding of the role of the Board, the
Committee stresses the limitations on proposed Board activities. The Board
would not perform or review individual risk assessments, nor would it
adjudicate disputes arising from regulatory actions related to specific
substances. Thus, the Board as envisioned would not perform functions
contemplated by the AIHC proposal or H.R. 638. A central board of
distinguished expert advisors is not well-suited to such day-to-day
responsibilities. Furthermore, we believe strongly that it would be inappropriate
to remove such essential analytic functions from the responsible agencies and
that it would be wasteful to duplicate agency activities.
The Board would make its contributions through discussion of contending
scientific positions, preparation of recommended uniform guidelines, and
fostering of advancement of the field. It would fill a need for a prestigious,
independent locus of activity for improving the understanding of generic issues
in both the scientific basis and the federal practice of risk assessment. Current
ad hoc approaches too often color debate on general issues with the implications
for particular, often contentious, risk management decisions. We expect that
Board activities would improve the scientific performance of the agency
processes and, in conjunction with other mechanisms we recommend, achieve
greater objectivity and consistency and better public understanding of risk
assessment. The Board would be the body to which agencies, agency review
panels, and others would turn both for periodic recommendations of guideline
revisions and for information on the evolving art of risk assessment.
Board Functions
We foresee four major functions for the Board. The first two, scientific
review and development of recommended guidelines, would pursue the process
described above for the initial generation of inference guidelines
(Recommendation 7). The drafting of guidelines by the Board would ensure that
guidelines benefit from the best available scientific knowledge and judgment.
After recommended guidelines for a particular health effect were prepared and
referred to the agencies for review and adoption, the Board would probably find
it useful to continue its activity in the review of scientific developments relevant
to risk assessment for that effect.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

RECOMMENDATIONS

173

The Board's third function would involve observation of and research into
federal experience with risk assessment generally and review of the usefulness
of guidelines. A major purpose would be to acquaint the Board with ways of
improving the guidelines in later periodic reviews.
As a fourth function, the Board would identify the key scientific research
needs in health risk assessment. Preparation of guidelines would put the Board
in an ideal position to understand which of the many inference options needed
to cover gaps in scientific understanding are most important and are amenable
to study. The policy difficulties in regulating chronic health hazards can be
resolved only if uncertainty in the scientific basis of assessments is reduced.
Board activities could take such forms as advising funding agencies on research
priorities, commissioning survey papers to synthesize recent scientific findings,
and sponsoring conferences or special publications on particularly apt scientific
questions or on matters that are important to risk assessment, but have been
neglected by the scientific community. In addition, the Board's experience
would place it in an ideal position to assess whether and how toxicologic
research on particular chemicals could be better tailored to the analytic needs of
future risk assessors. For example, many current testing procedures were
designed for the narrow purpose of hazard identification, and adjustments in
these procedures could lead to more definitive dose-response assessments.
The Committee believes that the responsibilities of the Board could be
discharged by a group of volunteer experts that convened monthly for 1-2 days.
Organizational Placement
The proper placement of the Board would be crucial to its prospects for
success. There are four criteria for identifying appropriate locations:
professional excellence, facility with studies having substantial policy
ramifications, permanence, and independence.
Professional excellence is important because the Board's recommended
guidelines, as well as its other work, should be based on the best available
science; the Board should be able to attract the best talent in the nation. Facility
with difficult policy issues is important because risk assessment is not a strictly
scientific undertaking, and it would be crucial for the Board to

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

RECOMMENDATIONS

174

conduct its work competently and with full understanding of the policy process.
Placement in a permanent, existing organization is advisable because the Board
should be able to begin its work quickly and remain stable in order to conduct
periodic revisions of guidelines. Independence is needed to provide credibility;
work that is suspected of bias will not transcend the current atmosphere of
distrust. We see advantages in placing the Board outside the government. In
particular, the Board should be able to draw on the widest pool of scientific
experts and not be restricted to government scientists; placement in the
government might hinder the perception that the Board is free from the policy
orientation of the administration in power; and direct involvement by the
regulatory agencies themselves could detract from their ability to make
regulatory decisions while the guidelines were in preparation.
The Committee has evaluated a number of possible organizational bases
for the Board. The National Toxicology Program has had relevant experience
with the scientific basis of risk assessment, but it already has major
responsibility for coordinating testing of chemicals of interest to regulatory
agencies. The Congressional Office of Technology Assessment is another
possibility. However, the governance of the Office of Technology Assessment
by a board composed of members of Congress could prove a practical
impediment to the production of guidelines. Guidelines would clearly have
policy ramifications that may be at variance with the established policy
positions of OTA board members. The Office of Science and Technology
Policy or the Office of Management and Budget could provide governmentwide coordination; both are in the Executive Office of the President and are
well positioned to ensure agency response and uniform implementation of
guidelines and other Board findings. The major disadvantage of location in the
Executive Office of the President is the lack of independence and,
consequently, the greater likelihood of mixing scientific and policy
considerations. All these organizations share the major drawback that they are
in the government.
A special-purpose national (or Presidential) commission on risk
assessment methods could attract eminent scientists to service and could be
designed to balance viewpoints, but would lack permanence and policy
experience. Professional societies constitute another class of possible
candidates, but they generally have limited familiarity with policy studies.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

RECOMMENDATIONS

175

We conclude that the National Academy of Sciences-National Research
Council meets the four criteria for placement. The AIHC proposal addressed the
same general concerns that have occupied this Committee and concluded that
the most appropriate locus for the central panel was in the NAS-NRC. Although
we do not concur in the idea of centralizing the performance of risk
assessments, the arguments presented by the AIHC proposal for the selection of
the NAS-NRC are fully applicable to the question of the placement of a Board
that would address generic scientific issues in risk assessment. We believe that
the Board could best function under NAS-NRC auspices, if the NAS-NRC
agreed to provide them, and would be of great value in achieving many of the
goals that we share with the authors of the AIHC proposal and of H.R. 638.
Current NAS-NRC procedures for establishing, managing, and issuing study
reports are appropriate for the prospective Board.
Qualifications of Members
We recommend that the Board consist of scientists with training and
experience in the various disciplines involved in the process of risk assessment,
including biostatistics, toxicology, epidemiology, environmental engineering,
and clinical medicine. Other relevant fields—such as law, ethics, and the social
sciences—should be included to ensure due appreciation of the policy context
of Board activities. For the same reason, some members should have familiarity
with regulatory programs. The nomination and selection of members should be
in accordance with established NAS-NRC procedures. Service might be for
staggered 3-year periods.
Sunset Review
The entire concept of the Board and its functions should be reviewed after
approximately 6-8 years.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
RECOMMENDATIONS
176

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

APPENDIX A

177

Appendix A
Background Information on Committee
Members
REUEL A. STALLONES, Chairman, is Dean of the University of Texas
School of Public Health in Houston. Dr. Stallones is an epidemiologist
specializing in studies of risk factors in cardiovascular disease and is a member
of the Institute of Medicine. He is a past member of the NRC Board on
Toxicology and Environmental Health Hazards and has served on several NRC
committees that evaluated the risks of environmental pollutants.
MORTON CORN is Director of the Division of Environmental Health
Engineering at the School of Hygiene and Public Health, The Johns Hopkins
University. He specializes in evaluation and engineering control of airborne
chemical agents in the workplace and the atmosphere. Dr. Corn served as the
Assistant Secretary of Labor for Occupational Safety and Health from October
1975 to January 1977. He is a member of the Panel of Experts in Occupational
Health of the World Health Organization and serves on committees of EPA's
Science Advisory Board and the Congressional Office of Technology
Assessment.
KENNY S. CRUMP is President of Science Research Systems, Inc., a
consulting firm specializing in the evaluation of statistical data and risk
assessment. His work on methods of extrapolating from high to low doses is
used by EPA's Carcinogen Assessment Group. He was previously with
Louisiana Tech University where he was Professor of Mathematics and
Statistics.
J. CLARENCE DAVIES is Executive Vice President of the Conservation
Foundation. He has served on other NRC

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

APPENDIX A

committees dealing with regulatory issues, was chairman of the NRC
Committee on Principles of Decision-Making for Regulating Chemicals in the
Environment (1974-1975), and now serves on the Environmental Studies
Board. Dr. Davies served for 6 years as a member of the Executive Committee
of EPA's Science Advisory Board.
VINCENT P. DOLE is Professor of Medicine at Rockefeller University and
conducts research on addictive behavior and metabolic diseases. Dr. Dole is a
member of the National Academy of Sciences and has served as an NAS
reviewer of a number of risk-related studies.
TED R. I. GREENWOOD is Associate Professor of Political Science at MIT.
He has served as a Senior Policy Analyst in the Office of Science and
Technology Policy (1977-1979). Dr. Greenwood has written about the problem
of nuclear waste disposal and recently completed a monograph on the
interaction between knowledge and discretion in regulatory decision-making.
RICHARD A. MERRILL is Dean of the Law School of the University of
Virginia. He has been on the Law School faculty since 1969, except for 2 years
(1975-1977), when he served as Chief Counsel to the FDA. He recently
completed a study of regulatory decision-making on carcinogens for the
Administrative Conference of the United States that focused on FDA's
regulation of food contaminants, CPSC's regulation of chronic hazards,
OSHA's program for workplace carcinogens, and the EPA pesticides program.
Dean Merrill is a member of the Institute of Medicine and the NRC Board on
Toxicology and Environmental Health Hazards. He teaches food and drug law,
environmental health regulation, and administrative law.
FRANKLIN E. MIRER is Director of the Health and Safety Department of the
International Union, United Auto Workers. Dr. Mirer, an industrial hygienist
and toxicologist, has been with the UAW since 1975. He specializes in issues
related to workplace chemical exposures and development of OSHA standards.
D. WARNER NORTH is a Principal with Decision Focus, Inc., a consulting
firm specializing in decision analysis, and consulting Associate Professor with
the Department

178

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

APPENDIX A

of Engineering-Economic Systems at Stanford University. Over the last 15
years, Dr. North has carried out applications of decision analysis and risk
assessment to a variety of public-policy issues. He has participated in three
previous NRC studies on air quality and toxic chemicals. His recent projects
include work on methods for setting priorities and developing a regulatory
strategy for toxic chemicals for the EPA Office of Toxic Substances. Dr. North
has served on committees of the EPA Science Advisory Board since 1977.
GILBERT S. OMENN is Dean of the School of Public Health of the
University of Washington in Seattle. A physician and geneticist, Dr. Omenn
served in senior positions in the Office of Science and Technology Policy and
in the Office of Management and Budget (1977-1981). He is a member of the
Institute of Medicine. At OSTP, he was concerned with federal decisionmaking for public-health risks and was coauthor of a paper on the process for
making such decisions. Before returning to the University of Washington, Dr.
Omenn was a Fellow at the Brookings Institution, where he analyzed EPA's
1979 decision to revise the national ambient air quality standard for
photochemical oxidants (measured as ozone).
JOSEPH V. RODRICKS is a Principal with ENVIRON Corporation, a
Washington, D.C., consulting firm specializing in risks related to exposure to
toxic substances. Dr. Rodricks, a biochemist, was with the FDA for 15 years
(1965-1980). While at FDA, he served as Deputy Associate Commissioner and
as chairman of an interagency work group on risk assessment that developed
guidelines for member agencies to follow for determining risks associated with
exposure to carcinogenic chemicals. Dr. Rodricks is a member of the NRC
Board on Toxicology and Environmental Health Hazards and a Diplomate of
the American Board of Toxicology.
PAUL SLOVIC is a psychologist at Decision Research in Eugene, Oregon. His
research interests are related to human judgment in decision-making, with
special emphasis on perception of risk, and he is coauthor of a book on the
concept of acceptable risk. Dr. Slovic has served as a consultant to FDA, NSF,
the National Institute of Mental Health, and the Nuclear Regulatory

179

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

APPENDIX A

Commission. He has been a council member of the Society for Risk Analysis
and is President-elect of that organization.
H. MICHAEL D. UTIDJIAN is Corporate Medical Director at the American
Cyanamid Company. Dr. Utidjian has been active in occupational medicine
since 1961. Before gaining his current position, he was a Staff Scientist at
Stanford Research Institute and served as a consultant to NIOSH. He also
served as Associate Corporate Medical Director at Union Carbide.
ELIZABETH WEISBURGER is Assistant Director for Chemical
Carcinogenesis at the National Cancer Institute. Dr. Weisburger, a toxicologist/
oncologist, has been at NCI for 33 years and was involved in initial NCI
decisions on establishing its bioassay program and determining which
compounds to test.

180

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

APPENDIX B

181

Appendix B
Bibliography

A. GUIDELINES AND POLICY FOR RISK ASSESSMENT
Albert, R. E., R. Train, and E. Anderson. Rationale Developed by EPA for the
Assessment of Carcinogenic Risks. Journal of the NCI Vol. 58, No. 5, May
1977, pp. 1537-1541.
Calkins, D. R., R. L. Dixon, C. R. Gerber, D. Zarin, and G. S. Omenn.
Identification, Characterization and Control of Potential Human
Carcinogens: A Framework for Federal Decision-Making. Journal of the
NCI Vol. 64, No. 1, January 1980, pp. 169-176.
Consumer Product Safety Commission. Interim Policy and Procedure for
Classifying, Evaluating, and Regulating Carcinogens in Consumer
Products. Federal Register Vol. 43, No. 114, June 13, 1978, pp.
25658-25665.
Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
Identification, Classification, and Regulation of Potential Occupational
Carcinogens. Federal Register Book 2 of 2, Vol. 45, No. 15, January 22,
1980, pp. 5001-5296.
Environmental Protection Agency. Health Risk and Economic Impact
Assessments of Suspected Carcinogens: Interim Procedures and
Guidelines. Federal Register Vol. 41, No. 102, May 25, 1976, pp.
21402-21405.
Environmental Protection Agency. Mutagenicity Risk Assessments; Proposed
Guidelines. Federal Register Vol. 45, No. 221, November 13, 1980, pp.
74984-74988.
Food and Drug Administration. Chemical Compounds in Food Producing
Animals: Criteria and Procedures for Evaluating Assays for Carcinogenic
Residues. Federal Register Vol. 44, No. 55, May 20, 1979, pp. 17070-17114.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

APPENDIX B

182

International Agency for Research on Cancer. General Principles for Evaluating
the Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals. In Evaluation of the Carcinogenic
Risk of Chemicals to Humans . IARC, Lyon, France, Vols. 1-29, 1972-1982.
Interagency Regulatory Liaison Group. Work Group on Risk Assessment.
Scientific Bases for Identification of Potential Carcinogens and Estimation
of Risks. Journal of the NCI Vol. 63, No. 1, July 1979, 25 pp. and Abstract.
March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation. Guidelines for Studies of Human
Populations Exposed to Mutagenic and Reproductive Hazards; Proceedings
of Conference. Washington, D.C., January 26-27, 1981, 163 pp.
National Academy of Sciences. Committee for a Study on Saccharin and Food
Safety Policy. Food Safety Policy: Scientific and Social Considerations.
NAS-NRC, March 1979.
National Academy of Sciences. Committee on the Biological Effects of
Ionizing Radiations. The Effects on Populations of Exposure to Low Levels
of Ionizing Radiation. NAS-NRC, 1980, 638 pp.
National Cancer Advisory Board. General Criteria for Assessing the Evidence
of Carcinogenecity of Chemical Substances. Report of the Subcommittee
on Environmental Carcinogenesis, NCAB. Journal of the NCI Vol. 58, No.
2, February 1977, pp. 461-465.
State of California, Health and Welfare Agency. Carcinogen Identification
Policy: A Statement of Science as a Basis of Policy; Section 2: Methods for
Estimating Cancer Risks from Exposure to Carcinogens. October 1982.
U.S. Regulatory Council. Statement on Regulation of Chemical Carcinogens:
Policy and Request for Public Comments. Federal Register Part IV, Vol.
44, No. 202, October 17, 1979, pp. 60038-60049.
B. SUGGESTIONS FOR PROCEDURAL REFORM
Albert, R. A. Toward a More Uniform Federal Strategy for the Assessment and
Regulation of Carcinogens. Report to the Office of Technology
Assessment, 1980.
American Industrial Health Council. AIHC Proposal for a Science Panel
(mimeo), March 12, 1981, 9 pp. and Appendix, AIHC Recommended
Framework for Identifying Carcinogens and Regulating Them in
Manufacturing Situations, October 11, 1979, 11 pp.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

APPENDIX B

183

American Industrial Health Council. Comparative Analysis of H.R. 6521
(Wampler Bill) and Science Panel Proposal, March 3, 1980.
American Industrial Health Council. Critical Evaluation of Proposals by the
AIHC to Strengthen the Scientific Base for Regulatory Decisions; Report
of the Scientific Workshop (mimeo), August 1982, 6 pp.
American Industrial Health Council. Proposals for Improving the Science Base
for Chronic Health Hazard Decision-Making, December 2, 1981, 29 pp.
and Appendixes.
Banks, R. The Science Court Proposal in Retrospect: A Literature Review and
Case Study. Critical Reviews in Environmental Control Vol. 10, August
1980, pp. 95-131.
Barr, J. T., D. H. Hughes, and R. C. Barnard. The Use of Risk Assessment in
Regulatory Decision-Making: Time for a Review. Regulatory Toxicology
and Pharmacology Vol. 1, 1981, pp. 264-276.
Bazelon, D. L. Risk and Responsibility. Science Vol. 205, July 20, 1979, pp.
277-280.
Boffey, P. M. Science Court: High Officials Back Test of Controversial
Concept. Science Vol. 194, October 8, 1976, pp. 167-169.
Deisler, P. F., Jr. Dealing with Industrial Health Risks: A Step-Wise, GoalOriented Concept. In Risk in the Technological Society, Hohenemser and
Kasperson, eds. Westview Press, 1981.
Food Safety Council. Social and Economic Committee. A New Approach:
Principles and Processes for Making Food Safety Decisions. FSC, 1981,
103 pp. plus Appendixes.
Food Safety Council. A Proposed Food Safety Evaluation Process: Final Report
of Board of Trustees. FSC, June 1982, 142 pp.
General Accounting Office. Improving the Scientific and Technical Information
Available to the EPA in Its Decision-making Process. Report CED-79-115,
September 1979, 60 pp.
Gori, G. B. Regulation of Cancer-Causing Substances: Utopia or Reality.
Chemical and Engineering News September 6, 1982, pp. 25-32.
Gori, G. B. The Regulation of Carcinogenic Hazards. Science Vol. 208, April
18, 1980, pp. 256-261.
H.R. 638 (Wampler Bill). National Science Council Act of 1981. Introduced
January 8, 1981.
H.R. 6159 (Ritter Bill). Risk Analysis Research and Demonstration Act of
1982. Introduced April 26, 1982.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

APPENDIX B

184

Kantrowitz, A. Controlling Technology Democratically. American Scientist
Vol. 63, 1975, pp. 505-509.
Kantrowitz, A. Proposal for an Institution for Scientific Judgment. Science Vol.
156, May 12, 1967, pp. 763-764.
Markey, H. T. Testimony to the Subcommittee on Science Research and
Technology, 1979. In Risk/Benefit Analysis in the Legislative Process .
U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., 1979.
Martin, J. Procedures for Decision-Making Under Conditions of Scientific
Uncertainty: The Science Court Proposal. Harvard Journal of Legislation
Vol. 16, Spring 1979, pp. 443-511.
National Academy of Sciences. Committee on Environmental DecisionMaking.
Decision-Making in the Environmental Protection Agency. NAS-NRC,
1977, 250 pp.
National Academy of Sciences. Committee on Food Protection, Food and
Nutrition Board. Risk Assessment/Safety Evaluation of Food Chemicals.
NAS-NRC, 1980, 36 pp.
National Academy of Sciences. Committee on Prototype Explicit Analyses for
Pesticides. Regulating Pesticides. NAS-NRC, 1980, 237 pp.
National Academy of Sciences. Committee on Toxicology. Principles and
Procedures for Evaluating the Toxicity of Household Substances. NASNRC, 1977, 130 pp.
National Academy of Sciences. Environmental Studies Board/Committee on
Toxicology. Principles for Evaluating Chemicals in the Environment. NASNRC, 1975.
Ramo, S. Regulation of Technical Activities: A New Approach. Science Vol.
213, Aug. 21, 1981, pp. 837-842.
Rowe, W. D. Regulation of Toxic Chemicals Within the Limits of Knowledge.
Report submitted to the Office of Technology Assessment, 1980.
S. 1442 (Hatch Bill). Food Safety Amendments of 1981. Introduced June 25,
1981.
Squire, R. A. Ranking Animal Carcinogens: A Proposed Regulatory Approach.
Science Vol. 214, 1981, pp. 877-880.
Toxic Substances Strategy of Committee. Report to the President: Toxic
Chemicals and Public Protection. U.S. Government Printing Office,
Washington, D.C., 1980.
U.S. House of Representatives. Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981:
Conference Report. Report 97-208, July 1981, pp. 383-384, 881-883.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

APPENDIX B

185

U.S. House of Representatives. Committee on Agriculture. The National
Science Council Act, June 1981.
U.S. House of Representatives. Committee on Science and Technology. Risk
Analysis Research and Demonstration Act of 1982. Report No. 97-625,
June 24, 1982.
Wessel, M. R. Science and Conscience. Columbia University Press, 1980, 140
pp.
C. SCIENTIFIC AND POLICY BASIS OF RISK ASSESSMENT
Ames, B. N. Identifying Environmental Chemicals Causing Mutations and
Cancer. Science Vol. 204, May 22, 1979, pp. 587-593.
Anderson, E. L. Quantitative Methods in Use in the United States to Assess
Cancer Risk. Paper presented at the Workshop on Quantitative Estimation
of Risk to Human Health from Chemicals, Rome, Italy, July 12, 1982.
Anderson, E. L. Uses of Quantitative Risk Assessment by EPA (mimeo).
Prepublication draft, 18 pp.
Ashford, N. A., E. M. Zolt, D. Hattis, J. I. Natz, G. R. Heaton, and W. C. Priest.
Evaluating Chemical Regulations: Trade-off Analysis and Impact
Assessment for Environmental Decision-Making (mimeo). MIT Center for
Policy Alternatives, 1979.
Baram, M. S. Cost-Benefit Analysis: An Inadequate Basis for Health, Safety,
and Environmental Regulatory Decision-making. Ecology Law Quarterly
Vol. 8, No. 3, 1980, pp. 473-531.
Campbell, G., D. Cohan, and D. W. North. The Application of Decision
Analysis to Toxic Substances: Proposed Methodology and Two Case
Studies. Prepared for EPA by Decision Focus Incorporated, 1981.
Cornfield, J. Carcinogenic Risk Assessment. Science Vol. 198, November 18,
1977, pp. 693-699.
Crandall, R. W., and L. B. Lave, eds. The Scientific Basis of Health and Safety
Regulation. Brookings Institution, 1981, 309 pp.
Crouch, E., and R. Wilson. Interspecies Comparison of Carcinogenic Potency.
Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health Vol. 5, 1979, pp.
1095-1118, plus Appendixes.
Crouch, E., and R. Wilson. Regulation of Carcinogens. Risk Analysis Vol. 1,
1981, pp. 47-57; discussion pp. 59-66.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

APPENDIX B

186

Crump, K. S. An Improved Procedure for Low-Dose Carcinogenic Risk
Assessment from Animal Data. Journal of Environmental Pathology and
Toxicology Vol. 5, No. 4, 1983.
Crump, K. S. Dose-Response Problems in Carcinogenesis. Biometrics Vol. 35,
March 1979, pp. 157-167.
Crump, K. S., D. Hoel, C. Langley, and R. Peto. Fundamental Carcinogenic
Processes and Their Implications for Low Dose Risk Assessment. Cancer
Research Vol 36, September 1979, pp. 2973-2979.
Crump, K. S. The Scientific Basis for Health Risk Assessment. Presentation at
the seminar sponsored by George Washington University Graduate
Program in Science, Technology, and Public Policy and by the EPA,
Washington, D.C., March 3, 1982.
Devoret, R. Bacterial Tests for Potential Carcinogens. Scientific American Vol.
241, No. 2, August 1979, pp. 40-49.
Doll, R., and R. Peto. The Causes of Cancer: Quantitative Estimates of
Avoidable Risks of Cancer in the United States Today. Journal of the NCI
Vol. 66. No. 6, June 1981, pp. 1191-1308.
Doniger, D., R. Liroff, and N. Dean. An Analysis of Past Federal Efforts to
Control Toxic Substances. Report to CEQ by the Environmental Law
Institute, July 20, 1978, 71 pp.
Dower, R. C., and D. Maldonado. An Overview: Assessing the Benefits of
Environmental Health and Safety Regulations. U.S. Regulatory Council,
1981, 34 pp.
Gelpe, M. R., and A. D. Tarlock. The Uses of Scientific Information in
Environmental Decision-making. Southern California Law Review Vol. 48,
1974, pp. 371-427.
Greenwood, T. Assessment of the Role of Science and Technology in StandardSetting by Two Federal Regulatory Agencies. Report to OSTP, March 1,
1981, 308 pp.
Greenwood, T. Knowledge and Discretion in Regulation (forthcoming).
Fischhoff, B., S. Lichtenstein, P. Slovic, S. L. Derby, and R. L. Keeney.
Acceptable Risk. Cambridge University Press, 1981, 185 pp.
Flamm, W. G. U.S. Approaches to Regulatory Carcinogens and Mutagens in
Food (mimeo). Address to the National Cancer Institute of Canada and
Toxicology Forum Conference, Vancouver, August 13, 1981.
Gaylor, D. W. The ED01 Study. Summary and Conclusion. Journal of
Environmental Pathology and Toxicology Vol. 3, 1979, pp. 179-183.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

APPENDIX B

187

Higgins, I. T. T. Importance of Epidemiological Studies Relating to Hazards of
Food and Environment. British Medical Bulletin Vol. 31, No. 3, 1975, pp.
230-235.
Hoel, D. G., D. W. Gaylor, R. L. Kirschstein, U. Saffiotti, and M. A.
Schneiderman. Estimation of Risks of Irreversible Delayed Toxicity.
Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health Vol. 7, 1975, pp. 133-151.
Howard, R. A., J. E. Matheson, and D. W. North. Decision Analysis for
Environmental Protection Decisions. SRI, June 1977, 67 pp.
Karch, N. J. Explicit Criteria and Principles for Identifying Carcinogens: A
Focus of Controversy and EPA. Volume IIa, Case Studies, National
Academy of Sciences, 1977, pp. 119-206.
Lave, L., and T. Romer. A Survey of Safety Levels in Federal Regulation .
Nuclear Regulatory Commission Rep. NUREG/CR-2226, June 1981, 46 pp.
Leape, J. P. Quantitative Risk Assessment in Regulation of Environmental
Carcinogens. Harvard Environmental Law Review Vol. 4, 1980, pp. 86-116.
Leventhal, H. Environmental Decision-making and the Role of the Courts.
University of Pennsylvania Law Review Vol. 122, January 1974, pp.
509-555.
Lowrance, W. W. Of Acceptable Risk: Science and The Determination of
Safety. William Kaufmann, Inc., Los Altos, Calif., 1976, 180 pp.
Mantel, N., and M. Schneiderman. Estimating ''Safe" Levels, A Hazardous
Undertaking. Cancer Research Vol. 35, June 1975, pp. 1379-1386.
McGarity, T. O. Substantive and Procedural Discretion in Administrative
Resolution of Science Policy Questions: Regulating Carcinogens in EPA
and OSHA. Georgetown Law Journal Vol. 67, 1979, pp. 729-810.
Merrill, R. A. CPSC Regulation of Cancer Risks in Consumer Products.
Virginia Law Review Vol. 67, 1981, p. 1261.
Merrill, R. A. FDA Regulation Environmental Contamination of Food. Virginia
Law Review Vol. 66, 1980, p. 1357.
Merrill, R. A. Federal Regulation of Cancer-Causing Chemicals. (mimeo).
Report to the Administrative Conference of the United States. April 1, 1982.
Munro, I. C., and D. R. Krewski. Risk Assessment and Regulatory Decisionmaking. Food and Cosmetic Toxicology Vol. 19, 1981, pp. 549-560.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

APPENDIX B

188

National Academy of Sciences. Committee on Risk and Decison-Making. Risk
and Decision-Making: Perspectives and Research. NAS-NRC, 1982 68 pp.
National Academy of Sciences. Governing Board; Committee on the
Assessment of Risks. The Handling of Risk Assessments in NRC Reports
(mimeo.). March 1981, 27 pp.
Nicholson, W. J., ed. Management of Assessed Risk for Carcinogens. New
York Academy of Sciences, 1981, 301 pp.
Nisbet, I. C. T., and N. J. Karch. Chemical Hazards to Human Reproduction .
Noyes Data, Park Ridge, N.J., 1983.
Office of Technology Assessment. Assessment of Technologies for
Determining Cancer Risks from the Environment. Office of Technology
Assessment, June 1981, 240 pp.
Oak Ridge National Laboratory/Environmental Protection Agency. Assessment
of Risks to Human Reproduction and to Development of Human Conceptus
from Exposure to Environmental Substances. ORNL/EIS-197,
EPA/9-82-001, February 1982, 158 pp.
Omenn, G. S. Risk Assessment and Environmental Policy-Making: An
Overview. Presentation at the seminar sponsored by George Washington
University Graduate Program in Science, Technology, and Public Policy
and by the EPA, Washington, D.C., January 27, 1982.
Rall, D. P. The Role of Laboratory Animal Studies in Estimating Carcinogenic
Risks for Man. Address to IARC Symposium, "Carcinogenic RisksStrategies for Intervention," Lyon, France, 1977, 12 pp.
Ricci, P. F., and L. S. Molton. Risk and Benefit in Environmental Law. Science
Vol. 214, December 4, 1981, pp. 1096-1100.
Rodricks, J. V., and R. G. Tardiff. Biological Bases for Risk Assessment. Paper
presented at the International Conference on Safety Evaluation and
Regulation of Chemicals, Session 2: State of the Art of Safety Evaluation,
Boston, Mass., February 24-26, 1982.
Rowe, W. D. An Anatomy of Risk. Wiley-Interscience, New York, 1977.
Samuels, S. W. Determination of Cancer Risk in a Democracy. Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences Vol. 271, 1976, pp. 421-430.
Thomas, L., S. J. Farber, R. A. Doherty, A. Koppas, and A. A. Upton. Report of
the Governor's Panel to Review Scientific Studies and the Development of
Public

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

APPENDIX B

189

Policy on Problems Resulting from Hazardous Wastes (mimeo). New York
State, October 1980, 33 pp.
Van Ryzin, J. Quantitative Risk Assessment. Journal of Occupational Medicine
Vol. 22, No. 5, May 1980, pp. 321-326.
Weinberg, A. M. Science and Trans-Science. Minerva No. 10, 1972, pp.
202-222.
Weisburger, J. H., and G. M. Williams. Carcinogen Testing: Current Problems
and New Approaches. Science Vol. 214, October 23, 1980 pp. 401-407.
D. BIBLIOGRAPHIES
Krewski, D., and C. Brown. Carcinogenic Risk Assessment: A Guide to the
Literature. Biometrics Vol. 37, June 1981, pp. 353-366.
Tardiff, R. G. Extrapolation: High to Low Doses (mimeo). National Academy
of Sciences, September 1981, 5 pp.
Tardiff, R. G. Extrapolation: High to Low Doses Combined with Laboratory
Animals to Humans (mimeo). National Academy of Sciences, October
1981, 6 pp.
Tardiff, R. G. Extrapolation. Laboratory Animals to Humans (mimeo). National
Academy of Sciences, October 1981, 6 pp.

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.
APPENDIX B
190

About this PDF file: This new digital representation of the original work has been recomposed from XML files created from the original paper book, not from the
original typesetting files. Page breaks are true to the original; line lengths, word breaks, heading styles, and other typesetting-specific formatting, however, cannot be
retained, and some typographic errors may have been accidentally inserted. Please use the print version of this publication as the authoritative version for attribution.

APPENDIX C

191

Appendix C
Working Papers

(Photocopies of the collected working papers of the Committee on the
Institutional Means for Assessment of Risks to Public Health are available from
the National Academy Press, 2101 Constitution Avenue, NW, Washington, DC
20418)
CASE STUDY: CPSC'S RISK ASSESSMENT FOR FORMALDEHYDE
William M. Stigliani
CASE STUDY: NITRITE
Catherine L. St. Hilaire
CASE STUDY: ASBESTOS RISK ASSESSMENTS BY OSHA/NIOSH AND
EPA
William M. Stigliani
AN ANATOMY OF RISK ASSESSMENT
Lawrence E. McCray
CURRENT FEDERAL PRACTICE IN RISK ASSESSMENT
Lawrence E. McCray and Robert I. Field

