# Source: https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/2009/09/test-no-403-acute-inhalation-toxicity_g1gh2927.html
# Document: OECD TG403 - Acute Inhalation Toxicity
# Downloaded: 2026-05-28

Section 4

Health effects

Test Guideline No. 403
Acute Inhalation Toxicity

25 June 2024

OECD Guidelines for the Testing
of Chemicals

OECD/OCDE

403
Adopted:
07 September 2009
Corrected: 25 June 2024

OECD GUIDELINE FOR THE TESTING OF CHEMICALS
Acute Inhalation Toxicity

INTRODUCTION
1.
OECD Guidelines are periodically reviewed in the light of scientific progress, changing
regulatory needs, and animal welfare considerations. The original acute inhalation Test Guideline 403 was
adopted in 1981. This revised Test Guideline 403 (TG 403) (1) has been designed to be more flexible, to
reduce animal usage, and to fulfil regulatory needs. The revised TG 403 features two study types: a
Traditional LC50 protocol and a Concentration x Time (C x t) protocol. Primary features of this Test
Guideline are the ability to provide a concentration-response relationship ranging from non-lethal to lethal
outcomes in order to derive a median lethal concentration (LC50), non-lethal threshold concentration (e.g.
LC01), and slope, and to identify possible sex susceptibility. The C x t protocol should be used when there
is a specific regulatory or scientific need that calls for the testing of animals over multiple time durations,
such as for purposes of emergency response planning (e.g. deriving Acute Exposure Guideline Levels
(AEGL), Emergency Response Planning Guidelines (ERPG), or Acute Exposure Threshold Levels
(AETL) values), or for land-use planning.
2.
Guidance on the conduct and interpretation of TG 403 studies can be found in the Guidance
Document on Acute Inhalation Toxicity Testing (GD 39) (2). The TG 403 should be conducted only as a
last resort after all the existing information has been considered (including in vitro, in chemico, and in
silico studies). If in vivo testing is required, consideration should be given to using alternative acute
inhalation studies that use fewer animals and more refined endpoints (TG 433 and TG 436). There are
instances where the TG 403 may still be necessary or still required by some regulatory authorities. It should
be noted that data generated from the earlier versions of this Test Guideline are equally valid.
3.

Definitions used in the context of this Guideline are provided in GD 39 (2).

4.
This Test Guideline enables test article characterization and quantitative risk assessment, and
allows test articles to be ranked and classified according to the United Nations (UN) Globally Harmonized
System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals (GHS) (3). GD 39 (2) provides guidance in the
selection of the appropriate Test Guideline for acute testing. When information on classification and
labelling only is required, Test Guideline 436 (4) is generally recommended [see GD 39 (2)]. Test
Guideline 403 is not specifically intended for the testing of specialized materials, such as poorly soluble
isometric or fibrous materials or manufactured nanomaterials.

INITIAL CONSIDERATIONS
5.
Before considering testing in accordance with this Test Guideline all available information on
the test article, including existing studies (e.g. TG 436)(4) whose data would support not doing additional
testing should be considered by the testing laboratory in order to minimize animal usage. Information that
© OECD, (2024)
You are free to use this material subject to the terms and conditions available at http://www.oecd.org/termsandconditions/

OECD/OCDE

403

may assist in the selection of the most appropriate species, strain, sex, mode of exposure and appropriate
test concentrations include the identity, chemical structure, and physico-chemical properties of the test
article; results of any in vitro or in vivo toxicity tests; anticipated uses and potential for human exposure;
available (Q)SAR data and toxicological data on structurally related substances [see GD 39 (2)].
6.
Testing corrosive and/or irritating test articles at concentrations that are expected to cause severe
pain and/or distress should be avoided to the extent possible. The corrosive/irritating potential should be
evaluated by expert judgment using such evidence as human and animal experience (e.g. from repeat dose
studies performed at non-corrosive/irritant concentrations), existing in vitro data (e.g. from TGs 430 (5),
431 (6) or 435 (7)), pH values, information from similar substances or any other pertinent data, for the
purpose of investigating whether further testing can be waived. For specific regulatory needs (e.g. for
emergency planning purposes), the TG 403 may be used for exposing animals to these materials because
it provides the study director or principal investigator with control over the selection of target
concentrations. However, the targeted concentrations should not induce severe irritation/corrosive effects,
yet sufficient to extend the concentration-response curve to levels that reach the regulatory and scientific
objective of the test. These concentrations should be selected on a case-by-case basis and justification for
concentration selection should be provided [see GD 39 (2)].

PRINCIPLE OF THE TEST
7.
This revised TG 403 has been designed to obtain sufficient information on the acute toxicity of
a test article to enable its classification and to provide lethality data (e.g. LC50, LC01 and slope) for one or
both sexes as needed for quantitative risk assessments. This Guideline offers two test methods. The first
method is a Traditional protocol in which groups of animals are exposed to a limit concentration (limit
test) or a series of concentrations in a stepwise procedure for a predetermined duration of usually 4 hours.
Other durations of exposure may apply to serve specific regulatory purposes. The second method is a (C x
t) protocol in which groups of animals are exposed to one (limit concentration) or a series of multiple
concentrations over multiple durations.
8.
Moribund animals or animals obviously in pain or showing signs of severe and enduring distress
should be humanely killed and are considered in the interpretation of the test result in the same way as
animals that died on test. Criteria for making the decision to kill moribund or severely suffering animals,
and guidance on the recognition of predictable or impending death, are the subject of an OECD Guidance
Document No. 19 on Humane Endpoints (8).

DESCRIPTION OF THE METHOD
Selection of animal species
9.
Healthy young adult animals of commonly used laboratory strains should be used. The preferred
species is the rat and justification should be provided if other species are used.
Preparation of animals
10.
Females should be nulliparous and nonpregnant. On the exposure day, animals should be young
adults 8 to 12 weeks of age, and body weights should be within ±20% of the mean weight for each sex of
any previously exposed animals of the same age. The animals are randomly selected and marked for
individual identification. The animals are kept in their cages for at least 5 days prior to the start of the test
to allow for acclimatization to laboratory conditions. Animals should also be acclimatised to the test
© OECD, (2024)

OECD/OCDE

403

apparatus for a short period prior to testing, as this will lessen the stress caused by introduction to the new
environment.
Animal husbandry
11.
The temperature of the experimental animal maintenance room should be 22±3°C. The relative
humidity should ideally be maintained in the range of 30 to 70%, though this may not be possible when
using water as a vehicle. Before and after exposures, animals generally should be caged in groups by sex
and concentration, but the number of animals per cage should not interfere with clear observation of each
animal and should minimize losses due to cannibalism and fighting. When animals are to be exposed noseonly, it may be necessary for them to be acclimated to the restraining tubes. The restraining tubes should
not impose undue physical, thermal, or immobilization stress on the animals. Restraint may affect
physiological endpoints such as body temperature (hyperthermia) and/or respiratory minute volume. If
generic data are available to show that no such changes occur to any appreciable extent, then pre-adaptation
to the restraining tubes is not necessary. Animals exposed whole-body to an aerosol should be housed
individually during exposure to prevent them from filtering the test aerosol through the fur of their cage
mates. Conventional and certified laboratory diets may be used, except during exposure, accompanied
with an unlimited supply of municipal drinking water. Lighting should be artificial, the sequence being
12 hours light/12 hours dark.
Inhalation chambers
12.
The nature of the test article and the objective of the test should be considered when selecting an
inhalation chamber. The preferred mode of exposure is nose-only (which term includes head-only, noseonly or snout-only). Nose-only exposure is generally preferred for studies of liquid or solid aerosols and
for vapours that may condense to form aerosols. Special objectives of the study may be better achieved
by using a whole-body mode of exposure, but this should be justified in the study report. To ensure
atmosphere stability when using a whole-body chamber, the total volume of the test animals should not
exceed 5% of the chamber volume. Principles of the nose-only and whole body exposure techniques and
their particular advantages and disadvantages are described in GD 39 (2).

EXPOSURE CONDITIONS
Administration of concentrations
13.
Nose-only exposures may be any duration up to 6 hours in rats. If mice are exposed nose-only,
exposures generally should not exceed 4 hours. Justification should be provided if longer duration studies
are needed [see GD 39 (2)]. Animals exposed to aerosols in whole-body chambers should be housed
individually to prevent ingestion of test article due to grooming of cage mates. Feed should be withheld
during the exposure period. Water may be provided throughout a whole-body exposure.
14.
Animals are exposed to the test article as a gas, vapour, aerosol, or a mixture thereof. The physical
state to be tested depends on the physico-chemical properties of the test article, the selected concentration,
and/or the physical form most likely present during the handling and use of the test article. Hygroscopic
and chemically reactive test articles should be tested under dry air conditions. Care should be taken to
avoid generating explosive concentrations.

© OECD, (2024)

OECD/OCDE

403

Particle-size distribution
15.
Particle sizing should be performed for all aerosols and for vapours that may condense to form
aerosols. To allow for exposure of all relevant regions of the respiratory tract, aerosols with mass median
aerodynamic diameters (MMAD) ranging from 1 to 4 µm with a geometric standard deviation (σg) in the
range of 1.5 to 3.0 are recommended (2) (9) (10). Although a reasonable effort should be made to meet
this standard, expert judgment should be provided if it cannot be achieved. For example, metal fumes may
be smaller than this standard, and charged particles, fibres, and hygroscopic materials (which increase in
size in the moist environment of the respiratory tract) may exceed this standard.
Test article preparation in a vehicle
16.
A vehicle may be used to generate an appropriate concentration and particle size of the test article
in the atmosphere. As a rule, water should be given preference. Particulate material may be subjected to
mechanical processes to achieve the required particle size distribution, however, care should be taken to
not decompose or alter the test article. In cases where mechanical processes are believed to have altered
test article composition (e.g. extreme temperatures from excessive milling due to friction), the composition
of the test article should be verified analytically. Adequate care should be taken to not contaminate the test
material. It is not necessary to test non-friable granular materials which are purposefully formulated to be
un-inhalable. An attrition test should be used to demonstrate that respirable particles are not produced when
the granular material is handled. If an attrition test produces respirable articles, an inhalation toxicity test
should be performed.
Control animals
17.
A concurrent negative (air) control group is not necessary. When a vehicle other than water is
used to assist in generating the test atmosphere, a vehicle control group should only be used when historical
inhalation toxicity data are not available. If a toxicity study of a test article formulated in a vehicle reveals
no toxicity, it follows that the vehicle is non-toxic at the concentration tested; thus, there is no need for a
vehicle control.

MONITORING OF EXPOSURE CONDITIONS
Chamber airflow
18.
The flow of air through the chamber should be carefully controlled, continuously monitored, and
recorded at least hourly during each exposure. The monitoring of test atmosphere concentration (or
stability) is an integral measurement of all dynamic parameters and provides an indirect means to control
all relevant dynamic atmosphere generation parameters. Special consideration should be given to avoiding
re-breathing in nose-only chambers in cases where airflow through the exposure system are inadequate to
provide dynamic flow of test article atmosphere. There are prescribed methodologies that can be used to
demonstrate that re-breathing does not occur under the selected operation conditions (2) (11). Oxygen
concentration should be at least 19% and carbon dioxide concentration should not exceed 1%. If there is
reason to believe that these standards cannot be met, oxygen and carbon dioxide concentrations should be
measured.
Chamber temperature and relative humidity
19.
Chamber temperature should be maintained at 22±3°C. Relative humidity in the animals’
breathing zone, for both nose-only and whole-body exposures, should be monitored and recorded at least
© OECD, (2024)

OECD/OCDE

403

three times for durations of up to 4 hrs, and hourly for shorter durations. The relative humidity should
ideally be maintained in the range of 30 to 70%, but this may either be unattainable (e.g. when testing
water based formulations) or not measurable due to test article interference with the test method.
Test article: Nominal concentration
20.
Whenever feasible, the nominal exposure chamber concentration should be calculated and
recorded. The nominal concentration is the mass of generated test article divided by the total volume of
air passed through the chamber system. The nominal concentration is not used to characterize the animals’
exposure, but a comparison of the nominal concentration and the actual concentration gives an indication
of the generation efficiency of the test system, and thus may be used to discover generation problems.
Test article: Actual concentration
21.
The actual concentration is the test article concentration at the animals’ breathing zone in an
inhalation chamber. Actual concentrations can be obtained by specific methods (e.g. direct sampling,
adsorptive or chemical reactive methods, and subsequent analytical characterisation) or by non-specific
methods such as gravimetric filter analysis. The use of gravimetric analysis is acceptable only for single
component powder aerosols or aerosols of low volatility liquids and should be supported by appropriate
pre-study test article-specific characterisations. Multi-component powder aerosol concentration may also
be determined by gravimetric analysis. However, this requires analytical data which demonstrate that the
composition of airborne material is similar to the starting material. If this information is not available, a
reanalysis of the test material (ideally in its airborne state) at regular intervals during the course of the
study may be necessary. For aerosolised agents that may evaporate or sublimate, it should be shown that
all phases were collected by the method chosen. The target, nominal, and actual concentrations should be
provided in the study report, but only actual concentrations are used in statistical analyses to calculate
lethal concentration values.
22.
One lot of the test article should be used, if possible, and the test sample should be stored under
conditions that maintain its purity, homogeneity, and stability. Prior to the start of the study, there should
be a characterization of the test article, including its purity and, if technically feasible, the identity, and
quantities of identified contaminants and impurities. This can be demonstrated by, but is not limited to,
the following data: retention time and relative peak area, molecular weight from mass spectroscopy or gas
chromatography analyses, or other estimates. Although the test sample’s identity is not the responsibility
of the test laboratory, it may be prudent for the test laboratory to confirm the sponsor’s characterization at
least in a limited way (e.g. colour, physical nature, etc.).
23.
The exposure atmosphere shall be held as constant as practicable and monitored continuously
and/or intermittently depending on the method of analysis. When intermittent sampling is used, chamber
atmosphere samples should be taken at least twice in a four hour study. If not feasible due to limited air
flow rates or low concentrations, one sample may be collected over the entire exposure period. If marked
sample-to-sample fluctuations occur, the next concentrations tested should use four samples per exposure.
Individual chamber concentration samples should not deviate from the mean concentration by more than
±10% for gases and vapours or ±20% for liquid or solid aerosols. Time to chamber equilibration (t 95)
should be calculated and recorded. The duration of an exposure spans the time that the test article is
generated and this takes into account the times required to attain t 95. Guidance for estimating t95 can be
found in GD 39 (2).
24.
For very complex mixtures consisting of gases/vapours, and aerosols (e.g. combustion
atmospheres and test articles propelled from purpose-driven end-use products/devices), each phase may
behave differently in an inhalation chamber so at least one indicator substance (analyte), normally the
principal active substance in the tested product formulation, of each phase (gas/vapour and aerosol) should
© OECD, (2024)

OECD/OCDE

403

be selected. When the test article is a mixture (e.g. a formulation), the analytical concentration should be
reported for the total formulation and not just for the active ingredient or the component (analyte).
Additional information regarding actual concentrations can be found in GD 39 (2).
Test article: Particle size distribution
25.
The particle size distribution of aerosols should be determined at least twice during each 4 hour
exposure by using a cascade impactor or an alternative instrument such as an aerodynamic particle sizer.
If equivalence of the results obtained by a cascade impactor or an alternative instrument can be shown,
then the alternative instrument may be used throughout the study. A second device, such as a gravimetric
filter or an impinger/gas bubbler, should be used in parallel to the primary instrument to confirm the
collection efficiency of the primary instrument. The mass concentration obtained by particle size analysis
should be within reasonable limits of the mass concentration obtained by filter analysis [see GD 39 (2)]. If
equivalence can be demonstrated in the early phase of the study, then further confirmatory measurements
may be omitted. For animal welfare reasons, measures should be taken to minimize inconclusive data
which may lead to a need to repeat an exposure. Particle sizing should be performed for vapours if there
is any possibility that vapour condensation may result in the formation of an aerosol, or if particles are
detected in a vapour atmosphere with potential for mixed phases (see paragraph 15).

PROCEDURE
26.
Two study types are described below: the Traditional protocol, and the C x t protocol. Both
protocols may include a sighting study, a main study, and/or a limit test (Traditional protocol) or testing at
a limit concentration (C x t). If one sex is known to be more susceptible, the study director may choose to
perform these studies using only the susceptible sex. If rodent species other than rats are exposed noseonly, maximum exposure durations may be adjusted to minimise species-specific distress. Before
commencing, all available data should be considered in order to minimize animal usage. For example, data
generated using TG 436 (4) may eliminate the need for a sighting study, and may also demonstrate whether
one sex is more susceptible [see GD 39 (2)].

TRADITIONAL PROTOCOL:
General considerations: Traditional protocol
27.
In a Traditional study, groups of animals are exposed to a test article for a fixed period of time
(generally 4 hours) in either a nose-only or whole-body exposure chamber. Animals are exposed to either
a limit concentration (limit test), or to at least three concentrations in a stepwise procedure (main study).
A sighting study may precede a main study unless some information about the test article already exists,
such as a previously performed TG 436 study [see GD 39 (2)].
Sighting study: Traditional protocol
28.
A sighting study is used to estimate test article potency, identify sex differences in susceptibility,
and assist in selecting exposure concentration levels for the main study or limit test. When selecting
concentration levels for the sighting study, all available information should be used including available
(Q)SAR data and data for similar chemicals. No more than three males and three females should be
exposed at each concentration (3 animals/sex may be needed to establish a sex difference). A sighting
study may consist of a single concentration, but more concentrations may be tested if necessary. A sighting

© OECD, (2024)

OECD/OCDE

403

study should not test so many animals and concentrations that it resembles a main study. A previously
performed TG 436 study (4) may be used instead of a sighting study [see GD 39 (2)].
Limit test: Traditional protocol
29.
A limit test is used when the test article is known or expected to be virtually non-toxic, i.e. eliciting
a toxic response only above the regulatory limit concentration. In a limit test, a single group of three males
and three females is exposed to the test article at a limit concentration. Information about the toxicity of
the test material can be gained from knowledge about similar tested compounds or similar tested mixtures
or products, taking into consideration the identity and percentage of components known to be of
toxicological significance. In those situations where there is little or no information about its toxicity, or
the test material is expected to be toxic, the main test should be performed.
30.
The selection of limit concentrations usually depends on regulatory requirements. When the GHS
Classification System is used, the limit concentrations for gases, vapours, and aerosols are 20000 ppm, 20
mg/L, and 5 mg/L, respectively (or the maximum attainable concentration) (3). It can be technically
challenging to generate limit concentrations of some test articles, especially as vapours and aerosols. When
testing aerosols, the primary goal should be to achieve a respirable particle size (MMAD of 1-4 µm). This
is possible with most test articles at a concentration of 2 mg/L. Aerosol testing at greater than 2 mg/L
should only be attempted if a respirable particle size can be achieved [see GD 39 (2)]. GHS discourages
testing in excess of a limit concentration for animal welfare reasons (3). The limit concentration should
only be considered when there is a strong likelihood that results of such a test would have direct relevance
for protecting human health (3), and justification provided in the study report. In the case of potentially
explosive test articles, care should be taken to avoid conditions favourable for an explosion. To avoid an
unnecessary use of animals, a test run without animals should be conducted prior to the limit test to ensure
that the chamber conditions for a limit test can be achieved.
31.
If mortality or moribundity is observed at the limit concentration, the results of the limit test can
serve as a sighting study for further testing at other concentrations (see main study). If a test article’s
physical or chemical properties make it impossible to attain a limit concentration, the maximum attainable
concentration should be tested. If less than 50% lethality occurs at the maximum attainable concentration,
no further testing is necessary. If the limit concentration could not be attained, the study report should
provide an explanation and supportive data. If the maximum attainable concentration of a vapour does not
elicit toxicity, it may be necessary to generate the test article as a liquid aerosol.
Main study: Traditional protocol
32.
A main study is typically performed using five males and five females (or 5 animals of the
susceptible sex, if known) per concentration level, with at least three concentration levels. Sufficient
concentration levels should be used to obtain a robust statistical analysis. The time interval between
exposure groups is determined by the onset, duration, and severity of toxic signs. Exposure of animals at
the next concentration level should be delayed until there is reasonable confidence of survival for
previously tested animals. This allows the study director to adjust the target concentration for the next
exposure group. Due to the dependence on sophisticated technologies, this may not always be practical in
inhalation studies, so the exposure of animals at the next concentration level should be based on previous
experience and scientific judgement. GD 39 (2) should be consulted when testing mixtures.

© OECD, (2024)

OECD/OCDE

403

CONCENTRATION X TIME (C X T) PROTOCOL
General considerations: C x t protocol
33.
A step-wise C x t study may be considered as an alternative to a Traditional protocol
when assessing inhalation toxicity (12) (13) (14). This approach allows animals to be exposed
to a test article at several concentration levels and for multiple time durations. All testing is
performed in a nose-only chamber (whole-body chambers are not practical for this protocol). A
flow diagram in Annex 1 illustrates this protocol. A simulation analysis has shown that the
Traditional protocol and the C x t protocol are both capable of yielding robust LC50 values, but
the C x t protocol is generally better at yielding robust LC01 and LC10 values (15).
34.
A simulation analysis has demonstrated that using two animals per C x t interval (one per
sex using both sexes, or two of the more susceptible sex) may generally be adequate when
testing 4 concentrations and 5 exposure durations in a main study. Under some circumstances,
the study director may elect to use two rats per sex per C x t interval (15). Using 2 animals per
sex per concentration and time point may reduce bias and variability of the estimates, increase
the estimation success rate, and improve confidence interval coverage. However, in case of an
insufficient close fit to the data for estimation (when using one animal per sex or two animals of
the more susceptible sex) a 5th exposure concentration may also suffice. Further guidance on
the number of animals and concentrations to be used in a C x t study can be found in GD 39 (2).

Sighting study: C x t protocol
35.
A sighting study is used to estimate test article potency and to assist in selecting exposure
concentration levels for the main study. A sighting study using up to three animals/sex/concentration [for
details see Appendix III of GD 39 (2)] may be needed to choose an appropriate starting concentration for
the main study and to minimize the number of animals used. It may be necessary to use three animals per
sex to establish a sex difference. These animals should be exposed for a single duration, generally 240 min.
The feasibility of generating adequate test atmospheres should be assessed during technical pre-tests
without animals. It is generally not necessary to perform a sighting study if mortality data are available
from a TG 436 study (4). When selecting the initial target concentration in a TG 403 study, the study
director should consider the mortality patterns observed in any available TG 436 studies (4) for both sexes
and for all concentrations tested [see GD 39 (2)].
Initial Concentration: C x t protocol
36.
The initial concentration (Exposure Session I) (Annex 1) will either be a limit concentration or a
concentration selected by the study director based on the sighting study. Groups of 1 animal/sex are
exposed to this concentration for multiple durations (e.g. 15, 30, 60, 120, or 240 minutes), resulting in a
total number of 10 animals (called Exposure Session I) (Annex 1).
37.
The selection of limit concentrations usually depends on regulatory requirements. When the GHS
Classification System is used, the limit concentrations for gases, vapours, and aerosols are 20000 ppm, 20
mg/L and 5 mg/L, respectively (or the maximum attainable concentration) (3). It can be technically
challenging to generate limit concentrations of some test articles, especially as vapours and aerosols. When
testing aerosols, the goal should be to achieve a respirable particle size (i.e. an MMAD of 1-4 µm) at a
limit concentration of 2 mg/L. This is possible with most test articles. Aerosol testing at greater than 2
mg/L should only be attempted if a respirable particle size can be achieved [see GD 39 (2)]. GHS

© OECD, (2024)

OECD/OCDE

403

discourages testing in excess of a limit concentration for animal welfare reasons (3). Testing in excess of
the limit concentration should only be considered when there is a strong likelihood that results of such a
test would have direct relevance for protecting human health (3), justification should be provided in the
study report. In the case of potentially explosive test articles, care should be taken to avoid conditions
favourable for an explosion. To avoid an unnecessary use of animals, a test run without animals should be
conducted prior to testing at the initial concentration to ensure that the chamber conditions for this
concentration can be achieved.
38.
If mortality or moribundity is observed at the initial concentration, the results at this concentration
can serve as a starting point for further testing at other concentrations (see main study). When a test
article’s physical or chemical properties make it impossible to attain a limit concentration, the maximum
attainable concentration should be tested. If less than 50% lethality occurs at the maximum attainable
concentration, no further testing is necessary. If the limit concentration could not be attained, the study
report should provide an explanation and supportive data. If the maximum attainable concentration of a
vapour does not elicit toxicity, it may be necessary to generate the test article as a liquid aerosol.
Main study: C x t protocol
39.
The initial concentration (Exposure Session I) (Annex 1) tested in the main study will either be a
limit concentration or a concentration selected by the study director based on the sighting study. If mortality
has been observed during or following Exposure Session I, the minimum exposure (C x t) which results in
mortality will be taken as a guide to establish the concentration and periods of exposure for Exposure
Session II. Each subsequent exposure session will depend on the previous session (see Annex 1).
40.
For many test articles the results obtained at the initial concentration, together with three
additional exposure sessions with a smaller time grid (i.e. the geometric spacing of exposure periods as
indicated by the factor between successive periods, generally √2), will be sufficient to establish the C x t
mortality relationship (16), but there may be some benefit to using a 5th exposure concentration [see Annex
1 and GD 39 (2)]. For mathematical treatment of results for the C x t protocol, see Annex 1.

OBSERVATIONS
41.
The animals should be clinically observed frequently during the exposure period. Following
exposure, clinical observations should be made at least twice on the day of exposure, or more frequently
when indicated by the response of the animals to treatment, and at least once daily thereafter for a total of
14 days. The length of the observation period is not fixed, but should be determined by the nature and time
of onset of clinical signs and length of the recovery period. The times at which signs of toxicity appear and
disappear are important, especially if there is a tendency for signs of toxicity to be delayed. All observations
are systematically recorded with individual records being maintained for each animal. Animals found in a
moribund condition and animals showing severe pain and/or enduring signs of severe distress should be
humanely killed for animal welfare reasons. Care should be taken when conducting examinations for
clinical signs of toxicity that initial poor appearance and transient respiratory changes, resulting from the
exposure procedure, are not mistaken for test article-related toxicity that would require premature killing
of the animals. The principles and criteria summarised in the Guidance Document on Humane Endpoints
(GD 19) should be taken into consideration (8). When animals are killed for humane reasons or found
dead, the time of death should be recorded as precisely as possible.
42.
Cage-side observations should include changes in the skin and fur, eyes and mucous membranes,
and also respiratory, circulatory, autonomic and central nervous systems, and somatomotor activity and

© OECD, (2024)

OECD/OCDE

403

behaviour patterns. When possible, any differentiation between local and systemic effects should be noted.
Attention should be directed to observations of tremors, convulsions, salivation, diarrhoea, lethargy, sleep
and coma. The measurement of rectal temperature may provide supportive evidence of reflex bradypnea
or hypo/hyperthermia related to treatment or confinement.
Body weights
43
Individual animal weights should be recorded once during the acclimatization period, on the day
of exposure prior to exposure (day 0), and at least on days 1, 3 and 7 (and weekly thereafter), and at the
time of death or euthanasia if exceeding day 1. Body weight is recognized as a critical indicator of toxicity
so animals exhibiting a sustained decrement of >20%, compared to pre-study values, should be closely
monitored. Surviving animals are weighed and humanely killed at the end of the post-exposure period.
Pathology
44.
All test animals, including those which die during the test or are euthanized and removed from
the study for animal welfare reasons, should be subjected to gross necropsy. If necropsy cannot be
performed immediately after a dead animal is discovered, the animal should be refrigerated (not frozen) at
temperatures low enough to minimize autolysis. Necropsies should be performed as soon as possible,
normally within a day or two. All gross pathological changes should be recorded for each animal with
particular attention to any changes in the respiratory tract.
45.
Additional examinations included a priori by design may be considered to extend the interpretive
value of the study, such as measuring lung weight of surviving rats, and/or providing evidence of irritation
by microscopic examination of the respiratory tract. Examined organs may also include those showing
evidence of gross pathology in animals surviving 24 or more hours, and organs known or expected to be
affected. Microscopic examination of the entire respiratory tract may provide useful information for test
articles that are reactive with water, such as acids and hygroscopic test articles.

DATA AND REPORTING
Data
46.
Individual animal data on body weights and necropsy findings should be provided. Clinical
observation data should be summarized in tabular form, showing for each test group the number of animals
used, the number of animals displaying specific signs of toxicity, the number of animals found dead during
the test or killed for humane reasons, time of death of individual animals, a description and time course of
toxic effects and reversibility, and necropsy findings.
Test report
47.

The test report should include the following information, as appropriate:
Test animals and husbandry
-

-

Description of caging conditions, including: number (or change in number) of animals per
cage, bedding material, ambient temperature and relative humidity, photoperiod, and
identification of diet;
Species/strain used and justification for using a species other than the rat;

© OECD, (2024)

OECD/OCDE
-

403

Number, age and sex of animals;
Method of randomization;
Details of food and water quality (including diet type/source, water source);
Description of any pre-test conditioning including diet, quarantine, and treatment for disease;

Test article
-

Physical nature, purity and, where relevant, physico-chemical properties (including
isomerization);
Identification data and Chemical Abstract Services (CAS) Registry Number, if known;

Vehicle
-

Justification for use of vehicle and justification for choice of vehicle (if other than water);
Historical or concurrent data demonstrating that the vehicle does not interfere with the outcome
of the study;

Inhalation chamber
-

Description of the inhalation chamber including dimensions and volume;
Source and description of equipment used for the exposure of animals as well as generation of
atmosphere;
Equipment for measuring temperature, humidity, particle-size, and actual concentration;
Source of air and treatment of air supplied/extracted and system used for conditioning;
Methods used for calibration of equipment to ensure a homogeneous test atmosphere;
Pressure difference (positive or negative);
Exposure ports per chamber (nose-only); location of animals in the system (whole-body);
Temporal homogeneity/stability of test atmosphere;
Location of temperature and humidity sensors and sampling of test atmosphere in the chamber;
Air flow rates, air flow rate/exposure port (nose-only), or animal load/chamber (whole-body);
Information about the equipment used to measure oxygen and carbon dioxide, if applicable;
Time required to reach inhalation chamber equilibrium (t95)
Number of volume changes per hour;
Metering devices (if applicable);

Exposure data
-

-

Rationale for target concentration selection in the main study;
Nominal concentrations (total mass of test article generated into the inhalation chamber divided
by the volume of air passed through the chamber);
Actual test article concentrations collected from the animals’ breathing zone; for test mixtures
that produce heterogeneous physical forms (gases, vapours, aerosols), each may be analysed
separately;
All air concentrations should be reported in units of mass (e.g. mg/L, mg/m3, etc.); units of
volume (e.g. ppm, ppb, etc.) may also be reported parenthetically;

© OECD, (2024)

OECD/OCDE
-

403

Particle size distribution, mass median aerodynamic diameter (MMAD), and geometric
standard deviation (σg), including their methods of calculation. Individual particle size
analyses should be reported;

Test conditions
-

-

Details of test article preparation, including details of any procedures used to reduce the particle
size of solid materials or to prepare solutions of the test article. In cases where mechanical
processes may have altered test article composition, include the results of analyses to verify
the composition of the test article;
A description (preferably including a diagram) of the equipment used to generate the test
atmosphere and to expose the animals to the test atmosphere;
Details of the chemical analytical method used and method validation (including efficiency of
recovery of test article from the sampling medium);
The rationale for the selection of test concentrations;

Results
-

-

Tabulation of chamber temperature, humidity, and airflow;
Tabulation of chamber nominal and actual concentration data;
Tabulation of particle size data including analytical sample collection data, particle size
distribution and calculations of the MMAD and σg;
Tabulation of response data and concentration level for each animal (i.e. animals showing signs
of toxicity including mortality, nature, severity, time of onset and duration of effects);
Individual body weights of animals collected on study; date and time of death if prior to
scheduled euthanasia, time course of onset of signs of toxicity and whether these were
reversible for each animal;
Necropsy findings and histopathological findings for each animal, if available;
Lethality estimates (e.g. LC50, LD01) including 95% confidence limits, and slope (if provided
by the evaluation method);
Statistical relation, including estimate for the exponent n (C x t protocol). The name of the
statistical software used should be provided;

Discussion and interpretation of results
-

-

Particular emphasis should be made to the description of methods used to meet this Test
Guideline’s criteria, e.g. the limit concentration or the particle size;
The respirability of particles in light of the overall findings should be addressed, especially if
the particle-size criteria could not be met;
An explanation should be provided if there was a need to humanely sacrifice animals in pain
or showing signs of severe and enduring distress, based on the criteria in the OECD Guidance
Document on Humane Endpoints (8);
If testing with TG 436 (4) was discontinued in favour of TG 403, justifications should be
provided;
The consistency of methods used to determine nominal and actual concentrations, and the
relation of actual concentration to nominal concentration should be included in the overall
assessment of the study;

© OECD, (2024)

OECD/OCDE
-

403

The likely cause of death and predominant mode of action (systemic versus local) should be
addressed.

© OECD, (2024)

OECD/OCDE

403

LITERATURE
1.

OECD (2009), Acute Inhalation Toxicity Testing. OECD Guideline for Testing of Chemicals No.
403, OECD, Paris. Available at: [http://www.oecd.org/env/testguidelines]

2.

OECD (2009), Guidance Document on Acute Inhalation Toxicity Testing. Environmental Health
and Safety Monograph Series on Testing and Assessment No. 39, OECD, Paris. Available at:
[http://www.oecd.org/env/testguidelines]

3.

UN (2007), United Nations Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of
Chemicals (GHS), ST/SG/AC.10/30, UN New York and Geneva. Available at:
[http://www.unece.org/trans/danger/publi/ghs/ghs_welcome_e.html]

4.

OECD (2009), Acute Inhalation Toxicity – Acute Toxic Class Method. OECD Guideline for Testing
of Chemicals No. 436, OECD, Paris. Available at: [http://www.oecd.org/env/testguidelines]

5.

OECD (2004), In Vitro Skin Corrosion – Transcutaneous Electrical Resistance Test (TER). OECD
Guideline for Testing of Chemicals No. 430, OECD, Paris. Available at:
[http://www.oecd.org/env/testguidelines]

6.

OECD (2004), In Vitro Skin Corrosion – Human Skin Model Test. OECD Guideline for Testing of
Chemicals No. 431, OECD, Paris. Available at: [http://www.oecd.org/env/testguidelines]

7.

OECD (2005), In Vitro Membrane Barrier Test Method For Skin Corrosion. OECD Guideline for
Testing of Chemicals No. 435, OECD, Paris. Available at: [http://www.oecd.org/env/testguidelines]

8.

OECD (2000), Guidance Document on the Recognition, Assessment and Use of Clinical Signs as
Humane Endpoints for Experimental Animals Used in Safety Evaluation. Environmental Health and
Safety Monograph Series on Testing and Assessment No. 19, OECD, Paris. Available at:
[http://www.oecd.org/env/testguidelines]

9.

SOT (1992), Technical Committee of the Inhalation Specialty Section, Society of Toxicology
(SOT). Recommendations for the Conduct of Acute Inhalation Limit Tests. Fund. Appl. Toxicol.
18, 321-327.

10.

Phalen R.F. (2009), Inhalation Studies: Foundations and Techniques. (2nd Edition) Informa
Healthcare, New York.

11.

Pauluhn, J. and Thiel, A. (2007), A Simple Approach to Validation of Directed-Flow Nose-Only
Inhalation Chambers. J. Appl. Toxicol. 27, 160-167.

12.

Zwart, J.H.E., Arts, J.M., ten Berge, W.F. and Appelman, L.M. (1992), Alternative Acute Inhalation
Toxicity Testing by Determination of the Concentration-Time-Mortality Relationship: Experimental
Comparison with Standard LC50 Testing. Reg. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 15, 278-290.

13.

Zwart, J.H.E., Arts, J.M., Klokman-Houweling, E.D. and Schoen, E.D. (1990), Determination of
Concentration-Time-Mortality Relationships to Replace LC50 Values. Inhal. Toxicol. 2, 105-117.

14.

Ten Berge, W.F. and Zwart, A. (1989), More Efficient Use of Animals in Acute Inhalation Toxicity
Testing. J. Haz. Mat. 21, 65-71.

© OECD, (2024)

OECD/OCDE

403

15.

OECD (2009), Performance Assessment: Comparison of 403 and C x t Protocols via Simulation and
for Selected Real Data Sets. Environmental Health and Safety Monograph Series on Testing and
Assessment No. 104, OECD, Paris. Available at: [http://www.oecd.org/env/testguidelines]

16.

Finney D.J. (1977), Probit Analysis, 3rd ed. Cambridge University Press, London/New York.

© OECD, (2024)

OECD/OCDE

403

ANNEX 1

C x t PROTOCOL

1.
A step-wise Concentration x Time (C x t) study may be considered as an alternative to the
Traditional protocol for assessing inhalation toxicity (12) (13) (14). It should be performed preferentially
when there is a specific regulatory or scientific need that calls for the testing of animals over multiple time
durations such as for emergency response planning or land use planning. This approach usually begins
with testing at a limit concentration (Exposure Session I) in which animals are exposed to a test article for
five time durations (e.g. 15, 30, 60, 120 and 240 min) so that multiple durations of time will be obtained
within one exposure session (see Figure 1). When the GHS Classification System is used, the limit
concentrations for gases, vapours, and aerosols are 20000 ppm, 20 mg/L, and 5 mg/L, respectively. These
levels may only be exceeded if there is a regulatory or scientific need for testing at these levels (see
paragraph 37 in the TG 403 main text).
2.
In situations where there is little or no information about the toxicity of a test article, a sighting
study should be performed in which groups of no more than 3 animals per sex are exposed to target
concentrations selected by the study director, generally for 240 min.
3.
If a limit concentration is tested during Exposure Session I and less than 50% mortality is observed,
no additional testing is needed. If there is a regulatory or scientific need to establish the
concentration/time/response relationship at higher levels than the indicated limit concentration, the next
exposure should be carried out at a higher level such as at two times the limit concentration (i.e. 2L in
figure 1).
4.
If toxicity is observed at the limit concentration, additional testing (main study) is necessary. These
additional exposures are carried out either at lower concentrations (in Figure 1: Exposure Sessions II, III
or IV) or at higher concentrations using shorter durations (in Figure 1: Exposure Session IV) using
durations that are adapted and not as widely spaced.
5.
The test (initial concentration and additional concentrations) is carried out using 1 animal/sex per
concentration/time point or with 2 animals of the more susceptible sex per concentration/time point. Under
some circumstances, the study director may elect to utilize 2 rats per sex per concentration/time point (or
4 animals of the susceptible sex per concentration/time point) (15). Using 2 animals per sex per
concentration/time point generally reduces bias and variability of the estimates, increases the estimation
success rate, and improves confidence interval coverage relative to the protocol as described here. Further
details are provided in GD 39 (2).
6.
Ideally, each exposure session is carried out on one day. This gives the opportunity to delay the
next exposure until there is reasonable confidence of survival, and it allows the study director to adjust the
target concentration and durations for the next exposure session. It is advised to start each exposure session
with the group that will be exposed the longest, e.g. the 240-min exposure group, followed by the 120
minute exposure group, and so on. If, for example, animals in the 240 minute group are dying after 90
minutes or showing severe signs of toxicity (e.g. extreme changes in breathing pattern such as laboured
breathing), it would not make sense to expose a group for 120 minutes because mortality would likely be
100%. Thus the study director should select shorter exposure durations for that concentration (e.g. 90, 65,
45, 33 and 25 minutes).

© OECD, (2024)

OECD/OCDE

403

7.
The chamber concentration should be measured frequently to determine the time-weightedaverage concentration for each exposure duration. Whenever possible, the time of death for each animal
(rather than the exposure duration) should be used in the statistical analysis.
8.
The results of the first four exposure sessions should be examined to identify a data
gap in the concentration-time curve (see Figure 1). In case of an insufficient fit, an additional exposure
(5th concentration) may be performed. Concentration and exposure durations for the 5th exposure should
be chosen to cover this gap.
9.
All exposure sessions (including the first Exposure Session) will be used to calculate the
concentration-time-response relationship using Statistical Analysis (16). If possible, for each C x t interval,
the time-weighted average concentration and the duration of exposure until death (if death occurs during
the exposure) should be used.

Figure 1: Hypothetical illustration of a concentration-time-mortality relationship in rats.
Open symbols = survivors; closed symbols = dead animals
Triangles = females; circles = males
Solid line = LC50 values (range 7.5-240 min) for males with n=1
Dashed line = LC50 values (range 7.5-240 min) for females with n=1
Dotted lines = hypothetical LC50 values line for males and females if n had been equal to
2 (12).

© OECD, (2024)

OECD/OCDE
10.

Below is an example of the stepwise procedure:
Exposure Session I –Testing at the limit concentration (see Figure 1)
• 1 animal/sex per concentration/time point; 10 animals in total a
• Target concentrationb = limit concentration.
• Expose five groups of animals at this target concentration for durations of
15, 30, 60, 120 and 240 minutes, respectively.
↓
Exposure Session IIc – Main Study
• 1 animal/sex per concentration/time point; 10 animals in total.
• Expose five groups of animals at a lower concentration d (1/2L) with
slightly longer exposure durations (factor √2 spaced; see Figure 1).
↓
Exposure Session III – Main Study
• 1 animal/sex per concentration/time point; 10 animals total.
• Expose five groups of animals at a lower concentration d (1/4L) with
slightly longer exposure durations (factor √2 spaced; see Figure 1).
↓
Exposure Session IV′ – Main Study
• 1 animal/sex per concentration/time point; 10 animals total.
• Expose five groups of animals at a lower concentration d (1/8L) with
slightly longer exposure durations (factor √2 spaced; see Figure 1).
↓ or
Exposure Session IV – Main Study
• 1 animal/sex per concentration/time point; 10 animals total.
• Expose five groups of animals at a higher concentration e (2L) with slightly
shorter exposure durations (factor √2 spaced; see Figure 1).
a If no sex susceptibility information is available, rats of both sexes will be used, i.e.
1 animal/sex per concentration. Based on existing information, or if it becomes
apparent during this exposure session that one sex is more susceptible, 10 animals of
the susceptible sex will be used (2 animals per concentration/time point) at each
concentration level during subsequent testing.
b When the GHS Classification System is used, the limit concentrations for gases,
vapours, and aerosols are 20000 ppm, 20 mg/L, and 5 mg/L, respectively. In case of
expected toxicity or based on the results of the sighting study, lower starting
concentrations should be chosen. In case of regulatory or scientific needs, higher
concentrations may be used.
c Ideally, exposure of animals at the next concentration level should be delayed until
there is reasonable confidence of survival for previously treated animals. This allows
the study director to adjust the target concentration and durations for the next exposure
session.
d The minimum dose (concentration x time) which resulted in mortality during testing

© OECD, (2024)

403

OECD/OCDE

403

at initial concentration (first exposure session) will be taken as a guide to establish the
next combination of concentration and exposure durations. Typically, the
concentration will be decreased two-fold (1/2L) and animals will be exposed over a
new time range with a finer grid using a geometric division of exposure periods with
a factor 1.4 (√2; see reference 12) around the time according to the minimum lethal
dose level (time x concentration) observed during the first exposure. In this figure
(figure 1), mortality in Exposure session I was first observed at 15 min; the durations
during session II are therefore centred around 30 min, and are 15, 21 30, 42 and 60
min. After the first two exposures, it is strongly advised to plot the data in a similar
figure as indicated above, and to check whether the relationship between
concentration and time has an angle of 45 degrees (n=1) or if the concentration-timeresponse relationship is less steep (e.g. n=2) or steeper (e.g. n =0.8). In the latter cases
it is strongly advised to adapt the next concentrations and durations accordingly.
e In certain cases it may be necessary to increase the concentration (2L) over a new
time range with a still finer grid using a geometric division of exposure periods with
a factor 1.4 (√2) around the time according to the minimum lethal concentration level
observed during the first exposure. The minimum exposure duration should preferably
exceed 5 minutes; the maximum exposure duration should not exceed 8 hours.

Mathematical treatment of results for the C x t protocol
11.
A C x t procedure with 4 or 5 exposure concentrations and five durations will yield 20 or
25 data points, respectively. With these data points, the C x t relationship can be calculated using statistical
analysis (16):

Probit (P) = b0 + b1 ln C + b2 ln t

Equation 1

where C = concentration; t = exposure duration, or
Response = f(C n t)
Equation 2
where n = b1 / b2.
Using equation 1, the LC50 value can be calculated for a given time period (e.g. 4 hour, 1 hour, 30 minutes,
or any time period within the range of time periods tested) using P = 5 (50% response). Note that Haber’s
rule is only applicable when n = 1. The LC01 can be calculated using P = 2.67.

© OECD, (2024)

