# S2(R1) Guideline.pdf
# Category: ich/S
# Pages: 29

INTERNATIONAL 
CONFERENCE 
ON 
HARMONISATION 
OF 
TECHNICAL 
REQUIREMENTS FOR REGISTRATION OF PHARMACEUTICALS FOR HUMAN USE 
 
 
ICH HARMONISED TRIPARTITE GUIDELINE  
 
 
GUIDANCE ON GENOTOXICITY TESTING AND 
DATA INTERPRETATION FOR 
PHARMACEUTICALS INTENDED FOR HUMAN USE 
 
S2(R1) 
 
 
 
Current Step 4 version 
dated 9 November 2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This Guideline has been developed by the appropriate ICH Expert Working Group and has 
been subject to consultation by the regulatory parties, in accordance with the ICH Process. At 
Step 4 of the Process the final draft is recommended for adoption to the regulatory bodies of 
the European Union, Japan and USA.

S2(R1) 
Document History 
 
 
Code 
History 
Date 
 
S2A: 
Guidance on Specific Aspects of Regulatory Genotoxicity Tests  
for Pharmaceuticals 
S2A 
Approval by the Steering Committee under Step 2 and release for 
public consultation. 
10 March 
1994 
S2A 
Approval by the Steering Committee under Step 4 and recommendation 
for adoption to the three ICH regulatory bodies. 
19 July 
1995 
S2B: 
Genotoxicity: A Standard Battery for Genotoxicity 
Testing of Pharmaceuticals 
S2B 
Approval by the Steering Committee under Step 2 and release for 
public consultation. 
2 October 
1996 
S2B 
Approval by the Steering Committee under Step 4 and recommendation 
for adoption to the three ICH regulatory bodies. 
16 July 
1997 
S2(R1): 
Revision of the S2A and S2B Guidelines  
which have been merged as part of the revision 
S2(R1) 
Approval by the Steering Committee of S2(R1) under Step 2 and 
release for public consultation. 
6 March 
2008 
 
Current Step 4 version 
S2(R1) 
Approval by the Steering Committee of S2(R1) under Step 4 and 
recommendation for adoption to the three ICH regulatory bodies.  
9 November 
2011

i 
GUIDANCE ON GENOTOXICITY TESTING AND 
DATA INTERPRETATION FOR PHARMACEUTICALS INTENDED FOR  
HUMAN USE 
ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline 
Having reached Step 4 of the ICH Process at the ICH Steering Committee meeting on 9 
November 2011, this Guideline is recommended for adoption to the three regulatory 
parties to ICH 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
1. 
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................... 1 
1.1 OBJECTIVES OF THE GUIDELINE ......................................................................... 1 
1.2. Background....................................................................................................................... 1 
1.3. Scope of the Guideline ...................................................................................................... 1 
1.4 General Principles ............................................................................................................ 1 
2 
THE STANDARD TEST BATTERY FOR GENOTOXICITY ................................... 2 
2.1 Rationale........................................................................................................................... 2 
2.2 Description of the Two Options for the Standard Battery .............................................. 2 
2.3 Modifications to the Test Battery .................................................................................... 4 
2.3.1 Exploratory Clinical Studies ................................................................................... 4 
2.3.2 Testing Compounds that are Toxic to Bacteria ....................................................... 4 
2.3.3 Compounds Bearing Structural Alerts for Genotoxic Activity ................................ 4 
2.3.4 Limitations to the Use of In Vivo Tests .................................................................... 4 
2.4 Detection of Germ Cell Mutagens .................................................................................... 4 
3. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR IN VITRO TESTS ....................................................... 5 
3.1 Test Repetition and Interpretation .................................................................................. 5 
3.2 Recommended Protocol for the Bacterial Mutation Assay .............................................. 5 
3.2.1 Selection of Top Dose Level ...................................................................................... 5 
3.2.2 Study Design/Test Protocol ..................................................................................... 5 
3.3 Recommended Protocols for the Mammalian Cell Assays .............................................. 6 
3.3.1 Selection of Top Concentration ................................................................................ 6 
3.3.2 Study Design/Test Protocols ................................................................................... 6 
3.3.3 Positive Controls ...................................................................................................... 7 
4. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR IN VIVO TESTS ......................................................... 7 
4.1 Tests for the Detection of Chromosome Damage In Vivo ................................................ 7 
4.2 Other In Vivo Genotoxicity Tests ..................................................................................... 7 
4.3 Dose Selection for In Vivo Assays .................................................................................... 8

ii 
4.3.1 Short-Term Studies ................................................................................................. 8 
4.3.2 Multiple Administration Studies ............................................................................. 8 
4.3.3 Testing Compounds that are Toxic for Blood or Bone Marrow ............................... 9 
4.4 Demonstration of Target Tissue Exposure for Negative In Vivo Test Results ............... 9 
4.4.1 When an In Vitro Genotoxicity Test is Positive (or not done) .................................. 9 
4.4.2 When In Vitro Genotoxicity Tests are Negative ..................................................... 10 
4.5 Sampling Times for In Vivo Assays ............................................................................... 10 
4.6 Number of Animals Analyzed ........................................................................................ 10 
4.7 Use of Male/Female Rodents in In Vivo Genotoxicity Tests ......................................... 10 
4.8 Route of Administration ................................................................................................. 11 
4.9 Use of Positive Controls for In Vivo Studies .................................................................. 11 
5. 
GUIDANCE ON EVALUATION OF TEST RESULTS AND ON FOLLOW-UP 
TEST STRATEGIES .................................................................................................... 11 
5.1 Assessment of Biological Relevance ............................................................................... 11 
5.2 Evaluation of Results Obtained in In Vitro Tests ......................................................... 12 
5.2.1 Evaluation of Positive Results Obtained In Vitro in a Bacterial Mutation Assay 12 
5.2.2 Evaluation of Positive Results Obtained In Vitro in Mammalian Cell Assays .... 12 
5.2.3 Evaluation of In Vitro Negative Results ................................................................ 12 
5.3 Evaluation of Results Obtained from In Vivo Tests ...................................................... 13 
5.4 Follow-up Strategies for Positive Results ...................................................................... 13 
5.4.1 Follow-up to Findings in In Vitro in Mammalian Cell Tests ............................... 13 
5.4.2 Follow-up to a Positive In Vivo Micronucleus Assay ............................................. 14 
5.5 Follow-up Genotoxicity Testing in Relation to Tumor Findings in a Carcinogenicity 
Bioassay .......................................................................................................................... 14 
6. 
NOTES ........................................................................................................................... 15 
7. 
GLOSSARY ................................................................................................................... 20 
8. 
REFERENCES ............................................................................................................. 23

1 
GUIDANCE ON GENOTOXICITY TESTING AND  
DATA INTERPRETATION FOR PHARMACEUTICALS INTENDED FOR 
HUMAN USE 
 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1 
Objectives of the Guideline 
This guidance replaces and combines the ICH S2A and S2B Guidelines.  The purpose of 
the revision is to optimize the standard genetic toxicology battery for prediction of 
potential human risks, and to provide guidance on interpretation of results, with the 
ultimate goal of improving risk characterization for carcinogenic effects that have their 
basis in changes in the genetic material.  The revised guidance describes internationally 
agreed upon standards for follow-up testing and interpretation of positive results in vitro 
and in vivo in the standard genetic toxicology battery, including assessment of non-
relevant findings. This guidance is intended to apply only to products being developed as 
human pharmaceuticals. 
1.2. 
Background 
The recommendations from the latest Organization for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD) guidelines and the reports from the International Workshops on 
Genotoxicity Testing (IWGT) have been considered where relevant.  In certain cases, 
there are differences from the OECD or IWGT recommendations, which are noted in the 
text. The following notes for guidance should be applied in conjunction with other ICH 
guidances. 
1.3. 
Scope of the Guideline 
The focus of this guidance is testing of new “small molecule” drug substances, and the 
guidance does not apply to biologics. Advice on the timing of the studies relative to 
clinical development is provided in the ICH M3 (R2) guidance. 
1.4 
General Principles 
Genotoxicity tests can be defined as in vitro and in vivo tests designed to detect 
compounds that induce genetic damage by various mechanisms.  These tests enable 
hazard identification with respect to damage to DNA and its fixation.  Fixation of 
damage to DNA in the form of gene mutations, larger scale chromosomal damage or 
recombination is generally considered to be essential for heritable effects and in the 
multi-step process of malignancy, a complex process in which genetic changes might 
possibly play only a part.  Numerical chromosome changes have also been associated 
with tumorigenesis and can indicate a potential for aneuploidy in germ cells.  
Compounds that are positive in tests that detect such kinds of damage have the potential 
to be human carcinogens and/or mutagens.  Because the relationship between exposure 
to particular chemicals and carcinogenesis is established for humans, whilst a similar 
relationship has been difficult to prove for heritable diseases, genotoxicity tests have 
been used mainly for the prediction of carcinogenicity.  Nevertheless, because germ line 
mutations are clearly associated with human disease, the suspicion that a compound 
might induce heritable effects is considered to be just as serious as the suspicion that a 
compound might induce cancer.  In addition, the outcome of genotoxicity tests can be 
valuable for the interpretation of carcinogenicity studies.

Guidance on Genotoxicity Testing and  
Data Interpretation for Pharmaceuticals Intended for Human Use 
 
2 
2 
THE STANDARD TEST BATTERY FOR GENOTOXICITY 
2.1 
Rationale 
Registration of pharmaceuticals requires a comprehensive assessment of their genotoxic 
potential.  Extensive reviews have shown that many compounds that are mutagenic in 
the bacterial reverse mutation (Ames) test are rodent carcinogens.  Addition of in vitro 
mammalian tests increases sensitivity for detection of rodent carcinogens and broadens 
the spectrum of genetic events detected, but also decreases the specificity of prediction; 
i.e., increases the incidence of positive results that do not correlate with rodent 
carcinogenicity.  Nevertheless, a battery approach is still reasonable because no single 
test is capable of detecting all genotoxic mechanisms relevant in tumorigenesis. 
The general features of a standard test battery are as follows: 
i. Assessment of mutagenicity in a bacterial reverse gene mutation test.  This test 
has been shown to detect relevant genetic changes and the majority of genotoxic 
rodent and human carcinogens. 
ii. Genotoxicity should also be evaluated in mammalian cells in vitro and/or in vivo as 
follows. 
Several in vitro mammalian cell systems are widely used and can be considered 
sufficiently validated:  The in vitro metaphase chromosome aberration assay, the in 
vitro micronucleus assay (Note 1) and the mouse lymphoma L5178Y cell Tk (thymidine 
kinase) gene mutation assay (MLA).  These three assays are currently considered 
equally appropriate and therefore interchangeable for measurement of chromosomal 
damage when used together with other genotoxicity tests in a standard battery for 
testing of pharmaceuticals, if the test protocols recommended in this Guideline are used. 
In vivo test(s) are included in the test battery because some agents are mutagenic in vivo 
but not in vitro (Note 2) and because it is desirable to include assays that account for 
such factors as absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion. The choice of an 
analysis either of micronuclei in erythrocytes (in blood or bone marrow), or of 
chromosome aberrations in metaphase cells in bone marrow, is currently included for 
this reason (Note 3).  Lymphocytes cultured from treated animals can also be used for 
cytogenetic analysis, although experience with such analyses is less widespread. 
In vitro and in vivo tests that measure chromosomal aberrations in metaphase cells can 
detect a wide spectrum of changes in chromosomal integrity.  Breakage of chromatids or 
chromosomes can result in micronucleus formation if an acentric fragment is produced; 
therefore assays that detect either chromosomal aberrations or micronuclei are 
considered appropriate for detecting clastogens.  Micronuclei can also result from 
lagging of one or more whole chromosome(s) at anaphase and thus micronucleus tests 
have the potential to detect some aneuploidy inducers.  The MLA detects mutations in 
the Tk gene that result from both gene mutations and chromosome damage.  There is 
some evidence that MLA can also detect chromosome loss. 
There are several additional in vivo assays that can be used in the battery or as follow-
up tests to develop weight of evidence in assessing results of in vitro or in vivo assays 
(see below).  Negative results in appropriate in vivo assays (usually two), with adequate 
justification for the endpoints measured, and demonstration of exposure (see Section 4.4) 
are generally considered sufficient to demonstrate absence of significant genotoxic risk. 
2.2 
Description of the Two Options for the Standard Battery  
The following two options for the standard battery are considered equally suitable (Note 4):

Guidance on Genotoxicity Testing and  
Data Interpretation for Pharmaceuticals Intended for Human Use 
 
3 
Option 1 
i. A test for gene mutation in bacteria. 
ii. A cytogenetic test for chromosomal damage (the in vitro metaphase chromosome 
aberration test or in vitro micronucleus test), or an in vitro mouse lymphoma Tk 
gene mutation assay. 
iii. An in vivo test for genotoxicity, generally a test for chromosomal damage using 
rodent hematopoietic cells, either for micronuclei or for chromosomal aberrations in 
metaphase cells. 
Option 2 
i. A test for gene mutation in bacteria. 
ii. An in vivo assessment of genotoxicity with two different tissues, usually an assay 
for micronuclei using rodent hematopoietic cells and a second in vivo assay.  
Typically this would be a DNA strand breakage assay in liver, unless otherwise 
justified (see below; also Section 4.2 and Note 12). 
There is more historical experience with Option 1, partly because it is based on S2A and 
B. Nevertheless, the reasoning behind considering Options 1 and 2 equally acceptable is 
as follows: When a positive result occurs in an in vitro mammalian cell assay, clearly 
negative results in two well conducted in vivo assays, in appropriate tissues and with 
demonstrated adequate exposure, are considered sufficient evidence for lack of genotoxic 
potential in vivo (see Section 5.4.1.1 below). Thus a test strategy in which two in vivo 
assays are conducted is the same strategy that would be used to follow up a positive 
result in vitro (Note 4). 
Under both standard battery options, either acute or repeat dose study designs in vivo 
can be used.  In case of repeated administrations, attempts should be made to 
incorporate the genotoxicity endpoints into toxicity studies, if scientifically justified.  
When more than one endpoint is evaluated in vivo it is preferable that they are 
incorporated into a single study.  Often sufficient information on the likely suitability of 
the doses for the repeat-dose toxicology study is available before the study begins and 
can be used to determine whether an acute or an integrated test will be suitable. 
For compounds that give negative results, the completion of either option of the standard 
test battery, performed and evaluated in accordance with current recommendations, will 
usually provide sufficient assurance of the absence of genotoxic activity and no 
additional tests are warranted.  Compounds that give positive results in the standard 
test battery might, depending on their therapeutic use, need to be tested more 
extensively (see Section 5). 
There are several in vivo assays that can be used as the second part of the in vivo 
assessment under Option 2 (see Section 4.2), some of which can be integrated into 
repeat-dose toxicology studies.  The liver is typically the preferred tissue because of 
exposure and metabolizing capacity, but choice of in vivo tissue and assay should be 
based on factors such as any knowledge of the potential mechanism, of the metabolism in 
vivo, or of the exposed tissues thought to be relevant.  
Information on numerical changes can be derived from the mammalian cell assays in 
vitro and from the micronucleus assays in vitro or in vivo. Elements of the standard 
protocols that can indicate such potential are elevations in the mitotic index, polyploidy 
induction and micronucleus evaluation.  There is also experimental evidence that 
spindle poisons can be detected in MLA.  The preferred in vivo cytogenetic test under 
Option 2 is the micronucleus assay, not a chromosome aberration assay, to include more

Guidance on Genotoxicity Testing and  
Data Interpretation for Pharmaceuticals Intended for Human Use 
 
4 
direct capability for detection of chromosome loss (potential for aneuploidy). 
The suggested standard set of tests does not imply that other genotoxicity tests are 
generally considered inadequate or inappropriate.  Additional tests can be used for 
further investigation of genotoxicity test results obtained in the standard battery (see 
Sections 4.2 and 5).  Alternative species, including non-rodents, can also be used if 
indicated, and if sufficiently validated. 
Under conditions in which one or more tests in the standard battery cannot be employed 
for technical reasons, alternative validated tests can serve as substitutes provided 
sufficient scientific justification is given. 
2.3 
Modifications to the Test Battery 
The following sections describe situations where modification of the standard test 
battery might be advisable. 
2.3.1 Exploratory Clinical Studies 
For certain exploratory clinical studies, fewer genotoxicity assays or different criteria for 
justification of the maximum dose in vivo might apply (see ICH M3(R2) guidance). 
2.3.2 Testing Compounds that are Toxic to Bacteria 
In cases where compounds are highly toxic to bacteria (e.g., some antibiotics), the 
bacterial reverse mutation (Ames) test should still be carried out, just as cytotoxic 
compounds are tested in mammalian cells, because mutagenicity can occur at lower, less 
toxic concentrations.  In such cases, any one of the in vitro mammalian cell assays 
should also be done, i.e., Option 1 should be followed. 
2.3.3 Compounds Bearing Structural Alerts for Genotoxic Activity 
Structurally alerting compounds (Note 5) are usually detectable in the standard test 
battery since the majority of “structural alerts” are defined in relation to bacterial 
mutagenicity.  A few chemical classes are known to be more easily detected in 
mammalian cell chromosome damage assays than bacterial mutation assays.  Thus 
negative results in either test battery with a compound that has a structural alert is 
usually considered sufficient assurance of a lack of genotoxicity.  However, for 
compounds bearing certain specific structural alerts, modification to standard protocols 
can be appropriate (Note 5).  The choice of additional test(s) or protocol modification(s) 
depends on the chemical nature, the known reactivity and any metabolism data on the 
structurally alerting compound in question. 
2.3.4 Limitations to the Use of In Vivo Tests 
There are compounds for which many in vivo tests (typically in bone marrow, blood or 
liver) do not provide additional useful information.  These include compounds for which 
data on toxicokinetics or pharmacokinetics indicate that they are not systemically 
absorbed and therefore are not available to the target tissues.  Examples of such 
compounds are some radioimaging agents, aluminum based antacids, some compounds 
given by inhalation, and some dermally or other topically applied pharmaceuticals.  In 
cases where a modification of the route of administration does not provide sufficient 
target tissue exposure, and no suitable genotoxicity assay is available in the most 
exposed tissue, it might be appropriate to base the evaluation only on in vitro testing.  
In some cases evaluation of genotoxic effects at the site of contact can be warranted, 
although such assays have not yet been widely used (Note 6). 
2.4 
Detection of Germ Cell Mutagens 
Results of comparative studies have shown that, in a qualitative sense, most germ cell

Guidance on Genotoxicity Testing and  
Data Interpretation for Pharmaceuticals Intended for Human Use 
 
5 
mutagens are likely to be detected as genotoxic in somatic cell tests so that negative 
results of in vivo somatic cell genotoxicity tests generally indicate the absence of germ 
cell effects. 
3. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR IN VITRO TESTS 
3.1 
Test Repetition and Interpretation 
Reproducibility of experimental results is an essential component of research involving 
novel methods or unexpected findings; however, the routine testing of drugs with 
standard, widely used genotoxicity tests often does not call for replication.  These tests 
are sufficiently well characterized and have sufficient internal controls that repetition of 
a clearly positive or negative assay is not usually warranted.  Ideally it should be 
possible to declare test results clearly negative or clearly positive.  However, test results 
sometimes do not fit the predetermined criteria for a positive or negative call and 
therefore are declared “equivocal”.  The application of statistical methods can aid in 
data interpretation; however, adequate biological interpretation is of critical importance.  
An equivocal test that is repeated might result in (i) a clearly positive outcome, and thus 
an overall positive result; (ii) a negative outcome, so that the result is not reproducible 
and overall negative, or (iii) another equivocal result, with a final conclusion that 
remains equivocal. 
3.2 
Recommended Protocol for the Bacterial Mutation Assay 
Advice on the protocols is given in the OECD guideline (1997) and the IWGT report 
(Gatehouse et al., 1994). 
3.2.1 Selection of Top Dose Level 
Maximum dose level 
The maximum dose level recommended is 5000 µg/plate (or 5 µL/plate for liquid test 
substance) when not limited by solubility or cytotoxicity. 
Limit of solubility 
For bacterial cultures, precipitating doses are scored provided precipitate does not 
interfere with scoring, toxicity is not limiting, and the top concentration does not exceed 
5000 µg/plate (or 5 µL/plate for liquid test substance).  If no cytotoxicity is observed, 
then the lowest precipitating dose should be used as the top dose scored.  If dose related 
cytotoxicity or mutagenicity is noted, irrespective of solubility, the top dose scored should 
be based on cytotoxicity as described below. 
Limit of cytotoxicity 
In the Ames test, the doses scored should show evidence of significant toxicity, but 
without exceeding a top dose of 5000 µg/plate. Toxicity might be detected by a reduction 
in the number of revertants, and/or clearing or diminution of the background lawn. 
3.2.2 Study Design/Test Protocol 
The recommended set of bacterial strains (OECD) includes those that detect base 
substitution and frameshift mutations as follows:  
 Salmonella typhimurium TA98;  
 Salmonella typhimurium TA100;  
 Salmonella typhimurium TA1535;  
 either Salmonella typhimurium TA1537 or TA97 or TA97a;

Guidance on Genotoxicity Testing and  
Data Interpretation for Pharmaceuticals Intended for Human Use 
 
6 
 and either Salmonella typhimurium TA102 or Escherichia coli WP2 uvrA or 
Escherichia coli WP2 uvrA (pKM101). 
One difference from the OECD and IWGT recommendations is that, based on experience 
with testing pharmaceuticals, a single bacterial mutation (Ames) test is considered 
sufficient when it is clearly negative or positive, and carried out with a fully adequate 
protocol including all strains with and without metabolic activation, a suitable dose 
range that fulfills criteria for top dose selection, and appropriate positive and negative 
controls.  Also, for testing pharmaceuticals, either the plate incorporation or the pre-
incubation method is considered appropriate for this single experiment (Note 7).  
Equivocal or weak positive results might indicate that it would be appropriate to repeat 
the test, possibly with a modified protocol such as appropriate spacing of dose levels. 
3.3 
Recommended Protocols for the Mammalian Cell Assays 
Advice on the protocols is given in the OECD guidelines (1997) and the IWGT 
publications (e.g., Kirsch-Volders et al., 2003; Moore et al., 2006).  Advice on 
interpretation of MLA results is also given (Moore et al., 2006), including use of a global 
evaluation factor.  Several differences from these recommendations are noted here for 
testing pharmaceuticals, notably for selection of the top concentration. (See details 
below.) 
3.3.1 Selection of Top Concentration 
Maximum concentration 
The maximum top concentration recommended is 1 mM or 0.5 mg/ml, whichever is lower, 
when not limited by solubility in solvent or culture medium or by cytotoxicity (Note 8). 
Limit of solubility 
When solubility is limiting, the maximum concentration, if not limited by cytotoxicity, 
should be the lowest concentration at which minimal precipitate is visible in cultures, 
provided there is no interference with scoring.  Evaluation of precipitation can be done 
by naked eye or by methods such as light microscopy, noting precipitate that persists or 
appears during culture (by the end of treatment). 
Cytotoxicity 
For in vitro cytogenetic assays for metaphase chromosome aberrations or for micronuclei, 
cytotoxicity should not exceed a reduction of about 50% in cell growth (Notes 9 and 10).  
For the MLA, at the top dose there should be 80-90% cytotoxicity as measured by an 
RTG between 20-10% (Note 9). 
3.3.2 Study Design/Test Protocols 
For the cytogenetic evaluation of chromosomal damage in metaphase cells in vitro, the 
test protocol should include the conduct of tests with and without metabolic activation, 
with appropriate positive and negative controls.  Treatment with the test articles 
should be for 3 to 6 hours with a sampling time approximately 1.5 normal cell cycles 
from the beginning of the treatment.  A continuous treatment without metabolic 
activation up to the sampling time of approximately 1.5 normal cell cycles should be 
conducted in case of negative or equivocal results for both short treatments, with and 
without metabolic activation.  The same principles apply to the in vitro micronucleus 
assay, except that the sampling time is typically 1.5 to 2 normal cell cycles from the 
beginning of treatment to allow cells to complete mitosis and enter the next interphase.  
For both in vitro cytogenetic assays, there might be a need to modify the protocol for 
certain types of chemicals that could be more readily detected by longer treatment, 
delayed sampling times or recovery periods, e.g., some nucleoside analogues and some

Guidance on Genotoxicity Testing and  
Data Interpretation for Pharmaceuticals Intended for Human Use 
 
7 
nitrosamines.  In the metaphase aberration assay, information on the ploidy status 
should be obtained by recording the incidence of polyploid (including endoreduplicated) 
metaphases as a percentage of the number of metaphase cells.  For MLA, the test 
protocol should include the conduct of tests with and without metabolic activation, with 
appropriate positive and negative controls, where the treatment with the test article is 
for 3 to 4 hours.  A continuous treatment without metabolic activation for 
approximately 24 hours should be conducted in case of a negative or equivocal result for 
both short treatments, with and without metabolic activation.  A standard MLA should 
include (i) the incorporation of positive controls that induce mainly small colonies, and 
(ii) colony sizing for positive controls, solvent controls and at least one positive test 
compound concentration (should any exist), including the culture that gave the greatest 
mutant frequency. 
For mammalian cell assays in vitro, built-in confirmatory elements, such as those 
outlined above (e.g., different treatment lengths, tests with and without metabolic 
activation), should be used.  Following such testing, further confirmatory testing in the 
case of clearly negative or positive test results is not usually warranted.  Equivocal or 
weak positive results might call for repeating tests, possibly with a modified protocol 
such as appropriate spacing of the test concentrations. 
3.3.3 Positive Controls 
Concurrent positive controls are important, but in vitro mammalian cell tests for genetic 
toxicity are sufficiently standardized that use of positive controls can generally be 
confined to a positive control with metabolic activation (when it is done concurrently 
with the non-activated test) to demonstrate the activity of the metabolic activation 
system and the responsiveness of the test system. 
4. RECOMMENDATIONS FOR IN VIVO TESTS 
4.1 
Tests for the Detection of Chromosome Damage In Vivo 
Either the analysis of chromosomal aberrations or the measurement of micronucleated 
polychromatic erythrocytes in bone marrow cells in vivo is considered appropriate for the 
detection of clastogens.  Both rats and mice are considered appropriate for use in the 
bone marrow micronucleus test.  Micronuclei can also be measured in immature (e.g., 
polychromatic) erythrocytes in peripheral blood in the mouse, or in the newly formed 
reticulocytes in rat blood (Note 3).  Likewise, immature erythrocytes can be used from 
any 
other 
species 
which 
has 
shown 
an 
adequate 
sensitivity 
to 
detect 
clastogens/aneuploidy inducers in bone marrow or peripheral blood (Note 3).  Systems 
for automated analysis (image analysis and flow cytometry) can be used if appropriately 
validated (OECD, 1997; Hayashi et al., 2000; 2007).  Chromosomal aberrations can also 
be analyzed in peripheral lymphocytes cultured from treated rodents (Note 11). 
4.2 
Other In Vivo Genotoxicity Tests 
The same in vivo tests described as the second test in the standard battery (Option 2) 
can be used as follow-up tests to develop weight of evidence in assessing results of in 
vitro or in vivo assays (Notes 11 and 12).  While the type of effect seen in vitro and any 
knowledge of the mechanism can help guide the choice of in vivo assay, investigation of 
chromosomal aberrations or of gene mutations in endogenous genes is not feasible with 
standard methods in most tissues.  Although mutation can be measured in transgenes 
in rodents, this entails prolonged treatment (e.g., 28 days) to allow for mutation 
expression, fixation and accumulation, especially in tissues with little cell division (Note 
12).  Thus the second in vivo assay will often evaluate a DNA damage endpoint as a 
surrogate.  Assays with the most published experience and advice on protocols include

Guidance on Genotoxicity Testing and  
Data Interpretation for Pharmaceuticals Intended for Human Use 
 
8 
the DNA strand break assays such as the single cell gel electrophoresis (“Comet”) assay 
and alkaline elution assay, the in vivo transgenic mouse mutation assays and DNA 
covalent binding assays, (all of which may be applied in many tissues, Note 12), and the 
liver unscheduled DNA synthesis (UDS) assay. 
4.3 
Dose Selection for In Vivo Assays 
Typically three dose levels are analyzed (Hayashi et al., 2005). 
4.3.1 Short-Term Studies 
For short-term (usually 1 to 3 administrations) studies, the top dose recommended for 
genotoxicity assays is a limit dose of 2000 mg/kg, if this is tolerated, or a maximum 
tolerated dose defined (for example for the micronucleus assay (OECD)) as the dose 
producing signs of toxicity such that higher dose levels, based on the same dosing 
regimen, would be expected to produce lethality.  Similar recommendations have been 
made for the Comet assay (Hartmann et al., 2003) and transgenic mutation assay 
(Heddle et al., 2000).  Suppression of bone marrow red blood cell production should also 
be taken into account in dose selection.  Lower doses are generally spaced at 
approximately two to three fold intervals below this.   
4.3.2 Multiple Administration Studies 
Option 1 Battery 
When the in vivo genotoxicity test is integrated into a multiple administration toxicology 
study, the doses are generally considered appropriate when the toxicology study meets 
the criteria for an adequate study to support human clinical trials; this can differ from 
dose selection criteria in the OECD guideline for the in vivo micronucleus assay.  This 
applies when the in vitro mammalian cell test is negative (or “non-relevant positive”; see 
Section 5).   
Follow-up studies or Option 2 Battery 
When carrying out follow-up studies to address any indication of genotoxicity, or when 
using Option 2 with no in vitro mammalian cell assay, several factors should be 
evaluated to determine whether the top dose is appropriate for genotoxicity evaluation.  
Any one of the criteria listed below is considered sufficient to demonstrate that the top 
dose in a toxicology study (typically in rats) is appropriate for micronucleus analysis and 
for other genotoxicity evaluation: 
i. Maximum Feasible Dose (MFD) based on physico-chemical properties of the drug in 
the vehicle (provided the MFD in that vehicle is similar to that achievable with 
acute administration; Note 13). 
ii. Limit dose of 1000 mg/kg for studies of 14 days or longer, if this is tolerated. 
iii. Maximal possible exposure demonstrated either by reaching a plateau/saturation in 
exposure or by compound accumulation.  In contrast, substantial reduction in 
exposure to parent drug with time (e.g.,  50% reduction from initial exposure) can 
disqualify the study (unless a blood sample taken in the first few days is available).  
If this is seen in one sex, generally the sex with reduced exposure would not be 
scored at the end of the study, unless there is enhanced exposure to a metabolite of 
interest. 
iv. Top dose is  50% of the top dose that would be used for acute administration, i.e., 
close to the minimum lethal dose, if such acute data are available for other reasons.  
(The top dose for acute administration micronucleus tests is currently described in

Guidance on Genotoxicity Testing and  
Data Interpretation for Pharmaceuticals Intended for Human Use 
 
9 
OECD guidance as the dose above which lethality would be expected; similar 
guidance is given (e.g., Hartmann et al., 2003) for other in vivo assays.) 
Selection of a top dose based only on an exposure margin (multiple over clinical 
exposure) without toxicity is not considered sufficient justification. 
4.3.3 Testing Compounds that are Toxic for Blood or Bone Marrow 
Many compounds that induce aneuploidy, such as potent spindle poisons, are detectable 
in in vivo micronucleus assays in bone marrow or blood only within a narrow range of 
doses approaching toxic doses.  This is also true for some clastogens.  If toxicological 
data indicate severe toxicity to the red blood cell lineage (e.g., marked suppression of 
Polychromatic Erythrocytes (PCEs) or reticulocytes), doses scored should be spaced not 
more than about 2 fold below the top, cytotoxic dose.  If suitable doses are not included 
in a multi-week study, additional data that could contribute to the detection of aneugens 
and some toxic clastogens could be derived from any one of the following: 
i. Early blood sampling (at 3-4 days) is advisable when there are marked increases in 
toxicity with increasing treatment time.  For example, when blood or bone marrow 
is used for micronucleus measurement in a multiweek study (e.g., 28 days), and 
reticulocytes are scored, marked hematotoxicity can affect the ability to detect 
micronuclei; i.e., a dose that induces detectable increases in micronuclei after acute 
treatment might be too toxic to analyze after multiple treatments (Hamada et al., 
2001).  The early sample can be used to provide assurance that clastogens and 
potential aneugens are detected (but see Notes 14 and 15). 
ii. An in vitro mammalian cell micronucleus assay. 
iii. An acute bone marrow micronucleus assay. 
4.4 
Demonstration of Target Tissue Exposure for Negative In Vivo Test 
Results 
In vivo tests have an important role in genotoxicity test strategies.  The value of in vivo 
results is directly related to the demonstration of adequate exposure of the target tissue 
to the test compound.  This is especially true for negative in vivo test results when in 
vitro test(s) have shown convincing evidence of genotoxicity, or when no in vitro 
mammalian cell assay is used.  Evidence of adequate exposure could include toxicity in 
the tissue in question, or toxicokinetic data as described in the following section. 
4.4.1 When an In Vitro Genotoxicity Test is Positive (or not done) 
Assessments of in vivo exposure should be made at the top dose or other relevant doses 
using the same species, strain and dosing route used in the genotoxicity assay.  When 
genotoxicity is measured in toxicology assays, exposure information is generally 
available as part of the toxicology assessment. 
Demonstration of in vivo exposure should be made by any of the following 
measurements: 
i. Cytotoxicity: 
a. For cytogenetic assays: By obtaining a significant change in the proportion of 
immature erythrocytes among total erythrocytes in the tissue used (bone marrow 
or blood) at the doses and sampling times used in the micronucleus test or by 
measuring a significant reduction in mitotic index for the chromosomal 
aberration assay. 
b. For other in vivo genotoxicity assays:  Toxicity in the liver or tissue being 
assessed, e.g., by histopathological evaluation or blood biochemistry toxicity

Guidance on Genotoxicity Testing and  
Data Interpretation for Pharmaceuticals Intended for Human Use 
 
10 
indicators. 
ii. Exposure: 
a. Measurement of drug related material either in blood or plasma.  The bone 
marrow is a well perfused tissue and levels of drug related materials in blood or 
plasma are generally similar to those observed in bone marrow.  The liver is 
expected to be exposed for drugs with systemic exposure regardless of the route 
of administration. 
b. Direct 
measurement 
of 
drug-related 
material 
in 
target 
tissue, 
or 
autoradiographic assessment of tissue exposure. 
If systemic exposure is similar to or lower than expected clinical exposure, alternative 
strategies might be called for such as:  
i. Use of a different route of administration;  
ii. Use of a different species with higher exposure;  
iii. Use of a different tissue or assay (see Section 2.3.4, “Limitations to the use of 
standard in vivo tests”). 
When adequate exposure cannot be achieved (e.g., with compounds showing very poor 
target tissue availability) conventional in vivo genotoxicity tests have little value. 
4.4.2 When In Vitro Genotoxicity Tests are Negative 
If in vitro tests do not show genotoxic potential, in vivo (systemic) exposure can be 
assessed by any of the methods above, or can be assumed from the results of standard 
Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism and Excretion (ADME) studies in rodents done for 
other purposes. 
4.5 
Sampling Times for In Vivo Assays 
Selection of the sampling time in the in vivo Micronucleus (MN), chromosomal 
aberration and UDS test should follow OECD (1997). 
When micronucleus analysis is integrated into multi-week studies, sampling of blood or 
bone marrow can be done the day after the final administration (see recommendation for 
additional blood sampling time above). 
For other genotoxicity assays, sampling time should be selected as appropriate for the 
endpoint measured; for example, DNA damage/strand break measurements are usually 
made a few (e.g., 2-6) hours after the last administration for the multiple daily 
administration.  In the case of single administration, two sampling times should be 
used: a few hours and 24 hours after the treatment. 
In principle, studies of any length can be considered appropriate, provided the top 
dose/exposure is adequate. 
4.6 
Number of Animals Analyzed  
The number of animals analyzed is determined by current recommendations for the 
micronucleus assay (OECD) or other genotoxicity assays and generally does not include 
all the animals treated for a toxicology study.  Animals used for genotoxicity analyses 
should be randomly selected from the group used for the toxicology study. 
4.7 
Use of Male/Female Rodents in In Vivo Genotoxicity Tests 
If sex-specific drugs are to be tested, then the assay can be done in the appropriate sex.  
In vivo tests with the acute protocol can generally be carried out in only one sex.  For

Guidance on Genotoxicity Testing and  
Data Interpretation for Pharmaceuticals Intended for Human Use 
 
11 
acute tests, both sexes should be considered only if any existing toxicity, metabolism or 
exposure (Cmax or AUC) data indicate a toxicologically meaningful sex difference in the 
species being used.  Otherwise, the use of males alone is considered appropriate for 
acute genotoxicity tests.  When the genotoxicity test is integrated into a repeat-dose 
toxicology study in two sexes, samples can be collected from both sexes, but a single sex 
can be scored if there is no substantial sex difference evident in toxicity/metabolism.  
The dose levels for the sex(es) scored should meet the criteria for appropriate dose levels 
(see Sections 4.3.2 and 4.3.3). 
Similar principles can be applied for other established in vivo genotoxicity tests. 
4.8 
Route of Administration 
The route of administration is generally the expected clinical route, e.g., oral, 
intravenous or subcutaneous, but can be modified if appropriate in order to obtain 
systemic exposure, e.g., for topically applied compounds (see Section 2.3.4). 
4.9 
Use of Positive Controls for In Vivo Studies 
For in vivo studies, it is considered sufficient to treat animals with a positive control only 
periodically, and not concurrently with every assay, after a laboratory has established 
competence in the use of the assay (Note 16).  
5. 
GUIDANCE ON EVALUATION OF TEST RESULTS AND ON FOLLOW-UP TEST 
STRATEGIES 
Comparative trials have shown conclusively that each in vitro test system generates both 
false negative and false positive results in relation to predicting rodent carcinogenicity.  
Genotoxicity test batteries (of in vitro and in vivo tests) detect carcinogens that are 
thought to act primarily via a mechanism involving direct genetic damage, such as the 
majority of known human carcinogens.  Therefore, these batteries are not expected to 
detect non-genotoxic carcinogens.  Experimental conditions, such as the limited 
capability of the in vitro metabolic activation systems, can lead to false negative results 
in in vitro tests.  The test battery approach is designed to reduce the risk of false 
negative results for compounds with genotoxic potential. On the other hand a positive 
result in any assay for genotoxicity does not always mean that the test compound poses a 
genotoxic/carcinogenic hazard to humans. 
Although positive in vitro data could indicate intrinsic genotoxic properties of a drug, 
appropriate in vivo data determine the biological significance of these in vitro signals in 
most cases.  Also, because there are several indirect mechanisms of genotoxicity that 
operate only above certain concentrations, it is possible to establish a safe level 
(threshold) for classes of drugs with evidence for such mechanisms (see 5.2. below, 
Müller and Kasper, 2000; Scott et al., 1991; Thybaud et al., 2007). 
5.1 
Assessment of Biological Relevance 
The recommendations below assume that the test has been conducted using appropriate 
spacing of doses, levels of toxicity etc. 
Small increases in apparent genotoxicity in vitro or in vivo should first be assessed for 
reproducibility and biological significance.  Examples of results that are not considered 
biologically meaningful include: 
i. Small increases that are statistically significant compared with the negative or 
solvent control values but are within the confidence intervals of the appropriate 
historical control values for the testing facility.

Guidance on Genotoxicity Testing and  
Data Interpretation for Pharmaceuticals Intended for Human Use 
 
12 
ii. Weak/equivocal responses that are not reproducible. 
If either of the above conditions applies, the weight of evidence indicates a lack of 
genotoxic potential, the test is considered negative or the findings not biologically 
relevant, and no further testing is called for. 
5.2 
Evaluation of Results Obtained in In Vitro Tests 
In evaluating positive results, especially for the microbial mutagenicity test, the purity of 
the test compound should be considered, to determine whether the positive result could 
be attributable to a contaminant. 
5.2.1 Evaluation of Positive Results Obtained In Vitro in a Bacterial Mutation 
Assay 
Since positive results in the Ames test are thought to indicate DNA reactivity, extensive 
follow-up testing to assess the in vivo mutagenic and carcinogenic potential would be 
warranted to assess the potential risk for treatment of patients, unless justified by 
appropriate risk-benefit analysis.  
There are some well characterized examples of artifactual increases in colonies that are 
not truly revertants.  These can occur due to contamination with amino acids (i.e., 
providing histidine for Salmonella typhimurium strains or tryptophan for Escherichia 
coli strains), so that the bacterial reversion assay is not suitable for testing a peptide 
that is likely to degrade.  Certain cases exist where positive results in bacterial 
mutation assays might be shown not to indicate genotoxic potential in vivo in humans, 
for example when bacterial-specific metabolism occurs, such as activation by bacterial 
nitroreductases. 
5.2.2 Evaluation of Positive Results Obtained In Vitro in Mammalian Cell 
Assays 
Recommendations for assessing weight of evidence and follow-up testing for positive 
genotoxicity results are discussed in IWGT reports (e.g., Thybaud et al., 2007).  In 
addition, the scientific literature gives a number of conditions that can lead to a positive 
in vitro result of questionable relevance.  Therefore, any in vitro positive test result 
should be evaluated based on an assessment of the weight of evidence as indicated below.  
This list is not exhaustive, but is given as an aid to decision-making. 
i. The conditions do not occur in vivo (pH; osmolality; precipitates). 
(Note that the 1 mM limit avoids increases in osmolality, and that if the test 
compound alters pH it is advisable to adjust pH to the normal pH of untreated 
cultures at the time of treatment). 
ii. The effect occurs only at the most toxic concentrations. 
In the MLA increases at ≥80% reduction in RTG. 
For in vitro cytogenetics assays when growth is suppressed by ≥50%. 
If any of the above conditions apply the weight of evidence indicates a lack of genotoxic 
potential; the standard battery (Option 1) can be followed.  Thus, a single in vivo test is 
considered sufficient. 
5.2.3 Evaluation of In Vitro Negative Results 
For in vitro negative results further testing should be considered in special cases, such as 
(the examples given are not exhaustive, but are given as an aid to decision-making): The 
structure or known metabolism of the compound indicates that standard techniques for 
in vitro metabolic activation (e.g., rodent liver S9) might be inadequate; the structure or

Guidance on Genotoxicity Testing and  
Data Interpretation for Pharmaceuticals Intended for Human Use 
 
13 
known activity of the compound indicates that the use of other test methods/systems 
might be appropriate. 
5.3 
Evaluation of Results Obtained from In Vivo Tests 
In vivo tests have the advantage of taking into account absorption, distribution and 
excretion, which are not factors in in vitro tests, but are potentially relevant to human 
use.  In addition metabolism is likely to be more relevant in vivo compared to the 
systems normally used in vitro.  If the in vivo and in vitro results do not agree, then the 
difference should be considered/explained on a case-by-case basis, e.g., a difference in 
metabolism; rapid and efficient excretion of a compound in vivo. 
In vivo genotoxicity tests also have the potential to give misleading positive results that 
do not indicate true genotoxicity.  As examples:  
i. Increases in micronuclei can occur without administration of any genotoxic agent, 
due to disturbance in erythropoiesis (Tweats et al., 2007, I). 
ii. DNA adduct data should be interpreted in the light of the known background level 
of endogenous adducts. 
iii. Indirect, toxicity-related effects could influence the results of the DNA strand break 
assays (e.g., alkaline elution and Comet assays).  
Thus it is important to take into account all the toxicological and hematological 
findings when evaluating the genotoxicity data (Note 15).  Indirect effects related 
to toxicological changes could have a safety margin and might not be clinically 
relevant. 
5.4 
Follow-up Strategies for Positive Results 
5.4.1 Follow-up to Findings in In Vitro in Mammalian Cell Tests 
The following discussion assumes negative results in the Ames bacterial mutation assay. 
5.4.1.1 Mechanistic/In Vivo Follow-up 
When there is insufficient weight of evidence to indicate lack of relevance, recommended 
follow-up for positive mammalian cell assays would be to provide experimental evidence, 
either by additional in vitro studies (i, below) or by carrying out two appropriate in vivo 
assays (ii, below), as follows: 
i. Mechanistic information that contributes to a weight of evidence for a lack of 
relevant genotoxicity is often generated in vitro, for example evidence that a test 
compound that induces chromosome aberrations or mutations in the MLA is not a 
DNA damaging agent (e.g., other negative mutation/DNA damage tests in addition 
to the Ames test; structural considerations), or evidence for an indirect mechanism 
that might not be relevant in vivo or might have a threshold (e.g., inhibition of DNA 
synthesis, reactive oxygen species produced only at high concentrations) (Galloway 
et al., 1998; Scott et al., 1991; Müller and Kasper, 2000).  Similar studies can be 
used to follow up a positive result in the in vitro micronucleus assay, or in this case 
evidence 
can 
include 
a 
known 
mechanism 
that 
indicates 
chromosome 
loss/aneuploidy, or centromere staining experiments (Note 17) that indicate 
chromosome loss.  Polyploidy is a common finding in chromosome aberration 
assays in vitro.  While aneugens can induce polyploidy, polyploidy alone does not 
indicate aneugenic potential and can simply indicate cell cycle perturbation; it is 
also commonly associated with increasing cytotoxicity.  If polyploidy, but no 
structural chromosome breakage, is seen in an in vitro assay, generally a negative 
in vivo micronucleus assay with assurance of appropriate exposure would provide

Guidance on Genotoxicity Testing and  
Data Interpretation for Pharmaceuticals Intended for Human Use 
 
14 
sufficient assurance of lack of potential for aneuploidy induction. 
If the above mechanistic information and weight of evidence supports the lack of 
relevant genotoxicity, only a single in vivo test with appropriate evidence of 
exposure is called for in order to establish the lack of genotoxic activity.  This is 
typically a cytogenetic assay, and the micronucleus assay in vivo is called for when 
following up potential for chromosome loss. 
If there is not sufficient weight of evidence or mechanistic information to rule out 
relevant genotoxic potential, two in vivo tests are generally called for, with 
appropriate endpoints and in appropriate tissues (usually two different tissues), 
and with an emphasis on obtaining sufficient exposure in the in vivo models. 
Or 
ii. Two appropriate in vivo assays are done, usually with different tissues, and with 
supporting demonstration of exposure. 
In summary, negative results in appropriate in vivo assays, with adequate justification 
for the endpoints measured and demonstration of exposure (see Section 4.4.1) are 
considered sufficient to demonstrate absence of significant genotoxic risk.   
5.4.1.2 Follow-up to an In Vitro Positive Result That is Dependent upon S9 
Activation 
When positive results are seen only in the presence of the S9 activation system, it should 
first be verified that metabolic activation is responsible and not some other difference in 
conditions (e.g., low or no serum in the S9 mix, compared with 10% serum in the non-
activated incubations).  The follow-up strategy is then aimed at determining the 
relevance of the results in vitro to conditions in vivo, and will generally focus on in vivo 
studies in liver (Note 18). 
5.4.2 Follow-up to a Positive In Vivo Micronucleus Assay 
If there is an increase in micronuclei in vivo, all the toxicological data should be 
evaluated to determine whether a non-genotoxic effect could be the cause or a 
contributing factor (Note 15).  If non-specific effects of disturbed erythropoiesis or 
physiology (such as hypo/hyperthermia) are suspected, an in vivo assay for chromosome 
aberrations might be more appropriate.  If a “real” increase is suspected, strategies 
should be used to demonstrate whether the increase is due to chromosome loss or 
chromosome breakage (Note 17).  There is evidence that aneuploidy induction, e.g., with 
spindle poisons, follows a non-linear dose response.  Thus, it might be possible to 
determine that there is a threshold exposure below which chromosome loss is not 
expected and to determine whether an appropriate safety margin exists compared with 
clinical exposure. 
In conclusion, the assessment of the genotoxic potential of a compound should take into 
account the totality of the findings and acknowledge the intrinsic values and limitations 
of both in vitro and in vivo tests. 
5.5 
Follow-up Genotoxicity Testing in Relation to Tumor Findings in a 
Carcinogenicity Bioassay 
Additional genotoxicity testing in appropriate models can be conducted for compounds 
that were negative in the standard test battery but which have shown increases in 
tumors in carcinogenicity bioassay(s) with insufficient evidence to establish a non-
genotoxic mechanism.  To help understand the mode of action, additional testing can 
include modified conditions for metabolic activation in in vitro tests or can include in 
vivo tests measuring genetic damage in target organs of tumor induction, such as DNA

Guidance on Genotoxicity Testing and  
Data Interpretation for Pharmaceuticals Intended for Human Use 
 
15 
strand break assays (e.g., comet or alkaline elution assays), liver UDS test, DNA 
covalent binding (e.g., by 32P-postlabelling), mutation induction in transgenes, or 
molecular characterization of genetic changes in tumor-related genes (Kasper et al., 
2007). 
6. NOTES 
1. The in vitro micronucleus assay has been widely evaluated in international 
collaborative studies (Kirsch-Volders et al., 2003), is validated by ECVAM (Corvi et 
al., 2008), and is the subject of an OECD guideline 487 (2010). 
2. There is a small but significant number of genotoxic carcinogens that are reliably 
detected by the bone marrow tests for chromosomal damage but have yielded 
negative/weak/conflicting results in the in vitro tests outlined in the standard battery 
options.  Carcinogens such as procarbazine, hydroquinone, urethane and benzene 
fall into this category.  Some other examples from a survey of companies are 
described by Tweats et al., 2007, II. 
3. In principle, micronuclei in hematopoietic cells can be evaluated in bone marrow from 
any species, and in blood from species that do not filter out circulating 
micronucleated erythrocytes in the spleen.  In laboratory mice, micronuclei can be 
measured in polychromatic erythrocytes in blood, and mature (normochromatic) 
erythrocytes can be used when mice are treated continuously for about 4 weeks or 
more.  Although rats rapidly remove micronucleated erythrocytes from the 
circulation, it has been established that micronucleus induction by a range of 
clastogens and aneugens can be detected in rat blood reticulocytes (Wakata et al., 
1998; Hamada et al., 2001).  Rat blood can be used for micronucleus analysis 
provided methods are used to ensure analysis of the newly formed reticulocytes 
(Hayashi et al., 2007; MacGregor et al., 2006), and the sample size is sufficiently 
large to provide appropriate statistical sensitivity given the lower micronucleus levels 
in rat blood than in bone marrow (Kissling et al., 2007).  Whichever method is 
chosen, bone marrow or blood, automated or manual analysis, each laboratory should 
determine the appropriate minimum sample size to ensure that scoring error is 
maintained below the level of animal-to-animal variation. 
Some experience is now available for micronucleus induction in the dog and rhesus 
monkey (Harper et al., 2007; Hotchkiss et al., 2008).  One example where such 
alternative species might be useful would be in evaluation of a human metabolite 
that was not sufficiently represented in rodents but was formed in the dog or monkey. 
4.  While the two options in the battery are equally suitable, specific knowledge about an 
individual test compound can indicate that one option is preferable.  For example, if 
systemic exposure in animal models is equal to or less than anticipated clinical 
exposure, in vitro assays should be employed: Option 1 (see also Sections 2.3.4 and 
4.4.1).  On the other hand Option 2, including a test in liver, is recommended in 
cases where short-lived reactive metabolites are expected to be generated in the liver.  
5. Certain structurally alerting molecular entities are recognized as being causally 
related to the carcinogenic and/or mutagenic potential of chemicals.  Examples of 
structural alerts include alkylating electrophilic centers, unstable epoxides, aromatic 
amines, azo-structures, N-nitroso groups, and aromatic nitro-groups (Ashby and 
Paton, 1994).  For some classes of compounds with specific structural alerts, it is 
established that specific protocol modifications/additional tests are important for 
optimum detection of genotoxicity (e.g., molecules containing an azo-group, glycosides, 
compounds such as nitroimidazoles requiring nitroreduction for activation,

Guidance on Genotoxicity Testing and  
Data Interpretation for Pharmaceuticals Intended for Human Use 
 
16 
compounds such as phenacetin requiring a different rodent S9 for metabolic 
activation). 
6. There is some experience with in vivo assays for micronucleus induction in skin and 
colon (Hayashi et al., 2007), and DNA damage assays in these tissues can also be an 
appropriate substitute. 
7. A few chemicals are more easily detectable either with plate-incorporation or with 
pre-incubation methods, though differences are typically quantitative rather than 
qualitative (Gatehouse et al., 1994).  Experience in the pharmaceutical industry 
where drugs have been tested in both protocols has not resulted in different results 
for the two methods, and, in the IWGT report (Gatehouse et al., 1994), the examples 
of chemical classes listed as more easily detectable in the pre-incubation protocol are 
generally not pharmaceuticals and are positive in in vivo genotoxicity tests in liver.  
These include short chain aliphatic nitrosamines; divalent metals; aldehydes (e.g., 
formaldehyde, crotonaldehyde); azo dyes (e.g., butter yellow); pyrrolizidine alkaloids; 
allyl compounds (allylisothiocyanate, allyl chloride), and nitro (aromatic, aliphatic) 
compounds. 
8. The rationale for a maximum concentration of 1 mM for in vitro mammalian cell 
assays includes the following:  The test battery includes the Ames test and an in 
vivo assay.  This battery optimizes the detection of genotoxic carcinogens without 
relying on any individual assay alone.  There is a very low likelihood of compounds 
of concern (DNA damaging carcinogens) that are not detected in Ames test or in vivo 
genotoxicity assay, but are detectable in an in vitro mammalian assay only above 1 
mM.  Second, a limit of 1 mM maintains the element of hazard identification, being 
higher than clinical exposures to known pharmaceuticals, including those that 
concentrate in tissues (Goodman & Gilman, 2001), and is also higher than the levels 
generally achievable in preclinical studies in vivo.  Certain drugs are known to 
require quite high clinical exposures for therapeutic effect, e.g., nucleoside analogs 
and some antibiotics.  While comparison of potency with existing drugs can be of 
interest to sponsors, perhaps even above the 1 mM limit, it is ultimately the in vivo 
tests that determine relevance for human safety.  For pharmaceuticals with 
unusually low molecular weight (e.g., less than 200) higher test concentrations 
should be considered.  
9. Although some genotoxic carcinogens are not detectable in in vitro genotoxicity 
assays unless the concentrations tested induce some degree of cytotoxicity, DNA 
damaging agents are generally detectable with only moderate levels of toxicity 
(Greenwood et al., 2004).  As cytotoxicity increases, mechanisms other than direct 
DNA damage by a compound or its metabolites can lead to ‘positive’ results that are 
related to cytotoxicity and not genotoxicity.  Such indirect induction of DNA damage 
secondary to damage to non-DNA targets is more likely to occur above a certain 
concentration threshold.  The disruption of cellular processes is not expected to 
occur at lower, pharmacologically relevant concentrations. 
In cytogenetic assays, even weak clastogens that are known to be carcinogens are 
positive without exceeding a 50% reduction in cell counts.  On the other hand, 
compounds that are not DNA damaging, mutagenic or carcinogenic can induce 
chromosome breakage at toxic concentrations.  For both in vitro cytogenetic assays, 
the chromosome aberration assay and the in vitro micronucleus assay, a limit of 
about 50% growth reduction is considered appropriate. 
For cytogenetic assays in cell lines, measurement of cell population growth over time 
(by measuring the change in cell number during culture relative to control, e.g., by

Guidance on Genotoxicity Testing and  
Data Interpretation for Pharmaceuticals Intended for Human Use 
 
17 
the method referred to as Population Doubling (PD; Note 10), has been shown to be a 
useful measure of cytotoxicity, as it is known that cell numbers can underestimate 
toxicity.  For lymphocyte cultures, an inhibition of proliferation not exceeding about 
50% is considered sufficient; this can be measured by Mitotic Index (MI) for 
metaphase aberration assays and by an index based on cytokinesis block for in vitro 
micronucleus assays.  In addition, for the in vitro micronucleus assay, since 
micronuclei are scored in the interphase subsequent to a mitotic division, it is 
important to verify that cells have progressed through the cell cycle.  This can be 
done by use of cytochalasin B to allow nuclear division but not cell division, so that 
micronuclei can be scored in binucleate cells (the preferred method for lymphocytes).  
For cell lines, other methods to demonstrate cell proliferation, including cell 
population growth over time (PD) as described above, can be used (Kirsch-Volders et 
al., 2003). 
For MLA, appropriate sensitivity is achieved by limiting the top concentration to one 
with close to 20% Relative Total Growth (RTG) (10-20%) both for soft agar and for 
microwell methods (Moore et al., 2002).  Reviews of published data using the current 
criteria found very few chemicals that were positive in MLA only at concentrations 
with less than 20% RTG and that were rodent carcinogens, and convincing evidence 
of genotoxic carcinogenesis for this category is lacking.  The consensus is that 
caution is appropriate in interpreting results when increases in mutation are seen 
only below 20% RTG, and a result would not be considered positive if the increase in 
mutant fraction occurred only at  10% RTG. 
In conclusion, caution is appropriate in interpreting positive results obtained as 
reduction in growth/survival approaches or exceeds 50% for cytogenetics assays or 
80% for MLA.  It is acknowledged that the evaluation of cells treated at these levels 
of cytotoxicity/clonal survival can result in greater sensitivity but bears an increased 
risk of non-relevant positive results.  The battery approach for genotoxicity is 
designed to ensure appropriate sensitivity without relying on single in vitro 
mammalian cell tests at high cytotoxicity. 
To obtain an appropriate toxicity range, a preliminary range-finding assay over a 
broad range of concentrations is useful, but in the genotoxicity assay it is often 
critical to use multiple concentrations that are spaced quite closely (less than two–
fold dilutions).  Extra concentrations can be tested but not all concentrations need be 
evaluated for genotoxicity.  It is not intended that multiple experiments be carried 
out to reach exactly 50% reduction in growth, for example, or exactly 80% reduction 
in RTG. 
10. For in vitro cytogenetic assays it is appropriate to use a measure of relative cell 
growth to assess toxicity, because cell counts can underestimate toxicity (Greenwood 
et al., 2004).  Using calculated population doublings (see Glossary) to estimate the 
50% growth reduction level, it was demonstrated that the frequency of positive 
results with compounds that are not mutagenic or carcinogenic is reduced, while 
agents that act via direct interaction with DNA are reliably positive. 
11. In certain cases it can be useful to examine chromosome aberrations at metaphase in 
lymphocytes cultured from test animals after one or more administrations of test 
compound, just as bone marrow metaphase cells can be used.  Since circulating 
lymphocytes are not replicating, agents that require replication for their genotoxic 
effect (e.g., some nucleoside analogs) are not expected to be detected in this cell type.   
Because some lymphocytes are relatively long-lived, in principle there is the potential 
for accumulation of un-repaired DNA damage in vivo that would give rise to 
aberrations when the cells are stimulated to divide in vitro.  The in vivo lymphocyte

Guidance on Genotoxicity Testing and  
Data Interpretation for Pharmaceuticals Intended for Human Use 
 
18 
assay can be useful in following up indications of clastogenicity, but in general 
another tissue such as liver is a more informative supplement to the micronucleus 
assay in hematopoietic cells because exposure to drug and metabolite(s) is often 
higher in liver. 
12. The inclusion of a second in vivo assay in the battery is to provide assurance of lack 
of genotoxicity by use of a tissue that is well exposed to a drug and/or its metabolites; 
a small number of carcinogens that are considered genotoxic gave positive results in 
a test in liver but were negative in a cytogenetics assay in vivo in bone marrow.  
These examples likely reflect a lack of appropriate metabolic activity or lack of 
reactive intermediates delivered to the hematopoietic cells of the bone marrow. 
Assays for DNA strand breaks, DNA adducts, and mutations in transgenes have the 
advantage that they can be applied in many tissues.  Internationally agreed 
protocols are not yet in place for all the in vivo assays, although considerable 
experience and published data and protocol recommendations exist for DNA strand 
break assays (Comet and alkaline elution assays), DNA adduct (covalent binding) 
measurements, and transgenic rodent mutation assays, in addition to the UDS assay.  
For a compound that is positive in vitro in the MLA and induces predominantly large 
colonies, and is also shown not to induce chromosome breakage in an in vitro 
metaphase assay, an in vivo assay for mutation, such as a transgenic mouse 
mutation assay, should be considered in preference to a DNA strand break assay.  
The UDS assay is considered useful mainly for compounds that induce bulky DNA 
adducts or are positive in the Ames test.  Because cytotoxicity induces DNA strand 
breakage, careful cytotoxicity assessment is needed to avoid confounding the results 
of DNA strand break assays.  This has been well characterized for the in vitro 
alkaline elution test (Storer et al., 1996) but not yet fully validated for the Comet 
assay.  In principle the DNA strand break assays can be used in repeat-dose 
toxicology assays with appropriate dose levels and sampling times. 
Since liver of mature animals is not a highly mitotic tissue, often a non-cytogenetic 
endpoint is used for the second assay, but when dividing hepatocytes are present, 
such as after partial hepatectomy, or in young rats (Hayashi et al., 2007), 
micronucleus analysis in liver is possible, and detects known genotoxic compounds. 
13. For common vehicles like aqueous methyl cellulose this would usually be appropriate, 
but for vehicles such as Tween 80, the volume that can be administered could be as 
much as 30 fold lower than that given acutely. 
14. Caution is appropriate if the toxicological study design includes additional blood 
sampling, e.g., for measurement of exposure.  Such bleeding could perturb the 
results of micronucleus analysis since erythropoiesis stimulated by bleeding can lead 
to increases in micronucleated erythrocytes. 
15. Increases in micronuclei can occur without administration of any genotoxic agent, 
due to disturbance in erythropoiesis (such as regenerative anemia; extramedullary 
hematopoiesis), stress, and hypo- and hyperthermia (reviewed by Tweats et al., 2007, 
I).  In blood, changes in spleen function that affect clearance of micronucleated cells 
from the blood could lead to small increases in circulating micronucleated red blood 
cells. 
16. Positive controls for either short-term or repeat dose genotoxicity studies:  
For micronucleus (and other cytogenetic) assays, the purpose of the positive control is 
to verify that the individuals scoring the slides can reliably detect increases in 
micronuclei.  This can be accomplished by use of samples from periodic studies 
(every few months) of small groups of animals (one sex) given acute treatment with a

Guidance on Genotoxicity Testing and  
Data Interpretation for Pharmaceuticals Intended for Human Use 
 
19 
positive control.  For manual scoring such slides can be included in coded slides 
scored from each study.  Positive control slides should not be obvious to readers 
based on their staining properties or micronucleus frequency.  For automated 
scoring, appropriate quality control samples should be used with each assay. 
For other in vivo genotoxicity assays, the purpose of positive controls is to 
demonstrate reliable detection of an increase in DNA damage/mutagenicity using the 
assay in the chosen species, tissue and protocol.  After a laboratory has 
demonstrated that it can consistently detect appropriate positive control compounds 
in multiple independent experiments, carrying out positive control experiments 
periodically is generally sufficient provided experimental conditions are not changed.  
However, currently it is considered that for the Comet assay concurrent positive 
controls are advisable. 
17. Determination of whether micronucleus induction is due primarily to chromosome 
loss or to chromosome breakage could include staining micronuclei in vitro or in vivo 
to determine whether centromeres are present, e.g., using Fluorescent in situ 
Hybridization (FISH) with probes for DNA sequences in the centromeric region, or a 
labeled antibody to kinetochore proteins.  If the majority of induced micronuclei are 
centromere positive, this suggests chromosome loss.  (Note that even potent tubule 
poisons like colchicine and vinblastine do not produce 100% kinetochore positive 
micronuclei, but more typically 70 to 80%, and are accepted as primarily aneugens 
for assessing risk).  An alternative approach is to carry out an in vitro or in vivo 
assay for metaphase structural aberrations; if negative this would imply that 
micronucleus induction is related to chromosome loss. 
18. Standard induced S9 mix has higher activation capacity than human S9, and lacks 
phase two detoxification capability unless specific cofactors are supplied.  Also, non-
specific activation can occur in vitro with high test substrate concentrations (see 
Kirkland et al., 2007).  Genotoxicity testing with human S9 or other human-relevant 
activation systems can be helpful.  Analysis of the metabolite profile in the 
genotoxicity test incubations for comparison with known metabolite profiles in 
preclinical species (in uninduced microsomes or hepatocytes, or in vivo) or in 
preparations from humans can also help determine the relevance of test results (Ku 
et al., 2007), and follow-up studies will usually focus on in vivo testing in liver.  A 
compound that gives positive results in vitro with S9 might not induce genotoxicity in 
vivo because the metabolite is not formed, is formed in very small quantities, or is 
metabolically detoxified or rapidly excreted, indicating a lack of risk in vivo.

Guidance on Genotoxicity Testing and  
Data Interpretation for Pharmaceuticals Intended for Human Use 
 
20 
7. 
GLOSSARY 
Alkaline elution assay:  
See DNA strand break assay. 
Aneuploidy: 
Numerical deviation of the modal number of chromosomes in a cell or organism. 
Base substitution: 
The substitution of one or more base(s) for another in the nucleotide sequence.  This can 
lead to an altered protein. 
Cell proliferation: 
The ability of cells to divide and to form daughter cells. 
Centromere/kinetochore:  
Structures in chromosomes essential for association of sister chromatids and for 
attachment of spindle fibers that move daughter chromosomes to the poles and ensure 
inclusion in daughter nuclei. 
Clastogen:  
An agent that produces structural breakage of chromosomes, usually detectable by light 
microscopy. 
Cloning efficiency:  
The efficiency of single cells to form clones.  It is usually measured after seeding low 
numbers of cells in a suitable environment. 
Comet assay:   
See DNA strand break assay. 
Culture confluency:  
A quantification of the cell density in a culture by visual inspection. 
Cytogenetic evaluation:  
Chromosome structure analysis in mitosis or meiosis by light microscopy or 
micronucleus analysis. 
DNA adduct:  
Product of covalent binding of a chemical to DNA. 
DNA repair:  
Reconstitution of the original DNA sequence after DNA damage. 
DNA strand breaks:  
Single or double strand scissions in the DNA. 
DNA strand break test:  
Alkaline treatment that converts certain types of DNA lesions into strand breaks that 
can be detected by the alkaline elution technique, measuring migration rate through a 
filter, or by the single cell gel electrophoresis or Comet test (in which cells embedded in a 
thin layer of gel on a microscope slides are subjected to electric current, causing shorter 
pieces of DNA to migrate out of the nucleus into a “Comet tail”).  The extent of DNA 
migration is measured visually under the microscope on stained cells. 
Frameshift mutation:  
A mutation (change in the genetic code) in which one base or two adjacent bases are

Guidance on Genotoxicity Testing and  
Data Interpretation for Pharmaceuticals Intended for Human Use 
 
21 
added to (inserted in) or deleted from the nucleotide sequence of a gene.  This can lead 
to an altered or truncated protein. 
Gene mutation:  
A detectable permanent change within a single gene or its regulating sequences.  The 
changes can be point mutations, insertions, or deletions. 
Genetic endpoint:  
The precise type or class of genetic change investigated (e.g., gene mutations, 
chromosomal aberrations, DNA strand breaks, DNA repair, DNA adduct formation, etc).   
Genotoxicity:  
A broad term that refers to any deleterious change in the genetic material regardless of 
the mechanism by which the change is induced. 
Micronucleus:  
Particle in a cell that contains nuclear DNA; it might contain a whole chromosome(s) or a 
broken centric or acentric part(s) of chromosome(s). 
Mitotic index:  
Percentage of cells in the different stages of mitosis amongst the cells not in mitosis 
(interphase) in a preparation (slide).   
Numerical chromosome changes:  
Chromosome numbers different from the original haploid or diploid set of chromosomes; 
for cell lines, chromosome numbers different from the modal chromosome set. 
Plasmid:  
Genetic element additional to the normal bacterial genome.  A plasmid might be 
inserted into the host chromosome or form an extra-chromosomal element. 
Point mutations:  
Changes in the genetic codes, usually confined to a single DNA base pair. 
Polychromatic erythrocyte:  
An immature erythrocyte in an intermediate stage of development that still contains 
ribosomes and, as such, can be distinguished from mature normochromatic erythrocytes 
(lacking ribosomes) by stains selective for RNA. 
Polyploidy:  
Numerical deviation of the modal number of chromosomes in a cell, with approximately 
whole multiples of the haploid number.  Endoreduplication is a morphological form of 
polyploidy 
in 
which 
chromosome 
pairs 
are 
associated 
at 
metaphase 
as 
“diplochromosomes”. 
Population doubling or culture growth:  
This can be calculated in different ways; one example of an appropriate formula is:  
Population doublings (PDs) = the log of the ratio of the final count (N) to the starting 
(baseline) count (Xo), divided by the log of 2.  That is: PD = [log(N  Xo)]  log 2. 
Recombination:  
Breakage and balanced or unbalanced rejoining of DNA. 
RTG (relative total growth):  
This measure of cytotoxicity takes the relative suspension growth (based on cell loss and 
cell growth from the beginning of treatment to the second day post-treatment) and 
multiplies it by the relative plating efficiency at the time of cloning for mutant

Guidance on Genotoxicity Testing and  
Data Interpretation for Pharmaceuticals Intended for Human Use 
 
22 
quantization. 
Single Cell Gel Electrophoresis assay:  
Comet assay. See DNA strand break assay. 
Survival (in the context of mutagenicity testing):  
Proportion of living cells among dead cells, usually determined by staining or colony 
counting methods after a certain treatment interval.  
Transgene:  
An exogenous or foreign gene inserted into the host genome, either into somatic cells or 
germ line cells. 
Unscheduled DNA synthesis (UDS):  
DNA synthesis that occurs at some stage in the cell cycle other than S-phase in response 
to DNA damage.  It is usually associated with DNA excision repair.

Guidance on Genotoxicity Testing and  
Data Interpretation for Pharmaceuticals Intended for Human Use 
 
23 
8. 
REFERENCES  
Ashby J, Paton D. The influence of chemical structure on the extent and sites of 
carcinogenesis for 522 rodent carcinogens and 55 different human carcinogen 
exposures.Mutat Res 1994;286:3-74. 
 
Corvi R, Albertini S, Hartung T, Hoffmann S, Maurici D, Pfuhler S et al. ECVAM 
Retrospective Validation of the in vitro micronucleus test (MNT). Mutagenesis 
2008;23:271-283. 
 
Gatehouse D, Haworth S, Cebula T, Gocke E, Kier L, Matsushima T et al. Report from 
the working group on bacterial mutation assays: international workshop on 
standardisation of genotoxicity test procedures. Mutat Res 1994;312:217-33. 
 
Goodman & Gilman. The pharmacological basis of therapeutics. Hardman JG, Limbird 
LE, Gilman AG, editors. 10th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Professional 2001. 
 
Greenwood SK, Hill RB, Sun JT, Armstrong MJ, Johnson TE, Gara JP et al. Population 
Doubling: A simple and more accurate estimation of cell growth suppression in the in 
vitro assay for chromosomal aberrations that reduces irrelevant positive results. Environ 
Mol Mutagen 2004;43:36-44. 
 
Hamada S., Sutou S, Morita T, Wakata A, Asanami S, Hosoya S et al. Evaluation of the 
rodent micronucleus assay by a 28-day treatment protocol: summary of the 13th 
collaborative study by the collaborative study group for the micronucleus test 
(CSGMT)/Environmental Mutagen Society of Japan (JEMS)–Mammalian Mutagenicity 
Study Group (MMS). Environ Mol Mutagen 2001;37:93-110.  
 
Hartmann A, Agurell E, Beevers C, Brendler-Schwaab S, Burlinson B, Clay P et al. 
Recommendations for conducting the in vivo alkaline Comet assay. Mutagenesis 
2003;18:45-51. 
 
Hayashi M, MacGregor JT, Gatehouse DG, Adler I, Blakey DH, Dertinger SD et al. In 
vivo rodent erythrocyte micronucleus assay. II. Some aspects of protocol design including 
repeated treatments, integration with toxicity testing, and automated scoring. Environ 
Mol Mutagen 2000;35:234-52. 
 
Hayashi M, MacGregor JT, Gatehouse DG, Blakey DH, Dertinger SD, Abramsson-
Zetterberg L et al. In vivo erythrocyte micronucleus assay. III. Validation and regulatory 
acceptance of automated scoring and the use of rat peripheral blood reticulocytes, with 
discussion of non-hematopoietic target cells and a single dose-level limit test. Mutat Res 
2007;627:10-30. 
 
Heddle JA, Dean S, Nohmi T, Boerrigter M, Casciano D, Douglas GR et al. In vivo 
transgenic mutation assays. Environ Mol Mutagen 2000;35:253-9. 
 
Hotchkiss CE, Bishop ME, Dertinger SD, Slikker W, Moore MM, MacGregor JT. Flow 
cytometric analysis of micronuclei in peripheral blood reticulocytes IV: an index of 
chromosomal damage in the rhesus monkey (macaca mulatta). Toxicol Sci 2008 ;102:352-
8. 
 
Kasper P, Uno Y, Mauthe R, Asano N, Douglas G, Matthews E et al. Follow-up testing of

Guidance on Genotoxicity Testing and  
Data Interpretation for Pharmaceuticals Intended for Human Use 
 
24 
rodent carcinogens not positive in the standard genotoxicity testing battery:  IWGT 
workgroup report. Mutat Res 2007;627:106-116. 
 
Kenelly JC, Waters R, Ashby J, Lefevre PA, Burlinson B, Benford DJ et al. In vivo rat 
liver UDS assay. In: Supplementary Mutagenicity Tests, UKEMS Recommended 
Procedures. Kirkland DJ, Fox M, editors. Cambridge University Press 1993;52-77. 
 
Kirkland DJ, Pfuhler S, Tweats D, Aardema M, Corvi R, Darroudi F et al. How to reduce 
false positive results when undertaking in vitro genotoxicity testing and thus avoid 
unnecessary follow-up animal tests: report of the ECVAM workshop. Mutat Res 
2007;628:31-55. 
 
Kirsch-Volders M, Sofuni T, Aardema M, Albertini S, Eastmond D, Fenech M  et al. 
Report from the in vitro micronucleus assay working group. Mutat Res 2003;540:153-63. 
 
Kissling GE, Dertinger SD, Hayashi M, MacGregor JT. Sensitivity of the erythrocyte 
micronucleus assay: dependence on number of cells scored and inter-animal variability. 
Mutat Res 2007;634:235-40. 
 
Ku WW, Bigger A, Brambilla G, Glatt H, Gocke E, Guzzie PJ et al. Strategy for 
genotoxicity testing-metabolic considerations. Mutat Res 2007;627:59-77. 
 
MacGregor JT, Bishop ME, McNamee JP, Hayashi M, Asano N, Wakata A et al. Flow 
Cytometric analysis of micronuclei in peripheral blood reticulocytes: II. An efficient 
method of monitoring chromosomal damage in the rat. Toxicol Sci 2006;94:92-107. 
 
Moore MM, Honma M, Clements J, Harrington-Brock K, Awogi T, Bolcsfoldi G et al. 
Mouse lymphoma thymidine kinase locus gene mutation assay: follow-up international 
workshop on genotoxicity test procedures–New Orleans, Louisiana, April 2000. Environ 
Mol Mutagen 2002;40:292-9. 
 
Moore MM, Honma M, Clements J, Bolcsfoldi G, Burlinson B, Cifone M et al. Mouse 
lymphoma thymidine kinase gene mutation assay: follow-up meeting of the international 
workshop on genotoxicity testing–Aberdeen, Scotland, 2003–Assay acceptance criteria, 
positive controls, and data evaluation. Environ Mol Mutagen 2006;47:1-5. 
 
Müller L, Kasper P. Human biological relevance and the use of threshold arguments in 
regulatory genotoxicity assessment: experience with pharmaceuticals. Mutat Res 
2000;464: 9-34. 
 
OECD Guidelines for Genetic Toxicology 1997. 
 
Scott D, Galloway SM, Marshall RR, Ishidate M Jr, Brusick D, Ashby J et al. 
Genotoxicity under extreme culture conditions. A report from ICPEMC task group 9. 
Mutat Res 1991;257:147-204. 
 
Storer RD, McKelvey TW, Kraynak AR, Elia MC, Barnum JE, Harmon LS et al. 
Revalidation of the in vitro alkaline elution/rat hepatocyte assay for DNA damage: 
improved criteria for assessment of cytotoxicity and genotoxicity and results for 81 
compounds. Mutat Res 1996;368:59-101. 
 
Suzuki H, Ikeda N, Kobayashi K, Terashima Y, Shimada Y, Suzuki T et al. Evaluation of

Guidance on Genotoxicity Testing and  
Data Interpretation for Pharmaceuticals Intended for Human Use 
 
25 
liver and peripheral blood micronucleus assays with 9 chemicals using young rats. A 
study by the Collaborative Study Group for the Micronucleus Test (CSGMT)/Japanese 
Environmental Mutagen Society (JEMS) - Mammalian Mutagenicity Study Group 
(MMS). Mutat Res 2005;583:133-45. 
 
Thybaud V, Aardema M, Clements J, Dearfield K, Galloway S, Hayashi M et al. Strategy 
for genotoxicity testing: hazard identification and risk assessment in relation to in vitro 
testing. Mutat Res 2007;627:41-58. 
 
Tweats DJ, Blakey D, Heflich RH, Jacobs A, Jacobsen SD, Morita T et al. Report of the 
IWGT working group on strategies and interpretation of regulatory in vivo tests. I. 
Increases in micronucleated bone marrow cells in rodents that do not indicate genotoxic 
hazards. Mutat Res 2007;627:78-91. 
 
Tweats DJ, Blakey D, Heflich RH, Jacobs A, Jacobsen SD, Morita T et al. Report of the 
IWGT working group on strategy/interpretation of regulatory in vivo tests. II. 
Identification of in vivo-only positive compounds in the bone marrow micronucleus test. 
Mutat Res 2007;627:92-105. 
 
Wakata, A, Miyamae Y, Sato S, Suzuki T, Morita T, Asano N et al. Evaluation of the rat 
micronucleus test with bone marrow and peripheral blood: summary of the 9th 
collaborative study by CSGMT/JEMS. MMS. Environ Mol Mutagen 1998;32:84-100.