# S5-R3_Step4_Guideline_2020_0218_1.pdf
# Category: ich/S
# Pages: 120

INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL FOR HARMONISATION OF TECHNICAL 
REQUIREMENTS FOR PHARMACEUTICALS FOR HUMAN USE 
 
 
ICH HARMONISED GUIDELINE 
 
 
 
DETECTION OF REPRODUCTIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL 
TOXICITY FOR HUMAN PHARMACEUTICALS 
S5(R3) 
 
 
Final version 
Adopted on 18 February 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This Guideline has been developed by the appropriate ICH Expert Working Group and has 
been subject to consultation by the regulatory parties, in accordance with the ICH Process.  
At Step 4 of the Process the final draft is recommended for adoption to the regulatory bodies 
of ICH regions.

2 
S5(R3) 
Document History 
 
Code 
History 
Date 
 
Parent Guideline: Detection of Toxicity to Reproduction for Medicinal Products 
 
S5A 
Approval of the Guideline by the Steering Committee under Step 2 and 
release for public consultation. 
19 September 
1992 
S5A 
Approval of the Guideline by the Steering Committee under Step 4 and 
recommendation for adoption to the three ICH regulatory bodies. 
24 June 1993 
 
Addendum to the Parent Guideline: Toxicity to Male Fertility 
 
S5B 
Approval of the Addendum by the Steering Committee under Step 2 and 
release for public consultation. 
30 March 1995 
S5B 
Approval of the Addendum by the Steering Committee under Step 4 and 
recommendation for adoption to the three ICH regulatory bodies. 
29 November 
1995 
S5B(M) 
Approval of minor revisions to the Addendum by the Steering Committee 
without further public consultation under Step 4 and recommendation for 
adoption to the three ICH regulatory bodies. 
9 November 
2000 
S5A and 
S5B(M) 
The parent guideline is now renamed S5(R2) as the Addendum and its first 
revision have been added to the parent guideline. 
 
November 2005 
Current Step 4 Version 
 
 
 
Legal notice: This document is protected by copyright and may, with the exception of the ICH logo, 
be used, reproduced, incorporated into other works, adapted, modified, translated or distributed 
under a public license provided that ICH's copyright in the document is acknowledged at all times.  
In case of any adaption, modification or translation of the document, reasonable steps must be taken 
to clearly label, demarcate or otherwise identify that changes were made to or based on the original 
document.  Any impression that the adaption, modification or translation of the original document 
is endorsed or sponsored by the ICH must be avoided. 
The document is provided "as is" without warranty of any kind.  In no event shall the ICH or the 
authors of the original document be liable for any claim, damages or other liability arising from the 
use of the document. 
The above-mentioned permissions do not apply to content supplied by third parties.  Therefore, for 
documents where the copyright vests in a third party, permission for reproduction must be obtained 
from this copyright holder. 
 
 
S5(R3) 
Approval by the ICH Assembly under Step 2 and release for public 
consultation. 
1 August 2017 
S5(R3) 
Adopted by the Regulatory Members of the ICH Assembly under Step 4 
(document dated 16 December 2019). 
18 February 
2020

3 
ICH HARMONISED GUIDELINE 
DETECTION OF REPRODUCTIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL 
TOXICITY FOR HUMAN PHARMACEUTICALS 
S5(R3) 
ICH Consensus Guideline 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS ............................................................................. 6 
1. 
INTRODUCTION & GENERAL PRINCIPLES ......................................... 7 
 
AIM OF STUDIES ............................................................................. 7 
2. 
SCOPE OF THE GUIDELINE ................................................................... 8 
3. 
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS ON REPRODUCTIVE TOXICITY 
ASSESSMENT ........................................................................................... 8 
 
TARGET PATIENT POPULATION/ THERAPEUTIC INDICATION 
CONSIDERATIONS ......................................................................... 9 
 
PHARMACOLOGY CONSIDERATIONS ......................................... 9 
 
TOXICITY CONSIDERATIONS ...................................................... 9 
 
TIMING CONSIDERATIONS ......................................................... 10 
 
TOXICOKINETICS (TK) ................................................................ 10 
4. 
DESIGN AND EVALUATION OF IN VIVO MAMMALIAN STUDIES ... 10 
 
STRATEGY TO ADDRESS FERTILITY AND EARLY 
EMBRYONIC DEVELOPMENT (FEED) ........................................ 10 
4.1.1. 
CONSIDERATIONS FOR BIOPHARMACEUTICALS .............. 11 
 
STRATEGIES TO ADDRESS EMBRYO-FETAL DEVELOPMENT 
(EFD) .............................................................................................. 12 
4.2.1. 
CONSIDERATIONS FOR BIOPHARMACEUTICALS .............. 12 
4.2.2. 
ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES FOR ADDRESSING EFD RISK
 ............................................................................................... 13 
4.2.2.1. 
Use of Alternative Assays ................................................. 13 
4.2.3. 
POTENTIAL APPROACHES TO DEFER DEFINITIVE IN VIVO 
TESTING AS PART OF AN INTEGRATED TESTING 
STRATEGY ............................................................................ 13 
 
STRATEGY TO ADDRESS EFFECTS ON PRE- AND POSTNATAL 
DEVELOPMENT (PPND) ............................................................... 13 
4.3.1. 
CONSIDERATIONS FOR BIOPHARMACEUTICALS .............. 14 
5. 
TEST SYSTEM SELECTION .................................................................. 14 
 
ROUTINE TEST SPECIES.............................................................. 14

4 
5.1.1. 
SELECTION OF SPECIES FOR DART TESTING ..................... 14 
5.1.2. 
SPECIES SELECTION FOR PREVENTATIVE AND 
THERAPEUTIC VACCINES .................................................... 14 
 
NON-ROUTINE TEST SPECIES .................................................... 15 
 
USE OF DISEASE MODELS, GENETICALLY MODIFIED 
MODELS, AND SURROGATE MOLECULES ................................ 15 
6. 
DOSE LEVEL SELECTION, ROUTE OF ADMINISTRATION AND 
SCHEDULE ............................................................................................. 16 
 
DOSE SELECTION......................................................................... 16 
6.1.1. 
TOXICITY–BASED ENDPOINT .............................................. 16 
6.1.2. 
SATURATION OF SYSTEMIC EXPOSURE ENDPOINT .......... 16 
6.1.3. 
EXPOSURE MARGIN BASED ENDPOINT .............................. 17 
6.1.3.1. 
Exposure-based Approach for Biopharmaceuticals .............. 17 
6.1.4. 
MAXIMUM FEASIBLE DOSE (MFD) ENDPOINT ................... 17 
6.1.5. 
LIMIT DOSE ENDPOINT ........................................................ 17 
6.1.6. 
SELECTION OF LOWER DOSE LEVELS ................................ 18 
 
ROUTE ........................................................................................... 18 
 
SCHEDULE .................................................................................... 18 
 
DOSE SELECTION AND STUDY DESIGNS FOR VACCINES ...... 18 
7. 
POSSIBLE COMBINATION STUDY DESIGNS IN RODENTS ............... 19 
8. 
DATA REPORTING AND STATISTICS .................................................. 20 
 
DATA REPORTING ....................................................................... 20 
 
STATISTICS ................................................................................... 20 
9. 
PRINCIPLES OF RISK ASSESSMENT ................................................... 20 
10. ENDNOTES ............................................................................................. 22 
11. GLOSSARY ............................................................................................. 22 
12. REFERENCES ......................................................................................... 23 
ANNEX 1 IN VIVO STUDY DESIGNS ............................................................. 25 
1.1 
IN VIVO STUDY DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS ............................. 28 
1.1.1 
FERTILITY AND EARLY EMBRYONIC DEVELOPMENT 
(FEED) STUDY ....................................................................... 28 
1.1.2 
EMBRYO-FETAL DEVELOPMENTAL (EFD) TOXICITY 
STUDY ................................................................................... 30 
1.1.2.1. 
Dose Range Finding Embryo-Fetal Developmental (EFD) 
Toxicity Study ................................................................. 30 
1.1.2.2 
Preliminary Embryo-Fetal Developmental (pEFD) Toxicity 
Study .............................................................................. 30 
1.1.2.3 
Definitive Embryo-Fetal Developmental (EFD) Toxicity Study
 ...................................................................................... 30 
1.1.3 
PRE- AND POSTNATAL DEVELOPMENTAL (PPND) 
TOXICITY STUDY ................................................................. 33 
1.1.3.1 
Enhanced Pre- and Postnatal Developmental (ePPND) Toxicity 
Study in Non-Human Primate (NHP) ................................. 35

5 
1.1.4 
COMBINATION STUDIES ...................................................... 36 
1.1.4.1 
FEED and EFD................................................................ 36 
1.1.4.2 
Male Fertility and Repeated-Dose Toxicology Study ........... 36 
ANNEX 2 
 ALTERNATIVE ASSAYS ..................................................... 38 
1.1 
QUALIFICATION OF ALTERNATIVE ASSAYS FOR 
PREDICTION OF MEFL ................................................................ 38 
1.2 
EXAMPLES OF EFD TESTING STRATEGIES UTILIZING 
ALTERNATIVE ASSAYS ............................................................... 40 
1.2.1 
POTENTIAL APPROACH TO DEFER IN VIVO TESTING AS 
PART OF AN INTEGRATED TESTING STRATEGY ................ 40 
1.2.2 
PHARMACEUTICALS EXPECTED TO BE EMBRYO-FETAL 
TOXICANTS ........................................................................... 40 
1.2.3 
PHARMACEUTICALS INTENDED TO TREAT SEVERELY 
DEBILITATING OR LIFE-THREATENING DISEASES ............ 41 
1.2.4 
PHARMACEUTICALS INTENDED TO TREAT LATE-LIFE 
ONSET DISEASES .................................................................. 42 
1.3 
REFERENCE COMPOUND LIST ................................................... 43 
1.3.1 
POSITIVE CONTROL REFERENCE COMPOUNDS ................. 46 
1.3.2 
NEGATIVE CONTROL REFERENCE COMPOUNDS ............. 114

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
6 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
AUC:   
Area Under the Curve 
Cmax:    
Maximum plasma concentration 
Cmin:    
Minimum plasma concentration 
DART:  
Developmental and Reproductive Toxicity  
DRF:   
Dose Range Finding 
EFD:   
Embryo-Fetal Development 
ePPND:  Enhanced Pre- and Postnatal Developmental 
FEED:  
Fertility and Early Embryonic Developmental 
GD:   
Gestation Day 
GI:  
 
Gastrointestinal  
GLP:   
Good Laboratory Practices 
ICH:  
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for 
Pharmaceuticals for Human Use 
IV:  
 
Intravenous  
LOAEL:  Lowest Observed Adverse Effect Level 
LLO:   
Late Life Onset 
MOA:   
Mechanism of Action 
MEFL:  
Malformation or Embryo-Fetal Lethality 
MFD:   
Maximum Feasible Dose 
MRHD:  Maximum Recommended Human Dose 
NHP:   
Non-Human Primate 
NOAEL:  No Observed Adverse Effect Level 
PD:  
 
Pharmacodynamic 
pEFD:  
Preliminary Embryo-Fetal Development 
PK:  
 
Pharmacokinetic 
PND:   
Postnatal Day 
PPND:  
Pre- and Postnatal Developmental  
SDLT:  
Severely Debilitating or Life-Threatening  
TK:  
 
Toxicokinetic 
WOCBP:  Women of Child Bearing Potential

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
7 
1. INTRODUCTION & GENERAL PRINCIPLES 
The purpose of this document is to recommend international standards for, and promote 
harmonization of, the assessment of nonclinical developmental and reproductive toxicity 
(DART) testing required to support human clinical trials and marketing authorization for 
pharmaceuticals. The guideline describes potential strategies and study designs to 
supplement available data to identify, assess, and convey risk. General concepts and 
recommendations are also provided that should be considered when interpreting study 
data.  
This is a revision of the ICH guideline “S5 Detection of Toxicity to Reproduction for 
Medicinal Products” that was originally published in 1993. This revision brings the 
guideline into alignment with other ICH guidelines, elaborates on the use of exposure 
margins in dose level selection, incorporates a section on risk assessment, and expands the 
scope to include vaccines and biopharmaceuticals. It also describes qualification of 
alternative assays, potential scenarios of use, and provides options for deferral of 
developmental toxicity studies. 
To assess a human pharmaceutical’s effect on reproduction and development, there should 
generally be information available that addresses the potential impact of exposure to a 
pharmaceutical and, when appropriate, its metabolites (ICH M3 (1), ICH S6 (2)) on all 
stages of reproduction and development. No guideline can provide sufficient information 
to cover all possible cases, and flexibility in testing strategy is warranted.  
 Aim of Studies 
The aim of DART studies is to reveal any effect of the pharmaceutical on mammalian 
reproduction relevant for human risk assessment. As appropriate, the set of studies 
conducted should encompass observations through one complete life cycle (i.e., from 
conception in one generation through conception in the following generation), and permit 
detection of immediate and latent adverse effects. The following stages of reproduction 
are generally assessed: 
A) Premating to conception (adult male and female reproductive functions, 
development and maturation of gametes, mating behavior, fertilization). 
B) Conception to implantation (adult female reproductive functions, preimplantation 
development, implantation). 
C) Implantation to closure of the hard palate (adult female reproductive functions, 
embryonic development, major organ formation). 
D) Closure of the hard palate to the end of pregnancy (adult female reproductive 
functions, fetal development and growth, organ development and growth). 
E) Birth to weaning (parturition and lactation, neonate adaptation to extrauterine life, 
pre-weaning development and growth). 
F) Weaning to sexual maturity (post-weaning development and growth, adaptation to 
independent life, onset of puberty and attainment of full sexual function, and effects 
on second generation).

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
8 
The risks to all stages should be assessed, unless the stage is not relevant to the intended 
population. The stages covered in individual studies are left to the discretion of the 
Sponsor, although the timing of studies within the pharmaceutical development process is 
dependent on study populations and phase of pharmaceutical development (see ICH M3, 
ICH S6 and ICH S9 (3)).  
2. SCOPE OF THE GUIDELINE  
This guideline applies to all pharmaceuticals, including biopharmaceuticals, vaccines (and 
their novel constitutive ingredients) for infectious diseases, and novel excipients that are 
part of the final pharmaceutical product. For the purposes of this guideline, the term 
“pharmaceutical” is used to encompass all of these treatment modalities. This guideline 
does not apply to cellular therapies, gene therapies and tissue-engineered products. The 
methodological principles (e.g., study design, dose selection and species selection, etc.) 
outlined in this guideline apply to all compounds for which the conduct of reproductive 
and/or developmental toxicity studies is appropriate. This guideline should be read in 
conjunction with ICH M3, ICH S6, and ICH S9 regarding whether and when nonclinical 
DART studies are warranted.  
3. GENERAL 
CONSIDERATIONS 
ON 
REPRODUCTIVE 
TOXICITY 
ASSESSMENT 
The majority of pharmaceuticals being developed should be assessed for all stages of the 
reproductive cycle identified above, although there can be some exceptions which should 
be justified, as indicated below. To support clinical development, these stages have 
typically been evaluated using three in vivo study types: 1) a fertility and early embryonic 
development study (FEED - stages A and B), 2) embryo-fetal development studies in two 
species (EFD - stages C and D), and 3) a pre- and a postnatal development study (PPND 
– stages C through F). For each compound, the stages that are to be evaluated should be 
determined and the most appropriate studies to conduct should be identified. Key factors 
to consider when developing an overall integrated testing strategy to evaluate effects on 
reproduction and development include: 
• The targeted patient population and conditions of use (especially in relation to 
reproductive potential and severity of disease);  
• The formulation of the pharmaceutical and route(s) of administration intended for 
humans; 
• Relevant data on toxicity (which can also include data from in vitro, ex vivo and 
non-mammalian studies, and structure-activity relationships), pharmacodynamics, 
pharmacokinetics, and pharmacological similarity to other pharmaceuticals;  
• Aspects of the general biology of the pharmaceutical target, or known roles of the 
target in reproduction or development. 
These concepts are discussed in more detail throughout the guideline. 
To the extent that it does not diminish the overall risk assessment, the experimental strategy 
should minimize the use of animals. Approaches towards this goal can include the conduct 
of studies that combine typical study types (see Section 7), as well as appropriately

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
9 
qualified alternative assays for risk assessment (see Annex 2). Since many clinical 
development programs are terminated prior to Phase 3, animal use can also be reduced by 
appropriately timing studies to support ongoing clinical development (e.g., embryo-fetal 
developmental toxicity data to support enrollment of women of childbearing potential) as 
per ICH M3. 
 
DART studies should, in general, be conducted according to Good Laboratory Practice 
(GLP) regulations, as they will contribute to the risk assessment. However, if a relevant 
DART risk is identified in a non-GLP study, repetition of the study to confirm the finding(s) 
under GLP conditions is not necessarily warranted. A relevant risk is one that occurs at or 
near intended clinical exposures and is of a nature that is reasonably likely to translate to 
humans (see Section 9). It is recognized that GLP compliance is not expected for some 
study types, or aspects of some studies, employing specialized test systems or methods. 
However, high quality scientific standards should be applied with data collection records 
readily available. Areas of non-compliance should be identified within the study report and 
their impact on study results/data interpretation should be considered relative to the overall 
safety assessment. 
 Target Patient Population/ Therapeutic Indication Considerations 
The intended patient population or therapeutic indication can influence the extent of 
DART testing. Studies evaluating all stages of reproduction and development are not 
warranted if the disease indicates that DART will have minimal impact on the risk of the 
pharmaceutical in the target population. For example, studies covering all stages are not 
necessarily appropriate for an exclusively post-menopausal female patient population, for 
use in the pediatric or juvenile pre-pubescent population, or for patient populations in 
hospitalized settings where pregnancy can be excluded.  
 Pharmacology Considerations 
Before designing a testing strategy, it should be determined if the intended pharmacologic 
effects of a pharmaceutical are known to be incompatible with fertility, normal EFD, or 
assessment of particular endpoints (e.g., a general anesthetic and assessment of mating 
behavior). This assessment can be based on data with other pharmaceuticals with similar 
pharmacology, known effects of target engagement, or on knowledge of effects in humans 
with related genetic diseases. For example, it would be appropriate to modify the design 
of a PPND study for a pharmaceutical developed to prevent pre-term labor. If the intended 
pharmacologic effects are incompatible with the study endpoints, testing for a particular 
reproductive endpoint is not warranted, with justification.  
 Toxicity Considerations 
Repeated–dose toxicity studies with sexually mature animals can provide important 
information on toxicity to reproductive organs that can affect the design of a DART study. 
The existing toxicology data for the compound should always be considered, taking into 
account the dose levels, toxicokinetic profile, and dosing duration. For example, the 
standard fertility study design can be modified to alter the duration of dosing, or the start 
of cohabitation, for a compound that affects testicular tissue.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
10 
 Timing Considerations 
General guidance on the timing for conduct of studies assessing reproductive and 
developmental endpoints is described in ICH M3, ICH S6, and ICH S9. The timing for 
when to conduct specific DART assessments should take into consideration the need for 
these data to support the safe use of the pharmaceutical in clinical trials or the intended 
patient population. Consequently, it can be appropriate to consider altering the timing of 
the assessment of specific reproductive stages. Additional options are discussed in Section 
4.2.2 and 4.2.3. 
 Toxicokinetics (TK) 
Exposure data can be generated in either reproductive (dose range finding (DRF) or pivotal) 
or repeated-dose toxicity studies. However, given the potential for meaningful changes in 
TK parameters induced by pregnancy, it is recommended to determine if pregnancy alters 
exposure. If dose selection is based on exposure ratio (see section 6.1.3), GLP-compliant 
TK data in pregnant animals is expected. Sampling day(s) should be justified.  
When warranted, determination of the pharmaceutical’s concentration in the embryo or 
fetus can facilitate interpretation of discordant or equivocal evidence of developmental 
hazard. This information can be collected in a separate study to determine the actual 
exposure. However, a direct comparison to the potential levels in the human conceptus is 
not appropriate.  
Evidence of lactational excretion can be obtained, when warranted, by sampling milk or by 
demonstrating exposure in offspring during the pre-weaning period.  
General concepts regarding TK data collection are discussed in ICH S3A (4).  
4. DESIGN AND EVALUATION OF IN VIVO MAMMALIAN STUDIES 
The strategy to evaluate the potential reproductive and developmental risk of a 
pharmaceutical generally includes one or more in vivo studies. The key factor is that, in 
total, they leave no gaps between stages and allow for evaluation of all stages of the 
reproductive process, although in some species (e.g., the non-human primate (NHP)) it is 
not possible to evaluate all stages. For most pharmaceuticals, the 3-study design will 
usually be appropriate, although various combinations of these study designs can be 
conducted to address specific product needs and to reduce animal use. Study details for the 
FEED, EFD, and PPND studies, and combinations thereof, can be found in Annex 1. The 
stages covered in individual studies are left to the discretion of the sponsor. All available 
pharmacological, toxicokinetic, and toxicological data for the pharmaceutical should be 
considered in determining which study design(s) should be used. 
 Strategy to Address Fertility and Early Embryonic Development (FEED) 
The aim of the FEED study is to test for adverse effects resulting from treatment initiated 
prior to mating of males and/or females and continued through mating and implantation. 
This comprises evaluation of Stages A and B of the reproductive process. Results from 
repeated-dose toxicity studies of at least two weeks duration can often be used to design 
the fertility study without conducting further dose ranging studies, although studies of such 
short duration can be insufficient to reveal all adverse effects.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
11 
A mating phase is expected in most cases when a FEED study is warranted to support 
exposure of the target population. Such studies are typically performed in rodents. If no 
adverse effects on fertility are anticipated, both sexes can be treated and cohabited together 
in the same study. If effects on fertility are identified in the study, the affected sex should 
then be determined. In contrast, if adverse effects are anticipated based on mode of action 
or on the results of repeated-dose studies, each treated sex can be cohabited with untreated 
animals of the opposite sex. This can be achieved using separate treatment arms within a 
single study or by the conduct of two separate FEED studies. Reversibility of adverse 
effects on fertility and early embryonic development can have an important impact on risk 
assessment.  
The FEED study design in female rodents (see Annex 1) allows for the detection of effects 
on the estrous cycle, tubal transport, implantation, and development of preimplantation 
stages of the embryo. When estrous/menstrual cycles are evaluated, it is important to obtain 
baseline cycle data (over 2 or 3 cycles minimum) to distinguish between treatment-related 
effects and inter/intra animal variability. The monitoring of estrous cyclicity should 
continue through the time of confirmation of mating. 
The FEED study design for male rodents that includes 2 to 4 weeks of treatment prior to 
cohabitation allows for the detection of effects on spermatogenesis and epididymal 
transport. When data from repeated-dose studies suggest toxicity to the testis, it can be 
appropriate to extend the duration of pre-cohabitation treatment to 10 weeks; this permits 
assessment of effects on the full spermatogenic cycle as well as epididymal transport. The 
FEED study additionally permits detection of functional effects (e.g., on libido, epididymal 
sperm maturation, ejaculation) that cannot be detected by histological examinations of the 
male reproductive organs.   
When there is cause for concern based on mode of action or data from previous studies, 
additional examinations can be included in repeated-dose toxicity and/or fertility studies 
(e.g., sperm collection for counts and morphology/motility assessments, measuring 
hormone levels, or monitoring of the estrous/menstrual cycle) to further characterize 
potential effects on fertility.  
4.1.1. Considerations for Biopharmaceuticals 
If the biopharmaceutical is pharmacologically active in rodents or rabbits, a FEED study in 
one of these species is recommended. Mating evaluations are not generally feasible in non-
rodents such as dogs and NHPs. For example, if NHPs are the only pharmacologically 
relevant species (as for many monoclonal antibodies, see ICH S6), histopathological 
examinations of the reproductive tissues from the repeated-dose toxicity studies of at least 
three months duration can serve as a substitute for the fertility assessments. Such an 
approach should include a comprehensive histopathological examination of the 
reproductive organs from both male and female animals (Note 1). Unless the 
biopharmaceutical is intended to treat advanced cancer, in which case FEED studies are 
not warranted, animals should be sexually mature at study initiation in order for an adequate 
evaluation of the reproductive tissues to be made. These data would only provide 
information on the structure of the reproductive tissues, as no functional assessment of 
fertility can be made and predicting effects on fertility and early embryonic development 
is not always possible based solely on the results of histopathology assessments.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
12 
 Strategies to Address Embryo-Fetal Development (EFD) 
The aim of the EFD studies is to detect adverse effects on the pregnant female and 
development of the embryo and fetus following treatment (Stage C) of the pregnant female 
during organogenesis. EFD studies include evaluation of fetal development and survival 
(Stages C through D). 
For most small molecules, effects on EFD are typically evaluated in two species (i.e., 
rodent and non-rodent (typically rabbit)). At least one of the test species should exhibit the 
desired pharmacodynamic response. If the pharmaceutical is not pharmacodynamically 
active in any routinely used species (Section 5.1) then non-routine species (Section 5.2), 
genetically modified animals, or use of a species-specific surrogate molecule (Section 5.3) 
(e.g., in the case of oligonucleotides) can be considered, provided there is sufficient 
characterization of the model to ensure pharmacologic relevance. Genetically modified 
animals and surrogate molecules are generally most useful for hazard identification, but 
have limitations when used for risk assessment.   Even when there are no relevant models 
(e.g., the pharmacological target only exists in humans, either normally or in the diseased 
state), EFD studies should be conducted in two species to detect the adversity of off-target 
effects or secondary pharmacology.  
Clearly positive results for the induction of malformations or embryo-fetal lethality 
(MEFL), in a single species, at exposures similar to that at the projected clinical exposure 
at the maximum recommended human dose (MRHD) can be sufficient for risk assessment.  
Under limited circumstances, other approaches can be used in place of definitive EFD 
studies (see Annex 2). Alternatively, there can be adequate information to communicate 
risk without conducting EFD studies. Evidence suggesting an adverse effect of the intended 
pharmacological mechanism on EFD (e.g., mechanism of action, phenotypic data from 
genetically modified animals) can be sufficient to communicate risk. 
4.2.1. Considerations for Biopharmaceuticals 
The effect of biopharmaceuticals on EFD should typically be assessed in two species (one 
rodent and one non-rodent) if both are pharmacologically relevant. However, the rodent is 
often not pharmacologically relevant, in which case EFD assessment in a single 
pharmacologically relevant non-rodent species can be conducted. In cases where the NHP 
is the only relevant species, an enhanced pre-and postnatal development (ePPND) study 
can be conducted instead of an EFD study.  Biopharmaceuticals intended for the treatment 
of advanced cancer typically need only be assessed in a single pharmacologically relevant 
species (ICH S9).  
When no relevant species can be identified because the biopharmaceutical does not interact 
with the orthologous target in any species relevant to reproductive toxicity testing, use of 
surrogate molecules or transgenic models can be considered, as described in ICH S6. 
Calculating safety margins relative to human exposures with surrogate molecules is not 
appropriate. If there are no relevant species, genetically modified animals or surrogates 
available, in vivo reproductive toxicity testing is not meaningful. In this case, the approach 
used for risk assessment, or rationale for not conducting studies, should be justified.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
13 
4.2.2. Alternative Approaches for Addressing EFD Risk  
4.2.2.1. Use of Alternative Assays 
A number of alternative in vitro, ex vivo, and non-mammalian in vivo assays (alternative 
assays) have been developed to detect potential hazards to embryo-fetal development. 
They have been used as drug discovery screens for adverse effects on EFD and have 
assisted in the understanding of the mechanism of toxicity, which can be useful for 
translating nonclinical data to human risk (especially for human-specific targets). 
The continued use of alternative assays for these purposes is encouraged.  
 
If properly qualified, alternative assays have the potential to defer or replace (in certain 
circumstances) conventional in vivo studies. This has the added benefit of potentially 
reducing animal use. Concepts to consider when qualifying these assays, and examples 
when the use of such assays could be appropriate, appear in Annex 2. Approaches that 
incorporate alternative assays should provide a level of confidence for human safety 
assurance at least equivalent to that provided by the current testing paradigms described 
above. Based on the direction of scientific development as of the writing of this document, 
it is expected that for regulatory purposes multiple alternative assays will be used within a 
tiered or battery approach. These testing strategies will be qualified within a certain context 
of use, which is defined by the chemical applicability domain of the assay, and by 
characterization of the biological mechanisms covered by the assay.  
4.2.3. Potential Approaches to Defer Definitive In Vivo Testing as Part of an Integrated Testing 
Strategy 
The design of an appropriate testing strategy relies on a cumulative weight-of-evidence 
approach. ICH M3 allows preliminary embryo-fetal developmental (pEFD) toxicity data 
from two species to support the limited inclusion of women of childbearing potential 
(WOCBP) (up to 150 WOCBP for up to 3 months) before conducting definitive EFD 
studies. Based on these considerations, this guideline expands on ICH M3 by allowing two 
additional options to support inclusion of WOCBP prior to Phase 3 clinical trials:  
 
1) Qualified alternative assays which predict the outcome in one species (see 
Annex 2), can be combined with a pEFD from a second species to enable the 
limited inclusion of WOCBP (up to 150 WOCBP for up to 3 months). The 
alternative assay and the second species should generally cover both a rodent 
and a non-rodent species. 
2) Additional endpoints incorporated into at least one GLP pEFD study 
(specifically increasing the group size of evaluable litters with inclusion of 
skeletal examinations) performed in a pharmacologically relevant species, if 
available, combined with a pEFD in a 2nd species allows all regions to include 
an unlimited number of WOCBP in clinical trials through Phase 2. 
 Strategy to Address Effects on Pre- and Postnatal Development (PPND) 
The aim of the PPND study is to detect adverse effects following exposure of the maternal 
animal from implantation through weaning to evaluate effects on the pregnant or lactating 
female and development of the offspring. Since manifestations of effects induced during 
this period can be delayed, development of the offspring is monitored through sexual

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
14 
maturity (i.e., Stages C to F). The rodent is usually used to assess PPND; however, other 
species can be used as appropriate (See Annex 1). 
In most cases, a preliminary (dose range finding) PPND study is not warranted, because 
the appropriate information is generally available from prior studies. However, a 
preliminary PPND study with termination of the pups before or at weaning can be used to 
select dose levels or inform study design and/or to provide pup exposure data. 
If a modified PPND/ePPND study design is being considered to support pediatric 
development, see ICH S11 (5). 
4.3.1. Considerations for Biopharmaceuticals  
For pharmaceuticals that can only be tested in the NHP, the ePPND study can provide a 
limited assessment of postnatal effects, but it is not generally feasible to follow the 
offspring through maturity (See Annex 1 and ICH S6).  
5. TEST SYSTEM SELECTION 
 Routine Test Species 
Mammalian species should be used to detect DART. The use of the same species and strain 
as in already completed toxicity studies can eliminate the need to use additional animals 
or conduct additional studies to characterize pharmacokinetics and metabolism, and/or for 
dose range finding. The species used should be well-characterized and relevant for 
detecting effects on the endpoints in a particular study (e.g., with respect to health, fertility, 
fecundity, background rates of malformation and embryo-fetal death, etc.).   
5.1.1. Selection of Species for DART Testing 
The rat is generally appropriate for DART testing and is the most often used rodent species 
for reasons of practicality, general knowledge of pharmacology in this species, the 
extensive toxicology data usually available for interpretation of nonclinical observations 
and the large amount of historical background data. The mouse is also often used as the 
rodent species for many of the same reasons. 
For assessment of EFD only, a second mammalian non-rodent species is typically 
evaluated, although there are exceptions (e.g., vaccines and biopharmaceuticals, see 
Sections 5.1.2 and 5.2, respectively). The rabbit has proven to be useful in identifying 
human teratogens that have not been detected in rodents and is routinely used as the non-
rodent species based on the extensive historical background data, availability of animals, 
and practicality. 
5.1.2. Species Selection for Preventative and Therapeutic Vaccines 
The animal species selected for testing of vaccines (with or without adjuvants) should 
demonstrate an immune response to the vaccine. The type of developmental toxicity study 
conducted, and the choice of the animal model, should be justified based on the immune 
response observed and the ability to administer an appropriate dose. Typically, rabbits, 
rats, or mice are used in developmental toxicity studies for vaccines. Even though

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
15 
quantitative and qualitative differences can exist in the responses (e.g., in humoral and 
cellular endpoints) between species, it is usually sufficient to conduct developmental 
toxicity studies in a single species. Although the degree and time course of transfer of 
maternal antibodies across the placenta varies between species, a developmental toxicity 
study in rabbits, rats, or mice can still provide important information regarding potential 
embryo-fetal toxicity of the vaccine components/formulation and safety of the product 
during pregnancy. NHP should be used only if no other relevant animal species 
demonstrates an immune response. 
When there is a lack of an appropriate animal model (including NHP), an EFD toxicity 
study in rabbits, rats, or mice can still provide important information regarding potential 
embryo-fetal toxicity of the vaccine components/formulation and safety of the product 
during pregnancy. 
 Non-routine Test Species 
Species other than the rat, mouse or rabbit can be used to evaluate the effects of 
pharmaceuticals on various reproductive stages. When considering the use of other species, 
their advantages and disadvantages (summarized in Table 1 of Annex 1) should be 
considered in relation to the pharmaceutical being tested, the study design and selected 
endpoints, and the ability to extrapolate results to the human situation. 
NHPs should be considered a non-routine test species. They are most typically used for 
evaluating effects on embryo-fetal development and early postnatal development for 
biopharmaceuticals that are only pharmacologically active in primates, as described in ICH 
S6. However, there are additional considerations that limit the utility of studies in NHPs 
for assessing some endpoints for DART risk assessment (see Annex 1 and ICH S6). 
 Use of Disease Models, Genetically Modified Models, and Surrogate Molecules 
Animal models of disease, genetically modified models, and surrogate molecules can be 
valuable for investigating the effect of the intended pharmacology on development and 
reproduction. Studies in disease models can be of value in cases where the data obtained 
from healthy animals could be misleading or otherwise not apply to the disease conditions 
in the clinical setting. The model should be pharmacologically relevant and appropriate for 
the development and reproductive endpoints being assessed. The pathophysiology of the 
disease course in the model should be characterized. Some differences from the human 
pathophysiology would not preclude its use if these are unlikely to confound data 
interpretation. Animal-to-animal variability should be characterized and appropriate within 
the context of the study. If historical control information is limited, reference data for the 
study endpoints should be available or should be generated during the study to aid data 
interpretation.  
Genetically modified models can be used to provide information about on-target effects of 
a pharmaceutical on DART parameters through permanent or conditional alterations in 
target activity. Such models can inform on whether the biology of the target is closely 
linked to adverse effects on reproduction and development in routine test species.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
16 
When the pharmaceutical does not have adequate activity against the target in the routine 
test species, surrogate molecules can be used to assess potential adverse effects on 
reproduction and development.  
6. DOSE 
LEVEL 
SELECTION, 
ROUTE 
OF ADMINISTRATION AND 
SCHEDULE 
The choice of dose levels, schedule and route of administration are important study design 
considerations and should be based on all available information (e.g., pharmacology, 
repeated-dose toxicity, pharmacokinetics, and dose range finding studies). Guidance on the 
principles of dose selection for small molecules and biopharmaceuticals is given in ICH 
M3 and ICH S6, respectively. When sufficient information on tolerability in the test system 
is not available, dose range finding studies are advisable. 
 Dose Selection  
There are a number of dose selection endpoints that can be used for DART studies. All 
endpoints discussed in this section are considered equally appropriate in terms of study 
design. The high dose in the definitive studies should be one that is predicted to comply 
with one or more of the concepts set forth in sections 6.1.1 to 6.1.5 below. The selected 
doses should take into account observations made in previous studies (e.g., repeated-dose, 
TK, DRF, etc.). There can be instances where fewer than three dose levels are sufficient to 
provide the necessary information for risk assessment. 
Justification for high dose selection using endpoints other than those discussed below can 
be made on a case-by-case basis. 
6.1.1. Toxicity–based Endpoint 
This endpoint is based on inducing a minimal level of toxicity in the parental animals at the 
high dose. Factors limiting the high dose determined from previously conducted studies 
could include, but are not limited to: 
• Alterations in body weight (gain or absolute; either reductions or increases). Minor, 
transient changes in body weight gain or body weight are not appropriate for dose 
selection. When assessing weight change effects, the entire dosing duration of the 
study should be considered.  
• Exaggerated pharmacological responses (e.g., excessive sedation or hypoglycemia) 
• Toxicological responses (e.g., convulsions, excessive embryo-fetal lethality, 
clinical pathology perturbations). Specific target organ toxicity that would interfere 
with the study endpoints within the duration of the planned DART study. 
6.1.2. Saturation of Systemic Exposure Endpoint 
High dose selection based on saturation of systemic exposure measured by systemic 
availability of pharmaceutical-related substances can be appropriate. There is little value in 
increasing the administered dose if it does not result in increased plasma concentration of 
parent or metabolites.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
17 
6.1.3. Exposure Margin Based Endpoint 
It can be appropriate to select doses based on predicted exposure margins relative to the 
exposure at the MRHD. For small molecules, a systemic exposure representing a large 
multiple of the human AUC or Cmax at the MRHD can be an appropriate endpoint for high 
dose selection. Doses providing an exposure in pregnant animals > 25˗fold the exposure at 
the MRHD are generally considered appropriate as the maximum dose for DART studies 
(Note 2). The 25-fold exposure margin should be established in a GLP-compliant dose 
range finding/pEFD or definitive study. Usually this multiple should be determined based 
on parent drug levels; however, consideration should also be given to ensuring an adequate 
exposure margin to major human metabolites (see ICH M3 and ICH M3 Q&A). In the case 
of prodrugs, it can be more appropriate to establish the exposure multiple on the basis of 
the active metabolite, particularly if the test species has a lower ratio of active metabolite 
to prodrug, compared to humans. The basis for the moiety used for comparison (parent drug 
or metabolite) should be justified.  
For pharmaceuticals that have demonstrated pharmacodynamic activity in the test species 
only at exposures > 25-fold that projected at the MRHD, higher doses can be warranted to 
assess adverse effects of exaggerated pharmacology. However, irrelevant off-target effects 
are more likely to be observed. 
When exposure-based endpoints are used as the basis for selection of the dose levels for 
EFD studies, TK data from pregnant animals in a GLP-compliant study is expected. The 
choice for the use of total vs. fraction unbound pharmaceutical exposures should be 
justified and consistent with the entire nonclinical development program as outlined in ICH 
S3A. 
6.1.3.1. Exposure-based Approach for Biopharmaceuticals 
Exposure-based margins can be appropriate to select doses for biopharmaceuticals as per 
ICH S6.  Generally, the dose should provide the maximum intended pharmacological effect 
in the preclinical species or provide an approximately 10-fold exposure multiple over the 
maximum exposure to be achieved in the clinic, whichever is higher. ICH S6 should be 
consulted with regard to dose adjustment for differences in target binding affinity and other 
relevant factors. 
6.1.4. Maximum Feasible Dose (MFD) Endpoint 
The MFD can be used for high dose selection when the physico-chemical properties of the 
pharmaceutical (or formulation) associated with the route/frequency of administration and 
the anatomical/physiological attributes of the test species limit the amount of the 
pharmaceutical that can be administered. Use of the MFD should maximize exposure in the 
test species, rather than maximize the administered dose, as per ICH M3 Q&A (1). Note 
that changes to the frequency of dose administration can be considered to increase the total 
feasible daily exposure (see Section 6.3). 
6.1.5. Limit Dose Endpoint 
A limit dose of 1 g/kg/day can generally be applied when other dose selection factors have 
not been attained with lower dose levels (see also ICH M3 for other considerations).

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
18 
6.1.6. Selection of Lower Dose Levels 
It is generally desirable to establish a no observed adverse effect level (NOAEL) for DART. 
The selection of lower dose levels should take into account exposure, pharmacology, and 
toxicity, such that the dose-response of findings can be established when appropriate. The 
low dose should generally provide a low multiple (e.g., 1 to 5-fold) of the human exposure 
at the MRHD. Dose levels that yield exposures that are sub-therapeutic in humans should 
be justified. 
 Route 
In general, the route of administration should be the clinical route. If, however, sufficient 
exposure cannot be achieved using the clinical route or the clinical route is not feasible, a 
different route should be considered. When multiple routes of administration are being 
evaluated in humans, a single route in the test species can be adequate provided that 
sufficient systemic exposure is achieved compared to that of all clinical routes and that 
there is adequate coverage for the metabolites. 
 Schedule 
Dosing schedules used in the toxicity studies determine the exposure profile, which can be 
important in the risk assessment. Although mimicking the clinical schedule is often 
sufficient, a more or a less frequent schedule can be appropriate. For example, twice daily 
dosing can be warranted with compounds that are quickly metabolized in the test species, 
although pragmatic factors (e.g., study logistics, stress on animals) should be considered 
when a more frequent schedule is contemplated. It can also be important to alter the dosing 
schedule to ensure that adequate exposure is obtained at all critical stages of reproduction 
and/or development being evaluated in a given study. 
 Dose Selection and Study Designs for Vaccines 
This guideline covers vaccines (adjuvanted or not) used in both preventative and 
therapeutic indications against infectious diseases. While not within the scope of this 
guideline, the principles outlined can be applicable to the nonclinical testing of vaccines 
for other indications as well (e.g., cancer).  
The types of reproductive and/or developmental toxicity studies used for preventative and 
therapeutic vaccines depend on the target population for the vaccine and the relevant 
reproductive risk. Generally, DART studies are not warranted for vaccines being developed 
for neonates, pre-pubertal children, or geriatric populations.  
For reproductive toxicity studies of vaccines, it is typically sufficient to assess a single dose 
level capable of eliciting an immune response in the animal model (Section 5.1.2), using 
the clinical route of administration. This single dose level should be the maximum human 
dose without correcting for body weight (i.e., 1 human dose = 1 animal dose). If it is not 
feasible to administer the maximum human dose to the animal because of a limitation in 
total volume that can be administered, or because of dose-limiting toxicity, whether local 
or systemic, a dose that exceeds the human dose on a mg/kg basis can be used. To use a 
reduced dose, justification as to why a full human dose cannot be used in an animal model 
should be provided.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
19 
The vaccination regimen should maximize maternal antibody titers and/or immune 
response throughout the embryonic, fetal, and early postnatal periods. Timing and number 
of doses will depend on the onset and duration of the immune response of the particular 
vaccine. When developing vaccines to be given during pregnancy, a justification should be 
provided for the specific study design, based upon its intended use (e.g., protecting the 
mother during pregnancy or protecting the child early postnatally).  
Daily dosing regimens can lead to overexposure to the vaccine constituents. Episodic 
dosing of pregnant animals rather than daily dosing is recommended. Also, episodic dosing 
better approximates the proposed clinical immunization schedule for most preventive and 
therapeutic vaccines. Considering the short gestational period of routine animal species, it 
is generally recommended to administer a priming dose(s) to the animals several days or 
weeks prior to mating in order to elicit peak immune response during the critical phases of 
pregnancy (i.e., the period of organogenesis). The dosing regimen can be modified 
according to the intended vaccination schedule in humans. 
At least one dose should be administered during early organogenesis to evaluate potential 
direct embryotoxic effects of the components of the vaccine formulation and to maintain a 
high antibody response throughout the remainder of gestation. If embryo-fetal toxicity is 
observed, this can be further assessed using subgroups of animals that are dosed at certain 
time points.  
In cases where a vaccine includes a novel active constitutive ingredient (including novel 
adjuvants), consideration of additional testing strategies similar to those for non-vaccine 
products can be appropriate.  
7. POSSIBLE COMBINATION STUDY DESIGNS IN RODENTS 
Although three separate study designs, i.e., FEED (stages A and B), EFD (stages C through 
D) and PPND (stages C through F) have been employed to develop the majority of 
pharmaceuticals, various combinations of these study designs can be conducted to reduce 
animal use. The main advantage of combination designs is that all relevant stages of the 
reproductive process can be assessed using fewer animals. Combination studies can also 
better mimic the exposure duration in the clinic, especially for drugs with long half-lives. 
A common combination study design is a combined Fertility and EFD study (stages A 
through D) with a separate PPND study (stages C through F). 
Designs and study details for FEED, EFD, and PPND studies, and combinations thereof, 
can be found in Annex 1.  
In cases where no effects on male or female fertility are anticipated, or where extending the 
dosing period is appropriate due to observation of reproductive organ toxicity in a repeated-
dose toxicity study, a combination design of repeated-dose and fertility studies can be 
considered. After a defined dosing period within the repeated-dose toxicity study, males 
can be paired with sexually mature females (whether untreated, or dosed for at least two 
weeks prior to mating). This combination study can reduce the number of animals used, 
but the number of mating pairs per group should be at least 16. Further, if treated, dosing 
of females can be extended until the end of organogenesis, thereby allowing evaluation of 
EFD endpoints (Annex 1).

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
20 
8. DATA REPORTING AND STATISTICS 
 Data Reporting 
Individual values should be tabulated in a clear concise manner to account for all animals 
in the study. The data tables should allow ready tracking of individual animals and their 
conceptuses, from study initiation through study conclusion.  
Fetal morphologic abnormalities should be described using industry-harmonized 
terminology. All findings for each litter should be clearly listed by conceptus. Summary 
listings should be prepared by type of abnormality. The inclusion or exclusion of data from 
non-pregnant animals in summary tables should be clearly indicated.  
Interpretation of study data relies primarily on comparison with the concurrent control 
group. Historical control/reference data can be used to assist data interpretation. Recent 
historical control data from the performing laboratory is preferable. Contemporary data 
typically from a five-year period is desirable and permits identification of genetic drift.  
 Statistics 
Statistical testing to assess the significance of differences between the treated and control 
groups is expected in definitive studies. Many of the datasets from DART studies do not 
follow a normal distribution, necessitating the use of non-parametric statistical methods. 
Cesarean, fetal and postnatal data summary statistics should be calculated using the litter 
as the unit of analysis. Statistical significance need not convey a positive signal, nor lack 
of statistical significance impute absence of effect. Determination of biological 
plausibility, based on all available pharmacologic and toxicologic data, is often useful.  
9. PRINCIPLES OF RISK ASSESSMENT 
As described in the preceding sections of this guideline, all available data garnered from 
the pharmaceutical, related compounds, human genetics, and knowledge of the role of 
target biology in human reproduction should be used to address potential reproductive risks 
in humans under the conditions of use, both during clinical trials and after marketing 
authorization. Any limitations (e.g., test system relevance, achieved exposure), 
uncertainties and data gaps in the available nonclinical DART data package should be 
addressed and their impact assessed. Generally, the results from definitive in vivo studies 
in an appropriate species with adequate exposures carry more weight than those from 
alternative assays or preliminary studies. Risk assessment is a continuous process through 
product development as more information becomes available.  
Not all findings reported in DART studies are adverse. When a finding is deemed adverse, 
several factors should be considered in a weight-of-evidence evaluation for risk assessment. 
These can include exposure margins, biological plausibility, evidence of a dose-response 
relationship, potential for reversibility, the potential for confounding parental toxicity, and 
evidence for cross-species concordance.  For rare malformations, the absence of increased 
frequency with dose does not always alleviate concern.  
Comparison of pharmaceutical exposure at the NOAEL in the test species to the exposure 
at the MRHD is an important component of the risk assessment. This comparison should 
be based on the most relevant metric (e.g., AUC, Cmax, Cmin, body surface area-adjusted

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
21 
dose). In general, there is increased concern when the NOAEL occurs at exposures less 
than 10-fold the human exposure at the MRHD; above this threshold, concern is reduced. 
Effects that are limited to occurrence at more than 25-fold the human exposure at the 
MRHD are usually of minor concern for the clinical use of the pharmaceutical. The most 
relevant margin is generally the exposure metric in the most sensitive species, unless 
appropriately justified otherwise. Biological plausibility is assessed by comparison of 
pharmacologic mechanism of action with the known role of the target in reproduction or 
development. A finding that can be interpreted as a consequence of pharmacology suggests 
that it will be of concern for humans. This relationship is further strengthened by evidence 
that the finding is dose-related, whether characterized as increasing incidence or severity. 
Absence of biological plausibility does not preclude off-target toxicity, particularly if this 
is characterized by a dose-response relationship. 
Understanding the potential for reversibility will alter the risk assessment. Effects on male 
and female fertility that are reversible after cessation of treatment are of less concern. 
Conversely, critical irreversible developmental endpoints, such as death or malformation, 
are of increased concern. Other forms of developmental toxicity (e.g., growth retardation, 
functional deficits), may or may not be reversible. Generally, transient findings (e.g., 
skeletal variations, such as wavy ribs in rodents) are of less concern when they occur in 
isolation. Similarly, variations that are indicative of growth retardation in the presence of 
reduced fetal weight are of less concern. However, an overall increase in the incidence of 
variations (qualitatively similar or not) can suggest increased concern for 
dysmorphogenesis in the presence of an equivocal increase in malformations.  
The role of parental toxicity should be considered in determination of the relevance of 
findings. Embryo-fetal toxicity observed in the presence of maternal toxicity should be 
considered carefully to determine the likelihood that the finding is relevant for humans. 
Specifically, evaluation of the concordance between individual litter findings and the 
severity of maternal toxicity in the dam could be helpful in this assessment. It should not 
be assumed that developmental toxicity is secondary to maternal toxicity, unless such a 
relationship is demonstrated de novo, or relevant published literature can be cited.  
Also, consistency of findings reported among studies, or between species can strengthen 
the concern for an adverse effect. Increased fetal lethality seen in a rodent EFD study that 
is consistent with decreased live litter sizes in the PPND study is an example of cross-study 
concordance. Observations of increased post implantation loss in rats and rabbits is an 
example of cross-species concordance. Further knowledge of the mechanism of 
reproductive or developmental effects identified in animal studies can help to explain 
differences in responses between species and provide information on the human relevance 
of the effect (e.g., corticosteroid-induced cleft palate in mice).  
A specific risk assessment conducted for breastfeeding would be predicated on hazards 
identified by the in vivo littering study (PPND or ePPND). These hazards can include 
adverse effects on offspring growth and development that are attributed to excretion of the 
pharmaceutical in the milk. Systemic exposure data in the pups from the littering study, if 
available, can also be compared with projected lactational exposures in the human infant. 
While interspecies differences in milk composition preclude a direct quantitative 
correlation of animal milk levels to human milk levels of a pharmaceutical, the presence of 
pharmaceutical in animal milk generally indicates the presence of pharmaceutical in human 
milk.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
22 
Lastly, available human data can influence the overall assessment of human reproductive 
risk. 
10. ENDNOTES 
Note 1: In particular, the testes and epididymides should be sampled and processed using 
methods which preserve the tissue architecture of the seminiferous epithelium. A detailed 
qualitative microscopic evaluation with awareness of the spermatogenic cycle is a sensitive 
means to detect effects on spermatogenesis. While generally not warranted, additional 
experimental endpoints (e.g., immunohistochemistry, homogenization resistant spermatid 
counts, flow cytometry, quantitative analysis of staging) can be incorporated into the study 
design to further characterize any identified effects. In females, a detailed qualitative 
microscopic examination of the ovary (including follicles, corpora lutea, stroma, 
interstitium, and vasculature), uterus and vagina should be conducted with awareness of 
the reproductive cycle and the presence of primordial and primary follicles.   
Note 2: An analysis of 22 known human or presumed human teratogens showed that if 
MEFL was observed, exposure at the lowest observed adverse effect level (LOAEL) in at 
least one species was < 6-fold the exposure at the MRHD (Andrews et al. (6)). This 
indicates that using a > 25-fold exposure ratio for high-dose selection in the EFD toxicity 
studies would have been sufficient to detect the teratogenic hazard for all these 
pharmaceuticals. The analysis also showed that for human teratogens that were detected in 
animal species, the exposure at the NOAEL in at least one species was < 4-fold the 
exposure at the MRHD. 
In addition, a survey was conducted on EFD toxicity studies by the IQ DruSafe Leadership 
Group (Andrews et al. (7)). This survey identified 153 and 128 definitive rat and rabbit 
EFD studies, respectively, that achieved ≥ 15-fold animal to human parent drug exposure 
ratios (using human exposure at the intended therapeutic dose) in the absence of 
confounding (i.e., dose-limiting) maternal toxicity. These data show that dosing animals 
to achieve exposures ≥ 25-fold human exposures when there is no maternal toxicity (that 
would otherwise limit the high dose), only infrequently detects MEFL. In all these cases, 
MEFL findings were not observed until exposures exceeded 50-fold and findings at such 
high exposures are not believed to be relevant to human risk assessment. In the absence of 
confounding maternal toxicity, the selection of a high dose for EFD and PPND studies that 
represents a > 25-fold exposure ratio to human plasma exposure of total parent compound 
at the intended maximal therapeutic dose is therefore considered pragmatic and reasonably 
sufficient for detecting outcomes relevant for human risk assessment. 
11. GLOSSARY 
Disclaimer: The definitions in this glossary are specific for their use within this guideline. 
Alternative assay(s): In vitro, ex vivo or non-mammalian in vivo assay(s) intended to 
predict malformations or embryo-fetal lethality; see MEFL. 
Applicability domain: refers to the definition of the physicochemical properties of the 
substances that can be reliably tested in the assay and the biological mechanisms of action 
covered by the assay.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
23 
Assay qualification (for regulatory use): Confirmation of the predictivity of an 
alternative assay(s) to identify MEFL, as observed in vivo. 
Constitutive ingredients: Chemicals or biologic substances used as excipients, diluents, 
or adjuvants in a vaccine, including any diluent provided as an aid in the administration of 
the product and supplied separately. 
Developmental toxicity: Any adverse effect induced prior to attainment of adult life. It 
includes effects induced or manifested from conception to postnatal life. 
GD 0: The day on which positive evidence of mating is detected (e.g., sperm is found in 
the vaginal smear / vaginal plug in rodents, or observed mating in rabbits). 
Malformation: Permanent structural deviation that generally is incompatible with or 
severely detrimental to normal development or survival. 
Preliminary EFD (pEFD) toxicity study: An embryo-fetal developmental toxicity study 
that includes exposure over the period of organogenesis, has adequate dose levels, uses a 
minimum of 6 pregnant animals per group, and includes assessments of fetal survival, fetal 
weight, and external and soft tissue alterations (see ICH M3). 
Surrogate molecule: A molecule showing similar pharmacologic activity in the test 
species as that shown by the human pharmaceutical in the human. 
Vaccine: For the purpose of this guideline, this term refers to preventative or therapeutic 
vaccines for infectious diseases. Vaccine (inclusive of the term vaccine product) is defined 
as the complete formulation and includes antigen(s) (or immunogen(s)) and any additives 
such as adjuvants, excipients or preservatives. The vaccine is intended to stimulate the 
immune system and result in an immune response to the vaccine antigen(s). The primary 
pharmacological effect of the vaccine is the prevention and/or treatment of an infection or 
infectious disease. 
Variation: Structural change that does not impact viability, development, or function (e.g., 
delays in ossification) which can be reversible, and are found in the normal population 
under investigation. 
 
12. REFERENCES 
1.  International Council for Harmonisation M3: Guidance on Nonclinical Safety 
Studies for the Conduct of Human Clinical Trials and Marketing Authorization 
for Pharmaceuticals together with ICH M3 Questions & Answers. 
2.  International Council for Harmonisation S6: Preclinical Safety Evaluation of 
Biotechnology-Derived Pharmaceuticals. 
3. International Council for Harmonisation S9: Nonclinical Evaluation for 
Anticancer Pharmaceuticals.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
24 
4. International Council for Harmonisation S3A: Note for Guidance on 
Toxicokinetics: The Assessment of Systemic Toxicity in Toxicity Studies 
together with ICH S3A Questions and Answers. 
5. International Council for Harmonisation S11: Nonclinical Safety Testing in 
Support of Development of Pediatric Medicines. 
6. Andrews PA, Blanset D, Lemos Costa P, Green M, Green ML, Jacobs A, et al. 
Analysis of exposure margins in developmental toxicity studies for detection of 
human teratogens.  Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2019a;105:62-8. 
7. Andrews PA, McNerney ME, DeGeorge JJ. Reproductive and developmental 
toxicity testing: An IQ-DruSafe industry survey on current practices.  Regul 
Toxicol Pharmacol. 2019b;107:104413.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
25 
ANNEX 1 IN VIVO STUDY DESIGNS 
Outlined below are advantages and disadvantages to the use of various species utilized in 
DART studies.  
Table 1: Principle Advantages and Disadvantages of Various Species for 
Developmental and Reproductive Toxicity Testing  
 
Routine Species 
Species 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
Rat 
• Well-understood biology 
• Widely 
used 
for 
pharmacodynamics and drug 
discovery  
• Robust reproductive capacity 
with short gestation 
• Large group sizes and litter size 
• Data available from repeated-
dose toxicity study 
• Suitable for all stages of testing 
• Widespread 
laboratory 
experience and availability 
• Extensive historical data 
• Different 
placentation 
to 
human (e.g., timing, inverted 
yolk sac) 
• Dependence on prolactin as 
the primary 
hormone for 
establishment 
and 
maintenance 
of 
early 
pregnancy, which makes them 
sensitive 
to 
some 
pharmaceuticals 
(e.g., 
dopamine agonists) 
• Highly 
sensitive 
to 
pharmaceuticals that disrupt 
parturition (e.g., nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs in 
late pregnancy) 
• Less sensitive than humans to 
fertility perturbations 
• Limited application for foreign 
proteins 
o Limited 
or 
no 
pharmacologic activity 
o Potential 
impact 
of 
immunogenicity

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
26 
Rabbit 
• Similar advantages to rats 
• Non-rodent model 
• Suitable 
for 
serial 
semen 
sampling and mating studies  
• Placental transfer of antibodies 
more 
closely 
approximates 
primates 
than 
rodents, 
an 
advantage for DART testing of 
vaccines  
• Limitations similar to rat for 
foreign proteins 
• Limited historical data for 
fertility 
and 
pre-/postnatal 
studies 
• Sensitive to gastrointestinal 
disturbances; 
(e.g., 
some 
antibiotics)  
• Prone to spontaneous abortion 
• General physical condition 
difficult to monitor using 
clinical signs 
• Should generate PD, toxicity, 
and TK data as not generally 
used for toxicology programs 
(except for vaccines) 
Mouse 
• Similar advantages to rats 
• Genetically modified models 
available or can be generated 
• Surrogate molecules are often 
available 
• Uses small amounts of test 
material 
• Similar limitations to rats  
• Small fetus size and tissue 
volumes 
• Stress sensitivity 
• Malformation 
clusters 
are 
known to occur 
 
 
Non-routine Species 
Species 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
Cynomolgus 
Monkey 
(NHP) 
• Generally more 
phylogenetically and 
physiologically similar to 
humans than other species 
• More likely than rodents to 
show similar pharmacology to 
humans 
• Placentation similar to human  
• Data available from repeated-
dose toxicity study 
• Transfer of antibodies across 
the placenta similar to humans  
• Small group size, hence low 
statistical power and wide 
variability across groups 
• Low fecundity 
o Single offspring 
• High background pregnancy 
lossLimited 
availability 
of 
breeding animals  
• Long menstrual cycle (30 
days) and gestation (165 days) 
• Impractical 
for 
fertility 
(mating) studies 
• F1 reproduction function not 
practical to evaluate due to late 
sexual maturity (around 3 to 6 
years of age) 
• Sexual maturity cannot be 
determined by age and body 
weight

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
27 
 
 
Limited Use Species (primarily used for investigative purposes) 
Species 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
Hamster 
• Alternate rodent model that can 
be pharmacologically relevant  
• High postnatal loss due to 
cannibalization 
• Limited historical control data 
and laboratory experience 
• Limited 
availability 
of 
postnatal 
behavioral 
and 
functional tests 
• IV route difficult 
• Aggressive 
• Sensitive to GI disturbances 
• Should generate PD, toxicity, 
and TK data as not generally 
used for toxicology programs  
• Blood sampling is difficult 
• Ethical considerations 
• Less historical control data 
and 
laboratory 
experience/capability 
• Highly variable age, weight 
and pregnancy history at the 
start   
Mini-pig 
• Alternate 
non-rodent 
for 
general toxicity testing 
• Short period of organogenesis 
(GD 11-35) 
• Defined genetic background 
and 
specific-pathogen-free 
animals  
• Sexual maturity by 7 months 
• Larger litter size compared to 
NHP 
• Suitable 
for 
serial 
semen 
sampling and mating studies   
• Sufficient 
historical 
background 
data 
on 
reproductive endpoints  
• Limited 
number 
of 
experienced laboratories 
• Long gestation (114 days) 
• Uses a large amount of test 
material  
• Minimal 
to 
no 
prenatal 
transfer of antibodies

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
28 
Dog 
• Usually 
have 
repeated-dose 
toxicity data 
• Readily amenable to semen 
collection 
• Long gestation (63 days) 
• Limited historical control data 
and laboratory experience 
• Limited 
availability 
of 
postnatal 
behavioral 
and 
functional tests 
• Uses a large amount of test 
material  
Other mammalian species not listed here can also be used to evaluate the effects of 
pharmaceuticals on DART endpoints.  
1.1 In Vivo Study Design Considerations 
Generally, within and between reproductive studies animals should be of comparable age, 
weight and parity at the start. The easiest way to fulfil these factors is to use animals that 
are young, sexually mature adults at the time of the start of dosing.  The number of animals 
per group specified in individual studies is a balance based on scientific judgment from 
many years of experience with these study designs, and ethical considerations on the 
appropriate use of animals. Smaller group sizes can be sufficient to demonstrate anticipated 
adverse effects on reproduction or development at clinically relevant exposures of the 
pharmaceutical.  
Evaluation of 16 to 20 litters for rodents and rabbits provides a degree of consistency among 
studies. Below 16 litters inter-study results become inconsistent, and above 20 to 24 litters 
per group, consistency and precision is not greatly enhanced. These numbers refer to litters 
available for evaluation. If groups are subdivided for different evaluations the number of 
animals starting the study should be adjusted accordingly.  
 
The suggested study designs below can be modified, particularly with respect to 
parameters, timings, and assessments and still meet the study objectives. Expert judgment 
should be used for adapting these framework designs for individual laboratories and 
purposes. 
1.1.1 
Fertility and Early Embryonic Development (FEED) Study 
The FEED study is designed to assess the maturation of gametes, mating behavior, fertility, 
preimplantation development of the embryo, and implantation. For females, this includes 
effects on the estrous cycle and tubal transport. For males, it includes detection of 
functional effects (e.g., epididymal sperm maturation) that cannot be detected by 
histological examinations of the male reproductive organs.  
A combined male/female FEED study, in which both sexes are administered test article, is 
commonly used (See Table 2). However separate male only or female only studies can be 
conducted by substituting the appropriate number of untreated females or males in the study 
designs.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
29 
Table 2: FEED Study Design: Rodents, combined male and female study 
 
 
a: Available data from repeated-dose toxicity studies and genotoxicity studies should be 
used to justify dosing duration, especially for detecting effects on spermatogenesis. A 
premating treatment interval of 2 weeks for females and 2 weeks for males can be used 
provided no effects have been found in repeated-dose toxicity studies of at least 2 weeks 
duration that preclude this. Treatment of males should continue throughout confirmation 
of mating, although termination following confirmation of female fertility can be 
valuable.  Treatment of females should continue through at least implantation. This will 
 
 
 
Parameter 
 
 
Group size  
at least 16 of each sex 
 
Number of dose groups 
4 (including 1 control) 
 
Administration perioda 
M: ≥ 2 weeks prior to cohabitation through at 
least confirmation of mating  
F: ≥ 2 weeks prior to cohabitation through 
implantation (GD6) 
 
Mating ratio 
1 male:1 female 
 
Mating periodb 
≥ 2 weeks 
 
Estrous cycle evaluation 
Daily, commencing 2 weeks before cohabitation 
and until confirmation of mating  
 
Clinical 
observations/mortality 
At least once daily 
 
Body weight 
At least twice weekly 
 
Food consumption 
At least once weekly (except during mating) 
 
Male necropsyc 
Preserve testes and epididymides for possible 
histological examination; and evaluate on a case 
by case basis. 
Perform macroscopic examination and preserve 
organs with findings for possible histological 
evaluation; keep corresponding organs of 
sufficient controls for comparison.  
 
 
 
Sperm analysisd 
Optional 
 
Female necropsye 
On a case by case basis, preserve ovaries and 
uteri for possible histological examination and 
evaluation. 
Perform macroscopic examination and preserve 
organs with findings for possible histological 
evaluation; keep corresponding organs of 
sufficient controls for comparison.  
 
 
 
Scheduled cesarean section  
Uterine implantation data 
Cesarean sections typically performed mid-
gestation; corpora lutea counts, number of 
implantation sites, live and dead embryos

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
30 
permit evaluation of functional effects on fertility that cannot be detected by 
histopathological examination in repeated-dose toxicity studies and effects on mating 
behavior.  
b: Most rats or mice will mate within the first 5 days of cohabitation (i.e., at the first 
available estrus), but in some cases females can become pseudopregnant. Leaving the 
female with the male for longer than 2 weeks can allow these females to restart estrous 
cycles and become pregnant. 
c: It can be of value to delay euthanasia of the males until the outcome of mating is known. 
In the event of an effect on fertility, males could be mated with untreated females to 
ascertain any potential male-mediation of the effect. A more complete evaluation of 
toxicity to the male reproductive system can be achieved if dosing is continued beyond 
mating and euthanasia delayed so that the males are exposed for the total duration of a 
spermatogenic cycle (e.g., 10 weeks).  
d: Sperm analysis (e.g., sperm counts, motility, and/or morphology) sometimes can be 
useful if issues arise to support risk assessment. 
e: Termination of females around days 13-15 of pregnancy in general is adequate to assess 
effects on fertility and reproductive function (e.g., to differentiate between live 
implantations and resorption sites). There is an option to terminate females near the end 
of gestation. 
 
1.1.2 Embryo-Fetal Developmental (EFD) Toxicity Study 
The EFD toxicity study is designed to assess maternal toxicity relative to that in non-
pregnant females, and to evaluate potential effects on embryo-fetal survival, intrauterine 
growth, and morphological development. 
 
Suggested study designs for rodents, rabbits and cynomolgus monkeys are described 
below.  
 
1.1.2.1. Dose Range Finding Embryo-Fetal Developmental (EFD) Toxicity Study 
Dose range finding studies in mated females are most often used to select appropriate dose 
levels, or dose schedules, for the definitive rodent and rabbit EFD studies. Tolerability and 
TK data from existing repeated-dose toxicity studies can, however, be sufficient for this 
purpose. 
1.1.2.2 Preliminary Embryo-Fetal Developmental (pEFD) Toxicity Study 
The pEFD toxicity study (Table 3) is similar in design to the definitive EFD toxicity study. 
A typical pEFD toxicity study design includes dosing over the period of organogenesis, 
has adequate dose levels, evaluates a minimum of 6 pregnant females per group, and 
includes assessments of fetal survival, fetal weight, external fetal abnormalities and soft 
tissue abnormalities (see ICH M3). 
1.1.2.3 Definitive Embryo-Fetal Developmental (EFD) Toxicity Study 
The females are submitted to cesarean section near term. Assessments of fetal survival, 
fetal weight, external fetal abnormalities, soft tissue abnormalities and skeletal 
examinations are performed (Table 3). The timing given in Table 3 is for rodent, rabbit 
and cynomolgus monkeys; for other species appropriate timing should be used.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
31 
Table 3: EFD Toxicity Study Designs for Rodent, Rabbit and NHP 
 
pEFD 
                                 EFD 
 
Parameter 
Rodent/Rabbit 
Rat (Mouse) 
Rabbit 
NHPa 
GLP Status 
Optionalc 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Minimum number of pregnant 
females 
6  
16 
16 
16b 
Number of dose groups 
4 (including 1 control) 
4 (including 1 control) 
4 (including 1 control) 
At least 2 (including 1 
control) 
Administration periodd 
Species appropriate 
GD6/7-17 (6/7-15) 
GD6/7-19 
Approximately GD 20 - 
to at least GD 50 
Antemortem endpoints 
 
 
 
 
Clinical 
observations/mortality 
At least once daily 
At least once daily 
At least once daily 
At least once daily 
Body weight 
At least twice weekly 
At least twice weeklye 
At least twice weeklye 
At least once weekly 
Food consumption 
At least once weekly 
At least once weekly 
At least once weekly 
Optional 
Toxicokinetics  
Optionalc 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Postmortem endpoints 
 
 
 
 
Cesarean section f 
Species appropriate 
GD20/21 (17/18) 
GD28/29 
GD100 
Macroscopic examination  
Yes  
Yes  
Yes  
Optional 
Gravid uterine weight 
Optional  
Optional  
Optional  
NA 
Corpora lutea 
Yes  
Yes  
Yes  
NA 
Implant sites 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
NA 
Live and dead conceptuses 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Early and late resorptions 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
NA 
Gross evaluation of placenta 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Weight of placenta 
Optional 
Optional 
Optional 
Optional 
Fetal body weight 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Fetal sex 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Fetal external evaluationsg 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
32 
Fetal soft tissue evaluationsg 
Yes 
Yesg 
Yes 
Yes 
Fetal skeletal evaluationsh 
Optionalc 
Yesg 
Yes 
Yes

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
33 
 
a: If a NHP other than the Cynomolgus monkey is used, the study design should be adapted. 
b: Group sizes in EFD studies should yield a sufficient number of fetuses in order to assess 
potential adverse effects on morphological development. 
c: If the pEFD is used to defer a definitive EFD study, then the pEFD should be done in 
accordance with GLP regulations, TK data in pregnant animals should be collected, and 
skeletal evaluations should be performed. 
d: For rodents and rabbits, females are dosed with the test substance from implantation to 
closure of the hard palate (i.e., stage C of the reproductive process, see Section 1.1).  For 
NHP, females are dosed from confirmation of pregnancy (approximately GD 20) to at least 
Day 50 (end of major organogenesis) 
e: Daily weighing of pregnant females during treatment can provide useful information.  
f: For rodents and rabbits, cesarean sections should be conducted approximately one day prior 
to expected parturition.  Preserve organs with macroscopic findings for possible histological 
evaluation; keep corresponding organs of sufficient controls for comparison. For NHP, 
cesarean sections should be conducted on approximately GD 100. 
g: All fetuses should be examined for viability and abnormalities. To permit subsequent 
assessment of the relationship between observations made by different techniques fetuses 
should be individually identified. 
h: Although it is preferable to examine all rodent fetuses for both soft tissue and skeletal 
alterations (if methods allow), it is acceptable to submit 50% of fetuses in each litter to 
separate examinations. 
 
1.1.3 
Pre- and Postnatal Developmental (PPND) Toxicity Study 
The PPND toxicity study is designed to assess enhanced toxicity relative to that in non-
pregnant females, pre- and postnatal viability of offspring, altered growth and development, 
and functional deficits in offspring, including sexual maturation, reproductive capacity at 
maturity, sensory functions, motor activity, and learning and memory. 
 
The females are permitted to deliver and rear their offspring to weaning at which time at least 
one male and one female offspring per litter are selected for rearing to adulthood and mating 
to assess reproductive competence (see Table 4).

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
34 
Table 4: PPND Toxicity Study Design: Rats 
 
 
 
Parameter 
 
 
Group size 
At least 16 litters  
 
Number of dose groups 
4 (including 1 control) 
 
Administration period 
From implantation (GD 6/7) through weaning 
(postnatal day (PND) 20) 
 
 
 
 
F0 Females 
 
 
Clinical 
observations/mortality 
At least once daily 
 
Body weight 
At least twice weekly  
 
Food consumption 
At least once weekly until mid-lactation 
 
Parturition observations 
GD 21 until complete 
 
Necropsy 
PND 21 
At necropsy, preserve and retain tissues with 
macroscopic findings and corresponding control 
tissues for possible histological evaluation, count 
uterine implantation sites 
 
 
F1 Pre-weaning 
 
 
Clinical 
observations/mortality 
Daily from PND 0 
 
Pre-and postweaning survival Daily from PND 0 
 
Body weight and sex 
 PND 0/1 and then at least twice per week 
 
Optional Standardization of  
   litter size 
≥ PND 4, to 4 or 5 pups per sex  
 
Physical developmenta 
Preweaning landmarks of development and reflex 
ontogeny (e.g. eye opening, pinna unfolding, 
surface righting, auditory startle, air righting, and 
response to light) 
 
 
 
 
 
F1 Post-weaning 
 
Selection 
for 
post-weaning  
  evaluation and group sizeb 
PND 21, at least 1 male and 1 female/litter where 
possible to achieve 16 animals per group/sex 
Clinical observations/mortality Daily 
Body weight 
Weekly 
Optional Food consumption 
Weekly 
Sexual maturationc 
Females: vaginal opening 
Males: preputial separation 
Other functional testsd 
Assess sensory functions, motor activity, and learning 
and memory. 
Reproductive performance 
At least 10 weeks old, paired for mating (1M:1F) within 
the same group (not siblings)

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
35 
a: The best indicator of physical development is bodyweight, however, measurement of 
bodyweight alone is not an acceptable substitute for the evaluation of other developmental 
parameters.    
b: At least one animal per sex per litter should be retained to conduct behavioral and other 
functional tests, and to assess reproductive function.  There can be circumstances where 
more animals per litter can be retained for independent functional assessments.   
c: Body weight should be recorded at the time of attainment to determine whether any 
differences from control are specific or related to general growth.   
d: Learning and memory should be evaluated in a complex learning task. Assessments of 
locomotor activity and startle reflex with prepulse inhibition (if conducted) should be 
evaluated over a sufficient period of time to demonstrate habituation.   
 
1.1.3.1 Enhanced Pre- and Postnatal Developmental (ePPND) Toxicity Study in Non-Human 
Primate (NHP) 
The ePPND toxicity study (Table 5) is a study in NHP that combines the endpoints from both 
the EFD and PPND studies. In this study dosing is extended throughout the gestation period to 
parturition (e.g., GD20 to parturition). See ICH S6 for information on timing and additional 
parameters to be evaluated.  
Table 5: ePPND Toxicity Study Design: for Cynomolgus Monkeya 
Parameter 
 
 
Group sizeb 
Approximately 16 pregnant females  
 
Number of dose groups 
At least 2 (including 1 control)  
 
Administration period 
From confirmation of pregnancy (approximately 
GD 20) to parturition 
 
 
 
 
F0 Females 
 
 
Clinical 
observations/mortality 
At least once daily 
 
Body weight 
At least weekly 
 
Parturition observations 
Document day of completion 
 
Placenta 
Collect and preserve if possible 
 
Necropsy 
and 
tissue 
evaluation 
Exposure Assessment 
Only as warranted 
TK profiles and/or systemic drug levels should be 
measured, as appropriate 
 
F1  
 
 
Clinical 
observations/mortality 
Daily from PND 0 
 
Body weights 
Weekly 
 
Morphometry/Physical and/or 
functionalassessment 
At regular intervals, as appropriate  
 
Neurobehavioural test battery
 
. 
At least 1 interval during the first 2 weeks 
postpartum

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
36 
Grip strength  
Mother-infant interaction 
 
Exposure assessment 
PND 28 
Minimally in early postnatal period to confirm 
nursing; as appropriate thereafter  
Systemic drug levels should be measured, as 
appropriate 
External evaluation 
At regular intervals 
 
Skeletal evaluation 
Approximately PND 28 or later 
 
Visceral evaluation 
At necropsy 
 
Necropsy 
At minimum 1 month, depends on aim of the 
evaluations 
Preserve and retain tissues for possible histological 
evaluation   
 
 
a:  If an NHP other than the Cynomolgus monkey is used, the study design should be adapted. 
b:  Group sizes in ePPND studies should yield a sufficient number of infants in order to assess 
potential adverse effects on pregnancy outcome, as well as dysmorphology and postnatal 
development, providing the opportunity for specialist evaluation if warranted (e.g., immune 
system). Most ePPND studies accrue pregnant animals over several months.  
1.1.4 
Combination Studies 
The possibility also exists to combine study types to meet the goals of the development 
program.  This is accomplished by incorporating appropriate endpoints measured in the 
separate studies summarized above into a single study.  Concepts for various combination 
studies are provided below. 
1.1.4.1 FEED and EFD 
The aim of the combined FEED/EFD study is to test for toxic effects resulting from treatment 
from before mating (males/females) through mating, implantation and until the end of 
organogenesis. This comprises evaluation of stages A through D of the reproductive process 
(see Section 1.1). This study design is most often used with rodents, although it could be used 
with non-rodents. 
A combined male/female FEED/EFD can be used, but a separate female only option is possible 
where male fertility is assessed in a separate study such as a repeated dose study of suitable 
duration. The study would then use untreated males for mating purposes only. For specific 
study design and observational parameters see Sections 1.1.1. and 1.1.2 of this Annex.   
1.1.4.2 Male Fertility and Repeated-Dose Toxicology Study 
It is also possible to evaluate male fertility during a rodent repeated-dose toxicity study.  In 
this combination study, males that have been dosed for a defined number of weeks are paired 
with untreated females.  Following cohabitation, the males continue to be dosed until the 
scheduled termination of the repeated-dose toxicity study. The untreated females are subjected 
to cesarean section approximately two weeks after evidence of mating.  The study endpoints 
collected are identical to those outlined in Section 1.1.1 of this Annex. To adequately assess

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
37 
effects, at least 16 males per group should be included in the study. Female fertility and other 
FEED endpoints will need to be evaluated in a separate study.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
38 
ANNEX 2  ALTERNATIVE ASSAYS 
Data generated from qualified alternative assays (see glossary) conducted alone or in 
conjunction with one or more in vivo studies can be utilized to support hazard identification 
and risk assessment under limited circumstances.   
 
Potential uses can include:  
• circumstances where there is evidence suggesting an adverse effect on EFD (e.g., a 
mechanism of action affecting fundamental pathways in developmental biology, 
phenotypic data from genetically modified animals, class effects) (see Section 1.2.2 
and Figure 1 of this Annex) 
• toxicity in animal species precludes attaining systemic exposures relevant to the human 
exposures under conditions of use 
• as support for a weight of evidence assessment when there are equivocal findings in 
animal studies 
• as partial support for clinical trials including up to 150 WOCBP for up to 3 months 
duration (see Section 4.2.3 of Guidance) 
• pharmaceuticals being developed for certain severely debilitating or life-threatening 
diseases or late-life onset diseases (see Sections 1.2.3, 1.2.4 and Figure 2 of this 
Annex). 
 
When alternative assays are used to support risk assessment, incorporation of these assays 
into an integrated testing strategy should be justified. Assay(s) used for risk assessment 
should be conducted in accordance with GLP and qualified for context of use (i.e. 
applicability domain and regulatory conditions under which assay results are reliable). 
Strategies incorporating alternative assays should also assess the effects of drug metabolites 
when warranted (ICH M3). This annex does not recommend specific assays; instead, basic 
scientific principles are included to assist in assay qualification for regulatory use. 
Alternative assays used to explore mechanism of action, or otherwise not intended to 
substitute for in vivo-derived EFD endpoints, are not expected to be qualified in this rigorous 
manner.  
1.1 Qualification of Alternative Assays for Prediction of MEFL 
Test methods must be appropriate in order for test results to be of value.  Accordingly, the 
endpoints measured should be scientifically justified with respect to assay objectives and 
predictions.  The relationships among the assay’s predictions, endpoint(s) assessed, and the 
applicability domain, should be supported empirically.  To qualify1 an alternative assay or a 
combination of assays for use in risk assessment for regulatory purposes, a comprehensive 
                                            
 
1 Qualified alternative assays within the context of this guideline have not been subject to formal validation as 
those can only be applied under certain specific circumstances.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
39 
description of the methodology and findings should be provided, including the following: 
 
• A thorough description and justification of the predictive model, including which 
species (e.g., rat, rabbit and/or human) and endpoint(s) it is predicting. The currently 
available in vitro alternative assays used for evaluating potential hazards to 
development are designed to detect MEFL.  
• An evaluation of the biological plausibility of the model including a description of the 
mechanisms of embryo-fetal development (e.g., cell migration, differentiation, 
vasculogenesis, neurulation, gastrulation) and subsequent developmental adverse 
effects studied with the model. In addition, any limitations of each of the individual 
assays should be discussed. The description should include a discussion and supporting 
data to show that the duration and timing of exposure supports the prediction of MEFL 
in vivo. 
• An assessment of the accuracy and ability for the alternative assay to detect MEFL. 
The performance of the assay is compared to the data generated from in vivo studies 
with compounds that induce MEFL in the absence of confounding maternal toxicity. If 
the compound is not a marketed pharmaceutical, then in vivo data should be provided. 
• A discussion determining whether an effect is negative or positive in the assay.  
• Definition and justification of the threshold for molecular and metabolic markers 
predicting MEFL.  
• The details of the algorithm employed for determining positive and negative outcomes 
in vivo. The predictive model should correlate concentrations tested in the alternative 
assay(s) to the in vivo exposure, preferably in pregnant animals, that results in an 
adverse outcome in the species being predicted.  
• The list of compounds in each of the training sets (data used to discover potentially 
predictive relationships) and test sets (data used to assess the strength and utility of a 
predictive relationship) for qualification of the assay and the basis for selection of these 
compounds.  
• Data sources (e.g., literature, study reports, regulatory reviews) for all in vivo 
exposure and MEFL data used for compounds in the qualification data set, if not 
obtained from the Reference Compound List (Section 1.3 of Annex 2).   
• Data demonstrating the test method’s performance covering an appropriate range of 
biological and chemical domains that are justified for the intended use of the alternative 
assay (context of use).   
• Data demonstrating the sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative predictive values, 
and reproducibility of an assay or battery of assays to predict in vivo developmental 
outcomes. The performance of the training and test sets can be evaluated separately 
and/or together, provided the selected approach is justified.  
• In cases when more than one assay is conducted, a separate description of the 
performance of each assay, in addition to the integrated assessment used for the 
predictive model. A clear description of how the results of individual assays are 
integrated into the final prediction.  
• Historical data for assay development and use (e.g., viability, numbers and types of

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
40 
malformations), including positive controls. 
 
The sponsor should state to which health authorities (if any) the assay qualification has been 
previously been submitted. Note that acceptance of an assay by one regulatory authority does 
not bind other health authorities to accept the assay. Last, evaluation of human teratogens not 
detected in vivo by rat and/or rabbit is encouraged since some alternative assay(s) might predict 
MEFL that are not detectable by in vivo studies.  
1.2 Examples of EFD Testing Strategies Utilizing Alternative Assays 
This section provides illustrative examples of integrated testing strategies into which 
alternative assays are incorporated to test for adverse effects on EFD. 
1.2.1 
Potential Approach to Defer In Vivo Testing as Part of an Integrated Testing Strategy 
See Section 4.2.3 of the Guidance. 
1.2.2 
Pharmaceuticals Expected to Be Embryo-fetal Toxicants 
For pharmaceuticals that are expected to adversely affect embryo-fetal development based on 
mechanism of action, pharmacologic class or target biology, it can be appropriate to confirm 
this activity in a qualified alternative assay(s) (see Figure 1 of this Annex).  
 
When a qualified alternative assay clearly predicts MEFL at clinically relevant extrapolated 
exposures, this can be sufficient to identify the compound as an EFD risk, and further testing 
would generally not be warranted.  If the alternative assay does not predict MEFL, this should 
be confirmed in definitive in vivo EFD studies in two species. Conducting the studies in series, 
as shown in Annex 2 Figure 1, can allow for reduction in animal use, as the second in vivo 
assay would not be warranted if the first one is positive. Under this scenario, since the 
pharmaceutical is expected to adversely affect embryo-fetal development, there is no merit in 
using in vivo EFD studies to attempt to negate a positive alternative assay response.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
41 
Figure 1: Use of Alternative Assays for Pharmaceuticals Expected to be EFD Toxicants 
 
   
 
1) No additional assessment is warranted if unequivocal MEFL signal is observed at clinically 
relevant extrapolated exposures. 
2) Alternatively, pEFD studies can be used; however, negative results should be confirmed by a 
definitive study in the relevant species 
3) Conducting in vivo EFD studies in series, as shown, can permit reduction in animal use, as 2nd 
in vivo assay is not warranted if the first study is positive. 
 
1.2.3 
Pharmaceuticals Intended to Treat Severely Debilitating or Life-Threatening Diseases 
 
Considering the risk/benefit for pharmaceuticals intended to treat severely debilitating or life-
threatening conditions (compared to less severe chronic diseases) where the likelihood of 
pregnancy is low, the use of qualified alternative assay(s) can be considered an appropriate 
component of the EFD risk assessment (see Annex 2 Figure 2).

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
42 
When a qualified alternative assay clearly predicts MEFL in the first species (e.g., rat) at 
clinically relevant extrapolated exposures, this can be considered, on a case-by-case basis, to 
sufficiently characterize the EFD risk. However, if the results are equivocal or thought to 
represent a false positive, definitive in vivo studies in one or two species should be conducted 
to assist human risk assessment. If no EFD signal is observed in the two definitive in vivo 
studies at appropriate exposure margins the results of the alternative assay could be considered 
of minimal concern for human risk.  However, for alternative assays that have been qualified 
to predict human MEFL (i.e., not predicting only animal MEFL), additional data (e.g., 
mechanistic or genetic) should be provided to support a conclusion that the alternative assay 
results represent a false positive finding.  If one or both of the in vivo studies are positive for 
EFD toxicity, the compound is considered to be positive for EFD risk. Conducting the studies 
in series, as shown in Annex 2 Figure 2, can allow for reduction in animal use, as the second 
in vivo assay would not be warranted if the first one is positive. 
 
If the alternative assay for the first species predicts a negative outcome (i.e., no MEFL), a 
definitive in vivo EFD study in the second species should be conducted to confirm the 
assessment.  If positive, the compound is considered positive for EFD risk.  If negative, the 
compound is considered negative for EFD risk, and no further testing is generally warranted, 
unless it is judged that additional studies would significantly alter the risk assessment.   
1.2.4 
Pharmaceuticals Intended to Treat Late-life Onset Diseases 
Some diseases are typically only diagnosed at a later age, but may nonetheless be diagnosed 
in reproductively capable women at a low incidence (e.g., bullous pemphigoid, which is 
typically diagnosed after age 60).  Given the generally low rate of fertility in the female 
population with such late-life onset diseases, there is a diminished likelihood that a 
pharmaceutical used exclusively in this population will lead to an increase in the incidence of 
birth defects.  Whether an EFD assessment is warranted under this scenario should be 
determined on a case-by-case basis.  This scenario is not intended for situations where the 
treatment population is presumptively infertile (e.g., post-menopausal osteoporosis), for which 
no EFD assessment would typically be warranted.  
 
The testing strategy under this scenario is similar to that depicted for severely debilitating or 
life-threatening diseases, with the exception that the first in vivo assessment in the second 
species can be conducted as a pEFD study.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
43 
Figure 2: Use of Alternative Assays for Severely Debilitating or Life-threatening or Late 
Life Onset Diseases 
  
 
 
1)  A clearly positive MEFL signal at clinically relevant extrapolated exposures can be sufficient 
to consider a pharmaceutical positive for EFD toxicity, without further assessment, on a case-
by-case basis.  
2)  While pEFD studies can be used, negative results from definitive in vivo EFD studies in two 
species are warranted to establish that alternative assay results represent a false positive. 
3)  For late-life onset diseases, given low likelihood of pregnancy in this patient population a pEFD 
study in the 2nd species can generally be sufficient. 
4)  Conducting in vivo EFD studies in series, as shown, can permit reduction in animal use, as 2nd 
in vivo assay is not to be conducted if the first is positive. 
5)  Same species as the alternative assay is intended to predict. 
 
1.3 Reference Compound List  
The Reference Compound List contains 29 compounds that have been shown to induce MEFL 
in nonclinical studies (in the absence of overt maternal toxicity) and/or humans (Table 1 of this 
Annex).

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
44 
Only findings of MEFL were recognized for NOAEL and LOAEL determinations. Doses 
associated with the induction of reversible or minor manifestations of developmental toxicity 
(e.g., changes in fetal weight, growth suppression, and skeletal variations) were not used for 
this assessment. (see Section 9, of the Guidance).  
The general robustness of the studies (e.g., compliance with GLP regulations, the number of 
animals in the study, number of dose levels) was considered when determining which NOAEL 
and LOAEL values to use. When multiple sources were available, the data from a study 
designed in a manner consistent with the design recommended in the ICH S5(R2) guideline 
was accepted as the definitive data. When there were multiple robust sources of data that did 
not closely align, the highest NOAEL (to avoid bias towards claiming a low margin) and lowest 
LOAEL (as is routinely done in regulatory assessments) were generally used, even if the data 
were from different studies.  
The compounds in this list as well as others can be used to support qualification of an 
alternative assay or battery of assays. 
Compounds not causing MEFL (negative compounds) should also be used to assess assay 
specificity. Such compounds would lack MEFL regardless of additional effects on 
embryo/fetus such as fetal body weight changes, structural variations or delayed/reduced 
ossification. These compounds can be negative at all in vivo doses tested, or can be positive 
(MEFL observed) at higher doses/exposures provided the alternative assay within its context 
of use predicts the transition from negative to positive.  That is, the alternative assay should 
predict a negative result at some extrapolated level under the conditions for which the in vivo 
study yielded a negative result (no MEFL). In the Reference Compound List, three compounds 
are provided as an example for negative controls (Cetirizine, Saxagliptin, Vildagliptin). These 
compounds did not induce MEFL in rat and rabbit at an exposure multiple (AUC and Cmax) 
of >25 fold at the MRHD. 
 
Table 1: Reference Compound Positive Control Examples for Qualifying Alternative 
Assays 
Positive Controls 
Human 
Teratogen 
Rat MEFL 
Rabbit MEFL 
Acitretin 
X 
X 
X 
Aspirin 
X 
X 
 
Bosentan 
 
X 
 
Busulfan 
X 
X 
X 
Carbamazepine 
X 
X 
X 
Cisplatin 
 
X 
 
Cyclophosphamide 
X 
X 
X 
Cytarabine 
X 
X 
 
Dabrafenib 
 
X 
 
Dasatinib 
 
X

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
45 
Positive Controls 
Human 
Teratogen 
Rat MEFL 
Rabbit MEFL 
Fluconazole 
X 
X 
X 
5-Fluorouracil 
X 
X 
X 
Hydroxyurea 
X 
X 
X 
Ibrutinib 
 
X 
X 
Ibuprofen 
X 
X 
 
Imatinib 
 
X 
 
Isotretinoin (13-cis-retinoic acid) 
X 
X 
X 
Methotrexate 
X 
X 
X 
Pazopanib 
 
X 
X 
Phenytoin (Diphenylhydantoin) 
X 
X 
X 
Pomalidomide 
presumed 
X 
X 
Ribavirin 
 
X 
X 
Tacrolimus 
 
X 
X 
Thalidomide 
X 
X 
X 
Topiramate 
X 
X 
X 
Tretinoin (all-trans-retinoic acid) 
X 
X 
X 
Trimethadione 
X 
X 
 
Valproic acid 
X 
X 
X 
Vismodegib 
presumed 
X

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
46 
1.3.1 
Positive Control Reference Compounds 
ACITRETIN (ETRETIN) 
CAS No.:  55079-83-9 
 
Rat NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat 
Findings 
Rabbit 
NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit Findings 
Human 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Margins 
NOAEL/Human 
LOAEL/Human Notes 
7.5 
mg/kg 
oral  
GD7-16  
(Kistler) 
 
Cmax = 1.5 
µg/mLa 
AUC = 6.6 
µg∙h/mLa 
15 mg/kg oral  
GD7-16  
(Kistler) 
 
Cmax 
= 
3.0 
µg/mLa 
AUC = 13.2 
µg∙h/mLa 
15 mg/kg: 
malformed 
humeri, 
dilated 
renal pelvis 
 
30 mg/kg: 
cleft palate; 
malformed 
humeri, 
radii 
and 
ulnae 
0.2 mg/kg 
oral GD7-
19 
(Kistler) 
 
no PK data 
available  
0.6 mg/kg 
oral GD7-
19 
(Kistler) 
 
no PK data 
available 
0.6 
mg/kg: 
cleft 
palate, open eyelid, 
skeletal 
 
2 mg/kg: cleft palate, 
skull 
and 
tail 
malformations, 
ectrodactyly of the 
fore- and hindfeet 
and malformations of 
the long bones 
50 mg 
(0.83 mg/kg,  
29.4 mg/m2) 
 
Exposure 
values at steady 
state: 
Cmax 
= 
0.79 
µg/mLb 
AUC(0-24h): 3.6 
µg∙h/mLb 
NOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax 
= 
1.9 
(1.5/0.79) 
AUC 
= 
1.8 
(6.6/3.6) 
rabbitc 
Cmax 
= 
0.2 
(0.2/0.83) 
AUC 
= 
0.08 
(2.4/29.4) 
 
LOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax 
= 
3.8 
(3.0/0.79) 
AUC 
= 
3.7 
(13.2/3.6) 
rabbitc 
Acitretin is the 
major 
metabolite (free 
acid) 
of 
etretinate (ethyl 
ester)

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
47 
Rat NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat 
Findings 
Rabbit 
NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit Findings 
Human 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Margins 
NOAEL/Human 
LOAEL/Human Notes 
Cmax 
= 
0.7 
(0.6/0.83) 
AUC 
= 
0.2 
(7.2/29.4) 
a:  Extrapolated from reported values at 5 mg/kg (Brouwer):  Cmax = ~1.0 µg/mL from visual inspection of graph, AUC = 4.4 µg∙h/mL. 
b:  Steady state values after 21 daily doses administered with food (FDA, United States):  Cmax = 0.786 µg/mL, AUC(0-24h) = 3.569 µg∙h/mL. 
c:  In the absence of rabbit PK data, Cmax ratio was based on mg/kg dose ratio and AUC was based on mg/m2 dose ratio. 
 
References 
Brouwer KR, McNamara PJ. Influence of pregnancy on the pharmacokinetic disposition of two aromatic retinoids (etretinate and acitretin) in the 
rat. II. Single and multiple oral dosing studies. Drug Metab Dispos. 1989;17:652-5. 
FDA, United States. Approval package review of NDA 019821, part 01 (28 Oct 1996), page 86. 
Kistler A, Hummler H. Teratogenesis and reproductive safety evaluation of the retinoid etretin (Ro 10-1670). Arch Toxicol. 1985;58:50-6. 
Additional References Evaluated 
FDA, United States. Pharm/tox review of NDA 019821 (08 Jun 1988), page 13. [There were no details provided for study findings, study appears 
to be the same as reported by Kistler and Hummer.]

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
48 
ACETYLSALICYLIC ACID (ASPIRIN) 
CAS No.:  50-78-2 
 
Rat NOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings 
Rabbit 
NOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
Findings 
Human 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Margins 
NOAEL/Human 
LOAEL/Human 
Notes 
125 
mg/kg 
oral GD6-17 
(n=20 
Sprague 
Dawley) 
[Gupta]a 
 
aspirin 
Cmax = ~25 
µg/mLb 
AUC = 6.6 – 
25.3 
µg∙h/mLb 
 
salicylate 
Cmax = 132 
µg/mLc 
AUC = 8333 
µg∙h/mLd  
200 
mg/kg 
oral GD7-17 
(n=20 
Sprague 
Dawley)  
[Nakatsuka]e 
 
aspirin  
Cmax = ~40 
µg/mLb 
AUC = 10.5 – 
40.5 
µg∙h/mLb 
 
salicylate 
Cmax = 211 
µg/mLc 
AUC 
= 
13,333 
µg∙h/mLd 
Nakatsuka (200 
mg/kg): 
malformations 
including 
craniorachischisis, 
abdominal hernia, 
exencephaly, club 
foot, open eyelid, 
severe defects of 
vertebral and 
costal bones; 
increased 
resorptions  
 
Gupta (250 
mg/kg): 
ablepharia, 
cranio-
rachischisis, 
exencephaly, 
various low 
occurrence head 
malformations, 
350 mg/kg 
oral GD7-
19 (n=20 
NZW) 
[Cappon]f 
 
aspirin: 
aspirin PK 
data in 
rabbits is 
not 
available 
 
salicylate  
Cmax = 490 
µg/mLg 
AUC = 
4865 
µg∙h/mLg 
Not 
Applicable: 
no MEFL 
findings in 
rabbits up 
to a 
maternally 
toxic dose 
None 
650 mg (10.8 
mg/kg) q4h 
3900 mg daily 
oral (2294 mg/m2 
daily) 
 
aspirin 
Cmax= 7.08 
µg/mLh 
AUC(0-24h) = 48.3 
µg∙h/mLh 
 
salicylic acid  
Cmax = 45.2 
µg/mLi 
AUC = 1448 
µg∙h/mLi 
Aspirin 
NOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax =  3.5 
(25/7.08) 
AUC = 0.1 – 0.5 
(6.6/48.3 to 
25.3/48.3) 
rabbitj 
Cmax = 32.4 
(350/10.8) 
AUC = 1.8 
(4200/2294) 
 
LOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax = 5.6 (40/7.08) 
AUC = 0.2 – 0.8 
(10.5/48.3 to 
40.5/48.3) 
rabbit  
LOAEL not  
identified 
The aspirin 
metabolite, 
salicylate 
(salicylic acid) 
has much higher 
concentrations in 
comparison to the 
parent and is 
pharmacologically 
active. Since 
aspirin 
concentrations 
were often BLQ, 
salicylate 
exposure data are 
also reported. 
 
salicylic acid 
MW = 138.12 
g/mol 
 
aspirin

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
49 
bent fore and hind 
paw, kinked tail, 
protruding 
tongue, 
gastroschisis, 
ectopic adrenal, 
various low 
occurrence 
cardio-vascular 
malformations, 
VSD, DH, 
hypoplastic 
kidney, 
hypoplastic testes; 
decreased 
implantations, 
increased 
resorptions and 
post implantation 
loss 
 
Salicylate  
NOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax:  2.9 
(132/45.2) 
AUC:  5.8 
(8333/1448) 
rabbit 
Cmax:  10.8 
(490/45.2) 
AUC:  3.4 
(4865/1448) 
 
LOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax:  4.7 
(211/45.2) 
AUC:  9.2 
(13,333/1448) 
rabbit 
LOAEL not 
identified 
MW = 180.16 
g/mol 
a:  Nakatsuka and Fujii reported a NOAEL of 100 mg/kg in Sprague Dawley rats; the highest NOAEL of the 2 studies is reported here.  
b:  Extrapolated or actual reported value at 200 mg/kg oral dose in Sprague Dawley rats (Wientjes):  Cmax = 40 µg/mL (visual inspection of Figure 
1); AUC = 629 – 2430 µg∙min/mL (recalculated as 10.5 – 40.5 µg∙h/mL).  Cmax data for aspirin is also available in Wistar rats administered 200 
mg/kg (Higgs).   
c:  Extrapolated from reported value at 200 mg/kg oral dose in Sprague Dawley rats (Wientjes):  Cmax = 211 µg/mL (Table 5); no AUC values 
were reported for salicylate.  Cmax data for salicylate is also available in Wistar rats administered 200 mg/kg (Higgs) and in Fischer rats 
administered 90 mg/kg (Kapetanovica).

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
50 
d:  Extrapolated from reported value at oral 90 mg/kg/day on D15 in Fischer rats (Kapetanovica):  AUC = 6000 µg∙h/mL.  Note the AUC in Table 
2 is reported as 6.0 µg∙h/mL, but this is incompatible with the plot in Figure 1a.  An AUC estimated from concentrations visually estimated 
from Figure 1a was 5319 µg∙h/mL (personal calculation); thus it is assumed that the reported value should actually be 6000 µg∙h/mL. 
e:  Gupta reported a LOAEL of 250 mg/kg in Sprague Dawley rats; the lowest LOAEL of the 2 studies is reported here.  
f:  Data from Cappon is reported since the study design complied with ICH S5 standards.  Data are also available in which 200 mg/kg was reported 
as the NOAEL (McColl, Schardein), but these studies were pre-ICH S5.  McColl reported small auricles in hearts (18% v 4.5% in controls) and 
increased presence of 13th rib (93% vs 56% in controls) at 200 mg/kg aspirin, but these are considered variations.  Schardein reported marked 
reduction in litter size at 200 mg/kg/day, but this dose was maternally toxic. 
g:  Extrapolated from reported values on D3 after 50 mg/kg/day oral dose in NZW rabbits (Marangos):  Cmax = 70 µg/mL and AUC = 695 µg∙h/mL.  
Note that the extrapolation is 7-fold and that there are no data available on the linearity of the pharmacokinetics in rabbits. 
h:  Extrapolated to 6 daily doses every 4 hours from reported values after a single 1000 mg dose (Schurer):  Cmax = 10.89 µg/mL, AUC = 12.38 
µg∙h/mL.  The Cmax after a single dose likely represents the Cmax at steady state since the half life is short (approximately 0.5 hours) and no 
accumulation is expected using the equation:  accumulation = 1/(1 – e-k∙tau), where k = 0.693/t½ with t½ = 0.5 hours and tau = 4 hours.  For 
AUC(0-24h), the single dose AUC at 1000 mg was extrapolated to 650 mg and multiplied by 6 (the maximum recommended doses in 24 hours).  
Data are also available following administration of 500 mg (Nagelschmitz). 
i:  Extrapolated to 6 daily doses every 4 hours from reported values after a single 1000 mg dose (Schurer):  Cmax = 53.5 µg/mL, AUC = 371.32 
µg∙h/mL.  For Cmax, an accumulation factor of 1.3 was applied that was estimated from the equation:  accumulation = 1/(1 – e–k∙tau), where k = 
0.693/t½ with t½ = 2.0 hours and tau = 4 hours (i.e., 1/(1 – e–1.386) = 1/(1 – 0.25) = 1/0.75 = 1.3).  For AUC(0-24h), the single dose AUC at 1000 
mg was extrapolated to 650 mg and multiplied by 6 (the maximum recommended doses in 24 hours).  Data are also available following 
administration of 500 mg (Nagelschmitz). 
j:  In the absence of PK data, Cmax ratio was based on mg/kg dose ratio and AUC was based on mg/m2 dose ratio. 
References 
Cappon GD, Gupta U, Cook JC, Tassinari MS, Hurtt ME. Comparison of the developmental toxicity of aspirin in rabbits when administered 
throughout organogenesis or during sensitive windows of development. Birth Defects Res B Dev Reprod Toxicol. 2003;68:38-46. 
Gupta U, Cook JC, Tassinari MS, Hurtt ME. Comparison of developmental toxicology of aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) in rats using selected dosing 
paradigms. Birth Defects Res B Dev Reprod Toxicol. 2003;68:27-37.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
51 
Kapetanovic IM, Bauer KS, Tessier DM, Lindeblad MO, Zakharov AD, Lubet R, et al. Comparison of pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic 
profiles of aspirin following oral gavage and diet dosing in rats. Chem Biol Interact. 2009;179:233-9. 
Marangos MN, Onyeji CO, Nicolau DP, Nightingale CH. Disposition kinetics of aspirin in female New Zealand white rabbits. Lab Anim Sci. 
1995;45:67-9. 
Nakatsuka T, Fujii T. Comparative teratogenicity study of diflunisal (MK-647) and aspirin in the rat. Oyo Yakuri. 1979;17:551-7. 
Schurer M, Bias-Imhoff U, Schulz HU, Schwantes U, Riechers AM. Lack of influence of glycine on the single dose pharmacokinetics of 
acetylsalicylic acid in man. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther. 1996;34:282-7. 
Wientjes MG, Levy G. Nonlinear pharmacokinetics of aspirin in rats. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1988;245:809-15. 
Additional References Evaluated  
Higgs GA, Salmon JA, Hendersonn B, Vane JR. Pharmacokinetics of aspirin and salicylate in relation to inhibition of arachidonate cyclooxygenase 
and antiinflammatory activity. Proc Natl Acad Sci. USA. 1986;84:1417-20. 
McColl JD, Robinson S, Globus M. Effect of some therapeutic agents on the rabbit fetus. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1967;10:244-252. 
Nagelschmitz J, Blunck M, Kraetzschmar J, Ludwig M, Wensing G, Hohlfeld T. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of acetylsalicylic acid 
after intravenous and oral administration to healthy volunteers. Clin Pharmacol. 2014;6:51-9. 
Schardein JL, Blatz AT, Woosley ET, Kaump DH. Reproduction studies on sodium meclofenamate in comparison to aspirin and phenylbutazone. 
Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1969;15:46-55.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
52 
ALL-TRANS-RETINOIC ACID (ATRA), TRETINOIN 
CAS No.:  302-79-4 
 
Rat NOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings Rabbit 
NOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
Findings 
Human 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Marginsa 
NOAEL/Human 
LOAEL/Human 
Notes 
5 mg/kg oral 
GD6-15 
(Wistar) 
[Seegmiller] 
 
Cmax = 0.15 
µg/mLb 
AUC(0-8h) = 
0.25 µg·h/mLb 
10 mg/kg oral 
GD6-15 
(Wistar) 
[Seegmiller] 
 
Cmax = 0.30 
µg/mLb 
AUC(0-8h) = 
0.50 µg·h/mLb 
cleft palate, 
sporadic gross 
external and 
soft tissue 
malformations, 
skeletal 
alterations 
 2 mg/kg oral 
GD6-18  
[Tzimas, 1994] 
 
Cmax = 0.10 
µg/mLc 
AUC(0-24h) = 
0.207 µg·h/mLc 
6 mg/kg 
oral GD6-
18 
[Tzimas, 
1994] 
 
Cmax = 0.30 
µg/mLc 
AUC(0-8h) = 
0.622 
µg·h/mLc 
fetal 
resorptions 
and a 
decrease in 
live fetuses; 
visceral 
ectopia, skin 
erosions, 
acaudia, 
torsion of 
hindlimbs, 
and 
omphalocele 
45 mg/m2/day 
in two divided 
doses 
 
Cmax = 0.394 
µg/mLd 
AUC = 0.537 
µg·h/mLd 
NOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax = 0.4 
(0.15/0.394) 
AUC = 0.5 
(0.25/0.537) 
 
rabbit 
Cmax = 0.3 
(0.100/0.394) 
AUC = 0.4 
(0.207/0.537) 
 
LOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax = 0.8 
(0.30/0.394) 
AUC = 0.9 
(0.50/0.537) 
 
rabbit 
Cmax = 0.8 
(0.300/0.394) 
tretinoin 
induces its 
own 
metabolism, 
so PK 
margins are 
highly 
dependent 
on day of 
assessment

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
53 
AUC = 1.2 
(0.622/0.537) 
a:  Since tretinoin induces its own metabolism, which causes a significant decrease in plasma exposures with repeated dosing, single dose PK data 
in animals and humans were used for calculating exposure margins. 
b: Extrapolated or actual value after single 5 mg/kg oral dose on GD9 in Wistar rats (Tzimas 1997):  Cmax = 0.15 µg/mL, AUC(0-8h) = 0.25 µg·h/mL.  
Pharmacokinetic data are also available after a single dose of 6 mg/kg on GD12 (Collins, 1995):  Cmax = 0.320 µg/mL from visual inspection 
of graph, AUC(0-8h) = 0.820 µg·h/mL; as well as after 6 daily doses (Collins 1994, 1995):  Cmax = 0.046 or 0.052 µg/mL, and AUC(0-24h) = 0.098 
µg·h/mL or AUC(0-10h) = 0.090 µg·h/mL, respectively. 
c:  Extrapolated or actual value after single 6 mg/kg oral dose on GD12 in Swiss hare rabbits (Collins 1995):  Cmax = 0.300 µg/mL from visual 
inspection of graph, AUC(0-8h) =  0.622 µg·h/mL.  Pharmacokinetic data are also available following 6 daily doses in Swiss hare rabbits (Collins 
1995):  Cmax = 0.110 µg/mL, AUC(0-10h) = 0.281 µg·h/mL; and from (Tzimas 1994):  Cmax = 0.105 µg/mL, AUC(0-24h) = 0.321 µg·h/mL. 
d:  PK data after first dose (US label). 
 
References 
Collins MD, Tzimas G, Bürgin H, Hummler H, Nau H. Single versus multiple dose administration of all-trans-retinoic acid during organogenesis: 
differential metabolism and transplacental kinetics in rat and rabbit. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1995;130:9-18. 
Seegmiller RE, Ford WH, Carter MW, Mitala JJ, Powers WJ Jr. A developmental toxicity study of tretinoin administered topically and orally to 
pregnant Wistar rats. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1997;36(3 Pt 2):S60-6 
Tzimas G, Bürgin H, Collins MD, Hummler H, Nau H. The high sensitivity of the rabbit to the teratogenic effects of 13-cis-retinoic acid 
(isotretinoin) is a consequence of prolonged exposure of the embryo to 13-cis-retinoic acid and 13-cis-4-oxo-retinoic acid, and not of isomerization 
to all-trans-retinoic acid. Arch Toxicol. 1994;68:119-28. 
Tzimas G, Thiel R, Chahoud I, Nau H. The area under the concentration-time curve of all-trans-retinoic acid is the most suitable pharmacokinetic 
correlate to the embryotoxicity of this retinoid in the rat. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1997;143:436-44. 
US label tretinoin.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
54 
Additional References Evaluated 
Collins MD, Tzimas G, Hummler H, Bürgin H, Nau H. Comparative teratology and transplacental pharmacokinetics of all-trans-retinoic acid, 13-
cis-retinoic acid,and retinyl palmitate following daily administrations in rats. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1994;127:132-44. [PK data after 6 daily 
doses] 
Kochhar DM, Christian MS. Tretinoin: a review of the nonclinical developmental toxicology experience. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1997;36(3 Pt 
2):S47-59. [review article of other papers already cited] 
Tembe EA, Honeywell R, Buss NE, Renwick AG. All-trans-retinoic acid in maternal plasma and teratogenicity in rats and rabbits. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 1996;141:456-72. [single dose teratology and PK at ≥20 mg/kg] 
FDA, United States. Pharmtox review of NDA 021108/S000 (31 Aug 2000), page 16,26. [p. 16:  same study as Seegmiller; p. 26:  review mentions 
“only a modest increase in intrauterine death” at 2.5 mg/kg in an oral rat developmental toxicity study, but there are no study details to allow 
confirmation]. 
US label tretinoin. [fetal resorptions and a decrease in live fetuses were stated as findings in all species studied, but the dose at which these occurred 
was not mentioned]

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
55 
Bosentan 
CAS No.:  147536-97-8 
 
Rat NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings 
Rabbit NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
Findings 
Notes 
60 mg/kg oral 
GD6-15 (FDA, 
United States, p. 
39, 155) 
 
Cmax = 4.5 μg/mLa 
AUC = 13.2 
μg∙h/mLa 
300 mg/kg oral 
GD6-15 (FDA, 
United States, p. 
39, 155) 
 
Cmax = 16.25 
µg/mLb 
AUC = 53.5 
µg∙h/mLb 
Cesarean sections 
300 mg/kg:  agenesis of soft palate (1 
litter) 
1500 mg/kg:  agenesis of soft palate (14 
litters), shortened tongues, abnormal 
origin of the right subclavian artery (1 
litter); abnormalities of the skull 
(shortened and misshapen mandibles, 
abnormally shaped palatine, abnormally 
shaped tympanic annulus and hyoid 
bone, fusion of the pterygoid process 
with the tympanic annulus, bent internal 
pterygoid process) 
 
Spontaneous delivery fetuses (PPND 
groups) that died on study:c  
300 mg/kg:  agenesis of the soft palate, 
anophthalmia, and microphthalmia 
1500 mg/kg/day 
oral (750 mg/kg 
BID) GD7-18 
(FDA, United 
States, p. 66) 
 
Cmax = 1.435 
µg/mLd 
AUC = 27.7 
µg∙h/mLd 
LOAEL not 
identified 
none 
 
a:  Extrapolated from reported values in plasma after 10 doses of 200 mg/kg oral bosentan in pregnant rats (FDA, United States, p. 78):  Cmax = 15 
µg/mL, AUC = 44 µg·h/mL. 
b:  Interpolated from reported values in plasma after 10 doses of 200 and 600 mg/kg oral bosentan in pregnant rats (FDA, United States, p. 78):  at 
200 mg/kg, Cmax = 15 µg/mL, AUC = 44 µg·h/mL; at 600 mg/kg, Cmax = 20 µg/mL, AUC = 82 µg·h/mL.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
56 
c:  In a separate PPND study with higher levels of impurities and pup sacrifice on PND4, agenesis of the soft palate was also observed in 3 litters 
at 120 mg/kg (FDA, United States, p. 58) 
d:  Actual values in plasma after 12 doses of 1500 mg/kg/day oral bosentan administered as 2 divided doses (750 mg/kg each) 5 to 6 hours apart 
in pregnant Himalayan rabbits (FDA, United States, p. 78):  Cmax = 1.435 µg/mL, AUC = 27.70 µg·h/mL. 
 
References 
FDA, United States. Pharmacology Review NDA 021290 (30 Aug 2001).

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
57 
Busulfan 
CAS No.:  55-98-1 
 
Rat 
NOAEL  
Dose  
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings Rabbit 
NOAEL 
Dose  
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
Findings 
Human 
Dosea 
Cmax 
AUC 
Margins  
NOAEL/Human 
LOAEL/Human 
Notes 
NOAEL 
not 
identified 
3 mg/kg oral 
single dose GD12  
(18 mg/m2) 
[Dodo] 
 
Cmax = 0.84 
µg/mLb 
AUC = 2.70 
µg·h/mLb 
3 mg/kg: 
fused carpal 
bones 
 
10 mg/kg:  
low incidence 
of limb and 
rib 
malformations 
 
30 mg/kg:  
high 
incidence of 
limb and rib 
malformations 
1.3 mg/kg 
oral GD7–14 
(15.6 mg/m2) 
[Somers] 
 
no rabbit PK 
data found  
3.6 mg/kg 
oral GD7-14 
(43.2 mg/m2) 
[Somers] 
 
no rabbit PK 
data found 
increased 
resorptions 
and 
decreased 
live young,  
abnormalities 
in liver and 
gall bladder 
4 – 8 mg daily 
oral 
(0.06 – 0.13 
mg/kg, 2.4 – 4.7 
mg/m2) 
 
for 8 mg dose 
Cmax = 0.128 
µg/mLc 
AUC = 0.529 
µg∙h/mLc 
NOAEL: 
rat 
NOAEL not 
identified 
rabbitd 
Cmax = 10 
(1.3/0.13) 
AUC = 3.3 
(15.6/4.7) 
 
LOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax = 6.6 
(0.84/0.128) 
AUC = 5.1 
(2.7/0.529) 
rabbitd 
Cmax = 27.7 
(3.6/0.13) 
AUC = 9.2 
(43.2/4.7) 
human dose 
is daily but 
MEFL 
NOAEL was 
single dose, 
margins 
likely even 
lower if rats 
dosed through 
organogenesis

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
58 
a:  Note that Busulfex is a concentrated busulfan intravenous formulation with dimethylformamide indicated for bone marrow ablation.  Myleran 
is the original busulfan oral drug product indicated for treatment of chronic myelogenous leukemia.  The doses used below are for remission 
induction in chronic myelogenous leukemia. 
b:  Extrapolated from reported values after 1 mg/kg busulfan oral dose to fasted rats (strain not specified) (FDA, United States):  Cmax = 0.28 
µg/mL, AUC = 0.9 µg·h/mL. 
c:  Extrapolated from the average of dose-normalized (to 2 mg) values across the range 2 to 6 mg (Cmax = 0.03 µg/mL, AUC = 0.130 µg∙h/mL) 
and dose-normalized values (to 4 mg) from 4 and 8 mg in a separate study (Cmax = 0.068 µg/mL, AUC = 0.269 µg∙h/mL) (US label, Ehrsson). 
d:  In the absence of rabbit PK data, Cmax ratio was based on mg/kg dose ratio and AUC was based on mg/m2 dose ratio. 
 
References 
Dodo T, Uchida K, Hirose T, Fukuta T, Kojima C, Shiraishi I, et al. Increases in discontinuous rib cartilage and fused carpal bone in rat fetuses 
exposed to the teratogens, busulfan, acetazolamide, vitamin A, and ketoconazole. Hum Exp Toxicol. 2010;29:439-50. 
Ehrsson H, Hassan M, Ehrnebo M, Beran M. Busulfan kinetics. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 1983;34:86-9. 
FDA, United States.  Pharmtox review NDA 020954 (04Feb1999), page 11.  
Somers GF. The evaluation of drugs for foetal toxicity and teratogenicity in the rabbit. Excerpta Medica International Congress. 1969;181:227-
34. [Proc Eur Soc Study Drug Toxic. 1969;10:227-34]. 
Additional References Evaluated 
Bishop and Wassom. Toxicological review of busulfan (Myleran). Mutat Res. 1986;168:15-45.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
59 
CARBAMAZEPINE 
CAS No.:  298-46-4 
 
Rat NOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings 
Rabbit 
NOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
LOAEL Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
Findings 
Human 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Margins 
NOAEL/Human 
LOAEL/Human Notes 
200 mg/kg 
oral GD7-18 
[Vorhees]a 
 
 
Cmax = 33 
µg/mLb  
AUC(0-24 h) = 
547 µg∙h/mLb 
400 mg/kg 
oral GD4-14 
[FDA, United 
States 1967, 
Vorhees] 
 
Cmax = 65 
µg/mLb 
AUC(0-24h) = 
1094 
µg∙h/mLb 
400 mg/kg GD4-
14 [FDA, United 
States 1967] 
abortions 
 
600 mg/kg GD7-
18 SD rats 
[Vorhees] 
increased 
resorptions, 
increased kinked 
tails  
 
650 mg/kg [US 
label] 
offspring showed 
low incidence of 
cleft palate, talipes, 
or anophthalmos 
NOAEL 
was not 
identified 
[FDA, 
United 
States 
1967] 
 
225 mg/kg 
GD5-12 
[FDA, United 
States 1967] 
 
Cmax = 29 
µg/mLc 
AUC(0-24h) = 
267 µg∙h/mLc 
No 
malformations 
up to 450 
mg/kg GD5-
12 
 
Decreased 
numbers of 
fetuses, 
increased 
resorptions at 
225 – 450 
mg/kg 
Up to 800 mg 
twice daily 
(1600 mg/day) 
 
Cmax = 11.7 
µg/mLd 
AUC(0-24h) = 
232 µg∙h/mLd 
 
NOAEL: 
Rat 
Cmax = 2.8 
(33/11.7) 
AUC = 2.4 
(547/232) 
 
Rabbit  
No NOAEL 
identified 
 
LOAEL: 
Rat 
Cmax = 5.6 
(65/11.7) 
AUC = 4.7 
(1094/232) 
 
Rabbit  
Cmax = 2.5 
(29/11.7) 
AUC = 1.2 
(267/232) 
Human 
exposure is 
invariant, 
independent 
of dose.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
60 
a:  Data from Vorhees was used for establishing the NOAEL because the data were much more detailed than provided in the FDA, United States 
review, which suggested a NOAEL of 300 mg/kg. 
b:  Extrapolated or actual data after 200 mg/kg oral single dose in Sprague Dawley male rats (Shi):  Cmax = 32.7 µg/mL, AUC(0-24h) = 32.8 
mg·min/mL (547 µg∙h/mL).   
c:  Extrapolated from reported value after 80 mg/kg oral single dose in Angora grey rabbits (Kourmaravelou):  Cmax = 10.4 µg/mL, AUC(0-24h) = 
94.8 µg∙h/mL.  Data are also available from Abushammala at a dose of ~20.6 mg/kg.  The data from Kourmaravelou were used because the 
dose was closer to the LOAEL, which provided a smaller extrapolation range (<3-fold). 
d:  From actual data for 1600 mg dose of conventional tablet carbamazepine (FDA, United States 1996).  Cmax = 11.66 µg/mL, AUC = 232.27 
µg∙h/mL. 
 
References 
FDA, United States. Pharmtox review of Tegretol NDA 016608 Part 02 (19 December 1967), page 5. 
FDA, United States. Approval package of Carbatrol NDA 020712 Part 02 (23 December 1996), page 33. 
Koumaravelou K, Adithan C, Shashindran CH, Asad M, Abraham BK. Effect of honey on carbamazepine kinetics in rabbits. Indian J Exp Biol. 
2002;40:560-3. 
Shi L, Dang XL, Liu XY, Wei HM, Yang MM, Zhang Y. Effect of Sophora flavescens on the pharmacokinetics of carbamazepine in rats. Arch 
Pharm Res. 2014;37:1617-23. 
US Label Tegretol. 
Vorhees CV, Acuff KD, Weisenburger WP, Minck DR. Teratogenicity of carbamazepine in rats. Teratology. 1990;41:311-17. 
Additional References Evaluated 
Abushammala I. The effect of pioglitazone on pharmacokinetics of carbamazepine in healthy rabbits. Saudi Pharm J. 2015;23:177-81.  
El-Sayed MG, Aly AE, Kadri M, Moustafa AM. Comparative study on the teratogenicity of some antiepileptics in the rat. East Afr Med J. 
1983;60:407-15. 
Tolbert D, Cloyd J, Biton V, Bekersky I, Walzer M, Wesche D, et al. Bioequivalence of oral and intravenous carbamazepine formulations in adult 
patients with epilepsy. Epilepsia. 2015;56:915-23. (PK data for oral carbamazepine was similar to cited data, AUC is invariant across dose levels.)

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
61 
CISPLATIN 
CAS No.:  15663-27-1 
 
Rat NOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings 
Rabbit NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit Findings 
Notes 
0.3 mg/kg IP on 
GD6,8,11, or 14 in 
Wistar rats (Keller) 
 
Cmax = 0.32 μg/mLa 
AUC = 0.25 μg∙h/mLa 
1 mg/kg IP on GD8 
or 11 in Wistar rats 
(Keller) 
 
Cmax = 1.08 µg/mLa 
AUC = 0.85 
µg∙h/mLa 
increased fetal 
mortality, 
decreased live 
fetuses per dam 
NOAEL not 
identified 
LOAEL not 
identified 
No data found 
 
a:  Extrapolated from values in plasma (unbound) after an intraperitoneal 5 mg/kg cisplatin single dose in male Donryu rats (Tamura):  Cmax = 5.4 
µg/mL, AUC(0-inf) = 254 µg·min/mL (4.23 µg·h/mL). 
 
References 
Keller KA, Aggarwal SK. Embryotoxicity of cisplatin in rats and mice. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1983;69:245-56.   
Tamura T, Imai J, Matsukawa Y, Horikiri Y, Suzuki T, Yoshino H, et al. Pharmacokinetic behaviour of cisplatin in peritoneal fluid after 
intraperitoneal  administration of cisplatin-loaded microspheres. J Pharm Pharmacol. 2001;53:1331-9.  
Additional References Evaluated 
Chen Y, Brott D, Luo W, Gangl E, Kamendi H, Barthlow H, et al. Assessment of cisplatin-induced kidney injury using an integrated rodent 
platform. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2013;268:352-61. 
Darwish MA, Abo-Youssef AM, Khalaf MM, Abo-Saif AA, Saleh IG, Abdelghany TM. Resveratrol influences platinum pharmacokinetics: A 
novel mechanism in protection against cisplatin-induced nephrotoxicity. Toxicol Lett. 2018;290:73-82.  
Okada A, Fukushima K, Fujita M, Nakanishi M, Hamori M, Nishimura A, et al. Alterations in cisplatin pharmacokinetics and its acute/sub-chronic 
kidney injury over multiple cycles of cisplatin treatment in rats. Biol Pharm Bull. 2017;40:1948-55.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
62 
Sekiya S, Iwasawa H, Takamizawa H. Comparison of the intraperitoneal and intravenous routes of cisplatin administration in an advanced ovarian 
cancer model of the rat. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1985;153:106-11.  [No Cmax or AUC values were reported.  Substantial differences in PK were 
noted between the intravenous and intraperitoneal routes] 
Toro-Cordova A, Flores-Cruz M, Santoyo-Salazar J, Carrillo-Nava E, Jurado R, Figueroa-Rodriguez PA, et al. Liposomes loaded with cisplatin 
and magnetic nanoparticles: physicochemical characterization, pharmacokinetics, and in vitro efficacy. Molecules. 2018;23(9). pii: E2272. doi: 
10.3390/molecules23092272.  [PK following 6 mg/kg intravenous cisplatin:  Cmax = 21.3 µg/mL, AUC(0-t) = 7.49 µg·h/mL·kg, which is 2.25 
µg·h/mL in 300 g rats.]

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
63 
Summary of Cisplatin PK data evaluated 
Note:  There was no obvious choice for the best PK data to use.  Chen required a 15-fold extrapolation, Darwish was unclear whether the data 
were total Pt or unbound drug, and Tamura used a different strain of rat (Donryu) than used for the EFD toxicity study (Wistar).  There are 
substantial differences in PK between the intravenous and intraperitoneal routes (Sekiya, et al., 1985), so intravenous data were not used. 
Reference 
Rout
e 
Dose 
(mg/kg) 
Cmax (μg/mL) 
AUC (μg∙h/mL) 
Notes 
Reported 
Normalized to 
1.0 mg/kg  
Reported 
Normalized 
to 1.0 mg/kg  
Chen 
IP 
15 
10.36 
0.69 
81.74    (0-inf) 
5.45 
unbound drug (DDTC-derivatized) 
Darwish 
IP 
6 
5.66 
0.94 
9.77 
1.63 
unclear whether unbound or total drug 
Tamuraa 
IP 
5 
5.4 
1.08 
4.23  
0.85 
unbound drug (ultrafilterable) 
Okada 
IV 
5 
7.3 
1.5 
3.0    (0-2h) 
0.6 
unbound drug (DDTC-derivatized) 
Toro-
Cordova 
IV 
6 
21.3 
3.55 
2.25b    (0-t) 
0.375 
unbound 
(ultrafilterable, 
DDTC-
derivatized) 
All studies used male Wistar rats except for Tamura et al., which used male Donryu rats. 
a:  PK parameters were derived from Figure 4 using scanning software (CurveUnscan).  
b:  Reported as AUC(0-t) = 7.49 µg·h/mL·kg, which is 2.25 µg·h/mL in 300 g rats.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
64 
Cyclophosphamide 
CAS No.:  50-18-0 
 
Rat 
NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings Rabbit 
NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
LOAEL Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
Findings 
Human 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Margins  
NOAEL/Huma 
LOAEL/Human 
Notes 
NOAEL 
not 
identified 
(<2.5 
mg/kg) 
[Chaube] 
2.5 mg/kg IP 
GD9 
[Chaube] 
 
Cytoxan 
Cmax = 4.1 
µg/mLa  
AUC = 3.65 
µg·h/mLa 
 
PM 
Cmax = 0.55 
µg/mLb 
AUC(0-24h) = 
2.13 µg·h/mLb 
2.5 mg/kg 
GD9 [Chaube] 
embryolethal 
 
5 mg/kg 
GD11 [von 
Kreybig, 
Mirkes] 
encephalocele, 
exencephaly, 
microcephaly, 
limb defects 
(ie, syndactyly 
and 
ectrodactyly), 
defective 
facial 
development 
(cleft palate) 
 NOAEL 
not 
identified  
(<30 
mg/kg) 
 
30 mg/kg IV 
single doses on 
GD6-14 
[Mirkes, Fritz] 
 
Cytoxan 
Cmax = 151 
µg/mLc 
AUC(0-8h) = 
24.1 µg·h/mLd 
PM 
Cmax = 0.07 
µg/mLe 
AUC(0-8h) = 
0.297  
µg·h/mLe 
embryo-fetal 
resportions, 
omphalocele, 
cleft lip/ 
palate, 
forelimb 
skeletal 
defects  
1600  mg/m2 (40 
mg/kg) IV (highest 
dose, q 3 – 4 
weeks)f 
 
Cytoxan 
Cmax = 106 
µg/mLg 
AUC = 798 
µg·h/mLg 
 
PM 
Cmax = 14.4 
µg/mLh 
AUC = 352 
µg·h/mLh 
NOAEL: 
rat: 
NOAEL not 
identified, but 
LOAEL margins 
were <0.1 
rabbit 
NOAEL not 
identified, but 
LOAEL margins 
were <1.5 
 
LOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax:  0.04 (4.1/106) 
AUC:  0.005 
(3.65/798) 
rabbit 
Cmax =  1.4 (151/106) 
AUC =  0.03 
(24.1/798) 
 
PM margins 
• MW CP = 
261.086 
• MW PM = 
221.018 
• Cytoxan is a 
prodrug, 
MEFL has 
been attributed 
to both 
phosphoramide 
mustard (PM) 
and acrolein 
metabolites

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
65 
rat 
Cmax = 0.04 
(0.55/14.4) 
AUC = 0.006 
(2.13/352) 
rabbit 
Cmax = 0.005 
(0.07/14.4) 
AUC = 0.0008 
(0.297/352) 
a:  Extrapolated from reported value after 20 mg/kg intravenous single dose in Sprague Dawley rats (Hong):  C0 = 125.3 µM (32.7 µg/mL), AUC/D 
= 265.3 min/L (in rats with mean BW = 0.330 kg the administered dose = 6.6 mg/rat; thus AUC = 265.3 min/L x 6.6 mg = 1751 mg∙min/L = 
29.2 µg∙h/mL). 
b:  Extrapolated from reported value after 20 mg/kg intravenous single dose in Sprague Dawley rats (Hong):  Cmax = 20 µM (4.4 µg/mL) from 
visual inspection of graph, AUC(0-24h) = 76.9 µM·h (17.0 µg·h/mL) from calculation based on concentration values estimated by visual 
inspection of graph. 
c:  Extrapolated from reported value after 45 mg/kg cytoxan intravenous single dose in 2 New Zealand White rabbits (Holm):  Cmax = 227 µg/mL 
from visual inspection of graphs (mean of 2 rabbits).  Values for the R and S isomers were added together; parent cytoxan is a racemic mixture.  
Data are also available after a 20 mg/kg intravenous single dose in New Zealand White rabbits (Anthony), but the reported Cmax value (2.2 µM 
[0.574 µg/mL] from visual inspection of graph) is inconsistent with the reported AUC and thus was not used.   
d:  Extrapolated from reported value after 20 mg/kg cytoxan intravenous single dose in New Zealand White rabbits (Anthony):  AUC(0-8h) = 3683 
µmol·min/L (16.0 µg·h/mL).  Data are also available after a 45 mg/kg intravenous single dose in 2 New Zealand White rabbits (Holm), but the 
reported AUC values for total racemate (3189 and 1259 µg∙min/mL [53.15 and 20.98 µg∙h/mL]) in 2 rabbits differed by 2.5-fold and tlast was 
≤90 minutes so these values were not used.   
e:  Extrapolated from reported value after 20 mg/kg cytoxan intravenous single dose in NZW rabbits (Anthony):  Cmax = 0.22 µM (0.049 µg/mL) 
from visual inspection of graph,  AUC(0-8h) = 53.7 µmol·min/L (0.198 µg·h/mL).  
f:  From SmPC.   
g:  Extrapolated from reported value after 1000 mg/m2 intravenous single dose cytoxan (Chan):  C0 = 254.4 µM (66.4 µg/mL), AUC(0-inf) = 1910 
µM·h (499 µg·h/mL).

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
66 
h:  Extrapolated from reported value after 1000 mg/m2 intravenous single dose cytoxan (Chan):  C0 = 40.5 µM (9.0 µg/mL), AUC(0-inf) = 996.3 
µM·h (220 µg·h/mL). 
 
References 
Anthony LB, Long QC, Struck RF, Hande KR. The effect of cimetidine on cyclophosphamide metabolism in rabbits. Cancer Chemother 
Pharmacol. 1990;27:125-30. 
Chan KK, Hong PS, Tutsch K, Trump DL. Clinical pharmacokinetics of cyclophosphamide and metabolites with and without SR-2508. Cancer 
Res. 1994;54:6421-9.  
Chaube S, Kury G, Murphy ML: Teratogenic effects of cyclophosphamide (NSC-26271) in the rat.  Cancer Chemother Rep 1967;51:363-76. 
Fritz H, Hess R. Effects of cyclophosphamide on embryonic development in the rabbit. Agents Actions. 1971;2:83-6. 
Holm KA, Kindberg CG, Stobaugh JF, Slavik M, Riley CM. Stereoselective pharmacokinetics and metabolism of the enantiomers of 
cyclophosphamide. Preliminary results in humans and rabbits. Biochem Pharmacol. 1990;39:1375-84.  
Hong PS, Srigritsanapol A, Chan KK. Pharmacokinetics of 4-hydroxycyclophosphamide and metabolites in the rat. Drug Metab Dispos. 1991;19:1-
7. 
Mirkes PE. Cyclophosphamide teratogenesis: a review. Teratog Carcinog Mutagen. 1985;5:75-88. 
von Kreybig T. Die teratogene wirkung cyclophosphamid wahrend der embryonalen entwicklungsphase bei der ratte. Naunyn-Schniedeb Arch 
Exp Pathol Pharmakol. 1965;252:173-95. 
Additional References Evaluated 
Claussen U, Hettwer H, Voelcker G, Krengel HG, Servos G. The embryotoxicity of cyclophosphamide in rabbits during the histiotrophic phase of 
nutrition. Teratog Carcinog Mutagen. 1985;5:89-100. 
US label cyclophosphamide.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
67 
Cytarabine 
CAS No.:  147-94-4 
 
Rat NOAEL  
Dose  
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL 
Dose  
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings Rabbit 
NOAEL  
Dose  
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
LOAEL 
 Dose  
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
Findings 
Human 
Dose  
Cmax 
AUC 
Margins 
NOAEL/Human 
LOAEL/Human 
Notes 
10 mg/kg IP 
single dose 
GD10,11, or 12 
[Chaube] 
 
Cmax = ~5.8 
µg/mLa 
AUC(0-inf) = ~15.9 
µg·h/mLa 
20 mg/kg IP 
single dose GD11 
or 12 [Chaube] 
 
Cmax = ~11.6 
µg/mLa  
AUC(0-inf) = 
~31.7 µg·h/mLa 
 
≥20 mg/kg  
cleft palate, 
micrognathia, 
deformed rear 
appendages, 
paws and tail; 
skeletal 
defects 
including 
distortion and 
fusion of the 
bones of the 
skull and 
appendages, 
embryofetal 
mortality 
 no rabbit 
data 
foundb 
 
no rabbit 
data 
foundb 
no rabbit 
data 
found 
100 mg/m2 IV every 
12 hours (days 1 to 
7) 
many regimens are 
used including CIV 
 
Cmax = ~2.8 µg/mLc 
AUC = 6.6 
µg∙h/mLc 
NOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax: 2.1 
(5.8/2.8) 
AUC: 2.4 
(15.9/6.6) 
 
LOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax: 4.1 
(11.6/2.8) 
AUC: 4.8 
(31.7/6.6) 
• half-life is short, 
rapidly 
deaminated to 
inactive uridine 
arabinoside by 
cytidine 
deaminase 
• active moiety is 
Ara-CTP which 
inhibits DNA 
polymerase 
• MW = 243.217 
a:  Extrapolated or reported value after 20 mg/kg intraperitoneal [14C]cytarabine single dose in male Sprague Dawley rats (Parker):  Cmax = ~11.6 
µg/mL from visual inspection of graph, AUC(0-inf) = ~31.7 µg∙h/mL from calculation based on concentration values estimated by visual 
inspection of graph.  Note that the reported plasma concentrations represent total radioactivity and that at 4 hours only 71% of the total plasma 
radioactivity was attributed to intact cytarabine (Parker).  The AUC value used, and the calculated margins, thus represents an upper bound and 
the true AUC for intact cytarabine would certainly be lower.  Also note that teratology was performed in Wistar rats.  PK data are also available 
in male Sprague Dawley rats administered 5 mg/kg intravenous cytarabine single dose (Zhang), in male Sprague Dawley rats administered 2.64

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
68 
µg/kg intravenous [3H]cytarabine (Simard), and in Wistar rats administered 5.4 mg/kg intramuscular cytarabine in solution with chitosan-beta-
glycerophosphate (Mulik). 
b:  Rabbit PK data are available in male New Zealand white rabbits administered single doses 50 mg/kg intravenous cytarabine (Zimmerman):  
Cmax = 400 µM (97 µg/mL) from visual inspection of graph, AUC estimated from CL = 8.16 mL/(min·kg) and dose = 50 mg/kg, AUC = 
dose/CL = (50/8.16)(1 h/60 min) = 102 µg·h/mL. 
c:  Extrapolated to 100 mg/m2 BID dose from reported value after single 100 mg intravenous dose (1.67 mg/kg, 60 mg/m2) (Wan):  Cmax = ~7.0 
µmol/L (1.7 µg/mL) from visual inspection of graph, AUC = dose/CL = 100 mg/845 mL/min = 1.97 µg·h/mL (which gives AUC = 3.29 
µg∙h/mL at 100 mg/m2 and 6.6 µg∙h/mL for 100 mg/m2 BID).

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
69 
Mouse NOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Mouse LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Mouse Findings 
Margins 
NOAEL/Human 
LOAEL Human 
Notes 
0.5 mg/kg IP GD6-15 
Swiss mice [Ortega] 
 
Cmax = ~0.50 µg/mLd 
AUC = ~0.46 
µg∙h/mLd 
 
Cmax = ~0.41 µg/mLe 
AUC = 0.315 
µg∙h/mLe 
2 mg/kg IP GD6-15 
Swiss mice [Ortega]  
 
Cmax = ~2 µg/mLd 
AUC= ~1.83 
µg∙h/mLd 
 
Cmax = ~1.62 µg/mLe 
AUC = 1.26 
µg∙h/mLe 
cleft palate, renoureteral 
alterations, polydactyly, 
oligodactyly  
NOAEL: 
mice 
Cmax:   0.16 (0.46/2.8)f 
AUC:  0.06 (0.39/6.6)f 
LOAEL: 
mice 
Cmax:   0.65 (1.81/2.8)f 
AUC:  0.23 (1.55/6.6)f 
this table is included because:  a) it 
shows that with the mouse teratology 
data, which was included in the US 
label, exposure margins at the 
NOAEL were <1, b) rat exposure 
margins at the NOAEL were much 
higher, c) rabbit data are not 
available, so it provides data in a 2nd 
species 
d:  Extrapolated from reported value after administration of a 30 mg/kg intraperitoneal single dose cytarabine to Swiss mice (Dedrick):  Cmax = 
~30 µg/mL from visual inspection of graph, AUC(0-24h) = ~27.5 µg∙h/mL from calculation based on concentration values estimated by visual 
inspection of graph.  Note large extrapolation range.  
e:  Extrapolated from reported value after administration of a 2.466 mmol/kg (600 mg/kg) intravenous single dose cytarabine to mice (Bayne): 
Cmax = 2 µmol/mL (486 µg/mL) from visual inspection of graph, AUC = 1.553 µmol∙h/mL (378 µg∙h/mL).  Note large extrapolation range. 
f:  Mouse values were taken as the average of the 2 sources, which gave similar values despite the 20-fold difference in administered dose, 
suggesting PK was linear. 
 
References 
Bayne WF, Mayer LD, Swenson CE. Pharmacokinetics of CPX-351 (cytarabine/daunorubicin HCl) liposome injection in the mouse. J Pharm Sci. 
2009;98:2540-8.  
Chaube S, Kreis W, Uchida K, Murphy ML. The teratogenic effect of 1-beta-D-arabinofuranosylcytosine in the rat. Protection by deoxycytidine. 
Biochem Pharmacol. 1968;17:1213-6. 
Dedrick RL, Forrester DD, Cannon JN, el-Dareer SM, Mellett LB. Pharmacokinetics of 1-beta-D-arabinofuranosylcytosine (ARA-C) deamination 
in several species. Biochem Pharmacol. 1973;22:2405-17.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
70 
Mulik R, Kulkarni V, Murthy RS. Chitosan-based thermosensitive hydrogel containing liposomes for sustained delivery of cytarabine. Drug Dev 
Ind Pharm. 2009;35(1):49-56.  
Parker RJ, Priester ER, Sieber SM. Comparison of lymphatic uptake, metabolism, excretion, and biodistribution of free and liposome-entrapped 
[14C]cytosine-beta-D-arabinofuranoside following intraperitoneal administration to rats. Drug Metab Dispos. 1982;10:40-6.  
Ortega A, Puig M, Domingo JL. Maternal and developmental toxicity of low doses of cytosine arabinoside in mice. Teratology. 1991;44:379-84.  
Simard P, Hoarau D, Khalid MN, Roux E, Leroux JC. Preparation and in vivo evaluation of PEGylated spherulite formulations. Biochim Biophys 
Acta. 2005;1715(1):37-48. 
Wan SH, Huffman DH, Azarnoff DL, Hoogstraten B, Larsen WE. Pharmacokinetics of 1-beta-D-arabinofuranosylcytosine in humans. Cancer 
Res. 1974;34:392-7. 
Zhang B, Lu Y, Chen J, Wu W. Effects of interior gelation on pharmacokinetics and biodistribution of liposomes encapsulating an anti-cancer 
drug cytarabine. J Biomed Nanotechnol. 2010;6:704-9. 
Zimmerman CL. The disposition of cytosine arabinoside and its metabolite after single doses to rabbits. Biopharm Drug Dispos. 1990;11:121-9. 
Additional References Evaluated 
Goto T, Endo A. Dose- and stage-related sex difference in the incidence of cytosine arabinoside induced digit anomalies in the mouse fetus. 
Teratology. 1987;35:35-40.  [Single dose data only.] 
Kochhar DM, Penner JD, McDay JA. Limb development in mouse embryos. II. Reduction defects, cytotoxicity and inhibition of DNA synthesis 
produced by cytosine arabinoside. Teratology. 1978;18:71-92. [Single dose data only.] 
Percy DH. Teratogenic effects of the pyrimidine analogues 5-iododeoxyuridine and cytosine arabinoside in late fetal mice and rats. Teratology. 
1975;11:103-17.  [Rats were dosed subcutaneously on GD18-21 and offspring sacrificed on PND10 and 20.  NOAEL was 12.5 mg/kg and LOAEL 
was 25 mg/kg.] 
Scott WJ, Ritter EJ, Wilson JG. Studies on induction of polydactyly in rats with cytosine arabinoside. Dev Biol. 1975;45:103-11. [100 mg/kg was 
the only dose level.]

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
71 
DABRAFENIB 
CAS No.:  1195765-45-7 
 
Rat NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings 
Rabbit NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit Findings Notes 
20 mg/kg oral pcD1-
17a 
(FDA, United States, 
p. 115)  
 
Cmax = 1.17 μg/mLb 
AUC(0-t) = 4.10 
μg∙h/mLb 
300 mg/kg oral pcD1-
17a 
(FDA, United States, 
p. 115) 
 
Cmax = 2.17 µg/mLc 
AUC(0-t) = 22.6 
µg∙h/mLc 
cardiac interventricular septal 
defects; decrease in the 
number of corpora lutea, 
number of implants, and the 
number of live fetuses  
No rabbit data 
found 
No rabbit data 
found 
None 
 
a:  From a combined female fertility and embryofetal development toxicity study in which females were dosed from 2 weeks prior to mating to 
post-coitum D17.  Cesarean sections were performed on post-coitum D21. 
b:  Actual values in plasma after 20 mg/kg oral dabrefenib for 24 days in rats (FDA, United States, p. 119):  Cmax = 1.17 µg/mL, AUC(0-t) = 4.10 
µg·h/mL. 
c:  Actual values in plasma after 300 mg/kg oral dabrefenib for 24 days in rats (FDA, United States, p. 119:  Cmax = 2.17 µg/mL, AUC(0-t) = 22.6 
µg·h/mL. 
 
References 
FDA, United States.  Pharmacology Review NDA 202806 (25 Apr 2013).

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
72 
Dasatinib 
CAS No.:  302962-49-8 
 
Rat NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings 
Rabbit NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit Findings 
Notes 
NOAEL not 
identified 
 
2.5 mg/kg oral GD6-15 
(FDA, United States, p. 
225) 
 
Cmax = 0.021 μg/mLa 
AUC(0-8h) = 0.105 
μg∙h/mLa 
increased post-
implantation loss and 
resorptions, decreased 
litter size; bent scapula 
or humerus 
6 mg/kg oral GD7-19 
(FDA, United States, 
p. 236) 
 
Cmax =  0.227 µg/mL 
AUC(0-inf) = 0.834 
μg∙h/mL 
LOAEL for MEFL 
not identified 
None:  findings in the 
definitive study were 
limited to an increase 
in skeletal variations 
(delays in 
ossifications); 
embryolethality 
observed in the DRF 
at 10 mg/kg was 
associated with severe 
maternal toxicity  
 
a:  Actual values in plasma after 10 days (GD15) of 2.5 mg/kg oral dasatinib in pregnant Sprague Dawley rats (FDA, United States, p. 227):  Cmax 
= 0.021 µg/mL, AUC(0-8h) = 0.105 µg·h/mL. 
b:  Actual values in plasma after 13 days (GD19) of 6 mg/kg oral dasatinib in pregnant NZW rabbits (FDA, United States, p. 238):  Cmax = 0.227 
µg/mL, AUC = 0.834 µg·h/mL. 
References 
FDA, United States. Pharmacology Review NDA 21986/22072 (28 Jun 2006). 
Additional References Evaluated 
Kassem MG, Ezzeldin E, Korashy HM, Mostafa GA. High-performance liquid chromatographic method for the determination of dasatinib in 
rabbit plasma using fluorescence detection and its application to a pharmacokinetic study. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
73 
2013;939:73-9.  [PK at 2.5 mg/kg was substantially different than reported in FDA, United States review:  Cmax = 0.459 μg/mL, AUC = 3.289 
μg∙h/mL] 
 
Fluconazole 
CAS No.:  86386-73-4 
 
Rat NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings 
Rabbit 
NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
LOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
Findings 
Human 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Margins 
NOAEL/Human 
LOAEL/Human 
Notes 
50 mg/kg oral 
[US label] 
 
Cmax = 33.8 
µg/mLa 
AUC(0-inf) = 
380 µg∙h/mLb 
 
80 mg/kg oral 
[US label] 
 
Cmax = 54 
µg/mLa 
AUC(0-inf) = 
608 µg∙h/mLb 
 
at ≥80 mg/kg: 
embryolethality, 
cleft palate, 
abnormal 
craniofacial 
ossification 
adactylia, 
brachygnathia 
[US Label, 
FDA, United 
States 1990a]. 
 
25 mg/kg 
oral 
[US Label, 
FDA, United 
States 1990a] 
 
Cmax = 27 
µg/mLc 
AUC = 521 
µg∙h/mLd 
 
75 mg/kg oral 
[US Label, 
FDA, United 
States1990a] 
 
Cmax = 81 
µg/mLc 
AUC = 1563 
µg∙h/mLd 
 
abortions 
(at 
maternally 
toxic dose) 
400 mg 
 
Cmax = 9.07 
µg/mLe 
AUC(0-24h)= 134.8 
µg∙h/mLe 
NOAEL:  
rat  
Cmax = 3.7 (33.8/9.07) 
AUC = 2.8 
(380/134.8) 
rabbit 
Cmax = 3.0 (27/9.07) 
AUC = 3.9 
(521/134.8) 
 
LOAEL: 
rat  
Cmax = 6.0 (54/9.07) 
AUC = 4.5 
(608/134.8) 
rabbit 
Cmax = 8.9 (81/9.07)

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
74 
AUC = 11.6 
(1563/134.8) 
a:  Extrapolated from reported value after 20 mg/kg fluconazole oral single dose in rats (FDA, United States 1990a, p. 7):  Cmax = 13.5 µg/mL. 
b:  Extrapolated from reported value after 20 mg/kg fluconazole oral single dose in rats (Humphrey):  AUC(0-inf) = 152 µg·h/mL. 
c:  Extrapolated from reported value after 10 mg/kg fluconazole oral single dose in rabbits (FDA, United States 1990a, p. 7):  Cmax = 10.8 µg/mL. 
d:  Calculated using plasma clearance value for rabbits (0.8 mL/min∙kg, FDA, United States 1990a, p 8):  AUC = Dose/Cl = (25 mg/kg)/(0.8 
mL/min∙kg)(1 h/60 min) = 521 µg∙h/mL. 
e:  Actual value after 400 mg/day fluconazole oral single dose (FDA, United States 1990b, p. 7, 50-52):  Cmax = 9.07 µg/mL, AUC(0-24h) = 134.8 
µg∙h/mL.  Data are also available after 14 days of repeated administration, which shows significant drug accumulation.  Cmax = 18.89 µg/mL, 
AUC(0-24h) = 349.9 µg∙h/mL.  Since PK was not available for repeated administration in animals, the single-dose human PK data were used for 
margin calculations.  
 
References 
Humphrey MJ, Jevons S, Tarbit MH. Pharmacokinetic evaluation of UK-49,858, a metabolically stable triazole antifungal drug, in animals and 
humans. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1985;28:648-53. 
FDA, United States. Pharmacology Review NDA 019949 (26 Jan 1990a), p. 7, 13. 
FDA, United States. Clinical Pharmacology Review NDA 019949 (17 Apr 1990b), p. 7, 50 – 52. 
US label Diflucan. 
Additional References Evaluated 
Brammer KW, Farrow PR, Faulkner JK. Pharmacokinetics and tissue penetration of fluconazole in humans. Rev Infect Dis. 1990;12 Suppl 3:S318-
26 . 
Pittrow L, Penk A. Plasma and tissue concentrations of fluconazole and their correlation to breakpoints. Mycoses. 1997;40:25-32.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
75 
5-FLUOROURACIL 
CAS No.:  51-21-8 
 
Rat NOAEL 
Dose  
Cmax 
AUC 
 
Rat LOAEL 
Dose  
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings Rabbit 
NOAEL 
Dose  
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
LOAEL 
Dose  
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
Findings 
Human 
Dose  
Cmax 
AUC 
Margins 
NOAEL/Huma 
LOAEL/Human 
Notes 
10 mg/kg 
single dose IP 
GD9 [Wilson] 
 
Cmax = 2.6 
µg/mLa 
AUC = 3.89 
µg·h/mLa 
15 mg/kg 
single dose IP 
GD9 [Wilson] 
 
Cmax = 3.87 
µg/mLa 
AUC = 5.83 
µg·h/mLa 
Wilson: 
15 mg/kg:  
malformations, 
embryofetal 
lethality 
Kuwagata:  
≥17 mg/kg: 
micro-
/anophthalmos, 
craniofacial 
defect, 
hydrocephaly, 
brain hernia 
NOAEL 
not 
identified 
[DeSesso] 
40 mg/kg SC 
GD12 
[DeSesso] 
 
Cmax = 111 
µg/mLb 
AUC = 11 
µg·h/mLb  
limb 
anomalies 
85% of 
term 
fetuses 
500 mg/m2 (400 – 
600 mg/m2) in a 
variety of dosing 
regimens, 
including doses 
up to 3000 mg/m2 
CIV for 46 hoursc 
 
Cmax = 29 
µg/mLd 
AUC = 11.5 
µg·h/mLd 
NOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax = 0.09 (2.6/29) 
AUC = 0.3 
(3.89/11.5) 
rabbit 
no NOAEL identified 
 
LOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax = 0.1 (3.87/29) 
AUC = 0.5 
(5.83/11.5) 
rabbit 
Cmax = 3.8 (111/29) 
AUC = 1.0 (11/11.5) 
• note: half-
life is very 
short (most 
patients 
have 
undetectable 
5-FU levels 
in plasma 
90 min after 
IV) and PK 
is nonlinear 
• 5FU is a 
pro-drug: 
thymidylate 
synthetase 
inhibitor is 
5FdUMP 
• MW = 
130.077 
a:  Extrapolated from reported value after 30 mg/kg 5FU intraperitoneal single dose in Sprague Dawley rats (Zhang):  Cmax = 7.74 µg/mL, AUC 
= 11.66 µg·h/mL.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
76 
b:  Extrapolated from reported value after 20 mg/kg 5FU intravenous single dose in rabbits (Kar):  Cmax = 0.427 µmol/mL (55.5 µg/mL), AUC = 
2.535 µmol∙min/mL (5.5 µg·h/mL). 
c:  The dose of 500 mg/m2 IV bolus was used for comparison although higher doses (e.g., ~1500 mg/m2/day CIV) are used.  Very low margins 
were calculated and using higher human doses would make them even lower. 
d:  Extrapolated from reported value after 14.7 mg/kg (544 mg/m2) 5FU oral single dose (Schaaf):  Cmax = 32 µg/mL from visual inspection of 
graph,  AUC = 12.55 µg·h/mL.  Data are also available after a 370 mg/m2 dose (Bocci):  Cmax = 48.41 µg/mL, AUC = 13.61 µg·h/mL. 
 
References 
DeSesso JM, Scialli AR, Goeringer GC. Teratology. 1995;51:172 (abstract) 
Kar R, Cohen RA, Terem TM, Nahabedian MY, Wile AG. Pharmacokinetics of 5-fluorouracil in rabbits in experimental regional chemotherapy. 
Cancer Res. 1986;46:4491-5.  
Kuwagata M, Takashima H, Nagao T. A comparison of the in vivo and in vitro response of rat embryos to 5-fluorouracil. J Vet Med Sci. 
1998;60:93-9. 
Schaaf LJ, Dobbs BR, Edwards IR, Perrier DG. Nonlinear pharmacokinetic characteristics of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) in colorectal cancer patients. 
Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 1987;32:411-8. 
Wilson JG. Teratogenic interaction of chemical agents in the rat. J Pharmacol Exp Therapeut. 1964;144:429-36. 
Zhang C, Li G, Wang Y, Cui F, Zhang J, Huang Q. Preparation and characterization of 5-fluorouracil-loaded PLLA-PEG/PEG nanoparticles by a 
novel supercritical CO2 technique. Int J Pharm. 2012;436:272-81. 
Additional References Evaluated 
Bocci G, Danesi R, Di Paolo AD, Innocenti F, Allegrini G, Falcone A, et al. Comparative pharmacokinetic analysis of 5-fluorouracil and its major 
metabolite 5-fluoro-5,6-dihydrouracil after conventional and reduced test dose in cancer patients. Clin Cancer Res. 2000;6:3032-7 
Chaube S, Murphy ML. The teratogenic effects of the recent drugs active in cancer chemotherapy. In: Woolham, DHM, editor. Advances in 
Teratology, Volume 3. New York: Academic Press. 1968. pp. 180-237. [no incidence were provided, but confirms malformations in rats as detailed 
by Kuwagata]

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
77 
Huang Y, Wei Y, Yang H, Pi C, Liu H, Ye Y, Zhao L. A 5-fluorouracil-loaded floating gastroretentive hollow microsphere: development, 
pharmacokinetic in rabbits, and biodistribution in tumor-bearing mice. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2016;10:997-1008. [no systemic PK, only oral after 
50 mg/kg dose; Cmax = 2.55µg/mL, AUC = 5.82 µg·h/mL] 
Shuey DL, Lau C, Logsdon TR, Zucker RM, Elstein KH, Narotsky MG, et al. Biologically based dose-response modeling in developmental 
toxicology: biochemical and cellular sequelae of 5-fluorouracil exposure in the developing rat. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1994a;126:129-44. 
[malformations were seen at 35 and 40 mg/kg administered SC on GD14; MEFL effects were seen at lower doses in other studies] 
Shuey DL, Buckalew AR, Wilke TS, Rogers JM, Abbott BD. Early events following maternal exposure to 5-fluorouracil lead to dysmorphology 
in cultured embryonic tissues. Teratology. 1994b;50:379-86. [10 – 40 mg/kg SC on GD14, all malformations studied in explants] 
US Adrucil label. [confirms malformations in rats as detailed by Kuwagata] 
Zhao B, Zhao XL. [Pharmacokinetic studies on 5-fluorouracil and its metabolite in rabbits by high pressure liquid chromatography]. Zhongguo 
Yao Li Xue Bao (Acta Pharmacol Sin). 1988;9:275-8. Chinese. [PK after 170 mg/kg IV dose, which would require greater extrapolation than data 
from Kar]

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
78 
Hydroxyurea 
CAS No.:  127-07-1 
 
Rat NOAEL 
Dose  
Cmax  
AUC 
 
Rat LOAEL 
Dose  
Cmax  
AUC 
Rat Findings Rabbit 
NOAEL 
Dose  
Cmax  
AUC 
Rabbit 
LOAEL 
Dose  
Cmax  
AUC 
Rabbit 
Findingsa 
Human 
Dose 
Cmax  
AUC 
Margins 
NOAEL/Human 
LOAEL/Human 
Notes 
100 mg/kg IP 
GD9-12 
[Wilson] 
 
Cmax = 47.3 
µg/mLb 
AUC not 
available 
137 mg/kg IP 
GD9-12 
[Wilson] 
 
Cmax = 80.6 
µg/mLb 
AUC not 
available 
embryofetal 
lethality, 
ocular and 
cerebral 
malformations 
NOAEL 
not 
identified 
 
PK not 
available 
30 
mg/kg 
[US 
label] 
 
 
PK not 
available 
650 mg/kg SC 
GD12 
[DeSesso 
1990]:  cleft 
lip, cleft 
palate, 
reduction 
deformities of 
limbs and tail 
 
750 mg/kg SC 
GD12 
[DeSesso 
1977]:  skull 
and facial 
anomalies as 
well as severe 
reduction 
deformities of 
all limbs 
oral for oncology 
indications:  
80 mg/kg Q3D, 
20 – 30 mg/kg/day  
oral for sickle cell 
anemia 
15 – 35 mg/kg/day 
(555 – 1295 mg/m2)  
 
Cmax = 52 µg/mLc 
AUC(0-inf) = 184 
µg·h/mLc 
NOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax = 0.9 
(47.3/52) 
Cmax dose = 2.9 
(100/35)d 
AUC = 0.5 
(600/1295)e 
rabbit 
NOAEL not 
identified 
 
LOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax = 1.6 
(80.6/52) 
Cmax dose = 3.9 
(137/35)d 
AUC = 0.6 
(822/1295)e 
 
rabbitf 
Cmax = 0.9 (30/35) 
• PK is nonlinear 
with short half-
life (15 min in 
rats, 2 – 4 h 
• in humans) 
• MW = 
76.05g/mol 
• PK after IP and 
IV is similar 
(Wilson) 
• bioavailability 
is 70 – 80% in 
rats and 
humans, 
respectively 
(Beckloff) 
• no robust data 
for adverse 
human 
pregnancy 
outcomes

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
79 
AUC = 0.3 
(360/1295) 
a:  US label states that “Hydroxyurea is embryotoxic and causes fetal malformations (partially ossified cranial bones, absence of eye sockets, 
hydrocephaly, bipartite sternebrae, missing lumbar vertebrae) at 180 mg/kg/day in rats and 30 mg/kg/day in rabbits”, but it is not clear which 
effects are in which species.  Thus, 30 mg/kg is accepted as the LOAEL, but the findings are listed from publications with rabbits with SC doses 
of 650 and 750 mg/kg. 
b:  Actual values after 100 and 137 mg/kg hydroxyurea IP doses in pregnant Wistar rats (Wilson):  Cmax = 47.3 at 100 mg/kg and 80.6 µg/mL at 
137 mg/kg. 
c:  Extrapolated from reported value after 1000 mg (16.7 mg/kg) hydroxyurea oral single dose (MHRA):  Cmax = 24.6 µg/mL, AUC(0-inf) = 87.79 
µg·h/mL.  The dose for margin calculations was chosen to be 35 mg/kg/day.  Although higher intermittent doses are used for oncology 
indications, the dose for sickle cell anemia is believed to be more relevant for assessing risk of developmental toxicity.  As summarized in the 
table below, other human PK data are also available. 
d:  Although rat Cmax data are available, this was after IP administration whereas the human data is after oral administration.  Thus, in the absence 
of more direct PK comparisons, the estimated ratio based on mg/kg dose is also provided. 
e:  In the absence of rat AUC data, AUC ratio was based on mg/m2 dose ratio. 
f:  In the absence of rabbit PK data, Cmax ratio was based on mg/kg dose ratio and AUC was based on mg/m2 dose ratio. 
 
References 
DeSesso JM, Jordan RL. Drug-induced limb dysplasias in fetal rabbits. Teratology. 1977;15:199-211. 
DeSesso JM, Goeringer GC. Ethoxyquin and nordihydroguaiaretic acid reduce hydroxyurea developmental toxicity. Reprod Toxicol. 1990;4:267-
75.  
MHRA Public Assessment Report PL 10880/128-9, page 48. 
US label Hydrea and Droxea. 
Wilson JG, Scott WJ, Ritter EJ, Fradkin R. Comparative distribution and embryotoxicity of hydroxyurea in pregnant rats and rhesus monkeys. 
Teratology. 1975;11:169-78.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
80 
Additional References Evaluated 
Beckloff GL, Lerner HJ, Frost D, Russo-Alesi FM, Gitomer S. Hydroxyurea (NSC-32065) in biologic fluids: dose-concentration relationship. 
Cancer Chemother Rep. 1965;48:57-8. [PK data in cancer subjects, no AUC] 
Charache S, Dover GJ, Moore RD, Eckert S, Ballas SK, Koshy M, et al. Hydroxyurea: effects on hemoglobin F production in patients with sickle 
cell anemia. Blood. 1992;79:2555-65. [PK data in sickle cell anemia subjects] 
Chaube S, Murphy ML. The effects of hydroxyurea and related compounds on the rat fetus. Cancer Res. 1966;26:1448-57. [effects of single and 
repeated IP doses ≥125 mg/kg ] 
Gwilt PR, Tracewell WG. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of hydroxyurea. Clin Pharmacokinet. 1998;34:347-58. [review article of PK 
publications] 
Millicovsky G, DeSesso JM. Cardiovascular alterations in rabbit embryos in situ after a teratogenic dose of hydroxyurea: an in vivo microscopic 
study. Teratology. 1980;22:115-24. [effects on ex vivo embryos after 500 and 750 mg/kg to does on GD12 ] 
Philips FS, Sternberg SS, Schwartz HS, Cronin AP, Sodergren JE, Vidal PM. Hydroxyurea. I. Acute cell death in proliferating tissues in rats. 
Cancer Res. 1967;27:61-75. [Cmax after 46, 184, and 1840 mg/kg IV dose, nonlinear PK] 
Tracewell WG, Vaughan WP, Gwilt PR. Nonlinear disposition of hydroxyurea. J Pharm Sci. 1994;83:1060-1. [formal PK analysis of Philips data] 
Villani P, Maserati R, Regazzi MB, Giacchino R, Lori F. Pharmacokinetics of hydroxyurea in patients infected with human immunodeficiency 
virus type I. J Clin Pharmacol. 1996;36:117-21. [PK in HIV subjects] 
Human Pharmacokinetic Data 
Reference 
Population 
Dose 
Route Cmax (µg/mL) AUC (µg∙h/ml) 
Notes 
Charache 
sickle cell anemia 25 mg/kg  
oral 
19 
AUC(0-6) = 1216 
AUC units were published as “µg 
mL/min”, value seems wrong since 
(Cmax  6 h = 114 µg∙h/mL) 
Villani 
HIV 
mean 7.6 mg/kg 
BID 
oral 
0.135 nmol/L = 
0.135 
µmol/mL 
= 
10.3 µg/mL 
AUC(0-12h) 
= 
540 
µmol·h/L 
= 
41.1 
µg·h/mL;  
AUC(0-24h) 
= 
82.1 
µg∙h/mL

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
81 
MHRA 
review 
not stated – BE 
study 
1000 mg (16.6 
mg/kg) 
oral 
24.6 
AUC(0-inf) 
= 
87.79 
µg∙h/mL 
use these values 
Beckloff 
cancer 
20 mg/kg  
oral 
20.7 
— 
 
80 mg/kg  
oral 
128.1 
—

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
82 
IBRUTINIB 
CAS No.:  936563-96-1 
 
Rat NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings 
Rabbit NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit LOAELa 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit Findingsb Notes 
40 mg/kg oral GD6-17 
(FDA, United States, 
p. 126) 
 
Cmax = 1.31 μg/mLc 
AUC(0-24h) = 5.348 
μg∙h/mLc 
80 mg/kg oral 
GD6-17 (FDA, 
United States, p. 
126) 
 
Cmax = 2.627 
µg/mLd 
AUC(0-24h) = 
13.729 µg∙h/mLd 
malformations including 
dextrocardia, 
retroesophageal aortic arch, 
persistent truncus 
arteriosus, right-sided aortic 
arch, and interrupted aortic 
arch; increased post-
implantation loss (increased 
early resorptions), 
decreased viable fetuses 
30 mg/kg oral 
GD7-19 (FDA, 
United States, p. 
135) 
 
Cmax = 0.311 
µg/mLe 
AUC = 1.31 
µg∙h/mLe 
100 mg/kg oral 
GD7-19 (FDA, 
United States, p. 
135)c 
 
Cmax = 1.83 µg/mLf 
AUC = 21.00 
µg∙h/mLf 
increased pre- and 
post-implantation 
loss (increased 
early resorptions), 
decreased viable 
fetuses, abortions 
 
a:  The LOAEL for MEFL was a maternally toxic dose as indicated by increased mortality and abortions, clinical signs, and reductions in body 
weight and food consumption. 
b:  This was a dose range finding study with limited numbers of animals (n=6) and fetal evaluations limited to external morphology.  It is thus 
unknown if there were visceral or skeletal alterations. 
c:  Actual values in plasma after 11 doses of 40 mg/kg oral ibrutinib in pregnant rats (FDA, United States, p. 130):  Cmax = 1.31 µg/mL, AUC(0-
24h) = 5.348 µg·h/mL. 
d:  Actual values in plasma after 11 doses of 100 mg/kg oral ibrutinib in pregnant rats (FDA, United States, p. 130):  Cmax = 2.627 µg/mL, AUC(0-
24h) = 13.729 µg·h/mL. 
e:  Actual values in plasma after 13 doses of 30 mg/kg oral ibrutinib in pregnant rabbits (FDA, United States, p. 136):  Cmax = 0.311 µg/mL, AUC 
= 1.31 µg·h/mL. 
f:  Actual values in plasma after 13 doses of 100 mg/kg oral ibrutinib in pregnant rabbits (FDA, United States, p. 136):  Cmax = 1.83 µg/mL, AUC 
= 21.00 µg·h/mL.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
83 
References 
FDA, United States. Pharmacology Review NDA 020552 (21 Aug 2013).

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
84 
Ibuprofen 
CAS No.:  15687-27-1 
 
Rat NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat 
Findings 
Rabbit NOAELc 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
Findings 
Human 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Margins 
NOAEL/Human 
LOAEL/Human 
Notes 
180 mg/kg oral 
GD1-20 
[Adams] 
 
Cmax = 205 
µg/mLa 
AUC = 597 
µg∙h/mLa 
oral GD1-20: 
No LOAEL 
idenitifed 
[Adams]  
 
oral GD9-10:  
300 mg/kg  
[Cappon 2003]b 
 
at 300 mg/kg  
Cmax = 341 
µg/mLa 
AUC = 995 
µg∙h/mLa 
GD1-20: 
None 
 
GD9-10: 
ventricular 
septal 
defects 
60 mg/kg oral 
GD1-29 [Adams] 
Cmax = 26.6 
µg/mLd 
AUC(0-inf) = 80.5 
µg∙h/mLd 
 
 
500 mg/kg oral 
GD9-11 [Cappon 
2003]b 
Cmax = 222  
µg/mLd 
AUC(0-inf) = 671 
µg∙h/mLd 
No 
LOAEL 
identified 
None 
Maximum dose is 800 mg 
QID, 3200 mg/day (13.3 
mg/kg/dose, 53 mg/kg/day)  
[US label] 
 
Cmax = 59 µg/mLe 
AUC = 839 µg∙h/mLe 
NOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax = 3.4 
(205/59.7) 
AUC = 0.7 
(597/839) 
 
rabbitc 
60 mg/kg NOAEL 
Cmax = 0.5 
(26.6/59) 
AUC = 0.1 
(80.5/839) 
500 mg/kg 
NOAEL 
Cmax = 3.8 (222/59) 
AUC = 0.8 
(671/839) 
 
LOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax = 5.8 (341/59)

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
85 
Rat NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat 
Findings 
Rabbit NOAELc 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
Findings 
Human 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Margins 
NOAEL/Human 
LOAEL/Human 
Notes 
AUC = 1.2 
(995/839) 
 
rabbit  no LOAEL 
a:  Extrapolated from reported value after 25 mg/kg ibuprofen (suspension) single oral dose in Sprague Dawley rats (You):  Cmax = 28.4 µg/mL,  
AUC(0-inf)= 4971.3 µg·min/mL (82.9 µg∙h/mL).  Note that different data (5- to 7-fold lower values) are available from the same laboratory at 
25 mg/kg where the only difference appears to be that ibuprofen was administered in hard gelatin capsules versus a suspension (Newa):  Cmax 
= 5.32 µg/mL,  AUC = 12.41 µg·h/mL. 
b:  To enhance detection of VSD and midline defects (seen in humans and with other NSAIDS), exposure was limited to the sensitive period of 
cardiovascular development and midline closure (i.e., GD9-10 in rats and GD9-11 in rabbits).  By limiting the exposure period, maternal GI 
toxicity was reduced, allowing for the administration of higher doses. 
c:  Two values are included for the rabbit NOAEL since neither study design was ideal for assessing the risk of developmental toxicity according 
to current conventions.  The study by Adams dosed rabbits on GD1-29 instead of the conventional GD7-19, whereas the study by Cappon dosed 
rabbits only on GD9-11 to enhance detection of VSD and midline defects. 
d:  Extrapolated from reported value after 56 mg/kg ibuprofen single oral dose in male New Zealand White rabbits (Kondal):  Cmax = 24.85 µg/mL,  
AUC(0-inf) = 75.14 µg·h/mL. 
e:  Extrapolated from reported value after 14.8 mg/kg (mean) ibuprofen single oral dose (Konstan):  Cmax = 65.5 µg/mL,  AUC(0-inf) = 14.0 
mg·min/mL (233 µg∙h/mL).  Note the Cmax was multiplied by 0.9 (13.3/14.8) to give the extrapolated Cmax.  The Cmax after a single dose likely 
represents the Cmax at steady state since the half life is short (approximately 1.8 to 2 hours [US label]) and little accumulation is expected using 
the equation:  accumulation = 1/(1 – e–k∙tau), where k = 0.693/t½ with t½ = 2 hours and tau = 6 hours (yielding an accumulation fatcor of 1.1).  
The AUC was multiplied by 4 to get the daily AUC for QID dosing (at 59.2 mg/kg/day), and then by 0.9 to give the extrapolated AUC for 53 
mg/kg/day.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
86 
References 
Adams SS, Bough RG, Cliffe EE, et al. Absorption, distribution and toxicity of ibuprofen. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1969;15:310-30. 
Cappon GD, Cook JC, Hurtt ME. Relationship between cyclooxygenase 1 and 2 selective inhibitors and fetal development when administered to 
rats and rabbits during the sensitive periods for heart development and midline closure. Birth Defects Res B Dev Reprod Toxicol. 2003;68:47-56. 
Kondal A1, Garg SK. Influence of acidic beverage (Coca-Cola) on pharmacokinetics of ibuprofen in healthy rabbits. Indian J Exp Biol. 
2003;41:1322-4. 
Konstan MW, Krenicky JE, Finney MR, Kirchner HL, Hilliard KA, Hilliard JB, et al. Effect of ibuprofen on neutrophil migration in vivo in cystic 
fibrosis and healthy subjects J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2003;306:1086-91. 
Newa M, Bhandari KH, Kim JO, Im JS, Kim JA, Yoo BK, et al.. Enhancement of solubility, dissolution and bioavailability of ibuprofen in solid 
dispersion systems. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo). 2008;56:569-74. 
US Motrin label. 
You X, Xing Q, Tuo J, Song W, Zeng Y, Hu H. Optimizing surfactant content to improve oral bioavailability of ibuprofen in microemulsions: just 
enough or more than enough? Int J Pharm. 2014;471:276-84.  
Additonal References Evaluated 
Cappon GD, Fleeman TL, Cook JC, Hurtt ME. Combined treatment potentiates the developmental toxicity of ibuprofen and acetazolamide in rats. 
Drug Chem Toxicol. 2005;28:409-21. [confirmed VSD findings in Cappon 2003] 
Cook JC, Jacobson CF, Gao F, Tassinari MS, Hurtt ME, DeSesso JM. Analysis of the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug literature for potential 
developmental toxicity in rats and rabbits. Birth Defects Res B Dev Reprod Toxicol. 2003;68:5-26. [review article: captured data from Adams] 
Malm H, Borisch C.  Analgesics, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), muscle relaxants, and antigout medications. In: Schaefer C, 
Peters P, Miller RK, editors.  Drugs during pregnancy and lactation:  treatment options and risk assessment (Third Edition).  Boston: Academic 
Press; 2015. p. 27-58. [mainly human data]

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
87 
IMATINIB 
CAS No.:  152459-95-5 (220127-57-1 as mesilate) 
 
Rat NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings 
Rabbit NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
Findings 
Notes 
30 mg/kg oral 
GD6-15 (FDA, 
United States, p. 
69) 
 
Cmax = 3.57 
μg/mLa 
AUC = 39.28 
μg∙h/mLa 
100 mg/kg oral 
GD6-15 (FDA, 
United States, p. 69) 
 
Cmax = 12.14 
µg/mLb 
AUC = 142.55 
µg∙h/mLb 
exencephaly and/or 
protruding tongue, 
encephalocele, absent 
frontal or parietal bones; 
increased post-
implantation loss, 
decreased live fetuses 
60 mg/kg oral GD7-19 
(FDA, United States, p. 
72) 
 
Cmax = 53.06 µg/mLc 
AUC = 699.8 µg∙h/mLc 
LOAEL not 
identified 
 
None 
 
a:  Interpolated from reported values in plasma after 15 and 50 mg/kg imatinib oral single dose in female rats (FDA, United States, p. 24):  at 15 
mg/kg, Cmax = 1.69 µg/mL, AUC(0-24h) = 15.40 µg·h/mL; at 50 mg/kg, Cmax = 6.07 µg/mL, AUC(0-24h) = 71.276 µg·h/mL. 
b:  Extrapolated from reported value in plasma after 50 mg/kg imatinib oral single dose in female rats (FDA, United States, p. 24):  Cmax = 6.07 
µg/mL, AUC(0-24h) = 71.276 µg·h/mL. 
c:  Reported value after 60 mg/kg oral imatinib single dose in rabbits species (FDA, United States, p. 26):  Cmax = 53.06 µg/mL, AUC(0-24h) = 699.8 
µg∙h/mL. 
References 
FDA, United States. Pharmacology Review NDA 021335 (04 May 2001).

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
88 
Isotretinoin (13-cis-retinoic acid) 
CAS No.:  4759-48-2 
 
Rat NOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings 
Rabbit 
NOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
LOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
Findings 
Human 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Margins 
NOAEL/Human 
LOAEL/Human 
Notes 
50 mg/kg oral 
dose on GD10 
[Tembe] 
 
Cmax = 0.9 
µg/mLa 
AUC(0-10h) = 
4.8 µg∙h/mLa 
100 mg/kg 
oral dose on 
GD10 
[Tembe] 
 
Cmax = 1.8 
µg/mLa 
AUC(0-10h) = 
9.6 µg∙h/mLa 
LOAEL: 
microtia and 
talipes. 
Higher doses: 
microcephaly, 
anotia, 
exopthalmos, 
protruding 
tongue, cleft 
lip, mandibular 
hypoplasia, 
cleft palate, 
overdeveloped 
papillae, 
analatresia, 
spina 
bifide,deformed 
tail, and 
acaudate; 
increased 
resorptions 
3 mg/kg oral 
GD8-11 
[Eckhoff] 
 
Cmax = 0.95 
µg/mLb 
AUC = 12.2 
µg∙h/mLb 
15 mg/kg oral 
GD8-11 
[Eckhoff] 
 
Cmax = 3.1 
µg/mLc 
AUC = 49.1 
µg∙h/mLc 
increased 
resorptions, 
malformations 
including eye 
defects, tail 
defects, 
cardiomegaly, 
skin tag on 
face 
0.5 mg/kg BID  
(1 mg/kg/day) 
 
Cmax = 0.32 
µg/mLd 
AUC = 7.52 
µg∙h/mLd 
 
NOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax = 2.8 
(0.9/0.32) 
AUC = 0.6 
(4.8/7.52) 
rabbit 
Cmax = 3.0 
(0.95/0.32) 
AUC = 1.6 
(12.2/7.52) 
 
LOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax = 5.6 
(1.8/0.32) 
AUC = 1.3 
(9.6/7.52) 
 
rabbit 
Cmax = 9.7 
(3.1/0.32)

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
89 
Rat NOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings 
Rabbit 
NOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
LOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
Findings 
Human 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Margins 
NOAEL/Human 
LOAEL/Human 
Notes 
AUC = 6.5 
(49.1/7.52) 
a:  Extrapolated from reported value after 500 mg/kg isotretinoin oral single dose in Wistar rats (Tembe):  Cmax = 9.07 µg/mL,  AUC(0-10h) = 47.9 
µg·h/mL. 
b:  Actual values after 3 mg/kg isotretinoin oral single dose in New Zealand White rabbits (Eckhoff):  Cmax = 0.952 µg/mL,  AUC = 12.2 µg·h/mL. 
c:  Actual values after 15 mg/kg isotretinoin oral single dose in New Zealand White rabbits (Eckhoff):  Cmax = 3.099 µg/mL,  AUC(0-10h) = 49.1 
µg·h/mL. 
d:  Extrapolated from reported value after 80 mg (1.33 mg/kg) isotretinoin oral single dose with food (US label):  Cmax =  0.86 µg/mL,  AUC(0-10h) 
=  10.0 µg·h/mL.  The Cmax extrapolation was based on a 0.5 mg/kg dose, whereas the AUC extrapolation was based on the daily dose of 1 
mg/kg/day.  PK data are also available while fasting, but the higher values from the fed state were used for margin calculations:  Cmax = 0.3 
µg/mL, AUC = 3.7 µg∙h/mL. 
References 
Eckhoff C, Chari S, Kromka M, Staudner H, Juhasz L, Rudiger H, et al. Teratogenicity and transplacental pharmacokinetics of 13-cis-retinoic acid 
in rabbits. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1994;125:34-41. 
Tembe EA, Honeywell R, Buss NE, Renwick AG. All-trans-retinoic acid in maternal plasma and teratogenicity in rats and rabbits. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol. 1996;141:456-72. 
US label isotretinoin.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
90 
METHOTREXATE 
CAS No.:  59-05-2 
 
Rat 
NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings Rabbit 
NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
LOAEL 
(Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
Findings 
Human 
Dosec 
Cmax 
AUC 
NOAEL 
Margins 
Notes 
NOAEL 
not 
identified 
0.1 mg/kg IP 
GD9 [Jordan, 
Woo] 
 
Cmax = 0.21 
µg/mLa 
AUC = 0.067 
µg∙h/mLa 
resorbed 
litters, 
malformations 
NOAEL 
not 
identified 
 
0.3 mg/kg IV 
GD10 
[Jordan] 
 
Cmax = 1.58 
µg/mLb 
AUC = 0.61 
µg∙h/mLb 
hydrocephalus, 
microphthalmia, 
cleft lip and 
palate, 
micrognathia, 
dysplastic sacral 
and caudal 
vertebrate, 
phocomelia, 
hemimelia, 
syndactyly, and 
ectrodactyly; 
embryolethality, 
resorptions 
psoriasis:  10 – 25 mg 
Q7D (5.9 – 14.7 
mg/m2) oral or IVc 
 
ALL:  induction – 3.3 
mg/m2 daily; 
maintenance – 15 
mg/m2 oral twice/week 
choriocarcinoma:  15 – 
30 mg oral QD 5 
(8.8 – 17.6 mg/m2)  
lymphoma:  10 – 25 
mg QD 4-8 oral (5.9 
– 14.7 mg/m2); 0.625 – 
2.5 mg/kg  (23 – 92.5 
mg/m2) 
mycosis fungoides:  5 – 
50 mg Q7D oral (2.9 – 
29 mg/m2) 
RA: 7.5 mg Q7D oral 
(4.4 mg/m2) 
 
Cmax = 2.14 µg/mLd 
NOAEL: 
rat 
NOAEL not 
identified  
rabbit 
NOAEL not 
identified  
 
LOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax = 0.1 
(0.21/2.14) 
AUC = 0.02 
(0.067/3.28) 
rabbit 
Cmax = 0.7 
(1.58/2.14) 
AUC = 0.2 
(0.61/3.28) 
Note:  animal 
MEFL data is 
after single 
dose, so 
margins 
would likely 
be eve n 
lower if dosed 
throughout 
organogenesis

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
91 
AUC = 3.28 µg·h/mLd 
a:  Extrapolated from reported value after 0.31 mg/kg methotrexate intravenous single dose in Wistar rats (Scheufler 1982):  C0 = 0.64 µg/mL, 
AUC(0.1-4h) = 0.207 µg·h/mL.  Other PK data are also available as shown in the table below.  The data from Scheufler 1982 were chosen for 
margin calculations because it required the least degree of extrapolation in the same strain as the teratology study. 
b:  Extrapolated from reported value after 1.33 mg/kg methotrexate intravenous single dose in male rabbits (Iven):  Cmax = 7 µg/mL, AUC = 2.72 
µg·h/mL.  Data are also available after a 10 mg/kg methotrexate intravenous single dose in female New Zealand White rabbits (Stagni):  Cmax 
= 74 µg/mL, AUC = 31.4 µg·h/mL.  The data from Iven were chosen for margin calculations because it required the least degree of extrapolation 
to the dose in the teratology study. 
c:  As noted there is a wide variety of doses, schedules, and routes used in a variety of indications (US label).  An intravenous dose of 25 mg (14.7 
mg/m2) in psoriasis was chosen for PK margin comparisons since this was the highest dose in a non-oncology indication and would also provide 
a higher exposure than a 50 mg (29 mg/m2) oral dose (mycosis fungoides) since oral bioavailability is only ~40%. 
d:  Extrapolated to 14.7 mg/m2 f rom reported value after 30 mg/m2 methotrexate intravenous single dose (Campbell):  Cmax = 4.37 µg/mL from 
visual inspection of graph, AUC(0-inf) = 6.69 µg·h/mL.  Oral data are also available (Campbell):  Cmax = 0.50 µg /mL from visual inspection of 
graph, AUC(0-inf) = 2.34µg·h/mL. 
 
 
References 
Campbell MA, Perrier DG, Dorr RT, Alberts DS, Finley PR. Methotrexate: bioavailability and pharmacokinetics. Cancer Treat Rep. 1985;69:833-
8. 
Iven H, Brasch H, Engster J. Pharmacokinetics of methotrexate and 7-hydroxy-methotrexate in rabbits. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 
1985;15:115-20. 
Jordan RL, Wilson JG, Schumacher HJ. Embryotoxicity of the folate antagonist methotrexate in rats and rabbits. Teratology. 1977;15:73-9. 
Scheufler E. Evidence of nonlinear pharmacokinetics of methotrexate in the rat. Pharmacology. 1982;25:51-6. 
US label methotrexate. 
Woo DC, McClain RM, Hoar RM. Potentiation of methotrexate embryolethality by aspirin in rats. Teratology. 1978;17:37-41.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
92 
Additional References Evaluated 
Berry CL. Transient inhibition of DNA synthesis by methotrexate, in the rat embryo and foetus. J Embryol Exp Morphol. 1971;26:469-74. 
[increased resoprtions at ≥1 mg/kg] 
Hyoun SC, Običan SG, Scialli AR. Teratogen update: methotrexate. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2012;94:187-207. [review article] 
Kim MM, Lee SH, Lee MG, Hwang SJ, Kim CK. Pharmacokinetics of methotrexate after intravenous and intramuscular injection of methotrexate-
bearing positively charged liposomes to rats. Biopharm Drug Dispos. 1995;16:279-93. [PK in Sprague Dawley rats at 4 mg/kg dose] 
Scheufler E, Zetler G, Iven H. Pharmacokinetics and organ distribution of methotrexate in the rat. Pharmacology. 1981;23:75-81. [PK only at 31 
mg/kg dose] 
Stagni G, Shukla C. Pharmacokinetics of methotrexate in rabbit skin and plasma after iv-bolus and iontophoretic administrations. J Control Release. 
2003;93:283-92. [PK only at 10 mg/kg dose] 
Wilson JG, Scott WJ, Ritter EJ, Fradkin R. Comparative distribution and embryotoxicity of methotrexate in pregnant rats and rhesus monkeys. 
Teratology. 1979;19:71-9. [no AUC data, only concentrations at 0.25 hours] 
 
Rat Pharmacokinetic Data 
Reference 
Dose 
(mg/kg ) 
Route Strain 
Cmax  
(µg/mL) 
AUC 
(µg∙h/mL) 
Notes 
Wilson 
0.3 
IV 
Wistar 
0.40 
— 
C0 was estimated from graph since 1st timepoint was 
0.25 hours 
Scheufler 
1981 
31 
IV 
Wistar 
177 
AUC(0-inf) = 38.4 
Cmax is C0 
Scheufler 
1982 
0.31 IV 
Wistar 
0.64 
AUC(0.1-4h) = 0.207 
 
Kim 
4.0 
IV 
Sprague 
Dawley 
40 
AUC(0-inf) = 2.88 
Cmax was from visual inspection of graph, AUC was 173 
µg∙min/mL

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
93 
Pazopanib 
CAS No.:  444731-52-6 
 
Rat NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings 
Rabbit NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit Findings Notes 
1 mg/kg oral GD6-
17 (FDA, United 
States, p. 218) 
 
Cmax = 3.47 
μg/mLa 
AUC = 0.028 
μg∙h/mLa 
3 mg/kg oral GD6-
17 (FDA, United 
States, p.218) 
 
Cmax = 10.4 
µg/mLa 
AUC = 0.083 
µg∙h/mLa 
malformations in the 
great vessels, missing 
innominate artery 
3 mg/kg oral GD7-19 
(FDA, United States, 
p. 225) 
 
Cmax = 0.130 µg/mLb 
AUC(0-t) = 0.517 
µg∙h/mLc 
10 mg/kg oral GD7-
19 (FDA, United 
States, p. 225) 
 
Cmax = 1.063 µg/mLd 
AUC(0-t) = 1.723 
µg∙h/mLd 
increased post-
implantation loss 
 
a:  Extrapolated or actual reported value in plasma after 3 mg/kg oral pazopanib for 28 days to Sprague Dawley rats (FDA, United States, p. 249):  
Cmax = 10.4 µg/mL, AUC = 83 µg·h/L (0.083 μg·h/mL). 
b:  Actual values in plasma after 3 mg/kg pazopanib in rabbits (FDA, United States, p. 227):  Cmax = 0.130 µg/mL. 
c:  Extrapolated from reported value after 10 mg/kg pazopanib to rabbits (FDA, United States, p. 227):  AUC(0-t) = 1.723 µg·h/mL. 
d:  Actual values in plasma after 10 mg/kg pazopanib in rabbits (FDA, United States, p. 227):  Cmax = 1.063 µg/mL, AUC(0-t) = 1.723 µg·h/mL. 
References 
FDA, United States. Pharmacology Review NDA 022456 (18 Sep 2009).  
Additional References Evaluated 
US Label Votrient.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
94 
PHENYTOIN 
CAS No.:  57-41-0 
 
Rat NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings 
Rabbit 
NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
Findings 
Human 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Margins 
NOAEL/Human 
LOAEL/Human 
Notes 
150 mg/kg oral 
GD6-15 [Kim] 
 
Cmax = 13.4 
µg/mLa  
AUC = 205 
µg∙h/mLa 
300 mg/kg oral 
GD6-15 [Kim] 
 
Cmax = 26.8 
µg/mLa 
AUC = 410 
µg∙h/mLa 
external findings 
(protruding 
tongue, 
meningoencepha-
locele, domed 
head, anasarca, 
and limb 
hyperflexion), 
skeletal 
malformation 
(short rib) 
50 mg/kg oral 
GD7-18 
[McClain] 
 
Cmax = 27 
µg/mLb  
AUC(0-24h) = 
193 µg∙h/mLc 
75 mg/kg oral 
GD7-18 
[McClain] 
 
Cmax = 34 
µg/mLd 
AUC(0-24h) = 
290 µg∙h/mLc 
open eyes, cleft 
palate, and limb 
abnormalities 
that included 
shortened and 
curved long 
bones, pes 
caves, 
syndactyly 
up to 625 mg/day 
oral solutione 
 
Cmax = 14.5 
µg/mLf 
AUC = 291 
µg∙h/mLg 
NOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax = 0.9 
(13.4/14.5) 
AUC = 0.7 
(205/291) 
rabbit 
Cmax = 1.9 
(27/14.5) 
AUC = 0.7 
(193/291) 
 
LOAEL: 
rat  
Cmax = 1.8 
(26.8/14.5) 
AUC = 1.4 
(410/291) 
rabbit  
Cmax = 2.3 
(34/14.5) 
AUC = 1.0 
(290/291)

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
95 
a:  Actual or extrapolated from reported value after 150 mg/kg phenytoin oral dose on GD8 in Sprague Dawley rats (Rowland):  Cmax = 13.4 
µg/mL, AUC(0-inf) = 205 µg∙h/mL.  PK data are also available on GD17:  Cmax = 30.2 µg/mL, AUC(0-inf) = 906 µg·h/mL. 
b:  Actual value after 50 mg/kg phenytoin oral single dose in female New Zealand White rabbits (McClain):  Cmax = 27 µg/mL.  PK data are also 
available after 30 mg/kg phenytoin oral dose in male New Zealand White rabbits (Medhi):  Cmax = 12.8 µg/mL.  The value from McClain was 
used because it was from females, required no extrapolation, and was generated in conjunction with the developmental toxicity study. 
c:  Extrapolated from reported value after 30 mg/kg phenytoin oral dose in male New Zealand White rabbits (Medhi):  AUC = 116 µg·h/mL, from 
calculation based on concentration values estimated by visual inspection of graph since published value was inconsistent with other data in the 
paper. 
d:  Interpolated from actual values after 50 or 100 mg/kg phenytoin oral single dose in female New Zealand White rabbits (McClain):  Cmax = 27 
µg/mL and 41 µg/mL at 50 and 100 mg/kg, respectively.   
e:  Phenytoin is available as an oral solution with an MRHD of 625 mg/day (dosing interval not clear) and as extended release capsules with an 
MRHD up to 600 mg/day (in 3 divided doses).  For exposure comparisons, a dose of 250 mg (10 mL) as a single dose was used for Cmax and a 
dose of 625 mg/day oral solution was used for AUC since exposure was higher for the solution than for extended release capsules (FDA, United 
States 1986). 
f:  Extrapolated to a 250 mg dose from reported value after 125 mg phenytoin oral solution single dose (FDA, United States 2002):  Cmax = 2.268 
µg/mL, AUC(0-inf) = 58.2 µg·h/mL.  PK data are also available for a 100 mg oral solution dose and for extended release capsules (FDA, United 
States 1986).  For Cmax, an accumulation factor of 3.2 was applied that was estimated from the equation:  accumulation = 1/(1 – e–k∙tau), where 
k = 0.693/t½ with t½ = 14.924 hours and tau = 8 hours (i.e., 1/(1 – e–0.372) = 1/(1 – 0.690) = 1/0.31 = 3.2). 
g:  Extrapolated to 625 mg/day from reported value after 125 mg phenytoin oral solution single dose (FDA, United States 2002):  AUC(0-inf) = 58.2 
µg·h/mL. 
 
References 
ANDA #40-420 Bioequivalence Review, Phenytoin FDA, United States Approval package, Clinical Pharmacology and Biopharmaceutics Review 
040420/S-000 
FDA, United States Approval Package (Bioequivalence Review) for ANDA 088771 (22 Oct 1986), p. 32.  
FDA, United States Approval Package (Bioequivalence Review) for ANDA 040420 (19 Apr 2002), p. 40. 
Kim SH, Lee IC, Baek HS, Lim JH, Moon C, Shin DH, Kim SH, Park SC, Kim JC. Dose-response effects of diphenylhydantoin on pregnant dams 
and embryo-fetal development in rats. Birth Defects Res B Dev Reprod Toxicol. 2012;95:337-45.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
96 
McClain RM, Langhoff L. Teratogenicity of diphenylhydantoin in the New Zealand white rabbit. Teratology. 1980;21:371-9. 
Medhi B, Prakash A, Joshi R, Byrav DS. Effect of esomeprazole on pharmacokinetics of phenytoin in rabbits. Indian J Physiol Pharmacol. 
2012;56:382-7.  
Rowland JR, Binkerd PE, Hendrickx AG. Developmental toxicity and pharmacokinetics of oral and intravenous phenytoin in the rat. Reprod 
Toxicol. 1990;4:191-202.  
US label Dilantin oral solution. 
US label Dilantin extended release capsules. 
 
Pomalidomide 
CAS No.:  19171-19-8 
 
Rat 
NOAEL 
Dose  
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL 
Dose  
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings 
Rabbit 
NOAEL 
Dose  
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit LOAEL 
Dose  
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit Findings 
Human 
Dose  
Cmax 
AUC 
Margins 
NOAEL/Human 
LOAEL/Human 
Notes 
NOAEL 
not 
identified 
25 mg/kg oral 
GD6-17 
[FDA, United 
States 2013a] 
 
Cmax = 2.7 
µg/mLa  
AUC(0-24) = 
34.3 µg·h/mLa 
absence of 
urinary bladder 
and thyroid 
gland, fusion 
and 
misalignment of 
lumbar and 
thoracic 
vertebral 
elements 
(vertebral, 
NOAEL 
not 
identified 
10 mg/kg GD7-
19 
[FDA, United 
States 2013a] 
 
Cmax = 0.072 
µg/mLb 
AUCτ = 0.418 
µg·h/mLb 
interventricular septal 
defects; misaligned, fused 
or small caudal vertebrae 
4 mg per day  
21 (2.4 
mg/m2/day) 
 
Cmax = 0.079 
µg/mLc 
AUC(0-24h) = 
0.402 µg·h/mLd 
NOAEL: 
rat 
NOAEL not 
identified  
rabbit 
NOAEL not 
identified  
 
LOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax = 34 
(2.7/0.079)

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
97 
central and/or 
neural arches) 
 
resorptions; 
increased post-
implantation 
loss, decreased 
viable fetuses 
AUC = 85 
(34.3/0.402) 
 
rabbit 
Cmax = 0.9 
(0.072/0.079) 
AUC = 1.0 
(0.418/0.402) 
a:  Actual value on GD17 after 25 mg/kg pomalidomide oral dose in pregnant Sprague Dawley rats (FDA, United States 2013a, p. 152):  Cmax = 
2.729 µg/mL, AUC(0-24h) = 34.34 µg·h/mL. 
b:  Actual value on GD17 after 10 mg/kg pomalidomide oral dose in pregnant New Zealand White rabbits (FDA, United States 2013a, p. 163):  
Cmax = 0.072 µg/mL, AUCτ = 0.418 µg·h/mL. 
c:  Actual value after 4 mg pomalidomide oral dose for 8 days in multiple myeloma subjects (FDA, United States 2013b, p. 24):  Cmax = 0.079 
µg/mL. 
d:  Actual value after 4 mg/kg mg pomalidomide oral dose for 4 weeks (FDA, United States 2013a, p. 180):  AUC(0-24h) = 0.402 µg·h/mL. 
References 
FDA, United States Pharmtox Review for Pomalyst NDA 204026 (08 Feb 2013a), pp. 149-156, 158-170, 178-180. 
FDA, United States ClinPharm Review for Pomalyst NDA 204026 (08 Feb 2013b), p. 25. 
Additional References Evaluated 
Gay F, Mina R, Troia R, Bringhen S. Pharmacokinetic evaluation of pomalidomide for the treatment of myeloma. Expert Opin Drug Metab 
Toxicol. 2013;9:1517-27. [review article, data from Hoffman] 
Hoffmann M, Kasserra C, Reyes J, Schafer P, Kosek J, Capone L, et al. Absorption, metabolism and excretion of [14C]pomalidomide in humans 
following oral administration. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2013;71:489-501. [PK in healthy volunteers, used data for patients from FDA, United 
States reviews]

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
98 
Ribavirin 
CAS No.:  36791-04-5 
 
Rat NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings 
Rabbit NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
Findings 
Notes 
0.3 mg/kg oral 
GD6-15 (FDA, 
United States, p. 
64) 
 
Cmax = 3.8 
ng/mLa 
AUC = 8.28 
ng∙h/mLa 
1.0 mg/kg oral 
GD6-15 (FDA, 
United States, p. 
64) 
 
Cmax = 12.7 
ng/mLa 
AUC = 27.6 
ng∙h/mLa 
hydrocephaly, retinal 
folds, diaphragmic 
hernia, displaced 
adrenal, displaced 
oesophagus, vascular 
defects; extra vertabra, 
scoliosis, fused ribs 
and vertebrae, split 
sternum, ectrodactyly, 
malrotated hind limbs; 
increased post-
implantation loss 
0.3 mg/kg oral 
GD6-18 (FDA, 
United States, p. 
68) 
 
No rabbit PK data 
found 
1.0 mg/kg oral 
GD6-18 (FDA, 
United States, p. 
68) 
 
No rabbit PK 
data found 
anomalous 
cervicothoracic 
arteries 
Ribavirin undergoes 
significant 1st pass 
metabolism. As a prodrug, 
it is rapidly anabolized to 
ribavirin monophosphate 
and ribavirin triphosphate, 
which play a role in its 
antiviral activity (Dixit).  
It is also deribosylated to 
triazole carboxamide 
(Lin).  The contribution of 
each of these metabolites 
to the developmental 
effects in rats is unknown. 
a:  Extrapolated from reported value in plasma after 10 mg/kg ribavirin oral single dose in female Sprague Dawley rats (FDA, United States, p. 
76):  Cmax = 0.127 µg/mL, AUC = 0.276 µg·h/mL. Note ≥10-fold extrapolation. 
References 
FDA, United States. Pharmacology Review NDA 020903 (18 May 1998). 
Additional References Evaluated 
Dixit NM, Perelson AS. The metabolism, pharmacokinetics and mechanisms of antiviral activity of ribavirin against hepatitis C virus. Cell Mol 
Life Sci. 2006;63:832-42

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
99 
Liao S, Jin X, Li J, Zhang T, Zhang W, Shi W, et al. Effects of silymarin, glycyrrhizin, and oxymatrine on the pharmacokinetics of ribavirin and 
its major metabolite in rats. Phytother Res. 2016;30:618-26. [at 30 mg/kg in fasted male Sprague Dawley rats:  Cmax = 1.36 μg/mL, AUC(0-inf) = 
14.7 µg·h/mL] 
Lin CC, Yeh LT, Luu T, Lourenco D, Lau JY. Pharmacokinetics and metabolism of [14C]ribavirin in rats and cynomolgus monkeys. Antimicrob 
Agents Chemother. 2003;47:1395-8. [at 30 mg/kg in fasted male Sprague Dawley rats:  Cmax = 0.433 μg/mL, AUC(0-inf) = 3.04 µg·h/mL]

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
100 
TACROLIMUS 
CAS No.:  104987-11-3 
 
Rat NOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings 
Rabbit NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit Findings 
Notes 
1.0 mg/kg oral 
GD7-17 (FDA, 
United States, p. 
18) 
 
Cmax = 2.9 ng/mLa 
AUC(0-inf) = 10.9 
ng∙h/mLa 
3.2 mg/kg oral 
GD7-17 (FDA, 
United States, p. 
18) 
 
Cmax = 20 ng/mLb 
AUC(0-inf) = 68.9 
ng∙h/mLb 
slight increase in 
post implantation 
loss (late 
resorptions) 
0.32 mg/kg oral 
GD6-18 (FDA, 
United States, p. 
19) 
 
Cmax = 0.93 ng/mLc 
AUC = 17.6 
µg∙h/mLc 
1.0 mg/kg oral 
GD6-18 (FDA, 
United States, p. 
19) 
 
Cmax =  2.9 
ng/mLc 
AUC = 55 
ng∙h/mLc 
ventricular hypoplasia, 
interventricular septal 
defect, bulbous aortic 
arch and stenosis of 
arch and ductus 
arteriosus, omphalocele, 
gallbladder agenesis, 
skeletal malformations; 
increased post-
implantation loss, 
decreased litter size 
• Maternal 
toxicity seen in 
both rats and 
rabbits at 
LOAEL 
• Ratio of 
blood:plasma is 
4:1 
• Metabolites are 
3-fold parent 
• 99% protein 
bound 
a:  Actual values in plasma after 1.0 mg/kg tacrolimus oral single dose in male rats (FDA, United States, p. 25):  Cmax = 2.9 ng/mL, AUC(0-inf) = 
10.9 ng·h/mL. 
b:  Actual values in plasma after 3.2 mg/kg tacrolimus oral single dose in male rats (FDA, United States, p. 25):  Cmax = 20 ng/mL, AUC(0-inf) = 
68.9 ng·h/mL. 
c:  Extrapolated from reported value after 2 mg/kg tacrolimus oral single dose in NZW rabbits (Piekoszewski):  Cmax = 5.79 ng/mL, AUC = 110 
ng·h/mL. 
References 
FDA, United States. Pharmacology Review NDA 50-708/50-709 (08 Apr 1994).

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
101 
Piekoszewski W, Chow FS, Jusko WJ. Disposition of tacrolimus (FK 506) in rabbits. Role of red blood cell binding in hepatic clearance. Drug 
Metab Dispos. 1993;21:690-8. 
Additional References Evaluated 
Iwasaki K, Shiraga T, Nagase K, Hirano K, Nozaki K, Noda K. Pharmacokinetic study of FK 506 in the rat. Transplant Proc. 1991;23:2757-9.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
102 
Thalidomide 
CAS No.:  50-35-1 
 
Rat NOAEL 
Dose  
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL 
Dose  
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat 
Findingsa 
Rabbit 
NOAEL 
Dose  
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
LOAEL 
Dose  
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit Findings 
Human 
Dose  
Cmax 
AUC 
Margins 
NOAEL/Human 
LOAEL/Human 
Notes 
10 mg/kgb 
[Janer] 
 
 
Cmax = 
0.97µg/mLc 
AUC(0-24h) = 
10.75 
µg·h/mLc 
50 mg/kgb  
[Newman, 
Schardein] 
 
Cmax = 
4.87µg/mLc 
AUC(0-24h) = 
53.75 
µg·h/mLc 
decreased 
implanta-
tion sites 
20 mg/kg oral 
GD7-19 
[Christian] 
 
 
at GD19 
Cmax = 0.82 
µg/mLd 
AUC(0-24h) = 
4.18 µg·h/mLd 
60 mg/kg oral 
GD7-19 
[Christian] 
 
 
at GD19 
Cmax = 2.16 
µg/mLe 
AUC(0-24h) = 
14.4 µg.h/mLe 
• resorptions 
• rotated or flexed 
limbs (4/38 fetuses 
at 60 mg/kg and 
15/25 fetuses at 180 
mg/kg) 
• hydrocephaly 
(n=2/38)  
• increased 
postimplantation 
loss, including dead 
fetuses, and 
numerous external 
and visceral 
malformations at 
180 mg/kg 
50 mg oralf 
 
Cmax = 0.62 
µg/mLg 
AUC(0-inf) = 4.9 
µg·h/mLg 
NOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax = 1.6 
(0.97/0.62) 
AUC = 2.2 
(10.75/4.9) 
rabbit 
Cmax = 1.3 
(0.82/0.62) 
AUC = 0.9 
(4.18/4.9) 
 
LOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax = 7.9 
(4.87/0.62) 
AUC = 11.0 
(53.75/4.9) 
rabbit 
Cmax = 3.5 
(2.16/0.62) 
AUC = 2.9 
(14.4/4.9)

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
103 
a:  Numerous developmental toxicity studies in rats have been reported in the literature with a variety of divergent results in different strains 
(Newman, Neubert, Janer, Schardein).  Many of these older studies do not meet today’s standards for design.  Although malformations cannot 
be reproducibly induced, embryolethality appears to be a common effect at doses ≥100 mg/kg (Newman).   
b:  Based on literature reviews by Newman and Schardein, a dose of 50 mg/kg was chosen as the LOAEL.  Based on review by Janer, 10 mg/kg 
appeared to be the highest dose with no evidence of developmental toxicity. 
c: Extrapolated or actual value after 50 mg/kg thalidomide oral dose for 8 days in female Fischer rats (FDA, United States p. 86):  Cmax = 4.87 
µg/mL, AUC(0-24h) = 53.75 µg∙h/mL.  PK data are also available after 30 mg/k oral single dose in female Fischer rats (FDA, United States, p. 
22, 91):  Cmax = 10.4 µg/mL, AUC(0-18h) = 63.99 µg∙h/mL; and after a 100 mg/kg oral single dose in male Sprague Dawley rats (FDA, United 
States, p. 73):  Cmax = 21.60 µg/mL, AUC(0-48h) = 348.5 µg∙h/mL. 
d:  Actual value after 20 mg/kg thalidomide oral doses in pregnant New Zealand White rabbits (Christian).  GD7:  Cmax = 1.77 µg/mL, AUC(0-24h) 
= 13.4 µg·h/mL; GD19:  Cmax = 0.824 µg/mL, AUC(0-24h) = 4.18 µg·h/mL. 
e:  Actual value after 60 mg/kg thalidomide oral doses in pregnant New Zealand White rabbits (Christian).  GD7:  Cmax = 6.39 µg/mL, AUC(0-24h) 
= 78.7 µg·h/mL; GD19:  Cmax = 2.16 µg/mL, AUC(0-24h) = 14.4 µg·h/mL.   
f:  Currently approved doses range from 100 to 400 mg/day.  A dose of 50 mg was used for PK comparisons because that was the lowest dose used 
to treat insomnia when thalidomide was first developed.  Also, one 50 mg tablet of thalidomide during the time-sensitive window is sufficient 
to cause birth defects in 50% of pregnancies (Vargesson). 
g:  Actual value after 50 mg single dose to healthy volunteers (Teo, US label):  Cmax = 0.62 µg/mL, AUC = 4.90 µg∙h/mL.  
 
References 
Christian MS, Laskin OL, Sharper V, Hoberman A, Stirling DI, Latriano L.  Evaluation of the developmental toxicity of lenalidomide in rabbits. 
Birth Defects Res B Dev Reprod Toxicol. 2007;80:188-207. 
FDA, United States.  Pharmtox review NDA 020785 (11 May 1998).   
Janer G, Slob W, Hakkert BC, Vermeire T, Piersma AH.  A retrospective analysis  of developmental toxicity studies in rat and rabbit: what is the 
added value of the rabbit as an additional test species? Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2008;50:206-17. 
Neubert R, Neubert D. Peculiarities and possible mode of actions of thalidomide. In: Kavlock RJ, Daston GP, editors.  Handbook of experimental 
pharmacology 124: Drug toxicity in embryonic development II. New York: Springer-Verlag; 1997. p.41-119. 
Newman LM, Johnson EM, Staples RE.  Assessment of the effectiveness of animal developmental toxicity testing for human safety. Reprod 
Toxicol. 1993;7:359-90.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
104 
Schardein JL, Macina OT.  Human developmental toxicants: aspects of toxicology and chemistry. Boca Raton: CRC Press; 2007. p. 127-141. 
Teo SK, Colburn WA, Tracewell WG, Kook KA, Stirling DI, Jaworsky MS, Scheffler MA, Thomas SD, Laskin OL.  Clinical pharmacokinetics 
of thalidomide. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2004;43:311-27. 
Vargesson N.  Thalidomide embryopathy: an enigmatic challenge. ISRN Development Biol. 2013;2013:Article ID 241016.  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2013/241016  
US label Thalomid. 
 
Additional References Evaluated 
Brock N, [Experimental contribution to the testing of teratogenic drug effects in the laboratory rat].  Naunyn-Schmiedebergs Archiv fur 
experimentelle Pathologie und Pharmakologie. 1964;249:117-145 [500 mg/kg only dose tested] 
EMA Assessment Report for Thalidomide Pharmion. EMEA/176582/2008, p. 13. [same PK values as FDA, United States review, AUC(0-inf) = 
55.25 µg∙h/mL at 50 mg/kg on D8] 
Eriksson T, Riesbeck K, Ostraat O, Ekberg H, Björkman S.  Drug exposure and flow cytometry analyses in a thalidomide treatment schedule that 
prolongs rat cardiac graft survival. Transplant Proc. 1992;24:2560-1.  [no PK parameters published] 
FDA, United States.  Pharmtox review NDA 021430 (23 Nov 2005).  [review for multiple myeloma, no new PK or teratology data from NDA 
020785 ] 
FDA, United States.  Pharmtox review NDA 204026 (08 Feb 2013).  [thalidomide was used as a positive control in the rabbit developmental 
toxicity study ata dose of 180 mg/kg]

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
105 
TOPIRAMATE 
CAS No.:  97240-79-4 
 
Rat NOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat 
LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings Rabbit 
NOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
Findings 
Human 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Margins 
NOAEL/Human 
LOAEL/Human 
Notes 
100 mg/kg 
oral GD6-15 
[US label, 
FDA, United 
States 1996a] 
 
Cmax = 49 
µg/mLa 
AUC = 893 
µg∙h/mLb 
400 mg/kg 
oral GD6-
15 
[US label, 
FDA, 
United 
States 
1996a] 
 
Cmax = 
168.6 
µg/mLc 
AUC = 
3573 
µg∙h/mLb 
ectrodactyly, 
hydronephrosis 
20 mg/kg 
oral GD6-18 
[US label, 
FDA, United 
States 1996a] 
 
Cmax = 13 
µg/mLd 
AUC = 67 
µg∙h/mLd  
35 mg/kg 
oral GD6-18 
[US label, 
FDA, United 
States 1996a] 
 
Cmax = 23 
µg/mLd 
AUC = 117 
µg∙h/mLd 
embryofetal 
mortality at 
≥35 mg/kg  
400 mg/day in 
two divided 
doses 
 
Cmax = 13.5 
µg/mLe 
AUC = 229 
µg·h/mLe 
NOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax = 3.6 
(49/13.5)  
AUC = 3.9 
(893/229) 
rabbit 
Cmax = 1.0 
(13/13.5) 
AUC = 0.3 
(67/229) 
 
LOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax = 12.5 
(169/13.5)  
AUC = 15.6 
(3573/229) 
 
rabbit 
Cmax = 1.7 
(23/13.5) 
• In rats: Although 
reduced fetal BW 
and increased 
incidence of 
structural 
variations were 
observed at 20 
mg/kg, the 
NOAEL for 
MEFL is assumed 
to be 100 mg/kg  
• In rats: Clinical 
signs of maternal 
toxicity were seen 
at ≥400 mg/kg and 
maternal BW gain 
was reduced at 
≥100 mg/kg 
• In rabbits: 
maternal toxicity 
(decreased BW 
gain, clinical 
signs, and/or

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
106 
AUC = 0.5 
(117/229) 
mortality) was 
seen at ≥35 mg/kg 
a:  Extrapolated from reported value after 200 mg/kg topiramate for GD12-15 (4 days) in pregnant female Sprague Dawley rats (FDA, United 
States, p. 48):  C1.5h = 97.3 µg/mL. 
b:  Extrapolated from reported value after 30 mg/kg topiramate for 8 days in female Sprague Dawley rats (FDA, United States, p. 12):  Cmax = 
22.2 µg/mL, AUC = 268.2 µg·h/mL. 
c:  Actual value after 400 mg/kg topiramate for GD12-15 (4 days) in pregnant female Sprague Dawley rats (FDA, United States, p. 48):  C1.5h = 
168.6 µg/mL. 
d:  Extrapolated from reported value after 60 mg/kg topiramate for 14 days in female New Zealand White rabbits (FDA, United States, p. 13):  
Cmax =39.1 µg/mL, AUC = 201 µg·h/mL. 
e:  Extrapolated from reported value after 100 mg/kg topiramate BID oral for 14 days (FDA, United States 1996b):  Cmax = 6.76 µg/mL, AUC(0-
24h) = 57.2 µg·h/mL.  PK data at a number of other doses and schedules and in combination with other drugs are also available (FDA, United 
States 1995b, Bialer). 
References 
Bialer M, Doose DR, Murthy B, Curtin C, Wang SS, Twyman RE, et al. Pharmacokinetic interactions of topiramate. Clin Pharmacokinet. 
2004;43:763-80. 
FDA, United States. Pharmtox Review NDA 020505 (24 Dec 1996a). 
FDA, United States. Clinical Pharmacology Review NDA 020505 (24 Dec 1996b), p. 39.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
107 
TRIMETHADIONE 
CAS No.:  127-48-0 
 
Rat NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings 
Rabbit 
NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
Findings 
Human 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Margins 
NOAEL/Human 
LOAEL/Human 
Notes 
60 mg/kg oral 
GD6-15 
[Buttar 1976] 
 
Trimethadione 
Cmax =  58.9 
µg/mLa 
AUC(0-inf) = 
203 µg∙h/mLa 
 
Dimethadione 
Cmax = 
97.7µg/mLb 
AUC(0-inf) = 
4872 µg∙h/mLb 
240 mg/kg 
oral GD6-18 
[Buttar 1976] 
 
Trimethadione 
Cmax = 235 
µg/mLa 
AUC(0-inf) = 
814 µg∙h/mLa 
 
Dimethadione 
Cmax =  391 
µg/mLb 
AUC(0-inf) = 
19,488 
µg∙h/mLb 
240 mg/kg 
GD6-15 
[Buttar]: 
“adverse fetal 
effects on 
survival and 
litter size” 
 
250 mg/kg 
GD7-18 
[Vorhees]: 
embryolethality, 
malformations 
(primarily 
cardiac, with a 
lower incidence 
of esophageal 
and kidney 
defects) 
No rabbit data 
found 
 
 
Trimethadione 
AUC = 10.78 
µg∙h/mLc 
No 
rabbit 
data 
found 
No 
rabbit 
data 
found 
600 mg QID (10 
mg/kg  4) 
[highest dose, 
US label] 
 
Trimethadione 
Cmax = 42.75 
µg/mLd 
AUC(0-inf) = 
1000 µg∙h/mLd 
 
Dimethadione 
Cmax = 1251 
µg/mLe 
AUC(0-inf) = 
36,670 
µg∙h/mLe 
Trimethadione 
NOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax = 1.4 
(58.9/42.75) 
AUC = 0.2 (203/1000) 
rabbit 
NOAEL not identified 
 
LOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax = 5.5 
(235/42.75) 
AUC = 0.8 (814/1000) 
rabbit 
LOAEL not identified 
 
Dimethadione 
NOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax = 0.1 
(97.7/1251) 
Dimethadione is 
the only 
metabolite, has 
much higher 
exposures than 
trimethadione, 
and is a 
confirmed 
teratogen (Buttar 
1978).  Thus, 
margins for 
dimethadione 
are also listed.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
108 
AUC = 0.1 
(4872/36670) 
 
LOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax = 0.3 (391/1251) 
AUC = 0.5 
(19488/36670) 
a:  Extrapolated from reported value after 100 mg/kg trimethadione oral single dose in male Wistar rats (Tanaka 1981):  Cmax = 98.1 µg/mL, 
AUC(0-inf) = 339 µg·h/mL.  
b:  Extrapolated from reported value after 100 mg/kg trimethadione oral single dose in male Wistar rats (Tanaka 1981):  dimethadione Cmax = 
162.8 µg/mL, AUC(0-inf) = 8120 µg∙h/mL. 
c:  Actual value after 4 mg/kg trimethadione intravenous single dose in Japanese White rabbits (Tanaka 1999):  AUC(0-inf) = 10.78 µg∙h/mL 
calculated from Cl = 0.371 L/(kg∙h). 
d:  Extrapolated from reported value after 4 mg/kg trimethadione oral single dose (Kobayashi):  Cmax = 6.0 µg/mL, AUC(0-inf) = 100.1 µg·h/mL.  
For Cmax, an accumulation factor of 2.85 was applied that was estimated from the equation:  accumulation = 1/(1 – e–k∙tau), where k = 0.693/t½ 
with t½ = 9.6 hours and tau = 6 hours (i.e., 1/(1 – e–0433) = 1/(1 – 0.649) = 1/0.351 = 2.85). 
e:  Extrapolated from reported value after 4 mg/kg trimethadione oral single dose (Kobayashi):  dimethadione Cmax = 12.83 µg/mL, AUC(0-inf) = 
3667 µg·h/mL.  For Cmax, an accumulation factor of 39 was applied that was estimated from the equation:  accumulation = 1/(1 – e–k∙tau), where 
k = 0.693/t½ with t½ = 160 hours and tau = 6 hours (i.e., 1/(1 – e–0.026) = 1/(1 – 0.974) = 1/0.026 = 39). 
 
References 
Buttar HS, Dupui I, Khera KS. Fetotoxicity of trimethadione and paramethadione in rats. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1976;37:126 [abstract] 
Buttar HS, Dupuis I, Khera KS. Dimethadione-induced fetotoxicity in rats. Toxicology. 1978;9:155-64. 
Tanaka E, Kinoshita H, Yamamoto T, Kuroiwa Y, Takabatake E. Pharmacokinetic studies of trimethadione and its metabolite in rats with chemical-
induced liver injury. J Pharmacobiodyn. 1981;4:576-83.  
Tanaka E, Ishikawa A, Horie T. In vivo and in vitro trimethadione oxidation activity of the liver from various animal species including mouse, 
hamster, rat, rabbit, dog, monkey and human. Hum Exp Toxicol. 1999;18:12-16.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
109 
Vorhees CV. Fetal anticonvulsant syndrome in rats: dose- and period-response relationships of prenatal diphenylhydantoin, trimethadione and 
phenobarbital exposure on the structural and functional development of the offspring. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1983;227:274-87. 
US label trimethadione. 
Additional References Evaluated 
Midha KK.  Metabolism and disposition of trimethadione in pregnant rats. Epilepsia. 1979;20:417-23. [only useful data are concentrations at 6 
hours after last dose following dosing 60 and 240 mg/kg GD6-15: at 60 mg/kg , C6h = 11.3 µg/mL] 
Schardein JL, Schwetz BA, Kenel MF. Species sensitivities and prediction of teratogenic potential. Environ Health Perspect. 1985;61:55-67.  
[claimed rats are an insensitive species for detecting trimethadione teratogenesis] 
Tanaka E, Yoshida T, Kuroiwa Y. Dose-independent pharmacokinetics of trimethadione and its metabolite in rats. J Pharm Sci. 1985;74:340-1. 
[PK values after 4 mg/kg trimethadione oral single dose in male Wistar rats: trimethadione Cmax = 3.0 µg/mL, AUC(0-inf) = 8.21 µg·h/mL, and 
dimethadione Cmax = 10.2 µg/mL, AUC(0-inf) = 465.8 µg∙h/mL.  The values after 100 mg/kg  (Tanaka 1981) were used instead]. 
Taylor JD, Bertcher EL. The determination and distribution of trimethadione (tridione) in animal tissues. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1952;106:277-
85. [levels in rabbit brain after 1000 mg/kg IP]

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
110 
Valproic Acid 
CAS No.:  99-66-1 (sodium valproate: 1069-66-5) 
 
Rat NOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings 
Rabbit NOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax  
AUC 
Rabbit Findings Human 
Dose 
Cmax  
AUC 
Margins 
NOAEL/Human 
LOAEL/Human 
 
Notes 
65 mg/kg oral 
GD6-15, SD 
rats [FDA, 
United States, 
1995] 
 
 
 
Cmax = 73.8 
µg/mLa 
AUC = 230 
µg∙h/mLa 
200 mg/kg 
oral, SD rats, 
GD7-18 
[Voorhees], 
GD8-17 
[Binkerd]; [US 
Depacon label] 
 
Cmax = 227 
µg/mLa 
AUC = 707 
µg∙h/mLa  
hydronephrosis, 
cardiovascular 
defects 
 
150 mg/kg oral 
GD6-18  
[FDA, United 
States, 1977] 
 
Cmax = 410 
µg/mLb 
AUC = 690 
µg∙h/mLb 
 
350 mg/kg 
oral GD6-
18  
[FDA, 
United 
States, 
1977] 
 
Cmax = 957 
µg/mLb 
AUC = 
1610 
µg∙h/mLb 
resorptions; 
external 
abnormalities 
(cleft palate, 
umbilical hernia, 
bilateral talipes, 
exencephaly, 
hypoplastic ears, 
gastrochisis, 
bilateral talipes); 
visceral 
malformations 
(intraventricular 
septal defects, 
misshapen 
ventricle, renal 
agenesis); 
skeletal 
malformations 
(supernumerary 
ribs, fused ribs) 
60 mg/kg/day 
oral in 2 
divided doses 
(30 
mg/kg/dose) 
[highest 
approved 
dose, US 
Depakote and 
Depakene 
labels] 
 
 
Cmax = 205 
µg/mLc 
AUC(0-inf) = 
4180 
µg∙h/mLd 
NOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax = 0.4 
(73.8/205) 
AUC = 0.06 
(230/4180) 
rabbit 
Cmax = 2.0 
(410/205) 
AUC = 0.2 
(690/4180) 
 
LOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax = 1.1 
(227/205) 
AUC = 0.2 
(707/4180) 
rabbit 
Cmax = 4.7 
(957/205) 
AUC = 0.4 
(1610/4180)

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
111 
a:  Extrapolated or actual value after 200 mg/kg valproic acid oral dose on GD17 in pregnant Sprague Dawley rats (Binkerd):  Cmax = 227 µg/mL, 
AUC = 707 µg·h/mL.  PK data are also available on GD8:  Cmax = 341µg/mL, AUC = 1019 µg∙h/mL 
b:  Extrapolated from reported value after 70 mg/kg valproic acid oral single dose in male New Zealand White rabbits (Bourin):  Cmax = 191.3 
µg/mL, AUC(0-inf) = 322 µg·h/mL. Rabbit PK data are also available after 50 mg/kg oral (FDA, United States), 20 mg/kg oral (van Jaarsveld), 
43 mg/kg intravenous (Nakashima), and 75 mg/kg intravenous (Yokogawa). 
c:  Extrapolated from reported value after 1000 mg valproic acid oral BID for 5 days (Nitsche):  Cmax = 114 µg/mL. 
d:  Extrapolated from reported value after 1000 mg valproic acid oral single dose (Nitsche):  AUC(0-inf) = 1161 µg·h/mL. 
 
References 
Binkerd PE, Rowland JM, Nau H, Hendrickx AG. Evaluation of valproic acid (VPA) developmental toxicity and pharmacokinetics in Sprague-
Dawley rats. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1988;11:485-93.  
Bourin M, Guenzet J, Thomare P, Kergueris MF, Ortega A, Larousse C. Effects of administration route on valproate pharmacokinetics in the 
rabbit. Fundam Clin Pharmacol. 1991;5:331-9. 
FDA, United States Approval Package, NDA 018081 (S-001, S-025) and 018082 (S-008) (1995), Part 2. p. 7-8,10,12,28. 
FDA, United States Pharmtox reviews IND 011152 (March 1977), p. 31-32, 34. 
Nitsche V, Mascher H. The pharmacokinetics of valproic acid after oral and parenteral administration in healthy volunteers. Epilepsia. 
1982;23:153-62 
Ong LL, Schardein JL, Petrere JA, Sakowski R, Jordan H, Humphrey RR, et al. Teratogenesis of calcium valproate in rats. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 
198;3:121-6. 
Vorhees CV. Teratogenicity and developmental toxicity of valproic acid in rats. Teratology. 1987;35(2):195-202.   
US Depacon (valproate injection) label. 
US Depakene (valproate capsule) label. 
US Depakote (valproex tablets) label.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
112 
Additional References Evaluated 
FDA, United States Pharmtox reviews IND 011152 (1977), p. 48.  [after 50 mg/kg [14C]valproic acid oral single dose in rabbits (FDA, United 
States):  Cmax = 86 µg/mL]. 
Katayama H, Mizukami K, Yasuda M, Hatae T. Effects of carnitine on valproic acid pharmacokinetics in rats. J Pharm Sci. 2016;105:3199-3204. 
[PK data in male Wistar rats after 32 mg/kg oral: Cmax = 40.7 µg/mL, AUC(0-inf) = 3458 µg∙min/mL (57.6 µg∙h/mL)] 
Nakashima M, Takeuchi N, Hamada M, Matsuyama K, Ichikawa M, Goto S. In vivo microdialysis for pharmacokinetic investigations: a plasma 
protein binding study of valproate in rabbits. Biol Pharm Bull. 1994;17:1630-4.  [PK after 43 mg/kg intravenous valproic acid in anesthetized male 
Japanese Albino rabbits: C0 = 157 µg/mL, AUC(0-inf) = 308 µg∙h/mL] 
Rha JH, Jang IJ, Lee KH, Chong WS, Shin SG, Lee N, Myung HJ. Pharmacokinetic comparison of two valproic acid formulations--a plain and a 
controlled release enteric-coated tablets. J Korean Med Sci. 1993 Aug;8(4):251-6. 
van Jaarsveld MF, Walubo A, du Plessis JB. Interaction between valproic acid and acyclovir after intravenous and oral administration in a rabbit 
model. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2007;101:434-40. [PK after 20 mg/kg valproic acid oral single dose in New Zealand White rabbts:  Cmax = 
64.2 µg/mL, AUC(0-inf) = 227 µg·h/mL]. 
Yokogawa K, Iwashita S, Kubota A, Sasaki Y, Ishizaki J, Kawahara M, Matsushita R, Kimura K, Ichimura F, Miyamoto K. Effect of meropenem 
on disposition kinetics of valproate and its metabolites in rabbits. Pharm Res. 2001;18:1320-6.  [PK after 75 mg/kg intravenous dose in male albino 
rabbits:  Cmax = 238 µg/mL, AUC(0-6h) = 17.5 mg∙min/L (292 µg∙h/mL)] 
Zaccara G, Messori A, Moroni F. Clinical pharmacokinetics of valproic acid--1988. Clin Pharmacokinet. 1988;15:367-89.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
113 
VISMODEGIB 
CAS No.:  879085-55-9 
 
Rat 
NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings Rabbit 
NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit 
Findings 
Human 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Margins 
NOAEL/Human 
LOAEL/Human 
Notes 
NOAEL 
not 
identified 
10 mg/kg GD6-17 
oral [FDA, United 
States, 2011] 
 
Cmax = 7.22 µg/mLa 
AUC(0-24h) = 50.5 
µg∙h/mLa 
malformations 
included 
absent and/or 
fused digits 
on the hind 
limb, open 
perineum, 
multiple 
craniofacial 
anomalies 
no rabbit data 
found 
no rabbit 
data found 
no rabbit 
data 
found 
150 mg oral 
 
Cmax = 13.0 µg/mLb 
AUC(0-24h) = 306 
µg∙h/mLb 
NOAEL: 
rat:   
NOAEL not 
identified 
rabbit: 
no data found  
 
LOAEL: 
rat 
Cmax = 0.6 (7.22/13) 
AUC = 0.2 
(50.5/306) 
rabbit 
no data found  
MW = 
421.3 
a:  Reported value after 10 daily oral doses of 10 mg/kg vismodegib in female pregnant Wistar rats (FDA, United States, 2011):  Cmax = 7.22 
µg/mL, AUC(0-24h) = 50.5 µg·h/mL 
b:  Reported value after 14 daily oral doses of 150 mg vismodegib (FDA, United States, 2012):  Cmax = 30.9 µM (13.0 µg/mL), AUC(0-24h) = 727 
µmol∙h/L (306 µg∙h/mL).  
 
References 
FDA, United States.  Pharmacology Review NDA 203388 (08 Sep 2011), p. 66-9. 
FDA, United States.  Clinical Pharmacology Review NDA 203388 (13 Jan 2012), p. 48.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
114 
1.3.2 
Negative Control Reference Compounds 
CETIRIZINE 
CAS No.:  83881-51-0 
 
Rat NOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings 
Rabbit NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit Findings 
Human 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Margins 
NOAEL/Human 
LOAEL/Human 
Notes 
NOAEL (MEFL) 
75  mg/kg oral  
GD6-15  
(FDA, United 
States 1989) 
 
Cmax = 45 µg/mLa 
AUC = 301 
µg•h/mLb 
 
Exposure data at 
lower doses 
8  mg/kg oral  
GD6-15  
(FDA, United 
States 1989) 
 
Cmax = 4.6 µg/mLa 
AUC = 32 
µg•h/mLb 
 
25  mg/kg oral  
GD6-15  
(FDA, United 
States 1989) 
 
Cmax = 12 µg/mLa 
225 mg/kg oral  
GD6-15  
(FDA, United States 
1989) 
 
Cmax = 128 µg/mLa 
AUC = 1010 
µg•h/mLb 
 
225  mg/kg:  
pre- and post-
implantation 
loss in presence 
of maternal 
toxicity (death, 
clinical signs) 
 
 
NOAEL 
(MEFL) 
135  mg/kg oral  
GD6-18  
(FDA, United 
States 1989) 
 
Cmax = 137 
µg/mLc 
AUC = 642 
µg•h/mLc 
 
Exposure data at 
lower doses 
15  mg/kg oral  
GD6-18  
(FDA, United 
States 1989) 
 
Cmax = 15 
µg/mLc 
AUC =  71 
µg•h/mLc 
 
45  mg/kg oral  
GD6-18  
(FDA, United 
States 1989) 
Not established No MEFL 
observed 
10 mg MRHD 
 
Exposure values after 
single dose: 
Cmax = 0.33 µg/mLd 
AUC(0-24h): 3.0 
µg•hr/mLd 
NOAEL: 
rat (75 mg/kg/day) 
Cmax: 136 (45/0.33) 
AUC: 111 (334/3.02) 
Rabbit (135 
mg/kg/day) 
Cmax:  415 (137/0.33) 
AUC: 213 (642/3.02) 
 
LOAEL: 
Rat (225 mg/kg/day) 
Cmax: 388 (128/0.33) 
AUC: 334 (1010/3.02) 
rabbit 
Not applicable 
None

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
115 
Rat NOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings 
Rabbit NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit Findings 
Human 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Margins 
NOAEL/Human 
LOAEL/Human 
Notes 
AUC = 41 
µg•h/mLb 
Cmax =  51 
µg/mLc 
AUC =  116 
µg•h/mLc 
 
a: From reported Cmax values in a 4-week repeated-dose toxicity study in rats at steady state (day 23) at doses of 25, 75 and 225 mg/kg/day. Cmax 
for 8 mg/kg/day was linearly extrapolated from these data. (FDA, United States 1993, page 4). 
b: From reported AUC values in a 4-week repeated-dose toxicity study in rats at steady state (day 23) at doses of 25 mg/kg/day and 225 mg/kg/day. 
AUC for 8 and 75 mg/kg/day were linearly extrapolated from these data (FDA, United States 1993, page 4). 
c: From reported Cmax and AUC values in pregnant rabbits exposed from GD6-18 at steady state (GD18) at doses of  25, 45 and 90 mg/kg/day. 
Cmax and AUC for 15 and 135 mg/kg/day were linearly extrapolated from these data. (FDA, United States 1993, page 5). 
d: Single administration of 10 mg cetirizine with water (FDA, United States, 2003). 
 
References 
FDA, United States. Pharmacology review of NDA 019835 (11 Apr 1989) part 01, pages 10-11 (rat and rabbit EFD overview). 
FDA, United States. Pharmacology review of NDA 019835 (11 Apr 1989) part 02, pages 10-30 (rat and rabbit EFD summary). 
FDA, United States. Pharmacology review of NDA 019835 (18 Oct 1993), pages 4 (rat PK data) and 5 (rabbit PK data). 
FDA, United States. Clinical Pharmacology and Biopharmaceutics Review 021621/S-000 (31 Oct 2003) (Clinical AUC, single dose pg 11) 
US Label Zyrtec. 
EU SmPC Zyrtec.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
116 
SAXAGLIPTIN 
CAS No.:  361442-04-8 
 
Rat NOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings 
Rabbit NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit Findings 
Human 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Margins 
NOAEL/Human 
LOAEL/Human 
Notes 
NOAEL (MEFL) 
900  mg/kg oral  
GD6-15  
(FDA, United 
States 2009) 
 
Saxagliptin 
Cmax = 249 
µg/mLa 
AUC0-24 = 647 
µg•h/mLa 
 
BMS-510849 
Cmax = 21.1 
µg/mLb 
AUC0-24 = 144 
µg•h/mLa 
 
 
Exposure data at 
lower doses 
64  mg/kg oral  
GD6-15  
 
Saxagliptin 
Cmax = 17.7 
µg/mLa 
AUC0-24 = 23.6 
µg•h/mLa 
Not established 
 
No MEFL 
observed 
 
 
NOAEL 
(MEFL) 
200  mg/kg oral  
GD7-19  
(FDA, United 
States 2009) 
 
Saxagliptin 
Cmax = 43 
µg/mLc 
AUC0-24 = 111 
µg•h/mLa 
 
BMS-510849 
Cmax = 125 
µg/mLc 
AUC0-24 = 434 
µg•h/mLa 
 
 
Exposure data at 
lower doses 
8  mg/kg oral  
GD7-19  
 
Saxagliptin 
Cmax = 2 µg/mLc 
AUC0-24 = 2.5 
µg•h/mLa 
Not established No MEFL 
observed 
5 mg MRHD 
 
Exposure values after 
single dose: 
 
Saxagliptin 
Cmax = 0.024 µg/mLd 
AUC(0-24h): 0.078 
µg•hr/mLd 
 
BMS-510849 
Cmax = 0.047 µg/mLd 
AUC(0-24h): 0.214 
µg•hr/mLd 
NOAEL: 
rat (900 mg/kg/day) 
 
Saxagliptin 
Cmax: 10,375 
(249/0.024) 
AUC: 8,294 
(647/0.078) 
 
BMS-510849 
Cmax: 449 
(21.1/0.047) 
AUC: 673 
(144/0.214) 
 
Rabbit (200 
mg/kg/day) 
 
Saxagliptin 
Cmax: 1,792 
(43/0.024) 
AUC: 1,423 
(111/0.078) 
 
BMS-510849 
Cmax: 2,659 
(125/0.047) 
AUC: 2,028 
(434/0.214) 
BMS-510849 
is a major 
active 
metabolite of 
saxagliptin. 
 (US Label 
and EU 
EPAR 
Onglyza)

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
117 
Rat NOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings 
Rabbit NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit Findings 
Human 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Margins 
NOAEL/Human 
LOAEL/Human 
Notes 
 
BMS-510849 
Cmax = 1.5 µg/mLb 
AUC0-24 = 6.3 
µg•h/mLa 
 
240  mg/kg oral  
GD6-15  
 
Saxagliptin 
Cmax = 66.3 
µg/mLa 
AUC0-24 = 121 
µg•h/mLa 
 
BMS-510849 
Cmax = 5.6 µg/mLb 
AUC0-24 = 28.9 
µg•h/mLa 
 
BMS-510849 
Cmax = 5 µg/mLc 
AUC0-24 = 7.4 
µg•h/mLa 
 
40  mg/kg oral  
GD7-19  
 
Saxagliptin 
Cmax = 9 µg/mLc 
AUC0-24 = 12.3 
µg•h/mLa 
 
BMS-510849 
Cmax = 25 
µg/mLc 
AUC0-24 = 47.9 
µg•h/mLa 
 
LOAEL: 
rat 
Not applicable 
rabbit 
Not applicable 
a: From reported AUC values in pregnant rats (GD15) and pregnant rabbits (GD19) at steady state at doses of 64, 240 and 900 mg/kg/day 
saxagliptin for rat and 8, 40 and 200 mg/kg/day saxagliptin for rabbit (FDA, United States, 2009, part 02, page 84) 
b: From reported Cmax values in a 4-week repeated-dose toxicity study in female rats at steady state (day 28) at doses of 150, 300 and 225 
mg/kg/day, corresponding to 50, 78 and 139 ug/mL for saxagliptin and 4.6, 7.9 and 11 ug/mL for the active metabolite.. Saxagliptin Cmax 
values were linearly extrapolated from these data. (FDA, United States, 2009, part 04, page 56) 
c: From reported Cmax values in a rabbit EFD study at steady state (GD19) at 40 mg/kg/day saxagliptin (Cmax 8.5 µg/mL). Saxagliptin Cmax 
values were linearly extrapolated from these data. 
d: Single administration of 5 mg saxagliptin (US Label Onglyza, page 12).

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
118 
References 
FDA, United States. Pharmacology Review 022350/S-000 (3 March 2009) Part 02, page 84 (rat and rabbit AUC data Saxagliptin and active 
metabolite) 
FDA, United States. Pharmacology Review 022350/S-000 (3 March 2009) Part 03, pages 57-59 (rat and rabbit EFD studies). 
FDA, United States. Pharmacology Review 022350/S-000 (3 March 2009) Part 04, page 56 (rat Cmax data Saxagliptin and active metabolite) 
FDA, United States. Pharmacology Review 200678Orig1s000 (10 January 2010) for Saxagliptin + metformin, page 44 table 30 (rabbit Cmax data 
Saxagliptin and active metabolite) 
US Label Onglyza. 
EU EPAR Onglyza.

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
119 
VILDAGLIPTIN 
CAS No.:  274901-16-5 
 
Rat NOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat LOAEL  
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rat Findings 
Rabbit NOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit LOAEL 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Rabbit Findings 
Human 
Dose 
Cmax 
AUC 
Margins 
NOAEL/Human 
LOAEL/Human 
Notes 
NOAEL (MEFL) 
750  mg/kg oral  
GD6-17  
(TGA, Australia 
2010) 
 
AUC0-24 = 241 
µg•h/mLa 
 
Exposure data at 
lower doses 
75  mg/kg oral  
GD6-17  
 
AUC0-24 = 23 
µg•h/mLa 
 
225  mg/kg oral  
GD6-17  
 
AUC0-24 = 68 
µg•h/mLa 
Not established 
 
No MEFL 
observed 
 
 
NOAEL 
(MEFL) 
150  mg/kg oral  
GD7-20  
(TGA, Australia 
2010) 
 
AUC0-24 = 80 
µg•h/mLa 
 
Exposure data at 
lower doses 
15  mg/kg oral  
GD7-20  
 
AUC0-24 = 6 
µg•h/mLa 
 
50  mg/kg oral  
GD7-20  
 
AUC0-24 = 19 
µg•h/mLa 
Not established No MEFL 
observed 
50 mg b.i.d. MRHD 
(100 mg/day) 
 
Exposure values after 
50 mg b.i.d.: 
 
AUC(0-24h): 2.06 
µg•hr/mLb 
 
 
NOAEL: 
rat (750 mg/kg/day) 
 
AUC: 117 
(241/2.06) 
 
Rabbit (150 
mg/kg/day) 
 
AUC: 39 (80/2.06) 
 
LOAEL: 
Not applicable 
 
a: Calculated from exposure ratios compared to human exposure at MRHD (2.06 µg•hr/mL at 50 mg BID) of AUC data provided within the rat 
and rabbit EFD studies (TGA, Australia, 2010, page 19) 
b: Human exposure data at 50 mg BID (TGA, Australia, 2010, page 14)

ICH S5(R3) Guideline 
 
 
120 
References 
TGA, Australia. Australian Public Assessment Report for Vildagliptin (April 2010) pages 19 (EFD studies), 14, 24 (exposure data) and 72 
(pregnancy). 
EU EPAR Galvus 
EU SmPC. Galvus