# TG443.pdf
# Category: oecd
# Pages: 27

Test Guideline No. 443
Extended One-Generation Reproductive 
Toxicity Study
25 June 2025
OECD Guidelines for the 
Testing of Chemicals
Section 4
Health effects

OECD/OCDE                          443 
Adopted:  
25 June 2025   
 
© OECD (2025) 
 
You are free to use this material subject to the terms and conditions available at http://www.oecd.org/termsandconditions/ 
1 
OECD TEST GUIDELINE FOR THE TESTING OF 
CHEMICALS 
Extended One-Generation Reproductive Toxicity Study 
INTRODUCTION 
1. 
This Test Guideline (TG) is based on the International Life Science Institute (ILSI)-Health and 
Environmental Sciences Institute (HESI), Agricultural Chemical Safety Assessment (ACSA) Technical 
Committee proposal for a life stage F1 extended one generation reproductive study as published in Cooper 
et al., 2006 (1). Several improvements and clarifications have been made to the study design to provide 
flexibility and to stress the importance of starting with existing knowledge, while using in-life observations 
to guide and tailor the testing.  
2. 
This TG 443 was updated in 2024-20251 for some of the endpoints, as suggested in the context 
of the extended one-generation reproduction toxicity study review project performed between 2021-
2023(2). This guideline provides a detailed description of the operational conduct of an Extended One-
Generation Reproductive Toxicity Study. The TG describes three cohorts of F1 animals:  
• 
Cohort 1: assesses reproductive/developmental endpoints; this cohort may be extended to include 
an F2 generation. 
• 
Cohort 2: assesses the potential impact of chemical exposure on the developing nervous system.  
• 
Cohort 3: assesses the potential impact of chemical exposure on the developing immune system.   
3. 
Decisions on whether to assess the second generation and to omit the developmental 
neurotoxicity cohort and/or developmental immunotoxicity cohort should reflect existing knowledge for the 
chemical being evaluated, as well as the needs of various regulatory authorities. The purpose of the Test 
Guideline is to provide details on how the study can be conducted and to address how each cohort should 
be evaluated. 
4. 
Procedure for the decision on the internal triggering for producing a 2nd generation is described 
in Guidance Document 117 (41) for those regulatory authorities using internal triggers. More specific 
guidance on procedures described in this Test Guideline is available in the Guidance Document 151 (42). 
INITIAL CONSIDERATIONS AND OBJECTIVES 
5. 
The main objective of the Extended One-Generation Reproductive Toxicity Study is to evaluate 
specific life stages not covered by other types of toxicity studies and test for effects that may occur as a 
result of pre- and postnatal chemical exposure. For reproductive endpoints, it is envisaged that, as a first 
step and when available, information from repeat-dose studies (including screening reproductive toxicity 
studies, e.g., TG 422 (34)), or short term endocrine disrupter screening assays, (e.g., Uterotrophic assay 
 
1 The original versions of the document (dated 2012 and 2018) mentioned in paragraph 9 the necessity to review and 
revise the TG 443 in the light of experience gained, when a sufficient number of studies are completed.

OECD/OCDE                          443 
 
       
© OECD (2025) 
 
2 
- TG 440 (38); and Hershberger assay - TG 441 (39)) is used to detect effects on reproductive organs for 
males and females. This might include spermatogenesis (testicular histopathology) for males and oestrous 
cycles, follicle counts/oocyte maturation and ovarian integrity (histopathology) for females. The Extended 
One-Generation Reproductive Toxicity Study then serves as a test for reproductive endpoints that require 
the interaction of males with females, females with conceptus, and females with offspring and the F1 
generation until after sexual maturity (see Guidance Document 151 supporting this Test Guideline (42)). 
6. 
The TG is designed to provide an evaluation of the pre- and postnatal effects of chemicals on 
development as well as a thorough evaluation of systemic toxicity in pregnant and lactating females and 
young and adult offspring. Detailed examination of key developmental endpoints, such as offspring 
viability, neonatal health, developmental status at birth, and physical and functional development until 
adulthood, is expected to identify specific target organs in the offspring. In addition, the study will provide 
and/or confirm information about the effects of a test chemical on the integrity and performance of the adult 
male and female reproductive systems. Specifically, but not exclusively, the following parameters are 
considered: gonadal function, the oestrous cycle, epididymal sperm maturation, mating behaviour, 
conception, pregnancy, parturition, and lactation. Furthermore, the information obtained from the 
developmental neurotoxicity and developmental immunotoxicity assessments will characterize potential 
effects in those systems. The data derived from these tests should allow the determination of No-Observed 
Adverse Effect Levels (NOAELs), Lowest Observed Adverse Effect Levels (LOAELs) and/or benchmark 
doses for the various endpoints and/or be used to characterize effects detected in previous repeat-dose 
studies and/or serve as a guide for subsequent testing.  
7. 
A schematic drawing of the protocol is presented in Figure 1. The test chemical is administered 
continuously in graduated doses to several groups of sexually mature males and females. This parental 
(P) generation is dosed for a defined pre-mating period (selected based on the available information for 
the test chemical; but for a minimum of two weeks) and a two-week mating period. P males are further 
treated at least until weaning of the F1. They should be treated for a minimum of 10 weeks. They may be 
treated for longer if there is a need to clarify effects on reproduction. Treatment of the P females is 
continued during pregnancy and lactation until termination after the weaning of their litters (i.e. 8-10 weeks 
of treatment). The F1 offspring receive further treatment with the test chemical from weaning to adulthood. 
If a second generation is assessed (see GD 117 (41)), the F1 offspring will be maintained on treatment 
until weaning of the F2, or until termination of the study.  
8. 
Clinical observations and pathology examinations are performed on all animals for signs of toxicity, 
with special emphasis on the integrity and performance of the male and female reproductive systems and 
the health, growth, development and function of the offspring. At weaning, selected offspring are randomly 
assigned to specific subgroups (cohorts 1-3, see paragraphs 34 and 35 and Figure 1) for further 
investigations, including sexual maturation, reproductive organ integrity and function, neurological and 
behavioural endpoints, and immune functions.  
9. 
In conducting the study, the guiding principles and considerations outlined in the OECD Guidance 
Document n° 19 on the recognition, assessment, and use of clinical signs as humane endpoints for 
experimental animals used in safety evaluations (34) should be followed.

OECD/OCDE                          443 
            
           
© OECD (2025) 
 
3 
Figure 1: Scheme of the Extended One-Generation Reproductive Toxicity Study  
 
DESCRIPTION OF THE METHOD/PREPARATIONS FOR THE TEST 
Animals 
Selection of animal species and strain 
10. 
The choice of species for the reproductive toxicity test should be carefully considered in light of all 
available information. However, because of the extent of background data and the comparability to general 
toxicity tests, the rat is normally the preferred species, and criteria and recommendations given in this TG 
refer to this species. If another species is used, justification should be given and appropriate modifications 
to the protocol will be necessary. Strains with low fecundity or a well-known high incidence of spontaneous 
developmental defects should not be used.  
Age, body weight and inclusion criteria 
11. 
Healthy parental animals, which have not been subjected to previous experimental procedures, 
should be used. Both males and females should be studied, and the females should be nulliparous and 
non-pregnant. The P animals should be sexually mature, of similar weight (within sex) at initiation of dosing, 
similar age (approximately 90 days) at mating, and representative of the species and strain under study. 
Animals should be acclimated for at least 5 days after arrival. The animals are randomly assigned to the

OECD/OCDE                          443 
 
       
© OECD (2025) 
 
4 
control and treatment groups, in a manner which results in comparable mean body weight values among 
the groups (i.e. ± 20% of the mean).  
Housing and feeding conditions 
12. 
The temperature in the experimental animal room should be 22 °C (± 3°). Relative humidity should 
be between 30-70%, with an ideal range of 50-60%. Artificial lighting should be set at 12 hours light, 12 
hours dark. Conventional laboratory diets may be used with an unlimited supply of drinking water. Careful 
attention should be given to diet phytoestrogen content, as a high level of phytoestrogen in the diet might 
affect some reproductive endpoints. Standardized, open-formula diets in which estrogenic substances 
have been reduced are recommended (3) (32). The choice of diet may be influenced by the need to ensure 
a suitable admixture of a test chemical when administered by this method. Content, homogeneity and 
stability of the test chemical in the diets should be verified. The feed and drinking water should be regularly 
analysed for contaminants. Samples of each batch of the diet used during the study should be retained 
under appropriate conditions (e.g., frozen at -20°C), until finalisation of the report, in case the results 
necessitate a further analysis of diet ingredients.  
13. 
Animals should be caged in small groups of the same sex and treatment group. They may be 
housed individually to avoid possible injuries (e.g., males after the mating period). Mating procedures 
should be carried out in suitable cages. After evidence of copulation, females that are presumed to be 
pregnant are housed separately in parturition or maternity cages where they are provided with appropriate 
and defined nesting materials. Litters are housed with their mothers until weaning. F1 animals should be 
housed in small groups of the same sex and treatment group from weaning to termination. If scientifically 
justified, animals can be housed individually. The level of phytoestrogens contained in the selected bedding 
material should be minimal. 
Number and identification of animals 
14. 
Normally, each test and control group should contain a sufficient number of mating pairs to yield 
at least 20 pregnant females per dose group. The objective is to produce enough pregnancies to ensure a 
meaningful evaluation of the potential of the substance to affect fertility, pregnancy and maternal behaviour 
of the P generation and growth and development of the F1 offspring, from conception to maturity. Failure 
to achieve the desired number of pregnant animals does not necessarily invalidate the study and should 
be evaluated on a case-by-case basis, considering a possible causal relationship to the test chemical. 
15. 
Each P animal is assigned a unique identification number before dosing starts. If laboratory 
historical data suggest that a significant proportion of females may not show regular (4 or 5-day) oestrous 
cycles, then an assessment of oestrous cycles before start of treatment is advised. Alternatively, the group 
size may be increased to ensure that at least 20 females in each group would have regular (4 or 5-day) 
oestrous cycles at the start of treatment. All F1 offspring are uniquely identified when neonates are first 
examined on postnatal day (PND) 0 or 1. Records indicating the litter of origin should be maintained for all 
F1 animals, and F2 animals where applicable, throughout the study. 
Test chemical 
Available information on the test chemical 
16. 
The review of existing information is important for decisions on the route of administration, the 
choice of the vehicle, the selection of animal species, the selection of dosages and potential modifications 
of the dosing schedule. Therefore, all the relevant available information on the test chemical, i.e. physico-
chemical, toxicokinetics (including species-specific metabolism), toxicodynamic properties, structure-
activity relationships (SARs), in vitro metabolic processes, results of previous toxicity studies and relevant

OECD/OCDE                          443 
            
           
© OECD (2025) 
 
5 
information on structural analogues should be taken into consideration in planning the Extended One-
Generation Reproductive Toxicity Study. Preliminary information on absorption, distribution, metabolism 
and elimination (ADME) and bioaccumulation may be derived from chemical structure, physico-chemical 
data, extent of plasma protein binding or toxicokinetic (TK) studies, while results from toxicity studies give 
additional information, e.g., on NOAEL, metabolism or induction of metabolism.  
Consideration of toxicokinetic data 
17. 
Although not required, TK data from previously conducted dose range-finding or other studies are 
extremely useful in the planning of the study design, selection of dose levels and interpretation of results. 
Of particular utility are data which: 1) verify exposure of developing fetuses and pups to the test compound 
(or relevant metabolites), 2) provide an estimate of internal dosimetry, and 3) evaluate for potential dose-
dependent saturation of kinetic processes. Additional TK data, such as metabolite profiles, concentration-
time courses, etc. should also be considered, if they are available. Supplemental TK data may also be 
collected during the main study, provided that it does not interfere with the collection and interpretation of 
the main study endpoints.  
As a general guide, the following TK data set would be useful in planning the Extended One-Generation 
Reproductive Toxicity Study:   
 
• 
Late pregnancy (e.g., Gestation Day 20) - maternal blood and foetal blood  
• 
Mid-lactation (PND 10) - maternal blood, pup blood and/or milk  
• 
Early post-weaning (e.g., PND 28) - weanling blood samples  
Flexibility should be employed in determining the specific analytes (e.g., parent compound and/or 
metabolites) and sampling scheme. For example, the number and timing of sample collection on a given 
sampling day will be dependent upon route of exposure and prior knowledge of TK properties in non-
pregnant animals. For dietary studies, sampling at a single consistent time on each of these days is 
sufficient, whereas gavage dosing may warrant additional sampling times to obtain a better estimate of the 
range of internal doses. However, it is not necessary to generate a full concentration time-course on any of 
the sampling days. If necessary, blood can be pooled by sex within litters for fetal and neonatal analyses.  
Route of administration 
18. 
Selection of the route should take into consideration the route(s) most relevant for human 
exposure. Although the protocol is designed for administration of the test chemical through the diet, it can 
be modified for administration by other routes (drinking water, gavage, inhalation, dermal), depending on 
the characteristics of the compound and the information required.  
Choice of the vehicle 
19. 
Where necessary, the test chemical is dissolved or suspended in a suitable vehicle. It is 
recommended that, where possible, the use of an aqueous solution/suspension is considered first, followed 
by consideration of a solution/suspension in oil (e.g., corn oil). For vehicles other than water, the toxic 
characteristics of the vehicle should be known. Use of vehicles with potential intrinsic toxicity should be 
avoided (e.g., acetone, DMSO). The stability of the test chemical in the vehicle should be determined. 
Considerations should be given to the following characteristics if a vehicle or other additive is used to 
facilitate dosing: effects on the absorption, distribution, metabolism, or retention of the test chemical; 
effects on the chemical properties of the test chemical that may alter its toxic characteristics; and effects 
on the food or water consumption or the nutritional status of the animals.

OECD/OCDE                          443 
 
       
© OECD (2025) 
 
6 
Dose selection 
20. 
Normally, the study should include at least three dose levels and a concurrent control. When 
selecting appropriate dose levels, the investigator should consider all available information, including the 
dosing information from previous studies, TK data from pregnant or non-pregnant animals, the extent of 
lactational transfer, and estimates of human exposure. If TK data are available which indicate dose-
dependent saturation of TK processes, care should be taken to avoid high dose levels which clearly exhibit 
saturation, provided of course, that human exposures are expected to be well below the point of saturation. 
In such cases, the highest dose level should be at, or just slightly above the inflection point for transition 
to nonlinear TK behaviour.    
21. 
In the absence of relevant TK data, the dose levels should be based on toxic effects, unless limited 
by the physical/chemical nature of the test chemical. If dose levels are based on toxicity, the highest dose 
should be chosen with the aim to induce some systemic toxicity, but not death or severe suffering of the 
animals.  
22. 
In the dose selection the investigator should also consider and ensure that data generated is 
adequate to fulfil the regulatory requirements across OECD countries as appropriate (e.g., hazard and risk 
assessment, classification and labelling, ED assessment, etc.) 
23. 
A descending sequence of dose levels should be selected in order to demonstrate any dose-
related effect and to establish NOAELs or doses near the limit of detection that would allow for derivation 
of a benchmark dose for the most sensitive endpoint(s). To avoid large dose spacing between NOAELs 
and LOAELs, two- or four-fold intervals are frequently optimal. The addition of a fourth test group is often 
preferable to using a very large interval (e.g. more than a factor of 10) between doses.  
24. 
Except for treatment with the test chemical, animals in the control group are handled in an identical 
manner to the test group subjects. This group should be untreated or sham-treated or a vehicle-control 
group if a vehicle is used in administering the test chemical. If a vehicle is used, the control group should 
receive the vehicle in the highest volume used.  
Limit test 
25. 
If there is no evidence of toxicity at a dose of at least 1000 mg/kg body weight/day in repeat-dose 
studies, or if toxicity would not be expected based upon data from structurally- and/or metabolically-related 
compounds, indicating similarity in the in vivo/in vitro metabolic properties, a study using several dose 
levels may not be necessary. In such cases, the Extended One-Generation Reproductive Toxicity Study 
could be conducted using a control group and a single dose of at least 1000 mg/kg body weight/day. 
However, should evidence for reproductive or developmental toxicity be found at this limit dose, further 
studies at lower dose levels will be required to identify a NOAEL. These limit test considerations apply only 
when human exposure does not indicate the need for a higher dose level.  
PROCEDURES 
Exposure of offspring  
26. 
Dietary exposure is the preferred method of administration. If gavage studies are performed, it 
should be noted that the pups will normally only receive test chemical indirectly through the milk, until direct 
dosing commences for them at weaning. In diet or drinking water studies, the pups will additionally receive 
test chemical directly when they commence eating for themselves during the last week of the lactation 
period. Modifications to the study design should be considered when excretion of the test chemical in milk

OECD/OCDE                          443 
            
           
© OECD (2025) 
 
7 
is poor and where there is lack of evidence for a continuous exposure of the offspring. In these cases, 
direct dosing of pups during the lactation period should be considered based on available TK information, 
offspring toxicity or changes in biomarkers (4) (5). Careful consideration of benefits and disadvantages 
should be made prior to conducting direct-dosing studies on nursing pups (6).  
Dosing schedule and administration of doses 
27. 
Some information on oestrous cycles, male and female reproductive tract histopathology and 
testicular/epididymal sperm analysis may be available from previous repeat-dose toxicity studies of 
adequate duration. The duration of the pre-mating treatment in the Extended One-Generation 
Reproductive Toxicity Study is therefore aimed at the detection of effects on functional changes that may 
interfere with mating behaviour and fertilisation. The pre-mating treatment should be sufficiently long to 
achieve steady-state exposure conditions in P males and females. A 2-week pre-mating treatment for both 
sexes is considered adequate in most cases. For females, this covers 3-4 complete oestrous cycles and 
should be sufficient to detect any adverse effects on cyclicity. For males, this is equivalent to the time 
required for epididymal transit of maturing spermatozoa and should allow the detection of post-testicular 
effects on sperm (during the final stages of spermiation and epididymal sperm maturation) at mating.  At 
the time of termination, when testicular and epididymal histopathology and analysis of sperm parameters 
are scheduled, the P and F1 males, will have been exposed for at least one entire spermatogenic process 
(7) (8) (9) (10) and GD 151 (42).   
28. 
Pre-mating exposure scenarios for males could be adapted if testicular toxicity (impairment of 
spermatogenesis) or effects on sperm integrity and function have been clearly identified in previous 
studies. Similarly, for females, known effects of the test chemical on the oestrous cycle and thus sexual 
receptivity, may justify different pre-mating exposure scenarios. In special cases it may be acceptable that 
treatment of the P females is initiated only after a sperm-positive smear has been obtained (see GD 151 
(42)). 
29. 
Once the pre-mating dosing period is established, the animals should be treated with the test 
chemical continuously on a 7-days/week basis until necropsy. All animals should be dosed by the same 
method. Dosing should continue during the 2-week mating period and, for P females, throughout gestation 
and lactation up to the day of termination after weaning. Males should be treated in the same manner until 
termination at the time when the F1 animals are weaned. For necropsy, priority should be given to females 
which should be necropsied on the same/similar day of lactation. Necropsy of males can be spread over 
a larger number of days, depending on laboratory facilities. Unless already initiated during the lactation 
period, direct dosing of the selected F1 males and females should begin at weaning and continue until the 
scheduled necropsy, depending on cohort assignment.  
30. 
For substances administered via the diet or drinking water, it is important to ensure that the 
quantities of the test chemical involved do not interfere with normal nutrition or water balance. When the 
test chemical is administered in the diet, either a constant dietary concentration (ppm) or a constant dose 
level in terms of the body weight of the animal may be employed; the option chosen should be specified.  
31. 
When the test chemical is administered by gavage, the volume of liquid administered at one time 
should not normally exceed 1 mL/100 g body weight (0.4 mL/100 g body weight is the maximum for oil, 
e.g., corn oil). Except for irritant or corrosive substances, which will normally reveal exacerbated effects 
with higher concentrations, variability in test volume should be minimised by adjusting the concentration to 
ensure a constant volume at all dose levels. The treatment should be given at similar times each day. The 
dose to each animal should normally be based on the most recent individual body weight determination 
and adjusted at least weekly in adult males and adult non-pregnant females, and every two days in 
pregnant females and F1 animals when administered prior to weaning and during the 2 weeks following 
weaning. If TK data indicate a low placental transfer of the test chemical, the gavage dose during the last

OECD/OCDE                          443 
 
       
© OECD (2025) 
 
8 
week of pregnancy may have to be adjusted to prevent the administration of an excessively toxic dose to 
the dam. Females should not be treated by gavage, or any other route of treatment where the animal needs 
to be handled, on the day of parturition; omission of test chemical administration on that day is preferable 
to a disturbance of the birth process.  
Mating 
32. 
Each P female should be placed with a single, randomly selected, unrelated male from the same 
dose group (1:1 pairing) until evidence of copulation is observed or 2 weeks have elapsed. If there are 
insufficient males, for example due to male death before pairing, then male(s) that have already mated 
may be paired (1:1) with a second female(s) such that all females are paired. Day 0 of pregnancy is defined 
as the day on which mating evidence is confirmed (a vaginal plug or sperm are found). Animals should be 
separated as soon as possible after evidence of copulation is observed. If mating has not occurred after 2 
weeks, the animals should be separated without further opportunity for mating. Mating pairs should be 
clearly identified in the data.  
Litter size 
33. 
On day 4 after birth, the size of each litter may be adjusted by eliminating extra pups by random 
selection to yield, as nearly as possible, five males and five females per litter. Selective elimination of pups, 
e.g., based on body weight, is not appropriate. Whenever the number of male or female pups prevents 
having five of each sex per litter, partial adjustment (for example, six males and four females) is acceptable.  
Selection of pups for post-weaning studies (see Figure 1)  
34. 
At weaning (around PND 21) pups from all available litters up to 20 per dose and control group 
are selected for further examinations and maintained until sexual maturation (unless earlier testing is 
required). Pups are selected randomly, with the exception that obvious runts (animals with a body weight 
more than two standard deviations below the mean pup weight of the respective litter) should not be 
included, as they are unlikely to be representative of the treatment group.  
On PND 21, the selected F1 pups are randomly assigned to one of three cohorts of animals, as follows:  
 
Cohort 1 (1A and 1B) = Reproductive/developmental toxicity testing 
 
Cohort 2 (2A and 2B) = Developmental neurotoxicity testing  
 
Cohort 3 = Developmental immunotoxicity testing  
Cohort 1A: One male and one female/litter/group (20/sex/group): priority selection for primary assessment 
of effects upon reproductive systems and of general toxicity.  
Cohort 1B: One male and one female/litter/group (20/sex/group): priority selection for follow-up 
assessment of reproductive performance by mating F1 animals, when assessed (see GD 117 (41)), and 
for obtaining additional histopathology data in cases of suspected reproductive or endocrine toxicants, or 
when results from cohort 1A are equivocal. 
Cohort 2A: A total of 20 pups per group (10 males and 10 females per group; one male or one female per 
litter) are assigned for neurobehavioral testing followed by neurohistopathology assessment as adults.   
Cohort 2B: A total of 20 pups per group (10 males and 10 females per group; one male or one female per 
litter) are assigned for neurohistopathology assessment at weaning (PND 21 or PND 22).  If there are 
insufficient numbers of animals, preference should be given to assigning animals to Cohort 2A.

OECD/OCDE                          443 
            
           
© OECD (2025) 
 
9 
Cohort 3: Total of 20 pups per group (10 males and 10 females per group; one per litter, where possible).  
Additional pups may be required from the control group to act as positive control animals in the T-cell 
dependent antibody response assay (TDAR) at PND 56 ± 3. 
 
35. 
Should there be an insufficient number of pups in a litter to serve all cohorts, cohort 1 takes 
precedence, as it can be extended to produce an F2 generation. Additional pups may be assigned to any 
of the cohorts in case of specific concern, e.g., if a chemical is suspected to be a neurotoxicant, 
immunotoxicant or reproductive toxicant. These pups may be used for examinations at different timepoints 
or for the evaluation of supplementary endpoints. Pups not assigned to cohorts will be submitted to clinical 
biochemistry (paragraph 56) and gross necropsy (paragraph 69). In cases where cohorts 2 and/or 3 are 
omitted, sufficient number of pups need to be maintained to investigate sexual maturation (3 
per/sex/litter/dose i.e. aiming at 50 pups/sex/group). Therefore, the required number of pups (aiming at 50 
pups/sex/group) should be maintained and evaluated for sexual maturation. The animals could be grouped 
in an extra cohort labelled Cohort 1C, for example (see also Figure 1 above and paragraphs 46 and 47 
below). 
Second mating of the P animals 
36. 
A second mating is not normally recommended for the P animals, as it comes at the expense of 
losing important information on the number of implantation sites (and thus post-implantation and peri-natal 
loss data, indicators of a possible teratogenic potential) for the first litter. The need to verify or elucidate an 
effect in exposed females would be served better by extending the study to include a mating of the F1 
generation. However, a second mating of the P males with untreated females is always an option to clarify 
equivocal findings or for further characterisation of effects on fertility observed in the first mating. 
IN-LIFE OBSERVATIONS 
Clinical observations 
37. 
For the P and the selected F1 animals, a general clinical observation is made once a day. In the 
case of gavage dosing, the timing of clinical observations should be prior to and post-dosing (for possible 
signs of toxicity associated with peak plasma concentration). Pertinent behavioural changes, signs of 
difficult or prolonged parturition and all signs of toxicity are recorded. All animals are observed for severe 
toxicity, morbidity, and mortality twice daily on weekdays and at least once daily on weekends.  
38. 
In addition, a more detailed examination of all P and F1 animals (after weaning) is conducted on a 
weekly basis and could conveniently be performed on an occasion when the animal is weighed, which 
would minimize handling stress. Observations should be carefully conducted and recorded using scoring 
systems that have been defined by the testing laboratory. Efforts should be made to ensure that variations 
in the test conditions are minimal. Signs noted should include, but not be limited to, changes in skin, fur, 
eyes, mucous membranes, the occurrence of secretions and excretions and autonomic activity (e.g., 
lacrimation, piloerection, pupil size, unusual respiratory pattern). Changes in gait, posture, response to 
handling, as well as the presence of clonic or tonic movements, stereotypy (e.g., excessive grooming, 
repetitive circling) or bizarre behaviour (e.g., self-mutilation, walking backwards) should also be recorded.

OECD/OCDE                          443 
 
       
© OECD (2025) 
 
10 
Body weight and food/water consumption  
39. 
P animals are weighed on the first day of dosing and at least weekly thereafter. In addition, P 
females are weighed during lactation on the same days as the weighing of the pups in their litters (see 
paragraph 45). All F1 animals are weighed individually at weaning (PND 21) and at least weekly thereafter. 
Body weight is also recorded on the day when they attain puberty (completion of preputial separation or 
vaginal patency). All animals are weighed at sacrifice.  
40. 
During the study, food and water consumption (in the case of test chemical administration in the 
drinking water) are recorded at least weekly on the same days as animal body weights (except during 
cohabitation). The food consumption of each cage of F1 animals is recorded weekly commencing with 
selection to a respective cohort.  
Oestrous cycles 
41. 
Preliminary information of test chemical-related effects on the oestrous cycle may already be 
available from previous repeat-dose toxicity studies and may be used in designing a test chemical-specific 
protocol for the Extended One-Generation Reproductive Toxicity Study. Normally the assessment of 
oestrous cyclicity (by vaginal cytology) will start at the beginning of the treatment period and continue until 
confirmation of mating or the end of the 2-week mating period. If females have been screened for normal 
oestrous cycles before treatment, then it is useful to continue smearing as treatment starts, but if there is 
concern about non-specific effects at the start of treatment (such as an initial marked reduction in food 
consumption) then animals may be allowed to adapt to treatment for up to two weeks before the start of 
the 2-week smearing period leading into pairing. If the female treatment period is extended in this way (i.e. 
to a 4-week pre-mating treatment) then consideration should be made to purchasing animals younger and 
to extending the period of male treatment before pairing. When obtaining vaginal/cervical cells, care should 
be taken to avoid disturbance of mucosa and subsequently, the induction of pseudopregnancy (11) (12). 
42. 
Vaginal smears should be examined daily for all F1 females in cohort 1A, after the onset of vaginal 
patency, until the first cornified smear is recorded, in order to determine the time interval between these 
two events. Oestrous cycles for all F1 females in cohort 1A should also be monitored for a period of two 
weeks, commencing around PND 75. In addition, should mating of the F1 generation be necessary, the 
vaginal cytology in cohort 1B will be followed from the time of pairing until mating evidence is detected. 
Mating and pregnancy 
43. 
In addition to the standard endpoints (e.g., body weight, food consumption, clinical observations 
including mortality/morbidity checks), the dates of pairing, the date of insemination and the date of 
parturition are recorded, and the precoital interval (pairing to insemination) and the duration of pregnancy 
(insemination to parturition) are calculated. The P females should be examined carefully at the time of 
expected parturition for any signs of dystocia. Any abnormalities in nesting behaviour or nursing 
performance should be recorded.  
44. 
The day on which parturition occurs is lactation day 0 (LD 0) for the dam and postnatal day 0 
(PND 0) for the offspring. Alternatively, all comparisons may also be based on post-coital time to eliminate 
confounding of postnatal development data, by differences in the duration of pregnancy; however, timing 
relative to parturition should also be recorded. This is especially important when the test chemical exerts 
an influence on the duration of pregnancy.

OECD/OCDE                          443 
            
           
© OECD (2025) 
 
11 
Offspring parameters 
45. 
Each litter should be examined as soon as possible after parturition (PND 0 or 1) to establish the 
number and sex of pups, stillbirths, live births, and the presence of gross anomalies (externally visible 
abnormalities, including cleft palate; subcutaneous haemorrhages; abnormal skin colour or texture; 
presence of umbilical cord; lack of milk in the stomach; presence of dried secretions). In addition, the first 
clinical examination of the neonates should include a qualitative assessment of body temperature, state of 
activity and reaction to handling. Pups found dead on PND 0 or at a later time should be examined for 
possible defects and cause of death. Live pups are counted and weighed individually on PND 0 or PND 1, 
and regularly thereafter, e.g., at least on PND 4, 7, 14, and 21. Clinical examinations, as applicable for the 
age of the animals, should be repeated when the offspring are weighed, or more often if case-specific 
findings have been made at birth. Signs noted could include, but may not be limited to, external 
abnormalities, changes in skin, fur, eyes, mucous membranes, occurrence of secretions and excretions 
and autonomic activity. Changes in gait, posture, and response to handling, as well as the presence of 
clonic or tonic movements, stereotypy or bizarre behaviour, should also be recorded. 
46. 
The anogenital distance (AGD) should be measured in all pups (i.e., all dose groups including 
controls) at least once, on the same day of age, between PND 0 and PND 4 before any culling is performed. 
The day of assessment should be noted, and for all pups, body weight should be collected on the day the 
AGD is measured.  For all pups, all three values (i.e. AGD, body weight and day of assessment) should 
be reported. AGD should be measured with at least two significant digit numbers and reported in mm.  In 
addition, AGD should be normalized to a measure of pup size, preferably the cube root of body weight 
value as described in Gallavan et al. (12) and in GD 151 (42). The presence of areolae in male pups should 
be counted in between PND 12 and 14, on the same PND for all pups (i.e., all dose groups, including 
controls) when the nipples are visible in female littermates (14).  More detailed guidance on the assessment 
of these two endpoints, such as the number of assessors, will be described in the revised GD 151.  
47. 
All selected cohort 1A, 1B and 3 animals should be evaluated daily for balano-preputial separation 
or vaginal opening for males/females, respectively, aiming as a minimum for 50 pups/sex/group. These 
investigations should commence before the expected day for the achievement of these endpoints to detect 
if sexual maturation occurs early. The examinations should start for balano-preputial separation (BPS) in 
males on PND 35 and for vaginal opening (VO) in females on PND 24 and continue until BPS and VO 
have occurred. All the animals included in each cohort are monitored for the timing of sexual maturation 
(VO or BPS). In cases where cohorts 3 is omitted, a sufficient number of pups need to be maintained to 
investigate sexual maturation (3 per sex/litter/dose, i.e., aiming at 50 pups/sex/group). Therefore, the 
required number of pups (aiming at 50 pups/sex/group) should be maintained and evaluated for sexual 
maturation. Statistical analysis should be provided by combining all the results (pooling the results from all 
cohorts) and should take the litter into consideration (the analysis should include the litter as statistical 
unit).  If less than 50 pups are available per sex/group e.g., due to effects on sexual function or fertility, all 
remaining pups should be used for the assessment, with the exception of cohort 2 pups. Any abnormalities 
of genital organs, such as persistent vaginal thread, hypospadias or cleft penis, should be noted. Sexual 
maturity of F1 animals is compared to physical development by determining age and body weight at BPS 
or VO for males/females respectively (15). 
Assessment of potential developmental neurotoxicity (cohorts 2A and 2B) 
48. 
Ten male and 10 female cohort 2A animals and 10 male and 10 female cohort 2B animals, from 
each treatment group (for each cohort: 1 male or 1 female per litter; all litters represented by at least 1 pup; 
randomly selected) should be used for neurotoxicity assessments. Cohort 2A animals should be subjected 
to auditory startle, functional observational battery, motor activity (see paragraphs 49-51), and 
neuropathology assessments (see paragraphs 75-76). Efforts should be made to ensure that variations in

OECD/OCDE                          443 
 
       
© OECD (2025) 
 
12 
all test conditions are minimal and are not systematically related to treatment. Among the variables that 
can affect behaviour are sound level (e.g. intermittent noise), temperature, humidity, lighting, odours, time 
of day, and environmental distractions. Results of the neurotoxicity assays should be interpreted in relation 
to appropriate historical control reference ranges. Cohort 2B animals should be used for neuropathology 
assessment on PND 21 or PND 22 (see paragraphs 75-76). 
49. 
An auditory startle test should be performed on PND 24 (±1 day) using animals in cohort 2A.  The 
day of testing should be counterbalanced across treated and control groups. Each session consists of 50 
trials.  In performing the auditory startle test, the mean response amplitude on each block of 10 trials (5 
blocks of 10 trials) should be determined, with test conditions optimized to produce intra-session 
habituation.  These procedures should be consistent with OECD TG 426 (37). 
50. 
At an appropriate time between PND 63 and PND 75, the cohort 2A animals are subjected to a 
functional observational battery and an automated test of motor activity. These procedures should be 
consistent with OECD TGs 424 (35) and 426 (37).  The functional observational battery includes a thorough 
description of the subject’s appearance, behaviour and functional integrity. This is assessed through 
observations in the home cage, after removal to a standard arena for observation (open field) where the 
animal is moving freely, and through manipulative tests. Testing should proceed from the least to the most 
interactive. A list of measures is presented in Appendix A. All animals should be observed carefully by 
trained observers who are unaware of the animals’ treatment status, using standardized procedures to 
minimize observer variability. Where possible, it is advisable that the same observer evaluates the animals 
in a given test. If this is not possible, some demonstration of inter-observer reliability is required. For each 
parameter in the behavioural testing battery, explicit operationally defined scales and scoring criteria are 
to be used. If possible, objective quantitative measures should be developed for observational endpoints 
which involve subjective ranking.  For motor activity, each animal is tested individually. The test session 
should be long enough to demonstrate intra-session habituation for controls. Motor activity should be 
monitored by an automated activity recording apparatus which should be capable of detecting both 
increases and decreases in activity, (i.e. baseline activity as measured by the device should not be so low 
as to preclude detection of decreases, nor so high as to preclude detection of increases in activity). Each 
device should be tested by standard procedures to ensure, to the extent possible, reliability of operation 
across devices and across days. To the extent possible, treatment groups should be balanced across 
devices. Treatment groups should be counter-balanced across test times to avoid confounding by circadian 
rhythms of activity. 
51. 
If existing information indicates the need for other functional testing (e.g., sensory, social, 
cognitive), these should be integrated without compromising the integrity of the other evaluations 
conducted in the study. If this testing is performed in the same animals as used for standard auditory 
startle, functional observational battery and motor activity testing, different tests should be scheduled to 
minimise the risk of compromising the integrity of these tests. Supplemental procedures may be particularly 
useful when empirical observation, anticipated effects, or mechanistic/mode-of-action indicate a specific 
type of neurotoxicity. 
Assessment of potential developmental immunotoxicity (cohort 3)  
52. 
At PND 56 (±3 days), 10 male and 10 female cohort 3 animals from each treatment group (1 male 
or 1 female per litter; all litters represented by at least 1 pup; randomly selected per litter) should be used 
in a T-cell dependent antibody response assay (TDAR), i.e. the primary and secondary IgM and IgG 
antibody response to a T-cell dependent antigen, Keyhole Limpet Hemocyanin (KLH), consistent with 
current immunotoxicity testing procedures (16) (17). If sheep red blood cells (SRBC) is required as an 
antigen by your regulatory authority, the detailed immunization protocol needs to be agreed with that 
authority. KLH should be administered at a dose of 0.30 mg/animal via intravenous administration (16).

OECD/OCDE                          443 
            
           
© OECD (2025) 
 
13 
Prior to the KLH administration, serum samples should be collected to verify that the animal has no pre-
existing KLH-specific IgM and IgG response.  The response is to be evaluated by determining the titer of 
KLH-specific IgM antibody and KLH-specific IgG antibody in the serum by ELISA, at the peak of the 
response. Responses generally peak at five days for IgM and at fourteen days for IgG following intravenous 
immunization (16). Consequently, IgM should be determined five days after immunization(s), i.e. on PND 
61±3 following primary immunization and on PND 75±3 following secondary immunization, and IgG should 
be determined fourteen days after primary immunization i.e. on PND 70±3 (prior to the secondary 
immunization) and five days after secondary immunization, i.e. on PND 75±3 (see Figure 2). If the peak 
responses vary for IgM and/or IgG from the days indicated above e.g. due to strain differences, the samples 
should be collected on the appropriate peak response day, however evidence of that should be provided. 
Exposure to the test chemical will continue until the day before collecting serum samples for measuring 
KLH-specific secondary IgM and IgG antibodies by ELISA assay (i.e. PND 75±3) (16). Proficiency in 
performing the TDAR assay should be confirmed and reported periodically (at least once per year), in case 
no concurrent positive control is used in the study.  
 
Figure 2:  Schematic representation of the immunization protocol and serum collection for IgM and IgG. 
 
Follow-up assessment of potential reproductive toxicity (cohort 1B) 
53. 
Cohort 1B animals can be maintained on treatment beyond PND 90 and bred to obtain a F2 
generation if necessary. Males and females of the same dose group should be cohabited (avoiding the 
pairing of siblings) for up to two weeks, beginning on or after PND 90, but not exceeding PND 120. 
Procedures should be similar to those for the P animals; investigations in the F2 animals should be identical 
to those in the F1 animals. However, based on the weight of evidence, it may suffice to terminate the litters 
on PND 4 rather than follow them to weaning or beyond.

OECD/OCDE                          443 
 
       
© OECD (2025) 
 
14 
TERMINAL OBSERVATIONS 
Clinical biochemistry / Haematology 
54. 
Systemic effects should be monitored in P animals. Blood samples of fasted rats from a defined 
site are taken from ten randomly selected P males and females per dose group at termination, stored under 
appropriate conditions and subjected to partial or full-scale haematology, clinical biochemistry, an assay 
of T4 and TSH or other examinations suggested by the known effect profile of the test chemical (see GD 
151 (42)). The following haematological parameters should be examined: haematocrit, haemoglobin 
concentration, erythrocyte count, total and differential leukocyte count, platelet count and blood clotting 
time/potential. Investigations of plasma or serum should include: glucose, total cholesterol, urea, 
creatinine, total protein, albumin and at least two enzymes indicative of hepatocellular effects (such as 
alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase, gamma glutamyl 
transpeptidase and sorbitol dehydrogenase). Measurements of additional enzymes and bile acids may 
provide useful information under certain circumstances. In addition, blood from all animals may be taken 
and stored for possible analysis at a later time to help clarify equivocal effects or to generate internal 
exposure data. If a second mating of P animals is not intended, the blood samples are obtained just prior 
to, or as part of, the procedure at scheduled sacrifice. In the case animals are retained, blood samples 
should be collected a few days before the animals are mated for the second time. Unless existing data 
from repeated-dose studies indicate that the parameter is not affected by the test chemical, urinalysis 
should be performed prior to termination and the following parameters evaluated: appearance, volume, 
osmolality or specific gravity, pH, protein, glucose, blood and blood cells, cell debris. Urine may also be 
collected to monitor excretion of test chemical and/or metabolite(s). 
55. 
Systemic effects should also be monitored in F1 animals. Fasted blood samples from a defined site 
are taken from ten randomly selected cohort 1A males and females per dose group at termination, stored 
under appropriate conditions and subjected to standard clinical biochemistry, including the assessment of 
serum levels for thyroid hormones (T4 and TSH), haematology (total and differential leukocyte plus 
erythrocyte counts) and urinalysis assessments. 
56. 
The surplus pups at PND 4 are subject to gross necropsy and consideration given to measuring 
serum thyroid hormone (T4) concentrations. If necessary, neonatal (PND 4) blood can be pooled by litter 
for biochemical/thyroid hormone analyses. Blood is also collected for T4 and TSH analysis from weanlings 
subject to gross necropsy on PND 22 (F1 pups not selected for cohorts). 
Sperm parameters 
57. 
Sperm parameters should be measured in all P generation males unless there is existing data to 
show that sperm parameters are unaffected in a 90-day study. Examination of sperm parameters should 
be performed in all cohort 1A males. 
58. 
At termination, testis and epididymis (both full epididymis and cauda epididymal) weights are 
recorded for all P and F1 (cohort 1A) males. At least one testis and one epididymis are reserved for 
histopathological examination. The remaining cauda epididymis is used for enumeration of cauda 
epididymis sperm reserves (18) (19) and the testis is used for spermatid counts. In addition, sperm from 
the cauda epididymis (or vas deferens) is collected using methods that minimise damage for the evaluation 
of sperm motility and morphology (20).  
59. 
Sperm motility can either be evaluated immediately after sacrifice or recorded for later analysis. 
The percentage of progressively motile sperm could be determined either subjectively or objectively by 
computer-assisted motion analysis (21) (22) (23) (24) (25) (26). For the evaluation of sperm morphology, 
an epididymal (or vas deferens) sperm sample should be examined as fixed or wet preparations (27) and

OECD/OCDE                          443 
            
           
© OECD (2025) 
 
15 
at least 200 spermatozoa per sample classified as either normal (both head and midpiece/tail appear 
normal) or abnormal. Examples of morphologic sperm abnormalities would include fusion, isolated heads, 
and misshapen heads and/or tails (28). Misshapen or large sperm heads may indicate defects in 
spermiation.  
60. 
If sperm samples are frozen, smears fixed and images for sperm motility analysis are recorded at 
the time of necropsy (29), subsequent analysis may be restricted to control and high-dose males.  
However, if treatment-related effects are observed, the lower dose groups should also be evaluated. 
Gross necropsy 
61. 
At the time of termination or premature death, all P and F1 animals are necropsied and examined 
macroscopically for any structural abnormalities or pathological changes. Special attention should be paid 
to the organs of the reproductive system. Pups that are humanely killed in a moribund condition and dead 
pups should be recorded and, when not macerated, examined for possible defects and/or cause of death 
and preserved. 
62. 
For adult P and F1 females, a vaginal smear is examined on the day of necropsy to determine the 
stage of the oestrous cycle and allow correlation with histopathology in reproductive organs. The uteri of 
all P females (and F1 females, if applicable) are examined for the presence and number of implantation 
sites, in a manner which does not compromise histopathological evaluation. 
Organ weight and tissue preservation – P and F1 adult animals 
63. 
At the time of termination, body weights and wet weights of the organs listed below from all P 
animals and all F1 adults from relevant cohorts (as outlined below), are determined as soon as possible 
after dissection to avoid drying. These organs should then be preserved under appropriate conditions. 
Unless specified otherwise, paired organs can be weighed individually or combined, consistent with the 
typical practice of the performing laboratory. 
• 
Uterus (with oviducts and cervix), ovaries 
• 
Testes, epididymides (total and cauda for the samples used for sperm counts) 
• 
Prostate (dorsolateral and ventral parts combined). Care should be exercised when trimming the 
prostate complex to avoid puncture of the fluid filled seminal vesicles.  In the event of a treatment-
related effect on total prostate weight, the dorsolateral and ventral segments should be carefully 
dissected after fixation and weighed separately. 
• 
Seminal vesicles with coagulating glands and their fluids (as one unit) 
• 
Brain, liver, kidneys, heart, spleen, thymus, pituitary, thyroid (post-fixation), adrenal glands and 
known target organs or tissues. 
64. 
In addition to the organs listed above, samples of peripheral nerve, muscle, spinal cord, eye plus 
optic nerve, gastrointestinal tract, urinary bladder, lung, trachea (with thyroid and parathyroid attached), 
bone marrow, vas deferens (males), mammary gland (males and females) and vagina should be preserved 
under appropriate conditions.  
65. 
Cohort 1A animals have all organs weighed and preserved for histopathology.  
66. 
For the investigation of pre- and postnatally induced immunotoxic effects, 10 male and 10 female 
cohort 1A animals from each treatment group (1 male or 1 female per litter; all litters represented by at 
least 1 pup; randomly selected) will be subject to the following at termination: 
• 
weighing of the lymph nodes associated with and distant from the route of exposure (in addition to 
the weight of the adrenal glands, the thymus and the spleen, already performed in all cohort 1A 
animals)

OECD/OCDE                          443 
 
       
© OECD (2025) 
 
16 
• 
splenic lymphocyte subpopulation analysis (CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes, B lymphocytes, and 
natural killer cells) using one half of the spleen, the other half of the spleen being preserved for 
histopathological evaluation. Splenic lymphocyte subpopulation analysis must be included in all 
study designs and is independent whether Cohort 3 is conducted.  
Analysis of splenic lymphocyte subpopulations in non-immunized (cohort 1A) animals will determine if 
exposure is related to a shift in the immunological steady state distribution of "helper" (CD4+) or cytotoxic 
(CD8+) thymus-derived lymphocytes or natural killer (NK) cells (rapid responses to neoplastic cells and 
pathogens). 
67. 
Cohort 1B animals should have the following organs weighed and corresponding tissues 
processed to the block stage:  
- Vagina (not weighed) 
- Uterus with cervix 
- Ovaries  
- Testes (at least one) 
- Epididymides 
- Seminal vesicles and coagulating glands 
- Prostate  
- Pituitary 
- Identified target organs 
 
Histopathology in cohort 1B should be conducted if results from cohort 1A are equivocal. Furthermore, 
histopathology in cohort 1B should be conducted if the tested substance is a suspected reproductive or 
endocrine toxicant 
68. 
Cohorts 2A and 2B: Developmental neurotoxicity testing (PND 21 or PND 22 and adult offspring). 
Cohort 2A animals are terminated after behavioural testing, with brain weight recorded and full 
neurohistopathology for purposes of neurotoxicity assessment. Cohort 2B animals are terminated on PND 
21 or PND 22, with brain weight recorded and microscopic examination of the brain for purposes of 
neurotoxicity assessment. Perfusion fixation is required for cohort 2A animals and optional for cohort 2B 
animals, as provided in OECD TG 426 (37). 
Organ weight and tissue preservation – F1 weanlings 
69. 
The pups not selected for cohorts, including runts, are terminated after weaning, on PND 22, 
unless the results indicate the need for further in-life investigations. Terminated pups are subjected to 
gross necropsy including an assessment of the reproductive organs, as described in paragraphs 63 and 
64. For up to 10 pups per sex per group, from as many litters as possible, the brain, spleen, and thymus 
should be weighed and retained under appropriate conditions. In addition, mammary tissues for these male 
and female pups may be preserved for further microscopic analysis2 (see GD 151 (42)). Gross 
abnormalities and target tissues should be saved for possible histological examination.    
 
2 Research has shown the mammary gland, especially in early life mammary gland development, to be a sensitive 
endpoint for estrogen action. It is recommended that endpoints involving pup mammary glands of both sexes be 
included in this Test Guideline, when validated.

OECD/OCDE                          443 
            
           
© OECD (2025) 
 
17 
Histopathology – P animals 
70. 
Full histopathology of the organs listed in paragraphs 63 and 64 is performed for all high-dose and 
control P animals. Organs demonstrating treatment-related changes should also be examined in all 
animals at the lower dose groups to aid in determining a NOAEL. Additionally, reproductive organs of all 
animals suspected of reduced fertility, e.g., those that failed to mate, conceive, sire, or deliver healthy 
offspring, or for which oestrous cyclicity or sperm number, motility, or morphology were affected, and all 
gross lesions should be subjected to histopathological evaluation.  
Histopathology – F1 animals 
Cohort 1 animals 
71. 
Full histopathology of the organs listed in paragraphs 63 and 64 is performed for all high-dose and 
control adult cohort 1A animals. All litters should be represented by at least 1 pup per sex.  Organs and 
tissues demonstrating treatment-related changes and all gross lesions should also be examined in all 
animals in the lower dose groups to aid in determining a NOAEL. For the evaluation of pre- and postnatally 
induced effects on lymphoid organs also the histopathology on the collected lymph nodes and bone marrow 
should be evaluated of 10 male and 10 female cohort 1A animals next to histopathological evaluation of 
the thymus, spleen, and the adrenal glands already performed in all 1A animals. 
72. 
Reproductive and endocrine tissues from all cohort 1B animals, processed to the block stage as 
described in paragraph 67, should be examined for histopathology in cases of suspected reproductive or 
endocrine toxicants. Cohort 1B should also undergo histological examination if results from cohort 1A are 
equivocal. 
73. 
Ovaries of adult females should contain primordial and growing follicles, as well as corpora lutea. 
Histopathological 
examination 
of 
ovaries 
should 
include 
qualitative 
evaluations 
of 
any 
abnormalities/lesions such as ovarian atrophy as well as presence or absence of follicle maturational 
stages. A quantitative histopathological evaluation of primordial and small growing follicles should be 
conducted in F1 females; the number of animals, the number of ovaries, ovarian section selection, and 
section sample size should be statistically appropriate for the evaluation procedure used. Examination 
should include enumeration of the number of primordial follicles, which can be combined with small growing 
follicles, for comparison of treated and control ovaries (see GD 151 (42)). The number of corpora lutea 
should be recorded for F1 females. Corpora lutea enumeration should be conducted in parallel with 
oestrous cyclicity testing so that the stage of the cycle can be taken into account in the assessment. 
Oviduct, uterus and vagina are examined for appropriate organ-typic development. Follicular and corpora 
lutea enumeration may first be conducted on control and high-dose animals, and in the event of an adverse 
effect in the latter, lower doses should be examined. 
74. 
Detailed testicular histopathology examinations are conducted on the F1 males in order to identify 
treatment-related effects on testis differentiation and development and on spermatogenesis (40).  When 
possible, sections of the rete testis should be examined. Caput, corpus, and cauda of the epididymis and 
the vas deferens are examined for appropriate organ-typic development, as well as for the parameters 
required for the P males. 
Cohort 2 animals 
75. 
Neurohistopathology is performed for all high-dose and control cohort 2A animals per sex following 
completion of neurobehavioral testing (after PND 75, but not to exceed PND 90). Brain histopathology is 
performed for all high-dose and control cohort 2B animals per sex on PND 21 or PND 22. Organs or tissues 
demonstrating treatment-related changes should also be examined for the animals in the lower dose

OECD/OCDE                          443 
 
       
© OECD (2025) 
 
18 
groups to aid in determining a NOAEL. For cohort 2A and 2B animals, multiple sections are examined from 
the brain to allow examination of olfactory bulbs, cerebral cortex, hippocampus, basal ganglia, thalamus, 
hypothalamus, mid-brain (thecum, tegmentum, and cerebral peduncles), brainstem and cerebellum. For 
cohort 2A only, the eyes (retina and optic nerve) and samples of peripheral nerve, muscle and spinal cord 
are examined. All neurohistological procedures should be consistent with OECD TG 426 (37). 
76. 
Morphometric (quantitative) evaluations should be performed on representative areas of the brain 
(homologous sections carefully selected based on reliable microscopic landmarks) and may include linear 
and/or areal measurements of specific brain regions. At least three consecutive sections should be taken 
at each landmark (level) in order to select the most homologous and representative section for the specific 
brain area to be evaluated. The neuropathologist should exercise appropriate judgment as to whether 
sections prepared for measurement are homologous with others in the sample set and therefore suitable 
for inclusion, since linear measurements in particular may change over a relatively short distance (30).  
Non-homologous sections should not be used. While the objective is to sample all animals reserved for 
this purpose (10/sex/dose level), smaller numbers may still be adequate.  However, samples from fewer 
than 6 animals/sex/dose level would generally not be considered sufficient for the purposes of this Test 
Guideline.  Stereology may be used to identify treatment-related effects on parameters such as volume or 
cell number for specific neuroanatomic regions. All aspects of the preparation of tissue samples, from 
tissue fixation, through the dissection of tissue samples, tissue processing, and staining of slides, should 
employ a counterbalanced design, such that each batch contains representative samples from each dose 
group. When morphometric or stereological analyses are to be used, then brain tissue should be 
embedded in appropriate media at all dose levels at the same time in order to avoid shrinkage artifacts 
associated with prolonged storage in fixative.  
REPORTING 
Data 
77. 
Data are reported individually and summarised in tabular form. Where appropriate, for each test 
group and each generation, the following should be reported: number of animals at the start of the test, 
number of animals found dead during the test or killed for humane reasons, time of any death or humane 
kill, number of fertile animals, number of pregnant females, number of females giving birth to a litter, and 
number of animals showing signs of toxicity. A description of the toxicity, including time of onset, duration, 
and severity should also be reported. 
78. 
Numerical results should be evaluated by an appropriate and accepted statistical method.  The 
statistical methods should be selected as part of the study design and should appropriately address non-
normal data (e.g., count data), censored data (e.g., limited observation time), non-independence (e.g., litter 
effects and repeated measures), and unequal variances. Generalized linear mixed models and dose-
response models cover a broad class of analytical tools that may be appropriate for the data generated 
under this TG. The report should include sufficient information on the method of analysis and the computer 
program employed so that an independent reviewer/statistician can evaluate/re-evaluate the analysis. 
Evaluation of results 
79. 
The findings should be evaluated in terms of the observed effects, including necropsy and 
microscopic findings. The evaluation includes the relationship, or lack thereof, between the dose and the 
presence, incidence, and severity of abnormalities, including gross lesions.  Target organs, fertility, clinical 
abnormalities, reproductive and litter performance, body weight changes, mortality and any other toxic and 
developmental effects should also be assessed. Special attention should be given to sex-specific changes.

OECD/OCDE                          443 
            
           
© OECD (2025) 
 
19 
The physico-chemical properties of the test chemical, and when available, TK data, including placental 
transfer and milk excretion, should be taken into consideration when evaluating the test results.  
Test report 
80. 
The test report should include the following information obtained in the present study from P, F1 
animals and F2 animals (where relevant): 
Test chemical: 
• 
All relevant available information on the substance, toxicokinetic and toxicodynamic properties of 
the test chemical;  
• 
Identification data; 
• 
Purity; 
 
Vehicle (if appropriate): 
• 
Justification for choice of vehicle if other than water; 
 
Test animals: 
• 
Species/strain used; 
• 
Number, age and sex of animals; 
• 
Source, housing conditions, diet, nesting materials, etc.; 
• 
Individual weights of animals at the start of the test; 
• 
Vaginal smear data for P females before initiation of treatment (if data are collected at that time); 
• 
P generation pairing records indicating male and female partner of a mating and mating success; 
• 
Litter of origin records for adult F1 generation animals; 
 
Test conditions: 
• 
Rationale for dose level selection; 
• 
Details of test chemical formulation/diet preparation, achieved concentrations; 
• 
Stability and homogeneity of the preparation in the vehicle or carrier (e.g., diet, drinking water), in 
the blood and/or milk under the conditions of use and storage between uses; 
• 
Details of the administration of the test chemical; 
• 
Conversion from diet/drinking water test chemical concentration (ppm) to the achieved dose (mg/kg 
body weight/day), if applicable; 
• 
Details of food and water quality (including diet composition, if available); 
• 
Detailed description of the randomization procedures to select pups for culling and to assign 
pups to test groups; 
• 
Environmental conditions; 
• 
List of study personnel, including professional training;  
• 
Report whether (yes/no) blinding was applied in the study 
 
Results (summary and individual data by sex and dose): 
• 
Individual data for adults per sex/dose and for offspring per sex/dose/litter; 
• 
Data supporting the reliability and sensitivity of the test (i.e., positive and historical control data, as 
well as, where appropriate, lower limits of detection) in particular for all parameters related to 
reproduction and indicative of endocrine disruption (such as AGD in male and females and the 
number of retained areolas in males, respectively), all other parameters showing statistically 
significant and/or biologically relevant variations, and all other parameters showing a dose-
response relationship;  
• 
Report qualitatively that the nipples are visible in the female littermates;

OECD/OCDE                          443 
 
       
© OECD (2025) 
 
20 
• 
Food consumption, water consumption if available, food efficiency (body weight gain per gram of 
food consumed, except for the period of cohabitation and during lactation), and test material 
consumption (for dietary/drinking water administration) for P and F1 animals; 
• 
Absorption data (if available); 
• 
Body weight data for P animals; 
• 
Body weight data for the selected F1 animals postweaning; 
• 
Time of death during the study or whether animals survived to termination; 
• 
Nature, severity and duration of clinical observations (whether reversible or not); 
• 
Haematology, urinalysis and clinical chemistry data including TSH and T4; 
• 
Phenotypic analysis of spleen cells (T-, B-, NK-cells); 
• 
Bone marrow cellularity; 
• 
Toxic response data; 
• 
Number of P and F1 females with normal or abnormal oestrous cycle and cycle duration; 
• 
Time to mating (precoital interval, the number of days between pairing and mating); 
• 
Toxic or other effects on reproduction, including numbers and percentages of animals that 
accomplished mating, pregnancy, parturition and lactation, of males inducing pregnancy, of 
females with signs of dystocia/prolonged or difficult parturition; 
• 
Duration of pregnancy and, if available, parturition; 
• 
Numbers of implantations, litter size and percentage of male pups; 
• 
Number and percent of post-implantation loss, live births and stillbirths; 
• 
Litter weight and pup weight data (males, females and combined), the number of runts if 
determined; 
• 
Number of pups and litters with grossly visible abnormalities; 
• 
Toxic or other effects on offspring, postnatal growth, viability, etc.; 
• 
Data on physical landmarks in all pups(i.e., all dose groups including controls), including 
anogenital distance (with at least two significant digit numbers) in male and female, respectively 
and areola retention, in male, respectively, and other postnatal developmental data; 
• 
Report qualitatively (with yes/no answer) that the nipples are visible in the female littermates; 
• 
AGD, body weight on the day of data collection, and day of assessment should be reported;  
• 
It is recommended to plot AGD versus body weight by sex as for better visibility like in Gallavan 
et al (13).  
• 
Data on sexual maturation and weight at this time point for F1 animals, along with information on 
any reproductively relevant male and female malformations—such as hypospadias and cleft 
penis in males, and persistent vaginal threads in females—should be included. VO and BPS data 
should also be reported together with body weight measurements on all pups on the same PND 
day (e.g. PND 21, 28 or 35); 
• 
Data on functional observations in pups and adults, as applicable; 
• 
Body weight at sacrifice and absolute and relative organ weight data for the P and adult F1 
animals; 
• 
Necropsy findings; 
• 
Detailed description of all histopathological findings; 
• 
Total sperm number in cauda epididymis, spermatid number in testis, percent progressively motile 
sperm, percent morphologically normal sperm, and percent of sperm with each identified 
abnormality for P and F1 males; 
• 
Numbers of ovarian follicles in F1 females; 
• 
Numbers of corpora lutea in the ovaries of (F1 females); 
• 
Maturational stages of follicles contained in the ovaries of  F1 females, where applicable; 
• 
Statistical treatment of results, where appropriate; 
 
Cohort 2 parameters:

OECD/OCDE                          443 
            
           
© OECD (2025) 
 
21 
• 
Detailed description of the procedures used to standardize observations and procedures as well 
as operational definitions for scoring observations; 
• 
List of all test procedures used, and justification for their use;  
• 
Statistical treatment of results, including statistical models used to analyse the data, and the 
results obtained, regardless of whether they were significant or not. 
• 
Details of the behavioural/functional, neuropathological and morphometric procedures used, 
including information and details on automated devices, if other functional testing (e.g., sensory, 
social, cognitive) is needed, these should be investigated as part of the main study in accordance 
with the specifications provided in the corresponding test guidelines such as OECD TG 426; 
• 
Procedures for calibrating and ensuring the equivalence of devices and the balancing of treatment 
groups in testing procedures;  
• 
Short justification explaining any decisions involving professional judgment;  
• 
Detailed description of all behavioural/functional, neuropathological and morphometric findings by 
sex and dose group, including both increases and decreases from controls;  
• 
Brain weight;  
• 
Any diagnoses derived from neurological signs and lesions, including naturally occurring 
diseases or conditions;  
• 
Images of exemplar findings;  
• 
Low-power images to assess homology of sections used for morphometry;  
• 
Statistical treatment of results, including statistical models used to analyse the data, and the 
results, regardless of whether they were significant or not;  
• 
Relationship of any other toxic effects to a conclusion about the neurotoxic potential of the test 
chemical, by sex and dose group;  
• 
Impact of any toxicokinetic information on the conclusions;  
• 
Data supporting the reliability and sensitivity of the test method (i.e. positive and historical control 
data);  
• 
Relationships, if any, between neuropathological and functional effects;  
• 
NOAEL or benchmark dose for dams and offspring, by sex and dose group;  
• 
Discussion of the overall interpretation of the data based on the results, including a conclusion of 
whether or not the chemical caused developmental neurotoxicity and the NOAEL;  
 
Cohort 3 parameters 
• 
Serum KLH-IgM and KLH-IgG antibody titer (sensitisation to KLH); 
• 
Laboratories establishing the TDAR method for the first time must confirm and report their 
proficiency in its performance, including both negative and positive control data, as part of the 
optimization process. This assessment should also be conducted periodically, at least once per 
year, in case no concurrent positive control is used in the study;   
• 
Discussion of the overall interpretation of the data based on the results, including a conclusion of 
whether or not the chemical caused developmental immunotoxicity and the NOAEL;  
 
Discussion of results 
 
Conclusions, including NOAEL values for parental and offspring effects 
 
All information not obtained during the study, but useful for the interpretation of the results (e.g., similarities 
of effects to any known neurotoxicants), should also be provided. 
Interpretation of Results 
81. 
An Extended One-Generation Reproductive Toxicity Study will provide information on the effects 
of repeated exposure to a substance during all phases of the reproductive cycle, as necessary. In

OECD/OCDE                          443 
 
       
© OECD (2025) 
 
22 
particular, the study provides information on the reproductive system, and on development, growth, 
survival, and functional endpoints of offspring up to PND 90. 
82. 
Interpretation of the results of the study should take into account all available information on the 
substance, including physico-chemical, TK and toxicodynamic properties, available relevant information 
on structural analogues, and results of previously-conducted toxicity studies with the test chemical (e.g., 
acute toxicity, toxicity after repeated application, mechanistic studies and studies assessing if there are 
substantial qualitative and quantitative species differences in in vivo/in vitro metabolic properties). Gross 
necropsy and organ weight results should be assessed in the context with observations made in other 
repeat-dose studies, when feasible. Decreases in offspring growth might be considered in relationship to 
an influence of the test chemical on milk composition (31).  
Cohort 2 (Developmental neurotoxicity) 
83. 
Neurobehavioral and neuropathology results should be interpreted in the context of all findings, 
using a weight-of-evidence approach with expert judgment. Patterns of behavioural or morphological 
findings, if present, as well as evidence of dose-response should be discussed. The evaluation of 
developmental neurotoxicity, including human epidemiological studies or case reports, and experimental 
animal studies (e.g., toxicokinetic data, structure-activity information, and data from other toxicity studies) 
should be included in this characterization. Evaluation of data should include a discussion of both the 
biological and statistical significance. The evaluation should include the relationship, if any, between 
observed neuropathological and behavioural alterations. For guidance on the interpretation of 
developmental neurotoxicity results, refer to OECD TG 426 (37) and Tyl et al., 2008 (32). 
Cohort 3 (Developmental immunotoxicity) 
84. 
Suppression or enhancement of immune function as assessed by TDAR (T-cell dependent 
antibody response), should be evaluated in the context of all observations made. Significance of the 
outcome of TDAR may be supported by other effects on immunologically related indicators (e.g., bone 
marrow cellularity, weight and histopathology of lymphoid tissues, lymphocyte subset distribution). The 
effects established by TDAR may be less meaningful in cases where of other toxicities are observed at 
lower exposure concentrations. 
85. 
OECD Guidance Document 43 should be consulted for aid in the interpretation of reproduction 
and neurotoxicity results (28). 
LITERATURE 
 
(1) Cooper, R.L., J.C. Lamb, S.M. Barlow, K. Bentley, A.M. Brady, N. Doerr, D.L. Eisenbrandt, P.A. 
Fenner-Crisp, R.N. Hines, L.F.H. Irvine, C.A. Kimmel, H. Koeter, A.A. Li, S.L. Makris, L.P.  
Sheets, G.J.A. Speijers and K.E. Whitby (2006), “A Tiered Approach to Life Stages Testing for 
Agricultural Chemical Safety Assessment”, Critical Reviews in Toxicology, 36, 69-98. 
(2) European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) (2023) “Evaluating results from 55 extended one-generation 
reproductive toxicity studies under REACH, Final report of the EOGRTS review project,” 
Reference: ECHA-23-R-04-EN. ISBN: 978-92-9468-262-8. DOI: 10.2823/92503 
(3) Thigpen, J.E., K.D.R. Setchell, K.B. Ahlmark, J. Locklear, T. Spahr, G.F. Leviness, M.F. Goelz, J.K. 
Haseman, R.R. Newbold, and D.B. Forsythe (1999), “Phytoestrogen Content of Purified Open and 
Closed Formula Laboratory Animal Diets”, Lab. Anim. Sci., 49, 530- 536.

OECD/OCDE                          443 
            
           
© OECD (2025) 
 
23 
(4) Zoetis, T. and I. Walls (2003), Principles and Practices for Direct Dosing of Pre-Weaning Mammals 
in Toxicity Testing and Research, ILSI Press, Washington, DC. 
(5) Moser, V.C., I. Walls and T. Zoetis (2005), “Direct Dosing of Preweaning Rodents in Toxicity Testing 
and Research: Deliberations of an ILSI RSI Expert Working Group”, International Journal of 
Toxicology, 24, 87-94. 
(6) Conolly, R.B., B.D. Beck, and J.I. Goodman (1999), “Stimulating Research to Improve the Scientific 
Basis of Risk Assessment”, Toxicological Sciences, 49, 1-4. 
(7) Ulbrich, B. and A.K. Palmer (1995), “Detection of Effects on Male Reproduction – a Literature 
Survey”, Journal of the American College of Toxicologists, 14, 293-327. 
(8) Mangelsdorf, I., J. Buschmann and B. Orthen (2003), “Some Aspects Relating to the Evaluation of the 
Effects of Chemicals on Male Fertility”, Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology, 37, 356-369. 
(9) Sakai, T., M. Takahashi, K. Mitsumori, K. Yasuhara, K. Kawashima, H. Mayahara and Y. Ohno (2000). 
“Collaborative work to evaluate toxicity on male reproductive organs by repeated dose studies in 
rats - overview of the studies”, Journal of Toxicological Sciences, 25, 1-21. 
(10) Creasy, D.M. (2003), “Evaluation of Testicular Toxicology: A Synopsis and Discussion of the 
Recommendations Proposed by the Society of Toxicologic Pathology”, Birth Defects Research, Part 
B, 68, 408-415. 
(11) Goldman, J.M., A.S. Murr, A.R. Buckalew, J.M. Ferrell and R.L. Cooper (2007), “The Rodent Estrous 
Cycle: Characterization of Vaginal Cytology and its Utility in Toxicological Studies”, Birth Defects 
Research, Part B, 80 (2), 84-97. 
(12) Sadleir, R.M.F.S. (1979), “Cycles and Seasons”, in C.R. Auston and R.V. Short (eds.), Reproduction 
in Mammals: I. Germ Cells and Fertilization, Cambridge, New York. 
(13) Gallavan, R.H. Jr, J.F. Holson, D.G. Stump, J.F. Knapp and V.L. Reynolds (1999), “Interpreting the 
Toxicologic Significance of Alterations in Anogenital Distance: Potential for Confounding Effects 
of Progeny Body Weights”, Reproductive Toxicology, 13: 383-390. 
(14) Schwartz CL, Christiansen S, Hass U, Ramhøj L, Axelstad M, Löbl NM and Svingen T (2021) On 
the Use and Interpretation of Areola/Nipple Retention as a Biomarker for Antiandrogenic Effects 
in Rat Toxicity Studies. Front. Toxicology 3:730752. Doi: 10.3389/ftox.2021.730752 
(15) Korenbrot, C.C., I.T. Huhtaniemi and R.I. Weiner (1977), “Preputial Separation as an External Sign 
of Pubertal Development in the Male Rat”, Biological Reproduction, 17, 298-303. 
(16) Wang X, Coppi A, Lebrec H. 2018. T-cell-dependent antibody response assay: biology, methods, and 
application. In: McQueen CA, editor. Comprehensive toxicology. 3rd ed. Amsterdam: Elsevier. Doi: 
10.1016/B978-0-12-801238-3.64235-6.484 
(17) Gore, E.R., J. Gower, E. Kurali, J.L. Sui, J. Bynum, D. Ennulat and D.J. Herzyk (2004), “Primary 
Antibody Response to Keyhole Limpet Hemocyanin in Rat as a Model for Immunotoxicity 
Evaluation”, Toxicology, 197, 23-35.

OECD/OCDE                          443 
 
       
© OECD (2025) 
 
24 
(18) Gray, L.E., J. Ostby, J. Ferrell, G. Rehnberg, R. Linder, R. Cooper, J. Goldman, V. Slott and J. Laskey 
(1989), ”A Dose-Response Analysis of Methoxychlor-Induced Alterations of Reproductive 
Development and Function in the Rat”, Fundamental and Applied Toxicology, 12, 92-108. 
(19) Robb, G.W., R.P. Amann and G.J. Killian (1978), “Daily Sperm Production and Epididymal Sperm 
Reserves of Pubertal and Adult Rats”, Journal of Reproduction and Fertility, 54, 103-107. 
(20) Klinefelter, G.R., L.E. Jr Gray and J.D. Suarez (1991), “The Method of Sperm Collection Significantly 
Influences Sperm Motion Parameters Following Ethane Dimethanesulfonate Administration in the 
Rat”. Reproductive Toxicology, 5, 39-44. 
(21) Seed, J., R.E. Chapin, E.D. Clegg., L.A. Dostal, R.H. Foote, M.E. Hurtt, G.R. Klinefelter, S.L. Makris, 
S.D. Perreault, S. Schrader, D. Seyler, R. Sprando, K.A. Treinen, D.N. Veeramachaneni and L.D. 
Wise (1996), “Methods for Assessing Sperm Motility, Morphology, and Counts in the Rat, Rabbit, 
and Dog: a Consensus Report”, Reproductive Toxicology, 10, 237- 244. 
(22) Chapin, R.E., R.S. Filler, D. Gulati, J.J. Heindel, D.F. Katz, C.A. Mebus, F. Obasaju, S.D. Perreault, 
S.R. Russell and S. Schrader (1992), “Methods for Assessing Rat Sperm Motility”, Reproductive 
Toxicology, 6, 267-273. 
(23) Klinefelter, G.R., N.L. Roberts and J.D. Suarez (1992), “Direct Effects of Ethane 
Dimethanesulphonate on Epididymal Function in Adult Rats: an In Vitro Demonstration”, Journal 
of Andrology, 13, 409-421. 
(24) Slott, V.L., J.D. Suarez and S.D. Perreault (1991), “Rat Sperm Motility Analysis: Methodologic 
Considerations”, Reproductive Toxicology, 5, 449-458. 
(25) Slott, V.L., and S.D. Perreault (1993), “Computer-Assisted Sperm Analysis of Rodent Epididymal 
Sperm Motility Using the Hamilton-Thorn Motility Analyzer”, Methods in Toxicology, Part A, 
Academic, Orlando, Florida. pp. 319-333. 
(26) Toth, G.P., J.A. Stober, E.J. Read, H. Zenick and M.K. Smith (1989), “The Automated Analysis of 
Rat Sperm Motility Following Subchronic Epichlorhydrin Administration: Methodologic and 
Statistical Considerations”, Journal of Andrology, 10, 401-415. 
(27) Linder, R.E., L.F. Strader, V.L. Slott and J.D. Suarez (1992), “Endpoints of Spermatoxicity in the Rat 
After Short Duration Exposures to Fourteen Reproductive Toxicants”, Reproductive Toxicology, 6, 
491-505. 
(28) OECD (2008), Guidance Document on Mammalian Reproductive Toxicity Testing and Assessment, 
Series on Testing and Assessment, No. 43, ENV/JM/MONO(2008)16, OECD, Paris. 
(29) Working, P.K., M. Hurtt (1987), “Computerized Videomicrographic Analysis of Rat Sperm Motility”, 
Journal of Andrology, 8, 330-337. 
(30) Bolin, B., R. Garman, K. Jensen, G. Krinke, B. Stuart, and an ad Hoc Working Group of the STP 
Scientific and Regulatory Policy Committee (2006), “A ‘Best Practices’ Approach to 
Neuropathologic Assessment in Developmental Neurotoxicity Testing – for Today”, Toxicological 
Pathology, 34, 296-313.

OECD/OCDE                          443 
            
           
© OECD (2025) 
 
25 
(31) Stütz, N., B. Bongiovanni, M. Rassetto, A. Ferri, A.M. Evangelista de Duffard, and R. Duffard (2006), 
“Detection of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic Acid in Rat Milk of Dams Exposed During Lactation and 
Milk Analysis of their Major Components”, Food Chemicals Toxicology, 44, 8-16. 
(32) Thigpen, JE, K.D.R. Setchell, J.K. Haseman, H.E. Saunders, G.F. Caviness, G.E. Kissling, M.G. Grant 
and D.B. Forsythe (2007), “Variations in Phytoestrogen Content between Different Mill Dates of 
the Same Diet Produces Significant Differences in the Time of Vaginal Opening in CD-1 Mice and 
F344 Rats but not in CD Sprague Dawley Rats”, Environmental health perspectives, 115(12), 1717-
1726. 
(33) Tyl, R.W., K. Crofton, A. Moretto, V. Moser, L.P. Sheets and T.J. Sobotka (2008), “Identification 
and Interpretation of Developmental Neurotoxicity Effects: a Report from the ILSI Research 
Foundation/Risk Science Institute Expert Working Group on Neurodevelopmental Endpoints”, 
Neurotoxicology and Teratology, 30: 349-381. 
(34) OECD (1996), Combined Repeated Dose Toxicity Study with the Reproduction/Developmental 
Toxicity Screening Test, OECD Guideline for Testing of Chemicals, No. 422, OECD, Paris. 
(35) OECD (1997), Neurotoxicity Study in Rodents, OECD Guideline for Testing of Chemicals, No.424, 
OECD, Paris. 
(36) OECD (2000), Guidance Document on the recognition, assessment, and use of clinical signs as 
humane endpoints for experimental animals used in safety evaluations, Series on Testing and 
Assessment, No. 19, ENV/JM/MONO(2000)7, OECD, Paris. 
(37) OECD (2007), Developmental Neurotoxicity Study, OECD Guideline for Testing of Chemicals, No. 
426, OECD, Paris. 
(38) OECD (2007), Uterotrophic Bioassay in Rodents: A short-term Screening Test for Oestrogenic 
Properties, OECD Guideline for Testing of Chemicals, No. 440, OECD, Paris. 
(39) OECD (2009), Hershberger Bioassay in Rats: A Short-term Screening Assay for (Anti)Androgenic 
Properties, OECD Guideline for Testing of Chemicals, No. 441, OECD, Paris.  
(40) OECD (2009), Guidance Document for Histologic Evalution of Endocrine and Reproductive Test in 
Rodents, Series on Testing and Assessment, No. 106, OECD, Paris. 
(41) OECD (2011), Guidance Document on the Current Implementation of Internal Triggers in the  
Extended One Generation Reproductive Toxicity Study in the United States and Canada, Series on 
Testing and Assessment, No. 117, OECD, Paris. 
(42) OECD (2013), Guidance Document supporting TG 443: Extended One Generation Reproductive 
Toxicity Study, Series on Testing and Assessment, No. 151, OECD, Paris. ENV/JM/MONO(2013)10

OECD/OCDE                          443 
 
       
© OECD (2025) 
 
26 
Appendix A:  Measures and Observations Included in the  
Functional Observational Battery (Cohort 2A) 
 
 
Home Cage & Open Field 
Manipulative 
Physiologic  
 
Posture 
Ease of removal 
Temperature 
Involuntary Clonic & Tonic 
Ease of handling 
Body weight 
Palpebral Closure 
Muscle Tone 
Pupil response 
Piloerection 
Approach Response 
Pupil size 
Salivation 
Touch Response 
Lacrimation 
Auditory Response 
Vocalizations 
Tail Pinch Response 
Rearing 
Righting Response 
Gait Abnormalities 
Landing Foot Splay 
Arousal  
Forelimb Grip Strength 
Stereotypy  
Hindlimb Grip Strength 
Bizarre Behaviour 
Stains 
Respiratory Abnormalities