# TG452.pdf
# Category: oecd
# Pages: 18

OECD/OCDE                            452 
Adopted:  
25 June 2018 
© OECD, (2018) 
 
You are free to use this material subject to the terms and conditions available at http://www.oecd.org/termsandconditions/.  
 
In accordance with the Decision of the Council on a Delegation of Authority to amend Annex I of the Decision of the Council on the Mutual 
Acceptance of Data in the Assessment of Chemicals [C(2018)49], this Guideline was amended by the OECD’s Joint Meeting of the Chemicals 
Committee and the Working Party on Chemicals, Pesticides and Biotechnology by written procedure on 25 June 2018. 
OECD GUIDELINE FOR THE TESTING OF CHEMICALS 
Chronic Toxicity Studies 
 
INTRODUCTION 
1. 
OECD Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals (TGs) are periodically reviewed 
in the light of scientific progress, changing assessment practices and animal welfare 
considerations. The original Guideline 452 was adopted in 1981.  Development of a 
revised TG 452 was considered necessary in order to reflect recent developments in the 
field of animal welfare and regulatory requirements (1) (2) (3) (4). The updating of TG 
452 has been carried out in parallel with revisions of the Test Guidelines 451, 
Carcinogenicity Studies and 453, Combined Chronic Toxicity/Carcinogenicity studies, 
with the objective of obtaining additional information from the animals used in the study 
and providing further detail on dose selection. This Test Guideline is designed to be used 
in the testing of a broad range of chemicals, including pesticides and industrial chemicals.  
2. 
The majority of chronic toxicity studies are carried out in rodent species, and this 
Test Guideline is intended therefore to apply primarily to studies carried out in these 
species. Should such studies be required in non-rodent species, the principles and 
procedures outlined in this Guideline, together with those outlined in OECD TG 409, 
Repeated Dose 90 day Oral Toxicity Study in Non Rodents (5) may also be applied, with 
appropriate modifications, as outlined in the OECD Guidance Document No. 116 on the 
Design and Conduct of Chronic Toxicity and Carcinogenicity Studies (6).  
3. 
The three main routes of administration used in chronic toxicity studies are oral, 
dermal and inhalation.  The choice of the route of administration depends on the physical 
and chemical characteristics of the test chemical and the predominant route of exposure 
of humans. Additional information on choice of route of exposure is provided in the 
OECD Guidance Document No. 116 (6).  
4. 
This Guideline focuses on exposure via the oral route, the route most commonly 
used in chronic toxicity studies.  While long–term chronic toxicity studies involving 
exposure via the dermal or inhalation routes may also be necessary for human health risk 
assessment and/or may be required under certain regulatory regimes, both routes of 
exposure involve considerable technical complexity.  Such studies will need to be 
designed on a case-by-case basis, although the Guideline outlined here for the assessment 
and evaluation of chronic toxicity by oral administration could form the basis of a 
protocol for inhalation and/or dermal studies, with respect to recommendations for

2 │       452                      OECD/OCDE 
© OECD 2018 
      
treatment periods, clinical and pathology parameters, etc. OECD Guidance is available on 
the administration of test chemicals by the inhalation (6) (7) and dermal routes (6). TG 
412 (8) and TG 413 (9), together with the associated OECD Guidance Document on acute 
inhalation testing (7), should be specifically consulted in the design of longer term studies 
involving exposure via the inhalation route. TG 410 (10) should be consulted in the case 
of testing carried out by the dermal route. 
5. 
The chronic toxicity study provides information on the possible health hazards 
likely to arise from repeated exposure over a considerable part of the lifespan of the 
species used. The study will provide information on the toxic effects of the substance, 
indicate target organs and the possibility of accumulation. It can also provide an estimate 
of the no-observed-adverse effect level which can be used for establishing safety criteria 
for human exposure. The need for careful clinical observations of the animals, so as to 
obtain as much information as possible, is also stressed.   
6. 
The objectives of studies covered by this test guideline include: 
 
The identification of the chronic toxicity of a chemical;  
 
The identification of target organs; 
 
Characterisation of the dose-response relationship;  
 
Identification of a  no-observed-adverse-effect level (NOAEL) or point of 
departure for establishment of a Benchmark Dose (BMD);  
 
The prediction of chronic toxicity effects at human exposure levels;  
 
Provision of data to test hypotheses regarding mode of action (6).   
INITIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
7. 
In the assessment and evaluation of the toxicological characteristics of a chemical, 
all available information on the test chemical should be considered by the testing 
laboratory prior to conducting the study, in order to focus the design of the study to more 
efficiently test for chronic toxicity potential and to minimize animal usage. Information 
that will assist in the study design includes the identity, chemical structure, and physico-
chemical properties of the test chemical; any information on the mode of action; results of 
any in vitro or in vivo toxicity tests; anticipated use(s) and potential for human exposure; 
available (Q)SAR data and toxicological data on structurally-related substances; available 
toxicokinetic data (single dose and also repeat dose kinetics where available) and data 
derived from other repeated exposure studies. The determination of chronic toxicity 
should only be carried out after initial information on toxicity has been obtained from 
repeated dose 28-day and/or 90-day toxicity tests.  A phased testing approach to chronic 
toxicity testing should be considered as part of the overall assessment of the potential 
adverse health effects of a particular chemical (11) (12) (13) (14).  
8. 
The statistical methods most appropriate for the analysis of results, given the 
experimental design and objectives, should be established before commencing the study. 
Issues to consider include whether the statistics should include adjustment for survival 
and analysis in the event of premature termination of one or more groups. Guidance on 
the appropriate statistical analyses and key references to internationally accepted 
statistical methods are given in Guidance Document No. 116 (6), and also in Guidance 
Document No.35 on the analysis and evaluation of chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity 
studies (15).

OECD/OCDE                            452 │ 3 
 
© OECD 2018 
      
9. 
In conducting a chronic toxicity study, the guiding principles and considerations 
outlined in the OECD Guidance Document No. 19 on the recognition, assessment, and 
use of clinical signs as humane endpoints for experimental animals used in safety 
evaluation (16), in particular paragraph 62 thereof, should always be followed. This 
paragraph states that “In studies involving repeated dosing, when an animal shows 
clinical signs that are progressive, leading to further deterioration in condition, an 
informed decision as to whether or not to humanely kill the animal should be made. The 
decision should include consideration as to the value of the information to be gained from 
the continued maintenance of that animal on study relative to its overall condition. If a 
decision is made to leave the animal on test, the frequency of observations should be 
increased, as needed. It may also be possible, without adversely affecting the purpose of 
the test, to temporarily stop dosing if it will relieve the pain or distress, or reduce the test 
dose.” 
10. 
Detailed guidance on and discussion of the principles of dose selection for chronic 
toxicity and carcinogenicity studies can be found in Guidance Document No. 116 (6), as 
well as two International Life Sciences Institute publications (17) (18).  The core dose 
selection strategy is dependent on the primary objective or objectives of the study 
(paragraph 6). In selecting appropriate dose levels, a balance should be achieved between 
hazard screening on the one hand and characterisation of low-dose responses and their 
relevance on the other.  This is particularly relevant in the situation where a combined 
chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity study (TG 453) is to be carried out (paragraph 11). 
11. 
Consideration should be given to carrying out a combined chronic toxicity and 
carcinogenicity study (TG 453), rather than separate execution of a chronic toxicity study 
(TG 452) and carcinogenicity study (TG 451). The combined test provides greater 
efficiency in terms of time and cost compared to conducting two separate studies, without 
compromising the quality of the data in either the chronic phase or the carcinogenicity 
phase. Careful consideration should however be given to the principles of dose selection 
(paragraphs 9 and 20-25) when undertaking a combined chronic toxicity and 
carcinogenicity study (TG 453), and it is also recognised that separate studies may be 
required under certain regulatory frameworks. 
12. 
Definitions used in the context of this Test Guideline can be found in Guidance 
Document No. 116. 
PRINCIPLE OF THE TEST 
13. 
The test chemical is administered daily in graduated doses to several groups of 
experimental animals, normally for a period of 12 months, although longer or shorter 
durations may also be chosen depending on regulatory requirements (see paragraph 33). 
This duration is chosen to be sufficiently long to allow any effects of cumulative toxicity 
to become manifest, without the confounding effects of geriatric changes. Deviations 
from exposure duration of 12 months should be justified, particularly in the case of 
shorter durations.  The test chemical is normally administered by the oral route although 
testing by the inhalation or dermal route may also be appropriate. The study design may 
also include one or more interim kills, e.g. at 3 and 6 months, and additional groups of 
animals may be included to accommodate this (see paragraph 19). During the period of 
administration the animals are observed closely for signs of toxicity. Animals which die 
or are killed during the test are necropsied and, at the conclusion of the test, surviving 
animals are killed and necropsied.

4 │       452                      OECD/OCDE 
© OECD 2018 
      
DESCRIPTION OF THE METHOD 
Selection of animal species 
14. 
This Guideline primarily covers assessment and evaluation of chronic toxicity in 
rodents (see paragraph 2) although it is recognised that similar studies in non-rodents may 
be required under certain regulatory regimes. The choice of species should be justified. 
The design and conduct of chronic toxicity studies in non-rodent species, when required, 
should be based on the principles outlined in this Guideline together with those in OECD 
TG 409, Repeated Dose 90-day Oral Toxicity Study in Non-Rodents (5). Additional 
information on choice of species and strain is provided in Guidance Document No. 116 
(6). 
15. 
In this Guideline, the preferred rodent species is the rat, although other rodent 
species, e.g. the mouse, may be used. Rats and mice have been preferred experimental 
models because of their relatively short life span, their widespread use in pharmacological 
and toxicological studies, their susceptibility to tumour induction, and the availability of 
sufficiently characterised strains.  As a consequence of these characteristics, a large 
amount of information is available on their physiology and pathology. Young healthy 
adult animals of commonly used laboratory strains should be employed. The chronic 
toxicity study should be carried out in animals from the same strain and source as those 
used in preliminary toxicity study(ies) of shorter duration. The females should be 
nulliparous and non-pregnant.   
Housing and feeding conditions 
16. 
Animals may be housed individually, or be caged in small groups of the same sex; 
individual housing should be considered only if scientifically justified (19) (20) (21). 
Cages should be arranged in such a way that possible effects due to cage placement are 
minimised. The temperature in the experimental animal room should be 22°C (± 3°C). 
Although the relative humidity should be at least 30% and preferably not exceed 70% 
other than during room cleaning, the aim should be 50-60%. Lighting should be artificial, 
the sequence being 12 hours light, 12 hours dark. For feeding, conventional laboratory 
diets may be used with an unlimited supply of drinking water. The diet should meet all 
the nutritional requirements of the species tested and the content of dietary contaminants 
including but not limited to pesticide residues, persistent organic pollutants, 
phytoestrogens, heavy metals and mycotoxins, that might influence the outcome of the 
test, should be as low as possible.  Analytical information on the nutrient and dietary 
contaminant levels should be generated periodically, at least at the beginning of the study 
and when there is a change in the batch used, and should be included in the final report.  
Analytical information on the drinking water used in the study should similarly be 
provided.  The choice of diet may be influenced by the need to ensure a suitable 
admixture of a test chemical and to meet the nutritional requirements of the animals when 
the test chemical is administered by the dietary route.  
Preparation of animals 
17. 
Healthy animals, which have been acclimated to laboratory conditions for at least 
7 days and have not been subjected to previous experimental procedures, should be used. 
In the case of rodents, dosing of the animals should begin as soon as possible after 
weaning and acclimatisation and preferably before the animals are 8 weeks old. The test 
animals should be characterised as to species, strain, source, sex, weight and age. At the

OECD/OCDE                            452 │ 5 
 
© OECD 2018 
      
commencement of the study, the weight variation for each sex of animals used should be 
minimal and not exceed ± 20 % of the mean weight of all the animals within the study, 
separately for each sex. Animals should be randomly assigned to the control and 
treatment groups. After randomisation, there should be no significant differences in mean 
body weights between groups within each sex.  If there are statistically significant 
differences, then the randomisation step should be repeated, if possible. Each animal 
should be assigned a unique identification number, and permanently marked with this 
number by tattooing, microchip implant, or other suitable method. 
PROCEDURE 
Number and sex of animals 
18. 
Both sexes should be used. A sufficient number of animals should be used so that 
at the end of the study enough animals in every group are available for thorough 
biological and statistical evaluation. For rodents, at least 20 animals per sex per group 
should normally be used at each dose level, while for non-rodents a minimum of 4 per sex 
per group is recommended. In studies involving mice, additional animals may be needed 
in each dose group to conduct all required haematological determinations.   
Provision for interim kills, satellite groups and sentinel animals  
19. 
The study may make provision for interim kills (at least 10 animals/sex/group), 
e.g. at 6 months, to provide information on progression of toxicological changes and 
mechanistic information, if scientifically justified. Where such information is already 
available from previous repeat dose toxicity studies on the substance, interim kills may 
not be scientifically justified. Satellite groups may also be included to monitor the 
reversibility of any toxicological changes induced by the chemical under investigation; 
these will normally be restricted to the highest dose level of the study plus control.  An 
additional group of sentinel animals (typically 5 animals per sex) may also be included 
for monitoring of disease status, if necessary, during the study (22). If interim kills or 
inclusion of satellite or sentinel groups are planned, the number of animals included in the 
study design should be increased by the number of animals scheduled to be killed before 
the completion of the study.  These animals should normally undergo the same 
observations, including  body weight, food/water consumption, haematological and 
clinical biochemistry measurements and pathological investigations as the animals in the 
chronic toxicity phase of the main study, although provision may also be made (in the 
interim kill groups) for measurements to be restricted to specific, key measures such as 
neurotoxicity or immunotoxicity.  
Dose groups and dosage 
20. 
Guidance on all aspects of dose selection and dose level spacing is provided in 
Guidance Document No.116 (6). At least three dose levels and a concurrent control 
should be used, except where a limit test is conducted (see paragraph 27). Dose levels 
will generally be based on the results of shorter-term repeated dose or range finding 
studies and should take into account any existing toxicological and toxicokinetic data 
available for the test chemical or related materials.  
21. 
In the dose selection the investigator should also consider and ensure that data 
generated is adequate to fulfil the regulatory requirements across OECD countries as

6 │       452                      OECD/OCDE 
© OECD 2018 
      
appropriate (e.g., hazard and risk assessment, classification and labelling, ED assessment, 
etc.) 
22. 
Unless limited by the physical-chemical nature or biological effects of the test 
chemical, the highest dose level should normally be chosen to identify the principal target 
organs and toxic effects while avoiding suffering, severe toxicity, morbidity, or death.  
While taking into account the factors outlined in paragraph 22 below, the highest dose 
level should be chosen to elicit evidence of toxicity, as evidenced by, for example, 
depression of body weight gain (approximately 10%).  
22. 
However, dependent on the objectives of the study (see paragraph 6), a top dose 
lower than the dose providing evidence of toxicity may be chosen, e.g., if a dose elicits an 
adverse effect of concern that nonetheless has little impact on lifespan or body weight.  
The top dose should not exceed 1000 mg/kg body weight/day (limit dose, see paragraph 
27).   
23. 
Dose levels and dose level spacing may be selected to establish a dose-response 
and a NOAEL or other intended outcome of the study, e.g a BMD (see paragraph 25) at 
the lowest dose level.  Factors that should be considered in the placement of lower doses 
include the expected slope of the dose–response curve, the doses at which important 
changes may occur in metabolism or mode of toxic action, where a threshold is expected, 
or where a point of departure for low-dose extrapolation is expected.  
24. 
The dose level spacing selected will depend on the characteristics of the test 
chemical, and cannot be prescribed in this Guideline, but two to four fold intervals 
frequently provide good test performance when used for setting the descending dose 
levels and addition of a fourth test group is often preferable to using very large intervals 
(e.g., more than a factor of about 6-10) between dosages. In general the use of factors 
greater than 10 should be avoided, and should be justified if used. 
25. 
As outlined further in Guidance Document No.116 (6), points to be considered in 
dose selection include: 
 
Known or suspected nonlinearities or inflection points in the dose–response; 
 
 
Toxicokinetics, and dose ranges where metabolic induction, saturation, or 
nonlinearity between external and internal doses does or does not occur;  
 
 
Precursor lesions, markers of effect, or indicators of the operation of key 
underlying biological processes;  
 
 
Key (or suspected) aspects of mode of action, such as doses at which cytotoxicity 
begins to arise, hormone levels are perturbed, homeostatic mechanisms are overwhelmed, 
etc.; 
  
 
Regions of the dose–response curve where particularly robust estimation is 
needed, e.g., in the range of the anticipated BMD or a suspected threshold;  
 
 
Consideration of anticipated human exposure levels.

OECD/OCDE                            452 │ 7 
 
© OECD 2018 
      
 
26. 
The control group shall be an untreated group or a vehicle-control group if a 
vehicle is used in administering the test chemical. Except for treatment with the test 
chemical, animals in the control group should be handled in an identical manner to those 
in the test groups. If a vehicle is used, the control group shall receive the vehicle in the 
highest volume used among the dose groups. If a test chemical is administered in the diet, 
and causes significantly reduced dietary intake due to the reduced palatability of the diet, 
an additional pair-fed control group may be useful, to serve as a more suitable control.  
27. 
If it can be anticipated, based on information from preliminary studies, that a test 
at one dose level, equivalent to at least 1000 mg/kg body weight/day, using the 
procedures described for this study, is unlikely to produce adverse effects and if toxicity 
would not be expected based upon data from structurally related substances, then a full 
study using three dose levels may not be considered necessary. A limit of 1000 mg/kg 
body weight/day may apply except when human exposure indicates the need for a higher 
dose level to be used. 
Preparation of doses and administration of test chemical 
28. 
The test chemical is normally administered orally, via the diet or drinking water, 
or by gavage.  Additional information on routes and methods of administration is 
provided in Guidance Document No. 116 (6). The route and method of administration is 
dependent on the purpose of the study, the physical/chemical properties of the test 
chemical, its bioavailability and the predominant route and method of exposure of 
humans. A rationale should be provided for the chosen route and method of 
administration. In the interests of animal welfare, oral gavage should normally be selected 
only for those agents for which this route and method of administration reasonably 
represent potential human exposure (e.g., pharmaceuticals). For dietary or environmental 
chemicals including pesticides, administration is typically via the diet or drinking water. 
However, for some scenarios, e.g., occupational exposure, administration via other routes 
may be more appropriate  
29. 
Where necessary, the test chemical is dissolved or suspended in a suitable vehicle. 
Consideration should be given to the following characteristics of the vehicle and other 
additives, as appropriate: effects on the absorption, distribution, metabolism, or retention 
of the test chemical; effects on the chemical properties of the test chemical which may 
alter its toxic characteristics; and effects on the food or water consumption or the 
nutritional status of the animals. It is recommended that, wherever possible, the use of an 
aqueous solution/suspension be considered first, followed by consideration of a solution/ 
emulsion in oil (e.g., corn oil) and then by possible solution in other vehicles. For 
vehicles other than water, the toxic characteristics of the vehicle should be known. 
Information should be available on the stability of the test chemical and the homogeneity 
of dosing solutions or diets (as appropriate) under the conditions of administration       
(e.g. diet).  
30. 
For substances administered via the diet or drinking water it is important to ensure 
that the quantities of the test chemical involved do not interfere with normal nutrition or 
water balance. In long-term toxicity studies using dietary administration, the 
concentration of the chemical in the feed should not normally exceed an upper limit of 
5% of the total diet, in order to avoid nutritional imbalances. When the test chemical is 
administered in the diet, either a constant dietary concentration (mg/kg diet or ppm) or a

8 │       452                      OECD/OCDE 
© OECD 2018 
      
constant dose level in terms of the animal’s body weight (mg/kg body weight), calculated 
on a weekly basis, may be used. The alternative used should be specified.  
31. 
In the case of oral administration, the animals are dosed with the test chemical 
daily (seven days each week), normally for a period of 12 months (see also paragraph 33), 
although a longer duration may be required depending on regulatory requirements. Any 
other dosing regime, e.g., five days per week, needs to be justified. In the case of dermal 
administration, animals are normally treated with the test chemical for at least 6 hours per 
day, 7 days per week, as specified in TG 410 (11), for a period of 12 months. Exposure 
by the inhalation route is carried out for 6 hours per day, 7 days per week, but exposure 
for 5 days per week may also be used, if justified. The period of exposure will normally 
be for a period of 12 months. If rodent species other than rats are exposed nose-only, 
maximum exposure durations may be adjusted to minimise species-specific distress. A 
rationale should be provided when using an exposure duration of less than 6 hours per 
day. See also TG 412 (8). 
32. 
When the test chemical is administered by gavage to the animals this should be 
done using a stomach tube or a suitable intubation cannula, at similar times each day. 
Normally a single dose will be administered once daily, where for example a compound 
is a local irritant, it may be possible to maintain the daily dose-rate by administering it as 
a split dose (twice a day). The maximum volume of liquid that can be administered at one 
time depends on the size of the test animal. The volume should be kept as low as 
practical, and should not normally exceed 1 ml/100g body weight for rodents (23).  
Variability in test volume should be minimised by adjusting the concentration to ensure a 
constant volume at all dose levels. Potentially corrosive or irritant substances are the 
exception, and need to be diluted to avoid severe local effects. Testing at concentrations 
that are likely to be corrosive or irritant to the gastrointestinal tract should be avoided. 
Duration of study  
33. 
While this Test Guideline primarily is designed as a 12 month chronic toxicity 
study, the study design also allows for and can be applied to either shorter (e.g. 6 or 9 
months) or longer (e.g. 18 or 24 months) duration studies, depending on the requirements 
of particular regulatory regimes or for specific mechanistic purposes.  Deviations from an 
exposure duration of 12 months should be justified, particularly in the case of shorter 
durations. Satellite groups included to monitor the reversibility of any toxicological 
changes induced by the chemical under investigation should be maintained without 
dosing for a period not less than 4 weeks and not more than one third of the total study 
duration after cessation of exposure. Further guidance, including consideration of survival 
in the study, is provided in Guidance Document No. 116 (6). 
OBSERVATIONS 
34. 
All animals should be checked for morbidity or mortality, usually at the beginning 
and end of each day, including at weekends and holidays. General clinical observations 
should be made at least once a day, preferably at the same time(s) each day, taking into 
consideration the peak period of anticipated effects after dosing in the case of gavage 
administration.  
35. 
Detailed clinical observations should be made on all animals at least once prior to 
the first exposure (to allow for within-subject comparisons), at the end of the first week of 
the study and monthly thereafter. The protocol for observations should be arranged such

OECD/OCDE                            452 │ 9 
 
© OECD 2018 
      
that variations between individual observers are minimised and independent of test group. 
These observations should be made outside the home cage, preferably in a standard arena 
and at similar times on each occasion. They should be carefully recorded, preferably 
using scoring systems, explicitly defined by the testing laboratory. Efforts should be 
made to ensure that variations in the observation conditions are minimal. Signs noted 
should include, but not be limited to, changes in skin, fur, eyes, mucous membranes, 
occurrence of secretions and excretions and autonomic activity (e.g., lacrimation, 
piloerection, pupil size, and unusual respiratory pattern). Changes in gait, posture and 
response to handling as well as the presence of clonic or tonic movements, stereotypies 
(e.g., excessive grooming, repetitive circling) or bizarre behaviour (e.g., self-mutilation, 
walking backwards) should also be recorded (24). 
36. 
Ophthalmological examination, using an ophthalmoscope or other suitable 
equipment, should be carried out on all animals prior to the first administration of the test 
chemical.  At the termination of the study, this examination should be preferably 
conducted in all animals but at least in the high dose and control groups.  If treatment-
related changes in the eyes are detected, all animals should be examined.  If structural 
analysis or other information suggests ocular toxicity, then the frequency of ocular 
examination should be increased. 
37. 
For chemicals where previous repeated dose 28-day and/or 90-day toxicity tests 
indicated the potential to cause neurotoxic effects, sensory reactivity to stimuli of 
different types (24) (e.g., auditory, visual and proprioceptive stimuli) (25), (26), (27), 
assessment of grip strength (28) and motor activity assessment (29) may optionally be 
conducted before commencement of the study and at 3 month periods after study 
initiation up to and including 12 months, as well as at study termination (if longer than 12 
months). Further details of the procedures that could be followed are given in the 
respective references. However, alternative procedures than those referenced could also 
be used.  
38. 
For chemicals where previous repeated dose 28-day and/or 90-day toxicity tests 
indicated the potential to cause immunotoxic effects, further investigations of this 
endpoint may optionally be conducted at termination.  
Body weight, food/water consumption and food efficiency 
39. 
All animals should be weighed at the start of treatment, at least once a week for 
the first 13 weeks, and at least monthly thereafter.  Measurements of food consumption 
and food efficiency should be made at least weekly for the first 13 weeks and at least 
monthly thereafter. Water consumption should be measured at least weekly for the first 
13 weeks and at least monthly thereafter when the substance is administered in drinking 
water. Water consumption measurements should also be considered for studies in which 
drinking activity is altered. 
Haematology and clinical biochemistry 
40. 
In studies involving rodents, haematological examinations should be carried out 
in at least 10 male and 10 female animals per group, at 3, 6, and 12 months, as well as at 
study termination (if longer than 12 months), using the same animals throughout. In mice, 
satellite animals may be needed in order to conduct all required haematological 
determinations (see paragraph 18). In non-rodent studies, samples will be taken from 
smaller numbers of animals (e.g. 4 animals per sex and per group in dog studies), at 
interim sampling times and at termination as described for rodents. Measurements at 3

10 │       452 
                      OECD/OCDE 
© OECD 2018 
      
months, either in rodents or non-rodents, need not be conducted if no effect was seen on 
haematological parameters in a previous 90 day study carried out at comparable dose 
levels. Blood samples should be taken from a named site, for example by cardiac 
puncture or from the retro-orbital sinus, under anaesthesia.  
41. 
The following list of parameters should be investigated (30):  Total and 
differential leukocyte count, erythrocyte count,  platelet count, haemoglobin 
concentration, haematocrit (packed cell volume), mean corpuscular volume (MCV), mean 
corpuscular haemoglobin (MCH),  mean corpuscular haemoglobin concentration 
(MCHC), prothrombin time, and activated partial thromboplastin time. Other hematology 
parameters such as Heinz bodies or other atypical erythrocyte morphology or 
methaemoglobin may be measured as appropriate depending on the toxicity of the 
substance. Overall, a flexible approach should be adopted, depending on the observed 
and/or expected effect from a given substance. If the chemical has an effect on the 
haematopoietic system, reticulocyte counts and bone marrow cytology may also be 
indicated, although these need not be routinely conducted. 
42. 
Clinical biochemistry determinations to investigate major toxic effects in tissues 
and, specifically, effects on kidney and liver, should be performed on blood samples 
obtained from at least 10 male and 10 female animals per group at the same time intervals 
as specified for the haematological investigations, using the same animals throughout. In 
mice, satellite animals may be needed in order to conduct all required clinical 
biochemistry determinations.  In non-rodent studies, samples will be taken from smaller 
numbers of animals (e.g. 4 animals per sex and per group in dog studies), at interim 
sampling times and at termination as described for rodents. Measurements at 3 months, 
either in rodents or non-rodents, need not be conducted if no effect was seen on clinical 
biochemistry parameters in a previous 90 day study carried out at comparable dose levels. 
Overnight fasting of the animals (with the exception of mice) prior to blood sampling is 
recommended1. The following list of parameters should be investigated (30):  glucose, 
urea (urea nitrogen), creatinine, total protein, albumin, calcium, sodium, potassium, total 
cholesterol, at least two appropriate tests for hepatocellular evaluation (alanine 
aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, glutamate dehydrogenase, total bile 
acids)(31), and at least two appropriate tests for hepatobiliary evaluation (alkaline 
phosphatase, gamma glutamyl transferase, 5'-nucleotidase, total bilirubin, total bile 
acids)(31).  Other clinical chemistry parameters such as fasting triglycerides, specific 
hormones and cholinesterase may be measured as appropriate, depending on the toxicity 
of the substance.  Overall, there is a need for a flexible approach, depending on the 
observed and/or expected effect from a given substance. 
43. 
Urinalysis determinations should be performed on at least 10 male and 10 female 
animals per group on samples collected at the same intervals as for haematology and 
clinical chemistry. Measurements at 3 months need not be conducted if no effect was seen 
on urinalysis in a previous 90 day study carried out at comparable dose levels. The 
following list of parameters was included in an expert recommendation on clinical 
pathology studies (30): appearance, volume, osmolality or specific gravity, pH, total 
protein, and glucose.  Other determinations include ketone, urobilinogen, bilirubin, and 
occult blood. Further parameters may be employed where necessary to extend the 
investigation of observed effect(s). 
44. 
It is generally considered that baseline haematological and clinical biochemistry 
variables are needed before treatment for dog studies, but need not be determined in

OECD/OCDE                            452 │ 11 
 
© OECD 2018 
      
rodent studies (30). However, if historical baseline data (see paragraph 50) are 
inadequate, consideration should be given to generating such data. 
Pathology 
Gross necropsy 
45. 
All animals in the study shall normally be subjected to a full, detailed gross 
necropsy which includes careful examination of the external surface of the body, all 
orifices, and the cranial, thoracic and abdominal cavities and their contents. However 
provision may also be made (in the interim kill or satellite groups) for measurements to 
be restricted to specific, key measures such as neurotoxicity or immunotoxicity (see 
paragraph 19). These animals need not be subjected to necropsy and the subsequent 
procedures described in the following paragraphs. Sentinel animals may require necropsy 
on a case-by-case basis, at the discretion of the study director. 
46. 
Organ weights should be collected from all animals, other than those excluded by 
the latter part of paragraph 45.  The adrenals, brain, epididymides, heart, kidneys, liver, 
ovaries, spleen, testes, thyroid (weighed post-fixation, with parathyroids), and uterus of 
all animals (apart from those found moribund and/or intercurrently killed) should be 
trimmed of any adherent tissue, as appropriate, and their wet weight taken as soon as 
possible after dissection to prevent drying. In a study using mice, weighing of the adrenal 
glands is optional. 
47. 
The following tissues should be preserved in the most appropriate fixation 
medium for both the type of tissue and the intended subsequent histopathological 
examination (32) (tissues in square brackets are optional):

12 │       452 
                      OECD/OCDE 
© OECD 2018 
      
 
all gross lesions 
heart 
pancreas 
stomach 
(forestomach, 
glandular stomach) 
adrenal gland 
ileum 
parathyroid gland 
[teeth] 
aorta 
jejunum 
peripheral nerve 
testis 
brain 
(including 
sections 
of 
cerebrum, 
cerebellum, 
and 
medulla/pons) 
kidney 
pituitary 
thymus 
caecum 
lacrimal 
gland 
(exorbital) 
prostate 
thyroid 
cervix 
liver 
rectum 
[tongue] 
coagulating gland 
lung 
salivary gland 
trachea 
colon 
lymph nodes (both 
superficial 
and 
deep) 
seminal vesicle 
urinary bladder 
duodenum 
mammary 
gland 
(obligatory 
for 
females 
and, 
if 
visibly dissectable, 
from males) 
skeletal muscle 
uterus 
(including 
cervix) 
epididymis 
[upper 
respiratory 
tract, 
including 
nose, turbinates, and 
paranasal sinuses]  
skin 
[ureter] 
eye 
(including 
retina) 
oesophagus 
spinal cord (at three 
levels: 
 
cervical, 
mid-thoracic, 
and 
lumbar) 
[urethra] 
[femur with joint] 
[olfactory bulb] 
spleen 
vagina 
gall 
bladder 
(for 
species other than 
rat) 
ovary 
[sternum], 
section 
of 
bone 
marrow 
and/or 
a 
fresh bone marrow 
aspirate 
Harderian gland 
 
 
 
 
In the case of paired organs, e.g., kidney, adrenal, both organs should be preserved. The 
clinical and other findings may suggest the need to examine additional tissues.  Also any 
organs considered likely to be target organs based on the known properties of the test 
chemical should be preserved. In studies involving the dermal route of administration, the 
list of organs as set out for the oral route should be preserved, and specific sampling and 
preservation of the skin from the site of application is essential. In inhalation studies, the 
list of preserved and examined tissues from the respiratory tract should follow the 
recommendations of TG 412 (8) and TG 413 (9). For other organs/tissues (and in addition 
to the specifically preserved tissues from the respiratory tract) the list of organs as set out 
for the oral route should be examined.

OECD/OCDE                            452 │ 13 
 
© OECD 2018 
      
 
Histopathology 
48. 
Guidance is available on best practices in the conduct of toxicological pathology 
studies (32).  The minimum histopathological examinations should be: 
 
all tissues from the high dose and control groups; 
 
all tissues from animals dying or killed during the study; 
 
all tissues showing macroscopic abnormalities; 
 
target tissues, or tissues which showed treatment-related changes in the high dose 
group, from all animals in all other dose groups; 
 
in the case of paired organs, e.g., kidney, adrenal, both organs should be 
examined. 
DATA AND REPORTING 
Data 
49. 
Individual animal data should be provided for all parameters evaluated. 
Additionally, all data should be summarised in tabular form showing for each test group 
the number of animals at the start of the test, the number of animals found dead during 
the test or killed for humane reasons and the time of any death or humane kill, the number 
showing signs of toxicity, a description of the signs of toxicity observed, including time 
of onset, duration, and severity of any toxic effects, the number of animals showing 
lesions, the type of lesions and the percentage of animals displaying each type of lesion. 
Summary data tables should provide the means and standard deviations (for continuous 
test data) of animals showing toxic effects or lesions, in addition to the grading of lesions. 
50. 
Historical control data may be valuable in the interpretation of the results of the 
study, e.g. in the case when there are indications that the data provided by the concurrent 
controls are substantially out of line when compared to recent data from control animals 
from the same test facility/colony. Historical control data, if evaluated, should be 
submitted from the same laboratory and relate to animals of the same age and strain 
generated during the five years preceding the study in question.  
51. 
When applicable, numerical results should be evaluated by an appropriate and 
generally acceptable statistical method. The statistical methods and the data to be 
analysed should be selected during the design of the study (paragraph 8). Selection should 
make provision for survival adjustments, if needed. 
TEST REPORT 
52. 
The test report should include the following information: 
Test chemical: 
 
physical nature, purity, and physicochemical properties; 
 
identification data; 
 
source of substance;

14 │       452 
                      OECD/OCDE 
© OECD 2018 
      
 
batch number; 
 
certificate of chemical analysis 
Vehicle (if appropriate): 
 
justification for choice of vehicle (if other than water). 
Test animals: 
 
species/strain used and justification for choice made; 
 
number, age, and sex of animals at start of test; 
 
source, housing conditions, diet, etc.; 
 
individual weights of animals at the start of the test. 
Test conditions: 
 
rationale for route of administration and dose selection; 
 
when applicable, the statistical methods used to analyse the data; 
 
details of test chemical formulation/diet preparation; 
 
analytical data on achieved concentration, stability and homogeneity of the 
preparation; 
 
route of administration and details of the administration of the test chemical; 
 
for inhalation studies, whether nose only or whole body; 
 
actual doses (mg/kg body weight/day), and conversion factor from diet/drinking 
water test chemical concentration (mg/kg or ppm) to the actual dose, if applicable; 
 
details of food and water quality. 
Results:(summary tabulated data and individual animal data should be 
presented): 
 
survival data; 
 
body weight/body weight changes; 
 
food consumption, calculations of food efficiency, if made, and water 
consumption if applicable; 
 
toxic response data by sex and dose level, including signs of toxicity; 
 
nature, incidence (and, if scored, severity), and duration of clinical observations 
((whether transitory or permanent); 
 
ophthalmological examination; 
 
haematological tests; 
 
clinical biochemistry tests; 
 
urinalysis tests; 
 
outcome of any investigations of neurotoxicity or immunotoxicity

OECD/OCDE                            452 │ 15 
 
© OECD 2018 
      
 
terminal body weight; 
 
organ weights (and their ratios, if applicable);  
 
necropsy findings; 
 
a detailed description of all treatment-related histopathological findings; 
 
absorption data if available; 
Statistical treatment of results, as appropriate 
Discussion of results including: 
 
Dose:response relationships 
 
Consideration of any mode of action information 
 
Discussion of any modelling approaches 
 
BMD, NOAEL or LOAEL determination 
 
Historical control data 
 
Relevance for humans 
Conclusions

16 │       452 
                      OECD/OCDE 
© OECD 2018 
      
LITERATURE 
 
1. 
OECD (1995), Report of the Consultation Meeting on Sub-chronic and Chronic 
Toxicity/Carcinogenicity 
Testing 
(Rome, 
1995), 
internal 
working 
document, 
Environment Directorate, OECD, Paris. 
2. 
Combes RD, Gaunt, I, Balls M (2004). A Scientific and Animal Welfare 
Assessment of the OECD Health Effects Test Guidelines for the Safety Testing of 
Chemicals under the European Union REACH System. ATLA 32, 163-208. 
3. 
Barlow SM, Greig JB, Bridges JW et al (2002). Hazard identification by methods 
of animal-based toxicology.  Food. Chem. Toxicol. 40, 145-191. 
4. 
Chhabra RS, Bucher JR, Wolfe M, Portier C (2003). Toxicity characterization of 
environmental chemicals by the US National Toxicology Programme: an overview. Int. J. 
Hyg. Environ. Health 206, 437-445. 
5. 
OECD (1998), Repeat Dose 90-day Oral Toxicity Study in Non-Rodents, Test 
Guideline No. 409, OECD Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals, OECD, Paris.  
6. 
OECD (2009), Draft Guidance Document on the Design and Conduct of Chronic 
Toxicity and Carcinogenicity Studies, Series on Testing and Assessment No. 116, 
available 
on 
the 
OECD 
public 
website 
for 
Test 
Guidelines 
at 
www.oecd.org/env/testguidelines. 
7. 
OECD (2009), Guidance Document on Acute Inhalation Toxicity Testing, Series 
on Testing and Assessment N°39, ENV/JM/MONO(2009)28, OECD, Paris. 
8. 
OECD (2009), Subacute Inhalation Toxicity: 28-Day Study, Test Guideline No. 
412, OECD Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals, OECD, Paris.  
9. 
OECD (2009), Subchronic Inhalation Toxicity: 90-Day Study, Test Guideline No. 
413, OECD Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals, OECD, Paris.  
10. 
OECD (1981), Repeated Dose Dermal Toxicity: 21/28-day Study, Test Guideline 
No. 410, OECD Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals, OECD, Paris.  
11. 
Carmichael NG, Barton HA, Boobis AR et al (2006). Agricultural Chemical 
Safety Assessment: A Multisector Approach to the Modernization of Human Safety 
Requirements. Critical Reviews in Toxicology 36, 1-7. 
12. 
Barton HA, Pastoor TP, Baetcke T et al (2006). The Acquisition and Application 
of Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism, and Excretion (ADME) Data in Agricultural 
Chemical Safety Assessments. Critical Reviews in Toxicology 36, 9-35. 
13. 
Doe JE, Boobis AR, Blacker A et al (2006). A Tiered Approach to Systemic 
Toxicity Testing for Agricultural Chemical Safety Assessment. Critical Reviews in 
Toxicology 36, 37-68. 
14. 
Cooper RL, Lamb JS, Barlow SM et al (2006). A Tiered Approach to Life Stages 
Testing for Agricultural Chemical Safety Assessment. Critical Reviews in Toxicology 36, 
69-98. 
15. 
OECD (2002), Guidance Notes for Analysis and Evaluation of Chronic Toxicity 
and Carcinogenicity Studies, Series on Testing and Assessment No. 35 and Series on 
Pesticides No. 14, ENV/JM/MONO(2002)19, OECD, Paris.

OECD/OCDE                            452 │ 17 
 
© OECD 2018 
      
16. 
OECD (2000), Guidance Document on the recognition, assessment, and use of 
clinical signs as humane endpoints for experimental animals used in safety evaluation, 
No. 19, ENV/JM/MONO(2000)7, OECD, Paris.  
17. 
Rhomberg, LR,  Baetcke, K, Blancato, J, Bus, J, Cohen, S, Conolly, R, Dixit R, 
Doe, J, Ekelman, K, Fenner-Crisp, P, Harvey, P,  Hattis, D, Jacobs, A,  Jacobson-Kram, 
D, Lewandowski, T, Liteplo, R,  Pelkonen, O, Rice, J,  Somers, D,  Turturro, A, West, W,  
Olin, S. Issues in the Design and Interpretation of Chronic Toxicity and Carcinogenicity 
Studies in Rodents: Approaches to Dose Selection  Crit Rev. Toxicol. 37  (9) 729 - 837 
(2007). 
18. 
ILSI (International Life Sciences Institute) (1997). Principles for the Selection of 
Doses in Chronic Rodent Bioassays. Foran JA (Ed.). ILSI Press, Washington, DC. 
19. 
EEC Council Directive 86/609/EEC on the approximation of laws, regulations 
and administrative provisions of the Member States regarding the protection of animals 
used for experimental and other scientific purposes. Official Journal, 29, L358, 18th 
December 1986. 
20. 
National Research Council, 1985. Guide for the care and use of laboratory 
animals. NIH Publication No. 86-23. Washington D.C., US. Dept. of Health and Human 
Services. 
21. 
GV-SOLAS (Society for Laboratory Animal Science, Gesellschaft für 
Versuchstierkunde, 1988). Publication on the Planning and Structure of Animal Facilities 
for Institutes Performing Animal Experiments. ISBN 3-906255-04-2. http://www.gv-
solas.de/publ/heft1_1988.pdf 
22. 
GV-SOLAS (Society for Laboratory Animal Science, Gesellschaft für 
Versuchstierkunde, 2006). Microbiological monitoring of laboratory animals in various 
housing systems. http://www.gv-solas.de/auss/hyg/hyg-p7_e.html 
23. 
Diehl K-H, Hull R, Morton D, Pfister R, Rabemampianina Y, Smith D, Vidal J-
M, van de Vorstenbosch C. 2001. A good practice guide to the administration of 
substances and removal of blood, including routes and volumes. Journal of Applied 
Toxicology, 
21:15-23. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.ff.up.pt/farmacologia/pdf/good_practice_lab_animals.pdf 
24. 
IPCS (1986). Principles and Methods for the Assessment of Neurotoxicity 
Associated with Exposure to Chemicals. Environmental Health Criteria Document No. 
60. 
25. 
Tupper, D.E., Wallace, R.B. (1980). Utility of the Neurologic Examination in 
Rats. Acta Neurobiol. Exp., 40, 999-1003. 
26. 
Gad, S.C. (1982). A Neuromuscular Screen for Use in Industrial Toxicology. J. 
Toxicol.Environ. Health, 9, 691-704. 
27. 
Moser, V.C., McDaniel, K.M., Phillips, P.M. (1991). Rat Strain and Stock 
Comparisons Using a Functional Observational Battery: Baseline Values and Effects of 
Amitraz. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol., 108, 267-283. 
28. 
Meyer O.A., Tilson H.A., Byrd W.C., Riley M.T. (1979). A Method for the 
RoutineAssessment of Fore- and Hind-limb Grip Strength of Rats and Mice. Neurobehav. 
Toxicol., 1, 233-236.

18 │       452 
                      OECD/OCDE 
© OECD 2018 
      
29. 
Crofton K.M., Howard J.L., Moser V.C., Gill M.W., Reiter L.W., Tilson H.A., 
MacPhail R.C. (1991). Interlaboratory Comparison of Motor Activity Experiments: 
Implication for Neurotoxicological Assessments. Neurotoxicol. Teratol., 13, 599-609. 
30. 
Weingand K, Brown G, Hall R et al. (1996). Harmonisation of Animal Clinical 
Pathology Testing in Toxicity and Safety Studies. Fundam. & Appl. Toxicol., 29: 198-
201. 
31. 
EMEA (draft) document ‘Non-clinical guideline on drug-induced hepatotoxicity’ 
(Doc. Ref. EMEA/CHMP/SWP/a50115/2006).  
32. 
Crissman JW, Goodman DG, Hildebrandt PK et al. (2004). Best Practices 
Guideline: Toxicological Histopathology. Toxicologic Pathology 32, 126-131.