# TG453.pdf
# Category: oecd
# Pages: 20

OECD/OCDE                              453 
Adopted:  
25 June 2018 
© OECD, (2018) 
 
You are free to use this material subject to the terms and conditions available at http://www.oecd.org/termsandconditions/.  
 
In accordance with the Decision of the Council on a Delegation of Authority to amend Annex I of the Decision of the Council on the Mutual 
Acceptance of Data in the Assessment of Chemicals [C(2018)49], this Guideline was amended by the OECD’s Joint Meeting of the Chemicals 
Committee and the Working Party on Chemicals, Pesticides and Biotechnology by written procedure on 25 June 2018. 
OECD GUIDELINE FOR THE TESTING OF CHEMICALS 
COMBINED CHRONIC TOXICITY\CARCINOGENICITY 
STUDIES- 
 
INTRODUCTION 
1. 
OECD Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals (TGs) are periodically reviewed in the light of 
scientific progress, changing assessment practices and animal welfare considerations. The original Test 
Guideline 453 was adopted in 1981.  Development of an updated TG 453 was considered necessary, in 
order to reflect recent developments in the field of animal welfare and regulatory requirements (1) (2) (3) 
(4) (5). The updating of TG 453 has been carried out in parallel with revisions of the Test Guidelines 
451, Carcinogenicity Studies and 452, Chronic Toxicity Studies, with the objective of obtaining 
additional information from the animals used in the study and providing further detail on dose selection. 
This Test Guideline is designed to be used in the testing of a broad range of chemicals, including 
pesticides and industrial chemicals.  It should be noted however that some details and requirements may 
differ for pharmaceuticals (see International Conference on Harmonisation (ICH) Guidance S1B on 
Testing for Carcinogenicity of Pharmaceuticals).  
2. 
The majority of chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity studies are carried out in rodent species 
and this Test Guideline is intended therefore to apply primarily to studies carried out in these species. 
Should such studies be required in non-rodent species, the principles and procedures outlined may also 
be applied, with appropriate modifications, together with those outlined in OECD TG 409, Repeated 
Dose 90-day Oral Toxicity Study in Non-Rodents (6), as outlined in the OECD Guidance Document No. 
116 on the Design and Conduct of Chronic Toxicity and Carcinogenicity Studies (7).  
3. 
The three main routes of administration used in chronic toxicity/carcinogenicity studies are 
oral, dermal and inhalation. The choice of the route of administration depends on the physical and 
chemical characteristics of the test chemical and the predominant route of exposure of humans. 
Additional information on choice of route of exposure is provided in Guidance Document No. 116 (7).  
4. 
This Guideline focuses on exposure via the oral route, the route most commonly used in 
chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity studies. While long–term studies involving exposure via the dermal 
or inhalation routes may also be necessary for human health risk assessment and/or may be required 
under certain regulatory regimes, both routes of exposure involve considerable technical complexity.  
Such studies will need to be designed on a case-by-case basis, although the Guideline outlined here for 
the assessment and evaluation of chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity by oral administration could form

2 │ 453                       OECD/OCDE                               
 © OECD 2018 
      
the basis of a protocol for inhalation and/or dermal studies, with respect to recommendations for 
treatment periods, clinical and pathology parameters, etc. OECD Guidance is available on the 
administration of test chemicals by the inhalation (7) (8) and dermal routes (7). TG  412 (9) and TG 413 
(10), together with the associated OECD Guidance Document on acute inhalation testing (8), should be 
specifically consulted in the design of longer term studies involving exposure via the inhalation route. 
TG 410 (11) should be consulted in the case of testing carried out by the dermal route. 
5. 
The combined chronic toxicity/carcinogenicity study provides information on the possible 
health hazards likely to arise from repeated exposure for a period lasting up to the entire lifespan of the 
species used. The study will provide information on the toxic effects of the substance, including potential 
carcinogenicity, indicate target organs and the possibility of accumulation. It can provide an estimate of 
the no-observed-adverse effect level for toxic effects and, in the case of non-genotoxic carcinogens, for 
tumour responses, which can be used for establishing safety criteria for human exposure. The need for 
careful clinical observations of the animals, so as to obtain as much information as possible, is also 
stressed. 
6. 
The objectives of chronic toxicity/carcinogenicity studies covered by this Test Guideline 
include: 
 
 The identification of the carcinogenic properties of a chemical, resulting in an   
increased incidence of neoplasms, increased proportion of malignant neoplasms or a 
reduction in the time to appearance of neoplasms, compared with concurrent control 
groups; 
 
 The identification of the time to appearance of neoplasms; 
 
The identification of the chronic toxicity of the chemical; 
 
The identification of target organ(s) of chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity, 
 
Characterisation of the dose:response relationship,  
 
Identification of a  no-observed-adverse-effect level (NOAEL) or point of departure for 
establishment of a Benchmark Dose (BMD),  
 
Extrapolation of carcinogenic effects to low dose human exposure levels,  
 
Prediction of chronic toxicity effects at human exposure levels, 
 
Provision of data to test hypotheses regarding mode of action (2) (7) (12) (13) (14) (15).  
INITIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
7. 
In the assessment and evaluation of the potential carcinogenicity and chronic toxicity of a 
chemical, all available information on the test chemical should be considered by the testing laboratory 
prior to conducting the study, in order to focus the design of the study to more efficiently test for its 
toxicological properties and to minimize animal usage. Information on, and consideration of, the mode of 
action of a suspected carcinogen (2) (7) (12) (13) (14) (15) is particularly important, since the optimal 
design may differ depending on whether the substance is a known or suspected genotoxic carcinogen. 
Further guidance on mode of action considerations can be found in Guidance Document No. 116 (7). 
8. 
Information that will assist in the study design includes the identity, chemical structure, and 
physico-chemical properties of the test chemical; any information on the mode of action; results of any in 
vitro or in vivo toxicity tests including genotoxicity tests; anticipated use(s) and potential for human 
exposure; available (Q)SAR data, mutagenicity/genotoxicity, carcinogenicity and other toxicological 
data on structurally-related substances; available toxicokinetic data (single dose and also repeat dose 
kinetics where available) and data derived from other repeated exposure studies. The determination of 
chronic toxicity/carcinogenicity should only be carried out after initial information on toxicity has been

OECD/OCDE                       453 │ 3 
 
 © OECD 2018 
      
obtained from repeated dose 28-day and/or 90-day toxicity tests. Short-tem cancer initiation-promotion 
tests could also provide useful information. A phased testing approach to carcinogenicity testing should 
be considered as part of the overall assessment of the potential adverse health effects of a particular 
chemical (16) (17) (18) (19).  
9. 
The statistical methods most appropriate for the analysis of results, given the experimental 
design and objectives, should be established before commencing the study.  Issues to consider include 
whether the statistics should include adjustment for survival, analysis of cumulative tumour risks relative 
to survival duration, analysis of the time to tumour and analysis in the event of premature termination of 
one or more groups. Guidance on the appropriate statistical analyses and key references to internationally 
accepted statistical methods are given in Guidance Document No. 116 (7), and also in Guidance 
Document No. 35 on the analysis and evaluation of chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity studies (20).  
10. 
In conducting a carcinogenicity study, the guiding principles and considerations outlined in the 
OECD Guidance Document on the recognition, assessment, and use of clinical signs as humane 
endpoints for experimental animals used in safety evaluation (21), in particular paragraph 62 thereof, 
should always be followed. This paragraph states that “In studies involving repeated dosing, when an 
animal shows clinical signs that are progressive, leading to further deterioration in condition, an 
informed decision as to whether or not to humanely kill the animal should be made. The decision should 
include consideration as to the value of the information to be gained from the continued maintenance of 
that animal on study relative to its overall condition. If a decision is made to leave the animal on test, the 
frequency of observations should be increased, as needed. It may also be possible, without adversely 
affecting the purpose of the test, to temporarily stop dosing if it will relieve the pain or distress, or 
reduce the test dose.” 
11. 
Detailed guidance on and discussion of the principles of dose selection for chronic toxicity and 
carcinogenicity studies can be found in Guidance Document No. 116  (7), as well as two International 
Life Sciences Institute publications (22) (23).  The core dose selection strategy is dependent on the 
primary objective or objectives of the study (paragraph 6). In selecting appropriate dose levels, a balance 
should be achieved between hazard screening on the one hand and characterisation of low-dose responses 
and their relevance on the other. This is particularly relevant in the case of this combined chronic toxicity 
and carcinogenicity study.  
12. 
Consideration should be given to carrying out this combined chronic toxicity and 
carcinogenicity study, rather than separate execution of a chronic toxicity study (TG 452) and 
carcinogenicity study (TG 451). The combined test provides greater efficiency in terms of time and cost, 
and some reduction in animal use, compared to conducting two separate studies, without compromising 
the quality of the data in either the chronic phase or the carcinogenicity phase.  Careful consideration 
should however be given to the principles of dose selection (paragraphs 11 and 22-26) when undertaking 
a combined chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity study, and it is also recognised that separate studies may 
be required under certain regulatory frameworks. Further guidance on the design of the combined 
chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity study in order to achieve maximum efficiency of the study in terms 
of possibilities for reduction in numbers of animals used as well as via the streamlining of the various 
experimental procedures can be found in Guidance Document No. 116. 
13. 
Definitions used in the context of this Test Guideline can be found in Guidance Document No. 
116.

4 │ 453                       OECD/OCDE                               
 © OECD 2018 
      
PRINCIPLE OF THE TEST 
14. 
The study design consists of two parallel phases, a chronic phase and a carcinogenicity phase 
(for duration see paragraphs 34 and 35, respectively). The test chemical is normally administered by the 
oral route although testing by the inhalation or dermal route may also be appropriate. For the chronic 
phase, the test chemical is administered daily in graduated doses to several groups of test animals, one 
dose level per group, normally for a period of 12 months, although longer or shorter durations may also 
be chosen depending on regulatory requirements (see paragraph 34). This duration is chosen to be 
sufficiently long to allow any effects of cumulative toxicity to become manifest, without the confounding 
effects of geriatric changes. The study design may also include one or more interim kills, e.g. at 3 and 6 
months, and additional groups of animals may be included to accommodate this (see paragraph 20). For 
the carcinogenicity phase, the test chemical is administered daily to several groups of test animals for a 
major portion of their life span. The animals in both phases are observed closely for signs of toxicity and 
for the development of neoplastic lesions. Animals which die or are killed during the test are necropsied 
and, at the conclusion of the test, surviving animals are killed and necropsied. 
DESCRIPTION OF THE METHOD 
Selection of animal species 
15. 
This Guideline primarily covers assessment and evaluation of chronic toxicity and 
carcinogenicity in rodents (paragraph 2). The use of non-rodent species may be considered when 
available data suggest that they are more relevant for the prediction of health effects in humans. The 
choice of species should be justified. The preferred rodent species is the rat, although other rodent 
species, e.g., the mouse, may be used. Although the use of the mouse in carcinogenicity testing may have 
limited utility (24) (25) (26), under some current regulatory programmes carcinogenicity testing in the 
mouse is still required. Rats and mice have been preferred experimental models because of their 
relatively short life span, their widespread use in pharmacological and toxicological studies, their 
susceptibility to tumour induction, and the availability of sufficiently characterised strains.  As a 
consequence of these characteristics, a large amount of information is available on their physiology and 
pathology. The design and conduct of chronic toxicity/carcinogenicity studies in non-rodent species, 
when required, should be based on the principles outlined in this Guideline together with those in OECD 
TG 409, Repeated Dose 90-day Oral Toxicity Study in Non-Rodents (6). Additional information on 
choice of species and strain is provided in Guidance Document No. 116 (7).  
16. 
Young healthy adult animals of commonly used laboratory strains should be employed. The 
combined chronic toxicity/carcinogenicity study should be carried out in animals from the same strain 
and source as those used in preliminary toxicity study(ies) of shorter duration, although, if animals from 
this strain and source are known to present problems in achieving the normally accepted criteria of 
survival for long-term studies (see Guidance Document No. 116 (7)), consideration should be given to 
using a strain of animal that has a acceptable survival rate for the long-term study. The females should be 
nulliparous and non-pregnant.  
Housing and feeding conditions 
17. 
Animals may be housed individually, or be caged in small groups of the same sex; individual 
housing should be considered only if scientifically justified (27) (28) (29). Cages should be arranged in 
such a way that possible effects due to cage placement are minimised. The temperature in the 
experimental animal room should be 22°C (± 3°C). Although the relative humidity should be at least 
30% and preferably not exceed 70% other than during room cleaning, the aim should be 50-60%. 
Lighting should be artificial, the sequence being 12 hours light, 12 hours dark. For feeding, conventional

OECD/OCDE                       453 │ 5 
 
 © OECD 2018 
      
laboratory diets may be used with an unlimited supply of drinking water. The diet should meet all the 
nutritional requirements of the species tested and the content of dietary contaminants, including but not 
limited to pesticide residues, persistent organic pollutants, phytoestrogens, heavy metals and mycotoxins, 
that might influence the outcome of the test, should be as low as possible.  Analytical information on the 
nutrient and dietary contaminant levels should be generated periodically, at least at the beginning of the 
study and when there is a change in the batch used, and should be included in the final report.  Analytical 
information on the drinking water used in the study should similarly be provided.  The choice of diet may 
be influenced by the need to ensure a suitable admixture of a test chemical and to meet the nutritional 
requirements of the animals when the test chemical is administered by the dietary route.  
Preparation of animals 
18. 
Healthy animals, which have been acclimated to laboratory conditions for at least 7 days and 
have not been subjected to previous experimental procedures, should be used. In the case of rodents, 
dosing of the animals should begin as soon as possible after weaning and acclimatisation and preferably 
before the animals are 8 weeks old.  The test animals should be characterised as to species, strain, source, 
sex, weight and age. At the commencement of the study, the weight variation for each sex of animals 
used should be minimal and not exceed ± 20 % of the mean weight of all the animals within the study, 
separately for each sex. Animals should be randomly assigned to the control and treatment groups. After 
randomisation, there should be no significant differences in mean body weights between groups within 
each sex.  If there are statistically significant differences, then the randomisation step should be repeated, 
if possible. Each animal should be assigned a unique identification number, and permanently marked 
with this number by tattooing, microchip implant, or other suitable method. 
PROCEDURE 
Number and sex of animals 
19. 
Both sexes should be used. A sufficient number of animals should be used so that a thorough 
biological and statistical evaluation is possible. For rodents, each dose group (as outlined in paragraph 
22) and concurrent control group intended for the carcinogenicity phase of the study should therefore 
contain at least 50 animals of each sex. Depending on the aim of the study, it may be possible to increase 
the statistical power of the key estimates by differentially allocating animals unequally to the various 
dose groups, with more than 50 animals in the low dose groups, e.g., to estimate the carcinogenic 
potential in low doses. However it should be recognised that a moderate increase in group size will 
provide relatively little increase in statistical power of the study. Each dose group (as outlined in 
paragraph 22) and concurrent control group intended for the chronic toxicity phase of the study should 
contain at least 10 animals of each sex, in the case of rodents. It should be noted that this number is lower 
than in the chronic toxicity study TG 452. The interpretation of the data from the reduced number of 
animals per group in the chronic toxicity phase of this combined study will however be supported by the 
data from the larger number of animals in the carcinogenicity phase of the study. In studies involving 
mice, additional animals may be needed in each dose group of the chronic toxicity phase, to conduct all 
required haematological determinations. Further information on statistical design of the study and choice 
of dose levels to maximise statistical power is provided in Guidance Document No. 116 (7). 
Provision for interim kills, satellite group and sentinel animals  
20. 
The study may make provision for interim kills, e.g. at 6 months for the chronic toxicity phase, 
to provide information on progression of non-neoplastic changes and mechanistic information, if 
scientifically justified.  Where such information is already available from previous repeat dose toxicity 
studies on the substance, interim kills may not be scientifically justified. The animals used in the chronic 
toxicity phase of the study, normally of 12 months duration (paragraph 34) provide interim kill data for

6 │ 453                       OECD/OCDE                               
 © OECD 2018 
      
the carcinogenicity phase of the study, thus achieving a reduction in the number of animals used overall. 
Satellite groups may also be included in the chronic toxicity phase of the study, to monitor the 
reversibility of any toxicological changes induced by the chemical under investigation. These may be 
restricted to the highest dose level of the study plus control. An additional group of sentinel animals 
(typically 5 animals per sex) may be included for monitoring of disease status, if necessary, during the 
study (30). Further guidance on study design to include interim kills, satellite and sentinel animals, while 
minimising the number of animals used overall is provided in Guidance Document No. 116 (7). 
21. 
If satellite animals and/or interim kills are included in the study design, the number of animals 
in each dose group included for this purpose will normally be 10 animals per sex, and the total number of 
animals included in the study design should be increased by the number of animals scheduled to be killed 
before the completion of the study. Interim kill and satellite animals should normally undergo the same 
observations, including body weight, food/water consumption, haematological and clinical biochemistry 
measurements and pathological investigations as the animals in the chronic toxicity phase of the main 
study, although provision may also be made (in the interim kill groups) for measurements to be restricted 
to specific, key measures such as neurotoxicity or immunotoxicity.  
Dose groups and dosage 
22. 
Guidance on all aspects of dose selection and dose level spacing is provided in Guidance 
Document No. 116 (7). At least three dose levels and a concurrent control should be used, for both the 
chronic and carcinogenicity phases. Dose levels will generally be based on the results of shorter-term 
repeated dose or range finding studies and should take into account any existing toxicological and 
toxicokinetic data available for the test chemical or related materials.  
23. 
In the dose selection the investigator should also consider and ensure that data generated is 
adequate to fulfil the regulatory requirements across OECD countries as appropriate (e.g., hazard and 
risk assessment, classification and labelling, ED assessment, etc.) 
24. 
For the chronic toxicity phase of the study, a full study using three dose levels may not be 
considered necessary, if it can be anticipated that a test at one dose level, equivalent to at least 1000 
mg/kg body weight/day, is unlikely to produce adverse effects. This should be based on information from 
preliminary studies and a consideration that toxicity would not be expected, based upon data from 
structurally related substances. A limit of 1000 mg/kg body weight/day may apply except when human 
exposure indicates the need for a higher dose level to be used. 
25. 
Unless limited by the physical-chemical nature or biological effects of the test chemical, the 
highest dose level should be chosen to identify the principal target organs and toxic effects while 
avoiding suffering, severe toxicity, morbidity, or death. The highest dose level should be normally 
chosen to elicit evidence of toxicity, as evidenced by, for example, depression of body weight gain 
(approximately 10%). However, dependent on the objectives of the study (see paragraph 6), a top dose 
lower than the dose providing evidence of toxicity may be chosen, e.g., if a dose elicits an adverse effect 
of concern, which nonetheless has little impact on lifespan or body weight.   
26. 
Dose levels and dose level spacing may be selected to establish a dose-response and, depending 
on the mode of action of the test chemical, a NOAEL or other intended outcome of the study, e.g., a 
BMD (see paragraph 27). Factors that should be considered in the placement of lower doses include the 
expected slope of the dose–response curve, the doses at which important changes may occur in 
metabolism or mode of toxic action, where a threshold is expected, or where a point of departure for low-
dose extrapolation is expected. In conducting a combined carcinogenicity /chronic toxicity study, the 
primary objective will be to obtain information for carcinogenicity risk assessment purposes, and

OECD/OCDE                       453 │ 7 
 
 © OECD 2018 
      
information on chronic toxicity will normally be a subsidiary objective. This should be borne in mind 
when selecting dose levels and dose level spacing for the study. 
27. 
The dose level spacing selected will depend on the objectives of the study and the 
characteristics of the test chemical, and cannot be prescribed in detail in this Guideline, but two to four 
fold intervals frequently provide good test performance when used for setting the descending dose levels 
and addition of a fourth test group is often preferable to using very large intervals (e.g., more than a 
factor of about 6-10) between dosages. In general the use of factors greater than 10 should be avoided, 
and should be justified if used. 
28. 
As outlined further in Guidance Document No. 116 (7), points to be considered in dose 
selection include: 
 
 
Known or suspected nonlinearities or inflection points in the dose–response; 
 
 
Toxicokinetics, and dose ranges where metabolic induction, saturation, or nonlinearity 
between external and internal doses does or does not occur; 
  
 
Precursor lesions, markers of effect, or indicators of the operation of key underlying 
biological processes;  
 
 
Key (or suspected) aspects of mode of action, such as doses at which cytotoxicity begins 
to arise, hormone levels are perturbed, homeostatic mechanisms are overwhelmed, etc.;  
 
 
Regions of the dose–response curve where particularly robust estimation is needed, e.g., 
in the range of the anticipated BMD or a suspected threshold; 
 
 
 Consideration of anticipated human exposure levels, especially in the choice of mid and 
low doses. 
 
29. 
The control group shall be an untreated group or a vehicle-control group if a vehicle is used in 
administering the test chemical. Except for treatment with the test chemical, animals in the control group 
should be handled in an identical manner to those in the test groups. If a vehicle is used, the control 
group shall receive the vehicle in the highest volume used among the dose groups. If a test chemical is 
administered in the diet, and causes significantly reduced dietary intake due to the reduced palatability of 
the diet, an additional pair-fed control group may be useful, to serve as a more suitable control.  
Preparation of doses and administration of test chemical 
30. 
The test chemical is normally administered orally, via the diet or drinking water, or by gavage.  
Additional information on routes and methods of administration is provided in Guidance Document No. 
116 (7). The route and method of administration is dependent on the purpose of the study, the 
physical/chemical properties of the test chemical, its bioavailability, and the predominant route and 
method of exposure of humans. A rationale should be provided for the chosen route and method of 
administration. In the interests of animal welfare, oral gavage should normally be selected only for those 
agents for which this route and method of administration reasonably represent potential human exposure 
(e.g., pharmaceuticals). For dietary or environmental chemicals including pesticides, administration is 
typically via the diet or drinking water. However, for some scenarios, e.g., occupational exposure, 
administration via other routes may be more appropriate.

8 │ 453                       OECD/OCDE                               
 © OECD 2018 
      
31. 
Where necessary, the test chemical is dissolved or suspended in a suitable vehicle. 
Consideration should be given to the following characteristics of the vehicle and other additives, as 
appropriate: effects on the absorption, distribution, metabolism, or retention of the test chemical; effects 
on the chemical properties of the test chemical which may alter its toxic characteristics; and effects on 
the food or water consumption or the nutritional status of the animals. It is recommended that, wherever 
possible, the use of an aqueous solution/suspension be considered first, followed by consideration of a 
solution/emulsion in oil (e.g. corn oil) and then by possible solution in other vehicles. For vehicles other 
than water, the toxic characteristics of the vehicle should be known. Information should be available on 
the stability of the test chemical and the homogeneity of dosing solutions or diets (as appropriate) under 
the conditions of administration (e.g., diet).    
32. 
For substances administered via the diet or drinking water it is important to ensure that the 
quantities of the test chemical involved do not interfere with normal nutrition or water balance. In long-
term toxicity studies using dietary administration, the concentration of the chemical in the feed should 
not normally exceed an upper limit of 5% of the total diet, in order to avoid nutritional imbalances. When 
the test chemical is administered in the diet, either a constant dietary concentration (mg/kg diet or ppm), 
or a constant dose level in terms of the animal’s body weight (mg/kg body weight), calculated on a 
weekly basis, may be used. The alternative used should be specified.  
33. 
In the case of oral administration, the animals are dosed with the test chemical daily (seven 
days each week) for a period of 12 months (chronic phase) or 24 months (carcinogenicity phase), see also 
paragraphs 33 and 34.  Any other dosing regime, e.g., five days per week, needs to be justified. . In the 
case of dermal administration, animals are normally treated with the test chemical for at least 6 hours per 
day, 7 days per week, as specified in TG 410 (11), for a period of 12 months (chronic phase) or 24 
months (carcinogenicity phase). Exposure by the inhalation route is carried out for 6 hours per day, 7 
days per week, but exposure for 5 days per week may also be used, if justified. The period of exposure 
will normally be for a period of 12 months (chronic phase) or 24 months (carcinogenicity phase). If 
rodent species other than rats are exposed nose-only, maximum exposure durations may be adjusted to 
minimise species-specific distress. A rationale should be provided when using an exposure duration of 
less than 6 hours per day. See also  TG 412 (9). 
34. 
When the test chemical is administered by gavage to the animals this should be done using a 
stomach tube or a suitable intubation cannula, at similar times each day. Normally a single dose will be 
administered once daily, where for example a compound is a local irritant, it may be possible to maintain 
the daily dose-rate by administering it as a split dose (twice a day). The maximum volume of liquid that 
can be administered at one time depends on the size of the test animal. The volume should be kept as low 
as practical, and should not normally exceed 1 ml/100g body weight for rodents (31).  Variability in test 
volume should be minimised by adjusting the concentration to ensure a constant volume at all dose 
levels. Potentially corrosive or irritant substances are the exception, and need to be diluted to avoid 
severe local effects. Testing at concentrations that are likely to be corrosive or irritant to the 
gastrointestinal tract should be avoided. 
Duration of study 
35. 
The period of dosing and duration of the chronic phase of this study is normally 12 months, 
although the study design also allows for and can be applied to either shorter (e.g. 6 or 9 months) or 
longer (e.g., 18 or 24 months) duration studies, depending on the requirements of particular regulatory 
regimes or for specific mechanistic purposes.  Deviations from an exposure duration of 12 months should 
be justified, particularly in the case of shorter durations. All dose groups allocated to this phase will be 
terminated at the designated time for evaluation of chronic toxicity and non-neoplastic pathology. 
Satellite groups included to monitor the reversibility of any toxicological changes induced by the

OECD/OCDE                       453 │ 9 
 
 © OECD 2018 
      
chemical under investigation should be maintained without dosing for a period not less than 4 weeks and 
not more than one third of the total study duration after cessation of exposure. 
36. 
The duration of the carcinogenicity phase of this study will normally be 24 months for rodents, 
representing the majority of the normal life span of the animals to be used. Shorter or longer study 
durations may be used, dependent on the lifespan of the strain of the animal species in the study, but 
should be justified. For specific strains of mice, e.g., AKR/J, C3H/J or C57BL/6J strains a duration of 18 
months may be more appropriate. The following provides some guidance on duration, termination of the 
study and survival; further guidance, including consideration of the acceptability of a negative 
carcinogenicity study relative to survival in the study, is provided in Guidance Document No. 116 (7): 
 
 
Termination of the study should be considered when the number of survivors in the 
lower dose groups or the control group falls below 25 per cent. 
   
 
In the case where only the high dose group dies prematurely due to toxicity, this should 
not trigger termination of the study.   
 
 
Survival of each sex should be considered separately.   
 
 
The study should not be extended beyond the point when the data available from the 
study are no longer sufficient to enable a statistically valid evaluation to be made.  
OBSERVATIONS (CHRONIC TOXICITY PHASE) 
37. 
All animals should be checked for morbidity or mortality, usually at the beginning and end of 
each day, including at weekends and holidays. General clinical observations should be made at least once 
a day, preferably at the same time(s) each day, taking into consideration the peak period of anticipated 
effects after dosing in the case of gavage administration.  
38. 
Detailed clinical observations should be made on all animals at least once prior to the first 
exposure (to allow for within-subject comparisons), at the end of the first week of the study and monthly 
thereafter. The protocol for observations should be arranged such that variations between individual 
observers are minimised and independent of test group. These observations should be made outside the 
home cage, preferably in a standard arena and at similar times on each occasion. They should be 
carefully recorded, preferably using scoring systems, explicitly defined by the testing laboratory. Efforts 
should be made to ensure that variations in the observation conditions are minimal. Signs noted should 
include, but not be limited to, changes in skin, fur, eyes, mucous membranes, occurrence of secretions 
and excretions and autonomic activity (e.g., lacrimation, piloerection, pupil size, unusual respiratory 
pattern). Changes in gait, posture and response to handling as well as the presence of clonic or tonic 
movements, stereotypies (e.g., excessive grooming, repetitive circling) or bizarre behaviour (e.g., self-
mutilation, walking backwards) should also be recorded (32). 
39. 
Ophthalmological examination, using an ophthalmoscope or other suitable equipment, should 
be carried out on all animals prior to the first administration of the test chemical.  At the termination of 
the study, this examination should be preferably conducted in all animals but at least in the high dose and 
control groups.  If treatment-related changes in the eyes are detected, all animals should be examined.  If 
structural analysis or other information suggests ocular toxicity, then the frequency of ocular examination 
should be increased.

10 │ 453                       OECD/OCDE                               
 © OECD 2018 
      
40. 
For chemicals where previous repeated dose 28-day and/or 90-day toxicity tests indicated the 
potential to cause neurotoxic effects, sensory reactivity to stimuli of different types (32) (e.g., auditory, 
visual and proprioceptive stimuli) (33) (34) (35), assessment of grip strength (36) and motor activity 
assessment (37) may optionally be conducted before commencement of the study and at 3 month periods 
after study initiation up to and including 12 months, as well as at study termination (if longer than 12 
months). Further details of the procedures that could be followed are given in the respective references. 
However, alternative procedures than those referenced could also be used.  
41. 
For chemicals where previous repeated dose 28-day and/or 90-day toxicity tests indicated the 
potential to cause immunotoxic effects, further investigations of this endpoint may optionally be 
conducted at termination.  
Body weight, food/water consumption and food efficiency 
42. 
All animals should be weighed at the start of treatment, at least once a week for the first 13 
weeks and at least monthly thereafter.  Measurements of food consumption and food efficiency should be 
made at least weekly for the first 13 weeks and at least monthly thereafter. Water consumption should be 
measured at least weekly for the first 13 weeks and at least monthly thereafter when the substance is 
administered in drinking water. Water consumption measurements should also be considered for studies 
in which drinking activity is altered. 
Haematology and clinical biochemistry 
43. 
In studies involving rodents, haematological examinations should be carried out on all study 
animals (10 male and 10 female animals per group) at 3, 6, and 12 months, as well as at study 
termination (if longer than 12 months). In mice, satellite animals may be needed in order to conduct all 
required haematological determinations (see paragraph 19). In non-rodent studies, samples will be taken 
from smaller numbers of animals (e.g. 4 animals per sex and per group in dog studies), at interim 
sampling times and at termination as described for rodents. Measurements at 3 months, either in rodents 
or non-rodents, need not be conducted if no effect was seen on haematological parameters in a previous 
90 day study carried out at comparable dose levels. Blood samples should be taken from a named site, for 
example by cardiac puncture or from the retro-orbital sinus, under anaesthesia.  
44. 
The following list of parameters should be investigated (38): total and differential leukocyte 
count, erythrocyte count,  platelet count, haemoglobin concentration, haematocrit (packed cell volume), 
mean corpuscular volume (MCV), mean corpuscular haemoglobin (MCH),  mean corpuscular 
haemoglobin concentration (MCHC), prothrombin time, and activated partial thromboplastin time. Other 
hematology parameters such as Heinz bodies or other atypical erythrocyte morphology or 
methaemoglobin may be measured as appropriate depending on the toxicity of the substance. Overall, a 
flexible approach should be adopted, depending on the observed and/or expected effect from a given 
substance. If the chemical has an effect on the haematopoietic system, reticulocyte counts and bone 
marrow cytology may also be indicated, although these need not be routinely conducted. 
45. 
Clinical biochemistry determinations to investigate major toxic effects in tissues and, 
specifically, effects on kidney and liver, should be performed on blood samples obtained from all study 
animals (10 male and 10 female animals per group), at the same time intervals as specified for the 
haematological investigations. In mice, satellite animals may be needed in order to conduct all required 
clinical biochemistry determinations. In non-rodent studies, samples will be taken from smaller numbers 
of animals (e.g. 4 animals per sex and per group in dog studies), at interim sampling times and at 
termination as described for rodents. Measurements at 3 months, either in rodents or non-rodents, need 
not be conducted if no effect was seen on clinical biochemistry parameters in a previous 90 day study

OECD/OCDE                       453 │ 11 
 
 © OECD 2018 
      
carried out at comparable dose levels. Overnight fasting of the animals (with the exception of mice) prior 
to blood sampling is recommended1.  The following list of parameters should be investigated (38):  
glucose, urea (urea nitrogen), creatinine, total protein, albumin, calcium, sodium, potassium, total 
cholesterol, at least two appropriate tests for hepatocellular evaluation (alanine aminotransferase, 
aspartate aminotransferase,  glutamate dehydrogenase, total bile acids) (39), and at least two appropriate 
tests for hepatobiliary evaluation (alkaline phosphatase, gamma glutamyl transferase, 5'-nucleotidase, 
total bilirubin, total bile acids) (39).  Other clinical chemistry parameters such as fasting triglycerides, 
specific hormones and cholinesterase may be measured as appropriate, depending on the toxicity of the 
substance.  Overall, there is a need for a flexible approach, depending on the observed and/or expected 
effect from a given substance. 
46. 
Urinalysis determinations should be performed on all study animals (10 male and 10 female 
animals per group), on samples collected at the same intervals as for haematology and clinical chemistry. 
Measurements at 3 months need not be conducted if no effect was seen on urinalysis in a previous 90 day 
study carried out at comparable dose levels. The following list of parameters was included in an expert 
recommendation on clinical pathology studies (38):  appearance, volume, osmolality or specific gravity, 
pH, total protein, and glucose.  Other determinations include ketone, urobilinogen, bilirubin, and occult 
blood.  Further parameters may be employed where necessary to extend the investigation of observed 
effect(s). 
47. 
It is generally considered that baseline haematological and clinical biochemistry variables need 
be determined before treatment for dog studies, but need not be determined in rodent studies (38). 
However, if historical baseline data (see paragraph 58) are inadequate, consideration should be given to 
generating such data. 
Pathology 
Gross necropsy 
48. 
All animals in the study shall be normally subjected to a full, detailed gross necropsy which 
includes careful examination of the external surface of the body, all orifices, and the cranial, thoracic and 
abdominal cavities and their contents. However provision may also be made (in the interim kill or 
satellite groups) for measurements to be restricted to specific, key measures such as neurotoxicity or 
immunotoxicity (see paragraph 21). These animals need not be subjected to necropsy and the subsequent 
procedures described in the following paragraphs. Sentinel animals may require necropsy on a case-by-
case basis, at the discretion of the study director. 
49. 
Organ weights should be collected from all animals, other than those excluded by the latter part 
of paragraph 47.  The adrenals, brain, epididymides, heart, kidneys, liver, ovaries, spleen, testes, thyroid 
(weighed post-fixation, with parathyroids), and uterus of all animals (apart from those found moribund 
                                                     
1 For a number of measurements in serum and plasma, most notably for glucose, overnight fasting is preferable. 
The major reason for this preference is that the increased variability which would inevitably result from non-
fasting, would tend to mask more subtle effects and make interpretation difficult. However it should be noted that 
overnight fasting may interfere with the general metabolism of the animals and, particularly in feeding studies, 
may disrupt the daily exposure to the test chemical. All animals should be assessed in the same physiological condition 
and preferably detailed or neurological assessments should therefore be scheduled for a different day than clinical 
biochemistry sampling.

12 │ 453                       OECD/OCDE                               
 © OECD 2018 
      
and/or intercurrently killed) should be trimmed of any adherent tissue, as appropriate, and their wet 
weight taken as soon as possible after dissection to prevent drying.  
50. 
The following tissues should be preserved in the most appropriate fixation medium for both the 
type of tissue and the intended subsequent histopathological examination (40) (tissues in square brackets 
are optional):  
 
all gross lesions 
heart 
pancreas 
stomach 
(forestomach, 
glandular stomach) 
adrenal gland 
ileum 
parathyroid gland 
[teeth] 
aorta 
jejunum 
peripheral nerve 
testis 
brain 
(including 
sections 
of 
cerebrum, 
cerebellum, 
and 
medulla/pons) 
kidney 
pituitary 
thymus 
caecum 
lacrimal 
gland 
(exorbital) 
prostate 
thyroid 
cervix 
liver 
rectum 
[tongue] 
coagulating gland 
lung 
salivary gland 
trachea 
colon 
lymph nodes (both 
superficial 
and 
deep) 
seminal vesicle 
urinary bladder 
duodenum 
mammary 
gland 
(obligatory 
for 
females 
and, 
if 
visibly dissectable, 
from males) 
skeletal muscle 
uterus 
(including 
cervix) 
epididymis 
[upper 
respiratory 
tract, 
including 
nose, turbinates, and 
paranasal sinuses]  
skin 
[ureter] 
eye 
(including 
retina) 
oesophagus 
spinal cord (at three 
levels: 
 
cervical, 
mid-thoracic, 
and 
lumbar) 
[urethra] 
[femur with joint] 
[olfactory bulb] 
spleen 
vagina 
gall 
bladder 
(for 
species other than 
rat) 
ovary 
[sternum], 
section 
of 
bone 
marrow 
and/or 
a 
fresh bone marrow 
aspirate 
Harderian gland 
 
 
 
 
 
In the case of paired organs, e.g., kidney, adrenal, both organs should be preserved. The clinical and 
other findings may suggest the need to examine additional tissues.  Also any organs considered 
likely to be target organs based on the known properties of the test chemical should be preserved. In 
studies involving the dermal route of administration, the list of organs as set out for the oral route

OECD/OCDE                       453 │ 13 
 
 © OECD 2018 
      
should be examined, and specific sampling and preservation of the skin from the site of application 
is necessary. In inhalation studies, the list of preserved and examined tissues from the respiratory 
tract should follow the recommendations of TG 412 (8) and TG 413 (9). For other organs/tissues 
(and in addition to the specifically preserved tissues from the respiratory tract) the list of organs as 
set out for the oral route should be examined.  
Histopathology 
51. 
Guidance is available on best practices in the conduct of toxicological pathology studies (40).  
The minimum histopathological examinations should be: 
 
all tissues from the high dose and control groups; 
 
all tissues from animals dying or killed during the study; 
 
all tissues showing macroscopic abnormalities; 
 
target tissues, or tissues which showed treatment-related changes in the high dose group, 
from all animals in all other dose groups, 
 
in the case of paired organs, e.g., kidney, adrenal, both organs should be examined. 
OBSERVATIONS (CARCINOGENICITY PHASE) 
52. 
All animals should be checked for morbidity or mortality, usually at the beginning and the end 
of each day, including at weekends and holidays. Animals should additionally be checked once a day for 
specific signs of toxicological relevance. In the case of gavage studies, animals should be checked in the 
period immediately following dosing. Particular attention should be paid to tumour development; and the 
time of tumour onset, location, dimensions, appearance, and progression of each grossly visible or 
palpable tumour should be recorded.  
53. 
All animals should be weighed at the start of treatment, at least once a week for the first 13 
weeks and at least monthly thereafter.  Measurements of food consumption and food efficiency should be 
made at least weekly for the first 13 weeks and at least monthly thereafter. Water consumption should be 
measured at least weekly for the first 13 weeks and at least monthly thereafter when the substance is 
administered in drinking water. Water consumption measurements should also be considered for studies 
in which drinking activity is altered. 
Haematology, clinical biochemistry and other measurements 
54. 
In order to maximise the information obtained from the study, especially for mode of action 
considerations, blood samples may be taken for haematology and clinical biochemistry, although this is 
at the discretion of the study director. Urinalysis may also be appropriate.  Data on the animals used in 
the chronic toxicity phase of the study, normally of 12 months duration (paragraph 34) will provide 
information on these parameters. Further guidance on the value of taking such samples as part of a 
carcinogenicity study is provided in Guidance Document No. 116 (7). If blood samples are taken, these 
should be collected at the end of the test period, just prior to or as part of the procedure for killing the 
animals.  They should be taken from a named site, for example by cardiac puncture or from the retro-
orbital sinus, under anaesthesia. Blood smears may also be prepared for examination, particularly if bone 
marrow appears to be the target organ, although the value of such examination  of blood smears in the 
carcinogenicity phase for the assessment of carcinogenic/oncogenic potential has been questioned (38).

14 │ 453                       OECD/OCDE                               
 © OECD 2018 
      
PATHOLOGY 
Gross necropsy 
55. 
All animals in the study except sentinel animals and other satellite animals (see paragraph 20) 
shall be subjected to a full, detailed gross necropsy which includes careful examination of the external 
surface of the body, all orifices, and the cranial, thoracic and abdominal cavities and their contents. 
Sentinel animals and other satellite animals may require necropsy on a case-by-case basis, at the 
discretion of the study director. Organ weights are not normally part of a carcinogenesis study, since 
geriatric changes and, at later stages, the development of tumours confounds the usefulness of organ 
weight data. They may, however, be critical to performing a weight of evidence evaluation and especially 
for mode of action considerations.  If they are part of a satellite study, they should be collected at no later 
than one year after initiation of the study. 
56. 
The following tissues should be preserved in the most appropriate fixation medium for both the 
type of tissue and the intended subsequent histopathological examination (40) (tissues in square brackets 
are optional):   
 
all gross lesions 
heart 
pancreas 
stomach 
(forestomach, 
glandular stomach) 
adrenal gland 
ileum 
parathyroid gland 
[teeth] 
aorta 
jejunum 
peripheral nerve 
testis 
brain 
(including 
sections 
of 
cerebrum, 
cerebellum, 
and 
medulla/pons) 
kidney 
pituitary 
thymus 
caecum 
lacrimal 
gland 
(exorbital) 
prostate 
thyroid 
cervix 
liver 
rectum 
[tongue] 
coagulating gland 
lung 
salivary gland 
trachea 
colon 
lymph nodes (both 
superficial 
and 
deep) 
seminal vesicle 
urinary bladder 
duodenum 
mammary 
gland 
(obligatory 
for 
females 
and, 
if 
visibly dissectable, 
from males) 
skeletal muscle 
uterus 
(including 
cervix) 
epididymis 
[upper 
respiratory 
tract, 
including 
nose, turbinates, and 
paranasal sinuses] 
skin 
[ureter] 
eye 
(including 
retina) 
oesophagus 
spinal cord (at three 
levels: 
 
cervical, 
mid-thoracic, 
and 
lumbar) 
[urethra] 
[femur with joint] 
[olfactory bulb] 
spleen 
vagina

OECD/OCDE                       453 │ 15 
 
 © OECD 2018 
      
gall 
bladder 
(for 
species other than 
rat) 
ovary 
[sternum], 
section 
of 
bone 
marrow 
and/or 
a 
fresh bone marrow 
aspirate 
Harderian gland 
 
 
 
 
In the case of paired organs, e.g., kidney, adrenal, both organs should be preserved. The clinical and 
other findings may suggest the need to examine additional tissues. Also, any organs considered 
likely to be target organs based on the known properties of the test chemical should be preserved. In 
studies involving the dermal route of administration, the list of organs as set out for the oral route 
should be examined, and specific sampling and preservation of the skin from the site of application 
is necessary. In inhalation studies, the list of preserved and examined tissues from the respiratory 
tract should follow the recommendations of TG 412 (8) and TG 413 (9). For other organs/tissues 
(and in addition to the specifically preserved tissues from the respiratory tract) the list of organs as 
set out for the oral route should be examined.  
Histopathology 
57. 
Guidance is available on best practices in the conduct of toxicological pathology studies (40). 
The minimum tissues examined should be: 
 
All tissues from the high dose and control groups; 
 
All tissues of animals dying or killed during the study; 
 
All tissues showing macroscopic abnormalities including tumours; 
 
When treatment-related histopathological changes are observed in the high dose group, 
those same tissues are to be examined from all animals in all other dose groups, 
 
In the case of paired organs, e.g., kidney, adrenal, both organs should be examined. 
 
DATA AND REPORTING (CARCINOGENICITY AND CHRONIC TOXICITY) 
Data 
58. 
Individual animal data should be provided for all parameters evaluated. Additionally, all data 
should be summarised in tabular form showing for each test group the number of animals at the start of 
the test, the number of animals found dead during the test or killed for humane reasons and the time of 
any death or humane kill, the number showing signs of toxicity, a description of the signs of toxicity 
observed, including time of onset, duration, and severity of any toxic effects, the number of animals 
showing lesions, the type of lesions and the percentage of animals displaying each type of lesion. 
Summary data tables should provide the means and standard deviations (for continuous test data) of 
animals showing toxic effects or lesions, in addition to the grading of lesions. 
59. 
Historical control data may be valuable in the interpretation of the results of the study, e.g, in 
the case when there are indications that the data provided by the concurrent controls are substantially out 
of line when compared to recent data from control animals from the same test facility/colony. Historical 
control data, if evaluated, should be submitted from the same laboratory, relate to animals of the same 
age and strain, generated during the five years preceding the study in question. 
60. 
When applicable, numerical results should be evaluated by an appropriate and generally 
acceptable statistical method. The statistical methods and the data to be analysed should be selected

16 │ 453                       OECD/OCDE                               
 © OECD 2018 
      
during the design of the study (paragraph 9). Selection should make provision for survival adjustments, if 
needed. 
61. 
The test report should include the following information: 
Test chemical: 
 physical nature, purity, and physicochemical properties; 
 identification data; 
 source of substance; 
 batch number; 
 certificate of chemical analysis. 
Vehicle (if appropriate): 
 justification for choice of vehicle (if other than water). 
Test animals: 
 species/strain used and justification for choice made; 
 number, age, and sex of animals at start of test; 
 source, housing conditions, diet, etc.; 
 individual weights of animals at the start of the test. 
Test conditions: 
 rationale for route of administration and dose selection; 
 when applicable, the statistical methods used to analyse the data; 
 details of test chemical formulation/diet preparation;  
 analytical data on achieved concentration, stability and homogeneity of the preparation; 
 route of administration and details of the administration of the test chemical; 
 for inhalation studies, whether nose only or whole body; 
 actual doses (mg/kg body weight/day), and conversion factor from diet/drinking water 
test chemical concentration (mg/kg or ppm) to the actual dose, if applicable; 
 details of food and water quality. 
Results (summary tabulated data and individual animal data should be 
presented): 
General 
 
Survival data; 
 
Body weight/body weight changes; 
 
Food consumption, calculations of food efficiency, if made, and water consumption if 
applicable; 
 
Toxicokinetic data if available; 
 
 Opthalmoscopy (if available) 
 
 Haematology (if available) 
 
 Clinical chemistry (if available)

OECD/OCDE                       453 │ 17 
 
 © OECD 2018 
      
Clinical findings 
 
Signs of toxicity; 
 
Incidence (and, if scored, severity) of any abnormality; 
 
Nature, severity, and duration of clinical observations (whether transitory or permanent); 
Necropsy data 
 Terminal body weight; 
 Organ weights and their ratios, if applicable;  
 Necropsy findings; Incidence and severity of abnormalities. 
Histopathology 
 
Non neoplastic histopathological findings,  
 
Neoplastic histopathological findings, 
 
Correlation between gross and microscopic findings 
 
Detailed description of all treatment-related histopathological findings including 
severity gradings; 
 
Report of any peer review of slides 
Statistical treatment of results, as appropriate 
Discussion of results including: 
 Discussion of any modelling approaches 
 Dose:response relationships 
 Historical control data 
 Consideration of any mode of action information 
 BMD, NOAEL or LOAEL determination 
 Relevance for humans 
Conclusions

18 │ 453                       OECD/OCDE                               
 © OECD 2018 
      
LITERATURE 
 
1. 
OECD (1995), Report of the Consultation Meeting on Sub-chronic and Chronic 
Toxicity/Carcinogenicity Testing (Rome, 1995), internal working document, Environment 
Directorate, OECD, Paris.   
2. 
EPA (2005). Guidelines for Carcinogen Risk Assessment  Risk Assessment Forum U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency Washington, DC  
http://cfpub.epa.gov/ncea/cfm/recordisplay.cfm?deid=116283&CFID=1267360&CFTOKEN=65
052793&jsessionid=9830b2c4116e3d8fbbf017414e1a782e7f79TR 
3. Combes RD, Gaunt, I, Balls M (2004). A Scientific and Animal Welfare Assessment of the 
OECD Health Effects Test Guidelines for the Safety Testing of Chemicals under the European 
Union REACH System. ATLA 32, 163-208 
4. Barlow SM, Greig JB, Bridges JW et al (2002). Hazard identification by methods of animal-
based toxicology.  Food. Chem. Toxicol. 40, 145-191 
5. Chhabra RS, Bucher JR, Wolfe M, Portier C (2003). Toxicity characterization of environmental 
chemicals by the US National Toxicology Programme: an overview. Int. J. Hyg. Environ. Health 
206, 437-445 
6. OECD (1998), Repeat Dose 90-day Oral Toxicity Study in Non-Rodents. Test Guideline No. 409, 
OECD Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals, OECD, Paris. 
7. OECD (2009), Draft Guidance Document on the Design and Conduct of Chronic Toxicity and 
Carcinogenicity Studies, Series on Testing and Assessment No. 116, available on the OECD 
public website for Test Guidelines: www.oecd.org/env/testguidelines. 
8. OECD (2009), Guidance Document on Acute Inhalation Toxicity Testing. Series on Testing and 
Assessment No. 39, ENV/JM/MONO(2009)28, OECD, Paris.  
9. OECD (2009), Subacute Inhalation Toxicity: 28-Day Study, Test Guideline No. 412, OECD 
Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals, OECD, Paris. 
10. OECD (2009), Subchronic Inhalation Toxicity: 90-Day Study, Test Guideline No. 413, OECD, 
Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals, OECD, Paris. 
11. OECD (1981), Repeated Dose Dermal Toxicity: 21/28-day Study, Test Guideline No. 410, OECD 
Guidelines for the Testing of Chemicals, OECD, Paris. 
12. Boobis, A.R., Cohen, S.M., Dellarco, V., McGregor, D., Meek, M.E., Vickers, C., Willcocks, D. 
& Farland, W. IPCS Framework for analyzing the Relevance of a Cancer Mode of Action for 
Humans. Crit. Rev. in Toxicol, (2006) 36:793-801. 
13. Cohen, S.M., Meek, M.E., Klaunig, J.E., Patton, D.E., and Fenner-Crisp, P.A. (2003) The human 
relevance of information on carcinogenic Modes of Action: An Overview. Crit. Rev. Toxicol. 
33:581-589 
14. Holsapple, M.P., Pitot, H.C., Cohen, S.N., Boobis, A.R., Klaunig, J.E., Pastoor, T., Dellarco, V.L. 
& Dragan, Y.P. (2006) Mode of Action in Relevance of Rodent Liver Tumors to Human Cancer 
Risk. Toxicol. Sci. 89:51-56. 
15. Meek, E.M., Bucher, J.R., Cohen, S.M., Dellarco, V., Hill, R.N., Lehman-McKemmon, L.D., 
Longfellow, D.G., Pastoor, T., Seed, J. & Patton, D.E.  (2003) A Framework for Human 
Relevance analysis of Information on Carcinogenic Modes of Action. Crit. Rev. Toxicol. 33:591-
653. 
16. Carmichael NG, Barton HA, Boobis AR et al (2006). Agricultural Chemical Safety Assessment: 
A Multisector Approach to the Modernization of Human Safety Requirements. Crit. Rev. Toxicol. 
36, 1-7. 
17. Barton HA, Pastoor TP, Baetcke T et al (2006). The Acquisition and Application of Absorption, 
Distribution, Metabolism, and Excretion (ADME) Data in Agricultural Chemical Safety 
Assessments. Crit. Rev. Toxicol. 36, 9-35.

OECD/OCDE                       453 │ 19 
 
 © OECD 2018 
      
18. Doe JE, Boobis AR, Blacker A et al (2006). A Tiered Approach to Systemic Toxicity Testing for 
Agricultural Chemical Safety Assessment. Crit. Rev. Toxicol. 36, 37-68. 
19. Cooper RL, Lamb JS, Barlow SM et al (2006). A Tiered Approach to Life Stages Testing for 
Agricultural Chemical Safety Assessment. Crit. Rev. Toxicol. 36, 69-98. 
20. OECD (2002), Guidance Notes for Analysis and Evaluation of Chronic Toxicity and 
Carcinogenicity Studies, Series on Testing and Assessment No. 35 and Series on Pesticides No. 
14, ENV/JM/MONO(2002)19, OECD, Paris. 
21. OECD (2000), Guidance Document on the recognition, assessment, and use of clinical signs as 
humane endpoints for experimental animals used in safety evaluation, Series on Testing and 
Assessment No. 19, ENV/JM/MONO(2000)7, OECD, Paris.  
22. Rhomberg, LR,  Baetcke, K, Blancato, J, Bus, J, Cohen, S, Conolly, R, Dixit R, Doe, J, Ekelman, 
K, Fenner-Crisp, P, Harvey, P,  Hattis, D, Jacobs, A,  Jacobson-Kram, D, Lewandowski, T, 
Liteplo, R,  Pelkonen, O, Rice, J,  Somers, D,  Turturro, A, West, W,  Olin, S. Issues in the 
Design and Interpretation of Chronic Toxicity and Carcinogenicity Studies in Rodents: 
Approaches to Dose Selection  Crit Rev. Toxicol. 37  (9) 729 - 837 (2007). 
23. ILSI (International Life Sciences Institute) (1997). Principles for the Selection of Doses in 
Chronic Rodent Bioassays. Foran JA (Ed.). ILSI Press, Washington, DC.  
24. Griffiths SA, Parkinson C, McAuslane JAN and Lumley CE (1994) The utility of the second 
rodent species in the carcinogenicity testing of pharmaceuticals. The Toxicologist 14(1):214. 
25. Usui T, Griffiths SA and Lumley CE (1996). The utility of the mouse for the assessment of the 
carcinogenic potential of pharmaceuticals. In D'Arcy POF & Harron DWG (eds). Proceedings of 
the Third International Conference on Harmonisation. Queen's University Press, Belfast. pp 279-
284. 
26. Carmichael NG, Enzmann H, Pate I, Waechter, F (1997). The Significance of Mouse 
Liver Tumor Formation for Carcinogenic Risk Assessment: Results and 
Conclusions from a Survey of Ten Years of Testing by the Agrochemical 
Industry. Environ Health Perspect 105:1196-1203 
27. EEC Council Directive 86/609/EEC on the approximation of laws, regulations and administrative 
provisions of the Member States regarding the protection of animals used for experimental and 
other scientific purposes. Official Journal, 29, L358, 18th December 1986. 
28. National Research Council, 1985. Guide for the care and use of laboratory animals. NIH 
Publication No. 86-23. Washington D.C., US. Dept. of Health and Human Services. 
29. GV-SOLAS (Society for Laboratory Animal Science, Gesellschaft für Versuchstierkunde, 
December, 1989). Publication on the Planning and Structure of Animal Facilities for Institutes 
Performing Animal Experiments. ISBN 3-906255-06-9. 
30. GV-SOLAS (Society for Laboratory Animal Science, Gesellschaft für Versuchstierkunde, 2006). 
Microbiological monitoring of laboratory animals in various housing systems. http://www.gv-
solas.de/auss/hyg/hyg-p7_e.html 
31. Diehl K-H, Hull R, Morton D, Pfister R, Rabemampianina Y, Smith D, Vidal J-M, van de 
Vorstenbosch C. 2001. A good practice guide to the administration of substances and removal of 
blood, including routes and volumes. Journal of Applied Toxicology, 21:15-23. Available at: 
http://www.ff.up.pt/farmacologia/pdf/good_practice_lab_animals.pdf 
32. IPCS (1986). Principles and Methods for the Assessment of Neurotoxicity Associated with 
Exposure to Chemicals. Environmental Health Criteria Document No. 60. 
33. Tupper, D.E., Wallace, R.B. (1980). Utility of the Neurologic Examination in Rats. Acta 
Neurobiol. Exp., 40, 999-1003. 
34. Gad, S.C. (1982). A Neuromuscular Screen for Use in Industrial Toxicology. J. Toxicol.Environ. 
Health, 9, 691-704.

20 │ 453                       OECD/OCDE                               
 © OECD 2018 
      
35. Moser, V.C., McDaniel, K.M., Phillips, P.M. (1991). Rat Strain and Stock Comparisons Using a 
Functional Observational Battery: Baseline Values and Effects of Amitraz. Toxicol. Appl. 
Pharmacol., 108, 267-283. 
36. Meyer O.A., Tilson H.A., Byrd W.C., Riley M.T. (1979). A Method for the RoutineAssessment 
of Fore- and Hind-limb Grip Strength of Rats and Mice. Neurobehav. Toxicol., 1, 233-236. 
37. Crofton K.M., Howard J.L., Moser V.C., Gill M.W., Reiter L.W., Tilson H.A., MacPhail R.C. 
(1991). Interlaboratory Comparison of Motor Activity Experiments: Implication for 
Neurotoxicological Assessments. Neurotoxicol. Teratol., 13, 599-609. 
38. Weingand K, Brown G, Hall R et al. (1996). Harmonisation of Animal Clinical Pathology Testing 
in Toxicity and Safety Studies. Fundam. & Appl. Toxicol., 29: 198-201. 
39. EMEA (draft) document ‘Non-clinical guideline on drug-induced hepatotoxicity’ (Doc. Ref. 
EMEA/CHMP/SWP/a50115/2006)  
40. Crissman JW, Goodman DG, Hildebrandt PK et al. (2004). Best Practices Guideline: 
Toxicological Histopathology. Toxicologic Pathology 32, 126-131.