============================================================
Prologue
============================================================

Friedrich Nietzsche

BEYOND GOOD AND EVIL
 
Translated by Ian Johnston, Vancouver Island University, 
Nanaimo, British Columbia, Canada
 
Students, teachers, artists, and members of the 
general public may download and distribute this text without permission and 
without charge. They may also freely edit the text for their own purposes. All 
commercial use of this translation, however, is forbidden without the permission 
of the translator. For comments and questions, please contact 
Ian Johnston.
 
For a Rich Text Version (Word) of this text, please 
use the following link: 

Beyond Good and Evil [RTF] 
 
[Table 
of Contents for Beyond Good and Evil]
 
 
PROLOGUE
 
Suppose truth is a woman, what 
then? Would we not have good reason to suspect that all philosophers, insofar as 
they were dogmatists, have had a poor understanding of women, that the dreadful 
seriousness and the awkward pushiness with which they have so far habitually 
approached truth were clumsy and inappropriate ways to win over a woman? It’s 
clear that she did not allow herself to be won over. And every form of dogmatism 
nowadays is standing there looking dismayed and disheartened—if it’s 
still standing at all! For there are mockers who assert that they’ve collapsed, 
that all dogmatisms are lying on the floor—even worse, that all dogmatisms are 
at death’s door. Speaking seriously, there are good reasons to hope that every 
dogmatism in philosophy—no matter how solemnly, conclusively, and decisively it 
has conducted itself—may have been merely a noble and rudimentary childish game, 
and the time is perhaps very close at hand when people will understand over and 
over again just what has sufficed to provide the foundation stones for such 
lofty and unconditional philosophical constructions of the sort dogmatists have 
erected up to now—any popular superstition from unimaginably long ago (like the 
superstition of the soul, which even today, in the form of the superstition 
about the subject and the ego, has still not stopped stirring up mischief), 
perhaps some game with words, a seduction by some grammatical construction, or a 
daring generalization from very narrow, very personal, very human, all-too-human 
facts. The philosophies of the dogmatists were, one hopes, only a promise 
lasting for thousands of years, as astrology was in even earlier times. In its 
service, people perhaps expended more work, money, astute thinking, and patience 
than for any genuine scientific knowledge up to that point. To it and to its 
“super-terrestrial” claims in Asia and Egypt we owe the grand style of 
architecture. It seems that in order for all great things to register their 
eternal demands on the human heart, they first have to wander over the earth as 
monstrous and frighteningly distorted faces. Dogmatic philosophy has been such a 
grimace—for example, the Vedanta doctrine in Asia and Platonism in Europe. We 
should not be ungrateful to them, even though we must also certainly concede 
that the worst, most protracted, and most dangerous of all errors up to now has 
been the error of a dogmatist, namely, Plato’s invention of the purely spiritual 
and of the good as such. But that now has been overcome, and, as Europe breathes 
a sigh of relief after this nightmare and at least can enjoy a more healthy 
sleep, those of us whose very task it is to stay awake are the 
inheritors of all the forces which the struggle against this error has fostered. 
To speak of the spirit and the good in this way, as Plato did, was, of course, a 
matter of standing truth on its head and even of denying the fundamental 
condition of all life, perspective. Indeed, one could, as a doctor, 
ask, “How did such a disease get to Plato, the most beautiful plant of 
antiquity? Did the wicked Socrates really corrupt him? Could Socrates have been 
a corruptor of youth, after all? Did he deserve his hemlock?” But the struggle 
against Plato, or, to put the matter in a more intelligible way and for “the 
people,” the fight against the thousands of years of pressure from the Christian 
church—since Christianity is Platonism for “the people”—created in Europe a 
splendid tension in the spirit, unlike anything existing on earth before. With 
such a tensely arched bow, we can from now on shoot for the most distant 
targets. Naturally, European man experiences this tension as a state of 
emergency. Already there have been two attempts in the grand style to ease the 
tension in the bow—the first time with Jesuitism, the second time with the 
democratic Enlightenment, through which, with the help of freedom of the press 
and reading newspapers, a state might, in fact, be attained in which the spirit 
itself is not so easily experienced as “in need”! (Germans invented 
gunpowder—all honour to them!—but they made up for that when they invented the 
printing press). But those of us who are neither Jesuits, nor democrats, nor 
even German enough, we good Europeans and free, very free 
spirits—we still have the need, the entire spiritual need, and the total tension 
of its bow! And perhaps we also have the arrow, the work to do, and—who knows?—the 
target . . .
 
Sils-Maria,
Oberengadin, June 1885.


============================================================
Part 1: On the Prejudices of Philosophers
============================================================

Friedrich Nietzsche

BEYOND GOOD AND EVIL
 
Translated by Ian Johnston, Vancouver Island University, 
Nanaimo, British Columbia, Canada
 
Students, teachers, artists, and members of the 
general public may download and distribute this text without permission and 
without charge. They may also freely edit the text for their own purposes. All 
commercial use of this translation, however, is forbidden without the permission 
of the translator. For comments and questions, please contact 
Ian Johnston.
 
For a Rich Text Version (Word) of this text, please 
use the following link: 

Beyond Good and Evil [RTF] 
 
[Table 
of Contents for Beyond Good and Evil]
 
 
 PART ONE
ON THE PREJUDICES OF PHILOSOPHERS
 
1
 
The will to truth, which is 
still going to tempt us to many a daring exploit, that celebrated truthfulness 
of which all philosophers up to now have spoken with respect, what questions 
this will to truth has already set down before us! What strange, sinister, 
dubious questions! There is already a long history of that—and yet does it not 
seem that this history has only just begun? Is it any wonder that at some point 
we finally become mistrustful, lose patience, and, in our impatience, turn 
ourselves around—that we learn from this sphinx to ask questions for ourselves? Who is 
really asking us questions here? What is it in us that 
really wants “the truth”? In fact, we paused for a long time before the question 
about the origin of this will—until we finally remained completely and utterly 
immobile in front of an even more fundamental question. We asked about the value of 
this will. Suppose we want truth. Why should we not prefer untruth? And 
uncertainty? Even ignorance? The problem of the value of truth stepped up before 
us—or were we the ones who stepped up before the problem? Who 
among us here is Oedipus? Who is the Sphinx?(1) 
It seems to be a tryst between questions and question marks. And could one 
believe that we are finally the ones to whom it seems as if the problem has 
never been posed up to now, as if we were the first ones to see it, to fix our 
eyes on it, and to dare confront it? For there is a risk involved in 
this—perhaps there is no greater risk.
 
2
 
“How could anything 
arise out of its opposite? For example, truth out of error? Or the will to truth 
out of the will to deception? Or selfless action out of self-seeking? Or the 
pure sunny look of the wise man out of greed? Origins like these are impossible. 
Anyone who dreams about them is a fool, in fact, something worse. Things of the 
highest value must have another origin peculiar to them. They cannot be 
derived from this ephemeral, seductive, deceptive, trivial world, from this 
confusion of madness and desire! Their basis must lie, by contrast, in the womb 
of being, in the immortal, in the hidden god, in ‘the thing in itself’—their 
basis must lie there, and nowhere else!” This way of shaping an 
argument creates the typical prejudice which enables us to recognize once more 
the metaphysicians of all ages. This way of establishing value stands behind all 
their logical procedures. From this “belief” of theirs they wrestle with their 
“knowledge,” with something that is finally, in all solemnity, christened “the 
truth.” The fundamental belief of the metaphysicians is the belief in 
oppositions of values. Even the most careful among them has never had the 
idea of raising doubts right here on the threshold, where such doubts are surely 
most essential, even when they promised themselves “de omnibus dubitandum” [one 
must doubt everything]. For we are entitled to doubt, first, whether such 
oppositions exist at all and, second, whether those popular ways of estimating 
worth and those oppositions of values on which the metaphysicians have impressed 
their seal are not perhaps only evaluations made in the foreground, only 
temporary perspectives, perhaps even a view from a corner, perhaps from 
underneath, a frog’s viewpoint, as it were, to borrow an expression familiar to 
painters. For all the value that the true, genuine, unselfish person may be 
entitled to, it might be possible that a higher and more fundamental value for 
everything in life must be ascribed to appearance, the will to deception, 
self-interest, and desire. It might even be possible that whatever creates 
the value of those fine and respected things exists in such a way that it is, in 
some duplicitous manner, related to, tied to, and intertwined with, perhaps even 
essentially the same as, those nasty, apparently contrasting things. Perhaps! 
But who is willing to bother with such dangerous Perhapses? For that we must 
await the arrival of a new style of philosopher, ones who have a different taste 
and inclination, the reverse of those so far—philosophers of the dangerous 
Perhaps, in every sense. And speaking in all seriousness, I see such new 
philosophers arriving on the scene.
 
3
 
After examining philosophers 
between the lines with a sharp eye for a sufficient length of time, I tell 
myself the following: we must still consider the greatest part of conscious 
thinking among the instinctual activities, even in the case of philosophical 
thinking. We must relearn here, in the same way we relearned about heredity and 
what is “innate.” Just as the act of birth merits little consideration in all 
the procedures and processes of heredity, so there is little point in setting up 
“consciousness” in any significant sense as something opposite to what 
is instinctual—most of the conscious thinking of a philosopher is led on 
secretly and forced into particular paths by his instincts. Even behind all 
logic and its apparent dynamic authority stand evaluations of worth or, putting 
the matter more clearly, physiological demands for the preservation of a 
particular way of life—for example, that what is certain is more valuable than 
what is uncertain, that appearance is of less value than the “truth.” 
Evaluations like these could, for all their regulatory importance for us, 
still be only foreground evaluations, a particular kind of niaiserie
[foolishness] that 
may necessary for the preservation of beings precisely like us. That’s assuming, 
of course, that not just man is the “measure of things” . . .
 
4
 
For us, the falsity of a 
judgment is still no objection to that judgment—that’s where our new way of 
speaking sounds perhaps most strange. The question is the extent to which it 
promotes and sustains life, maintains the species, perhaps even creates species. 
And, as a matter of principle, we are ready to assert that the falsest judgments 
(to which a priori synthetic judgments belong) are the most 
indispensable to us, that without our allowing logical fictions to count, 
without a way of measuring reality against the purely invented world of the 
unconditional and self-identical, without a constant falsification of the world 
through numbers, human beings could not live—that if we managed 
to give up false judgments, that would amount to a renunciation of life, a 
denial of life.(2) 
To accept falsehood as a condition of life means, of course, taking a dangerous 
stand against the customary feelings about value, and, for this reason alone, a 
philosophy which dares to do so is already standing beyond good and evil.
 
5
 
What stimulates one to look at 
all philosophers in part suspiciously and in part mockingly is not that we find 
again and again how innocent they are—how often and how easily they make 
mistakes and get lost, in short, how childish and child-like they are—but that 
they are not honest enough in what they do, while, as a group, they make a huge, 
virtuous noise as soon as the problem of truthfulness is touched on, even 
remotely. Collectively they take up a position as if they had discovered and 
arrived at their real opinions through the self-development of a cool, pure, 
god-like, disinterested dialectic (in contrast to the mystics of all ranks, who 
are more honest than they are and more stupid with their talk of 
“inspiration”—), while basically they defend with reasons sought out after the 
fact an assumed principle, an idea, an “inspiration,” for the most part some 
heartfelt wish which has been abstracted and sifted. They are all advocates who 
do not want to call themselves that. Indeed, for the most part they are even 
mischievous pleaders for their own judgments, which they baptize as “truths,” 
and very remote from the courage of conscience which would admit this, even 
this, to itself, very remote from the courageous good taste which would concede 
as much, whether to warn an enemy or a friend, or whether to mock themselves as 
an expression of their own high spirits. That equally stiff and well-behaved Tartufferie [hypocrisy] of 
the old Kant with which he entices us onto the clandestine path of dialectic, 
leading or, more correctly, seducing us to his “categorical imperative”—this 
dramatic performance makes us discriminating people laugh, for it amuses us in 
no small way to keep a sharp eye on the sophisticated scheming 
of the old moralists and preachers of morality.(3) 
Or that sort of mathematical hocus-pocus with which Spinoza presented his 
philosophy—in the last analysis “the love of his own wisdom,” to use 
the correct and proper expression—as if it were armed in metal and masked, in 
order in this way to intimidate from the start the courage of an assailant who 
would dare cast an eye on this invincible virgin and Pallas Athena—how 
much of his own shyness and vulnerability is betrayed by this masquerade of a 
solitary invalid!(4)
 
6
 
Gradually I have come to learn 
what every great philosophy has been up to now, namely, the self-confession of 
its originator and a form of unintentional and unnoticed memoir, and also that 
the moral (or immoral) intentions in every philosophy made up the essential 
living seed from which, on every occasion, the entire plant has grown. In fact, 
when we explain how the most remote metaphysical claims of a philosopher really 
arose, it’s good (and shrewd) for us always to ask first: What morality is it 
(is he—) aiming at? Consequently, I don’t believe that a “drive to 
knowledge” is the father of philosophy but that here, as elsewhere, knowledge 
(and misjudgment) have functioned only as a tool for another drive. But whoever 
explores the basic drives of human beings, in order to see in this particular 
place how far they may have carried their game as inspiring geniuses 
(or demons and goblins), will find that all drives have already practised 
philosophy at some time or another—and that every single one of them would all 
too gladly like to present itself as the ultimate purpose of existence 
and the legitimate master of all the other drives. For every drive 
seeks mastery and, as such, tries to practise philosophy. Of course, 
with scholars, men of real scientific knowledge, things may be 
different—“better,” if you will—where there may really be something like a drive 
for knowledge, some small independent clock mechanism or other which, when well
wound up, bravely goes on working, without all the 
other drives of the scholar playing any essential role.(5) 
The genuine “interests” of the scholar thus commonly lie entirely elsewhere, for 
example, in the family or in earning a living or in politics. Indeed, it is 
almost a matter of indifference whether his small machine is placed on this or 
on that point in science and whether the “promising” young worker makes a good 
philologist or expert in fungus or chemist—whether he becomes this or that does 
not define who he is. With a philosopher, by contrast, nothing at all 
is impersonal. And his morality, in particular, bears a decisive and crucial 
witness to who he is—that is, to the rank ordering in which the 
innermost drives of his nature are placed relative to each other.
 
7
 
How malicious philosophers can 
be! I know nothing more venomous than the joke which Epicurus permitted himself 
against Plato and the Platonists: he called them Dionysio-kolakes. The 
literal meaning of that, what stands in the foreground, is “flatterers 
of Dionysius,” hence accessories of tyrants and lickspittles.(6) 
But the phrase says still more than that—“they are all actors, with 
nothing true about them” (for Dionysokolax was a popular description of 
an actor). And that last part is the real maliciousness which Epicurus hurled 
against Plato: the magnificent manners which Plato, along with his pupils, 
understood, the way they stole the limelight—things Epicurus did not 
understand!—that irritated him, the old schoolmaster from Samos, who sat hidden 
in his little garden in Athens and wrote three hundred books—who knows?—perhaps 
out of rage and ambition against Plato?—It took a hundred years until Greece 
came to realize who this garden god Epicurus was.—Did they realize?
 
8
 
In every philosophy there is a 
point where the “conviction” of the philosopher steps onto the stage, or, to 
make the point in the language of an old mystery play:
 
The ass arrived
Beautiful and most valiant.(7)
 
9

Do you want to live “according 
to nature”? O you noble Stoics, what a verbal swindle!(8) 
Imagine a being like nature—extravagant without limit, indifferent without 
limit, without purposes and consideration, without pity and justice, 
simultaneously fruitful, desolate, and unknown—imagine indifference itself as a 
power—how could you live in accordance with this indifference? 
Living—isn’t that precisely a will to be something different from what this 
nature is? Isn’t living appraising, preferring, being unjust, being limited, 
wanting to be different? And if your imperative “live according to nature” 
basically means what amounts to “live according to life”—how could you not do 
that? Why make a principle out of what you yourselves are and must be? The truth 
of the matter is quite different: while you pretend to be in raptures as you 
read the canon of your law out of nature, you want something which is the 
reverse of this, you weird actors and self-deceivers! Your pride wants to 
prescribe to and incorporate into nature, this very nature, your morality, your 
ideal. You demand that nature be “in accordance with the Stoa,” and you’d like 
to make all existence merely living in accordance with your own image—as a huge 
and eternal glorification and universalizing of Stoicism! With all your love of 
truth, you force yourselves for such a long time and with such persistence and 
hypnotic rigidity to look at nature falsely, that is, stoically, until 
you are no long capable of seeing nature as anything else—and some abysmal 
arrogance finally inspires you with the lunatic hope that, because you 
know how to tyrannize over yourselves—Stoicism is self-tyranny—nature also 
allows herself to be tyrannized. Is the Stoic then not a part of nature? . . . . 
But this is an ancient, eternal story: what happened then with the Stoics is 
still happening today, as soon as a philosophy begins to believe in itself. It 
always creates a world in its own image. It cannot do anything different. 
Philosophy is this tyrannical drive itself, the most spiritual will to power, to 
a “creation of the world,” to causa prima [first cause].
 
10
 
The enthusiasm and the 
subtlety—I might even say the cunning—with which people everywhere in Europe 
today go at the problem “of the real and the apparent world” make one think and 
listen—and whoever hears only a “will to truth” in the background and nothing 
else certainly does not enjoy the keenest hearing. In single rare cases such a 
will to truth, some extravagant and adventurous spirit, a metaphysician’s 
ambition to hold an isolated post, may really be involved, something which in 
the end continues to prefer a handful of “certainty” to an entire wagon full of 
beautiful possibilities. There may even be Puritan fanatics of conscience who 
would still rather lie down and die on a certain nothing than on an uncertain 
something. But this is nihilism and the indication of a despairing, deathly 
tired soul, no matter how brave the gestures of such virtue may look. But among 
stronger thinkers, more full of life, still thirsty for life, it appears to be 
something different. When they take issue with appearances and already 
in their arrogance mention the word “perspective,” when they determine that the 
credibility of their own bodies is about as low as they rank the credibility of 
visual evidence which asserts that “the earth stands still,” and, as a result, 
in an apparently good mood, let go of their surest possession (for nowadays what 
do we think is more secure than our bodies?), who knows whether they don’t, at 
bottom, want to win back something which people previously possessed with even more 
certainty, something or other of the old ownership of an earlier faith, 
perhaps “the immortal soul,” perhaps “the old god,” in short, ideas according to 
which life could be lived better, that is, more powerfully and more cheerfully 
than according to “modern ideas”? In this, there is a mistrust of these 
modern ideas, a lack of faith in everything which has been built up yesterday 
and today, and perhaps a slight mixture of aversion and scorn, which can no 
longer tolerate the bric-á-brac of ideas coming from very different 
places, of the sort so-called positivism brings to market these days, a disgust 
of the more discriminating taste with the fairground colourful patchiness of all 
these pseudo-philosophers of reality, in whom there is nothing new or genuine, 
other than these motley colours. In my view, we should, in these matters, side 
with today’s sceptical anti-realists and  microscopists of knowledge: their 
instinct, which forces them away from modern reality, is unrefuted—what 
do we care about their retrogressive secret paths! The fundamental issue with 
them is not that they want to go “back,” but that they want to go away. 
With some more power, flight, courage, and artistry they’d want to 
move beyond—and not back!
 
11
 
It strikes me that nowadays 
people everywhere are trying to direct attention away from the real influence 
Kant exercised on German philosophy and, in particular, prudently to overlook 
the value he ascribed to himself. Above everything else, Kant was, first and 
foremost, proud of his table of categories. With this table in hand, he said, 
“That is the most difficult thing that ever could be undertaken on behalf of 
metaphysics.”—But people should understand this “could be”! He was proud of the 
fact that he had discovered a new faculty in human beings, the ability 
to make synthetic judgments a priori. Suppose that he deceived himself 
here. But the development and quick blood of German philosophy depend on this 
pride and on the competition among all his followers to discover, if possible, 
something even prouder—at all events “new faculties”! But let’s think this over. 
It’s time we did. “How are synthetic judgments a priori possible?” Kant 
asked himself. And what did his answer essentially amount to? Thanks to a 
faculty [Vermöge eines Vermögens]. Unfortunately, however, he did not 
answer in four words, but so laboriously, venerably, and with such an 
expenditure of German profundity and flourishes that people failed to hear the 
comical niaiserie allemande [German foolishness] inherent in such an 
answer. People even got really excited about this new faculty, and the rejoicing 
reached its height when Kant discovered yet another additional faculty—a moral 
faculty—in human beings, for then the Germans were still moral and not yet all 
complete “political realists.” Then came the honeymoon of German philosophy. All 
the young theologians of the Tubingen seminary went off right away into the 
bushes—all looking for “faculties.” And what didn’t they find—in that innocent, 
rich, still youthful time of the German spirit, in which Romanticism, that 
malicious fairy, played her pipes and sang, a time when people did not yet know 
how to distinguish between “finding” and “inventing”! Above all, a faculty for 
the “super-sensory.” Schelling christened this intellectual intuition and, in so 
doing, complied with the most heartfelt yearnings of his Germans, whose cravings 
were basically pious.(9)—The 
most unfair thing we can do to this entire rapturously enthusiastic movement, 
which was adolescent, no matter how much it boldly dressed itself up in gray and 
senile ideas, is to take it seriously and treat it with something like moral 
indignation. Enough—people grew older—the dream flew away. There came a time 
when people rubbed their foreheads. People are still rubbing them today. They 
had dreamed: first and foremost—the old Kant. “By means of a faculty,” he had 
said, or at least meant. But is that an answer? An explanation? Or is it not 
rather merely a repetition of the question? How does opium make people 
sleep? “By means of a faculty,” namely, the virtus dormitiva [sleeping 
virtue], answers that doctor in Moliere.
 
Because it has the sleeping 
virtue
whose nature makes the senses sleep.(10)
 
But answers like that belong in 
comedy, and the time has finally come to replace the Kantian question “How are 
synthetic judgments a priori possible?” with another question, “Why is 
the belief in such judgments necessary?”—that is, to understand that 
for the purposes of preserving beings of our type we must believe that such 
judgments are true, although, of course, they could still be false judgments! 
Or to speak more clearly, crudely, and fundamentally: synthetic judgments a 
priori should not “be possible” at all: we have no right to them. In our 
mouths they are nothing but false judgments. Only, of course, a belief in their 
truth is necessary as a foreground belief and appearance which belong in the 
perspective optics of living. In order finally to recall the immense influence 
which “German philosophy”—you understand, I hope, its right to quotation 
marks?—has exercised throughout Europe, there should be no doubt that a certain virtus dormitiva [virtue 
of making people sleep] was a part of that: people—among them noble 
loafers, the virtuous, the mystics, the artists, the three-quarter Christians, 
and political obscurantists of all nations—were delighted to have, thanks to 
German philosophy, an antidote to the still overpowering sensualism flowing over 
from the previous century into this one, in short—to have a “sensus assoupire” [way 
of putting the senses to sleep].
 
12
 
So far as materialistic atomism 
is concerned, it belongs with the most effectively refuted things we have, and 
perhaps nowadays in Europe no scholar remains so unscholarly that he still 
ascribes a serious meaning to it other than for convenient hand-and-household 
use (that is, as an abbreviated way of expressing oneself)—thanks primarily to 
that Pole Boscovich, who, together with the Pole Copernicus, 
has so far been the greatest and most victorious opponent of appearances.(11) For 
while Copernicus convinced us to believe, contrary to all our senses, that the 
earth does not stand still, Boscovich taught us to renounce the belief 
in the final thing on the earth that “stood firm,” the belief in “stuff,” in 
“matter,” in what was left of the earth, in atomic particles. It was the 
greatest triumph over the senses ever achieved on earth so far. But we must go 
even further and also declare war, a relentless war to the bitter end, against 
the “atomistic need,” which still carries on a dangerous afterlife in places 
where no one suspects, like that more celebrated “metaphysical need.”—We must 
first of all get rid of that other and more disastrous atomism, as well, which 
Christianity has taught best and longest, the atomism of the soul. With 
this phrase let me be permitted to designate the belief which assumes that the 
soul is something indestructible, eternal, indivisible—like a monad, like an atomon. 
We should rid scientific knowledge of this belief! Just between us, it 
is not at all necessary here to get rid of “the soul” itself and to renounce one 
of the oldest and most venerable hypotheses, as habitually happens with the 
clumsiness of the naturalists, who hardly touch upon “the soul” without 
immediately losing it. But the way to new versions and refinements of the 
hypothesis of the soul stands open: and ideas like “mortal soul” and “soul as 
the multiplicity of the subject” and “soul as the social structure of drives and 
affects” from now on want to have civil rights in scientific knowledge. While 
the new psychologist is preparing an end to the superstition which so 
far has flourished with an almost tropical lushness in the way the soul has been 
imagined, at the same time he has naturally pushed himself, as it were, into a 
new desert and a new mistrust—it may be the case that the older psychologists 
had a more comfortable and happier time of it—; finally, however, he knows that 
in that very process he himself is also condemned to invent, and—who 
knows?—perhaps to discover.
 
13
 
Physiologists should think 
carefully about setting up the drive to preserve the self as the cardinal drive 
in an organic being. Above everything else, something living wants to release its 
power—living itself is will to power. Self-preservation is only one of the 
indirect and most frequent consequences of that. In short, here as 
everywhere, beware of all extraneous teleological principles! The drive for 
self-preservation is one such principle (we have Spinoza’s inconsistency to 
thank for it—). For that is demanded by the method, which must, in essence, be 
economy of principles.
 
14
 
Nowadays in perhaps five or six 
heads the idea is dawning that even physics is only an interpretation and 
explication of the world (for our benefit, if I may be permitted to say so) and
not an explanation of the world. But to the extent it rests upon a 
faith in the senses, it counts for more and must continue to count for more for 
a long time yet, that is, as an explanation. Physics has eyes and fingers on its 
side; it has appearance and tangibility on its side. That works magically on an 
age with basically plebeian taste—persuasively and convincingly—indeed, 
it follows instinctively the canon of truth of eternally popular sensualism. 
What is clear, what is “explained”? Only whatever lets itself be seen and 
felt—every problem has to be pushed that far. By contrast, the reluctance to 
accept obvious evidence of the senses constituted the magic of the Platonic way 
of thinking, which was a noble way of thinking—perhaps among human 
beings who enjoyed even stronger and more discriminating senses than our 
contemporaries have, but who knew how to experience a higher triumph in 
remaining master of these senses and to do this by means of the pale, cool, 
gray, conceptual nets which they threw over the colourful confusion of sense, 
the rabble of the senses, as Plato called them. That form of enjoyment in 
overcoming this world and interpreting the world in the manner of Plato was 
different from the one which today’s physicists offer us, as well as the 
Darwinists and anti-teleologists among the physiological workers, with their 
principle of the “smallest possible force” and the greatest possible stupidity. 
“Where human beings have nothing more to look at and to grip, there they have 
also no more to seek out”—that is, of course, an imperative different from the 
Platonic one, but nonetheless for a coarse, diligent race of mechanics and 
bridge builders of the future, who have nothing but rough work to do, 
it might be precisely the right imperative.
 
15
 
In order to carry on physiology 
in good conscience, people must hold to the principle that the sense organs 
are not phenomena in the sense of idealistic philosophy: as such they could not, 
in fact, be causes! And so sensualism at least as a regulative hypothesis, if 
not as a heuristic principle.—What’s that? And other people even say that the 
outer world is the work of our organs? But then our body, as a part of this 
outer world, would, in fact, be the work of our organs! But then our organs 
themselves would, in fact, be—the work of our organs. It seems to me that this 
is a complete reductio ad absurdum [absurd conclusion]provided that the 
idea of causa sui [something being its own cause] is fundamentally 
absurd. Consequently, is the exterior world not the work of our 
organs—?
 
16
 
There are still harmless 
observers of themselves who believe that there are “immediate certainties,” for 
example, “I think,” or that superstition of Schopenhauer’s, “I will,” just as if 
perception here were able to seize upon its object pure and naked, as 
the “thing in itself,” and as if there were no falsification either on the part 
of the subject or of the object.(12)
However, the fact is that “immediate 
certainty,” just as much as “absolute cognition” and “thing in itself,” contains 
within itself a contradictio in adjecto [contradiction in terms]. I’ll 
repeat it a hundred times: people should finally free themselves from the 
seduction of words! Let folk believe that knowing is knowing all of something. 
The philosopher must say to himself, “When I dismantle the process that is 
expressed in the sentence ‘I think,’ I come upon a series of daring assertions 
whose rational grounding is difficult, perhaps impossible—for example, that I am 
the one who thinks, that there must really be something that thinks, that 
thinking is an action and effect of a being who is to be thought of as a cause, 
that there is an ‘I’, and finally that it is already established what we mean by 
thinking—that I know what thinking is. For if I had not yet decided 
these questions in myself, how could I assess that what is now  happening might 
not perhaps be ‘willing’ or ‘feeling’?” In short, this “I think” presupposes 
that I compare my immediate condition with other conditions which I 
know in myself in order to establish what it is. Because of this referring back 
to other forms of ‘knowing,’ it certainly does not have any immediate 
‘certainty’ for me.” Thus, instead of that “immediate certainty,” which people 
may believe in the case under discussion, the philosopher encounters a series of 
metaphysical questions, really essential problems of intellectual knowledge, as 
follows: “Where do I acquire the idea of thinking? Why do I believe in cause and 
effect? What gives me the right to speak of an ‘I,’ and indeed of an ‘I’ as a 
cause, finally even of an ‘I’ as the cause of thinking?” Anyone who ventures to 
answer those metaphysical questions right away with an appeal to some kind of
intuitive cognition, as does the man who says “I think and know that at 
least this is true, real, and certain”—such a person nowadays will be met by a 
philosopher with a smile and two question marks. “My dear sir,” the philosopher 
will perhaps give him to understand, “it is unlikely that you are not mistaken 
but why such absolute insistence on the truth?”—
 
17
 
So far as the superstitions of 
the logicians are concerned, I will never tire of emphasizing over and over 
again a small brief fact which these superstitious types are unhappy to 
concede—namely, that a thought comes when “it” wants to and not when “I” wish, 
so that it is a falsification of the facts to say that the subject “I” 
is the condition of the predicate “think.” It thinks: but that this “it” is 
precisely that old, celebrated “I” is, to put it mildly, only an assumption, an 
assertion, in no way an “immediate certainty.” After all, we’ve already done too 
much with this “it thinks”: this “it” already contains an interpretation of 
the event and is not part of the process itself. Following grammatical habits 
people conclude here as follows: “Thinking is an activity. To every activity 
belongs someone who does the action, therefore—.” With something close to this 
same pattern, the older atomism, in addition to the “force” which created 
effects, also looked for that clump of matter where the force is located, out of 
which it works—the atom. Stronger heads finally learned how to cope without this 
“remnant of earth,” and perhaps one day people, including even the logicians, 
will also grow accustomed to cope without that little “it” (to which the honest 
old “I” has reduced itself).
 
18
 
It’s true that the fact that a 
theory can be disproved is not the least of its charms: that’s precisely what 
attracts more sophisticated minds to it. Apparently the theory of “free will,” 
which has been refuted hundreds of times, owes its continuing life to this very 
charm alone—again and again someone or other comes along and feels he’s strong 
enough to refute it.
 
19
 
Philosophers customarily speak 
of the will as if it were the best-known thing in the world. Indeed, 
Schopenhauer let it be known that the will is the only thing really known to us, 
totally known, understood without anything taken away or added. But still, again 
and again it seems to me that Schopenhauer, too, in this case has only done what 
philosophers just do habitually—he’s appropriated and exaggerated a popular 
opinion. Willing seems to me, above all, something complicated, 
something that is unified only in the word—and popular opinion simply inheres in 
this one word, which has overmastered the always inadequate caution of 
philosophers. So if we are, for once, more careful, if we are 
“un-philosophical,” then let’s say, firstly, that in every act of willing there 
is, to start with, a multiplicity of feelings, namely, the feeling of the 
condition away from which, a feeling of the condition 
towards which, the feeling of this “away” and “towards” themselves, then again, an accompanying 
muscular feeling which comes into play through some kind of habit, without our 
putting our “arms and legs” into motion, as soon as we “will.” Secondly, just as 
we acknowledge feelings, indeed many different feelings, as ingredients of 
willing, so we should also acknowledge that thinking is an ingredient as 
well. In every act of will there is a commanding thought, and people should not 
believe that this thought can be separated from the “will,” as if then the will 
would still be left over! Thirdly, the will is not only a complex of feeling and 
thinking but, above all, an affect, and, indeed, an affect of the 
command. What is called “freedom of the will” is essentially the feeling of 
superiority with respect to the one who has to obey: “I am free; ‘he’ must 
obey”—this awareness inheres in every will, as does that tense attentiveness, 
that direct gaze fixed exclusively on one thing, that unconditional value 
judgment “Do this now—nothing else needs to be done,” that inner certainty about 
the fact that obedience will take place, and everything else that accompanies 
the condition of the one issuing commands. A person who wills—gives 
orders to something in himself that obeys or that he thinks obeys. But now 
observe what is the strangest thing about the will—about this multifaceted thing 
for which the people have only a single word: insofar as we are in a given case 
the one ordering and the one obeying, both at the same time, and as the 
one obeying we know the feelings of compulsion, of pushing and pressing, 
resistance and movement, which usually start right after the act of will, and 
insofar as we, by contrast, have the habit of disregarding this duality and of 
deceiving ourselves, thanks to the synthetic idea of “I,” a whole series of 
mistaken conclusions and, consequently, of false evaluations of the will itself 
has attached itself to the act of willing, in such a way that the person doing 
the willing believes in good faith that willing is sufficient for 
action. Because in the vast majority of cases a person wills something only 
where he may expect his command to take effect—that is, in obedience and 
action—what is apparent has translated itself into a feeling, as if 
there might be some necessary effect. In short, the one who is doing 
the willing believes, with a reasonable degree of certainty, that will and 
action are somehow one thing—he ascribes his success, the carrying out of the 
willing, to the will itself and, in the process, enjoys an increase in that 
feeling of power which all success brings with it. “Freedom of the will”—that’s 
the expression for the multifaceted condition of enjoyment in the person 
willing, who commands and, at the same, identifies himself with what is carrying 
out the order. As such, he enjoys the triumph over things which resist him, but 
within himself is of the opinion that it is his will by itself which really 
overcame this resistance. The person doing the willing thus acquires the joyful 
feelings of the successful implements carrying out the order, the serviceable 
“under-wills” or under-souls—our body is, in fact, merely a social construct of 
many souls—in addition to his joyful feeling as the one who commands. L’effet c’est moi [The 
effect is I]. What happens here is what happens in every well-constructed 
and happy community—the ruling class identifies itself with the successes of the 
community. All willing is simply a matter of giving orders and obeying, on the 
basis, as mentioned, of a social construct of many “souls”: for this reason a 
philosopher should arrogate to himself the right to include willing as such 
within the field of morality: morality, that is, understood as a doctrine of the 
relationships of dominance under which the phenomenon “living” arises.
 
20
 
That individual philosophical 
ideas are not something spontaneous, not things which grow out of themselves, 
but develop connected to and in relationship with each other, so that, no matter 
how suddenly and arbitrarily they may appear to emerge in the history of 
thought, they nevertheless belong to a system just as much as do the collective 
members of the fauna of a continent, that point finally reveals itself by the 
way in which the most diverse philosophers keep filling out again and again a 
certain ground plan of possible philosophies. Under an invisible spell 
they always run around the same orbit all over again: they may feel they are 
still so independent of each other with their critical or systematic wills, but 
something or other inside leads them, something drives them in a particular 
order one after the other, namely, that inborn structural arrangement and 
relationship of ideas. Their thinking is, in fact, much less a discovery than a 
recognition, a remembering, a return journey back home into a distant primordial 
collective household of the soul, out of which those ideas formerly grew. To 
practise philosophy is to this extent a form of atavism of the highest order. 
The strange family similarity of all Indian, Greek, and German ways of 
practising philosophy can be explained easily enough. It’s precisely where a 
relationship between languages is present we cannot avoid the fact that, thanks 
to the common philosophy of grammar—I mean thanks to the unconscious mastery and 
guidance exercised by similar grammatical functions—everything has been prepared 
from the beginning for a similar development and order of philosophical systems, 
just as the road to certain other possibilities of interpreting the world seems 
sealed off. There will be a greater probability that philosophers from the 
region of the Ural-Altaic languages (in which the idea of the subject is most 
poorly developed) will look differently “into the world” and will be found on 
other pathways than Indo-Germans or Muslims: the spell of particular grammatical 
functions is, in the final analysis, the spell of physiological judgments 
of value and racial conditions.—So much for the repudiation of 
Locke’s superficiality in connection with the origin of ideas.(13)
 
21
 
The causa sui [something 
being its own cause] is the best self-contradiction that has been thought 
up so far, a kind of logical rape and perversity. But the excessive pride of 
human beings has worked to entangle itself deeply and terribly with this very 
nonsense. The demand for “freedom of the will,” in that superlative metaphysical 
sense, as it unfortunately still rules in the heads of the half-educated, the 
demand to bear the entire final responsibility for one’s actions oneself and to 
relieve God, the world, ancestors, chance, and society of responsibility for 
them, is really nothing less than this very causa sui and a pulling 
oneself into existence out of the swamp of nothingness by the hair, with more 
audacity than Munchhausen. Suppose someone in this way gets behind the boorish 
simplicity of this famous idea of the “free will” and erases it from his head, 
then I would invite him now to push his “enlightenment” still one step further 
and erase also the inverse of this non-idea [Unbegriffs] of “free will” 
from his head: I refer to the “un-free will,” which amounts to an abuse of cause 
and effect. People should not mistakenly reify “cause” and “effect,” 
the way those investigating nature do (and people like them who nowadays 
naturalize their thinking—), in accordance with the ruling mechanistic 
foolishness which allows the cause to push and shove until it “have an effect.” 
People should use “cause” and “effect” merely as pure ideas, that is, 
as conventional fictions to indicate and communicate, not as an 
explanation. In the “in itself” there is no “causal connection,” no “necessity,” 
no “psychological un-freedom,” no “effect following from the cause”; no 
“law” holds sway. We are the ones who have, on our own, made up causes, 
causal sequences, for-one-another, relativity, compulsion, number, law, freedom, 
reason, and purpose, and when we fabricate this world of signs inside things as 
something “in itself,” when we stir it into things, then we’re once again acting 
as we have always done, namely, mythologically. The “un-free will” is a 
myth: in real life it’s merely a matter of strong and weak wills.—It is 
almost always already a symptom of something lacking in a thinker himself when 
he senses in all “causal connections” and “psychological necessity” some 
compulsion, necessity, requirement to obey, pressure, and un-freedom. That very 
feeling is a tell-tale giveaway—the person is betraying himself. And if I have 
seen things correctly, the “un-freedom of the will” has generally been viewed as 
a problem from two totally contrasting points of view, but always in a deeply
personal way: some people are not willing at any price to let go of 
their “responsibility,” their belief in themselves, their personal 
right to their merits (the vain races belong to this group—); others 
want the reverse: they do not wish to be responsible for or guilty of anything, 
and demand, out of an inner self-contempt, that they can shift blame for 
themselves somewhere else. People in this second group, when they write books, 
are in the habit nowadays of taking up the cause of criminals; a sort of 
socialist pity is their most attractive disguise. And in fact, the fatalism of 
those with weak wills brightens up amazingly when it learns how to present 
itself as “(T)la religion de la souffrance humaine” [the religion 
of human suffering]—that’s its “good taste.”
 
22
 
People should forgive me, as an 
old philologist who cannot prevent himself from maliciously setting his finger 
on corrupt methods of interpretation—but “nature’s conformity to law,” which you 
physicists talk about so proudly, as if—it exists only thanks to your 
interpretation and bad “philology”—it is not a matter of fact, a “text, but 
instead nothing but a naively humanitarian emendation and distortion of meaning, 
with which you make ample concessions to the democratic instincts of the modern 
soul! “Equality before the law everywhere—in that respect nature is no different 
and no better than we are”: a charming ulterior motive, in which once again lies 
disguised the rabble’s hostility to everything privileged and autocratic, as 
well as a second and more sophisticated atheism. Ni dieu, ni maître [neither 
god nor master]—that is how you want it, too, and therefore “Up with 
natural law!” Isn’t that so? But, as mentioned, that is interpretation, not 
text, and someone could come along who had an opposite intention and style of 
interpretation and who would know how to read out of this same nature, with a 
look at the same phenomena, the tyrannically inconsiderate and inexorable 
enforcement of power claims—an interpreter who set right before your eyes the 
unexceptional and unconditional quality in all “will to power,” in such a way 
that almost every word, even that word “tyranny,” would finally appear unusable 
or an already weakening metaphor losing its force—as too human—and who 
nonetheless in the process finished up asserting the same thing about this world 
as you claim, namely, that it has a “necessary” and “calculable” course, but not because 
laws rule the world but because there is a total absence of laws, and 
every power draws its final consequence in every moment. Granted that this also 
is only an interpretation—and you will be eager enough to raise that 
objection?—well, so much the better.
 
23
 
All psychology so far has 
remained hung up on moral prejudices and fears. It has not dared to go into the 
depths. To understand it as the morphology and doctrine of the development 
of the will to power—the way I understand it—no one in his own thinking has 
even touched on that, insofar, that is, as one is permitted to recognize in what 
has been written up to now a symptom of what people so far have kept silent 
about. The power of moral prejudices has driven deep into the most spiritual, 
the most apparently cool world, the one with the fewest assumptions, and, as is 
self-evident, in a way that damages, limits, blinds, and distorts. A true 
physical psychology has to fight against an unconscious resistance in the heart 
of the researcher. It has “the heart” against it. Even a doctrine of the mutual 
interdependence of the “good” and the “bad” drives creates, as a more 
sophisticated immorality, distress and aversion in a still powerful and hearty 
conscience—even more so a doctrine of how all the good drives are derived from 
the bad ones. But assuming that someone takes the affects of hate, envy, greed, 
and desire to rule as the affects which determine life, as something that, in 
the whole balance of life, have to be present fundamentally and essentially, 
and, as a result, have to be enhanced if life is to be further enhanced—he 
suffers from an orientation in his judgment as if he were seasick. Nevertheless, 
even this hypothesis is not nearly the most painful or the strangest in this 
immense and still almost new realm of dangerous discoveries;—and, in fact, there 
are a hundred good reasons why everyone should stay away from it, anyone who can! 
On the other hand, if someone aboard ship wanders here at some point—well, then! 
Come on! Now’s the time to keep one’s teeth tightly clenched, one’s eyes open, 
and one’s hand firm on the tiller!—We’re moving away directly over morality, and 
in the process, as we dare make our way there, we’re overwhelming, perhaps 
smashing apart, what’s left of our morality,—but what do we matter! 
Never before has a more profound world of insights revealed itself to 
venturesome travellers and adventurers: and the psychologist who in this manner 
“makes a sacrifice”—it is not the sacrifizio dell’intelletto [sacrifice of 
the intellect], quite the opposite—will for that reason at least be 
permitted to demand that psychology is recognized again as the mistress of the 
sciences, with the other sciences there to prepare things in her service. For 
from now on psychology is once more the route to fundamental problems.
 
NOTES
 
(1) In Greek mythology, the Sphinx was a 
monster which terrorized Thebes. The peril could only be averted by answering a 
riddle. Oedipus answered the riddle successfully and was made king of Thebes. [Back 
to Text]
 
(2) a priori synthetic judgments: 
a central claim of Kant’s theory of knowledge, these are judgments which do not 
arise from experience (i.e., they are innate) but which reveal knowledge of 
experience (like deductively argued mathematically based scientific laws). [Back 
to Text]
 
(3) Categorical imperative: the 
key phrase in Kant’s morality, the idea that moral action consists of acting 
upon a principle which could become a rational moral principle without creating 
a moral contradiction (“Act so that the maxim [which determines your will] may 
be capable of becoming a universal law for all rational beings.” Immanuel Kant 
(1724-1804) was an enormously influential German Enlightenment philosopher. [Back 
to Text]
 
(4) Baruch de Spinoza 
(1632-1677), an important and controversial Dutch philosopher; Pallas Athena: 
the Greek goddess of wisdom. [Back 
to Text]
 
(5) Nietzsche’s words Wissenschaft and wissenschaftlich, 
translated as science and scientific, refer to scholarship or 
academic research methods and activities in general. Their meaning is by no 
means confined to natural science. [Back 
to Text]
 
(6) Dionysius (432 to 367 BC), 
tyrant of Syracuse. [Back to 
Text]
 
(7) Nietzsche quotes the Latin: “adventavit asinus/ pulcher et fortissimus.” [Back 
to Text]
 
(8) The Stoics: a Greek 
philosophical school (founded in 306 BC) teaching patient endurance and 
repression of the emotions. [Back 
to Text]
 
(9) Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph 
Schelling (1775-1854), a German philosopher. [Back 
to Text]
 
(10) Nietzsche quotes the Latin, “Quia 
est in eo virtus dormativa/ Cujus est natura sensus assoupire.” Moliere
(Jean-Baptiste Poquelin, 1622-1673) was a famous French playwright.
[Back to Text]
 
(11) Roger Boscovich (1711-1787), 
a Jesuit philosopher and an important scientific thinker, denied material 
substance to atoms. His ethnic identity is contested. Nicolaus Copernicus 
(1473-1543), Polish monk and astronomer, offered a scientific theory for a sun-centred 
solar system. [Back to Text]
 
(12) Arthur Schopenhauer 
(1788-1860), an important German philosopher whose work had a significant 
influence upon Nietzsche. [Back 
to Text]
 
(13) John 
Locke (1632-1704), a very influential English philosopher, proposed that 
the mind at birth was a blank slate, without innate ideas. [Back 
to Text]


============================================================
Part 2: The Free Spirit
============================================================

Friedrich Nietzsche

BEYOND GOOD AND EVIL
 
Translated by Ian Johnston, Vancouver Island University, 
Nanaimo, British Columbia, Canada
 
Students, teachers, artists, and members of the 
general public may download and distribute this text without permission and 
without charge. They may also freely edit the text for their own purposes. All 
commercial use of this translation, however, is forbidden without the permission 
of the translator. For comments and questions, please contact 
Ian Johnston.
 
For a Rich Text Version (Word) of this text, please 
use the following link: 

Beyond Good and Evil [RTF] 
 
[Table 
of Contents for Beyond Good and Evil]
 
 
 PART TWO
THE FREE SPIRIT
 
24
 
O sancta simplicitas [O 
blessed simplicity]! Human beings live in such a peculiarly simple and 
counterfeit way! Once a man develops eyes to see this wonder, he cannot check 
his amazement! How bright and free and light and simple we have made everything 
around us! How we have learned to give our senses free license for everything 
superficial, our thinking a divine craving for wanton leaps and erroneous 
conclusions! How we have learned ways, right from the start, to maintain our 
ignorance in order to enjoy a hardly conceivable freedom, carelessness, 
rashness, heartiness, and merriment in life—in order to enjoy life.  And only on 
this now firm granite foundation of ignorance could scientific knowledge up to 
now rise up, the will to know on the foundation of a much more powerful will, 
the will not to know, to uncertainty, to what is not true! Not as its opposite, 
but—as its refinement! For even if language, here as elsewhere, does 
not cast off its clumsiness and continues to speak about opposites where there 
are only degrees and many subtleties of gradation, and similarly if inveterate Tartufferie [hypocrisy] in 
morality, which nowadays belongs to our invincible “flesh and blood,” turns the 
words even of us knowledgeable people around in our mouths, here and there we 
understand that and laugh about how it’s precisely the best scientific knowledge 
that most wants to hold us in this simplified, completely artificial, 
appropriately created, and appropriately falsified world, and about how, 
willingly or unwillingly, it loves error, because, as something alive—it loves 
life!
 
25
 
After such a cheerful start, 
I’d like you to not to miss hearing a serious word: it’s directed at the most 
serious people. Be careful, you philosophers and friends, of knowledge—protect 
yourself from martyrdom! From suffering “for the sake of the truth”! Even from 
defending yourselves! That corrupts all the innocence and refined neutrality in 
your consciences. It makes you stubborn against objections and red rags; it 
dulls your minds, turns you into an animal and a brute, when, in the struggle 
with danger, slander, suspicion, expulsion, and even dirtier consequences of 
hostility, you finally have to play out your role as the defenders of truth on 
earth, as though “the truth” were such a harmless and clumsy character as to 
require defenders! And as for you, you knights with the most sorrowful 
countenances, my gentlemen loafers and spiritual cobweb spinners! Ultimately you 
yourselves know well enough that it really doesn’t matter if you are 
the ones who are proved right. You also know that up to now no philosopher has 
been proved right and that a more praiseworthy truthfulness could lie in every 
small question mark which you set after your favourite words and cherished 
doctrines (and occasionally after yourselves), than in all the ceremonial 
gestures and trump cards before prosecutors and courts of justice! Better to 
stand aside! Run off to some secluded place! And retain your masks and your 
subtlety, so that people confuse you with someone else—or fear you a little! And 
for my sake don’t forget the garden, the garden with the golden trellis! And 
have people around you who are like a garden—or like music over water in the 
evening, when the day is already becoming a memory. Choose good 
solitude, the free, high-spirited, easy solitude, which also gives you a right 
to remain, in some sense or other, still good yourselves! How poisonous, how 
crafty, how bad every long war makes us, when it does not let us fight with open 
force! How personal a long fear makes us, a long attention on our 
enemies, on potential enemies! These social outcasts, these men long persecuted 
and wickedly hunted down—as well as the compulsory recluses, the Spinozas or 
Giordano Brunos—in the end always become, even under the most spiritual 
masquerade and perhaps without realizing it themselves, sophisticated avengers 
and makers of poisons (just dig into the foundation of Spinoza’s ethics and 
theology)—to say nothing of the foolishness of moral indignation, 
which in a philosopher is the unmistakable sign that his philosophical 
humour has run away from him.(1) 
The martyrdom of a philosopher, his “sacrifice for the truth,” brings forcefully 
to light how much of the agitator and actor he contains within himself. And if 
people have looked at him with only an artistic curiosity up to this point, 
then, in the case of several philosophers, we can naturally understand the 
dangerous wish to see him also in his degeneration (degenerated into a “martyr,” 
into a noisy troublemaker on the stage and in tribunals). But with such a wish, 
people must be clear about what they are going to see in every 
case—only a satyr play, only a farcical epilogue, only continuing proof that the 
long, real tragedy is over, assuming that every philosophy in its 
origin was a long tragedy.
 
26
 
Every special human being 
strives instinctively for his own castle and secrecy, where he is saved from 
the crowd, the many, the majority, where he can forget the ordinary “people” who 
are the rule [die Regel “Mensch”], for he is an exception to them—but 
for the single case where he is pushed by an even stronger instinct straight 
against this rule, as a person who seeks knowledge in a great and exceptional 
sense. Anyone who, in his intercourse with human beings, does not, at one time 
or another, shimmer with all the colours of distress—green and gray with 
disgust, surfeit, sympathy, gloom, and loneliness—is certainly not a man of 
higher taste. But provided he does not take all this weight and lack of 
enthusiasm freely upon himself, always keeps away from it, and stays, as 
mentioned, hidden, quiet, and proud in his castle, well, one thing is certain: 
he was not made for, not destined for, knowledge. For if he were, he would one 
day have to say to himself, “The devil take my good taste! The rule is more 
interesting than the exception—than I am, the exception!”—and he would make his 
way down and, above all, “inside.” The study of the average man—long, 
serious, and requiring much disguise, self-control, familiarity, bad company—all 
company is bad company except with one’s peers—that constitutes a necessary part 
of the life story of every philosopher, perhaps the most unpleasant, 
foul-smelling part, the richest in disappointments. But if he’s lucky, as is 
appropriate for a fortunate child of knowledge, he encounters real short cuts 
and people who make his task easier—I’m referring to the so-called cynics, those 
who, as such, simply recognize the animal, the meanness, the “rule” in 
themselves and, in the process, still possess that degree of spirituality and 
urge to have to talk about themselves and people like them before witnesses;—now 
and then they even wallow in books, as if in their very own dung. Cynicism is 
the single form in which common souls touch upon what honesty is, and the higher 
man should open his ears to every cruder and more refined cynicism and think 
himself lucky every time a shameless clown or a scientific satyr announces 
himself directly in front of him. There are even cases where enchantment gets 
mixed into the disgust: for example, in those places where, by some vagary of 
nature, genius is bound up with such an indiscreet billy-goat and ape—as in the Abbé Galiani, 
the most profound, sharp-sighted, and perhaps also the foulest 
man of his century—he was much deeper than Voltaire and consequently a good deal 
quieter.(2) 
More frequently, as I have intimated, it happens that the scientific head is set 
on an ape’s body, a refined and exceptional understanding in a common soul—among 
doctors and moral physiologists, in particular, that’s not an uncommon 
occurrence. And wherever anyone speaks without bitterness and quite innocently 
of man as a belly with two different needs and a head with one, wherever someone 
constantly sees, looks for, and wants to see only hunger, sexual 
desire, and vanity, as if these were the real and only motivating forces in 
human actions, in short, wherever people speak “badly” of human beings—not even in 
a nasty way—there the lover of knowledge should pay fine and diligent 
attention; he should, in general, direct his ears to wherever people talk 
without indignation. For the indignant man and whoever is always using his own 
teeth to tear himself apart or lacerate himself (or, as a substitute for that, 
the world, or God, or society) may indeed, speaking morally, stand higher than 
the laughing and self-satisfied satyr, but in every other sense he is the more 
ordinary, the more trivial, the more uninstructive case. And no one lies as 
much as the indignant man.
 
27
 
It is difficult to be 
understood, particularly when one thinks and lives gangasrotogati [like the 
flow of the river Ganges], among nothing but people who think and live 
differently, namely kurmagati [like the movements of a tortoise] or, in 
the best cases “following the gait of frogs” mandeikagati—am I simply 
doing everything to make myself difficult to understand?—and people should 
appreciate from their hearts the good will in some subtlety of interpretation. 
But so far as “good friends” are concerned, those who are always too 
lackadaisical and believe they have a particular right as friends to a life of 
comfort, one does well to start by giving them a recreation room and playground 
of misunderstanding:—so one still has to laugh—or else to get rid of them 
altogether, these good friends—and to laugh then, as well!
 
28
 
The most difficult thing about 
translating one language into another is the tempo of its style, which is rooted 
in the character of the race—speaking more physiologically, in the average tempo 
of its “metabolism.” There are honestly intended translations that, as 
involuntarily coarse versions of the original, are almost misrepresentations, 
simply because its brave and cheerful tempo, which springs over and neutralizes 
everything dangerous in things and words, could not be translated. A German is 
almost incapable of presto [quick tempo] in his language and thus, as 
we can reasonably infer, is also incapable of many of the most delightful and 
most daring nuances of free and free-spirited thinking. Just as the buffo [comic 
actor or singer] and satyr are foreign to him, in body and conscience, so 
Aristophanes and Petronius are untranslatable for him. Everything solemn, slow 
moving, ceremonially massive, all lengthy and boring varieties in style are 
developed among the Germans in a lavish diversity. You must forgive me for the 
fact that even Goethe’s prose, with its mixture of stiffness and daintiness, is 
no exception, as a mirror image of the “good old time” to which it belongs, and 
as an expression of German taste in an age when there still was 
a “German taste,” a rococo taste in moribus et artibus [in customs and the 
arts].(3) 
Lessing is an exception, thanks to his play-actor’s nature, which understood a 
great deal and knew how to do many things. He was not the translator of Bayle 
for nothing and was happy to take refuge in Diderot’s or Voltaire’s company—and 
even happier among the Roman writers of comic drama. In tempo, too, Lessing 
loved free-spiritedness, the flight from Germany. But how could the German 
language—even in the prose of a Lessing—imitate the tempo of Machiavelli, who in 
his Prince allows one to breathe the fine dry air of Florence and 
cannot help presenting the most serious affairs in a boisterous allegrissimo [very 
quick tempo], perhaps not without a malicious artistic feeling about what a 
contrast he is risking—long, difficult, hard, dangerous ideas, 
a galloping tempo, and the very best, most mischievous of moods.(4) 
Finally, who could even venture a German translation of Petronius, who was the 
master of the presto—more so than any great musician so far—in 
invention, ideas, and words. Ultimately what is so important about all the 
swamps of the sick, nasty world, even the “ancient world,” when someone like him 
has feet of wind, drive, and breath, the liberating scorn of a wind which makes 
everything healthy, as he makes everything run! And so far as 
Aristophanes is concerned, that transfiguring, complementary spirit for whose 
sake we excuse all Hellenism for having existed, provided that we have 
understood in all profundity everything that needs to be forgiven and 
transfigured there;—I don’t know what makes me dream about Plato’s 
secrecy and sphinx-like nature more than that petit fait [small fact], 
which fortunately has been preserved, that under the pillow on his deathbed 
people found no “Bible,” nothing Egyptian, Pythagorean, or Platonic—but 
something by Aristophanes. How could even a Plato have endured life—a Greek 
life, to which he said no—without an Aristophanes!
 
29
 
It’s the business of very few 
people to be independent:—that is a right of the strong. And whoever attempts 
it—even with the best right to it, but without being compelled to—shows 
by that action that he is probably not only strong but exuberantly daring. He is 
entering a labyrinth; he is increasing a thousand-fold the dangers which life 
already brings with it, not the least of which is the fact that no one’s eyes 
see how and where he goes astray, gets isolated, and is torn to pieces by some 
cavern-dwelling Minotaur of conscience. Suppose such a person comes to a bad 
end, that happens so far away from men’s understanding that they feel
nothing and have no sympathy:—and he cannot go back any more! 
He cannot even go back to human pity!(5)—

 
30
 
Our loftiest insights must—and 
should!—ring out like foolishness, under certain circumstances like crimes, when 
in some forbidden way they come to the ears of those for whom they are not 
suitable and who are not predestined for them. The exoteric and the esoteric 
views, as people earlier differentiated them among philosophers, with Indians as 
with Greeks, Persians, and Muslims, in short, wherever people believed in a 
hierarchy of rank and not in equality and equal rights—this 
differentiation does not arise so much from the fact that the exoteric 
philosopher stands outside and looks, assesses, measures, and judges from the 
outside, not from the inside: the more essential point is that the exoteric 
philosopher sees the matter looking up from underneath, but the esoteric one 
sees it looking down from above! There are heights of the soul viewed 
from which even tragedy ceases to work its tragic effect, and if we gathered all 
the sorrow of the world into one sorrow, who could dare to decide if a glance at 
it would necessarily seduce and compel us to pity and thus to a 
doubling of that sorrow? . . . What serves the higher kind of man as nourishment 
or refreshment must be almost poison to a very different and lower kind of man. 
The virtues of the common man would perhaps amount to vices and weaknesses in a 
philosopher; it could be possible that a higher kind of person, if he is 
degenerating and nearing his end, only then acquires characteristics for whose 
sake people in the lower world, into which he has sunk, would find it necessary 
to honour him as a saint from now on. There are books which have an opposite 
value for the soul and for health, depending on whether the lower soul, the 
lower vitality, or the higher and more powerful soul makes use of them: with the 
first group, the books are dangerous, shattering, and disintegrating; with the 
second group, they are a herald’s summons, which provokes the bravest to show their courage. 
Books for the whole world always smell foul: the stink of small people clings to 
them. Where the folk eat and drink, even where they worship, the place usually 
smells. One should not go into churches if one wants to breathe clean air.
 
31
 
In their young years, people 
worship and despise still without that art of subtlety that constitutes the 
greatest gain in life. And it’s reasonable enough that they must atone, with 
some difficulty, for having bombarded men and things in such a way with Yes and 
No. Everything is arranged so that the worst of all tastes, the taste for the 
absolute, will be terribly parodied and misused until people learn to put some 
art into their feelings and even prefer risking an attempt with artificiality, 
as the real artists of life do. The anger and reverence typical of the young do 
not seem to ease up until they have sufficiently distorted people and things so 
that they can vent themselves on them.—Youth is in itself already something 
fraudulent and deceptive. Later, when the young soul, tortured by nothing but 
disappointments, finally turns back against itself suspiciously, still hot and 
wild, even in its suspicion and pangs of conscience, how it rages against itself 
from this point on, how it tears itself apart impatiently, how it takes revenge 
for its lengthy self-deception, as if it had been a voluntary blindness! In this 
transition people punish themselves through their mistrust of their own feeling; 
they torment their enthusiasm with doubt; indeed, they even feel good conscience 
as a danger, as a veiling of the self, so to speak, an exhaustion of their finer 
honesty. Above all, people take sides, on principle the side against “the 
young.”—A decade later, they understand that all this was also still—youth!
 
32
 
Throughout the lengthiest 
period of human history—we call it the prehistoric age—the value or the lack of 
value in an action was derived from its consequences. Thus, the action in itself 
was considered as insignificant as its origin, but, in somewhat the same way as 
even today in China an honour or disgrace reaches back from the child to the 
parents, so then it was the backward working power of success or failure which 
taught people to consider an action good or bad. Let’s call this period the pre-moralistic
period of humanity: the imperative “Know thyself!” was then still unknown. 
In the last ten millennia, by contrast, people in a few large regions of the 
earth have come, step by step, to the point where they allow the value of an 
action to be determined, no longer by its consequences, but by its origin. On 
the whole, this was a great event, a considerable improvement in vision and 
standards, the unconscious influence of the ruling power of aristocratic values 
and of faith in “origins,” the sign of a period which one can designate moralistic in 
a narrower sense: with it the first attempt at self-knowledge was undertaken. 
Instead of the consequences, the origin: what a reversal of perspective! And 
this reversal was surely attained only after lengthy battles and fluctuations! 
Of course, in the process a disastrous new superstition, a peculiar narrowing of 
interpretation, gained control. People interpreted the origin of an action in 
the most particular sense as an origin from an intention. They became 
unanimous in believing that the value of an action lay in the value of its 
intention. The intention as the entire origin and prehistory of an action: in 
accordance with this bias people on earth have, almost up to the most recent 
times, given moral approval, criticized, judged, and also practised philosophy. 
But today shouldn’t we have reached the point where we must once again make up 
our minds about a reversal and fundamental shift in values, thanks to a renewed 
self-reflection and profundity in human beings? Are we not standing on the 
threshold of a period which we might at first designate negatively as outside 
morality: today, when the suspicion stirs, at least among us immoralists, 
that the decisive value of an action may lie precisely in what is unintentional in 
it and that all its intentionality, everything in it that we can see, know, and 
“are conscious of,” still belongs to its surface layer and skin,—which, like 
every skin, indicates something but conceals even more? In short, we 
believe that the intention is only a sign and a symptom, something still needing 
interpretation, and furthermore a sign that carries too many meanings and, thus, 
by itself alone means almost nothing. We think that morality, in the earlier 
sense, that is, a morality based on intentions, has been a prejudice, something 
rash and perhaps provisional, something along the lines of astrology and 
alchemy, but in any case something that must be overcome. The overpowering of 
morality, in a certain sense even the self-conquering of morality: let that be 
the name for the long secret work which remained reserved for the finest and 
most honest, and also the most malicious consciences nowadays, as living 
touchstones of the soul.
 
33
 
That is the only way: we must 
mercilessly put in question and bring before the court feelings of devotion, 
sacrificing for one’s neighbour, the entire morality of self-renunciation, and, 
in exactly the same way, the aesthetic of “disinterested contemplation,” 
according to which the emasculation of art seductively attempts these days to 
create a good conscience for itself. There is much too much magic and sweetness 
in those feelings “for others,” “not for myself,” for us not to find it 
necessary to grow doubly mistrustful here and to ask, “Are these not perhaps—seductions?”—The 
fact that those feelings please the person who has them and the one who 
enjoys their fruits, as well as the one who merely looks on—this still provides 
no argument for them. On the contrary, that demands immediate caution. 
So let’s be cautious!
 
34
 
No matter what philosophical 
standpoint people may adopt nowadays, from every point of view the falsity
of the world in which we think we live is the most certain and firmest 
thing our eyes are still capable of apprehending:—for that we find reason after 
reason, something that might well to entice us into conjectures about a 
deceitful principle in the “essence of things.” But anyone who makes our very 
thinking, that is, “the intellect,” responsible for the falsity of the world—an 
honourable solution which every conscious or unconscious advocatus dei 
[pleader for god] uses—: whoever takes this world, together with space, 
time, form, and movement as a false inference, such a person would at 
least have good ground finally to learn to be distrustful of all thinking 
itself. Would it not be the case that thinking has played the greatest of all 
tricks on us up to this point? And what guarantee would there be that thinking 
would not continue to do what it has always done? In all seriousness: the 
innocence of thinkers has something touching, something inspiring reverence, 
which permits them even today still to present themselves before consciousness 
with the request that it give them honest answers: for example, to the 
question whether it is “real,” and why it really keeps itself so resolutely 
separate from the outer world, and similar sorts of questions. The belief in 
“immediate certainties” is amoral naiveté which brings honour to us 
philosophers—but for once we should not be “merely moral” men! Setting 
aside morality, this belief is a stupidity that brings us little honour! It may 
be the case that in bourgeois life the constant willingness to suspect is 
considered a sign of a “bad character” and thus belongs among those things 
considered unwise. Here among us, beyond the bourgeois world and its 
affirmations and denials—what is there to stop us from being unwise and saying 
that the philosopher has an absolute right to a “bad character,” as the 
being who up to this point on earth has always been fooled the best—today he has 
the duty to be suspicious, to glance around maliciously from every 
depth of distrust. Forgive me the joke of this gloomy grimace and way of 
expressing myself. For a long time ago I myself learned to think differently and 
to make different evaluations about deceiving and being deceived, and I keep 
ready at least a couple of digs in the ribs for the blind anger with which 
philosophers themselves resist being deceived. Why not? It is nothing 
more than a moral prejudice that truth is worth more than appearance. That claim 
is even the most poorly demonstrated assumption there is in the world. People 
should at least concede this much: there would be no life at all if not on the 
basis of appearances and assessments from perspectives. And if people, with the 
virtuous enthusiasm and clumsiness of some philosophers, wanted to do away 
entirely with the “apparent world,” assuming, of course, you could do 
that, well then at least nothing would remain any more of your “truth” either! 
In fact, what compels us generally to the assumption that there is an essential 
opposition between “true” and “false”? Is it not enough to assume degrees of 
appearance and, as it were, lighter and darker shadows and tones for the way 
things appear—different valeurs [values], to use the language of 
painters? Why could the world about which we have some concern—not be a 
fiction? And if someone then asks “But doesn’t an author belong to a fiction?” 
could we not bluntly answer: Why? Doesn’t this “belong to” perhaps 
belong to the fiction? Is it then forbidden to be a little ironic about the 
subject as well as about the predicate and the object? Is the philosopher not 
permitted to rise above a faith in grammar? All due respect to governesses, but 
might it not be time for philosophy to renounce faith in governesses?—
 
35
 
O Voltaire! O humanity! O 
nonsense! There’s something about the “truth,” about the search for 
truth. And when someone goes after it in far too human a way—“il ne cherche 
le vrai que pour faire le bien” [he seeks the truth only to do good]—I’ll 
wager he comes up with nothing!
 
36
 
If we assume that nothing is 
“given” as real other than our world of desires and passions and that we cannot 
access from above or below any “reality” other than the direct reality of our 
drives—for thinking is only a relationship of these drives to each other—are we 
not allowed to make the attempt to ask the question whether this given is 
not sufficient also for understanding, on the basis of things like it, the 
so-called mechanical (or “material”) world. I don’t mean to understand it as an 
illusion, an “appearance,” an “idea” (in the sense of Berkeley and 
Schopenhauer), but as having the same degree of reality as our emotions 
themselves have—as a more primitive form of the world of emotions, in which 
everything is still combined in a powerful unity, which then branches off and 
develops in the organic process (also, as is reasonable, gets softer and 
weaker—), as a form of instinctual life in which the collective organic 
functions, along with self-regulation, assimilation, nourishment, 
excretion, and metabolism, are still synthetically bound up with one 
another—as an early form of life?(6) 
In the end making this attempt is not only permitted but is also demanded by the 
conscience of the method. Not to assume various forms of causality as 
long as the attempt to manage with a single one has not been pushed to its 
furthest limit (—all the way to nonsense, if I may say so): that is a moral of 
the method which people nowadays may not evade;—as a mathematician would say, it 
is a consequence “of its definition.” In the end the question is whether we 
really acknowledge the will as something efficient, whether we believe 
in the causal properties of the will. If we do—and basically our faith in 
this is simply our faith in causality itself—then we must make the 
attempt to set up hypothetically the causality of the will as the single 
causality. Of course, “will” can work only on “will”—and not on “stuff” (not, 
for example, on “nerves”—). Briefly put, we must venture the hypothesis whether 
in general, wherever we recognize “effects,” will is not working on will—and 
whether every mechanical event, to the extent that a force is active in it, is 
not force of will, an effect of the will.—Suppose finally that we were to 
succeed in explaining our entire instinctual life as a development and branching 
off of a single fundamental form of the will—that is, of the will to power, as 
my proposition asserts—and suppose we could trace back all organic 
functions to this will to power and also locate in it the solution to the 
problem of reproduction and nourishment—that is one problem—then in so doing we 
would have earned the right to designate all efficient force 
unambiguously as will to power. Seen from inside, the world defined and 
described according to its “intelligible character” would be simply “will to 
power” and nothing else.—
 
37
 
“What’s that? Doesn’t that mean 
in popular language that God is disproved, but the devil is not—?” On the 
contrary, on the contrary, my friends! And in the devil’s name, who is forcing 
you to speak such common language?
 
38
 
What happened only very 
recently, in all the brightness of modern times, with the French Revolution, 
that ghastly and, considered closely, superfluous farce, which, however, noble 
and rapturous observers from all Europe have been interpreting from a distance 
for so long and so passionately according to their own outrage and enthusiasm that 
the text disappeared under the interpretation, in the same way a noble 
posterity could once again misunderstand all the past and only by doing that 
perhaps make looking at that past tolerable.—Or rather, hasn’t this already 
happened? Have we ourselves not been—this “noble posterity”? And, to the extent 
that we understand this point, is not this the very moment when—it is over?
 
39
 
No one will readily consider a 
doctrine true simply because it makes us happy or virtuous, except perhaps the 
gentle “idealists,” who go into raptures about the good, the true, and the 
beautiful and allow all sorts of colourful, clumsy, and good-natured desirable 
things to swim around in confusion in their pond. Happiness and virtue are no 
arguments. But people, even judicious spirits, do like to forget that causing 
unhappiness and evil are by the same token no counterarguments. Something could 
well be true, although it is at the same time harmful and dangerous to the 
highest degree. In fact, it could even be part of the fundamental nature of 
existence that people are destroyed when they fully understand it—so that the 
strength of a spirit might be measured by how much it could still endure of the 
“truth,” or stated more clearly, by the degree it would have to have the 
truth diluted, masked, sweetened, muffled, and falsified. But there is no doubt 
about the fact that evil and unhappy people are more favoured and have a greater 
probability of success in discovering certain parts of the truth, to 
say nothing of the evil people who are happy—a species that moralists are silent 
about. Perhaps toughness and cunning provide more favourable conditions for the 
development of the strong, independent spirit and the philosopher than that 
gentle, refined, conciliatory good nature and that art of taking things lightly 
which people value in a scholar, and value rightly. If we assume, first of all, 
that the notion of a “philosopher” is not restricted to the philosopher who 
writes books—or even puts his own philosophy into books! —A final 
characteristic in the picture of the free-spirited philosopher is provided by 
Stendhal. Because of German taste I don’t wish to overlook emphasizing this 
trait:—for it goes against German taste. This last great psychologist 
states the following: “To be a good philosopher it is necessary to be dry, 
clear, without illusions. A banker who has made a fortune has one part
of the character required to make discoveries in philosophy, 
that is to say, to see clearly into what is.”(7)
 
40
 
Everything profound loves the 
mask. The most profound things of all even have a hatred for image and 
comparison. Shouldn’t the right disguise in which the shame of a god walks 
around be something exactly opposite? A questionable question: it would 
be strange if some mystic or other had not already ventured something like that 
on his own. There are processes of such a delicate sort that people do well to 
bury them in something crude and make them unrecognizable. There are actions of 
love and of extravagant generosity, after which there is nothing more advisable 
than to grab a stick and give an eyewitness a good thrashing:—in so 
doing we cloud his memory. Some people know how to befuddle or batter their own 
memories in order at least to take revenge on this single witness:—shame is 
resourceful. It is not the worst things that make people feel the worst shame. 
Behind a mask there is not only malice—there is so much goodness in cunning. I 
could imagine that a person who had something valuable and vulnerable to 
preserve might roll through life as coarse and round as an old green wine barrel 
with strong hoops. The delicacy of his shame wants it that way. For a person 
whose shame is profound encounters even his fate and delicate decisions on 
pathways which few people ever reach and of whose existence those closest to him 
and his most intimate associates are not permitted to know. His mortal danger 
hides itself from their eyes, just as his confidence in life does, once he 
regains it. A person who is concealed in this way, who from instinct uses 
speaking for silence and keeping quiet and who is tireless in avoiding 
communication, wants and demands that, instead of him, a mask of him 
wanders around in the hearts and heads of his friends. And suppose he does not 
want that mask: one day his eyes will open to the fact that nonetheless there is 
a mask of him there—and that that’s a good thing. Every profound spirit needs a 
mask; even more, around every profound spirit a mask is continuously growing, 
thanks to the constantly false, that is, shallow interpretation of 
every word, every step, every sign of life he gives.—
 
41
 
A person has to test himself to 
see that he is meant for independence and command—and he must do this at the 
right time. He should not evade his tests, although they are perhaps the most 
dangerous game he can play, tests which in the end are made only 
with ourselves as witnesses and with no other judges. Not to get stuck on a 
single person:—not even on the someone one loves the most. Every person is a 
prison—a cranny as well. And not to remain stuck on one’s fatherland:—not even 
if it is enduring the greatest suffering and in the greatest need of 
assistance—it is less difficult to disentangle one’s heart from a victorious 
fatherland. Not to be stuck on pity, even in the case of higher men whose rare 
torment and helplessness some fortuitous circumstance has allowed us to see. Not 
to be stuck on a science, not even if it tempts us with the most precious 
discoveries apparently reserved explicitly for us. Not to get stuck on 
one’s own detachment, on that sensual distancing and strangeness of a bird 
constantly soaring further up into the heights in order always to see more 
beneath it:—the danger of the man in flight. Not to get stuck on our own virtues 
and let our totality become a sacrifice to some particular detail in us, for 
example, our “hospitality,” the danger of dangers for lofty and rich souls, who 
spread themselves around lavishly, almost indifferently, and push the virtue of 
liberality into a vice. One must know how to preserve oneself: the 
sternest test of independence.
 
42
 
A new sort of philosopher is 
emerging: I venture to baptize them with a name that is not without danger. As I 
figure them out—to the extent that they let themselves be figured out, for it 
belongs to their type to want to remain something of an enigma—these 
philosophers of the future may have a right, perhaps also a wrong, 
to be described as attempters. This name itself is finally merely 
an attempt and, if you will, a temptation.(8)
 
43
 
Are they new friends of the 
“truth,” these emerging philosophers? That seems plausible enough: for all 
philosophers up to this point have loved their truths. But they certainly will 
not be dogmatists. It must go against their pride as well as their taste if 
their truth is still supposed to be some truth for everyman: and that has been 
the secret wish and deeper meaning of all dogmatic efforts up to now. “My 
judgment is my judgment: someone else has no casual right to it”—that’s 
what such a philosopher of the future will perhaps say. One must rid oneself of 
the bad taste of wanting to agree with many. “Good” is no longer good when one’s 
neighbour utters it. And how could there even be a “common good”! That 
expression contradicts itself: whatever can be common always has only little 
value. In the end things must stand as they stand and have always stood: great 
things remain for the great, the abysses for the profound, sensitivity and 
shudders for the refined, and, to sum up all this in brief, everything rare for 
the rare.—
 
44
 
After all this do I still need 
expressly to state that they will also be free, very free spirits, these 
philosophers of the future—although it’s also certain that they will not be 
merely free spirits but something more, higher, greater, and fundamentally 
different that does not wish to be misunderstood and confused with something 
else? But as I say this, I feel a duty almost as much to them as to us who are 
their heralds and precursors, we free spirits!—the duty to blow away an 
old stupid prejudice and misunderstanding about us both, something which for too 
long has made the idea “free spirit” as impenetrable as fog. In all the 
countries of Europe and in America as well there is now something which drives 
people to misuse this name, a very narrow, confined, chained-up type of spirit 
which wants something rather like the opposite of what lies in our intentions 
and instincts—to say nothing of the fact that, so far as those emerging new 
philosophers are concerned, such spirits definitely must be closed windows and 
bolted doors. To put the matter briefly and seriously, these falsely named “free 
spirits” belong with the levellers, as eloquent and prolific writing 
slaves of democratic taste and its “modern ideas”: collectively people without 
solitude, without their own solitude, coarse brave lads whose courage or 
respectable decency should not be denied. But they are simply unfree and 
ridiculously superficial, above all with their basic tendency to see in the 
forms of old societies up to now the cause for almost all human misery 
and failure, a process which turns the truth happily on its head! What they 
would like to strive for with all their powers is the universal, green, 
pasture-happiness of the herd, with security, absence of danger, comfort, an 
easing of life for everyone. The two songs and doctrines they sing most 
frequently are called “equality of rights” and “pity for all things that 
suffer”—and they assume that suffering itself is something we must do away 
with. We who are their opposites, we who have opened our eyes and 
consciences for the question of where and how up to now the plant “man” has 
grown most powerfully to the heights, we think that this has happened every time 
under the opposite conditions, that for this to happen the danger of his 
situation first had to grow enormously, his power of invention and pretence (his 
“spirit”—) had to develop under lengthy pressure and compulsion into something 
refined and audacious, his will for living had to intensify into an 
unconditional will to power:—we think that hardness, violence, slavery, danger 
in the alley and the heart, seclusion, stoicism, the art of the tempter, and 
devilry of all kinds, that everything evil, fearful, tyrannical, predatory, and 
snake-like in human beings serves well for the ennobling of the species “man,” 
as much as its opposite does:—in fact, when we say only this much we have not 
said enough, and we find ourselves at any rate with our speaking and silence at 
a point at the other end of all modern ideology and things desired by 
the herd, perhaps as their exact opposites? Is it any wonder that we “free 
spirits” are not exactly the most communicative spirits? That we do not want to 
give away every detail of what a spirit can free itself from and 
where it will then perhaps be driven? And as far as the meaning of the 
dangerous formula “beyond good and evil” is concerned, with which we at least 
protect ourselves from being confused with others, we are something 
different from “libres-penseurs,” “liberi pensatori,” “freidenker,” [free 
thinkers] and whatever else all these good advocates of “modern ideas” love 
to call themselves. Having been at home or at least a guest in many countries of 
the spirit, having slipped away again and again from the musty comfortable 
corners into which preference and prejudice, youth, descent, contingencies of 
men and books, or even exhaustion from wandering around seem to have banished 
us, full of malice against the enticement of dependency, which lies hidden in 
honours, or money, or offices, or sensuous enthusiasm, thankful even for 
distress and the frequent vicissitudes of sickness, because they always freed us 
from some rule or other and its “prejudice,” thankful to god, devil, sheep, and 
worm in us, curious to a fault, researchers all the way to cruelty, with fingers 
spontaneously working for the unimaginable, with teeth and stomachs for the most 
indigestible things, ready for any job which demands astuteness and keen senses, 
ready for any exploit, thanks to an excess of “free will,” with front-souls and 
back-souls whose final intentions  no one can easily see, with foregrounds and 
backgrounds that no foot may move through to the end, hidden under cloaks of 
light, conquerors, whether we appear like heirs and spendthrifts, stewards and 
collectors from dawn to dusk, miserly with our wealth and our crammed drawers, 
economical in learning and forgetting, resourceful in coming up with schemes, 
sometimes proud of tables of categories, sometimes pedants, sometimes night owls 
at work, even in broad daylight, in fact, when necessary, even scarecrows—and 
nowadays that’s necessary: that is, to the extent that we are born the sworn 
jealous friends of solitude, of our own most profound, most midnight, 
and most noontime solitude:—we are that kind of men, we free spirits! And 
perhaps you also are something like that, you who are coming, you 
new philosophers?
 
NOTES
 
(1) Giordano Bruno (1548-1600), 
an Italian philosopher who defended the theories of Copernicus (among other 
things), and was burned at the stake for heresy. Baruch de Spinoza 
(1632-1677), a Dutch philosopher, was constantly attacked for his heretical 
views. [Back to Text]
 
(2) Ferdinand Galiani (1728-1787), 
an Italian philosopher. Voltaire: pen name of Francois Marie Arouet (1694-1778), 
a very important and famous French Enlightenment writer. [Back 
to Text]
 
(3) Aristophanes (456-386 BC), 
foremost writer of Old Comedy in classical Athens; Petronius (27-66 
AD), a famous Roman satirist. Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749-1832), 
Germany’s greatest man of letters and literary artist. [Back 
to Text]
 
(4) Gotthold Ehraim Lessing 
(1729-1781), an important German dramatist. Bayle: Marie Henri Bayle 
(1783-1842), a well-known French novelist who wrote under the pen name Stendhal.
Denis Diderot (1713-1784), French philosopher and writer, a major 
figure in the Enlightenment. Niccolo Machiavelli (1469-1527), Italian 
diplomat, dramatist, and political philosopher. [Back 
to Text]
 
(5) Minotaur: in Greek 
mythology a monster, part man, part bull, living in the middle of the Labyrinth 
in Cnossus in Crete. [Back to 
Text]
 
(6) George Berkeley 
(1685-1753), Irish bishop and philosopher. [Back 
to Text]
 
(7) Stendhal: the pen name of 
the French novelist Marie Henri Bayle (1783-1842).  Nietzsche quotes from the 
French: “pour être bon philosophe, il faut être sec, clair, sans illusion. 
Un banquier, qui a fait fortune, a une partie du caractère requis pour faire 
des découvertes en philosophie, c’est-á-dire pour voir clair dans ce qui est.” [Back 
to Text]
 
(8) 
Nietzsche’s word Versucher means both attempter and experimenter. 
The very similar word Versuchung means temptation. [Back 
to Text]


============================================================
Part 3: The Religious Mood
============================================================

Friedrich Nietzsche

BEYOND GOOD AND EVIL
 
Translated by Ian Johnston, Vancouver Island University, 
Nanaimo, British Columbia, Canada
 
Students, teachers, artists, and members of the 
general public may download and distribute this text without permission and 
without charge. They may also freely edit the text for their own purposes. All 
commercial use of this translation, however, is forbidden without the permission 
of the translator. For comments and questions, please contact 
Ian Johnston.
 
For a Rich Text Version (Word) of this text, please 
use the following link: 

Beyond Good and Evil [RTF] 
 
[Table 
of Contents for Beyond Good and Evil]
 
 
 PART THREE
THE RELIGIOUS NATURE(1)
 
 
45
 
The human soul and its 
boundaries, the range of human inner experiences so far attained, the heights, 
depths, and extent of these experiences, the whole history of the soul up to 
this point and its still undrained possibilities: for a born psychologist 
and lover of the “great hunt” that is the predestined hunting ground. But how 
often must such a man say to himself in despair: “I’m just one man! Alas, only 
one man! And this is a huge wood, a primordial forest!” And so he wishes he 
could have few hundred helpers in the hunt and finely trained tracking dogs 
which he could drive into the history of the human soul in order to corner his wild 
animal there. A vain hope. He experiences over and over again, thoroughly and 
bitterly, how difficult it is to find helpers and hounds for all things which 
appeal to his curiosity. The problem he has in sending scholars out into new and 
dangerous hunting grounds, where courage, intelligence, and refinement are 
necessary in every sense, is that that’s precisely the place where scholars are 
no longer useful, where the “great hunt” but also the great danger 
begins:—right there they lose their keen eyes and noses for hunting. In order to 
ascertain and to establish, for example, what sort of history the problem of knowledge 
and conscience in the soul of the homines religiosi [religious men] has 
had up to now, the individual would himself perhaps have to be as profound, as 
wounded, and as monstrous as the intellectual conscience of Pascal was:—and then 
it would still be necessary to have that expansive heaven of bright, malicious 
spirituality capable of surveying from above this teeming mass 
of dangerous and painful experiences, of ordering it, and of forcing it into 
formulas.(2) 
But who would perform this service for me? And who would have time to wait for 
such servants?—It’s clear they arise too rarely. In all ages they are so 
unlikely! In the end, a person must do everything himself in order to 
know a few things himself: that means that one has much to do!—But at 
all events a curiosity of the sort I have remains the most pleasant of all 
vices.—Forgive me. I wanted to say this: the love of the truth has its reward in 
heaven and even on earth.—
 
46
 
The faith demanded and not 
rarely attained by early Christianity in the midst of a sceptical and southern 
world of free spirits that had behind and within it a centuries-long battle 
among philosophical schools, in addition to the education in tolerance provided 
by the imperium romanum [Roman empire]—this faith is not that 
naive and gruff faith of the subordinate, something like the faith with which a 
Luther or a Cromwell or some other northern barbarian of the 
spirit hung onto his god and his Christianity.(3) 
That earlier faith is much more similar to Pascal’s belief, which looks, in a 
terrifying way, something like a constant suicide of reason, a tenacious, 
long-lived, worm-like reason, which cannot be killed once and for all with a 
single blow. From the start Christian faith has been sacrifice: a sacrifice of 
all freedom, all pride, all self-confidence about the spirit, and at the same 
time slavery and self-mockery, self-mutilation. There is cruelty and a 
religious Phoenicianism in this faith, which one expects in a crumbling, 
multilayered, and very spoilt conscience: its assumption is that the subjection 
of the spirit is indescribably painful, that the entire past and the 
habits of such a spirit resist the absurdissimum [the most extreme 
absurdity], which is how this “faith” confronts it. Modern people, with 
their insensitivity to all Christian nomenclature, do not sense any more the 
ghastly superlative that lay in the paradox of the formula “God on the cross” 
for the taste of classical antiquity. To this point there has never yet been 
anywhere such an audacious reversal—anything as dreadful, questioning, and 
questionable, as this formula: it promised an inversion of all ancient 
values.—It is the Orient, the deep Orient, it is the Oriental slave who 
in this way took his revenge on Rome and its noble and frivolous tolerance, on 
the Roman “catholicity” of faith:—and what always enraged the slaves about their 
masters and against their masters was not their faith but their freedom from 
faith, that half-stoic, smiling lack of concern about the seriousness of belief. 
“Enlightenment” fills people with rage, for the slave wants something absolute; 
he understands only the tyrannical, even in morality; he loves as he hates, 
without subtlety, to the depths, to the point of pain, to the point of sickness. 
His many hidden sufferings grow incensed against the noble taste that 
seems to deny suffering. The scepticism about suffering, basically only 
an attitude of aristocratic morality, was also not the most insignificant factor 
in the origin of the last great slave revolt, which began with the French 
Revolution.
 
47
 
Up to this point, wherever 
religious neurosis has appeared on earth, we find it tied up with three 
dangerous dietary rules: isolation, fasting, and sexual abstinence—although it 
would be impossible to determine with certainty what in this may be cause and 
what may be effect and whether there is, in fact, a relationship 
between cause and effect here. This final doubt is justified by the fact that 
among the most regular symptoms of the religious neurosis, both with savage and 
docile peoples, belongs also the most sudden and most dissolute sensuality which 
then, just as suddenly, turns into spasms of repentance and a denial of the 
world and the will. We could interpret both perhaps as masked epilepsy? But 
nowhere should people resist interpretations more than here. About no type up to 
this point has such a glut of absurdity and superstition proliferated. No other 
type so far seems to have interested human beings, even philosophers, more than 
this one. It’s high time to become a little cool on this issue, to learn 
caution, or better yet, to look away, to go away. Even in the 
background of the most recent philosophy, the work of Schopenhauer, there 
stands, almost as the essential problem, this dreadful question mark of the 
religious crisis and awakening. How is denial of the will possible? How 
is the saint possible?—This seems, in fact, to have been the question which 
prompted Schopenhauer to become a philosopher and to begin. Hence, it was a 
result really worthy of Schopenhauer that his most convinced follower (perhaps 
also his last, where Germany is concerned), namely, Richard Wagner, brought his 
own life’s work to an end at this very point and finally led out onto the stage 
the living physical embodiment of that fearful and eternal type as Kundry, type vécu [a 
real-life type], at the very time when the psychiatrists of almost all the 
countries of Europe had an opportunity to study it up close, in every place 
where the religious neurosis—or as I call it, “the religious 
nature”—had its most recent epidemic outbreak and paraded around as the 
“Salvation Army.”(4) 
But if we ask ourselves what has really been so wildly interesting in the whole 
phenomenon of the saint for people of all types and ages, even for philosophers, 
then undoubtedly it is the appearance of a miracle associated with it, that is, 
the immediate succession of opposites, of conditions of the soul that 
are valued in morally opposed ways. People thought here they could get a grip on 
the fact that all of a sudden a “bad man” became a “saint,” a good man. On this 
point, psychology so far has suffered a shipwreck. Didn’t that happen primarily 
because psychology subordinated itself to the control of morality, because it 
itself believed in opposing moral evaluations and saw, read into, and interpreted 
these opposites into the text and the facts? How’s that? The “miracle” is only a 
failure of interpretation? A lack of philology?—
 
48
 
It seems that their Catholicism 
is much more inwardly bound up with the Latin races than all of Christianity is 
in general for us northerners and that, as a result, in Catholic countries 
unbelief means something entirely different from what it means in Protestant 
countries—namely, a form of rebellion against the spirit of the race; whereas, 
among us unbelief means rather a turning back to the spirit (or non-spirit [Ungeist]) 
of the race. We northerners undoubtedly stem from races of barbarians, and this 
also holds with respect to our talent for religion. We are badly equipped 
for it. One can make the Celtic people an exception to that, and for this reason 
they also provided the best soil for the start of the Christian infection in the 
north:—in France the Christian ideal bloomed only as much as the pale northern 
sun permitted. How strangely devout for our taste even these recent French 
sceptics still are, to the extent they have some Celtic blood in their ancestry! 
How Catholic, how un-German, August Comte’s sociology smells to us, with its 
Roman logic of the instincts! How Jesuitical that charming and clever cicerone 
[tour guide] from Port Royal, Sainte-Beuve, in spite of all his hostility 
to the Jesuits! And then there’s Ernest Renan: how inaccessible to us 
northerners the language of such a Renan sounds, in which at every moment some 
nothing of religious tension destroys the equilibrium of his soul, which is, in 
a more refined sense, sensual and reclining comfortably! One should repeat after 
him these beautiful sentences—and how much malice and high spirits at once arise 
in response in our probably less beautiful and harder, that is, more German 
souls: “Let us then boldly assert that religion is a product of the normal man, 
that man is most in touch with truth when he is most religious and most assured 
of an infinite destiny . . . When he is good he wants virtue to correspond to an 
eternal order; when he contemplates things in a disinterested manner he finds 
death revolting and absurd. How can we not assume that it is in those moments 
like this that man sees best? . . .” These sentences are so entirely 
antithetical to my ears and habits that when I found them my initial rage 
wrote beside them “ la niaiserie religieuse par excellence!” 
[the finest example of religious foolishness]—until my later anger really 
grew to like them, these sentences which turn the truth on its 
head! It is so nice, so distinguished, to have one’s very own antithesis!(5)
 
49
 
The thing that astonishes one 
about the religiosity of the ancient Greeks is the unrestrained fullness of 
gratitude which streams out of it:—it is a very noble kind of man who stands 
before nature and life in this way! Later, as the rabble gained 
prominence in Greece, fear grew all over religion as well, and 
preparations were made for Christianity.
 
50
 
The passion for God: there are 
sincere, peasant, pushy types, like Luther’s—all Protestantism lacks southern delicatezza [delicacy]. 
In it there is an oriental way of existing in an exalted state [Aussersichsein], 
as with a slave who, without deserving it, has been pardoned or ennobled, for 
example, Augustine, who lacks in an offensive way all nobility of gestures and 
desires. There is some feminine tenderness and desire in it which pushes itself 
bashfully and ignorantly towards a unio mystica et physica [a 
mystical and physical union], as with Madame de Guyon.(6) 
Strangely enough, in many cases it appears as a disguise for puberty in a young 
woman or man, and here and there even as the hysteria of an old spinster, also 
as her last ambition:—in such cases the church has often already declared the 
woman a saint.
 
51
 
Up to now the most powerful 
people have still bowed reverently before the saint, as the riddle of 
self-conquest and of intentional final sacrifice. Why did they bow? They sensed 
in him—and, so to speak, behind the question mark of his frail and pathetic 
appearance—the superior power that wished to test itself in such a victory, the 
strength of the will, in which they knew how to recognize and honour their own 
strength and pleasure in mastery once more. They were honouring something in 
themselves when they revered the saint. It got to the point that the sight of a 
saint aroused a suspicion in them: such a monster of denial, something so 
contrary to nature, would not have been desired for no reason—that’s what they 
said and questioned themselves about. Perhaps there is a reason for that, a 
really great danger, about which the ascetic, thanks to his secret comforters 
and visitors might provide more precise information? In short, the powerful 
people of the earth learned from the saint a new fear; they sensed a new power, 
a strange, as yet unconquered enemy:—it was the “will to power” which compelled 
them to halt in front of the saint. They had to ask him—
 
52
 
In the Jewish “Old Testament,” 
the book of divine justice, there are human beings, things, and speeches of such 
impressive style that the world of Greek and Indian literature has nothing to 
place beside them. We stand with fear and reverence before these tremendous 
remnants of what human beings once were and will in the process suffer 
melancholy thoughts about old Asia and its small protruding peninsula of Europe, 
which, in marked contrast to Asia, would like to represent the “progress of 
man.” Naturally, whoever is, in himself, only a weak, tame domestic animal and 
knows only the needs of domestic animals (like our educated people nowadays, 
including the Christians of “educated” Christianity), among these ruins such a 
man finds nothing astonishing or even anything to be sad about—a taste for the 
Old Testament is a touchstone with respect to “great” and “small”:—perhaps he 
finds the New Testament, that book of grace, still preferable to his heart (in 
it there is a good deal of the really tender, stifling smell of sanctimonious 
and small-souled people). To have glued together this New Testament, a sort of 
rococo of taste in all respects, with the Old Testament into a single book, as 
the “Bible,” and “the essential book,” that is perhaps the greatest act of 
daring and “sin against the spirit” that literary Europe has on its conscience.
 
53
 
Why atheism today?—”The father” 
in God has been fundamentally disproved, as well as “the judge,” “the rewarder.” Together 
with his “free will.” He is not listening—and if he were to hear, he wouldn’t 
know how to help anyway. The worst thing is this: he appears incapable of 
communicating clearly. Is he indistinct?—From a number of different 
conversations, asking and listening, this is what I have unearthed as the cause 
of the decline of European theism: it seems to me that the religious instinct 
is, in fact, growing powerfully—but that it is rejecting, with profound 
distrust, theistic satisfaction.
 
54
 
When you get down to it, what 
has all recent philosophy been doing? Since Descartes—and, in fact, more in 
defiance of him than on the basis of what he had done before—all philosophers 
have been trying to assassinate the old idea of the soul, under the appearance 
of a critique of the idea of the subject and predicate—that means an attempt to 
kill the basic assumption of Christian teaching. More recent philosophy, as an 
epistemological scepticism, is, in a concealed or open manner, anti-Christian, 
although (and this is said for more refined ears) in no way anti-religious. 
Formerly, that is, people believed in “the soul,” as they believed in grammar 
and the grammatical subject. They said “I” is the condition, “think” is the 
predicate and conditioned—thinking is an activity for which a subject must be 
thought of as cause. Now, people tried, with an admirable tenacity and trickery, 
to see whether they could get out of this net, whether perhaps the opposite 
might not be true: “think” as the condition, “I” the conditioned—thus “I” is 
only a synthesis that is itself created by thinking. Basically Kant wanted 
to show that if we started with the subject we could not prove the subject—or 
the object. The possibility of an apparent existence of the subject, 
hence “the soul,” might not have always been alien to him—that 
thought which, as Vedanta philosophy, was once before present with enormous 
power on earth.(7)
 
55
 
There is a huge ladder of 
religious atrocities, with many rungs. But three of them are the most important. 
First people sacrificed human beings to their gods, perhaps the very ones whom 
they loved best. Here belong the sacrifices of the first-born in all prehistoric 
religions, as well as the sacrifice of Emperor Tiberius in the 
grotto to Mithras on the island of Capri, that most terrible of all Roman 
anachronisms.(8) 
Then, in the moral ages of humanity, people sacrificed to their gods the 
strongest instincts that man possessed, his “nature.” This celebratory 
joy sparkles in the cruel glance of the ascetic, of the enthusiastic 
“anti-natural man.” Finally, what was still left to sacrifice? Did people not 
finally have to sacrifice everything comforting, holy, healing, all hope, all 
belief in a hidden harmony, in future blessedness and justice? Did people not 
have to sacrifice God himself and, out of cruelty against themselves, worship 
stone, stupidity, gravity, fate, and nothingness? To sacrifice God for 
nothingness—this paradoxical mystery of the last act of cruelty has been 
reserved for the generation which is coming along right now. We all already know 
something about this.
 
56
 
Anyone who, like me, has, with 
some enigmatic desire or other, made an effort for a long time to think 
profoundly about pessimism and to rescue it from the half-Christian, half-German 
restrictions and simple-mindedness with which it has most recently appeared in 
this century, that is, in the form of Schopenhauer’s philosophy; anyone who 
really has, with an Asiatic and super-Asiatic eye, looked into and down on the 
most world-denying of all possible ways of thinking—beyond good and evil and no 
longer as Buddha and Schopenhauer do, under the spell and delusion of 
morality—such a man has perhaps in the process, without really wanting to do so, 
opened his eyes for the reverse morality: for the ideal of the most 
high-spirited, most lively, and most world-affirming human being, who has not 
only learned to come to terms with and to accept what was and is but who wants 
to have what was and is come back for all eternity, calling out 
insatiably da capo [from the beginning], not only to himself but to the 
entire play and spectacle, and not only to a spectacle but basically to the one 
who needs this particular spectacle and who makes the spectacle necessary, 
because over and over again he needs himself—and makes himself necessary. How’s 
that? Wouldn’t this be circulus vitiosus deus [god as a vicious circle]?
 
57
 
With the power of his spiritual 
glance and insight the distance and, as it were, the space around man expand: 
his world becomes deeper; new stars and new riddles and pictures always come 
into his view. Perhaps everything on which the eye of his spirit has practised 
its astuteness and profundity was just an excuse for exercise, a matter of play, 
something for children and childish heads. Perhaps one day the most solemn 
ideas, the ones over which we have fought and suffered the most, the ideas of 
“God” and “sin,” will seem to us no more important than a children’s toy or 
childish pain appears to an old man—and perhaps then “the old man” will need 
again another children’s toy and another pain—still sufficiently a child, an 
eternal child!
 
58
 
Have people properly considered 
just how much a genuinely religious life (both its favourite task of microscopic 
self-examination and that tender calmness which is called “prayer” and is a 
constant preparedness for the “coming of God”) requires an outward leisure or 
half-leisure—I mean leisure with a good conscience, time-honoured, from blood, 
something not entirely foreign to the aristocratic feeling that work is 
dishonourable (that is, the feeling that work makes the soul and body 
coarse) and how, as a result, the modern blaring, time-consuming 
industriousness, so proud of itself, stupidly proud, trains and prepares people, 
better than anything else, precisely for “unbelief”? For example, among the 
present inhabitants of Germany who live without religion, I find people who hold 
to “free-thinking” of various kinds and origins, but above all a majority of 
those whose industriousness, from generation to generation, has dissolved the 
religious instincts, so that these people no longer have any idea what purpose 
religions serve and take note of their presence in the world with, as it were, 
only a kind of indifferent wonder. They already feel that generous demands are 
made of them, these good people, whether from their businesses or their 
pleasures, to say nothing of the “Fatherland” and the newspapers and the 
“obligations to the family”: it seems that they have no time at all left over 
for religion; it is especially unclear to them whether religion involves a new 
business or a new pleasure—for it’s not possible, they tell themselves, that 
people go to church merely to spoil their own good moods. They are no enemies of 
religious customs. If, in certain circumstances, people demand of them 
participation in such traditions (something required by the state, for example), 
they do what is required, just the way people do so many things—with a patient 
and modest seriousness and without much curiosity and concern. They just live 
too much apart and on the outside to find it necessary in such cases to conduct 
an argument with themselves for or against the matter. Among these indifferent 
people nowadays belongs the majority of German Protestants in the middle 
classes, particularly in the great industrious centres of trade and business, 
including most of the hard-working scholars and all the accessories of the 
university (with the exception of the theologians, whose existence and 
possibility there constantly provide the psychologist with more and ever more 
sophisticated riddles to sort out). Devout or merely church-going people rarely 
imagine how much good will—one could say how much arbitrary will—is 
involved nowadays when a German scholar takes the problem of religion seriously. 
On the basis of his whole trade (and, as mentioned, on the basis of the 
industriousness of the tradesman, which his modern conscience requires of him) 
he inclines to a supercilious, almost kindly amusement towards religion, mixed 
now and then with a slight contempt for the “uncleanliness” of the spirit which 
he assumes is present wherever people still profess their faith in the church. 
The scholar succeeds only with the help of history (hence not from his 
own personal experience) in bringing to religion a reverent seriousness and a 
certain timid consideration. But even if his feelings about religion have 
managed to rise all the way to gratitude towards it, in his own person he has 
not yet come a step closer to what still constitutes church and piety: perhaps 
the reverse is the case. The practical indifference to religious matters in 
which he was born and raised tends to sublimate itself in him to caution and 
cleanliness, things which avoid contact with religious people and things. And it 
can well be the very depth of his tolerance and humanity that tells him to stay 
out of the way of complex difficulties which tolerance brings with it. Every 
period has its own divine form of naiveté whose invention other ages may 
envy:—and how much naiveté, respectful, childish, and boundlessly foolish 
naiveté lies in this belief of the scholar in his own superiority, in the good 
conscience of his toleration, in the unsuspecting, unsophisticated certainty 
with which his instinct treats religious people as a less worthy and lower type, 
above whom he himself has grown up, out, and above—the scholar, the 
small, presumptuous dwarf and member of the rabble, the diligent and nimble 
head-and-hand-worker of “ideas,” of “modern ideas”!
 
59
 
Whoever has looked deep into 
the world will readily guess what wisdom exists in the fact that human beings 
are superficial. It is their preserving instinct, which teaches them to be 
changeable, light, and false. Here and there we find a passionate and 
exaggerated veneration of “pure forms,” among philosophers as well as among 
artists. No one should doubt that whoever requires the cult of surfaces 
that much has at some time or another grasped beneath those surfaces, 
with unhappy results. Perhaps with respect to these scorched children, the born 
artists, who still find the good things of life only in the intention to falsify its 
image (as it were, in a prolonged revenge against life), there is even a rank 
ordering: we could derive the degree to which life has been spoiled for them by 
the extent to which they wish to see its image falsified, diluted, transcended, 
deified. Among the artists we could count the homines religiosi [men of 
religion]as their highest rank. It is the deep suspicious fear of 
an incurable pessimism which compels entire millennia to sink their teeth into a 
religious interpretation of existence, the fear arising from that instinct which 
has a premonition that people could grasp the truth too early, before 
humans have become strong enough, hard enough, artistic enough. . . . From this 
point of view, piety, the “life in God,” could appear as the most refined and 
final spawn of the fear of truth, as an artist’s worship and 
intoxication in the face of the most consequential of all falsifications, as the 
will to the reversal of the truth, to untruth at any price. Perhaps up to this 
point there has been no stronger way of making human beings themselves look more 
beautiful than this very piety: through it man can become so much art, surface, 
play of colours, and goodness, that we no longer suffer at the sight of him.—
 
60
 
To love human beings for 
the sake of God—so far that has been the most noble and most remote feeling 
that has been attained among men. The fact that without some consecrating 
intention behind it the love of human beings is one more stupidity and 
brutishness, that the inclination to this love of humanity must first derive its 
extent, delicacy, its grains of salt and specks of ambergris from some higher 
inclination—whatever human being it happened to be who first felt and 
“experienced” this, no matter how much his tongue may have stumbled as it tried 
to express such a delicacy, let him remain for all time sanctified among us and 
worthy of reverence as the man who so far has flown the highest and has lost his 
way most beautifully!
 
61
 
The philosopher the way we understand 
him, we free spirits, as the man of the most all-encompassing responsibility, 
who has the conscience for the collective development of human beings—this 
philosopher will help himself to religions for use in his work of cultivation 
and education, just as he will use contemporary political and economic 
conditions. The selective and cultivating influence—that is to say always both 
the destructive as well as the creative and shaping influence—which can be 
practised with the help of religions is something multifaceted and different, 
according to the type of people who are put under its spell and protection. For 
strong, independent people, those prepared and predestined to command, those in 
whom the reason and culture of a ruling race become something living, religion 
is one more means of overcoming resistance, so that they will be able to rule; 
it is like a bond which ties ruler and subjects together in common and betrays 
and hands over to the former the consciences of the latter, something hidden in 
their innermost selves which would like to evade obedience. And in the event a 
few individual natures of such noble descent, because of their high mindedness, 
feel drawn towards a more secluded and more peaceful life and reserve for 
themselves only the most refined form of ruling (over chosen disciples or 
brethren in an order), then religion itself can be used as a means to create 
some peace for oneself from the noise and hardship of the cruder forms 
of ruling and cleanliness from the dirt which necessarily comes with 
all political action. That’s something the Brahmin, for example, understood: 
with the help of a religious organization they arrogated to themselves the power 
to appoint a king for the people, while they held and felt 
themselves apart and outside, as men with higher purposes beyond kingship.(9) 
Meanwhile, religion also provides instruction for some of the ruled and an 
opportunity to prepare themselves for ruling and ordering in the future, those 
slowly ascending classes and groups, that is, those in which, because of 
fortunate marriage traditions, the force and desire of the will, the will to 
rule oneself, is always rising:—to these people religion offers sufficient 
stimuli and temptations to travel the route to a higher spirituality, to test 
the feelings of great self-conquest, of silence and solitude:—asceticism 
and Puritanism are almost indispensable means for educating and ennobling people 
when a race wishes to become master of its origins from the rabble and works its 
way up towards future ruling power. Finally, for ordinary people, the vast 
majority, who are there to serve for common needs and are permitted to 
exist only for that purpose, religion gives an invaluable modest satisfaction 
with their situation and type, all sorts of peace at heart, an ennoblement of 
obedience, one more source of joy and suffering with people like them, and 
something of a transfiguration and beautification of and a justification for the 
whole routine, the whole baseness, the whole half-animal poverty of their souls. 
Religion and the religious significance of life bring the brilliance of the sun 
onto such constantly troubled people and make them capable of tolerating the 
sight of themselves. Religion works just as an Epicurean philosophy usually 
works on suffering people of a higher rank—refreshing and 
refining and, as it were, exploiting the suffering, finally even 
blessing and justifying it.(10)
In Christianity and Buddhism there is 
perhaps nothing so venerable as their art of teaching even the most abject 
people to place themselves, through their piety, into an illusory higher order 
of things and thus to hang onto their satisfaction with the real order, in the 
middle of which their life is hard enough—and this hardness is precisely what’s 
necessary!
 
62
 
Finally, of course, to evaluate 
the opposing bad effects of such religions, as well, and to bring to light their 
sinister danger, there is always an expensive and fearful price to pay when 
religions prevail, not as a means of cultivation and education in the 
hand of philosophers, but as some inherently sovereign power, when 
religions want themselves to be the final purpose and not a means alongside 
other means. Among human beings, as among all other animal species, there is an 
excess of failures, invalids, degenerates, and infirm individuals, those who 
necessarily suffer. Successful examples are always the exception, among human 
beings as well, and, given that man is the as-yet-undetermined animal, 
the rare exception. But even worse: the higher the type of human being a 
particular person represents, the more improbable it becomes that he will be 
successful. The contingent, the law of absurdity in the collective 
household of humanity, reveals itself in the most frightening manner in its 
destructive effects on the higher people, whose conditions of life are refined, 
multifaceted, and hard to estimate. Now, how do the two greatest religions 
mentioned above stand in relation to this excess of unsuccessful cases? 
They seek to preserve, to maintain alive, anything which merely allows itself to 
be preserved. In fact, they side with these unsuccessful cases, in principle, as 
religions for those who suffer; they agree that all those who suffer 
from life as from some illness are right, and they would like to see to it that 
every other feeling of life was judged false and became impossible. Even if we 
still wish to fix a high value on this protecting and preserving care, inasmuch 
as it is concerned and has been concerned with, among all the other people, the 
highest type of human being as well, the one who up to this point has almost 
always suffered the most, nonetheless in the total reckoning, the religions so 
far, that is, the sovereign religions, belong among the major causes 
which have kept the type “man” on a lower rung—they have preserved too much of what 
should have perished. We have to thank them for something invaluable, and 
who is rich enough in gratitude not to become poor in the face of everything 
which, for example, the “spiritual men” of Christianity have done for Europe up 
to this point? And yet, if they gave consolation to sufferers, courage to the 
oppressed and despairing, a staff and support to those who could not stand on 
their own, and enticed away from society and into monasteries and spiritual 
penitentiaries those suffering from inner destruction and those who had become 
wild, what must they have done in addition, in order to work in this way in good 
conscience basically for the preservation of everything sick and suffering, 
which amounts, in fact and truth, for the deterioration of the European race? 
Turn all evaluations of worth on their heads—that is what they had to 
do! Break up the strong men, infect great hopes, bring joy in beauty under 
suspicion, twist all self-mastery, everything manly, lofty, domineering, all 
instincts characteristic of the highest and most successful of the type “man” 
into uncertainty, distressed conscience, and self-destruction, in fact, to turn 
all love for earthly things and for dominion over the earth into hated for the 
earth and the earthly—that is the task the church gave itself and had 
to give itself, until finally in its estimation “unworldliness,” “lack of 
sensuality,” and “higher man” melted together into a single feeling. Suppose we 
could survey with the mocking and disinterested eye of an Epicurean god the 
strangely painful comedy of European Christianity, as crude as it is refined, I 
believe we would find no end to our amazement and laughter. Does it not seem 
that for eighteen centuries there has been ruling over Europe a will to turn the 
human being into a sublime monstrosity? However, anyone who, with the 
opposite needs, no longer Epicurean, but with some divine hammer in his hand, 
were to approach this almost voluntary degeneration and decay of a human being, 
like the Christian European (Pascal, for example), would he not have to cry out 
with fury, pity, and horror, “You fools! You arrogant, pitying fools, what have 
you done here? Was that a work for your hands? What a mess you’ve made, ruining 
my most beautiful stone! What have you presumed?” What I wanted to say was this: 
Christianity has been the most disastrous sort of arrogance so far. Men not 
lofty and hard enough to be permitted to shape men as artists; men not 
strong and far-sighted enough to allow, with a sublime conquest of the 
self, the foreground law of thousand-fold failure and destruction to prevail; 
men not noble enough to see the abysmally different rank ordering, the gulfs 
separating ranks between man and man:—such men have, with their “equal 
before God,” so far ruled over the fate of Europe to the point where finally a 
diminished, almost ridiculous type has been bred, a herd animal, something 
obliging, sickly, and mediocre—the contemporary European. . . .
 
NOTES
 
(1) The title of this section is “Das Religiöse Wesen”. Wesen has 
a number of meanings, including 
person, character, disposition, nature, soul, mind, essence, inclination. [Back 
to Text]
 
(2) Blaise Pascal (1623-1662), 
a brilliant French mathematician known for the extreme strictness and 
mortification of his religious beliefs. [Back 
to Text]
 
(3) Martin Luther (1483-1546), 
German monk and theologian whose work launched the Reformation and 
Protestantism; Oliver Cromwell (1599-1658), English Protestant leader 
against King Charles I and founder of the Commonwealth (the short-lived English 
experiment with republican government). [Back 
to Text]
 
(4) Richard Wagner (1813-1883), 
German composer and essayist, famous for his operas; Kundry: a 
character in Wagner’s opera Parsifal (1882), the high messenger of the 
Holy Grail. [Back to Text]
 
(5) August Comte (1798-1857), a 
French philosopher who founded positivism and is considered the father of modern 
sociology; Port Royal: an important French religious community in the 
seventeenth century which encouraged self-renunciation; Charles Augustin Sainte-Beuve
(1804-1869), a prominent French poet and literary critic; Ernest Renan 
(1823-1892), a well-known French writer on Christianity.  Nietzsche 
quotes the the French: “Disons donc hardiment que la religion est un produit 
de l’homme normal, que l’homme est le plus dans le vrai quand il est le plus 
religieux et le plus assure d’une destine infini . . . C’est quand il est bon 
qu’il veut que la virtue corresponde á un ordre éternel, c’est quand il 
contemple les choses d’une manière désintéressée qu’il trouve la mort révoltante 
et absurd. Comment ne pas supposer que c’est dans ces moments lá, que l’homme 
voit le mieux? . . . [Back 
to Text]
 
(6) Saint Augustine (345-430), 
Bishop of Hippo, a key figure in the development of early Christianity; 
Madame de Guyon: a sixteenth-century French mystic. [Back 
to Text]
 
(7) Vedanta: a philosophical 
tradition within Hinduism. [Back 
to Text]
 
(8) Emperor Tiberius: the Roman 
emperor after Augustus (from 14 AD to 37 AD). [Back 
to Text]
 
(9) Brahmin: the elite 
priesthood in Hinduism. [Back to 
Text]
 
(10) 
Epicurean: a follower of Epicurus (341 BC-270 BC), who taught that the 
highest good was pleasure, especially contemplative pleasure. [Back 
to Text]


============================================================
Part 4: Epigrams and Interludes
============================================================

Friedrich Nietzsche

BEYOND GOOD AND EVIL
 
Translated by Ian Johnston, Vancouver Island University, 
Nanaimo, British Columbia, Canada
 
Students, teachers, artists, and members of the 
general public may download and distribute this text without permission and 
without charge. They may also freely edit the text for their own purposes. All 
commercial use of this translation, however, is forbidden without the permission 
of the translator. For comments and questions, please contact 
Ian Johnston.
 
For a Rich Text Version (Word) of this text, please 
use the following link: 

Beyond Good and Evil [RTF] 
 
[Table 
of Contents for Beyond Good and Evil]
 
 
 PART FOUR
APHORISMS AND INTERLUDES

63
 
Whoever is fundamentally a 
teacher takes all things seriously only in relation to his students —including 
even himself.
 
64
 
“Knowledge for its own 
sake,”—that is the ultimate snare which morality sets: with that one gets fully 
entangled once again in morality.
 
65
 
The charm of knowledge would be 
slight, if there were not so much embarrassment to overcome on the route to 
knowledge.
 
65a
 
Man is most dishonest in 
relation to his god: he is not permitted to sin!
 
66
 
The inclination to 
diminish oneself, to let oneself be robbed, deceived, and exploited could be the 
shame of a god among men.
 
67
 
Love of one person is a 
barbarity: for it is practised at the expense of all the rest. Also the love of 
God.
 
68
 
“I have done that” says my 
memory. “I could not have done that” says my pride and remains implacable. 
Finally—my memory gives up.
 
69
 
One has watched life badly if 
one has not also seen the hand which, in a considerate manner—kills.
 
70
 
If a person has character, he 
still has his typical experience, which always repeats itself.
 
71
 
The wise man as astronomer: so 
long as you still feel the stars as something “above you,” you still lack the 
eye of a man who knows.
 
72
 
It’s not the strength but the 
duration of the lofty sensation that makes lofty people.
 
73
 
Whoever attains his ideal, in 
the act of doing just that goes beyond it.
 
73a
 
Many peacocks hide their 
peacock’s tails from all eyes—and call that their pride.
 
74
 
A man with genius is 
unendurable if he does not possess at least two things in addition: gratitude 
and cleanliness.
 
75
 
The degree and type of the 
sexuality in a man extend all the way to the ultimate peak of his spirit.
 
76
 
Under conditions of peace the 
warlike man attacks himself.
 
77
 
With their principles people 
want to tyrannize their habits or justify them or honour them or abuse them or 
hide them:—two men with the same principles probably want them for fundamentally 
different things.
 
78
 
Anyone who despises himself 
nonetheless still respects himself as the one doing the despising.
 
79
 
A soul which knows that it is 
loved but does not itself love reveals its bottom layers—its lowest stuff comes 
up.
 
80
 
A matter which is explained 
ceases to concern us.—What did that god mean who advised “Know thyself”? Does 
that not perhaps mean “Stop being concerned about yourself! Become 
objective!”—And Socrates? —And the “scientific man”?—
 
81
 
It is dreadful to die of thirst 
in the sea. Must you then salt your truth so much that it can no longer—quench 
thirst?
 
82
 
“Pity for everyone”—that would 
hard and tyrannical for you, my neighbour!
 
83
 
Instinct—when the house is 
burning, people forget even their noonday meal.—Indeed, but people later haul it 
out of the ashes.
 
84
 
Woman learns to hate to the 
extent that she forgets how to enchant.
 
85
 
The same emotions in men and 
women have, nonetheless, a different tempo. That’s the reason man and woman 
do not cease misunderstanding each other.
 
86
 
Behind all personal vanity 
women themselves always have their impersonal contempt—for “woman.”
 
87
 
Bound heart, free spirit.—When one 
binds one’s heart firmly and keeps it imprisoned, one can provide one’s spirit 
many freedoms: I have said that already once. But people do not believe me, 
provided that they do not already know it. . . .
 
88
 
We begin to mistrust very 
clever people when they become embarrassed.
 
89
 
Dreadful experiences lead one 
to wonder whether the person who undergoes them is not something dreadful.
 
90
 
Heavy, melancholy men become 
lighter precisely through what makes other people heavy, through hate and love, 
and for a while they come to their surface.
 
91
 
So cold, so icy that we burn 
our fingers on him! Every hand that grasps him pulls back!—And for that very 
reason many assume he is glowing hot.
 
92
 
For the sake of his good 
reputation who has not once—sacrificed himself?
 
93
 
In affability there is no 
hatred for humanity, but for that very reason there is too much contempt for 
humanity.
 
94
 
Maturity in a man: that means 
having found once again the seriousness which man had as a child, in play.
 
95
 
For someone to be ashamed of 
his immorality: that is a step on the staircase at the end of which he is also 
ashamed of his morality.
 
96
 
People should 
depart from life in the way Odysseus separated from Nausikaa—blessing it rather 
than in love with it.(1)
 
97
 
What? A great man? I always see 
only the actor of his own ideal.
 
98
 
If we train our conscience, it 
will kiss us at the very moment it bites us.
 
99
 
The disappointed man speaks:—”I 
listened for the echo, and I heard only praise—”
 
100
 
We all present ourselves to 
ourselves as more simple than we are: in this way we give ourselves a rest from 
our fellow human beings.
 
101
 
Today a man with knowledge 
might easily feel like god transformed into an animal.
 
102
 
To discover that one is loved 
in return should really bring the lover down about his beloved.“How’s that?Is 
this person modest enough to love even you? Or stupid enough? Or—or—. . .”
 
103
 
The danger in happiness—”Now 
everything is turning out the best for me; now I love every destiny:—Who feels 
like being my destiny?”
 
104
 
It is not their love of 
humanity but the impotence of their love of humanity that prevents today’s 
Christians—from burning us.
 
105
 
For the free spirit, the “pious 
man of discovery”—the pia fraus [pious fraud] is even more contrary to 
his taste (against his “piety”) than the impia fraus [impious fraud]. 
Hence his deep lack of understanding of the church, the sort associated with the 
type “free spirit,”—as his lack of freedom.
 
106
 
Thanks to music even the 
passions enjoy themselves.
 
107
 
Once the decision has been 
made, to shut your ears even to the best counter-arguments: a sign of a strong 
character. Hence, an occasional will to stupidity.
 
108
 
There are no moral phenomena at 
all, but only a moral interpretation of phenomena. . . .
 
109
 
The criminal is often enough 
not equal to his action: he diminishes and disparages it.
 
110
 
The lawyers for a criminal are 
rarely sufficiently artistic to turn the beautiful terror of his action to the 
benefit of the person who did it.
 
111
 
Our vanity is most difficult to 
injure at the very point when our pride has just been hurt.
 
112
 
Anyone who feels himself 
predestined to observe and not to believe finds all those who believe too noisy 
and pushy: he fends them off.
 
113
 
“Do you want to win him over 
for yourself? Then make yourself embarrassed in front of him.—”
 
114
 
The immense expectation 
concerning sexual love and the shame in this expectation ruin all perspective in 
women from the beginning.
 
115
 
Where the game involves neither 
love nor hate, woman plays indifferently.
 
116
 
The great epochs of our lives 
occur when we acquire the courage to rename our evil quality our best quality.
 
117
 
The will to overcome an emotion 
is, in the final analysis, only the will of another emotion or of several other 
emotions.
 
118
 
There is an innocence in 
admiration: such innocence belongs to the man who does not yet have any idea 
that he, too, could at some point be admired.
 
119
 
The disgust with filth can be 
so great that it prevents us from cleansing ourselves—from “justifying” 
ourselves.
 
120
 
Sensuality often makes the 
growth of love too fast, so that the root remains weak and easy to rip out.
 
121
 
There’s something fine about 
the fact that God learned Greek when He wanted to become a writer—and that he 
did not learn it better.
 
122
 
To be happy over praise is with 
some men only a courtesy of the heart—and exactly the opposite of vanity of the 
spirit.
 
123
 
Even concubinage has been 
corrupted—by marriage.
 
124
 
The man who still rejoices 
while being burned at the stake is not triumphing over the pain but over the 
fact that he feels none of the pain where he expected to. A parable.
 
125
 
When we have to change our 
minds about anyone, we hold the awkwardness which he has thus created for us 
very much against him.
 
126
 
A people is nature’s detour to 
produce six or seven great men.—Yes, and then to get around them.
 
127
 
Science offends the modesty of 
all real women. With it they feel as if someone wanted to peek under their 
skin—or even worse, under their dress and finery.
 
128
 
The more abstract the truth you 
wish to teach, the more you must still seduce the senses to it.
 
129
 
The devil has the widest 
perspectives for God; that’s why he keeps himself so far away from Him—for the 
devil is the oldest friend of knowledge.
 
130
 
What someone is begins 
to show itself when his talent subsides—when he stops showing what he can do. 
Talent is also finery, and finery is also a hiding place.
 
131
 
The sexes deceive themselves 
about each other: this happens because basically they honour and love only 
themselves (or, to put the matter more pleasantly, only their own ideal—). 
Hence, the man wants the woman to be peaceful—but woman, like a cat, is essentially not 
peaceful, however much she may have practised an appearance of peacefulness.
 
132
 
People are best punished for 
their virtues.
 
133
 
The man who does not know how 
to find the way to his own ideal lives more carelessly and impudently 
than the man without an ideal.
 
134
 
All credibility, all good 
conscience, all appearance of the truth come only from the senses.
 
135
 
Pharisaism is 
not degeneration in a good man: a good part of it is rather the condition of all 
being-good [Gut-sein](2)
 
136
 
One man seeks a midwife for his 
ideas; another seeks someone he can help: that’s how a good conversation arises.
 
137
 
By associating with scholars 
and artists one easily makes mistakes in reverse directions: behind a remarkable 
scholar we not infrequently find a mediocre human being, and be-hind a mediocre 
artist we often find—a very remarkable human being.
 
138
 
We act while awake as we do in 
a dream: we invent and fabricate the person with whom we associate—and then we 
immediately forget the fact.
 
139
In revenge and love woman is 
more barbaric than man.
 
140
 
Advice as riddle:—”If 
the bond is not to break—you must first bite down on it.”
 
141
 
The lower abdomen is the reason 
man does not so easily consider himself a god.
 
142

The most demure saying I have 
ever heard: “In true love it’s the soul that envelops the body.”(3)
 
143
 
What we do best our vanity 
wishes to count as the thing that is most difficult for us. On the origin of 
many a morality.
 
144
 
When a woman has scholarly 
inclinations, then something is usually wrong with her sexuality. Infertility 
itself tends to encourage a certain masculinity of taste, for man is, if I may 
say so, “the infertile animal.”
 
145
 
In comparing man and woman in 
general, we can say that woman would not have the genius for finery if she did 
not have the instinct for the secondary role.
 
146
 
Anyone who fights with monsters 
should make sure that he does not in the process become a monster himself. And 
when you look for a long time into an abyss, the abyss also looks into you.
 
147
 
From old Florentine novels, and 
in addition from life: buona femmina e mala femmina vuol 
bastone [the good woman and the bad woman want a stick]. Sacchetti, Nov. 
86.(4)
 
148
 
To seduce a neighbour into a 
good opinion and, beyond that, to believe faithfully in this opinion of one’s 
neighbour: who can match women in performing this trick?—
 
149
 
What an age finds evil is 
commonly an anachronistic echo of what previously was found to be good—the 
atavism of an older ideal.
 
150
 
Around the hero everything 
becomes a tragedy, around the demi-god everything becomes a satyr play, and 
around God everything becomes—what? Perhaps a “world”?—
 
151
 
Having a talent is not enough: 
one must also have your permission to have it—isn’t that so, my friends
 
152
 
“Where the tree of knowledge 
stands is always paradise”: that’s what the oldest and the most recent serpents 
declare.
 
153
 
What is done out of love always 
happens beyond good and evil.
 
154
 
Objection, evasion, cheerful 
mistrust, and love of mockery are indications of health: everything absolute 
belongs to pathology.
 
155
 
A sense of tragedy ebbs and 
flows with sensuality.
 
156
 
With individuals madness is 
something rare—but with groups, parties, peoples, and ages it’s the rule.
 
157
 
The thought of suicide is a 
strong consolation: with it people get through many a bad night.
 
158
 
Not only our reason but also 
our conscience submits to our strongest drive, the tyrant in us.
 
159
 
People must repay good 
and bad things, but why directly to the person who did good or bad things to us?
 
160
 
We no longer love our knowledge 
enough, once we have communicated it.
 
161
 
Poets are shameless about their 
experiences: they exploit them.
 
162
 
“Our neighbour [Nächster] is 
not our neighbour [Nachbar] but our neighbour’s neighbour”—that’s how 
every nation thinks.(5)
 
163
 
Love brings to light the high 
and the hidden characteristics of the person who loves—what is rare and 
exceptional about him: to that extent it easily misleads us about what is normal 
in him.
 
164
 
Jesus said to his Jews: “The 
law was for slaves—love God as I love him, as his son! What do we sons of God 
have to do with morality!”
 
165
 
Concerning every party: 
a shepherd always needs to have a bellwether—or he himself must from time to 
time be a wether.
 
166
 
People do lie with their 
mouths, but by the way they distort their mouths in doing so they nonetheless 
still speak the truth.
 
167
 
With hard people intimacy is 
shameful thing—and something precious.
 
168
 
Christianity gave Eros poison 
to drink—but he didn’t die from that. Instead he degenerated into a vice.
 
169
 
To talk a lot about oneself can 
also be a means of hiding oneself.
 
170
 
In praise there is more 
pushiness than in blame.
 
171

Pity in a man of knowledge 
seems almost laughable, like soft hands on a Cyclops.(6)
 
172
 
From love of humanity people 
sometimes embrace anyone (because they cannot embrace everyone): but that’s 
something they cannot reveal to this anyone. . . .
 
173
 
A man does not hate so long as 
his assessments are still low, but only when his assessments are equal or 
higher.
 
174
 
You utilitarians, even you love 
everything utile [useful] only as a cart to carry your 
inclinations—and don’t you really find the noise of its wheels unbearable?
 
175
 
Ultimately one loves one’s 
desire and not the object one desires.
 
176
 
The vanity of others goes 
against our taste only when it offends our vanity.
 
177
 
Concerning what “truthfulness” 
is, perhaps no one has yet been sufficiently truthful.
 
178
 
We do not believe in the 
foolishness of clever men: what a loss of human rights!
 
179
 
The consequences of our actions 
grab us by the hair, extremely indifferent to whether we have “improved” in the 
meantime.
 
180
 
There is an innocence in lying 
which indicates good faith in a cause.
 
181
 
It is inhuman to bless where 
one is cursed.
 
182
 
The familiarity of a superior 
person embitters, because it cannot be returned.
 
183
 
“What has shaken me is not that 
you lied to me but that I no longer believe you.”—
 
184
 
There is a high-spirited 
goodness which looks like malice.
 
185
 
“I dislike him.”—Why?—”I’m no 
match for him.”—Has a person ever answered in this way?
 
 
 
NOTES
 
(1) Nausikaa: a young princess 
in Homer’s Odyssey. [Back 
to Text]
 
(2) Pharisaism: hypocritical 
observance of religious or moral laws. [Back 
to Text]
 
(3) Nietzsche quotes the French: “Dans le véritable amour c’est l’âme, 
qui enveloppe le corps.” [Back 
to Text]
 
(4) Franco Sacchetti (c. 1335-c.1400), 
Florentine writer. [Back to Text]
 
(5) This enigmatic sentence seems to 
mean that our neighbour in a religious sense (“Love thy neighbour as thyself”) 
is not the person nearest to us (i.e., our literal neighbour) but rather the 
neighbour of someone else living close beside us. [Back 
to Text]
 
(6) 
Cyclops: in Greek mythology a giant, one-eyed monster. [Back 
to Text]


============================================================
Part 5: On the Natural History of Morals
============================================================

Friedrich Nietzsche

BEYOND GOOD AND EVIL
 
Translated by Ian Johnston, Vancouver Island University, 
Nanaimo, British Columbia, Canada
 
Students, teachers, artists, and members of the 
general public may download and distribute this text without permission and 
without charge. They may also freely edit the text for their own purposes. All 
commercial use of this translation, however, is forbidden without the permission 
of the translator. For comments and questions, please contact 
Ian Johnston.
 
For a Rich Text Version (Word) of this text, please 
use the following link: 

Beyond Good and Evil [RTF] 
 
[Table 
of Contents for Beyond Good and Evil]
 
 
 PART FIVE
A NATURAL HISTORY OF MORALS
 
186
 
Moral feeling in Europe is now 
just as refined, old, multifaceted, sensitive, and sophisticated as the “science 
of morality” associated with it is still young, amateurish, awkward, and 
fumbling:—an attractive contrast which now and then even becomes visibly 
incorporated in the person of a moralist. Even the phrase “science of morality” 
is, so far as what it designates is concerned, much too arrogant and contrary 
to good taste, which tends always to prefer more modest terms. We 
should in all seriousness admit to ourselves what we still need to do 
at this point and for a long time to come, the only thing that is 
justified at the moment, that is, to assemble materials, to organize 
conceptually and set in order an immense realm of delicate feelings of value and 
differences in values, which live, grow, reproduce, and die off—and, perhaps, to 
attempt to clarify the recurring and more frequent forms of these living 
crystallizations—as a preparation for a theory of types of morality. 
Naturally, so far we have not been so modest. As soon as philosophers busied 
themselves with morality as a science, they collectively have demanded from 
themselves, with a formal seriousness which makes one laugh, something very much 
higher, more ambitious, more solemn. They wanted a rational basis for 
morality—and every philosopher so far has believed that he has provided such a 
rational grounding. But morality itself has been considered something “given.” 
How distant from their stodgy pride lay that apparently unspectacular task, left 
in the dust and mould, of a description, although for that work the subtlest 
hands and senses could hardly be subtle enough! The very fact that moral 
philosophers had only a crude knowledge of the moral facta [facts], in 
an arbitrary selection or an accidental abbreviation, something like the 
morality of their surroundings, their class, their church, the spirit of their 
age, their climate and region of the world—the very fact that they were poorly 
educated and not even very curious with respect to peoples, ages, and past 
events—meant that they never confronted at all the essential problems of 
morality—all of which emerge only with a comparison of several moralities. 
In all the “science of morality” up to this point what is still lacking, 
odd as it may sound, is the problem of morality itself. What’s missing is the 
suspicion that here there may be something problematic. What philosophers have 
called a “rational grounding of morality” and demanded from themselves was, seen 
in the right light, only a scholarly version of good faith in the 
ruling morality, some new way of expressing it, and thus itself an 
element in the middle of a determined morality, even indeed, in the final 
analysis, a form of denial that this morality could be grasped as a 
problem—and, at any rate, the opposite of a test, analysis, questioning, or 
vivisection of this particular belief. Listen, for example, to how even 
Schopenhauer presents his own task with such an almost admirable innocence, and 
draw your own conclusions about the scientific nature of a “science” whose 
ultimate masters still talk like children and little old women: “The principle,” 
he says (on p. 136 of The Fundamental Problems of Morality), “the basic 
assumption whose meaning all ethicists are essentially in agreement 
about—neminem laede, immo omnes, quantum potes, juve [hurt no one, instead 
help everyone, as much as you can]—that is essentially the 
principle which all teachers of morality struggle to ground in reason . . . the essential foundation 
of ethics, which people have been seeking for thousands of years, like the 
philosophers’ stone.” The difficulty of rationally grounding the principle 
quoted above may, of course, be considerable—as we know, it’s not something even 
Schopenhauer was successful in doing—and whoever has once thoroughly understood 
just how tastelessly false and sentimental this principle is in a world whose 
essence is the will to power might like to recall that Schopenhauer, although a 
pessimist, actually—played the flute. . . . Every day, after his meal: 
just read his biographer on this point. And here’s an incidental question: a 
pessimist, a man who denies God and the world, who stops in front of 
morality—who says yes to morality, to the laede-neminem [hurt no one] morality, 
and blows his flute—How’s that? Is that really—a pessimist?
 
187
 
Even apart from the value of 
such claims as “There is in us a categorical imperative,” we can still always 
ask: What does such a claim express about the person making it? There are 
moralities which are intended to justify their creator before other people; 
other moralities are meant to calm him down and make him satisfied with himself; 
with others he wants to nail himself to the cross and humiliate himself; with 
others he wants to carry out revenge; with others to hide himself; with others 
to be transfigured and set himself above, high up and far away. This morality 
serves its originator so that he forgets; that morality so that he or something 
about him is forgotten; some moralists may want to exercise their power and 
creative moods on humanity, some others, perhaps even Kant as well, want us to 
understand with their morality: “What is respectable about me is that I can 
obey—and things should be no different for you than they are for me”—in 
short, moralities are also only a sign language of the feelings.
 
188
 
Every morality is—in contrast 
to laisser aller [letting go]—a part of tyranny against “nature,” also 
against “reason”: that is, however, not yet an objection to it. For to object, 
we would have to decree, once again on the basis of some morality or other, that 
no forms of tyranny and irrationality are permitted. The essential and 
invaluable part of every morality is that it is a lengthy compulsion: to 
understand Stoicism or Port Royal or Puritanism we should remember the 
compulsion under which every language so far has acquired strength and 
freedom—the metrical compulsion, the tyranny of rhyme and rhythm. In every 
people how much trouble poets and orators have made for themselves!—not 
excepting some contemporary prose writers in whose ears a relentless conscience 
dwells—“for the sake of some foolishness,” as utilitarian fools say, who think 
that makes them clever, —“out of obsequiousness to arbitrary 
laws,” as the anarchists say, who think that makes them “free,” even free 
spirited.(1) The 
strange fact, however, is that everything there is or has been on earth to do 
with freedom, refinement, boldness, dance, and masterly certainty, whether it is 
in thinking itself, or in governing, or in speaking and persuading, in the arts 
just as much as in morals, has developed only thanks to the “tyranny of such 
arbitrary laws,” and in all seriousness, the probability is not insignificant 
that it is precisely this that is “nature” and “natural”—and not that laisser aller! 
Every artist knows how far from the feeling of letting himself go his “most 
natural” condition is, the free ordering, setting, disposing, and shaping in 
moments of “inspiration”—and how strictly and subtly he obeys at that very 
moment the thousand-fold laws which make fun of all conceptual formulations 
precisely because of their hardness and decisiveness (even the firmest idea, by 
comparison, contains something fluctuating, multiple, ambiguous—). The essential 
thing “in heaven and on earth,” so it appears, is, to make the point again, that 
there is obedience for a long time and in one direction: in the process 
eventually there comes and always has come something for whose sake living on 
earth is worthwhile, for example, virtue, art, virtue, music, dance, reason, 
spirituality—something or other transfiguring, subtle, fantastic, and divine. 
The long captivity of the spirit, the mistrustful compulsion in our ability to 
communicate our thoughts, the discipline which the thinker imposed on himself to 
think within the guiding principles of a church or court or with Aristotelian 
assumptions, the long spiritual will to interpret everything which happens 
according to a Christian scheme and to discover and justify the Christian god 
once again in every coincidence—all this powerful, arbitrary, hard, dreadful, 
anti-rational activity has turned out to be the means by which the European 
spirit has cultivated its strength, its reckless curiosity, and its subtle 
flexibility. Admittedly by the same token a great deal of irreplaceable force 
and spirit must have been overwhelmed in the process, crushed, and ruined as 
well (for here, as everywhere, “nature” reveals herself as she is, in her 
totally extravagant and indifferent magnificence, which is an outrage, 
but something noble). The fact that for thousands of years European thinkers 
only thought in order to prove something—nowadays, by contrast, we distrust any 
thinker who “wants to prove something”—and that for them what was to emerge 
as the result of their strictest thinking was always already clearly 
established, as in something like Asiatic astrology earlier or the harmless 
Christian moralistic interpretation of the most intimate personal experience 
“for the glory of God” or “for the salvation of the soul” still present 
today—this tyranny, this arbitrariness, this strict and grandiose stupidity, 
has trained the spirit. Apparently slavery is also, in the cruder and 
more refined sense, the indispensable means for disciplining and cultivating the 
spirit. We should examine every morality in the following way: “nature” in it is 
what teaches hatred of the laisser aller, of that all-too-great 
freedom, and what plants the need for limited horizons, for work close at 
hand—it teaches the narrowing of perspective and also, in a certain 
sense, stupidity as a condition of living and growth. “You are to obey someone 
or other and for a long time: otherwise you perish and lose final 
respect for yourself”—this seems to me to be the moral imperative of nature, 
which, of course, is nether “categorical,” as the old Kant wanted the imperative 
to be (hence the “otherwise”), nor directed at the individual (what does nature 
care about individuals?), but rather at peoples, races, ages, classes, but above 
all at the whole animal “man,” at the human being.
 
189
 
The industrious races complain 
a great deal about having to tolerate idleness: it was a masterpiece of the English instinct 
to make Sunday so holy and so tedious, a form of cleverly invented and shrewdly 
introduced fasting, that the Englishman, without being aware of the 
fact, became eager again for weekdays and workdays. Things like it are 
frequently seen also in the ancient world (even if, as is reasonable among 
southern people, not exactly connected to work—). There must be fasts of several 
kinds, and in every place where powerful impulses and habits rule, the lawgivers 
have to take care to insert extra days in the calendar in which such an impulse 
is placed in chains and learns once again to go hungry. Seen from a higher 
viewpoint, the periods when entire races and ages get afflicted with some moral 
fanaticism or other look like such inserted times of compulsion and fasting, 
during which an impulse learns to cower down and abase itself, but also to cleanse and sharpen itself. 
Individual philosophical sects (for example the Stoa in the midst of Hellenistic 
culture and its lecherous air heavy with aphrodisiac scents) permit this sort of 
interpretation as well.—And with this we are also given a hint for an 
explanation of that paradox why it was precisely in Europe’s Christian period 
and, in general, only under the pressure of Christian value judgments that the 
sex drive sublimated itself into love (amour-passion [passionate love]).
 
190
 
There is something in Plato’s 
morality which does not really belong to Plato, but is found in his 
philosophy, one might say, only in spite of Plato, namely, the Socratism for 
which Plato was essentially too noble. “No one wants to injure himself; thus, 
everything bad happens unwillingly. For the bad man inflicts damage on himself: 
he would not do that, if he knew that bad is bad. Thus, the bad man is bad only 
from error. If we take his error away from him, we necessarily make him—good.” 
This sort of argument stinks of the rabble, which in the case of bad 
actions fixes its eyes only on the wretched consequences and really makes the 
judgment “It is stupid to act badly,” while “good” it assumes without 
further thought is identical to “useful and agreeable.” So far as every 
utilitarianism of morality is concerned, we may guess from the start that it had 
an origin like this and follow our noses: we will seldom go wrong.—Plato did 
everything to interpret something refined and noble in the proposition of his 
teacher, above all, himself—Plato, the most daring of all interpreters, took all 
of Socrates only like a popular tune and folk song from the alleys, in order to 
change it into infinite and impossible variations, that is, into all his own 
masks and multiplicities. To speak in jest—and one based on Homer: What is the 
Platonic Socrates if not prosthe Platon opithen te Platon messe te chimera 
[Plato in front, Plato behind, and in the middle the chimera]?(2)
 
191
 
The old theological problem of 
“believing” and “knowing”—or, to put the matter more clearly—of instinct and 
reason—and thus the question whether in assessing the value of things instinct 
deserves more authority than rationality, which wants to assess and act 
according to reasons, according to a “Why?”—according to expediency and 
utility—it is still that old moral problem, as it first appeared in the person 
of Socrates and had already divided minds long before Christianity. Socrates, in 
fact, with a taste for his talent—which was that of a superior dialectical 
thinker—set himself at first on the side of reason, and, in truth, what did he 
do his whole life long but laugh at the awkward inability of his noble 
Athenians, who were men of instinct, like all noble men, and who could never 
provide enough information about the reasons for their actions? Finally, 
however, in stillness and in secret he also laughed at himself. With his more 
subtle conscience and self-enquiry he found in himself the same difficulty and 
inability. But, he said to himself, why does that mean releasing oneself from 
the instincts! We must give the instincts and reason the proper help. 
We must follow the instincts but convince reason to assist in the process with 
good arguments. This was the real falsehood of that great ironist, so 
rich in secrets. He brought his conscience to the point where it was satisfied 
with a kind of trick played on itself. Socrates basically had seen through the 
irrational in moral judgments. Plato, who was more innocent in such things and 
without the mischievousness of a common man, wanted to use all his power—the 
greatest power which a philosopher up to that time had had at his command!—to 
prove that reason and instinct inherently move towards a single goal, towards 
the good, towards “god,” and since Plato all theologians and philosophers have 
been on the same road—that is, in things concerning morality up to now, 
instinct, or as the Christians call it, “faith,” or, as I call it, “the herd,” 
has triumphed. We must grant that Descartes is an exception, the father of 
rationalism (and thus the grandfather of the Revolution), a man 
who conferred sole authority on reason. But reason is only a tool, and Descartes 
was superficial.(3)
 
192
 
Anyone who has followed the 
history of a single science finds in its development a text-book case for 
understanding the oldest and commonest events in all “knowing and perceiving.” 
In the former, as in the latter, the rash hypotheses, the fabrications, the 
good, stupid will to “believe,” the lack of suspicion and patience develop first 
of all—our senses learn late and never learn completely to be subtle, true, and 
cautious organs of discovery. With a given stimulus, our eye finds it more 
comfortable to produce once more an image which has already been produced 
frequently than to capture something different and new in an impression. To do 
the latter requires more power, more “morality.” To listen to something new is 
disconcerting and hard on our ears; we hear strange music badly. When we hear 
some different language, we spontaneously try to reshape the sounds we hear into 
words which sound more familiar and native to us: that’s how, for example, in 
earlier times, when the German heard the word arcubalista he changed it 
into armbrust [arcubalista . . . armbrust: crossbow]. Something new 
also finds our senses hostile and reluctant, and generally, even with the 
“simplest” perceptual processes, the emotions—like fear, love, hate, as well as 
the passive feeling of idleness—are in control.—Just as a reader 
nowadays hardly reads all the individual words (let alone the syllables) on a 
page—he’s much more likely to take about five words out of twenty at random and 
“guess” on the basis of these five words the presumed sense they contain—so we 
hardly look at a tree precisely and completely, considering the leaves, 
branches, colour, and shape; we find it so very much easier to imagine an 
approximation of the tree. Even in the midst of the most unusual experiences we 
still act in the same way: we make up the greatest part of the experience for 
ourselves and are hardly ever compelled not to look upon any event as 
“inventors.” What all this adds up to is that basically from time immemorial we 
have been accustomed to lie. Or to express the matter more virtuously 
and hypocritically, in short, more pleasantly: we are much more the artist than 
we realize. In a lively conversation I often see in front of me the face of the 
person with whom I am speaking so clearly and subtly determined according to the 
idea which he expresses or which I think has been brought out in him that this 
degree of clarity far exceeds the power of my ability to see:—thus, the 
delicacy of the play of muscles and of the expression in his eyes must be 
something I have made up out of my own head. The person probably had a totally 
different expression or none at all.
 
193
 
Quidquid luce fuit, tenebris agit [What 
went on in the light, acts in the darkness], but the other way around as 
well. What we experience in a dream, provided we experience it frequently, 
finally is as much a part of the collective household of our souls as anything 
“truly” experienced. Thanks to this, we are richer or poorer, have one more need 
or one less, and finally in the bright light of day and even in the happiest 
moments of our waking spirit we are ordered around a little by the habits of our 
dreams. Suppose that an individual in his dreams has often flown and, finally, 
as soon as he dreams, becomes aware of the power and art of flying as his 
privilege and also as his own enviable happiness; such a man who believes he is 
capable of realizing every kind of curving or angled flight with the easiest 
impulse, who knows the feeling of a certain godlike carelessness, an “upward” 
without tension and compulsion, a “downward” without condescension and without 
humiliation—without gravity!—how should a man with such dream 
experiences and dream habits not also finally discover in his waking day that 
the word “happiness” has a different colour and definition! How could he not 
desire happiness in different way? “Soaring upward,” as described by 
poets, for him must be, in comparison with that “flying,” too earthbound, too 
muscular, too forceful, even too “heavy.”
 
194
 
The difference between men does 
not manifest itself only in the difference between the tables of the goods they 
possess, in other words, only in the fact that they consider different goods 
worth striving for and are at odds among themselves about what is more or less 
valuable, about the rank ordering of the commonly acknowledged goods—the 
difference becomes even clearer in what counts for them as really having 
and possessing something good. So far as a woman is concerned, for 
example, a more modest man considers having her body at his disposal and sexual 
gratification a satisfactory and sufficient sign of having, of possession. 
Another man, with his more suspicious and more discriminating thirst for 
possessions sees the “question mark,” the fact that such a possession is only 
apparent, and wants a more refined test, above all, to know whether the woman 
not only gives herself to him but also for his sake gives up what she has or 
would like to have. Only then does he consider her “possessed.” A third 
man, however, is at this point still not finished with his suspicion and desire 
to possess. He asks himself if the woman, when she gives up everything for him, 
is not perhaps doing this for a phantom of himself: he wants to be well known 
first, fundamentally, even profoundly, in order to be able to be loved at all. 
He dares to allow himself to be revealed.—Only then does he feel that the loved 
one is fully in his possession, when she is no longer deceived about him, when 
she loves him just as much for his devilry and hidden insatiability as for his 
kindness, patience, and spirituality. One man wants to possess 
a people: and all the higher arts of Cagliostro and Catiline he thinks 
appropriate for this purpose.(4) 
Another, with a more refined thirst for possession, tells himself “One is not 
entitled to deceive where one wants to possess.”—He is irritated and impatient 
at the idea that a mask of him rules the hearts of his people: “Hence I must let myself 
be known and, first of all, learn about myself!” Among helpful and charitable 
people we find almost routinely that crude hypocrisy which first prepares the 
person who is to be helped, as if, for example, he “earns” help, wants 
precisely their help, and would show himself deeply thankful, devoted, 
and obsequious to them for all their help—with these fantasies they dispose of 
the needy as if they are property, as if they are, in general, charitable and 
helpful people out of a demand for property. We find them jealous if we cross 
them or anticipate them in their helping. Parents unwittingly make their child 
into something that resembles them—they call it “an upbringing”—no mother doubts 
at the bottom of her heart that with a child she has given birth to a 
possession; no father denies himself the right to be allowed to subjugate the 
child to his ideas and values. In fact, in earlier times it seemed 
proper for fathers to dispose of the life and death of newborns at their own 
discretion (as among the ancient Germans). And like the father, even today the 
teacher, the class, the priest, and the prince still see in each new human being 
a harmless opportunity for a new possession. And from that follows . . . .
 
195
 
The Jews—a people “born for 
slavery,” as Tacitus and the entire ancient world say, “the chosen people among 
nations,” as they themselves say and believe—the Jews achieved the amazing feat 
of inverting values, thanks to which life on earth for two 
millennia has possessed a new and dangerous appeal.(5) 
Their prophets fused “rich,” “godless,” “evil,” “violent,” and “sensuous” into a 
unity and for the first time coined the word “world” as a word connoting shame. 
In this inversion of values (to which belongs the use of the word for “poor” as 
a synonym for “holy” and “friend”) lies the significance of the Jewish people: 
with them begins the slave rebellion in morality.
 
196
 
We can conclude that 
there are countless dark bodies in the region of the sun—bodies we will never 
see. Between us, that’s a parable, and a psychologist of morality reads the 
entire writing in the stars only as a language of parable and signs, something 
that allows a great deal to remain concealed.
 
197
 
We fundamentally misunderstand 
predatory animals and predatory men (for example, Cesare Borgia), and we 
misunderstand “Nature,” so long as we still look for a “pathology” at the bottom 
of these healthiest of all tropical monsters and growths or 
even for some “Hell” born in them—as almost all moralists so far have done.(6) 
Among moralists does it not appear that there is hatred for the primeval forest 
and the tropics? And that the “tropical man” must at any price be discredited, 
whether as a sickness and degeneration of human beings or as his own hell and 
self-torture? But why? For the benefit of the “temperate zones”? For the benefit 
of the temperate human beings? For the “moral human beings”? For the 
mediocre? This for the chapter “morality as timidity.”
 
198
 
All these moralities that 
direct themselves at the individual person, for the sake of his “happiness,” as 
people say—what are they except proposals about conduct in relation to the 
degree of danger in which the individual person lives with himself, 
recipes against his passions, his good and bad inclinations, to the extent that 
they have a will to power and would like to play the master; small and great 
clever sayings and affectations, afflicted with the musty enclosed smell of 
ancient household remedies or old women’s wisdom, all baroque and unreasonable 
in form—because they direct themselves to “all,” because they generalize where 
we should not generalize—all speaking absolutely, taking themselves absolutely, 
all spiced with more than one grain of salt, and much more bearable, sometimes 
even seductive, when they learn to smell over-seasoned and dangerous, above all 
“of the other world.” By any intellectual standard, all that is worth little and 
still a far cry from “science,” to say nothing of “wisdom,” but, to say it again 
and to say it three times: prudence, prudence, prudence, mixed in with 
stupidity, stupidity, stupidity—whether it is now that indifference and coldness 
of an ornamental column against the hot-headed foolishness of the emotions, 
which the Stoics recommended and applied as a cure; or even that 
no-more-laughing and no-more-crying of Spinoza, his excessively naive support 
for the destruction of the emotions through analysis and vivisection; or that 
repression of the emotions to a harmless mean, according to which they should be 
satisfied, the Aristotelianism of morality; even morality as the enjoyment of 
emotions in a deliberate dilution and spiritualization through artistic 
symbolism, something like music or the love of God and love of man for the sake 
of God—for in religion the passions have civil rights once more, provided that . 
. . ; finally even that accommodating and wanton dedication to the emotions, as Hafis and 
Goethe taught, that daring permission to let go of the reins, that 
physical-spiritual licentia morum [moral licentiousness] in 
the exceptional examples of wise old owls and drunkards, for whom it “has little 
danger anymore.”(7) 
This also for the chapter “morality as timidity.”
 
199
 
Given that at all times, as 
long as there have been human beings, there have also been herds of human beings 
(racial groups, communities, tribes, peoples, states, churches) and always a 
great many followers in relation to the small number of those issuing orders—and 
taking into consideration also that so far nothing has been better and longer 
practised and cultivated among human beings than obedience, we can reasonably 
assume that typically now the need for obedience is inborn in each individual, 
as a sort of formal conscience that states “You are to do something or 
other without conditions, and leave aside something else without conditions,” in 
short, “Thou shalt.” This need seeks to satisfy itself and to fill its form with 
some content. Depending on its strength, impatience, and tension, it seizes on 
something, without being very particular, like a coarse appetite, and accepts 
what someone or other issuing commands—parents, teachers, laws, class biases, 
public opinion—shouts in people’s ears. The curious limitation of human 
development—the way it hesitates, takes so long, often regresses, and turns 
around on itself—is based on the fact that the herd instinct of obedience is 
passed on best and at the expense of the art of commanding. If we imagine this 
instinct at some point striding right to its ultimate excess, then there would 
finally be a total lack of commanders and independent people, or they would 
suffer inside from a bad conscience and find it necessary first to prepare a 
deception for themselves in order to be able to command, as if they, too, were 
only obeying orders. This condition is what, in fact, exists nowadays in Europe: 
I call it the moral hypocrisy of those in command. They do not know how to 
protect themselves from their bad conscience except by behaving as if they were 
carrying out older or higher orders (from ancestors, the constitution, rights, 
law, or even God), or they even borrow herd maxims from the herd way of 
thinking, for example, as “the first servant of their people” or as “tools of 
the common good.” On the other hand, the herd man in Europe today makes himself 
appear as if he is the single kind of human being allowed, and he glorifies 
those characteristics of his thanks to which he is tame, easy going, and useful 
to the herd, as the really human virtues, that is, public spiritedness, 
benevolence, consideration, diligence, moderation, modesty, forbearance, and 
pity. For those cases, however, where people believe they cannot do without a 
leader and bellwether, nowadays they make attempt after attempt to replace the 
commander by adding together collections of clever herd people. All the 
representative constitutional assemblies, for example, have this origin. But for 
all that, what a blissful relief for these European herd animals, what a release 
from a pressure which is growing unbearable is the appearance of an absolute 
commander. The effect which the appearance of Napoleon made was the most recent 
major evidence for that:—the history of the effect of Napoleon is almost the 
history of the higher happiness which this entire century derived from its most 
valuable men and moments.
 
200
 
The man from an age of 
dissolution, which mixes the races all together, such a man has an inheritance 
of a multiple ancestry in his body, that is, conflicting and frequently not 
merely conflicting drives and standards of value, which war among themselves and 
rarely give each other rest—such a man of late culture and broken lights will 
typically be a weaker man. His most basic demand is that the war which constitutes him 
should finally end. Happiness seems to him, in accordance with a calming 
medicine and way of thinking (for example, Epicurean or Christian), principally 
as the happiness of resting, of having no interruptions, of surfeit, of the 
final unity, as the “Sabbath of Sabbaths,” to use the words of the saintly 
rhetorician Augustine, who was himself such a man. But if the opposition and war 
in such a nature work like one more charm and thrill in life—and if, on 
the other hand, in addition to that nature’s powerful and irreconcilable drives 
it has also inherited and cultivated a real mastery and refinement in waging war 
with itself—in other words, controlling and outwitting the self, then arise 
those delightfully amazing and inexplicable people, those enigmatic men 
predestined for victory and seduction, whose most beautiful expressions are 
Alcibiades and Caesar (—in their company I’d like to place the first European, 
according to my taste, the Hohenstaufen Frederick II), and, among artists, 
perhaps Leonardo da Vinci.(8) 
They appear in precisely the same ages when that weaker type, with its demands 
for quiet, steps into the foreground: both types belong with one another and 
arise from the same causes.
 
201
 
As long as the utility which 
rules in moral value judgments is merely the utility of the herd, as long as our 
gaze is directed only at the preservation of the community and we look for what 
is immoral precisely and exclusively in what appears dangerous to the survival 
of the community, there can be no “morality of loving one’s neighbour.” Assuming 
there already exists in society a constant small habit of consideration, pity, 
fairness, kindness, and mutual assistance, assuming also that in this condition 
of society all those drives are already active which are later described with 
honourable names as “virtues” and which finally are almost synonymous with the 
idea “morality,” at that time they are not at all yet in the realm of moral 
value judgments—they are still outside morality. For example, a 
compassionate action in the best Roman period was called neither good nor evil, 
neither moral nor immoral. And even if it was praised, this praise brought with 
it at best still a kind of resentful disdain, as soon as it was compared with 
some action which served the demands of the totality, of the res publica [republic]. 
Ultimately the “love of one’s neighbour” is always something of secondary 
importance, partly conventional, arbitrary, and apparent, in relation to fear 
of one’s neighbour. After the structure of society in its entirety is 
established and seems secure against external dangers, it is this fear of one’s 
neighbour which creates once again new perspectives of moral value judgments. 
Certain strong and dangerous instincts, like a love of enterprise, daring, 
desire for revenge, shiftiness, rapacity, and thirst for power, which up to this 
point not only were honoured as useful to the community, under different names, 
of course, from those just chosen here, but had to be powerfully inculcated and 
cultivated (because people constantly needed them to cope with the dangers to 
the totality, against the enemies of that totality)—these are now experienced as 
doubly dangerous—now that there is a lack of diversionary channels for them—and 
they are gradually abandoned, slandered, and branded as immoral. Now the 
opposing impulses and inclinations acquire moral honour. The herd instinct draws 
its conclusions, step by step. How much or how little something is dangerous to 
the community, dangerous to equality, in an opinion, in a condition and emotion, 
in a will, in a talent, that is now the moral perspective. Here also fear is 
once again the mother of morality. When the highest and strongest drives break 
out passionately and impel the individual far above and beyond the average and 
low level of the herd’s conscience, the feeling of commonality in the community 
is destroyed; its belief in itself, its spine, as it were, breaks: as a result 
people brand these very drives and slander them most of all. The high 
independent spirituality, the will to stand alone, even powerful reasoning, 
are experienced as a danger. Everything which lifts the individual up over the 
herd and creates fear in his neighbour from now on is called evil. The 
proper, modest, conforming faith in equality, the happy medium in 
desires—these acquire honorable moral names. Finally, under very peaceful 
conditions, there is an increasing lack of opportunity and need to educate the 
feelings in strength and hardness. Now every severity, even in justice, begins 
to disrupt the conscience. A high and stern nobility and self-responsibility is 
almost an insult and awakens mistrust; “the lamb” and even more “the sheep” gain 
respect. There is a point of morbid decay and decadence in the history of 
society when it itself takes sides on behalf of the person who harms it, the 
criminal, and does so, in fact, seriously and honestly. Punishment: that 
seems to society somehow or other unreasonable. What’s certain is that the idea 
of “punishment” and “We should punish” causes it distress, makes it afraid. “Is 
it not enough to make him un-dangerous? Why punish him as well? To 
punish is itself dreadful!”—with this question the morality of the herd, the 
morality of timidity, draws its final conclusion. Assuming people could, in 
general, do away with the danger, the basis of the fear, then people would have 
done away with this morality as well: it would no longer be necessary; it would 
no longer consider itself necessary! Whoever examines the conscience of 
the contemporary European will always have to pull out from the thousand moral 
folds and hiding places the same imperative, the imperative of the timidity of 
the herd: “Our wish is that at some point or other there is nothing more to 
fear(T)!” At some point or other—nowadays everywhere in Europe the will as 
well as the way to that point is called “progress.”
 
202
 
Let us state right away one 
more time what we have already said a hundred times, for today’s ears don’t 
listen willingly to such truths—to our truths. We know well enough how 
insulting it sounds when an individual reckons human beings in general plainly 
and simply and unmetaphorically among the animals, but one thing will make 
people consider us almost guilty, the fact that, so far as men of 
“modern ideas” are concerned, we constantly use the terms “herd,” “herd 
instincts,” and the like. What is the point of that? We cannot do anything else: 
for precisely here lies our new insight. We have found that in all major moral 
judgments Europe, together with those countries where Europe’s influence 
dominates, has become unanimous. People in Europe evidently know what 
Socrates thought he did not know and what that famous old snake once promised to 
teach—today people “know” what good and evil are. Now, it must sound harsh and 
be hard on their ears when we keep claiming all the time that what here thinks 
it knows, what here glorifies itself with its praise and censure and calls 
itself good, is the instinct of the herd animal man, which has managed to break 
through, overpower, and dominate other instincts and continues increasingly to 
do so, in accordance with the growing physiological assimilation and 
homogeneity, whose symptom it is. Morality today in Europe is the morality 
of the herd animal—thus only, as we understand the matter, one kind of 
human morality, alongside which, before which, and after which there are many 
other possible moralities, above all higher ones, or there should be. 
Against such a “possibility,” in opposition to such a “should be,” however, this 
morality defends itself with all its forces: it says stubbornly and 
relentlessly, “I am morality itself, and nothing outside me is moral”—in fact, 
with the help of a religion which indulged and catered to the most sublime 
desires of the herd animal, it has reached the point where we find even in the 
political and social arrangements an ever more visible expression of this 
morality: the democratic movement has come into the inheritance of the 
Christian movement. But the fact is that its tempo is still much too slow and 
drowsy for the impatient, the sick, and those addicted to the above-mentioned 
instinct—evidence for that comes from the wailing, which grows constantly more 
violent, the increasingly open snarling fangs of the anarchist hounds who now 
swarm through the alleys of European culture, apparently in contrast to the 
peacefully industrious democrats and ideologues of the revolution, even more to 
the foolish pseudo-philosophers and those ecstatic about brotherhood, who call 
themselves socialists and want a “free society.” But in reality these anarchists 
are at one with all of them in their fundamental and instinctive hostility to 
every form of society other than one of the autonomous herd (all the 
way to the rejection of the very ideas of “master” and “servant”—ni dieu ni 
maître [neither god nor master] is the way one socialist formula goes—); at 
one in their strong resistance against all special claims, all special rights 
and privileges (that means, in the last analysis, against every right, 
for when all people are equal, then no one needs “rights” any longer—); at one 
in their mistrust of a justice which punishes (as if it were a violation of the 
weaker people, a wrong against the necessary consequence of all earlier 
society—); and equally at one in the religion of pity, in their sympathy for 
whatever merely feels, lives, or suffers (right down to the animals, right up to 
“God”:— the excessive outpouring of “suffering vicariously with God” belongs to 
a democratic age—); at one collectively in their cries for and impatience in 
their pity, in their deadly hatred of suffering generally, in their almost 
feminine inability to stand there as spectators, to let suffering 
happen; at one in their involuntary gloom and softness, under whose spell Europe 
seems threatened by a new Buddhism; at one in their faith in the morality of mutual pity, 
as if that were morality in and of itself, as the height, the attained height 
of humanity, the sole hope of the future, a consolation for those now alive, the 
great absolution from all guilt of earlier times;—altogether at one in their 
belief in the community as the saviour, thus in the herd, in 
“themselves” . . .
 
203
 
We, the ones with a different 
belief—we, who consider the democratic movement not merely a degenerate form of 
political organization but a degenerate form of humanity, that is, something 
that diminishes humanity, makes it mediocre and of lesser worth, where do we have 
to reach out to with our hopes? There is no choice: we must reach for new 
philosophers, for spirits strong and original enough to provide the impetus 
for an opposing way of estimating value and to re-evaluate and invert “eternal 
values,” for those sent out as forerunners, for men of the future who at the 
present time establish the compulsion and the knot that forces the will of 
millennia into new paths. To teach man the future of humanity as his will, 
as dependent on a man’s will, and to prepare for great exploits and 
comprehensive attempts at discipline and cultivation, so as to put an end to 
that horrifying domination of nonsense and contingency which up to now has been 
called “history”—the nonsense of the “greatest number” is only its latest 
form:—for that a new type of philosophers and commanders will at some point be 
necessary, whose image will make all hidden, fearsome, and benevolent spirits on 
earth appear pale and dwarfish. The image of such leaders is what hovers before our eyes:—may 
I say that out loud, you free spirits? The conditions which we must partly 
create and partly exploit for the origin of these leaders, the presumed ways and 
trials thanks to which a soul might grow to such height and power to feel the compulsion for 
these tasks, a revaluation of values under whose new pressure and hammer a 
conscience would be hardened, a heart transformed to bronze, so that it might 
endure the weight of such responsibility and, on the other hand, the necessity 
for such leaders, the terrifying danger that they might not appear or could fail 
and degenerate—these are our real worries, the things that make us 
gloomy. Do you know that, you free spirits? These are the heavy, distant 
thoughts and thunderstorms which pass over the heaven of our life. 
There are few pains as severe as having once seen, guessed, and felt how an 
extraordinary man has gone astray and degenerated, but someone who has the rare 
eye for the overall danger that “man” himself is degenerating, someone 
who, like us, has recognized the monstrous accident which has played its game up 
to this point with respect to the future of humanity—a game in which there was 
no hand, not even a “finger of god,” playing along!—someone who divines the fate 
which lies hidden in the idiotic innocence and the blissful trust in “modern 
ideas,” and even more in the entire Christian-European morality, such a man 
suffers from an anxiety which cannot be compared with any other—with one look, 
in fact, he grasps everything that still might be cultivated in man, 
given a favourable combination and increase of powers and tasks; he knows with 
all the knowledge of his conscience how the greatest possibilities for man have 
not yet been exhausted and how often the type man has already stood up to 
mysterious decisions and new paths:—he knows even better, from his own most 
painful memory, what wretched things have so far usually broken apart a 
developing being of the highest rank, shattered him, sunk him, and made him 
pathetic. The overall degeneration of man, down to what nowadays shows 
up in the socialist fools and flat heads, as their “man of the future”—as their 
ideal!—this degeneration and diminution of man to a perfect herd animal (or, as 
they say, to a man of “free society”), this beastialization of man into a dwarf 
animal of equal rights and claims is possible—no doubt of that! Anyone 
who has once thought this possibility through to its conclusion understands one 
more horror than other people do—and perhaps a new task, as well! . . .
 
 
NOTES
 
(1) Stoicism: a Greek school of 
philosophy from the third century BC. It stressed the importance of overcoming 
one’s destructive emotions; Port Royal: a convent which became the centre of 
Jansenism, a challenge within the Catholic Church in the seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries. [Back to 
Text]
 
(2) The Greek alphabet in Nietzsche’s 
phrase (προσθε Πλατων οπιθεν Πλεσση τε Χιμαιρα) 
has here been transliterated into the Roman alphabet; Chimera: a 
fabulous Greek monster, with the head of a lion, the mid-section of a goat, and 
a dragon’s tail. [Back to Text]
 
(3) René Descartes (1596-1650), 
French philosopher and mathematician, one of the most important figures in the 
development of modern science and philosophy. [Back 
to Text]
 
(4) Cagliostro (1743-1795), a 
notorious Italian fraud; Catiline: Lucius Sergius Catilina (108-62 BC), 
a contemporary of Julius Caesar, famous as a devious political conspirator. [Back 
to Text]
 
(5) Publius Cornelius Tacitus 
(56-117), famous Roman historian. [Back 
to Text]
 
(6) Cesare Borgia (1475-1507), 
Italian statesman and general well known for his ruthlessness and duplicity. [Back 
to Text]
 
(7) Johann Wolfgang von Goethe: 
German’s greatest literary figure; Hafiz (c. 1325-1389), Persian poet 
and theologian. [Back to Text]
 
(8) 
Alcibiades: (450-404 BC), charismatic Athenian politician and general; 
Julius Caesar (100-44 BC), prominent Roman politician and general; 
Frederick II (1194-1250), Holy Roman Emperor of the Hohenstaufen dynasty, 
an extraordinarily gifted and powerful medieval figure; Leonardo da Vinci 
(1452-1519), an Italian painter, engineer, and inventor, one of the most amazing 
geniuses of the Renaissance. [Back 
to Text]


============================================================
Part 6: We Scholars
============================================================

Friedrich Nietzsche

BEYOND GOOD AND EVIL
 
Translated by Ian Johnston, Vancouver Island University, 
Nanaimo, British Columbia, Canada
 
Students, teachers, artists, and members of the 
general public may download and distribute this text without permission and 
without charge. They may also freely edit the text for their own purposes. All 
commercial use of this translation, however, is forbidden without the permission 
of the translator. For comments and questions, please contact 
Ian Johnston.
 
For a Rich Text Version (Word) of this text, please 
use the following link: 

Beyond Good and Evil [RTF] 
 
[Table 
of Contents for Beyond Good and Evil]
 
 
 PART SIX
WE SCHOLARS
 
204
 
At the risk that moralizing 
here also shows itself to be what it always has been—that is, an unabashed 
montrer ses plais [display of one’s wounds], as Balzac says—I’d like to 
dare to stand up against an unreasonable and harmful shift in rank ordering that 
nowadays, quite unnoticed and as if with the clearest conscience, threatens to 
establish itself between science and philosophy. I think that on the basis of 
our experience—experience means, as I see it, always bad experience?—we 
must have a right to discuss such a higher question of rank, so that we do not 
speak like blind people about colour or as women and artists do against science 
(“Oh, this nasty science!” their instinct and embarrassment sigh, “it always 
finds out what’s behind things”—). The declaration of independence of 
the scientific man, his emancipation from philosophy, is one of the subtler 
effects of the nature of and the trouble with democracy: today the 
self-glorification and self-exaltation of the scholar stand everywhere in full 
bloom and their finest spring—but that is still not intended to mean that in 
this case self-praise smells very nice. “Away with all masters!”—that’s what the 
instinct of the rabble wants here, too, and now that science has enjoyed its 
happiest success in pushing away theology, whose “handmaiden” it was for too 
long, it has the high spirits and stupidity to set about making laws for 
philosophy and to take its turn playing the “master” for once—what am I 
saying?—playing the philosopher. My memory—the memory of a scientific 
man, if you’ll permit me to say so!—is filled to bursting with the naiveté I 
have heard in arrogant remarks about philosophy and philosophers from young 
natural scientists and old doctors (not to mention from the most educated and 
most conceited of all scholars, the philologists and schoolmen, who are both of 
these thanks to their profession—). Sometimes it was a specialist and idler who 
in general instinctively resisted all synthetic tasks and capabilities; 
sometimes the industrious worker who had taken a whiff of the otium [leisure] and 
of the noble opulence within the spiritual household of the philosopher and, as 
he did so, felt himself restricted and diminished. Sometimes it was that colour 
blindness of the utilitarian man, who sees nothing in philosophy other than a 
series of refuted systems and an extravagant expense from which no one 
“receives any benefit.” Sometimes fear of disguised mysticism and of an 
adjustment to the boundaries of knowledge sprang up; sometimes the contempt for 
particular philosophers, which had unwittingly been generalized into a contempt 
for philosophy. Finally, among young scholars I most frequently found behind the 
arrogant belittlement of philosophy the pernicious effect of a philosopher 
himself, a man whom they had, in fact, generally ceased to follow, but without 
escaping the spell of his value judgments dismissing other 
philosophers—something which brought about a collective irritation with all 
philosophy. (For example, Schopenhauer’s effect on the most modern Germany seems 
to me to be something like this: with his unintelligent anger against Hegel he 
created a situation in which the entire last generation of Germans broke away 
from their connection to German culture, and this culture, all 
things well considered, was a high point in and a prophetic refinement of the historical 
sense.(1)
But Schopenhauer himself in this very 
matter was impoverished to the point of genius—unreceptive and un-German.) From 
a general point of view and broadly speaking, it may well have been, more than 
anything else, the human, all-too-human nature of the more recent philosophers 
themselves, in a word, their paltry spirit, which has most fundamentally damaged 
respect for philosophy and opened the gates to the instincts of the rabble. We 
should nonetheless acknowledge the extent to which the whole style of 
Heraclitus, Plato, Empedocles, and of whatever all those royal and splendid 
hermits of the spirit were called is absent from our modern world and how, given 
the sort of representatives of philosophy who nowadays, thanks to fashion, are 
just as much on top as at the bottom—in Germany, for example, the two lions of 
Berlin, the anarchist Eugen Dühring and the amalgamist Eduard von Hartmann—an 
honest man of science is entitled to feel that he is justifiably of a 
better sort, with a better descent. In particular, the sight of these mishmash 
philosophers who call themselves “reality philosophers” or “positivists” is 
capable of casting a dangerous mistrust into the soul of an ambitious young 
scholar: they are, in the best of cases, scholars and specialists 
themselves—that’s clear enough—they have been, in fact, 
collectively defeated and brought back under the rule of science.(2) 
At some time or other they wanted more from themselves, without having 
any right to this “more” and to its responsibilities—and now, in word and deed, 
they represent in a respectable, angry, vengeful way the lack of faith [den 
Unglauben] in the ruling task and masterfulness of philosophy. But 
finally—how could it be anything different? Science nowadays is in bloom, its 
face is filled with good conscience, while what all recent philosophy has 
gradually sunk to—this remnant of philosophy today—is busy generating suspicion 
and ill humour against itself, if not mockery and pity. Philosophy reduced to 
“theory of knowledge” is, in fact, nothing more than a tentative epochism [Epochistik] and 
a doctrine of abstinence: a philosophy which does not venture one step over the 
threshold and painstakingly denies itself the right to enter—that 
is philosophy at death’s door, an end, an agony, something pitiful! How could 
such a philosophy—rule!(3)
 
205
 
To tell the truth, there are so 
many varied dangers for the development of a philosopher today that we may well 
doubt whether this fruit can, in general, still grow ripe. The scope and the 
tower-building of the sciences have grown into something monstrous, and with 
these the probability that the philosopher has already grown tired while he is 
still learning or lets himself stop somewhere and “specialize,” so that he no 
longer reaches his full height, that is, high enough for an overview, for 
looking round, for looking down. Or else he reaches that point too 
late, when his best time and power are already over, or have become damaged, 
coarsened, and degenerate, so that his glance, his comprehensive value judgment, 
means little any more. The very refinement of his intellectual conscience 
perhaps allows him to hesitate along the way and to delay. He is afraid of being 
seduced into being a dilettante, a millipede, something with a thousand 
antennae. He knows too well that a man who has lost respect for himself may no 
longer give orders as a man of knowledge, may no longer lead. At that 
point, he would have to be willing to become a great actor, a philosophical 
Cagliostro and spiritual Pied Piper, in short, a seducer. In the end it’s a 
question of taste, even if it were not a question of conscience. Moreover, by 
way of doubling once again the difficulty for the philosopher, it comes to this: 
he demands from himself a judgment, a Yes or No, not about the sciences but 
about life and the value of living—he learns with reluctance to believe that he 
has a right or even a duty to make this judgment and that must seek his own path 
to that right and that belief only through the most extensive—perhaps the most 
disturbing, the most destructive—experiences, often hesitating, doubting, and 
saying nothing. As a matter of fact, the masses have for a long time mistaken 
and misidentified the philosopher, whether with the man of science and ideal 
scholar, or with the religiously elevated, desensualized, “unworldly” enthusiast 
drunk on God. If we hear anyone at all praised nowadays on the ground that he 
lives “wisely” or “like a philosopher,” that means almost nothing other than 
“prudently and on the sidelines.” Wisdom: that seems to the rabble to be some 
kind of escape, a means and a trick to pull oneself well out of a nasty game. 
But the real philosopher—as we see it, my friends?—lives “unphilosophically” and 
“unwisely,” above all imprudently, and feels the burden and the duty of 
a hundred attempts and temptations of life—he always puts himself at 
risk. He plays the wicked game. . . .
 
206
 
In comparison with a genius, 
that is, with a being who either engenders or gives birth, taking both 
words in their highest sense—the scholar, the average scientific man, always has 
something of the old maid about him, for, like the old maid, he does not 
understand the two most valuable things men do. In fact, for both scholars and 
old maids we concede, as if by way of compensation, that they are respectable—in 
their cases we stress respectability—and yet having to make this concession 
gives us the same sense of irritation. Let’s look more closely: What is the 
scientific man? To begin with, a man who is not a noble type. He has the virtues 
of a man who is not distinguished, that is, a type of person who is not a ruler, 
not authoritative, and also not self-sufficient. He has diligence, a patient 
endorsement of his position and rank, equanimity about and moderation in his 
abilities and needs. He has an instinct for people like him and for what people 
like him require, for example, that bit of independence and green meadows 
without which there is no peace in work, that demand for honour and 
acknowledgement (which assumes, first and foremost, recognition and the ability 
to be recognized—), that sunshine of a good name, that constant stamp of 
approval of his value and his utility, which is necessary to overcome again and 
again the inner suspicion at the bottom of the hearts of all dependent 
men and herd animals. The scholar also has, as stands to reason, the illnesses 
and bad habits of a non-noble type: he is full of petty jealousy and has a lynx 
eye for what is base in those natures whose heights are impossible for him to 
reach. He is trusting, but only as an individual who lets himself go but does 
not let himself flow. Before a person who is like a great stream he 
just stands there all the colder and more enclosed—his eye is then like a 
smooth, reluctant lake in which there is no longer any ripple of delight or 
sympathy. The worst and most dangerous thing of which a scholar is capable he 
gets from his instinctive sense of the mediocrity of his type, of that 
Jesuitical mediocrity, which spontaneously works for the destruction of the 
uncommon man and seeks to break every arched bow or—even better!—to relax it. 
That is, to unbend it, with consideration, of course, naturally with a 
flattering hand—to unbend it with trusting sympathy: that is the 
essential art of Jesuitism, which has always understood how to introduce itself 
as a religion of pity.—
 
207
 
No matter how gratefully we may 
accommodate ourselves to the objective spirit—and who has never been 
sick to death of everything subjective and its damnable ipsissimosity 
[references to itself]!—we must ultimately also learn caution concerning 
this gratitude and stop the exaggeration with which in recent years we have 
celebrated the depersonalizing of the spirit, emptying the self 
from the spirit, as if that were the goal in itself, redemption and 
transfiguration.(4) 
That’s what tends to happen, for example, in the pessimism school, which, for 
its part, has good reasons for awarding highest honour to “disinterested 
knowledge.” The objective man who no longer curses and grumbles like the 
pessimist, the ideal scholar, in whom the scientific instinct, after 
thousands of total and partial failures, all of a sudden comes into bloom and 
blossoms fully, is surely one of the most precious implements there are, but he 
belongs in the hands of someone more powerful. He is only a tool, we say. He is 
a mirror—he is no “end in himself.” The objective man is, in fact, a 
mirror: accustomed to submit before everything that wishes to be known, without 
any delight other than that available in knowing and “mirroring back”—he waits 
until something comes along and then spreads himself out tenderly so that even 
light footsteps and the spiritual essences slipping past are not lost on his 
surface and skin. What is still left of his “person” seems to him accidental, 
often a matter of chance, even more often disruptive, so completely has he 
himself become a conduit and reflection for strange shapes and events. He 
reflects about “himself” with effort and is not infrequently wrong. He readily 
gets himself confused with others. He makes mistakes concerning his own needs, 
and it is only here that he is coarse and careless. Perhaps he gets anxious 
about his health or about the pettiness and stifling atmosphere of wife and 
friends or about the lack of companions and society—indeed, he forces himself to 
think about his anxieties: but it’s no use! His thoughts have already wandered 
off to some more general example, and tomorrow he knows as little as he 
knew yesterday about how he might be helped. He has lost seriousness for 
himself—as well as time. He is cheerful, not from any lack of needs, 
but from a lack of fingers and handles for his own needs. His habitual 
concessions concerning all things and all experiences, the sunny and uninhibited 
hospitality with which he accepts everything which runs into him, his kind of 
thoughtless good will and dangerous lack of concern about Yes and No—alas, there 
are enough cases where he must atone for these virtues of his!—and as a human 
being he generally becomes far too easily the caput mortuum [worthless 
residue] of these virtues. If people want love and hate from him—I mean 
love and hate the way God, women, and animals understand them—he’ll do what he 
can and give what he can. But we should not be amazed when it doesn’t amount to 
much—when he reveals himself in these very matters as inauthentic, fragile, 
questionable, and rotten. His love is forced, his hate artificial, more a tour 
de force, a tiny vanity and exaggeration. He is genuine only as long as he 
is permitted to be objective: only in his cheerful comprehensiveness [Totalismus] is 
he still “nature” and “natural.” His mirror soul, always smoothing itself out, 
no longer knows how to affirm or deny. He does not command, and he does not 
destroy. “Je ne méprise presque rien” [There is almost 
nothing I despise]—he says with Leibnitz: we should not fail to hear 
and underestimate that presque [almost]!(5) 
Moreover, he is no model human being. He does not go ahead of anyone or behind. 
He places himself in general too far away to have a reason to take sides between 
good and evil. When people confused him for such a long time with the philosopher, 
with the Caesar-like breeder and powerhouses [Gewaltmenschen] of 
culture, they held him in much too high honour and overlooked the most essential 
thing about him—he is an instrument, something of a slave, although certainly 
the most sublime form of slave, but in himself nothing—presque rien [almost 
nothing]! The objective man is an instrument, an expensive, easily damaged 
and blunted tool for measurement and an artful arrangement of mirrors, something 
we should take care of and respect. But he is no goal, no way out or upward, no 
complementary human being in whom the rest of existence is justified, 
no conclusion—and even less a beginning, a procreation and first cause. He is 
nothing strong, powerful, self-assured, something that wants to be master. He is 
much rather merely a delicate, inflated, sensitive, and flexible pot for forms, 
which must first wait for some content and meaning or other, in order to “give 
itself a shape” consistent with it—usually a man without form and content, a 
“selfless” man. And thus also nothing for women, in parenthesi [in 
parenthesis].—
 
208
 
When a philosopher nowadays 
lets us know he is not a sceptic—I hope people have sensed this from the 
description of the objective spirit immediately above?—the whole world is 
unhappy to hear it. People look at him with some awe and would like to ask so 
much, to question . . . in fact, among timid listeners—and there are hordes of 
them today—from that point on he is considered dangerous. For them it is as if 
in his rejection of scepticism they heard coming from far away some evil 
threatening noise, as if a new explosive was being tested somewhere, spiritual 
dynamite, perhaps a newly discovered Russian nihilin, a pessimism 
bonae voluntatis [of good will], which does not merely say 
No and will No but—terrible to imagine!—acts No!(6) 
Against this form of “good will”—a will to a truly active denial of life—there 
is today, by general agreement, no better sleeping pill and sedative than 
scepticism, the peaceful, gentle, soporific poppy of scepticism, and even Hamlet is 
prescribed these days by contemporary doctors against the “spirit” and its 
underground rumblings. “Aren’t people’s ears all full enough already of wicked 
noises?” says the sceptic, as a friend of peace and quiet, almost as a sort of 
security police: “This subterranean No is terrifying! Be quiet at last, you 
pessimistic moles!” For the sceptic, this tender creature, is frightened all too 
easily. His conscience has been trained to twitch with every No, even with a 
hard, decisive Yes—to respond as if it had been bitten. Yes! And No!—that 
contradicts his morality. Conversely, he loves to celebrate his 
virtue with a noble abstinence, perhaps by saying with Montaigne, “What do I 
know?”(7) 
Or with Socrates, “I know that I know nothing.” Or “Here I do not trust myself. 
There is no door open to me here.” Or “Suppose the door was open, why go in 
right away?” Or “What use are all rash hypotheses? Not to make any hypotheses at 
all could easily be part of good taste. Must you be so keen immediately to 
straighten something crooked? Or to stop up every hole with some piece of 
oakum? Isn’t there time for that? Doesn’t time have time? O you devilish 
fellows, can’t you wait, even for a bit? What is 
unknown also has its attraction—the Sphinx is a Circe, too, and Circe also was a 
philosopher.”(8) 
In this way a sceptic consoles himself, and he certainly needs some consolation. 
For scepticism is the most spiritual expression of a certain multifaceted 
physiological condition which in everyday language is called weak nerves and 
infirmity. It occurs every time races or classes which have been separated from 
each other a long time suddenly and decisively cross breed. In the new 
generation, which has inherited in its blood, as it were, different standards 
and values, everything is restlessness, disturbance, doubt, experiment; the best 
forces have an inhibiting effect; even the virtues do not allow each other to 
grow and become strong; the body and soul lack equilibrium, a centre of gravity, 
a perpendicular self-assurance. But what is most profoundly sick and degenerates 
in such mixtures is the will. These people no longer know the 
independence in decision making, the bold sense of pleasure in willing—they have 
doubts about the “freedom of the will,” even in their dreams. Our Europe today, 
the scene of an insanely sudden attempt at radical mixing of classes and consequently of 
races, is as a result sceptical in all heights and depths, sometimes with that 
flexible scepticism which leaps impatiently and greedily from one branch to 
another, sometimes gloomy, like a cloud overloaded with question marks, and 
often sick to death of its will! Paralysis of the will—where nowadays do we not 
find this cripple sitting! And often how well dressed! In such a seductive 
outfit! This illness has the most beautifully splendid and deceitful clothing. 
For example, most of what presents itself in the display windows today as 
“objectivity,” “the practice of science,” “l’art pour l’art” [art 
for art’s sake], “purely disinterested knowledge” is only dressed up 
scepticism and paralysis of the will—I’ll stand by this diagnosis of the 
European disease. The sickness of the will has spread unevenly across Europe. It 
appears in its greatest and most varied forms where the culture has already been 
indigenous for the longest time, and it disappears to the extent that the 
“barbarian” still—or again—achieves his rights under the baggy clothing of 
Western culture. Thus, in contemporary France, we can conclude as easily as we 
can grasp it in our hands that the will is most seriously ill, and France, which 
has always had a masterful skill in transforming even the fateful changes in its 
spirit into something attractive and seductive, truly displays its cultural 
dominance over Europe today as the school and exhibition hall for all the charms 
of scepticism. The power to will and, indeed, to desire a will that lasts a long 
time, is already somewhat stronger in Germany, and in the north of Germany even 
more so than in the middle, but it’s significantly stronger in England, Spain, 
and Corsica. In Germany it’s bound up with apathy, and in those other places 
with hard heads—to say nothing of Italy, which is too young to know yet what it 
wants and which first must demonstrate whether it can will.—But it’s strongest 
and most amazing in that immense empire in between, where Europe, so to speak, 
flows back into Asia, that is, in Russia. There the power to will has for a long 
time lain dormant and built up, there the will waits menacingly—uncertain 
whether, to borrow a favourite phrase of our physicists today, it will be 
discharged as a will to negate or a will to affirm. It may require more than 
wars in India and developments in Asia for Europe to be relieved of its greatest 
danger; it will require inner revolutions, too, the breaking up of the empire 
into small bodies and, above all, the introduction of the parliamentary 
nonsense, along with every man’s duty to read his newspaper at breakfast. I’m 
not saying this because it’s what I want. The opposite would be closer to my 
heart—I mean such an increase in the Russian danger, that Europe would have to 
decide to become equally a threat, that is, it would have to acquire a will, 
by means of a new caste which would rule Europe, a long, fearful, individual 
will, which could set itself goals for thousands of years from now—so that 
finally the long spun-out comedy of its small states, together with  its 
multiple dynastic and democratic wills, would come to an end. The time for petty 
politics is over. The next century is already bringing on the battle for the 
mastery of the earth—the compulsion to grand politics.
 
209
 
The extent to which the new 
warlike age into which we Europeans have evidently entered may perhaps also be 
favourable to the development of another and stronger variety of scepticism—on 
that point I’d like to state my views only provisionally through a parable which 
friends of German history will understand easily enough. That harmless 
enthusiast for good-looking, tall grenadiers, who, as King of Prussia, brought 
into being a military and sceptical genius—and in the process basically created 
that new type of German who has just recently emerged victorious—the 
questionable and mad father of Frederick the Great—in one 
respect himself had the grip and lucky claw of genius.(9) 
He knew what Germany then needed, a lack which was a hundred times more 
worrisome and more urgent than some deficiency in culture and social style. His 
aversion to the young Frederick emerged from the anxiety of a profound instinct.
What was missing was men. And he suspected to his most bitter annoyance 
that his own son might not be man enough. On that point he was deceived, but who 
in his place would not have been deceived? He saw his son decline into atheism, esprit, the pleasure-loving 
frivolousness of witty Frenchmen:—he saw in the background the great blood 
sucker, the spider of scepticism. He suspected the incurable misery of a heart 
that is no longer hard enough for evil and for good, of a fractured will that no 
longer commands, is no longer capable of commanding. But in the 
meantime there grew up in his son that more dangerous and harder new form of 
scepticism—who knows how much it was encouraged by that very hatred of 
his father’s and by the icy melancholy of a will pushed into solitude?—the 
scepticism of daring masculinity, which is most closely related to the genius 
for war and conquest and which, in the shape of Frederick the Great, first 
gained entry into Germany. This scepticism despises and nonetheless grabs hold. 
It undermines and takes possession. It does not believe, but in so doing does 
not lose itself. It gives the spirit a dangerous freedom, but it keeps a firm 
grip on the heart. It is the German form of scepticism, which, as a 
constant Frederickianism [Fridericianismus] intensified into the 
highest spirituality, has brought Europe for some time under the dominion of the 
German spirit and its critical and historical mistrust. Thanks to the invincibly 
strong and tenacious masculine character of the great German philologists and 
historical critics (who, if we see them properly, were collectively also artists 
of destruction and subversion), gradually anew idea of the German spirit 
established itself, in spite of all the Romanticism in music and philosophy, an 
idea in which the characteristic of manly scepticism stepped decisively forward: 
it could be, for example, a fearlessness in the gaze, courage and hardness in 
the dissecting hand, a tough will for dangerous voyages of discovery, for 
expeditions to the spiritual North Pole under bleak and dangerous skies. There 
may well be good reasons why warm-blooded and superficial humanitarians cross 
themselves when confronted with this particular spirit: Michelet, not without a 
shudder, calls it cet esprit fataliste, ironique, 
méphistophélique [this fatalistic and ironic Mephistophelean spirit].(10) 
But if we want to sense how distinctive this fear of the “man” in the German 
spirit is, through which Europe was roused out of its “dogmatic slumber,” we 
might remember the earlier idea which it had to overthrow—and how it is still 
not so long ago that a masculine woman could dare, with unrestrained 
presumption, to recommend the Germans to the sympathy of 
Europe as gentle, good-hearted, weak-willed, poetical idiots.(11) 
Finally, we should understand with sufficient profundity Napoleon’s surprise 
when he happened to see Goethe: that reveals what people had thought about the 
“German spirit” for centuries. “Voilá un homme!” [There is a man!]—which 
is, in effect, saying: “That is really a man! And I had expected only a 
German!”—
 
210
 
Assuming, then, that in the 
image of the philosophers of the future there is some characteristic which 
raises the question whether they would not perhaps have to be sceptics, in the 
sense indicated immediately above, that would, nonetheless, indicate only one 
thing about them—and not what they themselves were. With just as much 
justification they could let themselves be called critics, and it’s certain they 
will be people who experiment. In the names with which I have ventured to 
christen them, I have already particularly emphasized experiments and their 
enjoyment in attempting experiments. Did I do this because, as critics in body 
and soul, they love to use experiments in a new, perhaps broader, perhaps more 
dangerous sense? In their passion for knowledge, will they have to go further 
with daring and painful experiments, than could be considered appropriate by the 
soft-hearted and mollycoddled taste of a democratic century? There is no doubt 
that these coming philosophers will be least of all able to rid themselves of 
those serious and not unobjectionable characteristics which separate the critic 
from the sceptic—I mean the certainty in the measure of value, the conscious use 
of a unity of method, the shrewd courage, the standing alone, and the ability to 
answer for themselves. In fact, they confess that they take delight in 
saying No and in dissecting things and in a certain thought-out cruelty, which 
knows how to guide the knife surely and precisely, even when the heart is still 
bleeding. They will be harder (and perhaps not always only on 
themselves) than humane people might wish; they will not get involved with the 
“truth,” so that the truth can “please” them or “elevate” them and “inspire” 
them:—by contrast, they will have little faith that the truth itself 
brings with it such emotional entertainment. They will smile, these strict 
spirits, if someone should declare in front of them, “That idea elevates me: how 
could it not be true?” or “That work delights me: how could it not be 
beautiful?” or, “That artist enlarges me; how could he not be great?”—Perhaps 
they are prepared not only to smile at but also to feel a genuine disgust for 
everything equally enthusiastic, idealisic, feminine and hermaphroditic. Anyone 
who knew how to follow them right into the secret chambers of their hearts would 
hardly find there any intention to reconcile “Christian feelings” with “the 
taste of antiquity” or even with “modern parliamentarianism” (a reconciliation 
which is said to be taking place even among philosophers in our very uncertain 
and therefore very conciliatory century). These philosophers of the future will 
demand not only of themselves critical discipline and every habit which leads to 
purity and strictness in things of the spirit: they could show them off as their 
own kind of jewellery—nonetheless, for all that they still do not wish to be 
called critics. It seems to them no small insult inflicted on philosophy when 
people decree, as they are so fond of doing today, “Philosophy itself is 
criticism and critical science—and nothing else!” This evaluation of philosophy 
may enjoy the applause of all French and German positivists (—and it’s possible 
that it would have flattered even the heart and taste of Kant: we 
should remember the title of his major works—): our new philosophers will 
nonetheless affirm that critics are the tools of the philosopher and for that 
very reason, the fact that they are tools, are still a long way from being 
philosophers themselves! Even the great Chinaman of Königsberg [Kant] 
was only a great critic.
 
211
 
I insist on the following 
point: people should finally stop confusing philosophical labourers and 
scientific people in general with philosophers—in this particular matter we 
should strictly assign “to each his due” and not give too much to the former and 
much too little to the latter. It may be that the education of a real 
philosopher requires that he himself has once stood on all of those steps where 
his servants, the scientific labourers in philosophy, remain—and must 
remain. Perhaps he must himself have been critic and sceptic and dogmatist and 
historian and, in addition, poet and collector and traveller and solver of 
riddles and moralist and prophet and “free spirit” and almost everything, in 
order to move through the range of human worth and feelings of value and to be able to 
look with a variety of different eyes and consciences from the heights into 
every distance, from the depths into every height, from the corners into every 
expanse. But all these things are only preconditions for his task: the task 
itself requires something different—it demands that he create values. 
Those philosophical labourers on the noble model of Kant and Hegel have to 
establish some large collection of facts concerning estimates of value—that is, 
earlier statements of value, creations of value that have become dominant and 
for a while have been called “truths”—and press them into formulas, whether in 
the realm of logic or politics (morality) or art. The 
task of these researchers is to make everything that has happened and which has 
been valued up to now clear, easy to imagine, intelligible, and manageable, to 
shorten everything lengthy, even “time” itself, and to overpower the 
entire past, a huge and marvellous task, in the service of which every 
sophisticated pride and every tough will can certainly find satisfaction. But 
the real philosophers are commanders and lawgivers: they say “That is how 
it should be!” They determine first the “Where to?” and the “What for?” 
of human beings, and, as they do this, they have at their disposal the 
preliminary work of all philosophical labourers, all those who have overpowered 
the past—they reach with their creative hands to grasp the future. In that 
process, everything that is and has been becomes a means for them, an 
instrument, a hammer. Their “knowing” is creating; their creating is 
establishing laws; their will to truth is—will to power.—Are there such 
philosophers nowadays? Have there ever been such philosophers? Is it not necessary that 
there be such philosophers? . . . .
 
212
 
It is increasingly apparent to 
me that the philosopher, who is necessarily a man of tomorrow and the 
day after, has in every age found and had to find himself in 
contradiction to his today: his enemy every time was the ideal of the day. Up to 
now all these extraordinary promoters of humanity whom we call philosophers and 
who themselves seldom felt that they were friends of wisdom but rather 
embarrassing fools and dangerous question marks, have discovered that their 
work, their hard, unsought for, inescapable task—but finally the greatness of 
their work—was for them to be the bad conscience of their age. By applying the 
knife of vivisection directly on the chest of the virtues of the day, 
they revealed what their own secret was—to know a new greatness for 
man, to know a new untrodden path to increasing his greatness. Every time they 
exposed how much hypocrisy, laziness, letting oneself go, and letting oneself 
fall, how many lies lay hidden under the most highly honoured type of their 
contemporary morality, how much virtue was out of date; every time they 
said, “We must go there, out there, where you nowadays are least at 
home.” Faced with a world of “modern ideas” that would like to banish everyone 
into a corner and a “specialty,” a philosopher, if there could be a philosopher 
these days, would be compelled to establish the greatness of mankind, the idea 
of “greatness,” directly on the basis of man’s range and multiplicity, of his 
integrated totality in the midst of diversity. He would even determine value and 
rank according to how much and how many different things one person could endure 
and take upon himself, how far he could extend his own responsibility. 
Today contemporary taste and virtue weaken and dilute the will; nothing is as 
topical as the weakness of the will. Thus, in the ideal of the philosopher it is 
precisely the strength of will, hardness, and the ability to make lengthy 
decisions that must be part of the idea “greatness”—with just as much 
justification as the opposite doctrine and the ideal of a stupid, denying, 
humble, selfless humanity was appropriate to an opposite age, one which 
suffered, like the sixteenth century, from the bottled-up energy of its will and 
from the wildest torrents and storm tides of selfishness. At the time of 
Socrates, among nothing but men of exhausted instincts, among conservative old 
Athenians, who allowed themselves to go “for happiness,” as they said, and for 
pleasure, as they did, and who, in the process, still kept mouthing the old 
splendid words to which their lives no longer gave them any right, perhaps 
irony was essential for greatness in the soul, that malicious Socratic 
confidence of the old doctor and member of the rabble, who sliced ruthlessly 
into his own flesh, as into the flesh and heart of the “noble man,” with a look 
which spoke intelligibly enough “Don’t play act in front of me! Here—we are the 
same!” By contrast, today, when the herd animal in Europe is the only one who 
attains and distributes honours, when “equality of rights” all too easily could 
get turned around into equality of wrongs—what I mean is into a common war 
against everything rare, strange, privileged, the higher man, the higher soul, 
the higher duty, the higher responsibility, the creative fullness of power and 
mastery—these days the sense of being noble, of willing to be for oneself, of 
being able to be different, of standing alone, and of having to live by one’s 
own initiative—these are part of the idea “greatness,” and the philosopher will 
reveal something of his own ideal if he proposes “The man who is to be the 
greatest is the one who can be the most solitary, the most hidden, the most 
deviant, the man beyond good and evil, lord of his virtues, a man lavishly 
endowed with will—this is precisely what (T)greatness(T) is to be called: 
capable of being as much an integrated totality as he is something multifaceted, 
as wide as he is full.” And to ask the question again: today—is greatness possible?
 
213
 
What a philosopher is, that’s 
difficult to learn because it cannot be taught: one must “know” it out of 
experience—or one should have the pride not to know it. But the fact 
that these days the whole world talks of things about which it cannot have 
any experience holds true above all and in the worst way for philosophers and 
philosophical situations: very few people are acquainted with them and are 
allowed to know them, and all popular opinions about them are false. And so, for 
example, that genuine philosophical association of a bold, exuberant 
spirituality, which speeds along presto, with a dialectical strictness 
and necessity which takes no false steps is unknown to most thinkers and 
scholars from their own experience, and hence, if someone wishes to talk about 
it in front of them, they find it implausible. They take the view that every 
necessity is an affliction, a painful requirement they must follow, a 
compulsion, and thinking itself they consider something slow, hesitant, almost 
laborious, and often enough “worth the sweat of the noble”—but under no 
circumstances something light, divine, closely related to dancing and high 
spirits! “Thinking” and “taking an issue seriously,” “considering it 
gravely”—among them these belong together: that’s the only way they have 
“experienced” thinking. In such matters artists may have a more subtle sense of 
smell. They know only too well that at the very moment when they no longer 
create “voluntarily,” when they make everything by necessity, their sense of 
freedom, refinement, authority, of creative setting up, disposing, and shaping 
is at its height—in short, that necessity and the “freedom of the will” are then 
one thing for them. Ultimately there is a rank ordering of spiritual conditions, 
with which the rank ordering of problems is consistent, and the highest problems 
shove back without mercy anyone who dares approach them without having been 
predestined to solve them with the loftiness and power of his spirituality. What 
help is it if nimble heads of nondescript people or, as happens so often these 
days, clumsy honest mechanics and empiricists with their plebeian ambition press 
forward into the presence of such problems and, as it were, up to the “court of 
courts”! But on such carpets crude feet may never tread: there is still a 
primeval law of things to look after that: the doors remain closed to these 
people who push against them, even if they bang or crush their heads against 
them! One must be born for every lofty world: to put the matter more clearly, 
one must be cultivated for it: one has a right to philosophy—taking the 
word in its grand sense—only thanks to one’s descent, one’s ancestors; here, as 
well, “blood” decides. For a philosopher to arise, many generations must have 
done the preparatory work. Every single one of his virtues must have been 
acquired, cared for, passed on, assimilated, and not just the bold, light, 
delicate walking and running of his thoughts, but, above all, the willingness to 
take on great responsibilities, the loftiness of the look which dominates and 
gazes down, the feeling of standing apart from the crowd and its duties and 
virtues, the affable protecting and defending of what is misunderstood and 
slandered, whether god or devil, the desire for and practice of great justice, 
the art of commanding, the breadth of will, the slow eye that seldom admires, 
seldom looks upward, seldom loves. . . .
 
NOTES
 
(1) Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel
(1770-1831), important German idealist philosopher. [Back 
to Text]
 
(2) Eugen Dühring (1833-1921) 
and Eduard von Hartmann (1842-1906): two well-known philosophers in 
Nietzsche’s day. [Back to Text]
 
(3) Epochism means dividing 
time or history up into epochs. [Back 
to Text]
 
(4) Nietzsche coined the word Ipsissimosität from 
the Latin ipsissima meaning very own. [Back 
to Text]
 
(5) Gottfried Wilhelm Leibnitz 
(1646-1716), German philosopher, diplomat, and mathematician.
[Back to Text]
 
(6) nihilin: a word Nietzsche 
invents to designate some new form of strong pessimism discovered like some as 
yet unknown chemical. [Back to 
Text]
 
(7) Michel de Montaigne 
(1533-1592), French diplomat and writer. [Back 
to Text]
 
(8) Circe: a goddess in 
Homer’s Odyssey who has magical powers to turn men into swine. [Back 
to Text]]
 
(9) Frederick the Great 
(1712-1786), son of Frederick William I, King of Prussia. Through his military 
and political skill he greatly enlarged Prussian territory. [Back 
to Text]
 
(10) Jules Michelet 
(1798-1874), a French historian. Mephistopheles is the chief agent of the Devil 
in Goethe’s Faust. [Back to 
Text]
 
(11) The 
woman is Madame de Staël, a French writer who produced a book about German and 
the Germans in 1810. [Back to 
Text]


============================================================
Part 7: Our Virtues
============================================================

Friedrich Nietzsche

BEYOND GOOD AND EVIL
 
Translated by Ian Johnston, Vancouver Island University, 
Nanaimo, British Columbia, Canada
 
Students, teachers, artists, and members of the 
general public may download and distribute this text without permission and 
without charge. They may also freely edit the text for their own purposes. All 
commercial use of this translation, however, is forbidden without the permission 
of the translator. For comments and questions, please contact 
Ian Johnston.
 
For a Rich Text Version (Word) of this text, please 
use the following link: 

Beyond Good and Evil [RTF] 
 
[Table 
of Contents for Beyond Good and Evil]
 
 
 PART SEVEN
OUR VIRTUES
 
214
 
Our virtues? It’s probable that 
we, too, still have our virtues, although it’s reasonable to think that they 
will not be those naive, four-square virtues for whose sake we respect our 
grandfathers, at the same time holding them somewhat at arm’s length. We 
Europeans of the day-after-tomorrow, we first-born of the twentieth century—with 
all our dangerous curiosity, our multiplicity and art of disguise, our tender 
and, so to speak, sweetened cruelty in spirit and sense—if we’re to 
have virtues, we’ll presumably have only those which have learned best how to 
tolerate our most secret and most heartfelt inclinations, our most burning 
needs. So then let’s look for them in our labyrinths!—where, as we know, so many 
different things get lost, so many different things disappear forever. And is 
there anything more beautiful than seeking out one’s own virtues? 
Doesn’t this already almost mean that one believes in one’s own 
virtues? But this phrase “believe in one’s own virtues”—isn’t that basically the 
same thing people in earlier times used to call their “good conscience,” that 
long worthy pigtail of an idea which our grandfathers hung behind their heads 
and often enough behind their understanding as well? Thus, it seems to follow 
that, no matter how little we may think of ourselves as old fashioned and as 
respectable as our grandfathers in other things, in one respect we are 
nonetheless the worthy grandsons of these grandfathers, we last Europeans with 
good consciences: we, too, still carry their pigtail.—Alas, if you knew how 
soon, how very soon—things will be otherwise! . . .
 
215
 
Just as it sometimes happens in 
the realm of the stars that two suns determine the orbit of a planet, and in 
some cases suns of different colours cast their lights around a single planet, 
sometimes red light, sometimes green light, and then again lighting it both at 
once, flooding it with many colours, in the same way we modern men, thanks to 
the complicated mechanics of our “starry heaven,” are determined by 
different moralities; our actions change their lights into different 
colours. They are rarely unambiguous—and there are enough cases where we carry 
out actions with many colours.
 
216
 
Love one’s enemies? I think 
that has been well learned. These days it happens thousands of times, in small 
and big things. In fact, now and then something even higher and more sublime 
takes place—we learn to despise when we love, and precisely when we 
love best: but all this is unconscious, without any fuss, without any pomp and 
circumstance, rather with that modesty and secret goodness which prohibit solemn 
words and virtuous formulas. Morality as a pose—that offends our taste 
nowadays. This is also a step forward, just as it was a step forward for our 
fathers when religion as a pose finally offended their taste, including 
hostility to and a Voltairean bitterness against religion (and everything that 
formerly went along with the sign language of free thinkers). It’s the music in 
our conscience, the dance in our spirit, that makes all puritanical litanies, 
all moral sermons and petty bourgeois respectability sound out of tune.
 
217
 
Be careful of those who set a 
high value on people’s ascribing to them moral tact and refinement in drawing 
moral distinctions! They never forgive us if they ever make a mistake in front 
of us (or even against us)—inevitably they become people who 
instinctively slander and damage us, even when they still remain our 
“friends.”—Blessed are the forgetful, for they are “done” with their stupidities 
as well.
 
218
 
Psychologists in France—and 
where else nowadays are there still any psychologists?—have not yet stopped 
enjoying the bitter and manifold pleasure they get from bêtise bourgoise 
[bourgeois stupidity]. It’s as if—but enough, by doing that they are 
revealing something. For example, Flaubert, that worthy citizen 
of Rouen, finished up by seeing, hearing, and tasting nothing else any more.(1) 
That was his kind of self-torture and more refined cruelty. Now, for a 
change—since this is becoming tedious—I recommend something else for our 
delight, and that is the unconscious shiftiness with which all good, thick, 
well-behaved, average spirits react to higher spirits and the work they do, that 
subtle, barbed, Jesuitical shiftiness, which is a thousand times more subtle 
than the understanding and taste of these middle-class people in their best 
moments—or even than the understanding of their victims as well. This is 
repeated evidence for the fact that “instinct” is the most intelligent of all 
forms of intelligence discovered so far. Briefly put, you psychologists should 
study the philosophy of the “rule” in its war against the “exception.” There 
you’ll see a drama good enough for the gods and divine maliciousness! Or, to put 
the matter still more clearly: practise vivisection on the “good person,” on the 
“homo bonae voluntatis” [man of good will]. . . on yourselves!
 
219
 
Moral judgment and condemnation 
are the favourite revenge of the spiritually limited against those who are less 
limited, as well as a form of compensation for the fact that nature has thought 
ill of them, and finally a chance to acquire some spirit and become 
refined:—malice spiritualizes. Deep in their hearts they feel good that there is 
a standard before which those plentifully endowed with spiritual wealth and 
privilege also stand, just like them:—they fight for the “equality of all before 
God” and almost require a faith in God just for that purpose. Among 
them are the most powerful opponents of atheism. Anyone who said to them “A high 
spirituality cannot be compared with any of the solidity and respectability of a 
man who is merely moral” would make them furious:—I’ll be careful not to do 
this. I’d much prefer to flatter them with my theory that a high spirituality 
itself arises only as the final offspring of moral qualities, that it is a 
synthesis of all those states which are ascribed to the “merely moral” man, 
after they have been acquired one by one through long discipline and practice, 
perhaps through an entire chain of generations, that high spirituality is simply 
the spiritualization of justice and of that kind severity which knows that its 
task is to maintain the order of rank in the world, not only among 
human beings, but even among things.
 
220
 
Given the present popular 
praise of the “disinterested person,” we must bring to mind, perhaps not without 
a certain danger, what it is that really interests the populace, and 
what, in general, are those things about which the common man is fundamentally 
and deeply concerned, including educated people, even scholars, and, unless all 
appearances deceive, perhaps philosophers as well. From that fact it turns out 
that the vast majority of what interests and charms more refined and more 
discriminating tastes and every higher nature appears completely “uninteresting” 
to the average man. Nonetheless, when he notices a devotion to these things, he 
calls it “désintéressé” [disinterested] and wonders to himself 
how it is possible to act “without interest.” There have been philosophers who 
have known how to confer a seductive and mystically transcendental form of 
expression upon this popular wonder (perhaps because in their own experience 
they knew nothing of higher nature?)—instead of presenting what’s reasonable—the 
honest naked truth that the “disinterested” action is a very interesting and 
interested action, provided . . . . “And love?”—What’s that! Is even an action 
done from love supposed to be “unegoistic”? You idiots—! “What about the praise 
for the person who makes a sacrifice?”—But anyone who has really made a 
sacrifice knows that he wanted and got something for it—perhaps something of 
himself in exchange for something of himself—he gave up here in order to have 
more there, perhaps in general to be more or at least to feel himself as “more.” 
But this is a realm of questions and answers in which a more discriminating 
spirit does not like to remain; here even truth finds it so very necessary to 
suppress her yawns when she is required to give an answer. In the last analysis, 
truth is a woman: we should not treat her with force.
 
221
 
It so happens, said a 
moralistic pedant and pettifogger, that I respect and honour a selfless man, not 
because he is unselfish but because he seems to me to have a right to be of use 
to another man at his own expense. All right, but it’s always a question of who he is 
and who the other is. For example, in a man who is marked out and made 
for command, self-denial and modest holding back would not be a virtue but a 
waste of virtue: that’s what it seems like to me. Every unegoistic morality 
which takes itself unconditionally and applies itself to everyone not only sins 
against taste; it also provokes sins of omission, one more seduction 
under the guise of philanthropy—and, in particular, a seduction for and injury 
to the higher, rarer, and privileged people. We must compel moralities first and 
foremost to give way before the order of rank. We must force into the 
conscience of moralities an awareness of their own presumption—until they 
finally are collectively clear about the fact that it is immoral to say 
“What is right for one man is fair to another.” As for my moralistic pedant and bonhomme [fine 
fellow]: does he deserve it when people laugh at him as he advises 
moralities in this way to become moral? But people should not be too much in the 
right if they want those who laugh on their side. A small grain of 
wrong is even a part of good taste.
 
222
 
Nowadays wherever people preach 
pity—and, if one listens correctly, there is now no other religion preached 
anymore—the psychologist should keep his ears open: through all the vanity, 
through all the noise characteristic of these preachers (like all preachers), 
he’ll hear a hoarse, moaning, genuine sound of self-contempt. It’s part 
of that process of making Europe dark and ugly, which has been growing now for a 
hundred years (and whose first symptoms were already placed in the documentary 
record in a thoughtful letter from Galiani to Madame d’Epinay): unless it’s 
the cause of this development!(2) 
The man of “modern ideas,” that proud ape, is uncontrollably dissatisfied with 
himself—that’s established. He’s suffering, and his vanity wants him only to 
suffer “with others” . . .
 
223
 
At any rate, the hybrid 
European—a reasonably ugly plebeian, all in all—needs a costume. He needs 
history as a storeroom of costumes. Naturally, he then notices that none of them 
fits his body properly—he changes and changes. Just take a look at the 
nineteenth century, at the rapid preferences and changes in the masquerades of 
style, along with the moments of despair over the fact that “nothing suits” us—. 
It’s no use presenting oneself romantically or classically or in a Christian or 
Florentine or Baroque or “national” manner in moribus et artibus [in customs 
and the arts]—it “doesn’t suit us”! But the “spirit,” in particular the 
“historical spirit,” also sees an advantage for itself even in this despair: 
over and over again a new piece of the past and of a foreign place is tested, 
put on, set aside, packed away, and above all studied:—we are the first 
age studious about the issue of “costume”: I mean in moralities, articles of 
faith, tastes in art, and religions, prepared as no other time ever was for a 
carnival in the grand style, for the most spiritual revelry of laughter and 
high spirits, for a transcendental height of the loftiest nonsense and 
Aristophanic mockery of the world.(3) 
Perhaps this is the very place where we are still discovering the realm of our 
own inventiveness, that realm where we too can still be original as 
some sort of satirists of world history and God’s clowns—perhaps when nothing 
else today has a future, perhaps it’s our very laughter that still has 
one!
 
224
 
The historical sense (or 
the ability to make quick conjectures about the rank ordering of value judgments 
according to which a people, a society, or a person has lived, the “instinct for 
divination” concerning the relations among these value judgments, for the 
connections between the authority of values and the authority of forces at 
work)—this historical sense which we Europeans claim as our distinctive 
characteristic, came to us as a consequence of the enthralling and wild semi-barbarianism into 
which Europe was plunged through the democratic intermixing of the classes and 
races—only the nineteenth century knows this sense as its sixth sense. The past 
of every form and manner of living, of cultures which earlier lay right 
alongside each other or over each other, flows, thanks to this intermixing, out 
into us “modern souls”; our instincts now run back all over the place; we 
ourselves are a kind of chaos. Finally “the spirit,” as I have said, sees an 
advantage for itself in this. Because of our semi-barbarism in body and desires 
we have secret entrances in all directions, in a way no noble age ever 
possessed, above all entrances to the labyrinth of unfinished cultures and to 
every semi-barbarism that has ever been present on earth. Inasmuch as the most 
considerable part of human civilization up to now has been semi-barbarism, the 
“historical sense” almost means the sense and instinct for everything, the taste 
and tongue for everything. And that establishes right away that it’s an ignoble sense. 
For example, we enjoy Homer again. It’s perhaps our happiest advance that we 
understand how to appreciate Homer, something which men of a noble culture do 
not know and did not know how to appropriate so easily and which they hardly 
allowed themselves to enjoy (for example, the French of the seventeenth century, 
like Saint Evremond, who criticized him for his esprit vaste [vast 
and all-encompassing spirit], and even Voltaire, their final chorus).(4) 
That very emphatic Yes and No of their palate, their easily aroused disgust, 
their hesitant holding back with respect to everything strange, their fear of 
bad taste, even of lively curiosity, and, in general, that reluctance of every 
noble and self-satisfied culture to acknowledge a new desire, a dissatisfaction 
with what is its own, an admiration for something foreign; all this makes them 
hostile even to the best things of the world which are not their own property 
or could not become their plunder—and no sense is more incomprehensible 
to such people than the historical sense and its obsequious plebeian curiosity. 
The situation is no different with Shakespeare, that amazing 
Spanish-Moorish-Saxon synthesis of taste, who would have made an old Athenian, 
one of Aeschylus’ friends, laugh himself almost to death or irritated him. But 
we take up this wild display of colours, this confusion of the most delicate, 
coarsest, and most artificial things with a secret confidence and good will. We 
enjoy him as the very refinement of art saved especially for us and, in the 
process, do not allow ourselves to be disturbed at all by the unpleasant stink 
and the proximity of the English rabble, in which Shakespeare’s art and taste 
live, no more so than on the Chiaja in Naples, where we go on our way
with all our senses enchanted and keen, no matter how much the 
sewers of the rabble’s quarter fill the air.(5) 
We men of the “historical sense,” we have our corresponding virtues. That’s 
beyond dispute. We are undemanding, unselfish, modest, brave, full of 
self-control, full of devotion, very grateful, very patient, very obliging:—with 
all that we are perhaps not very “tasteful.” Let’s finally admit it to 
ourselves: what’s hardest for us men of “historical sense” to grasp, to feel, to 
taste, and to love, what we’re basically prejudiced against and almost hostile 
to is precisely the perfection and ultimate maturity in every culture and art, 
what is really noble in works or in men, the moment when their sea is smooth and 
they have halcyon self-sufficiency, the gold and the coolness displayed by all 
things that have perfected themselves. Perhaps the great virtue of the 
historical sense stands in a necessary opposition to good taste, at 
least to the very best taste, and we can reproduce in ourselves only with 
difficulty and hesitantly, only by forcing ourselves, the small, short, and 
highest strokes of happiness and transfigurations of human life, as they 
suddenly shine out here and there: those moments and miracles where a great 
force voluntarily remains standing before the boundless and unlimited—where an 
excess of sophisticated pleasure was enjoyed in sudden restraint and 
petrifaction, in standing firm and holding oneself steady on still trembling 
ground. Restraint is strange to us. Let’s admit that to ourselves. Our 
itch is the particular itch for the unlimited, the unmeasured. Like the rider on 
a steed snorting its way forward we let the reins fall before the infinite, we 
modern men, we half-barbarians—and reach our bliss only in a place 
where we are most—in danger.
 
225
 
Whether hedonism, pessimism, 
utilitarianism, or eudaimonism—all these ways of thinking which measure the 
value of things according to pleasure and pain, that is, 
according to attendant circumstances and secondary issues, are ways of thinking 
in the foreground and naiveté, which anyone who knows about creative forces 
and an artistic conscience will look down on, not without ridicule and not 
without pity. Pity for you!—that is, of course, not pity the way you 
mean the term: not pity for social “distress,” for “society” and its sick and 
unsuccessful people, for those depraved and broken down from the start—they’re 
lying on the ground all around us—even less is it pity for the grumbling 
oppressed, the rebellious slave classes, who strive for mastery—they call it 
“Freedom.” Our pity is a higher compassion which sees further—we see 
how man is making himself smaller, how you are making him 
smaller!—and there are moments when we look at your very pity with an 
indescribable anxiety, when we defend ourselves against this pity—when we find 
your seriousness more dangerous than any carelessness. You want, if possible—and 
there is no more fantastic “if possible”—to do away with suffering. 
What about us? It does seem that we would prefer it to be even greater 
and worse than it ever was! Wellbeing, the way you understand it—that is no 
goal. To us that looks like an end, a condition which immediately makes 
human beings laughable and contemptible—something which makes their destruction desirable! 
The discipline of suffering, of great suffering—do you not realize that 
up to this point it is only this discipline that has created every 
enhancement in man up to now? That tension of a soul in misery which develops 
its strength, its trembling when confronted with great destruction, its 
inventiveness and courage in bearing, holding out against, interpreting, and 
using misfortune, and whatever has been conferred upon it by way of profundity, 
secrecy, masks, spirit, cunning, and greatness—has that not been given to it 
through suffering, through the discipline of great suffering? In human beings, creature and creator are 
united. In man is material stuff, fragments, excess, clay, mud, folly, and 
chaos, but in man there is also creator, artist, hammer hardness, the divinity 
of the spectator and the seventh day—do you understand this contrast? And do you 
understand that your pity for the “creature in man” is for what must be 
formed, broken, forged, torn apart, burned, annealed, and purified—for what must 
necessarily suffer and should suffer? And our pity—do 
you not understand for whom our reverse pity matters, when it protects 
itself against your pity as against the most wretched of all mollycoddling and 
weakness?—And so pity against pity!—But, to say the point again, there 
are higher problems than all those of enjoyment, suffering, and pity, and every 
philosophy that leads only to these is something naive.—
 
226
 
We immoral ones!—This 
world which we are concerned with, in which we have to fear and love, 
this almost invisible and inaudible world of sophisticated commanding and 
sophisticated obeying, a world of “almost” from every way of looking at 
it—entangled, insidious, cutting, and tender—yes, this world is well defended 
against clumsy spectators and familiar curiosity! We have been woven into a 
strict yarn and shirt of duties and cannot get out of it—in that 
respect we are simply “men of duty,” we as well! Now and then, it’s true, we 
dance in our “chains” and between our “swords.” More often, it’s no 
less true, we gnash our teeth about it and are impatient with all the secret 
hardness of our fate. But we can do what we like: the fools and appearance speak 
against us: “They are men without duty.”—We always have fools and 
appearance against us!
 
227
 
If we assume that honesty is a 
virtue of ours from which we cannot escape, we free spirits—well, we’ll want to 
work on it with all our malice and love and not grow tired of “making ourselves 
perfect” in our virtue, the only one which remains ours: may its 
brilliance one day remain lying like a gilded, blue, mocking evening light over 
this aging culture and its dull and dark seriousness! And if nonetheless our 
honesty one day grows tired and sighs and stretches its limbs and finds us too 
hard and would like to have things better, lighter, more loving, like a pleasing 
vice, let us remain hard, we final Stoics! And let us send her by way 
of help only what we have in us of devilry—our disgust with what is crude and 
approximate, our “nitimur in vetitum” [we seek what is forbidden], 
our courage as adventurers, our shrewd and discriminating curiosity, our most 
refined, most disguised, and most spiritual will to power and overcoming of the 
world which roams and swarms greedily around all realms of the future—let us 
come to the aid of our “god” with all our “devils”! It is likely that because of 
this people fail to recognize us and get us confused with others. What does that 
matter? People will say “Their ‘honesty’—that’s their devilry, nothing more than 
that.” What does that matter? Even if they were right! Haven’t all gods up to 
now been like that, devils who became holy by being re-christened? And what 
finally do we know about ourselves? And that spirit which guides us, what does 
it want to be called (it is a matter of names)? And how many spirits 
are we hiding? Our honesty, we free spirits—let’s take care that it does not 
become our vanity, our finery and splendour, our limit, our stupidity! Every 
virtue tends towards stupidity; every stupidity tends towards virtue: “stupid 
all the way to holiness” people say in Russia—let’s take care that we don’t end 
up becoming saints and bores through honesty! Isn’t life a hundred times too 
short to get bored with it? We would already have to believe in eternal life, in 
order to . . . .
 
228
 
I hope people forgive me the 
discovery that all moral philosophy so far has been boring and has belonged 
among things which send us to sleep—and that, in my eyes, “virtue” has been 
impaired by nothing so much as by this tediousness of its advocates. In 
saying this I still don’t wish to deny their general utility. A great deal rests 
on the fact that as few people as possible think about morality—and so it’s very important 
that morality does not one day become interesting! But that’s not something 
people should worry about! These days things still stand the way they always 
have stood: I do not see anyone in Europe who might have (or might provide) 
some idea about how reflecting on morality could be conducted dangerously, 
insidiously, and seductively—that there could be disaster in the 
process. People should consider, for example, the tireless unavoidable English utilitarians, 
how they wander around crudely and honourably in Bentham’s footsteps, moving 
this way and that (a Homeric metaphor says it more clearly), just as Bentham 
himself had already wandered in the footsteps of the honourable 
Helvetius (this Helvetius—no, he was no dangerous man!).(6) 
No new idea, nothing of a more refined expression and bending of an old idea, 
not even a real history of an earlier thought: an impossible literature 
in its totality, unless we understand how to spice it up with some malice. For 
in these moralists as well (whom we really have to read with their ulterior 
motives in mind [mit Nebengedanken], if we have to read them—) 
that old English vice called cant and moral Tartufferie [hypocrisy], 
has inserted itself, this time hidden under a new form of scientific thinking. 
Nor is there any lack of a secret resistance against the pangs of conscience, 
something a race of former Puritans will justifiably suffer from in all its 
scientific preoccupations with morality. (Isn’t a moralist the opposite of a 
Puritan, namely, a thinker who considers morality something questionable, worth 
raising questions about, in short, as a problem? Shouldn’t moralizing 
be—immoral?). In the end they all want English morality to be 
considered right, so that then mankind or “general needs” or “the happiness of 
the greatest number”—no! England’s happiness—will be best served. They 
want to prove with all their might that striving for English happiness, 
I mean for comfort and fashion (and, as the highest priority, a seat in 
Parliament) is at the same time also the right path of virtue, in fact, that all 
virtue which has existed in the world so far has consisted of just such 
striving. Not one of all those ponderous herd animals with uneasy consciences 
(who commit themselves to promoting the cause of egoism as an issue of general 
welfare—) wants to know or catch a whiff of the fact that the “general welfare” 
is no ideal, no goal, not even a concept one can somehow grasp, but is only an 
emetic—that what is right for one man cannot in any way therefore be 
right for another, that the demand for a single morality for everyone is a 
direct restriction on the higher men, in short, that there is a rank 
ordering between man and man, as a result, also between morality and 
morality. These utilitarian Englishmen are a modest and thoroughly mediocre kind 
of human being and, as mentioned, insofar as they are boring, we cannot think 
highly enough of their utility. We should even encourage them, just as, 
to some extent, someone has tried to do in the following rhyme:
 
Hail to you, brave 
working lout,
“It’s always better when drawn out.”
Always stiff in head and knee
Never funny, never keen,
Always sticking to the mean—
Sans genie et sans esprit.(7)
 
229
 
In these recent ages, which may 
be proud of their humanity, there remains so much fear, so much 
superstitious(T) fear of the “wild cruel beasts,” animals which these more 
humane ages are particularly proud of having overcome, that even obvious truths 
remain unspoken for hundreds of years, as if by some agreement, because they 
look as if they might help those savage beasts, which have been finally 
slaughtered, come back to life again. Perhaps I am risking something if I allow 
one such truth to escape me: let others catch it again and give it so much “milk 
of the devout ways of thinking” to drink, that it lies still and forgotten in 
its old corner.—People should learn to think differently about cruelty and open 
their eyes. They should finally learn to get impatient, so that such 
presumptuous, gross errors no longer brazenly wander around as virtues—like 
those dealing with tragedy, for example, which have been fattened up by old and 
new philosophers. Almost everything we call “higher culture” rests on the 
spiritualization and intensification of cruelty—that’s my claim. The 
“wild beast” hasn’t been killed at all: it’s alive, it’s flourishing. Only it 
has turned itself into—a god. What constitutes the painful delight in tragedy is 
cruelty. What has a pleasing effect in so-called tragic pity, and basically even 
in everything awe-inspiring right up to the highest and most delicate shudders 
of metaphysics, gets its sweetness only from the ingredient of cruelty added to 
the mixture. What the Roman in the arena, the Christian in the raptures of the 
cross, the Spaniard at the sight of a burning at the stake or a bull fight, the 
Japanese today who crowds into tragedies, the Parisian suburban worker who feels 
nostalgic for a bloody revolution, the female fan of Wagner who, with her will 
unhinged, lets herself “submit to” Tristan and Isolde—what all these 
people enjoy and try to drink down with mysterious enthusiasm is the spicy 
liquor of the great Circe, “cruelty.” In saying this, we must of course chase 
off the foolish psychology of former times, which, so far as cruelty is 
concerned, knew only how to teach us that it arose at the sight of someone 
else’s suffering. There is a substantial, over-abundant enjoyment also with 
one’s own suffering, with making oneself suffer—and wherever people let 
themselves be convinced about self-denial in a religious sense or about 
self-mutilation, as with the Phoenicians and ascetics, or in general about 
depriving themselves of sensual experience and the flesh, about remorse, Puritan 
pangs of repentance, about a vivisection of the conscience, and about a Pascalian sacrifizio dell’intelletto [sacrifice 
of the intellect], they are secretly seduced and pushed on by cruelty, by 
that dangerous thrill of cruelty turned against themselves. Finally, 
people should consider that even the knowledgeable man, when he compels his 
spirit to acknowledge things against his spirit’s inclinations and 
often enough also against his heart’s desires—that is, to say No where he’d like 
to affirm something, to love, to worship—rules as an artist and transformer of 
cruelty. In fact, every attempt to be profound and thorough is a forceful 
violation, a willingness to do harm to the basic will of the spirit, which 
always wants what’s apparent and superficial—in all desire to know there is 
already a drop of cruelty.
 
230
 
Perhaps people don’t readily 
understand what I’ve said here about a “basic will of the spirit.” So permit me 
to offer an explanation.—The something which commands, which people call “the 
spirit,” wishes to be master in and around itself and to feel that it is the 
master. In its multiplicity it possesses the will to simplicity, a will which 
ties up, tames, desires to dominate and truly rule. Its needs and capabilities 
are in this respect the same as those which physiologists indicate belong to 
everything that lives, grows, and reproduces itself. The power of the spirit to 
appropriate other things for itself is revealed in its strong inclination to 
assimilate the new with the old, to simplify what is diverse, to ignore or push 
away what is totally contradictory, just as it arbitrarily and strongly 
emphasizes, brings out, and falsifies for its own purposes certain 
characteristics and lines in what is foreign, in every piece of the “outside 
world.” Its intention in so doing is the assimilation of new “experiences,” the 
organization of new things in an old series—and also for growth, or, to put the 
matter even more clearly, for the feeling of growth, for the feeling of 
increased power. An apparently contradictory spiritual drive serves this same 
will, a suddenly erupting decision in favour of ignorance, an arbitrary shutting 
out, a slamming of its window, an inner cry of No to this or that thing, a 
refusal to let something in, a kind of defensive condition against much that can 
be known, a satisfaction with the darkness, with the sealed-off horizon, an 
affirmation and endorsement of ignorance: all this is necessary in proportion to 
the degree of its appropriating power, its “power of digestion,” to speak 
metaphorically—“the spirit,” in fact, most closely resembles a stomach. With 
this also belongs the occasional will in the spirit to allow itself to be 
deceived, perhaps with a high-spirited premonition that something or other is not the 
case, that we simply allow something or other to be valid, a joy in all 
uncertainty and ambiguity, an exultant self-indulgence in the capricious 
narrowness and secrecy of some corner, in what is all too near at hand, in the 
foreground, in what is magnified or made smaller, in what has been shifted 
around or made more beautiful, a delight in the arbitrariness of all these 
expressions of power. Finally with these belongs that not unobjectionable 
willingness of the spirit to deceive other spirits and to play act in front of 
them, that constant urge and pressure of a creative, formative, changeable 
force: here the spirit enjoys its capacity for adopting multiple masks and 
shiftiness; it also enjoys the feeling of its security in this 
activity—precisely through its protean art is the spirit, in fact, best defended 
and hidden!—Working against this will to appearances, to 
simplification, to masks, to cloaks, in short, to the surface—for every surface 
is a cloak—is that sublime tendency of the person looking for knowledge who 
grasps and wants to grasp things thoroughly in their profundity and 
multiplicity, as a kind of cruelty of the intellectual conscience and taste, 
which every bold thinker will recognize in himself, provided that he, as is 
appropriate, has hardened and sharpened his eye for himself long enough and has 
grown accustomed to strict discipline and to stern language. He’ll say, “There’s 
something cruel in my spiritual inclination”—let the virtuous and charming try 
to persuade him that’s not so! In fact, it would sound better if, instead of 
cruelty, people talked of or whispered about or credited us free, very free 
spirits as having “excessive honesty”—and perhaps that’s how it will 
really ring out one day—our posthumous reputation? In the meantime—for there is 
plenty of time until then—we ourselves may well be the least inclined to dress 
ourselves up in the finery of these sorts of moralistic word sequins and shawls: 
our entire work so far spoils for us this very taste and its merry opulence. 
These are the beautiful, sparkling, jingling, festive words: honesty, love of 
truth, love of wisdom, sacrifice for knowledge, heroism of the truthful—there is 
something in them that makes a person’s pride swell up. But we hermits and 
marmots, we persuaded ourselves long ago, with all the secrecy of a hermit’s 
conscience, that this worthy verbal pomp also belongs with the old lying finery, 
rubbish, and gold dust of unconscious human vanity, and that underneath such 
flattering colours and repainted surfaces we must once again recognize the 
terrifying basic text of homo natura [natural man]. In fact, to 
translate men back into nature, to master the many vain and effusive 
interpretations and connoted meanings which so far have been scribbled and 
painted over that eternal basic text of homo natura, to see to it that 
in future man stands before man in the same way he, grown hard in the discipline 
of science, already stands these days before the rest of nature, with the 
fearless eyes of Oedipus and the blocked ears of Odysseus, deaf to the seductive 
enticements of the old metaphysical bird-catchers, who for far too long have 
been piping at him, “You are more! You are higher! You are of a different 
origin!”—that may be a peculiar and mad task, but it is a task—who 
wants to deny that? Why did we choose it, this mad task? Or, to put the question 
differently, “Why knowledge at all?”—Everyone will ask us about that. And we, 
pressured like this, we, who have already asked ourselves that very question a 
hundred times, we have found and find no better answer . . .
 
231
 
Learning changes us. It 
achieves what all feeding does which does not merely “preserve,”—as a 
physiologist knows. But deep in us, really “down there,” is naturally something 
uneducable, a granite of spiritual fatum [fate], of predetermined 
decision and answer to predetermined selected questions. In every cardinal 
problem a steadfast “That’s what I am” speaks out. About men and a women, for 
example, a thinker cannot learn to think differently; he can only complete his 
learning—only finally discover how things “stand with him” on this question. 
Sometimes we find certain solutions to problems which create a strong faith in us in 
particular. Perhaps from then on we call them our “convictions.” Later we see in 
them mere footsteps to self-knowledge, signposts to the problem which we are—or, 
better, to the great stupidity which we are, to our spiritual fatum [fate], 
to the uneducable part way “down there.” After this rich civility I 
have just displayed with respect to myself, perhaps there’s a better chance that 
I’ll be allowed to speak out a few truths about “woman as such,” so long as from 
now on people realize at the start just how much these are simply my truths.
 
232
 
Woman wants to become 
independent—and for that reason she is beginning to enlighten men about “woman 
as such”—that is among the most deleterious developments in the general 
process of making Europe ugly. For what must these crude attempts of 
female scientific thinking and self-exposure bring to light! Woman has so many 
reasons for shame; hidden in women is so much pedantry, superficiality, so many 
characteristics of the school teacher, petty arrogance, petty indulgence, and 
petty immodesty—just look at the way she interacts with children!—Up to now 
basically these qualities have best been kept repressed and controlled by fear of 
man. Woe when the “eternally boring in woman”—she is rich in that!—is first 
allowed to venture out, when she begins thoroughly and in principle to forget 
her shrewdness and art, her qualities of grace, of play, of driving cares away, 
of mitigating troubles and taking things lightly, as well as her delicate skill 
with agreeable pleasures! Nowadays we can already hear women’s voices which—by 
holy Aristophanes!—are frightening. They utter threats with medical clarity 
about what woman wants from man, from start to finish. Is it not in the 
very worst taste for woman to prepare like this to become scientific? So far, 
enlightening has fortunately been a man’s business, a man’s talent—in the 
process we remained “among ourselves.” In dealing with everything which women 
write about concerning “woman,” we may finally retain a healthy mistrust whether 
woman really wants enlightenment about herself—or is capable of 
wanting it. . . . Unless a woman by doing this is seeking some new finery
for herself—so I do think that dressing herself up belongs to the eternally 
feminine?—well, by doing this she does want to arouse fear of herself:—in that 
way perhaps she wants to dominate. But she does not want the truth. 
What does a woman have to do with truth? From the very beginning nothing is 
stranger, more unfavourable, or more hostile to women than truth—her great art 
is the lie, her highest concern appearance and beauty. We men should admit it—we 
honour and love precisely this art and this instinct in woman, 
we who have a hard time of it and are happy to get our relief by associating 
with beings under whose hands, looks, and tender foolishness our seriousness, 
our gravity and profundity, seem almost silly. Finally I put the question: Has a 
woman ever herself conceded that a woman’s head is profound, that a woman’s 
heart is just? And is it not true that, speaking generally, “woman” up to this 
point has been held in contempt mostly by woman herself—and not at all by us? We 
men want a woman not to continue compromising herself by enlightenment, just as 
it was masculine care and consideration for woman that made the church decree mulier taceat in 
ecclesia [let a woman be silent in church]! It was an advantage for woman, 
when Napoleon let the all-too-eloquent Madame de Staël understand: mulier 
taceat in politicis [let women be silent in politics]!—And I think 
that a true friend of women is the person who nowadays shouts out to them: 
mulier taceat de muliere [let woman be silent about women]!
 
233
 
It reveals a corruption of the 
instincts—quite apart from revealing bad taste—when a woman makes a direct 
reference to Madame Roland or Madame de Staël or Mr. George Sand, as if by doing 
so they had something to prove in favour of the “woman as such.” Among 
men those names are the three comical woman as such—nothing more!—and 
the very best unintentional counter-arguments against emancipation and 
female high handedness.(8)
 
234
 
Stupidity in the kitchen, woman 
as cook, the ghastly absence of intelligent thought in taking care of the 
nourishment of the family and the master of the house! Woman understands nothing 
about what food means, and she wants to be the cook! If woman were a 
thinking creature, then, as cook for thousands of years, she’d surely have found 
out the most important physiological facts, while at the same time she’d have 
had to take ownership of the art of healing! Because of bad female cooks and the 
complete lack of reason in the kitchen, the development of human beings has been 
held up for the longest time and suffered the worst damage. Even today things 
are little better. A speech for fashionable young ladies.
 
235
 
There are expressions and 
successful projections of the spirit; there are aphorisms, a small handful of 
words, in which an entire culture, an entire society, suddenly crystallizes. 
Among these belongs that casual remark Madame de Lambert made to her son: “Mon 
ami, ne vous permettez jamais que de folies, qui vous feront grand plaisir”
[My dear, never allow yourself any follies but those which will bring you 
great pleasure]—which is, by the way, the most motherly and cleverest 
remark that has ever been directed to a son.
 
236
 
What Dante and Goethe believed 
about women—the former when he sang, “Ella guardava suso, ed io in lei”
[She looked upward and I at her] and the latter when he translated this 
passage as “the Eternally Feminine draws us upward”—I have no doubt 
that every more aristocratic woman will resist this faith, for that is 
exactly what she believes about the Eternally Masculine. . . .
 
237
 
Seven Short Maxims About Women
 
How the longest boredom 
flees—when man crawls to us on his knees!
 
Old age, alas, and science, 
too, give strength to even weak virtue.
 
Dressed in black and speaking 
never—every woman then looks clever.
 
When things go well, my 
gratitude goes—to God and the woman who cuts my clothes.
 
When young, a flowery cavern 
home—when old, a dragon on the roam.
 
A noble name, legs are fine—a 
man as well—would he were mine!
 
Brief in speech, the sense 
quite nice—a female ass on treacherous ice!
 
237a
 
Up to now women have been 
treated by men like birds which have strayed down to them from some high place 
or other, like something finer, more sensitive, wilder, stranger, sweeter, and 
with more soul—but like something which man must lock up so that it does not fly 
away.
 
238
 
To grasp incorrectly the basic 
problem of “man and woman,” to deny the most profound antagonism here and the 
necessity for an eternally hostile tension, perhaps in this matter to dream 
about equal rights, equal education, equal entitlements and duties—that’s a typical sign 
of a superficial mind. And a thinker who has shown that he’s shallow in this 
dangerous place—shallow in his instincts!—may in general be considered 
suspicious or, even worse, betrayed and exposed. Presumably he’ll be too “short” 
for all the basic questions of life and of life in the future, and he’ll be 
incapable of any profundity. By contrast, a man who does have 
profundity in his spirit and in his desires as well, together with that 
profundity of good will capable of severity and hardness and easily confused 
with them, can think about woman only in an oriental way: he has to 
grasp woman as a possession, as a property which he can lock up, as something 
predetermined for service and reaching her perfection in that service. In this 
matter he must take a stand on the immense reasoning of Asia, on the instinctual 
superiority of Asia: just as the Greeks did in earlier times, the best heirs and 
students of Asia, who, as is well known, from Homer to the time of Pericles, as 
they advanced in culture and in the extent of their power, also became 
step by step stricter with women, in short, more oriental. How necessary, how logical, 
even how humanly desirable this was: that’s something we’d do well to 
think about for ourselves!
 
239
 
In no age has the weak sex been 
treated with such respect on the part of men as in our time—that’s part of the 
tendency and basic taste of democracy, just like the disrespect for old age. Is 
it any wonder that this respect immediately leads to abuse? People want more; 
people learn to make demands. They finally find this toll of respect almost 
insulting and would prefer a competition for rights, in fact, a completely 
genuine fight. Briefly put, woman is losing her shame. Let’s add to that at once 
that she is also losing her taste. She is forgetting how to be afraid of 
man. But the woman who “forgets how to fear” is abandoning her most womanly 
instincts. The fact that woman dares to come out when that part of men which 
inspires fear—let’s say it more clearly—when the man in men—is no 
longer wanted and widely cultivated—is reasonable enough, even understandable 
enough. What’s more difficult to grasp is that in this very process—woman 
degenerates. That’s happening today: let’s not deceive ourselves about it! 
Wherever the industrial spirit has triumphed over the military and aristocratic 
spirit, woman now strives for the economic and legal independence of a clerk: 
“woman as clerk” stands written on the door of the modern society which is now 
developing. As she thus empowers herself with new rights and strives to become 
“master” and writes the “progress” of woman on her flags and banners, it becomes 
appallingly clear that the opposite is taking place: woman is regressing. 
Since the French Revolution the influence of woman in Europe has grown 
smaller in proportion to the increase in her rights and demands, and the 
“Emancipation of Woman,” to the extent that that is desired and demanded by 
women themselves (and not just by superficial men), has as a result shown itself 
to be a remarkable symptom of the growing weakening and deadening of the most 
feminine instincts. There is stupidity in this development, an almost 
masculine stupidity, about which a well-adjusted woman—who is always an 
intelligent woman—would have to feel thoroughly ashamed. To lose the instinct 
for the ground on which one is surest to gain victory, to neglect to practice 
the art of one’s own true weapons, to allow oneself to let go before men, 
perhaps even “in a book,” where previously one used discipline and a refined 
cunning humility, to work with a virtuous audacity against man’s faith in a 
fundamentally different ideal concealed in woman, some eternally and 
necessarily feminine, with constant chatter to talk men emphatically out of the 
idea that woman, like a delicate, strangely wild, and often pleasing domestic 
animal, must be maintained, cared for, protected, and looked after, the awkward 
and indignant gathering up of everything slavish and serf-like that has 
inherently belonged to the position of women in the social order up to this 
point and that still does (as if slavery were a counter-argument and not rather 
a condition of every higher culture, of every enhancement of culture)—what does 
all this mean, if not a crumbling away of feminine instinct, a loss of 
femininity? Of course, there are enough idiotic friends of women and corruptors 
of women among the scholarly asses of the male sex who counsel woman 
to defeminize herself in this manner and to imitate all the foolish things which 
make the “man” in Europe and European “manliness” sick—people who want to bring 
woman down to the level of a “common education,” perhaps even to reading 
newspapers and discussing politics. Here and there they even want to make women 
into free spirits and literati: as if a woman without piety were not something 
totally repulsive or ridiculous to a profound and godless man. Almost everywhere 
people ruin woman’s nerves with the most sickly and most dangerous of all forms 
of music (our most recent German music) and make her more hysterical every day 
and more incapable of her first and last profession, giving birth to strong 
children. They want to make her in general even more “cultivated” and, as they 
say, make the “weak sex” strong through culture, as if history did not 
teach us as emphatically as possible that “cultivating” human beings and making 
them weak—that is, enfeebling and fracturing the power of the will and 
making it sick—have always gone hand in hand and that the most powerful and most 
influential women of the world (in most recent times Napoleon’s mother) can 
thank the force of their own particular wills—and not their school masters!—for 
their power and predominance over men. The thing in woman that arouses respect 
and often enough fear is her nature, which is “more natural” than man’s 
nature, her genuine predatory and cunning adaptability, her tiger’s claws under 
the glove, the naiveté of her egotism, her uneducable nature and inner wildness, 
the incomprehensibility, breadth, and roaming of her desires and virtues. . . . 
With all this fear, what creates sympathy for this dangerous and beautiful cat 
“woman” is that she appears to suffer more, to be more vulnerable, more in need 
of love, and more condemned to suffer disappointment than any other animal. Fear 
and pity: with these feelings man has stood before woman up to this point, 
always with one foot already in tragedy, which tears to pieces while it 
delights. How’s that? And has this now to come to an end? Is the magic spell of 
woman in the process of being broken? Are women slowly being made boring? O 
Europe! Europe! We know the horned animal which has always been most attractive 
to you. Its danger still constantly threatens you! Your old fable could still at 
some point once again become “history”—once again a monstrous stupidity could 
gain mastery of you and drag you away! And no god is hiding 
underneath it, no, only an “idea,” a “modern idea”!(9)
 
 
NOTES
 
(1) Gustave Flaubert 
(1820-1880), well known French novelist. [Back 
to Text]
 
(2) Abbé Ferdinand Galiani (1728-1787), 
an Italian cleric and philosopher; Madame d’Épinay: Louise d’Épinay 
(1726-1783), a French writer. [Back 
to Text]
 
(3) Aristophanes (456-386 BC), 
a major dramatist in classical Athens, the foremost writer of Old Comedy.
[Back to Text]
 
(4) Charles de Marguetel de 
Saint-Denis de Saint Evremond (1610-1703), French soldier and writer; 
Voltaire: pen name of Francois-Marie Arouet (1694-1778), an enormously 
influential and popular French philosopher and writer. [Back 
to Text]
 
(5) Chiaja: an urban district 
in central Naples. [Back to Text]
 
(6) Jeremy Bentham (1748-1832), 
English utilitarian philosopher and social reformer; Claude Helvétius 
(1715-1771), French philosopher, condemned by the pope and the government for 
his godlessness. The mention of a Homeric metaphor may be a reference to the 
shuffling around of cattle (a description which occurs in the Iliad). 
The German edition of 1900 contains an additional phrase in the parenthetic 
remark describing Helvetius: “this sénateur Pococurante, to use Galiani’s expression!” 
(Senateur Pococurante, a character in Voltaire’s Candide, sets impossibly high 
standards for everything and thus finds nothing to admire or enjoy). [Back 
to Text]
 
(7) The French in the last line means: 
“Without genius and without wit.” [Back 
to Text]
 
(8) Madame Roland (1754-1793), 
French historian and writer; George Sand: pen name for Amandine Aurore 
Dupin (1804-1876), French novelist. [Back 
to Text]
 
(9) In Greek 
mythology, the young girl Europa was carried off from Asia Minor across the sea 
by the god Zeus, who had transformed himself into a beautiful bull. [Back 
to Text]


============================================================
Part 8: Peoples and Fatherlands
============================================================

Friedrich Nietzsche

BEYOND GOOD AND EVIL
 
Translated by Ian Johnston, Vancouver Island University, 
Nanaimo, British Columbia, Canada
 
Students, teachers, artists, and members of the 
general public may download and distribute this text without permission and 
without charge. They may also freely edit the text for their own purposes. All 
commercial use of this translation, however, is forbidden without the permission 
of the translator. For comments and questions, please contact 
Ian Johnston.
 
For a Rich Text Version (Word) of this text, please 
use the following link: 

Beyond Good and Evil [RTF] 
 
[Table 
of Contents for Beyond Good and Evil]
 
 
 PART EIGHT
PEOPLES AND FATHERLANDS
 
240
 
I heard once again for the 
first time Richard Wagner’s overture to the Meistersinger: it is a 
splendid, overloaded, difficult, and late art, which prides itself on the fact 
that, in order to understand it, one has to assume that two centuries of music 
are still vital. It is to the Germans’ credit that such a pride was not 
misplaced! What juices and forces, what seasons and climates are intermingled 
here! It impresses us sometimes as old fashioned, sometimes as strange, bitter, 
and too young; it is as arbitrary as it is conventionally grandiose, if not 
infrequently mischievous, still more frequently tough and coarse—it has fire and 
courage and, at the same time, the loose dun-coloured skin of fruits which 
become ripe too late. It streams out wide and full, and suddenly a moment of 
inexplicable hesitation, a gap, as it were, springs up between cause and effect, 
a pressure that makes us dream, almost a nightmare—but already the old stream of 
contentment is spreading and widening once more, of manifold contentment, of old 
and new happiness, which very much includes the happiness of the artist with 
himself, something he has no desire to conceal, his amazed and happily shared 
knowledge of the mastery of the means he has used here, new and newly acquired 
artistic means, so far untried, as he seems to inform us. All in all, no beauty, 
nothing of the south, nothing of the delicate southern brightness of heaven, 
nothing of grace, no dance, scarcely any will for logic, indeed a certain 
awkwardness that is even emphasized, as if the artist wanted to tell us, “That 
is part of my purpose,” a ponderous drapery, something arbitrarily barbaric and 
ceremonial, a shimmy of scholarly and venerable precious objects and lace; 
something German, in the best and worst senses of the word, something manifold, 
formless, and inexhaustible in the German way, a certain German power and 
spiritual excess, which has no fear of hiding under the refinements of decay—and 
which perhaps feels at its best only there, a truly authentic emblem of the 
German soul, young and obsolete both at the same time, over-rotten and still 
over-rich for the future. This kind of music expresses best what I think of the 
Germans: they belong to the day before yesterday and the day after tomorrow—but 
they still have no today.
 
241
 
We “good Europeans,” we too 
have hours when we allow ourselves a hearty feeling for our fatherland, a tumble 
and relapse into old loves and narrow places—I have just given a sample of 
that—hours of national tumults, patriotic apprehensions, and all sorts of other 
floods of old-fashioned emotion. Slower moving spirits than we are might take a 
longer period of time to be done with things which with us last and have run 
their course in a matter of hours—some need half a year, others half a human 
lifetime, each according to the speed and power with which they digest and 
“transform their stuff.” In fact, I could think of some dull, hesitant races 
which, even in our rapidly moving Europe, would require half a century in order 
to overcome such atavistic attacks of patriotism and attachment to their soil 
and to return to reason, that is to say, to “good Europeanness [guten Europäerthum]” 
And while I indulge myself with this possibility, it so happens that I listen in 
on a conversation between two old “patriots.” They both were obviously hard of 
hearing and so spoke all the louder. One said, “That man possesses and 
understands philosophy as much as a peasant or a student in a fraternity. He is 
still innocent. But what does that matter these days! This is age of the 
masses, who prostrate themselves before anything built on a massive scale. 
That’s how it is in politics, as well. If a statesman piles up a new Tower of 
Babel for them, anything at all that’s immense in power and empire, they call 
him ‘great.’ What does it matter that in the meantime those of us who are more 
cautious and reserved still do not give up the old belief that only a great idea 
confers greatness on an act or a cause? What if a statesman brought his people 
into a situation where from that point on they had to practise ‘grand politics,’ 
something for which they were by nature poorly adapted and prepared, so that it 
would be necessary for them to sacrifice their old and certain virtues for the 
sake of a new and doubtful mediocrity—suppose a statesman sentenced his people 
to a general ‘politicking,’ although up to that point those same people had had 
better things to do and to think about and in the depth of their souls could not 
rid themselves of a cautious disgust with the anxiety, emptiness, noise, and 
devilish squabbling of those peoples who were truly politicking—suppose such a 
statesman goaded the sleeping passions and desires of his people and turned 
their earlier shyness and their pleasure in standing to one side into defects, 
their fondness for foreign things [Ausländerei] and their secret 
boundlessness into a liability, devalued for them their most heartfelt 
inclinations, turned their conscience around, made their spirit narrow, and 
their taste ‘national,’—well, would a statesman who did all those things, 
someone for whom his people would have to atone through all future time, in the 
event they had a future, would such a statesman be great?” 
“Undoubtedly,” the other old patriot answered him vehemently, “otherwise he 
would have been incapable of doing it! Perhaps it was idiotic to want 
something like that? But perhaps every great thing was merely idiotic at the 
beginning!” “That’s an abuse of words!” cried his conversational partner in 
response, “Strong! Strong! Strong and idiotic! Not great!” The old men 
had evidently worked themselves up, as they shouted their “truths” into each 
other’s faces like this. But I, in my happiness and remoteness, thought about 
how a stronger man will soon become master over the strong, and also how there 
is a compensation for the spiritual flattening of one people, namely, the 
deepening of another people.—
 
242
 
Now, let’s call what we’re 
looking for as the distinguishing mark of Europeans “civilization,” or 
“humanizing,” or “progress”; let’s use a political formula and call it simply, 
without praise or blame, Europe’s democratic movement: behind all the 
moral and political foregrounds indicated with such labels, an immense physiological process 
is completing itself, something whose momentum is constantly growing—the process 
by which the Europeans are becoming more similar to each other, their growing 
detachment from the conditions under which arise races linked to a climate and 
class, their increasing independence from any distinct environment that 
for centuries wanted to inscribe itself on body and soul with the same 
demands—hence, the slow emergence of an essentially supra-national and nomadic 
type of human being, who, physiologically speaking, possesses as his 
characteristic mark a maximum of the art and power of adaptation. This process 
of the developing European, which can be held back by great relapses in 
tempo, but which for that very reason perhaps acquires and augments its 
vehemence and depth—the furious storm and stress of “national feeling” still 
raging today belongs here, along with that anarchism which is just emerging—this 
process will probably rush ahead to conclusions which its naive proponents and 
advocates, the apostles of “modern ideas,” are least likely to expect. The same 
new conditions which will, on average, create a situation in which human beings 
are homogenous and mediocre—useful, hard-working, practical in many tasks, 
clever men from an animal herd—are to the highest degree suitable for giving 
rise to exceptional men with the most dangerous and most attractive qualities. 
For while that power to adapt, which keeps testing constantly changing 
conditions and begins a new task with every generation, almost with every 
decade, by no means makes possible the full power of the type, while 
the collective impression of such future Europeans probably will be one of many 
kinds of extremely useful chattering workers with little will power, men who 
will need a master, someone to give orders, as much as they need their 
daily bread, and while the democratizing of Europe thus moves towards the 
creation of a type prepared for slavery in the most subtle sense, the strong man, 
in single and exceptional cases, will have to turn out stronger and richer than 
he has perhaps ever been before now—thanks to the absence of prejudice in his 
education, thanks to the immense multiplicity of practice, art, and mask. What I 
wanted to say is this: the democraticizing of Europe is at the same time an 
involuntary way of organizing for the breeding of tyrants—understanding 
that word in every sense, including the most spiritual.
 
243
 
I am pleased to hear that our 
sun is caught up in a rapid movement towards the constellation Hercules, 
and I hope that men on this earth act like the sun in this respect. And we 
first, we good Europeans!
 
244
 
There was a time when people 
were accustomed to confer on the Germans, as a mark of distinction, the label 
“profound.” Now, when the most successful type of the new Germanism craves 
completely different honours and perhaps finds that everything profound lacks 
“flair,” it is almost timely and patriotic to doubt whether we were not 
deceiving ourselves previously with that praise: in short, to wonder whether 
German profundity is not basically something else, something worse—and something 
which, thank God, we are about to succeed in removing. So let’s try to learn to 
think differently about German profundity. For that we don’t have to do anything 
except a little vivisection on the German soul. More than anything else, the 
German soul is multifaceted, with various origins, more cobbled together and 
superimposed than truly constructed. That comes from how it emerged. A German 
who had the audacity to claim “Alas, two souls dwell within my breast” would be 
seriously violating the truth, or, putting the matter more correctly, would lag 
behind the truth by several souls. As a people of the most monstrous mixing and 
stirring together of races, perhaps even with an excess of the pre-Aryan 
element, as “a people of the middle” in every sense, the Germans are more 
incomprehensible, more extensive, more contradictory, more unknown, more 
unpredictable, more surprising, and even more terrifying to themselves than 
other people are—they elude definition and for that reason alone are 
the despair of the French. It’s typical of the Germans that with them the 
question “What is German?” never dies away. Kotzebue certainly knew his Germans 
well enough: “We have been acknowledged,” they cheered to him—but Sand also 
thought he knew them. John Paul understood what he was doing when he expressed 
his anger over Fichte’s false but patriotic flatteries and exaggerations—but it 
is likely that Goethe’s thinking about the Germans was 
different from Jean Paul’s, even if he thought he was right in his opinion about 
Fichte.(1) 
What did Goethe really think about the Germans?—But he never spoke clearly about 
many things around him, and all his life he knew how to keep a delicate 
silence—he probably had good reasons for that. What’s certain is that “the Wars 
of Liberation” did not make him look up in a happier mood, any more than the 
French Revolution.(2) 
The event which made him rethink his Faust and, indeed, the 
entire problem of “man” was the appearance of Napoleon. There are words of 
Goethe in which, as if from a foreign country, he repudiates with an impatient 
severity what the Germans reckon as something they can be proud of: he once 
defined the famous German disposition [Gemüth] as “indulgence towards 
the weaknesses of strangers and towards one’s own.” Was he wrong in that? It’s 
characteristic of the Germans that one is rarely completely wrong about them. 
The German soul has within it lanes and connecting paths; in it there are caves, 
hiding places, and dungeons. Its lack of order has a great deal of the charm of 
something full of secrets. The German is well acquainted with the secret routes 
to chaos. And just as everything loves its own metaphorical likeness, so the 
German loves clouds and everything unclear, developing, dim, damp, and shrouded: 
any kind of uncertainty, shapelessness, shifting around, or evolving he senses 
as something “profound.” In himself, the German man does not exist—he is 
becoming something—he “is developing himself.” Hence, “developing” is the 
essential German discovery and successful stroke in the great realm of 
philosophical formulas—a governing idea which, along with German beer and German 
music, is working to Germanize all Europe. Foreigners stand there amazed at and 
attracted to the riddles which the contradictory nature underlying the German 
soul presents to them (something Hegel organized into a system and Richard 
Wagner finally even set to music). “Good natured and malicious”—such a 
juxtaposition, a contradiction if applied to any other people, unfortunately 
justifies itself too often in Germany. Just live for a while among the Swabians! 
The ponderousness of the German scholar, his social tastelessness, gets on 
alarmingly well with an inner agility in dancing on a tightrope and with a light 
impudence, faced with which all the gods have by now learned about fear. If 
people want an ad oculos [visual] demonstration “the German soul,” let 
them just look into German taste, into German arts and customs: what a boorish 
indifference to “taste”! See how there the noblest and the meanest stand next to 
each other! How disorderly and rich this entire spiritual household is! The 
German drags his soul along; he drags along everything he experiences. 
He digests his events badly—he’s never “finished” with them. German profundity 
is often only a difficult and hesitant “digestion.” And just as all chronic 
invalids, all dyspeptics, have an inclination for comfort, so the German loves 
“openness” and “conventional probity”: how comfortable it is to be open 
and conventional!—Today that is perhaps the most dangerous and most successful 
disguise the German knows—this trusting, cooperative, cards-on-the-table nature 
of German honesty. It is his true Mephistophelean art; with it he can 
“still go far!” The German lets himself go, as he gazes with true, blue, empty 
German eyes—and foreigners immediately confuse him with his dressing gown! What 
I wanted to say is this—let “German profundity” be what it will—when we are 
entirely among ourselves perhaps we’ll allow ourselves to laugh about it?—we’ll 
do well to hold its appearance and its good name in honour in future and not to 
dispose of our old reputation as people of profundity too cheaply for Prussian 
“dash” and Berlin wit and sand. It’s clever for a people to make itself pass 
for—and to let others think it—profound, clumsy, good natured, honest, 
unwise. That could even be—profound! Finally one should be a credit to one’s 
name—not for nothing are we called the “tiusche” people, the deceiving 
people . . .
 
245
 
The “good old” days are gone. 
In Mozart they sang themselves out:—how lucky we are that his rococo still 
speaks to us, that his “good society,” his loving raptures, his childish delight 
in Chinese effects and curlicues, the civility in his heart, his desire for 
delicacy, lovers, dancers, those with blissful tears, and his faith in the south 
can still appeal to some remnant in us! Alas, at some point it will be 
gone!—But who can doubt that the understanding of and taste for Beethoven will 
be gone even earlier!—Beethoven was, in fact, only the final chords of a 
stylistic transition, a break in style, and not, like Mozart, the last 
notes of a great centuries-long European taste. Beethoven is something that 
happens between an old worn out soul which is constantly breaking up and a very 
young soul of the future which is constantly coming on. In his music 
there lies that half light of eternal loss and of eternally indulgent 
hoping—that same light in which Europe was bathed when it dreamed with Rousseau, 
when it danced around the Liberty Tree of revolution and finally almost 
worshipped before Napoleon. But how quickly now this very feeling 
fades. Nowadays how difficult it has already become to know this 
feeling—how foreign to our ears the language of Rousseau, Schiller, Shelley, and 
Byron sounds, in whom collectively the same European 
fate found a way in words which it knew how to sing in Beethoven!(3) 
What has come in German music since then belongs to Romanticism, that is, 
historically considered, to an even shorter, even more fleeting, even more 
superficial movement than that great interlude, that transition in Europe from 
Rousseau to Napoleon and to the arrival of democracy. There is Weber: 
but what are Freischutz and Oberon these days for us? 
Or Marschner’s Hans Heiling and Vampyr!(4) 
Or even Wagner’s Tannhauser! That music has faded away, even if it has 
not yet been forgotten. In addition, all this Romantic music was not 
sufficiently noble, not sufficiently musical, to justify itself anywhere other 
than in the theatre and in front of crowds. Right from the start it was 
second-rate music, of little interest among true musicians. The situation was 
different with Felix Mendelssohn, that halcyon master, who won rapid admiration 
for his lighter, purer, and happier soul and then was forgotten 
just as quickly, as a lovely event in German music.(5) 
But as for the case of Robert Schumann, who took his work seriously and from the 
beginning was also taken seriously—he was the last one who founded a 
school—nowadays don’t we count it as good luck, as a relief, and as a 
liberation that this very Schumann-style Romanticism has been overthrown? 
Schumann ran off into the “Saxon Switzerland” of his soul, half like Werther, 
half like Jean-Paul, but certainly nothing like Beethoven, certainly nothing 
like Byron!—the music of his Manfred is an error in 
judgment and a misunderstanding to the point of injustice.(6)—Schumann 
with his taste, which was basically a petty taste (that is, a dangerous 
tendency, doubly dangerous among the Germans, toward quiet lyricism and a 
drunken intoxication of feeling), always going off to the side, shyly 
withdrawing himself and pulling back, a nobly tender soul, who wallowed in 
nothing but anonymous happiness and sorrow, from the start a sort of young 
maiden and noli me tangere [do not touch me]: this Schumann was already 
merely a German event in music, no longer something European, as 
Beethoven was, and, to an even greater extent, Mozart. With him German music was 
threatened by its greatest danger, the loss of the voice for the soul of 
Europe and its descent to something dealing merely with the fatherland.
 
246
 
What a torture are books 
written in German for the person who has a third ear! How unwillingly 
he stands beside the slowly revolving swamp of sounds without melody, of rhythms 
without dance, what among the Germans is called a “book!” And as for the German 
who reads books! How lazily, how reluctantly, how badly he reads! How 
many Germans know and demand from themselves the knowledge that there is art
in every good sentence, art which must be correctly grasped if the sentence 
is to be understood! With a misunderstanding about its tempo, for example, the 
sentence itself is misunderstood! That one must not be in doubt about the 
rhythmically decisive syllables, that one must feel the break in the extremely 
strict symmetry as intentional and charming, that one must lend a refined and 
patient ear to every staccato and every rubato, that one sorts 
out the sense in the series of vowels and diphthongs, how softly and richly they 
can colour and re-colour each other as they follow in their sequence—who among 
our book-reading Germans has enough goodwill to recognize these sorts of duties 
and demands and to listen for so much art and intentionality in the language? In 
the end we just “don’t have the ear for that.” And thus the most pronounced 
contrasts in style are not heard and the most refined artistry is wasted, 
as if on deaf people. These were my thoughts as I observed how crudely and 
naively people confused two masters of the art of prose with each other—one 
whose words drip down, hesitant and cold, as if from the roof of a damp 
cavern—he’s relying on their dull sound and echo—and the other who handles his 
language like a flexible sword and feels from his arm down to his toes the 
dangerous joy in the excessively sharp, shimmering blade that wants to bite, 
hiss, and cut.—
 
247
 
Just how little German style 
concerns itself with sound and with the ear is demonstrated in the fact that 
even our good musicians write badly. The German does not read aloud, not for the 
ear, but merely with his eyes. In the process he puts his ears away in a drawer. 
In antiquity a man read, when he read—and that happened rarely 
enough—to himself aloud and, in fact, in a loud voice. People were amazed if 
someone read quietly, and they secretly asked themselves why. With a loud 
voice—that is to say, with all the swellings, inflections, changes in tone, and 
shifts in tempo which the ancient public world enjoyed. At that time 
the principles of writing style were the same as those for the speaking style, 
and these principles depended in part on the astonishing development and the 
sophisticated needs of the ear and larynx and in part on the strength, 
endurance, and power of the ancient lungs. A syntactic period is, as the 
ancients understood it, above all a physiological totality, insofar as it is 
held together by a single breath. Such periods, as they manifest themselves in 
Demosthenes and Cicero, swelling up twice and sinking down 
twice, all within the single breath—that’s what ancient men enjoyed.(7) 
From their own schooling they knew how to value the virtue in such periods—how 
rare and difficult it was to deliver them. We really have no right to 
the great syntactical period, we moderns, we short-winded people in 
every sense! These ancient people were, in fact, themselves collectively 
dilettantes in public speaking—and as a result connoisseurs and thus critics. 
Hence, they drove their speakers to the utmost limits. In a similar way in the 
last century, once all Italian men and women understood how to sing, among them 
virtuoso singing (and with that the art of melody as well) reached its high 
point. But in Germany (right up until very recent times, when a sort of platform 
eloquence started flapping its young wings timidly and crudely enough) there was 
really only one form of public speaking which came close to being 
artistic: what came from the pulpit. In Germany only the preacher understood 
what a syllable or what a word weighs, how a sentence strikes, leaps, falls, 
runs, and comes to an end; only he had a conscience in his ears, often enough a 
bad conscience. For there is no shortage of reasons why it’s precisely the 
German who rarely, and almost always too late, achieves a proficiency in 
speaking. It is appropriate therefore that the masterwork of German prose is the 
masterwork of its greatest preacher: up to this point, the Bible has been the 
best German book. In comparison with Luther’s Bible, almost everything else is 
mere “literature”—something that did not grow in Germany and hence also did not 
grow and does not grow in German hearts, as the Bible has.
 
248
 
There are two kinds of genius: 
one which above all breeds and desires to breed, and another which is happy to 
let itself be fertilized and give birth. In just the same way, there are among 
peoples of genius those to whom the female problem of pregnancy and the secret 
task of shaping, maturing, and perfecting have been assigned—the Greeks, for 
example, were a people of this kind, like the French—and there are others who 
have to fertilize and become the origin of new orders of life—like the Jews, the 
Romans, and, one could ask in all modesty, the Germans?—People tormented and 
enchanted by unknown fevers and irresistibly driven outside themselves, in love 
with and lusting after foreign races (after those who “let themselves be 
fertilized”—) and thus obsessed with mastery, like everything which has a 
knowledge of itself as full of procreative power and thus “by the grace of God.” 
These two types of genius seek each other out, like man and woman, but they also 
misunderstand each other—like man and woman.
 
249
 
Every people has its 
characteristic Tartufferie [hypocrisy] and calls it its virtues.—The 
best that man is he does not know—he cannot know.
 
250
 
What does Europe owe the 
Jews?—All sorts of things, good and bad, and above all one that is at the same 
time among the best and the worst: the grand style in morality, the terror and 
majesty of infinite demands, infinite meanings, the whole romanticism and 
grandeur of morally questionable things [moralischen Fragwürdigkeiten]—and 
as a result precisely the most attractive, most insidious, and most exquisite 
parts of those plays of colours and enticements to life, whose afterglow these 
days makes the sky of our European culture glow in its evening light—perhaps as 
it burns itself out. Among the spectators and philosophers, we artists are 
grateful to the Jews for that.
 
251
 
When a people is suffering from 
nationalistic nervous fever and political ambition and wants to suffer, we have to accept the 
fact that various kinds of clouds and disturbances—in short, small attacks of 
stupidity—will pass over its spirit: for example, among contemporary Germans 
sometimes the anti-French stupidity, sometimes the anti-Jewish, sometimes the 
anti-Polish, sometimes the Christian-Romantic, sometimes the Wagnerian, 
sometimes the Teutonic, sometimes the Prussian (take a look at these poor 
historians Sybel and Treitzschke and their thickly bandaged heads—), and 
whatever else all these small obfuscations of the German spirit and conscience 
may call themselves.(8) 
May I be forgiven for the fact that I, too, during a short and risky stay in a 
very infected region did not remain entirely free of this illness and, like all 
the world, began to have ideas about things which were no concern of mine, the 
first sign of the political infection. For example, about the Jews. Hear me 
out.—I have not yet met a single German who was well disposed towards the Jews. 
And no matter how absolute the rejection of real anti-Semitism on the part of 
all cautious and political types may be, nonetheless this caution and politics 
directs itself not against this type of feeling itself, but only against its 
dangerous excess, in particular against the tasteless and disgraceful expression 
of this excessive feeling—on that point people should not deceive themselves. 
That Germany has a richly sufficient number of Jews, that the German stomach and German blood have 
difficulty (and will still have difficulty for a long time to come) absorbing 
even this quantum of “Jew”—in the way the Italians, the French, and the English 
have absorbed them, as a result of a stronger digestive system—that is the clear 
message and language of a general instinct which we must listen to and according 
to which we must act. “Let no more Jews in! And especially bar the doors to the 
east (also to Austria)!” So orders the instinct of a people whose type is still 
weak and uncertain, so that it could be easily erased, easily dissolved away by 
a stronger race. But the Jews are without any doubt the strongest, most 
tenacious, and purest race now living in Europe. They understand how to prevail 
even under the worst conditions (better even than under favourable conditions), 
as a result of certain virtues which today people might like to stamp as 
vices—thanks, above all, to a resolute faith which has no need to feel shame 
when confronted by “modern ideas.” They always change, if they change, 
only in the way the Russian empire carries out its conquests—as an empire that 
has time and was not born yesterday—that is, according to the basic principle 
“as slowly as possible!” A thinker who has the future of Europe on his 
conscience will, in all the designs he draws up for himself of this future, take 
the Jews as well as the Russians into account as, for the time being, the surest 
and most probable factors in the great interplay and struggle of forces. What we 
nowadays call a “nation” in Europe is essentially more a res facta [something 
made] than a res nata [something born] (indeed 
sometimes it looks confusingly like a res ficta et picta [something made up and unreal]—), 
in any case something developing, young, easily displaced, not yet a race, to 
say nothing of aere perennius [more enduring than bronze], as 
is the Jewish type. But these “nations” should be very wary of every hot-headed 
competition and enmity! That the Jews, if they wanted to—or if people were to 
force them, as the anti-Semites seem to want to do—could even now 
become predominant, in fact, quite literally gain mastery over Europe, is 
certain; that they are not working and planning for that is equally certain. Meanwhile, by 
contrast, they desire and wish—even with a certain insistence—to be absorbed 
into and assimilated by Europe. They thirst to be finally established somewhere 
or other, to be accepted and respected, and to bring to an end their nomadic 
life, to the “Wandering Jew.” And people should pay full attention to this 
tendency and impulse (which in itself perhaps even expresses a moderating of 
Jewish instincts) and accommodate it. And for this, it might perhaps be useful 
and reasonable to expel the noisy anti-Semitic troublemakers from the country. 
We should welcome them with all caution, and selectively, more or less the way 
the English aristocracy does. It’s clear that the stronger and already more 
firmly established type of the new Germanism could involve itself with them with 
the least objection, for example, the aristocratic officers from the Mark 
Brandenburg.(9) It would be interesting in all sorts of ways to see whether the 
genius for money and patience (and above all for some spirit and spirituality, 
which are seriously deficient in the people just referred to) could be added to 
and bred into the inherited art of commanding and obeying—in both of which the 
land mentioned above is nowadays a classic example. But at this point it’s 
fitting that I break off my cheerful Germanomania [Deutschthümelei] and 
speech of celebration. For I’m already touching on something serious to 
me, on the “European problem,” as I understand it, on the breeding of a new 
ruling caste for Europe.—
 
252
 
These Englishmen are no race of 
philosophers. Bacon signifies an attack on the spirit of philosophy 
generally; Hobbes, Hume, and Locke have been a debasement and a devaluing of the 
idea of a “philosopher” for more than a century. Kant raised himself and rose up 
in reaction against Hume. It was Locke of whom 
Schelling was entitled to say, “Je méprise Locke” [I despise Locke].(10) 
In the struggle with the English mechanistic dumbing down of the world, Hegel 
and Schopenhauer (along with Goethe) were unanimous—both of these hostile 
fraternal geniuses in philosophy, who moved away from each other towards 
opposite poles of the German spirit and, in the process, wronged each other, as 
only brothers do. What’s lacking in England, and what has always been missing, 
that’s something the semi-actor and rhetorician Carlyle understood well enough, 
that tasteless muddle-headed Carlyle, who tried to conceal under his passionate 
grimaces what he understood about himself, that is, what was 
lacking in Carlyle—a real power of spirituality, a real profundity of spiritual insight, 
in short, philosophy.(11) It is characteristic of such an unphilosophical race 
that it clings strongly to Christianity. They need its discipline to 
develop their “moralizing” and humanizing. The Englishman is more gloomy, more 
sensual, stronger willed, and more brutal than the German—he is also for that 
very reason, as the more vulgar of the two, also more pious than the German. He 
is even more in need of Christianity. For more refined nostrils even 
this English Christianity has still a lingering and truly English smell of 
spleen and alcoholic dissipation, against which it is used with good reason as a 
medicinal remedy—that is, the more delicate poison against the coarser one. 
Among crude people, a subtler poisoning is, in fact, already progress, a step 
towards spiritualization. The crudity and peasant seriousness of the English are 
still most tolerably disguised or, stated more precisely, interpreted and given 
new meaning, by the language of Christian gestures and by prayers and singing 
psalms. And for those drunken and dissolute cattle who in earlier times learned 
to make moral grunts under the influence of Methodism and, more recently, once 
again as the “Salvation Army,” a twitch of repentance may really be, relatively 
speaking, the highest achievement of “humanity” to which they can be raised: 
that much we can, in all fairness, concede. But what is still offensive even in 
the most humane Englishman is his lack of music, speaking metaphorically (and 
not metaphorically—). He has in the movements of his soul and his body no rhythm 
and dance—in fact, not even the desire for rhythm and dance, for “music.” Listen 
to him speak, or watch the most beautiful English woman walk—in no country 
of the earth are there lovelier doves and swans—and finally, listen to them 
sing! But I’m demanding too much . . .
 
253
 
There are truths which are best recognized by mediocre 
heads, because they are most appropriate for them; there are truths which have 
charm and seductive power only for mediocre minds:—at this very point we are 
pushed back onto this perhaps unpleasant proposition, since the time the spirit 
of respectable but mediocre Englishmen—I cite Darwin, John Stuart Mill, and 
Herbert Spencer—is successfully gaining pre-eminence in the middle regions of 
European taste.(12) 
In fact, who could doubt how useful it is that such spirits rule from time to time? It would be a mistake to think 
that highly cultivated spirits who fly off to great distances would be 
particularly skilful at establishing many small, common facts, collecting them, 
and pushing to a conclusion:—they are, by contrast, as exceptional men, from the 
very start in no advantageous position vis-à-vis the “rules.” In the 
final analysis, they have more to do than merely have knowledge—for they have 
to be something new, to mean something new, to present new 
values! The gap between knowing something and being able to do something is 
perhaps greater as well as more mysterious than people think. It’s possible that 
the man who can act in the grand style, the creating man, will have to be a 
person who does not know; whereas, on the other hand, for scientific discoveries 
of the sort Darwin made a certain narrowness, aridity, and conscientious 
diligence, in short, something English, may not be an unsuitable arrangement. 
Finally we should not forget that the English with their profoundly average 
quality have already once brought about a collective depression of the European 
spirit. What people call “modern ideas” or “the ideas of the eighteenth century” 
or even “French ideas”—in other words, what the German spirit has risen 
against with a deep disgust—were English in origin. There’s no doubt of that. 
The French have been only apes and actors of these ideas, their best soldiers, 
as well, and at the same time unfortunately their first and most complete victims. For with the damnable Anglomania 
of “modern ideas” the âme française [French soul] has finally 
become so thin and emaciated that nowadays we remember almost with disbelief its 
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, its profoundly passionate power, its 
resourceful nobility. But with our teeth we must hang on to the following 
principle of historical fairness and defend it against the appearance of the 
moment: European noblesse [nobility]—in feeling, in taste, in 
customs, in short, the word taken in every higher sense—is the work and 
invention of France; European nastiness, the plebeian quality of modern 
ideas, the work of England.
 
254
 
Even now France is still the 
place with the most spiritual and most refined European culture and the leading 
school of taste. But we have to know how to find this “France of taste.” Whoever 
belongs to it keeps himself well concealed—the number of those in whom it is 
embodied and lives may be small, and in addition they may perhaps be people who 
are not standing on the strongest legs, partly fatalistic, dark, sick, and 
partly mollycoddled and artificial, such people as have the ambition to conceal themselves. All of 
them have something in common: confronted with the raging stupidity and the 
noisy chattering of the democratic bourgeois, they keep their ears plugged. In 
fact, rolling around these days in the foreground is a stupid and coarsened 
France—recently, at the funeral of Victor Hugo, it celebrated a true orgy of 
tastelessness and at the same time of self-admiration.(13) Something else is 
also common to them: a great will to stand against spiritual Germanization—and 
an even greater inability to do so! Perhaps these days Schopenhauer is already 
more at home and has become more indigenous in this France of the spirit, which 
is also a France of pessimism, than he ever was in Germany, not to mention 
Heinrich Heine, who has long since been transformed into the flesh and blood of 
the more sophisticated and discriminating Parisian lyric poets, or Hegel, 
who today exercises an almost tyrannical influence in the form of Taine, the pre-eminent
living historian.(14) 
And so far as Richard Wagner is concerned—the more French music learns to shape 
itself according to the real needs of the âme moderne [modern soul], 
the more it will become “Wagnerian.” That’s something we can predict—it’s 
already doing enough of that now. Nonetheless, in spite of all the voluntary or 
involuntary Germanizing and vulgarizing of taste, there are three things which 
nowadays the French can still point to with pride as their inheritance and 
property and as the indelible mark of an old cultural superiority over Europe. 
The first is the capacity for artistic passions, for devotion to “form,” for 
which the expression l’art pour l’art [art 
for art’s sake] has been invented, along with a thousand others—something 
like that has been present in France for three centuries and, thanks to the 
reverence for the “small number,” has made possible again and again a kind of 
chamber music in literature, which is not to be found in the rest of Europe.—The 
second thing on which the French can base a superiority over Europe is their 
ancient, multifaceted, moralistic culture, because of which we find, on 
average, even in the small romanciers [novelists] of the newspapers and 
random boulevardiers de Paris [Parisian men about town], a 
psychological sensitivity and curiosity of which people in Germany, for example, 
have no idea (to say nothing of the thing itself!). For that the Germans are 
lacking a couple of centuries of moralistic behaviour which, as mentioned, 
France did not spare itself. Anyone who calls the Germans “naive” because of 
this is praising them for a defect. (In contrast to the German inexperience and 
innocence in voluptate 
psychologica [in psychological delight], which is not too distantly related 
to the boredom of associating with Germans—and as the most successful expression 
of a genuine French curiosity and talent for invention in this empire of tender 
thrills, Henry Beyle [Stendhal] may well qualify, that remarkably 
prescient and pioneering man, who ran at a Napoleonic tempo through his Europe, through several 
centuries of the European soul, as a tracker and discoverer of this soul. It 
took two generations to catch up with him somehow, to grasp some of the 
riddles which tormented and delighted him, this strange Epicurean and question 
mark of a man, who was France’s last great psychologist). There is still a third 
claim to superiority: in the nature of the French there is a semi-successful 
synthesis of north and south, which enables them to understand many things and 
tells them to do other things which an Englishman will never understand. In the 
French, the temperament which periodically turns towards and away from the south 
and in which, from time to time, the Provencal and Ligurian blood bubbles over, 
protects them from the dreadful northern gray on gray and the sunless conceptual 
ghostliness and anaemia—our German sickness of taste, against the excesses 
of which at the moment we have prescribed for ourselves, with great 
decisiveness, blood and iron—or I should say “grand politics” (in accordance 
with a dangerous art of healing which teaches me to wait and wait, but up to 
this point has not taught me to hope).(15) 
Even today there is still in France an advance understanding of and an 
accommodation with those rarer and rarely satisfied people who are too 
all-embracing to find their contentment in some patriotism or other and know how 
to love the south in the north and the north in the south—the born mid-landers, 
the “good Europeans.”—For them Bizet created his music, 
this last genius who saw a new beauty and enticement and—who discovered a 
piece of the south in 
music.(16)
 
255
 
I think all sorts of 
precautions are necessary against German music. Suppose that someone loves the 
south the way I love it, as a great school for convalescing in the most 
spiritual and sensual sense, as an unrestrained abundance of sun and 
transfiguration by the sun, which spreads itself over an existence which rules 
itself and believes in itself. Now, such a man will learn to be quite careful as 
far as German music is concerned, because in ruining his taste again it ruins 
his health again as well. Such a man of the south, not by descent but by faith, must, if he dreams of the future of 
music, also dream of a redemption of music from the north and have in his ears 
the prelude to a more profound, more powerful, perhaps more evil and more 
mysterious music, a supra-German music which does not fade away, turn yellow, 
and grow pale at the sight of the blue voluptuous sea and the brightness of the 
Mediterranean sky, the way all German music does, a supra-European music which 
justifies itself even when confronted with the brown desert sunsets, whose soul 
is related to the palm trees and knows how to be at home and to wander among 
huge, beautiful, solitary, predatory beasts. . . . I could imagine to myself a 
music whose rarest magic consisted in the fact that it no longer knew anything 
about good and evil, only that perhaps here and there some mariner’s nostalgia 
or other, some golden shadow and tender weaknesses would race across it, an art 
which from a great distance could see speeding towards it the colours of a 
sinking moral world—one which has become almost unintelligible—and which 
would be sufficiently hospitable and deep to take in such late fugitives.—
 
256
 
Thanks to the pathological 
alienation which the nationalist idiocy has established and still establishes 
among European peoples, thanks as well to the short-sighted politicians with 
hasty hands, who with the help of this idiocy are on top nowadays and have no 
sense of how much the politics of disintegration which they carry on can 
necessarily be only politics for an intermission—thanks to all this and to many 
things today which are quite impossible to utter, now the most unambiguous signs 
indicating that Europe 
wants to become a unity are being overlooked or willfully and 
mendaciously reinterpreted. With all the more profound and more comprehensive 
men of this century the real overall direction in the mysterious work of their 
souls has been to prepare the way to this new synthesis and to 
anticipate, as an experiment, the European of the future. Only in their 
foregrounds or in their weaker hours, as in old age, for example, did they 
belong to their “fatherlands”—they were only taking a rest from themselves when 
they became “patriots.” I’m thinking of men like Napoleon, Goethe, Beethoven, 
Stendhal, Heinrich Heine, and Schopenhauer. Don’t get upset with me if I also 
count Richard Wagner among them. About him people should not let themselves be 
seduced by his own misunderstandings—geniuses of his kind rarely have the right 
to understand themselves. Even less, of course, by the uncivilized noise with 
which people in France these days close themselves off from and resist Richard 
Wagner. Nonetheless, the fact remains that the late French Romanticism of 
the forties and Richard Wagner belong together in the closest and most inner 
relation. In all the heights and depths of their needs they are related to each 
other, fundamentally related. It is Europe, the one Europe, whose soul pushes 
out and upward through their manifold and impetuous art, and it longs to 
go—where? Into a new light? Towards a new sun? But who could express exactly 
what all these masters of new ways of speaking did not know how to express 
clearly? What is certain is that the same storm and stress tormented them, that 
they sought in the same way, these last great seekers! All of them were 
dominated by literature up to their eyes and ears—the first artists educated in 
world literature—most of them were even themselves writers, poets, conveyers of 
and mixers in the arts and senses (Wagner belongs as a musician with the 
painters, as a poet with the musicians, as an artist generally with the actors); 
they were all fanatics of expression “at any price”—I’ll cite Delacroix, the one 
most closely related to Wagner—they were all great discoverers in the realm of 
the sublime, as well as of the ugly and the horrific, even greater discoverers 
in effects, in display, in the art of the store window—all talents far beyond 
their genius, virtuosos through and through, with mysterious access to 
everything that seduces, entices, compels, knocks over, born enemies of logic 
and the straight line, greedy for the strange, the exotic, the monstrous, the 
crooked, the self-contradictory; as men they were Tantaluses of the will, 
up-and-coming plebeians, who knew that they were incapable of a noble tempo, a lento [slow movement], 
in their lives and works—think, for example, of Balzac—unrestrained workers, 
almost killing themselves with work, antinomians and rebels against morals, 
ambitious and insatiable without equilibrium and enjoyment; all of them finally 
collapsing and sinking down before the Christian cross (and they were right and 
justified in that, for who among them would have been sufficiently profound and 
original for a philosophy of the Antichrist?—), on the whole, a boldly daring, marvellously violent, 
high-flying kind of higher men, who pulled others up into the heights, men who 
first taught the idea of “higher man” to their century—and it’s the century of 
the masses!(17) 
The German friends of Richard Wagner should think about whether there is 
anything essentially German in Wagnerian art or whether it is not precisely its 
distinction that it comes from supra-German sources and 
urges. In doing that, one should not underestimate just how indispensable Paris 
was for the development of a type like him, how at the most decisive period the 
depth of his instincts called him there, and how his whole way of appearing and 
his self-apostleship could perfect itself only at the sight of the model of 
French socialists. Perhaps with a more sophisticated comparison people will 
discover, to the honour of Richard Wagner’s German nature, that he carried 
everything out more strongly, more daringly, harder, and higher than a Frenchman 
of the nineteenth century could have done—thanks to the fact that we Germans are 
still closer to barbarism than the French are. Perhaps the most peculiar thing 
that Richard Wagner created is even inaccessible and unsympathetic to and beyond 
the emulation of the entire Latin race, which is so mature, for all time and not 
merely for today: the character of Siegfried, that very free man, who, 
in fact, may be far too free, too hard, too cheerful, too healthy, too anti-Catholic
for the taste of an old and worn cultured people. He may even have been a 
sin against Romanticism, this anti-Roman [antiromanische] Siegfried. 
Well, Wagner more than made up for this sin in his old and gloomy days when—in 
anticipation of a taste which in the meantime has become political—he began, 
with his characteristic religious vehemence, if not to go to Rome, at 
least to preach the way there. So that you do not misunderstand these last words 
of mine, I’ll summon a few powerful rhymes to my assistance, which will reveal 
what I mean to less refined ears as well—what I have against the “late 
Wagner” and his Parsifal music:
 
Is that still German?
Did this oppressive screech come from a German heart?
Is this self-mutilation of the flesh a German part?
And is this German, such priestly affectation,
this incense-smelling, sensual stimulation?
And German this faltering, plunging, staggering,
this uncertain bim-bam dangling?
This nun-like ogling and ringing Ave bells,
this whole false heavenly super-heaven of spells?
Is that still German?
Think! You’re still standing by the entrance way.
You’re hearing Rome, Rome’s faith without the words 
they say.
 

NOTES
 
(1) August Kotzebue 
(1761-1819), a well-known German writer assassinated by Karl Sand 
(1795-1820); John Paul (1763-1825), pen name of Johann Richter, an 
influential German writer in the Romantic era; Johann Gottlieb Fichte 
(1797-1879), an influential German philosopher. [Back 
to Text]
 
(2) Wars of Liberation: the 
wars against Napoleon which followed the French Revolution. [Back 
to Text]
 
(3) Napoleon Bonaparte 
(I1769-1821) French general, ruler of France, and conqueror of much of Europe;
Rousseau: Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712-1778), critic, philosopher and 
writer whose work influenced the French Revolution; Schiller: Johann Christoph Friedrich 
von Schiller (1759-1805), German poet, playwright, and philosopher; Shelley: 
Percy Bysshe Shelley (1792-1822), a major English poet in the Romantic era; 
Byron: George Gordon Byron (Lord Byron) (1788-1824), English poet in the 
Romantic era, a leading international presence in European Romanticism.
[Back to Text]
 
(4) Carl Maria Friedrich Ernst von 
Weber (1786-1826), German musician during the Romantic period; 
Heinrich Marschner (1795-1861), German composer of operas. [Back 
to Text]
 
(5) Felix Mendelssohn 
(1809-1847) German composer in the early Romantic period. [Back 
to Text]
 
(6) Robert Schumann (1810-1856) 
German composer and music critic; Werther: hero of a famous Romantic 
novel by Goethe (he commits suicide). [Back 
to Text]
 
(7) Cicero (106-43 BC), the 
greatest of the Roman orators and prose stylists; Demosthenes (384-322 BC, a 
very famous Greek orator. [Back 
to Text]
 
(8) Heinrich von Sybel (1817-1895) 
and Heinrich von Treitschke (1834-1896), important mid-nineteenth 
century German historians. [Back to Text]
 
(9) Mark Brandenburg: a region 
near Berlin. [Back to Text]
 
(10) Thomas Hobbes (1588-1679), 
English philosopher; David Hume (1711-1776), Scottish historian and philosopher; 
John Locke (1632-1704), English philosopher; Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling
(1775-1854), German philosopher. [Back to Text]
 
(11) Thomas Carlyle (1795-1881), 
Scottish essayist, historian, and biographer. [Back 
to Text]
 
(12) Charles Darwin (1809-1882) 
English scientist, whose Origin of Species was published in 1859; 
John Stuart 
Mill (1806-1873), English utilitarian philosopher and economist; Herbert Spencer
(1820-1903), English philosopher. [Back to 
Text]
 
(13) Victor Hugo (1802-1885), 
French poet, playwright, and novelist. [Back 
to Text]
 
(14) Heinrich Heine (1797-1856), 
German lyric poet; Hippolye Adolphe Taine (1828-1893), French critic and 
historian. [Back to Text]
 
(15) blood and iron: a phrase made 
famous by Otto Eduard Leopold von Bismarck (1815-1898), First Chancellor of 
Germany: “Not by speeches and votes of the majority are the great questions of 
the time decided . . . but by iron and blood.” [Back 
to Text]
 
(16) Georges Bizet (1838-1875), 
French composer and pianist. [Back to Text]
 
(17) Ferdinand Victor Eugene 
Delacroix (1798-1863), important French Romantic painter; Honore de Balzac 
(1799-1850), prolific French novelist. [Back 
to Text]


============================================================
Part 9: What is Noble?
============================================================

Friedrich Nietzsche

BEYOND GOOD AND EVIL
 
Translated by Ian Johnston, Vancouver Island University, 
Nanaimo, British Columbia, Canada
 
Students, teachers, artists, and members of the 
general public may download and distribute this text without permission and 
without charge. They may also freely edit the text for their own purposes. All 
commercial use of this translation, however, is forbidden without the permission 
of the translator. For comments and questions, please contact 
Ian Johnston.
 
For a Rich Text Version (Word) of this text, please 
use the following link: 

Beyond Good and Evil [RTF] 
 
[Table 
of Contents for Beyond Good and Evil]
 
 
 PART NINE
WHAT IS NOBLE?
 
257
 
Every enhancement in the type 
“man” up to this point has been the work of an aristocratic society—and that’s 
how it will always be, over and over again: a society that believes in a long 
scale of rank ordering and differences in worth between one person and another 
and that, in some sense or other, requires slavery. Without the pathos of 
distance, the sort which grows out of the deeply rooted difference between 
the social classes, out of the constant gazing outward and downward of the 
ruling caste on the subjects and work implements, and out of their equally 
sustained practice of obedience and command, holding down and holding at a 
distance, that other more mysterious pathos would have no chance of growing at 
all, that longing for an ever new widening of distances inside the soul itself, 
the development of ever higher, rarer, more distant, more expansive, more 
comprehensive states, in short, simply the enhancement in the type “man,” the 
constant “self-surmounting of man,” to cite a moral formula in a supra-moral 
sense. Of course, where the history of the origins of aristocratic society is 
concerned (and thus the precondition for that raising of the type “man”—), we 
should not surrender to humanitarian illusions: truth is hard. So without 
further consideration, let’s admit to ourselves how up to this point every 
higher culture on earth has started! People with a still natural 
nature, barbarians in every dreadful sense of the word, predatory men still in 
possession of an unbroken power of the will and a desire for power, threw 
themselves on weaker, more civilized, more peaceful, perhaps trading or 
cattle-raising races, or on old, worn cultures, in which at that very moment the 
final forces of life were flickering out in a dazzling fireworks display of 
spirit and corruption. At the start the noble caste has always been the 
barbarian caste: its superiority has lain not primarily in physical might but in 
spiritual power—it has been a matter of more complete human beings 
(which at every level also means “more complete beasts”).
 
258
 
Corruption as the expression of 
the fact that within the instincts anarchy is threatening and that the 
foundation of the affects, what we call “life,” has been shaken: according to 
the living structure in which it appears, corruption is something fundamentally 
different. When, for example, an aristocracy, like that in France at the start 
of the Revolution, throws away its privileges with a sublime disgust and 
sacrifices itself to a dissipation of its moral feelings, this is 
corruption:—essentially it was only the final act in that centuries-long 
corruption, thanks to which the aristocracy step-by-step gave up its ruling 
authority and reduced itself to a function of the monarchy (finally 
even to the monarch’s finery and display pieces). The essential thing in a good 
and healthy aristocracy, however, is that it feels itself not as a 
function (whether of a monarchy or of a community) but as its significance and 
highest justification—that it therefore with good conscience accepts the 
sacrifice of an enormous number of people, who for its sake must be 
oppressed and reduced to incomplete men, to slaves and instruments of work. Its 
fundamental belief must, in fact, be that the society should exist, not for 
the sake of the society, but only as a base and framework on which an 
exceptional kind of nature can raise itself to its higher function and, in 
general, to a higher form of being, comparable to those heliotropic climbing 
plants on Java—people call them sipo matador—whose tendrils clutch an 
oak tree so much and for so long until finally, high over the tree but supported 
by it, they can unfold their crowns in the open light and make a display of 
their happiness.—
 
259
 
Mutually refraining from 
wounding each other, from violence, and from exploitation, and setting one’s 
will on the same level as others—these can in a certain crude sense become good 
habits among individuals, if conditions exist for that (namely, a real 
similarity in the quality of their power and their estimates of value, as well 
as their belonging together within a single body). However, as soon as people 
wanted to take this principle further and, where possible, establish it as the basic 
principle of society, it would immediately show itself for what it is, as 
the willed denial of life, as the principle of disintegration and 
decay. Here we must think through to the fundamentals and push away all 
sentimental weakness: living itself is essentially appropriation from 
and wounding and overpowering strangers and weaker people, oppression, hardness, 
imposing one’s own forms, annexing, and at the very least, in its mildest 
actions, exploitation—but why should we always use these precise words, which 
have from ancient times carried the stamp of a slanderous purpose? Even that 
body in which, as previously mentioned, individuals deal with each other as 
equals—and that happens in every healthy aristocracy—must itself, if it is a 
living body and not dying out, do to other bodies all those things which the 
individuals in it refrain from doing to each other: it will have to be the 
living will to power, it will seek to grow, grab things around it, pull to 
itself, and acquire predominance—not because of some morality or immorality, but 
because it is alive and because living is simply the will to power. But 
in no point is the common consciousness of the European more reluctant to be 
instructed than here. Nowadays people everywhere, even those in scientific 
disguises, are raving about the coming conditions of society from which “the 
exploitative character” is to have disappeared:—to my ears that sounds as if 
people had promised to invent a life which abstained from all organic functions. 
The “exploitation” is not part of a depraved or incomplete and primitive 
society: it belongs to the essential nature of what is living, as a 
basic organic function; it is a consequence of the real will to power, which is 
simply the will to life.—Assuming that this is something new as a theory—it is, 
nonetheless, in reality the fundamental fact of all history: we should 
at least be honest with ourselves to this extent!
 
260
 
As the result of a stroll 
though the many more sophisticated and cruder moral systems which up to this 
point have ruled or still rule on earth, I found certain characteristics 
routinely return with each other, bound up together, until finally two basic 
types revealed themselves to me and a fundamental difference sprang up. There 
is master morality, and there is slave morality—to this I 
immediately add that in all higher and more mixed cultures attempts at a 
mediation between both moralities make an appearance as well, even more often, a 
confusion and mutual misunderstanding between the two, in fact, sometimes their 
close juxtaposition—even in the same person, within a single soul. Distinctions 
in moral value have arisen either among a ruling group which was happily 
conscious of its difference with respect to the ruled—or among the ruled, the 
slaves and dependent people of every degree. In the first case, when it’s the 
masters who establish the idea of the “good,” the elevated and proud conditions 
of the soul emotionally register as the distinguishing and defining order of 
rank. The noble man separates his own nature from that of people in whom the 
opposite of such exalted and proud states expresses itself. He despises them. We 
should notice at once that in this first kind of morality the opposites “good” 
and “bad” mean no more than “noble” and “despicable”—the opposition between 
“good” and “evil” has another origin. The despised one is the coward, the 
anxious, the small, the man who thinks about narrow utility, also the suspicious 
man with his inhibited look, the self-abasing man, the species of human dogs who 
allow themselves to be mistreated, the begging flatterer, and, above all, the 
liar:—it is a basic belief of all aristocrats that the common folk are liars. 
“We tellers of the truth”—that’s what the nobility called itself in ancient 
Greece. It’s evident that distinctions of moral worth everywhere were first 
applied to men and then later, by extension, were established for actions; 
hence, it is a serious mistake when historians of morality take as a starting 
point questions like “Why was the compassionate action praised?” The noble kind 
of man experiences himself as a person who determines value and who 
does not need other people’s approval. He makes the judgment “What is harmful to 
me is harmful in itself.” He understands himself as something which in general 
first confers honour on things, as something which creates values. 
Whatever he recognizes in himself he honours. Such a morality is 
self-glorification. In the foreground stands the feeling of fullness, the power 
which wants to overflow, the happiness of high tension, the consciousness of 
riches which wants to give presents and provide:—the noble man also helps the 
unfortunate, however not, or hardly ever, from pity, but more in response to an 
impulse which the excess of power produces. The noble person honours the 
powerful man in himself and also the man who has power over himself, who 
understands how to speak and how to keep silent, who takes delight in dealing 
with himself severely and toughly, and who respects, above all, severity and 
toughness. “Wotan set a hard heart in my breast,” it says in an old Scandinavian 
saga: that’s poetry emerging from the soul of a proud Viking—and justifiably so. 
A man of this sort is simply proud of the fact that he has not been 
made for pity. That’s why the hero of the saga adds a warning, “In a man whose 
heart is not hard when he is still young it will never become hard.” Noble and 
brave men who think this way are furthest removed from that morality which sees 
the badge of morality specifically in pity or in actions for others or in désintéressement 
[disinterestedness]. The belief in oneself, pride in oneself, a fundamental 
hostility and irony against “selflessness” belong to noble morality, just as 
much as an easy contempt and caution before feelings of pity and the “warm 
heart.” Powerful men are the ones who understand how to honour; that is 
their art, their realm of invention. The profound reverence for age and for 
ancestral tradition—all justice stands on this double reverence—the belief and 
the prejudice favouring forefathers and working against newcomers are typical in 
the morality of the powerful, and when, by contrast, the men of “modern ideas” 
believe almost instinctively in “progress” and the “future” and increasingly 
lack any respect for age, then in that attitude the ignoble origin of these 
“ideas” already reveals itself well enough. However, a morality of the rulers is 
most alien and embarrassing to present taste because of the severity of its 
basic principle that man has duties only with respect to those like him, that 
man should act towards those beings of lower rank, towards everything foreign, 
at his own discretion, or “as his heart dictates,” and, in any case, “beyond 
good and evil.” Here pity and things like that may belong. The capacity for and 
obligation to a long gratitude and a long revenge—both only within the circle of 
one’s peers—the sophistication in paying back again, the refined idea in 
friendship, a certain necessity to have enemies (as, so to speak, drainage 
ditches for the feelings of envy, quarrelsomeness, and high spirits—basically in 
order to be capable of being a good friend): all those are typical 
characteristics of a noble morality, which, as indicated, is not the morality of 
“modern ideas” and which is thus nowadays difficult to sympathize with, as well 
as difficult to dig up and expose. Things are different with the second type of 
moral system, slave morality. Suppose the oppressed, depressed, 
suffering and unfree people, those ignorant of themselves and tired out, suppose 
they moralize: what will be the common feature of their moral estimates of 
value? Probably a pessimistic suspicion directed at the entire human situation 
will express itself, perhaps a condemnation of man, along with his situation. 
The gaze of a slave is not well disposed towards the virtues of the powerful; he 
possesses scepticism and mistrust; he has a subtlety of mistrust of 
everything “good” that is honoured in those virtues—he would like to persuade 
himself that even happiness is not genuine there. By contrast, those 
characteristics will be pulled forward and flooded with light which serve to 
mitigate existence for those who suffer: here respect is given to pity, to the 
obliging hand ready to help, to the warm heart, to patience, diligence, 
humility, and friendliness—for these are here the most useful characteristics 
and almost the only means to endure the pressure of existence. Slave morality is 
essentially a morality of utility. Here is the focus for the origin of that 
famous opposition of “good” and “evil”:—people sense power and danger 
within evil, a certain terror, subtlety, and strength that does not permit 
contempt to spring up. According to slave morality, the “evil” man thus inspires 
fear; according to master morality, it is precisely the “good” man who inspires 
and desires to inspire fear, while the “bad” man is felt as despicable. This 
opposition reaches its peak when, in accordance with the consequences of slave 
morality, finally a trace of disregard is also attached to the “good” of this 
morality—it may be light and benevolent—because within the way of thinking of 
the slave the good person must definitely be the harmless person: he is 
good natured, easy to deceive, perhaps a bit stupid, un bonhomme [a good 
fellow]. Wherever slave morality gains predominance the language reveals a 
tendency to bring the words “good” and “stupid” into closer proximity. A final 
basic difference: the longing for freedom, the instinct for happiness, 
and the refinements of the feeling for freedom belong just as necessarily to 
slave morality and morals as art and enthusiasm in reverence and in devotion are 
the regular symptoms of an aristocratic way of thinking and valuing. From this 
we can without further ado understand why love as passion—which is our 
European specialty—must clearly have a noble origin: as is well known, its 
invention belongs to the Provencal knightly poets, those splendidly inventive 
men of the “gay saber” [gay science] to whom Europe owes so 
much—almost its very self.
 
261
 
Vanity is among the things that 
are perhaps hardest for a noble man to understand: he will be tempted even to 
deny its existence where another kind of man thinks he has grasped it with both 
hands. For him the problem is imagining to himself beings who seek to elicit a 
good opinion of themselves which they themselves do not possess—and which, as a 
result, they also have not “earned”—people who, nonetheless, themselves later believe in 
this good opinion. Half of this seems to the noble man so tasteless and 
disrespectful of oneself and the other half so unreasonably baroque, that he 
would be happy to understand vanity as an exception and has doubts about it in 
most cases when people talk of it. For example, he’ll say: “I can make a mistake 
about my own value and yet on the other hand still demand that my value, 
precisely as I determine it, is recognized by others—that, however, is not 
vanity (but arrogance or, in the more frequent cases, something called 
“humility” and “modesty”). Or again, “For many reasons I can take pleasure in 
the good opinion of others, perhaps because I honour and love them and enjoy all 
of their pleasures, perhaps also because their good opinion underscores and 
strengthens the faith I have in my own good opinion of myself, or perhaps 
because the good opinion of others, even in cases where I do not share it, is 
still useful to me or promises to be useful—but all that is not vanity.” The 
noble man must first compel himself, particularly with the help of history, to 
see that since time immemorial, in all the levels of people dependent in some 
way or other, the common man was only what people thought of him:—not 
being at all accustomed to set values himself, he measured even himself by no 
value other than by how his masters assessed him (that is the essential right 
of masters, to create values). We should understand that, as the 
consequence of an immense atavism, the common man even today still always 
waits first for an opinion about himself and then instinctively submits 
himself to it: however, that is by no means merely to a “good” opinion, but also 
to a bad and unreasonable one (think, for example, of the greatest part of the 
self-assessment and self-devaluing which devout women learn from their father 
confessors and the devout Christian in general learns from his church). Now, in 
accordance with the slow arrival of the democratic order of things (and its 
cause, the blood mixing between masters and slaves), the originally noble and 
rare impulse to ascribe to oneself a value on one’s own and “to think well” of 
oneself will really become more and more encouraged and widespread. But in every 
moment it has working against it an older, more extensive, and more deeply 
incorporated tendency—and where the phenomenon of “vanity” is concerned, this 
older tendency becomes master over the more recent one. The vain person takes 
pleasure in every good opinion which he hears about himself (quite apart from 
all considerations of its utility and equally apart from its truth or falsity), 
just as he suffers from every bad opinion. For he submits to both; he feels himself 
subjected to them on the basis of that oldest of instincts for submission which 
breaks out in him. It is “the slave” in the blood of the vain man, a trace of 
the slave’s roguishness—and how much of the “slave” still remains nowadays in 
woman, for example!—that tries to tempt him into good opinions of 
himself; in the same way it’s the slave who later prostrates himself immediately 
in front of these opinions, as if he had not summoned them up. —To state the 
matter once again: vanity is an atavism.
 
262
 
A species arises, a 
type becomes established and strong, under the long struggle with essentially 
unchanging, unfavourable conditions. By contrast, we know from the 
experience of breeders that species which receive an ultra-abundant nourishment 
and, in general, an increase in protection and care immediately tend towards 
variety in the type in the strongest manner and are rich in wonders and 
monstrosities (as well as monstrous vices). Now, let’s look at an aristocratic 
commonwealth—for example, an ancient Greek polis [city state]or 
Venice—as an organization, whether voluntary or involuntary, for the purpose of breeding. 
There are men there living together who rely upon one another and who want their 
species to succeed mainly because it has to succeed or run the fearful 
risk of being annihilated. Here there is a lack of that advantage, that excess, 
that protection under which variations are encouraged. The species senses the 
need for itself as a species, as something which, particularly thanks to its 
hardness, uniformity, and simplicity of form, can generally succeed and 
enable itself to keep going in the constant struggles with neighbours or with 
the rebellious oppressed people or with those who threaten rebellion. The most 
varied experience teaches them which characteristics they have to thank, above 
all, for the fact that they are still there, in spite of all the gods and men, 
that they have always been victorious up to this point. These characteristics 
they call virtues, and they cultivate only these virtues to any great extent. 
They do that with severity—in fact, they desire severity. Every aristocratic 
morality is intolerant in its education of the young, its provisions for women, 
its marriage customs, its relationships between young and old, and its penal 
laws (which fix their eyes only on those who are deviants)—it reckons 
intolerance itself among the virtues, under the name “justice.” A type with few 
but very strong characteristics, a species of strict, warlike, shrewdly laconic 
people, close-knit and reserved (and, as such, having the most sophisticated 
feelings for the charm and nuances of society) in this way establishes itself 
over and above the changes in the generations. The constant struggle with 
unvarying, unfavourable conditions is, as mentioned, the factor that 
makes a type fixed and hard. Finally, however, at some point a fortunate time 
arises, which lets the immense tension ease. Perhaps there are no more enemies 
among the neighbours, and the means for living, even for enjoying life, are 
there in abundance. With one blow the bond and the compulsion of the old 
discipline are torn apart: that discipline no longer registers as necessary, as 
a condition of existence—if it wished to remain in existence, it could do so 
only as a form of luxury, as an archaic taste. Variation, 
whether as something abnormal (something higher, finer, and rarer) or as 
degeneration and monstrosity, suddenly bursts onto the scene in the greatest 
abundance and splendour; the individual dares to be individual and stand apart. 
At these historical turning points there appear alongside each other and often 
involved and mixed up together marvellous, multifaceted, jungle-like growths, an 
upward soaring, a kind of tropical tempo in competitiveness for growing 
and an immense annihilation and self-destruction, thanks to the wild egoisms 
turned against each other and, as it were, exploding, which wrestle with one 
another “for sun and light” and no longer know how to derive any limit, any 
restraint, or any consideration from the morality they have had up to that 
point. This very morality was the one which built up such immense power, which 
bent the bow in such a threatening manner—now, at this moment, it is and is 
becoming “outdated.” The dangerous and disturbing point is reached where the 
greater, more multifaceted, and more comprehensive life lives beyond the 
old morality; the “individual” stands there, forced to give himself his own 
laws, his own arts and tricks for self-preservation, self-raising, and 
self-redemption. Nothing but new what-for’s, nothing but new how-to’s, 
no common formulas any more, misunderstanding and contempt bound up together, 
decay, spoilage, and the highest desires tied together in a ghastly way, the 
genius of the race brimming over from all the horns of plenty with good and bad, 
an ominous simultaneous presence of spring and autumn, full of new charms and 
veils, characteristic of young, still unexhausted, still unwearied depravity. 
Once again there’s danger there, the mother of morality, great danger, this time 
transferred into the individual, into one’s neighbour and friend, into the 
alleyways, into one’s own child, into one’s own heart, into all the narrowest 
and most secret parts of one’s wishes and desires. What will the moral 
philosophers who emerge at such a time now have to preach? They discover, these 
keen observers and street loafers, that things are quickly coming to an end, 
that everything around them is going rotten and spreading corruption, that 
nothing lasts until the day after tomorrow, except for one kind of person, the 
incurably mediocre. Only the mediocre have the prospect of succeeding, 
of reproducing themselves—they are the people of the future, the only survivors, 
“Be like them! Become mediocre!”—from now on that’s the only morality that still 
makes sense, that people still hear.—But it is difficult to preach, this 
morality of mediocrity!—it may never admit what it is and what it wants! It must 
speak about restraint and worth and duty and love of one’s neighbour—it will 
have difficulty concealing its irony!
 
263
 
There is an instinct for 
rank which, more than anything, is already an indication of a high rank. 
There is a delight in the nuances of respect which permits us to 
surmise a noble origin and habits. The refinement, goodness, and loftiness of a 
soul are put to a dangerous test when something goes past in front of it which 
is of the first rank, but which is not yet protected by the fear of authority 
from prying clutches and crudities: something that goes its way unmarked, 
undiscovered, tentative, perhaps arbitrarily disguised and hidden, like a living 
touchstone. The man whose task and practice is to investigate souls will use 
precisely this art in a number of different forms in order to establish the 
ultimate value of a soul, the unalterable innate order of rank to which it 
belongs: he will put it to the test for its instinct of reverence. 
Différence engendre haine [Difference engenders hatred]: the nastiness of 
some natures suddenly spurts out like dirty water when some sacred container, 
some precious object from a locked shrine, or some book with marks of a great 
destiny is carried by. On the other hand, there is an involuntary falling 
silent, a hesitation in the eye, an end to all gestures, things which express 
that a soul feels close to something most worthy of reverence. The way 
in which reverence for the Bible in Europe has, on the whole, been maintained so 
far is perhaps the best piece of discipline and refinement of habits for which 
Europe owes a debt of thanks to Christianity: such books of profundity and 
ultimate significance need for their protection an externally imposed tyranny of 
authority in order to last for those thousands of years necessary to 
exhaust them and sort out what they mean. Much has been achieved when in the 
great mass of people (the shallow ones and all sorts of people with diarrhoea) 
the feeling has finally been cultivated that they are not permitted to touch 
everything, that there are sacred experiences before which they have to pull off 
their shoes and which they must keep their dirty hands off—this is almost the 
highest intensification of their humanity. By contrast, perhaps nothing makes 
the so-called educated people, those who have faith in “modern ideas,” so 
nauseating as their lack of shame, the comfortable impudence in their eyes and 
hands, with which they touch, lick, and grope everything, and it is possible 
that these days among a people, one still finds in the common folk, particularly 
among the peasants, more relative nobility of taste and tactful 
reverence than among the newspaper-reading demi-monde of the spirit, 
among the educated.
 
264
 
One cannot erase from a human 
being’s soul those actions which his ancestors loved most and carried out most 
steadfastly: whether they were, for example, industrious savers attached to a 
writing table and money box, modest and bourgeois in their desires, as well as 
modest in their virtues, or whether they were accustomed to live giving orders 
from morning until night, fond of harsh entertainment and, along with that, 
perhaps of even harsher duties and responsibilities; or whether, finally, they 
had at some time or other once sacrificed the old privileges of their birth and 
possessions in order to live entirely for their faith—for their “god”—as men of 
an unrelenting and delicate conscience, which blushes when confronted with any 
compromise. It is in no way possible that a man does not possess in his 
body the characteristics and preferences of his parents and forefathers, no 
matter what appearance might say to the contrary. This is the problem of race. 
If we know something about the parents, then we may draw a conclusion about the 
child: some unpleasant excess or other, some lurking envy, a crude habit of 
self-justification—these three together have at all times made up the essential 
type of the rabble—something like that must be passed onto the child as surely 
as corrupt blood, and with the help of the best education and culture people 
will succeed only in deceiving others about such heredity. And nowadays 
what else do education and culture want! In our age, one very much of the 
people—I mean to say our uncouth age—“education” and “culture” must basically 
be the art of deception—to mislead about the origin of the inherited rabble in 
one’s body and soul. Today an educator who preached truthfulness above 
everything else and constantly shouted at his students “Be true! Be natural! Act 
as you really are!”—even such a virtuous and true-hearted jackass would after 
some time learn to take hold of that furca [pitchfork] of Horace, in 
order to naturam expellere [drive out nature]. With 
what success? “Rabble” usque recurret [will always return].(1)
 
265
 
At the risk of annoying 
innocent ears, I propose the following: egoism belongs to the nature of the 
noble soul; I mean that unshakeable faith that to a being such as “we are” other 
beings must be subordinate by nature and have to sacrifice themselves. The noble 
soul takes this fact of its egoism without any question mark and without the 
feeling that there is anything harsh, compelled, or arbitrary in it, much more 
as something that may be established in the fundamental law of things. If he 
sought out a name for this, he would say “It is justice itself.” In some 
circumstances which make him hesitate at first, he admits that there are those 
with rights equal to his own. As soon as he has cleared up this question of 
rank, he moves among these equals who have the same rights as his with the same 
confident modesty and sophisticated reverence which he has in his dealings with 
himself—in accordance with an inborn heavenly mechanism which all the stars 
understand. It is one more part of his egoism, this sophistication and 
self-restraint in his relations with his equals—every star is such an egoist—: 
his soul honours itself in them and in the rights which it concedes to 
them. It has no doubt that the exchange of respect and rights, as the essential 
quality of all interactions, also belongs to the natural condition of 
things. The noble soul gives as it takes, out of the passionate and sensitive 
instinct for repayment, which lies deep within it. The idea “favour” has no 
sense and agreeable fragrance inter pares [among equals]; there may be 
a sublime manner of allowing presents from above to wash over one, as it were, 
and of drinking them up thirstily like water drops, but for these arts and 
gestures the noble soul has no skill. Here its egoism hinders it: in general, it 
is not happy to look “up above”—instead it looks either directly forward, 
horizontally and slowly, or down—it knows that it is on a height.
 
266
 
“We can only truly respect 
highly the man who is not seeking himself” Goethe to Councillor 
Schlosser.
 
267
 
There is a saying among the 
Chinese that mothers even teach their children: siao-sin, “Make your 
heart small!” This is the essential and basic tendency of late 
civilizations: I have no doubt that an ancient Greek would at once recognize 
this self-diminution in us contemporary Europeans as well—and for that reason 
alone we would already go “against his taste.”
 
268
 
Ultimately, what does it mean 
to be ignoble?—Words are sound signals for ideas, but ideas are more or less 
firm image signs for sensations which return frequently and occur together, for 
groups of sensations. To understand each other, it is not yet sufficient that 
people use the same words; they must also use the same words for the same form 
of inner experiences; in the end they must hold their experience in common
with each other. That’s why human beings belonging to a single people 
understand each other better among themselves than associations of different 
peoples, even when they use the same language; or rather, when human beings have 
lived together for a long time under similar conditions (climate, soil, danger, 
needs, work), then something arises out of that which “understands 
itself”—a people. In all souls, a similar number of frequently repeating 
experiences have won the upper hand over those which come more rarely; people 
understand each other on the basis of the former quickly and with 
ever-increasing speed—the history of language is the history of a process of 
abbreviation, and on the basis of this rapid understanding, people bind with one 
another, closely and with ever-increasing closeness. The greater the danger, the 
greater the need quickly and easily to come to agreement over what needs to be 
done; not to misunderstand each other when in danger is what people simply 
cannot do without in their interactions. With every friendship or love affair 
people still make this test: nothing of that sort lasts as soon as people reach 
the point where, with the same words, one of the two feels, means, senses, 
wishes, or fears something different from the other one. (The fear of the 
“eternal misunderstanding”: that is the benevolent genius which so often 
prevents people of different sexes from over-hasty unions, to which their senses 
and hearts urge them—and not some Schopenhauerish “genius of the 
species”!—). Which groups of sensations within the soul wake up most rapidly, 
seize the word, give the order—that decides about the whole rank ordering of its 
values, that finally determines its tables of goods. The assessments of value in 
a man reveal something about the structure of his soul and where it 
looks for its conditions of life, its essential needs. Now, assume that need has 
always brought together only such people as could indicate with similar signs 
similar requirements and similar experiences, then it generally turns out that 
the easy ability to communicate need, that is, in the last analysis, 
familiarity with only average and common experiences, must have been 
the most powerful of all the forces which have so far determined things among 
human beings. People who are more similar and more ordinary have been and always 
are at an advantage; the more exceptional, more refined, rarer, and more 
difficult to understand easily remain isolated; in their isolation they are 
subject to accidents and rarely propagate themselves. People have to summon up 
huge counter-forces to check this natural, all-too-natural progressus in 
simile [advance into similarity], the further development of human beings 
into what’s similar, ordinary, average, herd-like—into what’s common.
 
269
 
The more a psychologist—a born 
and inevitable psychologist and diviner of the soul—turns himself towards 
exceptional examples and human beings, the greater the danger to him of 
suffocation from pity. He has to be hard and cheerful, more so than 
another man. For the corruption and destruction of loftier men, of the stranger 
type of soul, is the rule: it is terrible to have such a rule always before 
one’s eyes. The multifaceted torment of the psychologist who has uncovered this 
destructiveness, who once discovers and then almost always rediscovers 
throughout all history this entire inner “hopelessness” of the loftier people, 
this eternal “too late!” in every sense—this torment can perhaps one day become 
the reason he turns with bitterness against his own lot, attempts 
self-destruction—and “corrupts” himself. With almost every psychologist we will 
see a revealing inclination for and delight in associating with ordinary and 
well-adjusted people: that indicates that he always needs healing, that he 
requires some sort of refuge and forgetting, far from what his insights and 
incisions, his “trade,” have laid on his conscience. Fear of his memory is 
characteristic of him. He is easily reduced to silence before the judgments of 
others; he listens with an unmoving face as people revere, admire, love, and 
transfigure where he has seen, or he even hides his silence, while he 
expressly agrees with some foreground point of view or other. Perhaps the 
paradox of his situation gets so terrible that precisely where he has learned 
great pity as well as great contempt, the crowd, the educated, and the 
enthusiasts have for their part learned great admiration—the admiration for 
“great men” and miraculous animals for whose sake people bless and honour the 
fatherland, the earth, the value of humanity, and themselves, those to whom they 
draw the attention of the young and whom they use as role models in their 
education . . . And who knows whether in all great examples up to this point the 
very same thing has not happened: the crowd worshipped a god—and the “god” was 
only a poor sacrificial animal! Success has always been the greatest liar, and 
the “work” itself a success; the great statesman, the conqueror, or the 
discoverer is disguised in his creation to the point where he is unrecognizable; 
the “work” of the artist and of the philosopher first invents the man who has 
created it or is supposed to have created it; the “great men,” as they are 
honoured, are small inferior works of fiction written later; in the world of 
historical values counterfeit is king. These great 
poets, for example, this Byron, Musset, Poe, Leopardi, Kleist, Gogol(2)—as 
they now are and perhaps had to be: men of the moment, enthusiastic, sensuous, 
childish, careless and sudden with trust and mistrust; with souls in which some 
fracture or other normally has to be concealed; often taking revenge in their 
works for an inner slur, often seeking with their flights upward to forget some 
all-too-true memory, often lost in the mud and almost infatuated, until they 
become like will o’ the wisps around a swamp and pretend that they are 
stars—then the populace may well call them idealists—often struggling against a 
long disgust, with a recurring ghost of unbelief which makes them cold and 
forces them to yearn for gloria [glory] and to feed on “inherent faith” 
from the hands of intoxicated flatterers—what torture are these great 
artists and the loftier human beings in general for the man who has once guessed 
who they are! It is thus understandable that they should so readily 
experience from woman—who is clairvoyant in the world of suffering and who 
unfortunately also seeks to help and to save far beyond her powers—those 
eruptions of unlimited and most devoted pity which the crowd, above all 
the worshipping masses, does not understand and which it overwhelms with curious 
and complacent interpretations. This pity regularly deceives itself about its 
power; woman may believe that love can do everything—that’s a belief essential 
to her. Alas, anyone who knows about the heart can guess how poor, stupid, 
helpless, presumptuous, mistaken, more easily destructive than saving even the 
best and deepest love is! It is possible that beneath the sacred story and 
charade of the life of Jesus there lies hidden one of the most painful examples 
of the martyrdom of knowledge about love: the martyrdom of the most 
innocent and most desiring heart, which was never satisfied with any human love, 
which demanded love, to be loved and nothing else, with hardness, with 
madness, with fearful outbreaks against those who denied him love; the history 
of a poor man unsatisfied and insatiable with love, who had to invent hell in 
order to send there those who did not wish to love him—and who finally, 
having grown to understand human love, had to invent a God who is entirely love, 
who is entirely capable of love—who takes pity on human love because it 
is so pathetic, so unknowing! Anyone who feels this way, who knows about love in 
this way—seeks death.—But why dwell on such painful things? Assuming we 
don’t have to.—
 
270
 
The spiritual arrogance and 
disgust of every man who has suffered deeply—how profoundly men can 
suffer almost determines their order of rank—his chilling certainty, with which 
he is thoroughly soaked and coloured, that thanks to his suffering he knows 
more than the cleverest and wisest can know, that he has experienced and at 
some point been “at home” in many terrible far-off worlds, about which “you 
know nothing!” . . . this spiritual and silent arrogance of the sufferer, this 
pride of the one chosen to know, of the “initiate,” of the one who has almost 
been sacrificed, finds all kinds of disguise necessary to protect itself from 
contact with prying and compassionate hands and, in general, from everything 
which is not its equal in pain. Profound suffering ennobles; it separates. One 
of the most sophisticated forms of disguise is Epicureanism and a certain 
continuing courageousness in taste adopted as a show, which takes suffering 
lightly and resists everything sad and deep. There are “cheerful men” who use 
cheerfulness because it makes them misunderstood—they want to be 
misunderstood. There are “scientific people” who use science because that 
provides a cheerful appearance and because being scientific enables one to infer 
that the person is superficial—they want to seduce people to a false 
conclusion. There are free, impudent spirits who would like to hide and deny 
that they are broken, proud, incurable hearts; and now and then 
even foolishness is a mask for a disastrous, all-too-certain knowledge.(3) 
Hence, it follows that it’s part of a more sophisticated humanity to have 
reverence “for the mask” and not to pursue psychology and curiosity in the wrong 
place.
 
271
 
What most profoundly divides 
two men is a different sense and degree of cleanliness. What help is all honesty 
and mutual utility, what help is all the good will for each other: in the end 
the fact remains—they “cannot bear to smell each other!” The highest instinct 
for cleanliness puts the person marked by it in the strangest and most dangerous 
isolation, like a saint: for that’s simply what saintliness is—the highest 
spiritualization of the instinct in question. Any awareness of an indescribable 
abundance of pleasure in the bath, any lust and thirst which constantly drives 
the soul out of the night into the morning and out of cloudiness, the 
“affliction,” into what is bright, gleaming, profound, and subtle; just as such 
a tendency singles out—it is a noble tendency—so it also separates. 
The pity of the saint is pity for the dirt of those who are human, 
all-too-human. And there are degrees and heights where the saint feels pity 
itself as contamination, as dirt . . .
 
272
 
Signs of nobility: never 
thinking of reducing our duties to duties for everyone; not wanting to give up 
one’s own responsibility, not wanting to share it; to include our privileges and 
acting on them among one's duties.
 
273
 
A person who strives for 
something great looks at everyone he meets along his way either as a means or as 
a delay and an obstacle—or as a temporary place to rest. His characteristic 
high-quality goodness towards his fellow men is first possible when he 
has reached his height and governs. His impatience and his awareness that until 
that point he is always sentenced to comedy—for even war is a comedy and 
conceals, just as every means hides the end—corrupt all contacts for him: this 
kind of man knows loneliness and what is most poisonous in it.
 
274
 
The problem of those who 
wait.—For a higher man in whom the solution to a problem lies asleep, 
strokes of luck and all sorts of unpredictable things are necessary for him to 
swing into action at just the right time—“for an eruption,” as we could say. 
Ordinarily it does not happen, and in all the corners of the earth 
people sit waiting, who hardly know to what extent they are waiting, but even 
less that they are waiting in vain. From time to time the call to wake up, that 
chance which provides “permission” for action, comes too late—at a time when 
their best youth and power for action have already been used up in sitting 
still. And many a man, in the very moment he “sprang up,” has found to his 
horror that his limbs have gone to sleep and his spirit is already too heavy! 
“It is too late,” he has said to himself, having lost faith in himself, and is 
now forever useless. —In the realm of genius, could “Raphael 
without hands,” taking that phrase in the widest sense, perhaps not be the 
exception but the rule?(4)—Genius 
is perhaps not really so rare, but rather the five hundred hands needed 
to tyrannize the kairos, “the right time,” to seize chance by the 
forelock!(5)
 
275
 
Anyone who does not want to 
see the height of a man looks all the more keenly at what is low and in his 
foreground—and in the process gives himself away.
 
276
 
With all kinds of injury and 
loss the lower and cruder soul is better off than the more noble one: the 
dangers for the latter must be greater; the probability that it will go wrong 
and die is even immense, given the multifaceted nature of its living 
conditions.—With a lizard a finger which has been lost grows back: not so with a 
man.
 
277
 
Bad enough! The old story 
again! When we have finished building our house, we suddenly notice that in the 
process we have learned something that we simply had to know before we 
started to build. The eternally tiresome “Too late!”—The melancholy of 
everything finished! . . .
 
278
 
Wanderer, who are you? I see 
you going on your way, without scorn, without love, with unfathomable eyes, damp 
and sad, like a lead sinker which has come back unsatisfied from every depth 
into the light—what was it looking for down there?—with a breast which does not 
sigh, with a lip which hides its disgust, with a hand which grasps only slowly: 
Who are you? What have you been doing? Have a rest here: this place is 
hospitable to everyone—relax! And whoever you happen to be, what would you like 
now? What do you need to recuperate? Just name it: what I have I’ll offer 
you! “For relaxation? For recuperation? O you inquisitive man, what are you 
talking about! But give me, I beg . . .” What? What? Say it!—“One more mask! A 
second mask!” . . . .
 
279
 
Men of profound sorrow betray 
themselves when they are happy: they have a way of grabbing happiness as if they 
would like to overwhelm and strangle it from jealousy—alas, they know too well 
that it is running away from them!
 
280
 
“Bad! Bad! What? Is he not 
going—back?”—Yes! But you understand him badly if you complain about it. He’s 
going back, as every man does who wants to make a huge jump.—
 
281
 
“Will people believe it of me? 
But I demand that people believe it of me: I have always thought only badly of 
myself and about myself, only in very rare cases, only when under compulsion, 
always without delight ‘for the subject,’ ready to wander off from ‘myself,’ 
always without faith in the conclusion, thanks to the uncontrollable mistrust of 
the possibility of self-knowledge, which has taken me so far that I 
find even the idea of ‘immediate knowledge,’ which the theoreticians allow 
themselves, a contradictio in adjecto [contradiction in terms]: this 
entire fact is almost the surest thing I know about myself. Within me there must 
be some kind of aversion to believing anything definite about myself. 
Is a riddle perhaps hidden in that? Probably, but fortunately nothing for my own 
teeth. Perhaps it reveals the species to which I belong?—But not to me: and 
that’s enough to satisfy me.
 
282
 
“But what has 
happened to you?”—”I don’t know,” he said, hesitating; “perhaps the Harpies have 
flown over my table.”(6) 
Occasionally nowadays it happens that a mild, moderate, reserved man suddenly 
becomes violent, smashes plates, throws over the table, screams, stomps around, 
slanders the entire world—and finally turns aside, ashamed, furious with 
himself.—Where? What for? To starve off on his own? To suffocate on his 
memory? Anyone who has the desires of a lofty, discriminating soul and only 
rarely finds his table set and his nourishment ready will at all times be in 
great danger: but today the danger is extraordinary. Thrown into a noisy and 
uncouth age, with which he does not want to eat out of the same dish, he can 
easily perish from hunger and thirst, or, if he finally nonetheless “helps 
himself,”—from sudden disgust.—All of us have probably already sat at tables 
where we did not belong; and it’s precisely the most spiritual ones among us who 
are the most difficult to feed, who know that dangerous dyspepsia which comes 
from a sudden insight and disappointment about our food and those sitting next 
to us at the table—the after-dinner disgust.
 
283
 
Assuming that one wants to 
praise at all, there’s a refined and at the same time noble self-control that 
always gives praise only where one does not agree:—in other cases one 
would really be praising oneself, something that contradicts good 
taste—naturally, a self-control which provides a good opportunity and 
provocation for one to be constantly misunderstood. In order to permit 
oneself this true luxury of taste and morality, one must not live among 
spiritual fools, but rather among people whose misunderstandings and false ideas 
are still amusing for their sophistication—or one will have to pay dearly for 
it!—“He is praising me: thus, he admits I’m right”—this asinine way of 
making conclusions ruins half of life for us hermits, for it brings the asses 
into our neighbourhood and friendship.
 
284
 
To live with an immense and 
proud composure: always beyond.—To have and not have one’s feelings, one’s for 
and against, voluntarily, to condescend to them for hours, to sit on 
them, as if on a horse, often as if on a donkey:—for one needs to know how to 
use their stupidity as well as their fire. To preserve one’s three hundred 
foregrounds and one’s dark glasses: for there are occasions when no one should 
be allowed to look into our eyes, even less into our “reasons.” And to select 
for company that mischievous and cheerful vice, courtesy. And to remain master 
of one’s four virtues: courage, insight, sympathy, and solitude. For solitude is 
a virtue with us, as a sublime tendency and impulse for cleanliness, which 
senses how contact between one person and another—“in society”—must inevitably 
bring impurity with it. Every community somehow, somewhere, sometime makes 
people—“common.”
 
285
 
The greatest events and 
ideas—but the greatest ideas are the greatest events—are understood last of all: 
the generations contemporary with them do not experience such 
events—they go on living past them. What happens then is something like in the 
realm of the stars. The light of the most distant stars comes to men last of 
all: and before that light arrives, men deny that there are stars 
there. “How many centuries does a spirit need in order to be understood?”—that 
is also a standard with which people construct a rank ordering and etiquette, as 
is necessary, for spirit and star.—
 
286
 
“Here the view is free, the 
spirit elevated.”—But there is a reverse kind of person who is also on the 
heights and also has a free view—but who looks down.
 
287
 
What is noble? What does the 
word “noble” still mean to us nowadays? What reveals the noble human being, how 
do people recognize him, under this heavy, oppressive sky at the beginning of 
the rule of the rabble, which is making everything opaque and leaden?—It is not 
the actions that prove him—actions are always ambiguous, always inscrutable—; 
nor is it the “works.” Among artists and scholars today we find a sufficient 
number of those who through their works reveal how a profound desire for what is 
noble drives them: but this very need for what is noble is 
fundamentally different from the needs of the noble soul itself and is really 
the eloquent and dangerous indication that such a soul is lacking. It’s not the 
works; it’s the belief which decides here, which here establishes the 
order of rank, to take up once more an old religious formula with a new and more 
profound meaning: some basic certainty that a noble soul has about itself, 
something that does not allow itself to be sought out or found or perhaps even 
to be lost. The noble soul has reverence for itself.—
 
288
 
There are human beings who have 
spirit in an inevitable way. They may toss and turn as they wish and hold their 
hands in front of their tell-tale eyes (—as if the hand were not a giveaway!—): 
finally it always comes out that they have something they are hiding, that is, 
spirit. One of the most sophisticated ways to deceive, at least for as long as 
possible, and to present oneself successfully as stupider than one is—what in 
common life is often as desirable as an umbrella—is called enthusiasm, 
including what belongs with it, for example, virtue. For, as Galiani, who must 
have known, says: vertu est enthousiasme [virtue is enthusiasm].
 
289
 
In the writings of a hermit we 
always hear something of the echo of a wasteland, something of the whispers and 
the timid gazing around of isolation; from his strongest words, even from his 
crying out, still resounds a new and more dangerous kind of silence, of 
concealment. Whoever has sat down, year in and year out, day and night, alone in 
an intimate dispute and conversation with his soul, whoever has become a cave 
bear or digger for treasure or guardian of treasure and dragon in his own 
cavern—it can be a labyrinth but also a gold mine—such a man’s very ideas 
finally take on a distinct twilight colouring and smell as much of mould as they 
do of profundity, something uncommunicative and reluctant, which blows cold wind 
over everyone passing by. The hermit does not believe that a 
philosopher—assuming that a philosopher has always first been a hermit—has ever 
expressed his real and final opinions in his books. Don’t people write books 
expressly to hide what they have stored inside them?—In fact, he will have 
doubts whether a philosopher could generally have “real and final” 
opinions, whether in his case behind every cave there does not lie, and must 
lie, an even deeper cavern—a more comprehensive, stranger, richer world beyond 
the surface, an abyss behind every ground, under every “foundation.” Every 
philosophy is a foreground philosophy—that is the judgment of a hermit: “There 
is something arbitrary about the fact that he remained here, looked 
back, and looked around, that at this point set his shovel aside and 
did not dig more deeply—there is also something suspicious about it.” Every 
philosophy also hides a philosophy; every opinion is also a hiding 
place, every word is also a mask.
 
290
 
Every deep thinker is more 
afraid of being understood than of being misunderstood. In the latter case, 
perhaps his vanity suffers, but the former hurts his heart, his sympathy, which 
always says, “Alas, why do you want to have it as hard as I did?”
 
291
 
Man, a multifaceted, lying, 
artificial, and impenetrable animal, who spooks other animals less by his power 
than by his cunning and intelligence, has invented good conscience in order to 
enjoy his own soul for once as something simple; and all of morality is 
a long spirited falsification, thanks to which it’s at all possible to enjoy 
looking at the soul. From this point of view, perhaps much more belongs to the 
idea of “art” than people commonly believe.
 
292
 
A philosopher: that is a man 
who constantly experiences, sees, hears, suspects, hopes, and dreams 
extraordinary things; who is struck by his very own thoughts as if from outside, 
as if from above and below, as if they are events and lightning strikes 
tailor-made for him; who is himself perhaps a storm which moves along 
pregnant with new lightning flashes; a fateful man, around whom things always 
rumble and mutter and gape and proceed mysteriously. A philosopher: alas, a 
being that often runs away from himself, is often afraid of himself—but that is 
too curious not to “come back to himself” again and again. . . .
 
293
 
A man who says, “That pleases 
me. I take that for my own and will protect it and defend it against everyone,” 
a man who can lead a cause, put a decision into effect, remain true to an idea, 
hold on to a woman, punish and cast down an insolent person, a man who has his 
anger and his sword and to whom the weak, the suffering, the distressed, and 
even the animals are happy to go and belong to by nature—in short, a man who is 
naturally a master—when such a man has pity, well, this pity 
is worth something! But what is there in the pity of those who suffer! Or even 
of those who preach pity! Today in almost all of Europe there is a pathological 
susceptibility and sensitivity to pain, as well as a nasty lack of restraint in 
complaining, a mollycoddling, which likes to dress itself up with religion and 
philosophical bits and pieces as something loftier—there is a formal culture of 
suffering. In my view, the unmanliness of what is christened “pity” in 
such enthusiastic circles is what always strikes the eye first.—We must 
excommunicate this latest form of bad taste, powerfully and thoroughly; and 
finally I wish that people would set against their hearts and throats the good 
amulet “gai saber,”—“gay science,” to clarify this matter for the 
Germans.
 
294
 
The Olympian vice.—In 
spite of that philosopher who, as a genuine Englishman, tried to make laughing a 
defamation of character among all thinking men—“Laughter is a serious infirmity 
of human nature, which every thinking man will strive to overcome” (Hobbes)—I 
would really allow myself to order the ranks of philosophers according to the 
rank of their laughter—right up to those who are capable of golden 
laughter. And assuming that the gods also practise philosophy, a fact which many 
conclusions have already driven me to—I don’t doubt that in the process they 
also know how to laugh in a superhuman and new way—and at the expense of all 
serious things! Gods delight in making fun: even where sacred actions are 
concerned, it seems they cannot stop laughing.
 
295
 
The genius of the heart, as 
that great hidden presence possesses it, the tempter-god and born pied piper of 
the conscience, whose voice knows how to climb down into the underworld of every 
soul, who does not say a word or cast a glance in which there does not lie some 
concern with and trace of temptation, whose mastery includes the fact that he 
understands how to seem—and not what he is, but what for those who follow him is 
one more compulsion to press themselves always closer to him, to follow 
him ever more inwardly and completely:—that genius of the heart who makes all 
noise and self-satisfaction fall silent and teaches it to listen, who smoothes 
out the rough souls and gives them a new desire to taste,—to lie still as a 
mirror so that the deep heaven reflects itself in them—; the genius of the heart 
who teaches the foolish and over-hasty hand to hesitate and reach out more 
delicately; who senses the hidden and forgotten treasure, the drop of goodness 
and sweet spirituality under the thick cloudy ice and is a divining rod for 
every grain of gold that has lain buried a long time in a dungeon crammed with 
mud and sand; the genius of the heart, at whose touch everyone goes forward 
richer, not divinely gifted and surprised, not as if delighted and oppressed 
with some foreign good, but richer in his own self, newer to himself than 
previously, broken open, blown upon and sounded out by a thawing wind, more 
uncertain perhaps, more tender, more fragile, more broken, but full of hopes 
that as yet have no names, full of new will and flowing, full of new irritations 
and opposing currents . . . But what am I doing, my friends? Whom am I speaking 
to you about? Have I forgotten myself so much that I have not once named him to 
you? Unless you have already guessed for yourselves who this questionable spirit 
and god is who wants to be praised in such a way. For just as things go 
with anyone who from the time he walked on childish legs has always been on the 
move and in alien territory, so many strange and not un-dangerous spirits have 
crossed my path, too, above all the one I have just been speaking about, who has 
come again and again, namely, no less a spirit than the god Dionysus, 
that enormously ambiguous and tempter god, to whom in earlier times, as you 
know, I offered up my first born, in all secrecy and reverence—as the last 
person, so I thought, who had offered a sacrifice to 
him: for I found no one who understood what I was doing then.(7) 
Meanwhile I learned a great deal, much too much, about the philosophy of this 
god, and, as mentioned, from mouth to mouth—I, the last disciple and initiate of 
the god Dionysus: and perhaps I can at last begin to give you, my friends, a 
little taste of this philosophy, as much as I am permitted? In a hushed voice, 
as is reasonable, for this concerns a number of things that are secret, new, 
strange, odd, and mysterious. Even the fact that Dionysus is a philosopher and 
that the gods also carry on philosophy seems to me a novelty that is not 
harmless and that perhaps might excite mistrust precisely among 
philosophers—among you, my friends it has less against it, although it could be 
that it comes too late and not at the right moment: for it has been revealed to 
me that nowadays you are not happy to believe in god and gods. Also perhaps the 
fact that in my explanation I must proceed with more candour than is always 
pleasing to the strict habits of your ears? Certainly the god under discussion 
went further, very much further, in conversations like this and was always 
several steps ahead of me . . . In fact, if it were permitted, I would, 
following human practices, attach to him beautifully solemn names of splendour 
and virtue; I would have to lavish a great deal of praise on him for his courage 
as an explorer and discoverer, for his daring honesty, truthfulness, and love of 
wisdom. But such a god has no idea how to begin with all this venerable rubbish 
and pageantry. “Keep that,” he would say, “for yourself and people like you and 
anyone else who needs it! I have no reason to cover my nakedness!”—Do people 
sense that this type of divinity and philosopher perhaps lacks shame? He said it 
this way once, “In some circumstances, I love human beings”—and in saying that, 
he was alluding to Ariadne, who was present—”for me a human being is a
pleasant, brave, inventive animal that has no equal on earth; 
it finds the right path even in every labyrinth.(8) 
I like him: I often reflect how I could bring him further forwards and make him 
stronger, more evil, and more profound than he is.”—”Stronger, more evil, and 
more profound?” I asked shocked. “Yes,” he said once more, “stronger, more evil, 
and more profound, also more beautiful”—and with that the tempter god smiled 
with his halcyon smile, as if he had just uttered an enchanting compliment. We 
see here also that it is not just shame this divinity lacks—; and in general 
there are good reasons to suppose that in some things the gods collectively 
could learn from us human beings. We human beings are—more human. . .
 
296
 
Alas, what are you then, my 
written and painted thoughts! It’s not so long ago that you were still so 
colourful, young, and malicious, full of stings and secret seasonings, that you 
made me sneeze and laugh.—And now? You have already stripped off your novelty 
and some of you, I fear, are ready to become truths: you already look so 
immortal, so heartbreakingly honest, so boring! And was it ever different? What 
things we transcribe in our writing and painting, we mandarins with a Chinese 
brush, we immortalizers of things which let themselves be written—what 
are the only things we are capable of painting? Alas, only what is about to fade 
and is beginning to lose its fragrance! Alas, only storms which are worn out and 
withdrawing and old yellow feelings! Alas, only birds which have exhausted 
themselves flying and lost their way and now let themselves be caught by 
hand—by our hand! We immortalize what can no longer live and fly, only 
tired and crumbling things! And it is only your afternoon, my written 
and painted thoughts, for which I alone have colours, many colours perhaps, many 
colourful caresses and fifty yellows and browns and greens and reds:—but no one 
will sense from me how you looked in your dawn, you sudden sparks and miracles 
of my solitude, you, my old loved ones—my wicked thoughts!
 
 
NOTES
 
(1) 
Quintus Horatius Flaccus (65-8 BC) an important poet in classical Rome. [Back 
to Text]
 
(2) The 1900 German edition adds here: 
“(I don’t dare mention greater names, but I have them in mind).
[Back to Text]
 
(3) The German edition of 1900 adds 
after the words “incurable hearts” the parenthetic comment: “(the cynicism of 
Hamlet, the case of Galiani).” [Back 
to Text]
 
(4) Raphael (1483-1520): major 
Italian painter of the Renaissance. [Back 
to Text]
 
(5) Nietzsche uses Greek letters here: καιρός. [Back 
to Text]
 
(6) Harpies: mythological 
winged monsters who steal food. [Back 
to Text]
 
(7) The “first work” Nietzsche is 
referring to is his Birth of Tragedy, published in 1872, in which he 
proposes the struggle between the Apollonian and Dionysian. [Back 
to Text]
 
(8) 
Ariadne: in Greek mythology the daughter of Minos, king of Crete. She 
helped Theseus kill the Minotaur in the Labyrinth and escaped with him. When 
Theseus abandoned Ariadne, Dionysus fell in love with her. [Back 
to Text]


============================================================
End of Beyond Good and Evil (translated by Ian Johnston)
============================================================
