Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil, Part Nine

Friedrich Nietzsche

BEYOND GOOD AND EVIL

Translated by Ian Johnston, Vancouver Island University,
Nanaimo, British Columbia, Canada

Students, teachers, artists, and members of the
general public may download and distribute this text without permission and
without charge. They may also freely edit the text for their own purposes. All
commercial use of this translation, however, is forbidden without the permission
of the translator. For comments and questions, please contact
Ian Johnston.

For a Rich Text Version (Word) of this text, please
use the following link:

Beyond Good and Evil [RTF]

[Table
of Contents for Beyond Good and Evil]

PART NINE

WHAT IS NOBLE?

257

Every enhancement in the type
“man” up to this point has been the work of an aristocratic society—and that’s
how it will always be, over and over again: a society that believes in a long
scale of rank ordering and differences in worth between one person and another
and that, in some sense or other, requires slavery. Without the pathos of
distance, the sort which grows out of the deeply rooted difference between
the social classes, out of the constant gazing outward and downward of the
ruling caste on the subjects and work implements, and out of their equally
sustained practice of obedience and command, holding down and holding at a
distance, that other more mysterious pathos would have no chance of growing at
all, that longing for an ever new widening of distances inside the soul itself,
the development of ever higher, rarer, more distant, more expansive, more
comprehensive states, in short, simply the enhancement in the type “man,” the
constant “self-surmounting of man,” to cite a moral formula in a supra-moral
sense. Of course, where the history of the origins of aristocratic society is
concerned (and thus the precondition for that raising of the type “man”—), we
should not surrender to humanitarian illusions: truth is hard. So without
further consideration, let’s admit to ourselves how up to this point every
higher culture on earth has started! People with a still natural
nature, barbarians in every dreadful sense of the word, predatory men still in
possession of an unbroken power of the will and a desire for power, threw
themselves on weaker, more civilized, more peaceful, perhaps trading or
cattle-raising races, or on old, worn cultures, in which at that very moment the
final forces of life were flickering out in a dazzling fireworks display of
spirit and corruption. At the start the noble caste has always been the
barbarian caste: its superiority has lain not primarily in physical might but in
spiritual power—it has been a matter of more complete human beings
(which at every level also means “more complete beasts”).

258

Corruption as the expression of
the fact that within the instincts anarchy is threatening and that the
foundation of the affects, what we call “life,” has been shaken: according to
the living structure in which it appears, corruption is something fundamentally
different. When, for example, an aristocracy, like that in France at the start
of the Revolution, throws away its privileges with a sublime disgust and
sacrifices itself to a dissipation of its moral feelings, this is
corruption:—essentially it was only the final act in that centuries-long
corruption, thanks to which the aristocracy step-by-step gave up its ruling
authority and reduced itself to a function of the monarchy (finally
even to the monarch’s finery and display pieces). The essential thing in a good
and healthy aristocracy, however, is that it feels itself not as a
function (whether of a monarchy or of a community) but as its significance and
highest justification—that it therefore with good conscience accepts the
sacrifice of an enormous number of people, who for its sake must be
oppressed and reduced to incomplete men, to slaves and instruments of work. Its
fundamental belief must, in fact, be that the society should exist, not for
the sake of the society, but only as a base and framework on which an
exceptional kind of nature can raise itself to its higher function and, in
general, to a higher form of being, comparable to those heliotropic climbing
plants on Java—people call them sipo matador—whose tendrils clutch an
oak tree so much and for so long until finally, high over the tree but supported
by it, they can unfold their crowns in the open light and make a display of
their happiness.—

259

Mutually refraining from
wounding each other, from violence, and from exploitation, and setting one’s
will on the same level as others—these can in a certain crude sense become good
habits among individuals, if conditions exist for that (namely, a real
similarity in the quality of their power and their estimates of value, as well
as their belonging together within a single body). However, as soon as people
wanted to take this principle further and, where possible, establish it as the basic
principle of society, it would immediately show itself for what it is, as
the willed denial of life, as the principle of disintegration and
decay. Here we must think through to the fundamentals and push away all
sentimental weakness: living itself is essentially appropriation from
and wounding and overpowering strangers and weaker people, oppression, hardness,
imposing one’s own forms, annexing, and at the very least, in its mildest
actions, exploitation—but why should we always use these precise words, which
have from ancient times carried the stamp of a slanderous purpose? Even that
body in which, as previously mentioned, individuals deal with each other as
equals—and that happens in every healthy aristocracy—must itself, if it is a
living body and not dying out, do to other bodies all those things which the
individuals in it refrain from doing to each other: it will have to be the
living will to power, it will seek to grow, grab things around it, pull to
itself, and acquire predominance—not because of some morality or immorality, but
because it is alive and because living is simply the will to power. But
in no point is the common consciousness of the European more reluctant to be
instructed than here. Nowadays people everywhere, even those in scientific
disguises, are raving about the coming conditions of society from which “the
exploitative character” is to have disappeared:—to my ears that sounds as if
people had promised to invent a life which abstained from all organic functions.
The “exploitation” is not part of a depraved or incomplete and primitive
society: it belongs to the essential nature of what is living, as a
basic organic function; it is a consequence of the real will to power, which is
simply the will to life.—Assuming that this is something new as a theory—it is,
nonetheless, in reality the fundamental fact of all history: we should
at least be honest with ourselves to this extent!

260

As the result of a stroll
though the many more sophisticated and cruder moral systems which up to this
point have ruled or still rule on earth, I found certain characteristics
routinely return with each other, bound up together, until finally two basic
types revealed themselves to me and a fundamental difference sprang up. There
is master morality, and there is slave morality—to this I
immediately add that in all higher and more mixed cultures attempts at a
mediation between both moralities make an appearance as well, even more often, a
confusion and mutual misunderstanding between the two, in fact, sometimes their
close juxtaposition—even in the same person, within a single soul. Distinctions
in moral value have arisen either among a ruling group which was happily
conscious of its difference with respect to the ruled—or among the ruled, the
slaves and dependent people of every degree. In the first case, when it’s the
masters who establish the idea of the “good,” the elevated and proud conditions
of the soul emotionally register as the distinguishing and defining order of
rank. The noble man separates his own nature from that of people in whom the
opposite of such exalted and proud states expresses itself. He despises them. We
should notice at once that in this first kind of morality the opposites “good”
and “bad” mean no more than “noble” and “despicable”—the opposition between
“good” and “evil” has another origin. The despised one is the coward, the
anxious, the small, the man who thinks about narrow utility, also the suspicious
man with his inhibited look, the self-abasing man, the species of human dogs who
allow themselves to be mistreated, the begging flatterer, and, above all, the
liar:—it is a basic belief of all aristocrats that the common folk are liars.
“We tellers of the truth”—that’s what the nobility called itself in ancient
Greece. It’s evident that distinctions of moral worth everywhere were first
applied to men and then later, by extension, were established for actions;
hence, it is a serious mistake when historians of morality take as a starting
point questions like “Why was the compassionate action praised?” The noble kind
of man experiences himself as a person who determines value and who
does not need other people’s approval. He makes the judgment “What is harmful to
me is harmful in itself.” He understands himself as something which in general
first confers honour on things, as something which creates values.
Whatever he recognizes in himself he honours. Such a morality is
self-glorification. In the foreground stands the feeling of fullness, the power
which wants to overflow, the happiness of high tension, the consciousness of
riches which wants to give presents and provide:—the noble man also helps the
unfortunate, however not, or hardly ever, from pity, but more in response to an
impulse which the excess of power produces. The noble person honours the
powerful man in himself and also the man who has power over himself, who
understands how to speak and how to keep silent, who takes delight in dealing
with himself severely and toughly, and who respects, above all, severity and
toughness. “Wotan set a hard heart in my breast,” it says in an old Scandinavian
saga: that’s poetry emerging from the soul of a proud Viking—and justifiably so.
A man of this sort is simply proud of the fact that he has not been
made for pity. That’s why the hero of the saga adds a warning, “In a man whose
heart is not hard when he is still young it will never become hard.” Noble and
brave men who think this way are furthest removed from that morality which sees
the badge of morality specifically in pity or in actions for others or in désintéressement
[disinterestedness]. The belief in oneself, pride in oneself, a fundamental
hostility and irony against “selflessness” belong to noble morality, just as
much as an easy contempt and caution before feelings of pity and the “warm
heart.” Powerful men are the ones who understand how to honour; that is
their art, their realm of invention. The profound reverence for age and for
ancestral tradition—all justice stands on this double reverence—the belief and
the prejudice favouring forefathers and working against newcomers are typical in
the morality of the powerful, and when, by contrast, the men of “modern ideas”
believe almost instinctively in “progress” and the “future” and increasingly
lack any respect for age, then in that attitude the ignoble origin of these
“ideas” already reveals itself well enough. However, a morality of the rulers is
most alien and embarrassing to present taste because of the severity of its
basic principle that man has duties only with respect to those like him, that
man should act towards those beings of lower rank, towards everything foreign,
at his own discretion, or “as his heart dictates,” and, in any case, “beyond
good and evil.” Here pity and things like that may belong. The capacity for and
obligation to a long gratitude and a long revenge—both only within the circle of
one’s peers—the sophistication in paying back again, the refined idea in
friendship, a certain necessity to have enemies (as, so to speak, drainage
ditches for the feelings of envy, quarrelsomeness, and high spirits—basically in
order to be capable of being a good friend): all those are typical
characteristics of a noble morality, which, as indicated, is not the morality of
“modern ideas” and which is thus nowadays difficult to sympathize with, as well
as difficult to dig up and expose. Things are different with the second type of
moral system, slave morality. Suppose the oppressed, depressed,
suffering and unfree people, those ignorant of themselves and tired out, suppose
they moralize: what will be the common feature of their moral estimates of
value? Probably a pessimistic suspicion directed at the entire human situation
will express itself, perhaps a condemnation of man, along with his situation.
The gaze of a slave is not well disposed towards the virtues of the powerful; he
possesses scepticism and mistrust; he has a subtlety of mistrust of
everything “good” that is honoured in those virtues—he would like to persuade
himself that even happiness is not genuine there. By contrast, those
characteristics will be pulled forward and flooded with light which serve to
mitigate existence for those who suffer: here respect is given to pity, to the
obliging hand ready to help, to the warm heart, to patience, diligence,
humility, and friendliness—for these are here the most useful characteristics
and almost the only means to endure the pressure of existence. Slave morality is
essentially a morality of utility. Here is the focus for the origin of that
famous opposition of “good” and “evil”:—people sense power and danger
within evil, a certain terror, subtlety, and strength that does not permit
contempt to spring up. According to slave morality, the “evil” man thus inspires
fear; according to master morality, it is precisely the “good” man who inspires
and desires to inspire fear, while the “bad” man is felt as despicable. This
opposition reaches its peak when, in accordance with the consequences of slave
morality, finally a trace of disregard is also attached to the “good” of this
morality—it may be light and benevolent—because within the way of thinking of
the slave the good person must definitely be the harmless person: he is
good natured, easy to deceive, perhaps a bit stupid, un bonhomme [a good
fellow]. Wherever slave morality gains predominance the language reveals a
tendency to bring the words “good” and “stupid” into closer proximity. A final
basic difference: the longing for freedom, the instinct for happiness,
and the refinements of the feeling for freedom belong just as necessarily to
slave morality and morals as art and enthusiasm in reverence and in devotion are
the regular symptoms of an aristocratic way of thinking and valuing. From this
we can without further ado understand why love as passion—which is our
European specialty—must clearly have a noble origin: as is well known, its
invention belongs to the Provencal knightly poets, those splendidly inventive
men of the “gay saber” [gay science] to whom Europe owes so
much—almost its very self.

261

Vanity is among the things that
are perhaps hardest for a noble man to understand: he will be tempted even to
deny its existence where another kind of man thinks he has grasped it with both
hands. For him the problem is imagining to himself beings who seek to elicit a
good opinion of themselves which they themselves do not possess—and which, as a
result, they also have not “earned”—people who, nonetheless, themselves later believe in
this good opinion. Half of this seems to the noble man so tasteless and
disrespectful of oneself and the other half so unreasonably baroque, that he
would be happy to understand vanity as an exception and has doubts about it in
most cases when people talk of it. For example, he’ll say: “I can make a mistake
about my own value and yet on the other hand still demand that my value,
precisely as I determine it, is recognized by others—that, however, is not
vanity (but arrogance or, in the more frequent cases, something called
“humility” and “modesty”). Or again, “For many reasons I can take pleasure in
the good opinion of others, perhaps because I honour and love them and enjoy all
of their pleasures, perhaps also because their good opinion underscores and
strengthens the faith I have in my own good opinion of myself, or perhaps
because the good opinion of others, even in cases where I do not share it, is
still useful to me or promises to be useful—but all that is not vanity.” The
noble man must first compel himself, particularly with the help of history, to
see that since time immemorial, in all the levels of people dependent in some
way or other, the common man was only what people thought of him:—not
being at all accustomed to set values himself, he measured even himself by no
value other than by how his masters assessed him (that is the essential right
of masters, to create values). We should understand that, as the
consequence of an immense atavism, the common man even today still always
waits first for an opinion about himself and then instinctively submits
himself to it: however, that is by no means merely to a “good” opinion, but also
to a bad and unreasonable one (think, for example, of the greatest part of the
self-assessment and self-devaluing which devout women learn from their father
confessors and the devout Christian in general learns from his church). Now, in
accordance with the slow arrival of the democratic order of things (and its
cause, the blood mixing between masters and slaves), the originally noble and
rare impulse to ascribe to oneself a value on one’s own and “to think well” of
oneself will really become more and more encouraged and widespread. But in every
moment it has working against it an older, more extensive, and more deeply
incorporated tendency—and where the phenomenon of “vanity” is concerned, this
older tendency becomes master over the more recent one. The vain person takes
pleasure in every good opinion which he hears about himself (quite apart from
all considerations of its utility and equally apart from its truth or falsity),
just as he suffers from every bad opinion. For he submits to both; he feels himself
subjected to them on the basis of that oldest of instincts for submission which
breaks out in him. It is “the slave” in the blood of the vain man, a trace of
the slave’s roguishness—and how much of the “slave” still remains nowadays in
woman, for example!—that tries to tempt him into good opinions of
himself; in the same way it’s the slave who later prostrates himself immediately
in front of these opinions, as if he had not summoned them up. —To state the
matter once again: vanity is an atavism.

262

A species arises, a
type becomes established and strong, under the long struggle with essentially
unchanging, unfavourable conditions. By contrast, we know from the
experience of breeders that species which receive an ultra-abundant nourishment
and, in general, an increase in protection and care immediately tend towards
variety in the type in the strongest manner and are rich in wonders and
monstrosities (as well as monstrous vices). Now, let’s look at an aristocratic
commonwealth—for example, an ancient Greek polis [city state]or
Venice—as an organization, whether voluntary or involuntary, for the purpose of breeding.
There are men there living together who rely upon one another and who want their
species to succeed mainly because it has to succeed or run the fearful
risk of being annihilated. Here there is a lack of that advantage, that excess,
that protection under which variations are encouraged. The species senses the
need for itself as a species, as something which, particularly thanks to its
hardness, uniformity, and simplicity of form, can generally succeed and
enable itself to keep going in the constant struggles with neighbours or with
the rebellious oppressed people or with those who threaten rebellion. The most
varied experience teaches them which characteristics they have to thank, above
all, for the fact that they are still there, in spite of all the gods and men,
that they have always been victorious up to this point. These characteristics
they call virtues, and they cultivate only these virtues to any great extent.
They do that with severity—in fact, they desire severity. Every aristocratic
morality is intolerant in its education of the young, its provisions for women,
its marriage customs, its relationships between young and old, and its penal
laws (which fix their eyes only on those who are deviants)—it reckons
intolerance itself among the virtues, under the name “justice.” A type with few
but very strong characteristics, a species of strict, warlike, shrewdly laconic
people, close-knit and reserved (and, as such, having the most sophisticated
feelings for the charm and nuances of society) in this way establishes itself
over and above the changes in the generations. The constant struggle with
unvarying, unfavourable conditions is, as mentioned, the factor that
makes a type fixed and hard. Finally, however, at some point a fortunate time
arises, which lets the immense tension ease. Perhaps there are no more enemies
among the neighbours, and the means for living, even for enjoying life, are
there in abundance. With one blow the bond and the compulsion of the old
discipline are torn apart: that discipline no longer registers as necessary, as
a condition of existence—if it wished to remain in existence, it could do so
only as a form of luxury, as an archaic taste. Variation,
whether as something abnormal (something higher, finer, and rarer) or as
degeneration and monstrosity, suddenly bursts onto the scene in the greatest
abundance and splendour; the individual dares to be individual and stand apart.
At these historical turning points there appear alongside each other and often
involved and mixed up together marvellous, multifaceted, jungle-like growths, an
upward soaring, a kind of tropical tempo in competitiveness for growing
and an immense annihilation and self-destruction, thanks to the wild egoisms
turned against each other and, as it were, exploding, which wrestle with one
another “for sun and light” and no longer know how to derive any limit, any
restraint, or any consideration from the morality they have had up to that
point. This very morality was the one which built up such immense power, which
bent the bow in such a threatening manner—now, at this moment, it is and is
becoming “outdated.” The dangerous and disturbing point is reached where the
greater, more multifaceted, and more comprehensive life lives beyond the
old morality; the “individual” stands there, forced to give himself his own
laws, his own arts and tricks for self-preservation, self-raising, and
self-redemption. Nothing but new what-for’s, nothing but new how-to’s,
no common formulas any more, misunderstanding and contempt bound up together,
decay, spoilage, and the highest desires tied together in a ghastly way, the
genius of the race brimming over from all the horns of plenty with good and bad,
an ominous simultaneous presence of spring and autumn, full of new charms and
veils, characteristic of young, still unexhausted, still unwearied depravity.
Once again there’s danger there, the mother of morality, great danger, this time
transferred into the individual, into one’s neighbour and friend, into the
alleyways, into one’s own child, into one’s own heart, into all the narrowest
and most secret parts of one’s wishes and desires. What will the moral
philosophers who emerge at such a time now have to preach? They discover, these
keen observers and street loafers, that things are quickly coming to an end,
that everything around them is going rotten and spreading corruption, that
nothing lasts until the day after tomorrow, except for one kind of person, the
incurably mediocre. Only the mediocre have the prospect of succeeding,
of reproducing themselves—they are the people of the future, the only survivors,
“Be like them! Become mediocre!”—from now on that’s the only morality that still
makes sense, that people still hear.—But it is difficult to preach, this
morality of mediocrity!—it may never admit what it is and what it wants! It must
speak about restraint and worth and duty and love of one’s neighbour—it will
have difficulty concealing its irony!

263

There is an instinct for
rank which, more than anything, is already an indication of a high rank.
There is a delight in the nuances of respect which permits us to
surmise a noble origin and habits. The refinement, goodness, and loftiness of a
soul are put to a dangerous test when something goes past in front of it which
is of the first rank, but which is not yet protected by the fear of authority
from prying clutches and crudities: something that goes its way unmarked,
undiscovered, tentative, perhaps arbitrarily disguised and hidden, like a living
touchstone. The man whose task and practice is to investigate souls will use
precisely this art in a number of different forms in order to establish the
ultimate value of a soul, the unalterable innate order of rank to which it
belongs: he will put it to the test for its instinct of reverence.
Différence engendre haine [Difference engenders hatred]: the nastiness of
some natures suddenly spurts out like dirty water when some sacred container,
some precious object from a locked shrine, or some book with marks of a great
destiny is carried by. On the other hand, there is an involuntary falling
silent, a hesitation in the eye, an end to all gestures, things which express
that a soul feels close to something most worthy of reverence. The way
in which reverence for the Bible in Europe has, on the whole, been maintained so
far is perhaps the best piece of discipline and refinement of habits for which
Europe owes a debt of thanks to Christianity: such books of profundity and
ultimate significance need for their protection an externally imposed tyranny of
authority in order to last for those thousands of years necessary to
exhaust them and sort out what they mean. Much has been achieved when in the
great mass of people (the shallow ones and all sorts of people with diarrhoea)
the feeling has finally been cultivated that they are not permitted to touch
everything, that there are sacred experiences before which they have to pull off
their shoes and which they must keep their dirty hands off—this is almost the
highest intensification of their humanity. By contrast, perhaps nothing makes
the so-called educated people, those who have faith in “modern ideas,” so
nauseating as their lack of shame, the comfortable impudence in their eyes and
hands, with which they touch, lick, and grope everything, and it is possible
that these days among a people, one still finds in the common folk, particularly
among the peasants, more relative nobility of taste and tactful
reverence than among the newspaper-reading demi-monde of the spirit,
among the educated.

264

One cannot erase from a human
being’s soul those actions which his ancestors loved most and carried out most
steadfastly: whether they were, for example, industrious savers attached to a
writing table and money box, modest and bourgeois in their desires, as well as
modest in their virtues, or whether they were accustomed to live giving orders
from morning until night, fond of harsh entertainment and, along with that,
perhaps of even harsher duties and responsibilities; or whether, finally, they
had at some time or other once sacrificed the old privileges of their birth and
possessions in order to live entirely for their faith—for their “god”—as men of
an unrelenting and delicate conscience, which blushes when confronted with any
compromise. It is in no way possible that a man does not possess in his
body the characteristics and preferences of his parents and forefathers, no
matter what appearance might say to the contrary. This is the problem of race.
If we know something about the parents, then we may draw a conclusion about the
child: some unpleasant excess or other, some lurking envy, a crude habit of
self-justification—these three together have at all times made up the essential
type of the rabble—something like that must be passed onto the child as surely
as corrupt blood, and with the help of the best education and culture people
will succeed only in deceiving others about such heredity. And nowadays
what else do education and culture want! In our age, one very much of the
people—I mean to say our uncouth age—“education” and “culture” must basically
be the art of deception—to mislead about the origin of the inherited rabble in
one’s body and soul. Today an educator who preached truthfulness above
everything else and constantly shouted at his students “Be true! Be natural! Act
as you really are!”—even such a virtuous and true-hearted jackass would after
some time learn to take hold of that furca [pitchfork] of Horace, in
order to naturam expellere [drive out nature]. With
what success? “Rabble” usque recurret [will always return].(1)

265

At the risk of annoying
innocent ears, I propose the following: egoism belongs to the nature of the
noble soul; I mean that unshakeable faith that to a being such as “we are” other
beings must be subordinate by nature and have to sacrifice themselves. The noble
soul takes this fact of its egoism without any question mark and without the
feeling that there is anything harsh, compelled, or arbitrary in it, much more
as something that may be established in the fundamental law of things. If he
sought out a name for this, he would say “It is justice itself.” In some
circumstances which make him hesitate at first, he admits that there are those
with rights equal to his own. As soon as he has cleared up this question of
rank, he moves among these equals who have the same rights as his with the same
confident modesty and sophisticated reverence which he has in his dealings with
himself—in accordance with an inborn heavenly mechanism which all the stars
understand. It is one more part of his egoism, this sophistication and
self-restraint in his relations with his equals—every star is such an egoist—:
his soul honours itself in them and in the rights which it concedes to
them. It has no doubt that the exchange of respect and rights, as the essential
quality of all interactions, also belongs to the natural condition of
things. The noble soul gives as it takes, out of the passionate and sensitive
instinct for repayment, which lies deep within it. The idea “favour” has no
sense and agreeable fragrance inter pares [among equals]; there may be
a sublime manner of allowing presents from above to wash over one, as it were,
and of drinking them up thirstily like water drops, but for these arts and
gestures the noble soul has no skill. Here its egoism hinders it: in general, it
is not happy to look “up above”—instead it looks either directly forward,
horizontally and slowly, or down—it knows that it is on a height.

266

“We can only truly respect
highly the man who is not seeking himself” Goethe to Councillor
Schlosser.

267

There is a saying among the
Chinese that mothers even teach their children: siao-sin, “Make your
heart small!” This is the essential and basic tendency of late
civilizations: I have no doubt that an ancient Greek would at once recognize
this self-diminution in us contemporary Europeans as well—and for that reason
alone we would already go “against his taste.”

268

Ultimately, what does it mean
to be ignoble?—Words are sound signals for ideas, but ideas are more or less
firm image signs for sensations which return frequently and occur together, for
groups of sensations. To understand each other, it is not yet sufficient that
people use the same words; they must also use the same words for the same form
of inner experiences; in the end they must hold their experience in common
with each other. That’s why human beings belonging to a single people
understand each other better among themselves than associations of different
peoples, even when they use the same language; or rather, when human beings have
lived together for a long time under similar conditions (climate, soil, danger,
needs, work), then something arises out of that which “understands
itself”—a people. In all souls, a similar number of frequently repeating
experiences have won the upper hand over those which come more rarely; people
understand each other on the basis of the former quickly and with
ever-increasing speed—the history of language is the history of a process of
abbreviation, and on the basis of this rapid understanding, people bind with one
another, closely and with ever-increasing closeness. The greater the danger, the
greater the need quickly and easily to come to agreement over what needs to be
done; not to misunderstand each other when in danger is what people simply
cannot do without in their interactions. With every friendship or love affair
people still make this test: nothing of that sort lasts as soon as people reach
the point where, with the same words, one of the two feels, means, senses,
wishes, or fears something different from the other one. (The fear of the
“eternal misunderstanding”: that is the benevolent genius which so often
prevents people of different sexes from over-hasty unions, to which their senses
and hearts urge them—and not some Schopenhauerish “genius of the
species”!—). Which groups of sensations within the soul wake up most rapidly,
seize the word, give the order—that decides about the whole rank ordering of its
values, that finally determines its tables of goods. The assessments of value in
a man reveal something about the structure of his soul and where it
looks for its conditions of life, its essential needs. Now, assume that need has
always brought together only such people as could indicate with similar signs
similar requirements and similar experiences, then it generally turns out that
the easy ability to communicate need, that is, in the last analysis,
familiarity with only average and common experiences, must have been
the most powerful of all the forces which have so far determined things among
human beings. People who are more similar and more ordinary have been and always
are at an advantage; the more exceptional, more refined, rarer, and more
difficult to understand easily remain isolated; in their isolation they are
subject to accidents and rarely propagate themselves. People have to summon up
huge counter-forces to check this natural, all-too-natural progressus in
simile [advance into similarity], the further development of human beings
into what’s similar, ordinary, average, herd-like—into what’s common.

269

The more a psychologist—a born
and inevitable psychologist and diviner of the soul—turns himself towards
exceptional examples and human beings, the greater the danger to him of
suffocation from pity. He has to be hard and cheerful, more so than
another man. For the corruption and destruction of loftier men, of the stranger
type of soul, is the rule: it is terrible to have such a rule always before
one’s eyes. The multifaceted torment of the psychologist who has uncovered this
destructiveness, who once discovers and then almost always rediscovers
throughout all history this entire inner “hopelessness” of the loftier people,
this eternal “too late!” in every sense—this torment can perhaps one day become
the reason he turns with bitterness against his own lot, attempts
self-destruction—and “corrupts” himself. With almost every psychologist we will
see a revealing inclination for and delight in associating with ordinary and
well-adjusted people: that indicates that he always needs healing, that he
requires some sort of refuge and forgetting, far from what his insights and
incisions, his “trade,” have laid on his conscience. Fear of his memory is
characteristic of him. He is easily reduced to silence before the judgments of
others; he listens with an unmoving face as people revere, admire, love, and
transfigure where he has seen, or he even hides his silence, while he
expressly agrees with some foreground point of view or other. Perhaps the
paradox of his situation gets so terrible that precisely where he has learned
great pity as well as great contempt, the crowd, the educated, and the
enthusiasts have for their part learned great admiration—the admiration for
“great men” and miraculous animals for whose sake people bless and honour the
fatherland, the earth, the value of humanity, and themselves, those to whom they
draw the attention of the young and whom they use as role models in their
education . . . And who knows whether in all great examples up to this point the
very same thing has not happened: the crowd worshipped a god—and the “god” was
only a poor sacrificial animal! Success has always been the greatest liar, and
the “work” itself a success; the great statesman, the conqueror, or the
discoverer is disguised in his creation to the point where he is unrecognizable;
the “work” of the artist and of the philosopher first invents the man who has
created it or is supposed to have created it; the “great men,” as they are
honoured, are small inferior works of fiction written later; in the world of
historical values counterfeit is king. These great
poets, for example, this Byron, Musset, Poe, Leopardi, Kleist, Gogol(2)—as
they now are and perhaps had to be: men of the moment, enthusiastic, sensuous,
childish, careless and sudden with trust and mistrust; with souls in which some
fracture or other normally has to be concealed; often taking revenge in their
works for an inner slur, often seeking with their flights upward to forget some
all-too-true memory, often lost in the mud and almost infatuated, until they
become like will o’ the wisps around a swamp and pretend that they are
stars—then the populace may well call them idealists—often struggling against a
long disgust, with a recurring ghost of unbelief which makes them cold and
forces them to yearn for gloria [glory] and to feed on “inherent faith”
from the hands of intoxicated flatterers—what torture are these great
artists and the loftier human beings in general for the man who has once guessed
who they are! It is thus understandable that they should so readily
experience from woman—who is clairvoyant in the world of suffering and who
unfortunately also seeks to help and to save far beyond her powers—those
eruptions of unlimited and most devoted pity which the crowd, above all
the worshipping masses, does not understand and which it overwhelms with curious
and complacent interpretations. This pity regularly deceives itself about its
power; woman may believe that love can do everything—that’s a belief essential
to her. Alas, anyone who knows about the heart can guess how poor, stupid,
helpless, presumptuous, mistaken, more easily destructive than saving even the
best and deepest love is! It is possible that beneath the sacred story and
charade of the life of Jesus there lies hidden one of the most painful examples
of the martyrdom of knowledge about love: the martyrdom of the most
innocent and most desiring heart, which was never satisfied with any human love,
which demanded love, to be loved and nothing else, with hardness, with
madness, with fearful outbreaks against those who denied him love; the history
of a poor man unsatisfied and insatiable with love, who had to invent hell in
order to send there those who did not wish to love him—and who finally,
having grown to understand human love, had to invent a God who is entirely love,
who is entirely capable of love—who takes pity on human love because it
is so pathetic, so unknowing! Anyone who feels this way, who knows about love in
this way—seeks death.—But why dwell on such painful things? Assuming we
don’t have to.—

270

The spiritual arrogance and
disgust of every man who has suffered deeply—how profoundly men can
suffer almost determines their order of rank—his chilling certainty, with which
he is thoroughly soaked and coloured, that thanks to his suffering he knows
more than the cleverest and wisest can know, that he has experienced and at
some point been “at home” in many terrible far-off worlds, about which “you
know nothing!” . . . this spiritual and silent arrogance of the sufferer, this
pride of the one chosen to know, of the “initiate,” of the one who has almost
been sacrificed, finds all kinds of disguise necessary to protect itself from
contact with prying and compassionate hands and, in general, from everything
which is not its equal in pain. Profound suffering ennobles; it separates. One
of the most sophisticated forms of disguise is Epicureanism and a certain
continuing courageousness in taste adopted as a show, which takes suffering
lightly and resists everything sad and deep. There are “cheerful men” who use
cheerfulness because it makes them misunderstood—they want to be
misunderstood. There are “scientific people” who use science because that
provides a cheerful appearance and because being scientific enables one to infer
that the person is superficial—they want to seduce people to a false
conclusion. There are free, impudent spirits who would like to hide and deny
that they are broken, proud, incurable hearts; and now and then
even foolishness is a mask for a disastrous, all-too-certain knowledge.(3)
Hence, it follows that it’s part of a more sophisticated humanity to have
reverence “for the mask” and not to pursue psychology and curiosity in the wrong
place.

271

What most profoundly divides
two men is a different sense and degree of cleanliness. What help is all honesty
and mutual utility, what help is all the good will for each other: in the end
the fact remains—they “cannot bear to smell each other!” The highest instinct
for cleanliness puts the person marked by it in the strangest and most dangerous
isolation, like a saint: for that’s simply what saintliness is—the highest
spiritualization of the instinct in question. Any awareness of an indescribable
abundance of pleasure in the bath, any lust and thirst which constantly drives
the soul out of the night into the morning and out of cloudiness, the
“affliction,” into what is bright, gleaming, profound, and subtle; just as such
a tendency singles out—it is a noble tendency—so it also separates.
The pity of the saint is pity for the dirt of those who are human,
all-too-human. And there are degrees and heights where the saint feels pity
itself as contamination, as dirt . . .

272

Signs of nobility: never
thinking of reducing our duties to duties for everyone; not wanting to give up
one’s own responsibility, not wanting to share it; to include our privileges and
acting on them among one's duties.

273

A person who strives for
something great looks at everyone he meets along his way either as a means or as
a delay and an obstacle—or as a temporary place to rest. His characteristic
high-quality goodness towards his fellow men is first possible when he
has reached his height and governs. His impatience and his awareness that until
that point he is always sentenced to comedy—for even war is a comedy and
conceals, just as every means hides the end—corrupt all contacts for him: this
kind of man knows loneliness and what is most poisonous in it.

274

The problem of those who
wait.—For a higher man in whom the solution to a problem lies asleep,
strokes of luck and all sorts of unpredictable things are necessary for him to
swing into action at just the right time—“for an eruption,” as we could say.
Ordinarily it does not happen, and in all the corners of the earth
people sit waiting, who hardly know to what extent they are waiting, but even
less that they are waiting in vain. From time to time the call to wake up, that
chance which provides “permission” for action, comes too late—at a time when
their best youth and power for action have already been used up in sitting
still. And many a man, in the very moment he “sprang up,” has found to his
horror that his limbs have gone to sleep and his spirit is already too heavy!
“It is too late,” he has said to himself, having lost faith in himself, and is
now forever useless. —In the realm of genius, could “Raphael
without hands,” taking that phrase in the widest sense, perhaps not be the
exception but the rule?(4)—Genius
is perhaps not really so rare, but rather the five hundred hands needed
to tyrannize the kairos, “the right time,” to seize chance by the
forelock!(5)

275

Anyone who does not want to
see the height of a man looks all the more keenly at what is low and in his
foreground—and in the process gives himself away.

276

With all kinds of injury and
loss the lower and cruder soul is better off than the more noble one: the
dangers for the latter must be greater; the probability that it will go wrong
and die is even immense, given the multifaceted nature of its living
conditions.—With a lizard a finger which has been lost grows back: not so with a
man.

277

Bad enough! The old story
again! When we have finished building our house, we suddenly notice that in the
process we have learned something that we simply had to know before we
started to build. The eternally tiresome “Too late!”—The melancholy of
everything finished! . . .

278

Wanderer, who are you? I see
you going on your way, without scorn, without love, with unfathomable eyes, damp
and sad, like a lead sinker which has come back unsatisfied from every depth
into the light—what was it looking for down there?—with a breast which does not
sigh, with a lip which hides its disgust, with a hand which grasps only slowly:
Who are you? What have you been doing? Have a rest here: this place is
hospitable to everyone—relax! And whoever you happen to be, what would you like
now? What do you need to recuperate? Just name it: what I have I’ll offer
you! “For relaxation? For recuperation? O you inquisitive man, what are you
talking about! But give me, I beg . . .” What? What? Say it!—“One more mask! A
second mask!” . . . .

279

Men of profound sorrow betray
themselves when they are happy: they have a way of grabbing happiness as if they
would like to overwhelm and strangle it from jealousy—alas, they know too well
that it is running away from them!

280

“Bad! Bad! What? Is he not
going—back?”—Yes! But you understand him badly if you complain about it. He’s
going back, as every man does who wants to make a huge jump.—

281

“Will people believe it of me?
But I demand that people believe it of me: I have always thought only badly of
myself and about myself, only in very rare cases, only when under compulsion,
always without delight ‘for the subject,’ ready to wander off from ‘myself,’
always without faith in the conclusion, thanks to the uncontrollable mistrust of
the possibility of self-knowledge, which has taken me so far that I
find even the idea of ‘immediate knowledge,’ which the theoreticians allow
themselves, a contradictio in adjecto [contradiction in terms]: this
entire fact is almost the surest thing I know about myself. Within me there must
be some kind of aversion to believing anything definite about myself.
Is a riddle perhaps hidden in that? Probably, but fortunately nothing for my own
teeth. Perhaps it reveals the species to which I belong?—But not to me: and
that’s enough to satisfy me.

282

“But what has
happened to you?”—”I don’t know,” he said, hesitating; “perhaps the Harpies have
flown over my table.”(6)
Occasionally nowadays it happens that a mild, moderate, reserved man suddenly
becomes violent, smashes plates, throws over the table, screams, stomps around,
slanders the entire world—and finally turns aside, ashamed, furious with
himself.—Where? What for? To starve off on his own? To suffocate on his
memory? Anyone who has the desires of a lofty, discriminating soul and only
rarely finds his table set and his nourishment ready will at all times be in
great danger: but today the danger is extraordinary. Thrown into a noisy and
uncouth age, with which he does not want to eat out of the same dish, he can
easily perish from hunger and thirst, or, if he finally nonetheless “helps
himself,”—from sudden disgust.—All of us have probably already sat at tables
where we did not belong; and it’s precisely the most spiritual ones among us who
are the most difficult to feed, who know that dangerous dyspepsia which comes
from a sudden insight and disappointment about our food and those sitting next
to us at the table—the after-dinner disgust.

283

Assuming that one wants to
praise at all, there’s a refined and at the same time noble self-control that
always gives praise only where one does not agree:—in other cases one
would really be praising oneself, something that contradicts good
taste—naturally, a self-control which provides a good opportunity and
provocation for one to be constantly misunderstood. In order to permit
oneself this true luxury of taste and morality, one must not live among
spiritual fools, but rather among people whose misunderstandings and false ideas
are still amusing for their sophistication—or one will have to pay dearly for
it!—“He is praising me: thus, he admits I’m right”—this asinine way of
making conclusions ruins half of life for us hermits, for it brings the asses
into our neighbourhood and friendship.

284

To live with an immense and
proud composure: always beyond.—To have and not have one’s feelings, one’s for
and against, voluntarily, to condescend to them for hours, to sit on
them, as if on a horse, often as if on a donkey:—for one needs to know how to
use their stupidity as well as their fire. To preserve one’s three hundred
foregrounds and one’s dark glasses: for there are occasions when no one should
be allowed to look into our eyes, even less into our “reasons.” And to select
for company that mischievous and cheerful vice, courtesy. And to remain master
of one’s four virtues: courage, insight, sympathy, and solitude. For solitude is
a virtue with us, as a sublime tendency and impulse for cleanliness, which
senses how contact between one person and another—“in society”—must inevitably
bring impurity with it. Every community somehow, somewhere, sometime makes
people—“common.”

285

The greatest events and
ideas—but the greatest ideas are the greatest events—are understood last of all:
the generations contemporary with them do not experience such
events—they go on living past them. What happens then is something like in the
realm of the stars. The light of the most distant stars comes to men last of
all: and before that light arrives, men deny that there are stars
there. “How many centuries does a spirit need in order to be understood?”—that
is also a standard with which people construct a rank ordering and etiquette, as
is necessary, for spirit and star.—

286

“Here the view is free, the
spirit elevated.”—But there is a reverse kind of person who is also on the
heights and also has a free view—but who looks down.

287

What is noble? What does the
word “noble” still mean to us nowadays? What reveals the noble human being, how
do people recognize him, under this heavy, oppressive sky at the beginning of
the rule of the rabble, which is making everything opaque and leaden?—It is not
the actions that prove him—actions are always ambiguous, always inscrutable—;
nor is it the “works.” Among artists and scholars today we find a sufficient
number of those who through their works reveal how a profound desire for what is
noble drives them: but this very need for what is noble is
fundamentally different from the needs of the noble soul itself and is really
the eloquent and dangerous indication that such a soul is lacking. It’s not the
works; it’s the belief which decides here, which here establishes the
order of rank, to take up once more an old religious formula with a new and more
profound meaning: some basic certainty that a noble soul has about itself,
something that does not allow itself to be sought out or found or perhaps even
to be lost. The noble soul has reverence for itself.—

288

There are human beings who have
spirit in an inevitable way. They may toss and turn as they wish and hold their
hands in front of their tell-tale eyes (—as if the hand were not a giveaway!—):
finally it always comes out that they have something they are hiding, that is,
spirit. One of the most sophisticated ways to deceive, at least for as long as
possible, and to present oneself successfully as stupider than one is—what in
common life is often as desirable as an umbrella—is called enthusiasm,
including what belongs with it, for example, virtue. For, as Galiani, who must
have known, says: vertu est enthousiasme [virtue is enthusiasm].

289

In the writings of a hermit we
always hear something of the echo of a wasteland, something of the whispers and
the timid gazing around of isolation; from his strongest words, even from his
crying out, still resounds a new and more dangerous kind of silence, of
concealment. Whoever has sat down, year in and year out, day and night, alone in
an intimate dispute and conversation with his soul, whoever has become a cave
bear or digger for treasure or guardian of treasure and dragon in his own
cavern—it can be a labyrinth but also a gold mine—such a man’s very ideas
finally take on a distinct twilight colouring and smell as much of mould as they
do of profundity, something uncommunicative and reluctant, which blows cold wind
over everyone passing by. The hermit does not believe that a
philosopher—assuming that a philosopher has always first been a hermit—has ever
expressed his real and final opinions in his books. Don’t people write books
expressly to hide what they have stored inside them?—In fact, he will have
doubts whether a philosopher could generally have “real and final”
opinions, whether in his case behind every cave there does not lie, and must
lie, an even deeper cavern—a more comprehensive, stranger, richer world beyond
the surface, an abyss behind every ground, under every “foundation.” Every
philosophy is a foreground philosophy—that is the judgment of a hermit: “There
is something arbitrary about the fact that he remained here, looked
back, and looked around, that at this point set his shovel aside and
did not dig more deeply—there is also something suspicious about it.” Every
philosophy also hides a philosophy; every opinion is also a hiding
place, every word is also a mask.

290

Every deep thinker is more
afraid of being understood than of being misunderstood. In the latter case,
perhaps his vanity suffers, but the former hurts his heart, his sympathy, which
always says, “Alas, why do you want to have it as hard as I did?”

291

Man, a multifaceted, lying,
artificial, and impenetrable animal, who spooks other animals less by his power
than by his cunning and intelligence, has invented good conscience in order to
enjoy his own soul for once as something simple; and all of morality is
a long spirited falsification, thanks to which it’s at all possible to enjoy
looking at the soul. From this point of view, perhaps much more belongs to the
idea of “art” than people commonly believe.

292

A philosopher: that is a man
who constantly experiences, sees, hears, suspects, hopes, and dreams
extraordinary things; who is struck by his very own thoughts as if from outside,
as if from above and below, as if they are events and lightning strikes
tailor-made for him; who is himself perhaps a storm which moves along
pregnant with new lightning flashes; a fateful man, around whom things always
rumble and mutter and gape and proceed mysteriously. A philosopher: alas, a
being that often runs away from himself, is often afraid of himself—but that is
too curious not to “come back to himself” again and again. . . .

293

A man who says, “That pleases
me. I take that for my own and will protect it and defend it against everyone,”
a man who can lead a cause, put a decision into effect, remain true to an idea,
hold on to a woman, punish and cast down an insolent person, a man who has his
anger and his sword and to whom the weak, the suffering, the distressed, and
even the animals are happy to go and belong to by nature—in short, a man who is
naturally a master—when such a man has pity, well, this pity
is worth something! But what is there in the pity of those who suffer! Or even
of those who preach pity! Today in almost all of Europe there is a pathological
susceptibility and sensitivity to pain, as well as a nasty lack of restraint in
complaining, a mollycoddling, which likes to dress itself up with religion and
philosophical bits and pieces as something loftier—there is a formal culture of
suffering. In my view, the unmanliness of what is christened “pity” in
such enthusiastic circles is what always strikes the eye first.—We must
excommunicate this latest form of bad taste, powerfully and thoroughly; and
finally I wish that people would set against their hearts and throats the good
amulet “gai saber,”—“gay science,” to clarify this matter for the
Germans.

294

The Olympian vice.—In
spite of that philosopher who, as a genuine Englishman, tried to make laughing a
defamation of character among all thinking men—“Laughter is a serious infirmity
of human nature, which every thinking man will strive to overcome” (Hobbes)—I
would really allow myself to order the ranks of philosophers according to the
rank of their laughter—right up to those who are capable of golden
laughter. And assuming that the gods also practise philosophy, a fact which many
conclusions have already driven me to—I don’t doubt that in the process they
also know how to laugh in a superhuman and new way—and at the expense of all
serious things! Gods delight in making fun: even where sacred actions are
concerned, it seems they cannot stop laughing.

295

The genius of the heart, as
that great hidden presence possesses it, the tempter-god and born pied piper of
the conscience, whose voice knows how to climb down into the underworld of every
soul, who does not say a word or cast a glance in which there does not lie some
concern with and trace of temptation, whose mastery includes the fact that he
understands how to seem—and not what he is, but what for those who follow him is
one more compulsion to press themselves always closer to him, to follow
him ever more inwardly and completely:—that genius of the heart who makes all
noise and self-satisfaction fall silent and teaches it to listen, who smoothes
out the rough souls and gives them a new desire to taste,—to lie still as a
mirror so that the deep heaven reflects itself in them—; the genius of the heart
who teaches the foolish and over-hasty hand to hesitate and reach out more
delicately; who senses the hidden and forgotten treasure, the drop of goodness
and sweet spirituality under the thick cloudy ice and is a divining rod for
every grain of gold that has lain buried a long time in a dungeon crammed with
mud and sand; the genius of the heart, at whose touch everyone goes forward
richer, not divinely gifted and surprised, not as if delighted and oppressed
with some foreign good, but richer in his own self, newer to himself than
previously, broken open, blown upon and sounded out by a thawing wind, more
uncertain perhaps, more tender, more fragile, more broken, but full of hopes
that as yet have no names, full of new will and flowing, full of new irritations
and opposing currents . . . But what am I doing, my friends? Whom am I speaking
to you about? Have I forgotten myself so much that I have not once named him to
you? Unless you have already guessed for yourselves who this questionable spirit
and god is who wants to be praised in such a way. For just as things go
with anyone who from the time he walked on childish legs has always been on the
move and in alien territory, so many strange and not un-dangerous spirits have
crossed my path, too, above all the one I have just been speaking about, who has
come again and again, namely, no less a spirit than the god Dionysus,
that enormously ambiguous and tempter god, to whom in earlier times, as you
know, I offered up my first born, in all secrecy and reverence—as the last
person, so I thought, who had offered a sacrifice to
him: for I found no one who understood what I was doing then.(7)
Meanwhile I learned a great deal, much too much, about the philosophy of this
god, and, as mentioned, from mouth to mouth—I, the last disciple and initiate of
the god Dionysus: and perhaps I can at last begin to give you, my friends, a
little taste of this philosophy, as much as I am permitted? In a hushed voice,
as is reasonable, for this concerns a number of things that are secret, new,
strange, odd, and mysterious. Even the fact that Dionysus is a philosopher and
that the gods also carry on philosophy seems to me a novelty that is not
harmless and that perhaps might excite mistrust precisely among
philosophers—among you, my friends it has less against it, although it could be
that it comes too late and not at the right moment: for it has been revealed to
me that nowadays you are not happy to believe in god and gods. Also perhaps the
fact that in my explanation I must proceed with more candour than is always
pleasing to the strict habits of your ears? Certainly the god under discussion
went further, very much further, in conversations like this and was always
several steps ahead of me . . . In fact, if it were permitted, I would,
following human practices, attach to him beautifully solemn names of splendour
and virtue; I would have to lavish a great deal of praise on him for his courage
as an explorer and discoverer, for his daring honesty, truthfulness, and love of
wisdom. But such a god has no idea how to begin with all this venerable rubbish
and pageantry. “Keep that,” he would say, “for yourself and people like you and
anyone else who needs it! I have no reason to cover my nakedness!”—Do people
sense that this type of divinity and philosopher perhaps lacks shame? He said it
this way once, “In some circumstances, I love human beings”—and in saying that,
he was alluding to Ariadne, who was present—”for me a human being is a
pleasant, brave, inventive animal that has no equal on earth;
it finds the right path even in every labyrinth.(8)
I like him: I often reflect how I could bring him further forwards and make him
stronger, more evil, and more profound than he is.”—”Stronger, more evil, and
more profound?” I asked shocked. “Yes,” he said once more, “stronger, more evil,
and more profound, also more beautiful”—and with that the tempter god smiled
with his halcyon smile, as if he had just uttered an enchanting compliment. We
see here also that it is not just shame this divinity lacks—; and in general
there are good reasons to suppose that in some things the gods collectively
could learn from us human beings. We human beings are—more human. . .

296

Alas, what are you then, my
written and painted thoughts! It’s not so long ago that you were still so
colourful, young, and malicious, full of stings and secret seasonings, that you
made me sneeze and laugh.—And now? You have already stripped off your novelty
and some of you, I fear, are ready to become truths: you already look so
immortal, so heartbreakingly honest, so boring! And was it ever different? What
things we transcribe in our writing and painting, we mandarins with a Chinese
brush, we immortalizers of things which let themselves be written—what
are the only things we are capable of painting? Alas, only what is about to fade
and is beginning to lose its fragrance! Alas, only storms which are worn out and
withdrawing and old yellow feelings! Alas, only birds which have exhausted
themselves flying and lost their way and now let themselves be caught by
hand—by our hand! We immortalize what can no longer live and fly, only
tired and crumbling things! And it is only your afternoon, my written
and painted thoughts, for which I alone have colours, many colours perhaps, many
colourful caresses and fifty yellows and browns and greens and reds:—but no one
will sense from me how you looked in your dawn, you sudden sparks and miracles
of my solitude, you, my old loved ones—my wicked thoughts!

NOTES

(1)
Quintus Horatius Flaccus (65-8 BC) an important poet in classical Rome. [Back
to Text]

(2) The 1900 German edition adds here:
“(I don’t dare mention greater names, but I have them in mind).
[Back to Text]

(3) The German edition of 1900 adds
after the words “incurable hearts” the parenthetic comment: “(the cynicism of
Hamlet, the case of Galiani).” [Back
to Text]

(4) Raphael (1483-1520): major
Italian painter of the Renaissance. [Back
to Text]

(5) Nietzsche uses Greek letters here: καιρός. [Back
to Text]

(6) Harpies: mythological
winged monsters who steal food. [Back
to Text]

(7) The “first work” Nietzsche is
referring to is his Birth of Tragedy, published in 1872, in which he
proposes the struggle between the Apollonian and Dionysian. [Back
to Text]

(8)
Ariadne: in Greek mythology the daughter of Minos, king of Crete. She
helped Theseus kill the Minotaur in the Labyrinth and escaped with him. When
Theseus abandoned Ariadne, Dionysus fell in love with her. [Back
to Text]