CAMBRIDGE TEXTS IN THE
HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE
The Gay Science

CAMBRIDGE TEXTS IN THE
HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
Series editor
KARL AMERIKS
Professor of Philosophy at the University of Notre Dame
DESMOND M. CLARKE
Professor of Philosophy at University College Cork
The main objective of Cambridge Texts in the History of Philosophy is
to expand the range, variety and quality of texts in the history of
philosophy which are available in English. The series includes texts by
familiar names (such as Descartes and Kant) and also by less well-
known authors. Wherever possible, texts are published in complete and
unabridged form, and translations are specially commissioned for the
series. Each volume contains a critical introduction together with a
guide to further reading and any necessary glossaries and textual
apparatus. The volumes are designed for student use at undergraduate
and postgraduate level and will be of interest not only to students of
philosophy, but also to a wider audience of readers in the history of
science, the history of theology and the history of ideas.
For a list of titles published in the series, please see end of book.

FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE
The Gay Science
With a Prelude in German Rhymes
and an Appendix of Songs
EDITED BY
BERNARD WILLIAMS
All Souls College, Oxford
TRANSLATED BY
JOSEFINE NAUCKHOFF
Wake Forest University
POEMS TRANSLATED BY
ADRIAN DEL CARO
University of Colorado at Boulder
CAMBRIDGE
UNIVERSITY PRESS

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, Sao Paulo, Delhi
Cambridge University Press
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge ca z 8ru, UK
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521636452
© Cambridge University Press 2001
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without
the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2001
Seventh printing 2008
Printed in the United Kingdom at the University Press, Cambridge
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library
Library of Congress cataloguing in publication data
Nietzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm, 1844~1900.
[Fréhliche Wissenschaft. English]
The gay science: with a prelude in German rhymes and an appendix of songs / Friedrich Nietzsche;
edited by Bernard Williams; translated by Josefine Nauckhoff; poems translated by Adrian Del Caro.
p. 
cm. -- (Cambridge texts in the history of philosophy)
Includes bibliographical references (p. ) and index.
ISBN 0 521 63159 9 (hardback) ~1sBN 0 521 63645 0 (paperback)
1. Philosophy. 
1. Williams, Bernard Arthur Owen. 
1. Nauckhoff, Josefine.
in. Del Caro, Adrian, 1952— 
. 
Iv. Title. 
v. Series.
B3313.F72 E5 2001
193—-dcz1 
2001025408
ISBN 978~0~521-63159~4 hardback
ISBN 978-0-§21-63645-2 paperback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of URLs
for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication, and does not
guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain,
accurate or appropriate.

Contents
Introduction 
page vii
Chronology 
XXtil
Further reading 
XXV1
Note on the text 
XXVii
The Gay Science 
I
‘Joke, Cunning and Revenge’: Prelude in German Rhymes 
II
Book One 
27
Book Two 
69
Book Three 
109
Book Four: St Januarius 
157
Book Five: We Fearless Ones 
199
Appendix: Songs of Prince Vogelfrei 
249
Index 
261


Introduction
The Gay Science is a remarkable book, both in itself and as offering a
way into some of Nietzsche’s most important ideas. The history of its
publication is rather complex, and it throws some light on the develop-
ment of his thought and of his methods as a writer. He published the
first edition of it in 1882. In that version, it consisted of only four books,
and had no Preface, though it did have the ‘Prelude in Rhymes’. A
second edition appeared in 1887, which added a fifth book, the Preface,
and an Appendix of further poems. This is the work as we now know it,
and which is translated here.
Between the two editions of The Gay Science, Nietzsche wrote two of
his best-known works, Thus Spoke Zarathustra (1883-5) and Beyond
Good and Evil (1886); the last section of Book Four of The Gay Science
(342)! is indeed virtually the same as the first section of Zarathustra. So
the complete Gay Science brackets these two books, which are different
from it and from each other. (Zarathustra, which is a peculiar literary
experiment in a rhetoric drawn from the Bible, was once one of
Nietzsche’s most popular works, but it has worn less well than the
others.) Book Five of The Gay Science anticipates, in turn, some of the
themes of another famous book which was to follow in 1887, On the
Genealogy of Morality, which is again different in tone, sustaining a
more continuous theoretical argument.
The Gay Science is a prime example of what is often called Nietzsche’s
‘aphoristic’ style. It consists of a sequence of sections which are not
obviously tied to one another except, sometimes, in general content, and
! References to The Gay Science, and to other works by Nietzsche, are to numbered sections.
vii

Introduction
which do not offer a connected argument. The second half of Book
Three, in particular, consists of many very short paragraphs of this
kind. Elsewhere, however, there are longer passages, and in fact the
arrangement of the shorter sections is not as fortuitous as it may look. It
is often designed to gather thoughts which will, so to speak, circle in on
some central theme or problem.
In his earlier works, Nietzsche had moved gradually towards this
style. He had been appointed in 1869 as a professor of classical philology
at the University of Basle, at the extraordinarily early age of twenty-
four. He served in this position for ten years, resigning in 1879 because
of the ill health which was to persist throughout his life. (The last letter
he wrote, when in 1889 he broke down into insanity and a silence which
lasted until his death in 1900, was to his distinguished colleague at
Basle, Jacob Burckhardt, in which he said that he would rather have
been a Swiss professor than God, but he had not dared to push egoism
so far.) In his years at Basle he published first The Birth of Tragedy,
which has the form, if not the content or the tone, of a treatise, and a set
of four long essays collected as Untimely Meditations. In 1878-9 he
brought out two books forming Human, All Too Human, followed in
1880 by a further part called ‘The Wanderer and his Shadow’, and in
these writings he moved from continuous exposition and argument to
setting out a sequence of thoughts which were not necessarily tied
discursively to their neighbours, a style that allowed him to approach a
question from many different directions. In Daybreak, which came out
in 1881, the style is fully developed. As late as 25 January 1882 he still
referred to what were to be the first books of The Gay Science as a
continuation of Daybreak; by June they had acquired their separate title.
When he made that decision, he sensed that Book Four, which is
called “Sanctus Januarius’ and invokes the spirit of the New Year, might
be found obscure, and he was anxious about whether his correspondent,
Peter Gast, would understand it. He knew that this was not just a set of
penetrating, perhaps rather cynical, apergus. ‘Aphorism’, the standard
term which I have already mentioned, implies too strongly that each is
supposed to be a squib, or a compact expression of a truth (often in the
form of an exaggerated falsehood) in the style of the French writers La
Rochefoucault and Chamfort, whom Nietzsche indeed admired, but
whom he did not simply follow in giving a self-conscious exposé of
some human failing, foible or piece of self-deception. There is a certain
vill

Introduction
amount of that, particularly in the earlier books, but he was very aware
of the risk that such aphorisms run of sliding from the daring through
the knowing to the self-satisfied (it is not merely cynicism that he
intends when he says in 379 that ‘we are artists of contempt’). His
ambitions are deeper; the effect is meant to be cumulative, and its aim is
more systematically subversive. A philosopher who had a similar inten-
tion, though in totally different connections, is the later Wittgenstein,
and Nietzsche might have called the sections of this book, as Wittgen-
stein called the paragraphs of his manuscripts, ‘remarks’.
His remarks cover very various subjects. Many of them touch on what
may be called moral psychology, and sometimes he does claim to detect
an egoistic origin of some ethically approved reaction (as he does, for
example, in the shrewd observation about magnanimity and revenge at
section 49). The search for the ‘shameful origin’ of our moral senti-
ments was later to become an important principle of his genealogical
method. But he is very clear that mere reductionism, the readily cynical
explanation of all such attitudes in terms of self-interest, is a mistake.
Partly this is because he does not think that self-interest is an indivi-
dual’s basic motive anyway, and this book contains some quite complex,
if unresolved, reflections on that question, in particular when he
considers whether the virtues have a value for the individual who
possesses them, or for the group. But, more broadly, Nietzsche thinks
that the reductive spirit itself can be in error, a form of vulgarity (3),
and that the ‘realists’ who congratulate themselves on having the
measure of human unreason and self-deception are usually themselves
in the grip of some ancient fantasy (57).
Above all, it is simply not enough, in Nietzsche’s view, to ‘unmask’
some supposedly honourable sentiment or opinion and leave it at that.
‘Only as creators can we destroy’, he very significantly says (58). What
things are called is fundamentally important, but a conventional set of
names — as we may say, an interpretation — can be replaced only by
another, more powerful, interpretation. When we say that one inter-
pretation is more powerful than another, it is vitally important what
counts as ‘power’. It is often said that Nietzsche explains everything in
terms of power. This says something about the way in which he saw
these problems, but it is wrong if it is supposed to state his solution to
it. The point is very clear in On the Genealogy of Morality. There he
tells a story of how a certain outlook or interpretation, embodying
ix

Introduction
metaphysical illusions, came into existence as a psychological compensa-
tion for the weakness of people who were powerless, and how this
outlook triumphed over the conventionally strong and their view of the
world. The question must be, how could this have come about? What
was the source of this new power? There had to be something to this new
way of describing the world which accounted in naturalistic terms for its
triumph, and Nietzsche fully accepts this, even if he does not have a
very rich vocabulary of social explanation in which he can discuss what
it might be. ‘Let us. . . not forget’, he goes on in section 58 of The Gay
Science, ‘that in the long run it is enough to create new names and
valuations and appearances of truth in order to create new “things” ’.
Indeed, but this immediately raises the question, one to which
Nietzsche returned in many different connections: what must someone
do to ‘create’ new names?
The words “The Gay Science’ translate the German title ‘Die
Fréhliche Wissenschaft’. No one, presumably, is going to be misled by
the more recent associations of the word ‘gay’ — it simply means joyful,
light-hearted, and above all, lacking in solemnity (section 327, on taking
things seriously, says something about this). ‘Science’ has its own
difficulties. The word ‘Wissenschaft’, unlike the English word ‘science’
in its modern use, does not mean simply the natural and biological
sciences — they are, more specifically, ‘Naturwissenschaft’. It means any
organized study or body of knowledge, including history, philology,
criticism and generally what we call ‘the humanities’, and that is often
what Nietzsche has in mind when he uses the word in the text (it is
often translated as ‘science’, for want of a brief alternative). But in the
title itself there is an idea still broader than this. It translates a phrase,
‘gai saber’, or, as Nietzsche writes on his title page, ‘gaya scienza’, which
referred to the art of song cultivated by the medieval troubadours of
Provence, and with that, as he explains in Beyond Good and Evil (260), it
invokes an aristocratic culture of courtly love. As he made clear, this
association comes out in the fact that the book contains poems. But the
title has other implications as well. One — particularly important to
understanding this book and Nietzsche more generally — is that, just as
the troubadours possessed not so much a body of information as an art,
so Nietzsche’s ‘gay science’ does not in the first place consist of a
doctrine, a theory or body of knowledge. While it involves and
encourages hard and rigorous thought, and to this extent the standard
xX

Introduction
implications of ‘Wissenschaft’ are in place, it is meant to convey a
certain spirit, one that in relation to understanding and criticism could
defy the ‘spirit of gravity’ as lightly as the troubadours, supposedly,
celebrated their loves. This is why the original publisher could an-
nounce at the beginning of the book that it brought to a conclusion a
series of Nietzsche’s writings (including Human, All Too Human and
Daybreak) which shared the aim of setting out ‘a new image and ideal of
the free spirit’.
He said that it was the most personal of his books, meaning that in
part it was explicitly about his own life: some of it is like a diary. It is not
irrelevant that the ‘gai saber’ belonged to the south of Europe, to the
Mediterranean. Nietzsche spent much of his time in the last years of his
working life in Italy (in places such as those he praises in sections 281
and 291), and he was very conscious of the contrast between overcast
German earnestness and Southern sun and freedom, an idea which had
a long literary history and had been most famously expressed, perhaps,
in Goethe’s Italian Journey. That is a recurrent contrast in The Gay
Science, but, as so often with Nietzsche, it is not one contrast, and his
reflections on the German spirit in philosophy and religion are specially
nuanced in this book, for instance in his discussion (357) of ‘What is
German?’
Nietzsche’s general reflections, here as elsewhere, have some recur-
rent weaknesses. There are cranky reflections on diet and climate. His
opinions about women and sex, even if they include (as at 71) one or
two shrewd and compassionate insights into the conventions of his time,
are often shallow and sometimes embarrassing; they were, biographi-
cally, the product of an experience which had been drastically limited
and disappointing. However, what is most significant for his thought as
a whole is the fact that his resources for thinking about modern society
and politics, in particular about the modern state, were very thin. The
point is not that he was opposed to a free society, equal rights, and other
typically modern aspirations (though he certainly was, as section 377,
for instance, makes clear). In fact, Nietzsche has by no means been a
hero exclusively of the political Right, and many radical, socialist and
even feminist groups in the last century found support in his writings.”
2 A very interesting study in this connection is Steven E. Ascheim, The Nietzsche Legacy in
Germany 1890~1990 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992). A helpful discussion of
Nietzsche’s political thought is Bruce Detwiler, Nietzsche and the Politics of Aristocratic Radicalism
xi

Introduction
This was possible just because the deeply radical spirit of his work was
combined with a lack of effective political and social ideas, leaving a
blank on which many different aspirations could be projected. His
clearly aristocratic sympathies are, in political connections, not so much
reactionary as archaic, and while he has many illuminating things to say
about the religious and cultural history of Europe, his conception of
social relations owes more to his understanding of the ancient world
than to a grasp of modernity. The idea of nihilism which is so important
in his later works is undeniably relevant to modern conditions, but his
discussions of such subjects as ‘corruption’ (in section 23 of this book)
borrow a lot from the rhetoric of the Roman Empire and the disposition
of its writers to praise the largely imaginary virtues of the vanished
Republic.
The Gay Science marks a decisive step beyond the books that came
before it because it introduces two of what were to become Nietzsche’s
best-known themes, the Death of God and the Eternal Recurrence. The
idea that God is dead occurs first at 108, in association with the image of
the Buddha’s shadow, still to be seen in a cave for centuries after his
death. This is followed at 125 by the haunting story of a madman with a
lantern in the bright morning, looking for God. He is met by ridicule,
and he concludes that he has ‘come too early’, that the news of God’s
death has not yet reached humanity, even though they have killed him
themselves. This idea recurs in more literal terms in 343, the first
section of Book Five (published, we may recall, five years later). The
death of God is identified there as the fact that ‘the belief in . 
. 
. God
has become unbelievable’: this, ‘the greatest recent event’, is beginning
to cast its shadow across Europe. Once this event is fully recognized, it
will have incalculable consequences, in particular for European morality.
Some of these consequences will be melancholy, and indeed elsewhere
Nietzsche struggles with the question of what act of creation, by whom,
might overcome the emptiness left by the collapse of traditional
illusions. But here the news brings, at least in the short term, only joy, a
sense of daybreak and freedom, the promise of an open sea: ‘maybe
>
there has never been such an “‘open sea’’’.
(University of Chicago Press, 1990). Mark Warren, in Nietzsche and Political Thought (Boston:
MIT Press, 1988), well brings out the limitations of Nietzsche’s social ideas, but is over-
optimistic in thinking that if his philosophy were true to itself, it would offer a basis for
liberalism.
xii

Introduction
Nietzsche continued to think that the death of God would have vast
and catastrophic consequences. But on the account that he himself gave
of Christian belief and its origins (in this book and in Beyond Good and
Evil, but above all in On the Genealogy of Morality), should he really
have thought this? He believed that the faith in the Christian God, and
more generally in a reassuring metaphysical structure of the world, was
a projection of fear and resentment, representing a victory of the weak
over the strong. That metaphysical belief has died; it has been
destroyed, as Nietzsche often points out, by itself, by the belief in
truthfulness — and we shall come back to that — which was itself part of
the metaphysical faith. But how much difference should he expect its
death to make? He shares with another nineteenth-century subverter,
Marx (with whom he shares little else), the idea that religious belief is a
consequence, an expression of social and psychological forces. If those
forces remain, and the Christian expression of them collapses, then
surely other expressions will take its place. If need secretes thought, and
the need remains, then it will secrete new thoughts.
Indeed, Nietzsche does think this: he thinks that liberalism, socialism,
Utilitarianism and so on are just secularized expressions of those same
forces. But he thinks that they are too manifestly close to the original,
and that our growing understanding that the world has no metaphysical
structure whatsoever must discredit them as well. The death of God is
the death of those gods, too. He has a particular contempt for benign
freethinkers who hope to keep all the ethical content of Christianity
without its theology: George Eliot is the unlucky target when the point
is spelled out very clearly in The Twilight of the Idols (the section called
‘Expeditions of an Untimely Man’). But that is not the most important
point. Even if the content of our morality changes noticeably, as for
instance attitudes towards sex have done in recent times, much more
basic and structural elements of it, its humanitarianism and its professed
belief in equal respect for everyone, are in Nietzsche’s view too bound
up with the mechanisms that generated Christianity, and will inevitably
go the same way that it has gone. It is too soon, surely, to say that he was
wrong.
For Nietzsche himself there was another dimension as well, one
immediately connected with his own values. He saw the unravelling of
Christianity as part of the phenomenon that he called European
nihilism, the loss of any sense of depth or significance to life. The world
Xill

Introduction
might conceivably avoid destruction and overt hatred by organizing a
pleasantly undemanding and unreflective way of life, a dazed but
adequately efficient consumerism. Nietzsche probably did not think that
such a society could survive in the long run, but in any case he could
not reconcile himself to such a prospect or regard it as anything but
loathsome. Contempt was one of his readier emotions, and nothing
elicited it more than what he sometimes calls ‘the last man’, the
contented, unadventurous, philistine product of such a culture. This
book, like all his others, makes it clear that any life worth living must
involve daring, individuality and creative bloody-mindedness. This is
indeed expressed in the ‘gaiety’ of its title. Gaiety can encompass
contentment, as it does on New Year’s Day at the beginning of Book
Four, but when that is so, it is a particular achievement and a piece of
good luck. Gaiety is not itself contentment, and while it rejects
solemnity and the spirit of gravity, it does so precisely because it is the
only way of taking life seriously.
Nietzsche has been thought by some people to have had a brutal and
ruthless attitude to the world; sometimes, perhaps, he wished that he
had. But in fact, one personal feature which, together with his illness
and his loneliness, contributed to his outlook was a hyper-sensitivity to
suffering. It was linked to a total refusal to forget, not only the existence
of suffering, but the fact that suffering was necessary to everything that
he and anyone else valued. ‘All good things come from bad things’ is one
of his fundamental tenets: it signals his rejection of what he calls ‘the
fundamental belief of the metaphysicians, the belief in the opposition of
values’ (Beyond Good and Evil, 2). This is, for him, a principle of
interpretation, but it presents itself in the first instance simply as a
fact, which he thought no honest understanding of the world could
evade. If a sense of the world’s achievements and glories ~ art, self-
understanding, nobility of character — cannot in common honesty be
separated from the knowledge of the horrors that have been involved in
bringing these things about, then there is a question that cannot,
Nietzsche supposed, simply be ignored: whether it has all been worth it.
Thinkers in the past have supposed that the question could be
answered, and answered positively. Leibniz, with his famous doctrine
that this is the best of all possible worlds, believed in a cosmic cost-
benefit analysis which would vindicate God’s mysterious management.
Hegel had told a progressive metaphysical story of the historical
XIV

Introduction
development of freedom and reason, which represented the horrors as
all dialectically necessary to the eventual outcome, so that we could be
sure that none of them was meaningless. Neither of these fantasies,
Nietzsche reasonably thought, could be taken seriously in the late 19th
century. Nor, he came to think, could one take altogether seriously
someone who answered the same question, but in the negative. In his
earlier years he had been very impressed, as Wagner was, by the
philosophy of Schopenhauer, and his references to Schopenhauer in this
book are mostly respectful (more so than those to Wagner), but he came
to be very sceptical about Schopenhauer’s so-called pessimism, which
had been expressed in the judgement (for instance) that the world’s
‘non-existence would be preferable to its existence’. ‘We take care not
to say that the world is worth /ess’, he says at 346:
The whole attitude of man. . .as judge of the world who finally
places existence itself on his scales and finds it too light — the
monstrous stupidity of this attitude has finally dawned on us and
we are sick of it.
Nietzsche recognizes that his own Birth of Tragedy had been full of
the Schopenhauerian spirit. Taken in that spirit, the question of ‘the
value of life’, he came to think, had no answer and was indeed not a
question. Yet it did not simply go away, because there remained what
seemed to Nietzsche, at least, to be a fact, that anyone who really
understood and held in his mind the horrors of the world would be
crushed or choked by them. That fact left, if not a question to be
answered, at least a problem to be overcome. Nietzsche presents the
problem, and his way of overcoming it, in the form of the thought-
experiment of the Eternal Recurrence, which appears for the first time
in The Gay Science.* In the startling words of 341, what would you
think if a demon told you that everything in life would recur over and
over again eternally? How would you answer the question “Do you want
this again and innumerable times again??? This question, Nietzsche
says, ‘would lie on your actions as the heaviest weight’. It tests your
ability not to be overcome by the world’s horror and meaninglessness.
3 The World as Will and Representation, trans. E. F. J. Payne (2 vols., New York: Dover, 1969), vol.
1, chapter 46, p. 576
4 The phrase ‘eternal recurrence’ occurs first at sec 285, but in a more limited connection, of
recognizing that there is no perpetual peace, but only (as the pre-Socratic philosopher Heraclitus
taught) a cycle of war and peace.
xv

Introduction
There is no belief which could ‘justify the world’: confronted with the
question of its value, or rather with the replacement for that question,
which is the prospect of being crushed by the consciousness of what the
world is like, the only issue is (as Nietzsche also puts it) whether one can
say ‘yes’ to it, and the test of that is whether seriously and in the fullest
consciousness you could will that the course of everything should
happen over and over again, including not just its pain and cruelty and
humiliation, but also its triviality, emptiness and ugliness, the last man
and everything that goes with him.
This is an entirely hypothetical question, a thought-experiment. It is
not a matter, as I read him, of Nietzsche’s believing in a theory of eternal
recurrence. The idea (which does not occur in Beyond Good and Evil or
The Genealogy of Morality) appears in Zarathustra in a form similar to
that of The Gay Science, and Nietzsche mentions its importance in The
Twilight of the Idols and in Ecce Homo (the intellectual autobiography
that he wrote on the verge of insanity). There are some places in which
it is treated as a theoretical idea, but they are largely confined to his
unpublished notes (his Nachlass), some of which, particularly from his
last years, were published in The Will to Power, which is not a book by
Nietzsche at all, but a selection from these notes tendentiously put
together by his sister.
But if the idea of the Eternal Recurrence is a thought-experiment,
how can answering its question lie on our actions ‘as the heaviest
weight’? If it is a mere fantasy, then how can ‘willing’ the Eternal
Recurrence cost one anything at all? It seems as simple as saying ‘yes’.
But one has to recall that in facing the question one is supposed to have
a real and live consciousness of everything that has led to this moment,
in particular to what we value. We would have to think in vivid detail, if
we could, of every dreadful happening that has been necessary to create
Venice, or Newton’s science, or whatever one thinks best of in our
morality. Then we would have not simply to say ‘yes’, but to say ‘yes’
and mean it. That does not seem exactly weightless. What perhaps does
less work in the thought-experiment is the element, which Nietzsche
certainly thought essential to it, of eternity. If there is anything in this
test at all, why would willing one recurrence not be enough? If you
could overcome the ‘nausea’, as Zarathustra repeatedly puts it, of the
prospect that the horrors and the last man and all the rest will come
round again even once, and say ‘yes’ to it, you would have taken the
Xvi

Introduction
essential step: could willing all those further recurrences cost you very
much more?
There is another, very natural, reaction to the problem, which is
almost everyone’s reaction: to forget about it. One can forget that the
horrors exist, and also, if one has a taste for metaphysical consolations,
that God is dead. The narrator of Scott Fitzgerald’s The Great Gatsby
says of Tom and Daisy that they ‘retreated back into their money and
their vast carelessness, or whatever it was that held them together’, and
that is, roughly speaking, the remedy that the ‘last man’ finds for
Nietzsche’s problem. David Hume spoke of ‘carelessness and inatten-
tion’ as the only remedy for sceptical doubts; but that 1s not the same,
because Hume thought that sceptical doubts were unreal. Nietzsche
knew that the considerations we all forget were not unreal, and he held
obstinately to an idea of truthfulness that would not allow us to falsify
them. In this book, he calls on honesty and intellectual conscience at
319 and (as we shall see) at 344; at 284 he speaks of those who have to
have an argument against the sceptic inside themselves — ‘the great self-
dissatisfied people’. In The Anti-Christ (50), at the very end of his active
life, he wrote:
Truth has had to be fought for every step of the way, almost
everything else dear to our hearts, on which our love and our trust
in life depend, has had to be sacrificed to it. Greatness of soul is
needed for it, the service of truth is the hardest service. — For what
does it mean to be Aonest in intellectual things? That one is stern
towards one’s heart, that one despises ‘fine feelings’, that one
makes every Yes and No a question of conscience!
The value of truthfulness embraces the need to find out the truth, to
hold on to it, and to tell it — in particular, to oneself. But Nietzsche’s
own dedication to this value, he saw, immediately raised the question of
what this value is. We have taken it for granted, he thinks, and we have
seriously misunderstood it: as he says in Beyond Good and Evil (177),
‘Perhaps nobody yet has been truthful enough about what “truthful-
ness” is.’
Section 344 of The Gay Science (the second section of Book Five)
gives one of Nietzsche’s most important and illuminating statements of
this question:
This unconditional will to truth — what is it? Is it the will not to let
oneself be deceived? Is it the will not to deceive? For the will to
XV1i

Introduction
truth could be interpreted in this second way, too — if ‘I do not
want to deceive myself is included as a special case under the
generalization ‘I do not want to deceive’. But why not deceive? But
why not allow oneself to be deceived?
The reasons for not wanting to be deceived, he goes on to say, are
prudential; seen in that light, wanting to get things right in our
intellectual studies and in practical life will be a matter of utility. But
those considerations cannot possibly sustain an unconditional value for
truth: much of the time it is more useful to believe falsehoods. Our
belief in the unconditional will to truth
must have originated in spite of the fact that the disutility and
dangerousness of ‘the will to truth’ or ‘truth at any price’ is proved
to it constantly. ‘At any price’: we understand this well enough
once we have offered and slaughtered one faith after another on
this altar! Consequently, ‘will to truth’ does mot mean ‘I do not
want to let myself be deceived’ but — there is no alternative — ‘I will
not deceive, not even myself’; and with that we stand on moral
ground.
. . .you will have gathered what I am getting at, namely, that it is
still a metaphysical faith upon which our faith in science rests — that
even we knowers of today, we godless anti-metaphysicians, still
take our fire, too, from the flame lit by the thousand-year-old faith,
the Christian faith which was also Plato’s faith, that God is truth;
that truth is divine. . .
The title of the section is ‘In what way we, too, are still pious’. The
idea is developed further in Book 111 of On the Genealogy of Morality,
where the ‘ascetic ideal’ which has received an unflattering genealogical
explanation is discovered to lie at the root of the will to truth, which
powered the need to discover that very explanation. But that does not
overthrow the will to truth: ‘I have every respect for the ascetic ideal in
so far as it 1s honest!’ (111.26).
The ‘unconditional will to truth’ does not mean that we want to
believe any and every truth. It does mean that we want to understand
who we are, to correct error, to avoid deceiving ourselves, to get beyond
comfortable falsehood. The value of truthfulness, so understood, cannot
lie just in its consequences, as Nietzsche repeatedly points out. Earlier
in this book (121), he says that various beliefs may be necessary for our
life, but that does not show them to be true: ‘life is not an argument’.
XViil

Introduction
Already in Human, All Too Human (517) he had noted: ‘Fundamental
Insight: There is no pre-established harmony between the furthering of
truth and the well-being of humanity.’ Again, in Beyond Good and Evil
(11) he says that we must understand that there are some judgements
which ‘must be believed to be true, for the sake of preservation of
creatures like ourselves, though they might, of course, be false judge-
ments for all that’.
Truth may be not just unhelpful, but destructive. In particular the
truths of Nietzsche’s own philosophy, which discredit the metaphysical
world, can (as we have seen) destructively lead to nihilism if they come
to be accepted. In the Nachlass (The Will to Power 5) there is a revealing
note, which mentions the way in which the idea of truthfulness has
turned against the morality which fostered it, and ends with the remark:
This antagonism — not to esteem what we know, and not to be
allowed any longer to esteem the lies we should like to tell ourselves
— results in a process of dissolution.
In what ways are we ‘not allowed’ to esteem these lies? To some degree,
Nietzsche thought that this was already in his time a historical or social
necessity: that, at least among thoughtful people, these beliefs simply
could not stand up much longer or have much life to them. It is a good
question whether this was right, indeed whether it is right today —
particularly when we recall the secularized, political, forms which are
now taken, as Nietzsche supposed, by the same illusions. What is
certainly true is that Nietzsche took it to be an ethical necessity, for
himself and anyone he was disposed to respect, not to esteem these
illusions. He did think that there were things which, even for honest
and reflective people, could rightly compensate in some ways for the
loss of the illusions; it is in this spirit that he remarks elsewhere in the
Nachlass (The Will to Power 822) ‘We possess art lest we perish of the
truth.’ He does not mean that we possess art in place of the truth; he
means that we possess art so that we can possess the truth and not
perish of it.
There continue to be complex debates about what Nietzsche under-
stood truth to be. Quite certainly, he did not think, in pragmatist spirit,
that beliefs are true if they serve our interests or welfare: we have
already seen some of his repeated denials of this idea. 
A more recently
fashionable view of him is that he shared, perhaps founded, a kind of
xix

Introduction
deconstructive scepticism to the effect that there is no such thing as
truth, or that truth is what anyone thinks it is, or that it is a boring
category that we can do without. This is also wrong, and more deeply
so. As we have seen, Nietzsche did not think that the ideal of truthful-
ness went into retirement when its metaphysical origins were discov-
ered, and he did not suppose, either, that truthfulness could be detached
from a concern for the truth. Truthfulness as an ideal retains its power,
and so far from truth being dispensable or malleable, his main question
is how it can be made bearable. Repeatedly Nietzsche — the ‘old
philologist’, as he called himself — reminds us that, quite apart from any
question about philosophical interpretations, including his own, there
are facts to be respected. In The Anti-Christ (59) he praises the ancient
world for having invented ‘the incomparable art of reading well, the
prerequisite for all systematic knowledge’, and with that ‘the sense for
facts, the last-developed and most valuable of all the senses’. At the
beginning of On the Genealogy of Morality, he tells us that ‘the English
psychologists’ should not be dismissed as old, cold, boring frogs; rather,
they are brave animals,
who have been taught to sacrifice desirability to truth, every truth,
even a plain, bitter, ugly, foul, unchristian, immoral truth. . .Be-
cause there are such truths —
He keenly detects elements in our intellectual structures which we
mistake for truths. In The Gay Science he stresses the importance of ‘a
law of agreement’, which regulates people’s thoughts and provides
intellectual security (76). He stresses the historical, indeed the con-
tinuing, importance of these conceptions, but he does not think that
they are the truth, or that they are immune to the discovery of truth.
They are contrasted with the truth, and the question is, what will emerge
from a battle between them and a growing awareness of the truth: as he
asks at 110, ‘to what extent can truth stand to be incorporated?’
In his earliest writings about truth and error, Nietzsche sometimes
spoke as though he could compare the entire structure of our thought to
the ‘real’ nature of things and find our thought defective. It is as though
the business of using concepts at all falsified a reality which in itself was
— what? Formless, perhaps, or chaotic, or utterly unstructured. Later, he
rightly rejected this picture, with its implication that we can somehow
look round our the edge of our concepts at the world to which we are
XX

Introduction
applying them and grasp it as entirely unaffected by any descriptions
(including, we would be forced to admit, the descriptions ‘formless’,
‘chaotic’, and so on).° There are passages in The Gay Science where it is
unclear whether he is still attached to this picture. He discusses fictions,
the practice of regarding things as equal or identical or mathematically
structured when they are not so or only approximately so (110, 121). He
is making the point, certainly, that mathematical representations which
are offered by the sciences are in various ways idealizations, and this is
entirely intelligible. There is greater ambiguity when he suggests that
nothing is really ‘identical’ or ‘the same’. To take an example: the
concept ‘snake’ allows us to classify various individual things as ‘the
same animal’, and to recognize one individual thing as ‘the same snake’.
It is trivially true that ‘snake’ is 
a human concept, a cultural product.
But it is 
a much murkier proposition that its use somehow /falsifies
reality — that ‘in itself? the world does not contain snakes, or indeed
anything else you might mention. Nietzsche came to see that this idea of
the world ‘in itself’ was precisely a relic of the kind of metaphysics that
he wanted to overcome. As a remark in the Nachlass puts it (The Will to
Power 567): ‘The antithesis of the apparent world and the true world is
reduced to the antithesis “world” and “nothing”’.’
It is less than clear, and also well worth considering, how far the
formulations of The Gay Science still commit him to the murky
metaphysical picture. Some of the same problems affect another idea
which appears in the book, and which was to be important in works he
wrote after it, the idea of ‘a perspective’. Our interpretative outlook, our
particular ‘take’ on the world, is modelled on the analogy of a literal,
visual, perspective, and this analogy has two implications: that we
understand that there can be alternative perspectives, and, importantly,
that these will be alternative perspectives on the same reality. In later
works, Nietzsche is often less than definite about what is involved in this
second implication, but he is very clear about the first implication, and
indeed urges us to combine perspectives, or move between them, which
shows that we not only know that there are other perspectival views, but
that we know what some of them are. In The Gay Science, he seems on
the very edge of stepping into this problem. Section 299, for instance,
suggests that we can make use of different perspectives. But at 374,
5 This is well argued by Maudemarie Clark, Nietasche on Truth and Philosophy (Cambridge
University Press, 1991).
XXi

Introduction
where he says ‘we cannot reject the possibility that it [the world]
includes infinite interpretations’, the idea of the ‘alternatives’ seems to
remain an entirely abstract possibility: ‘we cannot look around our
corner’.
The ‘Greeks were superficial — out of profundity’, he says in the
Preface (and he repeated the remark later, in the epilogue to Nietzsche
contra Wagner). But the Greeks in their time could straightforwardly
display a delight in surfaces and appearances which was indeed
profound. That is not possible for us, after so much history: any such
attitude for us will be a different and more sophisticated thing, and it
will represent an achievement. At the very end of the book, he returns
to the gaiety of the gay science, and calls up the ideal of ‘a spirit that
plays naively, i.e. not deliberately but from overflowing abundance and
power, with everything that was hitherto called holy, good, untouchable,
divine. . .” This might seem even inhuman in comparison to conven-
tional forms of seriousness, that is to say, solemnity,
and in spite of all this, it is perhaps only with it that the great
seriousness really emerges; that the real question mark is posed for
the first time; that the destiny of the soul changes; the hand of the
clock moves forward. . .
Then he adds, at the end of that section, ‘. . .the tragedy begins’. But
immediately there comes the last section of all, Epilogue, in which the
spirits of his own book tell him to stop these gloomy noises, these
‘voices from the crypt, and marmot whistles’. ‘Nicht solche Tone!’ they
cry in an echo of Schiller’s Ode to Joy, ‘Not such sounds!’ He says he
will give them something else — the poems, presumably, with which he
ends the book. But he does so with a final question, and it is a question
which he wanted his readers to ask themselves not just at the end of this
book, but throughout it and indeed throughout all his books — ‘Is that
what you want?”
XXii

1844
1846
1848
1849
1850
1858
1864
1865
1866
1868
1869
1870
1872
Chronology
Born in Récken, a small village in the Prussian province of
Saxony, on 15 October.
Birth of his sister Elisabeth.
Birth of his brother Joseph.
His father, a Lutheran minister, dies at age thirty-six of ‘soft-
ening of the brain’.
Brother dies; family moves to Naumburg to live with father’s
mother and her sisters.
Begins studies at Pforta, Germany’s most famous school for
education in the classics.
Graduates from Pforta with a thesis in Latin on the Greek poet
Theognis; enters the University of Bonn as a theology student.
Transfers from Bonn, following the classical philologist Friedrich
Ritschl to Leipzig where he registers as a philology student; reads
Schopenhauer’s The World as Will and Representation.
Reads Friedrich Lange’s History of Materialism.
Meets Richard Wagner.
On Ritschl’s recommendation is appointed professor of classical
philology at Basle at the age of twenty-four before completing
his doctorate (which is then conferred without a dissertation);
begins frequent visits to the Wagner residence at Tribschen.
Serves as a medical orderly in the Franco-Prussian war; con-
tracts a serious illness and so serves only two months. Writes
‘The Dionysiac World View’.
Publishes his first book, The Birth of Tragedy; its dedicatory
preface to Richard Wagner claims for art the role of ‘the highest
XXiil

Chronology
1873
1874
1876
1878
1879
1880
1881
1882
1883
1884
1885
1886
1887
task and truly metaphysical activity of his life’; devastating
reviews follow.
Publishes ‘David Strauss, the Confessor and the Writer’, the
first of his Untimely Meditations; begins taking books on natural
science out of the Basle library, whereas he had _ previously
confined himself largely to books on philological matters. Writes
‘On Truth and Lying in a Non-Moral Sense’.
Publishes two more Meditations, ‘The Uses and Disadvantages
of History for Life’ and ‘Schopenhauer as Educator’.
Publishes the fourth Meditation, ‘Richard Wagner in Bayreuth’,
which already bears subtle signs of his movement away from
Wagner.
Publishes Human, All Too Human (dedicated to the memory of
Voltaire); it praises science over art as the high culture and thus
marks a decisive turn away from Wagner.
Terrible health problems force him to resign his chair at Basle
(with a small pension); publishes ‘Assorted Opinions and
Maxims’, the first part of vol. 11 of Human, All Too Human;
begins living alone in Swiss and Italian boarding-houses.
Publishes ‘The Wanderer and His Shadow’, which becomes the
second part of vol. 11 of Human, All Too Human.
Publishes Daybreak.
Publishes Idylls of Messina (eight poems) in a monthly magazine;
publishes The Gay Science (first edition); friendship with Paul
Ree and Lou Andreas-Salomé ends badly, leaving Nietzsche
devastated.
Publishes the first two parts of Thus Spoke Zarathustra; learns of
Wagner’s death just after mailing part one to the publisher.
Publishes the third part of Thus Spoke Zarathustra.
Publishes the fourth part of Zarathustra for private circulation
only.
Publishes Beyond Good and Evil; writes prefaces for new releases
of: The Birth of Tragedy, Human, All Too Human vols. 1, 1, and
Daybreak.
Publishes expanded edition of The Gay Science with a new
preface, a fifth book, and an appendix of poems; publishes Hymn
to Life, a musical work for chorus and orchestra; publishes On
the Genealogy of Morality.
XXIV

Chronology
1888 
Publishes The Case of Wagner, composes a collection of poems,
Dionysian Dithyrambs, and four short books: Twilight of Idols,
The Antichrist, Ecce Homo, and Nietzsche contra Wagner.
1889 
Collapses physically and mentally in Turin on 3 January; writes
a few lucid notes but never recovers sanity; is briefly institution-
alized; spends remainder of his life as an invalid, living with his
mother and then his sister, who also gains control of his literary
estate.
1900 
©Dies in Weimar on 25 August.
XxVv

Further reading
The standard biography of Nietzsche in English is R. J. Hollingdale,
Nietzsche: The Man and his Philosophy, recently published in a revised
and updated second edition (Cambridge University Press, 1999). Lesley
Chamberlain’s Nietzsche in Turin: An Intimate Biography (Picador,
1997) gives a vivid picture of his life in the period during which he was
at work on The Gay Science. There are two excellent general introduc-
tions to Nietzsche’s philosophy, a short book by Michael Tanner,
Nietzsche (Oxford University Press, 1995) and a slightly longer and
more technical book by Henry Staten, Nietzsche’s Voice (Cornell
University Press, 1990). Readers interested in Nietzsche’s epistemology
and metaphysics should consult Maudemarie Clark’s Nietzsche on Truth
and Philosophy (Cambridge University Press, 1991), John T. Wilcox,
Truth and Value in Nietzsche: A Study of his Metaethics and Epistemology
(University of Michigan Press, 1974), and Ken Gemes, ‘Nietzsche’s
Critique of Truth’, Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 52 (1992),
47-66. Those with an interest in Nietzsche’s moral philosophy should
consult Alexander Nehamas, Nietzsche: Life as Literature (Harvard
University Press, 1987). There are two recent helpful discussions of
Nietzsche’s political and social thought: Bruce Detwiler, Nietzsche and
the Politics of Aristocratic Radicalism (University of Chicago Press, 1990)
and Mark Warren, Nietzsche and Political Thought (MIT Press, 1988).
See also Peter Bergmann, Nietzsche, 
‘the Last Unpolitical German’
(Indiana University Press, 1987). For an interesting discussion of some
aspects of Nietzsche’s legacy, see Steven E. Ascheim, The Nietzsche
Legacy in Germany 1890-1990 (University of California Press, 1992).
XXV1

Note on the text
The text used for this translation is printed in the now standard edition
of Nietzsche’s works edited by Giorgio Colli and Mazzino Montinari
(Berlin, de Gruyter, 1967-77). Their edition, and that of Peter Pitz
(Munich, Goldmann, 1994), have been used in the preparation of the
footnotes to this edition.
XXVIl


The Gay Science
(‘La gaya scienza’)
This house is my own and here I dwell,
I’ve never aped nothing from no one
and — laugh at each master, mark me well,
who at himself has not poked fun.
Over my front door.
The title is a translation into German (in our edition, into English) of the Provengal subtitle.
Gaya scienza (joyful, cheerful, or gay science’) was a term used by the troubadours in the twelfth
to fourteenth centuries to refer to the art of poetry. In Ecce Homo Nietzsche writes that he has
used the term gaya scienza here to designate the specific unity of ‘singer, knight, and free spirit’
which was characteristic of early Provengal culture.


Preface to the second edition
I
This book might need more than one preface; and in the end there
would still be room for doubting whether someone who has not
experienced something similar could, by means of prefaces, be brought
closer to the experiences of this book. It seems to be written in the
language of the wind that brings a thaw: it contains high spirits, unrest,
contradiction, and April weather, so that one is constantly reminded of
winter’s nearness as well as of the triumph over winter that is coming,
must come, perhaps has already come. . .Gratitude flows forth inces-
santly, as if that which was most unexpected had just happened — the
gratitude of a convalescent — for recovery was what was most unex-
pected. ‘Gay Science’: this signifies the saturnalia! of a mind that has
patiently resisted a terrible, long pressure — patiently, severely, coldly,
without yielding, but also without hope — and is now all of a sudden
attacked by hope, by hope for health, by the intoxication of recovery. Is it
any wonder that in the process much that is unreasonable and foolish
comes to light, much wanton tenderness, lavished even on problems
that have a prickly hide, not made to be fondled and lured? This entire
book is really nothing but an amusement after long privation and
powerlessness, the jubilation of returning strength, of a reawakened
faith in a tomorrow and a day after tomorrow, of a sudden sense and
anticipation of a future, of impending adventures, of reopened seas, of
goals that are permitted and believed in again. How many and what
1 Roman winter festival at which usual bonds of social order were thrown off, social roles were
reversed, etc.

The Gay Science
sorts of things did not lie behind me then! This stretch of desert,
exhaustion, loss of faith, icing-up in the midst of youth; this onset of
dotage at the wrong time; this tyranny of pain surpassed still by the
tyranny of a pride that refused the conclusions of pain — and conclusions
are consolations; this radical seclusion as a self-defence against a
pathologically clairvoyant contempt for humanity, this limitation in
principle to what was bitter, harsh, painful to know, as prescribed by the
nausea that had gradually developed from an incautious and excessively
luxurious spiritual diet — one calls it romanticism — oh, who could re-
experience all of this as I did? But if anyone could, he would surely
pardon even more than a bit of foolishness, exuberance, ‘gay science’ —
for example, the handful of songs that have been added to the book this
time, songs in which a poet makes fun of all poets in a manner that is
hard to forgive. Alas, it is not only the poets and their beautiful ‘lyrical
sentiments’ on whom this resurrected author has to vent his malice:
who knows what kind of victim he is looking for, what kind of monster
will stimulate him to pardon it? Incipit tragoedia,? we read at the end of
this suspiciously innocent book. Beware! Something utterly wicked and
mischievous is being announced here: incipit parodia, no doubt.
2
But let us leave Mr. Nietzsche: what is it to us that Mr Nietzsche has
got well again?. . .A psychologist knows few questions as attractive as
that concerning the relation between health and philosophy; and should
he himself become ill, he will bring all of his scientific curiosity into the
illness. For assuming that one is a person, one necessarily also has the
philosophy of that person; but here there is a considerable difference. In
some, it is their weaknesses that philosophize; in others, their riches and
strengths. The former need their philosophy, be it as a prop, a sedative,
medicine, redemption, elevation, or self-alienation; for the latter, it is
only a beautiful luxury, in the best case the voluptuousness of a
triumphant gratitude that eventually has to inscribe itself in cosmic
capital letters on the heaven of concepts. In the former, more common
case, however, when it is distress that philosophizes, as in all sick
thinkers — and perhaps sick thinkers are in the majority in the history of
2the tragedy begins’
3 ‘the parody begins’
4

Preface to the second edition
philosophy — what will become of the thought that is itself subjected to
the pressure of illness? This is the question that concerns the psycholo-
gist, and here an experiment is possible. Just like a traveller who resolves
to wake up at a certain hour and then calmly gives himself up to sleep,
so too we philosophers, should we become ill, temporarily surrender
with body and soul to the illness — we shut our eyes to ourselves, as it
were. And as the traveller knows that something is not asleep, something
that will count the hours and wake him up, we, too, know that the
decisive moment will find us awake, that something will then leap
forward and catch the mind 7 
the act, i.e. in its weakness or repentance
or hardening or gloom, and whatever else the pathological states of the
mind are called that on healthy days are opposed by the pride of the
mind (for the old saying still holds: ‘the proud mind, the peacock, and
the horse are the three proudest animals on earth’). After such self-
questioning, self-temptation, one acquires a subtler eye for all philoso-
phizing to date; one is better than before at guessing the involuntary
detours, alleyways, resting places, and sunning places of thought to
which suffering thinkers are led and misled on account of their
suffering; one now knows where the sick body and its needs uncon-
sciously urge, push, and lure the mind — towards sun, stillness,
mildness, patience, medicine, balm in some sense. Every philosophy
that ranks peace above war, every ethic with a negative definition of
happiness, every metaphysics and physics that knows some /inale, a final
state of some sort, every predominantly aesthetic or religious craving for
some Apart, Beyond, Outside, Above, permits the question whether it
was not illness that inspired the philosopher. The unconscious disguise
of physiological needs under the cloaks of the objective, ideal, purely
spiritual goes frighteningly far — and I have asked myself often enough
whether, on a grand scale, philosophy has been no more than an
interpretation of the body and a misunderstanding of the body. Behind the
highest value judgements that have hitherto guided the history of
thought are concealed misunderstandings of the physical constitution —
of individuals or classes or even whole races. All those bold lunacies of
metaphysics, especially answers to the question about the value of
existence, may always be considered first of all as symptoms of certain
bodies; and if such world affirmations or world negations lack altogether
any grain of significance when measured scientifically, they give the
historian and psychologist all the more valuable hints as symptoms
5

The Gay Science
of the body, of its success or failure, its fullness, power and high-
handedness in history, or of its frustrations, fatigues, impoverishments,
its premonitions of the end, its will to an end. I am still waiting for a
philosophical physician in the exceptional sense of the term — someone
who has set himself the task of pursuing the problem of the total health
of a people, time, race or of humanity — to summon the courage at last
to push my suspicion to its limit and risk the proposition: what was at
stake in all philosophizing hitherto was not at all ‘truth’ but rather
something else — let us say health, future, growth, power, life. . .
3
-— One might guess that I do not want to take my leave ungratefully from
that time of severe illness whose profits I have not yet exhausted even
today: I am well aware of the advantages that my erratic health gives me
over all burly minds. A philosopher who has passed through many kinds
of health, and keeps passing through them again and again, has passed
through an equal number of philosophies; he simply cannot but translate
his state every time into the most spiritual form and distance — this art
of transfiguration just is philosophy. We philosophers are not free to
separate soul from body as the common people do; we are even less free
to separate soul from spirit. We are no thinking frogs, no objectifying
and registering devices with frozen innards — we must constantly give
birth to our thoughts out of our pain and maternally endow them with
all that we have of blood, heart, fire, pleasure, passion, agony, con-
science, fate, and disaster. Life — to us, that means constantly trans-
forming all that we are into light and flame, and also all that wounds us;
we simply can do no other. And as for illness: are we not almost tempted
to ask whether we can do without it at all? Only great pain is the
liberator of the spirit, as the teacher of the great suspicion that turns
every U into an X,* a real, proper X, that is, the penultimate one before
the final one. Only great pain, that long, slow pain that takes its time
and in which we are burned, as it were, over green wood, forces us
philosophers to descend into our ultimate depths and put aside all trust,
everything good-natured, veiling, mild, average — things in which
formerly we may have found our humanity. I doubt that such pain
+ ‘to make a U out to be an X’ is a standard German expression for trying to pretend that one thing
is something completely different.

Preface to the second edition
makes us ‘better’ — but I know that it makes us deeper. Whether we learn
to pit our pride, our scorn, our willpower against it, like the savage who,
however badly tormented, repays his tormentor with the malice of his
tongue; or whether we withdraw before pain into the Oriental Nothing-
ness — called Nirvana — into mute, rigid, deaf self-surrender, self-
forgetting, self-extinction: one emerges from such dangerous exercises
in self-mastery as a different person, with a few more question marks,
above all with the wi// henceforth to question further, more deeply,
severely, harshly, evilly, and quietly than one had previously questioned.
The trust in life is gone: life itself has become a problem. Yet one should
not jump to the conclusion that this necessarily makes one sullen. Even
love of life is still possible — only one loves differently. It is like the love
for 
a woman who gives us doubts. . .But the attraction of everything
problematic, the delight in an X, is so great in highly spiritual,
spiritualized people such as these that this delight flares up like bright
embers again and again over all the distress of what is problematic, over
all the danger of uncertainty, and even over the jealousy of the lover. We
know a new happiness. . .
4
Finally, lest what is most important remain unsaid: from such abysses,
from such severe illness, also from the illness of severe suspicion, one
returns newborn, having shed one’s skin, more ticklish and malicious,
with a more delicate taste for joy, with a more tender tongue for all good
things, with merrier senses, joyful with a more dangerous second
innocence, more childlike, and at the same time a hundred times subtler
than one had ever been before. How repulsive enjoyment is to us now,
that crude, muggy, brown enjoyment as understood by those who enjoy
it, our ‘educated’, our rich, and our rulers! How maliciously we nowa-
days listen to the great fairground boom-boom with which the ‘educated
person’ and urbanite today allows art, books and music — aided by
spirituous beverages — to rape him for ‘forms of spiritual enjoyment’!
How the theatrical cry of passion now hurts our ears; that whole
romantic uproar and tumult of the senses that is loved by the educated
mob together with its aspirations towards the sublime, the elevated, the
distorted, how foreign it has become to our taste! No, if we convales-
cents still need art, it is another kind of art — a mocking, light, fleeting,

The Gay Science
divinely untroubled, divinely artificial art that, like a bright flame, blazes
into an unclouded sky! Above all: an art for artists, only for artists! In
addition we will know better what is first and foremost needed for that:
cheerfulness — any cheerfulness, my friends! As artists, too, we will
know this — I would like to prove it. There are some things we now
know too well, we knowing ones: oh, how we nowadays learn as artists
to forget well, to be good at not knowing! And as for our future, one will
hardly find us again on the paths of those Egyptian youths’ who make
temples unsafe at night, embrace statues, and want by all means to
unveil, uncover, and put into a bright light whatever is kept concealed
for good reasons. No, we have grown sick of this bad taste, this will to
truth, to ‘truth at any price’, this youthful madness in the love of truth:
we are too experienced, too serious, too jovial, too burned, too deep for
that. . .We no longer believe that truth remains truth when one pulls off
the veil; we have lived too much to believe this. Today we consider it a
matter of decency not to wish to see everything naked, to be present
everywhere, to understand and ‘know’ everything. ‘Is it true that God is
everywhere?’ a little girl asked her mother; ‘I find that indecent!’ — a
hint for philosophers! One should have more respect for the bashfulness
with which nature has hidden behind riddles and iridescent uncertain-
ties. Perhaps truth is 
a woman who has grounds for not showing her
grounds? Perhaps her name is — to speak Greek — Baubo?®. . .Oh, those
Greeks! They knew how to ive: what is needed for that is to stop
bravely at the surface, the fold, the skin; to worship appearance, to
believe in shapes, tones, words — in the whole Olympus of appearance!
5 Plutarch reports that in a temple in the Egyptian city of Sais, there was a veiled statue of the
goddess Isis with the inscription: ‘I am everything that is, that was, and that will be, and no
mortal has <ever> raised my veil.’ In his Critique of Judgement (1790, § 49) Kant says that this
inscription is the ‘perhaps most sublime thing ever said’. In a short historical essay ‘Die Sendung
Moses’ the German poet and dramatist Friedrich Schiller (1759-1805) speculates on a possible
influence of this cult on Moses and thus on the origin of monotheism. Schiller also wrote a poem
entitled ‘Das Verschleierte Bild zu Sais’ which told of an Egyptian youth who was especially
eager to know The Truth. One night he broke into the temple and violated the prohibition by
lifting the veil, but when found the next morning, he could not report what he had seen and died
an ‘early death’. The Romantic poet Novalis (1772~—1801) gives two further variants (1798-9). In
the first the youth left the young woman he loved, Rosenbliitchen, to go in search of wisdom,
truth, etc. When he arrived at the temple he fell asleeep and dreamed that when he lifted the veil
of the statue ‘Rosenbliitchen sank into his arms’. In the second variant, when he lifted the veil, he
saw himself. See also below, § 57.
When the goddess Demeter was grieving for the abduction of her daughter by Hades, god of the
underworld, the witch Baubo made her laugh again for the first time by lifting her skirts and
exposing herself.
an

Preface to the second edition
Those Greeks were superficial — out of profundity! And is not this
precisely what we are coming back to, we daredevils of the spirit who
have climbed the highest and most dangerous peak of current thought
and looked around from up there, looked down from up there? Are we
not just in this respect - Greeks? Worshippers of shapes, tones, words?
And therefore — artists?
Ruta near Genoa
Autumn, 1886


‘Joke, Cunning, and Revenge’
Prelude in German Rhymes
1. Invitation
Dare to taste my fare, dear diner!
Come tomorrow it tastes finer
and day after even good!
If you still want more — Pll make it,
from past inspiration take it,
turning food for thought to food.
2. My Happiness
Since I grew weary of the search
I taught myself to find instead.
Since cross winds caused my ship to lurch
I sail with all winds straight ahead.
‘Scherz, List, und Rache’ is the title of a libretto written by Goethe and set to music by Peter
Gast, Nietzsche’s friend and disciple/secretary. The title itself, like the subtitle ‘Prelude in
German Rhymes’, foreshadows the musical playfulness to be found both in the poems and in The
Gay Science; it also voices the hope that readers will recognize in the German language a medium
of grace and style, as seen for example in the writings of Goethe and Nietzsche. Scherz, List und
Rache was not set to music in the 1780s, though Goethe had intended it for a composer, and he
published it in 1790 with his other works. He had endeavoured in the 1780s, after his Italian
journey, to reform the German comic opera in the direction of the Italian opera buffa.
iI

The Gay Science
3. Undaunted
Where you stand, there dig deep!
Below you lies the well!
Let obscurantists wail and weep:
‘Below is always ~ hell!’
4. Dialogue
A. Was Lill? Have I recovered?
Has my doctor been discovered?
How have I forgotten all?
B. Now I know you have recovered:
Healthy is who can’t recall.
5. To the Virtuous
Our virtues too should step lively to and fro:
Like the verses of Homer, they have to come and go!
6. Worldly Wisdom
Stay not where the lowlands are!
Climb not into the sky!
The world looks best by far
when viewed from halfway high.
7. Vademecum — Vadetecum}
My way and language speak to you,
you follow me, pursue me too?
‘To thine own self and way be true:
Thus follow me, but gently do!
&. On the Third Shedding
Already cracks and breaks my skin,
my appetite unslaking
is fuelled by earth I’ve taken in:
1 
Vademecum is Latin for ‘go with me’, and refers to a book one carries all the time. Vadetecum is
Nietzsche’s improvement on the idea: ‘go with yourself’.
12

‘Joke, Cunning and Revenge’: Prelude in German Rhymes
This snake for earth is aching.
Among the stones and grass I wear
a path from fen to firth,
to eat what’s always been my fare
you, my snake food, you my earth.
9. My Roses
Yes! My joy —it wants to gladden — ,
every joy wants so to gladden!
Would you pluck my rose and sadden?
You must crouch on narrow ledges,
prop yourself on ropes and wedges,
prick yourself on thorny hedges!
For my joy ~— it loves to madden!
For my joy — is malice laden!
Would you pluck my rose and sadden?
10. The Scornful One
Much do I let fall and spiil,
thus I’m scornful, you malign.
One who drinks from cups too full will
often let much fall and spill — ,
yet never think to blame the wine.
11. The Proverb Speaks
Sharp and mild, dull and keen,
well known and strange, dirty and clean,
where both the fool and wise are seen:
All this am I, have ever been, —
in me dove, snake and swine convene!
12. To a Friend of Light
If you want to spare your eyes and your mind,
follow the sun from the shadows behind.
13

The Gay Science
13. For Dancers
Slipp’ry ice
is paradise
as long as dancing will suffice.
14. The Good Man
Better an enmity cut from one block
than friendship held together by glue.
15. Rust
Rust must be added: sharpness goes unsung!
Else they will always say: ‘He is too young!’
16. Upward
‘How do I best get to the top of this hill?’
‘Climb it, don’t think it, and maybe you will.’
17. Motto of A Brute
Never beg! It’s whining I dread!
Take, I beg you, just take instead!
18. Narrow Souls
It’s narrow souls that I despise;
not good, not evil, not my size.
19. The Involuntary Seducer
He shot an empty word into the blue
to pass the time — and downed a woman too.
20. Consider This
A twofold pain is easier to bear
than one pain: care to take a dare?
14

‘Joke, Cunning and Revenge’: Prelude in German Rhymes
21. Against Arrogance
Don’t let your ego swell too much,
a bubble bursts with just a touch.
22, Man and Female
‘Rob yourself the female, who to your heart appeals!’ —
So thinks a man; but she won’t rob, a woman only steals.
23. Interpretation
If I read me, then I read into me:
I can’t construe myself objectively.
But he who climbs consuming his own might
bears me with him unto the brighter light.
24. Medication for Pessimists?
You whine that nothing pleases you?
Still pouting, friend, and must you mutter?
I hear you curse, and shout and sputter —
it breaks my heart and patience too!
Come with me, friend! A nice fat toad,
if swallowed voluntarily
with eyes closed and summarily —
might lessen your dyspeptic load.
25. Request
I know another person’s thought
and who I am, I know that not.
My vision is too close to me —
Iam not what I saw and see.
I’d use myself more perfectly
if I could move away from me.
Yet not so distant as my foe!
My closest friend’s too far off, no —
2 Nietzsche’s inspiration for the toad as medicine derives from a maxim by Chamfort, to the effect
that a toad ingested each morning will make the rest of the day taste better.
15

The Gay Science
give me instead the middle ground!
Do you surmise what I propound?
26. My Hardness
I must leave by a hundred stairs,
I must ascend though I hear your cares:
“You are hard: Are we made of stone?’
I must leave by a hundred stairs,
And being a stair appeals to none.
27. The Wanderer
‘The path ends! Abyss and deathly silence loom!’
You wanted this! Your will strayed to its doom!
Now wanderer, stand! Be keen and cool as frost!
Believe in danger now and you — are lost.
28. Consolation for Beginners
See the child, with pigs she’s lying,
helpless, face as white as chalk!
Crying only, only crying —
will she ever learn to walk?
Don’t give up! Stop your sighing,
soon she’s dancing ’round the clock!
Once her own two legs are trying,
she’ll stand on her head and mock.
2g. Stellar Egotism
If I, round barrel that I am,
did not roll ’round me like a cam,
how could I bear, and not catch fire,
to the chase the sun as I desire?
30. The Closest One
The closest one from me I bar:
Away and up with him, and far!
How else could he become my star?
16

‘Joke, Cunning and Revenge’: Prelude in German Rhymes
gu. The Disguised Saint
Joy too great you are concealing,
you engage in dev’lish dealing,
devil’s wit and devil’s dress.
But no use! Your eye’s revealing
piety and holiness!
32. The Bound Man
A. He stands and hears: what’s wrong, he’s thinking?
What sound provokes his heart to sinking?
What was it hurled him to the ground?
B. Like all who once in chains were bound,
He hears around him — iron clinking.
33. The Solitary One
Despised by me are following and leading.
Commanding? Even worse to me than heeding!
Who does not scare himself can frighten no one:
The one who causes fear can lead another.
But just to lead myself is too much bother!
I love, as do the sea and forest creatures,
to lose myself a while in nature’s features,
to hide away and brood in secret places
until, lured home at last from distant traces,
my self-seduction lets me see — my features.
34. Seneca et hoc genus omne?
They write and write their desiccat-
ing learned la-di-da-di,
as if primum scribere,
deinde philosophant.
35. Ice
Yes! At times I do make ice:
Useful is ice for digesting!
3 Seneca (Roman philosopher) and his lot. The Latin: ‘First write, then philosophize.’
17

The Gay Science
If you had much for digesting,
oh how you would love my ice!
36. Fuveniliat
My old wisdom’s A and O
sounded here: what did I hear?
Now it does not strike me so,
just the tired Ah! and Oh!
that youth inspired fills my ear.
37. Caution
Into that region trav’lers must not go:
And if you’re smart, be cautious even so!
They lure and love you till you’re torn apart:
They’re halfwit zealots — : witless from the heart!
38. The Pious One Speaks
God loves us because he created us!
‘Man created God!’ — respond the jaded.
And yet should not love what he created?
Should even deny it because he made it?
Such cloven logic is limping and baited.
39. In Summer?
Beneath the sweat of our own brow
we have to eat our bread?
If you sweat, eat nothing now,
the wise physician said.
The Dog Star winks: what does it know?
What says its fiery winking?
Beneath the sweat of our own brow
our wine we should be drinking!
* Alpha and Omega are the first and last letters of the Greek alphabet, hence proverbially the
‘alpha and omega’ are said to comprise everything.
5 Genesis 3:19: ‘In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread.’
18

‘Joke, Cunning and Revenge’: Prelude in German Rhymes
40. Without Envy
His gaze is envyless: and him you praise?
No thirst for your esteem perturbs his gaze;
he has the eagle’s vision for the long view,
it’s stars he sees, just stars — he looks beyond you!
41. Heracliteanism
Happiness on earth, friends,
only stems from war!
Powder smoke, in fact, mends
friendship even more!
One in three all friends are:
Brothers in distress,
equals facing rivals,
free men — facing death!
42. Principle of the All-Too-Refined
Rather on your tiptoes stand
than crawling on all fours!
Rather through the keyhole scanned
than gazed through open doors!
43. Admonition
It’s fame on which your mind is set?
Then heed what I say:
Before too long prepare to let
honor slip away.
44. The Well-Grounded One®
A scholar I? I’ve no such skill! —
_ 
I’m merely grave — just heavy set!
I fall and fall and fall until
I to the bottom get.
6 Grindlich in German means thorough, based on Grund (ground).
19

The Gay Science
45. Forever
“Today I come, I choose today’ —
think all who come and mean to stay.
Though all the world may speculate:
“You come too early! Come too late!’
46. Judgements of the Weary
The sun is cursed by all men jaded;
to them the worth of trees is ~ shaded!
47. Going Down’
‘He sinks, he falls now’ — thus resumes your mocking;
in truth, look closely: Down to you he’s walking!
His super-joy became too much to bear,
his super-light dispels your gloomy air.
48. Against the Laws
From now on time hangs by a hair
around my neck, suspended there:
from now on stars shine randomly,
sun, rooster crow, and shadow flee,
whatever brought time to my mind
that now is mute and deaf and blind: —
All nature’s still in me, it balks
at ticking laws and ticking clocks.
49. The Wise Man Speaks
Unknown to folks, yet useful to the crowd,
I drift along my way, now sun, now cloud
and always I’m above this crowd!
? Niedergang means decline, but it is ambiguous because it is formed from nieder (down) and the
past participle of geken (to go), Compare Zarathustra’s ‘going under’ in the prologue of Thus
Spoke Zarathustra.
20

‘Joke, Cunning and Revenge’: Prelude in German Rhymes
50. Lost His Head
Now she has wit — what led her to this find?
Because of her a man had lost his mind.
His head was rich before this misadventure:
His head went straight to hell ~ no! no! to her!
51. Pious Wishes®
‘Keys should all just disappear,
lost from stem to stern,
and in keyholes far and near
skeletons should turn!’
Thus thinks when the day is done
each who is — a skeleton.
52. Writing With One’s Foot
I do not write with hand alone:
My foot does writing of its own.
Firm, free, and bold my feet engage
in running over field and page.
53. ‘Human, All Too Human.’ 
A Book?
When looking back you’re sad and not robust,
you trust the future when yourself you trust:
Oh bird, do you belong to eagle’s brood?
Are you Minerva’s favourite hoot hoot?
54. To My Reader
Strong teeth and good digestion too —
this I wish thee!
And once my book’s agreed with you,
then surely you’ll agree with me!
8 Dietrich in German is a skeleton key, or combination key capable of opening any lock. It is also a
common given name for males.
9 Minerva, Roman goddess of wisdom, the arts and crafts, and medicine, was identified with the
Greek goddess Athene, whose attribute was the sacred and wise owl. Vhu is the German word for
eagle-owl, as well as the sound (hooting) made by owls.
2

The Gay Science
55. The Realistic Painter
“To all of nature true!’ 
- How does he plan?
Would nature fit an image made by man?
The smallest piece of world is infinite! —
He ends up painting that which he sees fit.
And what does he see fit? Paint what he can!
56. Poet’s Vanity
Pll find wood, just give me substance
strong enough to bind like glue!
Cramming sense in rhyme is nonsense
worthy of a boast — or two!
57. Choosy Taste
Were it my choice to exercise,
I know that I would opt for
a cosy place in Paradise:
Better still — outside the door!
58. The Crooked Nose®
Your nose projects, so grand and plump,
into the land, its nostrils pump —
thus hornless rhino, lacking grace
you fall, proud mortal, on your face!
And that’s the way it always goes:
Straight pride alongside crooked nose.
59. The Pen Scribbles
My pen, it scribbles: this is hell!
Have I been damned to have to scribble? —
I dip it boldly in the well
and write broad streams of inky drivel.
See how it flows, so full, so pure!
See how each thing I try succeeds!
10 Nashorn means rhinoceros, from Nase (nose) and Horn.
22

‘Joke, Cunning and Revenge’: Prelude in German Rhymes
The text’s not lucid, to be sure —
So what? What I write no one reads.
60. Higher Men
He climbs on high ~ him we should praise!
But that one comes from high up always!
Immune to praise he lives his days,
he is the sun’s rays!
61. The Sceptic Speaks
Your life is halfway spent,
the clock hand moves, your soul now quakes with fear!
Long roaming forth it went
and searched but nothing found — and wavers here?
Your life is halfway spent:
In pain and error how the hours did craw!!
Why can you not relent? —
Just this I seek — some reason for it all!
62. Ecce Homo
Yes! I know now whence I came!
Unsatiated like a flame
my glowing ember squanders me.
Light to all on which I seize,
ashen everything I leave:
Flame am I most certainly!
63. Stellar Morals
Ordained to move as planets do,
what matters, star, the dark to your
Roll blithely through our human time!
Beyond its wretched mis’ry climb!
The furthest world deserves your shine:
For you compassion is a crime!
One law applies to you: be thine!
23


Book One


Book One
I
The teachers of the purpose of existence. 
—- Whether I regard human beings
with a good or with an evil eye, I always find them engaged in a single
task, each and every one of them: to do what benefits the preservation of
the human race. Not from a feeling of love for the race, but simply
because within them nothing is older, stronger, more inexorable and
invincible than this instinct — because this instinct constitutes the essence
of our species and herd. One might quickly enough, with the usual
myopia from five steps away, divide one’s neighbours into useful and
harmful, good and evil; but on a large-scale assessment, upon further
reflection on the whole, one grows suspicious of this tidying and
separating and finally abandons it. Even the most harmful person may
actually be the most useful when it comes to the preservation of the
species; for he nurtures in himself or through his effects on others
drives without which humanity would long since have become feeble or
rotten. Hatred, delight in the misfortunes of others, the lust to rob and
rule, and whatever else is called evil: all belong to the amazing economy
of the preservation of the species, an economy which is certainly costly,
wasteful, and on the whole most foolish — but still proven to have
preserved our race so far. I no longer know whether you, my dear fellow
man and neighbour, are even capable of living in a way which is
damaging to the species, i.e. ‘unreasonably’ and ‘badly’. What might
have harmed the species may have become extinct many thousands of
years ago and may by now belong to the things that are no longer
possible even for God. Pursue your best or your worst desires, and
above all, perish! In both cases you are probably still in some way a
promoter and benefactor of humanity and are thus entitled to your
eulogists — as well as to your mockers! But you will never find someone
who could completely mock you, the individual, even in your best
qualities, someone who could bring home to you as far as truth allows
your boundless, fly- and frog-like wretchedness! To laugh at oneself as
one would have to laugh in order to laugh from the whole truth — for that,
not even the best have had enough sense of truth, and the most gifted
have had far too little genius! Perhaps even laughter still has a future —
when the proposition ‘The species is everything, an individual is always
nothing’ has become part of humanity and this ultimate liberation and
irresponsibility is accessible to everyone at all times. Perhaps laughter
27

The Gay Science
will then have formed an alliance with wisdom; perhaps only ‘gay
science’ will remain. At present, things are still quite different; at
present, the comedy of existence has not yet ‘become conscious’ of
itself; at present, we still live in the age of tragedy, in the age of
moralities and religions. What is the meaning of the ever-new appear-
ance of these founders of moralities and religions, of these instigators of
fights about moral valuations, these teachers of pangs of conscience and
religious wars? What is the meaning of these heroes on this stage? For
these have been the heroes thus far; and everything else, even if at times
it was all that we could see and was far too near, has always served only
to set the stage for these heroes, whether as machinery and backdrop or
in the role of confidant and servant. (The poets, for example, were
always the servants of some kind of morality.) It is obvious that these
tragedies, too, work in the interest of the species, even if they should
believe that they are working in the interest of God, as God’s emissaries.
They, too, promote the life of the species by promoting the faith in life.
‘Life is worth living’, each of them shouts, ‘there is something to life,
there is something behind life, beneath it; beware!’ This drive, which
rules the highest as well as the basest of human beings — the drive for
the preservation of the species — erupts from time to time as reason and
passion of mind; it is then surrounded by a resplendent retinue of
reasons and tries with all its might to make us forget that fundamentally
it is drive, instinct, stupidity, lack of reasons. Life ought to be loved,
because ~! Man ought ta advance himself and his neighbour, because —!
What names all these Oughts and Becauses have been given and may yet
be given in the future! The ethical teacher makes his appearance as the
teacher of the purpose of existence in order that what happens necessa-
rily and always, by itself and without a purpose, shall henceforth seem
to be done for a purpose and strike man as reason and an ultimate
commandment; to this end he invents a second, different existence and
takes by means of his new mechanics the old, ordinary existence off its
old, ordinary hinges. To be sure, in no way does he want us to /augh at
existence, or at ourselves — or at him; for him, an individual is always an
individual, something first and last and tremendous; for him there are
no species, sums, or zeroes. Foolish and fanciful as his inventions and
valuations may be, badly as he may misjudge the course of nature and
deny its conditions — and all ethical systems hitherto have been so
foolish and contrary to nature that humanity would have perished from
28

Book One
every one had it gained power over humanity ~— all the same! Every time
‘the hero’ appeared on stage, something new was attained: the gruesome
counterpart of laughter, that profound shock that many individuals feel
at the thought: ‘Yes, living is worth it! Yes, I am worthy of living!’ Life
and I and you and all of us became interesting to ourselves once again for
a while. There is no denying that im the long run each of these great
teachers of a purpose was vanquished by laughter, reason and nature:
the brief tragedy always changed and returned into the eternal comedy
of existence, and the ‘waves of uncountable laughter’ 
— to cite
Aeschylus! — must in the end also come crashing down on the greatest
of these tragedians. Despite all this corrective laughter, human nature
on the whole has surely been altered by the recurring emergence of such
teachers of the purpose of existence — it has acquired one additional need,
the need for the repeated appearance of such teachers and such
teachings of a ‘purpose’. Man has gradually become a fantastic animal
that must fulfil one condition of existence more than any other animal:
man must from time to time believe he knows why he exists; his race
cannot thrive without a periodic trust in life — without faith in the reason
in life! And ever again the human race will from time to time decree:
‘There is something one is absolutely forbidden henceforth to laugh at.’
And the most cautious friend of man will add: ‘Not only laughter and
gay wisdom but also the tragic, with all its sublime unreason, belongs to
the means and necessities of the preservation of the species.’ And
therefore! Therefore! Therefore! Oh, do you understand me, my
brothers? Do you understand this new law of ebb and flood? We, too,
have our time!
2
Intellectual conscience. — 
1 keep having the same experience and keep
resisting it anew each time; I do not want to believe it although I can
grasp it as with my hands: the great majority lacks an intellectual
conscience — indeed, it has often seemed to me as if someone requiring
such a conscience would be as lonely in the most densely populated
cities as he would be in the desert. Everyone looks at you with strange
1 A mistranslation of lines 89~90 of Prometheus Bound formerly ascribed to the fifth-century (BC)
Athenian dramatist Aeschylus. The lines actually read: ‘countless laughter of the sea waves’.
29

The Gay Science
eyes and goes on handling their scales, calling this good and that evil;
nobody as much as blushes when you notice that their weights are
underweight — nor do they become indignant with you; perhaps they
laugh at your doubts. I mean: to the great majority it is not contemptible
to believe this or that and to live accordingly without first becoming
aware of the final and most certain reasons pro and con, and without
even troubling themselves about such reasons afterwards: the most
gifted men and the noblest women still belong to this ‘great majority’.
But what are goodheartedness, refinement, and genius to me when the
person possessing these virtues tolerates slack feelings in his believing
and judging and when he does not consider the desire for certainty to be
his inmost craving and deepest need — as that which separates the
higher human beings from the lower! I discovered in certain pious
people a hatred of reason and I was well disposed towards them for that:
at least this betrayed their bad intellectual conscience! But to stand in
the midst of this rerum concordia discors? and the whole marvellous
uncertainty and ambiguity of existence without questioning, without
trembling with the craving and rapture of questioning, without at least
hating the person who questions, perhaps even being faintly amused by
him — that is what I feel to be contemptible, and this is the feeling I look
for first in anyone. Some folly keeps persuading me that every person
has this feeling, simply as human. That is my type of injustice.
3
Noble and common. — For common natures all noble, magnanimous
feelings appear to be inexpedient and therefore initially incredible: they
give a wink when they hear of such things and seem to want to say,
‘Surely there must be some advantage involved; one cannot see through
every wall’ — they are suspicious of the noble person, as if he were
furtively seeking his advantage. If they become all too clearly convinced
of the absence of selfish intentions and gains, they view the noble person
as a kind of fool: they despise him in his pleasure and laugh at the
sparkle in his eye. ‘How could one enjoy being at a disadvantage? How
could one want with open eyes to be disadvantaged? Some disease of
reason must be linked to the noble affection’ — thus they think and look
2 ‘the discordant harmony of things’; from Horace, Epistles 1.12.19
30

Book One
disparagingly, the way they disparage the pleasure that a madman
derives from his fixed idea. What distinguishes the common nature is
that it unflinchingly keeps sight of its advantage, and that this thought
of purpose and advantage is even stronger than its strongest drives; not
to allow these drives to lead it astray to perform inexpeditious acts —
that is its wisdom and self-esteem. In comparison, the higher nature is
more unreasonable — for the noble, magnanimous, and self-sacrificing
person does in fact succumb to his drives; and in his best moments, his
reason pauses. An animal that protects its young at the risk of its own life
or during the mating period follows the female unto death does not
think of danger and death; its reason likewise pauses because the
pleasure in its brood or in the female and the fear of being deprived of
this pleasure dominate it totally; the animal becomes stupider than it
usually is — just like the person who is noble and magnanimous. Such
persons have several feelings of pleasure and displeasure so strong that
they reduce the intellect to silence or to servitude: at that point their
heart displaces their head, and one speaks thenceforth of ‘passion’.
(Occasionally we also encounter the opposite, the ‘reversal of passion’,
as it were; for example, somebody once laid his hand on Fontenelle’s
heart and said, ‘What you have here, my dear sir, is also brains.”*) The
unreason or odd reason (Unvernunfi oder Quervernunft) of passion is
what the common type despises in the noble, especially when this
passion is directed at objects whose value seems quite fantastic and
arbitrary. He is annoyed by the person who succumbs to the passion of
the belly, but at least he comprehends the appeal that plays the tyrant in
this case; but he cannot comprehend how anyone could, for example,
tisk health and honour for the sake of a passion for knowledge. The
higher nature’s taste is for exceptions, for things that leave most people
cold and seem to lack sweetness; the higher nature has a singular value
standard. Moreover, it usually believes that the idiosyncrasy of its taste
is not a singular value standard; rather, it posits its values and disvalues
as generally valid and so becomes incomprehensible and impractical. It
is very rare that a higher nature has enough reason left over to
understand and treat commonplace people as what they are; above all, it
believes in its own passion as something that is present in everyone but
3 French writer of fables (1657-1757); his most important work is the Dialogues of the Dead (1683)
to which Nietzsche refers in § 94.
31

The Gay Science
concealed, and in this belief it is full of ardour and eloquence. Now
when such exceptional people do not themselves feel like exceptions,
how can they ever understand the common natures and arrive at a
proper estimate of the rule! — and so they, too, speak of the stupidity,
inexpedience, and fancifulness of humanity, stunned that the world is
taking such an insane course and that it will not commit itself to that
which ‘is needful’. ~ This is the eternal injustice of the noble.
4
What preserves the species. - The strongest and most evil spirits have so
far done the most to advance humanity: time and again they rekindled
the dozing passions — every ordered society puts the passions to sleep — ,
time and again they reawakened the sense of comparison, of contra-
diction, of delight in what is new, daring, unattempted; they forced men
to pit opinion against opinion, ideal model against ideal model. Mostly
by force of arms, by toppling boundary stones, by violating pieties — but
also by means of new religions and moralities! In every teacher and
preacher of what is new we find the same ‘mischief’ that makes
conquerors infamous, even if its expression is subtler and does not
instantly set the muscles in motion and for just that reason does not
make one as infamous! What is new, however, is under all circumstances
evil, being that which wants to conquer, to overthrow the old boundary
stones and pieties; and only what is old is good! In every age the good
men are those who bury the old thoughts deeply and make them bear
fruit — the farmers of the spirit. But that land is eventually exhausted,
and the ploughshare of evil must come time and again. Nowadays there
is a thoroughly erroneous moral theory which is celebrated especially in
England: it claims that judgements of ‘good’ and ‘evil’ sum up experi-
ences of what is ‘expedient’ and ‘inexpedient’; that what is called good
preserves the species while what is called evil harms it. In truth,
however, the evil drives are just as expedient, species-preserving, and
indispensable as the good ones — they just have a different function.
5
Unconditional duties. - All persons who feel that they need the strongest
words and sounds, the most eloquent gestures and postures, in order to
32

Book One
be effective at ail — revolutionary politicians, socialists, preachers of
repentance with or without Christianity, all of whom refuse to accept
semi-successes: they all speak of ‘duties’, and indeed always of duties
with an unconditional character — without such duties they would have
no right to their great pathos; they know that quite well! So they reach
for moral philosophies that preach some categorical imperative, or they
ingest a goodly piece of religion, as Mazzini* did, for example. Because
they want the unconditional confidence of others, they first need
unconditional confidence in themselves on the basis of some ultimate,
indisputable and inherently sublime commandment, and they want to
feel like and pass themselves off as its servants and instruments. Here
we have the most natural and usually very influential opponents of
moral enlightenment and scepticism; but they are rare. On the other
hand, a very comprehensive class of these opponents can be found
wherever self-interest teaches submission while reputation and honour
seem to prohibit it. Whoever feels his dignity violated by the thought of
being the instrument of a prince or party or sect or even a financial power
— say, as the descendant of an old, proud family — but still wants to or
must be this instrument before himself and before the public, needs
poignant principles that can be mouthed any time, principles of an
unconditional ‘ought’ to which one may openly submit and be seen to
have submitted without shame. All refined servility clings to the
categorical imperative and is the mortal enemy of those who want to
deprive duty of its unconditional character: that is what decency
demands of them, and not only decency.
6
Loss of dignity. — Reflection has lost all its dignity of form: we have made
a laughing-stock of the ceremony and solemn gestures of reflection, and
couldn’t stand an old-style wise man. We think too fast, while on our
way somewhere, while walking or in the midst of all sorts of business,
even when thinking of the most serious things; we need little prepara-
tion, not even much silence: it is as if we carried around in our heads an
unstoppable machine that keeps working even under the most unfavour-
able circumstances. Formerly, one could tell just by looking at a person
4 Tealian liberal (1805-72).
33

The Gay Science
that he wanted to think — it was probably a rare occurrence! — , that he
now wanted to become wiser and was preparing himself for a thought:
one would set one’s face as for prayer and stop walking; yes, one stood
still for hours on the street once the thought ‘arrived’ — on one or two
legs. The dignity of the matter required it!
7
Something for the industrious. - Anyone who now wishes to make a study
of moral matters opens up for himself an immense field of work. All
kinds of passions have to be thought through separately, pursued
separately through ages, peoples, great and small individuals; their
entire reason and all their evaluations and modes of illuminating things
must be revealed! So far, all that has given colour to existence still lacks
a history: where could you find a history of love, of avarice, of envy, of
conscience, of piety, of cruelty? Even a comparative history of law or
even of punishment is so far lacking entirely. Has anyone done research
on the different ways of dividing up the day or of the consequences of a
regular schedule of work, festivals, and the rest? Do we know the moral
effects of foods? Is there a philosophy of nutrition? (The incessantly
erupting clamour for and against vegetarianism proves that there is still
no such philosophy!) Has anyone collected people’s experiences of
living together — in monasteries, for example? Has anyone depicted the
dialectic of marriage and friendship? The customs of scholars, busi-
nessmen, artists, artisans — have they found their thinkers? There is so
much in them to think about! Everything that humans have viewed until
now as the ‘conditions of their existence’ and all the reason, passion,
and superstition that such a view involves — has this been researched
exhaustively? To observe how differently the human drives have grown
and still could grow depending on the. moral climate — that alone
involves too much work for even the most industrious; it would require
whole generations, and generations of scholars who would collaborate
systematically, to exhaust the points of view and the material. The same
applies to the demonstration of the reasons for the variety of moral
climates (‘why does the sun of one fundamental moral judgement and
primary value-standard shine here — and another one there?’). Yet
another new project would be to determine the erroneousness of all
these reasons and the whole essence of moral judgements to date. If all
34

Book One
these jobs were done, the most delicate question of all would emerge in
the foreground: whether science is able to furnish goals of action after
having proved that it can take such goals away and annihilate them; and
then an experimenting would be in order, in which every kind of
heroism could find satisfaction — an experimenting that might last for
centuries and eclipse all the great projects and sacrifices of history to
date. So far, science has not yet built its cyclops-buildings;> but the time
for that will come, too.
8
Unconscious virtues. — All qualities of a person of which he is conscious —
and especially those he supposes to be visible and plain to others also —
are subject to laws of development entirely different from those qualities
which are unknown or badly known to him, which conceal themselves
by means of their subtlety even from the eye of a rather subtle observer
and which know how to hide as if behind nothing at all. This might be
compared to the subtle sculptures on the scales of reptiles: it would be a
mistake to take them for ornaments or weapons, since one sees them
only with a microscope, i.e. with an artificially sharpened eye, which
similar animals for whom they might signify something like ornaments
or weapons simply lack. Our visible moral qualities, and especially those
that we believe to be visible, take their course; and the invisible ones,
which have the same names but are neither ornaments nor weapons
with regard to others, also take their course: probably a totally different
one, with lines and subtleties and sculptures that might amuse a god
with a divine microscope. For example, we have our diligence, our
ambition, our acuteness — all the world knows about them — and in
addition, we probably also have our industry, eur ambition, our acute-
ness; but for these reptile scales, no microscope has yet been invented!
At this point the friends of instinctive morality will say: ‘Bravo! At least
he considers unconscious virtues to be possible — and that’s enough for
us.’ Oh, how little you are satisfied with!
5 The Cyclopes, in ancient mythology, were one-eyed giants. Though represented in Homer as
wild creatures, they elsewhere appear as workmen of superhuman power, and were credited with
building massive ancient fortifications such as those of Tiryns.
35

The Gay Science
9
Our eruptions. ~ Countless things that humanity acquired in earlier
stages, but so feebly and embryonically that no one could tell that they
had been acquired, suddenly emerge into the light much later, perhaps
after centuries; meanwhile they have become strong and ripe. Some
ages seem to lack completely some talent or virtue, just as some people
do: but just wait for their children and grandchildren, if you have time
to wait — they bring to light the inner qualities of their grandfathers, the
qualities that their grandfathers themselves did not know about. Often
it is already the son that betrays his father: the father understands
himself better once he has a son. All of us harbour in ourselves hidden
gardens and plantations; and, to use another metaphor, we are all
growing volcanoes approaching their hour of eruption; how near or
distant that is, of course, nobody knows, not even the good Lord.
10
A kind of atavism. —1 
prefer to understand the rare human beings of an
age as suddenly appearing, late ghosts of past cultures and their powers:
as atavisms of a people and its mores — that way one can really understand
something about them! They now seem strange, rare, extraordinary;
and whoever feels these powers in himself must nurse, defend, honor,
and cultivate them against another world that resists them: and so he
becomes either a great human being or a mad and eccentric one, unless
he perishes too soon. Formerly, these same qualities were common and
therefore considered ordinary: they weren’t distinguishing. They were
perhaps demanded, presupposed; it was impossible to become great
through them, if only because there was also no danger of becoming
mad and lonely through them. It is principally in the generations and
castes that conserve a people that we find such recrudescences of old
instincts, while such atavism is highly improbable where races, habits,
and valuations change too rapidly. For tempo is as significant a power in
the development of peoples as in music: in our case, what is absolutely
necessary is an andante of development, as the tempo of a passionate and
slow spirit — and that is after all what the spirit of conservative
generations is like.
36

Book One
II
Consciousness (Bewufstsein)® — Consciousness (Bewufftheit) is the latest
development of the organic, and hence also its most unfinished and
unrobust feature. Consciousness gives rise to countless mistakes that
lead an animal or human being to perish sooner than necessary, ‘beyond
destiny’, as Homer puts it.’ If the preserving alliance of the instincts
were not so much more powerful, if it did not serve on the whole as a
regulator, humanity would have to perish with open eyes of its misjud-
ging and its fantasizing, of its lack of thoroughness and its incredulity —
in short, of its consciousness; or rather, without the instincts, humanity
would long have ceased to exist! Before a function is fully developed and
mature, it constitutes a danger to the organism; it is a good thing for it
to be properly tyrannized in the meantime! Thus, consciousness is
properly tyrannized — and not least by one’s pride in it! One thinks it
constitutes the kernel of man, what is abiding, eternal, ultimate, most
original in him! One takes consciousness to be a given determinate
magnitude! One denies its growth and intermittences! Sees it as ‘the
unity of the organism’! This ridiculous overestimation and misappre-
hension of consciousness has the very useful consequence that an all-
too-rapid development of consciousness was prevented. Since they
thought they already possessed it, human beings did not take much
trouble to acquire it - and things are no different today! The task of
assimilating knowledge and making it instinctive is still quite new; it is
only beginning to dawn on the human eye and is yet barely discernible —
it is a task seen only by those who have understood that so far we have
incorporated only our errors and that all of our consciousness refers to
errors!
12
On the aim of science. - What? The final aim of science should be to give
man as much pleasure and as little displeasure as possible? But what if
6 The usual German word for ‘consciousness’ is Bewu/fitsein (literally ‘being-in-a-state-of-aware-
ness-of’) and this is the term Nietzsche uses in the title of this paragraph. He then however shifts
to the much more unusual word Bewufftheit, which has an ending (eit) that usually signifies an
abstract property, and argues against the view that having such a property is something
fundamental or especially important to humans.
7 See Iliad 11.155 and xX.30, 336.
37

The Gay Science
pleasure and displeasure are so intertwined that whoever wants as much
as possible of one must also have as much as possible of the other — that
whoever wants to learn to ‘jubilate up to the heavens’ must also be
prepared for ‘grief unto death’?® And that may well be the way things
are! At least the Stoics believed that this is how things are, and they were
consistent when they also desired as little pleasure as possible in order to
derive as little pain as possible from life (by using the saying ‘The
virtuous man is the happiest man’,’ they had both a school slogan for the
masses and a fine casuistic delicacy for the refined). Even today you still
have the choice: either as little displeasure as possible, in short, lack of pain
~and socialists and politicians of all parties fundamentally have no right
to promise their people any more than that — or as much displeasure as
possible as the price for the growth of a bounty of refined pleasures and
joys that hitherto have seldom been tasted. Should you decide on the
former, i.e. if you want to decrease and diminish people’s susceptibility
to pain, you also have to decrease and diminish their capacity for joy.
With science one can actually promote either of these goals! So far it may
still be better known for its power to deprive man of his joys and make
him colder, more statue-like, more stoic. But it might yet be found to be
the great giver of pain! — And then its counterforce might at the same time
be found: its immense capacity for letting new galaxies of joy flare up!
13
On the doctrine of the feeling of power. — Benefiting and hurting others are
ways of exercising one’s power over them — that is all one wants in such
cases! We hurt those to whom we need to make our power perceptible,
for pain is a much more sensitive means to that end than pleasure: pain
always asks for the cause, while pleasure is inclined to stop with itself
and not look back. We benefit and show benevolence toward those who
already depend on us in some way (that is, who are used to thinking of
us as their causes); we want to increase their power because we thus
increase our own, or we want to show them the advantage of being in
our power ~ that way, they will be more satisfied with their situation and
8 Quotation from Act 111, Scene 2 of Goethe’s Egmont, frequently cited in Germany as an
archetypal description of the Romantic personality.
9 This doctrine, originally defended by Socrates (see Xenophon, Memorabilia 111.5), was a central
part of Stoic ethics (see A. A. Long and D. Sedley, The Hellenistic Philosophers [Cambridge
University Press, 1987], esp. vol. 1, pp. 344~—436, and esp. pp. 
357—9).
38

Book One
more hostile towards and willing to fight against the enemies of our
power. Whether in benefiting or hurting others we make sacrifices does
not affect the ultimate value of our actions; even if we stake our lives, as
martyrs do for their church, it is a sacrifice made for our desire for
power or for the preservation of our feeling of power. He who feels ‘I
am in possession of the truth’ —~ how many possessions does he not
renounce in order to save this feeling! What would he not throw
overboard in order to stay ‘on top’ — that is, above the others who lack
‘the truth’! The state in which we hurt others is certainly seldom as
agreeable, in an unadulterated way, as that in which we benefit others; it
is a sign that we are still lacking power, or it betrays a frustration in the
face of this poverty; it brings new dangers and uncertainties to the
power we do possess and clouds our horizon with the prospect of
revenge, scorn, punishment, failure. Only to the most irritable and
covetous adherents of the feeling of power — to those for whom the sight
of those who are already subjected (the objects of benevolence) is a
burden and boredom — might it be more pleasurable to imprint the seal
of power on the reluctant. It depends on how one is accustomed to spice
one’s life; it is a matter of taste whether one prefers the slow or the
sudden, the safe or the dangerous and daring increase in power — one
always seeks this or that spice according to one’s temperament. An easy
prey is something contemptible for proud natures; they take delight
only at the sight of unbroken persons who could become their enemies
and at the sight of all possessions that are hard to come by; they are
often hard towards someone who is suffering, for he is not worthy of
their contention and pride — but they are the more obliging toward their
equals, against whom it would be honourable to fight and struggle if the
occasion should arise. Spurred by the good feeling of this perspective,
the members of the knightly caste became accustomed to treating each
others with exquisite courtesy. Compassion is the most agreeable feeling
for those who have little pride and no prospect of great conquests; for
them, easy prey — and that is what those who suffer are — is something
enchanting. Compassion is praised as the virtue of prostitutes.
14
The things people call love. - Greed and love: such different feelings
these terms evoke! And yet it could be the same instinct, named twice:
39

The Gay Science
once disparaged by those who already have, in whom the instinct has
somewhat calmed down and who now fear for what they ‘have’; the
other time seen from the standpoint of the unsatisfied, the thirsty, and
therefore glorified as ‘good’. Our love of our neighbours — is it not a
craving for new property? And likewise our love of knowledge, of truth,
and altogether any craving for what is new? We slowly grow tired of the
old, of what we safely possess, and we stretch out our hands again; even
the most beautiful landscape is no longer sure of our love after we have
lived in it for three months, and some more distant coast excites our
greed: possession usually diminishes the possession. The pleasure we
take in ourselves tries to preserve itself by time and again changing
something new into ourselves — that is simply what possession means. To
grow tired of a possession is to grow tired of ourselves. (One can also
suffer from an excess — even the desire to throw away, to dole out, can
take on the honorary name ‘love’.) When we see someone suffering, we
like to use this opportunity to take possession of him; that is for example
what those who become his benefactors and those who have compassion
for him do, and they call the lust for new possessions that is awakened in
them ‘love’; and their delight is like that aroused by the prospect of a
new conquest. Sexual love, however, is what most clearly reveals itself as
a craving for new property: the lover wants unconditional and sole
possession of the longed-for person; he wants a power over her soul as
unconditional as his power over her body; he wants to be the only
beloved, to live and to rule in the other soul as that which is supreme
and most desirable. If one considers that this means excluding the whole
world from a precious good, from joy and enjoyment; if one considers
that the lover aims at the impoverishment and deprivation of all the
competitors and would like to become the dragon guarding his golden
hoard as the most inconsiderate and selfish of all ‘conquerors’ and
exploiters; if one considers, finally, that to the lover himself the rest of
the world appears indifferent, pale, and worthless and that he is
prepared to make any sacrifice, upset any order, subordinate any other
interest; then one is indeed amazed that this wild greed and injustice of
sexual love has been as glorified and deified as it has in all ages — yes,
that this love has furnished the concept of love as the opposite of egoism
when it may in fact be the most candid expression of egoism. Here is it
evidently the have-nots and the yearning ones who have formed
linguistic usage — there have probably always been too many of them.
40

Book One
Those who were granted much possession and satiety in this area must
occasionally have made some casual remark about ‘the raging demon’, as
did that most charming and beloved of all Athenians, Sophocles:!° but
Eros always laughed at such blasphemers; they were always precisely his
greatest darlings. Here and there on earth there is probably a kind of
continuation of love in which this greedy desire of two people for each
other gives way to a new desire and greed, a shared higher thirst for an
ideal above them. But who knows such love? Who has experienced it?
Its true name is friendship.
15
From a distance. — This mountain makes the entire region it dominates
attractive and significant in every way; having said this to ourselves for
the hundredth time, we are so unreasonably and thankfully disposed
toward it that we suppose that it, the bestower of such delight, must
itself be the most delightful thing in the region — and so we climb it and
are disappointed. Suddenly the mountain itself and the entire landscape
around us, beneath us, seem to have lost their magic; we had forgotten
that certain types of greatness, like certain types of goodness, want to be
beheld only from a distance and always from below, not from above —
only thus do they have an effect. Perhaps you know people near you who
ought to view themselves only from a distance in order to find
themselves at all tolerable or attractive and invigorating; self-knowledge
is something they should be advised against.
16
Over the footbridge. 
- When dealing with people who are bashful about
their feelings, one has to be able to dissimulate; they feel a sudden
hatred towards anyone who catches them in a tender or enthusiastic or
elevated feeling, as if he had seen their secrets. If one wants to do them
good in such moments, one should make them laugh or utter some cold,
jocular sarcasm: then their feeling freezes and they regain power over
themselves. But I am giving the moral before the story. There was a
time in our lives when we were so close that nothing seemed to obstruct
10 See Plato, Republic 329¢.
41

The Gay Science
our friendship and brotherhood, and only a small footbridge separated
us, Just as you were about to step on it, I asked you: ‘Do you want to
cross the footbridge to me?’ — But then you didn’t want to any more;
and when I asked again, you were silent. Since then, mountains and
torrential rivers, and everything which separates and alienates, have
been cast between us, and even if we wanted to reach each other, we
couldn’t anymore! But when you think of that little footbridge now, you
have no words anymore — only sobs and bewilderment.
17
Finding a motive for one’s poverty. — There is clearly no trick that enables
us to turn a poor virtue into a rich and overflowing one, but we can
surely reinterpret its poverty nicely into a necessity, so that its sight no
longer offends us and we no longer make reproachful faces at fate on its
account. That is what the wise gardener does when he places the poor
little stream in his garden in the arms of a nymph and thus finds a
motive for its poverty: and who wouldn’t need nymphs as he does?
18
Ancient pride. — The specific hue which nobility had in the ancient world
is absent in ours because the ancient slave is absent from our sensibility.
A Greek of noble descent found such immense intermediate stages and
such a distance between his own height and that ultimate baseness that
he could barely see the slave clearly any more: not even Plato could
really see him. It is different with us, accustomed as we are to the
doctrine of human equality, if not also to equality itself. A creature who
is not at its own disposal and who lacks leisure is by no means something
despicable to us on that account; perhaps each of us possesses too much
of such slavishness in accordance with the conditions of our social order
and activity, which are utterly different from those of the ancients. The
Greek philosopher went through life feeling secretly that there were far
more slaves than one might think — namely, that everyone who was not a
philosopher was a slave;'! his pride overflowed when he considered that
even the mightiest men on earth might be his slaves. This pride, too, is
41 Stoic doctrine; see e.g. Diogenes Laertius 7.121-2 (in Long and Sedley, Philosophers, vol. 1
p. 431) and Cicero, De stoicorum paradoxits, Paradoxon V.
42

Book One
foreign and impossible for us; not even metaphorically does the word
‘slave’ possess for us its full force.
19
Evil. ~ Examine the lives of the best and the most fruitful people and
peoples and ask yourselves whether a tree which is supposed to grow to
a proud height could do without bad weather and storms: whether
misfortune and exernal resistance, whether any kinds of hatred, jealousy,
stubbornness, mistrust, hardness, greed, and violence do not belong to
the favourable conditions without which any great growth even of virtue
is scarcely possible? The poison from which the weaker nature perishes
strengthens the strong man — and he does not call it poison.
20
The dignity of foolishness. 
— A few millennia further along the course set
by the last century — and everything men do will display the highest
prudence: but just that way prudence will lose all its dignity. Then it
will, to be sure, be necessary to be prudent, but it will also be so
commonplace and vulgar that even a moderately aristocratic taste will
experience this necessity as a vulgarity. And just as a tyranny of truth
and science could increase esteem for the lie, a tyranny of prudence
could spur a new kind of nobility. To be noble might then come to
mean: to entertain follies.
aI
To the teachers of selflessness. - A person’s virtues are called good with
respect to their presumed effects not on him but on us and society — the
praise of virtues has always been far from ‘selfless’, far from ‘unegoistic’!
For otherwise one would have had to recognize that the virtues (such as
diligence, obedience, chastity, piety, justice) are mostly harmful to their
possessors, being drives which dominate them all too violently and
covetously and in no way let reason keep them in balance with the other
drives. When you have a virtue — a real, complete virtue (and not just a
small drive towards some virtue) — you are its victim! But the neighbour
praises your virtue precisely on that account! One praises the diligent
43

The Gay Science
even if he should harm his vision or the originality and freshness of his
spirit, one honours and feels sorry for the youth who has ‘worked
himself to death’ because one thinks: ‘For society as a whole the loss of
even the best individual is merely a small sacrifice! Too bad that the
sacrifice is necessary! It would surely be much worse though if the
individual had thought otherwise and considered his own preservation
and development more important than his work in the service of
society!’ And so one feels sorry for this youth, not for his own sake but
because a devoted too/, ruthless towards itself — a so-called ‘good man’ —
has been lost to society through his death. Perhaps one also asks
whether it would not have been more useful to society if he had worked
in a way that was less negligent towards himself and had preserved
himself longer — yes, one admits that there would have been some
advantage in that, but considers this other advantage to be greater and
more last; that a sacrifice was made and the ethos of the sacrificial animal
once again vindicated for all to see. What is, therefore, first really praised
when virtues are praised is their instrumental nature and then the blind
drive in every virtue that refuses to be held in check by the overall
advantage of the individual — in short, the unreason in virtue that leads
the individual to allow himself to be transformed into a mere function
of the whole. The praise of virtues is the praise of something privately
harmful — the praise of drives which deprive a human being of his
noblest selfishness and of the strength for the highest form of self-
protection. For the sake of inculcating and incorporating virtuous habits
into people, to be sure, one emphasizes various effects of virtue that
make virtue and private advantage appear as sisters — and there is in fact
such a relationship! Blindly raging industriousness, for example — this
typical virtue of an instrument — is represented as the road to riches and
honour and as the best poison for curing boredom and the passions; but
one keeps silent about its danger, its extreme dangerousness. That is
how education always proceeds: it tries to condition the individual
through various attractions and advantages to adopt a way of thinking
and behaving that, when it has become habit, drive and passion, will
rule in him and over him against his ultimate advantage but ‘for the
common good’. How often I see it: that blindly raging industriousness
brings riches and honour but at the same time deprives the organs of
refinement that make it possible to enjoy the riches and honour; also,
that this chief antidote to boredom and to the passions at the same time
44

Book One
dulls the senses and makes the spirit resistant to new attractions. (The
most industrious age — our own — doesn’t know how to make anything
of all its industriousness and money except still more money and still
more industriousness; for more genius is required to spend than to
acquire! — Well, we’ll still have our ‘grandchildren’!) If education is
successful, each virtue of the individual is a public utility and a private
disadvantage with respect to the highest private end — probably invol-
ving some deterioration of the spirit and the senses or even a premature
demise: consider from this standpoint the virtues of obedience, chastity,
piety, and justice. The praise of the selfless, the self-sacrificing, the
virtuous — that is, of the person who does not apply his entire strength
and reason to his own preservation, development, elevation, promotion,
and expansion of power, but rather lives, as regards himself, modestly
and throughtlessly, maybe even with indifference and irony — this praise
is certainly not born out of the spirit of selflessness! The ‘neighbour’
praises selflessness because it brings him advantages! If the neighbour
himself thought ‘selflessly’, he would reject this decrease in strength,
this harm for Ais benefit; he would work against the development of
such inclinations, and above all he would affirm his selflessness by not
calling it good! Hereby we hint at the fundamental contradiction in the
morality that is very much honoured just now: the motives to this
morality stand in opposition to its principle! What this morality wants to
use as its proof, it refutes with its criterion of what is moral! In order
not to contradict itself, the command ‘You shall renounce yourself and
sacrifice yourself’ could be proclaimed only by a being which thereby
renounced its own advantage and perhaps, through the demanded
sacrifice of the individual, brought about its own destruction. But as
soon as the neighbour (or society) recommends altruism for the sake of
its utility, it is using the directly opposed principle, ‘You shall seek your
advantage even at the expense of everything else’ — and thus one
preaches, in the same breath, a “Thou shalt’ and a “Thou shalt not’!
22
L’ordre du jour pour le roi.'2 — The day begins: let us begin to organize
for this day the business and festivities of our most gracious master who
12 The king’s schedule for the day’
45

The Gay Science
is still deigning to repose. His majesty has bad weather today: we shall
be careful not to call it bad; we shall not speak of the weather — but we
shall be a bit more ceremonious about the business than would
otherwise be necessary and a bit more festive about the festivities. His
majesty may even be ill: at breakfast we shall present the latest good
news of last evening, the arrival of Mr Montaigne, who jokes so
agreeably about his illness; he’s suffering from a stone.!’ We shall
receive a few persons (persons! What that puffed-up old frog who will
be among them would say if he heard this word! ‘I am not a person’, he
would say, ‘but always the matter itself’!*) — and this reception will take
longer than anyone finds agreeable: that is reason enough to tell about
the poet who wrote on his door, ‘Whoever enters here will pay me an
honour; whoever does not — a pleasure.’!> Truly a polite way to express
a rudeness! And perhaps this poet is for his part quite right in being
rude: they say his poems are better than their maker. Well, then let him
write many more and withdraw himself from the world as much as
possible — that is after all the meaning of his civil incivility! Conversely,
a prince is always worth more than his ‘verse’, even if — but what are we
doing? We are gossiping and the whole court thinks we are already
working and racking our brains — one sees no light earlier than the one
burning in our window. Listen! Wasn’t that the bell? Damn! The day
and the dance are beginning and we don’t know the programme! So we
have to improvise — the whole world improvises its day. Let’s just do
today as the whole world does! And there my strange morning dream
vanished, probably the victim of the hard strokes of the tower bell,
which just announced the fifth hour with all of its customary impor-
tance. It seems to me that this time the god of dreams wanted to poke
fun at my habit of starting the day by organizing it and making it
tolerable to myself, and it may well be that I have often done this in too
formal and princelike a manner.
13 French moralist (1533-92) who discusses the pains (and pleasures) of his affliction in his essay
‘Of Experience’
14 Perhaps a reference to Montaigne’s letter ‘To the Reader’, printed as introduction to his Essays
‘5 In his notebook Nietzsche writes that this refers to ‘Augier’; probably Emile Augier (1820-89),
minor French dramatist who wrote on classical topics.
46

Book One
23
The signs of corruption. — Consider the following signs of those states of
society that are necessary from time to time and that are designated by
the word ‘corruption’. As soon as corruption sets in anywhere, a
colourful superstition takes over, and the previous common faith of a
people becomes pale and powerless against it: for supersitition is free-
spiritedness of the second rank — whoever succumbs to it selects certain
forms and formulas that appeal to him and allows himself some freedom
of choice. The superstitious person is always, compared to the religious
person, much more of a ‘person’, and a superstitious society will be one
in which there are many individuals and much delight in individuality.
From this perspective, superstition always appears as progress against
faith and as a sign that the intellect is becoming more independent and
demanding its rights. Those who then complain about corruption are
the devotees of the old religion and religiosity — until now they have also
determined linguistic usage and given superstition a bad name even
among the freest spirits. Let us realize that it is actually 
a symptom of
enlightenment. Secondly, a society in which corruption spreads is
accused of laxity; and it is obvious that the esteem of war and the
pleasure in war diminish, while the comforts of life are now desired just
as ardently as were warlike and athletic honours formerly. What is
usually overlooked, however, is that the ancient civil energy and passion,
which received a magnificent visibility through war and competitive
games, has now transformed itself into countless private passions and
has merely become less visible; indeed, in times of ‘corruption’ the
power and force of a people’s expended energies are probably greater
than ever, and the individual spends them on a lavish scale which he
could not previously have afforded — when he was not yet rich enough!
And thus it is precisely in times of ‘laxness’ that tragedy runs through
the houses and streets, that great love and great hatred are born and the
flame of knowledge blazes up into the sky. Thirdly, it is usually said to
the credit of such societies, as if one wanted to compensate for the
reproaches of superstition and laxness, that they are milder and that
cruelty declines drastically in comparison to the older, stronger, more
devout age. But this praise I cannot endorse any more than the
reproaches: I concede only that cruelty now refines itself and that its
older forms henceforth offend taste; but wounding and torturing with
47

The Gay Science
word and eye reaches its highest cultivation in times of corruption — it is
now alone that malice and the delight in malice are born. People who
live in an age of corruption are witty and slanderous; they know that
there are other kinds of murder than by dagger or assault; they also
know that whatever is well satd is believed. Fourthly, when ‘morals
decay’, those beings emerge for the first time who are called tyrants:
they are the precursors and as it were the precocious firstling instances of
individuals. Just a little bit longer and this fruit of fruits hangs ripe and
yellow on the tree of a people — and this tree existed only for the sake of
this fruit! Once decay has reached its peak along with the struggle of all
sorts of tyrants, the Caesar always appears, the final tyrant who puts an
end to the weary wrestling for sole rule by putting weariness to work for
himself. In his age the individual is usually ripest and culture is
therefore at its highest and most fruitful stage, but not for the sake of
him and not through him, though those of the highest culture like to
flatter their Caesar by claiming to be Ais work. In truth they need peace
from without because they have enough unrest and work within. In
these times, bribery and treason are at their peak, for the love of the
newly discovered ego is now much mightier than the love of the old,
used-up, touted-to-death ‘fatherland’, and the need to secure oneself
from the terrible ups and downs of luck opens even noble hands as soon
as someone who is mighty and wealthy shows himself willing to pour
gold into them. There is now so very little secure future; one lives for
today: a state of soul that makes an easy game for all seducers, for one
allows oneself to be seduced and bribed only ‘for today’ and reserves the
future and virtue for oneself! As is well known the individuals, these
true ‘in~-and-for-themselves’, care more about the moment than do their
opposites, the herd people, for they consider themselves just as unpre~
dictable as the future. They also like to join up with people of violence
because they think themselves capable of actions and information which
the common people would neither understand nor forgive, while the
tyrant or Caesar would understand the rights of the individual even in
his excesses and has an interest in advocating and even abetting a bolder
private morality. For he thinks of himself and wants his self to be
thought of as Napoleon once expressed it in his classic manner : ‘I have
the right to answer all charges against me with an eternal ““That is me.”
I am apart from all the world and accept conditions from no one. I want
people to submit even to my fantasies and to find it natural when I yield
48

Book One
to this or that distraction.’ That is what Napoleon once replied to his
wife when she had reasons to question her husband’s marital fidelity. 
!®
Times of corruption are those in which the apples fall from the tree: I
mean the individuals, the seed-bearers of the future, the spiritual
colonizers and shapers of new states and communities. Corruption is
just a rude word for the autumn of a people.
24
Different forms of dissatisfaction. - The weak and, as it were, feminine
discontented types are those who are innovative at making life more
beautiful and profound; the strong discontents — the men among them,
to stick with the metaphor — are innovative at making it better and safer.
The former show their weakness and femininity by gladly letting
themselves be deceived from time to time and occasionally resting
content with a bit of intoxication and gushing enthusiasm, though they
can never be satisfied entirely and suffer from the incurability of their
dissatisfaction; they are also the promoters of all who know how to
procure opiates and narcotic consolations, and consequently they resent
those who esteem physicians above priests — thus they assure the
continuance of real distress! Had there not been a surplus of these
discontents in Europe since the middle ages, the celebrated European
capacity for constant transformation might never have developed, for the
demands of the strong discontents are too crude and basically too
undemanding not eventually to be brought to a final rest. China, for
example, is a country where large-scale discontentment and the capacity
for change became extinct centuries ago; and in Europe too the socialists
and state idolaters, with their measures for making life better and safer,
might easily establish Chinese conditions and a Chinese ‘happiness’,
provided they are first able to extirpate that sicklier, more tender, more
feminine discontentment and romanticism that is for the moment still
superabundant here. Europe is a patient who owes the utmost gratitude
to his incurability and to the perpetual changes in his affliction: these
incessantly new conditions, these no less incessantly new dangers, pains,
and modes of information have finally generated an intellectual
16 Reported in Mémoires de Madame de Rémusat (3 vols., Paris, 1879~80), vol. 1, pp. 
r14f, a copy of
which Nietzsche had in his library
49

The Gay Science
irritability that approximates genius and that is in any case the mother
of all genius.
25
Not predestined for knowledge. — There is a stupid humility that is by no
means rare, and those afflicted with it are altogether unfit to become
votaries of knowledge. For as soon as a person of this type perceives
something striking, he turns on his heel, as it were, and says to himself,
‘You have made a mistake! Where were your senses? This cannot be the
truth! And then, instead of looking and listening more keenly again, he
runs away, as if intimidated, from the striking thing and tries to shake it
from his mind as fast as possible. For his inner canon says: ‘I want to see
nothing that contradicts the prevalent opinion. Am J made to discover
new truths? There are already too many old ones.’
26
What is life? — Life — that is: continually shedding something that wants
to die; Life — that is: being cruel and inexorable against anything that is
growing weak and old in us, and not just in us. Life — therefore means:
being devoid of respect for the dying, the wretched, the aged? Always
being a murderer? And yet old Moses said: ‘Thou shalt not kill.’!”
27
The renouncer. — What does the renouncer do? He strives for a higher
world, he wants to fly further and higher than all affirmers — ke throws
away much that would encumber his flight, including some things that
are not valueless, not disagreeable to him: he sacrifices it to his desire for
the heights. This sacrificing, this throwing away, is now precisely what
alone becomes visible in him and leads people to call him the renouncer,
and thus he stands before us, shrouded in his hood as if he were the soul
of a hairshirt. But he is quite satisfied with the impression that he makes
on us: he wants to conceal from us his desire, his pride, his intention to
soar beyond us. Yes, he is cleverer than we thought, and so polite
7 Moses was the supposed author of the Pentateuch, the first five books of the Bible which
include, in Exodus, 20, the Ten Commandments.
50

Book One
towards us — this affirmer! For he is just as we are even in his
renunciation.
28
Harming with what is best in oneself. — At times our strengths propel us
so far ahead that we can no longer stand our weaknesses and perish from
them. We may even foresee this outcome and still will have it no other
way. Thus we become hard against that within us that wants to be
spared, and our greatness is also our mercilessness. Such an experience,
for which we must in the end pay with our lives, is a parable for the
whole effect of great human beings on others and on their age: precisely
with what is best in them, with what only they can do, they destroy
many who are weak, insecure, in the process of becoming, of willing,
and thus they are harmful. It can even happen that, all in all, they are
harmful only because what is best in them is accepted and as it were
imbibed only by those whom it affects like an overly potent drink: they
lose their mind and their selfishness; they become so intoxicated that
they are bound to break their limbs on all the wrong paths down which
their intoxication drives them.
29
The add-on-liars. — When people in France started to fight the
Aristotelian unities'® and others consequently also started to defend
them, one could see again something that is so often apparent but that
people are loath to see: one lied to oneself, inventing reasons for these
laws, simply to avoid admitting that one had become used to them and
would no longer have it any other way. And that is what one does, and
has always done, within every prevailing morality and religion: the
reasons and intents behind habits are invented only when some people
start attacking the habits and asking for reasons and intents. Here we
have the great dishonesty of conservatives of all times — they are the
add-on-liars.
18 In seventeenth-century France aestheticians (mis)read Aristotle (see his Poetics, esp. chapter 8
{1451a.16—35]) as requiring that a tragedy exhibit unity of time, place, and plot.
51

The Gay Science
30
The comedy of the famous. 
— Famous men who need their fame, e.g. all
politicians, never choose allies and friends without ulterior motives:
from one they want a piece of the splendour and reflected splendour of
his virtue; from another the fear-inspiring aspects of certain dubious
qualities that everyone knows him to have; from another they steal the
reputation of his idleness, his lying in the sun, because it serves their
own ends to appear inattentive and sluggish at times — it conceals the
fact that they actually lie in wait; now they need a visionary around; now
an expert; now a thinker; now a pedant, as if he were their present self;
but just as quickly they don’t need them any more! And so the
surroundings and exteriors of famous men die off continually, even
while everything seems to be pushing to get into these surroundings and
lend them their character; in this, they are like big cities. Their
reputation is continually changing, like their character, for their chan-
ging methods demand these changes and push forward now this, now
that real or fictitious characteristic onto the stage. Their friends and
allies belong, as I said, to these stage properties. What they want,
however, must stand all the much more firmly and unshakeably and be
splendidly seen from afar; and this, too, sometimes requires its comedy
and its theatrics.
31
Trade and nobility. — Buying and selling are common by now, like the art
of reading and writing; everyone has practised it, even if he is not a
tradesman, and gets more practice at this technique every day — just as
formerly, in the age of a more savage humanity, everyone was a hunter
and practised the technique of hunting every day. In that age, hunting
was common; but eventually it became a privilege and thereby lost its
everyday and common character — because it stopped being necessary
and became a thing of moods and luxury. The same thing could happen
to buying and selling one day. One can imagine social conditions in
which there is no buying and selling and in which this technique
gradually becomes unnecessary. Perhaps some individuals who are not
as subject to the laws of the general condition will then give themselves
permission to buy and sell as a /uxury of sentiment. Only then would
52

Book One
trade become something exquisite, and the noble might enjoy trade as
much as they hitherto enjoyed war and politics, while conversely the
assessment of politics could have changed completely. Even now it is
ceasing to be the art of the nobleman, and it is quite possible that some
day one will find it so base that, along with all political literature and
journalism, one classifies it as a ‘prostitution of the spirit’.
32
Undesired disciples. 
~ ‘What can I do with these two young men!’ cried
an irritated philosopher who ‘corrupted’ the youth as Socrates once had
done;!? they are unwelcome students. This one can’t say ‘no’ and the
other one says ‘half and half’ about everything. If they adopted my
doctrine, the first would suffer too much, for my way of thinking
requires a warlike soul, a desire to hurt, a delight in saying no, a hard
skin; he would languish from open and internal wounds. And the other
would strike 
a compromise with everything he represents and thereby
make it into a mediocrity — such a disciple I wish on my enemies.
33
Outside the lecture-room. — ‘In order to prove to you that man is
fundamentally a good-natured animal, I would remind you of how
credulous he has been for so long. Only now, quite late and after
tremendous self-conquest, has he become a distrustful animal. Yes, man
is now more evil than ever.’ I do not understand this: why should man
be more distrustful and evil now? ‘Because he now has a science — needs
a science.’
34
Historia abscondita.”® — Every great human being exerts a retroactive
force: for his sake all of history is put on the scale again, and a thousand
secrets of the past crawl out of their hiding places — into As sunshine.
There is no telling what may yet become a part of history. Maybe the
19 One of the charges on which Socrates was condemned to death was that of ‘corrupting the
youth’; see Plato, Apology 24 b—c.
20 ‘hidden history’
53

The Gay Science
past is still essentially undiscovered! So many retroactive forces are still
needed!
35
Heresy and witchcraft. 
- To think otherwise than is customary is much
less the effect of a superior intellect than of strong, evil inclinations —
detaching, isolating, defiant, 
gloating, and malicious inclinations.
Heresy is the adjunct of witchcraft and surely no more harmless and
least of all anything venerable. Heretics and witches are two species of
evil people; what they have in common is that they also feel evil but are
impelled by an unconquerable lust to harm what is prevailing (people or
opinions). The Reformation, which was a kind of redoubling of the
medieval spirit at a time when it was no longer accompanied by a good
conscience, produced both in the greatest abundance.
36
Last words. ~ One will recall that the emperor Augustus, that frightful
man who had as much self-control and who could be as silent as any
wise Socrates, became indiscreet against himself with his last words: he
let his mask fall for the first time when he made it clear that he had
worn a mask and acted a comedy — he had played the father of the
fatherland and the wisdom on the throne well enough to create the
proper illusion! Plaudite amici, comoedia finita est?! The thought of
the dying Nero — qualis artifex pereo?* — was also the thought of the
dying Augustus: actor’s vanity! Actor’s prolixity! And truly the opposite
of the dying Socrates!”> But Tiberius died silently, this most tormented
of all self-tormentors — #e was genuine and no actor! What might have
passed through his mind at the end? Maybe this: ‘Life — that is a long
death. What a fool I was to shorten so many lives! Was J made to be a
benefactor? I should have given them eternal /ife: that way, I could have
seen them die forever. That’s why I had such good eyes: qualis spectator
21 ‘Father of the Fatherland’ was an honorary title bestowed by the Roman Senate on the emperor
Augustus. In his biography (chapter gg} Suetonius reports that these Latin words (= ‘Applaud,
my friends, the comedy is over!) were among the last Augustus spoke on his deathbed.
22 “I die, what a loss to art!’ (as reported by Suetonius, Life of Nero, chapter 49)
23 Socrates insisted that a decorous silence be preserved while he was being executed; see Plato,
Phaedo 117¢~e, but see below, § 340, p. 193.
54

Book One
pereo?** When after a long death-struggle he seemed to recover his
strength, it was considered advisable to smother him with pillows — he
died a double death.?°
37
Because of three errors. - One has promoted science during the last
centuries partly because it was through science that one hoped best to
understand God’s goodness and wisdom — the main motive in the soul
of the great Englishmen (such as Newton);”° partly because one believed
in the absolute usefulness of knowledge, especially in the most intimate
affiliation between morality, knowledge, and happiness — the main
motive in the soul of the French (such as Voltaire);?” and partly because
one believed that in science one had and loved something selfless,
harmless, self-sufficient, and truly innocent in which the evil drives of
humanity had no part at all — the main motive in the soul of Spinoza,”®
who felt divine in attaining knowledge — in sum, because of three errors.
38
The explosive ones. 
—- When one considers how the energy of young men
needs to explode, one is not surprised to see them decide so unsubtly
and so unselectively for this or that cause: what thrills them is the sight
of the zeal surrounding a cause and, so to speak, the sight of the
burning match — not the cause itself. The subtler seducers therefore
know how to create in them the expectation of an explosion and to
disregard justifying their cause: reasons are not the way to win over
these powder kegs!
39
Changed taste. 
- Change in common taste is more important than that
in opinions; opinions along with proofs, refutations, and the whole
24 ‘I die, but what a good observer I was!’
25 Tiberius’ end is described in Suetonius, Life of Tiberius (chapter 73) and in Tacitus, Annals
VI.50. 
:
6 English physicist and mathematician (1643~—1727)
27 Paradigmatic French rationalist of the Enlightenment (1694~1778)
28 Jewish philosopher who lived most of his life in Amsterdam (1632-77)
55

The Gay Science
intellectual masquerade are only symptoms of a changed taste and most
certainly mot what they are so often taken to be, its causes. How does
common taste change? Through individuals — powerful, influential, and
without any sense of shame — who announce and tyrannically enforce
their hoc est ridiculum, hoc est absurdum,?? i.e. the judgement of their taste
and disgust: thus they put many under pressure, which gradually turns
into a habit among even more and finally becomes a need of everyone.
The reason why these individuals sense and ‘taste’ differently is usually
found in a peculiarity of their lifestyle, nutrition, digestion, maybe a
deficit or excess of inorganic salts in their blood and brains — in short, in
their physis:°° they have the courage to own up to their physis and to
heed its demands down to its subtlest tones. Their aesthetic and moral
judgements are such ‘subtlest tones’ of the physis.
40
On the lack of noble style. — Soldiers and leaders still have a far higher
relation to one another than do workers and employers. So far at least,
all cultures with a military basis are still high above so-called industrial
culture: the latter in its present form is altogether the most vulgar form
of existence that has ever been. Here it is simply the law of need
operating: one wants to live and has to sell oneself, but one despises
those who exploit this need and duy the worker. It is strange that
submission to powerful, frightening, yes, terrifying persons, to tyrants
and generals, is experienced to be not nearly as distressing as this
submission to unknown and uninteresting persons, which is what all the
greats of industry are: the worker usually sees in the employer only a
cunning, bloodsucking dog of a man who speculates on all distress and
whose name, figure, manner, and reputation are completely indifferent
to him. So far the manufacturers and large-scale commercial entrepre-
neurs have apparently been much too lacking in all the manners and
signs of higher race that alone enable a person to become interesting; if
they had the refinement of noble breeding in their eye and gesture, there
might not be any socialism of the masses. For the masses are basically
prepared to submit to any kind of s/avery provided that the superiors
constantly legitimize themselves as higher, as born to command —
29 ‘This is ridiculous, this is absurd.’
30 Greek for ‘nature’
56

Book One
through refined demeanour! The commonest man senses that refine-
ment cannot be improvised and that one has to honour in it the fruit of
long ages — but the absence of the higher demeanour and the notorious
manufacturer’s vulgarity with ruddy, plump hands give him the idea
that it is only accident and luck that elevated one above the other in this
case: well, then, he infers, let us try accident and luck! Let us throw the
dice! — and socialism begins.
41
Against remorse. ~- The thinker sees his own actions as experiments and
questions, as seeking explanations of something: to him, success and
failure are primarily answers To be vexed or even to feel remorse
because something goes wrong — he leaves that to those who act because
they were ordered to do so and who expect a beating when his gracious
lordship is not pleased with the result.
42
Work and boredom. — Seeking work for the sake of wages — in this, nearly
all people in civilized countries are alike; to all of them, work is just a
means and not itself the end, which is why they are unrefined in their
choice of work, provided it yields an ample reward. Now there are rare
individuals who would rather perish than work without taking pleasure
in their work: they are choosy, hard to please, and have no use for ample
rewards if the work is not itself the reward of rewards. To this rare
breed belong artists and contemplative men of all kinds, but also men of
leisure who spend their lives hunting, travelling, in love affairs, or on
adventures. All of them want work and misery as long as it is joined
with pleasure, and the heaviest, hardest work, if need be. Otherwise
they are resolutely idle, even if it spells impoverishment, dishonour, and
danger to life and limb. They do not fear boredom as much as work
without pleasure; indeed, they need a lot of boredom if their work is to
succeed. For the thinker and for all inventive spirits, boredom is that
disagreeable ‘lull’ of the soul that precedes a happy voyage and cheerful
winds; he has to endure it, must await its effect on him — precisely that
is what lesser natures are totally unable to achieve! To fend off boredom
at any price is vulgar, just as work without pleasure is vulgar. Perhaps
57

The Gay Science
Asians are distinguished as above Europeans by their capacity for a
longer, deeper calm; even their narcotics work slowly and require
patience, in contrast to the revolting suddenness of the European
poison, alcohol.
43
What the laws betray. — It is a grave error to study a people’s penal code
as if it were an expression of its character; the laws do not betray what a
people is but rather what appears to it as foreign, strange, uncanny,
outlandish. The laws concern the exceptions to the morality of custom
(Sittlichkeit der Sitte)*', and the severest punishments are for things that
accord with the customs of the neighbouring people. Thus the Waha-
nabis*? have only two mortal sins: having a god other than the Wahanabi
god and — smoking (which they call ‘the disgraceful way of drinking’).
‘And what about murder and adultery?’ asked the Englishman, amazed,
who found this out. ‘God is gracious and merciful’, the old chief
replied. Thus the old Romans had the notion that a woman could
commit only two mortal sins: adultery and — drinking wine. Old Cato
thought that kissing among relatives had been made into a custom only
in order to keep the women under control in this regard; a kiss meant,
‘Does she smell of wine??? Women caught with wine were actually put
to death; and certainly not just because sometimes women under the
influence of wine completely forgot how to say no; above all, the
Romans feared the orgiastic and Dionysian cult which afflicted the
women of southern Europe from time to time when wine was still new
in Europe — feared it as a foreign monster that overthrew the basis of
Roman sensibility; to them it seemed like a betrayal of Rome, like the
embodiment of the foreign.
31 Nietzsche here uses the expression Sittlichkeit der Sitte, and similar phrases occur elsewhere
(e.g. in § 46, die Sttte der Sittlichkeit). Hegel had distinguished between Sittlichkeit, the ethical
outlook embodied in a society’s customary practice, and Moralitét, an abstract, reflective, code
such as that insisted upon in Kant’s philosophy. It is unclear, but unlikely, that Nietzsche was
aware of Hegel’s own particular version of this distinction, but Nietzsche’s formulations
emphasize strongly the customary aspect of traditional ethical life.
32 Islamic sect in central Arabia. The anecdote which follows is taken from William Gifford
Palgrave’s A Narrative of a Year’s Journey through Central and Eastern Arabia 1862-1863
(translated into German in 1867~8).
33 Reported in Plutarch’s Quaestiones romanae, 6.
58

Book One
44
The supposed motives. — Important as it may be to know the motives from
which humanity has acted so far, it might be even more essential to
know the delief people had in this or that motive, i.e. what humanity has
imagined and told itself to be the real lever of its conduct so far. For
people’s inner happiness and misery has come to them depending on
their belief in this or that motive — not through the actual motives. The
latter are of second-order interest.
45
Epicurus.** — Yes, 
| am proud to experience Epicurus’ character in a way
unlike perhaps anyone else and to enjoy, in everything I hear and read of
him, the happiness of the afternoon of antiquity: I see his eye gaze at a
wide whitish sea, across shoreline rocks bathed in the sun, as large and
small creatures play in its light, secure and calm like the light and his
eye itself. Only someone who is continually suffering could invent such
happiness — the happiness of an eye before which the sea of existence
has grown still and which now cannot get enough of seeing the surface
and this colourful, tender, quivering skin of the sea: never before has
voluptuousness been so modest.
46
Our amazement. — It is a deep and fundamental stroke of luck that
science discovers things that stand up under examination and _ that
furnish the basis, again and again, for further discoveries — after all, it
could be otherwise! Indeed, we are so convinced of the uncertainty and
the fantastical quality of our judgements and of the eternal change of
human laws and concepts that it actually amazes us how well the results
of science stand up! Formerly, one knew nothing of the changeableness
of everything human; the habit of attachment to customary morality
(Sitte der Sittlichkeit) sustained the faith that the entire inner life of
34 Late fourth-century Bc Athenian philosopher who held that pleasure (correctly understood)
was the goal of human life. This paragraph is probably influenced by Lucretius, On the Nature
of Things, Bk. 11, 
1-61, which describes the effects to be expected from following the Epicurean
doctrine.
59

The Gay Science
humanity was fastened to iron necessity with eternal clamps; perhaps
people then experienced a similarly voluptuous amazement when they
told each other stories and fairy tales. The miraculous did a lot of good
to those who at times grew weary of the rule and of eternity. To lose
firm ground for once! To float! To err! To be mad! — that was part of the
paradise and debauchery of former ages, whereas our bliss is like that of
the shipwrecked man who has climbed ashore and is standing with both
feet on the firm old earth — marvelling because it does not bob up and
down.
47
On the suppression of the passions. — If one constantly forbids oneself the
expression of the passions, as if that were something to be left for the
‘common’, coarser, middle-class, peasant types — i.e. if one wants to
suppress not the passions themselves but only their language and gesture
—one still attains in addition what one did not desire: the suppression of
the passions themselves, at least their weakening and alteration — the
most instructive example being furnished by the court of Louis XIV and
everything that depended on it. The age that followed, brought up in the
suppression of expression, no longer had the passions themselves and
had in their place a graceful, shallow, playful manner — an age marked by
an incapacity for bad manners, so that even an insult was accepted and
returned with obliging words. Perhaps the present age supplies the most
notable counterpart: everywhere, in life and on the stage, and not the
least in everything written, I see the delight in all the coarser outbursts
and gestures of passion: what is demanded these days is a certain
convention of the passionate — but not passion itself! Nevertheless,
eventually passion itse/f will be reached this way, and our progeny will be
genuinely savage and not just savage and unruly in demeanour.
48
Knowledge of distress. - Perhaps nothing separates human beings or ages
from each other more than the different degrees of their knowledge of
distress — distress of the soul as well as of the body. Regarding the latter
we moderns may well, in spite of our frailties and fragilities, be bunglers
and dreamers owing to lack of ample first-hand experience, compared
60

Book One
with an age of fear, the longest of all ages, when individuals had to
protect themselves against violence and to that end had themselves to
become men of violence. In those days, a man received ample training in
bodily torments and deprivations and understood that even a certain
cruelty towards himself, as a voluntary exercise in pain, was a necessary
means of his preservation; in those days, one trained one’s surroundings
to endure pain; in those days, one gladly inflicted pain and saw the most
terrible things of this kind happen to others without any other feeling
than that of one’s own safety. As regards the distress of the soul,
however, I look at each person today to see whether he knows it through
experience or description; whether he still considers it necessary to fake
this knowledge, say, as a sign of refined cultivation, or whether at the
bottom of his soul he no longer believes in great pains of the soul and
reacts to its mention in much the same way as to the mention of great
bodily sufferings, which make him think of his toothaches and stomach-
aches. But that is how most people seem to me to be these days. The
general inexperience with both sorts of pain and the relative rarity of the
sight of suffering individuals have an important consequence: pain is
hated much more now than formerly; one speaks much worse of it;
indeed, one can hardly endure the presence of pain as a thought and
makes it a matter of conscience and a reproach against the whole of
existence. The emergence of pessimistic philosophers is in no way the
sign of great, terrible states of distress; rather, these question marks
about the value of all life are made in times when the refinement and
ease of existence make even the inevitable mosquito bites of the soul and
the body seem much too bloody and malicious, and the poverty of real
experiences of pain makes one tend to consider painful general 1deas as
already suffering of the highest rank. There is a recipe against pessi-
mistic philosophies and excessive sensitivity, things which seem to me to
be the real ‘distress of the present’ — but this recipe may sound too cruel
and would itself be counted among the signs that lead people to judge,
‘existence is something evil’. Well, the recipe against this ‘distress’ is:
distress.
49
Magnanimity and related things. - Those paradoxical phenomena, like
the sudden coldness in the behaviour of the emotional person, or the
61

The Gay Science
humour of the melancholy person, or above all magnanimity as a sudden
renunciation of revenge or a satisfaction of envy, appear in people who
have a powerful inner centrifugal force, in people of sudden satiety and
sudden nausea. Their satisfactions are so quick and strong that they are
immediately followed by weariness and aversion and a flight into the
opposite taste: in this opposite, the cramp of feeling is resolved — in one
person by sudden cold, in another by laughter, in a third by tears and
self-sacrifice. The magnanimous person — at least the type of magnani-
mous person who has always made the strongest impression — strikes
me as a person with a most extreme thirst for vengeance, who sees
satisfaction nearby and drinks it down already in imagination so fully,
thoroughly and to the last drop that a tremendous, quick nausea follows
this quick excess and he now rises ‘above himself’, as they say, and
forgives his enemy, indeed blesses and honours him. With this rape of
himself, with this mockery of his drive for revenge he only gives in to
the new drive which just now has become powerful in him (disgust),
and he does so just as impatiently and excessively as just a moment ago
he imaginatively anticipated and, as it were, exhausted his delight in
revenge. Magnanimity has the same degree of egoism as revenge, only
egoism of a different quality.
50
The argument from growing solitary. 
- The reproach of conscience is
weak in even the most conscientious people compared to the feeling:
‘This or that is against the morals (die gute Sitte) of your society.’ Even
the strongest person still fears a cold look or a sneer on the face of those
among whom and for whom he has been brought up. What is he really
afraid of? Growing solitary! This is the argument that refutes even the
best arguments for a person or a cause. — Thus the herd instinct speaks
out in us.
51
The sense of truth. 
- 
| approve of any form of scepticism to which I can
reply, ‘Let’s try it!” But I want to hear nothing more about all the things
and questions that don’t admit of experiment. This is the limit of my
‘sense of truth’; for there, courage has lost its right.
62

Book One
52
What others know about us. — What we know about ourselves and
remember is not as decisive to our life’s happiness as it is believed to be.
One day, what others know (or think they know) about us assails us ~
and then we realize that that is more powerful. It is easier to deal with a
bad conscience than a bad reputation.
53
Where the good begins. ~ At the point where the poor power of the eye is
no longer able to see the evil drive as such, owing to its increasing
subtlety, man posits the realm of goodness; and the feeling of now
having stepped into the land of goodness excites all those impulses that
had been threatened and limited by the evil drive, such as the feeling of
security, of comfort, of benevolence. So: the duller the eye, the more
extensive the good! Hence the eternal cheerfulness of the common
people and of children! Hence the gloominess and grief — akin to a bad
conscience — of the great thinkers!
54
The consciousness of appearance. 
~ How wonderful and new and yet how
fearful and ironic my new insight makes me feel towards all of existence!
I have discovered for myself that the ancient humanity and animality,
indeed the whole prehistory and past of all sentient being, continues
within me to fabulate, to love, to hate, and to infer — I suddenly awoke in
the middle of this dream, but only to the consciousness that I am
dreaming and that I must go on dreaming lest I perish — as the
sleepwalker has to go on dreaming in order to avoid falling down. What
is ‘appearance’ to me now! Certainly not the opposite of some essence —
what could I say about any essence except name the predicates of its
appearance! Certainly not a dead mask that one could put on an
unknown x and probably also take off x! To me, appearance is the active
and living itself, which goes so far in its self-mockery that it makes me
feel that here there is appearance and a will-o’-the-wisp and a dance of
spirits and nothing else — that among all these dreamers, even I, the
‘knower’, am dancing my dance; that the one who comes to know is a
63

The Gay Science
means of prolonging the earthly dance and thus is one of the masters of
ceremony of existence, and that the sublime consistency and interrelat-
edness of all knowledge may be and will be the highest means to sustain
the universality of dreaming, the mutual comprehension of all dreamers,
and thereby also the duration of the dream.
55
The ultimate noblemindedness. 
— So what makes a person ‘noble’?
Certainly not making sacrifices; even those burning with lust make
sacrifices, Certainly not following some passion, for there are contemp-
tible passions. Certainly not that one does something for others without
selfishness: perhaps no one is more consistently selfish than the noble
one. — Rather, the passion that overcomes the noble one is a singularity,
and he fails to realize this: the use of a rare and singular standard and
almost a madness; the feeling of heat in things that feel cold to everyone
else; a hitting upon values for which the scale has not yet been invented;
a sacrifice on altars made for an unknown god; a courage without any
desire for honours; a self-sufficiency that overflows and communicates
to men and things. Hitherto, then, it was rarity and the unawareness of
this rarity that made noble. Note, however, that by means of this
standard everything usual, near, and indispensable, in short, that which
most preserved the species, and in general the ru/e of humanity hitherto,
was inequitably judged and on the whole slandered in favour of the
exceptions. To become the advocate of the rule — that might be the
ultimate form and refinement in which noblemindedness manifests
itself on earth.
56
The desire for suffering. 
— When I think of the desire to do something,
how it continually tickles and goads the millions of young Europeans
who cannot endure boredom and themselves, I realize that they must
have a yearning to suffer something in order to make their suffering a
likely reason for action, for deeds. Neediness is needed! Hence the
clamour of the politicians; hence the many false, fictitious, exaggerated
‘emergencies’ of all kinds and the blind readiness to believe in them.
This young world demands that not happiness, but unhappiness should
64

Book One
approach or become visible from outside; and its imagination is already
busy turning this unhappiness into a monster ahead of time so that
afterwards it can fight a monster. Were these distress-addicts to feel
within themselves the power to do themselves good from within, to do
something for themselves, they would know how to create their very
own distress. Their inventions could then become more refined and
their satisfactions sound like good music, while they now fill the world
with their clamour about distress, and consequently, all too often with
the feeling of distress! They do not know what to do with themselves —
and so they paint the unhappiness of others on the wall; they always
need others! And continually other others! — Pardon me, my friends, I
have ventured to paint my Aappiness on the wall.*°
33 A reversal of the German expression ‘Don’t paint the devil on the wall’ (because by doing so you
will cause him to appear).
65


Book Two


Book Two
57
To the realists. 
— You sober people who feel armed against passion and
phantastical conceptions and would like to make your emptiness a
matter of pride and an ornament — you call yourself realists and
insinuate that the world really is the way it appears to you: before you
alone reality stands unveiled, and you yourselves are perhaps the best
part of it — oh, you beloved images of Sais!! But aren’t you too in your
unveiled condition still most passionate and dark creatures, compared to
fish, and still all too similar to an artist in love? And what is ‘reality’ to
an artist in love! You still carry around the valuations of things that
originate in the passions and loves of former centuries! Your sobriety
still contains a secret and inextirpable drunkenness! Your love of
‘reality’, for example — oh, that is an old, ancient ‘love’! In every
experience, in every sense impression there is a piece of this old love;
and some fantasy, some prejudice, some irrationality, some ignorance,
some fear, and whatever else, has worked on and contributed to it. That
mountain over there! That cloud over there! What is ‘real’ about that?
Subtract just once the phantasm and the whole human contribution from
it, you sober ones! Yes, if you could do that! If you could forget your
background, your past, your nursery school — all of your humanity and
animality! There is no ‘reality’ for us — and not for you either, you sober
ones — we are not nearly as strange to one another as you think, and
perhaps our good will to transcend drunkenness is just as respectable as
your belief that you are altogether incapable of drunkenness.
58
Only as creators! - This has caused me the greatest trouble and still does
always cause me the greatest trouble: to realize that what things are called
is unspeakably more important than what they are. The reputation,
name, and appearance, the worth, the usual measure and weight of a
thing — originally almost always something mistaken and arbitrary,
thrown over things like a dress and quite foreign to their nature and
even to their skin — has, through the belief in it and its growth from
generation to generation, slowly grown onto and into the thing and has
! See above, ‘Preface’, footnote 5, p. 8.
69

The Gay Science
become its very body: what started as appearance in the end nearly
always becomes essence and effectively acts as its essence! What kind of a
fool would believe that it is enough to point to this origin and this misty
shroud of delusion in order to destroy the world that counts as ‘real’, so-
called ‘reality’! Only as creators can we destroy! — But let us also not
forget that in the long run it is enough to create new names and
valuations and appearances of truth in order to create new ‘things’.
59
We artists. 
- When we love a woman, we easily come to hate nature
because of all the repulsive natural functions to which every woman is
subject; we prefer not to think about it at all, but when our soul for once
brushes against these matters, it shrugs impatiently and, as just said,
casts a contemptuous look at nature: we feel insulted; nature seems to
intrude on our property and with the most profane hands at that. In
cases like this one refuses to hear anything about physiology and decrees
secretly to oneself, ‘I will hear nothing of the idea that the human being
is anything other than soul and form!’ ‘The human being under the
skin’ is an abomination and unthinkable to all lovers, a blasphemy
against God and love. Now, the way lovers still feel about nature and
naturalness is how every worshipper of God and his ‘holy omnipotence’
formerly felt: in everything that was said about nature by astronomers,
geologists, physiologists, and doctors, he saw an intrusion on his
choicest property and thus an attack — and a shameless one at that! Even
the ‘law of nature’ sounded to him like a slander against God; he would
basically much rather have seen all of mechanics traced back to moral
acts of will and choice — but since no one could do him that service, he
concealed nature and mechanics from himself as best he could and lived
in a dream. Oh, these people of former times knew how to dream and
didn’t even need to fall asleep first! - and we men of today also still
know it all too well, despite all our good will towards waking and the
day! We need only to love, to hate, to desire, simply to feel — at once the
spirit and power of the dream comes over us, and we climb with open
eyes, impervious to all danger, up the most dangerous paths, onto the
roofs and towers of fantasy, and without any vertigo, as though born to
climb — we sleepwalkers of the day! We artists! We who conceal
naturalness! We who are moon- and God-struck! We untiring wan-
79

Book Two
derers, silent as death, on heights that we see not as heights but as our
plains, as our safety.
60
Women and their action at a distance. - Do I still have ears? Am J all ear
and nothing else? Here I stand amidst the fire of the surf, whose white
flames are licking at my feet: from all sides it is howling, threatening,
screaming, shrieking at me, while the old earth-rattler” sings his aria in
the lowest of depths, deep as a roaring bull, while pounding such an
earth-rattling beat that the hearts of even these weather-beaten monsters
of the rocks are trembling in their bodies. Suddenly, as if born out of
nothingness, there appears before the gate of this hellish labyrinth only
a few fathoms away a large sailing ship, gliding along as silently as a
ghost. Oh, this ghostly beauty! How magically it touches me! What?
Has all the calm and silence of the world embarked here? Is my
happiness itself sitting in this quiet place 
- my happier self, my second,
immortalized self?? Not yet to be dead, but also no longer alive? As a
spiritlike, silent, watching, gliding, hovering intermediate being? As
though I were that ship that moves over the dark sea with its white sails
like an enormous butterfly! Yes! To move over existence! That’s it! That
would be it! — It seems as though the noise here has made me into a
dreamer? All great noise makes us place happiness in silence and
distance. When a man stands in the midst of Ais own noise, in the midst
of his own surf of projects and plans, he is also likely to see gliding past
him silent, magical creatures whose happiness and seclusion he yearns
for — women. He almost believes that his better self lives there amongst
the women: in these quiet regions even the loudest surf turns into
deathly silence and life itself into a dream about life. Yet! Yet! My noble
enthusiast, even on the most beautiful sailing ship there is so much
sound and noise, and unfortunately so much small, petty noise! The
magic and the most powerful effect of women is, to speak the language
of the philosophers, action at a distance, actio in distans:* but that
requires, first and foremost — distance!
2 The standard epithet of the Greek god Poseidon, who was thought to rule the seas and be
responsible for earthquakes, is ‘earth-shaker’ (see [Had V11.445, VII1.201, 1X.362, etc.).
3 The German term Nietzsche uses here means both ‘dead’ and ‘made immortal’.
4 ‘action at a distance’
71

The Gay Science
61
In honour of friendship. — That the feeling of friendship was in antiquity
considered the highest feeling, even higher than the most celebrated
pride of the self-sufficient sage, indeed, as it were, as its sole and even
holier sibling: this is very well expressed in the story of the Macedonian
king who gave a world-despising Athenian philosopher a talent and got
it back. ‘What?’ said the king, ‘Has he then no friend??> He meant: ‘I
honour this pride of the wise and independent man, but I would honour
his humanity even more highly if the friend in him had won over his
pride. The philosopher has lowered himself before me by showing that
he doesn’t know one of the two highest feelings — and the higher one at
that.’
62
Love. — Love forgives the beloved even his lust.
63
The woman in music. 
~ Why do warm and rainy winds also bring on a
musical mood and the inventive pleasure of melody? Are they not the
same winds that fill the churches and give women thoughts of love?
64
Sceptics. — I am afraid that old women in their most secret heart of
hearts are more sceptical than all men: they believe the superficiality of
existence to be its essence, and all virtue and depth is to them merely a
veil over this ‘truth’, the very desirable veil over a pudendum — in other
words, a matter of decency and shame, and no more!
65
Devotion. — There are noble women with a certain poverty of spirit who
know no other way to express their deepest devotion than to offer their
5 A talent is a large sum of money. I have been unable to discover the origin of this story.
72

Book Two
virtue and sense of shame: it is what they hold as their highest
possession. And often this gift is accepted without incurring as
profound an obligation as the donors suppose — a very melancholy story!
66
The strength of the weak. — All women are subtle at exaggerating their
weaknesses; indeed they are inventive at weaknesses in order to appear
as utterly fragile ornaments that are harmed by even a speck of dust:
their way of living is supposed to remind men of their clumsiness and
burden their conscience with this. Thus they defend themselves against
the strong and ‘the law of the jungle’.
67
Feigning oneself. — She loves him now and gazes ahead with such calm
confidence, like a cow. But alas! What bewitched him was precisely that
she seemed utterly changeable and unfathomable! He already had too
much steady weather in himself! Wouldn’t she do well to feign her old
character? To feign lovelessness? Isn’t that the counsel of — love? Vivat
comoedia!®
68
Will and willingness. 
- Someone tock a youth to a wise man and said:
“Look, he is being corrupted by women!’ The wise man shook his head
and smiled. ‘It is men who corrupt women’, he exclaimed, ‘and the
failings of women should be atoned for and set right in men ~ for man
makes for himself the image (B:/d) of woman, and woman shapes herself
(bildet sich) according to this image (B:/d)’. “You are too gentle towards
women’, said one in the company; ‘you do not know them!’ The wise
man replied, “The way of men is will; the way of women is willingness —
that is the law of the sexes; truly a hard law for women! All human
beings are innocent of their existence; women, however, are doubly
innocent. Who could have oil and mercy enough for them?’ ‘Forget oil!
Forget gentleness!’ shouted someone else from the crowd; ‘one has to
© ‘Long live comedy!”
73

The Gay Science
raise women better!’ ‘One has to raise men better’, said the wise man and
beckoned to the youth to follow him. — But the youth did not follow him.
69
Capacity for revenge. — That someone cannot defend himself and there-
fore also does not want to — this is not enough to disgrace him in our
eyes; but we have a low regard for anyone who has neither the capacity
nor the good will for revenge — regardless of whether it is 
a man or a
woman. Would a woman be able to hold us (or ‘enthrall’ us, as they say)
if we did not consider her able under certain circumstances to wield a
dagger deftly (any kind of dagger) against us? Or against herself — which
in certain cases would be the more severe revenge (Chinese revenge).
70
The women who master the masters. — A deep and powerful alto voice,
such as one sometimes hears in the theatre, suddenly raises the curtain
upon possibilities that we usually do not believe in. All at once we
believe that somewhere in the world there could be women with lofty,
heroic, royal souls, capable of and ready for grandiose retorts, resolu-
tions, and sacrifices, capable of and ready for mastery over men, because
in them the best of man aside from his sex has become an incarnate
ideal. To be sure, the intention of the theatre is woz at all that such voices
convey this concept of women; normally they are supposed to represent
the ideal male lover, for example a Romeo; but to judge from my
experience, the theatre quite regularly miscalculates on this point, as
does the composer who expects such effects from such a voice. One does
not believe in these lovers: such voices always retain a motherly and
housewifely colouring, and most of all when love is in their tone.
7t
On female chastity. - There is something quite amazing and monstrous
in the upbringing of upper-class women; indeed, maybe there is nothing
more paradoxical. The whole world agrees that they should be brought
up as ignorant as possible about matters erotic, and that one has to
impart in their souls a deep shame in the face of such things and the
74

Book Two
most extreme impatience and flight at the merest suggestion of them.
Really, in this matter alone the ‘honour’ of a woman in its entirety is at
risk: what else would one not forgive them? But here they are supposed
to remain ignorant deep in their hearts: they are supposed to have
neither eyes, nor ears, nor words, nor thoughts for this their ‘evil’; yes,
even knowledge is here an evil. And then to be hurled as if by a
gruesome lightning bolt into reality and knowledge, with marriage —
and precisely by the man they love and esteem the most: to catch love
and shame in a contradiction and to have to experience all at once
delight, surrender, duty, pity, terror at the unexpected proximity of god
and beast, and who knows what else! There one has tied a psychic knot
that may have no equal. Even the compassionate curiosity of the wisest
connoisseur of human psychology (Menschenkenner) is insufficient for
guessing how this or that woman manages to accommodate herself to
this solution of the riddle and to this riddle of a solution, and what
dreadful, far-reaching suspicions must stir in her poor, unhinged soul;
indeed, how the ultimate philosophy and scepticism of woman casts
anchor at this point! Afterwards, the same deep silence as before, and
often a silence directed at herself; she closes her eyes to herself. Young
women try very hard to appear superficial and thoughtless; the most
refined among them simulate a kind of impertinence. Women easily
experience their men as a question-mark regarding their honour and
their children as an apology or atonement — they need children and wish
for them in an altogether different way from that in which a man wishes
for children. In sum, one cannot be too gentle towards women!
72
Mothers. ~ Animals think differently about females than humans do;
they consider the female to be the productive being. There is no
paternal love among them, only something like love for the children of a
beloved and a getting used to them. In their children females have a
satisfaction of their desire to dominate, a possession, an occupation,
something that is totally intelligible to them and can be prattled with: all
this taken together is motherly love — it is to be compared to the love of
an artist for his work. Pregnancy has made women gentler, more
patient, more timid, more pleased to submit; and just so does spiritual
pregnancy produce the character of the contemplative type, to which
75

The Gay Science
the female character is related: these are male mothers. - Among
animals the male sex is considered the beautiful one.
73
Holy cruelty. 
— A man holding a newborn in his hand approached a holy
man. ‘What should I do with this child?’ he asked; ‘it is wretched,
misshapen, and doesn’t have life enough to die’. ‘Kill it!’ shouted the
holy man with a terrible voice; ‘kill it and hold it in your arms for three
days and three nights to create 
a memory for yourself: thus you will
never again beget a child when it is not time for you to beget’. When the
man had heard this, he walked away disappointed; and many people
reproached the holy man because he had advised a cruelty; for he had
advised killing the child. ‘But is it not crueller to let it live?’ said the
holy man.
74
The unsuccessful. 
- Those poor women are always unsuccessful who, in
the presence of the one they love, become restless and insecure and talk
too much: for men are most surely seduced by a certain secret and
phlegmatic tenderness.
75
The third sex. - ‘A small man is a paradox, but still a man; but small
women seem to me, when compared to tall women, to belong to another
sex’, said an old dancing master. A small woman is never beautiful — said
old Aristotle.”
76
The greatest danger. — Had there not always been a majority of men who
felt the discipline of their heads — their ‘rationality’ — to be their pride,
their obligation, their virtue, and who were embarrassed or ashamed by
all fantasizing and debauchery of thought, being the friends of ‘healthy
common sense’, humanity would have perished long ago! The greatest
7 Aristotle doesn’t actually say exactly this, but see his Nichomachean Ethics 1123b.6—8 and Rhetoric
13614. 6~7.
76

Book Two
danger that hovered and still hovers over humanity is the outbreak of
madness — that is, the outbreak of arbitrariness in feeling, seeing, and
hearing; the enjoyment in the lack of discipline of the head, the joy in
human unreason. The opposite of the world of the madman is not truth
and certainty but the generality and universal bindingness of a faith; in
short, the non-arbitrary in judgement. And man’s greatest labour so far
has been to reach agreement about very many things and to lay down a
law of agreement — regardless of whether these things are true or false.
This is the discipline of the head which has preserved humanity — but
the counter-drives are still so powerful that it is basically with little
confidence that one may speak of the future of humanity. The picture of
things still moves and shifts continually, and perhaps more and faster
from now on than ever before; continually, the most select minds bristle
at this universal bindingness — the explorers of truth above all! Con-
tinually this faith, as 
a commonplace belief shared by everyone, breeds
nausea and a new lust in subtler minds; and the slow tempo for all
spiritual processes which this faith makes necessary, this imitation of the
tortoise that is recognized as the norm here, would by itself be sufficient
to turn artists and poets into deserters: it is these impatient minds in
whom a veritable delight in madness breaks out, because madness has
such a cheerful tempo! What is needed, then, are virtuous intellects —
oh, I’ll use the most unambiguous word ~ what is needed is virtuous
stupidity; what is needed are unwavering beat-keepers of the s/ow spirit,
so that the believers of the great common faith stay together and go on
dancing their dance: it is an exigency of the first order which commands
and demands. We others are the exception and the danger — we stand
eternally in need of defence! — Now there is certainly something to be
said for the exception, provided it never wants to become the rule.
77
The animal with a good conscience. - The vulgar element in everything
that pleases in Southern Europe — be it Italian opera (e.g. Rossini and
Bellini)® or the Spanish adventure novel (most readily accessible to us in
8 Gioachino Rossini (1792— 1868) wrote thirty-six operas in the years between 1810 and 1829, then
retired, devoting the remaining forty years of his life to culinary pleasures in Paris. Vincenzo
Bellini’s (1801—35) most famous opera is Norma. The music of Rossini and Bellini was very
highly regarded by Arthur Schopenhauer (1788~1860), the modern philosopher who influenced
the young Nietzsche most deeply.
77

The Gay Science
the French disguise of Gil Blas)? — does not escape me; but it does not
offend me, just as little as does the vulgarity that one encounters on a
walk through Pompeii and basically even when reading any ancient
book.!® Why is this? Is it because there is no shame and everything
vulgar acts as confidently and self-assuredly as anything noble, lovely,
and passionate in the same kind of music or novel? “The animal has its
own right, just like the human being; let it run about freely — and you
too, my dear fellow man, are still an animal despite everything!’ — That
seems to me to be the moral of the story and the peculiarity of Southern
humanity. Bad taste has its right just as good taste does — and even a
prior right if it answers to a great need, provides guaranteed satisfaction
and as it were a universal language, an unconditionally intelligible mask
and gesture; good, refined taste, on the contrary, is always somewhat
searching, deliberate, not altogether sure how it is to be understood: it is
not and never was popular! What is and remains popular is the mask! So
let them all continue to go their way, all those masklike elements in the
melodies and cadenzas, in the leaps and gaieties of the rhythm of these
operas! Ancient life, too! What can one understand about it when one
does not understand the delight in the mask, the good conscience in
everything mask-like! Here is the bath and the recreation of the ancient
spirit — and maybe the rare and sublime natures of the old world needed
this bath more than the vulgar. A vulgar turn in Northern works, for
example in German music, on the other hand, offends me unspeakably.
Here there is shame; the artist has lowered himself in his own eyes and
could not even help blushing: we are ashamed with him and are so
offended because we suspect that he believed he had to lower himself
for our sakes.
78
What we should be grateful for. — Only artists, and especially those of the
theatre, have given men eyes and ears to see and hear with some pleasure
what each himself is, himself experiences, himself wants; only they have
° Histoire de Gil Blas de Santillane (4 vols., 1715-35) by Alain-René Lesage is one of the original
picaresque novels.
10 The Roman city of Pompeii, near present-day Naples, was preserved by being covered in ash by
an eruption of the volcano Vesuvius in AD 79. Excavation of the site began in the mid-nineteenth
century. Nietzsche visited Naples and its environs several times. The ‘vulgarity’ of which he
speaks is probably the prominent display of a variety of forms of erotic art.
78

Book Two
taught us to value the hero that is hidden in each of these everyday
characters and taught the art of regarding oneself as a hero, from a
distance and as it were simplified and transfigured — the art of ‘putting
oneself on stage’ before oneself. Only thus can we get over certain lowly
details in ourselves. Without this art we would be nothing but fore-
ground, and would live entirely under the spell of that perspective
which makes the nearest and most vulgar appear tremendously big and
as reality itself. Maybe there is a similar sort of merit in that religion
which bade one to see the sinfulness of every individual through a
magnifying glass and turned the sinner into a great, immortal criminal:
by describing eternal perspectives around him, it taught man to view
himself from a distance and as something past and whole.
79
The attraction of imperfection. — 1 see here a poet who, like some people,
exerts a greater attraction through his imperfections than through all
that reaches completion and perfection under his hand — indeed, his
advantage and fame are due much more to his ultimate incapacity than
to his ample strength. His work never wholly expresses what he really
would like to express, what he mould like to have seen: it seems as if he
has had the foretaste of a vision, but never the vision itself — yet a
tremendous lust for this vision remains in his soul, and it is from this
that he derives his equally tremendous eloquence of desire and craving.
With it he lifts his listener above his work and all ‘works’ and lends him
wings to rise to heights which listeners otherwise never reach; and so,
having themselves become poets and seers, they give the creator of their
happiness their due admiration, as if he had led them immediately to
the vision of what was for him holiest and most ultimate; as if he had
really attained his goal and really seen and communicated his vision.
The fact that he never reached his goal benefits his fame.
80
Art and nature. — The Greeks (or at least the Athenians) liked to hear
good speech; indeed, they had a greedy craving for it which distin-
guishes them more than anything else from the non-Greeks. And so
they demanded even of passion on stage that it speak well, and
79

The Gay Science
submitted with delight to the unnaturalness of dramatic verse — after all,
in nature, passion is so taciturn! So mute and bashful! Or when it finds
words, so confused and irrational and a shame to itself! Now thanks to
the Greeks, we have all grown accustomed to this unnaturalness on
stage, just as we endure and gladly endure that other unnaturalness,
singing passion, thanks to the Italians. We have developed a need that we
cannot satisfy in reality: to hear people in the most difficult situations
speak well and at length; it delights us now when the tragic hero still
finds words, reasons, eloquent gestures, and altogether a radiant spirit
where life approaches the abyss and a real human being would usually
lose his head and certainly his fine language. This kind of deviation from
nature is perhaps the most pleasant meal for human pride; for its sake
man loves art as the expression of a lofty, heroic unnaturalness and
convention. We rightly reproach a dramatic poet if he does not trans-
form everything into reason and words but always retains in his hand a
residue of silence ~ just as one is dissatisfied with the musician at the
opera who cannot find a melody for the highest affect but only a
sentimental ‘natural’ stammering and screaming. For here nature is
supposed to be contradicted! Here the vulgar charm of illusion is supposed
to give way to a higher charm! The Greeks go far, far on this road —
terrifyingly far! Just as they make the stage as narrow as possible and
forbid themselves all effects through deep backgrounds; just as they
make facial expressions and easy movement impossible for the actor and
transform him into a solemn, stiff, masked puppet, so they also have
deprived passion itself of any deep background and dictated to it a law
of beautiful speech; yes, on the whole they have done everything to
counteract the elemental effect of images that arouse fear and compas-
sion - for fear and compassion were precisely what they did not want. With
all due respect to Aristotle, he certainly didn’t hit the nail, let alone on
the head, when he discussed the final purpose of Greek tragedy.!! Just
consider the Greek tragic poets and what most stimulated their indus-
triousness, their sensitivity, their competitiveness — certainly not the
aim of overwhelming the spectator with emotions. The Athenian went
to the theatre to hear pleasing speech! Pleasing speeches were what
preoccupied Sophocles!* — pardon the heresy! It is quite different with
1 Tn his Poetics (chapter 6, 1449b.24ff.) Aristotle says that tragedy has its effect by producing
‘pity /compassion’ and ‘fear’ in the audience.
12 Athenian dramatist of the fifth century BC
80

Book Two
serious opera. All of its masters try to keep the audience from under-
standing the characters. Occasionally catching a word might help the
inattentive listener, but on the whole the situation must explain itself —
the speeches don’t matter! This is how they all think and have pulled
their pranks with words. Maybe they only lacked the courage to express
fully their ultimate disregard for words: with just a little more impu-
dence, Rossini!? would have had everyone sing nothing but la-la-la-la —
and that would have made good sense. One shouldn’t believe the words
of characters in opera, but rather their sound! That is the difference,
that is the beautiful wnaturalness for the sake of which one goes to the
opera. Even the recitativo secco'* is not really meant to be heard as word
and text: this kind of half-music is rather supposed initially to give the
musical ear a short rest (rest from the melody as the most sublime and
therefore also the most challenging pleasure of this art) — but very soon
also something else, namely, a growing impatience, a growing aversion,
a new desire for whole music, for melody. How are things with Richard
Wagner’s art,!> considered from this perspective? Is it the same,
perhaps? Perhaps different? Often it has seemed to me as if one had to
memorize the words and music of his creations before the performance,
for otherwise -- so it appeared to me — one would hear neither the words
nor even the music.
81
Greek taste. — ‘What is beautiful about that?’ said the surveyor after a
performance of Iphigenia. ‘Nothing is proved in it!’!® Were the Greeks
13 See above, Book 11 footnote 8, p. 77. In Opera and Drama Wagner claims that Rossini had
reduced opera to absolute melody, destroying its dramatic content and so opera itself.
‘dry recitative’. ‘Recitative’ is a style of composing vocal music that tries to keep the musical
form as close as possible to the cadences of normal speech. ‘Dry’ recitative is one in which the
musical texture is sparse and the voice or voices are accompanied only by a minimal number of
instruments (e.g. keyboard and violoncello).
Richard Wagner (1813-83) in his theoretical writings returned again and again to the question
of the proper relation between words and music in opera.
Nietzsche takes this anecdote from Schopenhauer’s World as Will and Representation (vol. 1,
Book 3, § 36) where it is used to illustrate the complete discrepancy between, on the one hand,
the kind of intelligence used in everyday experience, science, and mathematics (ability, according
to Schopenhauer, to subsume things under the ‘principle of sufficient reason’) and, on the other,
aesthetic contemplation. The Iphigenia in question is the play by the French dramatist Jean
Racine (1639-99).
14
wm
on
81

The Gay Science
that far away from this taste? In Sophocles, at least, ‘everything is
proved’.
82
Esprit'’ as un-Greek. — The Greeks are indescribably logical and simple
in all their thought; at least in their long good age they never wearied of
this, as so often do the French, who all too gladly take a little leap into
the opposite and actually only endure the spirit of logic when, through a
series of such small leaps into the opposite, it betrays its sociable civility,
its sociable self-denial. Logic strikes them as necessary, like bread and
water, but also, like these, as a kind of prisoners’ food as soon as it is
enjoyed pure and plain. In good company one must never want to be
entirely and solely right, which is what all pure logic wants; hence the
small dose of unreason in all French esprit, The Greeks’ sense of
sociability was far less developed than that of the French is and was; that
is why there is so little esprit in even their most spirited men; that is why
there is so little humour in even their humorists; that is why — oh! One
will not even believe these sentences of mine, and how many more of the
same sort are yet on my mind! — Est res magna tacere!® — says Martial
along with all garrulous people.
83
Translations. — One can estimate the degree of an age’s historical sense
from the way it makes translations and seeks to absorb past ages and
books. The French of Corneille’s age!” as well as those of the Revolution
seized Roman antiquity in a way we no longer dare to — thanks to our
higher historical sense. And Roman antiquity itself; how violently and
yet naively it laid its hand on everything good and lofty in the older
Greek antiquity! How they translated things into the Roman present!
How deliberately and insouciantly they brushed the dust off the wings
of that butterfly called ‘The-Twinkling-of-an-Eye’! In this way Horace
'7 ‘Spirit’; the word often refers to a lively imagination.
18 ‘It is a great thing to keep silent’ (Martial 1v.80.6). Martial was a Roman epigrammatist who
lived in the first century Ab.
9 French dramatist (1606~84) who wrote a number of tragedies on ancient subjects
82

Book Two
translated Alcaeus or Archilochus”? now and then, as did Propertius
with Callimachus and Philetas (poets of the same rank as Theocritus,”!
if we may judge): what did they care that the real creator had
experienced this and that and written the signs of it into his poem! As
poets they were averse to the antiquarian inquisitiveness that precedes
the sense for history; as poets, they did not accept these utterly personal
things and names and all those things that serve as the mask and
costume of a city, coast, century. Rather they quickly replaced them
with what was contemporary and Roman. They seem to ask us: ‘Should
we not make new for ourselves what is old and put ourselves into it?
Should we not be allowed to breathe our soul into their dead body? For
it is dead, after all: how ugly everything dead is!’ They did not know the
pleasure of a sense for history; what was past and alien was embarrassing
to them; and as Romans, they saw it as an incentive for a Roman
conquest. In fact at that time one conquered by translating — not merely
by leaving out the historical, but also by adding allusions to the present
and, above all, crossing out the name of the poet and replacing it with
one’s own — not with any sense of theft but with the very best conscience
of the imperium Romanum.”
84
On the origin of poetry. 
~ The lovers of what is fantastic in humans, who
also advocate the view that morality is instinctive, reason as follows:
‘Supposing that usefulness has always been venerated as the supreme
deity, then where in all the world does poetry come from? This act of
making speech rhythm counteracts rather than contributes to the clarity
of communication, and yet it has shot up and is still shooting up all over
the earth like a mockery of all useful expediency! The wildly beautiful
irrationality of poetry refutes you, you utilitarians! Precisely to want to
get away from usefulness for once — that is what has elevated humanity;
that is what has inspired it to morality and art!’ Now, in this case I must
20 Archilochus (seventh century BC) and his slightly younger contemporary Alcaeus were early
Greek poets who became models for the writing of poetry in Latin, for instance by Horace (first
century BC).
21 The Roman poet Sextus Propertius (first century BC) cites the Greek poets Callimachus and
Philetas (both fourth/third century BC) as models (2.34.31-~-2; 3.1.1; 3-9.42~3). The Sicilian
bucolic poet Theocritus (early third century BC) also revered Philetas.
22 ‘Roman empire’
83

The Gay Science
side with the utilitarians for once — after all, they are so seldom right, it
is pitiful! In those ancient times that called poetry into being, one really
did aim at utility, and a very great utility at that; back then, when one let
rhythm penetrate speech — that rhythmic force that reorganizes all the
atoms of a sentence, bids one to select one’s words and gives thoughts a
new colour and makes them darker, stranger, more distant: a superstitious
utility, of course! Rhythm was supposed to make a human request
impress the gods more deeply after it was noticed that humans
remember a verse better than ordinary speech; one also thought one
could make oneself audible over greater distances with the rhythmic
tick-tock; the rhythmic prayer seemed to get closer to the ears of the
gods. Above all, one wanted to take advantage of that elemental over-
powering force that humans experience in themselves when listening to
music: rhythm is a compulsion; it engenders an unconquerable desire to
yield, to join in; not only the stride of the feet but also the soul itself
gives in to the beat — probably also, one inferred, the souls of the gods!
By means of rhythm one thus tried to compel them and to exercise a
power over them: one cast poetry around them like a magical snare.
There was another, stranger notion, and it may be precisely what
contributed most powerfully to the origin of poetry. Among the
Pythagoreans”’ it appears as a philosophical doctrine and as an educa-
tional contrivance; but even long before there were philosophers, one
acknowledged music to have the power to discharge the emotions, to
cleanse the soul, to soothe the ferocia animi?+ — and indeed precisely
through its rhythmic quality. When one had lost the proper tension and
harmony of the soul, one had to dance to the beat of the singer — that
was the prescription of this healing art. With it, Terpander quelled an
uprising; with it, Empedocles pacified a lunatic; with it, Damon purged
a youth who was languishing from love; with it, one also sought to
appease the ferocious, vindictive gods.2> One began by driving the
23 A group of philosophers centred in Southern Italy who claimed to be followers of Pythagoras
(sixth century BC). They led a life of ritual purity and were especially devoted to the study of
mathematics and harmonics.
24 “ferocity of the soul’
25 This anecdote about Terpander (seventh century BC), one of the earliest Greek musicians who
can be identified as a historical figure, is reported in chapter 42 of On Music, a short treatise
(almost certainly incorrectly) attributed to Plutarch. The fifth-century (BC) Sicilian politician,
philosopher, and shaman Empedocles had a keen interest in all sorts of purgatives. Damon was a
fifth-century (ac) Athenian politician and theorist of music who was particularly interested in
the effects of music on the soul. Plato’s discussion of this topic in Book 111 of Republic is probably
84

Book Two
giddiness and exuberance of their passions to their peak, that is, one
drove the madman wild, made the vindictive person drunk with lust for
revenge. All orgiastic cults wanted to discharge the ferocia?® of some
deity all at once and turn it into an orgy so that the deity would feel
freer and calmer afterwards and leave man in peace. Etymologically,
melos*’ means a tranquillizer, not because it is itself tranquil, but
because its effect makes one tranquil. And not only in the cult song, but
also in the mundane song of the most ancient times there is the
presumption that rhythmic quality exercises a magical force; when
bailing water, for instance, or rowing, the song is a bewitchment of the
demons believed to be at work here; it makes them compliant, unfree,
and a tool of humans. And whenever one acts, one has an occasion to
sing — every action is tied to the assistance of spirits: incantation and
conjuration seem to be the primordial form of poetry. When verse was
used in oracles ~ the Greeks said that the hexameter was invented at
Delphi — rhythm was also supposed to exercise a compulsion.”* To ask
for a prophecy — that meant originally (according to the derivation of
the Greek word that seems most probable to me) to have something
determined: one thought one could force the future by gaining Apollo’s
favour ~ he who according to the oldest views is much more than a god
of foresight. The way the formula is pronounced, with literal and
rhythmic precision, is how it binds the future; the formula, however, is
the invention of Apollo, who as god of rhythm can also bind the
goddesses of fate. In short: was there anything more wsefu/ than rhythm
to the old superstitious type of human being? One could do everything
with it: promote some work magically; compel a god to appear, to be
near, to listen; mould the future according to one’s own will; discharge
some excess (of fear, of mania, of pity, of vengefulness) from one’s soul,
and not only one’s own soul but also that of the most evil demon.
Without verse one was nothing; through verse one almost became a god.
Such a basic feeling cannot be completely eradicated — and still today,
after millennia of work at fighting such superstition, even the wisest of
us occasionally becomes a fool for rhythm, if only insofar as he feels a
influenced by his views, and Plato actually mentions him at 400B. This anecdote is recounted in
Martianus Capella (probably fifth century ab), De nuptis Philologiae et Mercuri 1x.926.
26 ‘ferocity’
27 ‘musical phrase, tune, melody’. It is unclear on what Nietzsche is basing this etymological
speculation.
28 Pausanias X.5.7
85

The Gay Science
thought to be truer when it has a metric form and presents itself with a
divine hop, skip, and jump. Is it not amusing that the most serious
philosophers, strict as they otherwise are in all matters of certainty, still
appeal to the sayings of poets to lend their thoughts force and credibility?
And yet it is more dangerous for a truth when a poet agrees with it than
when he contradicts it! For as Homer says: “The bards tell many a lie’.”?
85
The good and the beautiful. — Artists constantly glorify — they do nothing
else — and in particular all those states and things reputed to give man
the occasion for once to feel good, or great, or drunk, or merry, or well
and wise. These select things and states, whose value for human
happiness is considered certain and well-defined, are the artists’ objects:
artists always lie in wait to discover such things and to draw them into
the realm of art. I want to say: they are not themselves the appraisers of
happiness and of the happy man, but they always crowd around these
appraisers with the greatest curiosity and the urge to make immediate
use of their appraisals. They become like this because in addition to
their impatience they also have the big lungs of heralds and the feet of
runners, and are always among the first to glorify the new good, and
often appear to be the first to name it good and to appraise it as good.
This, however, as I already said, is a mistake: they are only quicker and
louder than the real appraisers. — But who are the real appraisers? ~ The
rich and the idle.
86
On theatre. — This day I had strong and elevated feelings again, and if
on its eve I could have music and art, I know very well what music and
art I would zot like to have, namely, the kind that tries to intoxicate its
audience and drive it to the height of a moment of strong and elevated
feelings — an art for those everyday souls who in the evening look not
like victors on triumphal chariots but rather like tired mules who have
been whipped somewhat too often by life. What would those people
know of ‘higher moods’ were there no intoxicating substances and
29 Not actually to be found in Homer, but a proverbial Greek saying. See Aristotle, Metaphysics
983a.3 and Solon, Fragment 21 (Diels).
86

Book Two
whip-lashes of ideals! — and so they have their inspirers as they have
their wines. But what is their drink and their drunkenness to me! What
is wine to the inspired! He looks instead with a sort of disgust at the
means and the mediators that are supposed to produce an effect without
sufficient reason — aping the high tide of the soul! What? One gives the
mole wings and proud conceits — before bedtime, before he crawls into
his hole? One sends him to the theatre and puts big glasses before his
blind and tired eyes? People whose lives are not a ‘dramatic action’ but a
business sit before the stage and look at strange creatures for whom life
is more than a business? ‘It’s proper that way’, you say; ‘it’s entertaining
that way; it’s culture!’ Well then! In that case I all too often lack culture,
for this sight is all too often disgusting to me. Whoever has enough
tragedy and comedy in himself probably does best to stay away from the
theatre; or, should there be an exception, the entire event — including
theatre and audience and poet — becomes the actual tragic and comic
spectacle to him, so that the piece that is performed means little to him
by comparison. What do the Fausts and Manfreds*° of the theatre
matter to someone who is himself somewhat like Faust and Manfred? —
whereas the fact that such figures are brought on stage is certainly
something for him to think about. The strongest thoughts and passions
are there presented before those who are capable not of thought and
passion — but of intoxication! And the former as a means to the latter!
And theatre and music as the hashish-smoking and betel-chewing of the
European! Oh, who will tell us the entire history of narcotics? - It is
nearly the history of ‘culture’, our so-called higher culture!
87
On the vanity of artists. — \ believe that artists often do not know what
they can do best because they are too vain and have set their minds on
something prouder than these small plants seem to be that are new,
strange, and beautiful and really capable of growing to perfection on
their soil. That which in the last instance is good in their own garden
and vineyard is not fully appreciated by them, and their love and insight
are not of the same order. Here is a musician who, more than any other
musician, is master at finding the tones from the realm of suffering,
30 In Byron’s tragedy Manfred (1817) the hero is burdened with excessive knowledge and tries in
vain to attain forgetfulness.
87

The Gay Science
dejected, tormented souls and at giving speech even to the mute
animals. Nobody equals him at the colours of late autumn, at the
indescribably moving happiness of a last, very last, very briefest enjoy-
ment; he knows a tone for those secret, uncanny midnights of the soul,
where cause and effect seem to have gone awry and something can come
to be ‘from nothing’ at any moment; more happily than anyone else, he
draws from the very bottom of human happiness and so to speak from
its drained cup, where the most bitter and repulsive drops have merged,
for better or for worse, with the sweetest ones; he knows how the soul
wearily drags itself along when it can no longer leap and fly, nor even
walk; he has the shy glance of concealed pain, of understanding without
solace, of taking farewell without confession; yes, as the Orpheus"! of all
secret misery he is greater than anyone, and he has incorporated into art
some things that seemed inexpressible and even unworthy of art, and
which could only be scared away and not be grasped by words in
particular — some very small and microscopic features of the soul: yes,
he is master at the very small. But he doesn’t want to be! His character
likes great walls and bold frescoes much better! It escapes him that his
spirit has a different taste and disposition and likes best of all to sit
quietly in the corners of collapsed houses — there, hidden, hidden from
himself, he paints his real masterpieces, which are all very short, often
only a bar long — only there does he become wholly good, great, and
perfect; perhaps only there. — But he doesn’t know it! He is too vain to
know it.
88
Being serious about truth. — Being serious about truth! How differently
people understand these words! The very same opinions and types of
proof and scrutiny that a thinker may consider a frivolity in himself to
which he has, to his shame, succumbed on this or that occasion — these
very same views may give an artist who encounters them and lives with
them for a while the feeling that he has now become deeply serious
about truth and that it is admirable that he, as an artist, has at the same
time the most serious desire for the opposite of appearance. So it can
happen that it is precisely with his ardent seriousness that someone
31 The legendary Orpheus was supposed to be able to do extraordinary things, such as bringing his
wife back to life from the dead, through the power of his music.
88

Book Two
betrays how shallow and undemanding his mind has been in playing the
field of knowledge so far. — And does not everything that we take to be
important betray us? It shows us what sort of thing has weight for us and
for what sort of thing we have no weights.
89
Now and formerly. — What do all our art of artworks matter if we lose
that higher art, the art of festivals! Formerly, all artworks were displayed
on the great festival road of humanity, as commemorations and memor-
ials of high and happy moments. Now one uses artworks to lure poor,
exhausted, and sick human beings to the side of humanity’s road of
suffering for a short lascivious moment; one offers them a 
little
intoxication and madness.
go
Lights and shadows. — Books and drafts mean different things to different
thinkers: one has collected in a book the lights that he was able swiftly to
steal and carry home from the rays of some insight that dawned on him;
another is able to convey only the shadows, the after-images in grey and
black, of that which built itself up in his soul the day before.
gi
Caution. — As is well known, Alfieri*? lied very much when he told his
amazed contemporaries his life story. He lied from that despotism
against himself which he also revealed in the way he created his own
language and tyrannized himself into becoming a poet — he had finally
found a severe form of sublimity into which he pressed his life and his
memory: no doubt there was much agony in all this. — I also would not
believe a life story of Plato, written by himself — any more than that of
Rousseau* or the vita nuova** of Dante.
32 an important Italian dramatist (1749-1803)
33 In addition to his political writings (e.g. The Social Contract) Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712-78)
wrote an important autobiography, the Confessions (1781).
34 Vita Nuova (‘New Life’) is a collection of Dante Alighieri’s (1265~1321) poems connected by
prose commentaries of a semi-autobiographical kind.
89

The Gay Science
g2
Prose and poetry. — It is remarkable that the great masters of prose have
almost always also been poets, be it publicly or only in secret, in the
‘closet’; and verily, one writes good prose only face to face with poetry!
For this is an uninterrupted, courteous war with poetry: all its attrac-
tions depend on the fact that poetry is constantly evaded and contra-
dicted; everything abstract wants to be presented as a prank against
poetry and as if with a mocking voice; everything dry and cool is
supposed to drive the lovely goddess into lovely despair; often there are
rapprochements, reconciliations for a moment, and then a sudden leap
back and derisive laugh; often the curtain is raised and a harsh light is
let in just as the goddess is enjoying her dusks and muted colours; often
the word is taken out of her mouth and sung according to a melody that
makes her cover her refined ears with her refined hands ~ and so there
are a thousand delights of this war, including defeat, of which the
unpoetic, the so-called men of prose, know nothing at all ~ which is why
they write and speak only bad prose! War is the father of all good things;*>
war is also the father of good prose! In this century, four very strange
and truly poetic persons attained a mastery of prose, for which this
century is otherwise not made — out of a lack of poetry, as I have
suggested. Excluding Goethe, who may fairly be claimed by the century
that produced him, I see Giacomo Leopardi, Prosper Mérimée, Ralph
Waldo Emerson, and Walter Savage Landor, the author of Imaginary
Conversations,*® as worthy of being called masters of prose.
93
But then why do you write? - A: 
lam not one of those who thing with a
wet quill in hand; much less one of those who abandon themselves to
their passions right before the open inkwell, sitting on their chair and
staring at the paper. I am annoyed or ashamed by all writing; to me,
35 Variant of the famous saying by the pre-Socratic philosopher Heraclitus of Ephesus (late sixth
century BC): ‘War is the father of all things.’ This is number 53 in the standard collections
(Diels-Kranz).
36 Giacomo Leopardi (1798-1837); Italian lyric poet, also admired for his prose writings, notably
Operette Moral (1827). The French writer Prosper Mérimée (1803-70) is now perhaps best
known as the author of a ‘Carmen’ on which the libretto of the opera of that name by Bizet is
based. Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803-82) was an American ‘Transcendentalist’ writer highly
regarded by Nietzsche. Walter Savage Landor (1775~1864)was an English prose writer.
go

Book Two
writing is nature’s call — to speak of it even in simile is repugnant to me.
B: But why, then, do you write? — A: Well, my friend, I say this in
confidence: until now I have found no other means of getting rid of my
thoughts. — B: And why do you want to get rid of them? — A: Why do I
want to? Do I want to? I have to. - B: Enough! Enough!
94
Growth after death. 
- Those audacious little words about moral matters
that Fontenelle threw out in his immortal Dialogues of the Dead*” were
considered in his time to be paradoxes and games of a not wholly
innocent wit; even the highest judges of taste and of the mind saw
nothing more in it ~ indeed, maybe not even Fontenelle himself. Now
something incredible transpires: these thoughts become truths! Science
proves them! The game gets serious! And we read these dialogues with a
different feeling than Voltaire*® and Helvétius*? read them, and invo-
luntarily we promote their creators to a different and much higher rank
of mind than they did. Rightly? Wrongly?
95
Chamfort.*° — That someone who knew humanity and the masses as well
as Chamfort still joined the masses and did not stand aside in philoso-
phical renunciation and defence, I can only explain as follows: one
instinct in him was stronger than his wisdom and was never satisfied:
his hatred of all nobility of blood; perhaps his mother’s old hatred,
which was only too easy to explain and which he had sanctified through
love of his mother — an instinct for revenge harking back to his
boyhood, waiting for the hour to avenge his mother. And now his life
and his genius — and alas! no doubt mostly the paternal blood in his
veins — had seduced him to join the ranks of this nobility as an equal, for
many, many years! But eventually he could no longer stand the sight of
37 See above, Book I, footnote 3, p. 31.
38 See above, Book I, footnote 27, p. 55.
39 French Encyclopedist who defended a form of hedonistic materialism in his major work On the
Spirit (1758)
4 French politician and writer (1741~94). Nietzsche’s source for most of the material in this
section is Histoire de Chamfort, sa vie et ses euvres by P.~J. Stahl (Paris, no date of publication
given), a book which Nietzsche had in his library.
gI

The Gay Science
himself, the sight of the ‘old type of man’ under the old regime; he was
gripped with a violent passion of repentance which led him to put on
the clothes of the mob, as Ais kind of hairshirt! His bad conscience was
his failure to take revenge. If Chamfort had remained just a little bit
more a philosopher, the Revolution would not have had its tragic wit
and sharpest sting: it would be considered a much stupider event and
would not seduce so many minds. But Chamfort’s hatred and revenge
educated a whole generation, and the most illustrious human beings
passed through this school. Note that Mirabeau*! looked up to Cham-
fort as to his higher and older self from which he expected and endured
impulses, warnings, and verdicts — Mirabeau, who as a human being
belongs to a quite different order of greatness than even the foremost
statesmen of yesterday and today. It is peculiar that despite such a friend
and advocate — after all, we have Mirabeau’s letters to Chamfort — this
wittiest of all moralists has remained a stranger to the French, no less
than Stendhal,*” who has perhaps had the most thoughtful eyes and ears
of all Frenchmen of ¢#is century. Is it that the latter basically had too
much of the Dutchman or Englishman within himself to be tolerable to
the Parisians? Whereas Chamfort, a man who was rich in depths and
backgrounds of the soul — gloomy, suffering, ardent ~ a thinker who
found laughter necessary as a remedy against life and who nearly
considered himself lost on those days when he had not laughed — seems
much more like an Italian, related to Dante and Leopardi, than a
Frenchman! We know Chamfort’s last words: ‘Ah! mon ami’, he said to
Sieyés,** ‘je m’en vais enfin de ce monde, ou il faut que le coeur se brise
ou se bronze —’.** Those are surely not the words of a dying
Frenchman.
96
Two speakers. — Of these two speakers, the one can show the full
rationality of his cause only when he abandons himself to passion: this
41 An important political figure in the early stages of the French Revolution, admired by
Nietzsche: see The Genealogy of Morality 1.10.
42 French novelist (1783-1842). He was born Marie Henri Beyle, ‘Stendhal’ being a pseudonym.
#8 French politician and theorist whose What is the Third Estate? (1789) had great influence on the
early course of the French Revolution.
+ ‘Ah, my friend, I am finally about to leave this world in which the heart must either break or
plate itself with steel.’
g2

Book Two
alone pumps enough blood and heat into his brain to force his lofty
intellect to reveal itself. The other attempts the same thing now and
then — to present his cause with the help of passion, sonorously,
violently, and captivatingly — but usually with little success. He then
quite soon starts speaking obscurely and confusedly; he exaggerates,
makes omissions, and arouses mistrust about the rationality of his cause;
indeed, he himself comes to feel this mistrust, and this explains sudden
leaps into the coldest and most repugnant tones which make the
audience doubt whether his whole passion was genuine. In his case,
passion inundates the mind every time — maybe because it is stronger
than in the first speaker. But he is at the peak of his strength when he
resists the pressing storm of his feeling and virtually derides it: only
then does his mind completely step out of its hiding place — a logical,
mocking, playful, and yet terrifying mind.
97
On the garrulousness of writers. 
- There is a garrulousness of rage —
frequent in Luther, also in Schopenhauer. A garrulousness due to an
exceedingly large supply of conceptual formulations, as in Kant. A
garrulousness due to a delight in ever-new twists of the same thing: one
finds this in Montaigne. A garrulousness of spiteful natures: whoever
reads the publications of our time will recall two writers here. A
garrulousness from a delight in good words and forms of language: not
rare in Goethe’s prose. A garrulousness from an inner pleasure in noise
and confusion of feelings: for example in Carlyle.**
98
In praise of Shakespeare. 
- The most beautiful thing I can say in praise
of Shakespeare as a human being is this: he believed in Brutus and didn’t
cast a speck of suspicion on this type of virtue! To him he devoted his
best tragedy — it is still called by the wrong name*® — to him and to the
most dreadful epitome of lofty morality. Independence of soul! That’s
what’s at stake here! No sacrifice can be too great for that: one has to be
capable of sacrificing even one’s dearest friend for it, even if he should
4 British writer on history and politics (1795~ 1881).
46 Shakespeare’s The Tragedy of Julius Caesar
93

The Gay Science
be the most marvellous human being, the ornament of the world, the
genius without peer — if one loves freedom as the freedom of great souls
and this freedom is endangered because of him: that is what Shakespeare
must have felt! The height at which he places Caesar is the finest
honour he could bestow on Brutus: only thus does he raise Brutus’
inner problem to immense proportions as well as the strength of mind
that was able to cut this knot! And was it really political freedom that
drove this poet to sympathize with Brutus — and turned him into
Brutus’ accomplice? Or was political freedom only a symbolism for
something inexpressible? Could it be that we confront some unknown
dark event and adventure from the poet’s own soul about which he
wanted to speak only in signs? What is all of Hamlet’s melancholy
compared to that of Brutus! And perhaps Shakespeare knew the latter
as he knew the former — through first-hand experience! Maybe he also
had his dark hour and his evil angel, like Brutus! But whatever such
similarities and secret references there may have been: before the whole
figure and virtue of Brutus, Shakespeare threw himself to the ground
and felt unworthy and distant — he wrote the evidence for this into his
tragedy. Twice in the tragedy he introduced a poet,*” and twice he
poured such impatient and ultimate contempt upon him that it sounds
like a cry — like the cry of self-contempt. Brutus, even Brutus loses
patience when the poet enters — conceited, pathetic, obtrusive, as poets
usually are — as a being who appears to be bursting with possibilities of
greatness, even moral greatness, although in the philosophy of deed and
life he rarely attains even a passable integrity. ‘When he knows his time,
I'll know his humour. / What should the wars do with these jiggling
fools? / Companion, hence!’** shouts Brutus. This should be translated
back into the soul of the poet who wrote it.
99
Schopenhauer’s followers. 
— What happens when people of a higher
culture and barbarians come into contact: the lower culture usually
takes on the vices, weaknesses, and excesses of the higher culture, on
which basis it feels a certain attraction to that culture and finally, by way
47 Act 11, Scene 3 and Act Iv, Scene 3
48 Nietzsche read and cited Shakespeare in the translation by Schlegel and Tieck. The text gives
the English original. The italics are Nietzsche’s own.
94

Book Two
of the acquired vices and weaknesses, accepts some overflow of the
valuable force of the higher culture — one can also observe this nearby
and without travelling to barbarian peoples, to be sure in a form that is
somewhat over-refined and intellectualized and not so easily palpable.
And what do Schopenhauer’s German followers usually take over at first
from their master? In relation to his higher culture, they must feel
barbarous enough to be at first barbarously fascinated and seduced by
him. Is it his sense for hard facts, his good will to clarity and reason, that
so often makes him appear so English and so un-German? Or is it the
strength of his intellectual conscience, which endured a life-long contra-
diction between being and willing and forced him to contradict himself
continually and on almost every point in his writings? Or is it his
cleanliness in matters of the church and of the Christian god? — for here
his cleanliness was unprecedented among German philosophers, so that
he lived and died ‘as a Voltairean’.*? Or was it his immortal doctrine of
the intellectuality of intuition, of the a priori nature of the causal law, of
the instrumental nature of the intellect and the unfreedom of the will?*°
No, all this does not enchant and is not felt to be enchanting; but
Schopenhauer’s mystical embarrassments and evasions in those places
where the factual thinker let himself be seduced and corrupted by the
vain urge to be the unriddler of the world; the indemonstrable doctrine
of One Will (‘all causes are merely occasional causes of the appearance of
the will at this time and this place’; ‘the will to life is present wholly and
undividedly in every being, even the least, as completely as in all beings
that have ever been, are, and shall be, taken together’),*! the denial of the
individual (‘all lions are at bottom only one lion’; ‘the plurality of
individuals is an illusion’,** just as development is only an illusion — he
calls Lamarck’s thoughts ‘an ingenious, absurd error’),>* his ecstatic
reveries on genius (‘in aesthetic intuition the individual is no longer
individual but pure, will-less, painless, timeless subject of knowledge’;
‘the subject, in being wholly taken up in the object it intuits, has become
the object itself’),°* the nonsense about compassion and how, as the
* The outspoken anti-clericalism of Voltaire (see above, Book 1, footnote 27, p. 55) gave him the
reputation of being an atheist.
50 See World as Will and Representation, vol. 1, Book 4, § 54, and vol. 11, Book 2, §& 19, 4.
51 Ybid., vol. 1, Book 4, § 60 and vol. 11, Book 2, § 25
52 Ibid., vol. 1, Book 2, § 28; vol. 11, Book 3, § 38, and vol. 11, Book 4, § 41
53 French naturalist (1744~-1829) who believed that acquired characteristics could be biologically
inherited
54 See World as Will and Representation, vol. 1, Book 3, § 38.
95

The Gay Science
source of all morality, it enables one to make the break through the
principium individuationis;>> and also such claims as ‘death is actually the
purpose of existence’,°° ‘one cannot deny a priori the possibility that a
magical effect cannot also emanate from someone who has already died’
— these and other such excesses and vices of the philosopher are always
what is accepted first of all and made into a matter of faith — for vices
and excesses are the easiest to imitate and require no extensive
preparatory practice. But let us discuss the most famous of living
Schopenhauerians, Richard Wagner. What happened to him has hap-
pened to other artists: he misinterpreted the characters he created and
misunderstood the philosophy that was implicit in his own art. Until
the middle of his life, Richard Wagner let himself be misled by Hegel;
he repeated this mistake when he started reading Schopenhauer’s
doctrine into his characters and began expressing himself in terms of
‘will’, ‘genius’, and ‘compassion’. Nevertheless it will remain true that
nothing goes so directly against the spirit of Schopenhauer as what is
genuinely Wagnerian in Wagner’s heroes: I mean the innocence of the
utmost selfishness; the faith in great passion as the good in itself, in a
word, what is Siegfried-like*’ in the countenances of his heroes. ‘All of
this smells even more like Spinoza than like me’, Schopenhauer might
say. Although Wagner would have good reason to look for some other
philosopher than Schopenhauer, the enchantment to which he suc-
cumbed with regard to this thinker has blinded him not only to other
philosophers but also to science; his entire art increasingly wants to
present itself as a companion piece and supplement to Schopenhauer’s
philosophy, and with increasing explicitness it renounces the loftier
ambition of becoming a companion piece and supplement to human
knowledge and science. And not only is it the whole secretive splendour
of this philosophy — which would also have attracted a Cagliostro*® —
that draws him to this, but the particular gestures and affects of the
philosophers were always seducers as well! Wagner is Schopenhauerian,
for example, in his exasperation over the corruption of the German
5
peed
‘The principle of individuation’. Schopenhauer believed that the reality of the universe was an
undifferentiated Will which however appeared to us as a world of distinct things subject to the
‘principle of individuation’. Ibid., vol. 1, Book 2, § 23, and vol. 1, Book 4, § 68
56 Tbid., vol. 11, Book 4, § 49
57 The third opera in Wagner’s four-part cycle Der Ring des Nibelungen tells the story of the hero
Siegfried, who can be taken to represent an energetic, unspoiled humanity of the future.
58 Notorious eighteenth-century charlatan
96

Book Two
language;*” even, however, if one should approve of Wagner’s imitation
of Schopenhauer in this point, one must not conceal the fact that
Wagner’s style itself suffers rather seriously from all those ulcers and
tumours whose sight so enraged Schopenhauer. Regarding the Wagner-
ians who write German, Wagnerianism is starting to prove as dangerous
as any Hegelianism ever has. Wagner is Schopenhauerian in his hatred
of the Jews, to whom he is unable to do justice even in their greatest
deed; after all, the Jews are the inventors of Christianity.°° Wagner is
Schopenhauerian in his attempt to conceive of Christianity as a seed of
Buddhism that has drifted far and to prepare a Buddhistic age for
Europe, with an occasional reconciliation with Catholic-Christian for-
mulas and sentiments.®! Wagner is Schopenhauerian when he preaches
mercy in our relations with animals; as we know, Schopenhauer’s
predecessor in this was Voltaire, who may also, like his successors, have
known to disguise his hatred of certain things and persons as mercy
towards animals.®? At least Wagner’s hatred of science, which finds
expression in his preaching, certainly does not come from a spirit of
mercy and goodness — any more, obviously, than it does from any spirit
at all. In the end, the philosophy of an artist is of little significance if it is
merely an afterthought (eine nachtragliche Philosophie) and does not
harm the art itself. One cannot be too careful to avoid bearing ill will
against an artist for an occasional, perhaps very unfortunate and
presumptuous masquerade; let us not forget that, without exception,
our dear artists are to some extent actors and have to be, and that
59 Wagner: ‘Bericht an Seine Majestat den Konig Ludwig II. von Bayern iiber eine in Miinchen zu
errichtende deutsche Musikschule’; Schopenhauer: ‘Uber Schriftstellerei und Sti? in his
Parerga und Paralipomena (vol. 11, chapter 23)
60 Wagner: Das Judentum in der Musik (1850); Schopenhauer: ‘Zur Rechtslehre und Politik’ in
Parerga und Paralipomena (vol. 11, chapter 9, § 132) Jews should have civil rights, but it is
‘absurd’ to grant them rights of political participation), ‘Uber die Universitits-Philosophie’ in
Parerga und Paralipomena (vol. 1) (One of the major defects of ‘modern’ philosophy, especially
that of Hegel, is that it has imposed on itself the task of arguing for the truth of a ‘Jewish
mythology’) etc.
Wagner: Religion und Kunst (1880), Schopenhauer: World as Will and Representation, vol. 11,
Book 4, § 41
Wagner, Religion und Kunst (1880). In Act t of Parsifal Gurnemanz lectures the young Parsifal
on the evils of killing animals. Schopenhauer, ‘Preisschrift tiber die Grundlage der Moral’ § 19.
In this essay, as generally, Schopenhauer connects proto-animal-liberation views with anti-
Semitism (see above, Book 11, footnote 60), arguing that Europeans treat animals badly because
the Old Testament posits an absolute distinction between animals and humans, and claiming
that anyone not ‘chloroformed by the foetor Iudaicus [Jewish stench]’ would see that animals and
humans were essentially the same and thus should be treated with similar compassion.
6
6.
Ru
97

The Gay Science
without acting they would hardly be able to hold out very long. Let us
remain faithful to Wagner in what is rue and original in him — and
especially, as his disciples, by remaining faithful to ourselves in what is
true and original in us. Let us leave him his intellectual tempers and
cramps; let us, in all fairness, ask what strange kinds of nourishment
and needs an art like his may require in order to be able to live and grow!
It doesn’t matter that as a thinker he is so often wrong; justice and
patience are not for him. Enough that his life is justified before itself and
remains justified — this life which shouts at every one of us: ‘Be a man
and do not follow me — but yourself! Yourself!’®? Our life, too, shall be
justified before ourselves! We too shall freely and fearlessly, in innocent
selfishness, grow and blossom from ourselves! And as I contemplate
such a person, the following sentences still come to mind today as they
did before: “That passion is better than Stoicism and hypocrisy; that
being honest even in evil is better than losing oneself to the morality of
tradition; that the free man can be good as well as evil, but the unfree
man is a disgrace to nature and has no share in heavenly or earthly
comfort; finally that everyone who wants to be free must become so through
himself, and that freedom does not fall into anyone’s lap as a wondrous
gift’ (Richard Wagner in Bayreuth, p. 94).°*
100
Learning how to pay homage. — Men have to learn to pay homage just as
they have to learn to feel contempt. Anyone who breaks new paths and
has led many people onto new paths discovers with amazement how
clumsy and poor those many are at expressing their gratitude; indeed,
how seldom gratitude is able to express itself at all. It is as though
whenever gratitude wants to speak, something gets caught in her throat
so that she just clears her throat and falls silent clearing her throat. The
way in which a thinker comes to sense the effects of his thoughts and
their reorganizing and unsettling power is almost a comedy; it seems at
times as if those who have been affected basically feel insulted and can
®3 Goethe’s highly overwrought novel The Sufferings of Young Werther tells the story of a young
man who is unhappy in love and shoots himself. When real young men began dressing and
acting like Werther, and a few actually shot themselves, citing his example, Goethe decided he
needed to intervene and had these words placed as a motto before the second edition of the text
(1775).
6+ Nietzsche quotes from his own essay orginally published as part of Untimely Meditations (1876).
98

Book Two
only express what they take to be their threatened independence
through a welter of incivilities. Entire generations are needed to invent
merely a polite convention for thanks; and only very late comes that
time when even gratitude has acquired a kind of spirit and genius; by
then, someone is usually also around to be the great recipient of the
gratitude, not only for what good he himself has done, but mostly for
what his predecessors have slowly heaped up as a treasure of the highest
and best.
IO]
Voltaire.©> — Wherever there was a court, there were laws of good speech
and thus also laws of style for all who wrote. The language of the court,
however, is the language of the courtier, who has no area of expertise and
who forbids himself convenient technical expressions even in conversa~
tion about scientific matters because they smack of areas of expertise;
that is why, in countries with a courtly culture, technical expressions
and everything that betrays a specialist is considered a stylistic blemish.
Now that all courts have become caricatures of past and present, one is
amazed to find even Voltaire unspeakably inflexible and punctilious on
this point (for example in his judgement of such stylists as Fontenelle®
and Montesquieu®’) — for we are all emancipated from courtly taste,
while Voltaire perfected it!
102
A word to the philologists. 
— That there are books so valuable and regal
that entire generations of scholars are well employed when, through
their efforts, these books are preserved in a pure and intelligible state —
philology exists to reinforce this faith again and again. It presupposes
that there is no dearth of those rare human beings (even if one doesn’t
see them right away) who really know how to use such valuable books —
probably those who themselves write or could write such books. I mean
that philology presupposes a noble faith — that for the sake of a few who
always ‘will come’ but are not there, a very great deal of painstaking,
65 See above, Book 1, footnote 27, p. 55 and Book 11, foomote 49, p. 95.
56 See above, Book 1, footnote 3, p. 31.
87 French political theorist (1689~1755)
99

The Gay Science
even unclean work first needs to be done: it is all work im usum
Delphinorum.©
103
On German music. 
- Today German music is, more than any other, the
music of Europe only because it alone has given expression to the
transformation that Europe underwent through the Revolution: only
German composers know how to lend expression to animated masses of
people; how to create that enormous artificial noise that doesn’t even
have to be very loud ~ whereas for example Italian opera knows only
choruses of servants or soldiers, but not ‘people’.©’ Moreover, in all
German music one can hear a deep bourgeois envy of nobility, especially
of esprit and élégance as expressions of a courtly, knightly, old, self-
assured society. This music is not like that of Goethe’s singer before the
gate, which also pleases ‘in the great hall’ and actually pleases the king;
the idea is not “The knights looked bravely thither, and the fair down at
their laps’.”? Even grace (Grazie) does not appear in German music
without pangs of conscience; only in the presence of native charm
(Anmut), the rustic sister of grace, does the German begin to feel wholly
moral — and from that point on increasingly so, all the way up to his
rapturous, erudite, often gruff ‘sublimity’, the sublimity of Beethoven.
If you want to picture the human being for this music, well, just imagine
Beethoven as he appears beside Goethe — say, at their encounter at
Teplitz:”! as semi-barbarism beside culture, as the people beside
nobility, as the good-natured human being next to the good and more
than merely ‘good’ human being, as the visionary beside the artist, as
8 The eldest son of the King of France and heir apparent to the throne was called ‘the Dauphin’.
In order to ensure that his son received the best education possible the French king Louis XIV
had a special edition of Greek and Latin authors made ‘in usum Delphini’ (i.e. ‘for the use of the
Dauphin’). This edition deleted passages from the works that were considered objectionable for
one reason or another. Jn usum Delphinorum means ‘for the use of Dauphins’.
This is an extraordinary statement, which must reflect Nietzsche’s selective view of Italian
opera. In particular, the chorus of Hebrew slaves from Verdi’s Naducco (1842), ‘Va pensiero’,
became one of the most famous patriotic songs of the Italian Risorgimento.
Poem by Goethe from his novel Wilhelm Meister, Book 11, chapter 11.
Goethe and Beethoven, walking together in the spa town of Teplitz, encountered the Empress
and her entourage. The staunch republican Beethoven tried to get Goethe to follow his example
of not making way for the Imperial Suite, but Goethe, who was for decades an official at the
small German court of Weimar, politely stepped aside and removed his hat as the Empress
passed.
69
7
7
= 
Ss
100

Book Two
the man in need of comfort next to the man who is comforted, as the
exaggerating and suspicious man next to the fair-minded, as the moody
self-tormentor, the foolishly ecstatic, the blissfully unhappy, the guile-
lessly immoderate, as the presumptuous and crude — and all in all, the
‘untamed human being’:”* that is how Goethe himself experienced and
characterized him — Goethe, the exception among Germans for whom
no music of equal rank has yet been found! Consider finally whether the
ever more widely reaching contempt for melody and the atrophy of the
melodic sense among Germans can be understood as a democratic
boorishness and after-effect of the Revolution. For melody has such an
open joy in lawfulness and such a revulsion towards everything that is
inchoate, unformed, and arbitrary that it sounds like a strain from the
old order of things European and like a seduction and return to it.
104
On the sound of the German language. 
— We know where the German
comes from that for a few centuries has been accepted as literary
German. The Germans, with their reverence for everything that came
from the court, have deliberately taken the chanceries as their model in
everything they had to write, such as letters, documents, wills, and so
forth. To write in the style of the chanceries was to write like the courts
and the government — that was something distinguished compared to
the German spoken in the city in which one happened to live.
Eventually one drew the consequences and started to speak the way one
wrote — thus one became even more discriminating in word formations,
in the choice of words and phrases, and finally also in sound: one
affected a courtly tone when speaking, and in the end the affectation
became natural. Perhaps nothing like this has happened anywhere else:
the triumph of written style over speech and the affectation and
pomposity of a whole people as the foundation of a common language
that is no longer a mere conjunction of dialects. I believe that the sound
of the German language in the middle ages, and especially in the time
after the middle ages, was deeply rustic and vulgar; in the last few
centuries it has become a bit more refined, primarily because one felt
compelled to imitate so many French, Italian, and Spanish sounds —
7 Goethe describes Beethoven thus in a letter to the former’s friend Zelter of 2 September 1812.
101

The Gay Science
particularly on the part of the German (and Austrian) nobility, which
could in no way be content with the mother tongue. But despite this
exercise, German must have sounded unbearably vulgar to Montaigne
or even Racine; and to this day, in the mouth of travellers even in the
midst of an Italian rabble, it sounds very coarse and hoarse, as if it
originated in the back woods in smoky cabins and rude regions. I note
today that among the former admirers of the chanceries a similar
yearning for refinement of sound is spreading, and that the Germans
are starting to obey a most peculiar ‘acoustic spell’ which could, in the
long run, become a real danger to the German language — for one would
seek in vain to find more abhorrent sounds in Europe. Something
scornful, cold, indifferent, careless in one’s voice: that is what sounds
‘refined’ to Germans today — and I hear the good will to this refinement
in the voices of young officials, teachers, women, merchants; even little
girls are starting to imitate this officers’ German. For the officer —
specifically the Prussian officer — is the inventor of these sounds: this
same officer who as military man and specialist possesses that admirable
tact of modesty which all Germans could stand to learn (including
German professors and musicians!). But as soon as he speaks and
moves, the German officer is the most immodest and distasteful figure
in old Europe — quite unselfconsciously, without any doubt! Nor are the
good Germans conscious of this when they admire him as the man of
the foremost and most distinguished society and gladly let him ‘set
the tone’. And so he does! First it is the sergeants and the non-
commissioned officers who imitate and coarsen his tone. Just listen to
the shouted commands that positively surround German cities with a
roar now that they drill outside all the gates: what presumptuousness,
what raging sense of authority, what scornful coldness reverberates from
this roar! Are the Germans really supposed to be a musical people? It is
certain that the Germans are becoming militarized in the sound of their
language; it is probable that once they have got used to speaking in a
military tone, they will eventually also start writing that way. For being
used to certain sounds has a profound effect on character — one soon has
the words and phrases, and finally also the thoughts that fit this sound!
Maybe the Germans already write like officers; maybe I just read too
little of what is written in Germany. But one thing I know more
certainly: the public German proclamations that also reach other
countries are inspired not by German music but by this new sound of a
102

Book Two
distasteful presumptuousness. In almost every speech of the foremost
German statesman, and even when he lets himself be heard only
through his imperial mouthpiece,”? is an accent that repels with revul-
sion the ear of a foreigner. But the Germans endure it — they endure
themselves.
105
The Germans as artists. 
- When the German really works up a passion
(and not merely the usual good will to passion!), he behaves as he must,
and thinks no further about his behaviour. But the truth is that his
behaviour is then very clumsy and ugly, as if lacking in tact and melody,
so that the spectators merely have their own feelings of embarrassment
or pathos and nothing more — unless he elevates himself into that state of
sublimity and rapture, of which many passions are capable. Then even
the German becomes beautifull An idea of the height at which beauty first
begins to pour its magic even over Germans drives the German artists
into the heights and superheights and excesses of passion: in other
words, a genuinely deep desire to rise beyond, at least look beyond, the
ugliness and clumsiness — to a better, lighter, more southern, sunnier
world. And so their cramps are often just indications that they would
like to dance: these poor bears in which hidden nymphs and sylvan gods
are at work — and at times still higher deities!
106
Music as advocate ~— ‘I am thirsting for a master composer’, said an
innovator to his disciple, ‘who can learn my thoughts from me and
hereafter speak them in his language: that way I will better penetrate
into people’s ears and hearts. With tones one can seduce people into
every error and every truth: who could refute a tone?’ — ‘So you would
like to be considered irrefutable?’ said his disciple. The innovator
replied: ‘I wish for the sprout to become a tree. For a teaching to
become a tree, it has to be believed for a good while; for it to be believed,
it has to be considered irrefutable. The tree needs storms, doubts,
% This probably refers to Chancellor Bismarck (‘foremost statesman’) and Emperor Wilhelm I
(‘imperial mouthpiece’).
103

The Gay Science
worms, and malice in order to reveal the nature and strength of its
sprout; may it break if it is not strong enough! But a sprout can only be
destroyed — not refuted!’ When he had said that, his disciple cried
impetuously: ‘But I believe in your cause and consider it so strong that I
will say everything, everything that I still have on my mind against it’.
The innovator laughed to himself and wagged a finger at him. “This
kind of discipleship’, he said, ‘is the best, but it is dangerous and not
every kind of teaching can withstand it’.
107
Our ultimate gratitude to art. 
- Had we not approved of the arts and
invented this type of cult of the untrue, the insight into general untruth
and mendacity that is now given to us by science — the insight into
delusion and error as a condition of cognitive and sensate existence ~
would be utterly unbearable. Honesty would lead to nausea and suicide.
But now our honesty has a counterforce that helps us avoid such
consequences: art, as the good will to appearance. We do not always keep
our eyes from rounding off, from finishing off the poem; and then it is
no longer eternal imperfection that we carry across the river of
becoming — we then feel that we are carrying a goddess, and are proud
and childish in performing this service. As an aesthetic phenomenon
existence is still bearable to us, and art furnishes us with the eye and
hand and above all the good conscience to be able to make such a
phenomenon of ourselves. At times we need to have a rest from
ourselves by looking at and down at ourselves and, from an artistic
distance, laughing at ourselves or crying at ourselves; we have to
discover the hero no less than the fool in our passion for knowledge; we
must now and then be pleased about our folly in order to be able to stay
pleased about our wisdom! And precisely because we are at bottom
grave and serious human beings and more weights than human beings,
nothing does us as much good as the fool’s cap: we need it against
ourselves — we need all exuberant, floating, dancing, mocking, childish,
and blissful art lest we lose that freedom over things that our ideal
demands of us. It would be a relapse for us, with our irritable honesty, to
get completely caught up in morality and, for the sake of the overly
severe demands that we there make on ourselves, to become virtuous
monsters and scarecrows. We have also to be able to stand above morality
104

Book Two
~ and not just to stand with the anxious stiffness of someone who is
afraid of slipping and falling at any moment, but also to float and play
above it! How then could we possibly do without art and with the fool? —
And as long as you are in any way ashamed of yourselves, you do not yet
belong amongst us!
105


Book Three


Book Three
108
New battles. — After Buddha was dead, they still showed his shadow in a
cave for centuries — a tremendous, gruesome shadow. God is dead; but
given the way people are, there may still for millennia be caves in which
they show his shadow. — And we — we must still defeat his shadow as
well!
109
Let us beware. — Let us beware of thinking that the world is a living
being. Where would it stretch? What would it feed on? How could it
grow and procreate? After all, we know roughly what the organic is; are
we then supposed to reinterpret what is inexpressibly derivative, late,
rare, accidental, which we perceive only on the crust of the earth, as
something essential, common, and eternal, as those people do who call
the universe an organism? This nauseates me. Let us beware even of
believing that the universe is a machine; it is certainly not constructed
to one end, and the word ‘machine’ pays it far too high an honour. Let
us beware of assuming in general and everywhere anything as elegant as
the cyclical movements of our neighbouring stars; even a glance at the
Milky Way raises doubts whether there are not much coarser and more
contradictory movements there, as well as stars with eternally linear
paths, etc. The astral order in which we live is an exception; this order
and the considerable duration that is conditioned by it have again made
possible the exception of exceptions: the development of the organic.
The total character of the world, by contrast, is for all eternity chaos,
not in the sense of a lack of necessity but of a lack of order, organization,
form, beauty, wisdom, and whatever else our aesthetic anthropomorph-
isms are called. Judged from the vantage point of our reason, the
unsuccessful attempts are by far the rule; the exceptions are not the
secret aim, and the whole musical mechanism repeats eternally its tune,
which must never be called a melody — and ultimately even the phrase
‘unsuccessful attempt’ is already an anthropomorphism bearing a
reproach. But how could we reproach or praise the universe! Let us
beware of attributing to it heartlessness or unreason or their opposites:
it is neither perfect, nor beautiful, nor noble, nor does it want to become
any of these things; in no way does it strive to imitate man! In no way do
109

The Gay Science
our aesthetic and moral judgements apply to it! It also has no drive to
self-preservation or any other drives; nor does it observe any laws. Let
us beware of saying that there are laws in nature. There are only
necessities: there is no one who commands, no one who obeys, no one
who transgresses. Once you know that there are no purposes, you also
know that there is no accident; for only against a world of purposes does
the word ‘accident’ have a meaning. Let us beware of saying that death
is opposed to life. The living is only a form of what is dead, and a very
rare form. Let us beware of thinking that the world eternally creates
new things. There are no eternally enduring substances; matter is as
much of an error as the god of the Eleatics.! But when will we be done
with our caution and care? When will all these shadows of god no longer
darken us? When will we have completely de-deified nature? When may
we begin to naturalize humanity with a pure, newly discovered, newly
redeemed nature?
IIo
Origin of knowledge. - Through immense periods of time, the intellect
produced nothing but errors; some of them turned out to be useful and
species-preserving; those who hit upon or inherited them fought their
fight for themselves and their progeny with greater luck. Such erro-
neous articles of faith, which were passed on by inheritance further and
further, and finally almost became part of the basic endowment of the
species, are for example: that there are enduring things; that there are
identical things; that there are things, kinds of material, bodies; that a
thing is what it appears to be; that our will is free; that what is good for
me is also good in and for itself. Only very late did the deniers and
doubters of such propositions emerge; only very late did truth emerge
as the weakest form of knowledge. It seemed that one was unable to live
with it; that our organism was geared for its opposite: all its higher
functions, the perceptions of sense and generally every kind of sensa-
tion, worked with those basic errors that had been incorporated since
time immemorial. Further, even in the realm of knowledge those
propositions became the norms according to which one determined
‘true’ and ‘untrue’ — down to the most remote areas of pure logic. Thus
1 Group of philosophers in the early fifth century 8c who argued that the world of change was a
mere appearance of an underlying unchanging being
IIo

Book Three
the strength of knowledge lies not in its degree of truth, but in its age, its
embeddedness, its character as a condition of life. Where life and
knowledge seem to contradict each other, there was never any serious
fight to begin with; denial and doubt were simply considered madness.
Those exceptional thinkers, like the Eleatics, who still posited and clung
to the opposites of the natural errors, believed in the possibility of also
living this opposite: they invented the sage as the man of unchange-
ability, impersonality, universality of intuition, as one and all at the same
time, with a special capacity for that inverted knowledge; they had the
faith that their knowledge was at the same time the principle of /ife. But
in order to be able to claim all this, they had to deceive themselves about
their own state: they had fictitiously to attribute to themselves imper-
sonality and duration without change; they had to misconstrue the
nature of the knower, deny the force of impulses in knowledge, and
generally conceive reason as a completely free, self-originated activity.
They closed their eyes to the fact that they, too, had arrived at their
propositions in opposition to what was considered valid or from a desire
for tranquillity or sole possession or sovereignty. The subtler develop-
ment of honesty and scepticism finally made also these people impos-~
sible; even their life and judgements proved dependent on the ancient
drives and fundamental errors of all sentient existence.This subtler
honesty and scepticism arose wherever two conflicting propositions
seemed to be applicable to life because both were compatible with the
basic errors, and thus where it was possible to argue about the greater or
lesser degree of usefulness for life; also wherever new propositions
showed themselves to be not directly useful, but at least also not
harmful, as expressions of an intellectual play impulse, and innocent
and happy like all play. Gradually the human brain filled itself with such
judgements and convictions; and ferment, struggle, and lust for power
developed in this tangle. Not only utility and delight, but also every
kind of drive took part in the fight about the ‘truths’; the intellectual
fight became an occupation, attraction, profession, duty, dignity —
knowledge and the striving for the true finally took their place as a need
among the other needs. Henceforth, not only faith and conviction, but
also scrutiny, denial, suspicion, and contradiction were a power; all ‘evil’
instincts were subordinated to knowledge and put in its service and took
on the lustre of the permitted, honoured, useful and finally the eye and
the innocence of the good. Thus knowledge became a part of life and, as
III

The Gay Science
life, a continually growing power, until finally knowledge and the
ancient basic errors struck against each other, both as life, both as
power, both in the same person. The thinker — that is now the being in
whom the drive to truth and those life-preserving errors are fighting
their first battle, after the drive to truth has proven itself to be a life-
preserving power, too. In relation to the significance of this battle,
everything else is a matter of indifference: the ultimate question about
the condition of life is posed here, and the first attempt is made here to
answer the question through experiment. To what extent can truth
stand to be incorporated? — that is the question; that is the experiment.
III
The origin of the logical. ~ What is the origin of logic in man’s head?
Surely it arose out of the illogical, the realm of which must originally
have been immense. But innumerable beings drew inferences in a way
different from that in which we do now perished; nonetheless, they
might have been closer to the truth! He, for instance, who did not know
how to find ‘identity’ often enough, both with regard to nourishment
and to hostile animals ~ that is, he who subsumed too slowly and was
too cautious in subsumption — had a slighter probability of survival
than he who in all cases of similarity immediately guessed that they
were identical. The predominant disposition, however, to treat the
similar as identical — an illogical disposition, for there is nothing
identical as such — is what first supplied all the foundations for logic.
Similarly, in order for the concept of substance to originate, which is
indispensable to logic though nothing real corresponds to it in the
strictest sense, it was necessary that for a long time changes in things
not be seen, not be perceived; the beings who did not see things exactly
had a head start over those who saw everything ‘in a flux’. As such,
every great degree of caution in inferring, every sceptical disposition, is
a great danger to life. No living being would be preserved had not the
opposite disposition — to affirm rather than suspend judgement, to err
and make things up rather than wait, to agree rather than deny, to pass
judgement rather than be just — been bred to become extraordinarily
strong. The course of logical thoughts and inferences in our brains
today corresponds to a process and battle of drives that taken separately
are all very illogical and unjust; we usually experience only the outcome
112

Book Three
of the battle: that is how quickly and covertly this ancient mechanism
runs its course in us.
112
Cause and effect. — We call it ‘explanation’, but ‘description’ is what
distinguishes us from older stages of knowledge and science. We are
better at describing — we explain just as little as all our predecessors. We
have uncovered a diverse succession where the naive man and investi-
gator of older cultures saw only two different things, ‘cause’ and ‘effect’,
as they said; we have perfected the picture of becoming but haven’t got
over, got behind the picture. The series of ‘causes’ faces us much more
completely in each case; we reason, ‘this and that must precede for that
to follow’ — but we haven’t thereby understood anything. The specifically
qualitative aspect for example of every chemical process, still appears to
be a ‘miracle’, as does every locomotion; no one has ‘explained’ the
push. And how could we explain! We are operating only with things that
do not exist — with lines, surfaces, bodies, atoms, divisible times,
divisible spaces. How is explanation to be at all possible when we first
turn everything into a picture — our picture! It is enough to view science
as an attempt to humanize things as faithfully as possible; we learn to
describe ourselves more and more precisely as we describe things and
their succession. Cause and effect: there is probably never such a
duality; in truth a continuum faces us, from which we isolate a few
pieces, just as we always perceive a movement only as isolated points,
i.e. do not really see, but infer. The suddenness with which many effects
stand out misleads us; it is 
a suddenness only for us. There is an infinite
number of processes that elude us in this second of suddenness. An
intellect that saw cause and effect as a continuum, not, as we do, as
arbitrary division and dismemberment — that saw the stream of the
event — would reject the concept of cause and effect and deny all
determinedness.
113
On the doctrine of poisons. 
- So much has to come together in order for
scientific thought to originate, and all these necessary forces have had to
be separately invented, practised, cultivated! In their separateness they
113

The Gay Science
have, however, very often had a totally different effect from that which
they have today when in the realm of scientific thought they mutually
limit and keep each other in check: they have worked as poisons, e.g. the
doubting drive, the denying drive, the waiting drive, the collecting
drive, the dissolving drive. Many hecatombs of human beings had to be
sacrificed before these drives learned to grasp their coexistence and feel
like functions of one organizing force in one human being! And how far
we still are from the time when artistic energies and the practical
wisdom of life join with scientific thought so that a higher organic
system will develop in relation to which the scholar, the physician, the
artist, and the lawmaker, as we now know them, would have to appear as
paltry antiquities!
Iq
The scope of the moral. ~ As soon as we see a new picture, we immediately
construct it with the help of all the old experiences we have had
depending on the degree of our honesty and justice. There are no experi-
ences other than moral ones, not even in the realm of sense perception.
115
The four errors. 
- Man has been educated by his errors: first, he saw
himself only incompletely; secondly, he endowed himself with fictitious
attributes; thirdly, he placed himself in a false rank order in relation to
animals and nature; fourthly, he invented ever new tables of goods and
for a time took them to be eternal and unconditioned — so that now this,
now that human drive and condition occupied first place and was
ennobled as a result of this valuation. If one discounts the effect of these
four errors, one has also discounted humanity, humaneness, and ‘human
dignity’.
116
Herd instinct. 
— Wherever we encounter a morality, we find an evaluation
and ranking of human drives and actions. These evaluations and
rankings are always the expression of the needs of a community and
herd: that which benefits it the most ~ and second most, and third most
114

Book Three
— is also the highest standard of value for all individuals. With morality
the individual is instructed to be a function of the herd and to ascribe
value to himself only as a function. Since the conditions for preserving
one community have been very different from those of another commu-
nity, there have been very different moralities; and in view of essential
changes in herds and communities, states and societies that are yet to
come, one can prophesy that there will yet be very divergent moralities.
Morality is herd-instinct in the individual.
117
Herd pangs of conscience. — During the longest and most remote periods
of time there was a kind of pang of conscience completely different from
that which exists now. Today one feels responsible only for what one
wants and does, and finds one’s pride in oneself: all our teachers of
justice start from this feeling of self and pleasure in the individual (des
Einzelnen), as if the spring of justice (des Rechts)” had always arisen here.
But for the longest period of humanity’s existence there was nothing
more frightful than feeling alone (einzeln). To be alone (allein), to
experience things by oneself (einzeln), to neither obey nor rule, to
represent an individual (ein Individuum bedeuten) — that was no pleasure
back then, but a punishment; one was sentenced ‘to be an individual
(Individuumy. Freedom of thought was considered discomfort itself.
While we experience law and conformity as compulsion and loss, one
formerly experienced egoism as a painful thing, as an actual affliction.
To be a self, to estimate oneself according to one’s own measure and
weight — that was contrary to taste in those days. The inclination to this
would have been considered madness, for every misery and every fear
were associated with being alone (Alleinsein). Back then, ‘free will’ had
bad conscience as its closest neighbour. The more unfreely one acted,
the more the herd instinct and not the sense of self spoke through the
action, the more moral one considered oneself. In those days, everything
that hurt the herd, whether the individual had willed it or not, gave the
individual pangs of conscience — and his neighbour as well; indeed, the
whole herd! On this point we have relearned most of all.
2 The German word ‘Recht’ is usually ambiguous, meaning both ‘right’ and ‘law’. In this case it
seems best to render it as ‘justice’.
It5

The Gay Science
118
Benevolence. — Is it virtuous when a cell transforms itself into a function
of a stronger cell? It has to. And is it evil when the stronger cell
assimilates the weaker? It also has to; this is necessary for it, since it
strives for superabundant replenishment and wants to regenerate itself.
Accordingly one should make a distinction in benevolence between the
drive to appropriate and the drive to submit, depending on whether it is
the stronger or the weaker who experiences it. Joy and desire go together
in the stronger, who wants to transform something into a function of
himself; joy and the wish to be desired go together in the weaker, who
wants to become a function. Compassion is essentially the former, a
pleasant stirring of the drive to appropriate at the sight of the weaker;
however, we must still keep in mind that ‘strong’ and ‘weak’ are relative
concepts.
119
No altruism! — In many people I see a surplus strength and pleasure in
wanting to become a function; they press towards and have the most
delicate sense for all places where precisely they can be a function. Here
belong those women who turn themselves into some function of a man
that is especially weakly developed in him, and to that extent become his
purse or his politics or his sociability. Such beings preserve themselves
best when they insert themselves into another organism; if they do not
succeed at this, they become cranky, irritated, and devour themselves.
120
Health of the soul. 
- The popular medical formulation of morality (the
originator of which is Ariston of Chios), ‘virtue is the health of the
soul’,? would, in order to be useful, have to be changed at least to read,
‘your virtue is the health of your soul’. For there is no health as such,
and all attempts to define such a thing have failed miserably. Deciding
what is health even for your body depends on your goal, your horizon,
your powers, your impulses, your mistakes and above all on the ideals
3 Ariston lived in the third century Bc. This is fragment number 359 in Stotcorum veterum
Jragmenta, ed. von Arnim,
116

Book Three
and phantasms of your soul. Thus there are innumerable healths of the
body; and the more one allows the particular and incomparable to rear
its head again, the more one unlearns the dogma of the ‘equality of
men’, the more the concept of a normal health, along with those of a
normal diet and normal course of an illness, must be abandoned by our
medical men. Only then would it be timely to reflect on the health and
illness of the sou/ and to locate the virtue peculiar to each man in its
health — which of course could look in one person like the opposite of
health in another. Finally, the great question would still remain whether
we can do without illness, even for the development of our virtue; and
whether especially our thirst for knowledge and self-knowledge do not
need the sick soul as much as the healthy; in brief, whether the will to
health alone is not a prejudice, a cowardice and a piece of most refined
barbarism and backwardness.
121
Life not an argument. — We have arranged for ourselves a world in which
we are able to live — by positing bodies, lines, planes, causes and effects,
motion and rest, form and content; without these articles of faith no one
could endure living! But that does not prove them. Life is not an
argument; the conditions of life might include error.
122
Moral scepticism in Christianity. — Christianity, too, has made a great
contribution to enlightenment: it taught moral scepticism in an extre-
mely trenchant and effective way — accusing, embittering, but with
untiring patience and refinement; it annihilated in every single man the
faith in his ‘virtues’. It caused those great virtuous men, of whom there
was no dearth in antiquity, to disappear forever from the face of the
earth — those popular men who with a faith in their own perfection went
about with the dignity of a toreador. When we now, educated in this
Christian school of scepticism, read the moral books of antiquity, e.g.
those of Seneca or Epictetus,* we feel an amusing superiority and are
full of secret insights and overviews, as if a child were speaking before
4+ Two stoic philosophers: Seneca (first century AD) was a wealthy member of the Roman ruling
class. Epictetus (late first/early second century) was a freed Greck slave.
117

The Gay Science
an old man or an overenthusiastic young beauty were speaking before
La Rochefoucauld:* we know better what virtue is! In the end, however,
we have applied this same scepticism also to all religious states and
procedures, such as sin, repentance, grace, sanctification; and we have
all allowed the worm to dig so deeply that even when reading Christian
books we now have the same feeling of refined superiority and insight:
we also know the religious feelings better! And it is time to know them
well and to describe them well, for even the pious of the old faith are
dying out: let us save their image and their type at least for knowledge!
123
Knowledge more than a means, — Even without this new passion — I mean
the passion for knowledge — science would be promoted: up to now
science has grown and matured without it. The good faith in science,
the prejudice in its favour that rules our modern states (and formerly
even the Church), is essentially based on the fact that this unconditional
tendency and urge has manifested itself in science so rarely and that
science is specifically regarded not as a passion but as a condition and
‘ethos’. Indeed, often mere amour-plaisir® of knowledge (curiosity) is
sufficient, or amour-vanité,’ being accustomed to it with the ulterior
motive of honour and bread; it is even enough for many that they have a
surplus of leisure and do not know what to do with it except read,
collect, arrange, observe, recount — their ‘scientific drive’ is their
boredom. Pope Leo X® once (in his brief to Beroaldus)’ sang the praise
of science: he designated it the most beautiful ornament and the greatest
pride of our life, a noble occupation in happiness and unhappiness;
‘without it’, he says finally, ‘all human undertakings would lack a firm
hold — indeed, even with it they are changeable and unstable enough!’
But this fairly sceptical pope keeps silent, like all other churchly
eulogists of science, his final judgement on science. Although one might
5 The Reflections of La Rochefoucauld (161380) contain a wealth of exceptionally astute and
disillusioned observations about human action and motivation.
‘the love which is pleasure’
‘the love which is vanity’. Nietzsche takes the distinction between amour-plaisir and amour-vanité
from Stendhal (see above, Book 11, footnote 42, p. 92) who actually distinguishes four kinds of
love; see his De /’amour, chapter 1.
Originally Giovanni de’ Medici (1475~—1521), elected to the Papacy in 1513; very active patron of
the arts
Minor Italian humanist (1472~—1518)
oo 
so
rd
118

Book Three
infer from his words that he places science above art — strange as this
may be for such a friend of the arts — in the end it is nothing but
politeness when he does not speak of what he, too, places high above all
science: ‘revealed truth’ and the ‘eternal salvation of the soul’. Com-
pared to that, what are ornaments, pride, entertainment, and the
security of life to him! ‘Science is something second-class; nothing
ultimate, unconditional; not an object of passion’ — this judgement was
held back in Leo’s soul: the truly Christian judgement about science! In
antiquity the dignity and recognition of science were diminished by the
fact that even among her most zealous disciples the striving for virtue
took first place, and that one thought one had given knowledge one’s
highest praise when one celebrated it as the best means to virtue. It is
something new in history that knowledge wants to be more than a
means.
124
In the horizon of the infinite. - We have forsaken the land and gone to
sea! We have destroyed the bridge behind us — more so, we have
demolished the land behind us! Now, little ship, look out! Beside you is
the ocean; it is true, it does not always roar, and at times it lies there like
silk and gold and dreams of goodness. But there will be hours when you
realize that it is infinite and that there is nothing more awesome than
infinity. Oh, the poor bird that has felt free and now strikes against the
walls of this cage! Woe, when homesickness for the land overcomes you,
as if there had been more freedom there — and there is no more ‘land’!
125
The madman. — Haven’t you heard of that madman who in the bright
morning lit a lantern and ran around the marketplace crying incessantly,
‘I’m looking for God! I’m looking for God!’ Since many of those who
did not believe in God were standing around together just then, he
caused great laughter. Has he been lost, then? asked one. Did he lose his
way like a child? asked another. Or is he hiding? Is he afraid of us? Has
he gone to sea? Emigrated? - Thus they shouted and laughed, one
interrupting the other. The madman jumped into their midst and
pierced them with his eyes. ‘Where is God?’ he cried; ‘I'll tell you! We
11g

The Gay Science
have killed him — you and I! We are all his murderers. But how did we do
this? How were we able to drink up the sea? Who gave us the sponge to
wipe away the entire horizon? What were we doing when we unchained
this earth from its sun? Where is it moving to now? Where are we
moving to? Away from all suns? Are we not continually falling? And
backwards, sidewards, forwards, in all directions? Is there still an up and
a down? Aren’t we straying as though through an infinite nothing? Isn’t
empty space breathing at us? Hasn’t it got colder? Isn’t night and more
night coming again and again? Don’t lanterns have to be lit in the
morning? Do we still hear nothing of the noise of the grave-diggers who
are burying God? Do we still smell nothing of the divine decomposi-
tion? — Gods, too, decompose! God is dead! God remains dead! And we
have killed him! How can we console ourselves, the murderers of all
murderers! The holiest and the mightiest thing the world has ever
possessed has bled to death under our knives: who will wipe this blood
from us? With what water could we clean ourselves? What festivals of
atonement, what holy games will we have to invent for ourselves? Is the
magnitude of this deed not too great for us? Do we not ourselves have to
become gods merely to appear worthy of it? There was never a greater
deed — and whoever is born after us will on account of this deed belong
to a higher history than all history up to now!’ Here the madman fell
silent and looked again at his listeners; they too were silent and looked
at him disconcertedly. Finally he threw his lantern on the ground so
that it broke into pieces and went out. ‘I come too early’, he then said;
‘my time is not yet. This tremendous event is still on its way, wandering;
it has not yet reached the ears of men. Lightning and thunder need
time; the light of the stars needs time; deeds need time, even after they
are done, in order to be seen and heard. This deed is still more remote
to them than the remotest stars — and yet they have done it themselves! It
is still recounted how on the same day the madman forced his way into
several churches and there started singing his requiem aeternam deo.’
Led out and called to account, he is said always to have replied nothing
but, ‘What then are these churches now if not the tombs and sepulchres
of God?’
10 ‘Grant God eternal rest.’ A transformation of that part of the service for the dead which reads
‘Requiem aeternam dona eis {scilicet, mortuis], Domine’ (‘Lord, grant them [the dead] eternal
rest’)
120

Book Three
126
Mystical explanations — Mystical explanations are considered deep; the
truth is, they are not even shallow.
127
Afiereffects of the oldest religiosity. 
— Every thoughtless person believes
that the will alone is effective; that willing is something simple,
absolutely given, underivable, and intelligible in itself. When he does
something, e.g. strikes something, he is convinced that it is Ae who is
striking, and that he did the striking because he wanted to strike. He
does not even notice a problem here; the feeling of will suffices for him
to assume cause and effect, but also to believe that he understands their
relation. He knows nothing of the mechanism of what happened and the
hundredfold delicate work that has to be done to bring about the strike,
or of the incapacity of the will as such to do even the slightest part of
this work. The will is to him a force that works by magic: the belief in
the will as the cause of effects is the belief in forces that work by magic.
Now, originally man believed, wherever he saw something happen, that
a will had to be the cause and that beings with a personal will had to be
operating in the background — the concept of mechanics was quite
foreign to him. But since man believed for immense periods of time
only in persons (and not in substances, forces, things, etc.), the faith in
cause and effect has become for him the fundamental faith that he uses
everywhere something happens — still today instinctively and as an
atavism of the oldest origin. The propositions, ‘no effect without a
cause’, ‘every effect again a cause’, appear as generalizations of much
narrower propositions: ‘no effecting without willing’; ‘it is possible to
have an effect only on willing beings’; ‘no suffering of an effect is ever
pure and without consequences, but all suffering is an agitation of the
will (towards action, defence, revenge, retribution) — but in the
prehistory of humanity the former and latter propositions were iden-
tical: the former were not generalizations of the latter, but the latter
were elucidations of the former.!! With his assumption that only that
which wills exists, Schopenhauer enthroned a primordial mythology; he
"See Schopenhauer, ‘Uber die vierfache Wurzel des Satzes vom zureichenden Grunde’ (1813).
121

The Gay Science
seems never to have attempted an analysis of the will because like
everyone else he believed in the simplicity and immediacy of all willing —
whereas willing is actually such a well-practised mechanism that it
almost escapes the observing eye. Against him I offer these propositions:
first, in order for willing to come about, a representation of pleasure or
displeasure is needed. Secondly, that a violent stimulus is experienced as
pleasure or pain is a matter of the interpreting intellect, which, to be
sure, generally works without our being conscious of it (uns unbewu/t);
and one and the same stimulus can be interpreted as pleasure or pain.
Thirdly, only in intellectual beings do pleasure, pain, and will exist; the
vast majority of organisms has nothing like it.
128
The value of prayer. — Prayer has been invented for people who never
really have thoughts of their own and who know no elevation of the soul
or do not notice it if it occurs: what are such people to do in sacred
places or in all important situations in life that demand calm and a kind
of dignity? In order that they at least do not disturb, the wisdom of all
founders of religions, small as well as great, has prescribed to them the
formulas of prayer as a long mechanical work of the lips, combined with
exertion of the memory and a same fixed posture of hands and feet and
eyes! So they may, like the Tibetans, go ahead regurgitating their ‘om
mane padme hum’!* countless times or, as in Benares, count the name
of the god off their fingers, Ram-Ram-Ram} (and so on, with or
without charm), or honour Vishnu with his thousand names,'* or Allah
with his ninety-nine; or they may use prayer-mills and rosaries — the
main point is that this work keeps them still for a time and makes them
a tolerable sight: their type of prayer has been invented for the benefit of
the pious who know thoughts and elevations of their own. And even
they have their tired hours, when a string of venerable words and
sounds and a mechanical piety do them good. But supposing these rare
human beings — in every religion the religious person is an exception —
can figure out what to do; those who are poor in spirit cannot figure out
12 This is a formula which adepts repeat in certain forms of Buddhist meditation as a help to
attaining spiritual enlightenment. The literal meaning seems to be something like: ‘You
[Buddha] the centre of the lotus-flower’.
3 The god of a monotheistic Hindu cult centred in Benares
14 One of the major gods of the Hindu pantheon
122

Book Three
what to do, and to forbid them their prayer-rattling is to deprive them
of their religion — as Protestantism increasingly shows us more and
more. From such people religion wants only that they keep stil] with
their eyes, hands, legs, and other organs; thus they are made beautiful
for a time and — more like human beings!
129
The conditions for God. — “God himself cannot exist without wise
people’, said Luther,!> and with good reason; but ‘God can exist even
less without unwise people’ — that our good Luther did not say!
130
A dangerous decision. ~- The Christian decision to find the world ugly and
bad has made the world ugly and bad.
131
Christianity and suicide. 
~ When Christianity came into existence the
inclination to suicide was very strong — Christianity turned it into a
lever of its power: it allowed only two kinds of suicide, dressed them up
with the highest dignity and the highest hopes and forbade all others in
a terrible manner. But martyrdom and the ascetic’s slow suicide were
permitted.
132
Against Christianity. 
- What decides against Christianity now is our
taste, not our reasons.
133
Principle. - An inescapable hypothesis to which humanity must have
recourse again and again is still more powerful in the long run than the
15 This passage in Luther’s work has not been located.
123

The Gay Science
best believed faith in something untrue (such as the Christian faith). In
the long run: that means here a hundred thousand years.
134
Pessimists as victims. - Wherever a deep dissatisfaction with existence
comes to prevail, it is the aftereffects of some great dietary mistake
made by a people over a long time that are coming to light. Thus the
spread of Buddhism (not its origin) depended greatly on the Indians’
excessive and almost exclusive diet of rice and the general enervation
resulting from it. Perhaps the modern European discontent is due to the
fact that our prehistory, the entire middle ages, was given to drinking
thanks to the influence of Germanic tastes on Europe: the middle ages
means the alcohol poisoning of Europe. — The German dissatisfaction
with life is essentially a winter sickness exacerbated by the effects of
cellar air and the noxious stove fumes in German living rooms.
135
Origin of sin. — Sin, as it is now experienced wherever Christianity
reigns or once reigned: sin is a Jewish feeling and a Jewish invention;
and given that this is the background of all Christian morality,
Christianity can be said to have aimed at ‘Judaizing’ the whole world.
The extent to which this has succeeded in Europe is best brought out
by how alien Greek antiquity — a world without feelings of sin — strikes
our sensibility as being, despite all the good will expended by entire
generations and many excellent individuals to approach and incorporate
this world. ‘Only when you repent does God have mercy on you’ — to a
Greek, that is an object of ridicule and an annoyance; he would say,
‘Maybe slaves feel that way.’ What is here being presupposed is a being
who is powerful, supremely powerful and yet enjoys revenge: his power
is so great that no harm whatsoever can be done unto him except in
matters of honour. Every sin is an injury of respect, a crimen laesae
majestatis divinae‘® — and nothing further! Feeling spiritually crushed,
degraded, wallowing in the dust — that is the first and last condition of
16 The Roman legal code contained a provision for punishing a crime called crimen laesae matestatis
which originally seems to have meant denigrating or insulting the honour and dignity of the
Roman people. The phrase Nietzsche uses would mean: ‘crime of insulting the dignity of god’.
124

Book Three
his grace; in sum, restoration of his divine honour! Whether the sin has
done any other harm; whether it has planted some deep, growing
calamity that seizes and strangles one person after another like a
disease; this honour-craving Oriental couldn’t care less: sin is an assault
on him, not on humanity! He gives those to whom he grants his grace
also this same nonchalance about the natural consequences of sin. God
and humanity are here conceived as so separate and opposite that there
can basically be no sin against humanity — every deed is supposed to be
considered only mith respect to tts supernatural consequences, not with
respect to its natural consequences; that is what Jewish feeling, to which
everything natural is indignity itself, demands. The Greeks, by contrast,
were closer to the thought that even sacrilege can have dignity — even
theft, as in the case of Prometheus;!” even the slaughter of cattle as the
expression of an insane envy, as in the case of Ajax:!® in their need to
incorporate into and devise some dignity for sacrilege, they invented
tragedy — an art form and a pleasure that has remained utterly and
profoundly foreign to the Jew, despite all his poetic talent and inclina-
tion towards the sublime.
136
The chosen people. — The Jews, who feel they are the chosen people of all
peoples precisely because they are the moral genius of all peoples
(owing to their ability more profoundly to despise the human being in
themselves than any other people) — the Jews take a pleasure in their
divine monarch and the holy which is similar to that which the French
nobility took in Louis XIV. This nobility had surrendered all its power
and sovereignty and had become contemptible: in order not to feel this,
in order to be able to forget this, there was a need for a royal splendour,
a royal authority and plenitude of power without equal to which only the
nobility had access. In rising to the height of the court by virtue of this
privilege and seeing from there everything as beneath oneself, as
17 Demi-god who is said to have stolen fire from the gods and to have given it to humans, thereby
initiating the process of civilization. An extant tragedy ascribed to Aeschylus treats the punish-
ment of Prometheus for this crime: he was fettered to a rock in the Caucasus while an eagle fed
on his liver. See above, Book 1, footnote 1, p. 2g and also below, § 300, p. 170.
18 Because of a slight to his standing as a warrior, Ajax went mad and killed a large number of
cattle, deludedly thinking they were the Greek leaders who had wronged him. Sophocles treats
this subject in his tragedy Ajax.
125

The Gay Science
contemptible, one got over an irritable conscience. Thus one deliber-
ately built the tower of royal power ever higher into the clouds and
staked on it the ultimate building stones of one’s own power.
137
Speaking in a parable. - A Jesus Christ was possible only in a Jewish
landscape — I mean one over which the gloomy and sublime thunder
clouds of the wrathful Jehovah hovered continually. Here alone was the
rare and sudden piercing of a single sunbeam through the gruesome
general and perpetual day-night experienced as a miracle of ‘love’, as
the ray of the most undeserved ‘grace’. Only here could Christ dream of
his rainbow and his heavenly ladder on which God descended to man;
everywhere else good weather and sunshine were too much of a rule and
everyday occurrence.
138
Christ’s error. 
—- The founder of Christianity thought that there was
nothing from which men suffered more than their sins. That was his
error — the error of one who felt himself free of sin and who lacked
experience of it! Thus his soul filled itself with that wonderful fantastic
compassion for a torment that was rarely a very great torment even
among his people, who invented sin! But the Christians have found a
way of retroactively vindicating their master and of sanctifying his error
into ‘truth’.
139
The colour of the passions. — People like St Paul have an ‘evil eye’ for the
passions: they come to know only what is dirty, disfiguring, and heart-
breaking about them; hence their ideal impulse seeks the annihilation of
the passions, which they see totally purified in the divine. Quite unlike
St Paul and the Jews, the Greeks turned their ideal impulse precisely
towards the passions and loved, elevated, gilded and deified them;
evidently passion made them feel not only happier but also purer and
more divine than usual. And the Christians? Did they want to become
Jews in this respect? Did they perhaps succeed?
126

Book Three
140
Too Jewish. — If God wanted to become an object of love, he should first
of all have had to give up judging and justice: a judge, even a merciful
one, is no object of love. The founder of Christianity lacked delicacy of
feeling in this regard, being a Jew.
141
Too oriental. 
— What? A god who loves men provided that they believe
in him and who casts evil gazes and threats at anyone who does not
believe in this love? What? A love hemmed in by conditions as the
feeling of an almighty god? A love that has not even mastered the feeling
of honour and roused vengefulness? How oriental this all is! ‘If I love
you, what does that concern you??!? is surely a sufficient critique of all
of Christianity.
142
Incense. — Buddha says: ‘Don’t flatter your benefactors!’ Repeat this
saying in a Christian church and it will instantly clear the air of
everything Christian.
143
The greatest advantage of polytheism. — For an individual to posit his own
ideal and to derive from it his own law, joys and rights — that may well
have been considered hitherto to be the most outrageous of human
aberrations and idolatry itself; indeed, the few who dared it always felt
the need to apologize to themselves, usually as follows: ‘Not I! Not I!
But a god through me!’ The wonderful art and power of creating gods —
polytheism — was that through which this drive could discharge itself,
purify, perfect and ennoble itself; for originally it was a base and
undistinguished drive, related to stubbornness, disobedience, and envy.
To be hostile to this drive to have one’s own ideal: that was formerly the
law of every morality. There was only one norm: ‘the human being’ —
19 Goethe, Wilhelm Meister, Book tv, chapter 9; Dichtung und Wahrheit, Book 111, chapter 14
127

The Gay Science
and every people believed itself to have this one and ultimate norm. But
above and outside oneself, in a distant overworld, one got to see a
plurality of norms: one god was not the denial of or anathema to another
god! Here for the first time one allowed oneself individuals; here one
first honoured the rights of individuals. The invention of gods, heroes,
and overmen (Ubermenschen) of all kinds, as well as deviant or inferior
forms of humanoid life (Neben- und Untermenschen), dwarfs, fairies,
centaurs, satyrs, demons, and devils, was the invaluable preliminary
exercise for the justification of the egoism and sovereignty of the
individual: the freedom that one conceded to a god in his relation to
other gods one finally gave to oneself in relation to laws, customs, and
neighbours. Monotheism, in contrast, this rigid consequence of the
teachings of a normal human type — that is, the belief in a normal god
next to whom there are only false pseudo-gods — was perhaps the
greatest danger to humanity so far: it threatened us with that premature
stagnation which, as far as we can tell, most other species have long
reached; for all of them believe in one normal type and ideal for their
species and have translated the morality of custom (Sittlichkeit der Sitte)
definitively into flesh and blood. In polytheism the free-spiritedness and
many-spiritedness of humanity received preliminary form — the power
to create for ourselves our own new eyes and ever again new eyes that
are ever more our own — so that for humans alone among the animals
there are no eternal horizons and perspectives.
144
Religious wars. — The greatest progress of the masses up till now has
been the religious war, for it proves that the mass has begun to treat
concepts with respect. Religious wars start only when the finer quarrels
among sects have refined common reason so that even the mob becomes
subtle and takes trifles seriously, and actually considers it possible that
the ‘eternal salvation of the soul’ might hinge on slight differences
between concepts.
145
Danger for vegetarians. ~ A diet consisting primarily of rice leads to the
use of opium and narcotics, just as a diet consisting primarily of potatoes
128

Book Three
leads to the use of liquor. But its subtler effects also include ways of
thinking and feeling that work narcotically. This harmonizes with the
fact that the promoters of narcotic ways of thinking and feeling, like
those Indian gurus, praise precisely a diet that is purely vegetarian and
would like to make that a law of the masses: thus they want to call forth
and increase a need that they are able to satisfy.
146
German hopes. ~ Let us not forget that names of peoples are usually
terms of abuse. The Tartars, for example, are literally ‘the dogs’; that is
what the Chinese called them. The ‘Germans’: this originally meant
‘heathen’; that is what the Goths after their conversion named the great
mass of their unbaptized kindred tribes, in accordance with their
translation of the Septuagint”? in which the heathens were designated
with a word that in Greek means ‘the nations’; see Ulfilas.”) It would
still be possible for the Germans to turn the term of abuse for them into
a name of honour by becoming the first un-Christian nation in Europe:
for which Schopenhauer honoured them as having a very strong
predisposition. That would be a way of fulfilling the words of Luther,
who taught them to be un-Roman and to say: ‘Here J stand! J can do no
other!’22
147
Question and answer. — What do savage tribes today take over first of all
from the Europeans? Liquor and Christianity, the narcotics of Europe.
And from what do they perish most quickly? From European narcotics.
20 Translation of the Old Testament into Greek for the use of Greek-speaking Jews, produced
between the third century Bc and the beginning of the Christian era
A fourth-century (aD) Gothic bishop who is responsible for the translation of the Bible into
Gothic. Nietzsche is claiming that the German word for ‘German’ (deutsch) is etymologically
related to the Gothic word thuida (‘people’), and that Ulfilas used this word to render the Greek
‘té €9vr? in the Septuagint which originally just meant ‘nations’, but came to be used by
Christians to refer specifically to ‘heathens’. Nietzsche discusses this paragraph of the text in his
letter to Peter Gast of 30 July 1882.
Probably apocryphal reply Luther is said to have given at the Diet of Worms (18 April 1521) to
the demand that he recant
2
2
n
129

The Gay Science
148
Where reformations arise. — At the time of the great corruption of the
Church, the Church in Germany was the least corrupt; that is why the
Reformation occurred here, as a sign that even the beginnings of
corruption were felt to be intolerable. For relatively speaking, no people
has ever been more Christian than the Germans at the time of Luther;
their Christian culture was ready to burst into a hundredfold splendour
of blossoms — only one more night was needed, but this brought the
storm that put an end to everything.
149
The failure of reformations. — That several attempts to found new Greek
religions have failed testifies to the higher culture of the Greeks even in
rather early times; it indicates that even early in Greece, there must
have been many diverse individuals whose diverse plights could not be
disposed of with a single prescription of faith and hope. Pythagoras”
and Plato, perhaps Empedocles”* as well, and the Orphic enthusiasts”
much earlier yet, were out to found new religions; and the former two
had souls and talents which were so much those of founders of religions
that one cannot wonder enough at their failure; yet all they managed to
found were sects. Every time the reformation of an entire people fails
and only sects raise their heads, one may conclude that the people is
already very heterogeneous and is starting to break away from crude
herd instincts and the morality of custom (Sittlichkeit der Sitte): a
notable hovering condition which one usually disparages as decay in
morals and corruption, when in fact it announces the maturation of the
egg and the impending breaking of the eggshell. That Luther’s reforma-
tion succeeded in the North is a sign of the fact that the North was
backward in comparison to the South and still had rather uniform and
monochrome needs; Europe would not have been christianized at all
had not the culture of the old world of the South gradually been
barbarized through an excessive admixture of Germanic barbarian
23 See above, Book 11, footnote 23, p. 84.
24 See above, Book 11, footnote 25, p. 84.
25 Orphism was an obscure but powerful religious movement that seems to have originated in the
sixth century BC. It was often associated with the view that the soul could live on after death.
130

Book Three
blood and its cultural superiority lost. The more general and uncondi-
tional the influence of an individual or an individual’s thought can be,
the more homogeneous and the lower must the mass be that is
influenced, while counter-movements betray inner counter-needs that
also want satisfaction and recognition. Conversely, one may always infer
a high level of culture when powerful and domineering natures only
manage to have a slight and sectarian influence: this is also true of the
individual arts and the areas of knowledge. Where there is ruling, there
are masses; where there are masses, there is a need for slavery. Where
there is slavery, there are few individuals, and these have herd instincts
and conscience against them.
150
Towards a critique of saints. - Must one then, in order to have a virtue,
want to have it in its most brutal form — the way the Christian saints
wanted and needed it, as those who endured life only with the thought
that the mere sight of their virtue would destroy the self-esteem of
anyone who viewed it? But a virtue with such an effect I call brutal.
151
On the origin of religion. - The metaphysical need is not the origin of
religion, as Schopenhauer”® has it, but only a date offshoot of it. Under
the rule of religious ideas, one has got used to the idea of ‘another world
(behind, below, above)’ and feels an unpleasant emptiness and depriva-
tion at the annihilation of religious delusions — and from this feeling
grows now ‘another world’, but this time only a metaphysical and not a
religious one. But what led to the belief in ‘another world’ in primordial
times was not a drive or need, but an error in the interpretation of
certain natural events, an embarrassing lapse of the intellect.
152
The greatest change. — The lighting and colours of everything have
changed! We no longer fully understand how the ancients experienced
26 In his ‘Uber Religion’ in Parerga und Paralipomena, vol. 11, chapter 15
131

The Gay Science
what was most familiar and frequent — for example the day and waking.
Because the ancients believed in dreams, waking life had a different
light. The same goes for the whole of life, illuminated by a light radiated
back on it from death and its significance: our ‘death’ is 
a completely
different death. All experiences shone differently because a god glowed
from them; all decisions and prospects concerning the distant future as
well, for one had oracles and secret signs and believed in prophecy.
‘Truth’ was formerly experienced differently because the lunatic could
be considered its mouthpiece — which makes ws shudder and laugh.
Every injustice affected feelings differently, for one feared divine
retribution and not just a civil punishment and dishonour. What was joy
in an age when one believed in devils and tempters! What was passion
when one saw the demons lurking nearby! What was philosophy when
doubt was felt as a sin of the most dangerous kind, as a sacrilege against
eternal love, as mistrust of everything that is good, lofty, pure, and
merciful! We have given things a new colour; we keep on painting them
— but what can we nowadays accomplish in comparison to the splendour
of colour of that old master! I mean ancient humanity.
153
Homo poeta.”’ — ‘I myself, who most single-handedly made this tragedy
of tragedies, insofar as it is finished; I, having first tied the knot of
morality into existence and drawn it so tight that only a god can loosen
it — which is what Horace demands!?8 — I myself have now in the fourth
act slain all gods, out of morality! What is now to become of the fifth
act? From where shall I take the tragic solution? Should I start
considering a comic solution?’
154
Different types of danger in life. 
~ You have no idea what you are
experiencing; you run through life as if you were drunk and once in a
while fall down a staircase. But thanks to your drunkenness, you don’t
break your limbs in the process; your muscles are too slack and your
27 ‘The human being as poet’
28 Ars poetica, 18off.
132

Book Three
head too dull for you to find the stones of these stairs as hard as the rest
of us do! For us, life is a greater danger: we are made of glass — woe unto
us if we bump against something! And everything is lost if we fall!
155
What we lack. — We love what is great in nature and have discovered it —
because in our heads, great human beings are lacking. It was the other
way around for the Greeks; their feeling for nature is different from
ours.
156
The most influential. ~ That a human being resists his whole age, stops it
at the gate and demands an accounting — that must exercise an influence!
Whether he wants to is irrelevant; that he can is what matters.
157
Mentiri.?? — Watch out! He’s thinking; in a moment he will have a lie
ready. This is a stage of culture at which entire peoples have stood. Just
consider what the Romans meant by the word mentiri!
158
An uncomfortable trait. — To find all things deep — that is an uncomfor-
table trait: it makes one constantly strain one’s eyes and in the end
always find more than one had wished.
159
Every virtue has its age. ~ Whoever is unyielding these days will often
have pangs of conscience because of his candour; for unyieldingness and
candour are virtues that belongs to different ages.
29 ‘to lie’ (Latin); etymologically related to mens (‘mind’) and memini (‘bear in mind’, ‘remember’)
133

The Gay Science
160
Dealing with virtues. — To a virtue, too, one can be undignified and
fawning.
161
To the lovers of the age. - The ex-priest and the ex-convict constantly
make faces: what they want is a face without a past. — But have you ever
seen people who know that the future is mirrored in their faces and are
so polite to you, you lovers of ‘the age’, that they make a face without a
future?
162
Egoism. — Egoism is the perspectival law of feeling according to which
what is closest appears large and heavy, while in the distance everything
decreases in size and weight.
163
After a great victory. — The best thing about a great victory is that it
takes the fear of defeat out of the victor. ‘Why not also be defeated
once?’ he says to himself; ‘I’m rich enough for that now.’
164
The seekers of rest. — 1 recognize the spirits who seek rest by the many
dark objects with which they surround themselves: he who wants to
sleep makes his room dark or crawls into a cave. — A hint to those who
don’t know, but would like to know, what they actually seek most!
165
On the happiness of those who renounce something. 
- He who thoroughly
forgoes something for a long time will, upon accidentally re-encoun-
tering it, almost think he has discovered it — and what happiness every
discoverer has! Let us be wiser than the snakes who lie too long in the
same sunlight.
134

Book Three
166
Always in our company. — Everything that is of my kind, in nature and
history, speaks to me, praises me, spurs me on, comforts me — every-
thing else I don’t hear or forget right away. We are always only in our
own company.
167
Misanthropy and love. — One speaks of being sick of people only when
one can no longer digest them and yet still has one’s stomach full of
them. Misanthropy is the result of an all-too-greedy love of man and
‘cannibalism’ — but who told you to swallow men like oysters, my Prince
Hamlet?
168
About a sick man. ~ ‘He is doing badly! — ‘What’s wrong?’ — ‘He is
suffering from the desire to be praised and finds no nourishment for it.’
— ‘Unbelievable! The whole world is celebrating him, and pampering
him; he is on everyone’s lips.’ — ‘Yes, but he has a bad ear for praise. If a
friend praises him, it sounds to him as if the friend is praising himself.
If an enemy praises him, it sounds to him as if the enemy wants be
praised for that. And when finally he is praised by any of the rest — and
they are not many at all; that is how famous he is! — it offends him that
they don’t want him as a friend or enemy; he likes to say: What do I care
about people who are capable of trying to play “the just man” even
towards me?’
169
Open enemies. ~ Courage before the enemy is one thing; it does not
prevent one from being a coward and indecisive scatterbrain. That is
how Napoleon judged ‘the most courageous person’ he knew: Murat.”
— Which shows that open enemies are indispensable to some people if
they are to rise to their own kind of virtue, manliness, and cheerfulness.
30 French general (1767~1815). Nietzsche takes the anecdote from his usual source about
Napoleon, the Mémoires of Madame de Rémusat (see above, Book 1, footnote 16, p. 49).
135

The Gay Science
170
With the crowd. — So far he is still running with the crowd and singing
its praises, but one day he will become its opponent! For he is following
it thinking that this will give his laziness full play, and he has not yet
discovered that the crowd is not lazy enough for him! That it always
pushes ahead! That it allows no one to stand still! - And he so much
likes to stand still!
171
Fame. — When the gratitude of many towards one throws away all
shame, fame arises.
172
The spoiler of taste. — A: ‘You are a spoiler of taste — that is what everyone
says!’ B: ‘Of course! I spoil for everyone the taste for his own party —
and no party forgives that.’
173
Being deep and seeming deep. - Those who know they are deep strive for
clarity. Those who would like to seem deep to the crowd strive for
obscurity. For the crowd takes everything whose ground it cannot see to
be deep: it is so timid and so reluctant to go into the water.
174
Aside. — Parliamentarianism, i.e. the public permission to choose
between five basic political opinions, flatters and wins the favour of all
those who like to appear independent and individualistic and would like
to fight for their opinions. In the end, however, it is irrelevant whether
the herd is commanded to have one opinion or permitted to have five.
Whoever deviates from the five public opinions and steps aside will
always have the whole herd against him.
136

Book Three
175
On eloquence. — Who has had the most convincing eloquence so far? The
drum roll; and as long as kings and commanders have control over that,
they will remain the best orators and rabble rousers.
176
Compassion. — Those poor reigning princes! All their rights are now
suddenly turning into claims, and all these claims soon begin to sound
like presumptions! The moment they merely say ‘We’ or ‘my people’,
wicked old Europe starts to smile. Verily, a chief master of ceremonies
in the modern world would waste little ceremony on them and might
perhaps decree: ‘les souverains rangent aux parvenus.’>!
177
On ‘the educational establishment’. - In Germany, higher men lack one
great means of education: the laughter of higher men; for in Germany,
these do not laugh.
178
On moral enlightenment. 
— One must talk the Germans out of their
Mephistopheles, and their Faust, too. They are two moral prejudices
against the value of knowledge.”
179
Thoughts. 
— Thoughts are the shadows of our sensations — always darker,
emptier, simpler.
31 ‘sovereigns rank with parvenus’
32 In Goethe’s drama Faust, Mephistopheles is a ‘spirit who always says “no”? (Act 1, line 1338);
Faust seeks for an experience so satisfying that he will wish time to stand still so that he can hold
on to it (Act 1, lines 1675-1706).
137

The Gay Science
180
The good age for free spirits. — Free spirits take liberties even with science
~ and for the time being, one also allows them to — as long as the
Church is still standing! To that extent they now have their good age.
181
Following and leading. — A: ‘Of these two, one will always follow and the
other will always lead, wherever fate may take them. And yer the former
is superior to the other in virtue and spirit!’ B: ‘And yet? And yet? That
was said for the others, not for me, not for us! — Fit secundum regulam.’*
182
In solitude. 
- When one lives alone, one neither speaks too loud nor
writes too loud, for one fears the hollow echo — the criticism of the
nymph Echo. And all voices sound different in solitude!
183
The music of the best future. 
—1 would consider the foremost musician to
be the one who knew only the sadness of the deepest happiness, and no
other sadness at all; there has never been such a musician.
184
Justice. ~ Yd rather let myself be robbed than be surrounded by
scarecrows — that is my taste. And in any case it is a matter of taste —
nothing more!
185
Poor. ~ Today he is poor, not because they have taken everything away
from him but because he has thrown everything away. What is that to
him? He is used to finding things. It is the poor who misunderstand his
voluntary poverty.
33 *This takes place according to the rule.’
138

Book Three
186
Bad conscience. — Everything he does now is upright and orderly — and
still he has a bad conscience. For the extraordinary is his task.
187
What 1s offensive in the presentation. — This artist offends me in the way
he presents his ideas, his very good ideas: so broad and emphatic, and
with such crude artifices of persuasion, as if he were speaking to a mob.
Whenever we devote some time to his art, it is soon as if we were ‘in bad
company’.
188
Work. — How close work and the worker are now even to the most
leisurely among us! The royal courtesy of the words ‘We are all
workers!’ would still have been a cynicism and an indecency under the
reign of Louis XIV.
189
The thinker. — He is a thinker: that means he knows how to make things
simpler than they are.
190
Against those who praise. — A: ‘One is praised only by one’s peers.’ B:
“Yes! And whoever praises you tells you: you are my peer!’
IQI
Against many a defence. - The most perfidious way of damaging a cause
is deliberately to defend it with faulty arguments.
192
The good-natured. - What distinguishes those good-natured people
whose faces radiate good will from the rest? They feel well in the
139

The Gay Science
presence of another person and quickly fall in love with him; conse-
quently they wish him well, and their first judgement is: ‘I like him.’ In
such people there is the following succession: the wish to appropriate
(they do not scruple much over the worth of the other person), quick
appropriation, delight in possession, and action for the benefit of the
person possessed.
193
Kant’s joke. - Kant wanted to prove, in a way that would dumbfound
the whole world, that the whole world was right: that was the secret joke
of this soul. He wrote against the scholars in favour of popular
prejudice, but for scholars and not for the people.
194
The ‘openhearted’ one. - That person probably always acts according to
secret reasons, for he always has communicable reasons on his tongue
and virtually in his open hand.
195
Laughable. — Look! Look! He is running away from people, but they
follow him because he is running ahead of them — that is how much they
are a herd!
196
Limits of our sense of hearing. - One hears only those questions to which
one is able to find an answer.
197
Better be careful! ~ There is nothing we like so much to impart to others
as the seal of secrecy — along with what is under it.
140

Book Three
198
Chagrin of the proud one. — The proud man feels chagrined even by those
who bring him forward: he gives the horse of his carriage the evil eye.
199
Generosity. — With the rich, generosity is often just a type of shyness.
200
Laughter. 
- Laughter means: to gloat, but with a good conscience.
201
Applause. — In applause there is always a kind of noise — even in the
applause we give ourselves.
202
A squanderer. — As yet he does not have that poverty of the rich man
who has already counted his entire treasure once — he squanders his
spirit with the unreason of a squandering nature.
203
Hic niger est.>+ — Usually he has no thought — but on rare occasions bad
thoughts come to him.
204
Beggars and courtesy. — ‘One isn’t being impolite if one uses a stone to
knock on a door which lacks a doorbell’: that is how beggars think, and
everyone who is suffering some kind of distress, but no one thinks they
are right.
34 ‘A dangerous man, this one’ (literally “This one is black’); Horace, Satires 4,85
141

The Gay Science
205
Need. — Need is taken to be the cause why something came to be; in
reality, it is often merely an effect of what has come to be.
206
When it rains. — It is raining, and I think of the poor who now huddle
together with their many troubles and without any practice at concealing
them: each is ready to hurt the other and to make for himself a pitiful
kind of pleasure even when the weather is bad. That and that alone is
the poverty of the poor!
207
The envious one. — He is envious — let’s hope he won’t have any children;
he would envy them because he can no longer be a child.
208
Great man! — From the fact that someone is a ‘great man’ one cannot
infer that he is a man; he may be just a boy, or a chameleon of all stages
of life, or a bewitched little woman.
209
A way of asking for reasons. — There is a way of asking us for our reasons
that not only makes us forget our best reasons but also awakens in us a
defiance and resistance towards reasons in general — a very stultifying
mode of asking and a trick used by tyrannical people!
210
Moderation in diligence. - One should not try to surpass one’s father in
diligence; that makes one sick.
211
Secret enemies. — To be able to afford a secret enemy — that is a luxury for
which the morality even of elevated spirits is usually not rich enough.
142

Book Three
212
Not to let oneself be deceived. — His spirit has bad manners, is hasty and
always stutters out of impatience; hence one hardly recognizes how
much stamina and robustness the soul possesses in which this spirit
dwells.
213
The road to happiness. — A wise man asked a fool what the road to
happiness is. The latter replied without delay, like someone being asked
the way to the nearest town: ‘Admire yourself and live on the street!’
‘Stop,’ replied the sage, ‘you are asking too much; it is quite enough to
admire oneself!’ The fool countered: ‘But how can one constantly
admire without constantly feeling contempt?’
214
Faith makes blessed. — Virtue gives happiness and a type of blessedness
only to those who have not lost faith in their virtue — not to those
subtler souls whose virtue consists of a deep mistrust of themselves and
of all virtue. So in the end, here, too, ‘faith makes blessed’*> — and, mind
you, not virtue!
215
Ideal and material. — You envisage a noble ideal, but are you such a noble
stone that such a divine image could be fashioned out of you? And
anyway — isn’t all your work a barbarous sculpting? A blasphemy against
your ideal?
216
Danger in the voice. - With a very loud voice in one’s throat one is almost
incapable of thinking subtle things.
35 Gospel according to Mark 16.16
143

The Gay Science
217
Cause and effect. — Before the effect one believes in causes different from
those one believes in after the effect.
218
My antipathy. — I do not love people who have to explode like bombs in
order to have any effect whatsoever and in whose presence one is always
in danger of suddenly losing one’s hearing — or more.
219
The purpose of punishment. 
- The purpose of punishment is to improve
the one who punishes; that is the last resort of the apologists for
punishment.
220
Sacrifice. 
— The sacrificial animal thinks differently about sacrifice than
the spectator, but one has never let it have its say.
221
Forbearance. — Fathers and sons have much more forbearance for each
other than mothers and daughters.
222
Poet and har. — The poet sees in the liar a foster brother (Milchbruder)
whose milk he has drunk up; that is why the latter has remained stunted
and miserable and has not even got as far as having a good conscience.
223
Vicartousness of the senses. — ‘Our eyes are also intended for hearing’, said
the old father confessor who had gone deaf, ‘and among the blind he is
king who has the longest ears.”
144

Book Three
224
Animals’ criticism. — | fear that the animals see man as a being like them
who in a most dangerous manner has lost his animal common sense — as
the insane animal, the laughing animal, the weeping animal, the miser-
able animal.
225
The natural. — ‘Evil has always had great effects in its favour! And
nature is evil! Let us therefore be natural!’ That is the secret reasoning
of the great effect-artists of humanity, who have all too often been
considered great human beings.
226
The distrustful and style. 
— We say the strongest things simply, provided
that we are among people who believe in our strength — such an
environment breeds ‘simplicity of style’. The distrustful speak emphati-
cally; the distrustful make emphatic.
227
Bad inference; bad shot. — He cannot control himself; from that, a woman
infers that it would be easy to control him and casts her net for him —
the poor woman who will shortly be his slave.
228
Against mediators. - He who wants to mediate between two resolute
thinkers shows that he is mediocre: he has no eye for what is unique;
seeing things as similar and making things the same is the sign of weak
eyes.
229
Obstinacy and faithfulness. - From defiance he clings to something he has
come to see through, but he calls it ‘faithfulness’.
145

The Gay Science
230
Lack of silence. — His whole being fails to persuade — that is because he
has never remained silent about any of his good deeds.
231
The ‘thorough’. — Those who are slow to know think that slowness is an
aspect of knowledge.
232
Dreaming. — Either one does not dream, or does so interestingly. One
should learn to spend one’s waking life in the same way: not at all, or
interestingly.
233
The most dangerous point of view. — What I now do or omit is as important
for everything that is to come as the greatest event of the past: seen from
this tremendous perspective, from that of their effects, all actions
appear equally great and small.
234
Words of comfort for a musician. — ‘Your life does not reach men’s ears; to
them you live a mute life, and all the subtlety of melody, all tender
resolution about following or leading, remain hidden from them. It is
true: you are not coming down a main street with regimental music, but
that does not give these good people the right to say your way of life
lacks music. He who has ears to hear, let him hear!’
235
Spirit and character. - Some reach their peak as characters, but their
Spirit is not adequate for this height, while with others it is the other
way around,

Book Three
236
In order to move the crowd. — Must not he who wants to move the crowd
be an actor playing the role of himself? Must he not first translate
himself into the grotesquely obvious and present his entire person and
cause in this coarsened and simplified version?
237
The polite one. - ‘He is so polite!’ — Yes, he always carries a cake for
Cerberus” and is so timid that he takes everyone for Cerberus, even you
and me; that is his ‘politeness’.
238
Without envy. — He is quite without envy, but that has no merit because
he wants to conquer a country that no one has yet possessed and hardly
anyone has ever seen.
239
The joyless one. — One single joyless person is enough to create constant
sullenness and dark skies for a an entire household, and only a miracle
can cause that one person to be lacking! Happiness is not nearly as
contagious a disease — why is that?
240
At the sea. — I wouldn’t build a house for myself (and it is part of my
good fortune not to be a home-owner!). But if I had to, I would, like
some Romans, build it right into the sea —I certainly would like to share
a few secrets with this beautiful monster.
241
Work and artist. — This artist is ambitious, nothing more: ultimately his
work is just a magnifying glass that he offers everyone who looks his way.
36 Three-headed dog who guarded the gates to hell. It was thought that he could sometimes be
mollified by being given a honey~cake.
147

The Gay Science
242
Suum cuique.*’ — However great my greed for knowledge may be, I
cannot take anything else out of things than what already belongs to me
— what belongs to others remains behind. How is it possible for a human
being to be a thief or a robber!
243
Origin of ‘good’ and ‘bad’. — An improvement is invented only by
someone who is able to feel ‘this is not good’.
244
Thoughts and words. — Even one’s thoughts one cannot entirely repro-
duce in words.
245
Praise by choice. — The artist chooses his subjects; that is his way of
praising.
246
Mathematics. — Let us introduce the subtlety and rigour of mathematics
into all sciences to the extent to which that is at all possible; not in the
belief that we will come to know things this way, but in order to ascertain
our human relation to things. Mathematics is only the means to general
and final knowledge of humanity.
247
Habit. — Every habit makes our hand more witty and our wit less handy.
248
Books. — What good is a book that does not even carry us beyond all
books?
37 *To each his own’. Definition of justice found, for instance, in Cicero, De officiis 1.15
148

Book Three
249
The sigh of the one who comes to know. — ‘Oh, my greed! In this soul there
dwells no selflessness but rather an all-desiring self that would like, as it
were, to see with the eyes and seize with the hands of many individuals
~a 
self that would like to bring back the entire past, that wants to lose
nothing it could possibly possess! Oh, this flame of my greed! Oh, that I
might be reborn into a hundred beings!’ — Whoever does not know this
sigh from experience does not know the passion of coming to know.
250
Guilt. — Although the shrewdest judges of the witches and even the
witches themselves were convinced of the guilt of witchcraft, this guilt
still did not exist. This is true of all guilt.
251
Misunderstood sufferers. — Great natures suffer differently from what
their admirers imagine: they suffer most severely from the ignoble,
petty agitations of some evil moments — in short, from their doubts
about their own greatness — and not from the sacrifices and martyrdoms
that their task demands from them. As long as Prometheus has pity for
men and sacrifices himself for them, he is happy and great; but when he
is envious of Zeus and the homage paid to him by mortals, then he
suffers!
252
Better in debt. ~ ‘Better to remain in debt than to pay with a coin that
does not bear our image!’ says our sovereignty.
253
Always at home. — One day we reach our goal — and now we point with
pride to the long journeys we took to reach it. In truth we did not notice
we were travelling. But we got so far because at each point we believed
we were at home.
149

The Gay Science
254
Against embarrassment. — Whoever is always deeply occupied is beyond
all embarrassment.
255
Imitators. — A: ‘What? You want no imitators?’ B: ‘I don’t want people
to imitate me; I want everyone to set his own example, which is what [
do.’ A: ‘So —??
256
Skinnedness. — All people of depth find happiness in being for once like
flying fish, playing on the outermost crests of waves; what they consider
best in things is that they have a surface: their skinnedness — sé vensa
verbo.°®
257
From experience. — Some do not know how rich they are until they
experience what kinds of rich people will steal from them.
258
Those who deny chance. — No victor believes in chance.
259
From paradise. — ‘Good and evil are the prejudices of God’ — said the
snake.
260
One times one. — One is always wrong; but with two, truth begins. — One
cannot prove his case, but two are already irrefutable.
38 4f you allow me to use this word’
150

Book Three
261
Originality. — What is originality? To see something that still has no
name; that still cannot be named even though it is lying right before
everyone’s eyes. The way people usually are, it takes a name to make
something visible at all. - Those with originality have usually been the
name-givers.
262
Sub specie aeterni.*? — A: ‘You are moving ever faster from the living:
soon they will strike you out of their lists!” — B: “That is the only way to
participate in the privilege of the dead.’ — A: ‘What privilege?’ — B: ‘No
longer to die.’
263
Without vanity. 
- When we are in love we want our defects to remain
hidden — not from vanity but so the loved one won’t suffer. Yes, the
lover would like to be godlike — also not from vanity.
264
What we do. — What we do is never understood but always merely
praised and reproached.
265
Ultimate doubt. - What, then, are man’s truths ultimately? — They are
the irrefutable errors of man.
266
Where cruelty 1s needed. 
- He who has greatness is cruel to his virtues
and secondary considerations.
39 ‘from the point of view of eternity’
151

The Gay Science
267
With a great goal. — With a great goal one is superior even to justice, not
only to one’s deeds and judges.
268
What makes one heroic? — To approach at the same time one’s highest
suffering and one’s highest hope.
269
What do you believe in? — In this: that the weight of all things must be
determined anew.
270
What does your conscience say? ~ ‘You should become who you are.”
271
Where lie your greatest dangers? — In compassion.
272
What do you love in others? — My hopes.
273
Whom do you call bad?— He who always wants to put people to shame.
49 This is a slightly truncated version of a famous passage from a victory-ode by the early fifth-
century (BC) poet Pindar, his Second Pythian Victory-Ode (line 73). The original Pindar passage
reads: ‘Become who you are through knowing’. The implication is that the ode should inform the
victorious young aristocrat of the great deeds of his ancestors and thereby inspire him to live up
to them. For Nietzsche the saying had deeper implications of self-discovery and self-realization:
‘How one becomes what one is’ is the sub-title of Ecce Homo, his reflection on his own work,
which was written in 1888.
152

Book Three
274
What ts most human to you? —'To spare someone shame.
275
What is the seal of having become free? — No longer to be ashamed before
oneself.
153


Book Four
St Januarius
You who with your lances burning
Melt the ice sheets of my soul,
Speed it toward the ocean yearning
For its highest hope and goal:
Ever healthier it rises,
Free in fate most amorous: —
Thus your miracle it prizes
Fairest Januarius!
Genoa in January 1882
Januarius is the first month of the Roman civil calendar. The name might (or might not) be
connected with that of the deity Janus, the god of doors and entrances. St Januarius (in Italian
San Gennaro) was an early Christian martyr, a vial of whose dried blood is kept in a church in
Naples. On certain feast days the blood is said miraculously to become fluid again.


Book Four: St Januarius
276
For the new year. — Ym still alive; I still think: I must still be alive
because I still have to think. Sum, ergo cogito: cogito, ergo sum.! Today
everyone allows himself to express his dearest wish and thoughts: so I,
too, want to say what I wish from myself today and what thought first
crossed my heart — what thought shall be the reason, warrant, and
sweetness of the rest of my life! I want to learn more and more how to
see what is necessary in things as what is beautiful in them — thus I will
be one of those who make things beautiful. Amor fati:? let that be my
love from now on! I do not want to wage war against ugliness. I do not
want to accuse; I do not even want to accuse the accusers. Let looking
away be my only negation! And, all in all and on the whole: some day I
- want only to be a Yes-sayer!
277
Personal providence. ~ There is a certain high point in life; once we have
reached it we are, for all our freedom, once more in the greatest danger
of spiritual unfreedom; and no matter how much we have confronted
the beautiful chaos of existence and denied it all providential reason and
goodness, we still have to pass our hardest test. For it is only now that
the thought of a personal providence confronts us with the most
penetrating force and the best advocate, appearance, speaks for it — now
that we so palpably see how everything that befalls us continually turns
out for the best. Every day and every hour life seems to want nothing else
than to prove this proposition again and again; be it what it may — bad
or good weather, the loss of a friend, a sickness, slander, the absence of a
letter, the spraining of an ankle, a glance into a shop, a counter-~
argument, the opening of a book, a dream, fraud — it shows itself
immediately or very soon to be something that ‘was not allowed to be
lacking’ — it is full of deep meaning and use precisely for us! Is there any
more dangerous seduction than to renounce one’s faith in the gods of
Epicurus,° those carefree and unknown ones, and to believe instead in
1 J am, therefore I think: I think, therefore I am.’ In the second of his Meditations, Descartes
argued that as long as he thought he could be sure he existed.
2 dove of (one’s) fate’
3 Epicurus thought common views about the gods were completely erroneous; they in fact lived a
157

The Gay Science
some petty deity who is full of worries and personally knows every little
hair on our heads and finds nothing nauseating in the most miserable
small service? Well — I mean in spite of it all! — we should leave the gods
alone as well as the genies at our service and be content with the
assumption that our own practical and theoretical skill in interpreting
and arranging events has now reached its apex. Nor should we think too
highly of this dexterity of our wisdom when at times the wonderful
harmony created by the playing of our instrument surprises us all too
much — a harmony that sounds too good for us to dare to give credit to
ourselves. Indeed, now and then someone plays mith us — good old
chance; occasionally chance guides our hand, and the wisest providence
could not invent music more beautiful than what our foolish hand then
produces.
278
The thought of death. — It gives me a melancholy happiness to live in the
midst of this jumble of lanes, needs, and voices: how much enjoyment,
impatience, desire; how much thirsty life and drunkenness of life comes
to light every moment of the day! And yet things will soon be so silent for
all these noisy, living, life-thirsty ones! How even now everyone’s shadow
stands behind him, as his dark fellow traveller! It’s always like the last
moment before the departure of an emigrant ship: people have more to
say to each other than ever; the hour is late; the ocean and its desolate
silence await impatiently behind all the noise — so covetous, so certain of
its prey. And everyone, everyone takes the past to be little or nothing
while the near future is everything; hence this haste, this clamour, this
outshouting and out-hustling one another. Everyone wants to be the first
in this future — and yet death and deathly silence are the only things
certain and common to all in this future! How strange that this sole
certainty and commonality barely makes an impression on people and
that they are farthest removed from feeling like a brotherhood of death! It
makes me happy to see that people do not at all want to think the thought
of death! I would very much like to do something that would make the
thought of life even a hundred times more worth being thought to them.
perfectly happy and contented life, and this meant that they had no interest in or involvement
with the human world at all.
158

Book Four: St Januarius
279
Star friendship. — We were friends and have become estranged. But that
was right, and we do not want to hide and obscure it from ourselves as if
we had to be ashamed of it. We are two ships, each of which has its own
goal and course; we may cross and have a feast together, as we did — and
then the good ships lay so quietly in one harbour and in one sun that it
may have seemed as if they had already completed their course and had
the same goal. But then the almighty force of our projects drove us
apart once again, into different seas and sunny zones, and maybe we will
never meet again — or maybe we will, but will not recognize each other:
the different seas and suns have changed us! That we had to become
estranged is the law above us; through it we should come to have more
respect for each other — and the thought of our former friendship
should become more sacred! There is probably a tremendous invisible
curve and stellar orbit in which our different ways and goals may be
included as small stretches — let us rise to this thought! But our life is too
short and our vision too meagre for us to be more than friends in the
sense of that sublime possibility. — Let us then be/eve in our star
friendship even if we must be earth enemies.
280
Architecture for those who wish to pursue knowledge. ~ One day, and
probably soon, we will need some recognition of what is missing
primarily in our big cities: quiet and wide, expansive places for reflection
— places with long, high-ceilinged arcades for bad or all-too-sunny
weather, where no shouts or noise from carriages can penetrate and
where refined manners would prohibit even priests from praying aloud:
a whole complex of buildings and sites that would give expression to the
sublimity of contemplation and of stepping aside. The time is past when
the Church had a monopoly on contemplation, when the vita contempla-
tiva*t always had to be first and foremost a vita religiosa:> and everything
built by the Church gives expression to that idea. I do not see how we
could make do with those buildings, even if they were stripped of their
churchly purposes; as houses of God and spaces for ostentatiously
+ ‘contemplative life’
5 ‘religious life’
159

The Gay Science
displaying our intercourse with the World-Beyond, these buildings
speak much that is too emotional and too partisan for us godless ones to
be able to think our thoughts here. We want to have us translated into
stone and plants; we want to take walks im us when we stroll through
these hallways and gardens.
281
Knowing how to end. — Masters of the first rank are recognized by the
fact that in matters great and small they know how to find an end
perfectly, be it the end of a melody or a thought; of a tragedy’s fifth act
or an act of state. The best of the second rank always get restless toward
the end, and do not fall into the sea with such proud and calm balance as
do, for example, the mountains at Portofino — where the bay of Genoa
finishes its melody.
282
Gait. — There are certain tricks of the spirit by which even great minds
betray that they come from the mob or half-mob; the gait and stride of
their thoughts especially plays the traitor: they cannot walk. Thus
Napoleon too, was unable, to his great vexation, to walk in a princely
and ‘legitimate’ fashion on occasions that really demanded it, such as
great coronation processions; even there, he was always just the leader
of a column ~ proud and hasty at the same time, and very conscious of
it. It is laughable to behold those authors who make the ruffled robes of
long sentences rustle about themselves: they are trying to hide their feet.
283
Preparatory human beings. — 1 welcome all the signs of a more virile,
warlike age approaching that will above all restore honour to bravery!
For it shall pave the way for a still higher age and gather the strength
that the latter will need one day — the age that will carry heroism into
the search for knowledge and wage wars for the sake of thoughts and
their consequences. To this end we now need many preparatory brave
human beings who surely cannot spring from nothingness any more
than from the sand and slime of present-day civilization and urbaniza-
160

Book Four: St Januarius
tion: human beings who know how to be silent, lonely, determined, and
satisfied and steadfast in invisible activities; human beings profoundly
predisposed to look, in all things, for what must be overcome; human
beings whose cheerfulness, patience, modesty, and contempt for great
vanities is just as distinctive as their magnanimity in victory and
patience with the small vanities of the defeated; human beings with a
sharp and free judgement concerning all victors and the share of chance
in every victory and glory; human beings with their own festivals, their
own working days, their own periods of mourning, accustomed to
command with assurance and equally prepared, when called for, to obey
~— in each case, equally proud, equally serving their own cause; more
endangered, more fruitful, happier human beings! For — believe me —
the secret for harvesting from existence the greatest fruitfulness and the
greatest enjoyment is — to live dangerously! Build your cities on the
slopes of Vesuvius! Send your ships into uncharted seas! Live at war
with your peers and yourselves! Be robbers and conquerors as long as
you cannot be rulers and possessors, you seekers of knowledge! Soon
the time will be past in which you had to be content living hidden in
forests like shy deer! Finally the search for knowledge will reach for its
due; it will want to rule and possess, and you with it!
284
Faith in oneself. — Few people have faith in themselves — and of these
few, some possess it as a useful blindness or partial eclipse of the mind
(what would they behold if they could see the bottom of themselves!),
while the rest have to acquire it. Everything good, fine, or great they do
is first of all an argument against the sceptic inside them. They have to
convince or persuade him, and that almost requires genius. These are
the great self-dissatisfied people.
285
Excelsior.© — ‘You will never pray again, never adore again, never again
rest in endless trust; you refuse to let yourself stop to unharness your
thoughts before any ultimate wisdom, goodness, or power; you have no
perpetual guard and friend for your seven solitudes; you live without
® ‘higher’
161

The Gay Science
the view of a mountain-range with snow-capped peaks and fire in its
heart; there is no avenger for you anymore, no final corrector of the text
of your life; there is no more reason in what happens, no love in what
will happen to you; no more resting place stands open for your heart in
which to find and no longer seek; you arm yourself against any ultimate
peace; you will the eternal recurrence of war and peace; — Man of
renunciation, all of this you wish to renounce? Who will give you the
strength to do so? No one yet has had the strength!’ There is a lake that
one day refused to let itself flow off and formed a dam where it used to
flow off: ever since, this lake rises higher and higher. Perhaps this very
renunciation will lend us the strength to bear renunciation; perhaps
man will rise ever higher when he no longer flows off into a god.
286
Interruption, 
—- These are hopes; but what will you see and hear of them
when you have not experienced splendour, ardour, and rosy dawn in
your own souls? I can only remind — more I cannot do! To move stones,
to turn animals into humans — is that what you want from me? Oh, if
you are still stones and animals, you had better look for your Orpheus’
first!
287
Delight in blindness. ~ ‘My thoughts’, said the wanderer to his shadow,
‘should show me where I stand, but they should not betray to me where
I am going. 1 love ignorance of the future and do not want to perish of
impatience and premature tasting of things promised.’
288
High spirits. — It seems to me that most people simply do not believe in
elevated moods, unless it be for moments or fifteen-minute intervals at
most — except for those few who experience an elevated feeling over a
longer period. But to be the human being of one elevated feeling, the
embodiment of a single great mood, has hitherto been a mere dream and
7 See above, Book 11, footnote 31, p. 88.
162

Book Four: St FJanuarius
enchanting possibility; as yet, history does not offer us any certain
examples of it. Nevertheless history might one day beget such people,
too, given the creation and determination of a great many preconditions
that even the dice rolls of the luckiest chance could not put together
today. Perhaps the usual state for these souls would be what has so far
entered our souls only as an occasional exception that made us shudder:
a perpetual movement between high and low and the feeling of high and
low; a continual sense of ascending stairs and at the same time of resting
on clouds.
289
Get on the ships! — If one considers how an overall philosophical
justification of one’s way of living and thinking affects each individual —
namely, like a sun, warming, blessing, impregnating, shining especially
for him; how it makes him independent of praise and blame, self-
sufficient, rich, generous with happiness and good will; how it inces-
santly turns evil into good, brings all forces to bloom and ripen and
keeps the petty, great weed of melancholy and moroseness from coming
up at all — one exclaims longingly, in the end: Oh, how I wish that many
such new suns would yet be created! Even the evil man, the unhappy
man, and the exceptional man should have their philosophy, their good
right, their sunshine! Pity for them is not what is needed! We have to
unlearn this arrogant notion, however long humanity has spent learning
and practising it — we do not need to present them with confessors,
conjurers of souls, and forgivers of sins; rather, a new justice is needed!
And a new motto! And new philosophers! The moral earth, too, is
round! The moral earth, too, has its antipodes! The antipodes, too, have
their right to exist! There is another world to discover — and more than
one! On to the ships, you philosophers!
290
One thing is needful. ~ To ‘give style’ to one’s character —a great and rare
art! It is practised by those who survey all the strengths and weaknesses
that their nature has to offer and then fit them into an artistic plan until
each appears as art and reason and even weaknesses delight the eye.
Here a great mass of second nature has been added; there a piece of first
163

The Gay Science
nature removed — both times through long practice and daily work at it.
Here the ugly that could not be removed is concealed; there it is
reinterpreted into sublimity. Much that is vague and resisted shaping
has been saved and employed for distant views — it is supposed to
beckon towards the remote and immense. In the end, when the work is
complete, it becomes clear how it was the force of a single taste that
ruled and shaped everything great and small — whether the taste was
good or bad means less than one may think; it’s enough that it was one
taste! It will be the strong and domineering natures who experience
their most exquisite pleasure under such coercion, in being bound by
but also perfected under their own law; the passion of their tremendous
will becomes less intense in the face of all stylized nature, all conquered
and serving nature; even when they have palaces to build and gardens to
design, they resist giving nature free rein. Conversely, it is the weak
characters with no power over themselves who fate the constraint of
style: they feel that if this bitterly evil compulsion were to be imposed
on them, they would have to become commonplace under it — they
become slaves as soon as they serve; they hate to serve. Such minds —
and they may be of the first rank — are always out to shape or interpret
their environment as free nature — wild, arbitrary, fantastic, disorderly,
and surprising — and they are well advised to do so, because only thus do
they please themselves! For one thing is needful: that 
a human being
should attain satisfaction with himself — be it through this or that poetry
or art; only then is a human being at all tolerable to behold! Whoever is
dissatisfied with himself is continually prepared to avenge himself for
this, and we others will be his victims if only by having to endure his
sight. For the sight of something ugly makes one bad and gloomy.
291
Genoa. — I have been looking at this city for a long time, at its villas and
pleasure-gardens and the wide circumference of its inhabited heights
and slopes, and in the end I must say: I see faces that belong to past
generations; this region is dotted with images of bold and autocratic
human beings. They have ved and wish to live on — that is what they
are telling me with their houses, built and adorned to last for centuries
and not for the fleeting hour: they were well disposed towards life,
however badly disposed they often may have been towards themselves, I
164

Book Four: St Januarius
keep seeing the builder, how he rests his gaze on everything built near
and afar as well as on city, sea, and mountain contours, and how with his
gaze he is perpetrating acts of violence and conquest: he wants to fit all
this into /zs plan and finally make it his possession by incorporating it
into his plan. The whole region is overgrown with this magnificent,
insatiable lust for possessions and spoils; and even as these people
heeded no boundaries in distant lands and, in their thirst for what was
new, placed a new world beside the old one, so, too, at home each flared
up against the other and found a way to express his superiority and
place his personal infinity between himself and his neighbour. Each
conquered his homeland again for himself by overwhelming it with his
architectural ideas and refashioning it, so to speak, into a house that was
a feast for his eyes. In the North one is impressed by the law and by the
general delight in lawfulness and obedience as one considers the way
cities are built: this allows one to recognize the inner propensity to
uniformity and conformism which must have dominated the souls of all
the builders. But here you find, upon turning every corner, a separate
human being who knows the sea, adventure, and the Orient; 
a human
being averse to the law and to the neighbour as to a kind of boredom,
who measures everything old and established with envious eyes: he
would, with a marvellous cunning of imagination, like to establish all
this anew at least in thought; to put his hand to it, his meaning into it —
if only for the moment of a sunny afternoon when his insatiable and
melancholy soul feels sated for once, and only what is his own and
nothing alien may appear to his eye.
292
To the preachers of morals. ~ 1 do not want to moralize, but to those who
do, I give this advice: if you want eventually to deprive the best things
and situations of all their worth, then keep talking about them the way
you have been! Place them at the top of your morality and talk from
morning till night about the bliss of happiness, the tranquillity of the
soul, about justice and immanent retribution — the way you carry on, all
these good things will finally attain a popularity and street-clamour of
their own, but at the same time all the gold that was on them will have
worn off through handling, and all the gold inside will have turned to
lead. Verily, you know the art of alchemy in reverse, the devaluation of
165

The Gay Science
what is most valuable! Sometime you should try a different prescription
to avoid reaching the opposite of what you seek, as you have so far: deny
these good things; withdraw from them the mob’s acclaim and their
easy currency; make them once again the hidden modesty of solitary
souls; say that morality is something forbidden! That way you might win
over for these things the kind of people who alone matter; I mean the
heroic. But then there must be something in them that provokes fear and
not, as hitherto, disgust! Isn’t it time to say of morality what Master
Eckhart said: ‘I ask God to rid me of God!”
293
Our air. — We know it very well: to those who glance at science as if
passing it on a walk, in the manner of women and unfortunately also
many artists, the severity of its service — this inexorability in matters
great and small, this swiftness in weighing, judging, and passing
judgement — has something dizzying and fear-inspiring. What frightens
them especially is how the hardest is demanded and the best done
despite the absence of praise and awards; rather, as among soldiers, what
one mostly hears is almost exclusively reproaches and sharp reprimands
— for doing things well is considered the rule, and failure the exception;
yet here as everywhere else, the rule has a reticent mouth. Now this
‘severity of science’ has something in common with the form and
decorum of the very best society: it frightens the uninitiated. But
someone accustomed to it wants to live nowhere else than in this bright,
transparent, strongly electric air — in this masculine air. Anywhere else is
not clean and airy enough for him: he suspects that there, his best art
would be of no real use to anyone and of no delight to himself; that
among misunderstandings half his life would slip through his fingers;
that much caution, much concealment and restraint would constantly be
called for — ways of having large amounts of one’s strength sapped
uselessly! But in this severe and clear element he has his full strength:
here he can fly! Why descend into those murky waters where one has to
swim and wade and sully one’s wings? No, it’s too hard for us to live
there; it’s not our fault that we were born for the air, for clean air, we
rivals of the light beam, and that we would prefer to ride on specks of
8 German mystic (1260~1327). This dictum is to be found in his Predigten und Schriften (Frankfurt
and Hamburg, 1956) p. 195.
166

Book Four: St Januarius
ether, like it — not away from the sun but towards the sun! That, however,
we cannot do. So let us do all we can do: bring light to the earth; be ‘the
light of the earth’! And for that, we have our wings and our speed and
our severity; for that, we are masculine and even terrifying, like fire.
May those be terrified of us who do not know how to gain warmth and
light from us!
294
Against the slanderers of nature. ~ I find those people unpleasant in whom
every natural inclination immediately becomes a sickness, something
disfiguring or even contemptible — they have seduced us into the belief
that man’s natural inclinations are evil; they are the cause of our great
injustice towards our nature, towards a// nature! There are enough
people who could well entrust themselves to their inclinations with
grace and without care, but who do not for fear of the imagined ‘evil
essence’ of nature! That is why there is so little nobility among human
beings; its distinguishing feature has always been to have no fear of
oneself, to expect nothing contemptible from oneself, to fly without
misgivings wherever we’re inclined — we free-born birds! And wherever
we arrive, there will always be freedom and sunlight around us.
295
Brief habits. — V love brief habits and consider them invaluable means for
getting to know many things and states down to the bottom of their
sweetnesses and bitternesses; my nature is designed entirely for brief
habits, even in the needs of its physical health and generally as far as I
can see at all, from the lowest to the highest. I always believe this will
give me lasting satisfaction — even brief habits have this faith of passion,
this faith in eternity — and that I am to be envied for having found and
recognized it, and now it nourishes me at noon and in the evening and
spreads a deep contentment around itself and into me, so that I desire
nothing else, without having to compare, despise, or hate. And one day
its time is up; the good thing parts from me, not as something that now
disgusts me but peacefully and sated with me, as I with it, and as if we
ought to be grateful to each other and so shake hands to say farewell.
And already the new waits at the door along with my faith — the
167

The Gay Science
indestructible fool and sage! — that this new thing will be the right thing,
the last right thing. This happens to me with dishes, thoughts, people,
cities, poems, music, doctrines, daily schedules, and ways of living.
Enduring habits, however, I hate, and feel as if a tyrant has come near me
and the air around me is thickening when events take a shape that seems
inevitably to produce enduring habits — for instance, owing to an official
position, constant relations with the same people, a permanent resi-
dence, or uniquely good health. Yes, at the very bottom of my soul I am
grateful to all my misery and illnesses and whatever is imperfect in me
because they provide a hundred back doors through which I can escape
enduring habits. To me the most intolerable, the truly terrible, would of
course be a life entirely without habits, a life that continually demanded
improvisation — that would be my exile and my Siberia.
296
A firm reputation. — A firm reputation used to be a thing of utmost
utility; and wherever society is still ruled by herd mentality it is still
today most expedient for everyone to act as if his character and
occupation are unchangeable, even if basically they are not. ‘One can
depend on him; he stays the same’: wherever society is threatened this is
the type of praise that means the most. Society sees in this person’s
virtue, in that person’s ambition, in the thoughtfulness and passion of a
third dependable ever-handy instruments. This is a source of great
gratification to society, and it bestows on this instrument-nature, this
staying-true-to-oneself, this immutability in views, aspirations, and
even vices its highest honours. Such esteem, which blooms and has
bloomed everywhere alongside the morality of custom (Sittlichkeit der
Sitte), fosters ‘character’ and brings all change, re-learning, and self-
transformation into ill repute. However great the advantages of this
mentality may be elsewhere, to the search for knowledge it is the most
harmful kind of general judgement, for it condemns and discredits the
willingness which a seeker after knowledge must have to declare himself
against his previous opinion and to mistrust anything that wishes to
become firm in us. The attitude of the seeker after knowledge, which is
incompatible with a ‘firm reputation’, is considered dishonourable while
the petrifaction of opinions has all the honour to itself — still today we
must live under the spell of such standards! How hard living is when
168

Book Four: St Januarius
one feels the judgement of many millennia against and around oneself!
It is probable that the search for knowledge was afflicted for many
millennia with a bad conscience and that there must have been much
self-contempt and secret misery in the history of the greatest spirits.
297
Being able to contradict. 
— Everybody knows now that being able to stand
contradiction is a high sign of culture. Some even know that the higher
human being desires and invites contradiction in order to receive a hint
about his own injustice of which he is as yet unaware. But the ability to
contradict, 
the 
acquired good conscience 
accompanying hostility
towards what is familiar, traditional, hallowed — that is better yet than
both those abilities, and constitutes what is really great, new, and
amazing in our culture; it is the step of all steps of the liberated spirit:
who knows that?
298
Sigh. — 1 caught this insight on the wing and quickly took the nearest
shoddy words to fasten it lest it fly away from me. And now it has died
of these barren words and hangs and flaps in them — and I hardly know
any more, when I look at it, how I could have felt so happy when I
caught this bird.
299
What one should learn from artists. 
- What means do we have for making
things beautiful, attractive, and desirable when they are not? And in
themselves I think they never are! Here we have something to learn
from physicians, when for example they dilute something bitter or add
wine and sugar to the mixing bowl; but even more from artists, who are
really constantly out to invent new artistic tours de force of this kind. To
distance oneself from things until there is much in them that one no
longer sees and much that the eye must add in order to see them at all, or
to see things around a corner and as if they were cut out and extracted
from their context, or to place them so that each partially distorts the
view one has of the others and allows only perspectival glimpses, or to
169

The Gay Science
look at them through coloured glass or in the light of the sunset, or to
give them a surface and skin that is not fully transparent: all this we
should learn from artists while otherwise being wiser than they. For
usually in their case this delicate power stops where art ends and life
begins; me, however, want to be poets of our lives, starting with the
smallest and most commonplace details.
300
Preludes to science ~ So you believe the sciences would have emerged and
matured, if they had not been preceded by magicians, alchemists,
astrologers, and witches who with their promises and false claims
created a thirst, hunger, and taste for hidden and forbidden powers?
Indeed, infinitely more has had to be promised than can ever be fulfilled
in order that anything at all be fulfilled in the realm of knowledge.
Those things which now appear to us to be preludes and exercises
preparatory to science were in the past certainly not practised and felt to
be any such thing. Similarly perhaps to a distant age the whole of
religion will appear as an exercise and prelude. Perhaps religion could
have been the strange means of making it possible one day for a few
individuals to enjoy the whole self-sufficiency of a god and all his power
of self-redemption. Indeed — one may ask — would man ever have
learned to feel hunger for himself and to find satisfaction and fullness in
himself without this religious training and prehistory? Did Prometheus?
first have to imagine having stolen light and pay for it before he could
finally discover that he had created light by desiring light, and that not
only man but also god was the work of his own hands and clay in his
hands? All mere images of the sculptor — no less than delusion, theft,
the Caucasus, the vulture, and the whole tragic Prometheia of all those
who know?
301
Delusion of the contemplative ones. - Higher human beings distinguish
themselves from the lower by seeing and hearing, and thoughtfully
seeing and hearing, immeasurably more — and just this distinguishes
9 See above, Book 111, footnote 17, p. 125.
170

Book Four: St Januartus
human beings from animals, and the higher animals from the lower.
The world becomes ever fuller for someone who grows into the height
of humanity; ever more baited hooks to attract his interest are cast his
way; the things that stimulate him grow steadily in number, as do the
kinds of things that please and displease him — the higher human being
always becomes at the same time happier and unhappier. But a delusion
remains his constant companion: he thinks himself placed as spectator
and /istener before the great visual and acoustic play that is life; he calls
his nature contemplative and thereby overlooks the fact that he is also the
actual poet and ongoing author of life — that, to be sure, he differs
greatly from the actor of this drama, the so-called man of action, but
even more so from a mere spectator and festival visitor in front of the
stage. As the poet, he certainly possesses vis contemplativa!® and a
retrospective view of his work; but at the same time and above all vis
creativa,'’ which the man of action lacks, whatever appearances and
universal belief may say. It is we, the thinking-sensing ones, who really
and continually make something that is not yet there: the whole
perpetually growing world of valuations, colours, weights, perspectives,
scales, affirmations, and negations. This poem that we have invented is
constantly internalized, drilled, translated into flesh and reality, indeed,
into the commonplace, by the so-called practical human beings (our
actors). Whatever has va/ue in the present world has it not in itself,
according to its nature — nature is always value-less — but has rather
been given, granted value, and we were the givers and granters! Only we
have created the world that concerns human beings! But precisely this
knowledge we lack, and when we catch it for 
a moment we have
forgotten it the next: we misjudge our best power and underestimate
ourselves just a bit, we contemplative ones. We are neither as proud nor as
happy as we could be.
302
The danger of the happiest. - To have refined senses and a refined taste;
to be accustomed to the exquisite and most excellent things of the spirit
as one is to the proper and most usual food; to enjoy a strong, bold,
audacious soul; to go through life with a calm eye and a firm step, always
10 ‘contemplative power’
11 ‘creative power’
171

The Gay Science
prepared for the most extreme situations — as for a feast and full of
yearning for undiscovered worlds and seas, people, and gods; to hearken
to all cheerful music as if brave men, soldiers, seafarers were perhaps
seeking a short rest and merriment there — and in the deepest pleasure
of the moment to be overcome by tears and the whole crimson
melancholy of the happy: who would not like all of this to be Ais
possession, his state! It was the happiness of Homer! The happiness of the
one who invented their gods for the Greeks — I mean, fis gods for
himself! But don’t disregard the fact that with this Homeric happiness
in one’s soul one is also more capable of suffering than any other
creature under the sun! Only at this price can one buy the most precious
shell hitherto washed ashore by the waves of existence! As its owner, one
becomes ever more refined in pain and eventually too refined; in the
end, any slight discontentment and disgust was enough to spoil life for
Homer. He had been unable to solve a silly little riddle posed to him by
some young fishermen!!? Yes, the little riddles are the danger for those
who are happiest!
393
Two happy ones. — Truly, despite his youth, this person knows how to
improvise life and amazes even the keenest observer — for he never seems
to make a mistake even though he constantly plays the riskiest game. It
reminds one of those masters of musical improvisation to whose hands
the listener would also like to ascribe a divine imfallibility even though,
like every mortal, they make a mistake here and there. But they are
practised and inventive and always ready at any moment to incorporate
into the thematic order the most accidental note to which the stroke of a
finger or a mood drives them, breathing a beautiful meaning and a soul
into an accident. Here is an entirely different person: basically every-
thing he wills and plans goes wrong. What occasionally he set his heart
on several times brought him to the edge of the abyss and within a hair
of destruction; and if he did escape that, it was certainly not just ‘with a
12 Some of the ancient biographies of Homer state that at the end of his life he was deeply
chagrined — some even say he died of chagrin — because he was unable to solve a riddle put to
him by some young fishermen. The riddle: ‘What we caught we left behind; what we didn’t
catch we carry with us.’ (Answer: lice. Not having any luck with their fishing, they sat down to
delouse each other. The lice they caught, they discarded; those they missed were still on their
persons.) See Vita Herodotea, 492-516, Certamen, 321-38, Plutarchi Vita, 62~71 etc.
172

Book Four: St Januarius
black eye.’ Do you believe he is unhappy about this? He decided long
ago not to take his own wishes and plans so seriously. ‘If I don’t succeed
at this,’ he says to himself, ‘I might succeed at that; and on the whole I
don’t know whether I should be more grateful towards my failures than
towards any success. Was I made to be stubborn and to have a bull’s
horns? That which constitutes the value and outcome of life for me lies
elsewhere; my pride as well as my misery lie elsewhere. I know more
about life because I have so often been on the verge of losing it; and
precisely therefore do I get more out of life than any of you!”
304
By doing we forgo. — Basically I abhor every morality that says: ‘Do not
do this! Renounce! Overcome yourself!’ But I am well disposed towards
those moralities that impel me to do something again and again from
morning till evening, and to dream of it at night, and to think of nothing
else than doing this well, as well as J alone can! When one lives that way,
one thing after another that does not belong to such a life drops off:
without hate or reluctance one sees this take its leave today and that
tomorrow, like the yellow leaves that every faint wisp of wind carries off
a tree. Or he does not notice that it takes its leave — so sternly is his eye
set on its goal, entirely forwards, not sideways, backwards, downwards.
‘What we do should determine what we forgo; in doing we forgo” —
that’s how I like it; that is my placitum.'? But I do not want to strive for
my impoverishment with open eyes; I do not like negative virtues —
virtues whose very essence is negation and self-denial.
395
Self-control. 
— Those moralists who command man first and above all to
gain control of himself thereby afflict him with a peculiar disease,
namely, a constant irritability at all natural stirrings and inclinations and
as it were a kind of itch. Whatever may henceforth push, pull, beckon,
impel him from within or without will always strike this irritable one as
endangering his self-control: no longer may he entrust himself to any
instinct or free wing-beat; instead he stands there rigidly with a
13 ‘opinion’
173

The Gay Science
defensive posture, armed against himself, with sharp and suspicious
eyes, the eternal guardian of his fortress, since he has turned himself
into a fortress. Indeed, he can become great this way! But how insuffer-
able he has become to others; how impoverished and cut off from the
most beautiful fortuities of the soul! And indeed from all further
instruction! For one must be able at times to lose oneself if one wants to
learn something from things that we ourselves are not.
306
Stoics and Epicureans. ~ The Epicurean seeks out the situation, the
persons, and even the events that suit his extremely sensitive intellectual
constitution; he forgoes the rest — that is, almost everything — because it
would be too strong and heavy a diet. The Stoic, by contrast, trains
himself to swallow stones and worms, glass shards and scorpions
without nausea; he wants his stomach to be ultimately insensible to
everything the chance of existence pours into him — he brings to mind
the Arabian sect of the Assua that one encounters in Algiers:'* like these
insensitive people, he likes to act out his insensitivity before an invited
audience, which is precisely what the Epicurean gladly eschews — for he
has his ‘garden’!!> Stoicism may well be advisable for those with whom
fate improvises and who live in violent times and depend on impulsive
and changeable people. But someone who more or less expects fate to
allow him to spin a long thread does well to take an Epicurean
orientation; people engaged in work of the spirit have always done so!
For it would be the loss of all losses, for them, to forfeit their subtle
sensitivity in exchange for a hard Stoic skin with porcupine spines.
397
In favour of criticism. — Something you formerly loved as a truth or a
probability now strikes you as an error; you cast it off and believe your
reason has made a victory. But maybe that error was as necessary for you
then, when you were still another person — you are always another
4 For further information about this sect see P. J. André, Contribution a l’étude des confréries
musulmanes (Algiers, 1956), pp. 216ff.
15 Epicurus (see above, Book 1, footnote 34, p. 59, and Book 1v, footnote 4, p. 157), when he was
about thirty-five, bought a house in Athens with a garden, setting up there a school of
philosophy which came to be known as ‘The Garden’.
174

Book Four: St Januarius
person — as are all your present ‘truths’, like a skin that concealed and
covered many things you weren’t allowed to see yet. It is your new life,
not your reason, that has killed that opinion for you: you don’t need it
any more, and now it collapses and unreason crawls out of it into the
light like a worm. When we criticize, we are not doing something
arbitrary and impersonal; it is, at least very often, proof that there are
living, active forces within us shedding skin. We negate and have to
negate because something in us wants to live and affirm itself, something
we might not yet know or see! ~ This in favour of criticism.
308
The history of every day. — What is the history of your every day?
Consider the habits of which it consists: are they the product of
innumerable little cowardices and lazinesses or of your courage and
innovative reason? Different as the two cases may be, people could
conceivably give you equal praise and you might actually benefit them
equally either way. However, praise and benefit and respectability may
be enough for those who want merely a good conscience — but not for
you who scrupulously examine the inside of things and know about
conscience!
309
From the seventh solitude. 
-One day the wanderer slammed a door shut
behind him, came to a halt, and wept. Then he said: “This penchant and
passion for what is true, real, non-apparent, certain — how it exasperates
me! Why does this gloomy and earnest oppressor follow me of all
people! I want to rest, but he won’t allow it. How many things seduce
me to linger? Everywhere there are Armida’s gardens!® for me. Thus
ever again I must tear myself away and feel another new bitterness in
my heart! Once again I must lift my foot, this tired, wounded foot; and
having to do so often makes me cast a wrathful glance back at the most
beautiful thing that could not hold me — because it could not hold me!’
'6 In the epic poem Gerusalemme Liberata (1575) by Torquato Tasso (1544~95), the enchantress
Armida has a magic garden into which she entices men.
175

The Gay Science
310
Will and wave. — How greedily this wave is approaching, as if it were
trying to reach something! How it crawls with terrifying haste into the
inmost crevices of the craggy gorge! It seems to be trying to arrive
before someone else; something of value, of great value, seems to be
hidden there. - And now it is returning, a bit more slowly but still
quite white with excitement — is it disappointed? Has it found what it
was seeking? Is it simulating disappointment? — But already another
wave is nearing, still more greedily and wildly than the first; and its
soul, too, seems full of secrets and the hunger for treasure-digging.
That is how the waves live — that is how we live, we who will — I will
say no more. So? You distrust me? You are angry with me, you
beautiful monsters? Are you afraid I will divulge your entire secret?
Well, be angry with me; raise your dangerous green bodies as high as
you can; make a wall between me and the sun — as you are now!
Truly, at this moment nothing remains of the world but green dusk
and green thunderbolts. Carry on as you want, you high-spirited ones:
roar with delight and malice — or dive again, pour your emeralds into
the deepest depths, cast your endless white mane of foam and froth
over them: everything is fine with me because everything suits you so
well, and I love you so for everything — how could I betray you! For —
mark my words! — I know you and your secret; 
I know your kind!
After all, you and I are of one kind! After all, you and I have one
secret!
311
Refracted light. - One is not always brave; and when one gets tired,
one of us, too, is likely one day to lament: ‘It is so hard to hurt people
— why is it necessary! What good does it do us to live in seclusion
when we don’t want to keep to ourselves what gives offence? Wouldn’t
it be more advisable to live in the bustle and to do good to individuals
as compensation for the sins that should and must be committed
against everyone? To be foolish with fools, vain with the vain, fanatic
with the fanatic? Wouldn’t it be fair, given the extravagant degree of
deviation on the whole? When I hear of other people’s malice towards
me, is not satisfaction the first thing I feel? Quite right! (I seem to be
176

Book Four: St FJanuarius
saying to them) I am so little in agreement with you and have so
much truth on my side that you might as well have a good day at my
expense whenever you can! Here are my faults and mistakes; here is
my delusion, my bad taste, my confusion, my tears, my vanity, my
owlish seclusion, my contradictions! Here’s something for you to
laugh at! So then laugh and be merry! I am not angry with the law
and nature of things that want faults and mistakes to cause merriment!
To be sure, there have been “more beautiful” times when one could
still, with every moderately new idea, feel so indispensable as to take it
out on the street and shout at everyone: “Behold! The kingdom of
heaven is at hand!”!? I would not miss myself if I were gone. We are
all dispensable!’ But as I said, this is not how we think when we are
brave; then we don’t think about that.
312
My dog. — 1 have named my pain and call it ‘dog’ — it’s just as faithful,
just as obtrusive and shameless, just as entertaining, just as clever as
every other dog — and I can scold it and take my bad moods out on it the
way others do with their dogs, servants, and wives.
313
No image of torment. — 1 want to follow Raphael’s example and never
paint another image of torment. There are enough sublime things; one
does not have to seek sublimity where it lives in sisterhood with cruelty;
anyway, my ambition would find no satisfaction if I wanted to make
myself a sublime torturer.
314
New domestic animals. — 1 want my lion and eagle around so that I can
always have hints and forebodings to know how great or small my
strength is. Must I look down on them today and fear them? And will
the hour return when they look up at me — in fear?
17 Matthew 4:17
177

The Gay Science
315
On the last hour. — Storms are my danger: will I have my storm of
which I perish, as Cromwell perished of his storm? Or will I go out
like a light that no wind blows out, but that grew tired and sated with
itself — a burned-out light? Or finally: will I blow myself out lest I
burn out? —
316
Prophetic human beings. 
— You are not sensible to the fact that
prophetic human beings are full of suffering; you simply think they
have been granted a beautiful ‘gift? that you yourselves probably
would like to have — but I will express myself in a parable. How
animals can suffer from electricity in the air and clouds! We see how
certain species, for example, monkeys, have a prophetic insight about
the weather (as one can observe even in Europe — and not only in
zoos, but also on Gibraltar). But we don’t think of the fact that for
them, their pains are prophets for them! When under the influence of
an approaching, as yet far from visible cloud a strong positive
electrical charge suddenly turns into negative electricity and a change
in the weather is impending, these animals act as if an enemy were
approaching and prepare for defence or escape. Most often they craw]
into hiding — they don’t see bad weather as weather, but as an enemy
whose hand they can already /fee/!
317
Retrospection. — While we are living each phase of our lives we
rarely recognize its true pathos, but always see it as the only state
that is now possible for us and reasonable and — to use some words
and a distinction of the Greeks — thoroughly an ethos and not a
pathos. Today a few notes of music called back to my memory a
winter and a house and a most solitary life, as well as the feeling I
lived with: I thought I could continue to live that way forever. But
now I understand that it was 
pathos and passion throughout,
18 A lasting state of character, not a temporary state of being affected one way or another
178

Book Four: St Januartus
comparable to this painful, courageous music which brings certain
solace — one is not allowed to possess such things for years at a
time, how much the less for eternities: they would make one too
‘overworldly’ for this planet.
318
Wisdom in pain. — There is as much wisdom in pain as in pleasure: like
pleasure, pain is one of the prime species-preserving forces. If it
weren't, it would have perished long ago: that it hurts is no argument
against it — it is its essence. In pain I hear the captain’s command: ‘Pull
in the sails!’ The hardy seafarer ‘Man’ must have learned to adjust the
sails in a thousand ways; otherwise he would have gone under too
quickly and the ocean would have swallowed him too soon. We have to
know how to live with reduced energy, too: as soon as pain sounds its
safety signal, it is time for such a reduction — some great danger, some
storm is approaching, and we do well to ‘inflate ourselves’ as little as
possible. True, there are people who hear exactly the opposite command
when great pain approaches and who never look as proud, bellicose, and
happy as when a storm is nearing — yes, pain itself gives them their
greatest moments! They are the heroic human beings, the great pain-
bringers of humanity, those few or rare ones who need the same apology
as pain itself — and truly, they should not be denied this! They are
eminently species-preserving and species-enhancing forces, if only
because they resist comfort and do not hide their nausea at this type of
happiness.
319
As interpreters of our experiences. - One type of honesty has been alien
to all religion-founders and such: they have not made their experi-
erices a matter of conscience for their knowledge. ‘What did I really
experience? What was going on inside and around me? Was my reason
bright enough? Was my will turned against all deceptions of the
senses and stalwart in warding off the fantastic?? None of them has
asked such questions. Even today, none of our dear religious ones asks
them; rather, they have a thirst for things that are contrary to reason
and do not want to make it too hard for themselves to quench it —~ so
179

The Gay Science
they experience ‘miracles’ and ‘rebirths’ and hear the voices of the
angels! But we, we others, we reason-thirsty ones, want to face our
experiences as sternly as we would a 
scientific experiment, hour by
hour, day by day! We want to be our own experiments and guinea-
pigs.
320
On meeting again. — A.: Do I still understand you rightly? You are
searching? Where is your corner and star within the real world? Where
can you lie down in the sun so that an abundance of well-being comes to
you, too, and your existence justifies itself? Let everyone do that for
himself — you seem to me to be saying — and let everyone put out of his
mind generalities and worries about others and about society! B: I want
more than that; I am no seeker. I want to create for myself a sun of my
own.
321
New caution. 
— Let’s stop thinking so much about punishing,
reproaching, and improving! We rarely change an individual; and
should we succeed, something else may have been accomplished,
unnoticed: we may have been changed through him! Let’s rather
make sure our own influence on all that is to come balances and
outweighs his influence! Let’s not struggle in a direct fight, which is
what reproaching, punishing, and desiring to improve amount to.
Let’s rather raise ourselves that much higher. Let us give our own
example ever more brilliant colours! Let us darken the others
through our light! No — let’s not become darker on their account,
like those who punish and are dissatisfied! Let’s sooner step aside!
Let us look away!
322
Parable. — Those thinkers in whom all stars move in cyclical orbits are
not the deepest; he who looks into himself as into a vast space and bears
galaxies within also knows how irregular galaxies are; they lead into the
chaos and labyrinth of existence.
180

Book Four: St Januarius
323
Luck in fate — Fate bestows on us the greatest distinction when it has let
us fight for a time on our opponents’ side. Thus we are predestined for a
great victory.
324
In media vita.'? — No, life has not disappointed me. Rather, I find it
truer, more desirable and mysterious every year — ever since the day the
great liberator overcame me: the thought that life could be an experi-
ment for the knowledge-seeker — not a duty, not a disaster, not a
deception! And knowledge itself: let it be something else to others, like a
bed to rest on or the way to one, or a diversion or a form of idleness; to
me it is a world of dangers and victories in which heroic feelings also
have their dance- and playgrounds. ‘Life as a means to knowledge’ — with
this principle in one’s heart one can not only live bravely but also /ive
gaily and laugh gaily! And who would know how to laugh and live well
who did not first have a good understanding of war and victory?
325
What belongs to greatness - Who will attain something great if he does
not feel in himself the power to inflict great pain? Being able to suffer is
the least; weak women and even slaves often achieve mastery at that. But
not to perish of inner distress and uncertainty when one inflicts great
suffering and hears the cry of this suffering — that is great; that belongs
to greatness.
326
Soul-doctors and pain. — All preachers of morals, and all theologians, share
one bad habit: they all try to talk people into thinking they are in a very
bad way and need some severe, final, radical cure. And since humanity
has for centuries far too eagerly lent its ear to these doctrines, something
of this superstition of being very badly off has finally stuck, so that they
19 Gn mid-life’
181

The Gay Science
are now only too ready to sigh and find nothing good in life and make
sad faces together, as if life were really quite hard to endure. In reality,
they are uninhibitedly sure of and in love with their lives, and are full
of innumerable wiles and tricks to get rid of unpleasantness and
extract the thorn of pain and misfortune. Talk of pain and misfortune
always strikes me as exaggerated, as if it were a matter of good
manners to exaggerate here while deliberately keeping quiet about the
fact that there are innumerable palliatives against pain, such as an
aesthetics, or the feverish haste of thoughts, or a restful position of the
body, or good and bad memories, intentions, hopes, and many types of
pride and sympathy, which have nearly the same effect as anaesthesia
— and at the highest degrees of pain, unconsciousness automatically
takes over. We know quite well how to trickle sweets onto our
bitternesses, especially onto the soul’s bitternesses; we find aid in our
boldness and sublimity, as well as in the nobler deliriums of submis-
sion and resignation. A loss is a loss for barely an hour; somehow it
also brings us a gift from heaven — new strength, for example, or at
least a new opportunity for strength! What fantasies about the inner
‘miseries’ of evil persons the preachers of morals have concocted! How
they have even /ied to us about the unhappiness of passionate people!
Yes, ‘lied’ is here the proper term: they knew very well about the
superabundant happiness of this type of person, but kept a deathly
silence about it, since it constituted a refutation of their theory on
which happiness arises only with the annihilation of passion and the
silencing of the will! Finally, concerning these soul-doctors’ prescrip-
tion and their praise for a severe, radical cure, one may ask: is our life
really so painful and burdensome that it would be advantageous for us
to trade it for a fossilized Stoic way of life? Things are not bad enough
for us that they have to be bad for us in the Stoic style!
327
Taking seriously. — For most people, the intellect is an awkward, gloomy,
creaking machine that is hard to start: when they want to work with this
machine and think well, they call it ‘taking the matter seriously’ — oh,
how taxing good thinking must be for them! The lovely human beast
seems to lose its good mood when it thinks well; it becomes ‘serious’!
And ‘where laughter and gaiety are found, thinking is good for nothing’
182

Book Four: St Januarius
— that is the prejudice of this serious beast against all ‘gay science’. Well
then, let us prove it a prejudice!
328
To harm stupidity. —- Surely the creed concerning the reprehensibility
of egoism, preached so stubbornly and with so much conviction, has
on the whole harmed egoism (to the advantage of, as I will repeat a
hundred times, the herd instincts!) — above all, by depriving egoism of
its good conscience and telling us to seek in it the true source of all
unhappiness. ‘Your selfishness is the reason your life is miserable
(Unheil)? — that was preached for millennia and, as I said, harmed
selfishness and deprived it of much spirit, much cheerfulness, much
inventiveness, much beauty; it made selfishness stupid and ugly and
poisoned it! Ancient philosophy, by contrast, taught a quite different
main source of misery (Unheil): from Socrates onwards these thinkers
never tired of preaching, ‘Your thoughtlessness and stupidity, your
way of living according to the rule, your subordination to the opinion
of your neighbour is the reason why you so seldom achieve happiness
— we thinkers are, as thinkers, the happiest.’ Let us not decide here
whether this sermon against stupidity had better reasons on its side
than the sermon against selfishness; what is certain, however, is that it
deprived stupidity of its good conscience — these philosophers harmed
stupidity.
329
Leisure and idleness. - There is something of the American Indian,
something of the savagery peculiar to the Indian blood, in the way the
Americans strive for gold; and their breathless haste in working — the
true vice of the new world — is already starting to spread to old Europe,
making it savage and covering it with a most odd mindlessness. Already
one is ashamed of keeping still; long reflection almost gives people a bad
conscience. One thinks with a watch in hand, as one eats lunch with an
eye on the financial pages — one lives like someone who might always
‘miss out on something’. ‘Rather do anything than nothing’ — even this
principle is a cord to strangle all culture and all higher taste. Just as all
forms are visibly being destroyed by the haste of the workers, so, too, is
183

The Gay Science
the feeling for form itself, the ear and eye for the melody of movements.
The proof of this lies in the crude obviousness which is universally
demanded in all situations in which people want for once to be honest
with others — in their relations with friends, women, relatives, children,
teachers, students, leaders, and princes: one no longer has time and
energy for ceremony, for civility with detours, for esprit in conversation,
and in general for any otium”° For life in a hunt for profit constantly
forces people to expend their spirit to the point of exhaustion in
continual pretence or out-smarting or forestalling others: the true virtue
today is doing something in less time than someone else. And thus
hours in which honesty is a//owed are rare; during them, however, one is
tired and wants not only to ‘let oneself go’ but also to lay oneself down
and stretch oneself out unceremoniously to one’s full length and breadth.
This is the way people now write /etters, the style and spirit of which
will always be the true ‘sign of the times’. If sociability and the arts still
offer any delight, it is the kind of delight that overworked slaves make
for themselves. How frugal our educated and uneducated have become
concerning ‘joy’! How they are becoming increasingly suspicious of all
joy! More and more, mork gets all good conscience on its side; the desire
for joy already calls itself a ‘need to recuperate’ and is starting to be
ashamed of itself. ‘One owes it to one’s health’ — that is what one says
when caught on an excursion in the countryside. Soon we may well
reach the point where one can’t give in to the desire for a vita
contemplativa”! (that is, taking a walk with ideas and friends) without
self-contempt and a bad conscience. Well, formerly it was the other way
around: work was afflicted with a bad conscience. A person of good
family concealed the fact that he worked if need compelled him to work.
The slave worked under the pressure of the feeling that he was doing
something contemptible: ‘doing’ was itself contemptible. ‘Nobility and
honour are attached solely to otium and bellum’? — that was the ancient
prejudice!
330
Applause. — A thinker needs no applause and clapping of hands provided
he is sure of his own clapping of hands; he cannot do without that. Are
20 ‘Jeisure’ 
21 ‘the contemplative life’ 
22 war?
184

Book Four: St Januarius
there people who can dispense with that, too, and altogether with every
kind of applause? I doubt it; and Tacitus, who did not slander the wise,
said even of the wisest of men: quando etiam sapientibus gloriae cupido
novissima excuitur?> — which for him means never.
331
Better deaf than deafened — Formerly one wanted to be ta/ked about; that
is no longer enough, since the market has grown too large — only a shout
will do. As a result, even good voices shout themselves down, and the
best goods are offered by hoarse voices; without the vendors’ cry and
hoarseness there is no longer any genius. That is, to be sure, a bad epoch
for a thinker; he must learn how to find his own quietude even between
two noises, and pretend he is deaf until he really is. As long as he has
not learned this, he runs the risk of going to pieces from impatience and
headaches.
332
The evil hour. ~ Every philosopher has probably had an evil hour when
he thought: What do I matter if people don’t accept my bad arguments,
too? And then some malicious little bird flew over him and chirped:
‘What do you matter? What do you matter?’
333
What knowing means. 
— Non ridere, non lugere, neque detestari, sed
intelligere!** says Spinoza as simply and sublimely as is his wont. Yet in
the final analysis, what is this intelligere other than the way we become
sensible of the other three? A result of the different and conflicting
impulses to laugh, lament, and curse? Before knowledge is possible,
each of these impulses must first have presented its one-sided view of
the thing or event; then comes the fight between these one-sided views,
and occasionally out of it a mean, an appeasement, a concession to all
23 ‘since the desire for fame is the last thing even the wise are able to rid themselves of’; Tacitus
(first century AD) Histories 1v.6
2+ ‘not to laugh at or lament over or despise, but to understand’; Spinoza (see above, Book 1,
footnote 28, p. 55) Ethica, Book 111, Praefatio
185

The Gay Science
three sides, a kind of justice and contract; for in virtue of justice and a
contract all these impulses can assert and maintain themselves in
existence and each can finally feel it is in the right vis-a-vis all the
others. Since only the ultimate reconciliation scenes and final accounts
of this long process rise to consciousness, we suppose that intelligere
must be something conciliatory, just, and good, something essentially
opposed to the instincts, when in fact it zs only a certain behaviour of the
drives towards one another. For the longest time, conscious thought was
considered thought itself; only now does the truth dawn on us that by
far the greatest part of our mind’s activity proceeds unconscious and
unfelt; but I think these drives which here fight each other know very
well how to make themselves felt by and how to hurt each other. This
may well be the source of that great and sudden exhaustion that afflicts
all thinkers (it is the exhaustion of the battlefield). Indeed, there may be
many hidden instances for Aeroism in our warring depths, but certainly
nothing divine, eternally resting in itself, as Spinoza supposed. Conscious
thought, especially that of the philosopher, is the least vigorous and
therefore also the relatively mildest and calmest type of thought; and
thus precisely philosophers are most easily led astray about the nature
of knowledge.
334
One must learn to love. — This happens to us in music: first one must
learn to hear a figure and melody at all, to detect and distinguish it, to
isolate and delimit it as a life in itself; then one needs effort and good
will to stand it despite its strangeness; patience with its appearance
and expression, and kindheartedness about its oddity. Finally comes a
moment when we are used to it; when we expect it; when we sense
that we’d miss it if it were missing; and now it continues relentlessly
to compel and enchant us until we have become its humble and
enraptured lovers, who no longer want anything better from the world
than it and it again. But this happens to us not only in music: it is in
just this way that we have /earned to love everything we now love. We
are always rewarded in the end for our good will, our patience, our
fair-mindedness and gentleness with what is strange, as it gradually
casts off its veil and presents itself as 
a new and indescribable beauty.
That is its thanks for our hospitality. Even he who loves himself will
186

Book Four: St FJanuarius
have learned it this way — there is no other way. Love, too, must be
learned.
335
Long live physics! ~ So, how many people know how to observe? And of
these few, how many to observe themselves? ‘Everyone is farthest from
himself’?5 — every person who is expert at scrutinizing the inner life of
others knows this to his own chagrin; and the saying, ‘Know thyself’,
addressed to human beings by a god, is near to malicious.*© That self-
observation is in such a bad state, however, is most clearly confirmed by
the way in which nearly everyone speaks of the nature of a moral act —
that quick, willing, convinced, talkative manner, with its look, its smile,
its obliging eagerness! People seem to be wanting to say to you, ‘But my
dear fellow, that is precisely my subject! You are directing your question
to the person who is competent to answer it: there is, as it happens,
nothing I am wiser about. So: when man judges “that is right” and
infers “hence it must come about!” and then does what he thus has
recognized to be right and described as necessary — then the nature of
his act is moral! But, my friend, you are speaking of three acts instead
of one: even the judgement ‘that is right’, for example, is an act.
Wouldn’t it be possible for a person to make a judgement in a way that
would be moral or immoral? Why do you take this and specifically this
to be right? ‘Because my conscience tells me so; conscience never speaks
immorally, since it determines what is to count as moral!’ But why do
you /isten to the words of your conscience? And what gives you the right
to consider such a judgement true and infallible? For this belief — is
there no conscience? Do you know nothing of an intellectual conscience?
A conscience behind your ‘conscience’? Your judgement, ‘that is right’
has a prehistory in your drives, inclinations, aversions, experiences, and
what you have failed to experience; you have to ask, ‘how did it emerge
there?’ and then also, ‘what is really impelling me to listen to it?’ You
can listen to its commands like a good soldier who heeds the command
of his officer. Or like 
a woman who loves the one who commands. Or
like a flatterer and coward who fears the commander. Or like a fool who
5 Reversal of common German expression ‘Everyone is closest to himself’; cf. Andria 1v .i12 by
the Roman comedy-writer Terence (second century BC).
26 Motto inscribed over the entrance to the oracle of Apollo at Delphi
187

The Gay Science
obeys because he can think of no objection. In short, there are a
hundred ways to listen to your conscience. But that you hear this or that
judgement as the words of conscience, i.e. that you feel something to be
right may have its cause in your never having thought much about
yourself and in your blindly having accepted what has been labelled
right since your childhood; or in the fact that fulfilling your duties has so
far brought you bread and honours — and you consider it right because
it appears to you as your own ‘condition of existence’ (and that you have
a right to existence seems irrefutable to you). For all that, the firmness of
your moral judgement could be evidence of your personal wretchedness,
of lack of a personality; your ‘moral strength’ might have its source in
your stubbornness — or in your inability to envisage new ideals. And,
briefly, had you reflected more subtly, observed better, and studied
more, you would never continue to call this ‘duty’ of yours and this
‘conscience’ of yours duty and conscience. Your insight into how such
things as moral judgements could ever have come into existence would spoil
these emotional words for you, as other emotional words, for example,
‘sin’, ‘salvation of the soul’, and ‘redemption’ have been spoiled for you.
And now don’t bring up the categorical imperative, my friend! The
term tickles my ear and makes me laugh despite your very serious
presence. I am reminded of old Kant, who helped himself to (erschlichen)
the ‘thing in itself’ — another very ridiculous thing! — and was punished
for this when the ‘categorical imperative’ crept into (beschlichen) his
heart and made him stray back to ‘God’, ‘soul’, ‘freedom’, ‘immortality’,
like a fox who strays back into his cage. Yet it had been Ais strength and
cleverness that had broken open the cage!?’ What? You admire the
categorical imperative within you? This ‘firmness’ of your so-called
moral judgement? This absoluteness of the feeling, ‘here everyone must
judge as I do’? Rather admire your selfishness here! And the blindness,
pettiness, and simplicity of your selfishness! For it is selfish to consider
one’s own judgement a universal law, and this selfishness is blind, petty,
27 In the Critique of Pure Reason (1781) Kant argued that the great concepts of traditional
speculation — God, the soul, freedom — did not designate objects about which it was even in
principle possible for us to know anything. This seemed to spell the end of traditional
metaphysics and theology. In the Critigue of Practical Reason (1788), however, Kant seemed to
argue that the morality required us to accept as ‘postulates of pure practical reason’ a number of
principles such as the existence of God and the continuation of some form of life after death.
This was thought by many to reintroduce the possibility of a version of the theology it had been
the great glory of his earlier work to terminate. “The categorical imperative’ is Kant’s
fundamental principle of morality.
188

Book Four: St Januarius
and simple because it shows that you haven’t yet discovered yourself or
created for yourself an ideal of your very own — for this could never be
someone else’s, let alone everyone’s, everyone’s! No one who judges, ‘in
this case everyone would have to act like this’ has yet taken five steps
towards self-knowledge. For he would then know that there neither are
nor can be actions that are all the same; that every act ever performed
was done in an altogether unique and unrepeatable way, and that this
will be equally true of every future act; that all prescriptions of action
(even the most inward and subtle rules of all moralities so far) relate
only to their rough exterior; that these prescriptions may yield an
appearance of sameness, but only just an appearance; that as one observes
or recollects any action, it is and remains impenetrable; that our
opinions about ‘good’ and ‘noble’ and ‘great’ can never be proven true by
our actions because every act is unknowable; that our opinions, valua-
tions, and tables of what is good are certainly some of the most powerful
levers in the machinery of our actions, but that in each case, the law of
its mechanism is unprovable. Let us therefore /imit ourselves to the
purification of our opinions and value judgements and to the creation of
tables of what is good that are new and all our own: let us stop brooding
over the ‘moral value of our actions’! Yes, my friends, it is time to feel
nauseous about some people’s moral chatter about others. Sitting in
moral judgement should offend our taste. Let us leave such chatter and
such bad taste to those who have nothing to do but drag the past a few
steps further through time and who never live in the present — that is, to
the many, the great majority! We, however, want to become who we are —
human beings who are new, unique, incomparable, who give themselves
laws, who create themselves! To that end we must become the best
students and discoverers of everything lawful and necessary in the
world: we must become piysicists in order to be creators in this sense —
while hitherto all valuations and ideals have been built on ignorance of
physics or in contradiction to it. So, long live physics! And even more
long live what compels us to it — our honesty!
336
Nature’s stinginess. 
— Why has nature been so miserly towards humans
that it did not allow them to shine — one more brightly, the other less so,
each according to his inner magnitude of light? Why are great human
189

The Gay Science
beings not as beautifully visible in their own rising and setting as the
sun? How much more unambiguous this would make life among men!
337
The ‘humanity’ of the future. ~ When I view this age with the eyes of a
distant age, I can find nothing odder in present-day man than his
peculiar virtue and disease called ‘the sense for history’. This is the
beginning of something completely new and strange in history: if one
gave this seed a few centuries and more, it might ultimately become a
wonderful growth with an equally wonderful smell that could make our
old earth more agreeable to inhabit. We present-day humans are just
beginning to form the chain of a very powerful future feeling, link by
link — we hardly know what we are doing. It seems to us almost as if we
are dealing not with a new feeling but with a decrease in all old feelings:
the sense for history is still something so poor and cold, and many are
struck by it as by a frost and made even poorer and colder by it. To
others it appears as the sign of old age creeping up, and they see our
planet as a melancholy sick man who chronicles his youth in order to
forget his present condition. Indeed, that is one colour of this new
feeling: he who is able to feel the history of man altogether as his own
history feels in a monstrous generalization all the grief of the invalid
thinking of health, of the old man thinking of the dreams of his youth,
of the lover robbed of his beloved, of the martyr whose ideal is
perishing, of the hero on the eve after a battle that decided nothing but
brought him wounds and the loss of a friend. But to bear and to be able
to bear this monstrous sum of all kinds of grief and still be the hero
who, on the second day of battle, greets dawn and his fortune as a
person whose horizon stretches millennia before and behind him, as the
dutiful heir to all the nobility of past spirit, as the most aristocratic of
old nobles and at the same time the first of a new nobility the likes of
which no age has ever seen or dreamt: to take this upon one’s soul — the
oldest, the newest, losses, hopes, conquests, victories of humanity. To
finally take all this in one soul and compress it into one feeling ~ this
would surely have to produce a happiness unknown to humanity so far:
a divine happiness full of power and love, full of tears and laughter, a
happiness which, like the sun in the evening, continually draws on its
inexhaustible riches, giving them away and pouring them into the sea, a
190

Book Four: St Januarius
happiness which, like the evening sun, feels richest when even the
poorest fisherman is rowing with a golden oar! This divine feeling
would then be called — humanity!
338
The will to suffer and those who feel compassion. — Is it good for you
yourselves to be above all else compassionate persons? And is it good for
those who suffer if you are compassionate? But let us leave the first
question unanswered for 
a moment. What we most deeply and most
personally suffer from is incomprehensible and inaccessible to nearly
everyone else; here we are hidden from our nearest, even if we eat from
the same pot. But whenever we are noticed to be suffering, our suffering
is superficially construed; it is the essence of the feeling of compassion
that it strips the suffering of what is truly personal: our ‘benefactors’
diminish our worth and our will more than our enemies do. In most
cases of beneficence toward those in distress there is something offensive
in the intellectual frivolity with which the one who feels compassion
plays the role of fate: he knows nothing of the whole inner sequence and
interconnection that spells misfortune for me or for you! The entire
economy of my soul and the balance effected by ‘misfortune’, the
breaking open of new springs and needs, the healing of old wounds, the
shedding of entire periods of the past — all such things that can be
involved in misfortune do not concern the dear compassionate one: they
want to help and have no thought that there is a personal necessity of
misfortune; that terrors, deprivations, impoverishments, midnights,
adventures, risks, and blunders are as necessary for me and you as their
opposites; indeed, to express myself mystically, that the path to one’s
own heaven always leads through the voluptuousness of one’s own hell.
No, they know nothing of that: the ‘religion of compassion’ (or ‘the
heart’) commands them to help, and they believe they have helped best
when they have helped most quickly! Should you adherents to this
religion really have the same attitude towards yourselves that you have
towards your fellow men; should you refuse to let your suffering lie on
you even for an hour and instead constantly prevent all possible
misfortune ahead of time; should you experience suffering and displea-
sure as evil, hateful, deserving of annihilation, as a defect of existence,
then you have besides your religion of pity also another religion in your
191

The Gay Science
hearts; and the latter is perhaps the mother of the former — the religion
of snug cosiness. Oh, how little do you know of the happiness of man, you
comfortable and good-natured ones! For happiness and misfortune
(Glick und Unglhick) are two siblings and twins who either grow up
together or — as with you — remain small together! But now back to the
first question. How is it possible to keep to one’s own path! Some
clamour is constantly calling us aside; rarely does our eye see something
there that does not make it necessary to drop our own occupation
instantly and spring to assistance. I know, there are a hundred decent
and praiseworthy ways of losing myself from my path, and, verily, highly
‘moral’ ways! Yes, the moral teacher of compassion even goes so far as to
hold that precisely this and only this is moral — to lose one’s own way
like this in order to help a neighbour. I, too, know with certainty that
I need only to expose myself to the sight of real distress and I, too, am
lost! If a suffering friend said to me, ‘Look, I am about to die; please
promise to die with me’, I would promise it; likewise, the sight of a
small mountain tribe fighting for its freedom would make me offer my
hand and my life — for once to choose bad examples, for good reasons.
Yes, there is a secret seduction even in all these things which arouse
compassion and cry out for help, for our own way is so hard and
demanding and so far from love and gratitude of others that we are by
no means reluctant to escape from it, from it and our ownmost
conscience — and take refuge in the conscience of the others and in
the lovely temple of the ‘religion of compassion’. As soon as any war
breaks out, precisely the noblest men in the population immediately
begin to experience a delight which is, to be sure, kept secret: they
throw themselves rapturously into the new danger of death because it
seems to offer them that long-desired permission — the permission to
deviate from their goal; war offers them a detour to suicide, but a
detour with a good conscience. And, although I will keep quiet here
about some things, I do not wish to keep quiet about my morality,
which tells me: Live in seclusion so that you are able to live for
yourself! Live in ignorance of what seems most important to your age!
Lay at least the skin of three hundred years between you and today!
And let the clamour of today, the noise of war and revolutions, be but
a murmur to you. You will also want to help — but only those whose
distress you properly understand because they share with you one
suffering and one hope — your friends — and only in the way you help
192

Book Four: St Januarius
yourself: I want to make them braver, more persevering, simpler, more
full of gaiety. I want to teach them what is today understood by so
few, least of all by these preachers of compassion (Mitleiden): to share
not pain, but jay (Mitfreude)!
339
Vita femina.”® — Not even all knowledge and all good will suffice for
seeing the ultimate beauties of a work; it requires the rarest of lucky
accidents for the clouds that veil the peaks to lift for us momentarily
and for the sun to shine on them. Not only must we stand in just the
right spot to see this, but our own soul, too, must itself have pulled the
veil from its heights and must have been in need of some external
expression and parable, as if it needed a hold in order to retain control
of itself. But so rarely does all of this coincide that I am inclined to
believe that the highest peaks of everything good, be it work, deed,
humanity, or nature, have so far remained hidden and covered from the
majority and even from the best. But what does unveil itself for us
unveils ttself for us only once! The Greeks, to be sure, prayed: ‘Everything
beautiful twice and thrice!’”? Indeed, they had good reason to summon
the gods, for ungodly reality gives us the beautiful either never or only
once! I mean to say that the world is brimming with beautiful things but
nevertheless poor, very poor in beautiful moments and in the unveilings
of those things. But perhaps that is the strongest magic of life: it is
covered by a veil of beautiful possibilities, woven with threads of gold —
promising, resisting, bashful, mocking, compassionate, and seductive.
Yes, life is a woman!
340
The dying Socrates.*° — I admire the courage and wisdom of Socrates in
everything he did, said — and did not say. This mocking, love-sick
monster and pied piper of Athens, who made the most audacious youths
of Athens tremble and sob, was not only the wisest chatterer of all time;
he was equally great in silence. 
I wish he had remained silent also in
28 “Life —a woman’
29 Plato, Gorgias 498¢ and Philebus 59e—60a
39 See also above, § 36, p. 54.
193

The Gay Science
the last moments of his life — perhaps he would then belong to a still
higher order of minds. Whether it was death or the poison or piety or
malice — something loosened his tongue and he said: ‘O Crito, I owe
Asclepius a rooster.’ This ridiculous and terrible ‘last word’ means for
those who have ears: ‘O Crito, life is a disease.’>! Is it possible that a
man like him, who had lived cheerfully and like a soldier in plain view
of everyone, was a pessimist? He had merely kept a cheerful demea-
nour while all his life hiding his ultimate judgement, his inmost
feeling! Socrates, Socrates suffered from life! And then he still avenged
himself — with this veiled, gruesome, pious, and blasphemous saying.
Did a Socrates really need revenge? Was there one ounce too little
magnanimity in his overabundant virtue? — O friends! We must
overcome even the Greeks!
341
The heaviest weight. 
— What if some day or night a demon were to
steal into your loneliest loneliness and say to you: ‘This life as you
now live it and have lived it you will have to live once again and
innumerable times again; and there will be nothing new in it, but
every pain and every joy and every thought and sigh and everything
unspeakably small or great in your life must return to you, all in the
same succession and sequence — even this spider and this moonlight
between the trees, and even this moment and I myself. The eternal
hourglass of existence is turned over again and again, and you with it,
speck of dust!’ Would you not throw yourself down and gnash your
teeth and curse the demon who spoke thus? Or have you once
experienced a tremendous moment when you would have answered
him: ‘You are a god, and never have I heard anything more divine.’ If
this thought gained power over you, as you are it would transform
and possibly crush you; the question in each and every thing, ‘Do you
want this again and innumerable times again?’ would lie on your
actions as the heaviest weight! Or how well disposed would you have
31 See Plato, Phaedo 116—18, esp. 118a.5—8. Asclepius was the god of healing and a rooster would
have been a usual thank-offering to him from someone whom he had cured of an illness.
Nietzsche’s interpretation of what Socrates said was not standard in the ancient world, and
became common only in the Renaissance. It is rejected by some modern scholars.
194

Book Four: St Januarius
to become to yourself and to life to long for nothing more fervently than
for this ultimate eternal confirmation and seal?
342
Incipit tragoedia.** — When Zarathustra*? was thirty years old, he left his
homeland and Lake Urmi and went into the mountains. There he
enjoyed his spirit and solitude, and did not tire of that for ten years. But
at last his heart changed — and one morning he arose with rosy dawn,
stepped before the sun, and spoke to it thus: ‘You great heavenly body!
What would your happiness be if you did not have those for whom you
shine! For ten years you have climbed up to my cave; without me, my
eagle, and my snake, you would have become tired of your light and of
this road; but we awaited you every morning, relieved you of your
overabundance, and blessed you for it. Behold, I am sick of my wisdom,
like a bee that has collected too much honey; I need outstretched hands;
I would like to give away and distribute until the wise among humans
once again enjoy their folly and the poor once again their riches. For
that I must step into the depths, as you do in the evening when you go
behind the sea and bring light even to the underworld, you over-rich
heavenly body! Like you I must go under, as it is called by the human
beings to whom I want to descend. So bless me then, you calm eye that
can look without envy upon all-too-great happiness! Bless the cup that
wants to overflow in order that the water may flow golden from it and
everywhere carry the reflection of your bliss! Behold, this cup wants to
become empty again, and Zarathustra wants to become human again.’
Thus began Zarathustra’s going under.
32 ‘The tragedy begins’. At this point, on completing Book iv, Nietzsche went on to write Also
Sprach Zarathustra (Thus Spoke Zarathustra), the most prophetic in style among his philoso-
phical works, in 1883-5. He added Book v to The Gay Science in 1887.
33 Nietzsche takes the name from that of the Persian religious thinker of the seventh/sixth century
BC who propagated a strongly dualistic doctrine, sharply distinguishing between good and evil.
195


Book Five
We Fearless Ones
Carcasse, tu trembles?
Tu tremblerais bien davantage, si tu savais
ou je te méne.
Turenne
‘Carcass, you tremble? You’d tremble even more if you knew where I’m taking you.’ Henri de
Latour d’Auvergne, Vicomte de Turenne (1611~75) was one of the most successful generals of
the French King Louis XIV.


Book Five: We Fearless Ones
343
How to understand our cheerfulness. 
- The greatest recent event — that
‘God is dead’; that the belief in the Christian God has become
unbelievable — is already starting to cast its first shadow over Europe. To
those few at least whose eyes — or the suspicion in whose eyes is strong
and subtle enough for this spectacle, some kind of sun seems to have set;
some old deep trust turned into doubt: to them, our world must appear
more autumnal, more mistrustful, stranger, ‘older’. But in the main one
might say: for many people’s power of comprehension, the event is itself
far too great, distant, and out of the way even for its tidings to be
thought of as having arrived yet. Even less may one suppose many to
know at all what this event really means — and, now that this faith has
been undermined, how much must collapse because it was built on this
faith, leaned on it, had grown into it — for example, our entire European
morality. This long, dense succession of demolition, destruction, down-
fall, upheaval that now stands ahead: who would guess enough of it
today to play the teacher and herald of this monstrous logic of horror,
the prophet of deep darkness and an eclipse of the sun the like of which
has probably never before existed on earth? Even we born guessers of
riddles who are so to speak on a lookout at the top of the mountain,
posted between today and tomorrow and stretched in the contradiction
between today and tomorrow, we firstlings and premature births of the
next century, to whom the shadows that must soon envelop Europe
really should have become apparent by now — why is it that even we look
forward to this darkening without any genuine involvement and above
all without worry and fear for ourselves? Are we perhaps still not too
influenced by the most immediate consequences of this event — and these
immediate consequences, the consequences for ourselves, are the oppo-
site of what one might expect — not at all sad and gloomy, but much
more like a new and barely describable type of light, happiness, relief,
amusement, encouragement, dawn . . . Indeed, at hearing the news that
‘the old god is dead’, we philosophers and ‘free spirits’ feel illuminated
by a new dawn; our heart overflows with gratitude, amazement,
forebodings, expectation — finally the horizon seems clear again, even if
not bright; finally our ships may set out again, set out to face any
danger; every daring of the lover of knowledge is allowed again; the sea,
our sea, lies open again; maybe there has never been such an ‘open sea’.
199

The Gay Science
344
In what way we, too, are still pious. — In science, convictions have no
right to citizenship, as one says with good reason: only when they decide
to step down to the modesty of a hypothesis, a tentative experimental
standpoint, a regulative fiction,’ may they be granted admission and
even a certain value in the realm of knowledge — though always with the
restriction that they remain under police supervision, under the police
of mistrust. But doesn’t this mean, on closer consideration, that a
conviction is granted admission to science only when it ceases to be a
conviction? Wouldn’t the cultivation of the scientific spirit begin when
one permitted oneself no more convictions? That is probably the case;
only we need still ask: in order that this cultivation begin, must there not
be some prior conviction — and indeed one so authoritative and
unconditional that it sacrifices all other convictions to itself? We see that
science, too, rests on a faith; there is simply no ‘presuppositionless’
science. The question whether truth is necessary must get an answer in
advance, the answer ‘yes’, and moreover this answer must be so firm
that it takes the form of the statement, the belief, the conviction:
‘Nothing is more necessary than truth; and in relation to it, everything
else has only secondary value.’ This unconditional will to truth — what
is it? Is it the will not to let oneself be deceived? Is it the will not to
deceive? For the will to truth could be interpreted in this second way, too
— if ‘I do not want to deceive myself” is included as a special case under
the generalization ‘I do not want to deceive.’ But why not deceive? But
why not allow oneself to be deceived? Note that the reasons for the
former lie in a completely different area from those for the latter: one
does not want to let oneself be deceived because one assumes it is
harmful, dangerous, disastrous to be deceived; in this sense science
would be a long-range prudence, caution, utility, and to this one could
justifiably object: How so? Is it really less harmful, dangerous, disas-
terous not to want to let oneself be deceived? What do you know in
advance about the character of existence to be able to decide whether
the greater advantage is on the side of the unconditionally distrustful or
of the unconditionally trusting? But should both be necessary — a lot of
trust as well as a lot of mistrust — then where might science get the
! See Kant, Critique of Pure Reason B 670, 799.
200

Book Five: We Fearless Ones
unconditional belief or conviction on which it rests, that truth is more
important than anything else, than every other conviction? Precisely this
conviction could never have originated if truth and untruth had
constantly made it clear they they were both useful, as they are. So, the
faith in science, which after all undeniably exists, cannot owe its origin
to such a calculus of utility; rather it must have originated in spite of the
fact that the disutility and dangerousness of ‘the will to truth’ or ‘truth
at any price’ is proved to it constantly. ‘At any price’: we understand this
well enough once we have offered and slaughtered one faith after
another on this altar! Consequently, ‘will to truth’ does not mean ‘I do
not want to let myself be deceived’ but — there is no alternative — ‘I will
not deceive, not even myself’; and with that we stand on moral ground.
For you have only to ask yourself carefully, ‘Why do you not want to
deceive?’ especially if it should seem — and it does seem! — as if life
aimed at semblance, i.e. error, deception, simulation, blinding, self-
blinding, and when life on the largest scale has actually always shown
itself to be on the side of the most unscrupulous polytropoi.” Charitably
interpreted, such a resolve might perhaps be a quixotism, a slight,
enthusiastic folly; but it could also be something worse, namely a
principle that is hostile to life and destructive. ‘Will to truth’ — that
could be a hidden will to death. Thus the question ‘Why science?’ leads
back to the moral problem: Why morality at ail, if life, nature, and
history are ‘immoral’? No doubt, those who are truthful in that
audacious and ultimate sense which faith in science presupposes thereby
affirm another world than that of life, nature, and history; and insofar as
they affirm this ‘other world’, must they not by the same token deny its
counterpart, this world, our world?. . .But you will have gathered what I
am getting at, namely, that it is still a metaphysical faith upon which our
faith in science rests — that even we knowers of today, we godless anti-
metaphysicians, still take our fire, too, from the flame lit by the
thousand-year old faith, the Christian faith which was also Plato’s faith,
that God is truth; that truth is divine ... But what if this were to
become more and more difficult to believe, if nothing more were to turn
out to be divine except error, blindness, the lie — if God himself were to
turn out to be our longest lie?
2 ‘sly, knowing all the tricks, devious’. Nietzsche uses the plural of this word which in the singular
is used in the Odyssey (e.g. Book 1, line 1) to describe Odysseus.
201

The Gay Science
345
Morality as a problem. —'The lack of personality always takes its revenge:
a weakened, thin, extinguished personality, one that denies itself and its
own existence, is no longer good for anything good — least of all for
philosophy. ‘Selflessness’ has no value in heaven or on earth; all great
problems demand great Jove, and only strong, round, secure minds who
have a firm grip on themselves are capable of that. It makes the most
telling difference whether a thinker has a personal relationship to his
problems and finds in them his destiny, his distress, and his greatest
happiness, or an ‘impersonal’ one, meaning he is only able to touch and
grasp them with the antennae of cold, curious thought. In the latter case
nothing will come of it, that much can be promised; for even if great
problems should let themselves be grasped by them, they would not
allow frogs and weaklings to hold on to them; such has been their taste
from time immemorial — a taste, incidentally, that they share with all
doughty females. Why, then, have I never yet encountered anyone, not
even in books, who approached morality in this personal way and who
knew morality as a problem, and this problem as his own personal
distress, torment, voluptuousness, and passion? It is clear that up to
now, morality has been no problem at all but rather that on which, after
all mistrust, discord, and contradiction, one could agree — the hallowed
place of peace where thinkers took a rest from themselves, took a deep
breath, and felt revived. I see no one who has ventured a critique of
moral valuations; I miss even the slightest attempts of scientific curi-
osity, of the coddled, experimental imagination of psychologists and
historians that easily anticipates a problem and seizes it in flight without
knowing what it has caught. I have hardly detected a few meagre
preliminary efforts to explore the history of origins of these feelings and
valuations (which is something quite different from a critique and again
different from a history of ethical systems): in one single case I did
everything to encourage a sympathy and talent for this kind of history —
in vain, as it seems to me today.* These historians of morality (particu-
larly, the Englishmen) do not amount to much: usually they themselves
unsuspectingly stand under the command of a particular morality and,
3 Probably a reference to Dr Paul Rée (1849-1901), author of Der Ursprung der moralischen
Empfindungen (1877) and Die Entstehung des Gewissens (1885). Nietzsche refers again to Rée in the
Preface to ‘On the Genealogy of Morality’ (Cambridge, 1994).
202

Book Five: We Fearless Ones
without knowing it, serve as its shield-bearers and followers, for
example, by sharing that popular superstition of Christian Europe
which people keep repeating so naively to this day, that what is
characteristic of morality is selflessness, self-denial, self-sacrifice, or
sympathy (Mitgeftihl) and compassion (Mitleiden). Their usual mistaken
premise is that they affirm some consensus among peoples, at least
among tame peoples, concerning certain moral principles, and then
conclude that these principles must be unconditionally binding also for
you and me — or, conversely, they see that among different peoples
moral valuations are necessarily different and infer from this that no
morality is binding ~ both of which are equally childish. The mistake of
the more subtle among them is that they uncover and criticize the
possibly foolish opinions of a people about their morality, or of
humanity about all human morality — opinions about its origin, its
religious sanction, the myth of the free will and such things — and then
think they have criticized the morality itself. But the value of the
injunction ‘Thou Shalt’ is still fundamentally different from and
independent of such opinions about it and the weeds of error that may
have overgrown it — just as surely as the value of a medication for
someone sick is totally independent of whether he thinks about medi-
cine scientifically or the way an old woman thinks about it. A morality
could even have grown out of an error, and the realization of this fact
would not as much as touch the problem of its value. Thus no one until
now has examined the value of that most famous of all medicines called
morality; and for that, one must begin by questioning it for once. Well
then! Precisely that is our task.
346
Our question mark. — But you do not understand this? Indeed, people
will have trouble understanding us. We are searching for words, perhaps
also for ears. Who are we anyway? If we simply called ourselves godless
(to use an old expression), or unbelievers, or even immoralists, we
would not think that these words came near to describing us: we are all
three of them, at too advanced a stage for anyone to comprehend — for
you to comprehend, my curious gentlemen — how it feels. No! No longer
with the bitterness and passion of the one who has torn himself away
and must turn his unbelief into another faith, a goal, a martyrdom! We
203

The Gay Science
have become hard-boiled, cold, and tough in the realization that the way
of the world is not at all divine — even by human standards it is not
rational, merciful, or just. We know it: the world we live in is ungodly,
immoral, ‘inhuman’; for far too long we have interpreted it falsely and
mendaciously, though according to our wish and will for veneration,
that is, according to a need. For man is a venerating animal! But he is
also a mistrustful one; and that the world is mot worth what we thought
is about the most certain thing our mistrust has finally gotten hold of.
The more mistrust, the more philosophy. We take care not to claim that
the world is worth /ess; indeed, it would seem laughable to us today if
man were to aim at inventing values that were supposed to surpass the
value of the real world. That is exactly what we have turned away from,
as from an extravagant aberration of human vanity and unreason that
for long was not recognized as such. It found its final expression in
modern pessimism, and an older and stronger expression in the teaching
of Buddha; but also Christianity includes it, more doubtfully and
ambiguously, to be sure, but not for that reason less seductively. The
whole attitude of ‘man against the world’, of man as a ‘world-negating’
principle, of man as the measure of the value of things, as judge of the
world who finally places existence itself on his scales and finds it too
light — the monstrous stupidity of this attitude has finally dawned on us
and we are sick of it; we laugh we soon as we encounter the juxtaposition
of ‘man and world’, separated by the sublime presumptuousness of the
little word ‘and!’ But by laughing, haven’t we simply taken contempt for
man one step further? And thus also pessimism, the contempt for that
existence which is knowable to us? Have we not exposed ourselves to the
suspicion of an opposition — an opposition between the world in which
until now we were at home with our venerations — and which may have
made it possible for us to endure life — and another world that we
ourselves are: a relentless, fundamental, deepest suspicion concerning
ourselves that is steadily gaining more and worse control over us
Europeans and that could easily confront coming generations with the
terrible Either/Or: ‘Either abolish your venerations or — yourselves!’
The latter would be nihilism; but would not the former also be —
nihilism? That is eur question mark.
204

Book Five: We Fearless Ones
347
Behevers and their need to believe. 
- The extent to which one needs a
faith in order to flourish, how much that is ‘firm’ and that one does not
want shaken because one clings to it — that is a measure of the degree of
one’s strength (or, to speak more clearly, one’s weakness). Christianity, it
seems to me, is still needed by most people in old Europe even today;
hence it still finds believers. For that is how man is: an article of faith
could be refuted to him a thousand times; as long as he needed it, he
would consider it ‘true’ again and again, in accordance with that famous
‘proof of strength’* of which the Bible speaks. Metaphysics is still
needed by some, but so is that impetuous demand for certainty that today
discharges itself in scientific-positivistic form among great masses — the
demand that one wants by all means something to be firm (while owing
to the fervour of this demand one treats the demonstration of this
certainty more lightly and negligently): this is still the demand for
foothold, support — in short, the instinct of weakness that, to be sure,
does not create sundry religions, forms of metaphysics, and convictions
but does — preserve them. Indeed, around all these positivistic systems
hover the fumes of a certain pessimistic gloom, something of a
weariness, fatalism, disappointment, fear of new disappointment — or
else self-dramatizing rage, a bad mood, the anarchism of exasperation
and whatever other symptoms or masquerades there are of the feeling of
weakness. Even the vehemence with which our cleverest contemporaries
get lost in pitiful nooks and crevices such as patriotism (I refer to what
the French call chauvinisme? and the Germans ‘German’), or in petty
aesthetic creeds such as French naturalism (which enhances and exposes
only the part of nature that simultaneously disgusts and amazes — today
one likes to call it /a verité vraie® — ), or in Petersburg-style nihilism’
(meaning faith in unbelief to the point of martyrdom), always indicates
primarily the need for faith, a foothold, backbone, support . . . Faith is
+ See 1 Corinthians 2:4. Originally this seems to have referred to the view that Christianity was
true because it was possible effectively to cure illnesses and drive out demons by invoking the
name of Jesus. By the eighteenth century (in Germany) the doctrine had been transformed into
the view that Christianity was true because firm belief in Jesus gave the believer power in the
form of an optimistic attitude towards life that would make it possible to cope effectively with
adversity.
‘jingoistic xenophobia’
‘true truth’
see Turgenev (1818-83) Fathers and Sons (1862); Dostoyevsky, The Possessed.
ores
205

The Gay Science
always most desired and most urgently needed where will is lacking; for
will, as the affect of command, is the decisive mark of sovereignty and
strength. That is, the less someone knows how to command, the more
urgently does he desire someone who commands, who commands
severely — a god, prince, the social order, doctor, father confessor,
dogma, or party conscience. From this one might gather that both world
religions, Buddhism and Christianity, may have owed their origin and
especially their sudden spread to a tremendous sickening of the will. And
that is actually what happened: both religions encountered a demand for
a ‘Thou Shalt’ that, through a sickening of the will, had increased to an
absurd level and bordered on desperation; both religions were teachers
of fanaticism in times of a slackening of the will and thereby offered
innumerable people support, a new possibility of willing, a delight in
willing. For fanaticism is the only ‘strength of the will’ that even the
weak and insecure can be brought to attain, as a type of hypnosis of the
entire sensual-intellectual system to the benefit of the excessive nourish-
ment (hypertrophy) of a single point of view and feeling which is now
dominant — the Christian calls it his faith. Once a human being arrives
at the basic conviction that he must be commanded, he becomes ‘a
believer’; conversely, one could conceive of a delight and power of self-
determination, a freedom of the will, in which the spirit takes leave of all
faith and every wish for certainty, practised as it is in maintaining itself
on light ropes and possibilities and dancing even beside abysses. Such a
spirit would be the free spirit par excellence.
348
On the origin of scholars. — In Europe the scholar grows out of all kinds of
classes and social conditions like a plant that requires no particular kind
of soil: thus he belongs, essentially and involuntarily, to the bearers of
the democratic idea. But this origin betrays itself. Once one has some-
what trained one’s eye to recognize in a scholarly book, in a scientific
treatise, the scholar’s intellectual idiosyncrasy ~ every scholar has one —
and catch it in the act, one will almost always behind it come face to face
with the scholar’s ‘prehistory’, his family, especially its occupations and
crafts. Where the feeling, “This is now proven; I am done with it,’ is
expressed, it is usually the ancestor in the blood and instincts of the
scholar who from his standpoint approves of ‘the finished job’ — the
206

Book Five: We Fearless Ones
faith in a proof is only the symptom of what in a hard-working family
for ages has been considered ‘good work’. An example: the sons of all
types of clerks and office workers, whose main task was always to
organize various different kinds of material, to compartmentalize and in
general to schematize, when they become scholars, show a tendency to
consider a problem practically solved when they have merely schema-
tized it. There are philosophers who are basically just schematizers — for
them, the formal aspect of their fathers’ occupation has become content.
The talent for classifications, for tables of categories, reveals something:
one pays the price for being the child of one’s parents. The son of a
lawyer will also, as a researcher, have to be a lawyer; he primarily wants
his cause to win; secondarily perhaps also for it to be right. The sons of
Protestant ministers and schoolteachers one recognizes by the naive
certainty with which, as scholars, they take their case already to have
been proven when they have merely stated it heartily and warmly; they
are thoroughly used to being believed, as that was part of their father’s
craft. A Jew, on the other hand, in keeping with the characteristic
occupations and the past of his people, is not at all used to being
believed. Consider Jewish scholars in this light: they all have a high
regard for logic, that is for compelling agreement by force of reasons,
they know that with logic, they are bound to win even when faced with
class and race prejudices, where people do not willingly believe them.
For nothing is more democratic than logic: it knows no regard for
persons and takes even the crooked nose for straight. (Incidentally,
Europe owes the Jews no small thanks for making its people more
logical, for cleanlier intellectual habits — none more so than the
Germans, as a lamentably déraisonnable® race that even today first needs
to be given a good mental drubbing. Wherever Jews have gained
influence, they have taught people to make finer distinctions, draw more
rigorous conclusions, and to write more clearly and cleanly; their task
was always ‘to make a people “‘listen to raison” ’.)
349
Once again, the origin of the scholars. — To wish to preserve oneself is a
sign of distress, of a limitation of the truly basic life-instinct, which aims
8 ‘ynreasonable’
207

The Gay Science
at the expansion of power and in so doing often enough risks and sacrifices
self-preservation. It is symptomatic that certain philosophers, such as
the consumptive Spinoza, took and indeed had to take just the so-called
self-preservation instinct to be decisive:? — they were simply people in
distress. That today’s natural sciences have become so entangled with
the Spinozistic dogma (most recently and crudely in Darwinism with its
incredibly one-sided doctrine of ‘the struggle for existence’ — ) is
probably due to the descent of most natural scientists: in this regard
they belong to ‘the people’, their ancestors were poor and lowly folks
who knew all too intimately the difficulty of scraping by. English
Darwinism exudes something like the stuffy air of English overpopula-
tion, like the small people’s smell of indigence and overcrowding. As a
natural scientist, however, one should get out of one’s human corner;
and in nature, it is not distress which ru/es, but rather abundance,
squandering — even to the point of absurdity. The struggle for survival
is only an exception, a temporary restriction of the will to life; the great
and small struggle revolves everywhere around preponderance, around
growth and expansion, around power and in accordance with the will to
power, which is simply the will to life.
350
In honour of the homines religiosi.!° - The struggle against the church is
certainly, among other things — for it means many things — also the
struggle of the baser, meaner, more cheerful, more confiding, more
superficial natures against the dominion of the graver, deeper, and more
contemplative, that is, more evil and distrustful individuals who, with a
long-standing suspicion about the value of existence, also brooded over
their own worth: the base instinct of the people, its sensuality, its ‘good
heart’, rebelled against them. The entire Roman Church rests on a
Southern distrust of human nature which is always misunderstood in
the North. The European South has inherited this suspicion from the
deep Orient, from ancient mysterious Asia and its contemplation.
Protestantism is, to be sure, an uprising in favour of the upright, the
guileless, the shallow (the North has always been more good-natured
and superficial than the South); but it was the French Revolution that
® Spinoza, Ethica, Book tv, props. 18-25 (esp. Scholium to prop. 18)
10 ‘religious people’
208

Book Five: We Fearless Ones
finally and ceremoniously handed over the sceptre to the ‘good people’
(to the sheep, the donkey, the goose, and everything that is incurably
shallow and loudmouthed and ripe for the madhouse of ‘modern ideas’).
351
In honour of the priestly type: — | think that what the people mean by
wisdom (and who today is not ‘people’?) — that prudent, cowlike
serenity, piety and country parson meekness which lies in the meadow
and earnestly and ruminantly observes life — is also that from which
precisely the philosophers have always felt the most remote, probably
because they were not ‘people’ enough, not country parsons enough.
They will presumably also be the last to learn to believe that the people
might come to understand something of that which is most remote from
them, something of the great passion of the knowledge-seeker who
steadfastly lives, must live, in the thundercloud of the highest problems
and the weightiest responsibilities (and thus in no way as an observer,
outside, indifferent, secure, objective. . .). The people venerate quite
another type of person when they construct for themselves an ideal of
the ‘sage’, and they have a thousandfold right to adore just this type of
person with the best words and honours — the mild, serious/simple-
minded and chaste priestly natures and whatever is related to them:
they are the ones who are the objects of approbation when the common
people reveres wisdom. And towards whom would the people have more
reason to show themselves grateful than these men, who belong to and
come from them, though as consecrated, chosen, sacrificed for the
common good — they believe themselves sacrificed to God — , to whom
the people can spill their hearts with impunity and get rid of their
secrets, worries and worse ( — for he who ‘unbosoms’ himself is relieved
of himself, and he who has ‘confessed’, forgets). Here reigns a great
necessity: drainages and their clean, cleansing waters are needed also for
the spiritual refuse; swift streams of love are needed, and strong,
humble, pure hearts who prepare and sacrifice themselves for such an
office of non-public health care — for it is a sacrifice; a priest is and
remains a human sacrifice. . .The people see such sacrificed, subdued,
serious persons of ‘faith’ as wise, that is, as having become knowing, as
‘certain’ in relation to their own uncertainty; and who would want to
deprive them of this word and of their awe? But as is conversely fair,
209

The Gay Science
among philosophers a priest, too, is considered to be one of ‘the people’
and not a knower, primarily because philosophers do not themselves
believe in ‘men of knowledge’ and already smell ‘the people’ in this
belief and superstition. It was modesty that in Greece coined the word
‘philosopher’ and left the extraordinary insolence of calling oneself wise
to the actors of the spirit — the modesty of such monsters of pride and
conceit as Pythagoras, as Plato — .
352
The extent to which morality is hardly dispensable. 
- The naked human
being is generally a disgraceful sight — I am talking about us Europeans
(and not even about female Europeans!). Supposing that by the mis-
chievous trick of a sorcerer, the merriest dinner party suddenly saw
itself exposed and undressed; I think not only the mirth would be lost
but also the strongest appetite discouraged, — it seems we Europeans are
utterly unable to dispense with that masquerade called clothing. But
why should there not be equally good reasons for the disguise of ‘moral
men’, for their veil of moral formulas and notions of decency, for the
whole benevolent concealment of our actions behind the concepts of
duty, virtue, public spirit, respectability, self-denial? I am not supposing
that something like human malice and perfidy — in short, the bad wild
beast in us — is thereby disguised; my thought is, quite on the contrary,
that it is precisely as tame animals that are we a disgraceful sight and
need the disguise of morality, — that the ‘inner man’ in Europe is not
nearly evil enough to be able to ‘show himself’ that way (and be beautiful
that way — ). The European disguises himself with morality because he
has become a sick, sickly, maimed animal which has good reasons for
being ‘tame’; because he is almost a monstrosity, something half, weak,
awkward. . .It is not the ferocity of the beast of prey that needs a moral
disguise, but the herd animal with its deep mediocrity, fear, and
boredom with itself. Morality dresses up the European — \et’s admit it! —
into something nobler, grander, goodlier, something ‘divine’ —
353
On the origin of religions. ~ The true invention of the religion-founders is
first to establish a certain way of life and everyday customs that work as
210

Book Five: We Fearless Ones
a disciplina voluntatis'' while at the same time removing boredom; and
then to give just this life an interpretation that makes it appear
illuminated by the highest worth, so that henceforth it becomes a good
for which one fights and under certain circumstances even gives one’s
life. Actually, the second invention is the more important: the first, the
way of life, was usually already in place, though alongside other ways of
life and without any consciousness of its special worth. The significance,
the originality of the religion-founder usually lies in his seemg and
selecting this way of life, in his guessing for the first time what it can be
used for and how it can be interpreted. Jesus (or Paul), for example,
discovered the life of the small people in the Roman province, a humble,
virtuous, depressed life: he explained it, he put the highest meaning and
value into it — and thereby also the courage to despise every other way of
life, the silent Moravian brotherhood!” fanaticism, the clandestine
subterranean self-confidence that grows and grows and is finally ready
to ‘overcome the world’ (i.e. Rome and the upper classes throughout the
empire). Buddha likewise discovered, scattered indeed among all classes
and social strata of his people, that type of person who is good and
gracious (above all, inoffensive) out of laziness and who, also from
laziness, lives abstinently and with nearly no needs at all: he understood
how such a type of person would inevitably, with all of his vis inertiae,TM
have to roll into a faith that promises to prevent the return of earthly toil
(i.e. of work and action in general), — this ‘understanding’ was his
genius. The religion-founder must be psychologically infallible in his
knowledge of a certain average breed of souls who have not yet
recognized one another as allies. He is the one who brings them together;
and to that extent, the establishment of a religion always turns into a
long festival of recognition. —
354
On ‘the genius of the species’. 
- The problem of consciousness (or rather,
of becoming conscious of something) first confronts us when we begin
to realize how much we can do without it; and now we are brought to
11 “discipline of the will’
12 A Christian religious group founded in 1722 in the town of Herrnhut (Germany). Members of
the group de-emphasized technical points of religious doctrine and theology in favour of
individual emotional experience and fraternal forms of living.
13 “force of inertia’
211

The Gay Science
this initial realization by physiology and natural history (which have
thus required two hundred years to catch up with Letbniz’s precocious
suspicion).'+ For we could think, feel, will, remember, and also ‘act’ in
every sense of the term, and yet none of all this would have to ‘enter our
consciousness’ (as one says figuratively). All of life would be possible
without, as it were, seeing itself in the mirror; and still today, the
predominant part of our lives actually unfolds without this mirroring —
of course also our thinking, feeling, and willing lives, insulting as it may
sound to an older philosopher. To what end does consciousness exist at
all when it is basically superfluous? If one is willing to hear my answer
and its possibly extravagant conjecture, it seems to me that the subtlety
and strength of consciousness is always related to a person’s (or
animal’s) ability to communicate; and the ability to communicate, in turn,
to the need to communicate. The latter should not to be taken to mean
that precisely that individual who is a master at expressing his needs
and at making them understood must also be the most dependent on
others in his needs. But for entire races and lineages, this seems to me to
hold: where need and distress have for a long time forced people to
communicate, to understand each other swiftly and subtly, there finally
exists a surplus of this power and art of expression, a faculty, so to
speak, which has slowly accumulated and now waits for an heir to spend
it lavishly (the so-called artists are the heirs, as well as the orators,
preachers, writers — all of them people who come at the end of a long
chain, each of them ‘born late’ in the best sense of the term, and each of
them, again, squanderers by nature), Assuming this observation is
correct, 
I may go on to conjecture that consciousness in general has
developed only under the pressure of the need to communicate; that at the
outset, consciousness was necessary, was useful, only between persons
(particularly between those who commanded and those who obeyed);
and that it has developed only in proportion to that usefulness.
Consciousness is really just a net connecting one person with another —
only in this capacity did it have to develop; the solitary and predatory
person would not have needed it. That our actions, thoughts, feelings,
and movements — at least some of them ~ even enter into consciousness
is the result of a terrible ‘must’ which has ruled over man for a long
time: as the most endangered animal, he needed help and protection, he
1+ German philosopher (1646—1716) who held that we had perceptions of which we were not
aware; see his Monadology, § 14.
212

Book Five: We Fearless Ones
needed his equals; he had to express his neediness and be able to make
himself understood — and to do so, he first needed ‘consciousness’, i.e.
even to ‘know’ what distressed him, to ‘know’ how he felt, to ‘know’
what he thought. For, once again: man, like every living creature, is
constantly thinking but does not know it; the thinking which becomes
conscious is only the smallest part of it, let’s say the shallowest, worst
part — for only that conscious thinking takes place in words, that is, in
communication symbols; and this fact discloses the origin of conscious-
ness. In short, the development of language and the development of
consciousness (not of reason but strictly of the way in which we become
conscious of reason) go hand in hand. One might add that not only
language serves as a bridge between persons, but also look, touch, and
gesture; without our becoming conscious of our sense impressions, our
power to fix them and as it were place them outside of ourselves, has
increased in proportion to the need to convey them to others by means of
signs. The sign-inventing person is also the one who becomes ever more
acutely conscious of himself; for only as a social animal did man learn to
become conscious of himself — he is still doing it, and he is doing it
more and more. My idea is clearly that consciousness actually belongs
not to man’s existence as an individual but rather to the community-
and herd-aspects of his nature; that accordingly, it is finely developed
only in relation to its usefulness to community or herd; and that
consequently each of us, even with the best will in the world to
understand ourselves as individually as possible, ‘to know ourselves’, will
always bring to consciousness precisely that in ourselves which is ‘non-
individual’, that which is ‘average’; that due to the nature of conscious-
ness — to the ‘genius of the species’ governing it — our thoughts
themselves are continually as it were outvoted and translated back into
the herd perspective. At bottom, all our actions are incomparably and
utterly personal, unique, and boundlessly individual, there is no doubt;
but as soon as we translate them into consciousness, they no longer seem
to be...This is what J consider to be true phenomenalism and
perspectivism: that due to the nature of animal consciousness, the world
of which we can become conscious is merely a surface- and sign-world,
a world turned into generalities and thereby debased to its lowest
common denominator, — that everything which enters consciousness
thereby becomes shallow, thin, relatively stupid, general, a sign, a
herd-mark; that all becoming conscious involves a vast and thorough
213

The Gay Science
corruption, falsification, superficialization, and generalization. In the
end, the growing consciousness is a danger; and he who lives among the
most conscious Europeans even knows it is a sickness. As one might
guess, it is not the opposition between subject and object which
concerns me here; I leave that distinction to those epistemologists who
have got tangled up in the snares of grammar (of folk metaphysics).
Even less am I concerned with the opposition between ‘thing in itself’
and appearance: for we ‘know’ far too little to even be entitled to make
that distinction. We simply have no organ for knowing, for ‘truth’: we
‘know’ (or believe or imagine) exactly as much as is useful to the human
herd, to the species: and even what is here called ‘usefulness’ is finally
also just a belief, a fiction, and perhaps just that supremely fatal
stupidity of which we some day will perish.
355
The origin of our concept of ‘knowledge’. — 1 take this explanation from the
street; I heard one of the common people say ‘he knew me right away’ —
and I asked myself: what do the people actually take knowledge to be?
what do they want when they want ‘knowledge’? Nothing more than
this: something unfamiliar is to be traced back to something familiar.
And we philosophers — have we really meant anything more by knowl-
edge? The familiar means what we are used to, so that we no longer
marvel at it; the commonplace; some rule in which we are stuck; each
and every thing that makes us feel at home: — And isn’t our need for
knowledge precisely this need for the familiar, the will to uncover
among everything strange, unusual, and doubtful something which no
longer unsettles us? Is it not the mstinct of fear that bids us to know?
And isn’t the rejoicing of the person who attains knowledge just
rejoicing from a regained sense of security?. . .Take the philosopher
who imagined the world to be ‘known’ when he had reduced it to the
‘idea’; wasn’t it precisely because the ‘idea’ was so familiar to him and
he was so used to it? because he no longer feared the ‘idea’? — How little
these men of knowledge demand! Just look at their principles and their
solutions to the world riddle with this in mind! When they find
something in, under, or behind things which unfortunately happens to
be very familiar to us, such as our multiplication table or our logic or
our willing and desiring, how happy they are right away! For ‘what is
214

Book Five: We Fearless Ones
familiar is known’: on this they agree. Even the most cautious among
them assume that the familiar can at least be more easily known than the
strange; that for example sound method demands that we start from the
‘inner world’, from the ‘facts of consciousness’, because this world is
more famthar to us. Error of errors! The familiar is what we are used to,
and what we are used to is the most difficult to ‘know’ — that is, to view
as a problem, to see as strange, as distant, as ‘outside us’. 
. .The great
certainty of the natural sciences in comparison with psychology and the
critique of the elements of consciousness ~ with the unnatural sciences,
one might almost say — rests precisely on the fact that they take the
strange as their object, while it is nearly contradictory and absurd even
to want to take the not-strange as one’s object. . .
356
The extent to which things will become ever more ‘artistic’ in Europe. — Even
today, in this transitional period in which so many forms of coercion have
lost their power, the need to make a living still forces nearly all European
men to adopt a particular role — their so-called profession. A few retain
the freedom, an apparent freedom, to choose this role themselves; for
most of them it is chosen. The result is strange enough. Almost all
Europeans, at an advanced age, confuse themselves with their role; they
become the victims of their ‘good performance’; they themselves have
forgotten how much they were determined by accidents, moods, and
arbitrariness at the time that their ‘profession’ was decided — and how
many other roles they may have been ad/e to play; for now it is too late!
Upon deeper consideration, the role has actually become character; and
artifice, nature. There were times when men believed with unyielding
confidence, even with piety, in their predestination for just this business,
just this way of making a living, and utterly refused to acknowledge the
element of accident, role, and caprice. With the help of this faith,
estates, guilds, and inherited trade privileges were able to establish
those monsters, the broad-based social pyramids that distinguished the
middle ages and to which one can credit at least one thing: durability
(and durability is a first-rank value on earth). But there are contrary
ages, the truly democratic ones, in which people unlearn this faith and
a certain audacious faith and opposite viewpoint moves steadily into the
foreground - the Athenian faith that first became noticeable in the
215

The Gay Science
Periclean age;!> the American faith which is increasingly becoming the
European faith as well, where the individual is convinced he can do just
about anything and is up to playing any role; and everyone experiments
with himself, improvises, experiments again, enjoys experimenting,
where all nature ends and becomes art. 
. .When the Greeks had fully
accepted this faith in roles — the faith of artistes, if you will — they
underwent, as is well known, step by step an odd metamorphosis that is
not in every respect worthy of imitation: they really became actors; as
such they captivated and overcame the whole world — finally even the
‘power that overcame the whole world’ itself (for it was not, as innocents
tend to say, Greek culture that conquered Rome, but the graeculus
histrio’®). But what I fear, what even today one could grasp with one’s
hands if one felt like grasping it, is that we modern men are pretty much
on the same road; and every time man starts to discover the extent to
which he is playing a role and the extent to which he can be an actor, he
becomes an actor. . .With this, a new human flora and fauna emerges that
cannot grow in firmer and more limited ages — or that would at least be
formally condemned and suspected of lacking honour; it is thus that the
most interesting and maddest ages always emerge, in which ‘the actors’,
all types of actors, are the real masters. Precisely because of this,
another human type becomes ever more disadvantaged and is finally
made impossible; above all, the great ‘architects’: the strength to build
is now paralysed; the courage to make far-reaching plans is discouraged;
the organizational geniuses become scarce — who still dares to undertake
works that would require millennia to complete? For what is dying out is
that fundamental faith on the basis of which someone could calculate,
promise, anticipate the future in a plan on that grand scale, and sacrifice
the future to his plan — namely, the basic faith that man has worth and
sense only in so far as he is @ stone in a great edifice; to this end he must
be firm above all, a ‘stone’. . above all not an actor! To put it briefly —
oh, people will keep silent about it for a long time! — what from now on
will never again be built, can never again be built, is — a society in the
old sense of the term; to build that, everything is lacking, mainly the
material. We are all no longer material for a society; this is a timely truth!
15 The mid-fifth century BC, named after Pericles, the Athenian statesman who was in power
during that period and who was thought by some to embody some of its salient virtues.
16 little Greek actor’. ‘Graeculus’ (‘little Greek’) was used by Romans as a term of contempt; see
Juvenal 3.78.
216

Book Five: We Fearless Ones
It is a matter of indifference to me that at present the most short-
sighted, perhaps the most honest, at any rate the noisiest human type
that we have today — our good socialists — believe, hope, dream, and
above all shout and write pretty much the opposite. For even now one
reads their slogan for the future ‘free society’ on all tables and walls.
Free society? Well, well! But surely you know, gentlemen, what one
needs to build that? Wooden iron!!? The famous wooden iron! And it
need not even be wooden. . .
357
On the old problem: ‘What is German?’ — Add up for yourself the real
achievements in philosophical thinking that can be attributed to
Germans: is there any legitimate sense in which one can credit them to
the entire race? Can we say that they are also the work of the ‘German
soul’, or at least symptoms of it in the same sense in which we are
accustomed to take Plato’s ideomania, his nearly religious lunacy about
forms, as a development and testimony of ‘the Greek soul’? Or would
the opposite be true? Would they be just so individual, just so much
exceptions to the spirit of the race as was, for instance, Goethe’s
paganism with a good conscience? Or as is Bismarck’s Machiavellianism
with a good conscience, his so-called Realpolitik, among Germans?
Might our philosophers perhaps even contradict the need of the
‘German soul’? In short, were the German philosophers really —
philosophical Germans? I recall three cases. First, Letbniz’s incomparable
insight!® that has been vindicated not only against Descartes but also
against everyone who had philosophized before him — that conscious-
ness (Bewufttheit)'? is merely an accidens”° of the power of representa-
tion (Vorstellung) and not its necessary and essential attribute; so that
what we call consciousness (Bewufftsein) constitutes only one state of
our spiritual and psychic world (perhaps a sick state) and by no means the
whole of it ~ is there something German to this idea, the profundity of
which has not been exhausted to this day? Is there reason to surmise
that no Latin could easily have thought of this reversal of appearances?
17 Common expression in German for something that cannot exist, like ‘square circle’.
18 See above, Book v, footnote 14, p. 212.
19 See above, Book 1, footnote 6, p. 37.
20 ‘accident’ in the sense of ‘inessential property’
217

The Gay Science
For it is a reversal. Let us recall, secondly, Kant’s colossal question mark
that he placed on the concept ‘causality’! — without, like Hume,
doubting its legitimacy altogether: he started much more cautiously to
delimit the realm in which this concept makes any sense whatsoever
(and to this day we have not yet come to terms with this marking out of
the boundaries). Let us take, thirdly, Hegel’s astonishing move, with
which he struck through all logical habits and indulgences when he
dared to teach that species concepts develop out of each other:”? with this
proposition the minds of Europe were preformed for the last great
scientific movement, Darwinism — for without Hegel there could be no
Darwin. Is there anything German in this Hegelian innovation which
first introduced the decisive concept of ‘development’ into science? Yes,
without any doubt: in all three cases we feel that something in ourselves
has been ‘uncovered’ and figured out, and we are grateful and at the
same time surprised. Each of these three propositions is a thoughtful
piece of German self-knowledge, self-experience, and self-conception.
‘Our inner world is much richer, more comprehensive, more hidden’,
we feel with Leibniz. As Germans, we doubt with Kant the ultimate
validity of the discoveries of the natural sciences and altogether of
everything that can be known causaliter?? — what is knowable already
seems to us of Jess value on that account. We Germans are Hegelians
even had there been no Hegel, insofar as we (as opposed to all Latins)
instinctively attribute a deeper meaning and greater value to becoming
and development than to what ‘is’; we hardly believe in the justification
of the concept ‘being’ — and also insofar as we are not inclined to
concede that our human logic is logic as such or the only kind of logic
(we would rather persuade ourselves that it is only a special case and
perhaps one of the oddest and stupidest). A fourth question would be
whether Schopenhauer, too, with his pessimism — that is, the problem of
the value of existence?* — had to be precisely a German. I believe not.
The event after which this problem was to be expected with certainty, so
that an astronomer of the soul could have calculated the very day and
hour for it — the decline of the faith in the Christian god, the triumph of
scientific atheism — is a pan-European event in which all races had their
See Kant’s Preface to Prolegomena to any Future Metaphysics (1783).
22 See Hegel’s Encyclopedia of Philosophical Sciences (1830 edn), § 368 (especially the Zusatz).
‘causally’
24 See Schopenhauer, World as Will and Representation vol. 1, Book 4, and vol. 11, chapters 46 and
49.
218

Book Five: We Fearless Ones
share and for which all deserve credit and honour. Conversely, one
might charge precisely the Germans — those Germans who were
contemporaries of Schopenhauer — with having delayed this triumph of
atheism most dangerously for the longest time. Hegel in particular was a
delayer par excellence, in accordance with his grandiose attempt to
persuade us of the divinity of existence, appealing as a last resort to our
sixth sense, ‘the historical sense’. As a philosopher, Schopenhauer was
the first admitted and uncompromising atheist among us Germans: this
was the background of his enmity towards Hegel. The ungodliness of
existence counted for him as something given, palpable, indisputable; he
always lost his philosopher’s composure and became indignant when he
saw anyone hesitate or beat around the bush on this point. This is the
locus of his whole integrity; unconditional and honest atheism is simply
the presupposition of his way of putting the problem, as a victory of the
European conscience won finally and with great difficulty; as the most
fateful act of two thousand years of discipline for truth that in the end
forbids itself the /ie of faith in God. . .One can see what it was that
actually triumphed over the Christian god: Christian morality itself, the
concept of truthfulness that was taken ever more rigorously; the father
confessor’s refinement of the Christian conscience, translated and
sublimated into a scientific conscience, into intellectual cleanliness at
any price. Looking at nature as if it were proof of the goodness and care
of a god; interpreting history in honour of some divine reason, as a
continual testimony of a moral world order and ultimate moral pur-
poses; interpreting one’s own experiences as pious people have long
interpreted theirs, as if everything were providential, a hint, designed
and ordained for the sake of salvation of the soul — that is over now; that
has conscience against it; every refined conscience considers it to be
indecent, dishonest, a form of mendacity, effeminacy, weakness, cow-
ardice. With this severity, if with anything, we are simply good
Europeans and heirs of Europe’s longest and most courageous self-
overcoming. As we thus reject Christian interpretation and condemn its
‘meaning’ as counterfeit, Schopenhauer’s question immediately comes at
us in a terrifying way: Does existence have any meaning at all? A few
centuries will be needed before this question can ever be heard
completely and in its full depth. What Schopenhauer himself said in
answer to this question was — forgive me — something hasty, youthful, a
mere compromise, a way of remaining and staying stuck in precisely
219

The Gay Science
those Christian and ascetic moral perspectives in which one had
renounced faith along with the faith in God. But he posed the question —
as a good European, as I said before, and mot as a German. Or is it
possible that at least the manner in which the Germans appropriated
Schopenhauer’s question proves that the Germans did have an inner
affinity and relation, preparation, and need for this problem? ‘That after
Schopenhauer one thought and printed things in Germany, too — by the
way, late enough — about the problem he had posed is certainly not
sufficient to decide in favour of this closer affinity. One might rather
adduce the peculiar ineptitude of this post-Schopenhauerian pessimism
against the thesis; clearly the Germans did not behave in this affair as if
they were in their element. This is by no means an allusion to Eduard
von Hartmann.”> On the contrary, to this day I have not shaken off my
old suspicion that he is too apt for us. I mean that he may have been a
real rogue from the start who perhaps made fun not only of German
pessimism — but in the end he might even reveal to the Germans in his
last will and testament to what extent it was possible to make fools of
them, even in an era of economic initiative and success.”° But let me ask
you: should we perhaps consider that old humming-top Bahnsen?’ as a
credit to the Germans, seeing how voluptuously he revolved his life
around his real-dialectical misery and ‘personal bad luck’? Might
precisely that be German? (I herewith recommend his writings to the
end for which I have used them myself, as an anti-pessimistic diet,
especially on account of their elegantiae psychologicae,”® with which, I
think, they should be effective also for the most constipated bowels and
temperaments.) Or could one count such dilettantes and old spinsters as
that mawkish apostle of virginity, Mainlinder,”? as a genuine German?
In the end he must have been a Jew (all Jews become mawkish when
they moralize). Neither Bahnsen nor Mainlander, nor even Eduard von
Hartmann, gives us any clear evidence regarding the question whether
Schopenhauer’s pessimism, his horrified look into a de-deified world
25 Nineteenth-century German philosopher who drew eclectically on both Hegel and Schopen-
hauer to develop a pessimistic ‘philosophy of the unconscious’
The 1870s were a period of such economic prosperity that they are sometimes referred to as the
‘Era of Foundations’ (of various business enterprises).
Deservedly forgotten nineteenth-century German philosopher
‘psychological elegance’
In his Philosophie der Erlésung (2 vols., 1876—7): Phillip Batz ~ ‘Mainlander’ is a pseudonym —
makes much of the virtues of virginity (and of suicide). He committed suicide when the second
volume of this work appeared, at the age of thirty-five.
26
2
2
2:
oe oe
220

Book Five: We Fearless Ones
that had become stupid, blind, crazed, and questionable, his honest
horror. . .was not merely an exception among Germans but a German
event. Everything else that is otherwise in the foreground — our brave
politics, our merry fatherlandishness which resolutely enough consider
all matters with a view to a not very philosophical principle (“Deutsch-
land, Deutschland iiber alles*°), ie. sub specie speciei,*! namely the
German species, bears emphatic witness to the opposite. No, the
Germans of today are no pessimists. And Schopenhauer was a pessimist,
to repeat, as a good European and not as a German. —
358
The peasant rebellion of the spirit. 
- We Europeans confront a world of
tremendous ruins. A few things are still towering; much looks decayed
and uncanny, while most things are already lying on the ground:
picturesque enough — where has one ever seen more beautiful ruins? —
and overgrown by large and small weeds. The Church is this city of
decline: we see the religious society of Christianity shaken to its lowest
foundations; faith in God has collapsed; faith in the Christian-ascetic
ideal is still fighting its last battle. An edifice such as Christianity that
had been built so carefully over such a long period — it was the last
Roman construction! — could of course not be destroyed all at once. All
kinds of earthquakes had to shake it; all kinds of minds (Gezst) that drill,
dig, gnaw, and moisten have had to help. But the oddest thing is: those
who exerted themselves the most to preserve and conserve Christianity
have become its best destroyers — the Germans. It seems that the
Germans do not understand the nature of a church. Are they not
spiritual enough for that? Not mistrustful enough? The edifice of the
Church rests, at any rate, on a Southern freedom and liberality of the
30 First line of a poem written in 1841 by Hoffmann von Fallersleben. At the time of its
composition ‘Germany’? was no more than a geographical expression for a congeries of
independent political entities. In this context the words were a call to put national unification ~
the creation of a ‘Germany’ — above all regional and local political loyalties. Once unification was
attained (in 1871), the words could come to bear a more aggressive meaning in an international
context (‘Let Germany be above all other nations’). In 1797 Haydn had composed a melody,
deriving it from an existing Croatian folktune, which he used to set the words ‘Gott erhalte
Franz den Kaiser’ (‘God Save Kaiser Franz’). Until 1918 this was the anthem of the Austro-
Hungarian Empire. In 1922 Fallersleben’s poem was put together with Haydn’s melody and the
result proclaimed the German National Anthem.
31 ‘from the point of view of the species’
221

The Gay Science
mind as well as on a Southern suspicion against nature, man, and spirit;
it rests on an altogether different knowledge and experience of man than
the North has had. The Lutheran Reformation was, in its whole
breadth, the indignation of simplicity against ‘multiplicity’, to speak
cautiously, a crude, naively narrow-minded misunderstanding in which
there is much to forgive. One failed to understand the expression of a
victorious church and saw only corruption; one misunderstood the noble
scepticism, that /uxury of scepticism and tolerance which every victor-
ious, self-confident power permits itself. 
. .Today one overlooks easily
enough how in all cardinal questions of power Luther was dangerously
short-sighted, superficial, incautious — mainly as a man of the common
people who lacked any inheritance from a ruling caste and instinct for
power; thus his work, his will to restore that work of the Romans only
became the beginning of a work of destruction, without his wanting and
knowing it. With honest wrath he unravelled, he tore up what the old
spider had woven so carefully for such a long time. He surrendered the
holy books to everyone — thus they finally ended up in the hands of the
philologists, who are the destroyers of every faith that rests on books.
He destroyed the concept of the ‘Church’ by throwing away the belief
in the inspiration of the church councils; for the concept of the
‘Church’ retains power only under the condition that the inspiring
spirit that founded the Church still lives in, builds, and continues to
build its house. He gave back to the priest sexual intercourse with a
woman; but three-quarters of the reverence of which the people,
especially the women of the people, are capable rests on the faith that a
person who is an exception in this regard will be an exception in other
regards as well — it is here precisely that the popular faith in something
superhuman in man, in the miracle, in the redeeming god in man, finds
its subtlest and most insidious advocate. Having given the priest
woman, Luther had to take from him auricular confession; that was
psychologically right, but with that development the Christian priest
was basically abolished, since his deepest utility has always been that he
was a holy ear, a silent well, a grave for secrets. ‘Everyone his own
priest’ ~ behind such formulas and their peasant cunning was hidden in
Luther the abysmal hatred of ‘the higher human beings’ and the
dominion of ‘the higher human beings’ as conceived by the Church; he
smashed an ideal that he could not attain, while he seemed to fight and
abhor the degeneration of this ideal. Actually he, the impossible monk,
222

Book Five: We Fearless Ones
pushed away the dominion of the homines religiosi,** and thus he himself
brought about within the ecclestastical social order what in relation to the
civil social order he attacked so intolerantly — a ‘peasants’ rebellion’.
What grew out of his Reformation afterwards, good as well as bad,
might be roughly calculated today; but who would be naive enough to
praise or blame Luther on account of these consequences? He is
innocent of everything; he did not know what he was doing. The
flattening of the European mind, particularly in the North — its becoming
more good-natured, if one prefers a moral term — advanced a large step
with the Lutheran Reformation, there is no doubt; and owing to it also
the flexibility and restlessness of the mind, its thirst for independence,
its faith in a right to liberty, its ‘naturalness’. If in connection with this
last point one wanted to give it the credit for having prepared and
favoured what we today honour as ‘modern science’, one must surely
add that it also shares the blame for the degeneration of the modern
scholar, for his lack of reverence, shame, and depth, for the whole naive
guilelessness and conventionality in matters of knowledge — in short for
that plebeianism of the spirit that is peculiar to the last two centuries and
from which even pessimism has not yet liberated us. ‘Modern ideas’ also
belong to this peasant rebellion of the North against the colder, more
ambiguous, mistrustful spirit of the South that built its greatest monu-
ment in the Christian Church. Let us not forget in the end what a
church is, specifically as opposed to any ‘state’. A church is above all a
structure for ruling that secures the highest rank to the more spiritual
human beings and that believes in the power of spirituality to the extent
of forbidding itself the use of all cruder instruments of force; and on
that score alone the Church is under all circumstances a nobler institu-
tion than the state.
359
The revenge against the spirit and other ulterior motives of morality. —
Morality — where do you suppose that it finds its most dangerous and
insidious advocates?. 
. .There is a human being who has turned out
badly, who does not have spirit enough to be able to enjoy it and just
enough education to know this; bored, weary, a self-despiser; wealthy
32 ‘religious people’
223

The Gay Science
through inheritance, he is deprived even of the last comfort, ‘the
blessings of work’, self-forgetfulness in ‘daily labour’. Such a person
who is basically ashamed of his existence — perhaps he also harbours a
few small vices — and on the other hand cannot keep himself from
becoming more spoiled and touchy as a result of reading books he has
no right to or through more spiritual company than he can digest: such
a thoroughly poisoned human being — for spirit becomes poison,
education becomes poison; ownership becomes poison, loneliness
becomes poison in persons who have turned out badly in this way —
eventually ends up in a state of habitual revenge, the will to revenge. . .-
What do you think he finds necessary, absolutely necessary, to give
himself in his own eyes the appearance of superiority over more spiritual
people and to obtain the pleasure of an accomplished revenge at least in
his own imagination? Always morality; you can bet on that. Always big
moral words. Always the boom-boom of justice, wisdom, holiness,
virtue. Always the Stoicism of gesture (how well Stoicism conceals what
one facks!). Always the cloak of prudent silence, of affability, of
mildness, and whatever the other idealistic cloaks may be called under
which incurable self-despisers, as well as the incurably vain, go about.
Do not misunderstand me: among such born enemies of the spirit
emerges occasionally the rare piece of humanity that the people revere
under such names as saint and sage. From among such men come those
monsters of morality who make noise, who make history — St Augus-
tine*? is among them. Fear of spirit, revenge against spirit — oh how
often have these propelling vices become the roots of virtues! Indeed,
become virtues! And, as a question asked in confidence: even that
philosopher’s claim to wisdom which has been made here and there on
earth; the maddest and most immodest of all claims — was it not always,
in India as well as in Greece, primarily a hiding place? At times perhaps a
hiding place chosen with pedagogical intent, which hallows so many
lies; one has a tender regard for those who are still becoming, growing —
for disciples who must often be defended against themselves through
faith in a person (through an error). . .In most cases, however, it is a
hiding place in which the philosopher saves himself owing to weariness,
age, growing cold, hardening — as a wisdom of that instinct which the
animals have before death — they go off alone, become silent, choose
33 North African rhetorician, theologian and bishop (AD 354~430)
224

Book Five: We Fearless Ones
solitude, crawl into caves, become wise. 
. .What? Wisdom as a hiding
place in which the philosopher hides himself from — spirit?
360
Two kinds of causes that are often confused. - This seems to me to be one
of my most essential steps forward: I learned to distinguish the cause of
acting from the cause of acting in a certain way, in a certain direction,
with a certain goal. The first kind of cause is a quantum of dammed-up
energy waiting to be used somehow, for something; the second kind, by
contrast, is something quite insignificant, mostly a small accident in
accordance with which this quantum ‘discharges’ itself in one particular
way: the match versus the powder keg. Among these small accidents
and matches I consider all so-called ‘purposes’ as well as the even more
so-called ‘vocations’: they are relatively random, arbitrary, nearly in-
different in relation to the enormous force of energy that presses on, as I
said, to be used up somehow. The usual view is different: one is used to
seeing the driving force precisely in the goals (purposes, professions,
etc.), in keeping with a very ancient error; but it is only the directing
force — one has mistaken the helmsman for the stream. And not even
always the helmsman, the driving force. . .Is the ‘goal’, the ‘purpose’,
not often enough a beautifying pretext, a self-deception of vanity after
the fact that does not want to acknowledge that the ship is following the
current into which it has entered accidentally? That it ‘wills’ to go that
way because it — must? That it certainly has a direction but — no
helmsman whatsoever? We still need a critique of the concept of
‘purpose’.
361
On the problem of the actor. - The problem of the actor has troubled me
for a very long time; I was unsure (and still sometimes am) whether it is
only from this angle that one can approach the dangerous concept of the
‘artist’ — a concept that has heretofore been treated with unpardonable
generosity. Falseness with a good conscience; the delight in pretence
erupting as a power that pushes aside, floods, and at times extinguishes
one’s so-called ‘character’; the inner longing for a role and mask, for an
appearance (Schein); an excess of capacities for all kinds of adaptation
225

The Gay Science
that can no longer be satisfied in the service of the nearest, most
narrowly construed utility — perhaps all of this is distinctive not only of
the actor? Such an instinct will have developed most easily in lower-
class families who had to survive under fluctuating pressures and
coercions, in deep dependency; who had nimbly to cut their coats
according to their cloth, always readapting to new circumstances, always
having to act and pose differently until they slowly learned to turn their
coats with every wind and thus almost turned into coats themselves —
and masters of an art which they have fully assimilated so that it is an
integral part of themselves, that art of perpetually playing at self-
concealment which in animals we call mimicry — until finally this
capacity, accumulated from generation to generation, becomes domi-
neering, unreasonable, intractable, an instinct that learns to command
other instincts and produces the actor, the ‘artist’ (the buffoon, the
teller of lies, the fool, the jester, the clown primarily, but also the
classical servant, Gil Blas;** for it is in such types that we find the pre-
history of the artist and often enough even of ‘genius’). In more elevated
social conditions, too, a similar human type develops under similar
pressures; only here, the histrionic instinct is usually just barely kept in
check by another instinct, as in the case of ‘diplomats’. Incidentally, I
would think that a good diplomat would be free at any time to become a
good actor — provided, of course, that he were ‘free’ to do this. But as
for the Jews, that people possessing the art of adaptability par excellence,
one might, according to this train of thought, immediately see in them a
world-historical organization for the cultivation of actors, a veritable
breeding ground for actors; and indeed it is really high time to ask: what
good actor today is not — a Jew? Also the Jew as a born literary man, as
the true master of the European press, exercises this power by virtue of
his histrionic ability, for the literary man is essentially an actor: he plays
the ‘expert’, the ‘specialist’. Finally, women: consider the whole history
of women — mustn’t they be actresses first and foremost? Listen to
doctors who have hypnotized womenfolk; finally, love them — let
yourself be ‘hypnotized’ by them! What is always the result? That they
try to be ‘taken for something’ even when they are being taken. . .
Woman is so artistic. . .
34 See above, Book 11, footnote 9, p. 78.
226

Book Five: We Fearless Ones
362
Our faith in the masculinization of Europe. — We owe it to Napoleon (and
not at all to the French Revolution, which aimed at the ‘brotherhood’ of
peoples and a general, blooming exchange of hearts) that a few warlike
centuries, incomparable to any other in history, are likely to follow in
succession — in short, that we have entered the classic age of war, of
sophisticated yet popular war on the largest scale (in terms of weapons,
talents, discipline); all coming ages will look back on this kind of war
with envy and deep respect as something perfect, for the national
movement out of which this war glory is growing is merely the counter-
shock against Napoleon and would not exist without Napoleon. He
should be credited one day for having enabled man in Europe to become
the master over the businessman and the philistine — perhaps even over
‘woman’, who has been spoiled by Christianity and the enthusiastic
spirit of the eighteenth century, and even more by ‘modern ideas’.
Napoleon, who saw something of a personal enemy in modern ideas and
in civilization itself,>> proved through this enmity to be one of the
greatest continuators of the Renaissance: he brought back a whole piece,
a block of granite, perhaps the decisive one, of antiquity’s essence. And
who knows whether this piece of antiquity’s essence will finally again
become master of the national movement, and whether it must not make
itself the heir and protractor in an affirmative sense of Napoleon ~— who
wanted one Europe, as is known, and wanted it as mistress of the earth. ~
363
How each sex has its own prejudice about love. ~ Despite all the
concessions I am willing to make to the prejudice favouring monogamy,
I will never admit talk of egua/ rights for man and woman in love: there
are none. For man and woman have different conceptions of love — and
it belongs to the conditions of love in each sex that neither presupposes
the same feeling, the same concept of ‘love’ in the other. What woman
means by love is clear enough: total devotion (and not mere surrender)
with soul and body, without any consideration or reserve, rather with
shame and horror at the thought of a devotion that might be tied to
35 See above, Book 1, footnote 16, p. 49. In this case see vol. 1, p. 112.
227

The Gay Science
special clauses or conditions. In this absence of conditions her love is a
faith: woman has no other. Man, when he loves a woman, wants precisely
this love from her and is thus himself as far as can be from the
presupposition of female love; supposing, however, that there should
also be men to whom the desire for complete surrender is not alien,
well, then they are — not men. A man who loves like a woman becomes a
slave, but a woman who loves like 
a woman becomes a more perfect
woman... The passion of a woman, in its unconditional renunciation
of her own rights, presupposes precisely that on the other side there is
not an equal pathos, not an equal will to renunciation; for if both should
renounce themselves from love, the result would be — well, I don’t
know, maybe an empty space? Woman wants to be taken, adopted as a
possession, wants to be absorbed in the concept ‘possession’, ‘pos-
sessed’; consequently, she wants someone who takes, who does not
himself give or give himself away; who on the contrary is supposed
precisely to be made richer in ‘himself’ — through the increase in
strength, happiness, and faith given him by the woman who gives
herself. Woman gives herself away; man takes more — I do not believe
one can get around this natural opposition through any social contracts
or with the best will to justice, desirable as it may be not to remind
oneself constantly how harsh, terrible, enigmatic, and immoral this
antagonism is. For love, when one considers it in its perfect, fully
developed state, is nature, and nature is eternally ‘immoral’. Faithful-
ness is then implicit in woman’s love, and follows from its definition; in
a man’s case it could perhaps arise as a consequence of his love, for
instance as gratitude or as an idiosyncrasy of taste, a so-called ‘elective
affinity’, but it does not belong to the essence of his love. Indeed this is so
little the case that one might almost speak with some justification of a
natural back-and-forth between love and faithfulness in a man: his love
is desire for possession and vot a renunciation or giving away, but with
possession desire for possession always ceases . . . In fact it is the highly
refined and suspicious thirst for possession on the part of a man who
rarely and only after a long time admits that he has ‘possession’, which
allows his love to endure. Thus it is possible that his love continues to
grow even after surrender — he will not easily admit that a woman has
nothing more to ‘give up’ to him.
228

Book Five: We Fearless Ones
364
The hermit speaks. — The art of dealing with people depends essentially
on the skill (requiring much practice) to accept and eat a meal prepared
in a kitchen you don’t trust. If you come to the table ravenous, all is easy
(‘the worst company makes itself felt? — as Mephistopheles says);*° but
one is never that hungry when one needs to be! Oh, how hard it is to
digest one’s fellow men! First principle: as in the face of misfortune, to
engage your courage, to spring boldly to action, to admire yourself in
the process, to sink your teeth into your reluctance, to swallow your
disgust. Second principle: to ‘improve’ your fellow man, e.g. by praising
him so as to make him start sweating out his pleasure in himself, or by
taking hold of a corner of his good or ‘interesting’ qualities and pulling
at it until all the virtue comes out and you can hide your fellow man in
its folds. Third principle: self-hypnosis. To fixate on your object of
association as if on a glass button until you stop feeling pleasure and
displeasure in this activity and fall asleep without noticing it, become
rigid, and attain equanimity: a home remedy amply tested in marriage
and friendship, praised as indispensable but not yet scientifically
analysed. Its popular name is — patience.
365
The hermit speaks again, — We, too, deal with ‘people’; we, too, modestly
don the cloak in which (as which) others know us, respect us, seek us,
and so we appear in company, i.e. among others who are disguised but
don’t want to admit it. Like all clever masks we, too, politely prop up a
chair against the door when confronted with curiosity about anything
but our ‘cloak’. But there are other ways and tricks for ‘wandering
amongst’, for ‘associating with’, people: for instance, as a ghost — which
is highly advisable if one desires to get rid of them quickly and make
them afraid. Example: others reach for us and can’t get a hold of us.
That’s frightening. Or we enter through a closed door. Or when all the
lights are out. Or when we're already dead. The latter is the trick
of posthumous people par excellence. (“And what were you thinking?’
one of them once said impatiently; ‘Would we wish to endure this
36 Goethe, Faust I, line 1637; the line continues: ‘. . . that you are a human being among humans’.
229

The Gay Science
estrangement, coldness, and sepulchral silence enveloping us, this entire
subterranean, hidden, mute, undiscovered loneliness that we call life
but might as well be called death unless we knew what will become of us
and that it is only after death that we come into our life and become alive
— oh, very much alive, we posthumous ones!)
366
Faced with a scholarly book. — We are not among those who have ideas
only between books, stimulated by books — our habit is to think
outdoors, walking, jumping, climbing, dancing, preferably on lonely
mountains or right by the sea where even the paths become thoughtful.
Our first question about the value of a book, a person, or a piece of
music is: ‘Can they walk?’ Even more, ‘Can they dance?’ We rarely read;
but are none the worse on that account — and oh, how quickly we guess
how someone has come to his ideas; whether seated before the inkwell,
stomach clenched, head bowed over the paper; and oh, how soon we’re
done with his book! Cramped intestines betray themselves — you can bet
on it — no less than stuffy air, closed ceilings, cramped spaces. — Those
were my feelings just now as I closed a decent, scholarly book — grateful,
very grateful, but also relieved . . . In a scholar’s book there is nearly
always something oppressive, oppressed: 
the ‘specialist’ emerges
somehow — his eagerness, his seriousness, his ire, his overestimation of
the nook in which he sits and spins, his hunchback — every specialist has
his hump. Every scholarly book also reflects a soul that has become
crooked; every craft makes crooked. Look at the friends of your youth
again, after they have taken possession of their speciality (Wissenschaft)
— Alas, in every case the reverse has also taken place! How they are now
for all time possessed and obsessed by it! Grown into their corner,
squashed beyond recognition, unfree, unstable, completely emaciated
and jagged except for one spot that is paradigmatically round — one is
moved and silenced when one sees them again that way. Above every
craft, even one with a golden floor, is also a leaden ceiling that presses
and presses on the soul until it becomes strangely and crookedly
pressed. There is nothing to do about this. Don’t think you can evade
such crippling through some educational artifice. One pays dearly for
any kind of mastery on earth, where perhaps one pays too dearly for
everything; one is master of one’s trade at the price of also being its
230

Book Five: We Fearless Ones
victim. But you want things to be different — ‘cheaper’, above all more
comfortable — not so, my dear contemporaries? Well, if so, you instantly
get something different: instead of the craftsman and master, you get
the man of letters, the dexterous, ‘polydexterous’ literary man who of
course lacks the hunched back — notwithstanding the posture he
assumes before you as the shop attendant of spirit and the ‘bearer’ of
culture — the literary man of letters, who really is nothing but who
‘represents’ nearly everything, who acts and ‘stands in for’ the expert,
who takes it upon himself in all modesty to make himself paid,
honoured, and celebrated in place of the expert. No, my scholarly
friends, I bless you even for your hunched backs! And for despising, as
do I, the ‘literary men’ and culture parasites! And for not knowing how
to make a business of the spirit! And for having opinions that cannot be
translated into monetary terms! And for not representing anything that
you are wot! And because your only desire (Wille) is to become masters
of your craft, with reverence for every type of mastery and competence
and with ruthless rejection of anything specious, semi-genuine, mere-
tricious, virtuoso-like, demagogical, or histrionic in litteris et artibus?” —
of anything that cannot give you proof of its unconditional probity in
discipline and prior training. (Not even genius can compensate for such
a deficiency, however much it may blind people to it. One grasps this
once one has watched our most talented painters and musicians up
close, who nearly without exception manage through a cunning inven-
tiveness of manners, stop-gap devices, and even principles, to acquire
artificially and belatedly the appearance of such probity, such solidity of
schooling and culture — without, of course, managing to deceive
themselves, to silence forever their bad conscience. For surely you
know? All great contemporary artists suffer from a bad conscience. . .)
367
The first distinction to draw regarding artworks. — Everything that is
thought, written, painted, composed, even built and sculpted, belongs
either to monologue art or to art before witnesses. The second category
must also include the seemingly monologue art involving faith in God,
the entire lyricism of prayer; for solitude does not yet exist to the pious
37 ‘in arts and letters’
231

The Gay Science
— this invention was first made by us, the godless. 
I know no deeper
distinction in an artist’s entire optics than this: whether he views his
budding artwork (‘himself’) from the eye of the witness, or whether he
‘has forgotten the world’, which is the essential feature of all monologue
art — it is based on forgetting; it is the music of forgetting.
368
The cynic speaks. - My objections to Wagner’s music are physiological
objections: why disguise them with aesthetic formulas? My ‘fact’ is that
I stop breathing easily once this music starts affecting me; that my foot
immediately gets angry at it and revolts — it has a need for tempo, dance,
march; it demands chiefly from music the raptures found in good
walking, striding, leaping, and dancing — but doesn’t my stomach
protest, too? My heart? My circulation? My intestines? Do I not
unnoticeably grow hoarse as I listen? And so I ask myself: what does my
whole body actually want from music? Its own relief; I believe, as if all
animal functions should be quickened by easy, bold, exuberant, self-
assured rhythms; as if iron, leaden life should be gilded by golden,
good, tender harmonies. My melancholy wants to rest in the hiding-
places and abysses of perfection: that’s what I need music for. What is the
drama to me! The cramps of its moral ecstasies that give the ‘people’
satisfaction! The whole hocus-pocus of gestures of the actor! You will
guess that I am essentially anti-theatrical — but Wagner was, conversely,
essentially a man of the theatre and an actor, the most enthusiastic
mimomaniac that ever existed, also as a musician. And, incidentally, if it
was Wagner’s theory that ‘the drama is the end; the music is always
merely its means’,>* his practice was always, from beginning to end, ‘the
attitude is the end; the drama, and music, too, is always merely its
means’. Music as a means of clarification, strengthening, internalization
of the dramatic gesture and the actor’s appeal to the senses; and the
Wagnerian drama a mere occasion for many dramatic attitudes! Beside
all other instincts, he had the commanding instinct of a great actor in
absolutely everything — and, as I said, also as a musician. I once made
this clear to an upright Wagnerian, with some trouble; and I had reasons
to add: ‘Do be a bit more honest with yourself — after all, we’re not at
38 Wagner, Opera and Drama (1850~1), Introduction
232

Book Five: We Fearless Ones
the theatre! At the theatre, one is honest only as a mass; as an individual
one lies, lies to oneself. One leaves oneself at home when one goes to the
theatre; one relinquishes the right to one’s own tongue and choice, to
one’s taste, even to one’s courage as one has it and exercises it within
one’s own four walls against god and man. No one brings the finest
senses of his art to the theatre; nor does the artist who works for the
theatre: there, one is people, public, herd, woman, pharisee, voting
cattle, democrat, neighbour, fellow man; there, even the most personal
conscience is vanquished by the levelling magic of the “greatest
number”’; there, stupidity breeds lasciviousness and is contagious; there,
the “neighbour” reigns; there, one becomes a neighbour’. (I forgot to
mention my enlightened Wagnerian’s retort to the physiological objec-
tions: ‘So, you simply aren’t healthy enough for our music?’)
369
Our coexistence. 
— Don’t we have to admit to ourselves, we artists, that
there exists an uncanny disparity within us; that in an odd way our taste
and on the other hand our creative power stand each distinct from the
other; each remains the way it is by itself, and each grows by itself; I
mean each of these has completely different degrees and tempi of old,
young, ripe, overblown, rotten? A musician, for instance, could spend a
lifetime creating things that contradict what his spoiled listener’s ear,
listener’s heart values, savours, prefers — he needn’t even be aware of
this contradiction! As experience shows with almost embarrassing
regularity, one’s taste can easily outgrow the taste of one’s powers, even
without thereby paralysing them and hindering their continued produc-
tivity. But the opposite can happen, too — and this is precisely what I’d
like to call artists’ attention to. A perpetually creative person, a ‘mother’
type in the grand sense of the term, someone who doesn’t hear or know
anything but the pregnancies and child-beds of his spirit anymore, who
simply has no time to reflect on himself and on his work and to make
comparisons, who no longer wants to exercise his taste and simply
forgets it, i.e. lets it stand, lie, or fall — maybe such a person would
finally produce works that far excel his own judgement, so that he utters
inanities about them and himself — utters them and believes them. This
seems to me to be almost the norm among fertile artists — nobody knows
a child less well than his parents — and this is true, to take a colossal
233

The Gay Science
example, even in the case of the whole world of Greek art and poetry: it
never ‘knew’ what it had done.
370
What is romanticism? — It may be recalled, at least among my friends,
that initially I approached the modern world with a few crude errors
and over-estimations and, in any case, with hope. I understood — on the
basis of who knows what personal experiences? — the philosophical
pessimism of the nineteenth century as if it were a symptom of a higher
force of thought, of more audacious courage, and of more victorious
fullness of life than had characterized the eighteenth century, the age of
Hume, Kant, Condillac,*? and the sensualists: thus, tragic insight struck
me as the distinctive /exury of our culture, its most precious, noblest
and most dangerous squandering; but still, in view of its over-richness,
as its permitted luxury. Similarly, I explained German music to myself as
the expression of a Dionysian might of the German soul: I believed I
heard in it the earthquake through which some pent-up primordial
force is finally released — indifferent about whether it sets everything
else which is called culture atremble.*° You see that what I misjudged
both in philosophical pessimism and in German music was what
constitutes its actual character — its romanticism. What is romanticism?
Every art, every philosophy can be considered a cure and aid in the
service of growing, struggling life: they always presuppose suffering and
sufferers. But there are two types of sufferers: first, those who suffer
from a superabundance of life —~ they want a Dionysian art as well as a
tragic outlook and insight into life; then, those who suffer from an
impoverishment of life and seek quiet, stillness, calm seas, redemption
from themselves through art and insight, or else intoxication, paroxysm,
numbness, madness. All romanticism in art and in knowledge fits the
dual needs of the latter type, as did (and do) Schopenhauer and Richard
Wagner, to name the most famous and prominent romantics that I
misunderstood at the time — not, incidentally, to their disadvantage, one
might in all fairness concede. He who is richest in fullness of life, the
Dionysian god and man, can allow himself not only the sight of what is
terrible and questionable but also the terrible deed and every luxury of
39 French empiricist philosopher (1715-80)
40 Nietzsche expressed these views in The Birth of Tragedy from the Spirit of Music (1872).
234

Book Five: We Fearless Ones
destruction, decomposition, negation; in his case, what is evil, non-
sensical, and ugly almost seems acceptable because of an overflow in
procreating, fertilizing forces capable of turning any desert into boun-
tiful farmland. Conversely, he who suffers most and is poorest in life
would need mainly mildness, peacefulness, goodness in thought and in
deed — if possible, also a god who truly would be a god for the sick, a
‘saviour’; as well as logic, the conceptual comprehensibility of existence
~— for logic soothes, gives confidence — in short, a certain warm, fear-
repelling narrowness and confinement to optimistic horizons. Thus I
gradually came to understand Epicurus, the antithesis of a Dionysian
pessimist, and equally the ‘Christian’, who really is simply a kind of
Epicurean and, like him, essentially a romantic; and my vision grew
keener for that most difficult and insidious form of backward inference
with which the most mistakes are made — the inference from the work to
the maker, from the ideal to the one who needs it, from every manner of
valuation to the commanding need behind it. Nowadays I avail myself of
this primary distinction concerning all aesthetic values: in every case I
ask, ‘Is it hunger or superabundance that have become creative here?’ At
first glance, a different distinction may appear more advisable — it’s far
more noticeable — namely, the question of whether the creation was
caused by a desire for fixing, for immortalizing, for being, or rather by a
desire for destruction, for change, for novelty, for future, for becoming.
However, both types of desires prove ambiguous upon closer examina-
tion, and can be interpreted under the first scheme, which seems
preferable to me. The desire for destruction, for change and for becoming
can be the expression of an overflowing energy pregnant with the future
(my term for this is, as is known, ‘Dionysian’); but it can also be the
hatred of the ill-constituted, deprived, and underprivileged one who
destroys and must destroy because what exists, indeed all existence, all
being, outrages and provokes him. To understand this feeling, take a
close look at our anarchists. The will to smmortalize also requires a dual
interpretation. It can be prompted, first, by gratitude and love; art of
such origin will always be an art of apotheosis, dithyrambic perhaps like
Rubens;*! blissfully mocking like Hafis;4? bright and gracious like
Goethe, spreading a Homeric light and splendour over all things. But it
41 Flemish Baroque painter (1577~1640)
# Persian lyric poet of the fourteenth century; especially well-known in Germany because of
Goethe’s great partiality for his poetry
235

The Gay Science
can also be the tyrannical will of someone who suffers deeply, who
struggles, is tortured, and who would like to stamp as a binding law and
compulsion what is most personal, singular, narrow, the real idiosyn-
crasy of his suffering, and who as it were takes revenge on all things by
forcing, imprinting, branding Ais image on them, the image of his
torture. The latter is romantic pessimism in its most expressive form, be it
Schopenhauer’s philosophy of will or Wagner’s music — romantic
pessimism, the last great event in the fate of our culture. (That there
could be a completely different pessimism, a classical one — this intuition
and vision belongs to me as inseparable from me, as my proprium*® and
ipsissimum;4 only the word ‘classical’ offends my ears; it has become far
too trite, round, and indistinct. I call this pessimism of the future — for
it is coming! I see it coming! — Dionysian pessimism.)
37!
We incomprehensible ones. 
— Have we ever complained about being
misunderstood, misjudged, misidentified, defamed, misheard, and
ignored? This is precisely our lot — oh, for a long time yet! Let’s say
until 1901, to be modest — this is also our distinction; we wouldn’t
honour ourselves enough if we wanted it otherwise. We are misidentified
— for we ourselves keep growing, changing, shedding old hides; we still
shed our skins every spring; we become increasingly younger, more
future-oriented, taller, stronger; we drive our roots ever more power-
fully into the depths — into evil — while at the same time embracing the
heavens ever more lovingly and broadly, and absorbing their light ever
more thirstily with all our sprigs and leaves. Like trees we grow — it’s
hard to understand, like all life! ~ not in one place, but everywhere; not
in one direction, but upwards and outwards and inwards and down-
wards equally; our energy drives trunk, branches, and roots all at once;
we are no longer free to do anything individual, to be anything
individual . . 
. This is our lot, as I have said: we grow in height; and
even if this should be our dark fate — for we dwell ever closer to the
lightning! — well, we do not honour it less on that account; it remains
that which we do not want to share, to impart: the dark fate of height,
our fate.
4 “my) own’ 
+ “(my) ownmost’
236

Book Five: We Fearless Ones
372
Why we are not idealists. 
— Formerly, philosophers feared the senses: is it
possible that we have unlearned this fear all too much? Today we are all
sensualists, we philosophers of the present and future, #o¢ in theory but
in praxis, in practice.** The former, however, saw the senses as trying to
lure them away from their world, from the cold kingdom of ‘ideas’, to a
dangerous Southern isle where they feared their philosophers’ virtues
would melt away like snow in the sun. ‘Wax in the ear’ was virtually a
condition of philosophizing; a true philosopher didn’t listen to life
insofar as life is music; he denied the music of life — it is an old
philosopher’s superstition that all music is siren-music.** Today we are
inclined to make the opposite judgement (which could itself be just as
mistaken), namely, that ideas are worse seductresses than the senses, for
all their cold, anaemic appearance and not even despite that appearance
— they always lived off the ‘blood’ of the philosopher; they always
drained his senses and even, if you believe it, his ‘heart’. These old
philosophers were heartless: philosophizing was always a kind of
vampirism. When considering such figures, including even Spinoza,
don’t you feel something deeply enigmatic and strange? Don’t you see
the spectacle unfolding, this steady growing paler — this ever more
ideally construed desensualization? Don’t you sense in the background
some long-concealed blood-sucker who starts with the senses and finally
leaves behind and spares only bones and rattling? — I refer to categories,
formulas, words (for, forgive me, what remained of Spinoza, amor
intellectualis dei,’ is mere rattle, nothing more! What is amor; what deus,
when they are missing every drop of blood?). In sum: all philosophical
idealism until now was something like an illness, except where, as in
Plato’s case, it was the caution of an overabundant and dangerous
45 If Nietzsche is trying to draw a distinction here between ‘praxis’ and ‘practice’, rather than just
rhetorically repeating himself, it is not clear what the distinction is.
In Odyssey Book x11 Odysseus tells how he outwitted the sirens, female singers who lure passing
sailors to their death by singing irresistibly. He says he had himself bound to the mast of his ship
so that he could hear the song, but could not do anything self-destructive, and that he had the
ears of his crew stopped with wax so that they didn’t hear the song at all, and continued to row
undisturbed. Nietzsche. refers to this story again in Beyond Good and Evil § 230, where he
speaks, very puzzlingly, of man standing ‘before the rest of nature, with intrepid Oedipus eyes
and sealed Odysseus ears. . .’ Odysseus’ ears were not sealed ~— but equally, Oedipus’ eyes, at the
end, could not see,
47 Gntellectual love of god’; see Ethics, Book v, props. 32—37.
46
237

The Gay Science
health; the fear of overpowerful senses; the shrewdness of a shrewd
Socratic. 
- Maybe we moderns are not healthy enough to need Plato’s
idealism? And we don’t fear the senses because —
373
‘Science’ as prejudice. — It follows from the laws that govern rank-
ordering (Rangordnung) that scholars, insofar as they belong to the
intellectual middle class, are not even allowed to catch sight of the truly
great problems and question marks; moreover, their courage and eyes
simply don’t reach that far — and above all, the need that makes them
scholars, their inner expectations and wish that things might be such and
such, their fear and hope, too soon find rest and satisfaction. What
makes, for instance, the pedantic Englishman Herbert Spencer* rave in
his own way and makes him draw a line of hope, a horizon which
defines what is desirable; that definitive reconciliation of ‘egoism and
altruism’ about which he spins fables — this almost nauseates the likes of
us: a human race that adopts as its ultimate perspective such a
Spencerian perspective would strike us as deserving of contempt, of
annihilation! But that he had to view as his highest hope what to others
counts and should count only as a disgusting possibility is a question
mark that Spencer would have been unable to foresee. So, too, it is with
the faith with which so many materialistic natural scientists rest
content: the faith in a world that is supposed to have its equivalent and
measure in human thought, in human valuations — a ‘world of truth’
that can be grasped entirely with the help of our four-cornered little
human reason — What? Do we really want to demote existence in this
way to an exercise in arithmetic and an indoor diversion for mathemati-
cians? Above all, one shouldn’t want to strip it of its ambiguous
character: that, gentlemen, is what good taste demands — above all, the
taste of reverence for everything that lies beyond your horizon! That the
only rightful interpretation of the world should be one to which you
have a right; one by which one can do research and go on scientifically
in your sense of the term (you really mean mechanistically?) ~ one that
48 English social thinker (1820~1903) who combined evolutionary beliefs with a form of
utilitarianism; he believed that human history would lead to an ideal state in which egoism and
altruism were reconciled.
238

Book Five: We Fearless Ones
permits counting, calculating, weighing, seeing, grasping, and nothing
else — that is a crudity and naiveté, assuming it is not a mental illness, an
idiocy. Would it not be quite probable, conversely, that precisely the
most superficial and external aspect of existence — what is most
apparent; its skin and its sensualization -~ would be grasped first and
might even be the only thing that let itself be grasped? Thus, a
‘scientific’ interpretation of the world, as you understand it, might still
be one of the stupidest of all possible interpretations of the world, i.e. one
of those most lacking in significance. This to the ear and conscience of
Mr Mechanic, who nowadays likes to pass as a philosopher and insists
that mechanics is the doctrine of the first and final laws on which
existence may be built, as on a ground floor. But an essentially
mechanistic world would be an essentially meaningless world! Suppose
one judged the value of a piece of music according to how much of it
could be counted, calculated, and expressed in formulas — how absurd
such a ‘scientific’ evaluation of music would be! What would one have
comprehended, understood, recognized? Nothing, really nothing of
what is ‘music’ in it!
374
Our new ‘infinite’. 
— How far the perspectival character of existence
extends, or indeed whether it has any other character; whether an
existence without interpretation, without ‘sense’, doesn’t become ‘non-
sense’; whether, on the other hand, all existence isn’t essentially an
interpreting existence — that cannot, as would be fair, be decided even by
the most industrious and extremely conscientious analysis and self-
examination of the intellect; for in the course of this analysis, the human
intellect cannot avoid seeing itself under its perspectival forms, and
solely in these. We cannot look around our corner: it is a hopeless
curiosity to want to know what other kinds of intellects and perspectives
there might be; e.g. whether other beings might be able to experience
time backwards, or alternately forwards and backwards (which would
involve another direction of life and a different conception of cause and
effect). But I think that today we are at least far away from the ridiculous
immodesty of decreeing from our angle that perspectives are permitted
only from this angle. Rather, the world has once again become infinite to
us: insofar as we cannot reject the possibility that 1 includes infinite
239

The Gay Science
interpretations. Once again the great shudder seizes us — but who again
would want immediately to deify in the old manner this monster of an
unknown world? And to worship from this time on the unknown (das
Unbekannte) as ‘the Unknown One’ (den Unbekannten)? Alas, too many
ungodly possibilities of interpretation are included in this unknown; too
much devilry, stupidity, foolishness of interpretation — our own human,
all too human one, even, which we know. . .
375
Why we seem to be Epicureans. — We are cautious, we modern men, about
ultimate convictions; our mistrust lies in wait for the enchantments and
deceptions of the conscience involved in every strong faith, every
unconditional Yes and No. How can this be explained? Maybe what is to
be found here is largely the caution of ‘once bitten, twice shy’; of the
disappointed idealist; but there is also another, superior component: the
gleeful curiosity of the one who used to stand in the corner and was
driven to despair by his corner and who now delights and luxuriates in
the opposite of a corner, in the boundless, in ‘the free as such’. Thus an
almost Epicurean bent of knowledge develops that will not easily let go
of the questionable character of things; also an aversion to big moral
words and gestures; a taste that rejects all crude, four-square oppositions
and is proudly aware of its practice in entertaining doubts. For this
constitutes our pride, this slight tightening of the reins as our urge for
certainty races ahead, this self-control of the rider on his wildest rides —
for we still ride spirited and fiery animals; and when we hesitate, it is
danger least of all that makes us hesitate.
376
Our slow periods. — This is how all artists and people of ‘works’ feel, the
motherly type: at every chapter of their lives — which is always marked
by a work — they always think they’ve reached their goal; they would
always patiently take death with the feeling ‘we are ripe for it’. This is
not the expression of weariness — rather that of a certain autumnal
sunniness and mildness that the work itself, the fact that the work has
become ripe, always leaves behind in its creator. Then the pace of life
240

Book Five: We Fearless Ones
slows down and becomes thick and flows like honey — to the point of a
long fermata,”’ of the faith in the long fermata.
377
We who are homeless. 
~ Among Europeans today there is no lack of those
who have a right to call themselves homeless in a distinctive and
honourable sense: it is to them in particular that I commend my secret
wisdom and gaya scienza.° For their lot is hard; their hope uncertain; it
is a feat to invent a form of comfort for them — but to what avail! We
children of the future — how could we be at home in this today! We are
unfavourably disposed towards all ideals that might make one feel at
home in this fragile, broken time of transition; as for its ‘realities’, we
don’t believe they are /asting. The ice that still supports people today
has already grown very thin; the wind that brings a thaw is blowing; we
ourselves, we homeless ones, are something that breaks up the ice and
other all too thin ‘realities’. 
. .We ‘conserve’ nothing; neither do we
want to return to any past; we are by no means ‘liberal’; we are not
working for ‘progress’; we don’t need to plug our ears to the market-
place’s sirens of the future: what they sing — ‘equal rights’, ‘free society’,
‘no more masters and no servants’ — has no allure for us. We hold it
absolutely undesirable that a realm of justice and concord should be
established on earth (because it would certainly be the realm of the most
profound levelling down to mediocrity and chinoiserie);>! we are de-
lighted by all who love, as we do, danger, war, and adventure; who refuse
to compromise, to be captured, to reconcile, to be castrated; we consider
ourselves conquerors; we contemplate the necessity for new orders as
well as for a new slavery — for every strengthening and enhancement of
the human type also involves a new kind of enslavement — doesn’t it?
With all this, can we really be at home in an age that loves to claim the
distinction of being the most humane, the mildest, and most righteous
age the sun has ever seen? It is bad enough that precisely when we hear
these beautiful words, we have the ugliest misgivings. What we find in
49 Musical sign indicating that a note or pause may be held for longer than its value would usually
prescribe
50 See above, footnote to p. 1.
51 European decorative style so called because it is intended to look Chinese. Because of the slight
artistic value of much that was produced in this style it has the connotation of insignificant,
insubstantial, vapid, frivolous.
241

The Gay Science
them is merely an expression — and the masquerade — of a deep
weakening, of weariness, of old age, of declining energies! What can it
matter to us what sequins the sick may use to cover up their weakness?
Let them parade it as their virtue; after all, there is no doubt that
weakness makes us mild, so righteous, so inoffensive, so ‘humane’! The
‘religion of compassion’ to which one would like to convert us — oh, we
know these hysterical litthe men and women well enough who today
need just this religion as a veil and finery. We are no humanitarians; we
should never dare to allow ourselves to speak of ‘our love of humanity’ —
our type is not actor enough for that! Or not Saint-Simonist>? enough;
not French enough. One really has to be afflicted with a Gallic excess of
erotic irritability and enamoured impatience to approach humanity
honestly with one’s lust ... Humanity! Has there ever been a more
hideous old woman amongst all old women? (Unless it were ‘the truth’:
a question for philosophers.) No, we do not love humanity; but on the
other hand we are not nearly ‘German’ enough, in the sense in which
the word ‘German’ is constantly used nowadays, to advocate nationalism
and racial hatred and to be able to take pleasure in the national scabies
of the heart and blood poisoning with which European peoples nowa~
days delimit and barricade themselves against each other as if with
quarantines. For that, we are too uninhibited, too malicious, too spoiled,
also too well-informed, too ‘well-travelled’: we far prefer to live on
mountains, apart, ‘untimely’, in past or future centuries, merely in
order to avoid the silent rage to which we know we should be
condemned as eyewitnesses of politics that are destroying the German
spirit by making it vain and which are, moreover, petty politics — to keep
its creation from falling apart again, doesn’t it need to plant it between
two deadly hatreds? Mustn’t it desire the eternalization of the European
system of many petty states? We who are homeless are too diverse and
racially mixed in our descent, as ‘modern men’, and consequently we
are not inclined to participate in the mendacious racial self-admiration
and obscenity that parades in Germany today as a sign of a German way
of thinking and that is doubly false and indecent among the people of
the ‘historical sense’. In a word — and let this be our word of honour —
we are good Europeans, the rich heirs of millennia of European spirit,
with too many provisions but also too many obligations. As such, we
52 Referring to Claude-Henri Saint-Simon (1760~ 1825), a French utopian socialist
242

Book Five: We Fearless Ones
have also outgrown Christianity and are averse to it — precisely because
we have grown out of it, because our ancestors were Christians who in
their Christianity were mercilessly upright: for their faith they willingly
sacrificed possessions, blood, position, and fatherland. We — do the
same. But for what? For our unbelief? For every kind of unbelief? No,
you know better than that, my friends! The hidden Yes in you is
stronger than all Nos and Maybes that afflict you and your age like a
disease; and you must sail the seas, you emigrants, you too are compelled
to this by — a faith!
378
‘And become bright again’. — We who are generous and rich in spirit, who
stand by the road like open wells with no intention to fend off anyone
who feels like drawing from us — we unfortunately do not know how to
defend ourselves where we want to: we have no way of preventing
people from clouding us, from darkening us; the time in which we live
throws into us what is most time-bound; its dirty birds drop their filth
into us; its boys their knick-knacks; and exhausted wanderers who come
to us to rest, their small and great miseries. But we will do what we have
always done: we take down into our depths whatever one casts into us —
for we are deep; we do not forget — and become bright again. . .
379
The fool’s interlude. - The writer of this book is no misanthrope; today
one pays too dearly for hatred of man. In order to hate the way one
formerly hated the human being, Timonically,*> wholly, without excep-
tion, with one’s whole heart, with the whole Jove of hatred, one would
have to renounce contempt. And how much fine joy, how much
patience, how much graciousness even do we owe precisely to our
contempt! Moreover, it makes us ‘God’s elect’: refined contempt is our
taste and privilege, our art, our virtue perhaps, and we are the most
modern of moderns. . .Hatred, in contrast, places people on a par, vis-
a-vis; in hatred there is honour; finally, in hatred there is fear, an ample
53 Legendary Athenian misanthrope, who is the subject of Shakespeare’s Timon of Athens
243

The Gay Science
good piece of fear. We fearless ones, however, we more spiritual men of
this age, we know our advantage well enough to live without fear of this
age precisely because we are more spiritual. We will hardly be decapi-
tated, imprisoned, or exiled; not even our books will be banned or
burned. The age loves the spirit; it loves and needs us, even if we should
have to make clear to it that we are artists of contempt; that every
association with human beings makes us shudder slightly; that for all
our mildness, patience, congeniality, and politeness, we cannot persuade
our noses to give up their prejudices against the proximity of a human
being; that we love nature the less humanly it behaves, and art ¢fit is the
artist’s escape from man or the artist’s mockery of man, or the artist’s
mockery of himself. . .
380
‘The wanderer’ speaks. ~ In order to see our European morality for once
as it looks from a distance, and to measure it up against other past or
future moralities, one has to proceed like a wanderer who wants to know
how high the towers in a town are: he /eaves the town. “Thoughts about
moral prejudices’, if they are not to be prejudices about prejudices,
presuppose a position outside morality, some point beyond good and evil
to which one has to rise, climb, or fly — and in the present case, at least a
point beyond our good and evil, a freedom from everything ‘European’,
by which I mean the sum of commanding value judgements that have
become part of our flesh and blood. That one wants to go precisely out
there, up there, may be a slight rashness, a peculiar and unreasonable
‘you must’ — for we seekers of knowledge also have our idiosyncrasies of
‘unfree will’ — the question is whether one really can get up there. This
may depend on manifold conditions. Mainly, the question is how light
or heavy we are — the problem of our ‘specific gravity’. One has to be
very light to drive one’s will to knowledge into such a distance and, as it
were, beyond one’s time; to create for oneself eyes to survey millennia
and, moreover, clear skies in these eyes. One must have liberated oneself
from many things that oppress, inhibit, hold down, and make heavy
precisely us Europeans today. The human being of such a beyond who
wants to catch a glimpse of the highest measures of value of his time
must first of all ‘overcome’ this time in himself — this is the test of his
strength — and consequently not only his time but also his aversion and
244

Book Five: We Fearless Ones
opposition against this time, his suffering from this time, his untimeli-
ness, his romanticism.
381
On the question of being understandable. - One does not only wish to be
understood when one writes; one wishes just as surely mot to be under-
stood. It is by no means necessarily an objection to a book when anyone
finds it incomprehensible: perhaps that was part of the author’s inten-
tion — he didn’t want to be understood by just ‘anybody’. Every nobler
spirit and taste selects his audience when he wants to communicate; in
selecting it, he simultaneously erects barriers against ‘the others’. All
subtler laws of a style originated therein: they simultaneously keep away,
create a distance, forbid ‘entrance’, understanding, as said above -- while
they open the ears of those whose ears are related to ours. And let me
say this amongst ourselves and about my own case: I want neither the
inexperience nor the liveliness of my temperament to keep me from
being understandable to you, my friends — not the liveliness, as much as
it forces me to deal with a matter swiftly in order to deal with it at all.
For I approach deep problems such as I do cold baths: fast in, fast out.
That this is no way to get to the depths, to get deep enough, is the
superstition of those who fear water, the enemies of cold water; they
speak without experience. Oh, the great cold makes one fast! And
incidentally: does a matter stay unrecognized, not understood, merely
because it has been touched in flight; is only glanced at, seen in a flash?
Does one absolutely have to sit firmly on it first? Have brooded on it as
on an egg? Diu noctuque incubando,** as Newton said of himself? At least
there are truths that are especially shy and ticklish and can’t be caught
except suddenly — that one must surprise or leave alone. Finally, my
brevity has yet another value: given the questions that occupy me, I
must say many things briefly so that they will be heard even more
briefly. For, as an immoralist, one needs to avoid corrupting innocents —
I mean, asses and old maids of both sexes to whom life offers nothing
but their innocence; even more, my writing should inspire, elevate, and
encourage them to be virtuous. I can’t imagine a funnier sight on earth
than inspired old asses and maids who get aroused by the sweet
54 ‘sitting upon it day and night’
245

The Gay Science
sentiments of virtue: and ‘this I have seen’ — thus spoke Zarathustra.
Enough about brevity; things stand worse with my ignorance, which I
don’t try to hide from myself. There are hours when I am ashamed of it
— to be sure, also hours when I am ashamed of this shame. Maybe we
philosophers are all in a bad position regarding knowledge these days:
science is growing, and the most scholarly of us are close to discovering
that they know too little. But it would be even worse if things were
different — if we knew too much; our task is and remains above all not to
mistake ourselves for someone else. We are different from scholars,
although we are inevitably also, among other things, scholarly. We have
different needs, grow differently; have a different digestion: we need
more; we also need less. There is no formula for how much a spirit
needs for its nourishment; but if it has a taste for independence, for
quick coming and going, for wandering, perhaps for adventures of
which only the swiftest are capable, it would rather live free with little
food than unfree and stuffed. It is not fat but the greatest possible
suppleness and strength that a good dancer wants from his nourishment
—and I wouldn’t know what the spirit of a philosopher might more want
to be than a good dancer. For the dance is his ideal, also his art, and
finally also his only piety, his ‘service of God’.
382
The great health. - We who are new, nameless, hard to understand; we
premature births of an as yet unproved future — for a new end, we also
need a new means, namely, a new health that is stronger, craftier,
tougher, bolder, and more cheerful than any previous health. Anyone
whose soul thirsts to experience the whole range of previous values and
aspirations, to sail around all the coasts of this ‘inland sea’ (Muttel/meer)
of ideals, anyone who wants to know from the adventures of his own
experience how it feels to be the discoverer or conqueror of an ideal, or
to be an artist, a saint, a lawmaker, a sage, a pious man, a soothsayer, an
old-style divine loner — any such person needs one thing above all — the
great health, a health that one doesn’t only have, but also acquires
continually and must acquire because one gives it up again and again,
and must give it up!. 
. .And now, after being on our way in this manner
for a long time, we argonauts of the ideal — braver, perhaps, than is
prudent and often suffering shipwreck and damage but, to repeat,
246

Book Five: We Fearless Ones
healthier than one would like to admit, dangerously healthy; ever again
healthy — it seems to us as if, in reward, we face an as yet undiscovered
land the boundaries of which no one has yet surveyed, beyond all the
lands and corners of the ideal heretofore, a world so over-rich in what is
beautiful, strange, questionable, terrible, and divine that our curiosity
and our thirst to possess it have veered beyond control — alas, so that
nothing will sate us anymore! After such vistas and with such a burning
hunger in our conscience and science, how could we still be satisfied
with modern-day man? Too bad ~ but it’s inevitable that we look at his
worthiest goals and hopes with a seriousness which is difficult to
maintain; maybe we don’t even look at all any more. Another ideal runs
before us, a peculiar, seductive, dangerous ideal to which we wouldn’t
want to persuade anyone, since we don’t readily concede the right to it to
anyone: the ideal of a spirit that plays naively, i.e. not deliberately but
from overflowing abundance and power, with everything that was
hitherto called holy, good, untouchable, divine; a spirit which has gone
so far that the highest thing which the common people quite under-
standably accepts as its measure of value would signify for it danger,
decay, debasement, or at any rate recreation, blindness, temporary self-
oblivion: the ideal of a human, superhuman well-being and benevolence
that will often enough appear inhuman — for example, when it places
itself next to all earthly seriousness heretofore, all forms of solemnity in
gesture, word, tone, look, morality, and task as if it were their most
incarnate and involuntary parody — and in spite of all this, it is perhaps
only with it that the great seriousness really emerges; that the real
question mark is posed for the first time; that the destiny of the soul
changes; the hand of the clock moves forward; the tragedy begins.
383
Epilogue. ~ But as I finally slowly, slowly paint this gloomy question
mark and am still willing to remind my readers of the virtues of reading
in the right way — oh, what forgotten and unknown virtues! — it strikes
me that I hear all around myself most malicious, cheerful, hobgoblin-
like laughter: the spirits of my book are themselves descending upon
me, pulling my ears and calling me to order. ‘We can’t stand it
anymore’, they shout, ‘stop, stop this raven-black music! Are we not
surrounded by bright mid-morning? And by soft ground and green
247

The Gay Science
grass, the kingdom of the dance? Was there ever a better hour for
gaiety? Who will sing us a song, a morning song, so sunny, so light, so
full-fledged that it does not chase away the crickets*> but instead invites
them to join in the singing and dancing? And even plain, rustic bagpipes
would be better than the mysterious sounds, such bog-cries, voices from
the crypt, and marmot whistles with which you have so far regaled us in
your wilderness, my Mr. Hermit and Musician of the Future!°*® No!
Not such sounds! Let us rather strike up more pleasant, more joyous
tones!>7 Does it please you nom, my impatient friends? Well then, who
wouldn’t like to please you? My bagpipes are already waiting; my throat,
too ~ it may sound a bit rough, but put up with it; after all, we’re in the
mountains. At least what you are about to hear is new; and if you don’t
understand it, if you misunderstand the singer, what does it matter?
This happens to be ‘the singer’s curse’.°® You will be able to hear his
music and tune so much the better, and so much the better will you be
able to dance to his pipe. Is that what you want?
55 Grille means both ‘cricket’ and ‘bad mood’.
56 Wagner referred to his own music as ‘the music of the future’.
57 from Schiller’s Ode to Joy, used in the choral conclusion to the fourth movement of Beethoven’s
Ninth Symphony
58 Title of 
a ballad by Ludwig Uhland (1787-1862)
248

Appendix: Songs of Prince Vogelfrei
To Goethe!
The ever-enduring
is merely your parable!
God the all-blurring
your fiction unbearable. . .
World-wheel, the turning one
spawns goals each day:
Fate — sighs the yearning one,
the fool calls it — play.
World-play, the ruling one,
blends truth and tricks: —
The eternally fooling one
blends us — in the mix!. . .
Vogelfret is an archaic expression used to declare someone an outlaw, literally ‘free as a bird’, and
therefore not to be sheltered. In German the v and fare both pronounced as f, adding alliteration
to this name and the title Nietzsche makes of it. ‘Prince Vogelfrei’ here functions as Nietzsche’s
nom de guerre or pseudonym.
Nietzsche is here parodying the ‘Chorus Mysticus’ which concludes Goethe’s Faust. At issue are
the poet’s need to fictionalize, and Goethe’s elevation of womanhood to a metaphysical ‘eternal
feminine’. In Faust, the ‘eternal feminine’ (das Ewig-Weibliche) represented by the blessed
Gretchen succeeds in helping to redeem Faust, and to pull him up into heaven: ‘Woman
Eternal / Draws us on high’ (“Das Ewig-Weibliche / Zieht uns hinan’) (lines 12110~12111 of
Faust).
249

The Gay Science
Poet’s Calling
Stopped to rest one day, while walking,
seated under shady trees,
when I heard a ticking tocking
dainty rhythm on the breeze.
I grew angry — made some faces —
but I lost my anger quick
and, as if in poet’s paces,
started speaking tick tock tick.
As I sat, my verses making,
syliables and sounds did pour,
till I burst out laughing, shaking
for a quarter hour or more.
You a poet? You a poet?
Is your mind no longer good?
“Yes, my man, you are a poet’
shrugs the pecker in the wood.
Whom do I await in bushes?
Whom do I, a robber, stalk?
Proverb? Image? My rhyme rushes
after it and makes it talk.
Anything that moves, you know it
serves to fuel my poet’s mood.
“Yes, my man, you are a poet’
shrugs the pecker in the wood.
Rhymes, I think, must be like arrows:
when they pierce the lizard’s heart,
how he twitches, how it harrows,
how he leaps in fits and starts!
Wretched creatures, full of woe, it
kills you or it boils your blood!
“Yes, my man, you are a poet’
shrugs the pecker in the wood.
Crooked proverbs full of hurry,
drunken wordlets how you throng!
See each word and sentence scurry
to the tick tock chain so long.
Worthless souls who can’t forgo it
250

Appendix: Songs of Prince Vogelfrei
find it fun? Are poets crude?
“Yes, my man, you are a poet’
shrugs the pecker in the wood.
Do you mock me feathered joker?
Mentally I’m in rough shape,
might my feelings too be broken?
Fear my rage you jackanapes!
Still, the poet rhymes — and though it
spoiled his mood ’twas all he could.
“Yes, my man, you are a poet’
shrugs the pecker in the wood.
In the South
I perch now midst the crooked arbour
and leave my weariness to sway.
A bird enticed me to this harbour,
within this nest I cool my ardour.
Yet where am I? Away! Away!
The sleeping sea, its colour fleeting,
a purple sail, pure indolence.
Rocks, fig trees, spires and harbour meeting,
around me idylls, sheep are bleating —
absorb me, southern innocence!
Just step by step — that is not living,
the German stride’s too dull for me.
I asked the wind to lift me heaving,
with birds I soared without misgiving, ~
and south J flew across the sea.
Reason! A grim preoccupation,
too soon it brings us all the way!
In flight I saw my limitation, —
now juices flow for new creation,
for life renewed and dawn of play...
It’s wise to think in solitary,
but sing alone? — There wisdom ends!
I’ve come to sing your praises merry,
be still, sit down, and with me tarry
my little birds, my naughty friends!
251

The Gay Science
So young so false and so beguiling,
it seems love looks upon me smiling
and offers ev’ry charm of youth?
Up north —I 
say it though I waver —
I loved a crone so old I quaver:
this woman bore the name of ‘truth’...
Pious Beppa
As long as I’m curvaceous,
being pious is no test.
To young girls God is gracious,
he loves the cute ones best.
He will forgive the friar,
forgive him certainly
that he, like other friars,
so wants to be with me.
He is no grey church father!
No, young and full of sap,
hung over he’ll still bother
to play the jealous chap.
I do not love the ageing,
he does not love the old:
How wondrous and engaging
when God’s designs unfold!
The Church, it knows of living,
it checks us thoroughly.
And always it’s forgiving ~
who would not pardon me!
One whispers low and steady,
one kneels and wipes at tears,
and when the new sin’s ready
the old one disappears.
Praise God who loves a maiden
as pretty as she lives,
his heart by sin is laden,
which he himself forgives.
As long as ’m curvaceous,
being pious is no test:
252

Appendix: Songs of Prince Vogelfrei
When old and unsalacious,
the devil take the rest!
The Mysterious Bark?
Yesternight, all were asleep,
how the wind with steps uncertain
sighing through the streets did creep.
Rest was not in pillow, curtain,
poppy, slumber potion deep,
nor good conscience — which unburdens.
Finally I left my bed,
dressed and ran down to the shoreline.
Tender mild the night — I met
man and bark on sand in moonshine,
sleepy both, the man and pet: —
Sleepily the bark took to the brine.
Just one hour, more than one,
or was it a year? — my thinking
and all feeling left me, sinking
down to timeless tedium.
Chasms opened, I stood shrinking,
bounds dissolved: — then it was done!
~ Morning came: On blackness seeping
rests a bark, it rides the swell...
What took place? Thus crying, weeping
hundreds ask: what was this? Hell? ——
Nothing happened! We were sleeping,
sleeping all — so well, so well.
Declaration of Love (whereby however the poet fell into a ditch)
Oh wonder! Does he fly?
He climbs aloft, and yet his pinions rest?
What lifts and bears him high?
What are his goal and course and limit’s test?
2 Cf. Nietzsche’s dithyramb ‘The Sun Sets’ (‘Die Sonne sinkt’) for the motif of the mysterious
bark or skiff.
253

The Gay Science
Star and eternity,
he lives now in the heights that living shuns,
forgives all jealousy —:
Who see him fly, they too are soaring ones!
Oh albatross! I know
that to the heights J am forever lured.
I thought of you: tears flow
and do not cease — I love you noble bird!
Song of a Theocritical Goatherd?
I lie here, stomach aching,
with bed bugs in my pants.
Close by, the noise they’re making!
Thear it, how they dance...
She was supposed to slip away
and join me as my lover.
I wait here like a stray —
there’s no sign of her.
She promised she would come,
how could she be untrue?
— Does she chase everyone
like my old goats do?
That silken dress, pray tell!
Proud girl, have you been good?
Does more than one buck dwell
in this little wood?
~ Lethally love makes us wait,
it burns, it hardens!
As hot nights germinate
toadstools in gardens.
Love eats away at me
like seven deadly sins —
[ll never eat again.
Farewell, dear onions!
3 The Greek poet Theocritus (third century BC) is considered the father of pastoral poetry. A
‘theocritical’ goatherd, using word play, is thus both pastoral and critical of God (theo). This
poem, with its terse irony and irregular meter, reminds one of the lyrics of Heinrich Heine,
Nietzsche’s favourite lyric poet.
254

Appendix: Songs of Prince Vogelfrei
The moon sets in the sea,
and stars fade from the sky.
Grey dawn comes ’round for me —
I just want to die.
‘These Vacillating People’
People who are vacillating
make my anger flame.
When they honour they are hating,
all their praise is self-contempt and shame.
I’m not bound by ¢heir convention
as I wander free,
in their gaze is apprehension,
poison-laced their hopeless jealousy.
May they curse me all to blazes,
spit for all to see!
Though they seek with helpless gazes,
none will ever find their mark in me.
Fool in Despair*
Oh! What I wrote on board and wall
with foolish heart and foolish scrawl,
was meant to help me decorate. . .
But you say: ‘Foolish hands desecrate —
and we the walls must expurgate,
remove all traces big and small!’
Allow me! This I can enjoy ~
I’ve wielded sponge and broom for all
as critic and as water boy.
But, when [ve finished your employ,
Task you, you of super wit,
your wisdom on the walls to sh—.
* ‘Narrenhande beschmieren Tisch und Wande’, literally ‘a fool’s hands smear table and walls’, is a
German proverb to the effect that clumsy people make a mess.
255

The Gay Science
Rimus remedium, or: How sick poets console themselves?
Time is dour,
a witch who drools incessantly,
drips hour upon hour.
In vain, disgust cries out of me:
‘Curse, curse the power
of eternity!’
World — brazen hard:
A glowing bull — it hears no moan.
Pain shoots through me and bores like a dart
into my bone:
‘World has no heart,
and stupid he, who’d therefore groan!”
Your poppies pour,
pour, fever! poison in my brain!
Too long already you bring me pain.
What would you ask? What? ‘For what reward?’
~~ Ha! Curse the whore
And her disdain!
No! Please don’t go!
Outside it’s cold, I hear it raining —
I'll cherish you without complaining.
~ Here! Take my gold: it glitters so! —
‘Happiness’ — No?
Fever is sustaining? —
The door panes fly!
Rain lashes in, to my bed it climbs!
The lamp blows out — havoc is nigh!
~ Who did not own a hundred rhymes,
betimes, betimes,
Would surely die!
5 Latin for ‘rhyme as remedy’. Compare the dithyramb ‘Ariadne’s Lament’ from Nietzsche’s
collection of poems entitled Dionysus Dithyrambs. In Zarathustra, the poem is featured in Part Iv
as the song of the magician. Ariadne, lover of Theseus, is abandoned by the Greek hero, even
though she rescued him from the labyrinth of the Minotaur by weaving a thread for him to
follow. The ‘glowing bull’ refers to Phalaris of Agrigentum (570-554 BC), a tyrant who tortured
his enemies by roasting them alive in a brazen bull.
256

Appendix: Songs of Prince Vogelfrei
‘My Happiness!’®
I see again the pigeons of San Marco:
The square is still, all bathed in sunny leisure.
In gentle morn I idly let my songs flow
like swarms of pigeons high into the azure —
And still caress
Them, tucking one more rhyme into their feathers
—my happiness!
You silent, blue-lit, silky heaven’s awning,
protectively above the coloured stone
I love, and fear, and envy — you are yawning . . .
Indeed Id drink its soul into my own!
Would I let it egress? —
No, silence, feast for eyes, in splendour dawning!
~ my happiness!
You tower stern, with lion force ascending
triumphantly, no effort, in full view!
Across the square your throaty peal suspending — :
In French you'd be its own accent aigu?
To stay would be duress
like yours, a bond of silken strands unending .. 
.
—my happiness!
Go, music, go! Let shadows start preparing
to grow into the brown and balmy night!
Too early in the day for chimes, the flaring
of gilded trim awaits a rosy light,
Much does the day compress,
much time for verses, prowling, secret sharing
~ my happiness!
6 The refrain of this poem, ‘mein Gliick! Mein Glick!’ is an emphatic statement of the kind of
happiness (Glick) Nietzsche enjoys, though in order to preserve the four beats I use ‘my
happiness’ only once.
257

The Gay Science
Toward New Seas’
Out there — thus I will; so doing
trust myself now and my grip.
Open lies the sea, its blueing
swallows my Genoese ship.
All things now are new and beaming,
space and time their noon decree — :
Only your eye — monstrous, gleaming
stares at me, infinity!
Sils-Maria®
There sat I, waiting, waiting, — yet for naught,
transcending good and evil, sometimes caught
in light, sometimes caught in shadow, all game,
all sea, all midday, all time without aim.
At once then, my friend! One turned into Two —
-~and Zarathustra strode into my view...
To the Mistral. 
A Dance Song?
Mistral wind, you rain-cloud reaper,
sadness slayer, heaven sweeper
blustering, how I love you!
Are we not of one womb’s making,
first born of one fate unbreaking,
predetermined just we two?
Here on stony pathways sliding
Trun to you dancing, gliding,
dancing as you pipe and sing:
You without a ship and rudder,
you as freedom’s freest brother,
over raging seas do spring.
7 Nietzsche frequently used the figure of Columbus and the metaphor of seafaring to symbolize the
courage of the human spirit. In The Gay Science § 289 he reminds us that the moral earth, too, is
round, as an exhortation to explore the realm of morals just as earlier explorers had ventured
around the globe. A draft of this poem was titled “To L.’ (Lou von Salome).
8 Sils Maria is a town in south-eastern Switzerland, in the Engadine valley, where Nietzsche spent
his summers.
9 The mistral wind of southern France is a strong north wind.
258

Appendix: Songs of Prince Vogelfrei
Scarce awake, I heard you calling,
rushed to where the cliffs are falling
golden walled into the sea.
Hail! You came like rapids teeming,
glitter bright and diamond gleaming
from the peaks triumphantly.
’Cross the plains of heaven dashing
I saw horses, hooves a-flashing,
saw the carriage where you stand,
saw your hand and how it quivered
when it to the steeds delivered
lightning-like the whip’s command, —
Saw you toss the reins and plummet
faster from your airy summit,
diving like an arrow bright,
glowing as the distance closes,
like a ray of gold on roses
struck by daybreak’s early light.
On a thousand backs we’re dancing,
billow-backs and backs of chancing —
hail to dances nem, I say!
Let us dance in every manner,
free ~ so shall be owr art’s banner,
And our science — shall be gay!
From each flower let us garner
just one blossom for our honour,
for our wreath just two leaves worth!
Then like troubadours in riches
we shall dance ’tween saints and bitches,
dance our dance *tween God and Earth!
He who cannot dance with twisters,
bandages his wounds and blisters,
bound and old and paralysed;
he who reeks of sanctimony,
honour-fools and virtues phony,
out of our paradise!
Let us whirl the dust in doses
into sickly people’s noses,
259

The Gay Science
let us shoo these sickly flies!
This whole coast we must unshackle
from their shrivel-breasted cackle,
from these courage-vacant eyes!
Let us chase the overcasters,
world maligners, rain-cloud pastors,
let us tear the dark sky’s veil!
Let us roar. . . Free spirits’ spirit,
joy uplifts me when you’re near, it
makes me bluster like a gale! ~
— And to mark this joy forever,
leave a will that time can’t sever,
take this wreath up where you are!
Hurl it higher, further, madder,
storm the sky on heaven’s ladder,
Hang it there — upon a star!
260

Index
When an entry refers to a page on which more than one numbered section of the text appears, the section
in question is indicated by an italicised numeral in parentheses.
actions 151 (264), 173 (304) 
new domestic 177 (314)
actors 
suffering from climate 178
as masters 216-17 
anthropomorphism 109-10
musicians and 232-3 
antipathy 144 (278)
on the problem of 225-6 (367) 
antiquity
add-on-liars, the 51 (29) 
essence of 227
Aeschylus 29 
great men of 117
aesthetics 182, 235—6 
science and virtue 119
agreement, law of xx, 77 (76) 
aphorisms vii—xi
air, our 166—7 (293) 
Apollo 85
Ajax 125 
appearance 69—70, 104, 231
Alcaeus 83 
avoiding deception by 143
alcohol 58, 124, 129 
the consciousness of 63 —4 (54)
Alfieri, Vittorio, conte di 89 
Greeks’ worship of xii, 8-9
Algiers 174 
and the problem of the actor 225-6
Allah 122 
and ‘thing in itself’ 214
altruism 
applause 141 (207), 184—5 (330)
and egoism 238 
Archilochus of Paros 83
no 116 (179) 
architects 216
utility of 45 
architecture
amazement, our 59—60 (46) 
of Genoa 164—5
Americans 183, 216 
for those who wish to pursue knowledge
amor fati 157 
159-60 (280)
analogy xxi 
aristocracy see nobility
anarchists 235 
Ariston of Chios 116
ancients 
Aristotle 76, 80
and the art of reading well xx, 247-8 
Armida 175
belief in dreams 132 
Arouet, Frangois Marie see Voltaire
Andreas-Salomé, Lou xxiv 
arrogance, against 15
animals 
art
criticism by 145 (224) 
after illness 7~9
female and male 75~6 
and happiness 86, 88
with good conscience 77~8 (77) 
and life 170
mercy to 97 
monologue 231-2
261

Index
art (cont.)
and nature 79-81 (80)
our ultimate gratitude to 104-5 (707)
and practical wisdom 114
romanticism in 234—6
and truth xix
artistic, the, in Europe 215-17 (356)
artists
bad conscience of 231
cheerfulness for 8--9
coexistence 233-4
concept of, and the problem of the actor
225-6
of contempt ix, 243~4 (379)
Germans as 103 (105)
glorify by choice 86, 148
in love 69, 70-1
love of work 57, 75
offensive in the presentation 139
philosophy of 97
slow periods 240-1
as squanderers 141, 212
on the vanity of 87~8 (87)
viewpoint 231-2
we 70~1 (59)
what one should learn from 169-70 (299)
and works 147 (247)
artworks
and the art of festivals 89
the first distinction to draw regarding 231-2
(367)
asceticism xviii, 38, 123
Asclepius 194
Asians 58
aside 136 (174)
Assua sect 174
atavism 36 (20)
atheism, triumph of scientific 218-19
audience, selection of 245-6
Augier, Emile 46n
Augustine, St 224
Augustus, Emperor 54
autobiography, warning against 89 (97)
backward inference 235
bad, whom do you call? 152 (273)
Bahnsen 220
Balsamo, Giuseppe see Cagliostro, Alessandro,
conte di
barbarians, vs. higher culture 94—5, 100-1
battles, new 109 (108), 112
Batz, Phillip (Mainlander’) 220n
Baubo 8
beautiful, the and the good 86 (85)
beauty 193
Beethoven, Ludwig van roo
beggars, and courtesy 141 (204)
being 218
or becoming 235-6
beliefs, and motives 58-9
believers
and their need to believed 205-6 (347)
see also faith
Bellini, Vincenzo 77
Benares 122
benevolence 116 (778)
Beroaldus 118
best of all possible worlds xiv
beware, let us 10g~10 (109)
Beyle, Marie Henri see Stendhal
Bible 205
Bismarck, Otto Eduard Leopold, Fiirst von 103n,
217
Blas, Gil 78, 226
blindness, delight in 162 (287)
body
distress of the 60—1
healths of the 116-17
philosophy as a misunderstanding of the 5-6
books gg~-100, 148 (248)
faced with scholarly 230~1 (366)
lights and shadows in 89 (go)
boredom, and work 57—8 (42), 64
brief habits 167-8 (295)
Brutus 93~4
Buddha xii, 109 (708), 127, 204, 211
Buddhism 97, 122, 206
the spread of 124
Burckhardt, Jacob viii
Caesar (Gaius Julius Caesar) 48, 94
Cagliostro, Alessandro, conte di 96
Callimachus 83
‘cannibalism’ 135
careful, better be 140 (197)
Carlyle, Thomas 93
categorical imperative 33, 188
categories 207, 237
Cato 58
causality 218
cause and effect 113 (112), 121, 142, 144 (217)
causes, two kinds often confused 255 (3760)
cautions 89 (gr), 180 (327)
Cerberus 147
certainty
of death 158
desire for 30, 205-6
Chamfort, Sébastien Roch Nicolas viii, 91-2 (95)
262

Index
chance 158
those who deny 150 (258)
chanceries, and German language 101-3
change, the greatest 131-2 (152)
changeableness 59-60
chaos 109, 180
character 168
giving style to one’s 163~4
and role 215
and spirit 146 (235)
chastity, female 74-5 (77)
chauvinisme 205
cheerfulness 8~9, 63, 161
how to understand our 199 (343)
of madness 77
child, killing a 76 (73)
children, women’s need for 75
China 49
Chinese 74, 129
chinoiserie 241
chosen people, the 125-6 (7376)
Christ, Jesus 127, 211
error of 126 (238)
possibility of 126
Christianity xiii, xviii, 97, 201, 204, 206
against 123 (132), 218-20, 243
critique of 127
a dangerous decision 123 (1,30)
decline of 221
and invention of sin 124-5, 126
moral scepticism in 117-18 (122)
and morality xiii~xiv, 219-20
as narcotics of Europe 129
need for 205-6
and the passions 126
as ‘romantic’ 235
and suicide 123 (737)
woman spoiled by 227
church 120, 222, 252
vs. state 223
cities 
159, 164-5
classification 207
climate xi, 142, 178
coexistence, our 233—4 (369)
Colli, Giorgio xxvii
comedy 29, 73, 87, 132
of the famous 52 (30)
common, and noble 30-2 (3)
communication, need for, and strength of
consciousness 212-14
communities, individuals, and the herd instinct
114-15
company, always in our 135 (766)
compassion 40, 95, 96, 116, 137 (176), 152
and morality 203
and ‘religion’ of 191~2, 242
those who feel, and the will to suffer 191~—2
(338)
as the virtue of prostitutes 39
compromise, refusal of 241-3
concepts
falsification of reality by using xx~—xxi, 113
species 218
Condillac, Etienne Bonnot de 234
confession 222
conscience 175
animal with a good 77—8 (77)
bad 139 (786)
deceptions of the 240
and herd instinct 115 (777), 131
intellectual xvii, 29-30 (2), 95, 179-80, (379),
187-9, 200-1 (344)
and judgement 187-9
paganism with a good 217
and the power of contradiction 169
refinement of the Christian 219
and unyieldingness 133
what does it say? 152 (270)
consciousness xvi, 215
Bewufitheit 47 (27), 217
Bewufitsein 37 (21), 217
and the need to communicate 212-14
the problem of 211-14
consensus, and morality 203
consumerism xiv
contemplative life 
159, 184
contemplative ones, delusion of the 75, 170-1
(302)
contempt xiii, xiv, 143, 243
contradictions 169 (297), 233
convictions 200~1
Corneille, Pierre 82
corruption
of the Christian Church 130, 222
of the German language 96-7
signs of xii, 479 (23)
counter-movements 131
courtesy, beggars and 141 (204)
courtly culture
German reverence for 101-2
of Voltaire 99
courtly love, aristocratic tradition of x—xi
creativity
destructiveness of ix—x, xii, 69—70 (58)
life and 170, 171
and taste 233—4
creators 69~70 (58)
criticism, in favour of 174~5 (307)
263

Index
crowd
with the 136 (170)
in order to move the 147 (236)
cruelty 47-8
holy 76 (73)
where it is needed 151 (266)
cults, orgiastic 85
culture, higher, vs. barbarians 94—5, 100-1
curiosity 240, 247
cynicism 232~3 (368)
Damon 84
dancing 14, 16, 84, 103, 246, 248, 259
danger
different types in life 132-3 (154)
the greatest 76—7 (76), 152 (277)
Dante Alighieri 89, 92
Darwin, Charles 218
Darwinism 208, 218
deaf, better than deafened 185 (337)
death 110, 132, 151, 178, 230
danger of 192
growth after g1 (94)
last words 54—5 (36), 92
as purpose of existence 96
the thought of 158 (278)
and time 20
Death of God xii—xiii, xvii, 109 (708), 
119-20
(725), 199-201 (343)
debt, better in 149 (252)
deception £33, 200-1
of the conscience 240
guarding against 143 (2/2)
see also self-deception
decision, a dangerous 123 (7,30)
deep 133, 243, 245-6
being and seeming 136 (773)
defeat, fear of 134
defences 139 (191), 243
Delphi 85
delusion, of the contemplative ones 170~1 (301)
democratic ages 215-16
democratic idea 206-7
demon 194
Descartes, René 157n, 217
description, or explanation xx—xxi, 113
destruction, desire for ix-—-x, 70, 235
determinism 113
devotion 72--3 (65), 227~8
diet xi, 128-9
and pessimism 124
digestion 135, 229, 246
dignity, humani14
loss of 33-4 (6)
diligence, moderation in 142 (210)
Dionysian spirit 58, 234~5, 236
diplomats 226
disciples, undesired 53 (32)
discipline
of the head 76-7
of the will 211
dispensability 177
dissatisfaction, different forms of 49-50 (24), 161,
164
distance
action of women at a 71 (60)
artistic 104, 169
greatness from a 41 (15)
viewing morality from a 244 ~5
viewing oneself from a 79
distress, knowledge of 60-1 (48), 65
distrustful, the, and style 145 (226)
dog, my 177 (312)
doing, we forgo by 173 (304)
domestic animals, new 177 (374)
Dostoyevsky, Fyodor (Mikhailovich) 2o5n
doubt 240
Hume on sceptical xvii
as a sin 132
ultimate 151 (265)
drama, and music 232-3
dramatic verse 80
dreaming 63—4, 70, 132, 146 (232)
drives 63, 114
benevolence and 116 (728)
goals of 225
and knowledge 186
ranking of 114-15
drunkenness 69, 132~3
duties, unconditional 32~3 (5)
Echo 138
Eckhart, Johannes (Meister Eckhart) 166
education 44
of man by his errors 114
‘educational establishment’, on the 137 (777)
egoism 40, 115, 128, 134 (162), 183
and altruism 238
in magnanimity and revenge 62
egotism, stellar 16
Egyptian youths 8
Either/Or 204
Eleatics 110, 111
‘elective affinity’ 228
Eliot, George xiii
eloquence, on 137 (175)
embarrassment, against 150 (254)
Emerson, Ralph Waldo go
264

Index
Empedocles 84, 130
and, knowing how to 160 (287)
enemies
open 135 (769)
excesses and vices 96
existence
ambiguous character of 238~9
perspectival character of 238-40
secret 142 
problem of the value of 218—30
of the spirit 224 
teachers of the purpose of 27~9 (7)
English 95, 202, 208, 238 
the value of 5-6
enlightenment 47 
experience
contribution of Christianity to 117
on moral 137 (178)
as interpreters of our 179-80 (319)
experiments 62, 180, 181
envious one, the 142 (207) 
explanation
envy, without 19, 147 (238) 
or description 113
Epictetus 117 
mystical 121 (726)
Epicureans 
explosive ones, the 55 (38)
and Stoics 174 (306)
why we seem to be 240 (375) 
facts, sense for xx, 95
Epicurus 59 (45), 157, 235 
failures 172-3
epistemology 214 
faith
equal rights, for men and women in love 227-8 
American 216
equality 
errors of 110
doctrine of human 42 
and hypothesis 123~4
and health 117 
loss of 3-4
Eros 41 
makes blessed 143 (214)
errors 110, 112 
need for xiti, 205-6
because of three 55 (37) 
in oneself 161 (284)
consciousness and 37 
in science 200—-1
of desire for familiarity 215 
woman’s love as 228
for four 114 (175) 
faithfulness
in interpretation of natural events 131 
and obstinacy 145 (229)
necessity of 174-5 
in woman’s love 228
as one of the conditions of life 
117 
Fallersleben, Hoffmann von 221n
and ultimate truth 151 
falseness, with a good conscience 225-6
eruptions 36 (9) 
fame 19, 136 (177), 184-5
esprit, as un-Greek 82 (82) 
familiarity, and knowledge 214~15
Eternal Recurrence xii, 161-2 (285), 194-5 
famous, comedy of the 52 (30)
(341) 
fanaticism 206, 211
thought experiment xv—xvii 
fate 157-8 (277), 236, 249
eternity xvi, 151 
luck in 181 (323)
ethos, not pathos 178 
fathers, and sons 144
Europe 49, 137, 183, 199, 205, 206 
Faust 137
effects of Germanic tastes on 124 
fear
masculinization of 227 (362) 
in hatred 243-4
narcotics of 129 
and need for knowledge 214-15
Southern 77-8 
fearless ones, we 244
transitional period 215-17 
feeling alone, fear of 115
Europeans 58, 87, 101, 210, 214, 221, 241, 242 
feigning oneself 
73 (67)
good 242—3 
femininity 49
and savage tribes 129 
festivals, the art of 89
Evans, Mary Ann see Eliot, George 
fictions xxi, 
111 (470), 117 (127)
evil 32, 43 (79), 54, 63, 98, 145 
Fitzgerald, F(rancis) Scott
and good 150 
The Great Gatsby xvii
imputed to nature 167 
folk metaphysics 214
evil hour, the 185 (332) 
following, and leading 138 (787)
excelsior 161-2 (285) 
folly 43 (20), 104-5, 143, 243-4 (379)
265

Index
Fontenelle, Bernard le Bovier, sieur de 31, 99
Dialogues of the Dead 91
foolishness, the dignity of 43 (20)
fool’s interlude 243-4 (379)
footbridge, over the 41-2 (76)
forbearance 144 (222)
forces of energy 225
forgetting xvii, 8, 12, 232
formerly, now and 89 (89)
free spirits xi, 206, 260
the good age for 138 (80)
freedom 98, 167, 135 (275)
freedom
and infinity 119
love of 94
over things 104
of perspective 244—5
of the will 206, 244
freethinkers xiii
French 82, 205, 242
French Revolution 82, 92, 100, 101, 208—9, 227
friendship 14, 19, 41, 192—3, 229
in honour of 72 (62)
star 159 (279)
future 216, 246
children of the 241
the ‘humanity’ of the 190—1 (337)
mirrored in faces 134
musician of the 248
thoughts and the 162
‘gai saber’, translation of x—xi
gaiety xiv, xxii, 248
gait 160 (282)
garrulousness, of writers 93 (97)
Gast, Peter viii, 
110
‘gay’, associations of the term x, 182—3 (327)
‘gay science’ 28, 183
‘gaya scienza’, translation of x—xi, In, 241
gender, and prejudice about love 227—8 (363)
genealogical method ix, xviii
generosity 141 (199)
genius 95, 96, 226
of the species 211 ~14 (354)
Genoa 164-5 (291)
German
use of term 242
what is? xi, 217-21 (357)
German language
corruption of the 96-7
on the sound of the 101-3 (704)
Germans 95, 137, 205, 207
as artists 103 (705)
and decline of Christianity 221-3
dissatisfaction with life 124
as ‘heathens’ 129
hopes 129 (746)
language and character 102
Germany
Christian Church in 130
‘educational establishment’ in 137
ghosts 229
goals 152 (267) 225
God 18, §5, 70, 166, 209, 249, 252
belief become unbelievable xii—xiii, 199 (343)
collapse of faith in 218-20, 221
the conditions for 123 (729)
insulting the dignity of by sin 124-5
and judgement 127
madman seeking 119-20
as oriental 125, 127 (147)
prejudices of 150
see also Death of God
gods 84, 120, 172, 193
the art of creating 127-8
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von 11n, go, 93, 100,
TOL, 127M, 217, 235, 249
Faust 137, 229, 249n
Italian Journey xi
poem to 249
good
and ‘bad’, origin of 148 (243)
and the beautiful 86 (85)
where it begins 63 (53)
good and evil 150
perspective beyond 244-5
good-natured, the 139—40 (792)
goodness 14, 63
Goths 129
grace of God 124~5, 126
‘Graeculus’ 216
grammar 214
gratitude 78—9 (78), 98-9
gratitude, to art 104-5 (107)
gravity
defiance of spirit of xi, xiv, 19
specific 244
greatness 142 (208), 181 (325)
at a distance 41 (75)
Greece, ancient 82, 215-16
greed
for knowledge 148, 149
and love 39-41
Greek 129
Greeks 8~—9, 193-4, 234
dignity of sacrilege 125
feeling for nature 133
ideal of the passions 126
266

Index
as logical 82
love of good speech 7g—-80
new religions 130
superficiality of xxii, 8—9
taste 81-2 (87)
without feelings of sin 124
guilt 149 (250)
habits 51, 148 (247), 167~8 (295), 175
Hafis (or Hafiz) (Shams-ed-Din Mohammad)
235
Hamlet 94, 135
happiest, the danger of the 171~2 (302)
happiness 11, 65, 71, 147, 150, 158, 161, 195
art and 86, 88
divine of humanity 190-1
Homeric 171-2
the road to 143 (273)
and suffering 59, 192
and thinking 183
of those who renounce something 134 (165)
and virtue 143
happy ones, two 172-3 (303)
Hardenberg, Friedrich Leopold von
see Novalis
harming, with what is best in oneself 51 (28)
Hartmann, Eduard von 220
hatred 243-4
health
defining 116~17
the great 246—7 (382)
and philosophy 4-7
will to 117
hearing, limits of our sense of 140 (196)
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich xiv—xv, 96, 218,
219
Helvétius, Claude-Adrien 91
Heraclitus of Ephesus gon
herd instinct 62, 114-15 (716), 140, 210
and conscience 115, 131
and consciousness 213-14
and harm to egoism 183
and opinions 136 (170)
and reputation 168
heresy, and witchcraft 54 (35)
hermit 229 ( 364), 229-30 (365), 248
heroism 153 (268), 160, 166, 186
hexameter 85
hic niger est 141 (203)
high spirits 162—3 (288)
Hinduism 122
history xxii, 120, 219
of every day 175 (308)
hidden (historia abscondita) 53~4 (34)
a sense for 83, 190
homage, learning how to pay 98-9 (700)
home, always at 149 (253)
homeless, we who are 241—3 (377)
Homer 37, 86, 172, 235
homines religiost 208—9 (350), 223
homo poeta 132 (153)
honesty xvii, xviii, 98, 104, 
111, 
114, 179 (379),
184, 189, 200~1 (344), 232~3
hope 152
Horace 82-3, 132
horrors xiv—xv
human, what is most to you? 153 (274)
human beings
distinguished from animals 171
preparatory 160-1 (283)
prophetic 178 (376)
humanitarianism xiii
humanities x
humanity 77, 114, 242
ancient, colour of 132
dangers of monotheism for 128
of the future 190-1 (337)
naturalization of 110
no sin against 125
Hume, David xvii, 218, 234
humility, stupid 50
humour 82
hunting 52
hypocrisy 98
hypothesis 200
and faith 123-4
ideal, and material 143 (215°)
idealism 237-8 (372), 240
ideals
creating one’s own 127-8
‘inland sea’ (Muttelmeer) of 246-7
ideas 206-7, 214~—15, 237
idleness, and leisure 183 —4 (329)
illness, xxiii, xxiv, 4-7, 12, 117, 135
illusions x, xii, xix, 80, 95
imitators 150 (255)
immortality 151
imperfection, the attraction of 79 (79)
improvisation 46, 168, 172
in media vita 181 (324)
incense 127 (142)
incipit
parodia 4
tragoedia, 4, 195 (342)
incomprehensibility 236 (377), 245-6
Indians, diet 124, 129
individuality, as a punishment 115
267

Index
individuals
always in our own company 135
and communities, the herd instinct 
114—15
denial of 95
enforcement of their taste 56
rights of in polytheism 128
tyrants as instances of 48
individuation, the principle of 96
industriousness 34—5 (7), 44
inference 112
backward 235
bad 145 (227)
infinite
in the horizon of the 119 (124)
our new 239~40 (374)
influential, the most 133 (756), 180
‘inland sea’ (Mittelmeer) 246
instrument-nature 168
intellect 182-3
and experience of pleasure, pain and will 122
perspectives of 239—40
see also conscience, intellectual
intellectual security xx, 76—7 (76)
interpretation ix, xxi—Xxxii, 15
and belief in opposite values xiv—xv
of existence 238-40
function of religions 211
of our experience 1779-80 (379)
possibility of infinite 239-40
unconscious 122
interruption 162 (286)
intuition 95
Islam 122
Italian opera 77-8, 80-1, 100
Italy xi, 160 (281), 164-5 (291)
Januarius, St 1550
Jehovah 126
Jewishness 127 (140)
Jewishness, and sin 124-5
Jews 97, 126, 207, 220
as actors 226
as the chosen people 125~—6 (136)
joy xii, 13, 116, 132, 184, 260
after illness 7
capacity for 38
and contempt 243
sharing 192—3
in unreason 77
joyless one, the 147 (239)
Judaism, and possibility of Jesus Christ 126
Judaization of the world 124
judgement, and conscience 187
justice 114, 115, 138 (784), 148, 152, 163
Kant, Immanuel 93, 140, 188, 218, 234
Kant’s joke 140 (793)
knowing
how to end 160 (287)
what it means 185-6 (333)
knowledge
assimilating and making it instinctive 37
and life 111-12, 181
love of 118
more than a means 118~19 (123)
not predestined for 50 (25)
origin of 110-12 (710)
the origin of our concept of 214-15 (355)
search for 160~1, 168—9, 181, 209, 240, 244-5
the sigh of the one who comes to 149 (249)
the value of 137
La Rochefoucauld, Frangois, duc de viii, 118
lack, what we 133 (155)
Lamarck, Jean Baptiste (Pierre Antoine) de
Monet, Chevalier de 95
Landor, Walter Savage
Imaginary Conversations go
language, development of, and development of
consciousness 213
last hour, on the 178 (375)
‘last man’ xiv, xvi, xvii
last words 54-5 (76), 92
of Socrates 194
laughable 140 (795)
laughter 27—9, 92, 137, 141 (200), 181, 247
law of agreement xx, 77 (76)
laws, what they betray 58 (43)
laziness 136, 211
leading, and following 136, 138 (281)
learning
losing oneself in 174
to love 186-7 (334)
lecture-room, outside the 53 (33)
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm xiv, 212, 217, 218
leisure, and idleness 118, 183~4 (329)
Leo X, Pope 118-19
Leopardi, Giacomo go, 92
Lesage, Alain-René 78n
letter-writing 184
liar, and poet 144 (222)
liberal 241
liberalism xiii
life 181 (324)
and art 170
author of one’s 170, 171
beliefs necessary for xviii—xix, 117 (121)
different types of danger in 132-3 (154)
faith in 28
268

Index
inescapability of 6~7
and knowledge 111-12, 181
living it to the full 173
love of xiv, xv, 7, 157-8
the music of 237
not as argument 117 (721)
asaproblem 
7
talk of enduring 182
what is? 50 (26)
as a woman 193 (339)
light 13, 167
refracted 176-7 (311)
lights, and shadows 89 (go)
living dangerously 161
living well 181
logic 82, 207, 218
the origin of 112-13 (177)
loneliness 230
Louis XIV 60, 125, 139
love
amour~plaisir or amour-vanité of knowledge
118
artists in 69, 70—1
and the critique of Christianity 127
and feigning oneself 73
how each sex has its own prejudice about 227~8
(363)
in Jesus Christ 126
and lust 72 (62)
and misanthropy 135 (767)
motherly 75~-6
one must learn to 186—7 (334)
pitfalls of 253-4
sexual 40
and strength of personality 202
the things people call 39—41 (14)
tradition of courtly x—xi
and vanity 151
what in others do you? 152 (272)
of women 226
lovers, of the age 134 (767)
luck, in fate 181 (323)
lunatic see madman
lust 72 (62)
Luther, Martin 93, 123, 129, 130, 222-3
luxury of sentiment 52-3
Machiavellianism 217
madman, the xii, 77, 119-20 (1725), 132
magic
of live 193
and will 121
magnanimity ix, 61-2 (49), 161
‘Mainlinder’ (Phillip Batz) 220
malice 48
man
the bound 17
concept of love 227-8
and female 15
like animals 145
modern-day 247
as world-negating 204
man of letters 231
marriage 75, 229
Martial (Marcus Valerius Martialis) 82
martyrdom 123, 155n
Marx, Karl xiii
masculinity of science 166-7
masculinization, of Europe 227 (362)
masks 78, 229
masses
progress of the 128
and slavery 131
mastery, the price of 230-1
material, and ideal 143 (215)
mathematical representation, as idealization xxi,
110-14 (770), 117 (122)
mathematics 148 (246)
Mazzini, Giuseppe 33
meaninglessness xv, 239
mechanics 121, 239
mediators, against 145 (228)
Medici, Giovanni de’ see Beroaldus
mediocrity 241
meeting again 180 (320)
melody 81, 85, 101, 146
men, and women 73, 74~5, 116
mentiri 133 (157)
Mephistopheles 137, 229
Mérimée, Prosper go
metaphysical faith xviii, 200—1
metaphysics
and illusion x, xiii
need for 5~6, 131, 205
rejection of xiv—xv, xxi
and the value of existence 5~—6
middle class, intellectual 238
middle ground, the 15-16
mind, pathological states and pride 5
Mirabeau, Honoré Gabriel Riqueti, comte de 92
misanthropy 243
and love 135 (167)
misery, and happiness 192
misfortune 191~2
mistrust, and philosophy 204
mockery 1, 244
modern state xi, 118, 241~3 (377)
modesty 210, 231
269

Index
monogamy 227
monotheism, as a danger to humanity 128
Montaigne, Michel (Eyquem) de 46, 93, 102
Montesquieu, Charles Louis de Secondat, baron
de la Bréde et de 99
Montinari, Mazzino xxvii
moral, the scope of the 114 (114)
moral judgements 187—9
moral sentiments, origin of ix
moralities, the age of 28
morality 165-6
and Christianity xiii—xiv, 219-20
consequences of Death of God for European xii,
199—201
of custom 51, 58, 59-60, 98, 128, 168
the disguise of 210
European 244
the extent to which it is hardly dispensable 210
(352)
and the herd instinct 114~15 (776)
historians of 202-3
the knot of 132
medical formulation of 116
motives vs. principle 45
personal 192
as a problem 202-~3 (345)
and religion 51, 199
of renunciation 173
and science 201
and truthfulness xix, 199-201
ulterior motives of 223-5 (359)
value of 203
vs. art 104—5
and the will of revenge 224
morals, to the preachers of 165~6 (292)
Moravian Brotherhood 211
Moses 50
mothers 75—6 (72)
and daughters 144
male 76
motives, the supposed 58—9 (44)
Murat, Joachim 135
music 186, 248
as advocate 103-4 (106)
of the best future 138 (783)
German 78, 100-1 (703), 234
of life 237
power of 84
Wagner’s 232~-3
the woman in 72 (63)
musicians 87-8, 146 (234)
mystical explanations 121 (126)
nakedness 210
names ix—x, 69-70
as terms of abuse 129
and visibility 151
Napoleon Bonaparte 48—9, 135, 160, 227
narcotics 58, 87
and diet 128~9
European 129
nationalism 227, 242
natural, the 145 (225)
natural history 212
natural sciences 208, 218, 238
naturalism, French 205
naturalization of humanity 110
nature 8, 219
against the slanderers of 167 (294)
art and 79-81 (8o)
greatness in compared with human beings 133
laws in 110
and the painter 22
stylization of 164
value-less 171
and woman 70
nature’s stinginess 189—go (336)
Naturwissenschaft x
‘nausea’ xvi, 4, 179
Nebenmenschen 128
necessity 116
need
cause and effect 142 (205)
for familiarity of knowledge 214-15
for interpretation of the world 204
law of 56
for metaphysics 5~—6, 131, 205
to believed xiii, 205~6 (347), 209
to communicate and strength of consciousness
212-14
for truth 111
women’s for children 75
needful, one thing is 163~4 (290)
neediness 64
negation 173, 175
Nero, Emperor 54
New Year’s Day xiv, 157 (276)
Newton, Isaac 55, 245
Nietzsche, Elisabeth (his sister) xvi, xxiii
Nietzsche, Friedrich
biographical details viii, xi, xxili—xxv
death viii, xxv
ill health viii, xxiii, xxiv, 3-4
insanity viii, xxv
WORKS
Anti-Christ, The xvii, xx, xxv
Beyond Good and Evil vii, x, xiii, xiv, xvii, xix,
xxiv
270

Index
Birth of Tragedy, The viii, xv, xxiii
Case af Wagner, The xxv
Daybreak viii, xi, xxiv
‘Declaration of Love’ 253-4
Dionysian Dithyrambs xxv
‘Ecce Homo’ (Poem) 23
Ecce Homo xiv, un, xxv
‘Fool in Despair’ 255
Gay Science, The, history of publication vii,
XXIV
Genealogy of Morality, On the vii, ix—x, xiii,
xviii, xx, Xxiv
‘Happiness, My’ 257
Human, All Too Human viii, xi, xix, xxiv
Hymn to Life xxiv
Tdylls of Messina xxiv
‘Joke, Cunning and Revenge’ 11-23
‘Mistral, To the’ 258-60
‘Mysterious Bark, The’ 253
Nachlass xvi, xix, xxi
Nietzsche contra Wagner xxii, xxv
On the Genealogy of Morality vii, ix—x, xiii,
xviii, Xx, XXIV
‘Pious Beppa’ 252-3
‘Poets Calling’250—-1
‘Richard Wagner in Bayreuth’ xxiv, 98
‘Sils-Maria’ 258
‘Songs of Prince Vogelfrei’ 2g9—60
‘South, In the’ 251—2
‘Theocritical Goathherd, Song of a’ 254-5
Thus Spoke Zarathustra vii, xvi, xxiv
‘Towards New Seas’ 258
Twilight of the Idols, The xiii, xvi, xxv
Untimely Meditations vii, xxiv, 98n
‘Vacillating People, These’ 255
‘Wanderer and his Shadow, The’ viii, xxiv
Will to Power, The xvi, xix, xxi
Nietzsche, Joseph (his brother) xxiii
nihilism xii, xix, 204
European xiii~xiv
Petersburg-style 205
nobility xii, 184, 190
Chamfort’s hatred of 91-2
envy of 100
and power of the court of Louis XIV 125
trade and 52~3 (37)
noble, and common 30~2 (3)
noble style, and the lack of 56-7 (go)
noblemindedness, the ultimate 64 (55)
noise 71, 141
norms, plurality of 128
North, the 130, 165, 208, 222, 223
Novalis 8n
novel, Spanish adventure 77-8
observation 187
obstinacy, and faithfulness 145 (229)
one times one 150 (260)
‘open sea’ xii, 199, 258
‘openhearted’ one, the 140 (794)
opera, Italian 77-8, 80-1, 100
opinions 189
about morality 203
public 136
and taste 55-6
oracles 85
orators 212
ordre du jour pour le rot, 1’ 45-6 (22)
Orient 208
oriental, God as 125, 127 (141)
originality 151 (267)
Orpheus 88, 162
Orphism 130
paganism, with a good conscience 217
pain
asks for the cause 38
called dog 177
as the great suspicion 6-7
infliction of 179, 181
as liberator of the spirit 6-7
palliatives against 182
or pleasure 122
and preservation of the species 179
the soul and 88
of the soul and of the body 61
soul-doctors and 181-2 (326)
twofold 14
the tyranny of 4
wisdom in 179 (318)
painter, and nature 22
parable 180 (322)
parable, speaking in a 126 (137)
paradise, from 150 (259)
parliamentarianism 136 (174)
parody 4, 247
passion
for knowledge 118, 209-10
on stage 79~—80
of a woman 228
passions 32, 103
ancient 132
the colour of the 126 (739)
on the suppression of the 60 (47)
patience 229
patriotism 205
Paul, St 126, 211
penal codes 58
people, the 208-10, 214
271

Index
perfection, music and 232
Pericles 216
perspective xxi-xxii, 169-70 (299), 239-40 (374)
of art 78—9
dangerous 146
and egoism 134 (162)
perspectivism 213
pessimism xv, 61, 204—5 (346)
of the future 236
medication for 15
nineteenth-century 234
romantic 236
Schopenhauer’s 218-21
pessimists, as victims 124 (734)
phenomenalism 213
Philetas 83
philistinism xiv
philologists, a word to the g9— 100 (102)
philology viii, xx, xxiii, 222
philosophers
compared with scholars 246
the evil hour 185
German 217
hiding place of wisdom 224-5
not idealists 237-8
passion of the knowledge-seeker 209, 210
as schematizers 207
and security of the ‘idea’ 214—15
philosophy
ancient 132, 183
of artists 97
comforts of 163
German spirit in xi, 217
and health 4—7
and mistrust 204
poetry and 86
physicians 6, 169
physics, long live! 187-9 (335)
physiology 212
pictures 
113~14
piety 18, 21, 122, 209, 219, 252~3
Pindar 152n
pious, we too are still 200~1 (344)
Plato 42, 89, 130, 201, 210, 217
idealism 237-8
pleasure 37-8
or pain 122
in work 57
poetry 250~1
origin of 83-6 (84)
and philosophy 86
and prose go (92)
poets 22, 132 (15.3) 250-1
consolation for sick 256
imperfection of 79
and liars 144 (222)
making fun of 4
of our lives 170, 171
Roman 83
as servants of morality 28
in Shakespeare 94
point of view, the most dangerous 146 (233)
poisons, on the doctrine of 113-14 (773)
polite one, the 147 (237)
politicians 52
politics xi—xii, 53
German 221, 242
polytheism, the greatest advantage of 127-8
(743)
polytropoi 201
Pompeii 78
poor, the 138 (185), 142
Portofino 160
Poseidon 71n
possession 140, 165
and love 40—1, 140, 228
posthumous ones 229-30
poverty, finding a motive for one’s 42 (17)
power
on the doctrine of the feeling of 38-9 (73)
and interpretation ix--x
lust for 111
praise
against those who 139 (go)
by choice 148 (245)
prayer 122-3 (128), 161, 231
preachers, of morals, to the 165--6 (292), 181~2
(326)
predestination 181
pregnancy, spiritual 75
prejudice, ‘science’ as 238—9 (373)
preparatory human beings 160-1 (283)
presentation, what is offensive in the 139 (787)
preservation of the human race 27-9 (7), 32 (4),
179
pretence 225-6
pride 4, 22, 72, 141 (198), 240
ancient 42—3 (18)
priestly type, in honour of the 209-10 (351)
priests, and the Reformation 222-3
princes 137
principle 123-4 (133)
probity 231
professions 215
profit 184
Prometheus 125, 149, 170
Propertius, Sextus 83
property, and love 40
272

Index
prophecy 85, 132
prophetic human beings 178 (376)
prose, and poetry go (92)
Protestantism 123, 207, 208
proud one, chagrin of the 141 (198)
proverbs 250
providence, personal 157—-8 (277)
Prussian officer 102
psychologists, English xx
punishment, the purpose of 144 (279)
purpose, the concept of 225
Piitz, Peter xxvii
Pythagoras 130, 210
Pythagoreans 84
question, the final xxii, 248
question mark, our 203-4 (346), 247
questioning 7, 30, 202-3
questions and answers 57, 129 (747), 140
Racine, Jean 102
Iphigenia 81
Ram 122
rank-ordering 114-15, 238
Raphael 177
readers, address to 21
reading, in the right way xx, 247-8
realism ix, 69 (57)
reality 60, 70
alternative perspectives on the same xxi—xxii,
169-70 (299)
falsification by using concepts xx--xxi, 113
Realpolitik 217
reason 29, 112—13, 179-80, 238, 251
reasons, a way of asking for 142 (209)
recitativo secco 81
Recurrence, Eternal see Eternal Recurrence
reductionism ix
Rée, Paul xxiv, 202n
refinement 19, 57, 64, 171-2
reflection 159, 183
Reformation 54, 130, 222—3
reformations
the failure of 130-1 (149)
where they arise 130 (7.48)
relativism, moral 20, 203
religion
as exercise and prelude 170
German spirit in xi
and honesty 179
and morality 199
on the origin of 131 (757)
perspective of 79
reasons and intents behind habits of 51
religions
the age of 28
on the origin of 210—11 (353)
world 206
religiosity 208—g9 (350), 223
aftereffects of the oldest 121-2 (127)
religious wars 128 (1.44)
remorse, against 57 (41)
Renaissance 227
renunciation 50-1 (27), 162, 173, 228
repentance 124
reputation 52, 63 (52), 69-70
a firm 168—9 (296)
resistance 133
rest, the seekers of 134 (164)
retroactive force 53-4
retrospection 178—9 (317)
revenge ix, 62 (49), 74 (69), 224
rhyme 250-1
as remedy 256
rhythm 84~-6
rich, the 141, 150
rightness, judgements of 187-8
rights, equal for men and women in love 227-8
Rimus remedium 256
Ritschl, Friedrich xxiii
roles, faith in 215-16
Roman Catholic Church 208
Roman Empire 83
rhetoric of xii
Roman Republic xii
Romans, ancient 58, 133, 216, 221, 222
romanticism 4, 49
overcoming 244-5
what is? 234-6 (370)
Rome, ancient 82, 83, 124n, 211
Rossini, Gioachino 77, 81
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques 89
Rubens (Peter Paul) 235
sacrifices 39, 44-5, 64, 144 (220), 209
sage, the 111, 209, 224
Saint-Simon, Claude-Henri 242
saints 224
disguised 17
towards a critique of 131 (150)
Sais 8n, 69
sameness xxi, 112, 189
savage tribes, and Europeans 129
scepticism xvii, 23, 62, 111, 161 (284), 222
deconstructive xx
moral in Christianity 117-18 (122)
of women 75
sceptics 72 (64)
273

Index
Schiller, Friedrich 8n
Ode to Joy xxii
scholars
books of 230-1
degeneration of the modern 223
Jewish 207
middle class 238
on the origin of 206-7 (348), 207-8 (349)
philosophers compared with 246
Schopenhauer, Arthur xv, 77n, 93, 121-2, 218,
219-21, 234, 236
on the Germans 129
his followers 94—8 (99)
on religion 131
science 35, Log, 138
on the aim of 37~8 (12)
as an attempt to humanize things 113
associations of the term x
and certainty 59-60
as a condition and ethos 118-19
and consequences of Death of God 200~1
development in 218
and distrust 53
and errors 55
masculinity of 166-7
‘modern’ and degeneration of the scholar 223
and morality 201
as prejudice 238—9 (373)
preludes to 170 (300)
severity of 166
secrecy 140, 176, 241
sects 130
seduction, involuntary 14
self
sense of 115
truth to 12
self-control 173-4 (305)
self-deception xvii—xviii, 
111, 200-1 (344), 225
self-denial 173
self-dissatisfaction 161, 164
self-hypnosis 229
self-interest ix
self-knowledge 187, 189, 213
self-mockery 1, 244
self-preservation 207-8
self-questioning 5
self-sacrifice 44~5
selfishness 44, 64
harm to 183
the innocence of the utmost 96, 97
and moral judgements 188-9
selflessness
and morality 202, 203
to the teachers of 43-5 (27)
Seneca 17, 117
sensations, thoughts as shadows of 137 (779)
sense for facts xx, 95
sense of truth 62 (51)
senses, vicariousness of the 144 (223)
sensitivity 174
sensualists 234, 237-8
Septuagint 129
seriously, taking 182-3 (327)
seriousness
about truth 88-9 (88)
the great xxii, 247
sex xi, 40, 227~-8
priests and 222
the third 76 (75)
shadows, lights and 89 (go)
Shakespeare, William, in praise of 93—4 (98)
shame 78, 152, 153
ships 119, 159, 225, 258
get on the 163 (289)
sick man, about a 135 (768)
Sieyés, Emmanuel Joseph, comte de g2
sigh 169 (298)
signs 213-14
silence 71, 75
lack of 146 (230)
residue of 80
of Socrates 193~4
similarity, as identity 112
sin 252
and Christ’s error 126
origin of 124-5 (135)
Sittlichkeit der Sitte see morality, of custom
skeleton keys 21
slavery 56—7, 131
new 241
slow periods, our 240—1 (376)
sociability 82, 184
social order, ecclesiastical and civil 223
socialism xiii, 49, 56-7, 217
Socrates 53, 54, 183, 238
the dying 193~4 (340)
soldiers, and leaders vs. workers and employers
56-7
solemnity, rejection of xiv, xxii, 182-3 (327), 247
solitude 17, 62 (50), 138 (183)
from the seventh 175 (309)
thinking in 251
songs 4, 85, 248, 251
of medieval troubadours x—xi
Sophocles 41, 80, 82
soul
distress of the 60, 61
health of the 116-17 (120)
274

Index
independence of the 93-4
and pain 88
and spirit 6
warlike 53
soul-doctors, and pain 181-2 ( 326)
souls, narrow 14
South, the 77~8, 208, 221~2, 237
barbarization of old culture 130
speakers, two 92~3 (96)
specialists 230-1
species
on the genius of the 211-14 (354)
preservation of the 27~9 (2), 32 (4), 179
speech
Greek love of good 79-80
rhythm in 84-6
Spencer, Herbert 238
Spinoza, Baruch 55, 96, 185, 186, 208, 237
spirit
of the artist 88
and character 146 (2375)
daredevils of the 9
of gaiety xxii
liberated 169
the peasant rebellion of the 221-3 (358)
plebeianism of the 223
politics as prostitution of the 53
revenge against the, as ulterior motive of
morality 223~5 (359)
of soul 6
that plays naively 247
see also free spirits; high spirits
spirituality 223, 244
squanderer, a 141 (202), 212
stars 23, 109, 260
state, and church 223
Stendhal g2
Stoicism 98, 182, 224
Stoics 38, 117
and Epicureans 174 (306)
storm 178, 179
stupidity 204, 214, 233
virtuous 77
style 163-4
and the distrustful 145 (226)
sub specie aeterni 151 (262)
sublimity 177
success and failure, as answers to questions 57
successes 172-3
suffer, the will to, and those who feel compassion
191-2 (338)
sufferers, misunderstood 149 (257)
suffering 141
the desire for 64-5 (56)
from impoverishment of life 234
from a superabundance of life 234
and happiness 59
the need for xiv
prophecy and 178
suicide
of the ascetic 123
Christianity and 123 (737)
sun 13, 16, 180, 195
superstition
as progress against faith 47
rhythm and 84-6
surface see skinnedness
suum cuique 148 (242)
Tacitus 185
Tartars 129
Tasso, Torquato 175n
taste 174
against Christianity 123
bad and good 78
changed 55-6 (39)
and creative power 233-4
good 238-9
Greek 81-2 (81)
the spoiler of 136 (772)
temperament 39
Teplitz 100
Terpander 84
theatre 74, 86-7 (86), 232-3
themes xii—xiii
Theocritus 83, 254n
thinkers 112, 139, (189), 180
and applause 184~5
gloominess of the great 63
sick 4-5
thinking 34
conscious 186, 213-14
deep 133
and happiness 183
outdoors 230
and seriousness 1823
with a warlike soul 53
‘thorough’, the 146 (232)
‘Thou Shalt’ 203, 206
thoughts
and the future 162
and need xiii
as shadows of sensations 137 (179)
unconscious 186
and words 148 (244), 169
Tiberius, Emperor 54
Tibetans 122
time, and death 20
275

Index
Timon of Athens 243
toad 15
today, living for 48
torment, no image of 177 (313)
trade, and nobility 52—3 (37)
tragedy xxii, 4, 47, 87, 132
the age of 28
begins 195 (342), 247
Greek 80
Greek invention of 125
trait, an uncomfortable 133 (758)
translations 82-4 (83)
troubadours x—xi, rn, 259
trust 21, 200—1
truth 150
being serious about 88-9 (83)
destructiveness of xix
experience in antiquity 132
explorers of 77
incorporation of xx, 
112 (170)
is it necessary for science 200-1
Nietzsche’s understanding of xix—xxi
the sense of 62 (51)
surprising 245
to oneself 98
as the weakest form of knowledge 110-11
woman as 252
see also will to truth
truthfulness xvii~xxi, 219
belief in xiii
and Christian morality 219-20
making it bearable xx
Turenne, Henri de la Tour d’Auvergne, vicomte
de 197
Turgenev, Ivan (Sergeyevich) zosn
tyrants 48~9, 56
Ubermenschen, creating 128
Uhland, Ludwig 248n
Ulfilas 129
understandable, on the question of being 245-6
(381)
understanding 151, 185—6
unknown, the (das Unbekannie) 240
unnaturalness, in art 80—1
unreason 76—7, 
119-20
unsuccessful, the 76 (74)
Untermenschen 128
urbanization 160—1
utilitarianism xiii 83-4
utility 45, 111, 201, 214
values 171
aesthetic 235—6
belief in opposition of xiv—xv
devaluation 165~6
and nihilism xiii—xiv
vanity 22, 204, 225
of artists 87-8 (87)
without 151 (263)
vegetarians, danger for 128-9 (145)
vicariousness, of the senses 144 (223)
victory, after a great 134 (763)
violence 48, 61
virginity 220
virtue
and happiness 143
sentiments of 245~6
virtues ix, 12, 151
annihilation of faith in ancient, by Christianity
117
Christian 131
dealing with 134 (160)
harmful to their possessors 43~5
has each its age 133 (159)
unconscious 35 (39)
Vishnu 122
vita femina 193 (339)
vocations 225
Vogelfret 249n
voice
alto 74
danger in the 143 (276)
Voltaire 55, 91, 95, 97, 99 (201)
vulgarity ix, 30-1 (3), 77-8, 80
Wagner, Richard xv, xxiii, 81, 96-8, 232-3, 234,
236, 248n
Wahanabis 58
wanderer 16, 244~5 (380)
war 19, 47, 90, 184
classic age of 227
and detour to suicide 192
wars, religious 128 (744)
wave, will and 176 (370)
way of life, religious 210-11
weakness 205, 242
the strength of 73 (66)
weight, the heaviest 152, 194-5 (341), 244
will
discipline of the 211
the feeling of and cause and effect 121
Schopenhauer’s concept of the g5~-6, 121-2
sickening of the 206
to immortalize 235-6
unfree 244
and wave 176 (370)
and willingness 73-4 (68)
276

Index
will to power, which is will to life 208
will to suffer, and those who feel compassion
191~2 (338)
will to truth, unconditional xvii—xix, 8, 200-1
(344)
willingness, the way of women is 73
wisdom 20, 104
claim to 224~5
and folly 143
in pain 179 (318)
for the people 209
practical, and art 114
secret 241
worldly 12
Wissenschaft x—xi
witchcraft 149
and heresy 54 (35)
Wittgenstein, Ludwig ix
woman
concept of love 227~8
life as 193 (339)
and loss of mind 21
love for one who gives us doubts 7
in music 72 (63)
spoiled by Christianity 227
women xi, 15, 202, 252
as actresses 226
artists in love with 70
and bad inference 145 (227)
capacity for revenge 74
corrupted by men 73
as function of men 116
honour of 75
and marriage 75
mastery of 74 (70)
noble in devotion 72-3
old 72
and priests 222
small 76
the strength of their weakness 73
and their action at a distance 71 (60)
under the influence of wine 58
unsuccessful, who talk too much 76
upper-class, and chastity 74~—5 (71)
words, thoughts and 148 (244), 169, 213
work 139 (788), 224
and artist 147 (241)
and boredom 57-8 (42)
and good conscience 184
passion for 34~5
workers 139
and employers, vs. soldiers and leaders 56~7
world
Christian decision to find it ugly and bad 123
existence of the xv, 204 (346)
human beings as creators of their 170-1
‘in itself? xxi, 214
as a machine 109
‘saying Yes to the’ xvi, 157, 243
‘scientific’ interpretation of the 238-9
views of the 109-10
vs. nothing xxi
writers, on the garrulousness of 93 (97)
writing
with one’s foot 21
reasons for go~1 (93)
scribbling drivel 22
youth 14, 18, 55
European 64
Zarathustra 195, 246, 258
Zeus 149
277

Philosophy
The main objective of Cambridge Texts in the History of Philo-
sophy is to expand the range, variety and quality of texts in the
history of philosophy which are available in English. The series
includes texts by familiar names (such as Descartes and Kant)
and also by less well-known authors. Wherever possible, texts are
published in complete and unabridged form, and translations are
specially commissioned for the series. Each volume contains a crit-
ical introduction together with a guide to further reading and any
necessary glossaries and textual apparatus. The volumes are designed
for student use at undergraduate and postgraduate level, and will
be of interest not only to students of philosophy, but also to a
wider audience of readers in the history of science, the history
of theology and the history of ideas.
Nietzsche wrote The Gay Science, which he later described as ‘perhaps
my most personal book’, when he was at the height of his intellectual
powers, and the reader will find in it an extensive and sophisticated
treatment of the philosophical themes and views which were most
central to Nietzsche’s own thought and which have been most
influential on later thinkers. These include the death of God, the
problem of nihilism, the role of truth, falsity and the will-to-truth in
human life, the doctrine of the eternal recurrence, and the question of
the proper attitude to adopt towards human suffering and towards
achievement. This volume presents the work in a new translation by
Josefine Nauckhoff, with a translation of the poems by Adrian Del
Caro. An introduction by Bernard Williams elucidates the work's
main themes and discusses their continuing philosophical importance.
ISBN 978-0-521-63645-2
9 
"780521°636452'>
CAMBRIDGE
S
UNIVERSITY PRESS 
| 
|
www.cambridge.org
